01篇名：鄉村文化觀光之經濟議題的研究－以新竹內灣商圈為例並列篇名：Economic Issues of Rural Cultural Tourism: A Case of Neiwan Old Street in Hsinchu County作者：廖淑容(Shu-Jong Liau)關鍵字：客家文化;鄉村發展;鄉村觀光;鄉村經濟;Hakka Culture;Rural Development;Rural Tourism;Rural Economy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：20卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：在全球化過程中，觀光策略是鄉村尋求再發展機會的途徑，從過去相關研究也證實了此論述的必然性。然而觀光策略產生的經濟效益，多以總體的結果檢視，對於地區本身或鄰近地區的效益，也需要討論，而觀光發展的結果，也經常出現短暫且不延續的現象。本研究以新竹縣內灣客家聚落的觀光發展為對象，透過觀光發展過程中，供給和需求兩個面向，調查商家的經營、資源連結、和經濟貢獻，也探討遊客對於內灣商圈的參與認知，並從客家符號、社會和情感作用等面向，解釋鄉村觀光經濟發展的作用力、效益、和潛藏的議題。結果回應鄉村觀光經濟的地區性，也指出產業與空間的連結作用，有別於論述單一鄉村地區經濟效益的研究，而遊客的認知因素分析，也論證地區符號和差異性的必要，避免鄉村觀光發展的短暫現象。英文摘要：The rural tourism has been driven by cities as a specific strategy for a new economic pattern in globalization. However, economic benefits of the rural tourism were usually discussed by views of developmental impacts and tourist's behaviors but local business and related economy in neighboring areas. By the way, a short and non-sustainable development could usually be obeserved in process of the rural tourism. This study tried to select a case of Neiwan hakka community in Hsinchu county to explore commerical activities and economic connections by investigating business conditions of local stores (in supply) and tourist consuming behaviors (in demand) in the tourism economy. It would be also expected to explain the force of economy, benefits, and potential issues of the rural tourism from viewpoints of hakka symbol, social and emotional effects. The results can respond to the locality of tourism economy and industrial connections in space which were different to studies aimed at economic influences in single rural community. The analysis of tourists' awareness also indicates necessities of rural identity and symbol to avoid a temporary development in the rural tourism.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2017.20.01.001-0352篇名：河川生態價值評估與生態補償之研究－以零淨損失為中心並列篇名：Research on River Ecological Value Assessment and Ecological Compensation - Focus on no Net Loss作者：何彥陞(Yen-Sheng Ho)關鍵字：濕地快速評估程序;零淨損失;生態補償原則;筏子溪;Ecological Compensation Priciple;Fazih River;no net loss;Wetland Rapid Assessment Procedure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：20卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：為了確認生態補償之核心價值，美國於1990年確立了零淨損失之理念，以作為水體開發與生態保育念的平衡工具。零淨損失也成為臺灣2013年濕地保育法的重要原則。惟如何落實零淨損失於生態補償制度，目前並沒有更具體的規定，實務操作之範例或模式付之闕如。此外，台灣雖然針對海岸、濕地、交通運輸開發已經以法律規定生態補償之規範，然而，與人類活動密不可分的「河川」，卻未見任何生態補償討論。本文嘗試呈現河川生態系統價值的適當樣貌，並以WRAP評分表換算法，就台中筏子溪進行生態補償之模擬。本文發現，生態系統價值與生態系統服務並不完全一致，故宜先界定台灣的「零淨損失」定義，從法制中予以落實。另外，台灣的河川生態價值並不具有高度的可測性，而生態補償後的恢復成果並無法確定。本文建議筏子溪流域應維持原生態係數，提高彌補面積，但是必須有明確可執行的監測機制。若採取面積與生態係數皆提高之方案，則原保育基地的生態條件可能被換成其他的生態條件，以提升該地區的生態係數。如何具體落實，避免違規濫用之現象，恐怕需要法律明文規範始足當之。英文摘要：In order to confirm the core value of ecological compensation, the United States established the principle of no-net-loss in 1990. The principle is used to balance water economic development and ecological conservation. No net loss is also provided in the Taiwan Wetland Conservation Act of 2013. However, there are no more specific provisions on how to implement it, and there are no examples or models of practical operation. Although the law in taiwan already provides the ecological compensation system on the coastal, wetlands, transportation. However, there is no discussion of ecological compensation in the ”river and streams”, which is inseparable from human activities. It seems that the authorities' oversight of the ecological value of river streams seems to be too neglected. This paper attempted to find the appropriate way to evaluate the ecosystem value of the river, and calculated the ecological compensation of the Taichung Fa-Tzu River by WRAP. This paper finds that ecosystem values are not the same as ecosystem services. Therefore, the definition of ”no net loss” should be defined first and implemented from the legal system. In addition, there is no high degree of testability ecological value of the rivers in Taiwan, and the restoration of ecological compensation can not be determined. In this paper, it is suggested that the original ecological coefficient should be maintained and the compensation area should be increased, but there must be a clear and enforceable monitoring mechanism. If the area and ecological factors are to be increased, the ecological conditions of the original conservation site may be replaced by other ecological conditions to enhance the ecological coefficient of the area. How to implement the ecological compensation to avoid the illegal use of river lands, there must be a clear legal norm.起始頁-結束頁：37-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2017.20.01.037-0703篇名：建築景觀設計之碳匯潛力評估－以透天集合式住宅社區為例並列篇名：The Assessment of Carbon Sinks Potential on Landscape Architecture - A Case of House-Style Community Patterns作者：李堅明(Chien-Ming Lee);洪悅容(Yue-Rong Hong)關鍵字：生態景觀;建築節能;碳足跡;碳價值;碳中和;Carbon Footprint;Carbon Neutral;Carbon Value;Ecological Landscape;Energy Efficient Building期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：20卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：面臨全球暖化與氣候變遷衝擊，建築景觀綠化之碳匯與碳中和價值，已逐漸凌駕傳統美質之功能。本研究以集合住宅社區為例，估算建築節能與景觀設計之60年碳匯潛力。研究結果顯示，若以景觀綠化之碳足跡而言，景觀建造與管理維護之碳足跡約占景觀總碳匯量2.51%-4.54%。易言之，本研究證明景觀綠化本身具有「負碳排放」功能。若以整體社區碳排放為基礎，景觀綠化碳匯潛力約占1.12%-2.02%，平均每戶景觀碳匯量為2.67-4.83公噸CO_2/戶。英文摘要：To respond to global warming and climate change, landscape architecture is now performing an important value in carbon sinks, rather than amenities. This study uses a case of house-style community patterns to assess the potential of 60 year carbon sinks on landscape architecture for carbon neutral. The result indicates that the share of carbon footprint caused by the construction and maintenance of landscaping equals only 2.51%- 4.54% of total carbon sinks. In other words, this research proved that the landscaping itself has a net carbon sinks, which reaches to 1.12% - 2.02% carbon sinks shares of building carbon emissions.起始頁-結束頁：71-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2017.20.01.071-10201篇名：舊瓶新酒：戰後臺灣經濟研究的新取經並列篇名：New Wine in Old Bottle: A Groundbreaking Approach to Postwar Taiwan Economic Studies作者：劉維開(LIU Wei-Kai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：199-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：把民族找進發展型國家理論：評論瞿宛文《台灣戰後經濟發展的源起：後進發展的為何與如何》並列篇名：Bring the Nation Back in the Theories of Developmental State: Comments on The Causes of Taiwan's Postwar Economic Growth: The Why and How of Late Development作者：徐進鈺(HSU Jinn-Yuh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：205-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：從Michael Mann的新國家論觀點閱讀瞿宛文教授的大作《台灣戰後經濟發展的源起：後進發展的為何與如何》並列篇名：Reflections and Comments on Wan-wen Chu's The Causes of Taiwan's Postwar Economic Growth: From Michael Mann's Perspective on Neo-Statism作者：徐振國(Chen-Kuo HSU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：213-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：戰後台灣經濟發展源起的兩個小敘事並列篇名：Two Narratives of the Origins of Post-WW ll Economical Growth in Taiwan作者：謝國興(Kuo-Hsing HSIEH)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：219-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：回應：如何解釋台灣戰後經濟發展並列篇名：Reply: How to Explain Taiwan's Postwar Economic Development作者：瞿宛文(Wan-Wen CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：227-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：環境正義與資本主義危機中的紅綠團結－專題導言並列篇名：Environmental Justice and the Solidarity between Red and Green in the Capitalist Crisis-Editorial Introduction作者：鍾秀梅(CHUNG Hsiu-Mei);鄭<U+4E98>良(CHENG Keng-Liang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：233-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：仍在探尋團結基礎的台灣紅綠運動以及始終無法迴避的「資本主義」課題並列篇名：Searching for Solidarity between the Red and Green Movements in Taiwan and the ”Capitalism” Lesson We Can't Avoid作者：陳柏謙(CHEN Po-Chien)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：241-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：「他們的生態」與「我們的生態」並列篇名：”Their Ecology” and ”Our Ecology”作者：林深靖(LIN Shenjing)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：247-257資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：環境運動的未來：挑戰「資本皇帝」與實踐「經濟民主」並列篇名：The Future of Environmental Movements: To Challenge the ”Capitalist Emperor” and Practice ”Economic Democracy”作者：吳松霖(WU Sun-Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：259-267資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：台灣環境運動中的紅綠議題思索並列篇名：The Red and Green Issues in Environmental Movements in Taiwan作者：洪申翰(HUNG Shen-Han)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：269-274資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：工會如何轉譯議題與重新組織並列篇名：How Do Labor Unions Translate Issues and Organize?作者：陳淑綸(CHEN Shulun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：275-281資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：綜合討論並列篇名：Questions and Answers作者：鄭<U+4E98>良;鍾秀梅;陳光興;丘延亮;劉荷雲;劉念雲;洪申翰;陳柏謙;林深靖;吳松霖;吳紹文;熊建劬期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：283-301資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：創造「好青年」的臺灣搖滾樂團潮：以鄰坊型熱門樂器行為中介並列篇名：Creating the Normalized Rock Band Wave in Taiwan: Community-Based Hit Music Instrument Stores as Mediator作者：朱夢慈(Meng Tze CHU)關鍵字：搖滾樂;臺灣樂團潮;熱門樂器行;熱門音樂社;行動者網絡理論;rock music;Taiwan band wave;hit music instrument store;hit music club;actornetwork theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文探討始於1990年代末的臺灣搖滾樂團潮的形成與持續，此現象的特徵不僅包含玩樂人數增加、年齡下降，更重要的是它呈現一種積極、具建設性的好青年形象。臺灣搖滾樂在1990年代初於臺北大安區發展成具體的地下音樂認同群體，在1990年代末走向建制化，並逐漸獲得主流社會賦予的文化正當性。上述的轉變並非只是少數搖滾菁英作品的成功以及倡議運動的功勞，而更受惠於一套由大量中學樂迷所組成的熱門音樂社及其鄰近的熱門樂器行共生形成的關係網絡。這個整體搖滾圈其實是一個金字塔形的階層結構：上層搖滾菁英生產技術與美學，並將之帶入中下層樂團，中下層樂團消費、再生產並往上晉升；同時臺灣樂器工業的低價自有品牌產品也促使這再生產有大量實踐的可能。然而，樂團潮的出現並非只是上述一連串音樂技藝、經營技術與樂器物件的匯合，樂團潮能被看見、被命名，其實是搖滾樂人從菁英到初始樂團不約而同展演出那個本來就存在臺灣主流社會的正向道德面貌。英文摘要：This article analyzes the formation and maintenance of the rock band wave in Taiwan since the late 1990s, which is characterized by the increasing number of teenagers involved in bands and by a normalized positive image. The identity of the underground rock music community started to crystalize in the early 1990s in the Daan District of Taipei. However, since the late 1990s, rock music has gradually been regarded as a legitimate cultural activity by the mainstream society in Taiwan, thanks to the institutionalization of the rock community. This transition does not result only from rock's commercial success, the growing presence of famous musicians in the media, or their engagements in social movements. It also benefits from the musical community network that is woven by the hit music clubs of high school students and the supporting music instrument stores in the neighborhoods. Meanwhile, the low cost of musical equipment in Taiwan makes rock more accessible. The band wave seems to have risen at the convergence of all these factors. But more importantly, what makes it a success story lies in the fact that the moral values promoted by its practitioners do correspond to the ones of the mainstream society.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：從「小城青年」到「新上海人」：《小時代》與大都會「新中產」之自我想像並列篇名：Imagining the Entitled Middle-class Self in the Global City: Tiny Times, Small-Town Youth and the New Shanghainese作者：黃宗儀(Tsung-yi Michelle HUANG);董牧孜(Muzi DONG)關鍵字：小城青年;品味政治;都會書寫;新上海人;郭敬明;small-town youth;the politics of taste;urban writings;new Shanghainese;Guo Jingming期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文取徑文學與文化研究，重新定義當代中國的「小城經驗」，將行政尺度不同，但空間形態、文化經驗、生活質地與情感結構相近的中等城市、小城市及小城鎮納入「小城」範疇，進而聚焦「城市中國」脈絡下的慾望主體「小城青年」，探討90年代以來發展主義對於城市及城市個體身份的等級差序（hierarchy）形塑。近年來，中國城市化的激烈競爭催生了明星大都會與「小城」的二元對立，「小城青年」與「小鎮青年」作為流行詞彙，將等級化的地域身份轉換為關乎格調與品味的象徵符碼。本文在此一背景下聚焦郭敬明與其作品，說明何以這位當紅作家身為世界一級明星都會之成功人士，卻始終未能擺脫「小城青年」的身份標籤。文章首先爬梳中國現當代文學中「小城」與「小城青年」的歷史意涵。繼而參照上海文學中隱含的城市文化身份認同問題，探討郭敬明散文中的小城經驗與上海想像。最後分析郭敬明的代表作系列小說《小時代》，藉由批判性地解讀文本，闡述品味政治、階級身份與城市書寫之交互作用。本文試圖說明郭敬明如何透過書寫從「小城青年」變身為「新上海人」，而其急切展演新都會人文化身份想像的背後，正是當代中國故鄉認同由「鄉土」到「大都會」的歷史性轉變。英文摘要：In an attempt to redefine ”small towns,” which refer to towns and cities at or below the level of the third-tier as generic spaces produced by China's urban development from the 1980s onwards and normally evoke the bad taste and worthlessness often attributed to counties, this paper seeks to examine the cultural politics and representations of classed selves in contemporary China. An outline of the urbanization of China's small towns, intra-city competition, and the effects of this hierarchized space on subject formation will be followed by a close reading of the urban writings of a small-town-boy-turned Shanghainese writer Guo Jingming. Both Guo's early writings on Shanghai fever and his novels of the city's second-generation nouveau riche will be discussed in an effort to reach a critical understanding of the methods by which an entitled middle-class self-image-marked by the accumulation of cultural capital, conspicuous consumption and the aestheticization of one's lifestyle-is formed in a first-tier global city as well as why the success stories of this Shanghai new comer are always haunted by the specter of his abandoned smalltown identity.起始頁-結束頁：43-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：社會危機與空間重構：清代臺北之區域動態並列篇名：Social Crisis and Spatial Reconstitution: Taipei's Regional Dynamics in the Qing Dynasty作者：顏亮一(Liang-Yi YEN)關鍵字：區域研究;臺北史;城鎮群聚;空間修復;空間生產;regional studies;Taipei history;synekism;spatial fix;the production of space期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017中文摘要：傳統區域史研究一般說來有兩個傾向：第一，將地域的形貌或特性僅視為地方社會與文化內在發展的產物，忽略了人群流動與貿易往來對於當地可能產生的影響；第二，將地理空間視為有待其他因素決定或影響的變項，低估了空間在歷史發展中可能扮演的建構性角色。在近年來地理學界對空間知識論重新思考的啟發下，本文試圖以較平衡與辯證的觀點來理解社會、空間、與時間的關係，並藉此重新解釋清代臺北區域的發展動態。本文認為清代臺北區域空間的發展，應該放在資本主義世界體系、清帝國、臺北盆地本身等三個不同地理尺度下來看待。從這種空間視角切入，本文指出，臺北盆地城鎮網絡的發展，乃是諸歷史行動者為了處理更大空間尺度上政治經濟系統的危機，所從事的一種社會性的空間佈局。當這種空間佈局無法回應新的社會危機時，就會被重新組織。有清一代，臺北盆地產生了「帝國邊防下的臺北」、「新莊城鎮群」、「艋舺城鎮群」、以及「大稻埕城鎮群」等四種城鎮網絡，其分別回應的是東南海防的危機、福建米穀不足的危機、臺灣社會內部階級衝突的危機、以及世界性資本主義生產過剩的危機。英文摘要：There are generally two tendencies characterizing traditional studies of regional history: First, it usually regards the morphology and features of a locality as the products of endogenously social and cultural development, overlooking the possible effects of the flows of people and trade between various places. Second, it views geographical space as a dependent variable to be determined by other factors, underestimating the potentially constructive role of space itself in the development of history. Informed by a rethinking of the epistemology of space in the field of geography in recent years, this study intends to reinterpret Taipei's regional development in the Qing Dynasty from a perspective that treats the relations between society, space, and time in a more balanced and dialectical fashion. This study holds that Taipei's regional development in the Qing Dynasty should be looked at simultaneously in terms of three geographical scales, namely, the system of world capitalism, the Qing Empire, and the Taipei Basin itself. From this perspective, this study points out that the spatial structure of the Taipei region was not merely an outcome of local natural or cultural condition, but a social-spatial configuration set by those in power to deal with the political-economic crisis taking place on a greater geographical scale. When a particular social-spatial configuration was not adequate in dealing with a new crisis, it would be reorganized accordingly. Throughout Qing Dynasty, there were four distinct city-town networks that had emerged in the Taipei Basin, i.e. the Frontier of Qing Empire, the Xingzhunag Town-Cluster, the Mongjia Town-Cluster, and the Dadaocheng Town-Cluster, which corresponded respectively to the crisis of coast defense in Southeast China, the crisis of shortage of food provisions in Fujian, the crisis of Taiwan's internal class conflicts, and the crisis of the overproduction of the world capitalism.起始頁-結束頁：89-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：從苦惱出發並列篇名：Starting with Vexation作者：賀照田(HE Zhaotian)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：135-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：試煉「進步」：歷史的延續與斷裂－編按並列篇名：Checking ”Progress”: The Continuities and Breaks of History-Editorial Introduction期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：173-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：中西文化論戰的再檢視並列篇名：Reviewing the Debates on Chinese Modernization作者：熊建劬(Jean Cheui HSUNG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：177-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：斷裂與延續：二十世紀與二十一世紀社會抗爭形式與內涵的異同並列篇名：The New and the Continuation: Comparison of the Forms and Contents of Social Struggles in the Twentieth and Twenty-first Centuries作者：陳信行(Hsin-Hsing CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：197-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：看不見的學運：對當前的臺灣學運史論述與相關議題的反省並列篇名：The Invisible Student Movement: Reflections on the History of Taiwan Student Movement and Related Issues作者：李杰穎(Stanley Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：207-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：修辭教育與共和政體：西塞羅論理想演說家並列篇名：Rhetorical Education and Republican Regime: Cicero on the Ideal Orator作者：胡全威(Chuan-Wei Hu)關鍵字：修辭;演說;西塞羅;政體;共和;rhetoric;oratory;Cicero;regime;republic期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：60期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以西塞羅的《論理想演說家》（De Oratore）作為主要詮釋文本，指出西塞羅藉由幾位優異演說家作為對話角色，傳達演說家對於政體的貢獻。其中，西塞羅強調必須透過演說家的教育或設立理想演說家作為典範，作為維繫共和政體的重要關鍵。因此，本文論證西塞羅是以維繫共和體制存在作為前提，而勉勵演說家藉由廣泛的文化－人文教育（humanitas）薰陶，培養自身，獲得引導群眾朝向做出有利共和體制穩定發展的能力。對於當代而言，培養理想演說家，著眼在說服群眾的能力，這是民主政治中重要的公民素養。這不僅可作為捍衛民主共和體制的種子；另方面也促使群眾溝通間能更加順暢，這些都是有益於當代民主政治的發展，同時也能反應當前社會的需要。英文摘要：What is the role of an orator in a regime? Cicero claims that orators, the major characters in a republic, aggregate public opinions and negotiate different beliefs. These orators are opinion leaders, and even the leaders of the republic, but only if the orators can properly present the thoughts of the mass and communicate and solve conflicts, taking the responsibility of governing. However, some ambitious demagogues with persuasive speech manipulate the multitudes and divide the community in their own interest. Plato, for instance, criticizes rhetoric as mere argumentative trickery and flattery, while Aristotle blames demagogues for wielding power to dominate people in the name of democracy. How, then, does Cicero solve the controversial issues between orators and the public order? Are orators more beneficial or hurtful for the regime? This paper focuses on Cicero's De Oratore and offers the author's interpretation aiming to solve the above problems. The author claims that Cicero coordinates the problems, through the dialogues of several contemporary famous orators, by setting up examples of the education of ideal orators. Education is to cultivate a citizen through liberal education, i.e. humanitas. Only through this cultivation can an ideal statesman be educated and hence be able to maintain the republic.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170300600012篇名：「國族優先」或「舉世共享」？對「國族優先論」與「世界主義」論戰之回顧與省思並列篇名：”Priority for Nation” or ”Sharing among the Whole World”? A Reflective Review on the Dispute between the ”Nation-Priority- Doctrine” and ”Cosmopolitanism”作者：林立(Li Lin)關鍵字：全球分配正義;國族優先;世界主義;全球基本結構;舉證責任;global distributive justice;priority for nation;cosmopolitanism;global basic structure;burden of proof期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：60期出版年：2017中文摘要：「國族優先論」與「世界主義」圍繞著「全球分配正義」這一議題，已經進行了四十年左右的爭辯；這一爭辯與「自由主義」和「社群主義」的論戰有類似性。本文試圖鋪陳雙方在攻防的過程中，如何辯證地深化其論述，最後使我們把握到爭執的癥結點。然後吾人可以評估誰對關鍵問題的主張較有說服力。本文認為，「國族優先論者」雖可以利用「舉證責任」的技巧，挫敗「世界主義」全球財富重新分配的主張，但卻仍無法逃避改善現今部分明顯不義的世界經貿規範的責任；再者，欲有效地解決世界貧困的問題，將無法避免要涉及嘗試調整恆久貧窮的國家之文化與政治體制，而這又必然關聯到「干涉內政」的難題。英文摘要：The adherents of the ”priority for the nation” doctrine and the cosmopolitans have been engaged in a series of disputes concerning the issue of ”global distributive justice” for around four decades. This debate is similar to that between liberalism and communitarianism in political ethics. This paper tries to describe how both fronts - in the process of debate - have deepened their own argumentation so that we finally can grasp the key points of this issue and judge which front can better solve crucial problems. Although the adherents of the ”priority for the nation” doctrine can thwart the claims to global redistribution of wealth held by the cosmopolitans by means of the argumentative skill of the burden of proof, they are still obliged to remove the injustices existing in the current economic order of the world. Furthermore, if we really want to solve the problem of the poverty existing in the world in an effective way, we inevitably must deal with the issue of adjusting the culture, customs and political institutions of the permanently poor countries. But this engagement involves the issue of intervention in internal affairs. This will become a challenge that human beings must strive to overcome.起始頁-結束頁：41-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170300600023篇名：民主改革的政治：困難與策略並列篇名：The Politics of Democratic Reform: Difficulties and Strategies作者：蘇彥圖(Yen-Tu Su)關鍵字：改革的政治;民主;民主改革;憲政;民主法;the politics of reform;democracy;democratic reform;constitutional politics;the law of democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：60期出版年：2017中文摘要：民主制度的改革往往極難被啟動，而且既有的民主制度安排，也往往極難經由制式的民主決策程序獲得改變。不過，在傳統的改革論述的影響下，民主改革者多半視改革的困難為理所當然，也不太考慮要以何種策略推動改革。民主法的新制度論已經揭示了「改革的政治」的重要性。基於民主法新制度論的問題意識與理論關懷，本文整合運用發展自比較憲政制度、憲法理論、民主法、國會法等相關學術領域的分析觀點，探討改革的政治帶給民主改革者的兩項政治習題：（i）為什麼民主改革在許多時候是困頓難行的？（ii）面對困境，改革者可以採取哪些做法，來推動、促成民主改革？除了嘗試藉由一般理論層次的分析與說明，盤點並開展關於「如何從事民主改革的政治」這件事情的應用知識，本文基於應用民主理論的自我定位，也試圖影響、改變民主改革社群面對改革的政治的規範態度。本文主張：（i）民主改革者應當學習做一個改革的現實主義者，認真看待現實政治之於民主改革的限制、挑戰及機遇。（ii）民主改革者還應當積極面對策略政治之於民主改革的機會與挑戰，本於政治智慧與責任倫理，從事改革策略的選擇及創新。英文摘要：Political reform of democratic institutions often encounters significant hurdles and prevails only at the mercy of political fortuna. The prevailing rhetoric of democratic reform, however, says nothing about the politics of reform. Inspired by the recent institutional turn in law of democracy scholarship and using analytical and conceptual tools as developed by students of democratic institutions and political reforms in adjacent fields, this article attempts to develop a general applied theory about the politics of democratic reform. This article first identifies and analyzes six common difficulties facing democratic reformers. It also takes a closer look at crisis as a double-edged sword for democratic reform. It then assesses four typical strategies (approaches, or game plans) for democratic reform. While the main objective of this theoretical endeavor is to deepen the understanding about the difficulties and possibilities of democratic reform from the standpoint of the democratic reformers, this article also argues for realism and strategic thinking as necessary virtues to be cultivated in the reform community.起始頁-結束頁：105-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201703006000301篇名：氣候科學：電腦模擬的不確定性並列篇名：Climate Science: Uncertainties in Computer Simulation作者：林宗德(Tzung-De Lin)關鍵字：氣候科學;全球暖化;模擬;模型;Climate Science;Global Warming;Simulation;Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：24期出版年：2017中文摘要：全球暖化既是科學議題也是政治議題。由於全球氣候系統的複雜性，科學家在評估自然因素與人為因素對於全球暖化的影響程度時，依賴的不是傳統意義下的實驗，而是電腦模擬。而由於電腦模擬的特性，模擬結果是否可信的問題，不只是科學家關心的合理科學議題，也提供了以科學之名的政治操作空間。本文評述圍繞在當前氣候科學所依賴的模擬之爭議。本文將從說明模擬與模型、理論、實驗的關係開始，接著回顧氣候模擬的歷史，並以氣候模擬中兩個爭議性的實作為例，指出模擬實作所蘊涵的不確定性。然而，除了不確定性之外，許多的證據也相當程度地印證了氣候模擬的結果。英文摘要：Global warming is a scientific as well as a political issue. Because of the complexity of global climate systems, scientists rely not upon experiments in the traditional sense but upon computer simulation in the evaluation of the relative impact of natural and anthropogenic factors in climate change. The uncertainties involved in computer simulation make its findings (and their potentially grave implications) vulnerable to the question of political manipulation in the name of science. This article reviews the technical controversies over computer simulation in climate science. It begins by introducing the complex relationships between simulation, model, theory, and experiment, followed by a short review of the history of climate simulation. This article explores the issue of uncertainty by focusing on two controversial practices in climate simulation. Despite the uncertainties, climate simulation is confirmed to a considerable degree by the evidence.起始頁-結束頁：7-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：科學事實建構與環評民主化：五件環評專家會議的啟示並列篇名：The Construction of Scientific Facts and the Democratization of EIA: The Implications from Experts' Meetings in Five EIA Cases作者：陳潁峰(Ying-Feng Chen)關鍵字：專家會議;科學民主化;科學建構;風險溝通;環境影響評估;experts' meeting;democratization of science;construction of scientific facts;risk communication;EIA期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：24期出版年：2017中文摘要：專家會議是近年來環評中引用的一項新制度，目的是希望在公眾討論前能釐清科學真相並產出公眾信服的科學結論。儘管官方認為此項制度有助於建構各界信服的科學事實，但本文分析了潮寮、霄裡溪、國光石化、永揚與核一廠乾式貯存場等案例後，發現專家之間對於科學事實難以產生一致的結論，而必須依賴在地民眾的觀察與政治性的安排作為解決手段。科學議題的審查過程必然是政治過程，環評使用「專家會議」的審查方式將其「學術化」的企圖，最終並無法避免在科學中加入更多政治考量的現實。常民作為日常生活的長期觀察者，其所見所聞亦有在科學上可觀之處，因此環評風險論述應把注意力應轉向在地民眾，避免將民眾看成是科學技術的「接受者」，而是把民眾當成主體並使其與專家形成伙伴關係，唯有透過公民參與和結合在地知識，才能產出更符合社會理性的知識，重振民眾對於科學技術與環評制度的信任。英文摘要：Experts' meetings have been widely introduced into Taiwan's EIA (Environmental Impact Assessment) system with the goals of clarifying scientific truth and producing authoritative scientific common ground prior to public discussion. Despite the high credit it received from Taiwan's EPA for enhancing EIA's capacity in scientific profession, this article finds that this mechanism has not satisfactorily met its stated goals, after analyzing five cases (Chaoliao, Siaoli River, Guoguang Petrochemical, Yungyang) and the nuclear waste reposition site of the First Nuclear Plant in Taiwan. Without local knowledge being integrated into the discussions from the outset, the experts had difficulty clarifying the scientific facts in social context and, therefore, their conclusions had little merit, which eventually led to political expediency. We suggest that lay citizens, as long-term observers, have better risk perception and greater knowledge of environmental change, which give them a more authentic grasp of the science at the local level. Instead of treating lay citizens as receivers of scientific information, a partnership relation between lay citizens and experts should be established. Only by local participation and integration of local knowledge can the construction of scientific facts better fit into the category of social reasoning. In this way, the trust of citizens toward scientific technology and EIA review can find a more firm grounding.起始頁-結束頁：49-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：大型科技系統理論之評析：兼論探索移入台灣之系統的幾個構想並列篇名：A Review of the Theory of Large Technological Systems: Some Thoughts about How to Study the Systems Transferred from the West to Taiwan作者：張國暉(Kuo-Hui Chang)關鍵字：大型科技系統;科技移轉;科技風格;科技政治;湯馬士． 休斯;large technological systems;technology transfer;technological style;technopolitics;Thomas P. Hughes期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：24期出版年：2017中文摘要：多個學術領域均認有必要對大型科技系統給予更多關注，即便目前已有不少相關案例探索、概念建構及理論創造的發展。Thomas P. Hughes(1923-2014) 藉1970 年代以來科技史新趨勢，並透過若干歐美電力系統案例研究，提出一般性的大型科技系統理論。然而，Hughes 及延伸研究多以歐美國家的科技系統為主，迄今少有非歐美國家經驗，更欠缺由此發展相關概念與之對話。台灣目前已建構不少現代大型科技系統，許多係從國外移入，不只系統的建構歷程與歐美經驗有異，在地脈絡更有相當不同特質。特別因國家脈絡及角色的差異，使台灣的系統與社會之互動關係出現諸多不同現象。本文旨在評析Hughes 的大型科技系統理論在STS 相關領域中的發展脈絡、關鍵貢獻及後續啟發，先透過分析其與社會建構論的承繼及聯繫關係、比較彼此異同，再探索其可對研究台灣大型科技系統的新議題啟發，並藉此提供幾個考量本土脈絡後的研究構想。英文摘要：One important way a variety of disciplines have explored the question of how society, city, the state or globalization is possible has been to investigate how large technical/technological systems (LTS) are built in these arenas. Drawing insights from academic development in the field of history of technology, Thomas P. Hughes (1923-2014) established LTS theory by examining the interaction of technology and society through the case studies of how electric grids were created in Chicago, Berlin and London. His study of the developmental process of LTS construction is a classic work in sociology of technology and STS. Hughes's research has inspired further research about how LTS produces cultural and political impacts. However, Hughes' LTS theory has not been applied to the non-Western world and its local contexts, social institutions, political economy, and so on. New theoretical concepts could be generated with LTS theory grounded in cases from the non-Western world. Based on these interests, this essay attempts to offer some thoughts on how to study the transferred LTS from the West to Taiwan and what this might contribute to current research in LTS studies in general.起始頁-結束頁：91-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：對稱人類學觀點的工農中介研究：臺灣鄉村工業區朝向永續發展的問題分析並列篇名：Mediation between Industry and Agriculture: An Exploration from a Symmetrical Anthropology Perspective on the Problems of Sustainable Development of a Rural Industrial Park in Taiwan作者：李威宜(Wei-I Lee)關鍵字：鄉村工業;飛地;對稱人類學;非工業化;物的議會;Rural industry;Enclave;Symmetrical anthropology;Non-industrialization;Parliament of things期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：24期出版年：2017中文摘要：臺灣社會永續了嗎？我們該如何理解生產全球綠色產品的鄉村工業基地？如何超越工業社會與農業社會二元分立的研究範式，有效把握二者共存的處境？本文以鄉村工業區為追蹤起點，對稱觀察與工業區相處的人的處境，以及工農之間人與非人的混雜特性。然後根據這些經驗材料，討論工業綠化治理只看見工業飛地，看不見異質空間的侷限。為了超越以工業化為中心的正反論述的爭議，我們主張一種非工業化的歷史論點，來認識工農中介的新鄉村社會，以思考地方工業區永續發展的問題。英文摘要：Is Taiwan a sustainable society? How should we understand the places where so-called greening objects are produced, particularly for the rural industrial bases? How could we break the dichotomy of industrial society vs. agricultural society to comprehend the situation of people living in-between? Taking a rural industrial park in central Taiwan as the starting point of our inquiry, this article proceeds to a symmetrical observation of the situation of the various people co-existing with the industrial park. We describe the hybridity of the human and the non-human between industry and agriculture. On the basis of our empirical evidence, we will discuss the limitations of industrial greening management, which is focused solely on the industrial enclave while ignoring spatial heterogeneity. To go beyond the polemical discourses concentrated on industrialization, we would like to advance a non-industrialization historical perspective; we understand the new rural society to be a mediation between industry and agriculture, a localized reflection on the question of sustainable development for the rural industrial park in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：145-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：科學家對哲學的愛憎交織－評《理性之夢－科學與哲學的思辨》作者：陳瑞麟期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：203-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：老農福利津貼制度永續性之初探並列篇名：A Study on the Sustainability of the Old-Age Farmers Welfare Allowance Scheme作者：陳琇惠(Hsiu-Hui Chen)關鍵字：老農福利津貼;時間序列方法;普及式;資產調查式;old-age farmer welfare allowance;time series analysis;universal program;means-test program期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：35期出版年：2017中文摘要：自2008年10月1日實施國民年金保險制度之後，臺灣的老年所得保障制度，以社會保險制度為主流的保障形式，只有農民的老年所得保障不在其中，其係以福利津貼的形式，提供免繳費制的給付，此制度已實施20年，過去的16年為普及式發給，近4年才修改為資產調查式，本研究的主要目的在探討此福利津貼型態的永續性，並以時間序列方法預測未來的財務負擔，資料來源為勞動部勞工保險局2007年1月至2015年4月每月老農福利津貼支出金額之統計資料，共計100筆觀察值，預測未來8年財務負擔趨勢，並進一步分析其存續的困難問題及永續性發展的建議方向。英文摘要：Since the Taiwan government implemented the National Pension System on October 1, 2008, its old-age pension has established a social insurance system as its main support type. However, farmers' old-age pensions were not included in this program, but rather were allocated as a non-contributory benefit. This 20-year scheme was disbursed universally for 16 years; however, for the last four years, the welfare allowance has been modified into a means-tested program. This study examined the type and sustainability of this non-contributory welfare benefit, using the time series analysis method to forecast future financial expenditures. The monthly spending data on the old-age farmers welfare allowance program from January 2007 to April 2015 were collected from the Bureau of Labor Insurance of the Ministry of Labor; it comprised a total of 100 observations. An 8-year trend of financial expenditure was estimated. In addition, the program's sustainable problems were analyzed, and possible system reforms recommended.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2017.35.012篇名：飲鴆止渴的病人：徘徊於正規醫療與自助醫療的毒品使用者並列篇名：Illegal Drug Users are Caught between the Formal and Self-help Medical Systems作者：陳玟如(Wen-Ju Chen);鄭麗珍(Li-Chen Cheng)關鍵字：正規醫療;污名;求助行為;毒品誤用;formal medical systems;stigma;help-seeking behavior;drug and substance misuse期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：35期出版年：2017中文摘要：毒品使用者除了需要戒癮治療外，因使用毒品衍生的意外、精神疾病、傳染病與慢性病等，亦需正規醫療提供適當的治療服務；有研究提出正規醫療受到毒癮再犯預防的影響，容易不自覺忽略這群人毒癮以外的治療需求。因此，本研究想從毒品使用者的經驗出發，以瞭解他們求助正規醫療及尋找替代醫療策略的狀況。本研究採用質性取向的研究方法，深度訪談七位毒品使用者的就醫經驗，並到他們求助醫療的場域進行參與觀察。研究發現，受訪者求助正規醫療時，經常因前科與毒癮身分被反覆強調，形成令人難以招架的污名枷鎖，使他們對此體系產生適應不良並主動遠離；遠離後採取的自助醫療行動，如同儕提供藥品、藥物混搭術、民俗療法或偏方等飲鴆止渴策略，反而增加毒品誤用、復發、過量致死的風險。最後提出三點建議：一、正規醫療應降低法規建構「毒品污名」所衍生的不利就醫處境；二、提供正規醫療臨床助人者以科學實證為基礎的毒品教育訓練；三、正規醫療應善用毒品使用者的社區復元資本。英文摘要：Besides drug treatment, drug addicts may require medical treatment as a result of their suffering accidental injuries, mental health problems, infectious diseases, chronic diseases, etc. However, few studies indicate that they do not actively seek help from the formal medical system for treating their physical and mental problems. The reason for not seeking help from the formal medical system is generally either personal preference or the stigmatization associated with social exclusion resulting from the identity of drug users being revealed as a result of their seeking help from the formal medical system. This study intends to explore the subjective experiences of drug users when seeking help from the formal medical system, as well as determining what kind of alternative medical systems they sought help from. Using a qualitative approach tocollect data, this study employed in-depth interviews with seven drug users regarding their help-seeking experiences in the formal medical system. This study also conducted participatory observation when five interviewees sought help at different kinds of medical systems. The results indicated that the interviewees experienced recurrent stigmatization due to the judgmental identification of these addicts not only as patients, also as criminals. The unfriendly social treatment they experienced precluded them from subsequently accessing formal medical systems. Subsequently, the drug users sought help from other alternative self-help sources, such as drugs provided by their peers, drug stores or clinics in the community, mixing drugs and medicine, folk therapy, etc., which sometime resulting in lethal harm from drug misuse and overdosing. Three suggestions for ameliorating the situation delineated above are included in the conclusion section.起始頁-結束頁：47-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2017.35.023篇名：離婚過後、親職仍在：建構判決離婚親職教育方案的模式初探並列篇名：After Divorce, We are still Parents: Establishing Parenting Education Programs for Judicial Divorce作者：沈瓊桃(April Chiung-Tao Shen)關鍵字：判決離婚;兒童權利公約;家事法院;親職教育;親權;judicial divorce;Convention on the Rights of the Child;family court;parenting education programs;custody期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：35期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在檢視父母在離婚訴訟過程中，造成子女適應困難的作為為何，並探討在臺灣實施判決離婚親職教育方案的可能模式。本研究以焦點團體方式蒐集質性資料；研究參與者為14位法官和九位父母離異的成年子女。研究結果顯示，在離婚訴訟過程中，造成子女適應困難的父母作為包括：要求小孩選邊站、父母離間、禁止會面交往、搶奪及拐帶子女、扶養費之爭執、情緒移轉、父母因離婚打擊對子女照顧異常、父母因互相猜忌而放大檢視子女照顧議題。離婚父母親職教育方案可能的實施模式包括普同式的強制性親職教育和個別式的強制性親職教育。配套措施需包括建立法源基礎、主管機關的協調合作和穩定的人力經費。個別式的強制性親職教育的配套措施需另包括評估機制、父母和子女的創傷修復，以及社區資源的連結。本研究對推行判決離婚父母親職教育的制度提出以下建議：修法是當務之急、實施多元的親職教育模式、建立本土化的親職教育課程和人力培訓、對婚暴案件應有特別的考量。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to examine the parental actions affecting children's adjustment during the divorce process, in order to establish parenting education programs for couples filing for divorce in Taiwan. The present study collected qualitative data from 9 adult children of divorced parents and 14 judges who had attended focus groups. The research results show that children may suffer from divorcing parents' actions which damage parental connections and entail improper care, including: asking children to choose between parents; parental alienation; prohibiting children from seeing one of their parents; snatching or abducting children; arguing over child financial support; emotion transference; improper care by parents who have mental illness symptoms due to divorce; and improper care due to inter-parental opposition and suspicion. The possible implementation models for parenting education programs include: universal requirements for filing for divorce and individualized implementation for special cases. The supporting measures for implementing mandatory parenting education programs for all divorcing parents include: establishing relevant laws and regulations, and cooperation between authorities to secure funding and manpower. Additional supporting measures for implementing individualized parenting education program include assessment, trauma therapy for parents and children, and community resources referrals. The suggestions for practice include: establishing laws and regulations, implementing diverse programs, establishing culturally appropriate materials for parenting education programs for divorcing parents, and giving special consideration to cases involving domestic violence.起始頁-結束頁：93-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2017.35.034篇名：正式與非正式照顧的協作：探討家庭外籍看護工進入護理之家的現象並列篇名：A Study on the Practices of Formal Care and Informal Care: Why Entering a Nursing Home Requires Having an Independent Foreign Care Worker作者：陳正芬(Cheng-Fen Chen);王增勇(Tseng-Yung Wang)關鍵字：外籍看護工;正式照顧;非正式照顧;建制民族誌;照顧機構;foreign care worker;formal care;informal care;Institutional Ethnography;care institution期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：35期出版年：2017中文摘要：家庭外籍看護工的工作場域應在家庭，現有護理之家卻出現許多家庭外籍看護工。本研究採取建制民族誌，運用參與式觀察法勾勒護理之家照顧服務員與家屬自聘外籍看護工每日照顧工作，訪談家屬與相關服務者，探討家屬自聘外籍看護工背後的社會編派。研究發現，機構將部分照顧工作轉嫁家屬，無法承接的家屬再轉嫁給外籍看護工；家屬不同的協作雖是受限不同經濟能力，但這一來一回所產生的變化，卻又衍生自聘額外人力的照顧者並未獲得雙重照顧資源的奇特發展。本研究揭露治理代理人與家屬藉由自聘外籍看護工，以符合建制現實的自主行動固然是單一機構透過對規約性認可，進而透過重新編寫文本而來的在地特殊個案，不僅揭示特定的建制型態，也因此開展文本使用者，包括護家主管、醫療體制內各式服務提供者與家屬多方之間互相連結的真實性，唯有建制真實性與斷裂經驗被真正看見，制度與文本及人們日常生活的斷裂方可能被改變。英文摘要：Family migrant care workers' workplace must be the family home. However, their appearance in nursing homes is becoming common. Using institutional ethnography as my research approach, I observed the daily care schedule of care workers (both Taiwanese and foreign) and interviewed institutional managers and their care workers, as well as family members serving as caregivers with and without hired in-home foreign care workers. The texts for Taiwan's nursing home system were also collected to discover how they make for the imbalance between space and care needs, and also why nursing homes, even those very near hospitals, require family caregivers to take clients to rehabilitation and other medical appointments. The truth is that from the hospital to the nursing home, the family has to assume all care responsibility, and when the family can't handle said responsibility, hiring a foreign care worker is the only alternative. This study's analysis shows multiple silhouettes of the ruling relations in a nursing home as well as their influences on the disjuncture experiences and institutional actions. One major finding of this study is how institutional managers distribute their care workers according to the number and placement of family-hired foreign care workers stationed in nursing homes, in effect balancing care needs and staff ratio. In addition, although it seems that a seamless care system is in place, the real issues behind the system have yet been illuminated.起始頁-結束頁：137-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2017.35.0401篇名：Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors and the Earnings Informativeness of Income Smoothing並列篇名：公司盈餘平穩化行為與盈餘資訊性之關係－合格境外機構投資者角色之檢測作者：陳慶隆(Ching-Lung Chen);張傳章(Chuang-Chang Chang);翁佩瑜(Pei-Yu Weng)關鍵字：QFIIs;income smoothing;earnings informativeness;deregulation;合格境外機構投資者;盈餘平穩化;盈餘資訊性;解除管制期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study uses the unbalanced-panel data to establish empirical regression and examines the role of qualified foreign institutional investors (hereafter QFIIs) in earnings informativeness of firms with income smoothing. We also examine whether the role of QFIIs in earnings informativeness for firms with income smoothing has changed since the deregulation of QFIIs' ownership restrictions. The empirical result reveals that high QFIIs' ownership weaken the informativeness of earnings for firms with income smoothing in the post-deregulation period. It suggests that the deregulation of QFIIs' ownership accelerates the opportunistic role of QFIIs, in turn, reduces the informative component of earnings for firms with income smoothing. We also find that the result is sensitive to the high QFIIs' shareholdings volatility case. The result supports the opportunistic role of QFIIs in firm's income smoothing, yet, is related to QFIIs' trading strategy.英文摘要：本研究以非平衡式追蹤資料檢測合格境外機構投資者(QFIIs)在我國上市櫃公司進行盈餘平穩化對盈餘資訊性影響中所扮演的角色，亦測試該角色是否因我國管制機關解除此類型投資者之股權限制而改變。實證結果顯示：合格境外機構投資者高持股之公司，在解除股權管制後，其盈餘平穩化的盈餘資訊性降低，意味解除合格境外機構投資者的股權管制在某種程度助長其在公司盈餘報導的投機性角色。進一步檢測顯示此實證發現與合格境外機構投資者的持股高波動性有關，此結果支持合格境外機構投資者的短期交易策略影響公司盈餘報導決策之觀點。起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.MAR.A103-0212篇名：逆強論：隨創式的資源建構過程並列篇名：Inversing the Powerful: The Process of Resource Construction through Bricolage作者：蕭瑞麟(Ruey-Lin Hsiao);歐素華(Su-Hua Ou);蘇筠(Yun Su)關鍵字：隨創理論;資源建構;逆強;bricolage;resource construction;power-inversing期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：弱肉強食是企業生存的真實處境。強勢者勝，弱勢者敗，被奉為競爭下的常態。不過，隨創(Bricolage)文獻卻充滿希望地指出，如果弱勢者懂得槓桿身旁資源，仍有可能於劣勢中創新。本研究以隨創理論為基礎，探索弱勢者如何能重新建構資源以回應強勢者所施加的制約。本研究分析研華科技如何回應德國競爭者於中國工業電腦市場的優勢地位。本案例觀察弱勢者如何逆轉強勢者的優勢，萃取其脆弱之處，進而以此弱點建構手邊的資源，逐步改變劣勢地位。在學理上，本文提出「逆強」的資源建構模式，找出「強者必弱」之原則，讓隨創理論更加豐富多元。於實務上，本研究所提出之逆機而動、逆敵而取、逆勢而行的三項劣勢創新原則，可以提供企業以小搏大的借鏡。若能反向思考，將強勢者的阻力逆向變成其助力，改變企業競爭之法則將不再是不可能。英文摘要：”The weak are the prey of the strong” seems to be the reality of business jungle. High-power actors win and low-power actors fail. This research employs bricolage as a theoretical basis, and explores how low-power actors could reconstruct resources to respond to constraints imposed by high-power actors. This study examines the case of Advantech's response to its German high-power competitor in the industrial computer market in Mainland China. This case study observes how the low-power actor inversed the high-power actor's advantage into fragileness while constructing resources to change its relative power position. Theoretically, this article proposes a ”power-inversing” model for resource construction, which recognizes the inevitable weakness of the high-power actors and enriches the diversity of bricolage theory. Practically, our research suggests three principles of bricolage: recognizing weakness from the strongest, converting foes into friends (so as to obtain resources), and shifting the power dynamics. By reversing the high-power actor's stumbling blocks into stepping stones, it might not be impossible to change the law of competition.起始頁-結束頁：43-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.MAR.A103-0163篇名：董監事暨重要職員責任保險對企業信用評等之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Directors' and Officers' Liability Insurance on Firms' Credit Ratings作者：廖秀梅(Hsiu-Mei Liao);湯麗芬(Li-Fen Tang);李建然(Jan-Zan Lee)關鍵字：董監事暨重要職員責任保險;信用評等;投保金額;directors' and officers' liability insurance;credit rating;insurance coverage期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在以債權人的觀點，針對2008年至2011年在臺灣證券交易所及櫃檯買賣中心交易之上市（櫃）公司為研究樣本，探討上市（櫃）公司購買董監事暨重要職員責任保險（簡稱D&O保險）是否會影響債權人對企業信用風險的認知，而債權人對企業信用風險的認知係以信用評量機構發布的評等來衡量。整體而言，實證結果穩健地支持相對於未購買D&O保險的公司，有購買D&O保險的公司，其信用評等較佳；然而進一步針對有購買D&O保險的公司，探討其投保金額與信用評等之關聯性時，實證結果則發現，當公司依自身之特質及所面臨的風險投保適度的金額（即正常投保金額），將可獲得較佳的信用評等；但當公司投保金額超過公司自身特質及風險所需之保險金額（即超額投保金額）愈大時，反而使債權人認為董監事與管理階層的道德風險會增加，因而導致給予較差的信用評等。英文摘要：This paper explores the effect of directors' and officers' liability insurance (D&O insurance hereafter) on the firms' credit ratings, which serve as a proxy for firms' credit risk perceived by the creditors. We construct a sample from the firms listed on both the Taiwan Stock Exchange (TWSE) and GreTai Securities Market (GTSM) from 2008 to 2011. The evidence shows that firms with D&O insurance have better credit ratings than those without D&O insurance. Further results show that D&O insurance coverage also impacts firms' credit ratings. If the firm purchases the appropriate (normal) D&O insurance coverage that suits the firm's specific characteristics and risk, it tends to have a superior credit rating. However, if the firm purchases excess (abnormal) D&O insurance coverage that is more than the firm's needs, it tends to have an inferior credit rating, a fact that likely stems from opportunistic behaviors from the directors and managers at the expense of creditors.起始頁-結束頁：75-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.APR.A102-0674篇名：千營共一呼：策略研討會中議題設定的實踐分析並列篇名：To the Answering Shout of A Thousand Tents: The Practice of Agenda-Setting in Strategy Workshops作者：曾詠青(Yung-Ching Tseng);洪世章(Shih-Chang Hung)關鍵字：議題設定;策略實踐;策略會議;開放策略;行動研究;agenda-setting;strategy-as-practice;strategy meeting;open strategy;action research期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究從策略實踐的觀點，觀察與分析會議規劃者及參與者如何做好議題設定的工作。議題設定是策略會議或是工作坊能否順利舉行的核心關鍵，也是近年來開放策略活動日趨蓬勃發展中的一個重要研究問題。我們的研究對象是台灣於2012年所舉行的第九次全國科學技術會議，因為牽涉領域廣泛，相關利害關係人多元，如何做好議題設定進而凝聚發展共識，是一件重要、但也深具挑戰性的工作。在方法上，我們紮根於質性的行動研究，歸納出三種議題設定的策略實踐手法，包括：問題化、未來化，以及連結化，同時也指出道德化所扮演的重要調節功能。我們的研究成果除了對於議題設定提供更豐富的解讀以外，對於策略實踐、策略會議，以及開放策略等領域也能提供理論與實務上的意涵。英文摘要：This paper draws on a strategy-as-practice perspective to examine the articulation of agenda setting, a key activity important for both strategy meetings and open strategy. Our research target is the 9th National Science and Technology Conference held by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan in 2012. The conference is nationwide, regularly organized, and has an open design, highlighting the importance of setting agendas skillfully to build consensus and guide action. Using qualitative-based action research procedures, we develop three strategy tools for the design and delivery of agenda setting. These include problematizing, futurizing, and corresponding. We also point out moralizing as a moderator for such a strategic and creative process. We conclude by discussing the implications of our research for strategy workshops, strategy practices, and open strategy.起始頁-結束頁：105-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.MAY.A103-1205篇名：Entrepreneurial Behavior in Family Business: The Investigation on the Relationship among Steward-Like Managers, Explorative Orientation and New Product Development並列篇名：家族企業之興業行為：探究忠僕型經理人、開創性導向以及新產品開發之關係作者：李佳蓉(Chia-Jung Lee);李振宇(Cheng-Yu Lee);吳學良(Hsueh-Liang Wu)關鍵字：stewardship;family business;new product development;family social capital;忠僕;家族企業;新產品開發;家族社會資本期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Although the literature on entrepreneurial behavior of family firms continues to accumulate, the causes behind such behavior remain inconclusive. While some scholars view family businesses as breeding grounds of innovation and entrepreneurship, others consider family businesses to be conservative and resistant to change. Drawing on the stewardship perspective, this study aims to argue how managers' stewardship orientation, in terms of decision comprehensiveness, participative governance and long-term orientation, shapes firm innovativeness through altering the company-wide explorative orientation. In a sample of 186 Taiwanese family firms, the empirical results show that stewardship orientation drives managers to initiate explorative activities which, in turn, enhance the performance of new product development (NPD). Furthermore, the NPD performance effect of stewardship orientation is strengthened in conjunction with family social capital. Our study contributes to entrepreneurship literature by highlighting the importance of managers' stewardship orientation to the entrepreneurial orientation and the innovation outcome in the context of family business.英文摘要：過去幾年，學界已累積了不少家族企業興業行為的相關研究，但對於促成興業行為的因素卻仍未有定論。部分學者認為家族企業提供之環境是形塑興業行為的良好場域，但亦有不少學者指出家族企業背負的保守精神正是阻礙改變的主因。本文以忠僕理論為依據，意在解析管理者的忠僕傾向，包括決策廣度、參與治理以及長期導向正是誘發企業開創性導向並提升新產品開發績效的驅動因素。透過186家的台灣家族企業，本文的實證結果顯示，管理者之忠僕傾向的確會促進企業整體的開創性導向，並進一步影響新產品開發之狀況，此外，家族社會資本亦會調和忠僕傾向以及開創性導向之關係。本研究之貢獻在於喚醒各界關注管理者的忠僕特質在公司整體興業傾向以及創新表現中所扮演之角色及其重要性。起始頁-結束頁：131-167資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.MAY.A103-0126篇名：資訊管理研究在台灣：歷史回顧與未來展望並列篇名：Information Management Research in Taiwan: Historical Retrospect and Future Outlook作者：李有仁(Eldon Y. Li);張芳凱(Laurence Fang-Kai Chang);許建隆(Alan Chien-Lung Hsu);廖建翔(Chien Hsiang Liao)關鍵字：資訊管理研究;議題分類;研究方法;內容分析法;趨勢分析;information management research;topic classification;research method;content analysis;trend analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著資訊科技的急遽改變，不同時期的資管研究主軸與其採用的研究方法不斷地演進與變化。本研究選定國內資訊與管理領域的兩本代表性期刊－「資訊管理學報」與「臺大管理論叢」－作為主要對象，針對近十年來所發表的文章，進行歷史回顧與未來展望。結果發現資管領域學者們的研究重心已由資訊科技在企業內部的應用轉到個人在生活與個人行動設備上的應用。我們也發現資管領域的研究特別強調產業的實際應用層面。隨著資料驗證工具的發展、大數據分析的普及，以及研究者對於研究信效度的追求，以實徵研究來進行資料收集與驗證的文章在近年來逐漸減少，取而代之的是實際進入研究場域收集資訊的田野式調查，以及採用資料庫進行分析的方式。英文摘要：With the rapid change of information technology (IT), the information management (IM) research stream and its research method have evolved continually during different time periods. This study selects two representative journals of information and management fields in Taiwan-Journal of Information Management and NTU Management Review, and analyzes the trends of their published topics in the past decade for historical retrospect and future outlook. The findings reveal that the focus of IM research has been changed from applications of IT in enterprises to personal life and personal mobile devices. The study also discovers that most IM research emphasizes the actual applications in industries. With the advance of data validation tool, the prevalence of big data analysis, and the researcher's pursue of research reliability and validity; empirical research with the data collection and verification is dwindling and an increasing amount of field study and database analysis have entered into the research arena.起始頁-結束頁：169-205資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.DEC.25104-0097篇名：會計穩健性：基於亞洲國家資料研究之回顧並列篇名：Accounting Conservatism: A Review of the Research Based on Data from Asian Countries作者：王泰昌(Tay-Chang Wang);林修葳(Hsiou-Wei Lin);許文馨(Wen-Hsin Hsu);陳漢鐘(Han-Chung Chen);劉嘉雯(Chia-Wen Liu)關鍵字：會計穩健性;審慎性;權益市場;債務市場;accounting conservatism;prudence;equity market;debt market期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文回顧2000年至2015年間，刊登於我國TSSCI期刊、中華會計學刊、國內其他非TSSCI期刊，以及科技部A級以上期刊，以我國或其他亞洲國家資料為實證樣本之會計穩健性研究。本文將研究主題區分為穩健性對財務報表數字之影響、穩健性與權益市場之關係、穩健性與債務市場之關係、穩健性與公司治理及薪酬制度之關係，以及穩健性與制度、管制、訴訟之關係等議題，並討論未來研究方向。IASB於2015年5月發布「財務報導之觀念架構」之草案，擬將審慎性重新引入觀念架構內，顯示討論會計穩健性是一重要議題。英文摘要：This paper reviews studies on the effects of accounting conservatism that used data from Taiwan and other Asian countries and were published between 2000 and 2015 in accounting journals listed in Rank ”A” Journals of the Ministry of Science and Technology, the Taiwan Social Science Citation Index (TSSCI), and the Taiwan Accounting Review, as well as in other non-TSSCI journals. We attempt taxonomy of the extant literature on accounting conservatism and suggest six categories of research: the effects of conservatism on financial statement numbers, on equity markets, on debt markets, on corporate governance and compensation, and on regulation and litigation. We also discuss possible future research opportunities. In May of 2015, the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) published for public comment an Exposure Draft proposing a revised Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting which reintroduces the concept of ”prudence” into the framework. This signifies the importance of research on accounting conservatism.起始頁-結束頁：207-254資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.DEC.25104-0108篇名：Process Innovation and Improvement: A Competitive Dynamics Perspective並列篇名：從動態競爭觀點審視作業流程管理的創新與改進作者：陳立民(Li-Ming Chen);劉妍(Yan Emma Liu);楊曙榮(Shu-Jung Sunny Yang)關鍵字：process innovation;process improvement;competition;operations strategy;作業流程創新;作業流程改進;競爭策略;營運策略期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Operations and strategy literatures have consistently promoted the best practice of accredited management standards for process efficiency and effectiveness. Based on the capability theorizing, studies have investigated how a following firm can improve its operational performance by learning from a leading firm's best practices. Our study extends this research stream by applying competitive dynamics perspective from strategy literature to the context of process development and management. We develop insights by applying a dynamic, computational model based on an extensive appraisal of the history of process innovation and improvement in the global automobile industry and draws on the underlying theoretical relationships in the empirical literatures on operations and strategy. The core proposition in our study is that a follower firm's investment in process innovation capabilities for long-term growth will provoke strong retaliation from leading firms using the current best practice. We demonstrate that the leading firm can publicly signal its best practice to induce the follower firm to invest in process improvement capabilities but only for short-term survival, not for long-term purposes or goals. In this way, the leader firm maintains its leading edge. Our results also underscore the importance of competition in determining the firm-level process development and management practices.英文摘要：營運暨策略管理文獻已廣泛討論透過採用業界認可之最佳管理實務來提升作業流程效率及效力。過去相關研究主要探討一家處於追隨者地位的企業，如何學習該產業標竿企業的最佳作業流程實務來發展並積累自身組織能耐，用以改進其營運績效。本研究引用策略管理文獻之動態競爭觀點來深耕此研究脈絡。根據全球汽車產業的作業流程創新與改進歷史和相關管理文獻的理論框架與實證研究，本文發展出一個動態模型並藉此得到作業流程創新與改進的管理意涵。文章主要命題如下：雖然追隨企業可以投資作業流程創新能耐來追求長期組織成長，但此舉將引起標竿企業的激烈競爭性回應。為保持業界領先地位，標竿企業具有強烈的策略意圖來公開其最佳作業流程管理實務以供追隨企業學習和採用；其目的在於誘導追隨企業投資短期見效的作業流程改進能耐進而喪失創造嶄新業界作業流程管理實務的機會。本文闡述動態競爭對作業流程發展及管理實務的重要性並影響業界最佳實務的演進與開創。起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.DEC.A103-0479篇名：仁慈領導一定能讓部屬產生組織公民行為嗎？領導者操弄意圖知覺與部屬信任的中介式調節作用並列篇名：Does Benevolent Leadership Always Lead to Organizational Citizenship Behavior? The Mediated Moderation Effect of Manipulative Intention and Trust作者：林家五(Chia-Wu Lin);胡宛仙(Wan-Hsien Hu);施建彬(Jian-Bin Shih)關鍵字：歸因理論;仁慈領導;操弄意圖;信任;組織公民行為;attribution theory;benevolent leadership;manipulative intention;trust;organizational citizenship behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：依據領導的歸因理論，部屬對領導行為背後動機的歸因，會影響部屬後續的情緒與行為；因而，本研究推論部屬對於領導者操弄意圖知覺，將調節仁慈領導對於部屬對組織與對主管的信任，以及組織公民行為的效果，研究者提出了中介式調節模型並做後續驗證。針對340 位部屬兩階段的調查結果顯示，當部屬知覺領導者有高度操弄意圖時，仁慈領導對於部屬之組織信任、主管信任及組織公民行為呈現較低正相關或負相關；反之，當部屬知覺領導者的操弄意圖低時，仁慈領導對於部屬之組織信任、主管信任及組織公民行為則呈現正相關；此外，仁慈領導與操弄意圖知覺的交互作用，會透過信任組織與信任主管的部分中介，間接影響部屬的組織公民行為；本文最後除了說明結論與討論外，也針對研究限制與未來研究提出數點建議。英文摘要：Drawing on the attribution theory of leadership process, the subordinates' attribution of intention about leaders' behavior will affect their emotion and behavior. To address the attribution-consequence process, we hypothesize that perception of leaders' manipulative intention moderated the positive relationship between benevolent leadership and trust, (i.e., in supervisor and organization) and organizational citizenship behavior, a mediated moderation model was proposed and tested. Two-wave data collected from 340 subordinates displayed results which demonstrated that benevolent leadership was less positively or even negatively related to trust and OCB when subordinates perceived high manipulative intention of their leaders' behavior. On the contrast, benevolent leadership was positively related to trust and OCB when subordinates perceived low manipulative intention. Another finding is that benevolent leadership is most effective when they interact with the manipulative intention–the interaction effect on OCB partially mediated by trust in supervisor and organization. Finally, research limitations and suggestions for future research are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：33-64資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JAN.A102-06210篇名：多元迴歸的自變數比較與多元共線性之影響：效果量、優勢性與相對權數指標的估計與應用並列篇名：The Impact of Multicollinearity on the Evaluations of Regressors: Comparisons of Effect Size Index, Dominance Analysis and Relative Weight Analysis in Multiple Regression作者：邱皓政(Haw-Jeng Chiou)關鍵字：相對權數分析;優勢分析;壓抑效果;relative weight analysis;dominance analysis;suppression effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：迴歸分析雖廣泛應用於社會科學研究，但過度仰賴顯著性檢定與迴歸係數而忽略了效果量與相對重要性的評估，本文除了檢視乘積係數等早期指標，並整理近來提出的優勢分析與相對權數分析，以模擬數據進行增強、壓抑與重疊等不同型態的共線性效果下各種指標的表現差異，並以「華人家庭動態資料庫」2011 年的調查資料，檢驗人口變數與人力資本變數對於2,325 名臺灣民眾的薪資差異的影響。研究結果指出，多元共線性對於自變數效果量與相對重要性的影響非常明顯，相對權數分析與優勢分析的相對重要性指數的表現最為穩定，其中優勢分析具有相當彈性能夠提供更豐富的變數效果與重要性資訊。最後本文對於各種指標策略進行整理比較，並說明在多元迴歸上的應用策略。英文摘要：Regression analysis is frequently used in social sciences. However, regression analyses often rely heavily on hypothesis testing and interpretations of regression coefficients. As a result, the effect sizes of regression models as well as the qualities of individual predictors have long been ignored. This paper reviews several indices that can be used to evaluate the effect size and relative importance of predictors, the relative weight analysis (RWA), and the dominance analysis (DA) in multiple regressions. A simulated dataset is used to examine the impacts of mutlicollinearity, including the enhancement, suppression, and redundancy effects, on the evaluation of the effect size and relative importance of predictors. A sample of 2,325 Taiwanese adults selected from the 2011 Panel Study of Family Dynamics (PSFD) are used to demonstrate the use of those indices in predicting the salary differences. Results suggest that the indices based on RWA and DA are recommended for evaluating the relative importance of predictors. In particular, DA has the advantage of flexible procedures for evaluating the different facets of the dominance of predictors. The properties of the recommended index were summarized in the end of the paper.起始頁-結束頁：65-108資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JAN.A103-02211篇名：The Real Options Perspective on Exploration, Exploitation, and Firm Performance: Test of a Mediation Model並列篇名：以實質選擇權觀點探討探索性與利用性活動對公司績效之影響：中介效果模型作者：趙雨潔(Yu-Chieh Chao);鄭鈞云(Chun-Yun Cheng);湯明哲(Ming-Je Tang);黃逸平(Yi-Ping Huang)關鍵字：exploration;exploitation;real options perspective;firm performance;探索性;利用性;實質選擇權;公司績效期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Theoretical debate on how firms can balance exploration and exploitation activities to achieve better performance remains inconclusive, and very few empirical studies offer guidance on how to delineate contradictory theoretical debates. We adopted a real option perspective in viewing exploration as creating real options and exploitation as executing those options. In the face of uncertainty, holding real options can bring firms future opportunities but may not lead to superior performance. Firm performance can be enhanced only if firms execute these real options. Using 25 years of data on semiconductor firms in the United States, this study examines the influence of uncertainty on exploration and exploitation and the mediating effect of exploitation on the relationship between exploration and firm performance. This study adopts a novel lag structure model to explicitly consider the time-lag factor in measuring the effects of exploration on firm performance. This study finds that (1) uncertainty is positively related to exploration; (2) exploitation mediates the relationship between exploration and firm performance. The results support the real-options perspective in elaborating exploration, exploitation, and firm performance.英文摘要：過去文獻認為公司必須平衡探索性與利用性活動以達到最佳績效，然而對於如何「平衡」這兩類本質上存在矛盾關係之活動仍未有定論。截至目前為止，探討探索性、利用性活動與公司績效關係之實證研究仍十分稀少。本研究採用實質選擇權觀點，論述當公司面對不確定的環境時，探索性活動可視為替公司創造實質選擇權，而利用性活動則視為執行實質選擇權。實質選擇權帶給公司探索未來的機會，但未必會對公司績效有直接且正面的影響。惟有當執行實質選擇權時，才能將機會轉化為實質效益，提升公司績效。本研究以美國半導體公司25 年的實證資料，檢視不確定性對利用性與探索性活動之影響，並探討利用性活動對於探索性活動與公司績效的中介效果。本研究採用創新的延遲結構 (Lag Structure) 模型，以在衡量探索性活動對公司績效之影響時，將時間延遲因素納入模型中考量。本研究發現：(1) 不確定性對探索性活動具正向顯著影響；(2) 利用性活動對於探索性活動與公司績效存在完全中介效果。此實證結果支持以實質選擇權觀點論述探索性與利用性活動對公司績效之影響。起始頁-結束頁：109-135資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.FEB.A102-05912篇名：External Ties of Managers and Firm Performance in an Emerging Industry並列篇名：經理人外部連結對新興產業內公司之表現影響作者：陳寶蓮(Pao-lien Chen)關鍵字：social capital;human capital;entry performance;社會資本;人力資本;進入表現期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：This paper examines the impact of managerial ties on the performance difference among entrants in an emerging industry. Empirical findings from firms that entered the cellular-phone service industry between 1983 and 1998 suggest the following. First, managers' ties to an intra-industry association positively moderated the relationship between managers' intra-industry experience and an entrant's new subscribers at the early stage of the focal industry; however, this effect decreased as the industry aged. Second, managers' ties to intra-industry competitors positively moderated the relationship between managers' intra-industry experience and an entrant's new subscribers regardless of industry age. Finally, mangers' external ties to other firms outside the industry exhibited no moderating impact.英文摘要：本文檢視經理人的外部連結對進入新興行業之廠商的表現差異影響。從1983 年至1998年間進入美國手機通訊服務業公司的實證，本文得到以下發現。首先，經理人與產業協會之連結會正向調節經理人的產業內經驗對公司手機用戶成長的影響。但這種正向的調節作用會隨著產業年齡增長而下降。其次，經理人與同業競爭者之連結也會正向調節經理人的產業內經驗對公司手機用戶成長的影響，而且此正向調節作用不會隨產業年齡而改變。最後，經理人的產業外連結不具前述調節作用。起始頁-結束頁：137-162資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.APR.A103-00713篇名：併購與策略聯盟在公司理財文獻之回顧與展望：亞洲市場之研究並列篇名：Review of M&A and Joint Ventures in the Field of Corporate Finance: Asia as the Case Study作者：翁鶯娟(Ying-Jiuan Wong);張紹基(Shao-Chi Chang)關鍵字：併購;策略聯盟;合資;公司理財;M&A;alliance;joint venture;corporate finance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：企業需藉由不同投資決策，以達成追求成長與永續經營等目的。當內部成長例如創新投資和資本投資等方式受限，無法達到成長目的時，併購、權益性策略聯盟如合資，或非權益性策略聯盟等外部成長方式遂成為組織達到擴張的重要方式。本文主要聚焦於公司外部成長之投資決策，回顧2000~2015 間以亞洲市場資料為樣本，並發表於TSSCI 或A 級SSCI 財務期刊中關於併購、合資與策略聯盟的文獻，依文獻之研究方向分為併購以及策略聯盟二個議題，系統性整理與分析各議題的發展與成果。此外，台灣市場具有家族企業普遍、網絡關係密切的產業供應鏈和集團企業等特性，這些特性提供台灣學者未來發展以台灣樣本為基礎之併購與策略聯盟研究的良好利基。本文希望透過系統性的整理分析，進而指出以台灣資料特性為樣本以及未來可能之研究方向，提供予後續研究者參考。英文摘要：A firm needs to engage in various corporate investments in order to grow and ensure sustainable operations. When opportunities for internal growth (innovation investment or capital investment) are limited and financial goals are not achieved, a firm may then turn to external growth methods (M&A, equity-based alliances such as joint ventures, and non-equity- based alliances) to achieve its growth objective. This study focuses on external growth strategies by revisiting the relevant literature that sampled data from the Asian market, and was published in TSSCI or A Tier SSCI financial journals from 2000 to 2015. Journals that touched upon M&A, joint ventures and strategic alliances were targeted. Following the research format within these journal articles, topics were then divided into two categories: M&A and alliances. Additionally, Taiwanese companies have a prevalence of family businesses, supply chains with closed networks and business groups. These unique characteristics of Taiwanese companies give scholars an opportunity to develop research focused on M&A and alliances. Taiwanese companies provide good data on niche acquisitions and alliances for researchers to examine. This study, through a systematic analysis, sheds light on potential future research topics and studies related to M&A and alliances based on data collected in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：163-213資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.NOV.25104-00314篇名：我國資訊科技採納與導入文獻回顧之趨勢分析(2000-2015)並列篇名：A Literature Review of the Information Technology Adoption, Implementation, and Related Themes in Information Systems Research in Taiwan (2000-2015)作者：歐陽瑜(Shirley Ou Yang);許瑋元(Carol Hsu)關鍵字：科技採納與導入;科技接受模式;科技創新;文獻回顧;IS adoption and implementation;technology acceptance model;IT innovation;literature review期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究回顧自2000-2015 年國內資訊科技採納與導入主題之文獻。總計針對有六份國內與研究主題高度關聯的頂尖資管與電子商務期刊進行研究。在本研究篩選出的82 篇相關論文中，根據理論、研究方法、分析單元與研究主題進行分析。研究結果發現，國內資訊科技採納與導入主題之研究在理論採用、研究方法、與分析單元等面相上，都受到科技接受模式研究典範的影響與限制，以個人層次的問卷調查研究佔極大多數，欠缺多樣性。本研究透過國際期刊的趨勢比較，提供未來國內資訊科技採納與導入後續研究建議，呼籲國內研究者應著眼於科技的、制度性的與歷史的脈絡因素，來豐富我們對科技創新之採納與導入的了解，同時建議未來研究需要有在個人、組織與產業等不同層次進行多層次、相互連結的分析。英文摘要：This paper reviews the IS adoption and implementation literature for the period of 2000- 2015.More specifically the top six Taiwanese journals on the information system, management and e-commerce topics were examined. In total 82 articles were analyzed in terms of theories, research methods, unit of analysis, and research topics. Our research found that Technology Acceptance Model has been the mainstream theory during the past 15 years in the Taiwanese IS journal. The individual level research, using survey method were appeared the most. We argued that the IS adoption and implementation literature in Taiwan in terms of the theories, methods, and units of analysis are considerably affected and narrowed the scope by TAM, lacking of diversity and contextual concern. We further compare our finding with the trend of international IS scholarship, and offer implications for future research directions on IS adoption and implementation, scholars to publish multiple, complementary levels of analysis across individual, organizations, and industries. Macro level study considering the variety of IT innovations and the intersection among different levels of IS adoption, implementation and user is also important.起始頁-結束頁：215-252資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.NOV.25104-00715篇名：董事及高階主管政治連結與公司績效之關聯性並列篇名：Political Connection and Firm Performance作者：紀信義(Hsin-Yi Chi);翁慈青(Tzu-Ching Weng);廖芝嫻(Chih-Hsien Liao);黃馨儀(Hsin-Yi Huang)關鍵字：政治背景;公司績效;公司治理;political connection;firm performance;corporate governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文主要探討公司成員政治背景是否影響企業績效。本文以大股東、最高階主管或董事成員是否擔任過中央政府官員、民意代表及相關政黨工作等特性，作為公司政治背景之替代變數，以台灣2005年至2011年之上市櫃公司為研究對象，實證結果發現，具有政治背景之公司，無論是會計績效或市場績效皆顯著較差。另將政治相關職位做進一步的分析發現，當公司有較高比例的董事成員擔任過中央政府官員或民意代表時，不但未能替公司增加價值，反而會產生較差的公司績效，此結果不受董事成員專業知識高低的影響，且在金融海嘯前後期均有相同的結果。最後，本文亦考慮公司取得政治連結的動機，結果發現，無論是否有較高的未來投資機會，政治連結均與公司績效呈顯著負相關，此外當公司有未來融資需求以及有較高的租稅管理程度時，政治連結對公司績效有顯著負向影響。英文摘要：This paper investigates how political connections affect firm performance. Different from prior studies, we enlarge the scope of political connections to include the board of directors in addition to large shareholders and top management. Besides, we also examine connection types, including connections through political parties, members of parliament, and government ministers. Using a sample of Taiwanese-listed firms from years 2005 to 2011, we find that politically-connected firms have lower accounting performance as well as lower market performance. Further analysis indicates that firms have weaker performance when they have higher proportions of directors serving as central government officers or legislative body representatives. The negative association is not affected by the director's level of professional knowledge and exists both before and after the financial crisis. The results are also consistent across different incentives (including future growth opportunities, financing needs, and tax avoidance) for politically-connected firms.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JUL.R.1301616篇名：Valuation Implication of Information Technology Expenditures in the Banking Industry並列篇名：銀行業資訊科技支出之價值攸關性作者：廖懿屏(Yi-Ping Liao);李德冠(Te-Kuan Lee)關鍵字：information technology;value relevance;earnings' persistence;資訊科技;價值攸關性;盈餘持續性期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Information technology (IT) expenditure has been regarded as critical in maintaining the competitiveness in the banking industry. However, existing literatures fail to document consistent evidence on the positive effect of IT expenditures on banks' productivity measures. This study is among the few that explore the valuation implication of IT expenditures based on U.S. banks. By utilizing the Ohlson (1995) model, our results indicate that: (1) IT expenditures are significantly and positively related to market values, suggesting that they are value-relevant; (2) IT intensity has positive impacts on earnings' multipliers (i.e., the persistence of earnings). Overall, this paper contributes to the literature by demonstrating the value relevance of IT expenditures for banks, an issue that few prior studies have addressed. Additionally, the quality of the management's decision-making is enhanced by ascertaining the critical role of IT expenditures in improving the earnings' persistence.英文摘要：現存文獻鮮少發現資訊科技支出對銀行業的正面效益，然不少銀行業公司卻仍舊維持高額的資訊科技支出，並明確指稱資訊科技支出有助於維持及擴展長期之客戶關係或營運品質。運用Ohlson（1995）模型，本研究結果指出：(1)資訊科技支出顯著且正向地影響銀行的市場價值，即資訊科技支出具有價值攸關性。(2)銀行的資訊科技支出水準對於盈餘乘數有正向的影響，亦即可提升盈餘持續性。本研究的貢獻為：(1)提供過去文獻未直接發現的資訊科技支出對銀行業價值攸關性之正面證據。(2)藉由瞭解資訊科技支出在改善盈餘持續性上的角色，使管理階層的決策品質進一步提升。起始頁-結束頁：35-56資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JUL.A102-02917篇名：以參考一籃子貨幣為名：人民幣匯率機制之驗證並列篇名：Verifying the Renminbi Exchange Rate Regime作者：黃志典(Jyh-Dean Hwang)關鍵字：人民幣匯率決定機制;狀態空間模型;爬行釘住美元;renminbi exchange rate regime;state space model;discretionary crawling peg to the US dollar期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文使用「狀態空間模型」（State Space Model）並完整納入中國人民銀行行長周小川揭露的11種貨幣，研究中國實施匯率機制改革以後的人民幣匯率機制。不論是使用月資料或是日資料，使用瑞士法郎、美元或是特別提款權作為計價標準，使用固定係數模型或是狀態空間模型，本文分析結果都顯示，人民幣通貨籃內的貨幣基本上只有美元。基於此一發現，加上匯改以來，人民幣對美元匯率在多數時間是以緩慢但不一致的速度爬升，而且人民幣對美元匯率的浮動程度一直相當低，我們推論中國實施的其實是「權衡式的爬行釘住美元」（Discretionary Crawling Peg to the US Dollar）機制。換言之，中國是以參考一籃子貨幣為名，行人民幣釘住美元之實。就中國面臨的經濟情勢來看，「權衡式的爬行釘住美元」機制應該是最佳選擇。基於中國經濟改革長期以來所遵循的漸進主義精神，可以預見中國實施自由浮動匯率機制，或只是實施有實質意涵的管理浮動匯率制度，應該還需要相當時間。英文摘要：This paper uses state space modeling to investigate the evolution of China's exchange rate regime after the announced shift to a managed floating exchange rate regime with reference to a basket of currencies in July 2005, considering all the 11 currencies disclosed by Governor Zhou Xiaochuan of the People's Bank of China as component currencies of the RMB basket. Invariant to the choices of the numeraire and the frequency of data used for investigation, we find that the RMB basket is essentially a one currency basket of the US dollar. In view of this finding and the facts that the exchange rate of USD/RMB has been crawling upward in an on-and-off manner and at a slow yet erratic rate after the regime shift, China's new exchange rate regime can best be characterized as a discretionary crawling peg to the US dollar. This regime seems to be the optimal and logical choice for China. Since China has been generally following a gradualist approach in economic reform, and the RMB exchange rate regime greatly affects China's macroeconomic stability, economic growth, and employment; China probably will not soon adopt a managed floating exchange rate regime, let alone a freely floating exchange rate regime.起始頁-結束頁：57-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.DEC.R.1302018篇名：以ITIL為基礎雲端運算服務品質評估機制之研究並列篇名：Evaluation Mechanism for Service Quality of Cloud Computing Based on ITIL作者：張碩毅(She-I Chang);張益誠(I-Cheng Chang);何晉滄(Chin-Tsang Ho);李幸蓉(Hsing-Jung Li);鄭伊秀(Yi-Hsiu Cheng)關鍵字：雲端運算服務;服務品質;資訊科技基礎架構庫;cloud computing service;service quality;ITIL期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著新的雲端運算服務和技術逐步進入市場，組織須不斷重新設計需求和重複評估，因此未來的評估工作應按照特定的準則加以規範。故本研究運用Gowin's Vee模型建立研究的流程，在文獻端透過文獻探討相關服務品質量表，以ITIL作為研究基礎，發展與建構雲端運算服務品質評估機制雛形；實證端則採用德爾菲專家問卷萃取適合衡量雲端運算品質服務項目，因此修正後的雲端運算服務品質評估機制包括有五大模組、19個流程與44個衡量項目，最後輔以層級分析法確認衡量項目間相對權重後，建構適合衡量不同供應商之雲端運算服務品質評估機制。這些結果可協助不同雲端運算服務供應商定義清楚自身市場定位及強化競爭優勢，同時更貼近不同雲端運算服務使用者的需求。英文摘要：As new cloud computing services and technologies penetrate the market gradually, and organizations should constantly redesign and reevaluate demands. Therefore, future assessment should be regulated according to specific criteria. This study adopts Gowin's Vee Model to establish the study process. Literature is employed to investigate relative service quality scales. With Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) as the research foundation, the embryo of cloud computing service quality assessment mechanism is developed and established. For verification, Delphi method is employed to determine the services suitable for measuring the quality of cloud computing. Therefore, the assessment mechanism of cloud computing service quality modified in this study includes five modules, 19 processes, and 44 measurement items. Lastly, after Analytic Hierarchy Process is adopted to confirm the relative weight of measurement items for diverse cloud computing service suppliers. The result can not only help different cloud computing service suppliers clearly define their positions in the market and enhance their competitive advantages, but can also meet the demands and requirements of users.起始頁-結束頁：97-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JAN.C102-02119篇名：中國股權分置改革對於最終控制股東與關係人交易之關係的影響並列篇名：The Impact of the Chinese Split-Share Structure Reform on the Relationship between Ultimate Controlling Shareholder and Related Party Transactions作者：王文聖(Wen-Sheng Wang);蔡子傑(Chi-Kit Choi);李易政(I-Cheng Li);洪榮華(Jung-Hua Hung)關鍵字：控制股東;關係人交易;股權分置改革;ultimate controlling shareholder;related party transactions;split-share structure reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：中國政府於2005年實施股權分置改革，以平衡非流通股東及流通股東的利益，減少控制股東剝奪少數股東財富的誘因。本研究以2002年至2013年間在深圳及上海交易所上市的公司為樣本，探討股權分置改革是否對控制股東從事關係人交易產生影響。透過PLS迴歸模型檢驗，實證發現國有控制股東在股權分置改革後減少進行關係人交易的下降幅度比非國有股東多；在國有控制股東樣本中，中央政府在股權分置改革後減少進行關係人交易的下降幅度比地方政府多。此外，第二大股東傾向與控制股東共謀而增加關係人交易的使用。本研究對於政策制定者及投資人具有管理意涵。英文摘要：Chinese government implemented the split-share structure reform in 2005, with an attempt to eliminate controlling shareholders' incentive to expropriate the minority shareholders' wealth through aligning the interest of controlling shareholders and minority shareholders. Using the sample of all companies listed on the Shenzhen and the Shanghai Stock Exchange during the years from 2002 to 2013, the study scrutinizes the impact of the split-share structure reform on the relationship between ultimate controlling shareholder and related party transactions. Through the PLS regression models, empirical results show that related party transactions are reduced after the split share structure reform in firms controlled by state-owned firms, especially in firms controlled by the central government. In addition, the second-largest shareholder tends to collude with the controlling shareholders and increase the use of related party transaction after the reform. Our findings have implications for policy makers and investors.起始頁-結束頁：135-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JAN.A103-01720篇名：Green Policy-Driven Closed-Loop Supply Chain for Recycling of Economically-Disadvantaged Recycled Materials並列篇名：以綠色導向政策探討低經濟價值再生材料之回收供應鏈作者：陳彥銘(Yenming J. Chen);許鉅秉(Jiuh-Biing Sheu)關鍵字：green supply chain management;game theory;tax-subsidy system;profitless recycling;economically-disadvantaged recycled materials (EDRM);綠色供應鏈管理;賽局理論;稅收補貼制度;低利潤資源回收;低經濟價值再生材料(EDRM)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：This paper investigates an effectiveness problem in the enactment of environmental policies aimed at profitless recycling of economically-disadvantaged recycled materials (EDRMs). After thorough analysis, a policy instrument has been proposed. The arguments are established from a closed-loop supply chain model in a multiplayer hierarchical Stackelberg game, manifesting interactions between competing manufacturers, suppliers of virgin and recycled materials, and the government. Analytical results indicate that a tax-subsidy system is effective because this policy improves the profits of all parties involved in the recycling system. We suggest that governments should involve in the recycling practice of profitless materials.英文摘要：本文探討對於低經濟價值再生材料(EDRMS)在低利潤資源回收上，如何制定相關有效的環境政策。經過深入分析，我們提出一個政策工具，其立論是基於順序競爭賽局的多層次閉環供應鏈模型，體現互相競爭的製造商、原生和再生材料供應商以及政府之間的相互作用。分析結果表明，目前的稅收補貼制度是有效的，因為這一政策提高了參與回收系統各方公司的利潤。我們建議政府應該多關注低利潤資源回收的政策制度。起始頁-結束頁：163-183資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JAN.A103-00601篇名：蘋果的政治技術：台灣高山農業的領域政治與經濟並列篇名：Political Technology of Apple: Territorial Politics and Economy of the Mountain Agriculture in Taiwan作者：洪伯邑(Po-Yi Hung);蕭彗岑(Hui-Tsen Hsiao)關鍵字：中橫公路;高山農業;領域;蘋果;Apple;Mountain Agriculture;Taiwan;Territory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：20卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：戰後台灣高山農業的發展之初並不僅僅是種植溫帶水果的任務，也是一項政治任務，國民政府藉由將自然地景轉變為農地的過程，深化其對高山土地與人的控制，成為國家實質的「領域」（territory），也就是政治領域化的過程。我們以梨山的高山農業種植（以蘋果為縮影）來討論這一個故事。中橫公路修築後一連串的土地測量、分配與整地的工作，表面是發展高山農業的措施，背後挾帶的是國家對高山地區的實質掌控；然而，當土地與其上的經濟作物都從這個過程成為「財產」（property），市場經濟的運作邏輯也就跟著深入梨山地區的高山農業。在不同事件的作用力下，我們以蘋果為案例，包括台灣戰後美援政治下的蘋果意象、對進口蘋果開放的農業全球化政策、社會環境意識抬頭下的高山農業土地利用限縮、食安議題下對「本土蘋果」的重新想像與認同等等，也讓梨山地區的蘋果，甚或整個台灣的高山農業，不斷地在變動的市場中持續著對外不同人事物的聯繫，而這些更迭的聯繫便是經濟去領域化、再領域化、再去領域化連續進程的體現。因此，從戰後台灣高山農業種植到產銷的案例，政治的領域化啟動了後續經濟去領域化的動能，而所謂的政治領域化與經濟去領域化的對立，儼然過度簡化了政治力、經濟力與領域三者的關係。英文摘要：By tracing the historical trajectory of temperate fruit production in Taiwan, particularly apples, this essay aims to understand the symbolic and material changes of Taiwan's mountain agriculture. Focusing on the post-World War II period to the present, we argue that the development of mountain agriculture in Taiwan operates as a political technology. Territory as political technology requires the political-legal mechanisms of the state to authorize power in maintaining order inside its territorial sovereignty. Meanwhile, political technology also comprises political-technical dimensions such as surveying and mapping techniques in order to produce a ”legible” territory for both the state and the market. Specifically, this work focuses on Lishan, a major apple production area, located in Taiwan's Central Mountain Range, to explore the relationship between mountain agriculture and the politics of territorialization. Throughout our analysis, we intend to shed light on how the development of mountain agriculture was not just a mission for the production of temperate fruits per se, but also a political project to turn the mountain landscape into a controllable territory of farmlands. In other words, we use Lishan to illustrate the relationship between the production of mountain agriculture and the increase of state control over its Central Mountain Range area, a political territorialization process. Additionally, we argue that this political territorialization has simultaneously brought economic deterritorialization, by connecting Taiwan's Central Mountain Range to the market economy. This political territorialization, and simultaneous economic deterritorialization, reflects the dynamic relationship between mountain agriculture and society in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2017.20.02.001-0292篇名：捷運系統對鄰近住宅價格之影響－以差異中之差異法估計並列篇名：The Impact of the Taipei Mass Rapid Transit System on Nearby Housing Prices: An Estimation Using the Difference-in-Difference Method作者：李春長(Chun-Chang Lee);梁志民(Chih-Min Liang);林豐文(Feng-Wen Lin)關鍵字：住宅價格;地理資訊系統;差異中之差異法;捷運車站;Difference-in-difference method;Geographic information system;Housing price;Mass Rapid Transit station期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：20卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究主要探討台北信義捷運線開工後，且住宅位於捷運影響範圍之內（實驗組）與影響範圍之外（控制組），其住宅價格是否產生差異。使用差異中之差異法（difference-in-difference method）對住宅內部屬性，以及地理資訊系統（geographical information system, GIS）測量後之住宅外部屬性，進行實證模型的建立。採用吉家網2004至2006年度台灣不動產成交行情公報資料，包括中正區、大安區、信義區共三個行政區之住宅成交資料。實證結果顯示，捷運開工之後，將實驗組與控制組兩者之差距扣除其實驗組原本趨勢後，在800公尺範圍下，得到因捷運開工之真正影響為92.772萬。英文摘要：This study investigated whether the housing prices for houses within the range of influence of the Taipei mass rapid transit (MRT) system (treatment group) and houses outside the range of influence (control group) differed after the new Xinyi MRT line began operation. The difference-in-difference method was used to measure internal housing characteristics and a geographical information system (GIS) was used to measure external housing characteristics; afterwards, an empirical model was created. The GigaHouse website was referenced to obtain public records on housing transactions in the Zhongzheng District, Da'an District, and Xinyi District between 2004 and 2006. The results indicated that, after correcting for the difference in housing prices between the two groups and the original pricing trend for houses in the treatment group, the opening of the new MRT line increased the cost of housing by NT$927,720 for houses within 800 meters of the MRT.起始頁-結束頁：31-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2017.20.02.031-0583篇名：電離層高階項誤差對GPS精密單點定位精度之影響並列篇名：The Higher Order Ionospheric Delay Effect on the Accuracy of GPS Precise Point Positioning作者：林老生(Lao-Sheng Lin);洪婉綺(Wan-Chi Hung)關鍵字：全球定位系統;電離層高階項誤差;精密單點定位;雙頻;Dual Frequency;Global Positioning System (GPS);Higher Order Ionospheric Refraction Effects;Precise Point Positioning (PPP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：20卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：全球定位系統（Global Positioning System, GPS）雙頻觀測資料經過處理後，其精密單點定位（Precise Point Positioning, PPP）之精度可達公分等級。然而，對於精度要求較高之應用，如控制測量、地殼變形監測等，公分級精度尚嫌不足。欲進一步提昇PPP之精度，必須考慮電離層二、三階等高階項誤差之改正。本文在於研究電離層高階項誤差對於台灣地區PPP之影響，因此，主要研究議題為探討在：（1）不同方向（2）太陽黑子高、低峰期（3）不同季節（4）不同地區等情況，改正電離層高階項誤差後對PPP精度之影響。實驗使用之主要軟體與服務有：（1）RINEX_HO程式，（2）gLAB程式，及（3）AUPOS服務。實驗資料，包含5個台灣衛星追蹤站2009年至2015年之GPS觀測資料。根據實驗結果發現，若改正電離層高階項誤差，對於PPP之影響有以下幾點特性：（1）對東西方向的定位精度提昇比例最高，約為63.0%。（2）太陽黑子低峰期之改正效果較佳，定位精度提昇比例為43.0%。（3）夏季、秋季的定位精度提昇比例優於春季及冬季。（4）南部的墾丁站，其精度提昇效果最佳，定位精度提昇比例約為47.3%。英文摘要：The precise point positioning (PPP) accuracy can reach cm level using Global Positioning System (GPS) dual-frequency data. However, cm level accuracy is insufficient for high accuracy applications, such as control surveying, deformation monitoring, etc. To improve the accuracy of PPP, must consider the higher order ionospheric refraction effects. The purpose of this research is to investigate the effects on PPP accuracies in Taiwan region caused by higher order ionospheric refraction errors in different situations: (1) errors in different directions, (2) using observation data in low or higher solar activity period, (3) using observation data of different seasons, and (4) using observation data of different areas. There were two programs and one service applied in this study: RINEX_HO, gLAB and AUPOS. Test data sets are the observation data from five satellite tracking stations of Taiwan region of year 2009 to 2015. According to the test results, there are several characteristics after correcting higher order ionospheric delays. (1) Most significant effects on the receiver positions occurred in the east-west direction. About 63.0% of PPP results were improved. (2) Accuracies of corrected PPP results improved 43% when the solar activity was low. (3) Summer and autumn observation data had better outcome. (4) The southern station, e.g. KDNM, can get better PPP results. About 47.3% of PPP results were improved.起始頁-結束頁：59-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2017.20.02.059-08201篇名：社運與政治：總工會與左翼政黨並列篇名：Social Movements and Politics: Federation of Unions and Left-wing Party作者：陳政亮(Cheng-Liang CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：225-236資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：非政黨政治過程和社會雙向運動：回顧與展望並列篇名：Non-Party Political Process and the Societal Self-Defense Movement: Reviewing and Looking Forward作者：丘延亮(Fred Y. L. CHIU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：237-253資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：紀念陳映真（1937.11.18 ∼ 2016.11.22）－論1960年代陳映真統左思想的形成並列篇名：In Memoriam Chen Yingzhen: On the Formation of His Pro-Unification Left Stance in the 1960s作者：呂正惠(Cheng-hui LU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：106期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：255-274資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：社會演化與人群分類：族群做為語意並列篇名：Social Evolution and Categorization of People: Ethnicity as Semantics作者：胡正光(Cheng-Kuang Hu)關鍵字：系統理論;自我生產;自我指涉;二階觀察;社會演化;族群性;族群語意;Systems theory;Autopoiesis;Self-reference;Second-order observation;Social evolution;Ethnicity;Ethnic semantics期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：61期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文嘗試由系統理論的概念解釋族群現象的一些議題，其基本的假設在於，社會的構成原則不同，則人群分類原則也就不同。以功能分化為構成原則的現代社會中，常用的人群分類（階級、民族、種族，當然也包含族群）只是做為語意，並非人群本質上的差異。而人群語意的功能，是把具有某些特性的群體概念帶入溝通，達到歸因和期望的效果。族群出現與否，取決於觀察時所採用的區別，是偶連的。而族群語意的內涵，牽涉功能系統的「涵括／排除」條件，以及符碼的「正值／負值」分配機會，此二者與現代社會的不平等議題相關。族群正是指出在社會中處於相對不平等狀態的人群語意，並藉由自我描述賦予這「一群人」特性。英文摘要：This essay tries to explain some ethnic phenomena with concepts of Niklas Luhmann's systems theory. The theoretical assumption is that the categorization principles of human groups transform with the fundamental structures of societies. In modern society, which is constructed on the basis of functional differentiation, the classification types, including class, nation, race, and ethnic group, merely refer to semantics instead of a way to categorize the actual people essentially. That is, in this classification, the characters of specific groups are involved in the process of communication. The emergence of ethnicity is contingent on the distinction adopted by the observer. Moreover, the ethnic semantics is related to the inequality issues in modern society, which can be observed on two levels. The first level of inequality is concerned with the inclusion/exclusion conditions of access to communications in functional systems. The second level of inequality is related to the probability of positive value/negative value in the self-observation of systems. Ethnicity is therefore a group-semantics which describes the formation and the character of a group of people treated unequally in the society, and the group character given by self-description in the communications.起始頁-結束頁：1-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170600610012篇名：無原因差異之積極與消極安樂死並列篇名：There Are No Causal Differences between Active and Passive Euthanasia作者：張智皓(Jhih-Hao Jhang)關鍵字：積極安樂死;消極安樂死;原因角色;道德差異;active euthanasia;passive euthanasia;causal role;moral difference期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：61期出版年：2017中文摘要：在安樂死議題中，關於積極安樂死與消極安樂死有道德差異的一個常見觀點是：醫生在兩種行為中扮演了不同的原因角色。當醫生執行積極安樂死時，投放致命毒藥之行為導致患者死亡，醫生行為是患者死亡的原因。當醫生執行消極安樂死時，關閉維生器材之行為沒有導致患者死亡，患者死亡的原因歸屬於疾病。基於前項行為是殺死患者，後項行為是任患者死亡，兩種行為有道德差異。本文針對此論點進行分析，並論證：不管醫生是關閉維生器材，還是投放致命毒藥，其行為都是患者死亡的原因，扮演相同的原因角色，換言之，兩種行為都是殺死患者。基於我們無法主張醫生的兩種安樂死行為中有原因差異，因此，我們無法基於原因差異來證成兩種安樂死的道德差異。英文摘要：With regard to the moral difference between active and passive euthanasia, one popular opinion is that the doctor plays different causal roles between these two actions. When it comes to active euthanasia, the doctor is the cause of the patient's death. In contrast, the doctor is not the cause of the patient's death when he performs passive euthanasia. It is natural to think that there are moral differences between these two actions in virtue of their causal differences. In this paper, I argue that there are no causal differences between active and passive euthanasia. The doctor is the cause of both actions and therefore plays the same causal role. If there are no causal differences between these two actions, then it is untenable to claim that there are moral differences between active and passive euthanasia because of their causal differences.起始頁-結束頁：73-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170600610023篇名：敘事在鄂蘭與呂格爾間的關聯：從實踐的意義出發來看並列篇名：Relation between Ricoeur and Arendt Regarding Narrative: A View Starting from Practical Significance作者：汪文聖(Wen-Sheng Wang)關鍵字：鄂蘭;呂格爾;敘事;悲傷;釋放;寬恕;慈愛;Arendt;Ricoeur;Narrative;Sorrow;Release;Forgiveness;Charity期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：61期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文對於敘事在鄂蘭與呂格爾的關聯是從問題性而非歷史性來探討，關注的是實踐多於理論的意義，指的是敘事具有一種創傷療癒的實踐作用。相關的悲傷、釋放、寬恕、悼念等概念、其他哲學家思想，以及敘事從時間與歷史角度的開展，也將從這個實踐意義出發去討論。在鄂蘭方面，她以受害人對加害人的寬恕可釋放心靈而減緩悲傷，但預設了加害人懺悔在先；與之相較，受害人的敘事可單方開放心靈以減緩痛苦。呂格爾進一步將敘事開展多層面相，包括悼念的意義、彼此交換敘事，致使敘事所具的療癒作用可更深與更廣的施展。他並強調以慈愛助益寬恕，且將慈愛連結到公共領域，以避免維持正義的法律僵化。呂格爾實將鄂蘭對敘事因釋放心靈而得以療癒的主張更加延伸與活絡。英文摘要：In this paper, the relation between Arendt and Ricoeur regarding narrative will be investigated from a problematic, but not historical point of view. The issue is more practical than theoretical insofar as narrative has a function of healing from trauma. Related concepts such as sorrow, release, forgiveness, the philosophies of Aristotle, Augustine, Husserl, and the extension of narrative theory in terms of time and history will be discussed staring from that practical significance. For Arendt, if a wrong-sufferer forgives the wrongdoer, his mind can be released from the closedness so that his sorrow can be mitigated. However, this presupposes the wrongdoer's regret. In contrast, narrative enables the wrong-sufferer to release his mind from the closedness and reduce his sorrow by himself. Ricoeur further develops narrative in multiple layers of meaning in terms of ”mourning,” ”exchange of memories” etc. so that the healing function of narrative can be realized more deeply and broadly. He also emphasizes charity to assist forgiveness, and wants the actualization of charity in public affairs in order to prevent possible rigidity in the law, which aims to maintain social justice. Ricoeur originally extends and re-acts the implication of the releasing of the mind that Arendt attributes to the healing function of narrative.起始頁-結束頁：129-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201706006100301篇名：疾病範疇與自我轉變：以台灣成年妥瑞人為例並列篇名：Disease Categories and Personal Identity: Adult Persons with Tourette Syndrome in Taiwan作者：詹穆彥(Mu-Yen Chan)關鍵字：醫療與社會;醫療化;自我認同;妥瑞症;Medicine and Society;Medicalization;Self-Identity;Tourette Syndrome期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：「人的類別」（kind of people）往往隨著醫療分類範疇而轉變，兩者之間存在互動關係，也影響了被分類人們的自我認同。相對於西方，妥瑞症在台灣是一個較為晚近才進入大眾意識的新興範疇。具有妥瑞症現象的人們常在與醫療知識及社會文化的互動過程中挪用了其中的客觀基礎，形構出了一種特殊的台灣「妥瑞人」認同，重新以神經科學的內涵細緻且全面地架構了關於自我的各個面向，獲得一種新的經驗自我方式。這種新的認同在某種程度上對患者具有充權的效果，不僅去除某些既有污名及道德負擔，也賦予了這些人們進一步行動的可能性。然而，新的認同也產生妥瑞人需要面對及處理的一系列新議題。藉由探索他們的經驗歷程，更有助於理解疾病範疇與醫用者相互生成的動態過程。本研究尤其聚焦在成年妥瑞人，包含在生命中較晚遇見妥瑞症的人們，他們鮮明且獨特的生命經驗更有助於探索這樣的轉變歷程。英文摘要：”Kind of people” is usually intertwined with changing medical categories, and together they influence the self-identification of people who have been classified by scientific knowledge. Tourette syndrome is a relatively new disease category in Taiwan with specific historical and social characteristics. In this article, I explore the ways in which many of the people diagnosed with this new medical category in Taiwan have creatively appropriated the clinical side of the neurological discourse and worked collaboratively with medical professionals to generate a self-identity, 'Tourette ren' (Touretter), which is able to further their personal and social interests. Their newly gained neurological knowledge reconfigures every facet of daily life and makes them experience their selves in new ways. This new kind of self-identity in a sense not only empowers them and eradicates their social stigma and moral burden, but also provides them with more possibilities in regard to their personal development. However, the new identity produces a series of new agendas which people with Tourette syndrome have to deal with. This article focuses on experiences of adult persons with Tourette syndrome in Taiwan. By exploring their experiences, this study brings forth the dynamic and mutually shaping relationship between disease categories and medical users.起始頁-結束頁：7-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：探索風險社會下的反身性知識技能：以日本311災難報導經驗和專業反思為例並列篇名：Disaster Reporting in Risk Society: A Study of the Risk Experiences and Reflexive Professionalism of Journalists Who Reported on the 3/11 disasters in Japan作者：張春炎(Chun-Yen Chang);劉昌德(Chang-De Liu)關鍵字：新聞生產與勞動;新聞倫理;記者安全;風險社會;災難新聞報導;news production and labor;news ethics;safety of journalists;risk society;disaster reporting期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以日本311震災為經，並採取風險社會概念為緯，探討新聞工作者如何因應災難報導過程的勞動風險及善盡新聞專業。透過對實際參與採訪報導的臺灣新聞工作者之訪談，本研究發現，新聞工作者面對充滿不確定性的災難事件，傳統新聞採訪的專業規範往往無法發揮應有功能。本研究歸納災難新聞勞動與經驗，提出因應風險的行動參考架構，以協助新聞工作者運用於災難事件報導中。本研究結論並建議媒體單位與工作者持續以動態過程，反身性地對此參考架構進行反思，期使未來災難事件中，記者能保護自身及同僚的身心安全、更善盡報導責任。英文摘要：Journalists' safety is a crucial issue to which researchers as well as practitioners need to pay more attention. Thus, this paper will focus on the question of how journalists who reported on the 3/11 disasters in Japan dealt with the physical dangers and emotional stresses. Using case study and qualitative methods, first we explore 11 Taiwanese journalists' experiences of disaster reporting, and then we examine concepts of journalism safety in disaster situations. Finally, we propose a safety and ethics guide for disaster journalists and also make some suggestions on how news organizations can improve journalists' safety and conclude with some reflections on disaster journalism.起始頁-結束頁：63-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：棄置的圍網和推不動的紙盤：產銷結構如何形塑技術物政治性並列篇名：Why Did the Animal-proof Netting and Paper Egg Tray Policies Fail? : The Social and Market Construction of Artifacts' Politics作者：簡妤儒(Yu-Ju Chien)關鍵字：禽流感;圍網;紙蛋盤;技術物;政治性;Avian flu;Animal-proof netting;Paper egg trays;Artifacts;Political qualities期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：看似符合適當科技精神的技術物為什麼會失敗？本文探討農委會自2004年起在養雞場試圖推動的兩項防範禽流感的技術物—防鳥圍網和盛裝雞蛋的紙盤—為何在產銷現場不斷遭遇反彈。本研究透過考察雞農養殖實作及相應市場產銷結構，指出技術物的成功或失敗，不僅涉及物與人的互動，以及社會群體的角力，也受到法律中物的所有權規範、產業上下游產銷鏈安排，以及市場中價格決定機制等結構因素的影響。在養雞業所面對的防疫挑戰中，以低價、大量生產為基礎的產業運作，深刻形塑了雞農、盤商，以及消費者的認知和行動，讓相關行動者多傾向捍衛開放性禽場和塑膠蛋箱等舊技術物，使得圍網和紙蛋盤在防疫實作中逐漸退場或遲遲難以登場。透過分析防鳥圍網和紙盤這兩樣簡易技術物推動的困境，本研究指出行動者網絡和社會世界理論解釋力的不足，並提出應正視技術物和社會互動過程中，制度或產業結構裡的權力關係對行動者認知和能動性的限制。英文摘要：To prevent avian flu outbreaks, the Taiwanese government has introduced two artifacts to poultry farmers to enhance farm biosecurity since 2004: bird-proof netting and paper egg trays. Although these two artifacts seem like appropriate technologies suitable for local small-scale production, most farmers and wholesalers resisted adopting them. This article explains these stakeholders' resistance by investigating how market structures shape their risk perceptions and willingness to change. Data were collected by analyzing policy documents, examining news reports, and interviewing government officials, veterinary experts, and poultry farmers. I argue that stakeholders' rationality and practices are embedded in conventional mass production markets. Not only does the current division of labor in poultry and egg markets encourage actors to externalize the cost of disease prevention, it also shapes artifacts' political qualities. Conventional artifacts, such as unenclosed chicken coops and plastic egg trays, are not inherently risky. It is stakeholders' attempts to reduce personal inputs and maximize short-term returns that have contributed to disease transmission via these artifacts. By showing how the market shapes actors' rationality and the characteristics of things, this study intends to overcome the explanatory limitations of actor network theory (ANT) and social worlds theory, both of which often neglect power relations in specific social contexts. To prevent zoonotic diseases, therefore, not only artifacts but also market structures should be taken into account.起始頁-結束頁：119-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：什麼是後殖民科技研究中的後殖民：淺論其主張與啟發並列篇名：What Is Postcolonial about Postcolonial Science and Technology Studies? A Preliminary Assessment of Its Arguments and Inspirations作者：陳嘉新(Jia-shin Chen)關鍵字：後殖民科技研究;強客觀性;刪節號下;對稱性原則;後進國;Postcolonial science and technology studies;strong objectivity;under erasure;symmetry principle;latecomer期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來，後殖民科技研究常常出現在台灣科技研究論著的語彙中，可是對於這個概念所指為何與價值何在，卻少有批判性的回顧與檢討。本文聚焦在後殖民的科技研究分析潛能如何展現的問題，不預先給定後殖民的定義，而是藉由爬梳慣常被認定為「後殖民」科技研究者的主張，尤其是編纂後殖民科技研究讀本的Sandra Harding的「強客觀性」主張與撰寫後殖民科技研究導論的Warwick Anderson的「刪節號下的殖民」概念，因而歸納出後殖民科技的常見討論主題，包括原住民的知識與技術、發展與現代性，以及重新檢討殖民概念；本文並以此延伸出本地乃至於東亞情境下的相關議題，如東亞特色、後進國概念與對稱性原則。最後再討論這個概念的啟發，並提出筆者對這個概念的建議定位。英文摘要：In recent years, postcolonial technoscience has often been addressed in STS research in Taiwan, but there have been few critical reviews and assessments. This article focuses on the ways in which postcolonial science and technology studies has been developed. It does not define postcolonial in advance, but examines closely the claims of those STS researchers who are usually considered postcolonial, such as Sandra Harding's idea of strong objectivity and Warwick Anderson's concept of colonial as ”under erasure.” Next, common themes of postcolonial science and technology studies are summarized, which include indigenous knowledge and technology, development and modernity, and the re-examination of the notion of colonial. This article then extends into relevant issues in local and even East Asian settings, such as East Asian distinction, the latecomer concept, and the symmetry principle. It concludes by discussing how postcolonial science and technology studies has inspired the exploration of contrasts between tradition and modernity, suggesting that postcolonial science and technology be seen as a sensitizing concept and a heuristic.起始頁-結束頁：171-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：地方化後殖民：在地經驗、認識空間與實作本體論作者：林文源期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：221-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：基礎建設：需索無度的環境　評Beyond the Big Ditch: Political Ecology, and Infrastructure at the Panama Canal.作者：何俊頤期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：233-243資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館7篇名：日本殖民官吏眼中的「臺灣鴉片問題」評《日本帝國主義與鴉片：臺灣總督府的鴉片政策》作者：許宏彬期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：245-251資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：1995-2000年香港社會福利整筆補助政策之「制定過程」並列篇名：The Process of Hong Kong’s Policy of Making Lump Sum Grants in Social Welfare, 1995-2000作者：王卓聖(Cho-Sheng Wang)關鍵字：社會福利改革;社會福利政策制定;香港社會福利整筆補助政策;新公共管理;social welfare reform;social welfare policy making;Hong Kong's lump grant policy in social welfare;new public management期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：36期出版年：2017中文摘要：新公共管理潮流下香港政府在1990年代興起改革運動，特別是1995-2000年在立法機關主導社會福利補助改革之論辯，繼之2001年實施整筆補助最令人矚目，被稱為新公共管理的改革、實踐典範或社會福利改革，迄今其後續效應仍持續影響著香港社會福利界。分析香港立法會1995-2000年有關整筆補助政策15次會議紀錄內容資料，本文發現香港政府為主導政策的行動者，利益團體及立法會議員為影響決策的利害關係者，雙方以立法機關為溝通平臺進行討論與協商，香港政府在過程中扮演的角色最為關鍵，操縱其所握有的財政資源，逐步讓利誘導非政府機構支持政策的制定，最終使該政策合法化，進而付諸實施。檢視整筆補助政策產出之意涵，其背後的邏輯為新公共管理對香港政府及香港社會福利制度的影響與作用，值得參採借鑑。2001年香港整筆補助制度終於誕生，同時也為香港社會福利界管理主義與專業主義拉鋸戰揭開了序幕。英文摘要：With the trend of new public management, the pace of Hong Kong's governmental reformation rose in the 1990s. The process of Hong Kong's social welfare subvention policy was debated from 1995 to 2000 in Hong Kong's legislative council. The implementation of lump sum grants in the social welfare system was most remarkable development in 2001; this practical model or social welfare reform was part the reform of new public management. Currently its subsequent effects are still influencing relevant stakeholders in the entire field of social welfare. After an analysis of the relevant documents of Hong Kong's legislative council from 1995 to 2000, this paper finds that in the process of policy making the Hong Kong government played the administrative and dominant roles. Interest groups and members of the legislative council amended the policy of the stakeholders. Both sides discussed and negotiated in the legislative council as a communication platform. The Hong Kong Government manipulated its financial resources by ”giving bonuses,” thereby gradually inducing non-governmental organizations to support their policy making. Finally it legalized and implemented the lump sum grant system. This paper reviews the logic of Hong Kong's policy making process of lump sum grants in social welfare, the new public management implications and its effects on Hong Kong's Government and social welfare institutions. The results should serve as reference. The use of lump sum grants in the social welfare system was enacted in 2001, and the debate between managerialism and professionalism among relevant stakeholders in the entire field of social welfare also started at the same time.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2017.36.012篇名：臺灣社會工作者的專業繼續教育生態適配度、專業支持感與專業價值感對專業勝任能力之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Ecological Fitness of Professional Continuing Education, Perceived Professional Support and Professional Value on Professional Competence Among Social Workers in Taiwan作者：林秉賢(Ping-Hsien Lin)關鍵字：生態觀點;社會工作專業勝任能力;社會工作專業繼續教育;ecological perspective;social work professional competence;social work professional continuing education期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：36期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以調查法，針對476位案例組織內從事經濟扶助業務之社工有效樣本，進行自陳式問卷調查。運用探索性因素分析，建構社會工作專業勝任能力指標，並檢驗組織內社工對於專業繼續教育生態適配程度、專業支持感、專業價值的覺知狀態，對社會工作專業勝任能力之影響。研究結果指出，社工實務生態對於社會工作專業繼續教育的各層級適配性，促使社工個人形成較高的專業支持感與價值感，進而提升社會工作專業勝任能力。本研究設計之「社會工作專業勝任能力量表」，形成八個內在建構效度良好之專業能力向度，包含57個題項，信度一致性Cronbach's α值達.90以上，可作為日後對於社會工作專業自我評量與實務訓練研究之引導工具參考。英文摘要：The researcher adopted the self-report questionnaire method to survey an effective sample of 476 social workers in charge of economic and financial assistance affairs at Taiwan Fund for Children and Families (TFCF), a Taiwanese non-profit organization specialized in the promotion of children's well-being. With the employment of the exploratory factor analysis (EFA) approach, this research aimed to construct the indicators for professional competence in social work while, evaluating how the social workers at TFCF perceive the ecological fitness of professional continuing education, perceived social support and professional value proposed by the organization. The research results prove that the ecologic alfitness of continuing professional education in social work contributes greatly to the exceeding performance in perceived professional support and professional value for social workers, which further enhance the fitness of their professional competence. The tool designed for this research, namely the ”Social Worker Competence Questionnaire”, encompasses 8 well-constructed professional competence dimensions along with 57 question items with item consistency of over .90 Cronbach's α value. It is hoped that the findings concluded by this research will shed more light on social workers' self-evaluation in their professional competence as well as the development of the continuing education framework for social work professionals.起始頁-結束頁：47-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2017.36.023篇名：國際兒童保護體制改革之制度論初探：以「兒童保護」與「家庭支持」典範交流為例，及其對臺灣兒保改革之啟發並列篇名：An Institutional Approach to International Child Protection Reforms: The Exchange of Child Protection and Family Support Paradigms and its Implications for Taiwan's Policy Reforms作者：林宜輝(Yei-Whei Lin);陳怡如(Yi-Ju Chen)關鍵字：兒童保護改革;兒童保護典範;制度反饋;政策拼貼;家庭支持典範;child protection reforms;child protection paradigm;institutional feedbacks;policy assemblage;family support paradigm期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：36期出版年：2017中文摘要：自上世紀，八○年代末期，先進工業國家興起了一波有關兒童保護制度的論辯。其中以英、美與歐洲國家，各自所擁護的「兒童保護」與「家庭支持」兩大政策典範，已然成為相關制度交鋒之所在。兩陣營間的改革對話，不僅引發了改革行動，也對本土兒保政策之興革醞釀了重要的政治意涵。在此脈絡下，本論文將採比較歷史研究方法，並立基「制度論」取向，初探兩個主要議題：一、為解析此兩大政策典範國家，在相互交流後，所帶來的體制改革政治。二、探討國際經驗，對本土兒保改革的啟發與挑戰。本論文研究發現指出，目前部分比較兒福政策學者所擁護的國際兒保體制，已漸趨同的說法，可能過於片面。相反地，由制度論觀點出發，將發現國際兒保改革仍朝多樣化體制發展。另在借鑑美國為主之經驗下，本土兒保體制改革已漸往管理主義模式發展，且仍面臨體制輸入不足而可能拖累體制能力及其效能之困境。英文摘要：Since the late 1980s, there have been waves of debates about child protection systems among advanced industrial countries. In particular, child protection and family support regimes embraced by Anglo-Saxon countries and continental European ones, respectively, have been the focus of heated debate. Amidst the process, the two camps started to undertake policy exchange, which triggered their subsequent policy reforms. These international experiences have important implications for Taiwan's own policy development. Having acknowledged this, an institutional approach is adopted in this comparative- historical paper to address two related research questions. The first concerns investigating the politics of child protection reforms in the case countries of the two aforementioned regimes following policy exchange. The other pertains to inquiring how international lessons have shaped Taiwan’s policy reforms as well as its related challenges in respect of policy implementation. With regards to the two major research findings, first, it is elicited that the convergence thesis of international child protection regimes put forward by some child welfare scholars is not sustainable. To the contrary, the analysis based on an institutional approach discovers a continuing diversity of policy regimes. As to the second finding, it is demonstrated that with heavily reliance on the importation of American reform experiences, Taiwan's child protection regime has been transformed into a managerialist one. Regardless whether this arrangement is appropriate or not, it cannot be ignored that the inadequacy of system inputs could have serious repercussions regarding the capacity and efficacy of the post-reform child protection system on the island.起始頁-結束頁：97-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2017.36.0301篇名：Supplier Selection Considering Buyers' Risk-Taking Behavior: A SMART-Based Approach Incorporating Utility Function並列篇名：考量買方風險接受態度的供應商選擇：結合效用函數的簡單多屬性評比方法作者：盧宗成(Chung-Cheng Lu);Phoeberry Kentt H. Ramos;陳尚佑(Shang-Yu Chen)關鍵字：supplier selection;multi-criterion decision-making;utility theory;供應商選擇;多準則決策;效用理論期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Supply portfolio is one of the strategies that can mitigate the impacts of supply disruptions. In making a supply portfolio, evaluating and selecting suppliers is a crucial step. Existing methods of supplier selection focus mainly on the attributes of suppliers, while the human effects of buyers and changes in external demand are seldom or never considered in the literature. To address these issues, this paper proposes the incorporation of the utility function in the simple multi-attribute rating technique to account for buyers' risk-taking behavior and investigate supplier selection decisions under different scenarios of market demand. The proposed approach aims to help decision-makers evaluate their supplier options and select the suppliers that will give the maximum utility. As a case study, the proposed approach is applied to the supplier selection problem faced by a large semiconductor assembly and testing company under different demand scenarios. The results show that our approach is able to determine the most appropriate suppliers for the company for different risk-taking behavior and under different demand scenarios.英文摘要：供應組合策略能夠有效減少供應鏈中斷所造成的影響，而評估與選擇供應商是產生供應組合的一個重要步驟。目前文獻中有關供應商選擇的方法大多僅考量與供應商相關的屬性，忽略了買方採購人員之風險接受態度與外部市場需求改變的影響。針對這項議題，本文提出結合效用函數於簡單多屬性評選方法的整合架構，考量買方之風險接受態度，並且探討不同需求情境下之供應商選擇決策。此方法之目的在於協助決策者評估供應商，並且選擇可以帶給買方最大效用的供應商。本研究將此方法應用於一家大型半導體封裝與測試公司在不同市場需求情境下的供應商選擇問題，結果顯示本研究提出的方法能夠協助廠商在不同的風險接受態度與市場需求情境下，決定最適當的供應商。起始頁-結束頁：185-210資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JAN.01132篇名：台灣衍生性金融商品市場實證與運用研究文獻回顧與展望並列篇名：Review and Prospects of Taiwan Derivatives Research: Empirical Studies and Applications作者：林丙輝(Bing-Huei Lin);張森林(San-Lin Chung);葉仕國(Shih-Kuo Yeh)關鍵字：衍生性金融商品;實證研究;實質選擇權;市場微結構;derivatives;empirical research;real option;market microstructure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文針對國內衍生性金融商品的市場實證與運用研究文獻進行回顧與展望，回顧的文獻範圍是西元2000年以後發表在TSSCI的學術期刊，總計整理了140篇以上相關的研究。在實證研究部分，本文針對衍生性金融商品的期貨市場、選擇權市場以及市場交易機制的相關各項議題進行文獻的回顧與整理。內容涵蓋了期貨與現貨關係、隱含波動率、市場微結構、價格的資訊內涵等較為大眾關切的研究領域。接著整理衍生性金融商品的概念或定價模型運用在其它領域的相關研究，範圍包括了將選擇權的模型應用在風險管理的研究、探討員工認股選擇權的設計與定價、實質選擇權的應用研究及市場業務經營等課題，最後本文提出未來後續研究的展望與結論。英文摘要：This paper reviews the empirical studies and applications of derivatives in Taiwan. We focus on articles published in TSSCI journals after the year 2000 and more than 140 papers are collected to conduct the survey. Initially, we review and summarize the empirical studies of derivatives markets in Taiwan regarding futures market, options market and market mechanism. These relevant topics include the relationship between futures market and cash market, microstructure issues of derivatives markets and the information content of derivatives prices, which are supposed to be intensively concerned by the general public. We then review the literature of applying the concept or the pricing model of derivatives to other areas such as risk management, employee stock option, real option, business operation and so on. We finally provide potential promising research issues, possible directions for future research and conclude the paper in the last section.起始頁-結束頁：211-257資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.AUG.25104-0113篇名：職場偏差行為之實證發現與展望：2000∼2015亞洲研究的回顧並列篇名：Research Findings and Prospect of Workplace Deviant Behavior: A Review of 2000-2015 Studies with Asian Samples作者：戚樹誠(Shu-Cheng Steve Chi);羅新興(Hsin-Hsin Lo);梁欣光(Shin-Guang Liang);賴璽方(Hsi-Fang Lai);朱志傑(Chih-Chieh Chu)關鍵字：職場偏差行為;員工工作行為;臺灣;亞洲;workplace deviant behavior;employee job behavior;Taiwan;Asia期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：在組織行為的研究議題中，職場偏差行為的探討在近二十年來迅速蓬勃發展。瞭解職場偏差行為對於組織與組織成員的影響不僅深具學術意涵，更有實務管理上的迫切性。本文針對2000-2015年以亞洲地區受試者為研究對象探討職場偏差行為的實證研究進行回顧，以臺灣社會科學引文索引（Taiwan Social Science Citation Index; TSSCI）中2015年所收錄的所有管理類與心理類期刊以及15本具高影響力的西方期刊，總共回顧研究共計81篇。我們參考Robinson and Bennett（1995）的分類架構進行系統性分析，藉以瞭解近年亞洲地區就職場偏差行為的研究發現。我們根據回顧的結果指出，職場偏差行為在亞洲地區的研究具有獨特之文化意涵，本研究提出未來研究方向與展望，以提供職場偏差行為研究之參考。英文摘要：Over the past two decades, researches on workplace deviant behaviors have become increasingly prevalent in the area of organizational behavior. There are both theoretical implications and practical urgency for understanding the impact of workplace deviant behaviors on organizations and their members. The purpose of this paper is to conduct a review of the empirical works on workplace deviant behavior with samples from Asian regions in the past fifteen years. We examined journals in the 2015 list of management and psychology in Taiwan Social Science Citation Index (TSSCI) and 15 highly influential international journals. We drew on Robinson and Bennett (1995) framework and conducted a systematic analysis on the studies of workplace deviant behaviors in Asia. We aim to understand the current status of researches on workplace deviant behaviors. Based on our review, we suggested that there are unique cultural implications for studies on workplace deviant behaviors in Asian regions. We propose directions for future studies and expect prominent outcomes. We hope our efforts can be of value for future research on workplace deviant behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：259-305資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.DEC.25104-0064篇名：社群媒體中顧客知識之挖掘：意見探勘技術開發並列篇名：Mining Consumer Knowledge from Social Media: Development of an Opinion Mining Technique作者：楊錦生(Chin-Sheng Yang);謝佩芸(Pei-Yun Xie);施曉萍(Hsiao-Ping Shih)關鍵字：意見句子識別;意見探勘;使用者產生資料;社群媒體分析;巨量資料分析;opinion sentence identification;opinion mining;user generated content;social media analytics;big data analytics期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：資訊科技與網際網路的普及，促成眾多新興應用的蓬勃發展，大量與多樣的資料迅速累積，為了有效地自大量資料中挖掘出有趣的知識，巨量資料分析的概念孕育而生。意見探勘是巨量資料分析的一項核心技術，其目的是自大量使用者產生資料中，分析使用者對某些有興趣的實體（例如，產品、服務等）的主觀看法（例如，意見、情感、評價等），並將這些資訊適當地摘要彙整，專換成結構化的顧客知識。本研究專注在意見探勘中意見句子識別的工作，為改善傳統監督式學習法在準備訓練資料上所需投入的大量人力與時間，本研究提出僅需要使用者提供少量的關鍵字，再輔以社群媒體抓取來，未經人工標註的使用者產生資料，便能夠進行半監督式的學習，產生與監督式學習相似甚至更佳的探勘結果。具體而言，本研究採用類別關聯規則演算法，達配本研究設計的半監督式學習法，提出規則式意見句子識別技術 (R-OSI)。根據實驗評估結果，本研究的R-OSI 技術能夠達到與監督式方法相近甚至更優良的效能。英文摘要：With the popularization of information and network technology, many emerging and interesting applications have been developed vigorously. The volume and variety of data accumulates rapidly. These data are considered vital assets for supporting crucial business intelligence applications. To better manage and use the valuable data, big data analytics, which is the process of examining large datasets containing a variety of data types to uncover hidden, previously unknown, and potentially useful patterns and knowledge, has become a crucial research issues. In this study, we concentrate on an important big data analytic task, namely opinion mining. We propose a rule-based opinion sentence identification (R-OSI) technique, which can retrieve relevant review sentences to a specific product feature of interest from a large volume of consumer reviews. The novelty of the proposed technique is that it adopts a semi-supervised learning approach by requesting a user to provide keywords to describe the target product feature. In addition, a set of unannotated consumer reviews are retrieved from various social media websites. On the basis of the user-provided keywords and the set of unannotated consumer reviews, the class association rule mining algorithm is applied to learn a set of opinion sentence identification rules for the target product feature. Our empirical evaluation results suggest that the proposed R-OSI technique achieves promising performance in opinion sentence identification, even when a supervised learning approach is adopted as the performance benchmark.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JUN.F104-0085篇名：為頻繁單變量不確定樣式產生摘要並列篇名：Generating Summaries for Frequent Univariate Uncertain Pattern作者：劉英和(Ying-Ho Liu)關鍵字：巨量資料;單變量不確定資料;頻繁單變量不確定樣式;摘要;big data;univariate uncertain data;frequent univariate uncertain patterns;summary期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：在巨量資料的研究與應用裡，從中發現有用的知識是一個重要的主題。大部份關於這個主題的研究著眼於發展於巨量資料中擷取知識的方法，然而如何呈現所發現的知識仍是一個關鍵的議題。在文獻中，單變量不確定資料是一種巨量資料，並且從單變量不確定資料裡取出的頻繁單變量不確定樣式是一有用的知識。可是，頻繁單變量不確定樣式的數量通常都非常龐大而不易被人們利用，因此我們需要一個好的頻繁單變量不確定樣式的呈現方式。我們提出為頻繁單變量不確定樣式產生摘要的研究，其使用階層群集技術去產生摘要。人們只需檢視數十或數百個代表樣式，而不需處理大量的頻繁樣式。實驗顯示我們方法的摘要品質高於最大頻繁單變量不確定樣式所提供的摘要品質。英文摘要：In big data related research and applications, discovery of useful knowledge from big data is an important topic. While most studies concerning this topic focus on developing methods for retrieving knowledge, presentation of the discovered knowledge remains a critical issue. A good method of presentation allows ordinary people to quickly understand and utilize the discovered knowledge. In the literature, univariate uncertain data is one kind of big data, and frequent patterns retrieved from univariate uncertain data, i.e., frequent univariate uncertain patterns, represent useful knowledge. However, the number of frequent univariate uncertain patterns is often too large to be dealt with by ordinary user. In other words, a good method of presenting the discovered frequent univariate uncertain patterns is required. To this end, we propose a novel way of summarizing frequent univariate uncertain patterns. We use a hierarchical clustering technique to generate a summary of a set of frequent univariate uncertain patterns. Instead of examining a large number of frequent univariate uncertain patterns, a user only needs to check tens, or perhaps hundreds, of representative frequent univariate uncertain patterns. Experimental results show that the summarization quality of our method is better than the summarization quality of maximum frequent univariate uncertain patterns.起始頁-結束頁：29-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.MAR.F104-0076篇名：服務庫存與營運績效關聯之實証研究：以台灣大車隊為例並列篇名：An Empirical Study on the Relationship between Service Inventory and Operational Performance: Taiwan Taxi Fleet Taken as an Example作者：侯勝宗(Sheng-Tsung Hou);連婉茜(Wan-Chien Lien);仇介民(Chieh-Min Chou)關鍵字：服務庫存;計程車;空中排班點;分享經濟;service inventory;taxi;on-air queuing system;sharing economy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：服務庫存意指廠商將「服務在製品」暫存在服務供應流程中的某一項價值活動中，一旦服務需求產生時，再將其立即轉化為「最終服務」，此種觀念在交通服務業中特別重要。本文收集衛星派遣計程車車隊300 位司機的時間與空間繞行資料，採用資料探勘及集群分析進行服務庫存實證研究，分析司機駕駛行為、服務庫存與營運績效間關係。研究發現四大類型服務庫存模式，其中，善於使用空中排班點的「彈性」型司機，其空間空車率與時間空車率均最低。本文說明了台灣大車隊如何藉由引導未載客司機前往不同「空中排班點」待命，將閒置的服務產能暫存特定區域之中；待一旦需求瞬間大量出現，便可快速派遣暫存的空車前往服務，滿足即時需求。文末提出理論與實務意涵。英文摘要：The term ”service inventory” mplies that a firm keeps a ”service in process” within a service-based supply chain as a form of temporary stock. The ”temporary service stock” belongs to a certain value activity within the service supply chain; once the service is demanded by a customer, the service provider will deploy temporary service as ”the final service”. Due to the lack of empirical studies regarding this concept, we conducted research by way of a quantitative approach, using the data mining and cluster analysis methodologies to identify and analyze the relationship between service inventory and operational performance. By using time-space air-queuing data from a group of 300 taxi drivers provided from the Taiwan Taxi Fleet group's satellite system, we identified four categories of taxi drivers' service inventory patterns: ”Customized”, ”High-Speed”, ”Flexibility” and ”Routine”, respectively. Furthermore, we investigated the relationships between these four patterns and their performance, with the end result showing that most drivers of the fleet qualify in the Flexibility category, efficiently overcoming issues in service perishability and unstockability by utilizing the ”on-the-air queuing system” for the taxi service. This study concludes with theoretical and practical implications for academia and practitioner reference.起始頁-結束頁：63-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.SEP.F104-0047篇名：巨量資料應用在台灣個資法架構下的法律風險並列篇名：Personal Information Protection Act and the Legal Risk of Big Data Applications in Taiwan作者：彭金隆(Jin-Lung Peng);陳俞沛(Yu-Pei Chen);孫群(Aureola Sun)關鍵字：巨量資料;個人資料保護法;隱私權;big data;Personal Information Protection Act;the right to privacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：巨量資料使用如涉及個人資料的蒐集、處理與利用，將面臨諸多潛在法律風險。本研究以我國2010年大幅修正之個人資料保護法出發1，研究發現，因為巨量資料的大量性、強調速度與資料多樣性等特質，適用我國個資法架構時可能發生以下問題：(1) 無法完全履行個資法第8 條與第9 條對於個人資料於蒐集、處理或利用時之告知義務、(2) 不易符合個資法第11 條在特定目的消失或契約到期後，不得持有、處理或利用資料的規定、(3) 部分蒐集方可能不符個資法第19 條須具有特定目的之要求、(4) 無法充分執行個資法第20 條對特定目的外之利用及停止行銷相關要求、(5) 無法配合個資法第54 條於首次利用時告知之要求等，顯見我國現行個資法可能對巨量資料應用產生重大法律風險。英文摘要：In spite of their underlying values, big data now present enormous challenges as their collection, processing and application are potentially susceptible to the legal risks under Personal Information Protection Act (PIPA 2010) in Taiwan. By putting big data under the analysis framework of PIPA, this paper notes that by taking into consideration the staggering volume, velocity and variety claimed by big data and the enactment of PIPA, problems might arise in a number of ways: (1) In terms of information disclosure, data collection and processing would not meet the requirement of Article 8 and Article 9 of PIPA; (2) Data controllers are very likely to breach the duty stipulated by Article 11 of PIPA, which is, deleting and discontinuing to process or use when the specific purpose no longer exists or contract period expires; (3) Some data collectors might fail to satisfy the specific purpose requirement set by Article 19 of PIPA; (4) Data controllers might violate Article 20 of PIPA at the first marketing action; (5) They also might not meet Article 54 of PIPA that requires a notification may be given at the time where such personal information is first used.起始頁-結束頁：93-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JUL.F104-0098篇名：保險經代人能否提供較佳的理賠服務品質？：台灣汽車責任保險實證並列篇名：Do Insurance Brokers or Agents Provide Superior Claim Service Quality?: Empirical Evidence on Automobile Liability Insurance in Taiwan作者：劉俊廷(Chun-Ting Liu);吳瑞雲(Jui-Yun Wu);江朝峰(Chao-Feng Chiang)關鍵字：保險經代制度;直接簽單制度;爭取理賠金額的服務;理賠案件處理時效;insurance broker or agent system;direct writer system;claim amount coordination service;claim processing efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文利用台灣汽車責任保險市場資料來驗證產品品質假說，亦即保險經代制度能提供顧客較佳的服務品質，因此能與較有效率的直接簽單制度共存於保險市場。本文從理賠服務觀點，並從兩方面考慮理賠服務品質：爭取理賠金額的服務與理賠案件處理時效。研究發現，在相同的體傷程度下，保險經代人在任意責任險的理賠案件，其理賠金額顯著高出直接簽單通路，顯示保險經代人相較於直接簽單通路能幫助顧客向保險公司爭取較高的理賠金額，此能力隨著受害人體傷程度的提高而跟著提高。研究亦發現不同通路在理賠案件處理時效上並無顯著差異。英文摘要：This study uses claim data from the automobile liability insurance of Taiwan to verify the product quality hypothesis, which argues that the insurance broker or agent system can provide better service quality to customers, and thus can coexist with the efficient direct writer system. We depart from the viewpoint of claim service and consider two claim service indicators: negotiation service of claim amount and efficiency in claim processing. Results show that under the same degree of bodily injuries, the claim amount coordinated by the insurance broker or agent is significantly higher than that by the direct writer channel. This finding suggests that the insurance broker or agent outperforms the direct writer system in earning higher claim amount for customers. The results also reveal that the capability of the insurance broker or agent to earn higher claim amount for customers improves further with the increase in the degree of bodily injury of the victims. We find no evidence of the existence of a significant difference between different distribution channels in the efficiency of claim processing.起始頁-結束頁：119-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.NOV.RM104-0049篇名：壽險公司銀行保險通路策略會不會受到競爭者行為的影響：動態競爭觀點之探討並列篇名：Effect of Competitors' Activities on the Bancassurance Strategy of Life Insurers: Competitive Dynamics Perspective作者：彭金隆(Jin-Lung Peng);魏筱昀(Siao-Yun Wei);陳彥志(Yen-Chih Chen)關鍵字：銀行保險;動態競爭;競爭者行為;bancassurance;competitive dynamics;competitors' activities期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究主要討論壽險市場中，競爭者行為對其銀行保險通路策略的影響。過去我國壽險公司主要以業務員通路為主，但銀行保險通路加入後，銀行擁有龐大據點與人員，保險公司透過與銀行合作調整通路策略，可在短期內獲得大量通路與業務，相較於建置緩慢且成本高的業務員通路，可更快速回應競爭者的市場行為。因此本文由動態競爭觀點出發，以臺灣2005 年至2013 年壽險公司為研究樣本，檢視各公司間的競爭行為，對目標公司銀行保險業務量以及保險費比重改變的影響。實證顯示在銀行保險排名前端競爭較為激烈的壽險公司間，銀行保險策略明顯會受到競爭對手的競爭性行動影響。英文摘要：This study analyzed the effect of competitors' activities on the bancassurance strategy from the competitive dynamics perspective. We investigated strategy and competition in the bancassurance business using data from Taiwan's life insurance companies from 2005 to 2013. For bancassurance competitive actions, we employed net bancassurance premium change and percentage changes in the bancassurance business as strategic measures of bancassurance. The empirical results reveal samples with higher competitive tension and competitive capabilities, and they show positive relationships between competitors' actions and competitive actions in the bancassurance business. The results provide evidence supporting the notion that competitors' strategies affect insurers' bancassurance strategies.起始頁-結束頁：149-176資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.MAR.RM104-02410篇名：長期照顧保險商品設計與風險效果分析並列篇名：Analysis of the Risk Effect of the Product Design of Long-Term Care Insurance作者：王儷玲(Jennifer L. Wang);邱于芬(Yu-Fen Chiu);謝明華(Ming-Hua Hsieh);陳彥志(Yen-Chih Chen)關鍵字：長期照顧保險;商品設計;風險效果;long-term care insurance;product design;risk effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探討長期照顧商品設計對保險公司負債風險之影響。本研究透過連續馬可夫鍊建構健康狀態轉換模型，並以風險值及條件尾端期望值作為風險衡量指標，分析長期照顧保險結合年金或壽險之後是否可以降低保險公司負債風險險邊際值。研究結果發現，結合長期照顧保險與壽險會產生自然避險，結合銷售會使負債風險邊際值下降；而長期照顧保險結合年金保險，因無法產生避險效果，負債風險邊際值反而較分別銷售時高，但是若近一步考慮逆選擇成本後，逆選擇成本降低效益大於其風險邊際值之增加，因此整體經營風險也會降低。保險公司根據本研究結果進行商品設計與搭售策略將有助於長期照顧與年金保險市場之成長，並可協助降低公司負債風險。英文摘要：This paper investigates the risk effect of the product design of long-term care insurance. Specifically, we focus on analyzing the changes in risk characteristics resulting from different combinations of long-term care insurance with annuity or life insurance. We use value at risk and conditional tail expectation as risk proxies to evaluate the risk margin of different product designs. A continuous-time Markov chain model is employed to model the health status of insureds. We find that the combination of long-term care insurance with life insurance reduces the risk margin. By contrast, the combination of long-term care insurance with annuity increases the risk margin. However, when the adverse selection cost of the annuity is further considered, the net risk effect of the combination of long-term care insurance with annuity actually decreases, because the benefit of lowering the adverse selection cost outweighs the increasing risk margin. This paper provides an effective risk management tool for life insurance companies to more effectively control their liability risks and offer more innovative retirement products to society.起始頁-結束頁：177-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.MAR.RM104-02511篇名：終身癌症保險之評價並列篇名：The Valuation of Lifetime Cancer Insurance Policies作者：黃泓智(Hong-Chih Haung);楊尚穎(Shang-Yin Yang);王敏琪(Mng-Chi Wang)關鍵字：癌症保險;全民健康保險研究資料庫;醫療成本;cancer insurance;National Health Insurance Research Database;medical cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文利用健保資料庫估計癌症發生率、持續治療率與醫療費用，並以理論模型評估終身癌症保險的保費。研究結果發現，癌症發生率逐年增加且30 歲以下族群之增幅較大，持續治療率逐年提高，癌症醫療費用隨年紀增長而上升，使保險成本逐年提高。同時發現於1998 至2003 年間男性癌症保險成本六年增加60%，女性癌症保險成本六年上升35%。英文摘要：To address the valuation of lifetime cancer insurance policies, this article provides an analytical solution for the fair premium. The premium increase is a result of a continuous increase in the incidence of cancer, especially in the younger generation. The continued treatment rate and the medical cost increases with age. From 1998 to 2003, the maximum difference premium cost reached nearly 60 percent for males and 35 percent for females.起始頁-結束頁：209-243資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.FEB.RM104-01012篇名：CEO Turnover and Reinsurance Demand in the U.S. Property Casualty Insurance Industry並列篇名：美國產險業CEO 更迭與再保險需求作者：何佳玲(Chia-Ling Ho)關鍵字：reinsurance demand;CEO turnover;non-routine CEO turnover;forced CEO turnover;SOX Act;再保險需求;CEO更迭;非例行性CEO更迭;強迫性CEO更迭;SOX法案期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：This paper examines the impact of CEO turnover on reinsurance demand in the U.S. property casualty insurance industry. Our evidence shows that insurers with CEO turnover are more likely to increase reinsurance demand after CEO turnover. More detailed analyses indicates that insurers with non-routine (forced) CEO turnover are more likely to increase reinsurance than insurers without CEO turnover, but insurers with routine (voluntary) CEO turnover are not likely to change reinsurance policies after CEO turnover. One possible explanation for these results is that an insurer with a new CEO resulting from non-routine (forced) CEO turnover is more likely to increase demand for reinsurance to stabilize earnings and reduce risk to protect the job security of the new CEO. The evidence shows that the interaction effect between mutual form and CEO turnover is negatively related to reinsurance demand after CEO turnover. Finally, our results also show that insurers with CEO turnover are not related to reinsurance demand after the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002. The overall results of this study indicate that CEO turnovers have a significant impact on the demand for reinsurance.英文摘要：本文探討美國產險業CEO 更迭對再保險需求的影響。實證結果顯示，有CEO 更迭的保險公司在CEO更迭後更有可能增加再保險的需求。本文進一步分析，在CEO更迭後，非例行性（強迫性）CEO 更迭較沒有更迭的保險公司更有可能增加再保險的需求，但例行性（任意性）CEO 更迭較沒有更迭的保險公司則不太會改變對再保險的需求。一個可能的解釋是，來自非例行性（強迫性）更迭的新任CEO 的保險公司更有可能增加再保險需求是為穩定盈餘與減少風險以確保新任CEO 的工作安全性。此外，在CEO更迭後，相互保險的組織型態與CEO 更迭的交乘項與再保險需求為負相關。研究結果顯示，在2002 年沙賓法案通過後，保險公司CEO 更迭與再保險需求無關。本研究結果指出CEO 更迭顯著影響再保險需求。起始頁-結束頁：245-288資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.DEC.RM104-00913篇名：保險業集中度及效率對市場競爭程度的影響：以日本產險業為例並列篇名：The Impact of Concentration and Efficiency on Market Competition: An Analysis of Japanese Non-Life Insurance Industry作者：鄭士卿(Vivian Shih-Ching Jeng);汪琪玲(Kili Chi-Ling Wang);蕭維萱(Kahlen Wei-Hsian Hsiao)關鍵字：市場競爭程度;市場壟斷力;集中度;效率;日本產險業;market competition level;market power;concentration;efficiency;Japanese non-life insurance industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：27卷2S期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文研究日本產險公司併購重組造成市場集中、公司經營效率改變，對市場競爭程度的影響。以壟斷力指標（Lerner Index）衡量市場競爭程度，以赫芬達指數衡量市場集中度、以資料包絡分析法所求出之效率值衡量為公司效率。結果發現，日本產險業市場集中度及公司效率皆對競爭度有負向影響，且日本市場集中度與市場競爭度反向關係，僅存在於市場壟斷力較大的子樣本。壟斷力高之廠商，專注主要險種之產品策略、優於多角化策略。英文摘要：This study assesses the impact of concentration and efficiency on competition in the Japanese non-life insurance industry and use the fixed effect model to analyze data from 2001 to 2012. We use the Lerner index as a proxy for market power while measuring market concentration by using the Herfindahl-Hirschman index. The data envelopment analysis method is also used to evaluate the efficiency of insurance companies. We find that the higher the concentration level or firm efficiency, the higher the Lerner index of the firm. Further analysis shows that the positive relationship between concentration level and market power exists only in firms with higher market power. The strategy of firms with high market power tends to be specializing in main product lines such as auto lines, but diversification can raise the market power within low-market-power firms.起始頁-結束頁：289-318資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2017.JAN.RM104-01901篇名：懷疑主義與寬容：論以撒．柏林（Isaiah Berlin）的自由主義與多元主義並列篇名：Scepticism and Toleration: On Isaiah Berlin's Liberalism and Pluralism作者：沈明璁(Ming-Cong Shen)關鍵字：寬容;懷疑主義;哲學本質;理解與同情共感;現實意識;Toleration;Scepticism;the Essence of Philosophy;Understanding and Empathy;the Sense of Reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：62期出版年：2017中文摘要：多數學者認為懷疑主義並無法為寬容提出十足的理據，但筆者認為在以撒．柏林的思想裡，可以從他的懷疑主義來理解寬容。柏林的思想裡帶有幾項懷疑主義的特徵：第一，從他對於「哲學本質」的看法，認為哲學問題並沒有一個確定性答案，因此我們無法只從單一理論或途徑來回應哲學問題。第二，從他對於「理解」和「同情共感」的看法，了解人類不是只靠「理性」了解這個世界。第三，從他對於「現實意識」的看法，真正可怕的不是我們會犯錯，而是認為永不犯錯。是故，筆者希望透過對柏林的懷疑主義的剖析，來探討他的寬容觀，以及其在自由主義、多元主義的關係為何；並藉由詮釋他的寬容，使我們對寬容有更多不同的認識，也能進一步了解柏林的政治思想。英文摘要：It is difficult to practice and justify toleration, and most scholars argue that scepticism offers no convincing reasons for toleration. We can understand Berlin's toleration from his skepticism. There are many common characteristics in the history of scepticism, and in Berlin's thoughts. First, Berlin argued that we cannot find the correct answer in philosophical questions, because there are many different answers in each place and era. Second, we do not have rationality only, but also understanding and empathy, which help us to understand the world. Third, the worst is not that we make a mistake, but that we believe we will not make it. We can understand Berlin's argument through his sense of reality. In this article, I will try to articulate Berlin's toleration through his skepticism, and I hope we can understand toleration with different views and Berlin's political thought.起始頁-結束頁：1-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170900620012篇名：雜眾的建構：重探一個史賓諾莎的理論論題並列篇名：Spinoza's Theory of the Constitution of Multitude: A Reinterpretation作者：蕭育和(Yu-He Hsiao)關鍵字：史賓諾莎;自然權利（力量）;相洽;雜眾;情動性網絡;情動;共同;Benedictus Spinoza;natural rights (powers);agreement;multitude;affective networks;affect;the common期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：62期出版年：2017中文摘要：在當代政治理論的系譜中，史賓諾莎對雜眾的論述是極為重要的智識脈絡，本文探究「雜眾的建構」此一理論論題，首先藉由史賓諾莎與霍布斯的對比，來說明雜眾的微觀基礎：自然權利（力量）的相洽。在此基礎上，史賓諾莎以雜眾的建構取代了主權肇建。而雜眾的建構涉及史賓諾莎兩次的理論性換位，第一次換位提出雜眾的現實樣態與理想樣態，以及兩者之間擺盪與過渡，對Balibar與史特勞斯來說，由情動性網絡交織而成雜眾，終究使得這樣的過渡無法完成。此一表面上的僵局就需要二度的理論性換位，藉由主動性情動的生成，而非主動情狀對被動情狀的取代，來界定雜眾建構的動力。對情動的重新評估與對「共同」的著力，會是奈格理詮釋史賓諾莎的兩個主要線索。英文摘要：In the genealogy of contemporary political theory, the conception of multitude in Spinoza is an intellectual source of importance. The present article aims to explore the theoretical thesis of ”the constitution of multitude.” By comparing the doctrines of natural rights of Hobbes and of Spinoza, the first section demonstrates the agreement of natural rights (powers) in Spinoza. Based on the agreement of powers, the multitude as a category of political collectivity replaces the foundation of sovereignty with the constitution of the multitude. There are two theoretical displacements in Spinoza: The first one proposes two modes of multitude and the oscillation or passage between them. But the affective networks weaving the multitude make this passage unattainable, as Balibar and Strauss clarified. For the contemporary thoughts inspired by Spinoza, this seeming impasse requires the second theoretical displacement to determine the dynamics of constitution of multitude by the becoming of active affects, instead of the overcoming of passive affections with active ones. And this is why the reassessment of affects and the emphasis of ”the common” are two major threads in Negri's interpretation of Spinoza.起始頁-結束頁：69-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170900620023篇名：論兩種不服從的保障方式：對於「證立取向」與「權利取向」的概念初探並列篇名：Justified Disobedience or a Right to Disobey?作者：陳弘儒(Hung-Ju Chen)關鍵字：公民不服從;法律責任;權利取向;證立取向;拉茲;政治參與權;道德確信;civil disobedience;legal liability;a rights-based approach;a justification-based approach;Joseph Raz;the right of political participation;the right of moral conviction期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：62期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文從區分「說服的脈絡」與「抵禦的脈絡」出發，輔以不服從者可能提出的理據類型，思考如何保障公民不服從。筆者指出，保障公民不服從的討論主要是在抵禦的脈絡中討論，從而可以區分出兩種保障方式：「證立取向」與「權利取向」。這兩種取向各有其蘊含的基本命題。而區分這兩種取向的基礎理論可以從拉茲（Joseph Raz）的理論中看出端倪。在這個基礎上我進一步說明了「證立取向」與「權利取向」的意義、要件與基礎命題，並進一步分析了不服從之權的可能來源與及效果。英文摘要：Based on the distinction between the context of persuasion and that of anti-intervention, I construct two approaches to disobedience: a justification-based and a rights-based approach. These two approaches are discussed in the context of anti-intervention in this article. Joseph Raz's theory provides the foundation for these two approaches here. After explicating his theory, I develop a conceptual framework that provides a better understanding of how to determine disobedients' legal liabilities. I also investigate core themes entailed in the two approaches, respond to critics, and explicate two possible sources of a right to disobey: the right of moral conviction and that of political participation. My sole purpose is to provide a conceptual analysis of the distinction between a justification-based and a rights-based approach to disobedience that can pave the way for further normative arguments.起始頁-結束頁：127-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170900620034篇名：起始維艱作者：顏厥安期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：62期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：189-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170900620045篇名：我的哲學：綱要作者：孫善豪期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：62期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：195-213資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170900620056篇名：未必可能的溝通－憶與善豪的觀察與批判之辯作者：魯貴顯期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：62期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：215-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320170900620067篇名：孫善豪教授著作列表作者：李煒;吳冠緯期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：62期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：221-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201709006200701篇名：西塞羅的共和主義式國家理論－「國家－邦國模式」的穩定性並列篇名：Cicero's Republican Theory of State-The Stability of the Model of Civitas-Res publica作者：劉岫靈(Hsiu-Ling Liu)關鍵字：共和主義;國家;邦國;萬民之法;審議性機構;政治行動;Republicanism;Civitas;Res pulica;jus gentium;Consilio;Political Action期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：63期出版年：2017中文摘要：羅馬如何永恆？對西塞羅而言是一個表現在時間中的問題：一切政治實體都是時空中的特殊存有，其特點是基於時間而來的有限性與不穩定性─受到「命運」的侵擾。然而，一切政治實體可以區分為兩種存在模式─「類國家模式」與「國家—邦國模式」，當政治實體處於「類國家模式」時，它會受到「命運」的侵擾而不穩定。反之，一旦政治實體掌握了「萬民之法」此一普遍規則，它就會進入「國家—邦國模式」而被稱為「國家」／「邦國」，此時政治實體就得以對抗「命運」的侵擾而成就穩定與永恆。因此，羅馬如何永恆的問題，就是羅馬這個特殊存有如何使自身進入並維持在「國家—邦國模式」的問題，而本文將說明西塞羅是如何以一種共和視角完成這個理論工作。英文摘要：How does Rome achieve eternity? For Cicero, this is a problem that is presented in time. All political entities are particular in time and space. They are limited so that there are a beginning and an end. These particular political entities are characterized by instability, and the reason for instability is time. However, Cicero believes that the particular existence can be divided into two models: ”The model of state-like political entity” and ”The model of civitas-res publica”. The political entity can only predominate over he law of nations as a universal. It can enter ”the model of civitas-res publica” and is called ”civitas/res publica”. The ”civitas/res publica” is miraculously stable, perfect and timeless because of rationality. When the political entity is ”the model of state-like political entity”, it is infested by ”fortune” and leads to instability. ”The model of civitas-res publica” is the only weapon against the ”fortuna”. Therefore, the problem of how Rome can achieve eternity is the problem of how this particular existence of Rome enters itself into ”the model of civitas-res publica”. This paper will explain how Cicero uses the republican perspective to complete this theoretical work.起始頁-結束頁：1-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320171200630012篇名：新盲點辯論與賽伯人商品生產：數位使用者的勞動、剝削與抵抗並列篇名：New Blindspot Debate and the Production of Cyborg Commodity: The Labor, Exploitation and Resistance of Digital Media Users作者：陳志賢(Chih-Hsien Chen)關鍵字：馬克思主義;賽伯人;閱聽人商品;新盲點辯論;勞動;剝削;Marxism;cyborg;audience commodity;new blindspot debate;labor;exploitation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：63期出版年：2017中文摘要：新盲點辯論不僅關係著馬克思主義傳播研究過時與否的理論檢視，更提供不同於主流新科技與新自由主義論調的左派視野。本文引入賽伯人商品概念以澄清新盲點，並指出資本家在三種線上勞動中奪佔數位使用者生產的價值：第一種發生在一般商品生產階段之前的數位勞動力打造，第二種出現在一般商品生產階段之外的流通行銷，第三種則跳過一般商品生產階段，直接進入之後的消費時刻。以傳統的馬克思主義來看，這三種線上勞動皆不具生產性，因此無關剝削與否。補強後的賽伯人馬克思主義彰顯勞動結合科技能生產可被剝削、也可抵抗的身體，有助於批判以消費之名行生產之實、以人工智慧自動化之華麗詞藻偷取網友集體智慧之勞動結晶等諸多的隱晦剝削。英文摘要：The new blindspot debate is about re-appreciating the values of Marxian communication studies as well as providing an alternative viewpoint to the mainstream visions of new technologies and neoliberalism. Taking advantage of Haraway's concept of the cyborg, this paper tries to illuminate the blind spots in the debate and to criticize the appropriation of digital users' value by the capitalists of new media in three kinds of digital labor: before, beyond, and after commodity production. Such appropriation, from the traditional Marxist perspective, is not exploitation per se, but is closely related to the current expansion of digital capitalism to produce exploitable bodies in everyday life. In various disguises of consumption and unproductiveness, digital labor has been rendered unnamable and unintelligible. Even so, however, digital labor cannot be totally controlled by capital.起始頁-結束頁：65-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320171200630023篇名：國家意志與政治行動：霍布斯、鮑桑葵與柯靈烏論主權國家的代表與臨現並列篇名：The Will of the State and Political Action: Hobbes, Bosanquet and Collingwood on the Representation and Presence of the Sovereign State作者：劉佳昊(Jia-Hau Liu)關鍵字：霍布斯;盧梭;鮑桑葵;柯靈烏;主權國家;代表;政治行動;Hobbes;Rousseau;Bosanquet;Collingwood;the sovereign state;representation;political action期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：63期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在探討霍布斯的主權國家理論及其疑難，如何經盧梭的人民主權學說影響了鮑桑葵和柯靈烏對於國家意志和政治行動的理解。以授權代表說為本，霍布斯主張國家人格須藉主權代表的意志與行動才可再現。但盧梭宣稱，主權意志無法經代表再現，故除了全體人民組成的議會外，沒有任何政府機關或統治者可僭稱為主權者。由此，主權是否可在不經代表再現的情形下實際進行治理活動、具體發揮統治作用，便是霍布斯和盧梭兩人存留下來的一項理論疑難。以此疑難出發，本文將指出，鮑桑葵和柯靈烏即分從「意志構造論」和「具現行動論」的角度就主權國家的臨現進行論說，隨而揭示了主權國家理論從意志論範式向結構論和行動論轉變的發展。英文摘要：This article aims to discuss how Hobbes's theory of the sovereign state and its puzzles have, through Rousseau's doctrine of popular sovereignty, influenced Bosanquet's and Collingwood's conceptions of the will of the state and political action. On the basis of his 'authorisation-representation' thesis, Hobbes claims that the person of the state has to be represented by the sovereign representative to will and act. However, Rousseau counters that the sovereign's will cannot be represented, except by the assembly of the whole people, hence no government or ruler can arrogate the name of the sovereign. In virtue of this difference between Hobbes and Rousseau, the issue of whether sovereignty can be present in the course of ruling and governing without representatives or not is a puzzle which thus remains for scholars and thinkers. Taking the puzzle as the starting point, this article argues that Bosanquet and Collingwood have proposed a theory of the organisation of the will of the state and a theory of the actualisation of the state in action respectively to disclose the presence of the sovereign state, and the thesis of the will as a paradigm of theorising the sovereign state has thus been developed and transformed.起始頁-結束頁：131-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/1684515320171200630034篇名：《從王權、專制到民主：西方民主思想的開展及其問題》－蔡英文先生專書論壇作者：曾國祥;蔡英文;黃俊龍;周家瑜;陳正國;陳嘉銘;葉浩;楊尚儒期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：63期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：185-244資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/16845153201712006300401篇名：西方模型移植還是扭曲性傳譯？中國行政改革的政策學習過程並列篇名：Transfer to Western Model or Distorted Translation? The Policy Learning Process of Administrative Reforms in China作者：蘇偉業(Bennis Wai Yip So)關鍵字：政策學習;政策傳譯;行政改革;行政三分制;Policy Learning;Policy Translation;Administrative Reform;Administrative Trichotomous System期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文是回顧近年中國政府在行政改革上如何向西方吸收經驗。本文會以政策學習理論當中的「政策傳譯」觀點來剖析中國政府的跨國性政策學習行為，指出在行政改革上，向西方學習並非是簡單移植西方模型。在跨文化學習限制下，所謂學習往往存在大量自己的演繹和加工，然後重構外國的模型。向西方學習之目的往往是一種對舶來品崇拜之反映，加上實用性工具的輸入。本文將回顧中國行政改革於向西方學習之發展動向，並利用於深圳市試行的「行政三分制」改革來闡釋上述的觀點，指出這政策學習是在自訂之空洞構架下尋求國外的「對應物」進行理論填補，但最終出現「扭曲性政策傳譯」，以自身之認知立場來理解國外政策之意義。英文摘要：This article reviews how the Chinese government draws lesson from the Western world in its recent administrative reforms, and explores the issue of cross-national policy learning for the Chinese government from the perspective of ”policy translation” under theory of policy learning, pinpointing that learning from the West in the case of administrative reforms is not simply to transfer the Western model. Constrained by cross-cultural learning, the so-called learning is always conducted with learners’ own interpretation and processing, then reconstructing the foreign model. Learning from the West usually reflects a sort of cargo cult and involves the import of practical instruments. This article will review the development trend of how the Chinese administrative reforms learn from the West and make use of the reform of ”Administrative Trichotomous System,” which was experimented in Shenzhen, as a case to illustrate the aforementioned points. We indicate that policy learning started with a self-developed empty framework and tried to search for foreign counterparts to fill in the theoretical framework. However, it produced a ”distorted policy translation” ultimately, i.e., a biased comprehension of the foreign policy.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201712_60(4).00012篇名：監督管理還是分工合作？解放軍「團」級以上政治委員職能角色之研究並列篇名：Supervision or Cooperation? A Study on the Functions above PLA ”Regiment” Level Political Commissars作者：董慧明(Hui-Ming Tung)關鍵字：黨軍關係;政治工作;黨委書記;政治委員;Party-Military Relations;Political Work;Party Committee Secretary;Political Commissar期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：中國人民解放軍「團」級以上政治委員的職能角色同時具備軍隊黨組織建設，以及軍隊政治工作特性。本研究分別探討在維繫與均衡中共黨軍關係制度上的黨委制、政治委員制和政治機關制，從制度規範面向，說明政治委員身兼軍隊黨委書記，其職能表現在透過黨委會集體決策方式對全軍各級進行監督管理，以及作為軍隊首長分工制之政治幹部，也必須在實戰化訓練變革中，於平、戰時和軍事幹部保持和諧的分工合作關係。兩種同樣重要的職能角色，在因應習近平主政後推動的「深化國防和軍隊改革」，以及中國大陸內外部國情環境的轉變，而對政治委員必須具備監督、控制功能，以及政治工作領導、政策說服管理等專業能力提出更高要求。因此，當中共強化「以黨領軍」原則，落實軍委主席負責制，政治委員等政治幹部的職能更顯重要。採用制度化的角色分析途徑，則是可以析察中共黨軍關係結構變動的關鍵因素，發現政治委員在適應制度變革必須釐清的問題。英文摘要：The People's Liberation Army (PLA) political commissars above the ”Regiment” level have two functions: ”military party organization construction” and ”military political work”. The study focuses on important systems among the party-military relations: party committee system, political commissar system, and political organization system. We analyze the political commissars not only as political work chief officers of the PLA system but also as Chinese Communist Party (CCP) committee secretary. That means the political commissars must maintain and balance the bilateral relationship between CCP and PLA when they exert the supervising function through collective decision making in PLA and create cooperative relations with military officers both during peacetime and wartime. Those two functions are equally important in the response to the PLA military reform and changes in China’s national condition. We find the political commissars must be in the actual combat training conditions to enhance supervision and control, and become a policy manager. The political commissars' pivot roles will become more important when CCP puts into effect the ”head of the PLA” principle and the ”CMC Chairman Responsibility System”. We use an institutional role analysis approach to discover the critical factors in partymilitary relations, and available adaptations between CCP and PLA.起始頁-結束頁：25-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201712_60(4).00023篇名：中國的非正式經濟制裁與對象國的反擊策略：中日稀土衝突為例的分析並列篇名：China's Informal Economic Sanctions and Target Countries' Responses: The Rare Earths Trade Dispute between China and Japan作者：林賢參(Hsien-Sen Lin);郭永興(Yung-Hsing Guo)關鍵字：釣魚臺;非正式經濟制裁;稀土;禁運;Diaoyu Islands;Informal Economic Sanctions;Rare Earths;Embargo期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在探討中日釣魚臺主權爭議背後，中國以稀土禁運為武器對日本施加外交壓力，以及日本採取反制措施的外交衝突事件。藉此個案研究，凸顯出中國挾其經貿優勢以施壓經貿對手國的「非正式經濟制裁」模式，以及日本成功地反制中國施壓的經驗教訓。由於日本具有稀土高度依存中國的危機意識，並未雨綢繆地研擬確保稀土穩定供應對策，當中國發動稀土禁運措施時，日本能夠迅速對應「稀土震撼」，並且以中國禁運措施違反WTO規範以及中國加盟WTO的承諾，與歐美國家聯手向WTO提起訴訟，最終迫使中國修正其管制稀土政策。英文摘要：In this paper, we analyze China's export restrictions on rare earth elements and Japan's responses after the Diaoyu Islands dispute in 2010. We consider the rare earths trade dispute between China and Japan as a case study, where China pressured Japan by its informal economic sanctions and Japan demonstrated an effective counter-attack. Japan was cautious about its dependence on China’s rare earths and previously prepared strategies for their stable supply. When China embargoed rare earths, the Japanese government and companies immediately put their strategies into practice; meanwhile, Japan cooperated with other countries to sue China as its restrictions had violated WTO rules. These measures successfully forced China to amend its export limitations.起始頁-結束頁：53-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201712_60(4).00034篇名：中共東海防空識別區之法條依據分析並列篇名：Analyzing the Legal Terms of the PRC East China ADIZ作者：張競(Ching Chang)關鍵字：防空識別區;領空;飛航情報區;主權聲索;Air Defense Identification Zone;Territorial Airspace;Flight Information Region;Sovereignty Claim期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：2013年11月23日大陸劃設東海防空識別區，曾經引據其國內法條，發表政府聲明。發布聲明後，中共國防部則公告規範東海防空識別區航空器識別細則。本文首將探討該政府聲明與識別規則公告文字意涵，淺論防空識別區國際法地位，引述大陸相關論述，掌握大陸對此基本認識，再考證前揭法規是否明確定義與授權劃設防空識別區，再依法條屬地管轄權限討論授權合法性，其識別細則法源是否充分，以及前揭法規可否衍生前述劃設作為與識別規範。本文續以防空識別區對比前揭中共法規所設立空域，期掌握異同處。最後討論劃設防空識別區，在無國際法規為前提，設立國內法源為依據作為結語。經考證比對後，發現大陸劃設東海防空識別區，曾引據早已失效法條，更在法條上充滿疑義，無適當法制基礎。實難支持劃設該防空識別區，若日後未補強法制，勢將授人以柄。英文摘要：The People's Republic of China has defined the East China Sea Air Defense Identification Zone（ADIZ）on November 23, 2013 based on its three domestic legal decrees. Subsequently, another announcement of the aircraft identification rules for this ADIZ was immediately issued by the PRC Defense Ministry. This paper first reviews the literatures ever published by the PRC scholars on this issue before further examining the contents of the three decrees for exploiting whether existed specific authorization of defining air defense identification zone and the principle of ratione loci may properly support the jurisdiction of such an action. Was the legal basis for aircraft identification rules of the ADIZ sufficient? Can these aforesaid decrees be the proper legal basis to define the ADIZ and directing the identification rules? Contents within these decrees for establishing other airspaces are also reviewed in this paper for confirming that there is no basis to define ADIZ. This paper eventually discusses the necessity to establish domestic legal basis to define such airspace. This paper concludes that the dates of the three decrees noted by the PRC government statements actually indicated that the editions have already expired. And there is no legal basis for the PRC to define the East China Sea ADIZ and the subsequent identification rules attached. Further efforts of legislation are needed in order to prevent political controversy.起始頁-結束頁：83-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201712_60(4).00045篇名：中國大陸的單邊和平外交與關係模式：習近平是新轉變，還是胡調重彈？並列篇名：Mainland China's Unilateral Peace Diplomacy and the Relationality Model: Is Xi Jinping Articulating a New Strategy, or Just Playing Hu Jintao's Same Old Tune?作者：王宏仁(Hung-Jen Wang)關鍵字：中國外交政策;和平;關係模式;單邊主義;Chinese Foreign Policy;Peace;Relationality;Unilateralism期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：冷戰結束後，中國大陸的外交政策面臨一種新的兩難：一方面要強調主權獨立自主，另一方面又必須對西方世界做出妥協。前者需要凸顯中國的利益，後者則要求中國做出犧牲，兩者同時並行的矛盾造成抉擇上的困境。習近平上台後，提出「中國夢」的新願景，並以「新型大國關係」為主軸。然而，「中國夢」所提出的「奮發有為」，是否將脫離原先胡錦濤「和諧世界」的外交政策，並能夠與美國相抗衡？本文試圖檢視大陸近年來的和平外交主張與內容，並探尋其中的轉變與新意。英文摘要：Since the end of the Cold War, Chinese foreign policy has faced the dilemma between defending China's sovereignty and making compromises with the Western world: ensuring self-interests vs. making self-sacrifice. When Chinese President Xi Jinping vowed to rejuvenate the Chinese nation - ”Chinese dream”, he put forward an idea of forging a new model of major power relationship between China and the U.S. However, it remains in dispute whether President Xi's ”Chinese dream”, with the strategic direction known as fenfa youwei (striving for achievement), implies an intention to challenge U.S. power. This paper investigates China's new diplomacy, especially China's unilateral peace policy, and discusses whether and what is new about this diplomacy.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201709_60(3).00016篇名：東亞安全困境為何不易緩解？無政府秩序形態演進與中國崛起制約並列篇名：Why Security Dilemma in East Asia is Difficult to Mitigate? An Evolutionary Pattern of Anarchical Order and the Constraint of China's Rise作者：張雅君(Ya-Chun Chang)關鍵字：安全困境;無政府狀態;相互依賴;中國崛起;Security Dilemma;Anarchy;Interdependence;China's Rise期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：自冷戰結束以來，東亞地區政治與經濟呈現大幅背離，以致安全困境始終未能有效緩解。本文從Barry Buzan無政府狀態論述，指出其背景在於自二次大戰結束以來東亞日漸形成以主權國家為核心之無政府秩序形態，東亞國家習於以權力平衡確保主權與安全，以致東亞區域結構緊張，相互依賴的安全溢出作用受限。冷戰結束以來，中國崛起過於快速導致東亞國家間實力不對稱性擴大，反而深化東亞總體關係由於國家類型、意識形態和領土因素綜合呈現之敵意性，中國睦鄰外交實踐的友善效應更因而被稀釋，安全建制亦因而無法在促進東亞安全困境緩解上發揮明確效益。英文摘要：Current increasing tensions in the Korean Peninsula and South China Sea show that political and economic dimensions in East Asia diverge drastically and security dilemma remains acute. This article will re-examine the basic security dilemma hypothesis, which presumes an anarchical status of international community. Neo-realist, neo-liberalist and constructionist schools agree that an anarchical status does not mean chaotic orderlessness. Barry Buzan indicates that international anarchy will evolve itself into a more mature phase and thereby alleviate tension caused by security dilemma. Interdependence is widely regarded as an effective variable enabling this evolution. The problem then is that interdependence is not free from the constraint of real-political power logics. This constraint deepens as the contemporary nation-state system of world politics expands, and as the interaction between security structures of various regions exposes their differences. This article argues that the difficulty in alleviating tension in East Asian security dilemma is inherited from the regional anarchy based on the nation-state system since the end of WWII, and complicated by the balance of power East Asian states were accustomed to in insuring security during the Cold War. After the end of Cold War, China's rise deepens this dilemma and thus constrains the evolution of East Asian anarchy to maturity. China's swift rise apparently expands asymmetry of national strengths within the region, manifests animosity caused by differences in statehood, ideologies and territorial disputes, and thereby worsens the sense of insecurity in the region, including China itself. More importantly, China's rise cancels some effects of its alleged policy of amity towards its neighbors, leading to another dilemma in security strategic choices in the future.起始頁-結束頁：21-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201709_60(3).00027篇名：大陸農村基層金融組織的發展內涵：從山西蒲韓社區出發並列篇名：Exploring the Developmental Nature of Micro-Financial Organizations in Rural China: A Case of Puhan Community in Shanxi作者：陳永生(Yong-Sheng Chen)關鍵字：農村金融;蒲韓社區;小額貸款公司;使命偏移;Rural Microfinance;Puhan Community;Small Loan Company;Mission Drift期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：農村發展需要金融支援，大陸當局以往建立起的正規農村金融體系看似完備，但績效不彰。從宏觀上看，農村金融系統資金有反向城市非農部門外流的趨勢；在微觀層面，農民「貸款難」及「貸款貴」的情況未見紓解。面對長期政策績效不彰的困局，大陸當局改弦易轍，逐步推動非正規金融的試點，改由農村微型金融及合作金融機構的試點與發展，以期改善農村金融的供給。本文經由山西蒲韓社區金融組織發展之案例，從基層之村級金融組織的萌發，擴張至農村信用合作及小額貸款公司的制度誘發性過程，探索大陸農村金融組織的微觀發展邏輯，以及指出一些制度局限條件所產生的績效變遷。英文摘要：It is generally believed that rural economic development requires financial support. According to China's past experience, the rural formal financial system seemed firmly established, but its performance was not effective. Broadly speaking, the financial deposit from rural sectors flows into urban and non-agricultural sectors. More specifically, farmers have hard times obtaining loans and face high interest rates. To solve this problem, Chinese authorities have attempted to gradually develop an informal institution by means of micro-financial organizations and cooperatives to improve the supply of rural finance. This article adopts the institutional evolutionary experience of Puhan Community in Shanxi and explores the developmental logic of rural microfinance through some performance changes by institution constraints.起始頁-結束頁：61-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201709_60(3).00038篇名：彭真和北京市的「大躍進」運動：工農生產及城市建設（1958∼1960）並列篇名：Peng Zhen and the Great Leap Forward in the Beijing Municipality: Industrial and Agricultural Production and Urban Construction (1958~1960)作者：鍾延麟(Yen-Lin Chung)關鍵字：彭真;北京市;大躍進;十大工程;Peng Zhen;Beijing Municipality;Great Leap Forward;Ten Grand Buildings期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：中共「大躍進」運動造成的危害已眾所周知。「文革」前跨足中央和地方工作的彭真，如何投入此一運動的問題，現有相關文獻較少聚焦在他擔任中共首都領導人的角色和活動，亦即其如何領導和管理北京市的「大躍進」運動，以及造成的政策影響。本文指出：在京畿農業和工業「大躍進」上，彭真親自開會鼓吹農業高產指標，動員投入大煉鋼鐵行列，並藉機發展當地的有關產業。在城市建設上，彭真戮力準時完成中央交付的首都「十大工程」任務，既為國慶十周年獻禮，也為「大躍進」宣傳和助陣。無可否認地，彭真在運動期間亦有成效不彰、可資爭議的市政規劃和舉措。彭真在北京市推行運動不遺餘力，致使中共的首善之區也出現了欲速不達的弊病和缺糧饑饉的危機。彭真晚年回顧相關歷史時，因為「十大工程」的正面聲譽和影響，特別重視記述其自身對之的指導。英文摘要：Before the Cultural Revolution erupted, Peng Zhen was one of the most influential central leaders of the Chinese Communist Party and a top official of the People's Republic of China's national capital. This article examines Peng Zhen's roles, policies and consequences during the Great Leap Forward (GLF) in the Beijing Municipality. The paper demonstrates that, like other local Party bureaucrats, Peng encouraged and set up the unrealistic grain production quotas and mobilized the local cadres to implement the steelmaking campaign in Beijing City. At the same time, he also considered the GLF to be a rare opportunity to facilitate local industrial development. Albeit succeeding in completing the ”Ten Grand Buildings” at all costs to demonstrate the great achievements and spirit of the GLF, he carried out some controversial local building projects during the campaign. Consequently, Peng could not shirk responsibility for the adverse effects brought by the devastating campaign in Beijing.起始頁-結束頁：93-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201709_60(3).00049篇名：Prelude to the Shift in Global Leadership: China’s ”One Belt, One Road” Initiative and Rebuilding the Asia-Pacific Trans-regional Institutions並列篇名：全球領導轉移的前奏：中國大陸「一帶一路」倡議與亞太跨區域制度的重構作者：陳欣之(Hsin-Chih Chen)關鍵字：‘One Belt, One Road’;Power Transition;Chinese Foreign Policy;Regional Institutions;一帶一路;權力轉移;中共外交政策;區域制度期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The ‘One Belt, One Road’（OBOR）initiative, proposed in 2013, marks China’s interest in reshaping regional institutions that may impact global power distribution. With an emphasis on the process of institutional reshaping linking to competition over global power, this paper will first summarize the relationship between international institutions building and hegemonic status of leadership in part one, followed by introduction to the background of China’s OBOR initiative in part two, China’s changing role in regard to the redistribution of global power in part three, and institutions-related competition between China and the U.S. This paper concludes that China’s OBOR initiative has triggered a soft hegemonic competition that entangles global institutional leadership.英文摘要：中國大陸於2013年提出的「一帶一路」倡議，顯明中國大陸重塑區域制度的利益，將可能對全球權力分配產生重大衝擊。本文強調制度重塑過程與全球權力競爭的密切關連性，將首先簡述國際制度創建與霸權領導地位的關係，其次介紹中國大陸的一帶一路倡議背景，第三部分將處理中國大陸在全球權力重組中的角色變化，第四部分說明美國與中國大陸的制度競爭。本篇論文最後總結，中國大陸的一帶一路倡議，已觸發涉及全球制度領導權的軟性霸權競逐。起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201706_60(2).000110篇名：「一帶一路：制度及地緣戰略之意涵」專刊編輯導言並列篇名：One Belt, One Road: Institutional and Geostrategic Implications作者：蕭琇安期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：iii-v資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201706_60(2).000011篇名：China Triggers a Race to Finance Infrastructure in Asia並列篇名：中國在亞洲啟動一場對基礎建設融資的競賽作者：Robert Wihtol關鍵字：The Asian Development Bank;the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank;China;International Financial Institutions;亞洲開發銀行;亞洲基礎設施投資銀行;中國;國際金融機構期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The Asian financial architecture is at a turning point. For over 70 years, it has been dominated by the Bretton Woods institutions. Their slow pace of reform has frustrated China and other emerging economies, which have established their own financial institutions: the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and New Development Bank. China is also expanding its bilateral financing, through One Belt, One Road and its large policy banks. The region’s architecture has evolved in four stages. In the 1950s and 1960s, the World Bank and IMF were the only multilateral financiers. The establishment of the Asian Development Bank in 1966 and ASEAN in 1967 marked the start of regionalization, which was later deepened by the 1997~1998 Asian Financial Crisis. The fourth stage is linked to China’s financial emergence, triggering a funding race with political undertones. The World Bank, the ADB and Japan have responded by stepping up financing. This article reviews the impact of the funding race in terms of healthy competition that benefits borrowers and unhealthy competition with negative externalities. China has triggered an expansion and diversification of financing. The World Bank and the ADB are improving their efficiency, which benefits the borrowers. However, there are also initial indications that their focuses on due diligence has been shifted to moving money. There is a risk that blocs will converge around Western-led and China-led institutions. To address these risks, it is important that the new banks and China’s policy banks should apply established lending standards and participate in international debt management. The established and new banks should coordinate closely at the global, regional and country levels.英文摘要：過去70多年來，一直由布列敦森林體系機構主導的亞洲金融結構正處於轉折點。中國與其它新興經濟體不滿這些機構緩慢的改革進程，轉而建立自己的金融機構，如亞洲基礎設施投資銀行和新開發銀行。同時，中國並透過「一帶一路」和大型政策性銀行擴大雙邊融資。二戰後亞洲區域金融結構的演化約分為四個階段：1950年代和1960年代，世界銀行和國際貨幣基金組織是唯一的多邊融資機構；1966年亞洲開發銀行成立和1967年東南亞國家協會成立，標誌著區域化的開始；1997至1998年間的亞洲金融危機導致區域化進一步的深化；第四階段與中國的金融地位崛起有關，並啟動一場帶 有政治色彩的資金競賽。世界銀行、亞洲開發銀行和日本都已加強提供融資作出回應。本文檢視資金競賽的正負面影響，即有利於借款人的良性競爭影響和形成不良外部因素的非良性競爭影響。中國已引發一場融資的擴張和多元化。世界銀行和亞洲投資銀行正設法提高其效率，此一發展對貸款方有利。然而，也有初步跡象顯示，這些機構已將焦點從投資風險評估轉向錢的流動性。這可能使金融結構形成以西方陣營領導和由中國主導之機構間競爭的風險。為避免這類風險，新興的銀行和中國政策性銀行最好能沿用既定之國際貸款標準，並參與國際債務管理；同時新興銀行應在全球、區域和國家層面進行密切協調。起始頁-結束頁：27-53資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201706_60(2).000212篇名：China’s OBOR Policy, China-U.S. Relations, and the Return of Geopolitics並列篇名：中國的一帶一路政策、中美關係和地緣政治回歸作者：Yale H. Ferguson關鍵字：OBOR;China;U.S.;Geopolitics;一帶一路;中國;美國;地緣政治期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：China’s ”One Belt, One Road” plan（or strategy）that was unveiled in late 2013 is a bold new foreign investment program by the country that, one measure suggests, already has the world’s largest economy. OBOR is aimed at addressing continuing domestic problems, exploring new investment opportunities abroad, and advancing China’s position as a global power in a rapidly shifting geopolitical environment. This article advises readers to eschew any geopolitical IR theory or methodological assumptions, and it simply attempts to trace OBOR’s antecedents, explain what the policy is （and is not）, analyze its strengths and limitations, and carefully consider its likely future. The article begins with a careful review of the complex Chinese domestic and international backgrounds out of which OBOR emerged and proceeds to examine the plan as articulated by Chinese policy-makers, its sources of finance and related institutions such as the new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and projects in various regions that have been approved to date. A further section focuses upon potential challenges that threaten the success of the OBOR initiative, from weaknesses in China’s own economy, political system, and society, to a host of problems likely to be encountered in host countries. In conclusion, our analysis acknowledges the potential for a ”return of geopolitics”, dividing the world into competing power blocs and spheres of influence, but advances the proposition that China’s OBOR should not be seen primarily as a threat. Win-win solutions are yet possible as investment in infrastructure and other projects encourages growth and may lead to more opportunities for all.英文摘要：中國2013年下旬所提出的「一帶一路」計劃（或戰略），是已堪稱全球 最大經濟體的中國所提出一套大膽的新對外投資計畫。「一帶一路」旨在解決國內持續存在的問題，探索海外新興投資機會，推動中國在快速變化的地緣政治環境中成為全球力量。本文建議讀者避開任何地緣政治國際關係理論或方法假設。本文將試圖追蹤「一帶一路」的來路，解釋此政策是什麼或不是什麼，分析其優勢和局限性，並考慮其可能的未來。文章首先從「一帶一路」的出現和進展，仔細審查複雜的中國內外背景，以中國決策者、財政來源以及相關機構如新興亞洲基礎設施投資銀行，和到目前為止已批准的各個地區的項目來檢視該計畫。進一步將焦點集中於說明潛在挑戰，從中國自身 經濟，政治制度和社會的弱點到東道國可能遇到的許多問題，這些挑戰威脅著「一帶一路」倡議的成功。文章的結論是，中國的「一帶一路」具有「回歸地緣政治」的可能，即將世界分為相互競爭的集團和勢力範圍的潛力，但這並不表示「一帶一路」應被視為具威脅性的主張。雙贏的結果仍是可能的，因為對基礎設施和其他項目的投資鼓勵增長，可能為所有人帶來更多的機會。起始頁-結束頁：55-85資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201706_60(2).000313篇名：Opportunities and Challenges of Building International Connectivity: The Indian Perspective on China’s ”One Belt and One Road” Initiative並列篇名：建立國際連結的機會與挑戰：印度對於中國「一帶一路」計畫的觀點作者：方天賜(Tien-Sze Fang)關鍵字：One Belt One Road;International Connectivity;China-Pakistan Economic Corridor;Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar Economic Corridor;一帶一路;國際連結;中巴經濟走郎;孟中印緬經濟走廊期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：India is among the countries invited to join China’s initiative to build the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st-Century Maritime Silk Road（the OBOR）. New Delhi has not yet decided whether to join. In fact, there is a diversity of opinion within India. This paper proposes an alternative perspective for examining India’s policy and responses to the OBOR from the perspective of international connectivity. For India, the OBOR presents both economic benefits and geopolitical concerns. Particularly, India prefers to be the hub of the network of international connectivity. To bracket the concerns together, this paper suggests that India may offer conditional support to the OBOR, join the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar Economic Corridor (BCIM-EC), but oppose the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor （CPEC）.英文摘要：印度是中國規劃「絲綢之路經濟帶」和「21世紀海上絲綢之路」（「一帶一路」）的沿線國家之一。但新德里迄今尚未決定是否加入此計畫。事實上，印度內部對於加入與否有不同意見。為提供對此議題的不同分析角度，本文將採用國際連結的觀點，來檢視印度對於「一帶一路」的政策及回應。對印度而言，「一帶一路」雖提供經濟利益，卻也帶來地緣政治的隱憂。印度在參與國際連結時，則傾向成為網絡的中心。綜合考量相關因素之下，本文認為，印度可能有條件性地回應「一帶一路」計畫：即參加孟中印緬經濟走廊建設，但反對中巴經濟走廊。起始頁-結束頁：87-108資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201706_60(2).000414篇名：書評作者：楊開煌期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：113-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201706_60(2).000515篇名：香港的本土化浪潮：中國因素氣旋下的抵抗動員並列篇名：The Rise of Localism in Hong Kong: Counter-Mobilization under the Hurricane of China Factor作者：方志(Brian C.H. Fong)關鍵字：中國因素;本土主義;中心邊陲矛盾;香港;China Factor;localism;center-periphery relations;Hong Kong期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文採納「中國因素」的理論框架，以分析中港關係的動態。近年，北京對香港事務的各種「直接施力」和「間接施力」，激發了本土主義在香港社會興起，並由此引發各種對「中國因素」的抵抗動員。本文的結論是，「中國因素」氣旋的不斷擴大，已經令「中心邊陲矛盾」有取代「普選議題」，成為香港政治的主要分歧之勢；而未來香港的各大政治勢力，會如何回應本土化浪潮以至重新組合，將是觀察香港政局的風向標。英文摘要：This article adopts the theoretical framework of China Factor in the analysis of the dynamics of Mainland-Hong Kong relations. In recent years, Beijing has increasingly adopted direct and indirect influence mechanisms to shape the affairs of Hong Kong, and paradoxically such attempts have triggered the rise of localism in Hong Kong and resulted in tidal waves of counter-China Factor mobilizations resisting Beijing's interferences. This article concludes that there are growing signs that the issue of center-periphery relations is replacing universal suffrage as the principal political cleavage in Hong Kong. How different political forces in Hong Kong respond and realign with the rise of localism will be a significant weather vane of political development in Hong Kong.起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201703_60(1).000116篇名：香港雨傘運動與跨域比較專刊編輯導言作者：吳介民期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：iii-v資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201703_60(1).000017篇名：本土、勇武與犬儒：傘後香港的社會趨勢並列篇名：Localism, Radicalism and Cynicism in Post-Umbrella Movement Hong Kong作者：陳健民(Kin-Man Chan);吳木欣(NG Vitrierat)關鍵字：香港;雨傘運動;一國兩制;本土;Hong Kong;Umbrella Movement;One Country Two Systems;Localism期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：2014 年9 月28 日爆發的佔領中環（雨傘運動）捲入超過百萬香港市民，以非暴力公民抗命爭取真普選。佔領行動持續79 天，政府未有確切回應普選訴求，運動內部出現分裂，對運動的目標、手段、組織方式、與政府談判的策略、退場機制等都有不同意見。學生組織最後在激進力量壓力下，即使民氣已盡亦欠缺周詳組織，竟發動升級行動，結果造成多人受傷，佔領最終黯然結束。即使運動產生了重大的啟蒙作用，年輕人覺得運動是「無功而還」，甚至是徹底失敗，「傘後」彌漫著沮喪與挫敗，三種社會趨勢繼而出現。第一是「本土化」，包括本土優先、城邦自治、甚至港獨民族等思潮的湧現。不少青年覺得在「一國兩制」下已無法實現真普選，必須轉而爭取民族自決以至主權獨立。第二種趨勢是「勇武化」，主要是認為「和平理性非暴力」（和理非）的民主運動策略已經失效，必須採取更激烈的抗爭方式。2016 年農曆元旦的「魚蛋革命」（旺角騷亂），便是典型的勇武抗爭。第三種趨勢是「犬儒化」，主要是彌漫在中產階級的一種無力感，暫時隱而未發。未來中共是否延續其在2003 年後對港的高度介入政策將影響「一國兩制」的前景和這三種趨勢的結局。英文摘要：The Occupy Central（Umbrella Movement）that broke out on September 28, 2014 involved more than a million people fighting for universal suffrage through non-violent civil disobedience in Hong Kong. The movement lasted 79 days with no substantial response from the government regarding the demand for political reform. The movement was then split by different ideas regarding goals, strategies, organizational structure, negotiation with government, and timing for retreat. Eventually, the student leaders under apparent pressure from the more radical forces, decided to escalate the movement by storming the government headquarter. The action was not supported by the public and resulted in a number of casualties, which triggered the clearance of the occupation by the government. Even though the movement had enlightened a generation of young people, many of whom regarded it as a complete failure. The post-Umbrella Hong Kong was very depressed and people witnessed the emergence of three social trends. First, the development of ”localism” has spread ideas such as ”Hong Kong people come first”, ”self-governing city-state” and ”Hong Kong nation” or even ”Hong Kong independence”. Many youngsters believe that the arrangement of ”One Country Two System” cannot accommodate democracy and thus necessitate a fight for ”self-determination” or even sovereignty of Hong Kong. Second, radicalism spurs in many who believe that the non-violent strategy of the old democracy movement is proven too weak when confronting the Communist regime of China, and advocate a more militant tactic such as the 2016 Chinese New Year riot dubbed by the media as the ”Fishball Revolution”. Third, cynicism, a sense of powerlessness, prevails among the middle class. Has ”One Country Two System” a future? What will these three trends lead to? The answers depend very much on whether Beijing will continue its ”interventionist policy” towards Hong Kong since 2003.起始頁-結束頁：19-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201703_60(1).000218篇名：從金鐘到我家：雨傘兩年後再撐並列篇名：From Admiralty to My Home: Two Years after the Umbrella Movement作者：何式凝(Sik-Ying HO)關鍵字：雨傘運動;性別政治;資源動員理論;民主;Umbrella Movement;Gender Politics;Resource Mobilization Theory;Democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：這是何式凝作為一個公共知識分子，針對「雨傘運動」所撰寫的人類學式「參與觀察」論文。本文詳細闡述她作為一個性／性別學者、一個政治素人參與雨傘運動的經驗，以及這段經驗如何促使她反思自己對世界、對生命和對學術的理解。因為參與雨傘運動的經歷，她開始研究參與者經過這場運動之後，在個人、家庭、婚姻和感情生活方面的種種轉變，也必須重新修訂她在雨傘運動之前對「民主情人」這個概念的詮釋。過去她關注的是性別政治（genderpolitics）、性的政治（sexual politics），現在則不得不看看香港政治，或者是說宏觀的政治（macro political），所謂正規的政治（formal political process）如何影響我們處理自己的性別、愛情、家庭、婚姻和各種親密關係。她更嘗試用自己的個人經歷來閱讀比較主流的社會運動理論，希望能對資源動員理論（resource mobilization theory）（Edwards and McCarthy 2004; Tilly and Tarrow 2007）提出一些改善的建議，並進一步探索宏觀政治與微觀政治的關係。這篇論文結合了文化研究議題、人類學式反思，與個人反身式行動研究，也希望能對於雨傘運動提出一個特殊角度的理解。英文摘要：Professor HO Sik Ying begins with a personal reflection on the relationship between participation in the Umbrella Movement and her academic and personal life during and after the Umbrella Movement. She shows the extent to which participation in the Movement had the capacity to change her personal life, academic career and perception of democratic struggle as a gender/sexuality scholar. She is now interested in both the politics of the personal and the personal consequences of the political especially as manifested in political processes. Her analysis of the overlap between the public and the private has created a space for the exploration of how work life, collegial relationships and different aspects of personal life can become sites of political engagement. When Ho first introduced the idea of a ‘democratic lover' in her work as a scholar of sexuality it referred to someone who prefers open to exclusive relationships and is not possessive. Thus they apply democratic principles to their relationships. Involvement with the Umbrella Movement has added a new element to this concept, focusing on how practices of democracy in intimate relationships must include dealing with differences in political stances and the conflicts involved. Her re-definition of the concept of 'democratic lover' and reflexive accounts of self-transformation and description of various kinds of political actions vis-a-vis the Movement illuminate the limitations of resource mobilisation theories in addressing gender and power issues involved in women's political participation. The article offers a unique perspective and interpretation of the Umbrella Movement.起始頁-結束頁：37-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201703_60(1).000319篇名：第三勢力與傘兵：比較台港佔領運動後的選舉參與並列篇名：The Third Force and Umbrella Soldiers: Comparing the Elections of Taiwan after the Sunflower Movement and Hong Kong after the Umbrella Movement作者：何明修(Ming-Sho Ho)關鍵字：太陽花運動;雨傘運動;選舉;政黨;Sunflower Movement;Umbrella Movement;Political Parties;Election期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文考察台灣的太陽花運動與香港的雨傘運動後的五場選舉。佔領是激進的體制外抗爭，但即便如此，在運動結束之後，台港都出現了新一波的參選風潮，儘管他們很少有人勝選。台灣的「第三勢力」與主要反對黨的關係較為友善，合作大於競爭；相對於此，香港「傘兵」與既有的反對黨陷入了競爭、甚至是衝突的態勢。本研究發現，認同政治在兩場運動後都獲得強化，卻有相異的後果。在台灣，「天然獨」認同的浮現，拉近了「第三勢力」與民進黨的距離；香港的本土派則是與反對黨的領袖陷入緊張關係。其次，台灣的反對黨較有資源，能夠吸納新興的政治勢力，香港分裂的反對陣營則陷入與新興勢力相競爭的狀態。英文摘要：This article reviews five elections in Taiwan and Hong Kong in the wake of the Sunflower Movement and the Umbrella Movement. Occupying public spaces is a radical extra-institutional protest; however, after the conclusion of these two movements, both Taiwan and Hong Kong witnessed the wave of electoral participation. Taiwan's ”third forces” were more friendly toward the principal opposition party, whereas Hong Kong's ”umbrella soldiers” emerged as a competitor to the existing pan-democrats. This article argues that the diverse patterns of cooperation and conflict can be explained by identity politics and the strength of opposition parties. The surge in pro-independence opinion had narrowed the distance between the ”third force” and the Democratic Progressive Party, while Hong Kong's localists posed a threat to the pan-democrat leaders who continued to embrace a Chinese identity. Moreover, Taiwan's stronger and more resourceful opposition party was more capable of cooperating and co-opting the new political forces, whereas Hong Kong's fragmented and weak opposition parties had to compete with the them.起始頁-結束頁：59-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201703_60(1).000420篇名：建構跨法域（大陸與港澳地區）自由貿易區商事爭議解決機制之構想並列篇名：Envisioning a Commercial Dispute Resolution Mechanism within (Mainland China, Hong Kong & Macau) Free Trade Zone作者：鄧智榮(Chi-Wing Tang)關鍵字：粵港澳自由貿易區;區域法律衝突;區域法律制度;自由貿易區爭端解決;Mainland China Free Trade Zone;Regional Legal System;FTZ legal system;FTZ Dispute Resolution System期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著港澳的回歸及區域經濟的快速融合發展，粵港澳區域更緊密合作的概念已經提出多時，但至今尚未完全落實，其中區內法院衝突問題複雜。借著中華人民共和國國家發展和改革委員會公佈《珠三角洲地區改革發展規劃綱要2008∼2020》和大陸「十三五」期間更加重視對外開放和區域合作的契機，在研究建立粵港澳自貿區的同時，筆者通過研究大陸與香港現行法律關係，提出探討自貿區的獨立法律機構及建構自貿區商事爭議解決機制的一些構想，希望以新思維新角度去解決積累已久的區域司法難題，亦對解決其他同類跨境、跨法域法律問題起參考作用。英文摘要：The idea for closer relationships has been rapidly developing within the region of Mainland, Hong Kong and Macau. However, in legal aspect, the regional legal system and conflicts of law is much more complicated than economic co-operations. Taking the opportunity that the Beijing government is reviewing and re-developing the free trade zone policy across the Guangdong and pearl-river delta areas, this article envisions the idea for a cross-jurisdictional commercial dispute resolution mechanism within the Free Trade Zone area.起始頁-結束頁：89-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201703_60(1).000501篇名：主編的話－文化脈絡中的危機、轉機與復原力：本土諮商心理學研究的方向、目標與策略並列篇名：Editor's note - Crisis, Chance, Resilience and Culture Context: Probing into the Direction, Goal and Strategy of Indigenous Counseling Psychology作者：王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang);劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);孫頌賢(Sung-Hsien Sun);夏允中(Yung-Jong Shiah)關鍵字：心理諮商本土化;本土諮商心理學;危機;創傷;復原力;Crisis;indigenization of counseling;indigenous counseling psychology;resilience;trauma期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：50期出版年：2017中文摘要：危機是人類生命中無法避免的課題，而各地人們面對危機的因應態度與方式卻可能因人而異，因文化背景而異。如何化危機為轉機，其中的關鍵在復原力，這個呼應正向心理學理念的建構，自1982年被提出以來，歷經因子、歷程、運作機轉、多元分析層次等四波之研究與理論發展。本學報第50期所收錄的五篇論文多著眼於第一波的因子探究，少數涉及第三波的運作機轉、第四波的分析層次。本文除了呼籲未來研究者可以多多採用第二波的歷程觀點，更呼籲參酌本學報上一期所探討的第二波正向心理學發展脈絡，將華人辯證思維與雙元性觀點作為第五波發展的指引。本文並提出以脈絡化變項觀點進行本土化復原力研究之芻議，以探討心理諮商本土化與本土諮商心理學研究的方向、目標與策略。英文摘要：Crisis is an unavoidable issue in the life of mankind. However, people's attitudes and ways to deal with the crisis may vary from person to person and from cultural backgrounds. How do we to turn the crisis into a chance? One of the key factors is resilience. This article aims at the issue of cultural context and resilience, which are all involved in the five essays in this volume as the theme of this article. First of all, we take the issue of cultural context as the starting point of this article. Then we review the research and the development of theory on resilience. This article echoes the construction of the positive psychology concept. It has undergone four wave studies such as factors, process, operation mechanism and multiple analysis levels of theoretical development since 1982. Based on this review, five essays in this volume focus on the discussion of resilience-related issues. The five essays included in this volume of journal mainly focus on the first wave of positive psychology. A few essays involve the operation of the third and fourth waves of positive psychology. In addition to appealing to future researchers to adopt the second wave of positive psychology, this article calls for citing references to the development of the second wave of positive psychology discussed in the previous volume of our journal, drawing on the point of view of contextual variable, Chinese dialectical thinking and duality, as the fifth wave acting as the development guidelines. This article puts forward the indigenous counseling psychology research of resilience with the perspective of contextual variables, with an aim to bring the direction, goal and strategy of indigenous counseling psychology and indigenization of counseling research. The directions of indigenous counseling psychology research are: (1) To review the history: The researchers need to review the past history from the perspective of counseling psychology to carry out the historical research of counseling psychology; (2) To confirm the theme: The researchers are suggested to not only focus on innovative research topics of indigenous culture characteristics, but also consider the comparison and docking with the previous counseling psychology research topics; (3)To establish the method: The researches are suggested to not only use the existing research methods, but also new methods based on cultural relevance and innovation research topics, for the indigenous counseling psychology studies, being local or global. The goals of indigenous counseling psychology research are: (1) The introduction of foreign theory (localization): The foreign counseling theory would be more applicable to the local people through the amending process based on the local culture.; (2) The indigenization of cultural integration (acculturative indigenization): Western counseling theories and techniques can be integrated with the cultural tradition and the living experience of the East, and finally transformed to new counseling theories; (3) The indigenization of cultural inheritance (enculturative indigenization): Based on the local culture and experience, we could create new original counseling theories and techniques. The new original counseling theories will be more applicable to the local people and will also demonstrate different counseling approaches to the Western counseling professionals. The strategies of indigenous counseling psychology research are: (1) Concept exploration: It is suggested to combine use of Eastern traditional wisdom as the theme, and adopt the Western philosophy of science as the basis to have clever choices of appropriate cultural content and research methods for indigenous counseling psychological research; (2) Theory construction: The construction of counseling theory could represent both the universal mind and the local cultural mentality; (3) Research validation: The researchers are encouraged to conduct research to support the new theory of indigenous counseling psychology, with an view to demonstrating its academic and practical application value. Finally, the current volume of our journal calls for new development of indigenous counseling psychology and Chinese counseling profession.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620171200500012篇名：探討不同風險程度的國中生之憂鬱情緒的保護與資源因子並列篇名：Examining protective and resources factors for depression among junior high school students experiencing different levels of family risk作者：陳杏容(Hsing-Jung Chen)關鍵字：家庭溝通與支持;酒癮與精神疾病共病;運動;學校依附;藝術;Art;communication with support;comorbidity of alcohol and psychiatric problems;school attachment;sport期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：50期出版年：2017中文摘要：嚴重的憂鬱會提高少年的自殺率，而主要照顧者有酒癮或酒癮與精神疾病共病之少年有更高的風險罹患憂鬱情緒，故本研究探索在不同風險程度下，哪些正向因素可預測國中生之憂鬱情緒，以作為處遇規劃之參考。立基於復原力的觀點，可同時預測高低風險少年之憂鬱者稱之資源因子，只能預測高風險少年之憂鬱者稱之保護因子。透過多元迴歸分析台灣教育長期追蹤之國一與國二資料（15999人），本研究發現多數的變項僅能預測低風險少年的憂鬱情緒。正向個人特質、家庭溝通支持、獎勵式教養、學校依附、參與運動社團皆能預測低風險少年的憂鬱情緒，其中以家庭溝通與支持、學校依附的預測力最高。而家庭溝通與支持、正向個人特質分別能預測酒癮家庭少年與共病家庭少年之憂鬱情緒。根據研究結果，建議以校園作為第一級憂鬱預防的場域，創造一個吸引少年的校園氛圍、提供壓力因應訓練、並鼓勵規律運動。此外，提升家庭溝通與支持或個人壓力因應能力對身處在高風險或一般家庭的少年都有幫助。英文摘要：Severe depression will decrease young people's social functioning and increase their suicidal behaviors. This is especially true for those who have a parent with an alcohol problem or comorbidity of alcohol and psychiatric problems. Interventions incorporating a risk-reducing approach may not effectively help children of a parent with an alcohol problem or comorbidity of alcohol and psychiatric problems because risks related to alcohol problems such as genetics, mental illness, and chronic life stress are not easy to manage, minimize, or eliminate. Therefore, the knowledge of positive factors of influence is crucial for the advanced development of intervention programs. Unfortunately, although a great number of studies have identified risks related to alcohol problems, only a few studies have focused on positive factors. Few studies clarify which factors have a positive influence across different family risk levels. It is unclear whether the positive factors derived from the research on youths in low-risk families can be effective on youths who have a parent with an alcohol problem or comorbidity of alcohol and psychiatric problems. Based on the resilience perspective, the aim of this research is to investigate what kinds of positive factors can predict depression among junior high school students who come from families with different risk levels. The resource factors are defined as factors that can predict depression for youths experiencing high- and low-risk levels, whereas protective factors are defined as factors that can predict depression for youths experiencing high-risk levels (i.e. having a parent with an alcohol problem or comorbidity of alcohol and psychiatric problems). The junior high school students' data derived from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (n=15,999) and the Stata 13.0 statistical software were used for this study. Descriptive statistics for sample characteristics, correlations for variable relationships, cronbach's alpha for internal reliability, power analysis for detecting effect sizes as well as intra-class correlation analysis for examining the issues of the nested effect were performed before multiple regression analyses. Seven main predictors, along with three control variables (i.e. the first wave of depression, gender, and family financial status), were included in regression models that presented the low-risk family, the family of a parent with an alcohol problem, and the family with comorbidity of alcohol and psychiatric problems. The research has four major findings. (1) Most predictors predict the depression for youths from low-risk families only. (2) Positive individual characteristics, family communication with support, positive reinforcement parenting, school attachment, and sports engagement were negatively associated with depression among low-risk youths. Among those factors, school attachment (B = -.04, p ＜.001) and family communication with support (B = -.04, p ＜.001) have the strongest influence on depression. (3) Family supportive communication (B = -.05, p ＜.05) is the only predictor that significantly predicts depression among youths from families with an alcohol problem. (4) The positive individual characteristic (B = -.23, p ＜.05) is the only one that significantly predicts depression among youths from families with comorbid alcohol and psychiatric problems. According to the research findings, the implications emphasize the primary prevention of depression through school where Taiwanese youths spend most of their time besides family time. It is important to create a welcoming school environment for every adolescent regardless of their grades and family backgrounds, to provide students with stress-coping training courses, and to encourage students to exercise regularly. Moreover, enhancing services, such as parent-child counseling in Family Education Centers, can help improve family communication with support that further benefits the emotional development of youths regardless of their being in high- or low-risk families.起始頁-結束頁：29-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620171200500023篇名：接觸偏差同儕對偏差行為影響之理論模式的衡鑑並列篇名：Evaluating The Theoretical Model for Effects of Associated with Deviant Peer on Individual Deviance作者：吳中勤(Chung-Chin Wu)關鍵字：脈絡效果;偏差同儕;偏差行為;測量誤差;Contextual effect;deviance;deviant peer;measurement errors期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：50期出版年：2017中文摘要：根據社會學習理論，接觸偏差同儕對偏差行為具有個人與脈絡層次的潛在影響，然而，過去研究受分析方式的限制，遲至近年來才有適當的統計分析方法來定量脈絡的影響。本研究考量過去相關研究在分析時所忽略的兩個層面：「測量誤差」與「分析層次」（個人與脈絡層次），進一步評估較適於探究接觸偏差同儕對偏差行為影響關係之理論模式。本研究採用單層與兩層SEM進行分析，研究發現：接觸偏差同儕與偏差行為的測量皆存有誤差，班級內青少年接觸偏差同儕與偏差行為皆存在著相似性，突顯出班級脈絡的影響。對個人而言，接觸偏差同儕程度越高的青少年從事偏差行為也越嚴重；同樣的，班級整體接觸偏差行為嚴重程度越高，班級內青少年從事偏差行為也越嚴重。更重要的是，班級脈絡效果比個人層次的影響效果大。據研究結果，社會學習理論內涵與實徵研究，應將接觸偏差同儕對偏差行為的脈絡層次影響納入考量，並採多層次SEM，以正確的探究理論變項間的關係。在教學實務面，可採情境轉換、輔導融入課程設計、增加與學生對話與觀察課間互動，來減少接觸偏差同儕對偏差行為的個人與脈絡影響效果。英文摘要：According to social learning theory, deviant peer serves as learning model of deviances for adolescents. Adolescent learned deviant behavior, they learned deviant motivation and belief behind that behavior as well. It may cause diffusion of deviances. It suggested that part of young adolescents studied in the same classroom/context may behave similar behaviors. A well-known slang: ”birds of a feather flock together” depicted this phenomenon, but it has been neglected in both theoretical literature and empirical researches. By inferring from social learning theory, deviant peers may exert both personal and contextual latent effects on individual deviances. However, contextual effect of deviant peers on deviances has not been addressed. One of possible reasons may also involve limitation on the usage of appropriate analytic methods in the past. There was appropriate statistic method could be used to quantify the effect of context recently. The main purpose of this study was to probe potential contextual effect of deviant peers by introducing alternative method. By using traditional and this alternative, this study considered two aspects which have been ignored: ”measurement errors” and ”analysis level” (single and two-level). Two theoretical models were proposed respectively to represent different consideration of one aspect or both aspects. Single level structural equation model was introduced to consider measurement errors but limited on its ability to take contextual effect into account. While two level structural equation model was used to consider measurement errors and to probe potential contextual effect. Several indices were used to evaluate the most suitable model on investigating the effect of peer deviance on individual deviance. Five thousand and seventy-nine junior high school students nested in one hundred and eighty three classes were sampled by using random cluster sampling method. All of which were consented to participate in this study. Results showed that there were considerable measurement errors resided in the measurements for deviant peer and individual deviance. There were also dependencies resided in observations. It implied the effect of the context in favor of deviances was salient. Combining these evidences suggested that was reasonable to use two level structural equation modeling for considering both effects of measurement errors and dependencies. This method may be not only more suitable and beneficial for probing contextual effect. Further evidences indicated that for individual, associated more with deviant peer resulted in more deviances. In the same token, on average, it showed the same pattern on class level. Specifically, it indicated that as the serious level of association with deviant peers on class level raised, the deeper the deviant problem resided in that context. More importantly, the contextual effect of deviant peers was greater than the individual effect of which. According to results, the contextual effect of deviant peers on individual deviances should be considered in social learning theory and empirical studies in addition to investigate the effect of deviant peers on individual deviances. Comparing to SEM, MSEM was a more useful tool which could be used to investigate explicit and implicit theoretical assumptions or relations. Because the contextual effect was more prominent than the effect on individual level. It suggested the contextual effect of deviant peers should be considered first and treated it seriously. In practical, the contextual effect may be weaken by adapting several methods. The first is context switching which is similar to time-out method. Theoretical, it may be useful for suspending the relationship between deviant peer and individual. Second, counseling methods could be incorporated into curriculum, and teacher should increasing frequency chats with students to understanding what they are thinking, doing and engaging in. The last but not least, it is important for teachers to observe interactions between students during breaking time in school.起始頁-結束頁：63-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620171200500034篇名：Bowen自我分化諮商團體於共依附特質傾向青少年之成效與療效因素初探並列篇名：Effects and Therapeutic Factors of a Counseling Group Based on Bowen's Concept of Differentiation for Adolescents with Codependency in Taiwan作者：劉瓊珊(Chiung-Shan Liu);張世華(Shih-Hua Chang)關鍵字：共依附;自我分化;青少年;諮商團體;Bowen理論;Adolescents;Bowen theory;codependency;counseling group;differentiation of self期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：50期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討Bowen自我分化諮商團體於共依附特質傾向且有感情困擾之青少年的成效與療效因素，採混合研究之嵌入式設計，主要以質性研究探討本團體對成員的幫助和療效因素；輔以量化研究評估成員於團體結束及結束三個月後，其在自我分化、人際親密能力，以及自我概念的變化。本研究參與者為六位北部某專科五專生（均為女性），平均年齡16歲。本研究質性資料主題分析結果發現，團體對成員的幫助，包括：（1）自我的成長與朝向分化；（2）親密與自主的平衡；（3）學習關係困擾的解決方法等三個主題；本團體的療效因素則包括：（1）家庭與人際互動經驗的覺察；（2）對他人經驗的體會與共鳴；（3）團體提供溫暖信任與回饋的環境；（4）幫助成員解決問題等四個主題。本研究量化資料以Wilcoxon配對符號等級檢定結果顯示，團體成員之自我分化、人際親密能力與社會自我概念於團體結束後有顯著的提升，且其人際親密能力與社會自我概念，於團體結束三個月後仍有顯著的提升。最後，本研究綜合討論質性與量化研究結果與發現，並對未來相關研究與諮商實務工作提出若干建議。英文摘要：Evolving from the treatment of families of alcoholics, the construct of codependency has been expanded and mainly refers to excessively other-oriented caretaking traits and behaviors that are derived from a stressful or dysfunctional family environment. Current research findings and clinical observations have consistently shown codependency traits and related symptoms including low self-esteem, relationship difficulties, and psychological maladjustment among adolescents and college students in both Western countries and Taiwan. However, there is limited work examining and assessing the effectiveness of treatment model based on a theoretical framework for codependency. Chang (2012, 2016) has proposed and provided empirical support for a Bowen-based model of codependency for adolescents and college students in Taiwan. Particularly, differentiation of self was found to be negatively related to codependency traits and was a significant mediator of the relationship between family-of-origin dysfunction and codependency traits. Consistent with previous research, codependency traits were found to be significantly associated with low self-esteem, relationship anxiety and avoidance, as well as psychological adjustment problems including somatic symptoms, anxiety, depression, and social dysfunction. The purpose of this study was to develop a group counseling model based on Bowen's concept of differentiation of self and explore the effects and therapeutic factors of the counseling group for adolescents with codependency in Taiwan. With a mixed method embedded design, the core qualitative method was used to understand participants' perceptions of the helpfulness and therapeutic factors of the counseling group. The supplemental quantitative method was used to examine their changes in measures of differentiation of self, interpersonal competence, and self-concept at the end of the group and a three-month follow up. The group model consisted of eight two-hour sessions for a total of sixteen hours for eight successive weeks. The group goals were to increase members' differentiation of self, to help them understand the impact of their family-of-origin experiences on intimate relationships, as well as to enhance their ability to recognize and take care of their own needs. Participants were six female students in a five-year junior college in Taipei, and their ages ranged from 15 to 18 with a mean age of 16 years. They had an average score higher than 3 on the Chinese version of the Spann-Fischer Codependency Scale, and experienced codependent relationships or had problems in the current or past intimate relationships. With semi-structured interviews and a phenomenological approach, qualitative data were coded and analyzed using thematic analysis. Participants' perceptions of the ways in which the group was helpful included: (1) development and differentiation of self, (2) balance of intimacy and autonomy, (3) learning solutions for relationship problems. The therapeutic factors of the group included: (1) awareness of the experiences in family and interpersonal interaction, (2) understanding and resonating with others' experiences, (3) a warm environment of trust and feedback exchange in the group, (4) helping members solve problems. Results of Wilcoxon Matched-Pairs Signed-Ranks tests indicated that participants' levels of differentiation of self, interpersonal competence, and social self-concept improved significantly at the end of the group. Also, their interpersonal competence and social self-concept continued to improve at a three-month follow up. The findings of the study provide preliminarily empirical support for the effectiveness of the Bowen- based treatment group for adolescents with codependency in Taiwan. Counselors and therapists are encouraged to use the group counseling model and extend the group sessions or time for adolescents and college students who struggle with codependent relationships. The implications of the findings for group counseling for codependency as well as suggestions for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：89-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620171200500045篇名：害羞、婚姻溝通和婚姻滿意度的相關研究並列篇名：A Study on The Relationships among Shyness, Marital Communication and Marital Satisfaction作者：蘇素美(Su-Mei Su)關鍵字：多群體分析;害羞;婚姻溝通;婚姻滿意度;Marital communication;marital satisfaction;multi-group analysis;shyness期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：50期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以婚姻的「脆弱－壓力－適應」模式去探討害羞、婚姻溝通和婚姻滿意度的關係。選取366位已婚者為研究對象，以「害羞量表修訂版」、「婚姻溝通量表」及「婚姻滿意度量表」為研究工具，採用結構方程模式進行分析。主要研究結果為：（1）害羞對婚姻溝通有負向的直接效果，顯示害羞特質對婚姻溝通會有負向的影響。（2）婚姻溝通對婚姻滿意度有正向的直接效果，顯示婚姻溝通可以正向的預測婚姻滿意度，婚姻溝通愈良好的個體，對婚姻的滿意度愈高。（3）婚姻溝通完全中介害羞和婚姻滿意度之間的關係，顯示害羞對個體婚姻滿意度的影響，完全是透過婚姻溝通而產生的。（4）男女生在害羞對婚姻溝通的徑路係數上有顯著差異，男生的徑路係數比女生更大，顯示害羞對男生的婚姻溝通之負面影響比女生要更為深遠。本研究結果證實了Karney和Bradbury（1995）所提出婚姻的「脆弱－壓力－適應」模式中「脆弱性」、「適應過程」和「婚姻品質」三個要素之間的關係，害羞此項持久性的弱點會影響個人在婚姻中的適應過程，而個體在婚姻生活中的適應過程，會影響到其對婚姻的滿意程度。本研究針對研究結果，對教育與輔導及未來的研究方向提出建議。英文摘要：The vulnerability-stress-adaptation model (VSA) of marital development provides a framework for understanding the variations in marital quality and stability over time (Karney & Bradbury, 1995). Marital outcomes are a function of enduring vulnerabilities, stress events, and adaptive processes in the VSA model of marital development. The VSA model is a comprehensive model that explains how the quality and stability of marriage changes over time. However, this study only focuses on part components of the model. We used the VSA model to test the relationships among enduring vulnerabilities, adaptive processes, and marital quality. The VSA model emphasizes enduring vulnerabilities have direct effects on adaptive processes, and adaptive processes have direct effects on marital quality. Shyness is a personality trait that is stable over time. It is therefore an appropriate representation of enduring vulnerability. Shy individuals possess fewer social skills and abilities to initate discussions. Such low level of relationship self-efficacy may prevent them from managing interpersonal conflicts in families. Because communication is an important determinant in relationship satisfaction, shyness may negatively influence their marital satisfaction. This study examines shyness as enduring vulnerability, marital communication as an adaptive process, and marital satisfaction as indicator of marital quality. We hypothesized that shyness negatively influences marital communication and marital satisfaction, and marital communication positively influences marital satisfaction. Moreover, marital communication plays a mediating role between shyness and marital satisfaction. The subjects were 366 married adults in Taiwan. Structural Equation Modeling was used to analyze the data. Self-report data were gathered through the Shyness Scale revision, the Marital Communication Scale, and the Marital Satisfaction Scale. The Shyness Scale revision requires individuals to report agreement with 24 items using a 5-point Likert response scale. Composite reliability ranged from .77 to .85, and the average variance extracted for each dimension ranged from .41 to .54. The Cronbach α was between .84 and .91. The Marital Communication Scale is a 5-point Likert scale that measures the couples' communication in marriage. The Cronbach α was between .88 and .94. We assessed marital satisfaction using the Marital Satisfaction Scale. This scale asks participants to evaluate their satisfaction in marriage using a 5-point Likert response scale (1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree). The Cronbach α was between .73 and .88. The results are as follows: (1) Shyness has negative direct effects on marital communication. Shyness is significantly and negatively associated with marital communication. (2) Marital communication has positive direct effects on marital satisfaction. Marital communication can predict individual marital satisfaction. The better marital communication is, the higher marital satisfaction is. (3) Marital communication completely mediate the relationships between shyness and marital satisfaction. The impact of shyness on individual marital satisfaction is entirely through marital communication. (4) There are significant gender differences on the path coefficient from shyness to marital communication. The path coefficient for males is greater than the coefficient for females, indicating that shyness has worse effects on males' marital communication than females'. In conclusion, this study shows that shyness negatively correlate with marital communication and marital satisfaction. Furthermore, marital communication completely mediate the relationship between shyness and marital satisfaction. The results of this study confirm the relationships among the three elements of ”vulnerability”, ”adaptation process” and ”marital quality” in the VSA model of marriage proposed by Karney and Bradbury (1995). The enduring vulnerability of shyness will affect the adaptation process of the individual in marriage, and the adaptation process of the individual in the marriage will affect marital satisfaction. Suggestions and implications for education, counseling, and future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：123-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620171200500056篇名：國小高年級學童所知覺之父母管教行為與心理社會適應之關聯並列篇名：The Associations between Perceived Parenting Behavior and Psychosocial Adjustment of Elementary School Students作者：程景琳(Ching-Ling Cheng)關鍵字：父母管教行為;心理社會適應;心理控制;行為控制;前青少年期;Behavioral control;parenting behavior;preadolescence;psychological control;psychosocial adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：50期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究之目的在於探討高年級學童所知覺之控制性父母管教行為（即心理控制與行為控制）與其心理社會適應不良的關聯。「心理控制」管教行為指父母藉由操控孩子的想法與感受，使其行為表現得以合乎父母期望，乃針對孩子心理層面的干預；而「行為控制」管教行為則指父母藉由強制介入性的規定，對孩子的行為加以嚴格限制與規範，偏向於高壓權威式的管教。研究參與者為來自臺灣6個縣市8所國小共350名五年級學生（男生177名、女生173名，平均年齡10.89歲），透過自陳之「父母行為控制量表」、「父母心理控制量表」、「困難量表」及「同儕受害經驗量表」，測量高年級學童所知覺之父母行為及心理控制程度，及自身之情緒困難及同儕受害狀況。本研究發現在同時考量父親及母親行為控制的情況下，高年級男生所知覺的父親及母親行為控制程度並無法顯著預測其心理社會適應情況；而高年級女生所知覺的母親行為控制管教能預測其心理適應不良與社會適應不良，但父親行為控制並無顯著預測力。另外，在同時考量父親及母親心理控制的情況下，對於高年級男生而言，其所知覺的父親心理控制程度愈高，愈容易出現心理社會適應不良；針對高年級女生而言，其所知覺的母親心理控制程度愈高，則愈容易出現心理社會適應不良。最後針對父母控制管教行為與高年級學童適應不良之關聯的可能影響因素進行相關討論。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between elementary school students' perceived controlling parenting and their psychosocial maladjustment. In the present study, controlling parenting was represented by psychological as well as behavioral control. Psychological control refers to parenting behavior that constrains and manipulates children's psychological and emotional experiences, while behavioral control refers to parenting behavior that coercively regulates and demands children's behavior and activity. Psychosocial maladjustment was indicated by emotional difficulties (i.e., emotional symptoms and hyperactivity of SDQ) and experiences of peer victimization (i.e., physical and relational victimization). The hypotheses of the present study were: (1) children's perceived paternal and maternal psychological as well as behavioral control would be, respectively, positively associated with psychosocial maladjustment of early adolescents; (2) children's perceived paternal and maternal behavioral control would positively predict their psychosocial maladjustment, respectively, for boys as well as for girls; and (3) children's perceived paternal and maternal psychological control would positively predict their psychosocial maladjustment, respectively, for boys as well as for girls. The participants were 350 fifth-graders (173 girls and 177 boys; mean age = 10.89 years) from 18 classrooms of 8 elementary schools in 6 counties of Taiwan. Children reported how they perceived, respectively, their fathers' and mothers' controlling parenting (i.e., behavioral and psychological control). Participants also self-reported their emotional difficulties and experiences of peer victimization. Structural equation modeling (SEM) analyses were conducted separately, by gender of children, for two different forms of parental control to examine the associations between paternal as well as maternal control and children's psychosocial maladjustment. The results demonstrated that the psychological and behavioral forms of controlling parenting delivered by fathers and mothers respectively were associated with children's emotional difficulties and peer victimization. With regard to the effect of behavioral control parenting, the model fit was first examined on all subjects and then separately on boy and girl samples. The SEM results showed that the estimated model was accepted in the girl sample (χ^2 = 19.56, p ＞ .05; RMSEA = .05, CFI = .99, SRMR = .06), but not in the boy sample. Furthermore, there were significant influences of maternal behavioral control on girls' emotional difficulty (γ = .38, p ＜ .01) and peer victimization (γ = .45, p ＜ .001); however, there was no significant effect of paternal behavioral control on girls' psychosocial maladjustment. Thus, while simultaneously considering the effects of behavioral control from fathers and mothers, for young adolescent boys, neither their perceived paternal or maternal behavioral controlling parenting would significantly predict their psychosocial maladjustment. On the other hand, the perceived maternal behavior control of young adolescent girls would predict their psychosocial maladjustment, but not the perceived paternal behavioral control. With regard to the effect of psychological control parenting, the SEM results demonstrated that the estimated models were both accepted in boy (χ^2 = 17.31, p ＞ .05; RMSEA = .05, CFI = .99, SRMR = .04) and girl samples (χ^2= 11.44, p ＞ .05; RMSEA = .00, CFI = 1.00, SRMR = .03). In addition, in boy sample, there was significant influence of paternal psychological control on boys' maladjustment (γ of emotional difficulty = .70, p ＜ .001; γ of peer victimization = .60, p ＜ .001), but no significant maternal influence. On the other hand, in girl sample, there was significant influence of maternal psychological control on girls' maladjustment (γ of emotional difficulty = .63, p ＜ .001; γ of peer victimization = .51, p ＜ .001), but no significant paternal influence. The findings thus demonstrated that, while considering simultaneously the effects of paternal and maternal psychological control, young adolescent boys with higher levels of perceived paternal psychological control tend to have more psychosocial maladjustment, and young adolescent girls with higher levels of perceived maternal psychological control tend to have more psychosocial maladjustment. This is the first study at Taiwan to examine how both paternal and maternal parenting in forms of behavioral as well as psychological control might relate to psychosocial adjustment of preadolescents, with child gender as the moderating factor. Briefly, for boys, only paternal psychological control was associated with their psychosocial maladjustment. For girls, both maternal psychological and behavioral control was related to their psychosocial maladjustment. Implications for understanding the mechanisms underlying the harmful effects of parental control on elementary school students' psychosocial adjustment were further discussed.起始頁-結束頁：161-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620171200500067篇名：後現代思維與第二波正向心理學在諮商的應用並列篇名：Application of Postmodernism and the Second Wave of Positive Psychology in Counseling作者：劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);孫頌賢(Sung-Hsien Sun);夏允中(Yung-Jong Shiah);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：成長取向;系統觀點;後現代思維;第二波正向心理學;辯證思維;Dialectical thinking;growth-oriented;postmodernism;systematic theory;the second wave of positive psychology期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：49期出版年：2017中文摘要：後現代思維與第二波正向心理學研究正逐漸發展中，諮商與心理治療取向之演進也有著相互輝映的關連，蘊含著對現代思維在哲學上、學理上的多項變革。本學報第49期所收錄的五篇實徵性研究論文，恰可展現出這樣的特色，其中，強調人本主義的成長取向並相信人類具有尋求意義與創造意義的驅力、系統理論的視框、後現代思維中更具平等性的助人關係或研究關係等等，呈現出後現代思維與第一波正向心理學的貢獻，強調辯證思維則突顯出第二波正向心理學的突破。溯本究源，辯證思維根本是華人文化之特色與優勢所在，期待華人文化所蘊藏的更多瑰寶，能夠帶出後現代思維與正向心理學之持續革命與突破，新近發展中的修養心理學或許是可期待的瑰寶之一。英文摘要：Postmodernism and the second wave of positive psychology are gradually developing, and the evolution of counseling and therapeutic approach has a mutually consensual relationship. The characteristics of such a reaction to modernism, not only focus on the study of positive behavioral traits, but also contain a number of philosophy and academic paradigm changes. This collection of five practical research papers in this journal of 49th issue, just reflects these characteristics. The emphasis on the growth-oriented of humanism and its belief that human being has the drives of meaning-making and meaning-seeking, the framing of systematic theory, and the more equal helping relationship or research relationship in postmodern thinking indicate the contribution from postmodernism and the first wave of positive psychology; the application of dialectical thinking in Chinese culture reveal the breakthrough of the second wave of positive psychology. Furthermore, dialectical thinking is the advantage of Chinese culture. In the future study, more treasures of Chinese culture may bring about a continuous revolution and breakthrough in postmodernism and positive psychology, such as the newly developed self-cultivation psychology.起始頁-結束頁：1-15資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620170800490018篇名：團體領導者工作同盟量表編製與相關研究並列篇名：The Development of Group Counseling Working Alliance Scale: Leader-rated Scale作者：謝麗紅(Lih-Horng Hsieh);巫珮如(Pei-Ju Wu)關鍵字：團體工作同盟;團體氣氛;團體領導者;團體凝聚力;團體諮商;Group Counseling;group leader;group working alliance;group climate;group cohesion期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：49期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在編製團體領導者工作同盟量表，作為領導者在團體過程中評估團體工作同盟之工具，及了解本量表與成員團體工作同盟、團體凝聚力、團體氣氛之相關。量表編製主要參考相關同盟文獻、Marziali、Munroe-Blum和McCleary（1997）、與研究者訓練團體領導者的實務經驗來編製團體領導者工作同盟量表，形成本量表架構內涵，並邀請國內五位輔導與諮商領域專家進行專家效度考驗，形力成預試量表。以團體領導者進行預試，共取得31個團體，179份領導者資料，以預試資料進行鑑別分析、項目分析及探索性因素分析，決定保留所有題項，形成36題之正式量表，接著以預試樣本進行內部一致性、建構效度和效標關聯效度，以作為評量工具信效度考驗。量表分成兩個因素向度：內容向度和系統向度。研究結果顯示，本量表α係數為.96，內容向度α係數值介於.89至.90之間；系統向度值介於.84至.88之間，具有良好的信度。在效標關聯效度方面，本量表與成員團體工作同盟量表相關為.12（p ＜ .01），團體凝聚力相關為.13（p ＜ .01），團體氣氛之分量表投入、逃避和衝突間則皆達顯著水準，分別為.07（p ＜ .05）、-.10（p ＜ .01）及-.18（p ＜ .01），顯示具有可接受的效度。本研究結果符合文獻研究結果，也符合理論假設，高工作同盟的團體相對團體凝聚力亦高，團體氣氛之投入與團體工作同盟有正向的相關，亦即領導者與成員的團體工作同盟也越高，成員評估投入團體的程度也越高，而成員所評估的逃避與衝突則與領導者與成員團體工作同盟有負向的相關，亦即團體領導者工作同盟分數則越低，成員呈現逃避與衝突的現象越多。最後，本研究針對量表應用，以及後續研究進行討論並提出相關建議。英文摘要：The therapist-client relationship or the working alliance plays an important role not only in individual counseling but also in group counseling. Group counseling differs from individual counseling in many ways. Group dynamics is particularly attended to in the process of group counseling. The relations among the group members are rather complex because there are a variety of members with multiple relations among them in a counseling group. Besides, the role of the group leader in a counseling group is different from that of the therapist in individual counseling. The group leader creates an atmosphere of interaction in the group process that cultivates the member's self-exposure and lower the pattern of one-way interaction between the leader and the individual. The group leader would only intervene in the mutual interaction among the members in a group process, instead of responding to the individual. The multiple ways of interactions such as group members' observation, reflection, explanation and feedback require a situation different from working alliance in individual counseling. Based on previous studies, assessing the working alliance used in individual counseling indeed has its limit. Developing the working alliance scale specifically used for group counseling would allow us directly and effectively to assess the working alliance between the leader and group members. There is no group counseling working alliance scale up to now in Taiwan. The purpose of this study is to develop leader-rated group counseling working alliance scale (LGCWAS), which helps the group leaders as a tool to assess groups working alliance development, and help to understand the correlation between the leaders group working alliance scale and members of group working alliance, cohesion, and group climate. The development of this scale mainly refers to the relevant alliance literature, the practical experience of training the leadership skills and strategies for leaders in group counseling by the first author, and the group therapy alliance Scale (GTAS) used by the group members, which is developed by Marziali, Munroe-Blum and McCleary (1997). An original scale is formed by inviting five domestic experts in guidance and counseling to test expert validity on the scale structure and items. The group counseling leaders are tested using this scale. Through evaluating the participants' attitude toward the group therapy working alliance, there are 179 effective questionnaires in total from 31 different groups. We apply confirmatory factor analysis to test the internal consistency and validity of scale construction and its criterion-related validity as a reference for testing the reliability and validity of this assessment tool. After the item analysis and confirmatory factor analysis of the original scale data are carried out, we keep all the items and develop the formal scale with 36 items in total. These results reveal that the three categories in the Content Dimension are Goal, Task, and Bond; the four categories in the Interpersonal Dimension are Self-Therapist, Other-Therapist, Group-Therapist, and within system. The result reveals that the Cronbach's α is .96, Content Dimension Cronbach's α between .89 and .90; Interpersonal Dimension Cronbach's α between .84 and .88. It can be readily seen that the leaders group working alliance scale has good internal consistency. For the criterion-related validity, the correlation between leader-rated group counseling working alliance scale and member-rated group counseling working alliance scale is .12(p ＜ .01). The correlation between leaders group working alliance scale and cohesion is .13(p ＜ .01). The correlation between leaders group working alliance scale and engagement, avoidance, and conflict is .07, -.10, and -.18 respectively (p ＜ .01). These results indicate that the leaders group working alliance scale has good validity as well. This research is consistent with the results reported in the literature as well as the theoretical hypotheses. High working alliance group has high group cohesion. The involvement of group members has positive correlation with the group working alliance. In other words, the high working alliance between the leader and the group members would lead to high involvement in the group process assessed by the group members. On the contrary, the avoidance and conflict assessed by the group members have negative correlation with the working alliance between the leader and the group members. In other words, the low score in the leaders group working alliance scale would lead to more avoidance and conflict of group members. Based on our findings, we make some suggestions for the application of group counseling working alliance scale, the group leaders, professional training in group counseling and future research.起始頁-結束頁：17-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620170800490029篇名：獨樂樂不如眾樂樂：人際關係是影響樂觀解釋風格與幸福感間關係的中介角色並列篇名：Joy Share with Others Is More Joyful: Interpersonal Relationship as a Mediator between Optimistic Explanatory Style and Well-being作者：黎佩欣(Pei-Hsin Li);朱玲慧(Ling-Hui Chu);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)關鍵字：人際關係;中介變項;幸福感;樂觀解釋風格;Interpersonal relationship;mediator variable;optimistic explanatory style;well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：49期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來，國小學童的心理健康與幸福感日益受到大眾的重視，國內相關研究仍有待發展；過去研究發現，個人樂觀與否會影響看待事物的方式，而對於幸福感受亦具有預測力，然而，國小學童身處於家庭與學校環境中，與重要他人和同儕的人際關係對個人的影響亦不容忽視。因此，本研究目的在探究國小學童的樂觀解釋風格對幸福感的影響，以及人際關係是否能在樂觀解釋風格與幸福感之間扮演中介角色。本研究的研究對象是北區五所國小共1322位六年級的學生，資料乃從對國小學生進行的五波縱貫性研究中，抽取2012年蒐集的第五波資料進行分析。本研究採用結構方程式模型（SEM）探討研究變項之間的關係。研究結果發現：（1）國小學生的樂觀解釋風格與人際關係具有顯著正向的關係；（2）國小學生的人際關係與幸福感之間具有顯著正向的關係；（3）國小學生的人際關係在解釋風格與幸福感之間扮演完全中介的角色。由研究結果可知，在提昇國小學生的幸福感上，人際關係扮演了重要角色。最後，依據分析結果，研究建議老師及家長給予學生正向支持，並關注學生在校與同儕之間的人際關係，將有助於提昇學生的幸福感受。英文摘要：Recently, the public has put an increasing emphasis on the psychological health and happiness of primary school students, which calls for a continued effort to explore and develop this area. Previous studies found that an individual's optimistic attitude may affect his or her view about the environment, and may influence his or her well-being as an individual. Individuals who are more optimistic tend to respond positively to stress and handle stressful situations more successfully. In addition, not only are children's optimistic explanatory styles affected by their personalities, the interaction between family and school is also another important contributor. However, there are few studies that focus on children's optimistic explanatory styles and its relationship with interpersonal relationships. Hence, the present study aims in understanding the mediating role of children's interpersonal relationship between optimistic explanatory style and well-being. In the current study, we regarded optimism as an attributional style that it is the way in which children explain the causes of events happen in their lives. Children who are optimistic tend to believe that negative events are external, unstable, and specific. Thus, we supposed that children's well-being relates to optimistic explanatory style in a positive way. In addition, children's relationships with their classmates, family, and teachers are included in the study. Previous studies found that children with better interpersonal relationships may have much better well-being. In this study, we hypothesized that children's interpersonal relationship influences their well-being, and the interpersonal relationship plays a mediating role between optimistic explanatory style and well-being. The present study was conducted using a sample randomly selected from five elementary schools in North Taiwan from 2010 to 2012. A total of 1322 sixth grade students were selected from the fifth wave of the three-year longitudinal data set. To test the hypotheses we conducted, data was analyzed through structural equation modeling (SEM) using LISREL 8.7. Self-report data were gathered through Optimistic Explanatory Style Scale, Interpersonal Relationship Scale, and Subjective Well-Being Scale. For Optimistic Explanatory Style Scale, children responded each item regarding how they viewed each event, either unstable or external event, with KR20 of 0.44 and 0.42 respectively. Interpersonal relationship scale is a 4-point Likert scale that includes children's relationship with their classmates, family, and teachers, with Cronbach's alpha of .88. Subjective Well-Being Scale is a 4-point Likert scale that measures children's overall positive emotion and life satisfaction, with Cronbach's alpha of .90. The confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) showed that the model had a good fit to the data. Results from the present study showed that there is a positive relationship between children's optimistic explanatory style and well-being. That is, children who are more likely to view events as external or unstable have higher well-being scores. Another contribution of the study is the mediating role of interpersonal relationship between children's optimistic explanatory style and well-being. In our study, we also found that children's interpersonal relationship is positively associated with their well-being. Moreover, interpersonal relationship fully mediated the relationship between optimistic explanatory style and well-being. In conclusion, the current study showed that elementary school students' optimistic explanatory style positively correlated with interpersonal relationship and well-being. Furthermore, interpersonal relationship fully mediated the relationship between optimistic explanatory style and well-being. Accordingly, interpersonal relationship plays an important role in facilitating the well-being of students. We suggest that teachers and parents should support students in a positive way, encourage children to cultivate optimistic attitude, and pay more attention to the peer relationship with other students. The other implications for future research and practice are also proposed.起始頁-結束頁：53-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186201708004900310篇名：成長主題、意義化與台灣成人心理成熟的關聯性初探並列篇名：A Study on the Relationship among Growth Themes, Meaningfulness, and Psychological Maturity of Taiwanese Adults作者：張繐<U+7920>(Hui-Tuz Chang);劉奕蘭(Yih-Lan Liu)關鍵字：心理成熟;成長主題;社會認知成熟;社會情緒幸福感;意義化;Psychological maturity;growth themes;social-cognitive maturity;social-emotional wellbeing;meaningfulness期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：49期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究依據Bauer和McAdams（2004a, 2004b）的觀點，將心理成熟定義為社會認知成熟及社會情緒幸福感等兩種人格發展類型，藉此探討台灣樣本的心理成熟特色，並檢視成長主題、意義化與心理成熟間的關聯性。研究樣本是透過滾雪球方式選取102位18∼57歲的參與者，分別填寫Loevinger華盛頓造句測驗（WUSCT）、心理幸福感量表（PWB）、大五人格量表（BFI）及撰寫成長主題故事。研究將WUSCT所量測的自我發展階段視為社會認知成熟的指標，研究結果發現參與者的自我發展階段平均介於「自我意識」與「良心」之間，且年齡越大發展階段越高；至於心理幸福感所量測出的社會情緒幸福感程度，則反映出多數人認同日常生活中所帶來的正向情緒；但社會認知成熟與社會情緒幸福感間無關聯性。基本上，在高峰經驗中描述成就主題並能賦予事件意義化者，越能促進社會認知成熟度的提升；而描述學業挫折或工作表現不佳等低潮經驗，則會降低社會情緒幸福感的程度。此外，高峰經驗成就主題中的意義化能調節成長主題與社會認知成熟的關係。在輔導實務面上，建議啟發個體多元的自我價值及生命意義的建構，勿拘泥於學業及工作表現。英文摘要：Based on concept of psychological maturity in personality psychology (Bauer & McAdams, 2004), this study defines two forms of personality development: social-cognitive maturity (SCM) and social-emotional well-being (SEWB). SCM deals with how complexly ones think about the self and others, and how their lives have organized in the world in increasingly complex ways. It is frequently measured by Loevinger's measure of ego development (Loevinger, 1976; Hy and Loevinger, 1996). SEWB, based on self-determination theory, deals with how good one feels about the self in a world of others (Ryan & Deci, 2001). SCM and SEWB were expected to relate differentially to two forms of growth themes: Agentic-grwoth tehms and Communal-growth themes. Agentic-growth themes (e.g., emphasizing power) correlated primarily with SCM, and communal-growth themes (e.g., emphasizing intimacy) correlated primarily with SEWB (Bauer & McAdams, 2004b). Growth themes from personal memories are narratives of specific events in a person's life. They complete with a visual image of the event and attendant thoughts and feelings that the person remembers experiencing at the time of the event (Brewer, 1986). Growth themes often provide meaning or even contribute to a sense of meaning. A strong sense of meaning is associated with well-being (Emmons, 2003). How people construct their growth themes and make meaning of these themes greatly depend on personality. This study explores the characteristics of psychological maturity in Taiwanese adults and examines the relationships among personality, growth themes, meaningfulness, and psychological maturity. 102 participants were recruited through snowball sampling from Taiwan. The participants' ages ranged from 18-57 years old (average age = 26.78; male, N = 44; married = 11; student = 57). The participants completed the scales of Washington University Sentence Completion Test (WUSCT), Psychological Well-being (PWB), and Big- Five Inventory (BFI), and they were asked to write down their life stories (Growth Themes). The participants completed a booklet typically took 2-6 hours to complete. Regression model was used to examine the meaningfulness would moderate the relationship between growth themes and ego development. Results showed that the average stage of ego development for participants was between Self-Aware stage and conscientious stage. Older participants displayed a higher level of ego development. Moreover, majority of people agreed with that life brings positive emotion in everyday. Consistent with previous findings, PWB and SCM were not significantly correlated. Furthermore, the results of regression analysis indicated that personality was positively correlated with social emotion well-being, but didn't correlate with meaningfulness. Extraversion personality was positively related to the growth themes derived from life stories. In the description of the peak experience in life stories, making meanings to achievement themes was positively correlated with SCM. On the other hand, when describing nadir experience, experiencing academic setback and poor job performance was negatively correlated with SWB. Finally, the meaningfulness moderated the relationship between growth themes and ego development for participants when describing achievement themes in peak experience. The overall findings are summarized in three parts. First, the non-significant relationship between SCM and SWB indicates that these two perspectives of maturity develop independently. Moreover, the two growth themes mapped differentially onto measures of SCM and SWB, suggesting that the different underlying reasons that people for their life experience relate to specific kinds of personality development. Second, Taiwanese adults describe the achievement themes more often than communion themes. When people describe more achievement themes in peak experiences, they tend to develop a higher level of ego development. Third, when people make more meaning of achievement themes in peak experiences, they tend to display a higher ego development.起始頁-結束頁：79-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186201708004900401篇名：臺灣地方政府貪腐現象之時空掃描並列篇名：A Spatial-Temporal Scan on the Corruption of Counties in Taiwan作者：廖興中(Hsin-Chung Liao);徐明莉(Ming-Li Hsu)關鍵字：時空掃描;空間分析;公務人員貪瀆;地理資訊系統;SaTScan;time-temporal scan;spatial analysis;public servant corruption;geographical information system;SaTScan期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：53期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究主要是針對臺灣本島各縣市2006至2012年間，地方政府公務人員因貪瀆被起訴之資料進行時空分析研究。由於SaTScan在流行病學與犯罪學的研究中常被運用，主要是利用來掃描是否這些現象具有在時間與空間的固定盛行趨勢。因此，本研究嘗試運用這項時空統計工具的特性，以臺灣各縣市政府公務人員的貪瀆起訴資料進行分析，試圖藉此探索臺灣貪瀆現象的時空固定趨勢，並將分析結果利用地理資訊系統進行空間圖像的呈現。在研究發現方面，本研究結果顯示，臺灣貪瀆起訴比率較高的風險區域並沒有長時間的固定性。然而，新北市（2009年）、高雄市（2008年）、桃園縣（2012年）、新竹縣（2012年）、新竹市（2012年）、苗栗縣（2012年）、臺中市（2012年）、南投縣（2012年）、以及臺東縣（2012年）等區域，在不同的時間點都曾出現顯著的高風險狀態。其次，本研究在納入共變數之後的分析結果也發現，居民教育程度與當地經濟狀況可能是與貪瀆起訴比率相關的重要因素，未來值得更深入探討其原因。英文摘要：SaTScan is often used by the researchers in epidemiology and criminology. This tool is usually used to examine if a pattern exists. This study has been undertaken to explore the pattern of the prosecution rate for corruption among the counties in Taiwan during the period 2006-2012 by using SaTScan with a time-temporal analysis function. The results show that there is no regular risk area among counties. However, New Taipei City(2009), Kaohsiung City(2008), Taoyuan County(2012), Hsinchu County(2012), Hsinchu City(2012), Miaoli County(2012), Taichung City(2012), Nantou County(2012), and Taitung County(2012) are identified as high-risk areas in different years. In addition, education and economic variables are associated with the prosecution rate for corruption, and this finding is worthy of future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201709_(53).00012篇名：公共參與<U+771E>的能提升效能感嗎？以全民健康保險會之利害關係團體參與為例並列篇名：Does Public Participation Increase Stakeholders' Efficacy? A Case Study of the National Health Insurance Committee作者：羅凱凌(Kai-Ling Luo)關鍵字：行政部門委員會;利害關係人;公共參與;效能感;全民健康保險會;governmental committee;stakeholder;public participation;efficacy;National Health Insurance Committee期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：53期出版年：2017中文摘要：「行政部門委員會」意指行政部門內針對特定政策或重大議題進行審議和協商的合議制組織，其決策者包含行政官員、專家學者以及相關團體代表。儘管利害關係人可透過委員會增加政策參與的機會，但也引發許多對參與程序和成效的批判。依此，本文試圖說明：委員會作為公共參與的重要機制，是否真能提升利害關係團體的效能感。為更深入分析參與對效能感的作用，作者將參與細分為制度與行為兩層次；效能感則以行政效能感、民主效能感和實質效能感三個次構面組成。本文以全民健康保險會為研究案例，透過健保的利害關係人問卷以及會議記錄編碼，分析利害關係人的委員會參與對效能感有何影響。研究結果發現：三項效能感皆傾向正面評價，民主效能感最高，行政效能感最低。就參與作用而言，出席次數愈多，三項效能感評價愈高；但發言和提案則分別對行政效能感和實質效能感呈現負相關。由此反映出委員會參與的本質：無論與會者對委員會的行政或民主功能多悲觀，制度賦權仍舊對實質效能感具有正面影響。然而，把參與成本和決策結果納入考量後，對委員會參與的規範性期待，將趨向政治利益的實務考量。英文摘要：”Governmental committees” are a type of collegial organization for negotiation and deliberation of critical policies in the executive branch, whereas decision makers are bureaucrats, experts and representatives of related groups. Although the stakeholders can strengthen the opportunity of policy participation through governmental committees, they are often criticized for their participatory procedures and outcomes. Thus, the aim of this research is to explore whether committee participation can improve the efficacy of stakeholder groups. In order to elaborate the impact of participation on the efficacy of stakeholders, in this study, the concept of participation is divided into the institutional and behavioral levels, while stakeholders' efficacy is discussed on administrative, democratic, and substantive sub-dimensions. By analyzing the survey of stakeholders and the meeting minutes of the National Health Insurance Committee, this study attempts to illustrate the relationship between participation and efficacy. The results are illustrated as follows: Three sub-dimensions of efficacy are more positive than negative. The democratic dimension holds the highest rating while the substantive efficacy is the lowest. In terms of participative behavior, the frequency of attendance is significantly positive correlated to the three efficacies. However, the statement and proposal variables separately result in negative outcomes of the administrative and substantive efficacy. These findings uncover the nature of committee participation: Regardless of whether participants are skeptical of the administrative and democratic function of governmental committees or not, the institutional factor has a positive effect, meaning empowered groups have positive feedback on substantive efficacy. Nevertheless, after the participatory cost and decision outcome are taken into account, the stakeholders' normative expectations of governmental committees are transferred to the pursuit of substantive political interests.起始頁-結束頁：25-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201709_(53).00023篇名：研發成果商業化政策研究：順服因素之個案分析並列篇名：The Implementation of the Research Commercialization Policy in Taiwan: A Case Study作者：王怡瀠(Yi-Ying Wang);黃婉玲(Wan-Ling Huang)關鍵字：研發成果商業化政策;科學技術基本法;政策利害關係人;政策順服;個案研究;research commercialization policy;Science and Technology Basic Law;policy stakeholders;policy compliance;case study期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：53期出版年：2017中文摘要：政府於1999年通過施行《科學技術基本法》，其中第6條揭示由政府補助之研究計畫，其所獲之研發成果智慧財產權，下放至研究計畫執行單位所有，並負推廣運用之責，此即「研發成果商業化政策」。過去關於此項政策的探討，多著重於量化成果的分析，較少從質化的角度切入，深入了解相關人員在執行或適用此項政策時，所面臨的問題與阻礙。有鑒於此，本文以國立臺灣大學與私立淡江大學為研究對象，透過對其校內技術移轉單位人員與教授進行深度訪談的方式，分析兩校政策利害關係人對研發成果商業化政策的順服程度，並進一步了解影響其政策順服的因素。研究結果顯示，國立臺灣大學雖在資源與研發成果運用表現上大幅領先淡江大學，但淡江大學校內利害關係人的政策順服程度卻相對高於國立臺灣大學。此外，影響校內政策利害關係人順服程度之因素，除了文獻上所列之行為動機、資源規模與個人認知等因素外，與其他政策利害關係人之互動亦扮演關鍵的角色。透過訪談資料的整理，作者發現在研發成果商業化政策執行過程中，仍面臨資源不足、研究計畫主管機關的介入以及產學落差等問題。本研究進一步針對上述問題提出政策建議，期能作為未來相關政策修正之參考，以使大學校院研發成果管理制度更臻完善。英文摘要：The Taiwanese government adopted the Science and Technology Basic Law (STBL) in 1999. Article. 6 of the STBL allows universities to own the intellectual property rights of the research funded by the government, and to assume the responsibility of promoting the use of university research. This action is called the ”Research Commercialization Policy (RCP).” Prior research mainly focused on quantitative analyses, while few studies employ a qualitative approach to determining the problems facing policy stakeholders when implementing the RCP. Our study aims at making this determination. National Taiwan University (NTU) and Tamkang University (TKU) were selected for our case study. By interviewing the staff of the technology transfer offices (TTOs) and the faculty members of the two universities, we determined the degree of stakeholders' compliance with the RCP in these universities and identified the factors that explain the differences in policy compliance among the stakeholders. Our findings show that NTU has more resources and better quantitative performance than TKU has, while the stakeholders of TKU present a higher degree of policy compliance. In addition, we show that the interaction among policy stakeholders is an important determinant apart from the behavioral motivation, resources and individual cognition that have been discussed in the literature. We conclude that the major problems that universities face when implementing the RCP include lack of resources, interference by government agencies and the gap between university and industry. The findings of our study have policy implications for university managers and decision makers.起始頁-結束頁：79-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201709_(53).00034篇名：成功老化或活躍老化？輸送基礎以及未來轉型之探討對〈社區據點服務品質與成功老化提升程度關連性之初探：政府角色認知的調節效果〉的對話與回應作者：陳正芬期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：53期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：121-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201709_(53).00045篇名：組織成員觀點下公部門團體績效評比之製度效應檢驗：目標校準、績效學習與團隊動態並列篇名：The Institutional Effects of Group Performance Evaluation in the Public Sector: Goal Alignment, Performance Learning and Team Dynamics作者：胡龍騰(Lung-Teng Hu);徐瑋鴻(Wei-Hung Hsu)關鍵字：團體績效評比;績效學習;目標校準;團隊凝聚力;團隊回復力;group performance evaluation;performance learning;goal alignment;team cohesion;team resilience期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：52期出版年：2017中文摘要：目前我國中央政府部門有兩套主要的績效管理制度，一為以部會為評價單位的行政機關施政績效評核制度，另一則是公務人員考績制度；在現行運作方式下，此二套制度彼此間未能有效連結，形成組織層次之機關整體績效表現與個人層次的考績結果，無法產生連動效果，以致造成脫勾現象。為解決上述問題，論者主張必須由團體績效概念出發，建立一套上能連結組織績效目標，下能扣合員工個人考績的團體績效制度，讓組織、團體與個人績效得以垂直整合。然而，觀諸國內文獻對於團體績效之討論不足，為彌補此一研究缺口，本研究以參與試辦機關做為問卷調查對象，盼能更進一步瞭解團體績效評比制度實施後對公部門組織團體動態所可能造成的影響。本研究發現，儘管受訪者對於目前所試辦的新制度之認知和評價程度不高，且該制度所期待的目標校準目的也可能獲得實現，不過此一制度的引進，確實將為公部門組織文化帶來值得關注的擾動和影響。英文摘要：The two major governmental performance management systems in the central government consist of the administrative performance assessment and the civil service performance appraisal system. The former evaluates ministries’ performance while the latter focuses on individual employee’s achievements. However, there is no alignment and linkage between the aforementioned institutions. In this regard, the Amendment of the Civil Service Performance Appraisal Act proposed by the Examination Yuan aims to solve the institutional problem by establishing a mechanism of group performance evaluation in addition to the existing institutions. The group performance evaluation system not only authorizes ministries and agencies to evaluate the performance of their internal units and/or subordinate agencies, but also enables ministers and agency heads to flexibly allocate the proportion of staff who can be granted as Grade A under the appraisal system. By so doing, it is expected that different levels of performance goals between organization, team/group, and staff could be aligned. In order to understand the potential institutional effects and impacts derived from this new mechanism, this study surveyed the central agencies which participate in the pilot scheme. It is found that the prospect of goal alignment between different organizational levels might be achieved through effective performance learning, and group/team cohesion and resilience could be strengthened as well. Competition between teams however will also become more significant than ever.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201703_(52).00016篇名：再生能源政策在地實踐之探討：以高雄市推動屋頂型太陽光電為例並列篇名：The Local Praxis of Renewable Energy Policy in Taiwan: The Case of Rooftop Solar PV Systems in Kaohsiung作者：林子倫(Tze-Luen Lin);李宜卿(Yi-Ching Lee)關鍵字：再生能源政策;能源治理;地方政府;太陽光電;能源轉型;renewable energy policy;energy governance;local government;solar photovoltaic energy;energy transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：52期出版年：2017中文摘要：氣候變遷與能源安全驅動了新一波的能源轉型，發展再生能源更成為其中的關鍵方向。同時，如何使得能源議題的思考與因應，得以銜接整體社會與在地脈絡的觀點，更為契合在地民眾的需求，提升社會的接受度，已成為學界與政策實務關切的重要課題。本文以高雄市推動屋頂型太陽光電為例，聚焦於以下討論：台灣再生能源政策推動與實踐歷程中，面臨到哪些「在地脈絡」的挑戰？對於現行的能源治理模式帶來哪些影響？本文首先回顧再生能源在地實踐與能源轉型等相關文獻，梳理出能源科技在地化議題的重要面向。其次，以太陽光電為例，回顧台灣整體再生能源政策歷程與產業發展概況，以及當中所呈現產業發展與推廣策略之間的關鍵矛盾。接著，透過高雄案例經驗，檢視屋頂型太陽光電應用的在地化歷程與困境，並反映出台灣長期在整體再生能源發展上所呈現的技術與決策思維，與未來能源系統轉型與治理創新的重要性。本文發現，過時的建築法令規範、建築型態的複雜性、民眾生活慣習、申辦流程的繁瑣、以及財務配套與整合機制不足等因素，削弱了民間參與設置太陽光電的誘因，使得再生能源的在地實踐面臨了多重挑戰。此外，中央政府再生能源推動策略、能源決策與治理模式、也會影響再生能源在地實踐的成效與路徑。英文摘要：Climate change and energy security have become a driving force for recent energy transitions. Many countries have recognized the importance of developing renewable energy to diversify the sources of energy supply. Public acceptance of renewable energy technologies and solar energy, in particular, has been widely acknowledged as one of the major issues in the adoption process so as to incorporate overall social needs with views from the local community. This paper attempts to answer the following questions: What are the challenges emerging from the local context during the implementation process? What are the major factors in influencing the design and implementation of the rooftop solar PV policy in Kaohsiung, one of the model cities in generating solar power? Apart from reviewing the development of the renewable energy policy in Taiwan, this paper discusses the limits and challenges of existing energy governance and institutional arrangement. The study finds that the outdated building codes, the complexity of architectural style, lifestyles, the amount of red tape involved, and the lack of a financial mechanism could hinder the development of local renewable energy. In addition, the central government’s policy for renewable energy, energy governance and decision-making would affect the praxis of local renewable and development paths.起始頁-結束頁：39-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201703_(52).00027篇名：環境管制行政的科學技術框架與決策　僵局：六輕工安事件環評過程析論並列篇名：The Scientific Framework and Decision Deadlock in the Environmental Administrative Procedures: Examining the EIA of the Fire Accident in the No. 6 Naphtha Cracking Project, 2010作者：施佳良(Chia-Liang Shih);杜文苓(Wen-Ling Tu)關鍵字：環境影響評估;管制科學;科學不確定性;六輕;社會強健知識;scientific uncertainty;environmental impact assessment (EIA);regulatory science;No. 6 Naphtha Cracking Project;socially robust knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：52期出版年：2017中文摘要：在傳統的環境管制決策模型裡，科學評估被視為是中立、理性客觀之分析技術，因此不僅是環境行政程序設計之核心，往往是政策正當性來源。然而在面對未知的環境風險時，行政機關在規則制訂、標準制訂與風險評估等制度建構上，正面臨著行動遭受各方質疑的「正當性」（legitimacy）危機。這危機來自於行政決策的結構性弱點：行政決策依賴與等待專家共識以證成決策正當性；專家因著科學不確定性與等待更多證據論證，而給予保守的答案。本文分析認為以「被管制者所提出的資訊」作為決策基礎的程序設計，不僅使得資訊來源及類型偏狹，同時也將問題建構與調查，甚至詮釋權讓渡給被管制者。因此在管制政策當中，被管制者能夠利用此一結構弱點，運用「科學不確定性」來癱瘓決策程序，導致行政僵局的產生。本文以2010年7月所發生的六輕工安大火事件為案例。大火事件後，地方陸續傳出有水產養殖生物，如吳郭魚、文蛤、雛鴨等大量死亡的農業損失情事，使六輕營運後所造成的環境影響與健康風險問題，受到社會高度矚目。環保署因而要求台塑提出「環境影響調查報告書」進行審查，直到兩年後台塑提出因應對策，環評程序才告一段落。本文透過多重資料來源的蒐集，包括環評專案小組會議、專家會議等相關之會議紀錄、相關事件的剪報資料，以及相關會議的參與觀察紀錄等，進行分析闡釋相關制度設計背後的預設與侷限。英文摘要：Scientific assessment in the traditional environment regulation policy is generally regarded as a rational technique. Therefore, scientific assessment has been not only a foundation of environmental administration procedure, but also a resource of legitimacy. On the contrary, the environmental regulation procedure is confronted by a legitimacy crisis because of the process design that is based on the main information provided by polluters. The process design demands that polluters should investigate environmental impact. However, it not only means that the right of environmental problem framing and interpretation is transferred to polluters, but it also damages the credibility of environmental information and policy decisions. On the other hand, the environmental administration defines ”scientific assessment” narrowly in that it does not consider the characteristics and limit of ”Regulatory Science” and excludes other forms of knowledge from administrative procedure. That could lead to loss of multiple sources of knowledge, and weakened regulations while the polluter uses ”Science Uncertainty” as a defense. Finally, the situation brings out the possibility of a deadlocked decision. Taking the examples of the environmental impact assessment of a fire accident in the sixth naphtha cracking project in July, 2010, the study analyzes the hidden scientific framework and limitations of the administrative procedure. The finding is that the policy decision relying on the information from a single source, especially from polluters, leads to a shrinking of the government’s role and erodes the legitimacy of decisions. In order to strengthen the foundation of legitimacy, the administration should rebuild an open administrative procedure to foster socially robust knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：81-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201703_(52).00038篇名：對〈社區防救災社會資本指標之建構〉的對話與省思作者：李宗勳期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：52期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：113-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201703_(52).00049篇名：新公共人力資源管理：比管理更重要的事並列篇名：The New Strategic Personnel Management: Management and Beyond Management作者：林俞君(Yu-Chun Lin)關鍵字：公共人力資管理;自由雇用;解除管制;分權化;公共服務動機;public personnel management;employment at will (EAW);deregulation;decentralization;public service motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：52期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文評論Dr. R. Paul Battaglio Jr.所著之《公共人力資源管理：21世紀的策略與實務》（Public Human Resource Management: Strategies and Practice in the 21th Century, 2015）一書。本書出版於2015年，為美國目前最新的公部門人力資源管理專書。作者提出了美國政府人力資源管理的五大框架，並且依此框架描述人力資源管理的各項業務的轉變。雖然這個框架嚴格來說並非作者原創，而是承襲新公共管理關於行政改革的一脈思想，但應用於人力資源管理的專書仍然頗具新意。此外，這個框架也刺激讀者思考市場機制應用於政府人力資源管理方面的問題，以及公共服務動機如何影響政府人力資源管理；而學界和實務界是否已經準備好、該如何準備好面對這樣的變革，也同樣值得深思。英文摘要：This article reviewed the book ”Public Human Resource Management: Strategies and Practice in the 21th Century,” written by Dr. R. Paul Battaglio Jr. This book was published in 2015 and was the latest book in the field of public personnel management. The author proposed a reform framework to describe the recent and the future reform of the public personnel management in the United States. The framework was inspiring for readers to think about how PHRM can be driven by market rather than by laws, how PHRM be related with public service motivation, what values are crucial for PHRM, and whether practitioners and academia are ready for the reform.起始頁-結束頁：121-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201703_(52).000501篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor’s Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷4期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：部落公法人的前景與隱憂－原住民族善治的體制嘗試並列篇名：Indigenous Tribes as Public Juristic Persons: A View from Indigenous Good Governance作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-tung Huang)關鍵字：部落公法人;原住民族;自治;治理;課責;(tribal) public juristic persons;indigenous peoples;autonomy;governance;accountability期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：2015年底，立法院為「促進原住民族部落健全自主發展」，特別增訂了《原住民族基本法》第2條之1，將經中央原住民族主管機關核定之部落，賦予其公法人地位。該法同時也將訂定相關辦法之權限，授權中央原住民族主管機關為之。一般認為，「部落公法人」制度對於厚植部落自主能力、實踐原住民族集體權、奠定原住民族自治基礎進而重建部落傳統，皆具有里程碑的意義。不過，由於公法人在我國實務上較為少見，因此目前相關的討論，重點多在定性、組織、職能等權能面向；有關這類具有執行公共任務功能的組織，如何才能達成當代公共治理所標舉之透明、課責、參與、效率等原則，進而達成所謂的善治（good governance），相關討論則較少論及。對此，本文擬在原住民族善治的概念下，通過理論、實證資料、和國外經驗之借鏡，來對當前制度進行檢視，進而提出政策建言。本文認為，部落公法人既然涉及到公權力的行使、公款與資源的分配和使用，就必然涉及到代表性、能力建構與發展（capacity building/ development）、監督機制和課責等問題。對於這些議題，如能預先思考並妥適規劃，相信除能增進公法人運作上的安定性，也有助於強化一般大眾對原住民族自治的信心，進而鞏固整體原住民族自治的基盤。英文摘要：In 2015, the Indigenous Peoples Basic Law was amended and a novel concept of Tribal Public Juristic Person was introduced. According to the Basic Law, indigenous tribes recognised by the authorities shall be considered as public juristic persons. Both aborigines and the general public welcomed this change and considered it a starting point for further indigenous autonomy in Taiwan. Facing this brand new concept, there has been however widespread debate over its introduction and materialization, especially the establishment of its following regulations. This article analyses the emergent system of public juristic persons through the lens of good governance. Using detailed legal exposition in tandem with interviews, this article seeks to demonstrate the importance of good governance in the practice of indigenous autonomy. It noted that literature on this issue mainly focused on the question of how to use tribal public juristic persons to materialize indigenous rights; few has discussed the issue of accountability. In fact, some indigenous scholars/interviewees even criticised the very concept of accountability. For them, it is nothing but a resurrection of internal colonization. Given the history of the Taiwanese aborigines, this article well recognizes the danger of governmental powers. However, this article treats the institution of tribal public juristic persons as an opportunity to step closer to the goal of autonomy. It further argues that it is time for us/aborigines to translate our tradition into modern forms and take the issue of good governance seriously.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：日本《政黨法》的立法爭議與政黨利益－進入21世紀後的新發展並列篇名：Legislative Controversy and Party Interest of the Political Parties Law in Japan: New Development in the 21st Century作者：鄭子<U+771E>(Tzu-chen Cheng)關鍵字：《政黨法》;日本政治;預期效果;制度安排;Political Parties Law;Japanese politics;expected effect;institutional arrangements期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：戰後日本政黨政治發展至今，最大特色莫過於自民黨的長期執政。因此自民黨累積不少資產和綿密的政商關係，在現今白熱化的選戰中，挾持優渥財力而屢屢勝選，導致日本國內也逐漸出現欠缺政黨公平競爭的撻伐聲浪。本文企圖從比較政治觀點，探討日本欲成立《政黨法》的目的和真正動機。然《政黨法》的施行，勢必影響政黨的政治自由、左右人民的思想自由、集會結社等。為此，本文分析日本政黨和利益團體提出的《政黨法》版本，釐清參與者的真正動機。卻發現日本政黨用意在於，標準化政黨管理規則，和推動政黨寡頭化以求權力極大化。而利益團體則是著眼於政黨公約和政黨補助款，卻有可能讓日本政黨政治淪為寡頭競爭，讓政治淪為替經濟服務。換言之，《政黨法》作為新制度的預期效果，是讓大黨持續獲利，而利益團體呈現市場導向的政治發展。在現有的制度安排之下，發現諸如《政治資金規正法》制度的衰退。面臨制度調整之際，行為者勢必採取有利自我的制度安排。此時《政黨法》成為一良好口號，本文分析認為將會造成降低政黨數量、擴大大黨和小黨之間的差異，以及因為排擠小黨繼續參與政治，增加主要政黨的國家補助款基數。英文摘要：After World War II, the political system of Japan was characterized by the dominance of Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) in past several decades. Therefore, LDP, which has accumulated abundant of assets and developed a close and extensive relationship with business complex, has been won elections under competitive campaigns. This result aroused the accusation for unfair competition among political parties. However, the implementation of Political Parties Law (PPL) would like to influence the freedom of party politics, people's thought and assembly and association. This article tries to explore the purpose and motivation of making the Political Parties Law in Japan through perspective of comparative politics. Through analyzing the version of PPL proposed by political parties and interest groups, it reveals that the real motivation of Japanese parties is to standardize the management rules of parties and to promote the oligopoly of parties for maximizing the political power. On the other hand, interest groups are focusing on the convention and subsidies of parties. Consequently, the party politics of Japan will fall into the competition of oligarchy and bring politics as a serving role of business complex. That is, the expected effect of PPL as a new institution is to continually promote the benefits of big parties, and interest groups tend to follow the path of market oriented rules in their political development. Currently, the decline of Political Funds Control Acts has triggered the advocate of PPL as a good idea, but is also provides an opportunity for those actors to sponsor institutional arrangements which are favorable their interests. However, the implementation of PPL will reduce the number of political parties, widen the gap between big and small parties, and raise subsidies for big parties because of exclusion of small parties from participation.起始頁-結束頁：49-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：政治課責與選民投票行為－以2014年高雄氣爆事件為例並列篇名：Political Accountability and Voting Behavior: A Case Study of Gas Blast of Kaohsiung City in 2014作者：游清鑫(Ching-hsin Yu);蔡宗漢(Tsung-han Tsai);林長志(Chang-chih Lin)關鍵字：政治課責;投票行為;施政表現;氣爆事件;2014年高雄市長選舉;political accountability;voting behavior;government performance;gas blast;mayoral election of Kaohsiung City in 2014期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：透過選舉表達民意是當代民主重要的運作原則之一，此一過程也體現了政治課責之價值。然而，選舉時選民可能無法客觀地確認哪些人是需要為錯誤負起責任，且其它與政治表現沒有直接關聯的因素也可能影響選民對政治人物表現的判斷，使民主理論所主張選民可以透過選舉淘汰表現不好的政治人物的想像，無法在具體經驗中被驗證。事實上，政治課責的實踐與民主治理的好壞息息相關，在臺灣走向成熟民主國家的過程中，此一課題顯得更加重要。本文以2014年11月底的高雄市氣爆事件為研究對象，藉由政治課責的理論觀點，瞭解高雄市選民對該事件責任歸屬的認知，以及這樣的認知如何影響其市長選舉的投票行為。本文發現高雄市選民在該年的市長選舉中，其投票決定固然仍舊受到諸如政黨認同與施政表現等傳統因素的影響，但是選民對氣爆事件的責任歸屬也對其投票決定具有影響力。此一結果也透露出，相較於選民長期心理與情感取向的政黨認同因素，以及選民可能依據模糊資訊所致的政府施政評估因素，具有選民感受程度深、注意程度高以及時間接近選舉時程的氣爆事件，更能直接檢驗政治課責在選舉過程中的作用。英文摘要：”Throwing the rascal out” is one of the bedrock principles in modern democracy. The idea of ”accountability” is thus realized by replacing under-performed politicians by qualified ones. However, it is often found that citizen fails to identify the real ”rascal” as well as non-performance issues carries more weight in citizen's voting choices in election. In Taiwan, the demand for accountable governance is even more pressing as Taiwan has entered a new phrase of democratic consolidation. This paper focuses on the event of gas blast in Kaohsiung City in 2014 as a case study of the association between political accountability and voter's choice in the year end election for city mayor. Special attention is paid to citizen's perception of responsibility attribution of the event and how the perception affects citizen's vote choice in mayoral election. Based on the analyses of post-election survey, this paper concludes that, in addition to the conventional factors such as party identification and approval rating, citizen's perception of responsibility attribution and evaluation of government's responses toward the event also play significant roles in election. It also shows that, comparing to the long term psychological or ambiguous approval factors, the gas blast event as a case study of political accountability is more able to examine the electoral impact of political accountability. In the last part of this paper, a brief concluding remarks and the suggestions of studying political accountability in Taiwan will be provided.起始頁-結束頁：101-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：書評：Rethinking Japan: The Politics of Contested Nationalism〔日本新思考－爭議性民族主義政治學〕by Arthur Stockwin and Kweku Ampiah〔亞瑟．史塔恩與奎庫．安琵雅〕（Lexington Books, 2017, cloth bound, 299pp., ISBN 9781498537926）並列篇名：A review of Rethinking Japan: The Politics of Contested Nationalism by Arthur Stockwin and Kweku Ampiah (Lexington Books, 2017, cloth bound, 299pp., ISBN 9781498537926)作者：林超琦(Chao-chi Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷4期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：139-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：世界民主大事紀：2017年7-9月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: July-September 2017期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷4期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：145-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：影響台灣民眾公平正義與發展機會評估的因素並列篇名：Causes of Taiwanese People's Evaluations on Social Justice and Development Opportunity作者：吳親恩(Chin-en Wu)關鍵字：公平正義;機會平等;世代;省籍;資本利得;fairness;equal opportunity;generation;sub-ethnicity;capital gain期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文探討發展機會差異與發展方式評估，如何影響台灣民眾對社會公平正義與發展機會多寡的評估。發展機會差異討論世代、富人與窮人、性別以及省籍等群體的發展機會差異，發展方式則關切靠個人努力過好生活以及操作房地產與股票致富等兩部分。研究首先發現，與民眾經濟生活關係密切的因素，包括世代、富人與窮人發展機會差異，以及公平正義象徵性意義高的因素，包括省籍間的發展機會差異與資本利得，都是影響社會公平正義綜合評價的重要因素。其次，研究發現，與民眾經濟生活關係密切的因素，才會對發展機會多寡評估有顯著的影響，公平正義象徵性意義高的因素則沒有相應的影響力。除了發展機會差異與發展方式等發展過程因素之外，本文也討論發展結果的影響，發展結果指的是以所得、職業與教育程度來衡量的個人發展情況。實證結果發現，發展結果並不是影響社會公平正義與發展機會多寡評估的顯著因素。資料方面，本文使用臺灣民主基金會「2015 台灣社會公平正義滿意度調查」來進行分析。英文摘要：We discuss how perceived equality of opportunity and the legitimacy of development approaches affect how people evaluate social justice and development opportunities in Taiwan. We explore the gaps of perceived opportunity equality between different generations, genders, income and sub-ethnicity groups, and investigate people's feelings toward making a good living through hard work vs. through real estate investments and stock trading. Factors closely relating to people's economic life, including perceived opportunity gap between generations and between income groups, play significant roles in influencing people's assessments of social justice. In addition, factors with highly symbolic meaning, such as the perceived opportunity gap between sub-ethnicity groups and the perceived legitimacy of capital games also shape people's views toward social justice. Next, we find that factors closely associated with people's economic life significantly influence people's evaluations on development opportunities, while factors with highly symbolic meaning do not have similar effects. We also examine the influence of development outcomes, operationalized as income, occupation, or educational levels. Empirical results prove that these outcome factors do not significantly influence people's evaluations on both social justice and development opportunities. We analyze the ”2015 Taiwan Society Fairness Survey” to test our hypotheses.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：政治宣傳與抗拒說服－名人政治背書的廣告效果研究並列篇名：Political Propaganda and Resistance to Persuasion: The Research on Advertising Effectiveness Regarding Celebrity Political Endorsements作者：周軒逸(Hsuan-yi Chou);李瑞清(Jui-ching Lee);吳秀玲(Hsiu-ling Wu)關鍵字：政治宣傳;名人政治背書;廣告效果研究;社會距離;抗拒說服;political propaganda;celebrity political endorsement;advertising effectiveness;social distance;resistance to persuasion期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：民主政治是政治菁英爭取選票的競爭過程，台灣選民的投票行為長期以候選人形象為主，而候選人邀請名人來為自己作政治背書，在國內外的選舉過程中，是常見的一種競選策略。本文從名人政治背書的內容對於選民的影響切入，結合政治宣傳、社會距離、態度改變和抗拒說服等概念，檢視名人政治背書廣告所推薦之政黨，是否影響選民的知覺社會距離、政黨建構方式及訊息處理心態，進而干擾廣告中不同政績訴求陳述方式的效果。根據兩個實驗的結果發現：（1）當目標/ 推薦政黨與政黨認同者的政黨偏好一致時，相較於偏好不一致或獨立選民的情況，選民會覺得自己與該政黨的社會距離較近，並對該政黨採取低水平建構；（2）當政黨偏好一致時，低水平陳述可以引發選民較佳的態度反應；反之，若偏好不一致，則高水平陳述可降低選民對於廣告所推薦政黨的敵對態度信心；對於獨立選民，則可藉由高水平陳述提升其出門投票以及票投廣告政黨的意願；（3）政治人物的背書，相較於藝人的背書，可使選民產生較佳的廣告態度、政黨態度以及票投廣告政黨的意願，且上述效果主要出現於具政黨認同者。英文摘要：Politicians compete for votes through democratic election procedures. Taiwanese voters' voting behavior has been greatly affected by candidate image. Celebrity political endorsement (CPE) has become a frequently used campaign strategy in domestic and foreign election practices. This study aims to investigate how the design of the endorsed content affects voters' responses towards political endorsement advertising. Additionally, combined with related theories and literature on political propaganda, social distance, attitudinal change, and resistance to persuasion, this study examines whether the political parties recommended in ads moderate the effects of different framed appeals regarding party administration performance by changing voters' perceived social distance, modes of mentally construing the parties, andmindsets of processing the messages. The results of the two experiments reveal the following. (1) When the target/recommended party is consistent with voters' individual party preferences (i.e. party consistency), compared to inconsistent or independent voter conditions, the voters' perceived social distance from the party is closer. Additionally, a preference-consistency party causes voters to construe the party at a lower-level. (2) For party identifiers, low-level framing of administration performance can evoke better attitudinal responses from voters under the condition of party consistency. Under the condition of party inconsistency, high-level framing decreases voters' confidence in the form of hostile attitudes towards the advertised party. As to the independent voters, high-level framing can improve their turnout and voting intentions for the advertised party. (3) Political figure endorsement, compared to entertainer endorsement, makes voters generate better ad attitudes, party attitudes, and intentions of voting for the advertised party, especially for party identifiers. The implications of these and other findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：45-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：誰說了算？台灣全民健康保險會利害關係人政策參與之個案研究並列篇名：Who Call the Shots? A Case Study of Stakeholders Participation in the Taiwanese National Health Insurance Committee作者：羅凱凌(Kai-ling Luo)關鍵字：行政部門委員會;政策參與;決策影響力;利害關係人;全民健康保險會;governmental committee;policy participation;decision-making influence;stakeholder;national health insurance committee期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：行政部門委員會（以下簡稱委員會）指行政部門內的特定合議制組織，由主管機關邀請利益團體、倡議組織、學者專家，以及相關行政人員等利害關係人進入政策程序，針對爭議政策或重大議題共同協商。委員會為政策程序中，強化參與的重要機制，但其民主效果仍有許多爭議。依此，本研究之具體問題為：究竟掌握何種資源的利害關係人，在會議中具有較大的決策影響力？在理論上作者以三種決策影響力途徑，來探討影響委員會決策的關鍵因素：選舉動員途徑，強調政策的政治本質，必須在多數民意的支持下才有正當性；專業資源從專業不對稱的觀點，說明知識掌握者的主導優勢；行政優勢途徑則針對國家機器的正當性以及功能面的行政資源。在實證研究上，作者以全民健康保險會為研究個案，透過會議紀錄的整理與編碼，進行多項式勝算對數模型分析，並以多項重要提案做補充，揭露健保會的實際運作。研究結果發現：對健保會決策具有顯著影響者為被保險人與行政機關，前者掌握選舉動員資源，在議事上同時擁有議程阻絕與直接否決的效果；後者則以行政優勢為主，同時掌握支援者、仲裁者與最終否決者的角色。相較於此，醫事服務提供者雖被認為具有財務與專業的資源，但卻因為內部異質性與競爭關係，以及健保政策的政治性，在統計上不具有顯著影響。是故，委員會作為補充現有制度的正當性與回應性，其決策仍舊受到傳統代議的動員能力以及主管機關的控制。英文摘要：Governmental committees are a type of collegial organizations in the executive branch whereby policy stakeholders are incorporated into the decision-making process so that they may negotiate with each other to achieve policy outcomes under the overall executive leadership. However, as institutions designed to enlarge policy participation, the democratic effects of committees are still under debate. To uncover the political effects of committee mechanism, the aim of this study is to address the stakeholders' influence over decision making in the committee mechanism and how this influence is affected by access to resources. Theoretically, the author illustrates the factors determining stakeholders' influence with three perspectives. First, the election mobilization approach emphasizes the political dimension of public policies, meaning that decision-making should be legitimated by majoritarian support. Second, from the viewpoint of professional asymmetry, professional dominance over knowledge resources can lead or affect policy content; as a result, those with access to professional resources have the implicit capacity to control decision outcomes. Third, the administrative approach focuses on the normative legitimacy of the state, as well as its monopoly over executive functions. To test these three approaches to decision-making influence, this study examines the operation of the National Health Insurance Committee (NHIC) through a MNL model and content analysis of meeting minutes. We find that the insured and the government have the most significant power in the NHIC. The former can exercise influence through election mobilization as well as agenda obstruction and veto power. The latter dominates the administrative mechanism, playing the roles of facilitator, mediator, and arbitrator. By contrast, although medical service providers can access both financial and professional resources, they are unable to dominate the process due to both internal heterogeneity and mutual competition among them. In short, the decisions made by committees continue to be affected by the majority under the traditional representative system as well as by the manipulation of administrative authority.起始頁-結束頁：103-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：戰國時期族群思想初探並列篇名：Ethnic Thought of the Warring States Period作者：張其賢(Chi-shen Chang)關鍵字：戰國;族群思想;左傳;實用論;烏托邦;Warring States;Ethnic Thought;Zuozhuan;Pluralism;Utopia期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文企圖根據戰國史料，呈現學界過去較為陌生的戰國時期族群思想的內容，並重現其長期受到忽略的豐富多樣性。本文要點大致有二：一是指出戰國族群思想和春秋族群思想，其實並非簡單的連續發展，而是存在重大的逆轉性差異。此一逆轉情形，過去長期受到忽略，但對於研究先秦政治思想的學者來說，它其實具有相當重要的啟示性意義。二是指出過去較少被提及的戰國族群思想特點，如：《墨子》之貢獻；以和平、善治、貿易、禮遇尊重爭取「四夷」支持的主張；對於「夷」、「夏」人性是否有別之看法；處理「夷」、「夏」文化差異的態度；以及其他一些久經湮沒的獨特思路。這些特點，在今日仍有助於我們對當代問題進行深刻而有新意的省思。希望經由重現戰國族群思想的精彩豐富，讓學界可以從不同的角度，再一次認識到戰國思想在其他方面的永恆光輝。英文摘要：This article intends to present the rich content of the ethnic thought in the Warring States period. There are two main features to be noted. First, instead of referring to the continuous development of the ethnic thought of the Spring and Autumn period, that of the Warring States period marks the reversal of the former-a phenomenon which has been ignored hitherto. Second, the ethnic thought in the Warring States period contains several important points of interest, such as the significant contribution made by Mozi in providing a new outlook for understanding the Chinese-Yi relation, and the idea of winning support from the Yi and Di people not by force, but by peaceful means (e.g., good governance, tribute-trade, courtesy and respect). Other highly valuable ideas are the views regarding whether human nature differs between the Chinese and the Yi how to deal with their cultural differences, and some other quite unique but enlightening strands of thought regarding identity politics.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201712_21(2).00012篇名：台灣地方層級社會抗議之解析（1992∼2008）：一個政治機會結構的觀點並列篇名：Explaining Local Protests in Taiwan (1992-2008): From the Perspective of Political Opportunity Structure作者：蘇彥斌(Yen-pin Su);吳親恩(Chin-en Wu)關鍵字：社會運動;地方抗議;政治機會結構;民主進步黨;選舉周期;Social Movements;Local Protests;Political Opportunity Structure;Democratic Progressive Party;Electoral Cycle期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：社會抗爭在台灣政治變遷的過程中扮演很重要的角色。過去關於台灣社會運動的文獻大多為質化案例研究，卻很少有研究解釋為何台灣有些地區較常發生社會抗爭，而有些地區卻不常出現抗爭。為了補充相關文獻的不足，本研究利用一個獨特的抗議事件資料庫，採取政治機會結構論的視角，解析台灣各縣市為何會有不同的抗爭頻率。本研究的實證分析顯示：第一，在其他條件不變的情況下，民進黨執政的縣市較常發生地方抗議事件；第二，各縣市的地方抗議在選舉年時，會有較高的發生頻率；第三，民進黨籍縣市議員當選的比例，對於地方抗議事件的頻率沒有顯著的影響。總結而言，本研究為台灣公民社會的發展提出更細膩的解釋，同時也對新興民主國家的政治過程提出更深刻的理解。英文摘要：Social protests have played an important role in the process of political change in Taiwan. Although many studies on Taiwan's social movements are qualitative analyses focusing on specific cases, few explain the variation in the frequency of social protests within Taiwan. To fill this empirical gap, this paper draws hypotheses from the theory of political opportunity structure and subjects it to empirical tests using a unique dataset of subnational protest events. First, the empirical analyses show that the frequency of local protests tends to be higher in a locality where the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) is in power. Secondly, the results demonstrate that, in an election year, local citizens have stronger incentives to protest. Finally, we find that the share of seats of the DPP in a locality council does not have a significant effect on local protests. Overall, this study facilitates a better understanding of the development of Taiwan's civil society and provides important insights regarding the political process in new democracies.起始頁-結束頁：57-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201712_21(2).00023篇名：投資和平？外資互賴與鼓勵外資政策對國家間衝突影響之分析（1985∼2001）並列篇名：Investing in Peace: Do FDI Interdependence and Shared Pro-FDI Policies Reduce Interstate Conflict?(1985~2001)作者：邱奕宏(Yi-hung Chiou)關鍵字：外資互賴;國家間衝突;鼓勵外資政策;均衡外資互賴;商業自由主義;FDI Interdependence;Interstate Conflict;Pro-FDI Policy;Symmetrical FDI;Commercial Liberalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：自1970年代以來，外來直接投資（FDI）已成為驅動經濟全球化與形塑世界政經格局最重要的因素之一。儘管商業自由主義強調貿易互賴對國家間衝突的和平影響，但外來直接投資與國際衝突的關聯尚未在學界有深入的探討。本文從商業自由主義觀點出發，檢視外資因素對國家間衝突的和平影響。超越傳統觀點僅從機會成本的角度分析經濟因素對國家間衝突的抑制效果，本文主張國家的鼓勵外資政策隱含該國不願使用武力作為國家間爭端解決方式的主觀意向。本文亦主張兩國間均衡的外資互賴產生的和平影響，將隨不同經濟發展程度的成對國家而有差異。本文分析從1985年至2001年在成對國家間外資因素與國家間衝突的關聯，研究顯示均衡外資互賴與較高程度的財產權保護是減少兩國爆發衝突的重要因素。英文摘要：Since the 1970s, a rapid surge in foreign direct investment (FDI) has become one of the most important factors shaping the landscape of the global political economy. While theorists of commercial liberalism place emphasis on trade and claim the pacifying effects of economic interdependence on interstate conflict, few recognize plausible linkages between FDI and interstate conflict. This goal of this paper is to investigate the influence of FDI on interstate conflict. Differing from the conventional wisdom that merely focuses on the impact of opportunity costs on conflict, it argues that states' pro-FDI policies may reveal their reluctance to initiate military action in interstate disputes. Moreover, this paper also contends that symmetrical FDI interdependence may be a promising factor facilitating peace. Nevertheless, the pacifying effects of the preceding FDI factors may vary in different dyads of state combination between developed and developing countries, due to the structural pattern of FDI flows. This paper analyzes the FDI-conflict relationship from 1985 to 2001. The findings suggest that the institutional feature of property rights protection in a dyad of states is likely to be a credible indicator promoting the prospect of peace between states.起始頁-結束頁：107-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201712_21(2).00034篇名：自然資源也詛咒了環境表現嗎？一個跨國實證的分析並列篇名：Do Natural Resources also Curse Environmental Performance? An Empirical Cross-Country Analysis作者：張文揚(Wen-yang Chang);平思寧(Szu-ning Ping)關鍵字：自然資源詛咒;環境表現;可耕地;二氧化碳（CO_2）;甲烷（CH_4）;Resource Curse;Environmental Performance;Arable Land;Carbon Dioxide (CO_2);Methane (CH_4)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文的主要研究目的是在探討「自然資源詛咒」理論是否也適用在國家的環境表現？學界與實務均同意一般自然資源秉賦較高且依賴度較高的國家，通常在政治、經濟與社會發展上都會有較差的表現，且這個觀察不僅限於開發中國家，先進國家也會承受程度不一的影響。然而過去自然資源詛咒的研究較少觸及當前日益受到重視的環境表現問題，因此使得其論述受到一定程度的限制。本文認為一國欲依賴其自然資源時，其環境表現表現愈差。這種負向關係奠基在自然資源導致國家產業集中在造成污染的開採業，以及經濟誘因優先於環境保護的直接解釋，與高度依賴豐富自然資源秉賦會削弱國家治理能力，並因此波及環境表現的間接解釋上。上述的論證經由1980<U+223C>2015年共214個國家或政治實體的計量數據檢視以後得到印證。本文並對此分別針對自然資源與環境表現提出政策與理論上的建議。英文摘要：This paper aims at exploring whether or not the argument of the ”natural resource curse” theory also applies to environmental performance. Both academia and policy practitioners all agree that countries with abundant natural resource endowments that significantly rely on these endowments tend to perform poorly in political, economic and social development. This observation not only applies to developing states, but also to advanced ones. However, few scholars have paid attention to the effects of natural resources on environmental governance, which is an issue that has become prominent in recent decades. This deficiency suggests a gap between the argument of the resource curse thesis and the breadth of its application. This article proposes that countries that rely more on these natural resources also have worse environmental performance. Such anegative relationship is based on two direct explanations-that natural resources encourage states to concentrate on extractive industrial sectors that usually cause environmental damage, and economic incentives from natural resource exploitation outweigh incentives to protect the environment. In addition, one further indirect explanation is that higher reliance on abundant natural resource endowments weakens state capacity, thus damaging environmental governance. Based on empirical evidence using data for 214 countries or political entities for the period 1980-2015, such an argument is statistically confirmed. This article offers practical and theoretical contributions to both the natural resource curse and environmental governance.起始頁-結束頁：181-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201712_21(2).00045篇名：Ideological Bias and Extremism among Twitter Networks in South Korea作者：Whasun Jho;Jae-Mook Lee;Min Song;Erin Hea-Jin Kim關鍵字：Ideological Extremism;Social Media;Political Communication;Election;South Korea期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study investigates how ideological extremism is portrayed in online and offline communications by using the case of South Korea. We evaluate whether any forms of ideological biases are observed among Twitter users in Korea. We also examine how users are ideologically distinguished from one another in terms of their online political behavior. While most of the existing literature has relied heavily on survey data, we address these questions by means of both survey data analysis and Twitter data analysis using 13,500 tweets during the 2012 Korean presidential election. We find that 1. Twitter users tend to hold more extreme attitudes compared to non-users and the general population in Korea; 2. There are more progressive tweets than conservative ones in Korea; 3. Korean Twitter users differ from each other in terms of their online behavior according to their partisan and ideological preferences.起始頁-結束頁：235-276資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201712_21(2).00056篇名：歐洲聯盟超國家民主實踐之再思考並列篇名：Rethinking Supranational Democracy in the European Union作者：盧倩儀(Chien-yi Lu)關鍵字：歐洲聯盟;民主;新自由主義;凱因斯經濟學;歐債危機;European Union;democracy;neoliberalism;Keynesianism;Euro-debt crisis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：在「世界是平的」的二十一世紀，民主政治陷入困境，近乎舉世皆然。然而在歐洲，民主政治的演化多了一項中介變數。民主政治在歐洲的演變過程裡，歐洲聯盟扮演了何種角色？歐盟的存在，是使「人民作主」的實踐更為穩固了？還是反而使其受到侵蝕了？以「民主的體現包含輸入端（由人民決定誰主政）與輸出端（政策產出及政策結果讓人民受惠）；同時歐洲超國家層次的民主實踐其存在意義是後者而非前者」為前提，本文檢視1980年代末歐洲整合再出發之背景、驅動力量、制度設計邏輯，及歐盟創立以來之運作，評估歐盟的存在是使「人民作主」的實踐更為穩固了還是受到了侵蝕。文章發現，1980年代以來的歐洲整合是將民主政治「新自由主義化」的重要步驟，導致了財富向頂端集中，不僅破壞了歐洲原本引以為傲的社會安全與社會福利系統，亦嚴重侵蝕了民主政治在國內層次運行的基礎。英文摘要：That democracy is faced with great challenges in the 21st Century where the world is flat is more or less a universal phenomenon. Whatever the causes of this conundrum are, the evolution of democracy has encountered a unique intervening variable in Europe, namely, deeper economic and political integration. What role does the EU play in the evolution of democracy in Europe? Has the existence of the EU reinforced or undermined the goal of “government by the people”? This article assumes that democracy is embodied in two components, namely, an input component (participation by the people) and an output component (outcomes for the people). It further assumes that the establishment of the EU is aimed at improving the latter, i.e., the output end of democratic performance. Based on these assumptions, this article examines the background, the key driving forces, the logic behind the institutional design, and the actual practices of policy-making in the Union, and finds that the relaunching of European integration that took place in the mid-80s was a crucial step towards the neoliberalization of democracy, resulting in severe income inequality, a breakdown of the social security and social welfare systems that the Europeans used to pride themselves in, and an erosion of the foundation for democracy even at the national level.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201706.21(1).1-507篇名：台灣人民對法院的信任支持及觀感：以對法官判決之公正性為中心並列篇名：Explaining Public Attitudes toward the Judicial System: The Case of Taiwan作者：黃國昌(Kuo-chang Huang);陳恭平(Kong-pin Chen);林常青(Chang-ching Lin)關鍵字：面訪;法意識;法院信任;公共信任;統計分析;survey;legal consciousness;trust in courts;public trust;statistical analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以「2011年台灣人民紛爭解決行為暨法意識實證調查研究」所蒐集之資訊為基礎，以「法官判決公正性」為指標，考察台灣人民對法院的公共信任支持程度，並分析影響公共支持的因素。整體而言，台灣人民對法院的信任支持程度偏低：對「法官判決公正性」持正面評價的比例，僅佔全體半數，較對「警察執法公正」持正面信任支持的比例為低；而對「法院整體服務滿意程度」持正面評價者，比例更僅有約四成。尤其，「有法庭經驗者」較「無法庭經驗者」，對於法院的信任支持程度更低。這和現有的「熟悉衍生信任」（Familiarity Breeds Respect）理論相反，並顯示經驗內容才是重點。另外，雖然民眾在「貧富階級」、「權威感距離」與「法官認知與社會脫節」三個對法院觀感的面向上，以對「法官認知與社會脫節」負面觀感最弱，但此面向對於公眾對法院的信任支持所造成的負面衝擊程度，卻相對最強。最後，民眾的「法意識變項」對其就法院信任支持所造成的影響，明顯高於「人口統計變項」的結果。對於法治價值抱持較為擁護態度者，以及愈支持「無罪推定原則」所蘊含價值選擇者，對法院有著更為正面積極的信任支持。此一研究結果，印證了對法院 的公共支持程度，的確受到民眾本身經社會化過程所累積形成的信念所影響。英文摘要：Using data from the ”2011 Taiwan Civil Justice Survey,” this paper investigates Taiwan citizens’ attitude toward and trust in the judicial system, together with the factors that influence their attitude and trust. In general, citizens have relatively little trust in the courts. Specifically, only about half of the subjects interviewed believe that the court rulings are fair. This is lower than their trust in the police's work. Only 41.5% of the subjects are satisfied with the overall performance of the courts. Even more serious is the finding that the subjects who had court experience have even lower trust than those who had not, a result contracting the theory which extor ”Familiarity Breeds Respect.” Our statistical analysis indicates that, although fewer subjects believe that ”the judge’s thinking is out of pace with society” than either ”judgments are influenced by litigants’ social positions” or ”courts are authoritarian,” it has the strongest negative impact on the subjects’ support for and trust in the courts. The impact of legal consciousness on the support for and trust in the courts is significantly stronger than the demographic characteristics, as well as those who strongly believe in the presumption of innocence. All in all, people's trust in and support for the courts are indeed influenced by their value judgments and experience.起始頁-結束頁：51-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201706.21(1).51-1128篇名：文化資產治理與公民參與：大陸培田古民居的案例分析並列篇名：Cultural Heritage Conservation and Civic Participation: The Case of Peitian Ancient Village in Mainland China作者：魏玫娟(Mei-chuan Wei);湯京平(Ching-ping Tang)關鍵字：文化資產保存;新共享資源;多中心治理;合產;公民參與;cultural heritage conservation;new commons;polycentric governance;coproduction;civic participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著文化多樣性的重要性在全球日益受到重視，文化資產的治理與相關產業的發展也引起諸多討論。然而，從治理標的的物理特性以及治理涉及的利益結構來檢視有效治理的文獻卻不多見。本研究指出，文化資產某種程度具有共享資源的特性，在政治上面臨「利益分散於多數、成本集中於少數」的不利結構，需要擴大公民參與，因此發展社會組織、整合在地社會網絡，透過賦權以提升在地自主管理的能力，成為治理成功的重要基礎。本文以大陸培田村古村落的保護與發展為個案，透過既有文獻與田野調查，檢視培田透過保存物質遺產與復振非物質文化過程中所面臨的主要挑戰，展示培田在大陸其他類似的治理案例中所展現的創新與限制。本研究發現許多民間力量在諸如中國人民大學鄉村建設中心等機構的支持與培育之下，吸引許多年輕人投入基層培力的工作，創造合產的機制，也提供更多公道的發展（just development）機會。英文摘要：The value and importance of cultural historic heritage has been increasingly recognized and emphasized for the reason that its conservation contributes to human diversity, something which is crucial for human creativity and inspiration. From the perspective of the psychological needs of human beings, cultural heritage is a very important resource for shaping both national and local identity, and its conservation is significant in improving social wellbeing. Accordingly, cultural historic heritage has become the focus of rural and urban sustainable developmental strategies in both developed and developing countries. Using Peitian village in Fujian Province of Mainland China as a case study, this article seeks to analyze the major challenges facing Peitian’s governance of its tourism through its construction of an eco-museum. The dilemma facing the governance of cultural heritage conservation - entrepreneurial politics where the majority benefit from the interests gained, and the minority bears the cost - stems from the subtractability of use and difficulty of excluding potential beneficiaries of cultural heritage from the new commons. The conclusion emphasizes the need for institutional innovation if Peitian is to sustain its economic development and make it more equitable and just. Essential prerequisites to this innovative institutional design include: a polycentric governance regime where multiple centers/arenas of power exist, an institution of co-production which breaks the divide of state/public and market/private, and civic participation.起始頁-結束頁：113-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201706.21(1).113-1569篇名：政黨認同對於政治知識的動機性推理影響並列篇名：The Motivated Reasoning Influence of Party Identification on Political Knowledge作者：湯晏甄(Yen-chen Tang);蔡宗漢(Tsung-han Tsai);張傳賢(Alex Chuan-hsien Chang)關鍵字：政治知識;動機性推理;政治資訊;政黨認同;選擇性接觸;political knowledge;motivated reasoning;political information;party identification;selective exposure期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：政治知識對於民主政治的重要性不言可喻，然而學界對於政治知識的了解仍十分有限。當大多數研究結果與經驗資料著眼於政黨的社會化功能，並主張政黨屬性與政治知識間的正向關係時，卻忽略進一步探索選民的政黨認同在政治知識形成過程中所可能產生的負面影響。本文以動機性推理理論為依據，主張選民的政黨屬性扮演著資訊篩檢與選擇的角色。當選民的政黨認同愈強時，愈會傾向以個人的政治偏好來過濾及篩檢政治資訊，並刻意刪除、忽略、不信任與自身理念相悖的資訊，甚而可能扭曲政治資訊以支持自身的政治判斷。也因此相較於中立選民，具有政黨屬性的選民其政治資訊的接受程度對於政治知識的影響較不顯著。我們進一步藉由分析TEDS2012的選後調查資料印證本文的動機性推理假設，分析結果發現選民的政黨認同愈強時，政治資訊之於政治知識的邊際效應愈不顯著。英文摘要：Despite the importance of political knowledge to democracy, there is still only a limited understanding of the political knowledge of the electorate. While research and empirics generally point to the existence of a positive association between partisanship and political knowledge, most of the electorate fail to notice the probable negative influence of party identification on political knowledge. In this paper, in accordance with the theory of motivated reasoning, we claim that partisanship plays a role in sifting and selecting political information, and in deleting, ignoring, and disbelieving the information against personal prior beliefs. Moreover, the electorate might even distort the information in order to sustain their political decisions. Therefore, as the voters’ party identification becomes stronger, the influence of political information on political knowledge becomes insignificant. We further test our motivated reasoning hypotheses against the TEDS 2012 data. The result supports our hypotheses and shows that, as the voters’ party identification increases, the marginal effect of political information on political knowledge decreases.起始頁-結束頁：157-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201706.21(1).157-21810篇名：Urban Hysteresis and Anti-Left Sentiments in Asia: Beyond the Global Middle-Class Thesis並列篇名：亞洲的都市遲滯現象與反左派情緒：一個超越全球中產階級的論述作者：尹智煥(Ji-whan Yun)關鍵字：anti-left sentiments;urban hysteresis;Japan;South Korea;Thailand;反左派情緒;都市遲滯現象;日本;南韓;泰國期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This paper explores why anti-left sentiments have recently emerged in some Asian cities and, in particular, why urban middle classes have frequently, if not persistently, protested against the socioeconomic reforms of new left governments. The global middle-class thesis ascribes the emergence of anti-left sentiments to the liberal-democratic ideology and conservative values of the affluent middle classes. However, this paper does not characterize these anti-left sentiments as ideological or value-driven conflicts. Alternatively, this paper argues that this phenomenon has stemmed from the immediate reactions, or hysteresis, of the middle classes to the critical instability that the new left governments have caused in their taken-for-granted lifestyles in unique urban spaces. To corroborate the argument, this paper compares the cases of the most contentious middle classes in three East and Southeast Asian countries, including Japan’s wage earners or salarymen, South Korea’s self-employed, and Thailand’s urban professionals.英文摘要：本文旨在探索為何最近有些亞洲城市開始興起反左派的情緒？特別是為何都市中的中產階級頻繁地抗議新左派政府的社會經濟改革。全球中產階級理論將反左派情緒之興起歸咎於自由民主的意識形態，以及富裕中產階級的保守價值。本文認為這樣的現象並非意識形態或是價值所驅動的衝突，而是新左派政府在特定都市空間中，對於中產階級視為理所當然的生活型態造成衝擊，導致後者對於不穩定之立即回應或是所謂的遲滯現象。為了證實這個主張，本文比較了三個亞洲國家中最具爭議性的中產階級個案，包含日本的受薪階級，南韓的自由業人士，以及泰國的都市專業人士。起始頁-結束頁：219-259資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201706.21(1).219-25901篇名：從協力治理檢視日本的災害防救：以東日本大地震為例並列篇名：Japanese Disaster Prevention from a Partnership Governance Perspective: The Example of the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake作者：林淑馨(Shu-Hsin Lin)關鍵字：協力治理;災害防救;日本;東日本大地震;非營利組織;collaborative governance;disaster prevention;Japan;Tohoku Earthquake;NPO期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：65期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著全球化的發展，傳統以單一國家為主體的世界觀和風險管理思維逐漸受到挑戰，特別是以國家為主所提出的災害防救措施，過度強調「依法行政」與平等原則，在緊急災害發生時反而制約地方政府的行動，降低策略的有效性。因此，政府與民間、中央與地方之間的關係被認為有重新檢討之必要。日本災害防救的發展也受到上述整體結構變化的影響，在阪神大地震之後不得不重新檢討中央集權的垂直救災運作模式，並開始重視橫向的水平資源整合。本研究發現，從全國層次來看，日本的災害相互支援協定並非是無秩序、混亂的，而是有自治體規模、空間距離和時間法則可遵循。阪神大地震前，日本政府所打造的是一個「由上到下」的垂直型防災社會，之後則逐漸朝向輔以地方自治體的「水平協力網絡」方向發展，而東日本大地震之後，則積極強化基層防救災能力，鼓勵民眾、企業參與防災活動，並充實避難設施，試圖建構水平減災協力社會。此外，如欲借鏡日本經驗，垂直互補、水平互補以及民間力量的內化則是我國在建構減災協力治理網絡時可以參考之要素。英文摘要：Traditionally, nation is the major enforcement and key element in risk management. However, this point of view has gradually been challenged during globalization. Over emphasizing rule of law and egalitarianism during disasters has restricted the effectiveness of local government policies and strategies. Therefore, it is essential to review the relationship between public and private sectors and central and local governments. After the Great Hanshin earthquake, the traditional vertical (top-down) disaster rescue operation model implemented by the central government was strictly criticized. This has deeply influenced the Japanese disaster prevention structure. Since then, government began to pay more attention to the horizontal mode of resource integration. This study found that, from the national level, Japan's Disaster Mutual Aid Agreement is autonomous, and comply with space and time, rather than a chaotic mess. Prior to the Great Hanshin earthquake, the Japanese government has established a ”top-down” disaster prevention system. After the earthquake, management turned to a ”horizontal partnership” with local governments. After the Tohoku earthquake, the Japanese government strengthened its local disaster management ability, and encouraged the public and private sector to participate in disaster prevention activities. The government also increased refuge facilities, aiming to establish the horizontal disaster partnership. In addition, when establishing disaster mitigation partnership network at Taiwan, we can take Japan's experience as an example on how to integrate the resources vertically, horizontally and collaborate with the abilities of the local community.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系2篇名：吉園圃蔬果標章之地理分布與其成因分析並列篇名：A Study on the Spatial Distribution of the Farms with GAP and Underlying Factors作者：洪暐婷(Wei-Ting Hung);王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang)關鍵字：食品安全;吉園圃;空間分析;農會;food safety;Good Agricultural Practice (GAP);spatial analysis;farmers' association期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：65期出版年：2017中文摘要：吉園圃標章的目的是要確保我國蔬果的農藥用藥安全，但經過二十多年的推廣，其普及率並不高，因此本文的研究目的是想要透過了解吉園圃標章的地理分布，了解在哪些地區的普及率較低或較高，影響因素為何。過去相關文獻顯示農友在考慮是否申辦農產品標章時，會受到許多因素影響，其中有一些因素是與農友所在的地區相關，例如資訊外溢、社會一致性、生產外部性、及農作物特性等，因此農產品標章應會有地理上群聚的現象。但筆者認為國外相關研究多是從農友或業者的角度出發，在探討臺灣吉園圃標章的地理分布現象時，可能忽略了農會作為從上而下的推廣功能，因此補充了此一研究視角。本文運用空間分析法及深度訪談法來探究臺灣本島吉園圃標章的地理分布情況為何，以及造成如此分布之可能原因，研究結果顯示臺灣吉園圃標章確實有群聚之現象，但各縣市與鄉鎮市之普及率差異很大，主要原因除了過去文獻中的影響因素之外，也證實了農會推廣努力程度之重要性。英文摘要：The purpose of Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) is to ensure that there is no excess pesticide residue in fruits and vegetables in Taiwan. However, after 20 years of promotion, the penetration rate of GAP is not high. The purpose of this study is to investigate the penetration rates of GAP in different areas, the geographical distribution of the farms participating GAP, and the underlying causes. The past research showed that farmers take many factors into account when considering to apply agricultural labels. Some of the factors are geographically related, such as information spillovers, social coherence, production externality, and agricultural products' characteristics. As a result, the farms with agricultural labels were found to be spatially clustered. Foreign researchers usually study this issue from the perspective of farmers or manufacturers. However, the role of promotion played by farmers' association, which is ignored by foreign scholars, should be included in order to better explain the phenomenon. This paper applies the spatial analysis method and the in-depth interview method to answer the above questions. The results show that the farms with GAP are spatially clustered. But the penetration rates of GAP in different counties, cities, and townships vary widely. In addition to the factors identified in past literature, this study confirms the importance of farmers' associations in promoting GAP.起始頁-結束頁：39-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系3篇名：影響現職消防人員提早退休因素之研究：工作特性的分析並列篇名：Factors of Incumbent Firefighters' Decision on Early Retirement in Taiwan作者：李俊達(Chun-Ta Lee);彭錦鵬(Thomas C. P. Peng);唐雲明(Yun-Ming Tang)關鍵字：消防人員;退休;消防人事制度;firefighters;retirement;firefighter personnel system期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：65期出版年：2017中文摘要：「提早退休」意指未達法定強迫退休之年齡，便申請提前辦理自願退休。由於消防人員勤務具有高度危險、辛勞等特性，其所考量之退休因素應不同於一般工作者之退休決定。本研究分析現職消防人員提早退休的考量因素，結果顯示，顯著影響消防人員提早退休傾向的因素包括婚姻狀況（有配偶者傾向較早）、消防工作年資（資深者傾向較晚）、勤務性質（外勤者傾向較早）、外在工作滿意度（請調成功申請者傾向較晚）、內在工作滿意度（滿意度高者傾向較早）。各變項對於提早退休的解釋力符合既有的研究成果，並能相應於消防工作的特質，獲得更細緻的解釋。本研究並針對勤務性質、工作滿意度、請調經驗等三項因素，提出進一步的討論與建議。英文摘要：Early retirement is defined as voluntary retirement that applicants do not reach the age of mandatory retirement set by law. Due to the job characteristics of obvious personal safety concern, Taiwan incumbent firefighters' consideration of early retirement may differ from other workers'. This study finds the incumbent firefighters tend to retire before the legal mandatory retirement age when considering their marital status, seniority, fieldwork, extrinsic and intrinsic satisfaction. This research explores various dimensions of early retirement that related to the three important factors that pertinent to Taiwan firefighters' human resource system: nature of fieldwork, job satisfaction, and transferring system.起始頁-結束頁：93-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系4篇名：民主社會裡的個人與他者並列篇名：The Individual and Others in Democratic Society作者：許國賢(Kuo-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：個人;他者;多數專制;民主社會;the individual;others;tyranny of the majority;democratic society期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：64期出版年：2017中文摘要：近代民主社會的誕生，代表了以血緣來決定及固著人們之社會身份的時代的結束。自此之後，個人獲得了解放，但也被迫進入一個龐大的交換系絡中，他的獨立性受到結構因素的極大的限制，因此，「流動的不確定性」可謂是民主社會裡的無可迴避的人類情境。就其建構的本意來說，民主社會係期盼成為一種「在內部緊張中尋求和平的社會」。這意味著民主社會承認了內在分歧和矛盾的必然性，並試圖以非暴力的手段來進行調解，俾守住和平的整體格局。而民主社會裡的個人與他者的相互對待之道，係是影響此一期盼的關鍵因素。本文從托克維爾的經典論述出發，進而以「可販售性」和「面對束縛的二元性」分析當代民主社會裡的個人之一般處境，並從「做為同胞的他者」和「做為政治選擇之對手的他者」之間的動態的身份移動，探討多數專制的相關問題。英文摘要：The birth of modern democratic society denotes the end of the dominance of blood linkage that feudalism closely fastens itself. Thereafter, the individual emerges onto the stage of history and acquires a newly found independence denied before. Yet, in the new era, he is forced to enter into a colossal network of exchange in which his independence is immensely limited and conditioned. In its original intention of construction, democratic society is supposed to be a society in search of peace within inner tensions. This indicates that inner cleavages are by all means parts of it and also that resolving and containing cleavages in a peaceful way is what a democratic society truly pursuits. Focusing on ”salability” and ”duality in relation to bondages”, this essay aims to explore the nature of modern democratic society and the general conditions of individuals living in it, and, on this basis, to enquire further into the relations between the individual and others on which the longing for peace depends.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系5篇名：貪腐容忍度的類型化建構：內在與外在效度的評估並列篇名：Typologization of corruption tolerance: Internal and external validity assessment作者：莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);余致力(Chilik Yu)關鍵字：貪腐認知;貪腐容忍度;廉政治理;民意調查;指標設計;corruption perception;corruption tolerance;integrity governance;opinion poll;indicator design期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：64期出版年：2017中文摘要：廉政是良善治理（good governance）的重要面向之一，我國法務部近年提出「貪腐零容忍（zero tolerance of corruption）」的概念，期能打造廉能政府與型塑拒絕貪腐的社會文化。然而，想要評估民眾對貪腐是否真能達到零容忍的境界，在方法論上必須先處理如何測量貪腐容忍度的問題。因此，本研究採取電話調查法，以臺北市和高雄市的成年民眾為調查母體，採分層隨機抽樣方法各自調查1,069和1,071個有效樣本，調查資料經樣本代表性檢定與加權處理後進行分析，以期達成下列四個研究目的。首先，從臺灣本土文化脈絡出發，以貪腐認知為核心，建構一組測量民眾對貪腐觀念與行為的容忍度指標。其次，運用類型學（typology）的概念與量化分析的技術，建構貪腐容忍度的不同類型。第三，以整體貪腐容忍度和檢舉貪腐意願為外在效標，檢證此一分類的內在與外在效度。最後，提出較為簡化的貪腐容忍度測量指標，作為後續其他相關研究之參考。英文摘要：Integrity is an important aspect of good governance. The Ministry of Justice in Taiwan has recently promoted the concept of zero tolerance of corruption in order to build a clean government and to cultivate an anti-corruption culture. However, in order to assess if the public could reach zero tolerance of corruption, it is methodologically necessary to tackle the measurement problem of corruption tolerance. Accordingly, this study collected and analyzed data from the telephone surveys of two stratified random samples of 1,069 adults in Taipei and 1,071 adults in Kaohsiung to achieve the following four objectives. First, design a set of indicators to measure corruption tolerance under Taiwan culture context. Second, apply typology concept and quantitative analysis techniques to construct different categories of corruption tolerance. Third, use overall level of corruption tolerance and the willingness to report corruption as two external criteria to verify internal and external validity of the above typology. Finally, provide a parsimonious measurement of corruption tolerance for the reference of further empirical research.起始頁-結束頁：37-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系6篇名：臺北市里長如何運用里鄰建設服務經費：以信義區為例並列篇名：How the Li Chiefs Use the Li-Lin Infrastructure Funds in Taipei: A Case Study of Xin-Yi District作者：楊永年(Yung-Nien Yang);王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang)關鍵字：里長;里鄰建設服務經費;分配政治;臺北市;地方治理;li chief;Li-Lin Infrastructure Fund;distributive politics;Taipei;local governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：64期出版年：2017中文摘要：里長是我國最基層的民選公職人員，在地方治理中扮演重要角色，而其所能掌握運用的最重要資源之一為里鄰建設服務經費，本文依據分配政治理論來探討臺北市里長如何分配里鄰建設服務經費，希望能充實國內分配政治相關研究，也能深入了解基層治理的實況。本文研究對象為信義區2011年至2014年第11屆的里長，並採取質化與量化的研究方法。依據訪談結果，筆者將建設經費分為四類，分析結果顯示各里之經費運用有很大的差異，且會受到里內的地區特性、里長特性與偏好、及政治因素的影響。此外，里長在選舉年時，會將較多的經費分配在守望相助的項目上。最後，訪談結果顯示里長在建設經費的決策過程幾乎都是由里長主導，雖然有依循法規進行討論與公告，但多流於形式，民眾參與程度不佳，因此本文提出兩項政策建議，一是在經費決策過程中，採用參與式預算的方式，以提高里民的參與，第二是各里的建設經費總額應考量各里的地區特性。英文摘要：Li chief is the entry level of the public officials elected by citizens and plays an important role in Taiwan's local governance. One of the most important resources used by li chiefs is Li-Lin Infrastructure Funds. The goal of this paper is to investigate how the li chief allocates the funds based on the theory of distributive politics. The research focuses on the funds allocation in the Xin-Yi District between 2011 and 2014. Based on the interviews, the use of funds was classified into four categories. The results show that there were great variations in li chiefs' fund allocation. Several factors, such as the characteristics of li, the features and the priorities of li chiefs, and political factors, had significant impacts on the allocation of funds. In addition, the li chiefs tended to allocate more funds on mutual attention team in the election year. The interviews show that the use of funds was dominated by the li chiefs, and li chiefs followed related government rules. However, the degree of public participation was low. As a result, this study provides two policy recommendations. First, the government should involve the citizens more in the decision process of the use of funds by adopting the form of participatory budgeting. Second, the amount of infrastructure fund for each li should vary in accordance with the characteristics of li.起始頁-結束頁：69-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系01篇名：呷碗內、看碗外？選區重疊度與開放性對於議員參與立委提名的影響並列篇名：Constituency Congruency, Open Seat, and Political Promotion of Local Council Members作者：楊婉瑩(Wan-Ying Yang);陳宏哲(Hung-Che Chen)關鍵字：地方議員;黨內立委提名;政治晉陞;選區重疊度;現任者嚇阻效果;local councilors;legislative election nomination;political promotion;constituency congruency;scare-off effect of incumbents期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：地方議員為何以及是否參選區域立委，是政治晉陞的重要課題。本研究認為，當議員選區與立委選區高度重疊時，提供該選區的議員低成本與高效益的參選立委誘因結構。在地方議員與立委選區高度重疊的選區中，地方議員往往有在立委選區經營成本低、與選民高度連結、較高的可辨識度、長期經營導致相對勝選機率較大、以及政治晉陞的累積性優勢。本研究探討2016年第九屆立委選舉，國民黨以及民進黨在各自立委提名過程中，議員參與黨內區域立委提名的情形。首先，本研究發現，對於國民黨來說，當議員選區與立委選區重疊度愈高時，該選區愈可能出現議員參與黨內立委提名。不過，對於民進黨來說，選區重疊度並不會直接對於議員參與黨內立委提名的機會造成顯著地影響。再者，過去的研究普遍認為，現任者優勢可能阻斷其他挑戰者的機會。本研究顯示，對於國民黨而言，選區開放性並不會使得選區重疊度對於議員參與黨內立委提名的機會產生不同的影響。不過，對於民進黨來說，相較於有同黨現任者時，選區重疊度對於有無議員參與黨內立委提名的影響效果，在無同黨現任者時較能發揮正向影響作用，這顯示黨內的現任者發揮了嚇阻作用。英文摘要：Whether and why local council members run for legislative elections are critical issues for political promotion. This study argues that when the constituency of the local councilors highly overlaps with that of the legislators, it provides the local councilors the political incentive structure with lower costs and higher benefits to run for the legislative elections. In those highly overlapped districts, local councilors running for legislative elections have lower costs in familiarizing with the districts, greater connection to the district voters, and higher name recognition, all of which lead to higher possibilities of winning the legislative elections. This study uses the 2016 legislative election to examine both the KMT and DPP's local councilors' decisions in running for legislative election nominations. Our findings are the following. Firstly, for the KMT councilors, higher constituency congruency tends to bring about higher possibilities of running for nomination of legislative elections. However, for the DPP councilors, constituency congruencies do not directly affect their decisions to run for legislative elections. Furthermore, past studies have indicated that the impact of constituency congruency on political promotion is greatly affected by the scare-off effect of the incumbents. For the KMT councilors, the scare-off effect of the incumbent does not change the impact of constituency congruency on councilors' running for legislative elections. However, for the DPP councilors, the impact of district congruency on whether to run for legislative election or not is conditional upon whether the legislative districts are with or without same-party incumbents. The constituency-congruency-effect in encouraging the DPP's councilors' running for the legislative election only occurs when there are no same -party incumbents.起始頁-結束頁：1-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：選舉預測：利用全國性調查推估區域立委選情並列篇名：Election Prediction: Using National Survey to Predict District-Level Legislative Yuan Elections作者：俞振華(Eric Chen-Hua Yu);涂志揚(Chih-Yang Tu)關鍵字：多層次估計模型與事後分層加權;選舉預測;全國民調;立委選舉;multilevel regression and post-stratification (MRP);election prediction;national survey;Legislative Yuan elections期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究利用2016年大選前的民意調查資料，並採用多層次估計模型搭配分層加權的方式（multilevel regression and post-stratification：MRP），預測73個區域立委選舉結果。具體來說，本文所採用的預測模式包含三個步驟：首先，透過基本人口特徵變數（性別、年齡、及教育程度）輔以選區層級的特徵，估計不同類型選民分別支持國民黨立委參選人及民進黨立委參選人的機率。其次，我們使用內政部2015年全國人口調查資料，求得每一個選區當中，不同類型選民的聯合機率分布。最後，將各個選區內不同類型選民當中，支持國民黨立委參選人（及民進黨立委參選人）的成年人口數加總（每個選區皆含50種類型），並分別除以各選區的總成年人口數，以推估每一選區當中，國民黨立委參選人及民進黨立委參選人的得票率。在選區樣本數有限（平均約55案）的情況下，本研究仍能透過多層次統計模型及人口調查資料輔助，得出各選區政黨候選人得票率預測值與實際得票率之間的平均誤差值之絕對值僅約5個百分點。此外，本研究成功預測61個立委選區的選舉輸贏，與「未來事件交易所」的選舉預測結果相比較，僅落後一個選區。英文摘要：This paper uses pre-election national survey data and a method combining the Bayesian multilevel modeling approach with the population information for post-stratification (i.e., multilevel regression and post-stratification: MRP) to predict Legislative Yuan elections in the 73 single-member districts. Specifically, our method is consisted of three steps: first, we construct a multilevel logistic regression model to estimate the vote choice variables for the Kuomintang (KMT) and Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) candidates, respectively, given demographics and districts of residence. Second, we post-stratify on all the variables in the model by using the joint population distribution of the demographic variables within each district. Third, we then combine the above two steps and estimate the mean of support for the KMT and DPP candidates in the district level. Given that each district only has about 55 samples on average, this study shows that MRP method can be regarded as an effective tool for election prediction, as the average absolute measurement error between the estimates and actual vote shares is just about 5 percentage points. In a comparison with the pre-election district-level predictions issued by the prediction market ”xFuture”, our estimates are almost as good as the results of ”xFuture”.起始頁-結束頁：71-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系3篇名：從大埔事件省思我國空間計畫體系發展侷限並列篇名：A Reflection on Limitations of Taiwan's Spatial Planning System through the Dapu Incident作者：黃信勳(Hsin-Hsun Huang);徐世榮(Shih-Jung Hsu)關鍵字：環境正義;土地正義;空間計畫;科學工業園區;大埔事件;environmental justice;land justice;spatial planning;science-based industrial park;Dapu incident期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：2010年苗栗大埔事件係肇因於開發科學工業園區及其附隨區所致的農民抗爭，甚而引發全國迴響的「土地正義運動」。此一結果與科學工業園區及國土空間計畫高揭之永續發展目標，大相徑庭。就規劃而論，各級空間計畫是國家空間干預政策的制度性表現，旨在促進公共利益。然而在大埔事件中，相關空間（政策）規劃之善為預謀，詳為規劃，增進國民福祉之積極作用並未有效發揮，反倒是引發當地農／住民受壓迫的不平之鳴，甚而發展成大規模的社會抗爭行動。爰此，本研究借鏡「環境正義」的理論視角來理解大埔事件與土地正義，探究何以架構在整體土地規劃與管制體系內的大埔開發案，會從擴大科學工業園區的開發案演變成各界譁然的爭議事件。研究發現指出，前揭體系對此事件之發生有著關鍵性的作用，因其運作未能涵容土地的多重意義以及人與土地之間的複合關係，致令農／住民在承認、程序、分配以及能力面向上承受不公對待。英文摘要：The 2010 Dapu incident was a peasants' protest against developing a science-based industrial park and its adjacent areas, which resulted in the Land Justice Movement, nationwide. Such a consequence is a notable conflict with the very goal of science-based industrial parks policy and national spatial planning, that is, sustainable development. Spatial planning at all levels is the state's spatial intervention actions aiming at improving public interests. In the Dapu incident, however, the very goal of spatial planning had not been attained but caused local people's resistance to oppressions, which then became a large-scale social movement. This study takes the point of view from Environmental Justice to understand the Incident and the meanings of Land Justice, as well as to investigate into the development case. This article finds that the spatial planning system is the key to the Incident. This is because the system's practices do not take the multiple meanings of land and the multiple relations between humans and land into account so that peasants/residents have been treated unfairly in terms of recognition, procedure, distribution and capacity.起始頁-結束頁：121-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系4篇名：從債務危機評述希臘民主治理的困境並列篇名：The Debt Crisis and the Predicament of Democratic Governance in Greece作者：盧倩儀(Chien-Yi Lu)關鍵字：希臘債務危機;歐盟;撙節;新自由主義;民主;Greek Debt Crisis;EuropeanUnion;Austerity;Neoliberalism;Democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：從希臘債務危機的因到果，「民主政治」扮演什麼樣的角色？甚或是否有角色？民主政治在此過程中受到什麼樣的衝擊？該如何理解民主選舉不斷反映人民向左走的企盼；然而危機之中，左派政府之施政卻在人民諒解下頻頻向右偏的現象？一般民眾在主流媒體的影響下對希臘的慘況即便寄予同情，多少攙雜了「希臘是自食惡果」之印象。然而問題是否果真如此簡單？債權國的所作所為是否經得起歷史的檢驗？相關區域及國際組織究竟是維護了還是踐踏了民主？本文檢視希臘政府自2010至2015年7月所吞下之撙節藥方及其效果，分析債權國對病灶的診斷，繼之參考一波波個別或者聯名對歐元區領袖及財長提出反撙節呼籲之學者的立論，探討希債危機深層的原因以及握有權力的菁英們不願正視問題之結構性理由。在對希債危機之實際病因以及官方診斷背後之動機有了初步瞭解後，本文將進一步闡述希債危機如何使原本黑暗的角落曝了光，照亮了民主政治所深陷的困境。英文摘要：What role does democratic politics play in the cause, the treatment, and the reflection process of the Greek debt crisis? Or does it have a role? What is the impact of the crisis on democracy? How do we explain the phenomena where, repeatedly, voters express their wish for Left -leaning, anti-austerity policies, yet the subsequent policies delivered by the anti-austerity government continues to turn Right with more and more draconian austerity measures? Fed by reports of mainstream media, the general public-even those sympathetic to the Greeks going through tremendous suffering-tend to have the impression that the Greeks ”deserve” this because of the profligacy in the previous era. Is this impression an over-simplification of what actually happened? How will the interpretation and treatment of the crisis by the Troika be judged by history? Have the relevant regional and international organizations protected or undermined democracy? This article examines the effects of the medicine taken by Greece as prescribed by the Troika between 2010 and July 2015, followed by an investigation of reasons provided by those who criticized the prescription and warned against further austerity. It then provides an explanation for the stubborn refusal of the Troika to respond to the criticisms and warnings from the world's top economists. Based on this explanation, the article elaborates on the enlightening effect of the Greek debt crisis on the predicament of democratic politics.起始頁-結束頁：179-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系5篇名：半總統制下總統、總理和國會的三角關係：台灣和波蘭的運作經驗分析並列篇名：The Triangular Relationship between the President, Prime Minister, and Parliament in Semi-presidentialism: Analyzing Taiwan and Poland作者：蔡榮祥(Jung-Hsiang Tsai)關鍵字：總統;總理;國會;三角關係;台灣;波蘭;president;prime minister;parliament;triangular relationship;Taiwan Poland期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文主要的目的在於解釋和分析半總統制獨有的總統、總理和國會的三角關係。核心的研究問題是為何特定半總統制國家之制度特徵或安排會形成總統、總理和國會的向心三角關係以及為何特定半總統制國家之制度特徵或安排會促成總統、總理和國會的離心三角關係。主要的論點是具有議會制的特徵如同意權的行使和國會議員兼任閣員的半總統制國家，較容易出現強權總理、總統行政權力之行使受到限制以及府會關係較為和諧的現象。相反地，不具議會制特徵如同意權的行使和國會議員不能兼任閣員的半總統制國家，較容易出現弱權總理、總統行政權力之行使較無限制、立法權力較有自主性以及府會關係容易發生衝突的結果。本文以建構類型的比較觀點來分析1997年修憲後的台灣半總統制的運作，並以波蘭半總統制的經驗作為對比，解釋台灣半總統制的制度特徵和運作結果。英文摘要：The main purpose of this paper is to explicate and analyze the triangular relationship between the president, prime minister, and parliament in semi-presidentialism. Why the specific features of institutional arrangements can produce a centripetal triangular relationship and why the specific features of institutional arrangements can entail a centrifugal triangular relationship in semi-presidentialism are the major research questions. The combination of the investiture and portfolio's parliamentary membership can facilitate the centripetal tendency of the triangular relationship among the president, prime minister, and parliament in semi-presidentialism. On the contrary, without the investiture and portfolio's parliamentary membership, it can enhance the centrifugal tendency of the triangular relationship among the president, prime minister, and parliament in semi-presidentialism. By way of contrasting semi-presidential operation in Poland with semi -presidential operations in Taiwan, we can explain why Taiwan has a strong president, a strong parliament and a weak prime minister.起始頁-結束頁：1-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系6篇名：「後衝突社會」的政治制度設計：波士尼亞與盧安達的權力分享模式比較並列篇名：Political Systems in Post-Conflict Societies Comparing the Experiences of Power-Sharing in Bosnia and Rwanda作者：陳宏銘(Hongming Chen)關鍵字：後衝突社會;權力分享;協商式民主;波士尼亞;盧安達;Post-Conflict Society;Power-Sharing;Consociational Democracy;Bosnia;Rwanda期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：關於後衝突社會如何設計政治制度設計，既是重要的理論問題，在實務上也是政治工程師所面臨的重大挑戰。本文探討經歷族群嚴重衝突和內戰的國家，如何進一步設計其政治制度，並以波士尼亞與盧安達兩國所採權力分享模式的經驗進行探討和比較。這兩個案例均屬第二次世界大戰後所經歷最嚴重的種族屠殺，時間均在1990年代初期。再者，兩國均有不同程度的協商式民主制度實踐，迄今（2017年）均超過二十年的時間，故可供比較其權力分享制度經驗和效果。本研究發現，波士尼亞對三大族裔採權力均霑的同等原則和比例原則，惟其結果雖確保族群的代表性，但也鞏固了族群的界限，跨族群的合作仍不易強化。盧安達的情況，則是少數族群之圖西族相較胡圖族，取得超過其族群人口比例的政治權力，而政黨的公平競爭亦受到了較大的限制。換言之，兩國協商式民主的實踐均普遍不被認為成功，族群間仍潛在不安因素，但儘管如此，兩國近二十年來族群間未再重演之前的嚴重暴力衝突，也至少維持了一定的和平。英文摘要：How to design the political system in a post-conflict society is an important theoretical issue, and also a difficult challenge for the political engineers. This paper, based on the experiences of Bosnia and Rwanda which have experienced serious ethnic conflict and civil war, discusses how the countries designed their political systems after the end of the conflict. These two countries have experienced the most serious ethnic conflicts since World War II, and these conflicts both took place in the early 1990s. Furthermore, over the past two decades both countries have adopted consociational democracatic systems in varying degrees after the conflict. Therefore I believe enough time has passed to evaluate their practices of power -sharing. The study found that in Bosnia the principles of proportionality and parity have been adopted, so as to ensure the power-sharing of the three ethnic groups. However, the political system paid the cost of consolidating existing ethnic boundaries, and it is still difficult for three ethnic groups to cooperate mutually. In Rwanda, compared to the Hutu majority, the Tutsi minority obtained political power which exceeds its ethnic population ratio. Besides, fair competition between political parties is also restricted. In other words, consociational democracy of the two countries was generally not considered to be successful. Nevertheless, Bosnia and Rwanda have at least maintained the peace and there have been no serious ethnic conflicts and violence for the past two decades.起始頁-結束頁：73-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系7篇名：政策創新的影響因素：我國地方政府的分析（1999-2013）並列篇名：The Influencing Factors of Various Types of Policy Innovation: A Longitudinal Analysis of Taiwan Local Governments (1999-2013)作者：李仲彬(Chung-Pin Lee)關鍵字：政策創新;地方政府;政策類型;分配性政策;管制性政策;policy innovation;local government;policy type;distributive policy;regulatory policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去對於政府創新的研究因為定義創新的方式不同，研究成果間難以比較與對話，而且多以單一個案進行分析，缺乏政府整體創新能量的解釋模型，忽略不同創新類型間差異性的探討，也沒有跟傳統公共政策領域的文獻對話。為了彌補上述缺口，本文先透過文獻的檢閱，針對創新的定義、創新的分類以及公共政策分類進行整理。接下來再透過1999-2013共15年間我國地方政府所推出共約一千個創新政策（也就是從未在其他地方施行過的政策）的資料庫，以地方政府為分析單位進行縱貫性模型統計分析，比較管制、分配、以及服務型創新各自受到哪些影響因素而產生，將公部門創新的研究與傳統公共政策的文獻進行結合。研究結果顯示，不同類型創新政策所受到的驅動因素差異甚大，與著名學者Lowi的權力場域推論也不吻合。除了提升公務員本身知識的水準（教育程度）為各類型創新產出的共通因素外，管制型創新為了回應都會環境複雜度的需要，主要出現在直轄市地區。分配（福利）型創新則是因社會需求出現與預算資源配合而產生，在此情況之下，如何提升偏鄉地方政府對社會福利性創新的提出能力，變成是分配（福利）型創新發展的重要工作。服務型創新除了上述要件的滿足之外，更需要的是政治環境壓力的刺激。英文摘要：The pursuit of innovation has become a key for organizational sustainability. This paper aims to explore the factors affecting the development of different types of innovation and to classify innovations into the classic public policy categories, the regulatory and distributive policy, in an attempt to connect the discussion on innovation development models with the public policy literature. This paper performs a longitudinal analysis on 953 cases of innovation policies from local governments in Taiwan, which we have collected from the fifteen years between 1999 and 2013. The results reveal substantial differences in the factors driving different types of innovations. However, the factors influencing the production of distributive and regulatory policies in local governments, in general, do not come from the interaction of political power, as stated by Lowi. The factors mostly originate from government resources and the needs of the social environment. Service innovation mainly requires the stimulation of environmental pressure. Regulatory innovation is more likely to be initiated by municipal cities with quality human resources. Distributive (welfare) innovation is usually a response to social demands with budgetary resources. The results obtained above produce several policy suggestions for government innovation development.起始頁-結束頁：139-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系8篇名：公部門人力資源管理實務之研究－地方薦任公務人員的初探性調查並列篇名：A Study of Human Resource Management Practices - An Exploratory Research of Local Junior Rank Civil Servants作者：許峻嘉(Jyun-Jia Shiu)關鍵字：文官制度改革;公部門人力資源管理;轉換型領導;覺察組織績效;工作滿意度;Civil Service Reform;Public Human Resource Management Practices;Transformational Leadership;Perceive Organizational Performance;Job Satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：人力資源管理理論是公部門人事制度變革的主要途徑，多數學者同意運用人力資源管理能夠增加員工工作意願與動機，進而提升政府運作效能，而在我國系絡中，究竟其成效如何？產生什麼變化？似尚未有足夠的實證研究結果能回答前述問題。為探索人力資源管理理論於實務界的發展，本文運用「人力資源管理實務」(Human Resource Management Practices, HRMPs)概念，檢驗公務人員認知中「人力資源管理實務」對「員工成果」是否具有影響力，以及轉換型領導的中介效果，兼論文官制度改革成效。本文以參與行政院人事行政總處地方公務人員訓練中心訓練之地方薦任公務人員為研究對象，透過問卷調查方式進行資料蒐集。研究發現：首先，工作彈性、俸給與考績對組織績效有正向影響；其次，工作彈性、俸給、訓練與決策參與有助於提升工作滿意度；第三，轉換型領導在部分人力資源管理實務與組織績效、工作滿意度之間，扮演中介角色。透過分析人力資源管理實務與員工成果間關係、以及轉換型領導效果，一方面檢驗人力資源管理理論在我國文官制度系絡下的解釋力，另一方面也檢視公務人員對文官制度改革評價，作為改善我國人事制度之參考。英文摘要：Human resource management theories have been the main approach to design reform plans in public personnel administration. Most scholars agree that human resource management programmes and techniques could be used to increase employees' willingness and motivations to work. In our country, Civil Service Reform has also applied human resource management ideas. However, there was little empirical evidence that can tell us the outcomes or effects of Civil Service Reform. To evaluate Civil Service Reform effects, this study examines the relationship between human resource management practices and employee outcomes, and the mediation effect of transformational leadership, through conducting and analyzing a local Civil Servants survey. This study investigated the local junior rank Civil Servants' cognitions who attended a training program at the Civil Service Development Institute, Directorate-General of Personnel Administration, Executive Yuan. The survey data shows: (1) job flexibility, pay and performance evaluation have positive effects on perceive organizational performance; (2) job flexibility, decision-making participation, pay and training can increase employees' job satisfaction; (3) transformational leadership play a mediator role between human resource management practices and employee outcomes. These results reflect the evaluations for Civil Service Reform outcomes in local junior rank Civil Servants. It proves that human resource management practices could predict the employee outcomes, and transformational leadership delivers the effect from human resource management practices to employee outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：207-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系9篇名：地方支出與財政幻覺之實證分析並列篇名：An Empirical Analysis of Local Spending and Fiscal Illusion作者：姚名鴻(Ming-Hung Yao)關鍵字：歲入結構複雜性;歲入所得彈性;捕蠅紙效果;房客幻覺;債務幻覺;revenue-complexity hypothesis;the income elasticity of revenue;the flypaper effect;the renter effect;debt illusion期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：財政幻覺假說是解釋公共支出規模擴大的公共選擇理論之一。該假說認為選民會系統性地低估公共支出的稅收價格，導致對公共支出的需求增加，並支持政府提出較高的公共支出水準。本研究主要是檢驗財政幻覺的五項成因，包括：（一）歲入結構複雜性；（二）歲入所得彈性；（三）捕蠅紙效果；（四）房客幻覺；（五）債務幻覺。實證結果顯示地方政府接受上級政府之補助收入對地方支出的影響大於自籌收入對地方支出的影響，亦即我國地方支出水準存在捕蠅紙效果。其次，地方府會結構也是影響地方支出水準的重要因素，一致性府會結構（地方首長屬於地方議會最大黨）政府之支出水準顯著高於分立府會結構（地方首長不屬地方議會最大黨）政府之支出水準。此外，在2010 年底行政區改制前，我國各地方政府的支出規模存在顯著差異，北高兩直轄市、北部的台北縣、桃園縣、新竹縣，以及新竹市、台中市和台南市等三省轄市的支出規模明顯高於中南部、東部和外島的縣政府，呈現明顯的南北差異，以及城（直轄市、工商業發達之都會型轄區）鄉（農業活動為主之非都會型轄區）差異。另一方面，在樣本期間內（2001 年至2010年），除2001 至2003 年期間地方支出水準有下滑的現象外，整體而言，我國地方政府的支出水準有上升的趨勢。英文摘要：The fiscal illusion hypothesis is a public choice theory that provides an explanation for the expansion of public expenditures. This hypothesis refers to voters systematically underestimating the tax price of public expenditures, resulting in the increase in the demand of public expenditures and support for expansionary public spending. The empirical studies explore the relationship between public spending and fiscal illusion via estimating five major sources of the fiscal illusion, namely the revenue-complexity hypothesis, the income elasticity of revenue, the flypaper effect, the renter effect, and debt illusion. The empirical results show that local expenditures are influenced by the flypaper effect, and the local executive-legislative relations. Besides, there is evidence that the expenditure levels of the municipality and northern county governments are greater than those of central, southern, eastern and surrounding island county governments. Finally, except for the period 2001-2003, the overall local expenditure level shows an upward trend in the sample period.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系10篇名：黨團協商機制：從制度化觀點分析並列篇名：Party Negotiation Mechanism: An Analysis through the Lens of Institutionalization作者：盛杏湲(Shing-Yuan Sheng);黃士豪(Shih-Hao Huang)關鍵字：黨團協商;制度化;記名表決;議長中立化;party negotiation mechanism;institutionalization;legislative voting;impartiality of the speaker期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文欲以制度化的觀點來評估黨團協商機制，希望回答以下研究問題：首先，黨團協商機制是否被頻繁的使用，以去解決重大爭議，且黨團協商機制解決重大爭議是否有效；其次，黨團協商機制的規則與程序是否依照普遍性原則來規律地執行，不因個案或個人（尤其是立法院長）的意志而有差別；第三，黨團協商機制是否被政治行動者所普遍認同，是一個具有價值的存在。本文以第八屆立法院為分析的基礎，使用的方法包括：對於立法院提案的內容分析，以就實際面去觀察黨團協商應用的狀況以及其效果；其次是對立委的深入訪談與對立委助理的調查訪問，期望如此得以從政治行動者的角度看他們對於黨團協商的看法。研究結果顯示，首先，在實務運作上，黨團協商機制相較於記名表決，已經成為最常被用來處理立法院爭議的機制，而且是爭議法案要通過三讀的關鍵因素；其次更重要的是，黨團協商機制獲得政治行動者，包括多數黨、少數黨與小黨的認同，這有利於黨團協商的制度化。然而，黨團協商在實務運作上並未完全遵照協商期一個月的規定，且立法院院長的意志與判斷，也決定了相當一部份法案是否被交付協商，以及協商成敗的命運，也就是說，黨團協商在實務運作上並沒有完全按照普遍性原則來運作，因此尚未達到制度化的標準。英文摘要：This research empirically examines the institutionalization of the party negotiation mechanism in Taiwan's Legislative Yuan. Utilizing data of legislative initiatives from the 8th Legislative Yuan, in-depth interviews with legislators and a survey of legislators’ staffs, we investigate how often the party negotiation mechanism is adopted to settle partisan conflicts, whether it is used in accordance with the laws and finally, whether it is widely recognized and valued as a key mechanism in the policy-making process. The findings show that the party negotiation mechanism has been recognized by parties and legislators as a major pathway to resolve disputes within the Legislative Yuan. In practice, the party negotiation mechanism is applied much more frequently than voting. A successful negotiation is almost a guarantee of successful legislation. Moreover, a considerable portion of political actors within the Legislative Yuan, including those from the majority party, the minority party and small parties, approve of the utility of negotiation, which helps the institutionalization of the party negotiation mechanism. Yet, the practice of this mechanism has not been stabilized, and its application has not completely followed the statutes. The Speaker of the Legislative Yuan also has the discretion to determine the operation and hence, the outcomes of party negotiation meetings. According to our findings, it might be too early to say that this mechanism has been institutionalized.起始頁-結束頁：37-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：電影作為國際關係教學文本與研究工具之後設理論思辨並列篇名：The Metatheorical Reflection on Cinema as Research Texts and Teaching Tools of International Relations作者：莫大華(Ta-hua Mo)關鍵字：電影國際關係學;流行文化;國際關係理論;後設理論;虛擬真實世界;Cinematic IR;Popular Culture;International Relations Theory;Metatheory;Visually Real World期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：72期出版年：2017中文摘要：國際關係研究學者藉由流行文化媒介的「視覺再呈現」（visual representation）建構其所認知的國際關係「真實世界」，尤其流行文化媒介的視覺效果及便利性，使學者嘗試以流行電影作為研究文本與教學工具，藉由視覺化（visualization）再呈現（represent）國際關係的「虛擬世界」（virtual world），藉以減少理論抽象或缺乏共同經驗的限制，展現出不同的研究與教學方式。本文主旨在嘗試探索國際關係學者以流行電影作為國際關係「真實世界」與「虛擬世界」之間的通道，建構出國際關係的「虛擬真實世界」（virtually real world），以協助國際關係理論的研究與教學。首先，探討國際關係學者如何連結流行文化（電影）與國際關係的相互關聯性，即是流行文化怎會與國際關係有所關聯。第二，探索國際關係學者提出運用流行文化（電影）的哲學基礎，也就是國際關係「真實世界」與流行文化「虛擬世界」之間的連結。第三，探索國際關係學者如何以流行電影建構國際關係的「虛擬真實世界」，即是再呈現國際關係議題與理論所建構的世界。第四及第五，分別探討國際關係學者運用電影作為教學工具及其優缺點。第六，探討國內國際關係學者此議題的觀點及現狀，即是有無學者運用，如何運用，有無提出深層的哲學觀點等等。最後，以後設理論分析的觀點，批判性分析「電影國際關係學」的發展方向及關切議題。英文摘要：International relations scholars constructed a cognitive portray of the real international relations through popular culture. Because of the visual effects and easy access of popular culture modern scholars have tried to use popular movies as research texts and teaching tools so to provide a visualization of the virtual reality of international relations. This can reduce the barriers imposed by abstract theories and missing common experiences, and to present a new and different way of research and teaching. This article aims at exploring how scholars of international relations use popular movies as the channels between the real international world and the cognitively-constructed virtual world, and this virtual reality of international relations is then utilized to complement the research and teaching of international relations. Firstly, this article aims to explore the relationship between popular cultures (movies) and international relations. Secondly, it will explore the philosophical foundations of this interconnection between the real international world and the virtual world in popular culture. Thirdly, it will explore how scholars re-construct the world depicted by international relation theories with the virtual world in popular culture. Fourthly and fifthly, this article will explore, respectively, how popular movies are used as teaching tools and the pros and cons. Sixthly, it will explore Taiwanese IR scholars’ views on cinematic IR and current application of this in Taiwanese classrooms. Lastly, from metatheoretical perspective, this paper will critically map out some future directions.起始頁-結束頁：91-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.72(91-120)2篇名：歐美跨大西洋貿易及投資夥伴協定之興起與挑戰並列篇名：The Rise and Challenge of the United States-European Union Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership作者：李貴英(Catherine Li)關鍵字：美國;歐洲聯盟;跨大西洋貿易及投資夥協定;市場進入;非關稅貿易障礙;United States;European Union;The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP);Market Access;Non-tariff Barriers期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：72期出版年：2017中文摘要：歐盟與美國進行之跨大西洋貿易及投資夥伴協定（TTIP）談判，被公認是國際貿易史上最大規模與最具野心者。雖然歐美均同意一般自由貿易協定所涵蓋之市場進入問題乃是TTIP義務之核心，不過雙方對於如何處理各自市場上管制政策之差異歧見頗深。自2013年10月至2017年6月，歐盟與美國代表舉行十五回合正式談判。2017年1月與2017年6月初又再度舉行會議，檢視歐盟與川普政府有關協定談判之進展。雖然川普總統曾數度發表聲明，而歐盟亦提出關於TTIP協定之進展報告，但目前TTIP仍前景不明。自2017年1月以來，川普政府面對TTIP之問題，似有前後不一、自相矛盾之態勢。因此TTIP未來能否順利完成洽簽具有高度不確定性，一方面是因為政治問題，另一方面則是因為廢除非關稅貿易障礙之技術性困難。如此一來可能導致國際貿易之不穩定性，全球經濟成長趨緩，以及造成國際社會新的分歧。縱然目前TTIP之發展前景不明，但並不表示歐美之間已推動之TTIP談判徒勞無功；未來歐美雙方不無可能在TTIP之基礎上，推出新的貿易模式、新的協定型態，或以新的名稱取而代之。英文摘要：The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) negotiated by the United States and the European Union is widely considered as the largest and most ambitious regional free trade agreement in the history of international trade. While the United States and the European Union broadly agree that market access problems traditionally covered in free trade agreements would be the subject of TTIP obligations, they have sharply divergent views regarding how to deal with differences in evolving regulatory policies in each market. Between October 2013 and June 2017, fifteen formal negotiation meetings have been held between representatives of the European Union and the United States. In January 2017 and again in early June 2017, update meetings have been held to review progress between the European Union and the Trump administration. Despite several statements from President Trump and a report by the European Union on the state of play for a final TTIP agreement, the current position on TTIP is unclear. There have been contradictory reports on the Trump administration’s approach to TTIP since January 2017.Therefore, successful conclusion of TTIP is far from certain. This uncertainty does not just stem from the usual political problems but also from the technical difficulties associated with the removal of non-tariff barriers. It has the potential to lead to instability in international trade, a slowing of global economic growth and new divisions in the international community. It does not mean that the TTIP negotiations between the European Union and the United States will be completely wasted. A new trade model, a new type of agreement and a new name for a trade partnership might emerge.起始頁-結束頁：121-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.72(121-148)3篇名：屬靈的或屬世的？論霍布斯的政教關係理論並列篇名：Spiritual or Secular? On Hobbes's Theory of Church-State Relation作者：梁裕康(Yu-kang Liang)關鍵字：霍布斯;馬蒂尼奇;柯林斯;宗教;Thomas Hobbes;A. P. Martinich;Jeffery Collins;Religion期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：71期出版年：2017中文摘要：綜觀霍布斯畢生的著作，可以發現一個明顯卻不太被關注的傾向：有關宗教議題的討論，在霍布斯越後期的作品中，所佔的篇幅越大。如果這個現象代表霍布斯對於宗教議題逐漸重視，那麼我們應該如何來評價這個部分？馬蒂尼奇（A. P. Martinich）認為霍布斯的主權者權力來自上帝，柯林斯（J. Collins）則認為政教關係（church-state relation）才是霍布斯宗教理論的核心。本文將指出，霍布斯的宗教理論是對於其公民科學（civil science）的另一種描述（alternative description），旨在透過宗教語言，讓當時耽溺在宗教紛爭的英格蘭，能夠接受理性推演結論。在這層意義上，馬蒂尼奇與柯林斯只說對了部分的情況。英文摘要：Among his numerous works, Thomas Hobbes’s writings concerning religion receive relatively little attention. This seems an odd ignorance since he was getting more and more attentive to this subject in his later works. In recent years Hobbes’s conception of religion has been taken more seriously for its role in his whole theory. A. P. Martinich holds a deontological interpretation of Hobbes’ theory that the power of the sovereign comes from God’s command. Rather, Jeffery Collins contends that the essence of Hobbes’ idea about religion lies in the church-state relation, which dominates his allegiance to the sovereign. Contrary to these opinions, I argue that Hobbes religion is an alternative description of his civil science. The reason why he was doing so consists in his belief that the pervasive discourse in contemporary England is rather religious than rational. To promote his civil science, it is necessary to wrap his theory with a Christian disguise.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.71(1-40)4篇名：從德國Hartz改革法案反思後歐債危機的歐盟經濟治理並列篇名：The EU's Economic Governance in the Post-Euro Crisis Era and Labour Market Reforms? Reflections on Germany's Hartz Reforms作者：羅至美(Chih-mei Luo)關鍵字：勞動市場改革;Hartz改革法案;歐洲統合;後歐債危機時代;經濟治理;Labour Market Reforms;The Hartz Reforms;European Integration;Post-euro Crisis Era;Economic Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：71期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在從對立性的論點中釐清出德國勞動市場改革－所謂的Hartz改革法案對德國社會與經濟的福祉效果為何，並以5項政策評估標準作為本文的分析架構，再繼而探討此一類型的勞動市場改革是否可以繼財政紀律之後，成為歐盟在後歐債危機時間的經濟治理中，另一項值得效法的德國模式。本文確認Hartz改革法案有效地降低了德國的高失業率，但並根本性地解決其失業問題。同時，此一降低失業率的成效係以低薪部門的成長、全民薪資的負成長、與所得分配不公的惡化為代價。對個人而言，Hartz改革法案所造成的工作貧窮與失業貧窮上升的現象意味著它並非是一福祉提升的政策；對德國經濟而言，則因國內消費的萎縮而不利經濟成長；對德國社會而言，則因所得分配不公的增加與惡化的生活水準意味著社會潛在的不穩定風險。因此，此一類型的勞動市場改革無法成為其他歐盟國家學習效法的模式；亦無法成為歐盟在財政撙節與負利率的後歐債危機時代其經濟治理的解答。本文認為，歐洲統合所面臨的真正危險，不在於高失業問題的挑戰，而在於德國其一體適用簡化思維下所流露出的自滿，以及作為歐元區領導國家，其對歐盟事務所展現出的雙重標準。本文提醒，對勞動市場改革推動的不當處置恐將進一步瓦解民眾對歐洲統合僅存的脆弱信心。英文摘要：This paper was an attempt to clarify the effects of the German labour market reforms, commonly known as the Hartz reforms. Competing arguments were used to identify the welfare implications for German society and economy in order to explore whether or not such labour market reforms might provide another German answer, following fiscal discipline, to the EU's post-euro crisis management. This paper confirmed that the Hartz reforms effectively reduced German unemployment, but they did not fundamentally solve the problem. Moreover, such effects appeared to propagate an increase in the size of the low-paid sector, negative wage growth, and increasing income inequality. The reforms were not welfare-enhancing for individuals because of increased poverty levels in employment and unemployment, which further implied a counter-productive risk for the German economy because of the contraction of domestic consumption, and potential social instability for the German society because of rising inequality and deteriorating living standards. Therefore, the Hartz-style reforms could be neither a desirable model for other EU countries, nor the answer to the EU’s post-euro crisis management in a time of fiscal austerity and negative interest rates. The real danger to European integration, as argued in this paper, was not the challenge from high unemployment, but from Germany’s complacency of a one-size-fits-all thinking and, being the EU’s leading country, its double-standards of the differential nature and contexts of the European unemployment issue from the German one. This paper warned that the mishandling of labour market reforms could result in the collapse of the already fragile public confidence in European integration.起始頁-結束頁：41-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.71(41-74)5篇名：由澎湖山東流亡學生案重估臺灣白色「恐怖」統治並列篇名：Reconsidering White ”Terror” in Taiwan during the Martial Law Period: A Case Study on the Persecution of Yantai Associated High School Students in Penghu作者：楊穎超(Ying-chao Yang);吳秀玲(Hsiu-ling Wu)關鍵字：白色恐怖;山東流亡學生案;威權統治;外來政權;White Terror;Case of Yantai Associated High School Students on the Persecution in Penghu;Authoritarian Resilience;Emigre Regime期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：71期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以文化及時局因素解釋白色恐怖時期政府全面、極端恐怖統治論述與得票率不相符的矛盾。在過去，部份學者對該時期政府及官員描述是儘可能的暴虐與邪惡，人民則心懷怨恨隨時準備反抗；另有部份學者則認為國民黨在當時獲得多數人民支持。本文以白色恐怖時期山東流亡學生案的口述及訪談資料為例，說明政府雖在時局影響下對學生徵兵並製造冤案。但仍保有文化影響及應對時局考慮，於事對受迫學生採行各種彈性措施；其次，從受難者對政府反應亦相當多元來看，文化與時局影響也能解釋雙方共體時艱行為。本文研究發現，過去威權時期政府與人民立場僵固論述有檢討空間。英文摘要：This article explains the contradiction between the description of the brutal rule under the KMT administration and the result of KMT’s vote share during the authoritarian period. In the past, several scholars have claimed that the KMT government and officials were extremely brutal, and hence people in Taiwan resented their new rulers. On the other hand, other scholars believe this government was popular because the majority of Taiwanese people voted for them. This article uses the case of the persecution of the Yantai Associated High School students in Penghu to point out that the KMT government took resilient policies to soothe the rage of survivors after it created this injustice. At the same time, the survivors did not resent the government as some historians have previously claimed. There were different reactions from the survivors and some survivors believed that the tragedy was a result of a few selfish officials, rather than the government. Therefore, the claim that the KMT government’s rule was brutal is something which should be re-examined.起始頁-結束頁：75-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.71(75-112)6篇名：網路統獨的聲量研究：大數據的分析並列篇名：Public Opinion of Unification-Independence on the Web: A Big-Data Analysis作者：劉嘉薇(Jia-wei Liu)關鍵字：統一;獨立;統獨;大數據;網路;Unification;Independence;Unification-independence;Big Data;Internet期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：71期出版年：2017中文摘要：統獨議題是臺灣最重要的政治分歧，本研究透過7,000多個網路頻道大數據，分析網路上的統獨輿論。因為統獨屬於較敏感的政治性議題，網路的匿名性也有助於探知敏感議題的意見表達。網路民意的大數據分析在國內政治學研究仍屬少見，本文也用了一些篇幅探討它的信效度。本研究發現在統獨聲量的分布中，偏向獨立者高於統一。以「對象」而言，「中國」及「臺灣」被提及次數最多。在聲量來源方面，兩岸議題討論聲量中，高達48%集中在社群網站，其中單一網站聲量最多者為PTT。再進一步考慮到統獨議題的聲量情緒分析，平均每出現6篇正面情緒聲量時，同時會出現10篇負面情緒聲量。以上網路大數據的分析不同於民意調查的結果，網路大數據偏向獨立的聲量較高，維持現狀是民調主要的結果，但在網路的聲量很少，可能與網路具有匿名特質有關，讓網民亦在網上表達意見，值得重視。本研究分析網路大數據，而這與以民意調查進行統獨研究時，研究者想方設法希望挖掘「維持現狀者」骨子裡想法的做法異曲同工。不同於民意調查之處在於，民意調查以個體為分析單位，網路大數據分析以聲量為分析單位，兩者獲致不同結果，兩者都是民意，但當政府和政黨疾呼重視網民意見時，網路大數據呈現異於民調的結果，民調試圖理解「全民」的意見，但實際抽樣時可能缺乏年輕人的意見，網路大數據有助於理解「網民」的意見，兩者皆需做為當局執政依據。尤其當網路論壇或社群媒體民意四起時，更彰顯網路大數據分析的價值。英文摘要：The Unification-independence issue is an major political cleavage in Taiwan. This study analyzed the public opinion of unification-independence on the internet through big data. We found that in the distribution of unification-independence sound volume, the number of the independence sound volume was higher than that of unification. In the aspect of the target, ”China” and ”Taiwan” were mentioned the most. In the source of the sound volume, social media was the main source, and PTT is the main channel. Furthermore, the sentiments of sound volume were that there were 6 positive sound volume and 10 negative sound volume at the same time. The above results were not different from the results of the surveys, and it deserves to be taken seriously by the administration. The value of big data analysis is obvious, especially when online forum or social media rise.起始頁-結束頁：113-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.71(113-166)01篇名：東北亞權力結構的變動下南、北韓軍事安全對峙與外交角力（2012∼2016）並列篇名：Military Security Conflict and Diplomatic Rivalry between North and South Korea in the Changes of Power Structure in Northeast Asia from 2012 to 2016作者：河凡植(Bum-Sig Ha)關鍵字：外交角力;北韓核武戰略;軍事安全對峙;南韓北韓政策;新古典現實主義;Diplomatic Rivalry;Military Security Conflict;Neoclassical Realism;North Korea's Nuclear Strategy;South Korea's Policy towards North Korea期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：64期出版年：2017中文摘要：本論文採用新古典現實主義概念，探討2012∼2016年兩韓安全競逐與其對外交政策的影響。從新古典現實主義觀點來看，金正恩的核武戰略與朴槿惠的外交政策皆是受到東北亞國際權力體系的壓力與國內層次的因素而採取。對北韓而言，國際體系的壓力是指東北亞相對權力分布變動，北韓在兩韓安全競爭上處於劣勢狀態，加上南韓保守政府與具超強軍事實力的美國採取敵對北韓政策；國內層次的因素為金正恩採取並進路線，且將其作為國家推動經濟開發與強化防禦力的指針，藉此爭取軍隊與人民的信任與忠誠，凝聚北韓內部的團結，穩定其政權，並為了實現並進路線的目的，展開強硬外交與全方位外交政策。對南韓而言，東北亞國際權力體系的壓力是指北韓強化核武的非常規武器力量威脅南韓國家安全，國內層次的因素為保守派政府在兩韓問題上將安全作為優先考量，對北韓政策強調警惕態度，保持北韓先放棄核武再推動雙方交流的態度，為了施壓北韓，南韓外交戰略從「聯美和中」轉換為「盟美牽中」，引進「薩德」。南、北韓之間的安全對峙，不僅加劇朝鮮半島局勢的不確定性，兩韓的外交角力也受到中美角力與美日外交關係等東北亞國際體系因素的限制，無法取得外交成果。英文摘要：This paper explores the military security rivalry between North and South Korea, and its impact on their diplomatic policies during the period of 2012 ~ 2016. From the perspective of neoclassical realism, the nuclear strategy of Kim Jong-un and the diplomatic policy of Park Geun-hye are in response to the pressure from the power shift in Northeast Asia and their respective domestic concerns. For North Korea, the pressure at the regional level refers to its inferiority in the regional power structure, especially when South Korea's conservative government takes a hostile position and enhances its political and military ties with the U.S. At the domestic level, Kim Jongun adopts the so-called parallel policy roadmap which aims at winning trust and loyalty of the army and the people. For South Korea, North Korea's nuclear strategy threatens security of South Korea, and domestically, the conservatives urge the North Korea to abandon its nuclear strategy prior to opening channels for communication. In response, South Korea has shifted its diplomatic strategy from uniting with the U.S. and China to aligning with the U.S. against China, even by equipping THAAD. In addition, the diplomatic rivalry between China and the U.S. and the complexity of power relations in Northeast Asia have exacerbated the security uncertainty in the Korean Peninsula.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2017.64.012篇名：以西漢前期對胡越之行動檢視攻勢現實主義並列篇名：Examining Offensive Realism by the Early Western Han's Action toward Hu and Yue作者：唐欣偉(Hsin-wei Tang);唐豪駿(Hao-Chun Tang)關鍵字：物質實力;現實主義;道家思想;權力政治;Daoism;Material Capabilities;Power Politics;Realism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：64期出版年：2017中文摘要：西漢前期國力逐漸增長，從韜光養晦轉變成主動對外征伐，可能被視為支持攻勢現實主義的一個例證，從而使人擔心今日中國會否走上同樣道路。本文於檢視西漢案例後，發現其統治者未必如攻勢現實主義者所稱是在尋求物質權力的極大化。西漢曾與相對弱勢的越人和平共存了約九十年。「無為而治」的觀念有助於漢朝政治菁英避免戰爭，而武帝對匈奴開戰也可以用守勢現實主義者尋求安全的理由來解釋。因此西漢的案例未必全然支持攻勢現實主義。英文摘要：As the national capabilities grew during the early period, the Western Han Dynasty transferred its ”hidden light” low-profile policy toward aggressively attacking foreign enemies. It could be considered as a confirmative case to support offensive realism. Some even worry if China would follow the same path today. However, this paper suggests that Han rulers did not necessarily aim at maximizing material power, as offensive realists argue. In contrast, the Western Han peacefully coexisted with weaker Yue people for about ninety years. With the help of the ”laissez-faire” ideology, Han elites managed to avoid war. We argue that the Wu Di's war against Hiongnu could be better explained by the concept of security maximization suggested in the defensive realism. Thus, Western Han's case does not fully confirm offensive realism.起始頁-結束頁：23-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2017.64.023篇名：中國與土耳其新地緣政治經濟關係下之合作並列篇名：Cooperation under China and Turkey's New Geo- Political and Economic Relations作者：吳雪鳳(Sheue-Feng Wu);曾怡仁(Yi-Ren Dzeng)關鍵字：一帶一路;土耳其;中國;地緣戰略;競合策略;China;Co-Opetition;Geopolitical Strategies;One Belt One Road;Turkey期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：64期出版年：2017中文摘要：對於中國「一帶一路」戰略而言，土耳其可成為其陸路及海路兩大戰略的主要連結點，具有連結中亞、中東及歐洲三大地區的地緣樞紐位置，是中國可以逐步擴張在此區域影響力的戰略要點，特別是抗衡美國防患中國崛起的全球戰略。反觀，土耳其近來欲將其國家打造成能源的網絡中心，藉由「中間走廊」計劃，提升為經濟大國並厚實土耳其在歐亞大陸的影響力，進而取得影響國際事務的重要地位。對此，中國的「一帶一路」地緣戰略正是土耳其可以借助之力。然而，縱使中國與土耳其有共同的地緣戰略利益，但由於過去中、土兩國的產業結構過於相似，彼此的關係可說是競爭大於合作。因此，中、土如何在競爭中擴展合作關係，為兩國創造互惠機會，締造雙贏的局面，值得深入研究。本文將以國際關係中的地緣政治學理論結合經濟學與管理學中的競合策略理論視角，來探討中國與土耳其在新地緣政治經濟框架下所進行之合作關係。英文摘要：Located in the geopolitical pivot position among Central Asia, Middle East and Europe, Turkey is a crucial connecting point for China's land and sea routes in the One Belt One Road strategies (OBOR). From Turkey's perspective, cooperation with China can help it to realize the goal of being an energy hub in Eurasia through its Middle Corridor Plan. Nevertheless, even with shared geopolitical and strategic interests, the similar economic structure of China and Turkey have led their relationship to more competition than cooperation. Would it be possible for China and Turkey to expand their cooperative relation within their competition and create a reciprocal opportunity for a win-win situation? This article tries to answer this question through the geopolitical theory of international relations and cooperation-competition theory of economics and management.起始頁-結束頁：41-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2017.64.034篇名：儒家文化、軟權力與霸權抉擇：清初的案例研究（1676∼1735）並列篇名：Confucian Culture, Soft Power, and Hegemony: A Case Study of the Early Qing Dynasty (1676 ~ 1735)作者：楊仕樂(Shih-Yueh Yang)關鍵字：武力使用;建構主義;軟權力;儒家文化;霸權;Confucian Culture;Constructivism;Hegemon;Soft Power;Use of Force期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：64期出版年：2017中文摘要：中國崛起是當代國際關係中深受矚目的焦點，中國在東亞崛起為霸權之後，會怎麼行事？以在北美洲的美國此一霸權為例，霸權的最佳策略會是「軟權力」，透過對武力使用的自我克制，來誘使他國自願的服從。就此而言，在清朝鼎盛的乾隆時期，也有相似的行為模式。不過，這並不是說霸權就必然奉行「軟權力」邏輯，中國在不同朝代的鼎盛時期，雖然都是東亞的霸權，行為模式並不相同。相對於唐朝、元朝，清朝對武力使用的自我克制程度是明顯較高。這樣的差異是否是文化所致？就算物質力量驅使霸權奉行「軟權力」邏輯，清朝所採納的儒家思想是否有助於他順應此一趨力？本文以清初對俄羅斯與準噶爾的戰爭為例進行研究，從中顯示儒家文化確實有這樣的作用。英文摘要：The rise of China has been the focus of contemporary international relations. After China achieves hegemony in East Asia, how will China act? Taking U.S. hegemony in North America as an example, ”soft power” seems to be the best choice for a hegemon. It induces voluntary compliance form other countries through self-restraint on the use of force. Nevertheless, hegemons do not necessarily adopt the ”soft power” logic. In history, China had achieved hegemony in East Asia for many times, but its behavioral patterns were not consistent. Indeed, the heyday of Qing, in contrast to the Tang and Yuan dynasties, had a similar behavioral pattern with the U.S. This article studies China's two wars with Russia and Junggar in the early Qing period and finds that Qing's embrace of Confucian culture contributes to its adoption of the ”soft power” logic.起始頁-結束頁：75-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2017.64.045篇名：外來直接投資與國家安全的權衡：探討影響美國外資政策的政治因素並列篇名：Foreign Direct Investment and National Security: Analyzing the Political Factors of U.S. Foreign Investment Policy作者：邱奕宏(Yi-hung Chiou)關鍵字：外來直接投資;國家安全;跨國公司;美國外資政策;美國投委會;FDI;National Security;Multinational Corporations;US FDI Policy;CFIUS期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：63期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來外來直接投資席捲全球，地主國一方面歡迎外資帶來的正面經濟效益，另一方面也擔心外資對國家安全的危害。本文探討作為政治因素的國家安全對外資政策的影響，並建構外資與國家安全的理論。本文主張一國的外資政策可能因國家安全與相對獲益的思考，而對流入的外資進行國安審查。本文以美國外資政策為例，建構影響外資政策的政治因素之理論與假設，並採取質化途徑分析影響美國外資政策的政治因素。英文摘要：The rise of multinational corporations and the surge of foreign direct investment (FDI) have spread around the world. With the prevalence of FDI, many controversial investment cases have triggered national security concerns. This paper explores theoretical linkages between FDI and national security, while investigating political factors behind the U.S. foreign investment policy. This paper argues that due to consideration of national security and relative gains, a state is likely to conduct national security reviews toward foreign investments. By adopting a qualitative approach, this paper examines the case of U.S. FDI policy. The findings suggest that the U.S. FDI policy has been driven by political factors and gradually moved toward the direction of national security.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2017.63.016篇名：英國脫歐與英歐貿易關係之未來並列篇名：Brexit and the Future of the UK-EU Trade Relations作者：洪德欽(Der-Chin Horng)關鍵字：《歐洲聯盟條約》第50 條;英國脫歐;歐盟;人員自由流動;WTO-plus 模式;Article 50 TEU;Brexit;European Union;Free Movement of Persons;WTO-Plus Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：63期出版年：2017中文摘要：英國於2016 年6 月23 日舉行脫歐公投，脫歐陣營以51.9% 得票率勝出，震驚世界。英國於1973 年1 月1 日加入歐盟，因為無法分享法國與德國在歐盟的領導權，且一向抗拒移轉更多主權給歐盟，反對歐盟朝向政治同盟方向發展，英國內部因此一直存有強烈疑歐聲音以及脫歐要求。脫歐公投已引發英鎊重跌，衍生更多問題及不確定性。英國於2017 年3 月29 日正式啟動《歐洲聯盟條約》第50 條的脫歐程序。英國與歐盟未來貿易關係，何去何從，是合作或對抗，在攸關英國與歐盟的興衰以及西方團結。英國脫歐乃是一件重大國際事件，具有深遠的影響。本文將從法律方法與國際政治經濟學觀點，研究英國脫歐有哪些原因及爭議？帶來哪些影響？英國與歐盟如何進行脫歐談判？又有哪些模式用以架構雙方新的貿易關係？本文建議WTO-plus FTA 得做為英歐未來貿易合作關係之一項最佳模式。英文摘要：The UK has been a member of the European Union (EU) since 1973. However, a national referendum, held on 23 June 2016, resulted in a 51.9% vote to exit the EU. The Brexit referendum has brought a strong shock and impacts on both the UK and the EU, and it also poses a high uncertainty for the UK-EU trade relationship in the future. The Brexit has emerged as an important issue that needed to have a deep study. Accordingly, this paper will examine the following core issues: What are the causes of Brexit? How to trigger Article 50 procedure? What are the impacts of Brexit on the pound sterling, British economy, immigration, etc.? What are the models for the future trade UK-EU relations? What lessons for the EU and its future reforms? In general, the Brexit marks a backward step of European integration, and will be undertaken with a series difficult negotiations and adjustments by both UK and the EU in the coming years. It is expected that the UK and the EU will develop a new cooperative model for their future trade relationship. This paper proposes the WTO-plus FTA as one of the best options for the future UK-EU trade cooperation relations.起始頁-結束頁：33-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2017.63.027篇名：朝貢體系下中小國家的避險行為：朝鮮半島的兩個歷史案例初探並列篇名：Hedging in the Tributary System: Case Studies of the Korean Peninsula作者：張登及(Simon Teng-Chi Chang);金世勛(Sehun Kim)關鍵字：朝貢體系;避險;朝鮮半島;中韓關係;國際關係理論;Tribute System;Hedging;Korean Peninsula;Sino-Korean Relations International Relations Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：63期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究迴異於以往國際關係理論與國關史一般關注大國關係的視角，選擇從不對稱關係中的小國出發，檢討小國面對兩個以上大國時的避險行為，並同時關注避險考慮背後的物質性因素與非物質性因素的作用。本研究挑選了高麗與遼國關係 (993 ~ 1019) 和朝鮮與後金關係 (1608 ~ 1636) 兩個案例，還是因為這兩組不對稱關係中，存在著顯著的文化認同差異。這個非物質性因素，顯然對半島方面的中小國家避險決策產生了重要的影響。研究的兩個案例顯示，半島國家在面臨周邊權力變化及新強權崛起時，當事國會首先考慮物質實力對比。如果新強權的侵略意圖明顯及物質能力強大，該國就只能採取完全制衡或完全扈從，沒有避險可談。如果新興強權的侵略意圖模糊，半島國家就會採取避險。一旦採取避險，決策過程與政策效果必然同時受到物質實力與理念因素的共同影響。非物質性因素是避險的「構成性」因素。特別是當朝貢體系的名分觀念仍是東亞國際關係史中重要的世界觀和秩序組織原理，且被中國週邊不同程度地社會化和共享，這樣的制度就會造成路徑依賴，對避險的成效發揮決定性作用。英文摘要：In the field of International Relations, hedging strategy means that a state, when it faces a sudden emergence of rising power, chooses a flexible diplomatic strategy in order to maximize its interest or to minimize its loss. This research argues that hedging strategy can be influenced by both of material and non-material factors, although hedging is essentially a realist concept. According to realism, when a state faces the emergence of a rising power, it will choose either bandwagoning or balancing. However, as we have witnessed, states actually have wider spectrum of choices, especially when the rising power's capability and intention of revisionism (or invasion) is not clear. Therefore, this research aims at analyzing the process of hedging strategy and proving how material and non-material factors influence hedging's result. The historical cases of Goryeo-Liao and Chosun-Later Jin period will be analyzed as two asymmetric relations. Confucianism will be studied as non-material factors embedded in Goryeo and Chosun's foreign policy. When ancient dynasties of Korea adopted hedging strategy, the motivation is based on material power. However, nonmaterial factors as shared norm of Confucianism with China also influenced the efficiency of hedging, sometimes even led the policy to failure. Therefore, the research illustrates how hedging strategy is adopted against emerging power such as the two steppe regimes of Liao and Later Jin. It demonstrates the efficiency of material and non-material factors in the process of Korea's hedging decision.起始頁-結束頁：63-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.2017.63.0301篇名：編者言作者：林樹聲期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷S期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會2篇名：地方本位環境教育課程的實踐──以東臺灣一個原住民小學為例並列篇名：The Implementation of a Place-Based Environmental Education Course at an Indigenous Elementary School in Eastern Taiwan作者：林佳靜(Chia-Ching Lin);許世璋(Shih-Jang Hsu)關鍵字：地方依附;地方意義;情感涉入;環境行動;環境教育;Place Attachment;Place Meaning;Emotional Involvement;Environmental Action;Environmental Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探討一個臺灣東部原住民小學的地方本位環境教育課程，於教學歷程中有哪些關鍵性的因素，能引發學生的地方依附與意義、提升環境責任感，並促進對在地環境的關懷與行動。本課程結合地方教育與環境行動的理念，並整合地方體驗與議題探索、藝術媒介、批判對話、及社區支持網絡等教學策略。本研究的對象為一所東部原住民小學的12位6年級學生，研究方法採取質性研究取徑，透過研究者課堂參與觀察及省思札記、教師討論紀錄、學生訪談、學生的學習單與繪圖作品等多元資料的蒐集，並採用Argyris, Putnam與Smith (1985／夏林清譯，2000)所提推論階梯的概念(the ladder of inference)來分析資料，以瞭解學生在學習過程中情意與行動的改變。研究結果顯示，本課程能提升學生對地方環境的覺知與敏感度、引發學生對地方情感的涉入與認同、發展地方意義與價值、並能有效地提升學生的能力感(empowerment)，進而產生環境行動。最後，根據本研究結果，對於未來地方本位環境教育課程的發展與教學策略提出建議。英文摘要：This study investigated what the major causes were for promoting students' place attachment, place meaning, environmental responsibility, and environmental action for the community in the implementation of a place-based environmental education course at an indigenous elementary school in eastern Taiwan. The environmental education course integrated the idea of place-based education with environmental action through the teaching strategies such as place-based experiential activities, issue investigation, art media, critical discussions, and community-supported network. The subjects of the study were twelve 6th graders. The research design of the study adopted qualitative approach. To assess the effect of learning process on students' affective domain and environmental action, qualitative data were collected through participant observations, reflective thinking, discussions, students' works, and interviews. The Ladder of Inference developed by Argyris, Putnam, and Smith (2000) was used to analyze data. The results indicated that the course can help students improve environmental awareness and sensitivity, increase students' place identification and emotional involvement for the place, develop place meaning and values, and promote action competence and environmental action. Finally, implications were given for future place-based environmental education program development and teaching strategies.起始頁-結束頁：301-330資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2504.013篇名：臺灣四年級與八年級學生於TIMSS 2011試題中建模能力之比較並列篇名：Comparing Taiwanese Grade 4 and Grade 8 Students' Modeling Ability in TIMSS 2011 Items作者：林靜雯(Jing-Wen Lin);余阮清(Ruan-Ching Yu)關鍵字：TIMSS 2011;建模能力分析指標TIMSS修正版;建模實務評量;學習進程;TIMSS 2011;Revised Modeling Ability Analytic Index (MAAI-T);Modeling Practice Assessment;Learning Progression期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：有鑒於目前全面性探討學生建模實務評量之不足，本研究採用「建模能力分析指標」國際數學與科學教育成就趨勢調查(Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, TIMSS)修正版，分析TIMSS 2011四、八年級科學試題以瞭解其中適合檢測建模能力之試題於「建模歷程」與「建模階層」之分布情形，而後再探討臺灣四、八年級學生於此測驗中建模能力之表現。結果發現：一、TIMSS 2011四、八年級試題皆集中於「模型選擇」與「模型分析與應用」兩階段；四年級試題於建模階層分布尚稱平均，八年級則集中於階層二及三。二、在「模型選擇」方面，臺灣四年級學生可掌握至階層二「多因素之選擇」，八年級學生則進展到階層三「簡單關係的選擇」；在「模型分析與應用」方面，四年級和八年級學生皆可掌握至階層三「簡單關係的應用」，但八年級學生可處理較多因素及較為抽象、微觀之變數。研究建議若運用TIMSS試題作為建模實務評量，尚需補充「模型建立」、「效化」及「調度」階段之試題，方能檢測學生各面向的建模能力。設計以建模為基礎之課程時，在「模型選擇」及「模型分析與應用」兩階段可參考本研究之結果發展學習進程。英文摘要：Due to the scantiness of the whole perspectives of the assessments of modeling practices, this study adopted the Revised Modeling Ability Analytic Index (MAAI-T), to analyze the distribution of stages of modeling process and levels of modeling ability in the appropriate 4th and 8th TIMSS items, then exploring Taiwanese fourth and eighth grade students' performance of modeling ability in this assessment. The results indicate: 1. The fourth and eighth grade items in TIMSS 2011 mainly focus on the stages of ”model selection” and ”model analysis and application.” The items equally distributed in each level of modeling ability in fourth grade, but mainly focus on level 2 and 3 in eighth grade. 2. In the stage of model selection, the fourth grade students in Taiwan could handle multiple factors (level 2); the eighth grade students could expand to operate simple relationships (level 3). In the stage of model analysis and application, both fourth and eighth grade students could handle simple relationships (level 3), but eighth grade students could deal with more multiple factors, abstract and microscope variables. This study suggests that using TIMSS items as modeling practice assessments still requires supplementing the items to model construction, validation and deployment stages in order to explore students' performances in whole modeling process. However, designing the modeling-based curriculum, educators can establish learning progression of modeling ability by referencing to the stages of model selection and model analysis and application in the study.起始頁-結束頁：331-354資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2504.024篇名：科學探究與實作課程的發展、實施與評量：以實驗室中的科學論證為核心之研究並列篇名：The Development, Implementation and Assessment of a Scientific Inquiry and Practice Curriculum: The Scientific Argumentation in the Laboratory作者：張珮珊(Pei-Shan Chang);賴吉永(Chi-Yung Lai);溫媺純(Meichun Lydia Wen)關鍵字：科學探究與實作課程;科學寫作;科學論證;Scientific Inquiry and Practice Curriculum;Science Writing;Scientific Argumentation期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究目的為發展一符應核心素養之科學探究與實作課程，並探討學生科學論證與科學概念的學習成效。本課程以酵素為主題，參照十二年國教自然領綱(草案)的學習內容，藉逆向課程設計含實驗任務的四大探究單元，期望學生透過探究實作來探索知識的建構、理解寫作在知識轉化與科學社群溝通的重要性，故以啟發式科學寫作(Science Writing Heuristics, SWH)協助學生運用「酵素概念暨科學論證寫作簿」發展基於證據的科學論證。本研究採單組前、後測(成就測驗)設計，藉「酵素概念成就測驗」瞭解學生科學概念理解情形，並以「勾選式論證寫作評分表」評量其論證表現，再藉逐步迴歸分析來預測論證寫作品質的最佳指標，以期提升論證教學與評量之效益。研究發現，18位高中生的酵素概念學習顯著進步(p ＜ .001)，且四次科學論證寫作表現良好，皆達優良論證寫作標準。然而，學生論證表現存在顯著的個別差異。低論證表現組學生的各論證向度表現受探究任務影響大，但整體而言，在「問題」、「主張」向度均有進步，且概念理解表現與高論證表現組學生相當。此外，預測各次論證寫作品質的最佳指標有「主張─證據關係」、「主張」與「證據」，然整體寫作品質的最佳預測指標仍為「證據」。最後根據研究發現，提出教學與研究建議。英文摘要：The aims of this study were to develop a scientific inquiry and practice curriculum corresponding with core literacy, and to investigate students' conceptual learning and performance of scientific argumentation in laboratory contexts. Based on Grade 1-12 Curriculum Guidelines for Nature Science Discipline, we developed the curriculum, which included four inquiry enzyme experiments through Backward Design. The learning outcome we expected was that students could explore the construction of knowledge through practicing and understanding the importance of writing in the scientific community. Therefore, we employed the Science Writing Heuristic approach to guide students' scientific argumentation in the ”Enzyme Concept & Scientific Argumentation Writing Journal.” Achievement test and check-type argumentative writing evaluation sheets were adopted to evaluate the results. Step-wise multiple regression analyses were conducted to determine important argument components. The results indicated that 18 participants from a senior high school in Southern Taiwan did excellently on the conceptual achievement test (p ＜ .001) and written argumentation, which suggested that this curriculum could help students develop their scientific concepts and scientific argumentation. However, there were distinct differences between individuals' argumentative performances. Compared to the stable performance across written argumentation of high argumentation performance group, the performance of low argumentation group was affected by the inquiry tasks. But overall, the ”question,” ”claim” argument components and the concepts of enzyme were improved in low performance group. Furthermore, the predictive components of argumentative writing quality were ”claim-evidence relationship,” ”claim,” and ”evidence.” Taken as a whole, the ”evidence” component was the most important predictor for overall argumentative writing. Last, we provided teaching and research suggestions according to our results.起始頁-結束頁：355-389資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2504.035篇名：Exploring University Students' Group and Individual Socioscientific Decision Making with Web-Based Instruction並列篇名：探討大學生在社會性科學議題情境中個人與集體決策能力之展現作者：方素琦(Su-Chi Fang);許瑛玿(Ying-Shao Hsu)關鍵字：Decision Making;Socioscientific Issues;Web-Based Learning Environments;決策能力;社會性科學議題;線上學習環境期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：In this study, we designed a web-based learning environment about water resources to support students' socioscientific decision making. The purposes of the study were to analyze and compare undergraduate students' interdisciplinary thinking and decision making at the individual and collective levels. Individual students first completed the web-based learning unit at home, in which they needed to decide on a suitable location for building a dam. Then, they worked in groups, discussing, debating, and negotiating to reach a group decision. Individual interdisciplinary thinking and decision making were recorded by the web-based platform. Group discussions were audio- and video-taped. Interdisciplinary thinking was analyzed qualitatively based on the SEE-SEP framework. Decision-making approaches were examined and categorized into different proficiency levels. The results show that, compared to individual decision making, the students used more moral or ethical considerations and made more links to personal experiences when engaged in group discussion. Despite wider aspects being considered at the group level, some facets such as their beliefs, values, and experiences regarding science were not adopted in the arguments at either the individual or the group level. Although a few students were able to use compensatory strategies when making individual decisions, none of the groups employed compensatory strategies to reach a group decision. The comparison between individual and collective levels manifests that group discussions can facilitate interdisciplinary thinking. The deficiencies in the group decision making identified in the study such as lack of deep reflection and not using a refined decision-making strategy underscore the need to provide scaffolds for collective decision making.英文摘要：本研究根據決策框架發展以水資源為主題的線上教學模組以培養大學生社會性科學議題個人和集體決策能力。本研旨在探究並比較大學生在社會性科學議題中「個人」與「小組」層次之間多面向思考以及應用決策策略的異同。學生個別完成水資源線上教學模組，根據教學情境中提供的資料進行思考判斷，並決定一個合適的地點建水庫。課堂中學生先分組進行討論，最後需達成共識完成一個集體的決策。本研究中社會性科學議題多面向思考依據SEE-SEP架構進行質性分析，決策能力則依文獻分成不同精熟程度。研究發現，學生在小組討論中較常使用道德方面的論述並連結個人的經驗於論點中。部分學生進行個別決策時可展現較高層次的決策能力。然而，小組集體決策時缺乏系統性優缺點比較，也未使用較高層次的決策方法。本研究結果所指出小組決策過程中的不足恰反應了教學引導在提升小組決策能力的重要性。建議未來社會性科學議題教學可提供小組進行討論和集體決策的結構性教學框架，以提升學生集體決策能力與決策品質。起始頁-結束頁：391-412資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2504.046篇名：高中學生決策能力與氣候變遷調適素養改變之教學研究並列篇名：A Teaching Research on Improvements of Eleventh Graders' Decision-Making Abilities and Climate Change Adaptability Literacy作者：林昇邦(Sheng-Pang Lin);許瑛玿(Ying-Shao Hsu)關鍵字：決策能力;社會性科學議題;氣候變遷調適素養;Decision-Making;Socio-Scientific Issues;Climate Change Adaptability Literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷S期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究設計氣候變遷調適為主軸的社會性科學議題課程，並探討教學前、後，學生決策能力(辨識兩難問題、區別差異、形成判準、運用策略進行權衡、做出決定並提出缺點)與氣候變遷調適素養(調適認知、調適態度、調適行動力)的表現與變化情形。本研究採單組前後測設計，以便利取樣選取桃園市某高中二年級共37位學生作為研究樣本，進行兩週共四節課的教學實施(課程名稱：海岸線的未來)。研究蒐集學生的「學習單、情境式決策能力試題、氣候變遷調適素養問卷前、後測」等資料，利用描述性統計、無母數檢定法的魏氏考驗、U考驗進行分析。結果發現：教學與課程對於提升學生整體決策能力有顯著幫助，尤其在「形成判準、運用策略進行權衡、做出決定並提出缺點」等三種能力的進步最為明顯；對於提升學生整體「氣候變遷調適素養」(包含調適認知、調適態度與調適行動力)也有顯著幫助；學生傾向從「生態保育」的觀點進行方案的抉擇，其次為「安全功能性」與「社會經濟」。英文摘要：This study aims to explore students' improvements in decision-making abilities (i.e., identifying controversies and differentiation, generating criteria, using strategies to compare pros and cons, making and evaluating decisions), and climate change adaptability literacy (i.e., cognition, attitude and action) after socio-scientific issues instruction. The one-group pretest-posttest design was adopted with a technique of convenient sampling (37 sophomore students from a senior high school in Taoyuan City) in the study. The data including the pre- and post- tests of decision-making ability, questionnaire of climate change adaptability literacy and worksheets were collected and analyzed with nonparametric statistics. The results showed that the students' overall decision-making ability was improved significantly after socio-scientific issues instruction; the students' overall climate change adaptability literacy was improved significantly after socio-scientific issues instruction; most of the students intended to make their decisions from the ”ecological protection” view.起始頁-結束頁：413-437資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.25S.017篇名：社會性科學議題新聞的框架分析－以基因改造新聞為例並列篇名：The Framing Analysis of SSI News-Examples of Gene-Modification News作者：陳映均(Ying-Chun Chen);李松濤(Sung-Tao Lee)關鍵字：科學新聞;框架分析;框架包裹;基改新聞;新聞框架;Science News;Frame Analysis;Frame Package;Genetic-Modified News;News Frames期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷S期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探討國內主要新聞媒體在報導社會性科學議題時，所採用的新聞框架類型、論述模式與框架包裹。研究以基因改造(基改)新聞文本為對象，採內容和框架分析途徑，分析聯合報自2012年至2016年的基因改造新聞，共107篇。研究發現：在「新聞框架與子框架」方面，基因改造新聞報導採用「經濟、公共課責、衝突、採取策略、社會發展、科學／科技不確定性、現況、失控的科學和風險」等九種框架類型，且於「經濟、公共課責、衝突、採取策略、社會發展和失控的科學」等六種框架類目之下，都可以細分出二至三項子框架。其中，「公共課責」是基改新聞中最常出現的框架類型，佔總框架數的20.9%。在此框架之下，子框架以「政府」的百分比最高，佔42.0%。在框架出現趨勢方面，「公共課責、採取策略、經濟」框架數量有明顯上升的趨勢，「失控的科學」則呈現下降趨勢，其他框架類別則會因該年發生的重大事件而有不同的趨勢；在論述模式與框架包裹方面，可歸納出10種論述模式，顯示基改新聞在框架的使用上具有結構性與順序性。此外，框架論述模式經整合為核心框架後，再衍伸為「進步、問題解決、危害」等三項框架包裹，其百分比依序為24.3%、60.7%、15.0%。英文摘要：Based on the premises that Socio-Scientific Issues (SSI) are part of the appropriate contexts for scientific literacy presentations and framing is related to the process of scientific information descripted in science news, the purpose of this study is to explore the frames and discourse patterns regarding genetic-modified (GM) science news in Taiwan. The popular local news text in Taiwan, United Daily News (UDN) were selected for investigation and the total number of collected articles by the keyword ”GM” searching during 2012 to 2016 was 107. A qualitative approach was adopted and the literature established frames were used to conduct the content and framing analysis. The results suggest that there are nine frame categories used in Taiwan’s genetically modified news, including ”economic,” ”public accountability,” ”conflict,” ”strategy,” ”social progress,” ”scientific/ technological uncertainty,” ”commonness,” ”runaway science,” ”risk,” and some new sub-frames were inductively constructed. And, ”public accountability” is the most used frame in GM science news (20.87%) in which the government perspective is much higher (42%) than research and enterprise; followed by the frames of economy (15.7%), strategy (15.5%) and conflict (15.29%). In the trend, the number of the frames ”public accountabilit,” ”strategy,” and ”economic” has increased from 2012 to 2016, but the frame ”runaway science” has become lower. In the discussion pattern and the frame package, the results suggest that there are 10 types of discussion pattern in the GM science news. The survey results indicate that within the discourse pattern, there are three frame packages in GM news, including progress (25%), problem solving (52%) and harm (16%).起始頁-結束頁：439-462資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.25S.028篇名：大學生對人工生殖科技的接受度與觀點並列篇名：A Study on Undergraduates' Acceptance and Perspectives of in Vitro Fertilization作者：林秀玉(Show-Yu Lin);辛旻靜(Ming-Chin Hsin)關鍵字：人工生殖科技;大學生;社會性科學議題;接受度;觀點;In Vitro Fertilization;Undergraduate;Socio-Scientific Issues;Acceptance;Perspective期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷S期出版年：2017中文摘要：人工生殖科技是一項全球性的社會性科學議題，可能因不同地區的文化傳統、社會氛圍等因素，發展不同的在地性公民意見。由於醫療使用人工生殖科技日漸成熟與普及，現代人可以在更多樣化的生殖條件下決定如何使用人工生殖科技，是故本研究探討大學生對不同精卵來源授精所組成之四種人工生殖科技脈絡的接受度與觀點。本研究以自行發展「人工生殖科技脈絡接受度與觀點」問卷為研究工具，採便利取樣對非主修科學大學生進行調查，透過紮根理論建立分析架構，再以描述性統計、ANOVA等方法分析資料，瞭解研究對象對不同人工生殖科技脈絡的接受度、背後的觀點和差異。研究主要發現包括：一、參與者對四種不同精卵來源之人工生殖科技脈絡的接受度有顯著差異，但沒有性別差異；二、參與者的觀點有生物性的考量也有非生物性的考量，且呈現不同的立場。本文從「父權文化轉為兩性平權、想法中缺乏表達倫理、宗教和風險等觀點、對人工生殖科技的立場」等三方面進行討論，最後對未來科學教育研究和實務推動等方面提出建議。英文摘要：In vitro fertilization (IVFs) is a global socio-scientific issue and may lead to different public forum and policy-making due to various cultures and traditions locally. Nowadays, people are given more opportunities and options regarding assisted reproductive issues as IVFs technologies have been advanced. Thus, this study aims to investigate undergraduates' acceptance and perspectives of IVFs as socio-scientific issues in the four contexts with spouse's or donor's gametes. Self-developed questionnaire survey was conducted with undergraduate students for their acceptance and perspectives regarding IVFs contexts followed by a statements survey. Grounded theory, descriptive, rubric, and content analysis were used for data analysis. The main findings included: first, the degree of acceptance located differently in the four contexts without gender differences. Second, both biological and non-biological concerns were considered. Content analysis suggested that participants revealed various perspectives on concerns and positions. Discussions addressed patriarchal culture to gender equity, a deficiency on ethic, religion and risk concerns, and a contrary presentation of their positions. This study suggests that IVFs contexts should be addressed for related issues and education.起始頁-結束頁：463-484資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.25S.039篇名：社會性科學議題情境下論證式探究教學與課程對七年級學生科學學習成就、論證能力和科學素養之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Argumentation-Based Inquiry Instruction and Course in Socio-Scientific Context on 7th Grade Students' Achievements, Argumentation Skills and Scientific Literacy作者：楊景盛(Ching-Sheng Yang);董曜瑜(Yao-Yu Tung);陳秀溶(Shiou-Rung Chen);王國華(Kuo-Hua Wang)關鍵字：社會性科學議題;科學素養;科學學習成就;論證式探究;論證能力;Socio-Scientific Issues;Scientific Literacy;Achievements;Argumentation-Based Inquiry;Argumentation Skills期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷S期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究針對「人類與環境」單元，以社會性科學議題「國光石化是否興建」為主題，發展論證式探究課程，並評估此課程之教學對七年級學生在科學學業成就、論證能力與科學素養上的影響。研究採用準實驗研究設計，對象為彰化地區某國中兩班七年級學生，其中實驗組(N = 30)接受「論證式探究課程」之教學，控制組(N = 35)則接受傳統講述教學。教學介入持續兩週、共3節課。教學前、後，兩組學生分別接受科學學習成就測驗和科學素養評量的施測，而論證能力問卷由於時間限制僅實施後測。研究結果顯示：實驗組在科學學習成就、論證能力和科學素養都顯著優於控制組(p ＜ .01)。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to develop an argumentation-based Inquiry instruction and course in Socio-Scientific Issue (SSI)-”KouKuang Petrochemical Project,” and to assess its effectiveness on students' scientific learning achievements, argumentation skills and scientific literacy. The study adopted a quasi-experimental design. The research samples were 7th grade students in a junior high school in Changhua. The experimental group (N = 30) received the argumentation-based inquiry instruction and course with SSI, and the control group (N = 35) received traditional instruction. The intervention with 3 sessions lasted for 2 weeks. Each group subsequently completed pre- and post- achievement test and scientific literacy assessment. Because of the time limitation, argument skill questionnaire was administered without pretest. The result showed that the experimental group significantly outperformed the control group in students' achievements, argumentation skills and scientific literacy (p ＜ .01).起始頁-結束頁：485-500資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.25S.0410篇名：探究原住民與非原住民國中生生物演化概念之世界觀並列篇名：Exploring the Worldviews of Aboriginal and Non-Aboriginal Students on the Concept of Evolution at Junior High School Level作者：韋寧均(Ning-Chun Wei);林樹聲(Shu-Sheng Lin)關鍵字：生物演化概念;世界觀;多元文化科學教育;原住民學生;國中生;Evolution;Worldview;Multicultural Science Education;Aboriginal Students;Junior High School Students期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究藉由生物演化概念，探究原住民與非原住民學生的世界觀類型，以及影響其演化世界觀形成的因素。研究者利用「生物演化概念之世界觀問卷」，調查原住民與非原住民學生各98人，並訪談其中各15位學生。資料經分析和歸納後的結果顯示：在「物種起源」、「物種改變」向度上，原住民與非原住民學生呈現顯著不同的世界觀分布(p ＜.05)。物種起源方面，原住民學生選擇以「神創論」解釋的百分比遠高於非原住民；物種改變方面，原住民學生傾向選擇「無目的論」的世界觀做解釋，非原住民則傾向選擇「目的論」的世界觀來說明；兩群學生世界觀類型之人數分布也存在著顯著差異(p ＜ .05)，特別是在「目的論」的類型上，原住民學生少於非原住民學生；而兩群學生皆以混合型世界觀的人數最多；宗教信仰、來自書籍和網路的訊息，在學生生物演化概念世界觀的建構上扮演重要角色。文末從世界觀的角度，對生物演化概念的教與學、師資培育提出相關建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the aboriginal and non-aboriginal students’ worldview types and the factors influencing their worldview formation through understanding their concepts of evolution. Data consisted of junior high school students’ responses to a questionnaire (N = 196) and individual interviews (N = 30). The findings revealed that the percentage of aboriginal students explaining the origin of species in terms of creationism was significantly higher than non-aboriginal students. For the variation of species, the aboriginal students tended to illustrate it in terms of the non-teleology; non-aboriginal students inclined to use teleology to interpret it. There was a statistically significant difference in the worldview types between two groups of students; non-aboriginal students who held teleology were many more than aboriginal students. Moreover, most of the aboriginal and non-aboriginal students had the mixed-type worldview. Religious beliefs and the information from books and websites played important roles in the students’ worldview formation about biological evolution. Implications based on worldview aspects for teaching and learning the concepts of evolution, and science teacher education were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：197-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2503.0111篇名：教科書中科學知識架構之內容分析－以生殖與遺傳單元為例並列篇名：The Content Analysis of the Science Knowledge Framework in Textbooks: An Example of Reproduction and Heredity Units作者：李明玲(Ming-Ling Lee);溫媺純(Meichun Lydia Wen)關鍵字：巨觀結構;有意義的學習;科學知識架構;科學教科書;前導組體;Macrostructure;Meaningful Learning;Science Knowledge Framework;Science Textbook;Advanced Organizer期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：由於文本內的知識架構會影響學習成果，所以當教科書提供組織良好的科學知識架構時，則能促進學生學習。因此，確認教科書內這類架構是否具有完善的組織，是一件重要的任務。本研究首先根據巨觀結構理論、有意義學習理論(即與前導組體有關理論)，以及與學習主題有序排列觀點有關理論，發展出檢驗科學知識架構的準則。隨後研究者針對國中三版本科學教科書(A、B與C)中的生殖與遺傳學習範圍，進行內容分析。本研究發現三個版本的教科書：一、都具有明顯的巨觀結構；二、三版本教科書具有中等連結強度的外顯橫向架構；以及三、三版本教科書具有部分組織的內隱橫向結構。亦即三版本國中生物教科書內的科學知識架構之橫向結構組織雖然需要增強，但是仍提供明顯的縱向架構。所以，本研究認為教師在依賴科學教科書為主要教材，並且運用其內既有科學知識架構時，可以參照巨觀結構理論以及有意義學習理論等組織觀點，重新檢驗與建立適當的科學知識架構。英文摘要：Given the impact of science knowledge framework on learning outcomes, it would benefit students' science learning while textbooks could provide a well-organized framework. Therefore, it is an important task to examine whether science textbooks comprise this well-organized framework or not. Firstly, the current study developed the rubrics to examine the science knowledge framework in science textbooks depending on theories about the macrostructures, meaningful learning theories (i.e. the advanced organizer), and theories regarding learning topic sequence. Next, we conducted a content analysis of reproduction and heredity units in junior high school science textbooks (i.e. three books from A, B, and C Publishers). The findings of our study showed: 1. these textbooks display the explicit macrostructures; 2. these textbooks held explicit horizontal structures with a median degree of linkage; 3. these textbooks exhibited some degree of the organization in terms of implicit horizontal structures. Namely, the framework of three biology textbooks comprised somehow insufficient organized vertical and horizontal structures. Therefore, this study suggests that teachers should examine and modify the science knowledge framework in textbooks depending on theories about the macrostructures and the meaningful learning while they rely on textbooks and subsequently use the framework.起始頁-結束頁：219-243資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2503.0212篇名：以地方為基礎之文化融入科學教育課程研究－以泰雅族和賽德克族傳統編織文化為例並列篇名：An Investigation of Place-Based Culture Integrated into Science Education Curriculum - An Example of Atayal and Seediq Knitting Culture作者：洪萱芳(Hsuan-Fang Hung);姚宗威(Tsung-Wei Yao);林淑芬(Su-Fen Lin);顏瓊芬(Chiung-Fen Yen)關鍵字：文化中介者;以地方為基礎的教育;原住民科學教育;編織文化;賽德克族;Cultural Broker;Place-Based Education;Indigenous Science Education;Knitting Culture;Seediq期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以地方為基礎的教育理論為課程架構，以賽德克族傳統織布文化為主題，設計原住民編織教學模組，建構以原住民文化為主體之教育模式。從模組設計、發展和實施過程中，瞭解融入在地文化，結合社區資源對於原住民學生在科學學習過程是否有所幫助。研究對象主要為13名國小六年級學童，教學模組共包含16堂課，蒐集資料包含學習成就測驗前後測資料、課程設計討論紀錄、教學影帶、課室觀察資料、學生學習紀錄、學生課後訪談、耆老訪談等。研究結果發現，原住民教師扮演了文化中介者的關鍵角色，教師對於原住民文化和西方科學知識的熟悉和瞭解，透過生活經驗的連結，可充分協助學生跨越文化邊界，也讓學習經驗較為正向。耆老和社區人士參與課程實施，清楚呈現原住民教學和目前學校教學方式有所差異，而原住民學生亦傾向體驗實作方式來學習。學生在學習成效方面，在知識層面，達到符合教學目標的學習成效，但在情意部分，學生雖對自己的原住民文化表現出高度認同和信心，也願意傳承編織文化，但談論到是否會將編織文化放入正式課程，部分學童卻產生猶疑，由此可觀察出學生仍對原住民文化是否能夠呈現於學校課程有所疑慮，這將會是未來進一步研究的重要焦點。英文摘要：This research adopted place-based education as the curriculum framework and used Seediq traditional knitting culture as the main topic to develop indigenous science education modules. The core concept of the module is taking the culture of indigenous students into the consideration of curriculum design. An investigation was conducted to understand whether indigenous culture inclusive curriculum and connecting with the community resources can help students to have better learning effectiveness in science learning. Research participants included 13 sixth graders in an elementary school located in Nantou, and the teaching modules included 16 classes. Data collection included pre- and post-learning achievement outcomes, curriculum design discussion records, class observations, student works, after-class interviews with students, and interviews with elders. Research found that indigenous teachers who were familiar with two cultures played a vital role in assisting students with cultural border crossing from indigenous culture to western science, and helping students to have more positive learning experiences at school. The participation of elders and community members from the tribe clearly presented that traditional indigenous teaching methods differed greatly from what is currently done at school, and students preferred to learn by doing. In the process of integrating indigenous culture into curriculum design, it is critical to take traditional indigenous teaching style into consideration. Therefore, the activities of learning by doing or experiential instruction should be a critical part of the class. Research also found that students have achieved learning goals at the end of the class, and shown a high degree of cultural identity. However, some students reported that they would not like indigenous culture based curriculum integrated into school curriculum. This has led to more questions about how students perceive science curriculum. This will be an important question to research in the future.起始頁-結束頁：245-276資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2503.0313篇名：開放式與結構式探究實驗活動對國小學生教室環境感知的影響並列篇名：Influence of Open and Structured Inquiry Instructions on Elementary School Students Perceptions of Classroom Environment作者：陳淑苾(Shu-Bi Chen);張文華(Wen-Hua Chang);陳素芬(Sufen Chen)關鍵字：小學科學教育;探究學習;教室環境;實驗活動;Elementary Science;Inquiry;Classroom Environment;Laboratory Activity期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：學生對教室環境的感知常會影響學生的參與情形，也可能因而影響其學習成果。本研究比較在開放式及結構式的探究實驗教學後，學生對教室環境感知的異同。研究採混合研究方法收集量化及質性資料，資料的內容包括：教室環境量表(What Is Happening In this Class, WIHIC)及學生對結構式和開放式探究學習看法的回饋寫作。教學實驗的實施是為期共10週的自然與生活科技課程，研究對象為國小五年級學生四個班級共106人，其中兩個班(N = 52)為實驗組進行開放式探究，兩個班(N = 54)為對照組進行結構式探究。量化資料分析的內容包括：關係層面的同學親和、教師支持及學生參與；個人發展層面的探究、任務取向及合作；系統維持的平等三個層面七個向度的環境感知。分析結果顯示，實驗組學生經過開放式探究的學習後，在WIHIC的七個向度中，會在同學親和和探究兩向度上有顯著提升，但對照組在結構式探究的學習後則全部都沒有顯著的改變。以ANCOVA比較兩組，實驗組在探究向度上有顯著較高的教室環境感知。此外，回饋寫作顯示多數的實驗組學生喜歡開放式探究學習，其喜歡的原因同樣集中在同學親和及探究向度上。學生認為在開放式探究課程中有較多的思考及挑戰，也是以學生為中心的學習，不僅有益於小組合作，且能培養探究能力。本研究對上述的發現，提出對學生學習、課程教學設計與研究相關的建議。英文摘要：Students' perceptions of classroom environment often affect their participation and learning achievement. This study examined students' perceptions of classroom environment in open inquiry versus structured inquiry instructions. Mixed methods were employed to collect quantitative and qualitative data, including What Is Happening in This Class (WIHIC) and students' written feedback. WIHIC measured seven aspects of classroom environment, including Student Cohesiveness, Teacher Support, Student Involvement, Investigation, Task Orientation, Cooperation and Equity. Fifth graders in the experimental group (N= 52) carried out open inquiry activities. Their peer students in the comparison group (N = 54) conducted structured inquiry activities. The intervention lasted for 10 weeks. Findings suggested that the experimental group demonstrated significantly better perceptions of classroom environment on Student Cohesiveness and Investigation from the pre- to post- surveys; however, there was no significant change in the comparison group in all aspects. Moreover, the experimental group showed significantly higher perceptions than their compared peers on Investigation through ANCOVA. The written feedback showed that a majority of students in the experimental group preferred open inquiry. Students who prefer open inquiry showed keener perceptions than those who prefer structured inquiry on Student Cohesiveness and Investigation. The students made explicit that open inquiry provoked more thinking and challenges. Open inquiry is student-centered learning; it can not only benefit group cooperation but also cultivate inquiry ability. Finally, the implications of these findings on student learning, curriculum design, and future research are presented.起始頁-結束頁：277-300資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2503.0414篇名：科學類與美術類博物館之在地化研究－從國中生之地方依附與忠誠度觀點比較並列篇名：Place Attachment and Loyalty of Junior High School Students in Taichung City - A Comparative Study Between the Natural Museum of Natural Science and the National Taiwan Museum of Fine Arts作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin);徐薇棋(Wei-Chi Xu)關鍵字：地方依附;自然科學博物館;忠誠度;美術館;國中生;Place Attachment;Science Museum;Loyalty;Museum of Fine Arts;Junior High Students期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以地方性為理念基礎，藉地方依附與忠誠度為構念，自編並效化地方依附(含地方認同與地方依賴)及忠誠度等兩份問卷，調查臺中市國二學生對於國立自然科學博物館(科博館)與國立臺灣美術館(美術館)之在地化程度。研究採便利抽樣方式，選取八所國中各一班，共回收有效問卷208份。結果顯示：男生對科博館的地方依附、地方認同及地方依賴顯著高於女生；在美術館方面，男女之間則無顯著差異。在對科博館及美術館的各項上，市中心與都會周邊學校的學生間，均無顯著差異。母親學歷對科博館及美術館的「忠誠度」具顯著影響。至於父親學歷在兩館的各變項上皆無影響。不同自覺科學技術知識程度的學生，在對科博館的「地方依附」、「地方依賴」與「忠誠度」等面向均有顯著的影響；對美術館則無。至於不同自覺藝文程度的學生，對兩館的各變項皆無影響。此外，科博館與美術館的地方依附與忠誠度之間，皆有顯著相關。以簡單迴歸來檢定地方依附對於科博館及美術館忠誠度的解釋力，分別達到58.0%與70.9%。根據結果，本研究針對科博館與美術館的在地化程度的差異，提出未來教育經營與研究的建議。英文摘要：This study, focused on the rationale of place-based, was to investigate ”place attachment” and ”loyalty” of the Natural Museum of Natural Science (NMNS) and the National Taiwan Museum of Fine Arts (NTMFA) from grade 8 students in Taichung. Two instruments, Place Attachment (including Place Identity and Place Dependence) Scale and Loyalty Scale, developed purposively for this study, were administrated to 208 students from 8 conveniently selected junior high schools. The results showed that male students had significantly higher place attachment, place identity and place dependence toward NMNS than females; however, no difference was found toward NTMFA. There was no significant difference between urban and suburban students among all scales for NMNS and NTMFA. Mothers' education had significant influences on loyalty toward NMNS and NTMFA. There was no difference between fathers' education. Different self-reported levels of knowledge on science and technology showed different place attachment, place dependence, and loyalty toward NMNS. On the contrary, different self-reported levels of knowledge on arts had no difference toward NTMFA and NMNS. All 4 variables for NMNA and NTMFA respectively had significantly correlation between each pair. According to the findings, to strengthen the relationship of informal institutes and neighboring area is suggested. It is recommended on the follow-up studies in the future.起始頁-結束頁：97-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2502.0115篇名：桌上遊戲課程與教學之應用－以小學六年級學生為例並列篇名：The Application of Board Games in Curriculum and Instruction - Taking Sixth-Grade Students of Primary School for Example作者：常雅珍(Ya-Jane Chaung)關鍵字：人際關係;自創桌上遊戲;桌上遊戲;Interpersonal Relationship;Self-Made Board Game;Board Games期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究者設計一系列桌上遊戲相關課程，不僅幫助學生引起動機和注意力，也發揮其創意自創桌上遊戲。研究者首先自編「小學生對桌上遊戲的態度量表」及「小學生自創桌上遊戲量表」，建立信效度後，進行準實驗研究設計，實驗組實施為期十六週創新課程，控制組接受十六週一般課程，實驗組和控制組都是國小六年級學生，研究結果顯示：一、發現接受桌上遊戲課程之實驗組受試者，在「小學生對桌上遊戲的態度量表」之「接受度」、「學習助益」及「人際感受」分量表中顯著高於控制組；二、在「小學生自創桌上遊戲量表」之「自創能力」及「自創助益」分量表中也顯著高於控制組；三、經由質化資料分析，瞭解實施桌上遊戲課程的歷程、學生喜愛的原因、學習助益以及對人際關係的影響。最後根據研究結果，提出相關結論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to design a serial of board games curriculum for education. They can not only increase the students' motivation and attention, but also release students' potential to create board games by themselves. The researcher made two scales: one was ”The attitude of primary school students to board games,” while the other was ”The attitude of primary school students to self-made board games.” The experimental group had creative board games curriculum on every Tuesday for 16 weeks. The control groups had ordinary board games curriculum on every Tuesday for 16 weeks. The experimental and control groups were sixth-grade students of primary school. The results were as follows: 1. The scores of the experimental group were significantly higher than the control group in the acceptance scale, learning assistance scale and interpersonal relationship scale of ”The attitude of primary school students to board games”; 2. The scores of the experimental group were significantly higher than the control group in the creative capability scale and learning assistance scale of ”The attitude of primary school students to self-made board games”. This research summarized the experiments with qualitative data analysis to find out the cause of why students like board games, the learning assistance, and the influence of interpersonal relationship. Finally, this study offers discussion on instructional assistance and future studies.起始頁-結束頁：119-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2502.0216篇名：「跨領域整合核心能力量表」的編製－以母嬰生活服務為例並列篇名：Developing the Interdisciplinary Integration-Based Core Competencies Scale: A Case Study of Maternal-Infant Services Curriculum作者：陳俐淇(Li-Chi Chen);王子華(Tzu-Hua Wang);邱富源(Fu-Yuan Chiu);沈欣宜(Shin-Yi Shen);曾敏(Min Zeng)關鍵字：母嬰生活服務;母嬰生活服務跨領域整合核心能力量表;跨領域人才培育;跨領域教育;跨領域整合核心能力;Maternal-Infant Services;Interdisciplinary Integration-Based Core Competencies Scale for Maternal-Infant Services (IICC-MIS scale);Interdisciplinary Talent Cultivation;Interdisciplinary Education;Interdisciplinary Integration-Based Core Competencies期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在編製一份適合評估國內大學生自覺母嬰生活服務跨領域能力的評量工具，以作為母嬰生活服務跨領域人才培育之成效評量使用。本研究採兩次專家意見調查，發展母嬰生活服務之跨領域整合核心能力的定義內涵，並建構「母嬰生活服務跨領域整合核心能力量表」初稿，經兩次施測後，分別採探索式與驗證式因素分析，以瞭解量表的信效度與理論模式和觀察資料之適配度情形。研究結果為，母嬰生活服務之跨領域整合核心能力共有五種核心能力，而依據核心能力定義發展之「母嬰生活服務跨領域整合核心能力量表」，包含「溝通」、「反思」、「實踐」、「場域通識知能」和「專業倫理涵養」等五個分量表，共27題，在量表信效度考驗方面，總量表之內部一致性Cronbach's α係數達.948，各分量表之內部一致性Cronbach's α係數介於.865∼.939，總量表之累積解釋變異量為70.6%，而本量表經施測與採用線性結構模式分析發現，總量表之理論模式和觀察資料皆有良好的表現。本研究亦提出學生跨領域能力評量的相關建議。英文摘要：This study developed a scale for assessing domestic university students' self-perception of their interdisciplinary integration-based core competencies in providing maternal-infant services. The scale was used for evaluating the effectiveness of interdisciplinary maternal-infant services curriculum. Two expert surveys were conducted to define the interdisciplinary integration-based core competencies in providing maternal-infant services and the draft version for the ”Interdisciplinary Integration-based Core Competencies Scale for Maternal-Infant Services” (IICC-MIS scale) was developed. Two tests were then administered, after which the exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory analysis were performed to understand the reliability and validity of the scale as well as the goodness of fit between the theoretical model and the observed data. The findings showed that interdisciplinary integration-based competencies consisted of five core competencies, which were ”communication,” ”reflection,” ”implementation,” ”field-based general knowledge and skills,” and ”professional ethics.” A subscale was developed for each core competency and a total of 27 items were constructed. The Cronbach's α value of internal consistency of the subscales of this scale ranged from .865 to .939. The Cronbach's α value of the IICC-MIS scale was .948 and was able to explain 70.6 % of variances. The IICC-MIS scale was administered and the structural equation modeling (SEM) analysis showed that the goodness of fit between the theoretical model and the observed data was in a moderate fit. This study also proposed some suggestions for further research in assessing interdisciplinary core competencies.起始頁-結束頁：143-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2502.0317篇名：林務局池南自然教育中心環境教育遊戲方案對於六年級生環境素養之成效分析並列篇名：The Effects of an Environmental Education Game on Sixth Graders' Environmental Literacy at Chih-Nan Nature Center of Forestry Bureau作者：許世璋(Shih-Jang Hsu);黃怡華(Yi-Hwa Huang)關鍵字：非正規環境教育;遊戲;課程評估;環境素養;Non-formal Environmental Education;Game;Program Evaluation;Environmental Literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探討池南自然教育中心兩小時遊戲方案「鷹眼看大地」對於提升六年級生環境素養的成效。本研究採用不等控制組設計，實驗組(N = 100)接受此遊戲方案，控制組(N = 89)則不接受任何環境課程。資料分析顯示本遊戲方案可提升學生的環境知識、環境敏感度、環境態度、與環境責任感；而除了環境敏感度，其他三個變項在一個月後仍保有延宕效果。然而，本遊戲方案無法提升學生的環境行動與內控觀。最後根據研究結果，本研究針對池南自然教育中心的課程發展與教學策略提出建議。英文摘要：This study assessed the effects of a two-hour environmental education game on sixth-grade students' environmental literacy at Chih-Nan Nature Center. A nonequivalent control group design was used to collect data. The experimental group (N = 100) received the environmental education game, and the control group (N = 89) did not receive any environmental instruction. The quantitative data showed that the game did significantly promote students' environmental knowledge, environmental sensitivity, environmental attitudes, and environmental responsibility; and these effects, except for environmental sensitivity, were still maintained one month after the end of the game. However, the game didn't promote environmental action and internal locus of control. Based on this study, implications for program development and instructional practice of Chih-Nan Nature Center were presented.起始頁-結束頁：169-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2502.0418篇名：教學信念、年齡及科技教學與內容知識關係之探討並列篇名：Exploring the Relationships among Teaching Beliefs, Age and TPACK作者：簡桂彬(Kuei-Pin Chien);梁至中(Jyh-Chong Liang);陳素芬(Sufen Chen)關鍵字：年齡;科技教學與內容知識;教學信念;路徑分析;驗證性因素分析;Age;TPACK;Teaching Beliefs;Path Analysis;CFA期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：教師的教學策略和科技融入教學受教學信念及科技教學與內容知識(TPACK)所影響。因此，教學信念及TPACK一直是各教學領域中，學者極為重視且深入研究的議題。雖然大部分教學領域皆有實驗、實做、實習等技能教學，然而，過往的TPACK研究偏向認知類的教學，對於技能教學為主的領域，長期在此議題上的實證研究較為缺乏。有鑑於數位科技在技能教學的應用已有增加之趨勢，以及文獻中顯示教師年齡在教學信念和TPACK所造成的影響，因此本研究的目的在探討年齡差異對技能類教師在教學信念與科技教學與內容知識的影響。以358名公立國民中學的在職體育教師為研究對象，以全國教師之平均年齡分為兩群，實施教師年齡、教學信念量表及科技教學與內容知識量表之調查。研究結果顯示驗證性因素分析、路徑分析的各項配適度指標均屬良好。結果也發現年輕教師與年長教師有稍微不同的結構模式。兩群教師的建構主義教學信念和傳統教學信念均能正向預測教學內容知識(PCK)和科技教學知識(TPK)，但僅有建構主義教學信念能預測科技內容知識(TCK)，傳統教學信念缺乏對TCK的預測力。TPK與TCK則能預測TPCK。值得注意的是，年長族群的PCK會負向預測TPCK，越是擁有PCK的資深教師，越是具備低的TPCK。此研究提供具體之教師專業成長建議。英文摘要：Previous studies in various subjects have paid much attention to teaching beliefs and Technological Pedagogical and Content Knowledge (TPACK), which significantly influence teachers' choices of teaching strategies and integration of technology. However, instruction that involves on motor skills such as scientific laboratory, medical practices, and physical education has not drawn adequate attention on this issue. As the increase of technology-integrated instruction in motor skills, it is crucial to investigate the teaching beliefs and TPACK of the teachers who are mainly in charge of motor skill instruction. Previous studies also revealed that teaching beliefs and TPACK may differ in different age groups. As a result, the purpose of this study was to examine the age differences in teaching beliefs and TPACK between senior and junior teachers in motor skill instruction. The participants were 358 in-service Health and Physical Education Learning Area teachers in junior high schools. They were divided into two age groups based on the average age among the teacher population. They completed demographics, teachers' teaching beliefs, and TPACK questionnaires. The results indicated that all of the goodness-of-fit indexes reached acceptable values in confirmatory factor analyses and path analyses. The junior and senior inservice teachers fitted into slightly different models. In both age groups, teachers' constructivist and traditional teaching beliefs could positively predict pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) and technological pedagogical knowledge (TPK); constructivist beliefs could also predict technological content knowledge (TCK); and TPK and TCK predicted technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPCK). It should be noted that, with the senior group, PCK negatively predicted TPCK. Senior teachers who possessed high PCK tended to have lower TPCK, whereas the junior teachers did not demonstrate this relationship. Suggestions for teacher professional development were provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-19資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2501.0119篇名：國小學童在社會性科學議題教學中的非形式推理改變：以不同條件下之能源決策為例並列篇名：Elementary Students' Change in Informal Reasoning through the SSI Instruction: Their Decisions on Energy Choice under the Different Conditions作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin);吳靜宜(Chin-Yi Wu)關鍵字：社會性科學議題;社會性科學議題教學;非形式推理;能源議題;做決定;Socio-Scientific Issue;Socio-Scientific-Issue Instruction;Informal Reasoning;Energy Issue;Decision-Making期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究針對某鄰近火力發電廠之國小一班五年級學生(N = 28)，根據Zeidler與Keefer (2003)對社會性科學議題(SSI)教學模式，所建議的個案、文化、對話與知識形成等內涵，發展一份「臺灣能源的使用和選擇」模組，以單組前、後測設計從事5週10節課的個案班級之教學研究。研究目的主要探討在此SSI教學前後，學生就三種條件下對火力發電廠在家鄉設立與否及其理由的改變，藉此呈現其學習前後的非形式推理改變。在教學過程中，以議題學習單及錄影紀錄等蒐集質性資料。結果顯示：一、在維持現況及增加補助金條件下，教學前後，反對火力發電廠設在家鄉的人數，皆達七成上下；二、教學後，在增加污染防治的條件下，六成學生贊成設立；三、教學後，約四成學生在三種條件下，均反對設置；四、由學生在三種條件下立場的組合，可知其對議題的判斷與決定具備理性基礎；五、就「維持既有條件下」及「增加補助金條件下」，在教學後持反對立場的學生所提出的理由類別及次數，均高於在教學前；六、與其他另兩項條件相比，在「增加防治措施條件下」，教學後學生所提贊成的理由次數增加較多。本研究結果顯示營造不同條件下之議題教學具有促進學生理性推理的作用。根據結果，本文並就未來研究及教學提出建議。英文摘要：This study was based on the SSI teaching model which included case-, culture-, discourse-, and NOS elements suggested by Zeidler and Keefer (2003) to develop and teach a module themed as ”Choice and exploit of energy in Taiwan” in a 5th case class (N = 28) adjacent to a Power Plant (PP) for a one-group pre- and post-test design with 10 sessions in 5 weeks. The study mainly explored students' change in their opinions and reasons if maintaining PP under three different conditions after the SSI-module teaching. Qualitative methods, such as worksheets, informal interviews, and videotaping were mainly used for data collection. The findings were: 1. Under both conditions without change and the additional compensation, 70% students opposed the PP in both before and after teaching. 2. After teaching, 60% students supported PP if there were more strictly controls on the pollution. 3. After teaching, 40% students opposed PP under all three conditions. 4. According to the decisions under three different conditions, it was concluded that students' informal reasoning is mostly based on logic. 5. For both ”the current condition” and ”the more compensation,” students with opposite position proposed more reasons to support themselves in the post-test than pre-test. 6. Compared with the other two conditions, students who advocated the PP under ”the more pollution controlling policies” after the instruction gave more reasons than in pre-test. This study reveals the use of variety of conditions for students to compare and make the decision can enhance their rational reasoning in the social context. Based on the results, the recommendations on teaching and research in the future are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：21-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2501.0220篇名：科學創造力課程成效之縱貫性分析並列篇名：Longitudinal Analysis of Scientific Creativity Course Effectiveness作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：正向情緒;科學創造力;創造力傾向;創意自我效能;縱貫性分析;Positive Emotion;Scientific Creativity;Creative Tendency;Creative Self-Efficacy;Longitudinal Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以自編的科學創造力課程融入國小自然與生活科技學科，選取實驗組學生157位、對照組學生211位，進行實驗課程教學，以瞭解課程成效及縱貫性發展。除了分析科學創造力的成長趨勢之外，更瞭解學生參加實驗與否、領域知識對於科學創造力成長趨勢是否有所影響。本研究一共進行四次實驗課程、四次調查，藉由階層線性模式發現，實驗組學生的科學創造力是呈現先下後上的趨勢，而對照組學生則是線性向下的發展趨勢。本研究除分析學生科學創造力受到時間變項的影響之外，也討論科學創造力是否為受到隨時間變動的共變項而影響其科學創造力，討論的變項包含了正向情緒、創意自我效能以及創造力傾向。其中，實驗組學生的創造力會受到創意成品、好奇性、挑戰性的正向影響，而對照組學生則是受到創意思考、創意成品、抗衡負面、冒險性的正向影響，可知，影響實驗組與對照組的科學創造力共變因素略為不同。另外，在實驗組學生部分，若領域知識越好，或是沒有補習，則成長曲率越快；但是在對照組來說，有補習的學生他們的科學創造力下降速率也將較快。整體而言，本研究所設計的融入式課程可有效提升學生的科學創造力。英文摘要：A self-edited scientific creativity course was integrated into Science and Technology for elementary schools in this study to conduct the experimental course teaching with 157 students in the experimental group and 211 students in the control group in order to understand the course effectiveness and the longitudinal development. In addition to analyzing the growing trend of scientific creativity, it was expected to understand the effects of student participation in the experiment and the domain knowledge on the growing trend of scientific creativity. The experimental course was proceeded four times for 4 surveys. By using hierarchical linear modeling, it was found, from the conditional growth model, that the students in the experimental group presented downward and then upward trend on scientific creativity, while the students in the control group appeared linear downward development trend. This study explored the effect of time on students' scientific creativity and also discussed the effect of covariance with time, including positive emotion, creative self-efficacy, and creative tendency, on scientific creativity. Creative product, curiosity, and challenge showed positive effects on the creativity of students in the experimental group, while creative thinking, creative product, negative contention, and adventure revealed positive effects on the control group. Apparently, the covariance for the scientific creativity was different in the experimental group and the control group. Furthermore, the students in the experimental group with better domain knowledge or not going to cram schools showed faster growing curve, while the scientific creativity of students in the control group who go to cram schools reduced more rapidly. Overall speaking, the integrated course designed in this study could effectively promote students' scientific creativity.起始頁-結束頁：47-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2501.0301篇名：學習障礙學生自我概念與學校適應之縱貫研究並列篇名：Self-Concept and School Adjustment of Students with Learning Disabilities作者：張萬烽(Wan-Feng Chang)關鍵字：自我概念;潛在成長模式;學校適應;學習障礙;縱貫研究;latent growth curve modeling;learning disabilities;longitudinal study;school adjustment;self-concept期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：學習障礙學生的自我概念和學校適應間的關係一直受到關注，臺灣相關研究多指出兩者呈現正向相關，但僅從單一時間點進行研究，缺乏發展性的觀點，透過縱貫研究才能了解自我概念隨時間變化的情形。本研究旨在探討學習障礙學生在自我概念與學校適應上的發展變化及彼此之間的關係，同時也在探討性別和安置類型對自我概念的影響情形，以特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫中97到100學年度三波段中填寫兩次以上學生問卷的309位國中到高中職之學習障礙學生為對象，以縱貫研究中的貫時性研究設計為研究方法，並透過結構方程模式進行潛在成長模式以及交互延宕模式的分析工作，結果發現，學習障礙學生的一般性自我概念並未隨著時間而有顯著變化，但呈現先降後升的發展趨勢，學校適應則是逐年顯著成長，雖然同一年自我概念與學校適應間有顯著的中度正相關，但兩者在隨時間發展的關係上沒有顯著關聯，且兩者亦未存有持續交互影響的關係；在性別變項方面，男、女生的自我概念發展無顯著差異，在安置類型上，四種不同安置型態中，學生的自我概念也沒有顯著差異。英文摘要：Purpose: Students with a healthy self-concept typically think of themselves as valuable and competent, are motivated to perform well academically, try hard to overcome challenges, have harmonious relationships with family and friends, and exhibit relatively few behavioral problems. Considering the major influence of self-concept on learning and behavioral outcomes, it is important to understand how students' self-concept develops. Some studies have shown that self-concept declines with age, whereas others have reported that it does not. Still other studies have stated that self-concept changes during transition period. Considerable research has focused on the relationship between self-concept and school adjustment in students with learning disabilities; however, relatively little has focused on the development of self-concept in these students. Methods: This study investigated the development of the general self-concept and school adjustment as well as the impact of sex and placement on self-concept. The study data were collected from the Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study database. Of all students with learning disabilities, 309 who had completed <U+2265> 2 questionnaires during 4 academic years (2008-2009 to 2011-2012) were studied. Structural equation modeling with latent growth curve models and a cross-lagged panel model were used to analyze the three waves of data. Items were chosen based on the definitions of self-concept and school adjustment provided in the literature. Each research tool included appropriate items that could be found repeatedly in all three ranges. Items that could only be found in two ranges were excluded. Accordingly, there were 14 items regarding self-concept and 7 items regarding school adjustment. Results/Findings: Self-concept did not vary significantly among the students over time; however, significant differences were found among students with learning disabilities at the beginning of the study period. The initial slope and rate of change also exhibited variance between individuals. The negative correlation between the initial slope and the rate of change indicated greater development in the first-grade students with inferior self-concept. School adjustment, however, showed a tendency to increase steadily. There were individual differences with regard to both the initial slope and the rate of growth; moreover, the course of development varied among students. The initial slope and rate of change were negatively correlated with school adjustment. Therefore, with time, students with inferior school adjustment exhibited a greater rate of change, contrasting with a slower rate of change in students with more favorable school adjustment. However, little difference was noted in the rate of change between the two types of students. Self-concept and school adjustment demonstrated moderate correlation in a single year; however, no significant relationship was identified between these two characteristics in the long term. Cross-lagged panel correlation analysis showed that the self-concept for predicting the subsequent school adjustment was not statistically significant. No significant difference was found for the slope or rate of change in self-concept between the sexes; however, the boys and girls had a similar development trajectory over the 4 years. The nonsignificant differences among students with different placements in terms of slope and rate of change indicated that all of them remained similar over time. Conclusions/Implications: Suggestions are provided for the practical application of and future research on self-concept and school adjustment.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201711_42(3).00012篇名：有效鑑別國小二年級語言障礙兒童和典型發展兒童的敘事指標並列篇名：Narrative Indicators for Effectively Distinguishing between Second-Grade Students with Language Disorders and their Typically Developing Peers作者：賴曉嬋(Hsiao-Chan Lai);王秋鈴(Chiu-Ling Wang)關鍵字：敘事;語言障礙;學齡兒童;narrative;language disorder;school-aged child期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在比較國小二年級典型發展及語言障礙兒童，在敘事「巨結構」及「微結構」各項指標的表現是否呈現顯著差異，並探討各項指標的效果量，找出區辨兩組兒童最具敏感度的指標。本研究對象為60名國小二年級學童，語言障礙與典型發展兒童各30名，兩組兒童均以無字圖畫書Frog, where are you?為材料，透過故事重述的方式蒐集敘事樣本。本研究結果如下：一、巨結構：兩組兒童在故事文法要素中的「背景、起始事件、嘗試、結果、內在反應」及插曲完整度等指標有顯著差異。二、微結構：兩組兒童在「語意」部分的「總詞彙數、相異詞彙數、詞彙錯用率」、「語法」部分的「平均C單位長度、複雜句使用率、文法錯誤句出現率」，以及「凝聚結」部分的「前後關係照應凝聚完整率、關聯詞凝聚完整率、凝聚結凝聚完整率」等指標有顯著差異。三、比較各項敘事評量指標的效果量，最能區辨兩組兒童的前五名指標依次為平均C單位長度、詞彙錯用率、嘗試、文法錯誤句出現率及複雜句使用率。在評量國小二年級兒童的敘事能力時，可特別針對以下的幾個能力進行探討：插曲完整度、詞彙使用能力（包括總詞彙數、相異詞彙數及詞彙錯用情形）、語句使用的能力（包括複雜句使用率、平均語句長度、文法錯誤句出現率）及前後關係照應的使用情形。英文摘要：Purpose: Children's narrative performance plays a pivotal role in developing their abilities of conversation, literacy, and socialization. To tell a complete and coherent story, a child must possess various skills, including the use of a specific structure to compose a story, the ability to choose appropriate vocabulary and sentence structures to covey ideas, and the use of proper references and connectives to unite the story. Therefore, it is crucial to evaluate children's narrative abilities in clinical settings. This study investigated whether second-graders with language disorders and their typically developing peers demonstrated significantly different performances in the various areas of macrostructure and microstructure narrative. The effectiveness of these indicators was also investigated to identify the most sensitive indicators for distinguishing these two groups of children. The results can serve as a reference for relevant personnel in clinical practice. Method: A total of 60 children were examined, namely 30 with language disorders and 30 with typical language development. The two groups were asked to retell a wordless picture book called Frog, Where Are You? in order to assess their narrative abilities. Results/Findings: The two groups had significantly different indicator scores for narrative macrostructure elements such as background, initiating event, attempt, consequence, internal response, and number of complete episodes. Regarding the microstructure elements, the two groups demonstrated significantly different indicator scores in semantics (i.e., total number of words, number of different words, and percentage of incorrect vocabulary), syntax (i.e., mean length of C-unit, subordination index, and percentage of grammatically incorrect sentences), and cohesive ties (i.e., ratios of complete reference cohesive ties, complete connective cohesive ties, and total complete ties). Concerning the effect size of these narrative indicators, the top five indicators were as follows: mean length of C-unit, percentage of incorrect vocabulary, number of attempts, percentage of grammatically incorrect sentences, and subordination index. Conclusions/Implications: The narrative ability of second-grade students should be thoroughly assessed in the following aspects: the number of complete episodes, vocabulary usage (total number of words, number of different words, and percentage of incorrect vocabulary), sentence usage (subordinate index, mean length of sentences, and percentage of grammatically incorrect sentences), and reference cohesive tie usage. For clinical practitioners, narrative assessment can serve as a supplementary tool for determining children's language performance in addition to norm-referenced assessment batteries, and is an effective method of monitoring children's progress over time.起始頁-結束頁：33-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201711_42(3).00023篇名：以整合式音樂治療行動方案改善一位自閉症兒童嚴重自傷行為之研究並列篇名：Improving the Severe Self-Injurious Behavior of a Child with Autism Spectrum Disorder through an Integrated Music Therapy Action Program作者：陳淑瑜(Shu-Yu Chen)關鍵字：自閉症;自傷行為;行為策略;音樂治療;智能障礙;autism spectrum disorders;self-injurious behavior;behavioral strategy;music therapy;intellectual disability期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：自傷行為是自閉症兒童最嚴重的行為問題之一，不僅造成身體傷害，更影響到全面性的教育或社會功能。近年來，針對自閉症者因感覺處理異常、經由無法容忍不確定性和焦慮情緒之中介，引發重複動作行為和堅持同一性行為的順序關聯性，已獲得許多研究的支持，也被認為是預測自傷行為的風險因素。本研究個案為國小特教班教師緊急轉介的學童，患有自閉症共病智能障礙，主因為嚴重自傷行為及情緒問題。雖然特教持續介入並有醫療用藥，但受家庭內部因素影響，行為改善的成效有限。因個案相當喜愛音樂，教師遂主動尋求入校輔導支援。在直接入班觀察、分析課堂行為觀察紀錄並閱讀相關文獻資料後，發現有採取混合方法處理個案問題的必要性，故整合音樂治療和行為策略，共同解決個案和教師的困境。本研究以協同行動研究的方式進行個案評估、介入與成效檢討，參與協同的成員包括研究者及三位特教教師，由研究者提供每週一次、單次40分鐘，兩學期總共18次的個別音樂治療，並由三位教師於課堂提供行為策略。研究結果顯示，個案在整合方案介入後的音樂行為和互動行為提升、重複行為下降，自傷行為幾乎不再出現，並達到長期維持成效。個案家人也因為孩子的進步，開始積極與學校配合。整體而言，本研究藉由在實務現場解決自閉症學童自傷行為的歷程和經驗，啟發從根源探尋解決方法的模式，也為未來的問題處理提出多元介入的可行性。英文摘要：Purpose: Self-injurious behavior is not one of the three core symptoms that define autism; however, it is one of the most severe behavioral problems observed in children with autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability. It causes physical harm and affects education and social functioning. Sensory processing abnormalities, anxiety, and restricted and repetitive behaviors frequently co-occur in autism spectrum disorder. Recent studies support that sensory processing abnormalities, intolerance of uncertainty, and anxiety may sequentially relate to or influence the repetitive motor, sameness, and self-injury behaviors of children with autism spectrum disorder and be considered risk factors for self-injury. The student in the present case study had autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability and exhibited self-injurious behavior and emotional problems, and was referred to the emergency support by special education teachers at the student's elementary school. There were several complicated factors within the student's family; therefore, the influences of education and medical intervention were limited. Because the student was fond of music, his teachers requested relevant support services from the researcher. Based on direct observation in the classroom, data analysis of the behavioral observation documents provided by the teachers, and a literature review, the researcher collaborated with three special education teachers and performed an intervention involving an integrated program of music therapy and behavioral strategies. Methods: This study was conducted using a group-based collaborative action research design to discuss the results of the evaluation, intervention, and effect. Participants included the researcher and three special education teachers. A total of 18 weekly sessions of 40 minutes of individual music therapy was provided by the researcher, namely 10 sessions in the first semester and 8 sessions in the second semester. The three teachers taught behavioral strategies in the classroom during the same period. Data were collected using a questionnaire on demographics, the scale of music therapy, and classroom observations, and analyzed through the approach of Therapeutic Narrative Analysis developed by Aldridge in 2005. Results/Findings: The student's musical and interaction behaviors improved and his repetition behavior decreased after the intervention. His head-banging behavior in the class largely diminished and then stabilized. Family members began to actively cooperate with the teachers because of the improvement in his behaviors. Conclusions/Implications: Overall, this study developed an effective practical intervention aimed at reducing self-injurious behavior through the causes analysis in a child with autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability. Discussions and suggestions for future problem-solving strategies and a new integrated concept are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：63-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201711_42(3).00034篇名：時間次序與空間位置訊息於記憶運作中的運用：以失聰手語使用者為例並列篇名：Temporal order and spatial information in short-term memory: Evidence from deaf Taiwanese signers作者：邱倚璿(Yi-Shiuan Chiu)關鍵字：手語;失聰／聾人／聽障;空間位置;時間次序;短期記憶;deaf;sign language;temporal order;short-term memory;spatial location期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：失聰手語使用者短期記憶能力較弱原因，可能是手語視覺空間形式不擅於時間次序的記憶運作所致。本研究欲探討短期記憶，失聰手語者與聽力正常非手語者於時間次序運作的異同，以及時間次序與空間位置對其短期記憶的影響。實驗一比較失聰手語者與聽常非手語者於三種不同時間空間一致性下，兩種刺激（數字、中文雙字詞）之項目再認表現。時間空間一致性包含時間空間一致（刺激依序由左至右呈現）、時間空間不一致（數字刺激隨機出現）與僅有時間次序（刺激依序呈現於螢幕中央）等，此效果可反映出內在時間次序與空間位置之整合運作狀況；實驗二探討不同時間空間一致性下，數字刺激的項目與位置再認表現；實驗三中，運用兩種隨機出現作業（25%項目及位置再認，75%項目再認），探討在偶發性的位置判斷作業時，時間空間一致性之影響。本研究結果為：實驗一發現兩族群都出現序列位置效果，於時間空間一致情境優於僅有時間次序；實驗二發現兩族群僅在正確率中有一致性優勢；實驗三發現失聰手語者於項目與位置再認表現明顯劣於聽常非手語者，但於項目再認中相對差異較小。除了時間次序外，同時提供有規律的空間位置可以協助短期記憶表現；時間次序與空間位置整合是於作業要求下發生，符合時間次序與空間位置兩者平行但可彙整的論點。失聰手語者與聽常非手語者有相似的內隱時間次序運作，但被要求回憶位置時，失聰手語者整合時間次序與空間位置運作，會需要耗費較多的認知資源。英文摘要：In working and short-term memory processes, to-be-remembered items and their temporal orders can be more accurately maintained by an auditory system than a visual system. Thus, previous studies have reported that deaf signers have poorer memory performance or digit span than nondeaf people. By contrast, deaf signers showed more favorable performance with respect to visuospatial processes and mental image operations. We hypothesized that deaf signers benefit from the short-term memory condition with spatial location cues. Purpose: This research investigated the processing and organization of temporal order and spatial location in short-term memory among deaf people. Methods: Experiment 1 explored item recognition performance (digits and Chinese two-character words) when the temporal and spatial order had varying levels of consistency. This consistency was categorized under three conditions: temporal-spatial consistent, temporal-spatial inconsistent, and temporal order only. In the temporalspatial consistent condition, items were sequentially presented from left to right; in the temporal-spatial inconsistent condition, items were presented sequentially in random locations. In the third condition, the items were sequentially presented in the center of the screen. In Experiment 2, participants were requested to recognize items and their corresponding locations during consistent and inconsistent temporal and spatial orders. In Experiment 3, the independent variables included not only the consistency of the temporal and spatial orders but also the tasks (item and location recognition task and item recognition task). Participants' tasks comprised 25% item and location recognition task and 75% item-only task. Results/Findings: In Experiment 1, we observed the recency effect and superiority of the temporal-spatial consistent condition in addition to that of the temporal-order-only condition, reflecting the similar nature of implicit processing in the temporal order among deaf signers and nondeaf people. Both groups also organized temporal and spatial orders in a similar manner. In Experiment 2, both groups had more accurate memory in the temporal-spatial consistent condition. In Experiment 3, the deaf signers had significantly lower accuracy than the nondeaf people with respect to the item and location tasks as compared to the item-only task. Conclusions/Implications: Both groups reorganized temporal order and spatial locations only when location recognition was required. In addition, deaf signers benefitted from short-term memory tasks with spatial location cues and conducted order processes in a manner similar to that of nondeaf people, although with less efficient retrieval. In conclusion, providing appropriate spatial locations for deaf signers can improve their memory performance.起始頁-結束頁：93-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201711_42(3).00045篇名：基本職業能力工作樣本之編製研究並列篇名：Development of ”Basic Vocational Ability Work Samples”作者：林珮如(Pei-Ju Lin);林幸台(Hsin-Tai Lin)關鍵字：工作樣本;基本職業能力;智能障礙學生;職能評估;work sample;basic vocational ability;students with intellectual disabilities;vocational evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在發展一套學校基本職業能力評估工具，以了解智能障礙學生的基本職業能力，作為調整課程內容與教學策略之參考依據。研究者依循一般編製心理測驗的原則編製工作樣本，包括修訂工作樣本初稿、進行工作樣本預試、進行專家審查與修訂，以及正式施測建立工具信效度等階段。本研究以「高職階段智能障礙學生職能評估向度與項目」為基礎，逐步發展具實用性、價格低、施測工具容易取得及施測，且以就業能力為基礎、學習與訓練為導向、工作樣本設計為主，並適用於智能障礙學生的「修訂版學校基本職業能力工作樣本」，共包括商品準備、秤重包裝、餐飲服務、信件處理、包裝餅乾、負重上架、公文處理、拼圖高手、製作苔球、商品高手與精打細算等11組工作樣本，各含有三至四個分測驗。本工具除初步獲得內容效度外，並以臺北市、新北市72名高職階段智能障礙學生為樣本考驗其信效度，結果發現大致具良好的建構效度、評分者間信度、再測信度與內部一致性信度。本研究結論如下：一、學校基本職業能力評估工具以「高職階段智障學生職能評估向度與項目」為基礎，具信效度；二、學校基本職業能力評估工具價格低、易取得與施測，以就業為導向，適用於學校與智能障礙學生，具高度實用性。最後，本研究根據研究結果與結論，針對職能評估等相關議題提出未來實務及研究上的建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Vocational high school is the final educational stage for students with intellectual disabilities. Ensuring that such students gain and maintain employability skills during school is the principal objective of special education. The assessments are a prerequisite for teaching and curriculum planning. Schools should use vocational assessments in accordance with regulations and practical needs in order to understand the initial behavior of students with disabilities and the strengths and weaknesses of their basic vocational abilities, which can serve as a reference for adjusting course content and teaching strategies. The purpose of this study was to develop a set of basic vocational ability assessment tools for measuring the basic vocational ability of students with intellectual disabilities, which can provide a reference for adjusting curriculum content and teaching strategies. Methods: The researchers followed the general principles of the development of psychological tests to develop the working samples, including revising the preliminary draft work sample, executing a work sample pilot test, incorporating expert review and revision, and formally establishing the tool’s validity and reliability. Results/Findings: Modified School Basic Vocational Ability Work Samples, based on Dimensions and Items of Vocational Evaluations for Students with Intellectual Disabilities in Vocational High School, a practical, low-cost, and easily accessible and executable tool was developed. A total of 11 work samples were used, each of which contained 3-4 subtests based on employability, was learning- and training-oriented, and was suitable for students with intellectual disabilities. Work sample evaluation was used, and the work samples were as follows: preparing, weighing, and packing goods; providing catering services; processing mail; packing cookies; loading goods onto shelves; processing official documents; puzzle activities, designing moss balls; inspecting goods; and calculating change. The content validity of the tool was established, and the set of work samples was verified for its validity and reliability through application to a sample of 72 students with intellectual disabilities in vocational high schools in Taipei City and New Taipei City. The results indicated favorable construct validity, interrater reliability, test–retest reliability, and internal consistent reliability. Conclusions/Implications: The conclusions drawn from this study are outlined as follows: 1. The basic vocational ability evaluation tool was based on Dimensions and Items of Vocational Evaluations for Students with Intellectual Disabilities in Vocational High Schools, and it was determined to be reliable and valid; 2. The basic vocational ability evaluation tool is practical, lowcost, easily accessible and executable, and based on employability. Furthermore, it is suitable for application in schools and to students with intellectual disabilities. Finally, suggestions are proposed in this paper to improve future practice and to provide researchers of vocational evaluation with possible research directions.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.2017.07.42020016篇名：後效區辨訓練對自閉症兒童觀察學習之成效研究並列篇名：Effectiveness of Contingency Discrimination Training for Observational Learning of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder作者：蔡侑恩(Yu-En Tsai);鳳華(Hua Feng)關鍵字：自閉症;後效區辨;觀察學習;autism spectrum disorders;contingency discrimination training;observational learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：觀察他人的行為反應來學習新技能，是人類最常見的學習管道，不僅能減少因嘗試錯誤所耗費的時間，亦能促進後續複雜能力的發展。觀察學習包含注意力、模仿能力及後效區辨能力，其中，後效區辨力被視為發展觀察學習技能的關鍵元素。本研究旨在探討透過後效區辨訓練對提升自閉症兒童觀察學習能力之成效。研究對象為兩名六歲的輕度自閉症兒童。研究方法採用單一受試之跨受試多基線實驗設計，透過後效區辨訓練，了解自閉症兒童在學習後效區辨之成效與其維持、類化情況，並觀察學習命名的技能表現。以視覺分析及觀察資料，了解後效區辨訓練是否提升受試者之區辨後效與觀察學習的能力，並透過家長與教師的回饋問卷與訪談建立社會效度。研究結果如下：一、後效區辨訓練可增進輕度自閉症兒童之區辨後效能力，且具維持與類化的效果。二、後效區辨訓練可增進輕度自閉症兒童觀察學習命名技能。三、家長與教師均肯定後效區辨訓練之教學成效。本研究根據研究結果與發現提出相關建議，以供教育工作者與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: The common process through which human beings learn new skills is by observing the behaviors of others and the consequences that accompany these behaviors. This process not only prevents wasting time through trial and error but also enhances the development of complex capacities. Observational learning skills comprise the abilities of attention, imitation, and contingency discrimination. In particular, the ability to discriminate contingencies is the most crucial for developing observational learning skills. In the literature, children with autism spectrum disorder exhibit deficiencies in their ability to pay attention to and imitate others in order to learn new skills. Even if they acquire these essential skills after intensive training, children with autism still have difficulty making complex discriminations of another person’s actions and their consequences. This study investigated the effects of contingency discrimination training on the observational learning ability of children with autism spectrum disorder. Methods: The participants were two 6-year-old children with mild autism. A single-subject multiple-baseline experimental design across subjects was used. The independent variable was contingency discrimination training. The dependent variables were the percentage of correct responses in the acquisition, maintenance, and generalization of discrimination and progression of observational learning abilities. Visual analysis and observation data were used to analyze the effect of contingency discrimination training on the participants. Additionally, questionnaires and interviews with the participants’ parents and teachers were conducted, and the results confirmed the social validity of the study. Results/Findings: The results showed that contingency discrimination training (1) enhances, maintains, and generalizes the discriminating contingency skills of children with mild autism; (2) enhances observational learning skills in acquiring naming skills for children with mild autism; and (3) was confirmed by to have a beneficial effect by the caregivers of the participants, thus giving the training social validity. Conclusions/Implications: We suggest professionals fully comprehend all information regarding this training, confirm participants’ repertoires before commencing training, identify new skills that participants are capable of learning through observation, and use the reinforcements in consider to strengthen the motivation of the participants. Furthermore, practitioners who undertake future intervention research should increase the number of participants or include participants of different ages, implement contingency discrimination training to promote a variety of skills, and compare the effectiveness of the training using the experimental multiple-baseline design across behaviors. In addition, high-tech equipment should be used to record the frequency, duration and direction of participants' eye contact, participants’ capacity for selective attention, and their ability to discriminate a figure-ground during intervention.起始頁-結束頁：31-55資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.2017.07.42020027篇名：中年輕症自閉症男性的成長境遇與自我調適並列篇名：Growth process and self-adjustment of two middle-aged fathers with autism spectrum disorder作者：鄭津妃(Chin-Fei Cheng)關鍵字：自我調適;輕症自閉症;self-adjustment;mild autism期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：在沒有特殊教育支持的年代，輕症自閉症者一路的成長境遇如何？本研究聚焦於中年輕症自閉症男性的成長，整體性地揭示其成長境遇與歷程中的自我調適。本研究招募兩位擁有工作、已組成家庭且育有輕症自閉症青少年的自閉症父親，實施七至八次深度訪談，並以現象學方法分析訪談逐字稿，以進行現象的還原並獲得研究對象的結構性描述。研究結果指出，文凱與梧朗共同置身在社交人際的困頓裡，尋不得相處之道，其所面臨更勝於一般人的學習困境、職場緊繃與壓抑，並置身家庭的極端處境。自我調適方面，兩人在學習與家庭面向呈現出不同的策略，在人際與自我面向均顯現相同與相異的策略，從本質結構比較發現，文凱以「認知調適」為主要，認知調整未足以在下回自動化展現合宜的行動；而梧朗是「行為似調適但認知不易調整」，行動上他能做出稍得體的表現，但處事觀點依舊埋藏很多的不認同。兩者即使優勢能力鮮明，卻都在學校場域中面臨早期的挫敗且難以順利升學，在成人期均持續透過認知調整改善社交技巧。然而，調適需視各方的調整配合而定，因此文凱與梧朗在不同場域得到不同的適應品質。兩人在自我調適中均呈現認知調適與行為調適的斷裂，此與其不易卸下堅持、讀心能力不足及行為表現困難有關。除了回答研究問題外，本研究提出反思與建議，對大眾倡議同時也有助於實務工作者進行教育訓練之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: This study examined how individuals with mild autism spectrum disorder (ASD) developed in the years before special education was commonly provided. In particular, it explored the development of middle-aged fathers with mild autism spectrum disorder to determine their growth process and self-adjustment. Methods: Two fathers with mild autism spectrum disorder were recruited; they both had experience of working, supporting a family, and fathering adolescents with autism. Seven to eight in-depth interviews were held with the participants. The interview transcriptions were then analyzed through a method of phenomenological interpretation research to restore the phenomenon and obtain a structural description of the growth process and self-adjustment of the participants. Results/Findings: It indicated that both Wen-Kai and Wu-Lang were exposed to social interpersonal difficulties and found interpersonal relationships difficult to maintain, leading to learning difficulties, above average workplace tension and depression, and exposure to the extreme challenge situation of the family. The two participants presented different strategies for self-adjustment in both learning and family aspects, and they presented some identical and some different strategies for self-adjustment in both interpersonal aspects and that regarding coexistence with mild autism. In terms of the essential structure of his self-adjustment, Wen-Kai was found to exhibit ”cognition accommodation” in certain social situations, but his cognition adjustment was insufficient for acting appropriately in subsequent situations. Wu-Lang's behavior seemed to exhibite adjustment, but his cognition found it difficult to adjust. His actions therefore were a little bit of socially appropriate, but his point of view had a lot of disagreement about the thinking of the normal person. Conclusions/ Implications: Even though both men had significant and advantageous skills, they faced with an early defeat and experienced difficultly in successfully progressing to the next academic stage at school. Both managed to improve their social skills through cognitive adjustment in adulthood. However, the adjustment process depended on all parties interacting with each other; therefore, Wen-Kai and Wu-Lang experienced varying levels of adjustment quality in different areas. They also exhibited a fracture in the cognitive adjustment and behavioral adjustment of their self-adjustment processes, which was linked with difficulty removing persistence, a lack of the ability to read minds of others, and difficulty in behaving appropriately. In addition to answering the research questions, this paper poses topics for discussion and suggestions: The advocacy to the public should be enhanced, and guidelines for practitioners should be developed for educating and training patients with autism spectrum disorder.起始頁-結束頁：57-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.2017.07.42020038篇名：永齡國語文補救教學方案及補救教師專業背景對國小二年級學生讀寫進展之成效研究並列篇名：Effects of the Yong-Ling Chinese remedial program and teachers’ professional background on the literacy progress of second graders作者：陳淑麗(Shu- Li Chen);曾世杰(Shih-Jay Tzeng);張毓仁(Yu-Jen Chang);蔡佩津(Pei-Chin Tsai)關鍵字：永齡希望小學;低成就;師資專業背景;國語文補救教學;讀寫;literacy;low achievers;remedial Chinese reading program;teacher professional background;Yong-Ling School of Hope期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探究永齡希望小學國語文補救教學方案在國小二年級的實施成效，以及執行補救教學的師資背景是否會影響學生的讀寫能力發展。本研究採用準實驗設計，一共有382位國小二年級讀寫低成就學生參與，實驗組學生有198位，接受永齡方案16週，每週六節課；對照組學生則有184位，他們和實驗組學生同校，但是未接受永齡方案的服務。實驗組的參與教師共有36 位，依其專業背景，可分為現職教師（16人）、儲備教師（12人）和大專生教師（八人）。研究者以階層迴歸分析評估永齡方案對後測讀寫能力進展指標的影響，同時也評估實驗組中三類不同專業背景師資所教授的學生，在後測上有無顯著差異。研究結果顯示，當控制社經、智力及前測分數後，除了識字量之外，實驗組學生在國字聽寫、閱讀理解能力及攜手計畫課後扶助方案科技化評量系統（After School Alternative Program technology-based testing, ASAP）國語成績都明顯優於對照組，顯示介入是有成效的。其次，從教師的背景來看，三種不同專業背景教師所教授 的三群學生，僅ASAP後測具有差異，現職教師及儲備教師顯著優於教學經驗較 弱的大專生教師；而在後測識字量、國字聽寫及閱讀理解等標準測驗的分數，三組均無顯著差異。本研究最值得看重之處，除了指出永齡希望小學國語文補救教學方案能顯著提升低成就學生的國語文能力之外，同時發現不同師資背景並未顯著影響其教學成效。據此，研究者進一步提出相關的討論與建議。英文摘要：Purpose: This study examined the effects of the Yong-Ling Chinese remedial program (YL program) and teachers’ professional backgrounds on the literacy progress of second graders. Methods: Fifty-nine schools with 382 students (average age: 7.8 years) participated in this study. The participating students were divided into two groups: a treatment group of 198 students and a control group of 184 students-both containing students from every school. With their parents’ consent, students in the treatment group participated in the YL program for 40-minute sessions, six times per week over the course of 16 weeks. The students in the control group did not take part in the program. The 36 teachers assigned to the treatment group were categorized by professional background: full-time teachers with a elementary teacher certification (n = 16), unemployed teachers with certificates (n = 12), and student teachers from colleges (n = 8). A pretest–posttest quasi-experimental design was adopted. In addition to using the measures of socioeconomic status (SES) and nonverbal intelligence quotient (IQ), we tested for Chinese character size, Chinese character dictation, and Chinese reading comprehension before and after the intervention. Additionally, all students were required by the Taiwanese Ministry of Education to take a literacy achievement test, the After School Alternative Program- (ASAP-) technology-based test. We obtained the students' ASAP scores from the schools. Hierarchical regression analysis techniques, using SES, IQ, and pretest scores as covariates, were used to analyze the treatment effects. Furthermore, for the treatment group, hierarchical regression analysis was repeated to analyze the effects of teachers’ professional backgrounds on students’ test scores. Results/Findings: First, the intervention effects, for three out of four measures of literacy progress-namely Chinese character dictation, Chinese reading comprehension, and ASAP-were significant; that is, students in the experimental group outperformed the students in the control group in all aspects, except for Chinese character size. Second, when comparing the means of the three teacher professional background groups, no significant differences were observed in terms of Chinese character size, Chinese character dictation, and Chinese reading comprehension. However, the ASAP scores of students who were taught by the inexperienced student teachers lagged significantly behind those of students taught by the more experienced teachers. Conclusions/Implications: In addition to illustrating the intervention effectiveness of the YL program, this study discovered that teachers' professional background is not a crucial factor influencing the effectiveness of the YL program.起始頁-結束頁：85-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.2017.07.42020049篇名：運用教學反應結果作為國中閱讀障礙學生鑑定研判標準之試探性研究並列篇名：Response-To-Intervention as a Criterion for Identifying Reading Disability in Secondary Schools: A Pilot Study from 7^(th) -Grade Remediation作者：陳秀芬(Hsu-Feng Chen);洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung)關鍵字：國中;教學反應;閱讀障礙;鑑定;RTI;reading disability;identification;secondary school期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究主要目的在評估將教學反應模式（Response-To-Intervention Model, RTI）的第二層級介入納入閱讀障礙鑑定系統的可行性。臺灣學障鑑定基準「介入難有效改善」的要求即是以第二層級的補救教學反應結果作為鑑定研判標準的概念，如何合理地訂定「無教學反應者」（Non-Responser, NR），評量標準是相當重要的議題。研究者先比較採用不同測量工具、界定方法及切截點所組成之各種教學反應標準對於鑑別出「無教學反應者」的差異情形，再透過現行閱讀障礙綜合研判結果為效標，檢驗所設定教學反應標準的臨床效度。研究樣本為臺灣北區兩縣市70名接受一年閱讀理解補救教學方案並接受5次語文能力追蹤的國中七年級學生，其中53人於方案結束後同意接受閱讀障礙鑑定。研究者運用KAPPA一致性分析、二元邏輯斯迴歸、分類分析等方法進行資料分析。研究結果顯示，無論是使用詞彙或閱讀理解測驗，均建議採用「最終水準」及「成長斜率」之雙重差距標準，較能穩定選出NR出現比例，且因測驗間研判一致性低，故應考慮同時使用兩項測驗。迴歸及分類預測結果指出，在控制智力及前測後，納入詞彙及閱讀理解測驗成長斜率或最終水準之模式能小幅提升模式解釋力，且獲致較佳的敏感度（86%），惟受限於樣本數少、國中生語文能力成長幅度較小，故整體而言研判效能提升效果並不顯著。研究者最後針對結果提出討論及相關建議。英文摘要：Purpose: This study was aimed to appply the response-to-intervention (RTI) model into the process of identifying students with reading disabilities (RD) in Taiwan. The main purpose was to compare the different measurements and methods in order to establish adequate responses to identify nonresponsers (NRs), and then to determine the types of data used as a criterion of RTI. Method: A total of 70 seventh graders from northern Taiwan participated in a 1-year Chinese literacy remedial program. They were assessed five times during the year at 2-month intervals through both word reading (WR) and passage reading (PR) tests. After the remediation, 53 of the participants were referred to RD identification with consent. Kappa consistency analysis, logistic regression statistics, and classification accuracy were analyzed. Results: The main findings were as follows: 1) The results of the WR and PR tests both suggested that the dual discrepancy criterion, which combines the use of the final status and growth slope of the students' performance, was the most stable means for screening a reasonable percentage of NRs. However, of a possible 91 combinations from the different data, less than half the comparisons yielded a kappa value of ≧ 0.40; moreover, the percentage decreased with a more stringent cut-point. Consistency among the methods varied considerably: higher kappa values were driven by methods derived from the same test, as well as by similar cut-points. These consequences of comparison demonstrated the heterogeneous reading development of students at the secondary school level, so both the WR and PR assessments simultaneously were recommended for the decision of RTI. 2)The results of the logistic regression analysis and classification analysis indicate that the two proposed models that added the growth slope or posttest data of WR and PR respectively and controlled the index scores of the IQ tests and pretests of themselves, both showed adequate sensitivity (SEN) of classification. A SEN value of 86% indicated that only 14% of NR who were identified as RD could not be detected after the remedial program. Therefore, WR and PR were appropriate indicators at the screening stage of identification. However, the outcome could not be confirmed as statistically significant predictors because of the small sample and limitation of the growth of reading abilities in these students. Conclusions: Therefore, the overall results yielded supporting evidence to RTI. The final status of students' performance was recommended as the criteria of RTI compared with the growth slope. Other recommendations for further applications and studies are made.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.2017.03.420100110篇名：華語遲語幼兒及典型語言發展幼兒的表達性詞彙發展並列篇名：Expressive Mandarin Vocabulary Development in Late Talkers and Typical Language Development Children作者：劉惠美(Hui-Mei Liu);林郡儀(Chun-Yi Lin)關鍵字：表達性詞彙;華語嬰幼兒溝通發展量表;詞彙發展;詞類組成;遲語幼兒;Expressive vocabulary;Late talker;MCDI-Taiwan;Vocabulary composition;Vocabulary development期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討華語遲語幼兒（Late-Talker, LT）及典型語言發展幼兒（Typical language development, TLD）的表達性詞彙發展，以標準化家長報告的方式（華語嬰幼兒溝通發展量表臺灣版）蒐集37名LT及32名TLD在24個月及36個月的表達性詞彙發展，分析兩組幼兒在四種詞類（普通名詞、謂語、封閉詞、其他詞類）的詞彙數量、各詞類在總詞彙量中所占的詞類組成比例，以及各詞類詞彙量在24∼36個月間的變化差異。結果顯示，LT在兩個年齡階段的整體及各詞類詞彙量皆顯著少於TLD，代表LT的詞彙量在24個月和36個月時皆落後於TLD。在24個月時，TLD的詞類詞彙量由多至少，依序為普通名詞、謂語、其他詞類、封閉詞，而LT的詞類組成在此時與TLD略為不同，詞類詞彙量依序為其他詞類、普通名詞、謂語、封閉詞。其中，其他詞類（含人物稱謂）顯著多於TLD，而普通名詞及謂語比例顯著少於TLD，封閉詞則無顯著差異。然而，在36個月時，LT和TLD兩組幼兒的詞類組成比例相似，依序為普通名詞、謂語、其他詞類、封閉詞，但LT在封閉詞的比例顯著少於TLD，推測封閉詞包含較多語法（如連接詞），LT在封閉詞的習得較慢。整體詞彙在一年內的數量變化上，LT顯著大於TLD，惟兩組幼兒在封閉詞的變化量無顯著差異。本研究發現，LT在總詞彙量上較TLD少，其詞類組成在24個月時與TLD有所不同，但到36個月時即與TLD類似；另外，LT在24∼36個月間的各詞類詞彙變化量大於TLD，惟在封閉詞上的發展仍較慢於TLD，顯示LT早期詞彙有遲緩的現象，但在「質」的向度上則無明顯偏異。英文摘要：Purpose: This study examined the expressive vocabulary development of Mandarinspeaking children who exhibit late talking (LT) and compared it with children who exhibit typical language development (TLD). Methods: Thirty-seven LT and 32 TLD participated in the study. Their expressive vocabulary development, which included vocabulary size, vocabulary composition, and vocabulary developmental change, was assessed. The Mandarin-Chinese Communicative Development Inventory of Taiwan (MCDI-Taiwan) was used to determine the early expressive vocabulary development of these two groups of children. All pieces of vocabulary in the MCDI-Taiwan were categorized by semantic class into four types: ”common nouns,” ”predicates,” ”closed class,” and ”other pieces of vocabulary.” Three measures of vocabulary development, including the total vocabulary produced, the percentage of each vocabulary type in the total vocabulary size, and the progress in total vocabulary size between 24 months and 36 months were collected for individual children. Results/Findings: The total amount of vocabulary produced and the four types of vocabulary of LT were all significantly less developed than those of the TLD. These results indicate that the vocabulary produced by the LT at both 24 and 36 months was delayed when compared with that produced by TLD. Vocabulary size analysis for both groups revealed that ”common nouns” were the most developed, ”predicates” the second most developed, ”other pieces of vocabulary” the third most developed, and the ”closed class” the least developed. By contrast, the vocabulary composition of LT was significantly different from that of TLD at 24 months old. The four vocabulary categories ordered by use proportion, from most to least production category, were ”other pieces of vocabulary,” ”common nouns,” ”predicates,” and the ”closed class;” in other words, ”other pieces of vocabulary” were employed significantly more often by LT than by TLD. However, the production of ”common nouns” and ”predicates” by LT was less than that produced by TLD; finally, the proportion of ”closed class” words did not differ between the two groups at 24 months of age. Further analysis of these vocabulary categories revealed that the most used lexical choices in the ”other pieces of vocabulary” category related to people (e.g., ”father,” ”mother”). This result concerning vocabulary composition may be assumed to result from the emphasis on respect for seniority in Chinese society. At 36 months, vocabulary composition for both groups was similar: the most to least produced word groups were ”common nouns,” ”predicates,” ”other pieces of vocabulary,” and the ”closed class.” Notably, the use of ”closed class” words by LT was significantly less than that of TLD. More syntactical usage (e.g., conjunctions) potentially occurred for the ”closed class” words, resulting in slower development among LT. Overall, the developmental change in the vocabulary of LT over one year was significantly greater than that of TLD; however, the amount of that increment in the use of ”closed class” words was similar between the two groups. Conclusions/Implications: The vocabulary size of LT is significantly inferior to that of TLD. Additionally, vocabulary composition differs between the two groups at 24 months but is comparable at 36 months. Furthermore, the developmental change in terms of vocabulary for LT was greater than is that of the TLD, although the development change of ”closed class” words was comparable to TLD; this indicates that use of ”close class” vocabulary is difficult for both groups. The results suggest that LT exhibit ”delayed” vocabulary development rather than the ”deviant” when compared with TLD.起始頁-結束頁：27-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.2017.03.420100211篇名：傑出合唱團團員音樂才能發展及相關因素之探究並列篇名：The Developmental Process of Music Talent and Its Related Factors: A Study of Distinguished Choir作者：陳昭蓉(Chao-Jung Chen);林忻叡(Hsin-Rui Lin);陳美芳(Mei-Fang Chen)關鍵字：合唱團;音樂才能發展;音樂資優;choir;developmental process of music talent;music talent期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探究音樂才能發展與相關影響因素，邀請臺灣三大傑出合唱團中五位來自不同聲部與音樂教育背景的團員為研究對象，透過半結構訪談蒐集資料。研究第一部分撰寫每位受訪者音樂才能發展故事，並進行音樂發展階段的整體探究，結果大致符應音樂發展階段理論。受訪者在啟蒙階段展現感官天賦與對音樂的興趣；發展階段開始和未來領域直接相關的學習，除音樂班外，合唱團和校外活動也很重要；在轉折階段精進技能，認同自己音樂家身分，並正式踏入領域專業活動；目前階段已投入音樂領域一段時間，雖獲得成功，但也常面臨經濟困難等難題。此外，受訪者啟蒙較一般職業古典音樂家晚，也需要古典音樂外的涵養。研究第二部分由個人與環境、有利與不利四向度分析影響音樂才能發展的因素，結果發現無論個人或環境層面，有利因素很相似，受訪者均在啟蒙段階段展現優秀音樂潛力或興趣；在各階段皆展現強的內在動機，因而能在不同狀態下選擇進入音樂專業領域；隨發展階段晉升，更多受訪者展現強韌的意志，能克服困難，持續留在合唱專業發展；到能力趨於成熟的現階段，受訪者均有敏銳的覺察力，了解自己的特殊性。重要他人是最有利的環境因素，啟蒙階段最重要的是母親，其後則是音樂領域的同儕、師長或專業人士，這些專業夥伴也和受訪者能獲取環境資源密切相關。不利因素異質性較大，例如：找尋聲音定位、經濟因素、時間分配等。根據結果，本研究並提出對未來研究、藝術教育及音樂政策方面的建議。英文摘要：Purpose: This study investigated the developmental process of musical talent and its related factors among five singers from three distinguished semiprofessional choirs in Taiwan. Methods: Qualitative data were collected through semistructured interviews with the five singers, who vary in educational background and voice quality. A template analysis was adopted to generate meaning from the five singers' life stories using Gagne's DMGT 2.0 as a referential model. Results/findings: First, life stories were categorized into four stages. In the emerging phase, participants displayed their natural talents and interests in music and then entered the domain during the developing phase, where the activities in extracurricular settings assumed greater importance in addition to their formal training at school. In the turning phase, they established their musical identity and engaged in the professional field. In the current phase, they succeeded in some degree, while coping with challenges such as financial problems. Compared with the professional musicians in earlier studies, different qualities were observed. In general, they entered the domain later and sought resources from the nonclassical musical field. Second, influential factors were classified into four categories according to two dimensions, personal-environmental and beneficial-challenging, in consideration of the four stages. Similarities could be identified concerning beneficial factors among the five cases on both personal and environmental levels. For example, participants consistently displayed their natural talents and interests in the emerging phase, while possessing strong intrinsic motivation across all stages, which facilitated entrance to the musical domain, despite diverse conditions. Moreover, volition revealed its importance during the whole process, enabling them to overcome challenges and continue their professional pursuits. In the current phase, sensible awareness allowed them to understand their own specialties. Among the environmental beneficial factors, significant other was the most frequently stated. During the emerging phase, the mother was the most influential, with peers, teachers, and professional musicians following in importance thereafter. In contrast to the beneficial factors, the challenging factors were heterogeneous. For example, the following were mentioned: establishing a musical identity, income instability, and the distribution of time. Conclusions/implications: The development of musical talent is a process of interaction between a person and the environment. A person's motivation and volition across all stages facilitate music development. Significant other is the most crucial environmental beneficial factor. On the basis of the results, the study provides suggestions for future study and for music students' parents, music training education, and music culture development for Taiwanese society.起始頁-結束頁：51-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.2017.03.420100312篇名：學生學習動機與學業成就關聯之研究：教師創意教學的多層次調節式中介效果並列篇名：Correlation between students' learning motivation and academic achievements: The multilevel moderated mediation of creative teaching作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：多層次調節中介效果;教師創意教學;學習動機;學業成就;academic achievement;learning motivation;multilevel moderated mediation;creative teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：42卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究是以個體層次之學習動機與總體層次之教師創意教學為自變數，探討二者對學生學業成就的影響。透過對78位教師、1,808位學生的調查，使用階層線性模型（hierarchical linear modeling, HLM）分析變數之間的關係。研究結果發現如下：一、學生學習動機中的價值、預期、情感以及執行意志對學業成就有顯著的直接正向影響效果。二、教師創意教學中的心胸開放以及問題解決對於學業成就有正向的直接影響。三、教師創意教學中的心胸開放必須透過學生動機中的價值與情感兩個層面去解釋學生的學業成就，而問題解決必須透過學生動機中的價值、預期與執行意志三個層面去解釋學生的學業成就。四、教師創意教學中的問題解決在學生學習動機中的預期構面與學業成就間具有正向調節效果，互動討論在學生學習動機中的情感構面與學業成就間具有正向調節效果；換言之，價值與執行意志是中介變項，而預期與情感除了是中介變項之外，其與學業成就之間的關係也會分別被問題解決、互動討論所調節。針對上述結果，本研究提出相關的討論與建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Contemporary domestic research on creative teaching mainly focuses on teachers when discussing the factors affecting this aspect of education, but seldom studies the major party involved in creative teaching, namely students. By taking students as the main research object, the present study was aimed at elucidating the effect of creative teaching on students' academic achievements. As the independent variables, this study approached students' learning motivation at the individual level and teachers' creative learning at the overall level, examining the effects of both levels on students' academic achievements. Method: Aiming at a total of 78 teachers and 1,808 students to complete the survey, hierarchical linear modeling was utilized to analyze the relations among the variables. Results: The results are summarized as follows: 1. Value, expectancy, affection, and executive volition in students' learning motivation had significantly and directly positive effects on academic achievements. 2. Open-mindedness and problem solving in teachers' creative teaching exhibited positive and direct effects on students' academic achievements. 3. Open-mindedness in creative teaching explained students' academic achievements only through value and affection in student motivation. Problem solving further explained students' academic achievements through value, expectancy, and executive volition in students’ learning motivation. 4. Problem solving in creative teaching revealed positive moderating effects on the relationship between expectancy in students’ learning motivation and academic achievements. Moreover, interactive discussion appears to have had positive moderating effects on the relationship between affection in students' learning motivation and academic achievement. In other words, value and executive volition are mediators. Expectancy and affection, in addition to being mediators, were also moderated by problem solving and interactive discussion in their relation to academic achievements. In addition to clarifying the direct effect of teachers' creative teaching on students' academic achievements, this paper also presents a unique contribution in elucidating the change in these effects in situations in which students exhibit different degrees of learning motivation. Conclusions/Implications: On the basis of the preceding research results, the following relevant discussions and suggestions are outlined in this study: 1. Teachers and parents can directly enhance students' learning motivation so as to affect their academic achievements. 2. Teachers' creative teaching can directly influence students' academic achievements and indirectly affect students' academic achievements through the mediating effect of learning motivation. 3. Students' learning motivation should be considered by teachers practicing creative teaching. Finally, suggestions for relevant research are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：79-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.2017.03.420100401篇名：國小高年級語言障礙學生口語說明與對話能力之初探並列篇名：Examining Performance of Expository and Conversational Discourse in Mandarin-Speaking Children with Language Impairment作者：曾彥翰(Yen-Han Tseng);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu)關鍵字：語言障礙;口語說明;對話;語法;語意;language impairment;expository discourse;conversation;syntax期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：46期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國小高年級正常發展學生與語言障礙學生口語說明與對話能力，以「對話」及「說明」作業（「遊戲或運動」和「同儕衝突」）收集學生的語言樣本，進行語意、語法與迷走語之分析。主要發現如下：(1)語意方面，兩組學生在對話中所使用的總詞彙數、校正後相異詞出現率，較說明作業多；組間比較顯示語言障礙學生的校正後相異詞出現率顯著低於正常發展學生，呈現語意能力的缺陷。(2)語法方面，兩組學生在對話時所產生的「總主謂句」、「介詞」、「連詞」的數量均較說明為多，而說明的「平均主謂句長度」較對話長；在組間比較方面，語言障礙學生的「平均主謂句長度」明顯較正常發展學生短，顯示此一計量較能反應國小高年級學生的語法能力。(3)迷走語方面，對話與說明作業的「迷走語比率」無顯著差異，但「遊戲或運動」作業的迷走語數量最少；組間比較上，無論是迷走語數量或比率，均未有顯著差異。整體而言，本研究發現「校正後相異詞出現率」與「平均主謂句長度」為有效區辨語言障礙的指標，而「同儕衝突」作業是較適合評量國小高年級學生說明能力的語言作業。英文摘要：Expository discourse is an important genre to understand the growth of language production, especially the syntactic development of individuals through childhood to adolescence. The purpose of this study aimed to investigate and compare the language performance of expository and conversational discourses in Mandarin-speaking children with language impairment (LI) and typically developing age-matched peers (TD). An initial attempt was also made to explore the most competent task and language measures to indicate the performance differences of these two groups in Mandarin expository discourse. In this study, 10 LI aged 10;10 - 12;8 (years; months) and 10 TD participated in general conversation and expository discourse were elicited in the ”peer conflict resolution task” and ”favorite game or sport task”. Each language sample was transcribed and segmented into Chinese simple sentences. Expository and conversational samples were analyzed for several language variables (e.g. number different words, type token ratio, corrected type token ratio, number of conjunction/preposition/mazes, percentage of Maze words, total subject-predicate sentences, and mean length of subject-predicate sentences). Results of this study indicated that children with LI have inferior semantic and syntactic abilities than their age-matched peers in the conversational and expository discourses. In Mandarin, expository discourse was also a more sensitive genre than conversation to examine syntactic ability of older children. Moreover, the peer conflict resolution task could elicit greater syntactic complexity than favorite game or sport task.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系2篇名：國小中年級閱讀障礙兒童伴隨語言問題之研究並列篇名：A Study of Reading Disabilities Associated with Language Problems in Mandarin Speaking Middle- Grade Elementary Students作者：劉義翔(Yi-Xiang Liu);黃瑞珍(Rei-Jane Huang)關鍵字：學習障礙;閱讀障礙;語言能力;口語理解;口語表達;learning disabilities;reading disabilities;language ability;receptive language;expressive language期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：46期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國小中年級閱讀障礙兒童伴隨語言問題之比率、伴隨和不具語言問題之閱讀障礙兒童的口語理解與表達能力、語意及語法能力之差異。研究對象為46名國小中年級閱讀障礙兒童。配合研究目的以《國民小學閱讀理解診斷測驗(elementary school reading comprehension diagnostic assessment, RCDA)》、課程本位口語流暢度測驗(curriculum-based measurement-oral reading fluency, CBM-ORF)及《華語學齡兒童溝通及語言能力測驗(test of communication and language ability for school-age children in Chinese, TCLA)》進行閱讀障礙及伴隨語言問題之認定，及口語理解與表達能力之測量，並以敘述統計、獨立樣本t檢定及相依樣本t檢定進行資料分析。研究結果：(1)國小中年級閱讀障礙兒童伴隨語言問題之比率為74%；(2)伴隨語言問題之閱讀障礙兒童在TCLA全測驗、理解量表及表達量表得分顯著低於不具語言問題之閱讀障礙兒童；(3)伴隨語言問題之閱讀障礙兒童在TCLA理解量表得分顯著高於TCLA表達量表得分，不具語言問題之閱讀障礙兒童則無內在差異存在；(4)在語意能力方面，伴隨語言問題之閱讀障礙兒童在TCLA的詞彙及象徵性語言分測驗表現顯著低於不具語言問題之閱讀障礙兒童；(5)在語法能力方面，伴隨語言問題之閱讀障礙兒童在TCLA的語句結構及關聯詞分測驗表現，顯著低於不具語言問題之閱讀障礙兒童。最後，本研究依據研究結果進行討論並提供未來研究之建議，供研究者及教育工作者參考。英文摘要：There were two objectives in this study. One was to examine the percentage of children with reading disabilities associated with language problems. The other one was to explore the expressive and receptive language skills in children with reading disabilities. Forty-six 3rd and 4th grade students with reading disabilities in Taiwan participated in the current study. Three instruments were administered: Elementary School Reading Comprehension Diagnostic Assessment (RCDA), Curriculum-Based Measurement Oral Reading Fluency (CBM-ORF), and Test of Communication and Language Ability for School-Age Children in Chinese (TCLA). The data were analyzed using descriptive statistics and t-test, which provided the following results: (a) Approximately 74% of children with reading disabilities associated with language problems. (b) Not only receptive language skills but also expressive language skills in children with reading disabilities had language problems (RD-L group) were significant lower than children with reading disabilities only (RD only group). (c) Receptive language skills were significant higher than expressive language skills in the RD-L group, but there was no difference in the RD only group. (d) The semantic performances which included vocabulary abilities and figurative language abilities in the RD only group were significant higher than in the RD-L group. (e) Syntactic performances which included sentence structure abilities and connectives abilities in the RD only group were significant higher than in the RD-L group.起始頁-結束頁：31-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系3篇名：影響語音異常兒童非詞複誦表現因素之探討並列篇名：Factors Affecting the Performance of Nonword Repetition for Children with Speech Sound Disorders (SSD)作者：鄭靜宜(Jing-Yi Jeng)關鍵字：非詞複誦;語音異常;構音異常;非詞偵測;非詞聽辨;短期記憶;nonword repetition;speech sound disorders;articulatory disorders;phonological memory;nonword detection;nonword discrimination期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：46期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究的目的在探討語音異常(speech sound disorders, SSD)兒童的非詞複誦表現以及非詞複誦和聽知覺區辨、偵測、詞語理解、短期記憶和構音能力之間的關係。非詞是不具意義的音節組成，因非詞的音韻處理受到語意的牽絆較小，藉由非詞的複誦、區辨和偵測等評估作業可對SSD兒童的音韻工作記憶能力、語音聽知覺、語音切割、語音動作等能力關係加以釐清，並可顯現SSD能力的限制。本研究所使用的三種非詞作業，包括非詞聽知覺區辨、非詞音節偵測以及非詞複誦作業，共有134位學前兒童參與，其中SSD兒童和正常控制組各有67位，控制組是由年齡、性別配對的SSD同儕所組成。測試後分析結果發現兩組兒童在三項非詞作業的正確率和數字廣度分數有顯著差異，且發現兒童的非詞複誦正確率和非詞聽辨、非詞偵測、數字廣度分數與構音正確率之間具顯著中度至中高度相關，而非詞複誦正確率和詞彙理解能力之間相關則不顯著。多元迴歸分析的結果顯示兒童的詞語構音正確率，其次是非詞區辨正確率、再其次是數字廣度分數（短期記憶）這三個變項可解釋64%之非詞複誦正確率的變異量。推論語音異常兒童較差的非詞複誦表現之因，除了較弱的構音動作技巧外，尚有聽知覺區辨以及短期音韻記憶能力的限制。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to investigate the relationship between the nonword repetition performance of children with speech sound disorders (SSD) and nonword discrimination, nonword detection, phonological shorten memory and auditory word comprehension. Nonwords, composed by syllables are meaningless, were thought to be less involved in semantic components. In this study, three nonword tasks were developed for preschool children, including the nonword repetition task, the nonword discrimination task and the nonword detection task. In the nonword repetition task, there are two subtests, one is ”simple nonword repetition”, and the other is ”complex nonword repetition”. The main difference between these two repetition tasks is the motor complexity of the initial consonant of a syllable. The simple nonword repetition task is similar to the ”syllable repetition task” (SRT), proposed by Shriberg, et al. (2009). There are also two subtests in the nonword detection tasks, one is sentence nonword detection task, and the other is nonword sequence nonword detection tasks. The target nonwords are the same, but the difference is the carrier stimuli, which are either sentences or nonword sequences. There were 134 preschool children participating the nonword assessments, half of them with speech sound disorders, and half of them are speech typically developing, age-matched peers. The results showed that the children with SSD had significantly lower percentage correct on all three nonword tasks, as well as on the digital span task, but not on the PPVT scores. The correct rates of nonword repetition were moderately correlated with those of the nonword discrimination, nonword detection and digital span scores. The performance of nonword repetition can be 64% explained by the articulatory correct rates, speech discrimination, and digital span scores, and it suggests that the poor articulatory motor ability, and the limitation of speech perception capacity and phonological working memory can account for the poor performance of nonword repetition on children with SSD.起始頁-結束頁：55-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系4篇名：A Study on the Effects and Challenges of Itinerant Services for the Gifted in Junior High School並列篇名：彰化縣國中資優巡迴輔導成效與困境之研究作者：賴翠媛(Tsuei-Yuan Lai)關鍵字：itinerant services for the gifted students in junior high school;itinerant teacher;國中資優巡迴輔導;巡迴輔導教師期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：46期出版年：2017中文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects and challenges of itinerant services for junior high school's gifted students in Changhua County. Participants were one administration staff member from the Special Education Division of Changhua County Education Bureau and three itinerant teachers for the gifted students. Interviews were conducted through the Internet with semi-structured questions and related documents were collected from the county government. The findings were as follows: (a) Itinerant teachers offered both direct and indirect services to the gifted students, of which were providing one-on-one learning sections to the students and professional counseling services to the school staffs and parents; (b) The learning activities which itinerant teachers offered were subject enrichment and special needs curriculum, such as independent study, affection education, leadership training and creative thinking; (c) Difficulties occurred on the lesson planning when a teacher's professional expertise differed from his/her gifted students; (d) The decline in the number of gifted students posed another challenge for maintaining the gifted itinerant services; and (e) The itinerant teachers' stress came from the numbers of students they served, difficulties of schedule arrangements, time spent on traveling, and a lack of support from schools. In conclusion, itinerant teachers did bring divertive enrichment services to the gifted students. However, there was a need for the County Government to solve the challenges which related to the gifted itinerant services. Based on the findings, this study offered some suggestions for the county education authority, the junior high school itinerant teachers, and further studies.英文摘要：我國自2009年特殊教育法修法將國民教育階段資優學生的安置方式由原來的集中式改為資源教室、巡迴輔導及特殊教育方案後，為符應資優學生的需求，彰化縣率先於2011年針對未能安置於資優資源班的國民中小學資優學生提供巡迴輔導的服務，其後，各縣市亦陸續提供資優教育巡迴輔導服務，使偏遠地區及學校總人數較少的資優學生能受惠。本研究主要目的在了解國中資優巡迴輔導的服務成效及困境，期能提供縣市政府及未來政策擬定的參考。研究對象為一位辦理特殊教育的公務人員與三位現職國中資優巡迴輔導教師。透過文件分析及訪談蒐集相關資料，並進行綜合分析，所得結果如下：(1)巡迴輔導教師提供國中資優學生直接和間接的服務，包含對學生進行個別教學，及提供學校相關工作人員及家長專業諮詢。(2)巡迴輔導教師所提供的教學內容包含學科領域的充實與特殊需求課程包含：獨立研究、情意課程、領導才能訓練以及創造思考訓練。(3)當資優學生類別與巡迴輔導教師專業領域不同時，規劃教學活動對教師來說是一大難題。(4)通過鑑定的資優學生人數逐漸減少是國中資優巡迴輔導班繼續經營的一大隱憂。(5)巡迴輔導教師的工作壓力包括：學生人數，排課困難，時間和交通壓力，以及缺乏學校支持等。整體而言，國中資優巡迴輔導確實能為資優學生提供多元化的充實服務。但是，整體運作方面仍存在諸多挑戰有待解決。本研究依據研究發現提出了一些建議供縣教育局、國中巡迴輔導教師和未來研究之參考。起始頁-結束頁：85-99資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系5篇名：學習障礙大學生學校生活適應研究並列篇名：School Adjustment of College Students with Learning Disabilities作者：王瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Wang)關鍵字：學習障礙;大專生;學校生活適應;college students;learning disabilities;school adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：45期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究係透過問卷調查瞭解學習障礙大學生在高等教育階段學校生活適應狀況和特教需求，並分析不同背景變項之學習障礙大學生在學校生活適應之差異。研究對象係從北，中，南三區招收學習障礙人數較多的32 所大專校院中抽樣，每所學校寄四份，其中一所只有三份回收，總填答份數為127 人（男86 人，女41 人），回收率99.22%。根據問卷結果分析，得到以下的結果：(1)學習障礙大學生在同儕與師生關係方面多屬正向反應；個案多表示喜歡上大學，認為大學的價值主要係結交各種好朋友，擴大生活領域；對大學整體學習成果感到滿意的約有六成；(2)多數(94%)學生對於學校提供特殊教育協助感到滿意，最需要的項目是經費掖助與課業輔導，以及獲得未來職涯發展的相關訊息；(3)家庭社經地位高低，學習障礙鑑定時間的早晚，自我概念強弱，成功特質多寡之學習障礙學生，其學校生活適應有顯著差異。其餘背景變項（即入學管道，年級，科系與志願相符程度，接受特殊教育時間的早晚）之學習障礙學生的學校生活適應則無顯著差異。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to investigate the school adjustment, the needs of disability services, and various factors relating to school adjustment of college students with learning disabilities. Participants were 127 college students (86 males and 41 females) from 32 colleges or universities in Taiwan. A self-rating questionnaire was given to each student to fill out by school counselors. Results indicated that social relationships with classmates and faculties were positive, however, they had more learning struggles, especially in completing group assignments. Most of them enjoyed going to colleges because of the friendship with classmates and different life experiences. Financial support, academic remediation, and career development information were top three services students needed. No significant differences in school adjustment were found among students of various admission pathways, grades, commitment to their majors, and length of receiving special education. Significant differences in school adjustment were found between students of different SES, identification timing, self- concept, as well as success characteristics of adults with learning disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系6篇名：多感官音樂活動促進多重障礙幼兒持續注意力與肢體動作之學習成效並列篇名：A Study of Multi-Sensory Musical Activities for Children with Multiple Disabilities on Promoting Sustained Attention and Physical Movement Effective Learning作者：李玲玉(Liza Lee);何函儒(Han-Ju Ho)關鍵字：多感官音樂活動;多重障礙幼兒;持續注意力;肢體動作;multi-sensory musical activities;children with multiple disabilities;sustained attention;physical movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：45期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究目的為探討多重障礙幼兒於多感官音樂活動中持續注意力與肢體動作學習成效。研究以個案研究為多感官音樂活動為主架構所進行之活動，經由質性與量化資料分析個案之學習成效。研究採用參與觀察法與單一受試研究法蒐集研究資料，活動進行為期12 週，每週一次，每次30 分鐘。為求研究結果的客觀性，將量化資料及相關文字資料進行交叉比對，研究結果為：(1)多感官音樂活動能增進個案持續注意力與肢體動作。(2)活動後，穩定保留其進步成果。從研究結果發現多感官音樂活動除了能夠促進個案之多感官發展，還能夠引起個案參與活動之意願。因此，本研究證實多感官音樂活動對多重障礙幼兒之正向影響，是個值得推廣之活動。英文摘要：The study main goals were to discuss multi-sensory musical activities' influence on the participants' sustained attention and physical movements through the aids of multi-sensory musical activities. This case study was structured under the framework of multi-sensory musical activities in order to analyze children with multiple disabilities performance by way of qualitative and quantitative studies. The researcher team participated in, Participant Observation, and single-subject research designs then collected data. This duration lasted twelve weeks with 30 minutes per week. To achieve objectivity, the researcher cross-juxtaposed all quantitative data and found out. Results of the analysis indicated:(a)Multi-sensory activities can improve children with multiple disabilities sustained attention abilities and intensify physical movements. (b)After the activity, a follow-up retention session also indicated that the improvement had been retained. Conclusions/Implications: Not only can multi-sensory musical activities accelerate the development of these children, but they can also arouse their willingness to join this course. Thus, this research proves to be positive to the children with multiple disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：25-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系7篇名：運用字母拼讀法於國中資源班學習障礙學生英語教學之行動研究並列篇名：The Action Research of Using Phonics to Enhance English Learning for Students with Learning Disabilities in the Junior High School Resource Room作者：黃翔怡(Hsiang-Yi Huang);于曉平(Hsiao-Ping Yu)關鍵字：字母拼讀法;學習障礙;英語教學;phonics;learning disability;English teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：45期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究採用行動研究法，以研究者任教的三名國中資源班學習障礙學生為研究對象，實施為期15 週，共27 節課的字母拼讀教學方案於國中資源班英語課程，以探討實施過程、所遭遇的困難與因應策略，並觀察學生學習表現、學習方法與學習態度方面的轉變，以及研究者於教學上的省思與成長。茲將所得結論分述如下：(1)關於教學實施過程，進行英文字母讀音教學時，學生難以辨識字形相似英文字母，且不易掌握或混淆部分字母讀音，教師適時提供簡易區辨策略，並以『示範說明』、『彈性調整』與『加強練習』作為因應進行目標尾韻單字教學時，學生易遺忘或混淆單字字義，教師以『多元教學』與『反覆練習』作為改善之道。(2)關於學生的改變，學生一方面習得看字讀音與聽音拼字的能力，掌握學英文的要領，另一方面則學習與單字的中文字義連結，提升單字辨識能力，且有助於激發學生對課程的參與度，但對整體學習態度的改變有限。(3)關於教師的省思，教師除了應審慎規劃課程與教學，兼顧學生聽說讀寫之綜合能力外，也應彈性調整課程進度，靈活運用多元教學方式與教學時間，並培養學生獨立學習能力，降低習得依賴感。最後根據研究結論，提出有關的研究與教育上的建議。英文摘要：This study took action research and Phonics to English course for three students with learning disabilities in the junior high school resource room for 15 weeks, to find out difficulties that might occur during English implementation, coping strategies, the changing learning results, methods, and attitudes of students, and the reflection of the researcher. According to the research findings, first, in the implementation of Phonics teaching, students with LD had difficulties in recognizing similar letters of the alphabet, and confused with some alphabet pronunciations. The teacher offered simple strategies of recognition, and used demonstrations, adjustments, and practices for them. In addition, students easily forgot or confused the meaning of the words. The teacher used multiple teaching and practices repeatedly to solve the difficulties. Second, the students learned pronunciation and spelling, and knew the keys to learn English. Besides, they learned to connect the English word to the meaning, and their word recognition skills were improved. On the other hand, Phonics can arouse the students' participation in course. However, Phonics can't change all students' learning attitudes. Then, teacher should plan the English curriculum and instruction carefully, and develop students' comprehensive ability combined with listening, speaking, reading and writing. Finally, teacher should adjust the course schedule, uses multiple teaching methods, and control instructional time flexibly. Teacher could need to promote students' independence of learning English, and reduce their dependence.起始頁-結束頁：55-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系8篇名：臺灣身心障礙青少年健康與快樂感之縱貫性研究並列篇名：A Longitudinal Study of Health and Happiness in Taiwanese Adolescents with Disabilities作者：廖錦文(Chin-Wen Liao);鄭博文(Po-Wen Cheng);石宜正(Yi-Cheng Shih);江耀宗(Yao-Tsung Chiang)關鍵字：身心障礙青少年;快樂感;健康;縱貫性研究;特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫;adolescents with disabilities;happiness;health;longitudinal study;special needs education longitudinal study (SNELS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：45期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討身心障礙青少年健康與快樂感之關聯性及發展變化，並細究性別對快樂感之差異性。本研究採用縱貫性調查，以特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫2010 年、2012 年及2013 年之身心障礙學生資料，三個時間點的重覆測量，共計830 位固定樣本追蹤資料。以交叉延宕模型以及潛在成長曲線模型進行資料分析。研究結果發現：(1)從交叉延宕模型分析結果，健康與快樂感存在相互影響效應；(2)身心障礙青少年健康起始狀態與健康成長速率具有預測效應，性別對快樂感起始狀態與成長率無顯著差異；(3)健康對快樂感有因果關係之影響，健康初始狀態與成長率對於快樂感之初始狀態與成長速率有顯著正向效果。英文摘要：The purpose of the present study was to investigate the relationship between health and happiness, developmental changes, and happiness for gender differences in adolescents with disabilities. Using a longitudinal approach, panel sample data were collected from 830 senior high school students with the special needs education longitudinal study (SNELS) in three waves in 2010, 2012, and 2013. Data analysis was performed using the autoregressive cross-lagged model (ARCL) and the latent growth curve model (LGCM). Results showed the following: (a) The results of the analysis with autoregressive cross-lagged model, health and happiness indicated a mutually influential relationship. (b) The initial state of health could forecast the growth rate of health for adolescents with disabilities, gender had not significant impacts on the initial status and the growth rates of happiness. (c) Health revealed a causal relationship with the effects of happiness, the initial state and growth rate of health exerted significantly positive effects on the initial state and growth rate of happiness. This paper presents suggestions based on the study results.起始頁-結束頁：89-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系01篇名：社區強制諮商團體對預防再犯親密暴力的成效探究並列篇名：The Effectiveness of Court-Mandated Group Counseling in Community for Preventing from the Recidivism of Intimate Partner Violence作者：邱獻輝(Hsien-Huei Chiou)關鍵字：社區強制諮商;施暴者;家庭暴力;團體處遇;Community-based mandated counseling;Domestic violence;Group treatment;Wife batterer期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：社區強制諮商團體是預防親密暴力再犯的主要處遇之一，然其成效在國外頗具爭議，國內相關諮商訓練與研究有限，故急需建構一套適用於台灣的療效知識。本研究綜合目前主流方案的療效困境與改善意見後，根據性別平權、認知行為療法、團體動力等理念設計並帶領一個12次單元的半結構、開放諮商團體方案，透過混合研究設計、蒐集施暴者與受暴者的質性與量化評估資料，共獲得22對參與者的有效資料；考量共同生活與否可能會影響再犯率，故將同住與分住的伴侶分開進行對偶分析。研究結果顯示在處遇後，除了受暴者的精神受暴分數增加外，其餘暴力向度的分數皆減少；進一步顯著性考驗發現同住組的伴侶溝通已顯著增加、且肢體暴力明顯減少；分住組則在溝通、肢體暴力、精神暴力、性暴力、受傷等皆顯著減少。本研究施暴者暴力減少除了可歸因於團體療效之外，理應還參混著保護令的抑制與分住的隔離效果。英文摘要：Court-mandated group counseling in community is one of the most important ways to prevent from recidivism of intimate partner violence (IPV). The effectiveness related to this kind of counseling is still debatable generally. Moreover, the related issues are seldom explored in Taiwan train institute and research field. To construct related knowledge, this author reviewed the critical and improved ways for the current court-mandated group counseling. Then, a court-mandated, open-ended, semi-structural group counseling program including 12 sessions within community based on gender equality, cognitive-behavior therapy, and group counseling was designed and conducted by this author. The participants included 22 perpetrators and their victims. The study adopted a mixed method design which collected data from both perpetrators and their victims. Due to whether lived together or not would influence the probability of recidivism of IPV, the data were divided into cohabitating team and separated team, and then analyzed through dyadic analysis approach. The descriptive statistics showed that all the scores of IPV diminished in addition to psychological violence from the victims' perspective. Further analysis indicated that not only perpetrator's couple communication improved but also physical assault decreased significantly after attending court-mandated group counseling in the cohabitating team. On the other hand, the physical, psychological, sexual violence, and injury have decreased significantly, accompanying communicational frequency decreased, in the separated team. The effectiveness of IPV decreasing among participants in this study could partially attribute to attending group counseling in this study, although part of effectiveness should attribute to the inhibiting function of protection order and the result of separating.起始頁-結束頁：163-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201712-49(2).00012篇名：性侵害兒童的意願與行為的關聯及影響因素並列篇名：Relationship Between Child Sexual Aggression Intention and Practice and Its Impact Factors作者：黃軍義(Jiun-Yih Huang)關鍵字：性侵害兒童;偏差性興奮;意願與行為;Child sexual aggression;Deviant sexual arousal;Intention and practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：犯罪意願與行為之間的關聯，過去研究甚少探討，然而此一議題的探討具有犯罪防制上的意涵。而各類犯罪行為中，性侵害兒童行為是道德可責性較高者，且數量不少，有鑑於此，本研究特別探討性侵害兒童的意願與行為的關聯，及其間的影響因素。本研究以台灣三所監獄裡的男性受刑人，以及台北、新竹共計六所公、私立大學的男性學生為參與者。以無記名自陳式問卷調查法蒐集資料，共計得到受刑人與大學生有效樣本數分別為915、559位。研究結果顯示，性侵害兒童的意願與行為具有關聯，男性受刑人、大學生性侵害兒童的意願可解釋性侵害兒童行為的變異量分別為13.7~28.0%、2.2~8.4%。此外，偏差性興奮、認知扭曲、反社會性格違常傾向、與觀看兒童色情影刊，是影響受刑人性侵害兒童的意願與行為之間關聯的因子；反社會性格違常傾向、認知扭曲、與觀看兒童色情影刊，是影響大學生性侵害兒童的意願與行為之間關聯的因子。兩樣本的影響因子略有不同，各項影響因子可解釋意願與行為間隔的變異量亦不同。文未就研究結果的意涵、實務應用、研究限制與未來研究方向提出討論。英文摘要：Few studies have examined the relationship between criminal intention and practice. However, investigations in this field have implications in crime prevention. Sexual aggression against children causes severe harm to victims, has a prevalence, and is associated with major social concerns; therefore, the present study investigated the relationship between child sexual aggression intention and practice and its impact factors. An anonymous self-report questionnaire was adopted to collect data from 915 incarcerated males at Taipei, Taichung, and Kaohsiung prisons in Taiwan and 559 male college students from 6public and private universities in Taipei and Hsinchu. The results show that the intention and practice of child sexual aggression are related. Child sexual aggression intention accounts for 13.7~28.0%, 2.2~8.4% variances of practice separately in male inmates and college students. Besides, deviant sexual arousal (pedophilia tendency), cognitive distortion (child sexual aggression myth acceptance), antisocial personality disorder tendency, and viewing child pornography are factors influencing the relevance of child sexual aggression intention and practice among male inmates. Antisocial personality disorder tendency, cognitive distortion, and viewing child pornography are factors influencing the relevance of child sexual aggression intention and practice among male college students. The impact factors and the amount of variance they can account for the relevance of child sexual aggression intention and practice are different in the two samples. Finally, this paper discusses the implications of the research results, practical applications, limitations, and directions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：193-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201712-49(2).00023篇名：科學多重文本閱讀理解評量之建構與信效度分析－以氣候變遷與三峽大壩之間的關係題本為例並列篇名：Developing and Validating a Scientific Multi-Text Reading Comprehension Assessment: Evidence from Texts Describing Relationships between Climate Changes and the Three Gorges Dam作者：林小慧(Hsiao-Hui Lin);曾玉村(Yu-Htsuen Tzeng)關鍵字：多面向Rasch測量模式;科學多重文本閱讀理解評量;部分給分模式;評定量尺模式;驗證性因素分析;Confirmatory factor analysis;Many-facet Rasch measurement;Partial credit model;Rating scale model;Scientific multiple text reading comprehension assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究主要目的係在發展「科學多重文本閱讀理解評量」，並建立一組評鑑閱讀理解能力之「多重文本閱讀理解評量規準」。本評量之科學題本為「氣候變遷與中國長江三峽大壩的關係」，包含「提取訊息」、「概化訊息」、「解釋訊息」以及「整合訊息」四個分評量，共計10題選擇題及9題建構題。分析結果顯示，評分者內之Cronbach's α值均大於.9，表示評分者內一致性尚稱良好。其次，評分者間之Kendall ω和諧係數值大於 .8，P值小於＜ .001，達顯著相關，顯示評分者間有相同相對等級的評分趨勢。另評分者嚴苛度之多面向Rasch測量模式與評定量尺及部分給分模式比較之卡方考驗則達顯著水準，表示評分者間的嚴苛度及閾值嚴苛度存在差異存在，前者infit與outfit MFRM均介於1±0.3 之間，表示無論是嚴格或寬鬆的評分者，均能有效區分出高、低能力的學生；後者意謂著對於牽涉到評分者之詮釋、評估、評分的心理歷程，本來就很難像機器評分一樣的一致性，亦符合一般對於人評分的預期，並可被理解與接受。其次，題本之內部一致性，除「提取訊息」、「概化訊息」外，其餘亦均大於.70，全評量α則在.90以上，顯示SMTRCA之Cronbach's α尚在可接受範圍內。最後，驗證性因素分析也支持「科學多重文本閱讀理解評量」四因素之假設模式，兩者適配尚稱符合。本研究初步發現「科學多重文本閱讀理解評量」可分為「提取訊息」、「概化訊息」、「解釋訊息」以及「整合訊息」四個分評量，而該四個分評量分數所表徵之一階潛在因素，可被「科學多重文本閱讀理解評量」解釋的變異量分別為.60、.66、.80、.80。英文摘要：This study aimed to advance the Scientific Multi-Text Reading Comprehension Assessment (SMTRCA), with a focus on the Rubric of Multi-Text Reading Comprehension Assessment (RMTRCA) designed to evaluate the extent of reading comprehension. To this end, we used scientific texts describing the dispute of the relationships between climate changes and the Three Gorges Dam and developed assessment items according to our rubric. Test items included 10 close-ended and 9 open-ended questions and were categorized into 4 subscales: information retrieval, information generalization, information interpretation, and information integration. The results of analysis showed that the cronbach's α values were more than .9, indicating that the intra-rater consistency was well. Secondly, the Kendall’s coefficient of concordance was more than .8 and its P value was smaller than .001, denoting a consistent scoring pattern between raters. Additionally, the analysis of many-facet Rasch measurement (MFRM) and the comparison of the rating scale model (RSM) and the partial credit model (PCM) showed that the chi-square test of rater severity and threshold difficulty were significant. The infit and outfit MNSQ of the former are between 1±0.3, meaning that both severe and lenient raters can distinguish high-ability students from low-ability students more effectively. The latter means that the rating procedures involve human interpretation, evaluation and scoring processes so that it is difficult to reach a machine-like consistency level. However, this is in line with expectations of typical human judgment processes. Thirdly, most values of Cronbach's α of test items were larger than .7 except those from information retrieval and information generalization but overall they were all within acceptable range. Finaly, confirmatory factor analysis showed that there was an acceptable goodness-of-fit among the SMTRCA. The SMTRCA accounts for .60, .66, .80, and .80 of the variance associated with the first order factors of 4 subscales.起始頁-結束頁：215-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2017-49(2).00034篇名：融入基督宗教靈性觀之心理諮商歷程分析：以家庭關係諮商為例並列篇名：Integrating Christian Spirituality into Counseling: An analysis of family relationship counseling process作者：張淑芬(Shu-Fen Chang)關鍵字：重要事件;家庭關係;融入基督宗教靈性觀之心理諮商;Christian spirituality integrated counseling;Family relationship;Significant events期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討融入基督宗教靈性觀之心理諮商歷程，以了解心理師融入靈性之個案概念化、諮商意圖，以及諮商介入之內涵。研究方法採質性研究之重要事件法，以深度訪談法收集資料，並以持續比較法分析之。研究參與者為諮商心理師及親子互動困擾之夫妻一對，三人皆具相同之天主教信仰。研究結果為：（1）融入靈性之個案概念化內涵：包含評估宗教信念意涵與影響、評估人－神關係與心理議題間動力；（2）融入靈性之諮商意圖內涵：包含意圖加深體驗神愛層次、意圖重新架構上帝意象內涵；（3）融入靈性之諮商介入內涵：包含重新架構上帝意象內涵、辨別神臨在記號訊息等。本研究根據研究結果，對諮商心理師、諮商教育者及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this research was to understand the process of integrating Christian spirituality into counseling in terms of case conceptualization, counseling intention, and counseling intervention skills. One Catholic counseling psychologist and one Catholic couple with parent-child maltreatment issues participated in this study. Qualitative research method was adopted and in-depth, semi-constructed interviews of significant events were constructed. The major findings were: (1) Types of case conceptualization: evaluation on religious belief, and dynamics between human-God relations and psychological issues. (2) Types of counseling intention: intention on deepening the experiencing levels of divine love, and changing the images of God. (3) Types of counseling intervention skills: Reframing the images of God, and discerning the signs of God's presence. Suggestions were offered for counseling psychologists, educators and further research.起始頁-結束頁：243-266資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2017-49(2).00045篇名：你求助嗎？個人目標導向與適應／非適應課業求助／避助行為之關係並列篇名：Do you ask for help? Exploring the Relations between Achievement Goal Orientations and Academic Adaptive/Nonadaptive Help-seeking/Help-avoidance Behaviors作者：彭淑玲(Shu-Ling Peng);王佩琪(Pei-Chi Wang);林宏泰(Hung-Tai Lin)關鍵字：非適應行為;個人目標導向;課業求助;課業避助;適應行為;Academic help-avoidance;Academic help-seeking;Adaptive behaviors;Nonadaptive behaviors;Persona goal orientations期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去研究多探討學習者採取的課業求助行為類型，鮮少區分課業避助行為。本研究目的是：（1）統整課業求助／避助行為，進一步區分避免求助類型，據此編製課業求助／避助行為量表（含工具性求助、執行性求助、掩飾性避助、獨立性避助與完全不求助），並考驗該量表之信、效度；（2）分析五種課業求助／避助行為之適應、非適應行為屬性；（3）探討個人目標導向與課業求助／避助行為之關係。本研究抽取共1376位七至九年級國中生進行施測，蒐集資料以結構方程式進行分析。研究結果顯示：（1）課業求助／避助行為量表具有良好信、效度，可用來解釋國中生在數學科中採取的課業求助／避助行為；（2）工具性求助與獨立性避助為適應行為，執行性求助、掩飾性避助與完全不求助則為非適應行為；（3）個人目標導向可預測課業求助／避助行為，其中趨向精熟目標最能促進適應的求助／避助行為、並抑制非適應的求助／避助行為；而逃避表現目標則與趨向精熟目標帶來的結果相反。英文摘要：The topic of academic help-seeking behavior has been extensively researched in past studies. Nevertheless, few studies explore both the help-seeking behaviors and its counterpart, namely, help-avoidance simultaneously. This study, accordingly, aims to achieve the following objectives: (a) developing the Academic Help-Seeking/Help-Avoidance Behaviors Scale and testing its validity and reliability; (b) clarifying the attribute of five help-seeking/help-avoidance behaviors as adaptive or nonadaptive; (c) investigating the relations between the achievement goal orientations and five help-seeking/help-avoidance behaviors. 1376 junior high school students were recruited in the study. Structure equation modeling was used for data analysis. The results showed that: (a) the Academic Help-Seeking/Help-Avoidance Behaviors Scale containing instrumental help-seeking, executive help-seeking, independent help-avoidance, covert help-avoidance, and complete help-avoidance had a good validity and reliability, indicating that the scale was suitable for examining the academic help-seeking/help-avoidance behaviors adopted by students in math; (b) instrumental help-seeking and independent help-avoidance could be regarded as adaptive behaviors, while executive help-seeking, covert help-avoidance, and complete help-avoidance were considered nonadaptive behaviors; (c) academic help-seeking/help-avoidance could be predicted by achievement goal orientation. Most specifically, approach-mastery goal could promote the adoption of adaptive help-seeking/help-avoidance behaviors but inhibit students’ tendency toward nonadaptive help-seeking/help-avoidance behaviors. The predictive effect of avoidance-performance goal on academic help-seeking/help-avoidance displayed the opposite result to that by mastery-approach goal. Based on these findings, pedagogical implications were discussed to offer reference for teaching and counseling.起始頁-結束頁：267-293資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2017-49(2).00056篇名：國小教師數學知識信念量表之發展與信效度考驗並列篇名：The Development of Mathematical Epistemological Beliefs Scale of Elementary School Teachers and Its Reliability and Validity Evaluation作者：<U+51C3>金堂(Chin-Tang Tu)關鍵字：測量不變性;數學知識信念;驗證性因素分析;Confirmatory factor analysis;Mathematical epistemological beliefs;Measurement invariance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在發展適用國小教師的數學知識信念量表（Mathematical Epistemological Beliefs Scale, MEBS），並檢驗該量表之信效度。本研究分預試與正式施測兩階段，兩階段皆採分層抽樣方式，各抽取國小教師251人與439人。透過探索性因素分析與驗證性因素分析，皆獲得四個因素：簡單知識、確定知識、知識來源、識知辯證，13題的總量表Cronbach's α係數為.80，顯示本量表具有適切的信度。本研究更進一步進行測量不變性考驗，考驗結果發現數學知識信念量表對不同性別國小教師具測量不變性，顯示本研究發展的數學知識信念量表具良好建構效度。英文摘要：This study aims at developing the Mathematical Epistemological Beliefs Scale (MEBS) suitable for elementary school teachers by evaluating its reliability and validity. The analysis consisted of two phases: pre-test and test. Both phases adopted stratified sampling method with elementary teachers of 251for the pre-test and 439 for the test respectively. Through exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis, four factors were found: simplicity of knowledge, certainty of knowledge, source of knowledge, and justification of knowledge. The internal consistency of the Cronbach's alpha of the MEBS was .80 for the total score of the 13 test items, which shows the high degree of reliability of the MEBS. This study further investigated the measurement invariance of the test. The results indicated that the same construct is being measured across different genders of the elementary school teachers, which confirmed high level of construct validity of the MEBS.起始頁-結束頁：295-320資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2017-49(2).00067篇名：兒少性虐待受害者與身體虐待受害者在心裡創傷與生理健康之比較研究並列篇名：A Comparative Study of the Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and Physical Abuse in the Psychological Trauma and Physical Health作者：楊思芳(Szu-Fang Yang);丁原郁(Yuan-Yu Ting)關鍵字：心理創傷;生理健康;身體虐待;性虐待;Psychological trauma;Physical health;Physical abuse;Sexual abuse期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在比較兒童與少年之性虐待受害者與身體虐待受害者在心理創傷與生理健康中的差異，研究採用問卷調查法，抽取各縣市家防中心、社福機構、諮商中心之9-16歲個案群中，52位兒少性虐待受害者及52位兒少身體虐待受害者為樣本。所使用的研究工具包括個人基本資料、心理創傷量表、生理健康量表。將調查所得資料以描述性統計、無母數統計法的Mann-Whitney U test、Kruskal-Wallis H檢定法、邏輯斯迴歸分析等統計方式進行分析，研究結果發現：「身體疼痛」、「界限創傷」與「就醫情形」可有效區辨出兒少性虐待或身體虐待之受害類型，且「身體疼痛」更具區辨力；此外，兒少性虐待受害者與身體虐待受害者，在不同受虐類型和不同背景變項中存有部分的差異。根據研究結果，研究者提出建議供兒少照顧者、社會福利、醫療與司法專業之兒少保護工作者、諮商輔導專業之兒少保護工作者及未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to compare the differences between the victims of child sexual abuse and physical abuse in their psychological trauma and physical health. Questionnaire Survey is mainly used in this study. And the quantitative data was collected from the sample consisted of 52 victims of child sexual abuse and 52 victims physical abuse aged form 9 to 16 years old, who had been the clients serviced by the Centers of Prevention of Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault, social welfare organizations and counseling centers in Taiwan. Instruments used in this study include basic personal information, psychological abuse trauma scale and physical health scale. Data obtained in this study were analyzed by descriptive statistics, Nonparametric Statistics (Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H test), logistic regression. The main findings were as follows: The types of injury of child sexual abuse or physical abuse can be distinguished efficiently by ”physical pain”, ”boundary trauma” and ”medical care visits”, especially by ”physical pain”. In addition, there are partial variance in different background variables and in different injury types between the victims of child sexual abuse and physical abuse. Finally, the researcher provide suggestions as references for care givers, social welfare related systems and child protective service workers who are specialized in counseling, legislation and medical profession according to the findings of this study.起始頁-結束頁：321-343資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2017-49(2).00078篇名：成人生涯召喚量表之編製及其信效度分析並列篇名：Development and Validation of a Career Calling Scale for Working Adults in Taiwan作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang);吳清麟(Qing-Lin Wu)關鍵字：生涯召喚;成人工作者;量表發展;Career calling;Scale development;Working adults期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在編製成人生涯召喚量表並進行信效度分析。量表發展分三階段，第一階段，以30 位20 歲以上之成人工作者為對象，透過焦點團體訪談蒐集生涯召喚相關經驗，以質性紮根方法進行分析，所得結果作為編製量表題目之基礎。第二階段，先進行專家效度檢核，接著進行預試分析，確立正式題目。所建構之量表包含興趣熱情、存在意義、助人利他與超越召喚等四部份，共計20題，以4 點量表方式填答，分數愈高表示該部分之生涯召喚程度愈明顯。第三階段，以548 位成人工作者為對象，年齡介於16 至58 歲（M = 35.59，SD = 11.48），進行正式量表之信效度驗證。四個分量表之內部一致性介於 .87 至 .92，總量表為 .97。社會服務與管理政治領域之工作者在各分量表的傾向顯著高於事務領域，各分量表與工作滿意度、自我效能具有正相關、與工作壓力呈現負相關，以及透過驗證性因素分析結果，顯示本量表具有不錯的建構效度及效標關聯效度。最後根據結果進行討論，並提出未來研究及實務應用的建議。英文摘要：This study developed a career calling scale for working adults in Taiwan. In the first stage, the participants were 30 working adults over the age of 20. Focus group interviews were conducted to collect the data, that the author used to establish the scale as a pilot scale. In the second stage, three experts were invited to assess content validity. Then, a pre-test of the pilot scale was conducted to obtain 151 questionnaires, and the data was analyzed and selected under item analysis and factor analysis methods to establish a formal scale. The Career Calling Scale (CCS) contains 20 items rated on a 4-point scale and consists of four subscales: Interests and Passions, Life Meaning, Altruism, and Transcendent Summons. Higher scores people in each subscale show strong inclination toward that aspect. In the third stage, the participants were 548 working adults between the ages of 16 and 58 (M = 35.59, SD = 11.48). Reliability analysis indicated that the internal consistency of the four subscales was between .87 and .92, and the internal consistency of the whole scale was .97. The comparison of background variables showed that the scores for each subscale for social workers and enterprising workers were significantly higher than the scores for realistic workers. Using Job Satisfaction, Self-Efficacy, and Work Stress as criteria, the test showed high criterion-related validity. Confirmatory factor analysis also showed a good model fit, which supported good construct validity. At the end, a discussion based on the results and suggestions for practice and future studies are provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201609059篇名：感恩課程對大學生感恩、幸福感與復原力影響之研究並列篇名：Effects of Gratitude Program on Gratitude, Well-Being and Resilience of Undergraduate Students作者：吳相儀(Hsiang-Yi Wu);辛昱融(Yu-Zong Hsin);陳琬云(Wan-Yun Chen);簡晉龍(Chin-Lung Chien);鍾昆原(Kuen-Yung Jone)關鍵字：大學生;幸福感;復原力;感恩;Gratitude program;Resilience;Undergraduates;Well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在設計適合大學生之「感恩課程」，跳脫過去研究單純以活動設計進行的方式，以感恩五向度為架構設計課程，內容包括珍視當下、知足惜福、感謝他人、逆境及恩典五向度，探討課程對於大學生感恩、幸福感及復原力的影響。採用準實驗研究法，研究對象為高雄地區67 位大學生，實驗組36 人進行為期四週共十二小時的「感恩課程」，控制組31 人未接受任何實驗處理。前後測工具為「大學生感恩量表」、「GQ-6 量表」、「幸福感量表」、「復原力量表」，同時分析單元總回饋表做為輔佐資料。研究結果發現：（1）課程對實驗組的「感恩」具提升效果，包括珍視當下、知足惜福、感謝他人、感謝恩典、逆境感恩五向度。（2）課程對實驗組的「幸福感」具提升效果，包括情緒、心理及社會幸福感三向度。（3）課程對實驗組的「復原力」具提升效果，包括問題認知、希望樂觀、同理人際及情緒調節四向度。課程回饋分析則顯示課程教學符合學生學習需求。研究者歸納提出未來教育、輔導及研究的建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to design a gratitude program for undergraduate students and to investigate its immediate and long-term effects on gratitude, well-being and resilience. The program includes five dimensions: thanking others, thanking God, cherishing what you have, appreciating hardship, and appreciating the moment. Moreover, the study is a quasi-experimental design. A total of 67 students from Kaohsiung participated in this study. In the experimental group, 36 students went through the 12-hour gratitude program. The rest of the 31 students were in the control group and didn’t undergo any training. The pre- and post-test included four questionnaires: Inventory of Undergraduates’ Gratitude, The Gratitude Questionnaire-6, Mental Health Continuum-Short Form, and Inventory of Adolescent Resilience. The researcher also analyzed a feedback questionnaire. The results showed: (1) The gratitude program elevated students’ gratitude, based on the five dimensions of the Inventory of Undergraduates’ Gratitude, (2) The gratitude program elevated students’ well-being, based on the three dimensions of Mental Health Continuum-Short Form. (3) The gratitude program elevated students’ resilience, based on the four dimensions of Inventory of Adolescent Resilience. The feedback questionnaire displayed that the gratitude program met students’ learning needs. Some concrete suggestions on education, student guidance, and research are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：23-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016091610篇名：學業競爭及升學因應策略對心理困擾的影響並列篇名：The Effect of Academic Competition and Coping Strategy on Students’ Psychological Distress作者：許崇憲(Chong-Shiann Hsu)關鍵字：升學因應策略;心理困擾;教育期望;臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;學業競爭;Academic competition;Coping strategy;Educational expectation;Psychological distress;Taiwan Education Panel Survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究利用臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫第三波及第四波資料，探討學業競爭及升學因應策略對高三學生心理困擾的影響，並討論學業競爭是否調節升學因應策略的影響力。排除填答不完整樣本以及填答者不滿五人的班級之後，共有1,181 班的15,077 位參與者納入分析。探索性因素分析顯示成績排名、考試頻率、及挪用副科等指標合理地組成班級競爭結構變項。執行階層線性模式分析之後，獲得以下發現。首先，控制學生高二心理困擾之後，班級內學業競爭愈激烈，同儕之間愈多人採用各種升學策略，則高三學生個人心理困擾愈嚴重。其次，對於原本就有心理困擾的學生，班級學業競爭結構可能加重其心理困擾。第三，學生個人學業能力對其心理困擾沒有顯著預測力，班級競爭結構對此預測力亦無顯著的調節作用。第四，學生本身的教育期望及學業因應策略可正向預測其心理困擾。本文最後提出未來研究以及學生輔導方面的建議。英文摘要：This study examined the effect of academic competition and individuals' academic competency and coping strategy on psychological distress among third-year students in senior high school. Data from the third and fourth wave of the Taiwan Education Panel Survey were used for this study. We excluded participants without complete responses and classes with less than five students taking part in this survey. There were 1,181 classes and over 15,000 students included in this study. Academic competition was defined operationally as class competition structure and classroom competition aura. Explorative factor analysis showed that class competition structure was composed of academic performance ranking, testing frequency, and misappropriation of deputy subjects time to main subjects. Classroom competition aura was represented by classmates' educational expectation, academic competency, and coping strategies. First, hierarchical linear modeling was conducted, and it was found that after controlling for psychological distress in students’ second year, class competition structure and classmates' coping strategies positively predicted psychological distress in the third year. Second, students with poor mental health in their second year experienced worsened psychological distress in their third year due to class competition structure. Third, students’ academic competency did not predict their psychological distress, and class competition structure did not moderate the prediction. Fourth, individuals' educational expectation and coping strategy positively predicted their own psychological distress. The higher the educational expectation that peers had concerning future career, the more the individuals' educational expectation negatively predicted their psychological distress. Future research and practical guidance are also suggested.起始頁-結束頁：43-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016092211篇名：科學想像力學習進程之驗證：測量觀點並列篇名：Validation of the Learning Progression in Scientific Imagination: A Measurement Perspective作者：王佳琪(Chia-Chi Wang);何曉琪(Hsiao-Chi Ho);鄭英耀(Ying-Yao Cheng);邱文彬(Wen-Bin Chiou)關鍵字：科學想像力;學習進程;BEAR 評量系統;Rasch 部份給分模式;BEAR assessment system;Learning progression;Rasch partial credit model;Scientific imagination期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在以Wang、Ho 和Cheng（2015）所發展的科學想像力學習進程為架構，提出一個國小三至六年級學生科學想像力之假設性學習進程模式，運用BEAR 評量系統以實徵證據驗證，進而修編科學想像力情境測驗，試圖釐清科學想像力的核心概念與發展途徑。研究對象分為評量工具施測對象為臺灣國小三至六年級學生共767 名；另依據研究結果，訪談兩名指導科學發明展且獲獎無數的自然科績優教師。研究工具有科學想像力情境測驗、心像問卷修編版和訪談大綱。資料分析方面，本研究採用Rasch部份給分模式分析學生在科學想像力情境測驗的反應，提供量表的多元效度證據（Wolfe & Smith, 2007），並輔以訪談資料解釋結果。研究結果指出，運用BEAR評量架構和Rasch測量模式的分析，能開發具多元效度證據的科學想像力之學習進程評量工具；結果亦支持科學想像力的學習進程由「漫想力、聯想力、奇想力、妙想力」所發展之理論假設。最後，針對「科學想像力學習進程」的應用，提出未來研究之建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to validate a learning progression (LP) for the scientific imagination (Authors, 2015) based on a measurement approach using the BEAR Assessment System (BAS; Wilson, 2005, 2009) in an attempt to better understand the core ideas and developmental path of the scientific imagination process as well as align curriculum, instruction, and assessment through LP. Participants in this study were selected from Taiwan and classified into two categories. The first category, which included 767 third to sixth grade elementary school students, was administered the Scientific Imagination Test-Verbal (SIT-Verbal). The second category consisted of two award-winning teachers who were interviewed in order to achieve more information for the LP. The SIT-Verbal, Imagery Questionnaire, and the outline of interview were used in this study. Among these, the SIT-Verbal covered four key components of the scientific imagination process: brainstorming, association, transformation/elaboration, and conceptualization/organization/formation. The Imagery Questionnaire covered imagery ability, which could generate imagery, objects, and pictures in one’s mind. For analysis, the multiple validities (Wolfe & Smith, 2007) of the SIT-Verbal were assessed using the Rasch partial credit model. The findings showed that (1) the BEAR assessment system and Rasch measurement approaches provided a feasible framework for developing validated tools to assess the LP of scientific imagination; (2) the empirical data supported that students' scientific imagination progressed ”from brainstorming, association, and transformation/elaboration to conceptualization/organization/formation.” Implications for the assessments with the LPs and revisions for both the SIT-Verbal and the scientific imagination LP are also proposed.起始頁-結束頁：69-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016100512篇名：青少年時期親子關係滿意度的變化：生態脈絡的影響並列篇名：Changes in Parent-Child Relationship Satisfaction During Adolescence: The Effects of Ecological Contexts作者：林惠雅(Huey-Ya Lin);蕭英玲(Ying-Ling Hsiao)關鍵字：生態脈絡因素;青少年;親子關係;Adolescent;Ecological contexts;Parent-child relationship satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探討在青少年時期，青少年知覺親子關係滿意度的變化軌跡，同時，本研究也檢視生態脈絡因素變化（包括知覺父母教養行為、知覺父母婚姻關係、朋友支持、學業成績）對於親子關係滿意度變化的影響。本研究以成長曲線模式進行分析，採用次級資料分析法，使用「台灣青少年成長歷程研究」中第一、三、六波作為分析的資料，共1226 人完整填寫三波的問卷。本研究結果顯示，青少年知覺親子關係滿意度由國中7年級至高中3年級呈直線下降。此外，青少年知覺父母教養行為、知覺父母婚姻關係的變化與父親和母親親子關係的變化有所關聯。隨著時間的推移，青少年知覺父母越多採用說明理由、監督教養行為，越少採用體罰教養行為，其與父親和母親關係滿意程度越高。同時，青少年知覺父母婚姻快樂程度越高，其與父親和母親關係滿意程度越高。青少年知覺朋友支持及學業成績的變化與母親關係滿意度的變化有關，但與父親關係滿意度的變化無關。本研究結果或許可以增進青少年親子關係變化的理論知識，並提供實務運用上的參考。英文摘要：This study estimated the trajectory of changes in parent-child relationship satisfaction during adolescence over time. In addition, this study examined the effects of ecological contextual changes (including adolescent perceptions of parenting practices, the quality of parental marital relations, friends’ support, and school grades) on changes in parent-child relationship satisfaction. The data used in this study was drawn from wave 1, 3 and 6 in the Taiwan Youth Project (TYP), and a total of 1226 students completed 3 waves of data collection. The results of the growth curve models showed that parent-child relationship satisfaction significantly declined when the adolescent was in between 7^(th) grade of middle school and the junior year of high school. Changes in parenting practices and parent’s marital satisfaction perceived by adolescents were associated with changes in father-child and mother-child relationship satisfaction. Adolescents who perceived their parents used more inductive reasoning, more monitoring behaviors, and less physical punishment were more likely to have a good relationship with their parents. Also, adolescents who perceived their parents had a satisfying marriage tended to have a better quality relationship with their parents. Changes in friends’ support and school grades were associated with changes in mother-child relationship satisfaction but not associated with changes in father-child relationship satisfaction. The findings of this study advance theoretical understanding of how parent-child relationships change during adolescence and provide some implications for practical application.起始頁-結束頁：95-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016100713篇名：教師教學情緒、學生學業情緒與動機涉入之關係探究並列篇名：The Relations of Teachers' Teaching Emotion, Students' Achievement Emotion, and Students' Motivational Engagement for Junior High School Students作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang);程炳林(Bing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：正向情緒;負向情緒;教師教學情緒;學生動機涉入;學生學業情緒;Negative emotions;Positive emotions;Students' motivational engagement;Students' achievement emotions;Teachers' teaching emotions期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：教師教學情緒在學生學習歷程中扮演重要角色，然而在當代教育心理學中，相較於學生學業情緒的研究，較少關注教師教學情緒。因此，本研究建構「教師教學情緒二階驗證性因素分析模式」針對教師教學情緒分類架構作探討，以及建構「教學情緒、學業情緒與動機涉入之關係模式」，分析教學情緒、學業情緒與動機涉入之關係。本研究抽取二批國二學生為樣本，共1083 人，以結構方程模式進行分析。研究結果顯示：（1）本研究建構的「教師教學情緒二階驗證性因素分析模式」、「教學情緒、學業情緒與動機涉入之關係模式」皆與觀察資料適配；（2）教師正向教學情緒正向預測學生正向學業情緒；教師負向教學情緒正向預測學生負向學業情緒；（3）學生正向學業情緒正向預測適應性動機涉入；學生負向學業情緒正向預測不適應性動機涉入。本研究根據研究結果在理論及實務上的涵義進行討論，並提出未來的建議。英文摘要：Teachers’ teaching emotions play a significant role in students' learning processes. Compared with students’ achievement emotions, there is less focus on teachers’ teaching emotions in the current field of study in psychology. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to construct a second order confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) model of teachers' teaching emotions and a model of teaching emotions, achievement emotions, and motivational engagement to test how the two models fit with observed data and analyze the relationships among teachers' teaching emotions, students' achievement emotions, and students' motivational engagement. The participants were 1,083 junior high school students. Structural equation modeling was used to obtain the following results: (a) the second order CFA model of teachers' teaching emotions fit the observed data well, (b) the model of teaching emotions, achievement emotions, and motivational engagement fit the observed data well, (c) teachers' positive teaching emotions positively predicted students' positive achievement emotions; teachers' negative teaching emotions positively predicted students' negative achievement emotions, and (d) students' positive achievement emotions positively predicted adaptive motivational engagement; students' negative achievement emotions positively predicted maladaptive motivational engagement. Based on the findings in this research, implications for theory, practice, and further research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：113-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016102814篇名：1200個中文雙字詞的聯想常模與其被聯想反應參照表並列篇名：Word Association Norms and Associated Responses: Reference Index for 1200 Two-Character Chinese Words作者：胡中凡(Jon-Fan Hu);陳彥丞(Yen-Cheng Chen);卓淑玲(Shu-Ling Zhuo);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);張雨霖(Yu-Lin Chang);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung)關鍵字：心像程度;字詞聯想常模;情緒價性;聯想反應共通性;聯想反應個別性;Abstraction level;Commonality responses;Idiosyncratic responses;Valence;Word association norms期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：字詞聯想是探索人類知識結構重要的工具之一，已被應用在教育、臨床、消費等研究領域，因此建立一個含有大量刺激辭彙的聯想常模有學術與應用面的意義。過去國內的聯想常模多針對特定類別的詞彙編製，缺乏含大量一般中文詞的聯想常模，故本研究將建立含大量一般中文詞的聯想與被聯想反應參照表。預備性研究請30 位參與者評定高／低頻各900 個雙字詞的7 點心像度。刪除心像評定結果標準差過大的詞彙後，從高／低頻詞中各挑選出200 個高／中／低心像程度共1200 個詞彙作為正式研究的刺激，另使104 位參與者評定其情緒價性以便後續研究者使用。正式研究共1200 個參與者進行實驗。每位參與者只對其中200 個刺激詞彙進行反應，因此每個刺激詞彙可得200 個聯想反應，依此建立聯想常模並分析出每個刺激詞彙的聯想反應共通性、各別性、與詞彙的被聯想反應參照表。本研究發現，低頻詞的聯想反應較高頻詞集中；心像程度愈高參與者的聯想反應愈一致。本研究產生的常模可幫助後續研究者更嚴謹地探索中文語義網路結構與操弄實驗。英文摘要：The word association task is one of the most important techniques to explore knowledge structures in human beings. It has been applied to the educational, clinical, and business research areas. Thus, establishing a comprehensive association norm that contains enough staple words as stimuli is a necessity. However, only a few association norms were established in Chinese, and these norms were often only prepared for words of particular categories. Hence, the goal of the present study was to establish a larger Chinese association norm covering more stimulated words. In the preliminary experiment, 30 subjects were asked to rate the level of abstraction of 900 frequent and 900 infrequent Chinese words with a 7-point scale. After deleting the words with large variability in abstraction ratings, there were 1800 Chinese words remaining. From this pool, 200 words from each combination of high/medium/low abstraction levels and frequent/infrequent words (six combinations in total) were chosen, resulting in a total of 1200 words chosen as word stimuli in the formal study. We also asked 104 subjects to rate the valence degree on these word stimuli in order to let follow-up researchers select the stimulus from the norm reported by the present study. In the formal study, 1200 subjects were recruited, and each performed a free association task with only 200 words among the word stimuli. An average of 200 responses were collected for each cue. Commonality, idiosyncratic index, and associated reference index of each stimulus word were analyzed. The result showed that commonality of low frequency or high abstraction words was higher than the commonality of high frequency or low abstraction words. It further indicated that low frequency or high abstraction words yielded more consistent and convergent associative responses. The association norms from our study could help future researchers explore the Chinese semantic network and manipulate experimental stimuli more carefully.起始頁-結束頁：137-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016111115篇名：不同結果狀態對正、負向回饋的注意與回憶效果並列篇名：The influence of Outcome Status on the attending and memory of positive and negative feedback.作者：黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang);劉政宏(Cheng-Hong Liu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen)關鍵字：回饋價性;注意;記憶;眼動儀;結果狀態;attention;eye-tracking system;feedback valence;memory;outcome status期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：教師或他人所提供之回饋，是影響學習表現的重要因素。本研究目的在探討人們對於正向與負向回饋的觀看傾向與回憶效果，以及在不同結果狀態（好結果或壞結果）下，是否會影響人們對回饋的處理。在研究中，先請參與者填寫心理健康量表，透過給與虛構的心理健康百分等級分數，來操弄結果狀態（高分結果、低分結果），並使用眼動儀來記錄正向與負向回饋的觀看時間，接著進行自由回憶與再認回憶的測量。研究結果指出：（1）人們傾向會對負向回饋有較多的觀看時間與較好的再認回憶，支持解困模式的觀點；（2）結果狀態並未改變人們對回饋的觀看與回憶，不論是在好結果或壞結果的情境下，皆會對負向回饋有較多的觀看與再認。最後，討論本研究結果在理論文獻與教育實務的貢獻與應用。英文摘要：Feedback provided by teachers or others is one of the most important factors in learning situation. Do people prefer to process and recall positive or negative feedback? Would the processing and memory of different feedback be affected by different outcome situations? These are the questions our research concerned. An experiment was conducted to examine the influence of outcome status (high score or low score) on the attending and memory of positive or negative feedback. The measurement of Mental Health was used to give a bogus score to manipulate the outcome status. We used an eye-tracking system to record the viewing time of feedback, and then asked the participants to recall and recognize the feedback. Overall, the results show that (a) participants would view negative feedback longer and recognize better than positive feedback so the resolution model was supported, and (b) outcome status would not influence the processing and recall of feedback because participants would view or recognize more of negative feedback regardless of high or low score outcome situations . Implications of psychological theory and practice are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：469-486資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016031516篇名：學齡前兒童之成就目標設定與其氣質組型並列篇名：Preschoolers' Achievement Goal Settings and Temperament Patterns作者：龔美娟(Mei-Juan Kung);雷庚玲(Keng-Ling Lay)關鍵字：目標設定;成就動機;氣質組型;學齡前兒童;achievement motivation;goal setting;preschooler;temperament patterns期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去研究礙於研究派典之缺失，不易凸顯學齡前兒童目標設定之個別差異。本研究修改Atkinson與Litwin（1960）的套圈圈派典，探討具不同目標設定的學齡前兒童之氣質組型的個別差異。參與者為138 位兒童（4 歲8 個月至7 歲）。每位兒童皆個別進行十次套圈圈遊戲，而每次皆可自行選擇其投擲難度。本研究依據兒童在套圈圈過程中的目標設定傾向而將其分至目標設定過低、適中或過高組。以母親所填寫之兒童行為量表（Children’s Behavior Questionnaire, CBQ）設定騰動性/外向性、負向情感、主動控制與害怕等四個氣質指標，並依此進行非階層式群聚分析，將所有兒童的氣質組型分為三個群聚。卡方百分比同質性考驗顯示，不同目標設定組別之兒童分布在此三個群聚的人數百分比具顯著差異。有持平的騰動性/外向性氣質傾向、但具較高害怕、較高負向情感氣質傾向與較高主動控制傾向的氣質組型是目標設定適中組分布比例最高的群聚。本研究顯示了以組型而非個別氣質向度探討成就動機個別差異之優勢。英文摘要：Prior research has indicated that setting easy, intermediate, or difficult challenge goals may reflect the individual differences of achievement motivation. Individual differences in goal setting have also been found to relate with personality traits. The current study adopted Atkinson and Litwin's (1960) ring toss paradigm to investigate the manifestation of individual differences of preschoolers' goal-setting behaviors in their temperament patterns. One hundred and thirty-eight preschoolers (age range = 4 yr. 8 mo. to 7 yr. 0 mo.) participated individually in a ten-trial ring toss game. Children freely decided how far from the target they wanted to toss for each trial. Information of the goal setting and the success/failure of each trial were simultaneously made available to the preschoolers to help them make the goal setting decision for the future trials. After the game, they were then categorized into one of the three goal-setting styles of ”Low Challenging,” ”Moderately Challenging,” and ”Unrealistic Challenging,” according to whether they often decided to toss from a distance nearer than, close to, or farther away from their current best tossing performance, respectively. Mothers filled up the Chinese version of Children's Behavior Questionnaire (CBQ), from which four motivation-related temperament indices of ”surgency/extraversion”, ”negative affectivity”, ”effortful control” and ”fear” were derived. A non-hierarchical cluster analysis was implemented on the four indices resulting in three patterns profiling preschoolers' motivation-related temperament. Chi-square tests indicated that the proportion of children of different goal-setting styles distributed in the three temperament patterns differently. Specifically, preschoolers in the ”Moderately Challenging” group were characterized by average levels of surgency/extraversion and above-average levels of fear, negative affectivity, and effortful control, suggesting potential compensatory mechanisms behind different temperament indices in regulating young children's achievement motivation. This study highlighted the advantages of using temperament patterns rather than single temperament dimensions or factors to understand the individual differences of children's goal setting behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：487-507資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016051317篇名：課室社會目標結構之建構暨其與個人社會目標、求助行為之關係並列篇名：The Construction of Social Classroom Goal Structure and Its Relationship with Social Goals and Help-Seeking Behavior作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang);程炳林(Biing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：工具性求助;社會目標;逃避求助;執行性求助;課室社會目標結構;avoidance help-seeking;executive help seeking;instrumental help seeking;social classroom goal structure;social goals期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：社會目標在學習歷程中扮演重要角色，而過去研究卻少探討，以社會目標理論觀點所形成學習情境之研究更是付之闕如，因此本研究建構課室社會目標結構驗證性因素分析模式來考驗其適配度，並探討其與個人社會目標、求助行為之關係。本研究抽取1032名國二學生為樣本，以結構方程模式與階層迴歸進行分析。研究結果顯示：（1）本研究所建構課室社會目標結構驗證性因素分析模式獲得觀察資料支持；（2）課室社會目標結構與社會目標有對應關係；（3）社會關係與社會責任目標正向預測工具性求助，社會關係目標負向預測逃避求助，社會責任目標負向預測執行性求助；社會地位目標正向預測執行性與逃避求助；（4）課室社會關係與課室社會責任目標結構正向預測工具性求助，課室社會關係目標結構正向預測執行性求助，課室社會責任目標結構負向預測逃避求助，課室社會地位目標結構正向預測執行性與逃避求助。（5）社會目標為課室社會目標結構與求助行為的中介變項。本研究根據結果進行討論，並提出建議。英文摘要：Social goals, which few studies have focused on, play a significant role in the learning process. Research on learning situations from social goal theory perspectives (social classroom goal structure) has been even less. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to construct a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) model of social classroom goal structure to test how it fit with observed data and to analyze the relationships among social classroom goal structure, social goals and help-seeking behavior. The participants were 1,032 junior high school students. Structural equation modeling and regression analysis were used. The following results were obtained: (a) the CFA model of social classroom goal structure fit the observed data well, (b) social classroom goal structure fit in with social goals, (c) social relationship and social responsibility goals positively predicted instrumental help seeking; social relationship goals negatively predicted avoidance help seeking; social responsibility goals negatively predicted executive help seeking; social status goals positively predicted executive help seeking and avoidance help seeking, (d) social relationship and social responsibility classroom goal structure positively predicted instrumental help seeking; social relationship classroom goal structure positively predicted executive help seeking; social responsibility classroom goal structure negatively predicted avoidance help seeking; social status classroom goal structure positively predicted executive help seeking and avoidance help seeking, and (e) the effects of social classroom goal structure on help seeking behavior were mediated by social goals. Based on the findings in this research, implications for theory, practice and further research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：509-530資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016060618篇名：高中職學生家庭功能、憂鬱情緒與網路成癮之相關研究並列篇名：Family Function, Depressive Mood and Internet Addiction among Senior High School Students作者：張月馨(Yueh-Hsin Chang);林旻沛(Min-Pei Lin);洪福源(Fu-Yuan Hong);胡薇瑄(Wei-Hsuan Hu);吳詠葳(Yung-Wei Wu)關鍵字：高中職學生;家庭功能;網路成癮;憂鬱情緒;depressive mood;family function;Internet addiction;senior high school/technical school students期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解高中職學生的家庭功能、憂鬱情緒與網路成癮間之關係，並檢驗憂鬱情緒在家庭功能與網路成癮間所扮演之中介角色。本研究以高中與高職學生為研究對象，並以立意取樣方式針對北臺灣兩所高中、兩所高職之全體高一學生進行取樣，共取得2,170 名有效樣本（高中生佔51.94%；男性佔47.87%），且施以「簡式家庭功能量表」、「柯氏憂鬱量表」及「陳氏網路成癮量表」來進行分析。本研究發現如下：（1）高中職學生平均每週上網時間為13.42 小時（標準差為15.43 小時），其中，平均每週花在非課業相關的上網時間為11.22 小時（標準差為14.29 小時）；（2）不良家庭功能可顯著預測網路成癮；（3）憂鬱情緒能顯著預測網路成癮；（4）不良家庭功能可顯著預測憂鬱情緒；以及（5）憂鬱情緒能部分中介不良家庭功能對網路成癮之預測關係。研究者根據研究結果提出討論與建議，以供學校教育工作者、諮商輔導人員及未來研究參考。英文摘要：The present study aimed to understand the relationship among family function, depressive mood and Internet addiction among senior high school students. Additionally, we examined the mediating role of depressive mood in the relationship between family function and Internet addiction. This study recruited 2,170 high school and technical school students through purposive sampling (high school students: 51.94%; males: 47.87%). Administered questionnaires included the Family Function Scale - short form, Ko's Depressive Inventory, and Chen Internet Addiction Scale. Findings showed the following: (a) the average Internet usage time per week was 13.42 hours (SD 15.43 hours), including an average of 11.22 hours (SD 14.29 hours) for non-academic purposes; (b) poor family function significantly predicted Internet addiction; (c) depressive mood significantly predicted Internet addiction; (d) poor family function significantly predicted depressive mood; and (e) depressive mood partially mediated the relationship between poor family function and Internet addiction. Findings from the present study provide suggestions and a reference for schools and guidance counselors, as well as for future research.起始頁-結束頁：531-550資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016061319篇名：誰是好的演講者？以多層面Rasch來分析校長三分鐘即席演講的能力並列篇名：Who is a Good Speaker? Applying Multifaceted Rasch model to analyze Principal Three-minute Impromptu Speech作者：謝名娟(Ming-Chuan Hsieh)關鍵字：多層面Rasch;即席演講;校長評量;multifaceted Rasch model;school principals evaluation;speech期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：在儲訓校長的培訓課程中，即席演講為重要的培育能力之一。過去在進行演講評分，大多使用所有評審分數的加總或是平均當作最終的分數，然而，當比賽的人數眾多必須分組時，每一組評審的嚴苛度可能會對成績造成影響。本研究將評分項目、評分委員的嚴苛度放進多層面Rasch模型中估計，進而以較為客觀的方式來評估儲訓校長的口語表達能力。研究結果發現，即使有受過訓練的評分者，在評分過程中，還是有嚴苛度的不同，而儲訓校長在演說上，對於內容、架構，語詞使用、與時間掌控等部份較感困難，而對於發音標準、演說中有合適的語調，具有良好的儀表態度等向度感到較為容易。此外，若忽視納入可能影響的層面而直接使用原始分數總分或是平均做為受試者的成績，可能會造成分數上的誤差與排名的不公。英文摘要：In the pre-service training program, impromptu speech is one of the most important ability to develop for school principals. To assess the speech ability, most researchers use the total or average of the raw scores as final scores. However, when there are many students attending the test, raters need to be divided into several groups to provide grading, and the severity of the raters for different groups may impact students' score. In this study, the scoring criteria, rater's severity and person's ability are all considered into the multifaceted Rasch model. The results show that, even for the trained raters, there still exist subjectivity and different level of rater severity. On the other hand, school principals feel most difficult in content, framework, proper usage of words and time control and feel relative easy in pronunciation, prosody, and appropriate manner in the context of impromptu speech. The ignorance of facets and use the raw total or average score as final score may cause bias or unfairness of the score ranking.起始頁-結束頁：551-566資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016080120篇名：三∼六歲學齡前幼兒影片敘說：故事理解與故事重述之初探並列篇名：Narrating a Video Story in Three- to Six-Year-Olds: Story Comprehension and Story Retelling作者：洪宜芳(Yi-Fang Hung);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：幼兒敘說;故事文法分析;故事理解;影片故事重述;comprehension;preschool children narrative;story comprehension;video story retelling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究目的主要是探究三~六歲學齡前幼兒在影片故事重述的歷程中，訊息接收、故事理解與故事重述三者的年齡發展，以及三者之間的相關性。本研究對象為25 名三~六歲的學齡前幼兒，先讓參與幼兒觀看卡通故事影片並立即敘述，之後再進行故事重述與理解問題的回答，藉由上述表現來進行訊息接收、故事理解與故事重述分析。研究結果顯示，訊息接收、故事理解和故事重述能力在不同年齡層間有顯著差異，五歲組與六歲組的表現顯著優於三歲組，而訊息接收、故事理解與故事重述三者之間亦有顯著正相關。三~六歲學齡前幼兒在故事重述表現中，提及事件與結果之故事結構元素最多，其次則是嘗試與內在計畫。針對研究結果，本文進行討論並在文末提出結論與未來研究建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the development of and relationship among information received, story comprehension, and story retelling abilities in three- to six-year-old preschool children in a video story retelling task. Twenty-five three- to six-year-old children were asked to watch a short cartoon video and the children's performance in story comprehension and story-telling during and after the video were analyzed. The results revealed that five- and six-year-old children had significantly better abilities in information received, story comprehension and story retelling than three-year-old children. Children's performance in information received, story comprehension, and story retelling were also found to be significantly interrelated. Besides, structural elements of initiating events and consequences occurred most frequently in story retelling. Discussion about the results and suggestions for future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：567-590資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016090701篇名：學習做勞工，同時做男人：反學校文化中階級與性別的交織之民族誌研究並列篇名：Learning to Labor While Learning to be a Man: An Ethnographic Study of the Intersectionality of Class and Gender in the Counter-School Culture作者：楊巧玲(Chiao-Ling Yang)關鍵字：反學校文化;交織性;批判民族誌;性別;階級;counter-school culture;intersectionality;critical ethnography;gender;class期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:4期出版年：2017中文摘要：P. Willis的Learning to Labour: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs出版至今已40年，促使後來的研究者視學校為一政治、社會、文化鬥爭的場域，並能了解青少年的身分認同如何在學校中形構而成，影響深遠，經典地位無庸置疑。本文著眼於其主要發現與論證，即反學校文化中階級與性別如何交織共構而成勞工子弟的身分認同，首先從四位一體的角度，分別針對其基本議題、技法、認識論、存在論進行評析，以期形成較為全面的理解；其次將焦點置於教育的範疇，探討這樣的經典著作對教育研究以及實務有何啟示，前者包括基本議題的深化與開創、民族誌研究法的貢獻與侷限，後者包括教育政策與學校改革、教師角色與師資培育；最後提出二點反思：教育研究應多著眼於教育政策的可能弔詭、教育機會均等既是基本議題也是終極關懷。英文摘要：It has been forty years since P. Willis published his seminal work, Learning to Labour: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs. Two contributions stand out. One is to convincingly make it explicit that schooling serves as a site for political, social and cultural struggle. The other is to vividly analyze how youth identity is constituting and constructed in schools. This paper focuses on its major finding and argument, which is that class and gender intersect in a complicated way to form the identity of white working-class boys via the counter-school culture. To establish a more comprehensive understanding, this paper considers this influential study Ofirst in terms of four interrelated aspects, the basic issue, the technique, epistemology and ontology, and then its implications for educational research and practice. For educational research, two points are addressed: deepening and creating basic issues and the contribution and limitation of ethnographic studies; for educational practice, educational policy and school reform are discussed as well as teachers’ role and teacher education. This paper concludes with two reflections: educational research should inquire more into potential paradoxes in educational policy; equality of educational opportunity should be fundamental issues and ultimate concern.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820171263040012篇名：P. Willis的《學做工》：概念、方法與研究方向並列篇名：P. Willis’s Learning to Labor: Concepts, Method, and Research Direction作者：黃庭康(Ting-Hong Wong)關鍵字：反學校文化;學校組織;歷史比較方法;競逐性再生產;anti-school culture;school organization;historical-comparative method;contested reproduction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Willis的《學做工》把文化及行動者主體性重新引入批判教育研究，建立了一個能夠兼顧結構與行動、客觀與主觀因素的分析架構，也超越了當時的再生產理論，觀察到學生並不只是被動地接受學校的洗腦，並指出學校教育與經濟體系的斷裂，單靠學校不足以延續不平等的階級關係。Willis以實證資料證明階級子弟因為抗拒學校的「教學典範」—而非服從學校的教導—而繼承勞動階層的位置；而「小子」們反抗有部分是因為從學校以外場域而來的風格、意義及實踐替「反學校文化」提供了資源。筆者認為，應在Willis的基礎上繼續探討教育與社會再生產的關係。具體的做法包括：一、把階級文化的意義擴大至涵蓋個人層面；二、嚴謹地定義「反抗」及「反學校文化」等關鍵概念；三、利用Willis的洞見對不同學生群體、階級及社會進行比較研究。英文摘要：Paul Willis’ Learning to Labor is a classic in critical education studies. By bringing agencies and culture back to the discussion in sociology of education, it developed an analytical framework that synthesized structure and action as well as objectivity and subjectivity. Willis also went beyond conventional reproduction theory. He discovered that students were by no means passive recipients of the dominant ideology, that class domination was perpetuated because working-class students resisted-but not accepted-schools’ teaching, and that anti-school culture was formed at least partly by meanings, styles and practices from spheres outside schools. This article encourages scholars to use insights from Learning to Labor to further explore the connections between school education and social reproduction. It also urges that researchers go beyond Willis by extending cultural analysis to the individual level and private domain, adopting more rigorous and theory-guided definitions of ”resistance” and ”anti-school culture” and employing comparative method to investigate student cultures among different social groups and in diverse social settings.起始頁-結束頁：37-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820171263040033篇名：學做工還是怕做工？臺灣社會高學業成就勞動階級學生及其家長的反再製心態之分析並列篇名：Learning to Labor or Being Afraid to Labor? An Analysis of the High-Academic-Achievement Working-Class Students and Parents' Counter-Reproduction Attitude in the Taiwanese Society作者：鄭英傑(Ying-Jie Jheng)關鍵字：反再製心態;文化創生（抗拒）;面子;教育再製;counter-reproduction attitude;cultural production (resistance);face;educational reproduction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在重新檢視P. Willis文化創生（或抗拒）觀點在臺灣社會文化脈絡中的適用性與侷限性，據此，本研究植基於臺灣社會文化脈絡，訪談高學業成就勞動階級學生及其家長。研究發現，在「脫貧」與「爭面子」的雙重影響下，勞動階級家長及其子女因「怕做工」，故衍生出「反再製心態」，進而看重學校教育價值（包括工具性價值與象徵性價值），其子女也因此獲得高學業成就。植基於研究發現，本研究一則為臺灣社會勞動階級家長與學生為何如此重視學校教育提供可能解釋，二則亦為勞動階級學生獲得高學業成就之現象提供可能理由。而此二者，都是Willis理論無法解釋臺灣教育現象之處。英文摘要：The study aims to examine the application and limitation of P. Willis’s idea of cultural production (or resistance). In this regard, the study, rooted in the social and cultural context of the Taiwanese society, interviews high-academic-achievement working-class students and parents. The results show that, working-class parents and children, influenced by ”getting rid of poverty” and ”gaining face”, were afraid to labor so as to generate a ”counter-reproduction attitude,” and, consequently, emphasized the value of education (including instrumental value and symbolic value). As a result, working-class students appeared to obtain high academic achievement. While Willis’s theory is unable to account for some phenomena in Taiwan, the study, based on the research Ofindings, Ofirst, provides some explanations to why working-class parents and students in the Taiwanese society care so much about education; second, it also sheds some light on why working-class students do well academically in school.起始頁-結束頁：65-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820171263040024篇名：晚清戊戌變法前英人在華教育活動與英國教育經驗的輸入並列篇名：Britons' Educational Activities and Educational Transfer to China in the Qing Dynasty before the Wuxu Reform作者：周愚文(Yu-Wen Chou)關鍵字：戊戌變法;英國教育;教會學校;教育轉移;Wuxu Reform;British education;mission schools;educational transfer期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在探討戊戌變法前英人如何利用在華教育活動輸入其教育經驗。自1843年起，英人透過官、私管道，輸入其教育經驗。1858年前，差會辦有各類男女義塾，主收下層子女免學費，教中文聖經，程度低，組織欠備，量少規模小，設於通商口岸。之後，教士得入內地傳教辦學。上海出現制度、組織及課程較完備學堂，教英語或西學，程度提高，但量少未成體系。有書館採高學費收富商子弟，用英語教學。官辦同文三館、船政學堂等學堂雖聘英籍教習，但人少且禁傳教，影響有限。故1898年前英人輸入教育經驗，是摸索、個別、無規劃與體系的歷程，又因社會排外反教，難以推廣。此與甲午戰後，朝野以日為師、主動仿日制定兩學制有別。各差會爭辯「以學輔教」策略，直到1890年始有共識。英人校數雖增，但成效與制度化均不及美人，故更難發揮影響力。英文摘要：The aim of this article is to explore how British educational experiences were transferred to China before the Wuxu Reform. Since 1843, British educational experiences were introduced via official and private ways. Before 1858, some British missionaries had established charity schools to teach Scriptures in Chinese for the lower class at trade ports. After that, foreigners were allowed to travel, preach, and establish churches and schools in inland. Some well-organized schools were established in Shanghai, and few fee-paying English studios were established for children from well-being families. Their loose connections had to fight with stronger anti- Christianity and anti-foreignism. Besides, some British missionaries taught English at Governmental schools but evangelical preaching was forbidden. Therefore, the process of British educational transfer was a trying, individual, unplanned and un-systemized one, less supported by the Japanese government after 1894. Furthermore, disputes existed among different protestant missions on taking education as means for evangelic preaching. After the 1890 Missionary Conference, consensus was made. Compared with their counterparts in America, the number of British mission schools had increased but had not been systemized, and had less achievement, which had made it more difficult to diffuse the British educational experiences.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170963030015篇名：從政策工具選擇省思臺灣高等教育治理並列篇名：Reflections on Governance of Taiwan's Higher Education Based on an Analysis of Government’s Choice of Policy Instruments作者：謝卓君(Chuo-Chun Hsieh)關鍵字：政策工具;高等教育改革;教育治理;新自由主義;policy instruments;higher education reform;education governance;neoliberalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在透過政策工具選擇的分析，探究臺灣高等教育改革的可能問題與治理的特性。研究之分析以公共政策學家M. Howlett的理論為架構，針對臺灣1994年以來重要的官方政策文本進行編碼與統計，透過內容分析之結果達成上述研究目的。本研究的主要結論為：一、政府對於不同高等教育改革議題，選擇使用的政策工具類型與數量明顯不同，混合使用不同治理邏輯的政策工具進行高等教育改革。二、雖然臺灣政府用於高等教育改革的政策工具日顯多樣，但仍以權威型為主；此與過去20年臺灣高等教育治理多反映市場治理邏輯存在落差。本研究亦根據研究結果對於當前教育政策實務與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of the study is to identify the problems of Taiwan's higher education reform and the features of governance through an analysis of the choice of policy instruments. In order to achieve that, this study applies content analysis on prominent official policy documents published during the years 1994-2013, in line with the theories formulated by the public policy scientist, Michael Howlett. The major conclusions are twofold. Firstly, the types and usage counts of policy instruments chosen by the government for different higher education reform issues were found diversified. Regarding the choice of policy instruments for higher education reform, Taiwan displays a mixture of different governance models. Secondly, although the policy tools used by the Taiwan government for higher education reform have been increasingly diverse, most of them still exhibit the characteristics of authority policy tools and do not reflect the logic of market governance. That governance logic identified in Taiwan's higher education was theoretically inconsistent with the application of policy instruments. Based on these results, the study also makes suggestions to the current policy practice and future research in the field of higher education.起始頁-結束頁：41-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170963030026篇名：大學學業退學制度的批判與反思並列篇名：A Critical Review of the Policies of Academic Dismissal from University作者：何萬順(One-Soon Her);林俊儒(Jun-Ru Lin)關鍵字：大學自治;合理妥適;學業成就;學業退學;釋字563號;university autonomy;reasonable and appropriate;academic achievements;academic dismissal;Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 563期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:3期出版年：2017中文摘要：釋字563號揭示退學制度屬大學自治，惟退學侵害學生基本權甚鉅，大法官因此要求其內容應「合理妥適」、制定及執行須符合「正當法律程序」。本文以「合理妥適」作為檢視現行學業退學制度之一貫標準。在此大學自治內部界限的要求下，本文以國立臺灣大學、國立政治大學及國立清華大學學則作為檢證標的，認為學業退學制度有違此內部界限，規範性分析上存有疑慮。就合理性而言，該制度設計在理論上亦有諸多缺失。在實務運作上，雖然大學之學業退學規定日益寬鬆，但此舉並無助於學習品質的提升，依然是對成績不佳遭退學學生的不當壓迫。而此制度之持續存在，係由若干迷思所導致。基於本文立論，現行學業退學制度並非「合理妥適」，應予廢除。本文並對於取代學業退學制度的積極措施提出建議。英文摘要：Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 563 has made clear that the policies of academic dismissal from university are within the rights of university autonomy. However, as such policies do violate students' right to education, the Constitutional Court requires these policies be 'reasonable and appropriate' and their making and implementation follow 'due process of law'. Based on these requirements, this paper examines the rules of academic dismissal implemented by three of the top universities in Taiwan, namely, National Taiwan University, National Chengchi University, and National Tsing Hua University, and demonstrates that, due to the logical flaws in their basic design and assumptions, these rules are far from being 'reasonable or appropriate', and are therefore likely to be judged as problematic in court. We further argue that the enforcement of these rules, which have been made less and less stringent in recent years, not only fails to serve the purpose of upholding the standard of student academic performance, but also constitutes a form of maltreatment and persecution of disadvantaged students. We then discuss the misguided values and beliefs underlying such policies. This paper thus concludes that the current policies should be abolished and replaced with more constructive measures.起始頁-結束頁：77-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170963030037篇名：Rogers革新擴散理論於課程推廣之意涵並列篇名：Rogers' Theory of Innovation Diffusion Discussed for Curriculum Dissemination作者：侯一欣(Yi-Hsin Hou)關鍵字：課程革新;課程推廣;課程擴散;擴散;curriculum innovation;curriculum dissemination;curriculum diffusion;diffusion期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:3期出版年：2017中文摘要：從擴散的興革背景與Rogers理論的探析，了解到擴散在推廣中的概念本質其實就是人際體系中隨著時間的訊息傳播。而為助益於訊息在人際溝通網絡的擴散，需釐清個人和組織層次的採用依據，以充分掌握教育場域的教師特性及組織脈絡。最後，依據擴散的時間特性，將個人採用時間早晚所衍生的態度進行角色分析，並對革新本身的生命週期提出有關對課程推廣的擴散層面之啟示與省思。本篇為理論性研究，係針對革新擴散理論與課程推廣研究之相關文獻進行回顧和整理後，大致歸納出以下四個結論：一、革新擴散理論為課程推廣的源頭，新近則有結合制度理論的趨勢。二、Rogers的革新擴散理論有助於課程推廣的人際互動過程。三、採用革新有個人和組織層次的考量，也有時間的先後順序之別。四、經當代科技創新與制度理論的補充，使擴散理論在課程推廣的應用更為完善。英文摘要：Based on the academic background of diffusion and Rogers' theory, the paper shows that diffusion is nested in the concepts of dissemination, and only restricted in message transferred by time through interpersonal communication channel. The judgment of innovation diffusion depends on personal adoption. For innovation diffusion to come true, disseminators should take individual and organizational considerations into account. Finally, the correlation between the timing of individuals' innovation diffusion and the persons' attitudes is analyzed, with implications on the diffusive respect of curriculum dissemination from the life cycle of innovation. This paper presents the following three conclusions after reviewing the theoretical research and sorting out the relevant literatures. First, curriculum dissemination originates from the theory of innovation diffusion, which recently integrates with institutionalization theory. Second, Rogers' theory contributes to the interpersonal interaction of disseminating process. Third, personal adoption of innovation relies on individual and organizational considerations, with a difference in the order of time among them. Fourth, the theory of diffusion might be highlighted for the aspect of curriculum dissemination by the replenishment of the theory of contemporary information communication technology and institutionalism.起始頁-結束頁：107-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170963030048篇名：從美國歷史教學變遷看教育改革：評《歷史教學的今昔：學校穩定與改變的故事》並列篇名：Book Review: Teaching History Then and Now: A Story of Stability and Change in Schools作者：宋佩芬期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:3期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：147-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170963030059篇名：寧靜自主．協同合作．樂活共生：法國Freinet教育學與公立佛賀內學校並列篇名：Serene Autonomy, Cooperation, Co-evolution: Freinet Pedagogy and Public Freinet Schools作者：許宏儒(Hung-Ju Hsu)關鍵字：Freinet教育學;協同合作;法國公立佛賀內學校;寧靜自主;樂活共生;Freinet pedagogy;cooperation;French public Freinet schools;autonomy;co-evolution期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:2期出版年：2017中文摘要：「不一樣的教育」或「另類教育」的思維與實踐，為教育勾勒了美麗的藍圖。儘管如此，許多對於另類教育的質疑（昂貴學費、教室秩序不佳、學習成就低落），經常使得另類教育所勾勒的教育之美不斷地被挑戰，而另類教育也總是面臨被邊緣化的困境。本文透過爬梳法國教育學家Freinet（1896-1966）之法文原典、相關Freinet研究著作，以及研究者於佛賀內學校實地觀察與接受培訓相關資料，萃取出「寧靜自主、協同合作、樂活共生」為其教育學思想與實踐核心。而其「寧靜自主、協同合作、樂活共生」之教育學思想與實踐，以及法國目前的「公立」佛賀內學校，正悄悄地打破對於另類教育的種種質疑，蘊含著突破教育再製的可能性動力，並逐步地在法國與鄰近的歐陸國家，實現「不一樣的教育」所勾勒的教育之美。英文摘要：The concept and practice of a(n) ”different education” / ”alternative education” have drawn an ideal educational blueprint. Nevertheless, the doubts towards alternative education (including high tuition fees, classroom disorder, low learning achievement) frequently challenge the ideal possibility that it has presented; also, alternative education constantly faces the crisis of being marginalized. By examining Celestin Freinet (the French pedagogue, 1896-1966)'s original texts, relevant research works on Freinet and the author's observations and training data in Freinet Schools, this article discusses the spirit of Freinet Pedagogy: Autonomy, Cooperation and Co-evolution. The practice of Freinet's Pedagogy and the public Freinet Schools now in France have the possibility to break the reproduction in education, and they have been triumphing over the various doubts towards the alternative education. In France and the neighboring European countries, Freinet's Pedagogy is progressively realizing the beauty of education by means of a different education. Finally, it is stated that Freinet Pedagogy shows the potential to minimize the possibility of class reproduction in education.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201706630200110篇名：師生共構文化回應數學教學之個案研究並列篇名：Co-construction of Culturally Responsive Mathematics Teaching: The Case Study of a Junior High School Class in Taiwan作者：陳玟樺(Wen-Hua Chen)關鍵字：文化回應教學;批判識讀;新移民;culturally responsive teaching;critical literacy;new immigrant期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:2期出版年：2017中文摘要：在多元文化教育潮流下，課室層級被期許能實踐文化回應教學，以促進整體學生的學習增能。本研究旨在探討現階段臺灣課程改革脈絡中，課室師生共同建構文化回應數學教學模式的歷程，採質性個案研究，以參與觀察、訪談、文件分析等方法進行資料蒐集，研究時間為二年。研究發現，師生在設定「邁向公平與正義」為課室專屬之「新」數學教學目標後，為實踐協助課室中新移民子女以「母文化」為橋梁來學習數學，嘗試以「文化差異」，如族群、語言、社會階級、生活經驗等不同文化脈絡與社會建構論為基礎，連結「批判識讀」於數學課程與教學的轉化處理，在協助新移民子女搭建學習鷹架的同時，泛漢族學生也同步展現了不同層次主體性。個案師生透過持續反思與實踐，逐步構築起課室文化回應數學教學模式之雛形。英文摘要：With the trend on multicultural education, learners' empowerment is expected to be promoted by culturally responsive teaching at the classroom level. This research focuses on the understanding of operating culturally responsive mathematics teaching in a multi-ethnic junior-high-school classroom in northern Taiwan. This two-year case study used multiple methods to collect research data, including participant observation, interviews and document analysis. The author links the research findings with the following questions. After setting ”towards fairness and justice” for the classroom-exclusive ”new” mathematics teaching objectives, the teacher and students strived to support new immigrant children to learn mathematics using their ”mother culture” as a bridge. All of them strived on the basis of ”cultural differences” such as ethnicity, languages, social classes, life experiences under different cultural contexts and social constructivism with ”critical literacy” to deal with the transformation of mathematics curriculum and instruction. Simultaneously, Pan Han students also show diverse levels of subjectivity. Through continuous reflection and practice, the teacher and students gradually build up the prototype of culturally responsive mathematics teaching model at the classroom level.起始頁-結束頁：49-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201706630200201篇名：進行多層次建模最小可行的樣本數建議：貝氏模擬取向並列篇名：Sample Size Requirements of Using Multilevel Models: Bayesian Simulation Study作者：曾明基(Ming-Chi Tseng)關鍵字：貝氏方法;多層次模型;成長模型;Bayesian method;multilevel model;growth model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究經由模擬研究的方式同時比較貝氏方法和ML估計法在多層次模型以及成長模型建構時，最小可行的分析樣本單位數，並同時考慮存在隨機遺漏下，在多層次模型以及成長模型建構所需的樣本數調整。研究發現，使用貝氏方法進行多層次模型以及成長模型建構，所需的樣本數較小且可以獲得穩定的參數覆蓋率以及統計考驗力，值得加以推廣。英文摘要：This paper shows practical guidelines of sample size requirements when results are analyzed by multilevel models. The study found that when Bayesian method is used for multilevel model, stable parameters and power are attained through fewer samples.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420171213040012篇名：量表長度簡化研究：「簡式中小學教師主觀幸福感量表」修訂並列篇名：Study of Scale-Items Reduction: The Reconstruction of Subjective Well-Being Scale作者：余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);陳玉樺(Yu-Hua Chen)關鍵字：主觀幸福感;短題本;試題反應理論;subjective well-being;short form version;item response theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在發展一份適合華人使用，經濟、有效之評估主觀幸福感之工具。本研究將過去所編制之「主觀幸福感量表」修訂為「簡式中小學教師主觀幸福感量表」，以符合臨床應用與實務研究上之經濟性與效率性的需求。依據全國各縣市學校數比率進行抽樣後，共得有效選題樣本1,046人，在原量表情緒幸福感、心理幸福感與社會幸福感三向度的架構下，根據評定量尺模式與試題差異功能分析結果，選出15題的「簡式中小學教師主觀幸福感量表」。然後，重新以分層隨機抽樣取得1,180名中小學教師為有效樣本，執行主觀幸福感驗證性因素分析（CFA），發現整體模式具備相當不錯之適配度。本研究發現：以「臺灣憂鬱情緒量表」作為外在效標，進行效標關聯效度分析，發現心理、社會、情緒幸福感與憂鬱變項間，均有顯著負相關，顯示本簡式量表具有不錯的外在效標關聯效度。針對上述研究結果並提出相關建議，以供未來研究與實務工作者之參考。英文摘要：The multidimensional Subjective Well-being Scale (SWS) had become one of the most widely-used inventories for measuring the subjective well-being construct including psychological well-being, social well-being, and emotional well-being. For economic efficiency and widespread use, we developed a short form of the Subjective Well-being Scale, the SWS-SF. There were two sets of sample: development sample and validation sample, in which 1,046 and 1,180 teachers randomly selected according to the ratio of the number of schools from cities around Taiwan. Through two-stage process of item selection and model confirmation, the 39-item full scale was reduced to 15-item brief version. The items in the brief version of Subjective Well-being Scale were selected according to the rating scale model (RSM) and differential item functioning (DIF) of item response theory. The structure of the brief version was tested by the confirmation factor analysis (CFA). Results show that: The processes of parameter estimation, item selection, cross-validation, and comparisons with the full scale and other construct (Taiwan Depression Scale) are presented and discussed. The results show that the three-factor model performed adequate goodness-of-fit in brief version, and the psychological, social, and emotional well-beings all had significantly negative relationships with depression. This indicates that the factor structure of the brief version of Subjective Well-being Scale was the same as the full scale and also there was a good criterion-related validity in teachers' subjective well-being model. Finally, some suggestions for practice usage and future research are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：27-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420171213040023篇名：國小學童正向情緒與創造力關聯之研究：以創造力傾向及創意自我效能為中介變項並列篇名：The Correlation between Elementary Pupils' Positive Emotion and Creativity with Creativity Tendency and Creative Self-efficacy as The Mediators作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：正向情緒;創造力傾向;創造力;創意自我效能;positive emotion;creativity tendency;creativity;creative self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以368名國小五年級的學童為研究樣本進行分析，以了解正向情緒、創造力傾向、以及創意自我效能等因素對創造力的直接影響，以及正向情緒透過創造力傾向的中介、創意自我效能的中介對創造力所造成的間接影響，以及正向情緒透過創意自我效能再透過創造力傾向的中介對創造力所造成的間接影響，並以結構方程模式加以檢驗。經由結構方程模式統計檢定後，整體模式所獲得的指數顯示模式尚可被接受。對整體效果的分析顯示，創造力傾向對創造力具直接影響；正向情緒以及創意自我效能雖然對創造力不具有直接影響，但是正向情緒透過創造力傾向對創造力產生間接影響；以及正向情緒可以透過創意自我效能再透過創造力傾向對創造力產生間接影響。最後，針對分析結果，本研究將提出相關的討論與建議。英文摘要：Total 368 G5 pupils were sampled for analyzing the direct effects of positive emotion, creativity tendency, and creative self-efficacy on creativity, the indirect effects of positive emotion on creativity with the mediating effects of creativity tendency and creative self-efficacy, as well as the indirect effects of positive emotion on creativity through the mediating effects of creative self-efficacy and then creativity tendency in this study. Structural Equation Model was further utilized for the verification. After the statistical test through Structural Equation Model, the acquired overall model index shows the model being acceptable. The analysis of the overall effect reveals direct effects of creativity tendency on creativity, no direct effect of positive emotion and creative self-efficacy on creativity, but indirect effects of positive emotion on creativity through creativity tendency, as well as indirect effects of positive emotion on creativity through creative self-efficacy and then creativity tendency. Finally, relevant discussions and suggestions aiming at the analyses are proposed in this study.起始頁-結束頁：57-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420171213040034篇名：Teachers' Cognitive Processes from the Perspective of Distributed Cognition: An Analysis Focused on Teachers-Made Assessments並列篇名：分布認知觀點的教師認知歷程：以教師自編評量為分析焦點作者：梁金都(Chin-Tu Liang)關鍵字：artifact;cognitive process;distributed cognition;teachers-made assessment;Two-Way Specification Table;人造物;認知過程;分布認知;教師自編評量;雙向細目表期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Few studies deal with how the gap between artifacts and task in terms of members' cognition distributed (Halverson & Clifford, 2006) in the field of teaching practice. The present study explored how the teachers' cognition evolved with a close look at the artifact, and the processes adopted by ”Two-Way Specification Table” (TWST) for teachers-made assessments as an artifact designed for nine students' tests in ”SiSi” Elementary School. Participatory observation, interviews, and documents were employed. The following conclusions were drawn: Firstly, after the implementation of TWST in SiSi Elementary School, teachers had produced 13 kinds of cognitive systems respectively. Secondly, during the process of implementing TWST, teachers gradually presented different stages of cognitive systems such as questioning, reflection, transformation, and creativity. Moreover, continuous discussions and sharing, the need for experts' assistance, developing the technological systems, and the positive attitude of principal were key elements in the functioning of the TWST. Lastly, after the implementation of TWST in SiSi Elementary School, it was found that teachers' cognitive systems were slightly improved.英文摘要：本研究主要是採取個案研究法，並選取「西西」國小（化名）為研究個案，且以該校實施「雙向細目表」的教師自編評量為中介物，透過了觀察和訪談與文件分析等方法，蒐集11位研究參與者與該表持續交互影響的實地資料，以了解教師們的認知歷程。最後本研究獲致了以下結論：一、西西國小實施雙向細目表後，教師們分別產生了十三種認知系統。二、雙向細目表的歷程，教師們漸次呈現質疑、反思、轉向、創新等不同的認知階段。三、持續地討論與分享、需要專家協助、科技系統引入、校長積極推動的態度等，乃是發揮雙向細目表功能的關鍵因素。四、西西國小實施雙向細目表，教師們的認知系統大致呈現朝向上升方向發展。起始頁-結束頁：85-118資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420171213040045篇名：我國都會地區國民小學課後照顧班執行現況之研究：以弱勢群體學生為探討焦點並列篇名：A Study on the Implementation of the After-School Care at Elementary Schools in Urban Areas in Taiwan: Focusing on the Disadvantaged Students作者：陳盈宏(Ying-Hong Chen)關鍵字：都會地區;課後照顧;弱勢群體學生;urban areas;after-school care;the disadvantaged students期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究主要探討我國都會地區國民小學課後照顧班為弱勢群體學生所提供的課後照顧服務現況、困境及因應策略，並輔以探討都會地區不同類型國民小學對於弱勢群體學生所提供的課後照顧服務之差異情形。本研究採用的研究方法包括問卷調查、文件分析及訪談法。根據研究發現，我國都會地區國民小學課後照顧班普及度高，但對於弱勢群體學生的關照積極度尚待加強；再者，我國都會地區國民小學課後照顧班在提供弱勢群體學生課後照顧服務時，最主要面臨的問題為「課後照顧經費短絀」及「課後照顧服務人員數量及品質不足」等；此外，我國都會地區國民小學課後照顧班若與民間資源協力合作及持續辦理課後照顧在職進修課程，會有助提升弱勢群體學生課後照顧品質；另外，我國都會地區不同類型國民小學課後照顧班的辦理方式及對於弱勢群體學生所發揮的照顧功能有所差異。最後，根據相關研究發現，本研究提出可供課後照顧政策調整方向之參考建議。英文摘要：Taking the disadvantaged students as the focus group, this study explored the status quo, problems and adaptive strategies of the the after-school care programs at elementary schools in urban areas in Taiwan, and compared the differences between different cities. The study adopted the methods of questionnaire, document analysis, and focus group interview to collect data. The results analysis revealed that: the penetration of after-school care at elementary schools in urban areas was high, but it still required improvement in disadvantaged student groups; main problems they faced when providing after-school care service were fund and manpower shortage and unqualified care teams; if this program cooperated with civil resources and continued to organize on-the-job training courses of after-school care, it could improve the quality of after-school care for the disadvantaged students; the differences were in the organization of the after-school care and the role it played for the disadvantaged students among different urban areas. Based on the conclusions, some suggestions are made for the related departments to adjust the policy direction of the after-school care for the disadvantaged students.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420170913030016篇名：幸福感與學習成就之跨國分析並列篇名：A Cross-Nations Study of the Well-Being and Academic Achievement作者：張芳全(Fang-Chung Chang)關鍵字：學習成就;幸福感;性別不平等指數;失業率;國際學生能力評量計畫;academic achievement;well-being;the ratio of unemployment;the Gender Inequality Index;PISA期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：幸福感與學生學習成就之關聯性是重要議題。許多研究探討學生特性與學習成就的關聯性，忽略了幸福感的因素。本研究以正向心理學理論，從UNDP（2014）的《人力發展報告》（Human Development Report）取得56個國家的主觀與客觀幸福感、學習成就（數學、科學與閱讀成就）資料，探討學習成就與幸福感排名與其對學習成就的影響，獲得以下結論：學習成就排前五名為新加坡、南韓、日本、臺灣及芬蘭。主觀與客觀幸福感較高的國家，其學習成就不一定比較好；主觀幸福感中的國民安全滿意度對學習成就有正向助益，而客觀幸福感中的性別不平等與失業率對學習成就的影響至為關鍵。上述反應了，國民安全滿意度高，學習成就好，而性別愈不平等與失業率愈高，對學習成就有負面影響。最後，各國的客觀幸福感與學習成就之間，存在主觀幸福感部分中介的影響。英文摘要：The relationships between well-being and academic achievement is an important issue. Many studies on academic achievement focused on factors related to student characteristics and ignored the notion of well-being. In this study based on the positive psychology theory, we ranked the academic achievement and well-being in 56 countries, and also investigated the subjective and objective well-being impact factors in academic achievement (mathematics, science, and reading achievement) in 56 countries, using data collected from UNDP (2014) ”Human development report.” The results were as follows. First, on the top five ranking of the academic achievement were Singapore, South Korea, Japan, Taiwan and Finland. Second, the high subjective well-being countries did not always reach a higher academic achievement, and there was a positively significant relationship between the safety perceptions of individual well-being, the objective wellbeing and academic achievement, especially in the ratio of unemployment and the Gender Inequality Index. It implied that these were significant factor in the academic achievement. That is, the higher the ratio of unemployment and Gender Inequality Index that a nation has, the more negative effects the nation has on the academic achievement. Moreover, subjective well-being partly enhanced the academic achievement.起始頁-結束頁：31-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420170913030027篇名：以教訓輔三合一學生輔導模式探討偏鄉地區國中生藥物濫用輔導之問題及策略思考並列篇名：Discussion on the Problems and Strategies of Drug Abuse Counseling in the Countryside by Taking the Guidance Model of Three-in-One Student作者：林俊傑(Chun-Chieh Lin);謝文英(Wen-Ying Hsieh)關鍵字：教訓輔三合一輔導模式;偏鄉地區;國中;藥物濫用;teaching three-in-one counseling model;rural areas;junior high school;drug abuse期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：整合教學、訓導及輔導資源將輔導成效發揮至最大效益，向為學生輔導議題最為關注之焦點。本研究以屏東縣防制學生藥物濫用輔導團為例，旨在探討輔導團在偏鄉國中生藥物濫用輔導之分析，期望透過個案研究及深入訪談輔導團成員，了解偏鄉地區藥物濫用輔導的問題。在研究方法上採參與觀察法及深度訪談法進行研究，並以教訓輔三合一學生輔導模式為研究分析架構。研究結果發現如下：一、偏鄉地區國中生藥物濫用之輔導策略顯現具體成效，但仍有檢討的空間。二、偏鄉地區國中生藥物濫用之輔導策略有兩大問題構面。三、偏鄉地區國中生藥物濫用輔導過程有理論四構面的問題。本研究根據研究結果，提出具體建議，供主管教育行政機關及國中進行藥物濫用輔導教育之參考。英文摘要：It is the main target of students' counseling issues to integrate the family, school and community resources so as to maximize the counseling effectiveness. This study takes the Pingtung County School of Drug Abuse Prevention for example. It aims to explore the counseling group's experience in junior high schools students' drug abuse counseling in rural areas. It is hoped that through case studies and in-depth interviews with counselors to understand the problems of drug abuse counseling. As for the research method, the case study observation method and the interview method are carried out, and the research analysis employed three-in-one student guidance model. The results of this study are as follows: 1. It shows that there are concrete results in the analysis of the counseling strategies of junior high school students' drug abuse in the rural areas, but there is still room for improvement. 2. Two problems were identified in the analysis of counseling strategies of junior high school students' drug abuse in the rural areas. 3. The counselors pointed out the theoretical four-faceted problem of junior high school students' drug abuse counseling in the rural areas. Finally, according to the conclusions, there are recommendations provided for the government as the policy references for drug abuse school counseling education.起始頁-結束頁：67-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420170913030038篇名：香港職業學校愉快學習語文現狀調查分析並列篇名：Student Survey and Analysis of Pleasant Learning Experiences for Chinese Language at Vocational Training Schools in Hong Kong作者：謝惠芝(Wai-Chi TSE, Vivian)關鍵字：職業語文教育;愉快學習;情境教學;情感教育;vocational language education;pleasant learning experience;contextual teaching and learning;affective education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：為了解香港職校學生對中國語文科（簡稱「中文科」）的觀感，開課前進行了一項學生對中文科的問卷調查（回收有效問卷625份）。研究發現，大多數學生對學習中文科缺乏興趣，並認為中文科是沉悶的科目。接著，通過學生對科目的觀感調查與分析，設計「愉快職業中文教學研究計畫」，還創建一套愉快教學模式。實踐計畫後再進行後測問卷調查（回收有效問卷625份），剖析當中最影響愉快學習職業中文的因素和成效，並提出愉快學習職業中文的教學建議，藉此鼓勵職校教師實踐職業中文愉快教學，增強學生學習職業中文的趣味和動機，達到自主學習和樂學中文的成功教育。英文摘要：In order to understand Hong Kong's vocational students' perception of the Chinese language, a survey was conducted among students at the start of the semester. Our analysis showed that most of the students lacked an interest in learning Chinese language and considered it as a boring subject. Based on the survey analysis, we implemented a research program named ”Pleasant Teaching Program for Chinese Language Courses in Vocational Education”. After implementing this program, we carried out a second survey to analyze the effectiveness and most impactful factors affecting their learning. In this report, we focus on the second survey results and their comparison with the initial survey results, and propose strategies for future learning programs in vocational Chinese language which are aimed at encouraging program use by teachers and arousing students' interest and motivation in learning Chinese language.起始頁-結束頁：103-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420170913030049篇名：多元文化取向「認識新住民」之課程大綱建構並列篇名：The Development of Core Curriculum Guidelines for Knowing New Immigrants: A Multicultural Perspective作者：曾銘翊(Ming-Yi Tseng);陳麗華(Li-Hua Chen)關鍵字：多元文化取向;認識新住民;課程大綱;multicultural approach;new immigrant study;curriculum guidelines期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在建構一套適用於幼兒園至終身學習階段的多元文化取向「認識新住民」課程大綱（以下簡稱課程大綱），提供未來發展適切的認識新住民課程教材之依據。本研究主要採德懷術為研究方法，以20位相關的學者專家為對象，進行三回合的問卷調查以凝聚共識，完成建構工作。本研究所建構之課程大綱具有以下屬性：一、課程大綱包括4個主題軸、12項主要概念及36條能力指標。二、課程大綱主題軸為：「多元覺知」、「族群關係」、「文化探究」、「社會正義」等4個主題軸。三、課程大綱核心概念有：「跨國現象」、「文化多樣性」、「族群價值與貢獻」、「理解與認同」、「尊重接納」、「族群關懷」、「文化價值」、「跨文化學習」、「文化素養」、「偏見與歧視／文化剝奪」、「公民權」及「正義人權」等12項主要概念。四、課程大綱的36條能力指標，以能力進階分為「基礎、中階、高階」等三層級，並參據認知歷程向度及情意向度層次加以檢視，以發展出具有區隔力之進階性指標。五、課程大綱係參照公民行動取向課程模式發展出來的，具有公民行動精神。六、課程大綱係參照多元文化課程教學原理發展，符合多元文化精神。英文摘要：This research aimed to develop curriculum guidelines based on multicultural approach for the course of knowing ”New Immigrant” (abbreviated as core curriculum guideline). In developing the curriculum guidelines, three-run Delphi surveys were administrated to 20 experts to achieve consensus. The attributes of the curriculum guidelines were as follows: Firstly, the curriculum guidelines included four themes, twelve main concepts and thirty-six indicators of ability. Secondly, the four themes of curriculum guidelines were awareness with multiple perspectives, ethnic relationship, cultural exploration, and social justice. Thirdly, twelve main concepts of the curriculum guidelines were transnational phenomenon, cultural diversification, value and contribution of ethnic group understanding and identity, respect and accept, care for ethnic group, cultural value, cross-cultural learning, cultural literacy, prejudice and discrimination, civic rights, and justice and human rights. Fourthly, 36 indicators of the curriculum guidelines were divided into basic, intermediate and advanced levels by capability. The discriminative validity for the three levels of indicators was verified with the Bloom's Taxonomy of Cognitive Domain and Krathwohl's Taxonomy of Affective Domain. Fifthly, the curriculum guidelines contained the spirit of citizen actions. Sixthly, the curriculum guidelines were in accordance with the essence of multicultural approach.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201706130200110篇名：中學體育師資生實施理解式教學法之探究並列篇名：A Case Study of Physical Education Student Teachers' Implementation of Teaching Games for Understanding (TGfU)作者：陳萩慈(Chiu-Tsu Chen);掌慶維(Ching-Wei Chang)關鍵字：遊戲比賽概念教學法;集中實習;師資培育;games concept approach;teaching practice program;teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：探討中學體育師資生在集中實習時，運用遊戲比賽促進戰術理解之教學（理解式教學）（Teaching Games for Understanding, TGfU），針對知覺面（教學前）、實施面（教學中）與反思面（教學後）。研究方法以訪談法、參與觀察法、內容分析法，立意取樣4位。教學項目以球類為主，並以持續比較法將進行分析與歸納。結果發現，一、知覺面－特色：引發學習動機的教學、先行遊戲比賽的教學、提升教學能力與培養教材教具能力。二、實施面以教學前、中與後期進行探討成功經驗與問題情境之遭遇情形。三、反思面－體育課經驗、專業知能與知覺上的衝突、學生能力與高國中生階段動機、課程流程與評量、教學環境、學校風氣、師資培育單位及場地。研究建議增加中學體育師資生在教學時成功的經驗，加入實習輔導教師及實習指導教師的協助、以供給師資培育單位參酌。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore student teachers' (STs) implementation of Teaching Games for Understanding (TGfU) during their teaching practice in a secondary school. Student teachers' perception, teaching practice, and reflection of their teaching practice were examined during 5 weeks teaching practicum. Four participants (2 males and 2 females) were selected from the teaching practicum course. Qualitative research method was adopted, including class observations, interviews, and professional dialogue with the university supervisor, and teaching reflection journals. All gathered data were transcribed and then analysed with the inductive method. Firstly, the results indicated that STs' perception was focused on a student-centered orientation and tactical awareness, teaching skills, expression, creativity, observation and classroom management skills. Secondly, in terms of teacher education program, the designing games activities, the implementation of the successful experience, the limits of time and equipment factors, time management, students' acceptance were the major parts while STs implemented TGfU. Cooperating teachers' (CTs) support or lack thereof and problem-solving context of the situation were encountered during the STs' implementation. Finally, in terms of the teaching reflection, STs' past experience, professional knowledge and ability, students' ability and students' motivation and different competency levels, assessment process, and learning environment were major factors. Implications extracted for the future showed that: 1. To assist CTs and UTs to build teachers' professional development network platform; 2. To build TGfU community data base; 3. To enhance the STs' self-efficacy.起始頁-結束頁：35-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201706130200201篇名：全球視野在地化的校務研究：以國立臺灣大學經驗為例並列篇名：Think Globally and Act Locally: National Taiwan University's Experience of Institutional Research作者：李紋霞(Jennifer Wen-Shya Lee);符碧真(Bih-Jen Fwu)關鍵字：校務研究;校務研究角色功能面貌;校務研究組織智能;國立臺灣大學;證據為本;evidence-based;faces of institutional research;institutional research;National Taiwan University;organizational intelligence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去我國的大學經營常是「跟著感覺走」，但在校園民主化後，校務決策應以「證據」為本。2015年在教育部推動下，許多大學成立校務研究（Institutional Research, IR）辦公室進行相關工作。美國校務研究發展出成熟的運作模式，成為全球高等教育的典範，惟校務研究需高度與所處的區域、校園環境脈絡結合，故如何具有全球視野在地化的思維，從事植基於校園文化的IR工作，以解決自己的問題，是當前要務。本文以廣為學界引用的校務研究三種組織智能與五種角色功能面貌，檢視與反思國立臺灣大學過去10年發展全球視野在地化IR工作的過程和挑戰，供各校未來推動IR工作的參考。英文摘要：Previously, university management in Taiwan was often guided by common sense or decision-makers' intuition. However, because university governing bodies have become more democratic, policymaking need to be more evidence based. In 2015, with the promotion of the Ministry of Education, many universities established institutional research (IR) offices to support evidence-based policymaking. The mature U.S. IR model has long been considered a global standard. However, because each university has its own campus culture and governance style, the U.S. model must be adapted and modified to suit Taiwanese universities. The major objective of IR is to think globally and act locally by maintaining a global perspective, staying informed of local concerns, and working within regional constraints. By using the well-cited frameworks of three organizational intelligences and five IR faces, this paper examined and reflected on the processes and challenges of IR at National Taiwan University (NTU). NTU's experience may provide insights into future IR development in Taiwanese higher education.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(4).012篇名：校務研究資料建置與決策支援應用並列篇名：Database Establishment in Institutional Research and Decision-Making Support Applications作者：彭耀平(Yao-Ping Peng);劉峰旗(Feng-Chi Liu);段盛華(Sheng-Hua Tuan)關鍵字：決策支援;校務研究;教育資料;資料庫管理;database management;decision-making support system;educational data;institutional research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：校務研究對於臺灣高等教育而言是個尚待開發的新興領域，故各大專校院所進行的校務研究活動與事物，皆是根據該校所擁有的資料進行分析、轉換及應用。在資料蒐集及建置上並無共通一致的標準與規定，各大專校院亦根據美國校務研究協會所提供之資料與資訊發展自身的校務研究（特色）。由於校務研究係針對高等教育機構內部資料的蒐集、分析與詮釋，包含學生、教師、行政人員、校內環境等等，由校務研究專業人員分析出有價值且可參考的資訊，提供機構高階管理者進行決策考量與校務發展的規劃。然而，資料分析應用是否能有效進行皆植基於資料的蒐集與整理，起始資料的完備程度與資料系統建置可視為是校務研究的第一步，其決定了後續的資料分析與分析資訊能否富含決策價值。因此，本研究參酌社會科學量化分析、圖書館學與資訊科學，檢視某（北部）私立大學校務研究資料庫之設計與建置模組，其結果可作為提供我國大專校院參考依循的實務模式。最後，本文旨在探討現行高等教育領域運用學校所蒐集之巨量教育資料的儲存與編整模式，以作為校務研究中心專業人員的分析基礎及實務參考模式，並利於學校進行決策支援管理。英文摘要：Institutional research (IR) is expected to undergo development to conform to the needs of Taiwan's higher education sector by enabling each university to execute IR based on its own data to conduct analysis, transfers, and applications. Thus, no common and consistent standards and regulations will govern data collection and storage. Each university develops its own IR strategy based on data and information provided by the U.S. Association of Institutional Research. IR focuses on internal data collection, analysis, and interpretation from higher education institutions. Objects of study include students, faculty members, support staff, and the school environment. Institutional researchers analyze information of value to facilitate senior leaders' decision-making and institutional development. However, the effectiveness of data analysis applications is based on data collection and storage; therefore, the completeness of the initial data and data system construction is the first step in IR development to determine whether subsequent data analysis and interpretation are valuable for decision-making. Therefore, this study investigated the data-processing elements of libraries and information science and the design and models of IR databases at a private university in Taiwan. The study objective was to ascertain the method of massive educational information use and storage in the modern higher education sector and to determine the optimal mode of analyzing concepts and references for institutional research professionals. The outcomes of this study could contribute to university decision-making processes.起始頁-結束頁：27-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(4).023篇名：高等教育經費補助政策與績效分析：以臺灣公立大學與頂尖大學為例並列篇名：Efficiency Analysis of Subsidiary and Grant Policy in Public Universities and Top Universities in Taiwan作者：葉怡芬(Yi-Fen Yeh)關鍵字：公立大學;頂尖大學計畫;資料包絡分析;績效分析;aim for the top university;data envelopment analysis (DEA);efficiency analysis;public university期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：在經濟不景氣時，高等教育常被詬病辦學經費（包含教育支出與研究支出）較中、小學為高，且易被質疑經費使用的有效性。本研究透過資料包絡分析（Data Envelopment Analysis）法，就研究傾向較高的40所大學進行研發績效評比，以及探討「邁向頂尖大學計畫」成員學校於兩期計畫中研發技術的成長。結果指出，長期國內大學排名為首的大學（如：臺灣大學、清華大學）在投入成本較他校為多的情況下，研發產能仍為高效率；科技大學的研發產能在考量投入成本後，績效也為高效率；惟教學型大學可能因學科特性與投注較多於教育推廣，於考量成本與研發產能的績效則為落後。頂尖大學計畫的成員學校於計畫補助的二期內（2006-2014年，共三階段），研發的技術效率多有維持或進步，技術變革於階段三也已全面提升，惟規模效率的降低是多校的隱憂。績效分析結果雖無法代替校務分析，但其方法與結果可作為校內院所或校際間良性競爭的形成性評量與校務政策修正參考。英文摘要：Higher education is often criticized for its relatively high cost to students, and universities generally incur high research costs. In this study, the research efficiency of 40 public universities was compared using data envelopment analysis. Additionally, member institutes of the project ”Aim for the Top University” were evaluated for their research performance during project execution. The results indicated a high level of technical efficiency among top-tier universities (including National Taiwan University and National Tsing Hua University), even though they incurred relatively higher research costs. A high level of technical efficiency was also identified in many technology universities, particularly in terms of research output quality and comparatively low costs. Lower levels of technical efficiency were found for education-focused universities, likely because of their comparatively high expenditure and time on community education. The research capabilities of most member institutions improved with project funding during 2006-2014, even though scale inefficiency was a major concern. Efficiency analysis cannot substitute institutional research; nevertheless, the findings of the estimated efficiency and gaps can be valuable considerations for the evaluated universities.起始頁-結束頁：53-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(4).034篇名：大學教師職級、主持研發計畫數與研究產能關聯性之探討：以一所私立醫學大學為例並列篇名：Relationships Among Academic Ranks, Numbers of Funded Projects, and Research Productivity of University Faculty: The Case of a Private Medical University作者：黃淑玲(Sheila Shu-Ling Huang);沈碩彬(Shuo-Pin Shen)關鍵字：大學教師職級;研究產能;校務研究;階層迴歸;academic rank;hierarchical regression;institutional research;research productivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討各職級（正、副、助理教授）大學教師其主持研發計畫數（非營利、校內、產學、政府、跨校）對研究產能（研討會、學術期刊論文數）之預測模型。研究資料採用南部一所私立醫學大學於2006-2015年共10年期間之教師人事資料，串接該校之校務資料庫中與本研究相關之變項，並採用描述性統計、階層迴歸分析等統計方法進行分析。主要研究結果如下：一、各職級教師均以主持政府計畫為主，但其他類計畫數與研究產能表現不盡相同；二、總體上，職級高者主持計畫數多，也正向預測研究產能；三、年輕但職級高者有較高的校內、政府與跨校計畫數和研究產能；四、不同職級教師的期刊論文發表途徑各異，正教授學術產出模式最靈活多元。本研究提出大學組織、教師個人策略規劃之建議；同時，優化校務資料蒐集有益進一步分析，以期掌握研究產能趨勢，降低大學教師職能落差。英文摘要：This study modeled the relationship between types of research funding and faculty research productivity. Utilizing faculty data between 2006 and 2015 and matching with variables of interest in the institutional data system of a private medical university in Southern Taiwan, this IRB-approved study employed hierarchical regression analyses to test the assumption that types of research funding affected research productivity in numbers of publications and conference papers. The results confirmed that funding sources significantly affected faculty research productivity. Specifically, we found the following: (1) governmental programs were the most effective funding resources, and faculty performance varied across academic ranks; (2) a higher rank was correlated with more funded projects, which positively predicted research productivity; (3) younger faculty with a higher academic rank, however, outperformed others in numbers of funded projects and publications; and (4) full professors had the most diverse and sophisticated strategies regarding academic productivity in numbers of funded projects and publications. Suggestions are made herein for appropriate institutional changes and individual strategies for career advancement. A more sophisticated data collection strategy should be established to monitor trends in faculty productivity and to close the gap between the faculty capacity and job demands.起始頁-結束頁：89-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(4).045篇名：家庭資源、學習態度、多元入學管道與學習成效關聯性之研究：以臺灣某大學為例並列篇名：Relationships Among Family Resources, Learning Attitudes, University Admission Channels, and Learning Performance: Case of a Taiwanese University作者：黃政仁(Cheng-Jen Huang);黃偉婷(Wei-Ting Huang)關鍵字：大學多元入學管道;家庭資源;學習成效;學習態度;family resource;learning attitude;learning performance;multiple university admission channels期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討家庭資源、學習態度、多元入學管道與學習成效之間的關係。研究對象主要是個案大學的大一學生，並控制學生之背景變數，建構以家庭資源為自變數，學習態度、多元入學管道與學習成效為依變數的廣義結構方程模型。有別於過去的研究，本研究將學習成效分為智育及服務學習之學習成效，且智育之學習成效包含較具客觀性的會考成績。研究結果顯示，家庭資源愈豐富，學生智育與服務的學習成效反而愈差。其次，家庭資源愈豐富的學生傾向於選擇甄選入學管道。最後，學生的學習態度愈佳，則無論智育或服務之學習成效也會愈好。英文摘要：This study analyzed the interrelationships between family resources, learning attitudes, university admission channels, and learning performance. This study used first-year college students enrolled at the case university as the research sample. This research applied the generalized structural equation model and used family resources as its independent variable and learning attitude, university admission channels, and learning performance as dependent variables. Learning performance was separated into intellectual and service learning performance. The empirical results indicated that students with more family resources were less likely to exhibit high intellect and high service learning performance. In addition, students with more family resources were more likely to enter the university through recommendations and screening. Finally, students with superior learning attitudes were more likely to exhibit high intellect and high service learning performance.起始頁-結束頁：117-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(4).056篇名：OECD國家與臺灣之教育績效比較：以PISA科學素養為例並列篇名：High School Students' Science Literacy and Educational Performance: A Comparison Between Taiwan and OECD Countries作者：彭開<U+743C>(Kai-Chiung Peng);張佳雯(Chia-Wen Chang);李瑞生(Jui-Sheng Li)關鍵字：Tobit迴歸;三階段包絡分析法;國際學生能力評量計畫;PISA;Three Stage-DEA;Tobit regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究的焦點在於經濟合作暨發展組織（OECD）會員國及臺灣科學素養之比較，研究內容包括彙整科學素養評量結果、進行科學素養成就統計分析、探究影響科學素養成就的相關因素、評估OECD會員國及臺灣科學素養成就的整體效率值，以提出各項教育績效評估的建議。研究對象為參與PISA 2012評量的學生為主。本研究主要資料來源為OECD之2012年「國際學生能力評量計畫」的調查結果，採用的研究方法為三階段包絡分析法：第一階段利用DEA中的CCR、BCC模式分析各種效率值，第二階段利用Tobit迴歸去除環境因素所造成的相對無效率，第三階段則把調整後的產出項投到模型，分析調整後的各種效率值。研究結果顯示，經第二階段調整產出項後，第三階段分析結果顯示，各國的平均技術效率值及純技術效率值是提升的，而規模報酬遞減的國家數量明顯增加，且與第一階段的效率值有顯著的差異。所以各國皆面臨不同的經營環境，這些因素會干擾各國的經營效率評估，如果不事先予以消除，將會使各效率值的評估結果產生偏誤。因此，可以發現達到技術效率、純技術效率、規模效率值為1的國家數量增加，而規模報酬固定的國家由30個減至13個，顯示此報酬狀態為該國在投入與產出的比例上最為恰當，因此無須做任何改善與調整，規模報酬遞減的國家由5個增加至22個，顯示此報酬狀態為該國在投入與產出的比例上過大，因此各國政府可考慮調整或降低投入產出的比例，避免可能因規模過度擴張導致資源浪費的情形。英文摘要：This study compared science literacy between the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) member countries and Taiwan. To evaluate educational achievements, the study included archiving the assessment results of science literacy, statistically analyzing science literacy accomplishments, investigating the factors that influence science literacy, and assessing the overall efficiency of the science literacy accomplishments that the OECD member countries and Taiwan have achieved. The study participants were the high school students of the OECD member countries and Taiwan who had participated in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2012. The study data source was OECD PISA 2012 results. A 3-stage Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) was used. The 1-stage DEA was employed to analyze variety efficiency in the DEA of the CCR and BCC models. The 2-stage DEA was used to remove environmental factors caused by the relative inefficiencies in the Tobit regression analysis. The last stage placed the adjusted output into the model and analyzed the efficiency. It also revealed more decreasing returns to scale countries. Because different countries have different management environments, these factors can interfere with the efficiency assessment. If they are not eliminated in advance, a deviation may be observed in the analysis. This study indicated that the number of countries with technical efficiency, pure technical efficiency, and a scale efficiency value of 1 has increased, while the constant returns to scale countries from 30 to 13, indicating that the status of returns is the most appropriate proportion in input and output. Therefore, no improvements and adjustments were observed. A decrease was observed in returns to scale countries from 5 to 22, indicating that the status of returns is a huge proportion gap in input and output. Therefore, governments should consider adjusting or reducing the proportion of inputs and outputs, as resources may be wasted due to excessive scale expansion.起始頁-結束頁：145-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(4).067篇名：故事提示策略、工作記憶能力對幼兒故事理解能力的影響並列篇名：Effects of Story Prompting and Working Memory Ability on Young Children's Story Comprehension作者：簡馨瑩(Hsin-Ying Chien);連啟舜(Chi-Shun Lien);張紹盈(Shao-Ying Chang)關鍵字：工作記憶;序列分析;故事結構;理解;comprehension;sequential analysis;story grammar;working memory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討教師提示故事主角的目標與意圖對幼兒在故事理解能力的影響，並進一步分析不同工作記憶能力的幼兒在故事理解能力的表現。另外，應用序列分析法分析幼兒聽完故事後排列故事圖卡的順序情形。研究對象為臺北市公立幼兒園四歲七個月至六歲兩個月幼兒。研究方法採取以2（故事提示有無）×3（高、中、低工作記憶能力）之實驗設計，以多變量共變數分析及序列分析進行資料的分析。實驗組為幼兒接受故事提示的故事朗讀教學，控制組為未接受故事提示的一般朗讀。研究發現：以提示故事主角的目標與意圖方式作為教學策略，有助於幼兒對故事內容的記憶與理解；不同工作記憶能力幼兒在故事理解能力與故事圖卡排序的表現亦有顯著差異。最後，根據研究結果進行討論並對現場教學與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：This study explored the effects of a teacher's prompt and children's working memory capacity on story comprehension. A sequential analysis technique was used to explore how accurately children remembered the sequence of events after listening to a story. Participants aged from 4 years and 7 months to 6 years and 2 months were recruited from municipal preschools. A 2 by 3 factorial design with prompt (with/without) and working memory capacity (high/medium/low) as two independent variables was used. A multivariate analysis of covariance and sequential analysis were conducted for data analysis. The experimental group received storytelling with prompts regarding a protagonist's goal, and the control group received storytelling without any prompt. The results revealed that children who received prompts about the protagonist's goals and intention from the teacher exhibited improved story comprehension and improved accuracy in story picture sorting. In addition, a significant difference was observed among the working memory groups. The findings were discussed for educational implications, and future research goals were identified.起始頁-結束頁：181-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(4).078篇名：促動改變的扳手：學習共同體影響學校變革之分析並列篇名：Leverage for Change: An Analysis of the Influence of the Learning Community on Changes in School作者：潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Wendy Pan)關鍵字：學校發展力;學校變革;學習共同體;學習領導;capacity for school development;leadership for learning;learning community;school change期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：學習共同體作為改變教育現場的一項取徑，在臺灣已實施數年。本研究以自願參與教育部「學習領導下的學習共同體」計畫之試辦學校為對象，探討學校發展為學習共同體的程度，以及學習共同體促動學校產生變革的情形。針對32所中小學，採問卷調查法進行研究。結果顯示，試辦學校經過1年的試作後，教師對自己學校具有學習共同體特徵，展現正向知覺。在四項落實學習共同體特徵（構面）的得分上，以「願景與認同」最高；其次為「變革的學習」、「支持性與分散性領導」與「分享的個人實務」。而教師參與學習共同體的研討與實作經驗愈多，學校愈能彰顯學習共同體的特徵。另對於學校變革的影響，學習共同體特徵之一的「願景與認同」未具顯著解釋力；「分享的個人實務」對於三項學校變革（教師的課堂教學、教師的專業學習及學校發展力）保持一貫的影響力；「支持性與分散性領導」與「變革的學習」則各對教師的專業學習、學校發展力發揮促進作用。此研究結果除呈現學校在學習共同體各構面的落實情形，也揭示了學校要能產生變革，需要掌握的學習共同體之關鍵要素。英文摘要：The learning community, as an approach to influencing changes in schools, has been implemented for several years in Taiwan. To explore how a school develops itself as a learning community and how the learning community triggers changes in the school, the study recruited schools voluntarily attending the MOE-funded project titled ”Learning Community under Leadership for Learning” as subjects. A survey was conducted in the 32 participatory schools. The study results indicated that teachers had positive perceptions regarding their schools with features of the learning community. Among the four features (dimensions) of the learning community, ”vision and recognition” was ranked as the top feature, followed by ”learning for change,” ”supportive and distributed leadership,” and ”shared personal practice.” In addition, the higher the level of project participation, the more schools exhibited features of the learning community. Moreover, regarding the influence of the learning community on changes in schools, this study revealed that ”vision and recognition” had no significant impact, while ”shared personal practice” consistently exerted an effect on teachers' classroom teaching methods and professional learning, and the capacity for school development. ”Supportive and distributed leadership” and ”learning for change” influenced teachers' professional learning and the capacity for school development, respectively. The aforementioned results revealed how schools establish themselves as learning communities. Furthermore, the results revealed the vital elements of the learning community that might influence changes in school.起始頁-結束頁：209-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(4).089篇名：從教師自編科學成就測驗之Rasch分析看教與學並列篇名：Glimpse Into Teaching and Learning Using Rasch Analyses of a Teacher-Made Science Achievement Test作者：陳映孜(Ying-Tze Chen);何曉琪(Hsiao-Chi Ho);劉昆夏(Kun-Hsia Liu);林煥祥(Huann-Shyang Lin);鄭英耀(Ying-Yao Cheng)關鍵字：Rasch測量;教師自編成就測驗;評量回饋;學習可能發展區;學習進程;assessment feedback;learning progression;Rasch model;teacher-made achievement test;zone of proximal learning development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究採Rasch測量模式，分析教師自編科學成就測驗，以檢驗測驗試題的品質，並提供有用的評量回饋訊息，作為教師調整教學與修正評量之參考。研究對象為高雄市8,936位（男生4,617位、女生4,319位）七年級學生。研究工具為教師自編生物科成就測驗。測驗資料採試題反應理論的Rasch模式進行分析。結果發現：整體而言，教師自編科學成就測驗能區分出學生的能力程度。然而，有些試題的內容對女生較不公平。本研究也發現，教師對於部分試題難易度的認知與學生實際的作答反應存有若干差異。最後，本研究透過評量回饋圖表，包含學生能力與試題難度對照圖、學生作答診斷圖等，提出辨識學習基礎發展區和學習可能發展區的範圍之方式，作為教師規劃學生學習進程之參考。英文摘要：This study examined the quality of a teacher-made achievement test using Rasch analyses and provided useful assessment feedback information for improving teaching and testing. The participants were 8,936 seventh-grade students (4,617 boys and 4,319 girls) from the Kaohsiung area in Taiwan. Data were collected through a teacher-made biology achievement test and analyzed using the Rasch model. The results indicated that the test clearly discriminated students' abilities. Some questions, however, were found to have unfair content for girls. Additionally, some mismatches were identified between teachers' expectations and students' assessments of question difficulty. This paper also provides assessment feedback diagrams, including a person-item map and diagnostic map, and a method of identifying ”the zone of fundamental learning development” and ”the zone of proximal learning development” is proposed to enable teachers to plan students' learning progression.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(3).0110篇名：在職進修教師創意教學自我效能發展之縱貫性研究並列篇名：Longitudinal Research on In-Service Trainee Teachers Development of Self-Efficacy for Creative Teaching作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：創意教學;創意教學自我效能;縱貫性研究;creative teaching;longitudinal research;self-efficacy for creative teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以在職進修碩士學位的教師及其同事為對象，分析創意教學自我效能的成長趨勢，以及五大人格特質、進修與否對於創意教學自我效能的初始狀態及成長趨勢的影響。本研究在2年期間一共進行四次調查，分析結果顯示：一、抗壓信念呈現線性上升的成長趨勢，負向自覺為線性下降的發展趨勢；而正向肯定呈現先上後下發展的成長趨勢。二、進修教師的正向肯定、抗壓信念的成長趨勢明顯優於未參與進修的教師，負向自覺也明顯低於未進修的教師。三、五大人格特質的外向性與神經質對於創意教學自我效能成長趨勢有影響，其中神經質對於正向肯定的成長曲率為負向調節，但對於負向自覺的成長速率則為正向調節，而外向性對於抗壓信念的成長速率有正向影響。英文摘要：Self-efficacy for creative teaching is a primary antecedent for the development of creative teaching. In consideration of the current emphasis on creative teaching, in-service trainee teachers studying for master's degrees and their colleagues were surveyed regarding their growth of self-efficacy for creative teaching. The effect of personality traits and in-service training on initial state of self-efficacy for creative teaching and the time dependence of this self-efficacy were determined in this study. A total of 252 teachers were recruited and completed four surveys over a 2-year period; 126 of the participants were studying for master's degrees. Analysis through hierarchical linear modeling revealed the following: (1) The stress-resistance faith of teachers' self-efficacy for creative teaching linearly increased with time, whereas negative self-consciousness linearly decreased. Positive appreciation first increased and then decreased. (2) In-service trainee teachers were found to clearly outperform their colleagues who were not receiving training with regards to growth of positive appreciation and stress-resistance faith and mitigation of negative self-consciousness. (3) The personality traits of extraversion and neuroticism affected the growth trend of self-efficacy for creative teaching: neuroticism was found to reduce the growth rate of positive appreciation but enhance that of negative self-consciousness, whereas extraversion was discovered to positively affect the growth rate of stress-resistance faith. According to these results, suggestions are made for the reference of relevant actors.起始頁-結束頁：25-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(3).0201篇名：兒童正念教育方案對於改善注意力與憂鬱傾向之效果並列篇名：The Effect of Mindfulness Program on Children's Attention and Depressive Tendency作者：黃鳳英(Feng-Ying Huang);鄧瑞瑋(Ruey-Woei Deng)關鍵字：兒童正念教育方案;注意力;情緒調適;憂鬱傾向;attention;depressive tendency;emotion regulation;mindfulness training program to children期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：國外研究顯示，兒童正念教育可以增進自我調控與注意力、並降低學童的憂鬱、焦慮等情緒困擾。本研究以國內34名國小三年級學童為對象，在某臺北國小之家長會及校園公開招募學員，並以隨機分派方式，讓其中17 名學童接受10 週共400 分鐘短期兒童正念教育方案，其餘學童為對照組，接受原時間所安排的晨間自習與繪本導讀。測量方法包含國小兒童注意力量表、台灣版兒童青少年憂鬱量表、及質性訪談。研究採用二因子混合變異數分析，結果發現：實驗組兒童在短期兒童正念教育方案介入後，在注意力提升、及憂鬱傾向改善顯著優於對照組。又根據質性訪談，實驗組兒童反映其憂鬱與焦慮等負向情緒降低、人際友善行為增加，且有降低人際爭吵及仇視情形。從本研究結果顯示短期兒童正念教育方案可作為國內校園兒童注意力與情緒調適的有效方案。英文摘要：Previous research measuring the effectiveness of Mindfulness Training for children has reported that such training can produce positive effects on their ability to pay attention and psychological well-being. This current research aims to investigate the effects of mindfulness training programs on Taiwan elementary school third-grade students regarding their attention ability, depressive symptoms, and interpersonal relationships with others. This study consisted of 34 third grade students. The participants were recruited from an elementary school in Taipei during a parent-teacher conference, and by disseminating leaflets, all of whom were randomly assigned to the experimental group or the control group. Students in the experimental group (17 of 34) attended the mindfulness teaching program for ten weeks, with each class lasting 40 minutes. The rest of the students made up the control group and attended a regular reading class for an equivalent amount of time. Both questionnaires and semi-structured interviews with children were used to test the effects of mindfulness intervention. The results from the mixed design of two-way ANOVA analyses revealed significant improvements in attention and a decrease in depression symptoms. Furthermore, children from the mindfulness group also reported developing better strategies for managing their emotions and stress, as well as better interpersonal relationships with their peers. Therefore, the Mindfulness Training Program seems to be a promising intervention program that increases children's attention and emotion regulation.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學2篇名：提升職前教師校園霸凌辨識能力的訓練介入成效並列篇名：The Effectiveness of Interventions to Improve Preservice Teachers' Bullying Identification作者：宋宥賢(Yu-Hsien Sung);陳利銘(Li-Ming Chen)關鍵字：介入;校園霸凌;職前教師;霸凌定義;霸凌辨識;Bullying identification;Definition of school bullying;Inventions;Preservice teachers;School bullying期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探究不同介入方式對於職前教師校園霸凌辨識能力之影響，包含1.5小時霸凌辨識訓練（第一組）、僅有定義（第二組）、定義與特徵要件檢覈表（第三組）三種方式。研究對象為427 位職前教師，其皆參與前後測情境式霸凌個案辨識問卷施測，以確認訓練介入成效。問卷資料主要經由混合模式二因子變異數分析法分析。結果顯示：經介入後，第一組職前教師之霸凌情境正確辨識得分顯著高於第二組、第三組、及控制組，效果量分別為.88、.82、.91；同時第一組職前教師對霸凌情境之過分警戒類型的錯誤辨識得分顯著低於第二組、第三組、控制組，效果量分別為-.95、-.59、-.90；而第二組、第三組、控制組職前教師於霸凌情境正確辨識得分與過分警戒類型之錯誤辨識得分間則未存有顯著差異。關於霸凌辨識，本研究發現僅提供書面霸凌定義與特徵並無法收立竿見影之效，建議仍需透過霸凌防制專業訓練方可進一步提升其辨識成效。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate whether different types of interventions could enhance preservice teachers' ability to identify bullying incidents. Participants included 427 preservice teachers in Taiwan who were assigned to four groups. The first group received a 1.5-hour training on bullying identification; The second group was given a written definition of bullying and its features. The third group received a written definition with a checklist of three bullying characteristics. The fourth group, the control group, was not given information on bullying. Pretest–posttest designs were employed in this study. The results of the mixed-model two-way ANOVA analysis indicated that the preservice teachers in the first group had significantly higher correct identification scores than those in the second group (d = .88), the third group (d = .82), and the control group (d = .91). Moreover, those in the first group had significantly lower incorrect identification scores than those in the second group (d = -.95), the third group (d = -.59), and the control group (d = -.90). There was no significant difference among the correct and incorrect identification scores of the second group, the third group, and the control group. This study suggests that administrators and policymakers should provide bullying identification training for preservice teachers, rather than merely offer the definition and characteristics of school bullying.起始頁-結束頁：35-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學3篇名：建構中小學初任輔導人員職前培訓機制：戴明循環觀點之應用並列篇名：Applying the Deming Cycle Perspective on Pre-service Training Mechanism for Novice Professional and School Counselors in Elementary and Secondary School Settings作者：李佩珊(Pei-Shan Lee);宋宥賢(Yu-Hsien Sung);王麗斐(Li-Fei Wang);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong)關鍵字：學生輔導法;戴明循環觀點;職前培訓;Deming Cycle, pre-service training mechanism, Student Guidance and Counseling Act期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究應用戴明循環觀點，檢視中小學初任輔導人員職前培訓機制現況，建構職前培訓機制。本研究首先實施前導性研究及現場觀察，再邀請7位輔導人力培訓的領域專家（平均工作年資20.3年，SD=11.1年）進行深度訪談，共計訪談715分鐘。研究發現中小學初任輔導人員職前培訓計畫少有需求評估及目標設定，執行時混合不同性質對象辦理，缺乏檢覈培訓效果及課程規劃，且未強化系統合作與學用落差。作者提出中小學初任輔導人員職前培訓機制：(1)「計畫」整體思維和專家團隊，評估組織和個人需求，從學習者和用人者角度設定目標；(2)「執行」建立單一專責聯繫窗口、雙軌與混成學習模組、彈性課程架構及善用案例教學方法；(3)「檢覈」加強檢視方案及培訓成效；(4)「行動」發展標準化機制，過系統合作創造向上循環。英文摘要：This study applied the Deming Cycle perspective on evaluating pre-service training mechanism for novice school counselors. First, a pilot study and field observations were conducted. Then, seven experts were purposively interviewed (Average relevant working = 20.3 years, SD = 11.1 years), adding up to 715 minutes of interview time. The result found that the current programs rarely conducted assessment and goal-setting, mixed different background participants, lack inspection for training results and curriculum planning, and need to strengthen system cooperation and learning gap. We suggested: (1)”Plan”- emphasize overall thinking and expert team, assess the needs of organizations and individuals, and set training objectives from learners and practitioners; (2)”Do” - establish a dedicated and single contact window, design two-track and blended-learning modules, flexible adjustment of curriculum structure and use case teaching methods; (3) ”Check” - Strengthen training program and effectiveness; (4) ”Act” - develop a standardized mechanism and create a progressive cycle.起始頁-結束頁：67-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學4篇名：英國國定課程評量的沿革與其對十二年國民基本教育課程評量的啟示並列篇名：Evolutions of the National Curriculum Assessment in England and Its Implications for the Assessment of the 12-year Basic Education Curriculum in Taiwan作者：盧雪梅(Sheue-Mei Lu)關鍵字：十二年國民基本教育;十二年國民基本教育課程評量;英國國定課程評量;12-year Basic Education, assessment of 12-year Basic Education Curriculum, national curriculum assessment in England期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：英國1988年的教育改革法案通過國定課程與評量的實施，按照學生年齡分為四個關鍵期，在各關鍵期末（7歲、11歲、14歲和16歲）安排學生接受評量，並公布學校的表現，供家長作為選擇學校的參考。本文藉由文件與文獻的分析，回顧並闡述自1987年國定課程評量規劃期以降，各朝政府重大的評量政策、實務與課題，並探討其脈絡與影響。本文同時檢視與評析當前國內配合十二年國民基本教育改革推出之重大的評量方案與措施，在國內既有的基礎上，參酌英國國定課程評量實施的經驗，提出十二年國民基本教育課程評量之規劃與實施建議，包括：根據課程綱要訂定各學習階段的期望表現或標準，強化「臺灣學生學習成就評量資料庫」（TASA）的學力監控功能，整合TASA協助縣市辦理學力檢測計畫與補救教學科技評量，重新思考國中教育會考的目的與定位，及規劃與推動全方位的教師評量。英文摘要：The British Education Reform Act of 1988 introduced the national curriculum and national assessment in England and Wales. The curriculum was structured into four key stages, and pupils were assessed at or near the end of each key stage (ages 7, 11, 14 and 16). The school performance tables were published to help parents make informed decisions. This article aims to present an account of the development and changes in the England national curriculum assessment from its original blueprint in 1987 to the current time through reviewing official papers, documents, and related academic articles. This article also examines the current assessment projects and programs for the 12-year Basic Education in Taiwan. Based on the recent assessment innovation efforts of the 12-year Basic Education and the assessment experience of England, the author proposes suggestions for the design and implementation of the assessment of the 12-year Basic Education Curriculum as follows: 1) Establish expected achievement standards for each learning stage based on the 12-year Curriculum Guidelines. 2)Enhance the long-term trends monitoring function of National Taiwan Assessment of Student Achievement (TASA). 3)Integrate regional TASA and remedial instruction-technology-based testing programs. 4) Re-clarify the purposes of the Comprehensive Assessment Program for Junior High School Students. 5) Plan and implement comprehensive teacher assessment policies.起始頁-結束頁：105-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學5篇名：葬禮二重奏？－洪堡（Humboldt）理念在現代德國高等教育之浮沉並列篇名：A Funeral Duet for Humboldt? The Rise and Decay of Humboldtian Thought in Contemporary Higher Education in Germany作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：柏林大學;洪堡理念;德國高等教育;German higher education;Humboldtian thought;University of Berlin期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：德國大學在19 世紀中葉後至二次大戰發展為世界學術中心，Humboldt多被視為重要擘劃者，且其理念亦廣為全世界所接受，伴隨著前述頌揚有所謂的「Humboldt 神話」之質疑。本文從現實層面與大學理念層面檢視Humboldt理念與德國大學的關係。在現實層面上，1960 年代德國大學轉型為大眾化大學，而使得競爭、效率與績效等理念逐漸取代Humboldt 理念。在大學理念層面上，Humboldt 理念與現代科學處於緊張關係；且近代德國科學發展乃得利於工業革命，透過分權化競爭機制而有長足發展。再者，角色統合機制對理論／經驗研究、不同學科領域加以整合，因而帶來科學的創新。但Humboldt 亦難以被漠視，其理念恰如「扳道工」，將研究探索精神注入原本靜如死水的德國大學，也才有所謂的柏林大學模式。英文摘要：Between the middle of the 19th century and the Second World War German universities developed into top-notch centers of academia. Wilhelm von Humboldt is widely recognized as a pivotal figure in this development and his ideas have been widely influential throughout the world. Nonetheless, some have called into question the ”myth of Humboldt.” In this paper, I investigate the relationship between Humboldtian thought and higher education in Germany on both the practical level and the level of university idea. On the practical level, as a result of the shift to mass education in the 1960s, the Humboldtian thought began to be eclipsed by a new emphasis on competition, efficiency, and achievement. On the level of university idea, there has long been a tense relationship between Humboldtian thought and modern science; further, the industrial revolution lent much impetus to the development of science, which has been further bolstered by institutions characterized by competition and division of authority. Moreover, institutions characterized by role hybridization tend to have an integrating influence on theoretical and experiential research in various fields, which tends to spur scientific innovation. In such a situation, Humboldt's ideas can be likened to a switchman for steering stagnant German universities back onto the track of research imbued with the spirit of exploration, an approach which has given rise to the so-called ”Berlin University model.”起始頁-結束頁：143-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學6篇名：進出無言之間：兒童心理治療中鬼之意義與兒童心理創傷並列篇名：The Significance of Demons in the Consultation Room and Children's Psychological Trauma作者：洪素珍(Su-Chen Hung)關鍵字：兒童心理治療;客體關係;鬼魂;創傷;榮格原型;Archetype;Child psychotherapy;Demon;Object relations;Trauma期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文目的在於以榮格分析心理學中父親情結、原型及集體潛意識之概念，以及客體關係之理論架構試圖去理解在諮商室中，兒童個案呈現出來的有關創傷與鬼魂現象的可能意涵。文中案例中，均因失去父親，出現創傷反應後，開始接受治療。當兒童有創傷時，會以內在或外在的症狀呈現出來，本文的兩位個案對鬼魂的反應及過度黏母親均為兒童喪親後的創傷反應。所以，他們在治療當中都碰觸到「鬼魂/原魔」（Demon）的議題，經過詮釋分析後，原本以害怕鬼或愛看鬼片之行動投射出來防衛喪親的痛苦，開始可以談論到關鍵的「失落」議題。當因喪親而造成的傷痛未消化，此傷痛將進入個人潛意識，並與人類集體潛意識連結。由本文發現鬼魂對兒童的意義為：兒童以怕鬼的形式內攝母親無法哀悼父親的離去，故以怕鬼的形式陪伴母親，並保留內在好父親的客體，而投射出壞父親的客體展現父親情結，及再度認同父親的歷程。英文摘要：The purpose of this article is to elucidate the possible implications of related trauma and demon phenomena manifested by children in the consultation room by using the concepts of father complex, archetype, the collective unconscious in Jungian psychology and the theoretical framework of object relations. Children in the cases in this article have all lost their fathers and started receiving treatment after having a traumatic response. When trauma occurs in children, it manifests as internal or external symptoms; the traumatic response to bereavement in the two cases in the article was presented as demons and being overly attached to his/her mother. Thus, the topic of demons was touched upon during their treatment. While they originally projected fear of ghosts or love for ghost films as a defense mechanism for the pain of bereavement, after analysis and explanation, they were able to begin dialogue about their loss. To children, the significance of imagining demons lies in their introjection of their mother's inability to mourn their father's death. They use their fear of demons as an excuse to accompany their mother while preserving internally the object of great father and projecting the object of bad father in order to display the father complex. Children internalize their father figure again by understanding their demon phenomenon.起始頁-結束頁：181-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學7篇名：大學生全球素養指標之建構並列篇名：A Construction of Global Literacy Indicators for Undergraduates作者：李隆盛(Lung-Sheng Lee);賴春金(Chun-Chin Lai);潘瑛如(Ying-Ju Pan);梁雨樺(Yu-Hua Liang);王玫婷(Mei-Tyng Wang)關鍵字：全球素養;高等教育;階層分析法;模糊德懷術;analytic hierarchy process (AHP);fuzzy Delphi method (FDM);global literacy;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：「全球在地化」和「在地全球化」兼重的時代中，具備全球素養之大學畢業生方能有效處理涉外或境外的工作。本研究目的在建構適切的大學生全球素養指標，以做為評量大學生全球素養表現水準之工具及全球教育課程發展之基礎。本研究從理論架構出發，由相關文獻整理出全球素養之構面內涵及指標項目，邀集具有國際經驗之18 位實務專家進行模糊德懷術（fuzzy Delphi method，FDM）篩選全球素養指標，並透過階層分析法（analytic hierarchy process，AHP）程序整理問卷結果以辨認權重，建構出「溝通」、「環境」、「職涯」及「文化」四構面的「大學生全球素養指標」，發現「溝通」構面最重要，「利用外語溝通」、「利用資通訊科技與他人溝通」則分列二、三層級最重要指標及項目。英文摘要：In the era of glocalization and logloblization, only university graduates who are globally literate can effectively deal with international affairs or work overseas. Therefore, this study aimed to construct a set of global literacy indicators for undergraduates in Taiwan. The global literacy indicators can be used as a guide to assess undergraduates' global literacy level and serve as the foundation for developing global education curriculums. Employing a theoretical framework, this study drafted global literacy dimensions and indicators from reviewing related literature, and invited 18 practitioners with international experience to participate in this study. During the item development process, fuzzy Delphi method (FDM) and analytic hierarchy process (AHP) were applied to select and weight global literacy indicators respectively. Consequently, a set of global literacy indicators for undergraduates were constructed, which include the following four dimensions: communication, context, career development, and culture. ”Communication” is the most important dimension among them, while ”communicate with foreign languages” and ”use information and communication technology (ICT) to communicate with others” are the most important indicators and items at the second and third hierarchical levels, respectively.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學8篇名：Changing College Students' Stereotypes of Standard English: The Pedagogical Process of an English Course並列篇名：改變大學生對標準英語刻板印象：一門英語課的實踐歷程作者：楊孝慈(James H. Yang)關鍵字：ELF;English accents;New Zealand;world Englishes;世界英語;英語混合語;英語腔調;紐西蘭期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：The use of English as a lingua franca for international communication has made the primacy of Standard English (SE) become ideologically undesirable, not only because distinct varieties of English have evolved with their own standards, but also because nonnative speakers tremendously outnumber native speakers and their interaction has soared in intercultural exchange. Accordingly, a curriculum was devised to guide students to explore worldwide English variations in response to the paradigm shift from SE to a pluralistic model of English language teaching. This pedagogical research aims to examine how students transformed their stereotypes of SE into the understanding of world Englishes. This curriculum was implemented in English with 77 undergraduates enrolled in the ‘Language and Culture' class at a national university in central Taiwan. With the focus on English spoken in New Zealand (NZ), they began with their impressions followed by their revisions. Then, they were guided to discover stories connecting themselves with the country. They proceeded to promote NZ tourism, understand local slang and accent, and take part in an optional semester-final volunteer teaching workshop. Their learning portfolios indicate that they modified their initial stereotypes, generalizations, misconceptions, and prejudices, becoming aware of the cultural diversity in NZ and linguistic differences between NZE and GAE. Overall, 86% of the students found the given instruction helpful for communication with New Zealanders, particularly so among high achievers and those who participated in the teaching service project.英文摘要：英語已經成為國際溝通的混合語，因為各國已發展出屬於他們自己的獨特英語用法，非母語人數也已大幅超越母語人數，而且非母語人士彼此間的跨文化交流日益頻繁，這些國際趨勢已使得標準英語的意識形態不再令人信服，本研究設計一門翻轉傳統英語教學的課程，引導學生探索英語在全世界的實際用法，跳脫標準英語的單一規範，而能包容英語的變異性與多樣性。此教學研究主要瞭解學生在學習歷程中如何轉變標準英語的刻板印象。參與對象為77 位修習「語言與文化」的大學生，就讀於臺灣中部的一所國立大學。此課程以紐西蘭英語為例，先引導學生探索紐西蘭與自己國家有關聯的歷史、事蹟和故事，然後認識並推動紐西蘭觀光產業，進而瞭解當地俚語和腔調，並與通用美式英語作對比分析。學生透過學習檔案製作，彼此分享紐西蘭和美國的語言與文化異同。最後鼓勵他們參與期末英語教學的志工活動。從學生的學習檔案中，發現他們修正了原先的刻板印象、一般推論、誤解和歧視，也體悟了紐西蘭的英語變異現象。對於此教案，86%的學生認為有助於他們與紐西蘭人的互動交流，特別是高學習成效的學習者以及參與期末教學服務計劃的學生，更覺得獲益良多。起始頁-結束頁：33-69資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學9篇名：案例撰寫與討論引導架構促進實習教師反省思考層次之研究並列篇名：A Study of Using the Case Writing and Discussion Guide Framework to Promote Student Teachers' Reflective Thinking作者：劉唯玉(Wei-Yu Liu)關鍵字：反省思考;案例撰寫與討論引導架構;實習教師;Case Writing and Discussion Guide Framework (CWDGF);Reflective Thinking Level;Student Teacher期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究目的是以行動研究法探討研究者發展之一套能回應「教材教法的實踐省思」、「撰寫案例前即有效引導師資生聚焦」、以及「有系統的引導師資生進行多層次省思」的案例撰寫引導架構（Case Writing and Discussion Guide Frame，CWDGF），並探討本架構如何促進實習教師的反省思考層次。本研究以研究者在2013 年8 月到2015 年1 月教育實習課程所指導的12 位小學實習教師為研究對象。研究發現，案例撰寫與討論引導架構能促進多數實習教師由單一迴圈反省思考，進入雙重迴圈反省思考；由技術性省思，進入實務性省思；並能幫助本研究所有實習教師在案例撰寫後即達到以教學原則如教學目標、方法與評量的一致性；心理學理論如理想我、現實我；並考慮實習班級或個別學生特質等脈絡因素提出解釋。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to promote student teachers' reflective thinking by using the case writing and discussion guide framework (CWDGF), which was developed by the researcher in response to the requirement of effective focus before case writing. The framework focused on pedagogical reflection during practicum and provides a systematic guide for pre-service teachers to engage in multiple levels of reflection. The participants were 12 student teachers who were enrolled in the researcher's class of Educational Practicum from August, 2013 to January, 2015. The results showed that CWDGF helped most student teachers advance from single-loop to double-loop reflection, and from technical to practical reflection. In addition, CWDGF helped all student teachers reach the level of explanation with principle or theory and with consideration of context.起始頁-結束頁：71-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學10篇名：大學「昆蟲學」轉化為國小師資生的師培課程並列篇名：Transforming a University ”Entomology” Course into an Elementary Pre-service Teachers Training Course作者：盧秀琴(Chow-Chin Lu)關鍵字：昆蟲學課程;師培課程;國小師資生;學科教學知識;elementary pre-service teachers;Entomology curriculum;pedagogical content knowledge;teacher training course期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：因應國小自然領域師資生必須學習國小自然領域教學的學科教學知識，本研究探討大學「昆蟲學」轉化為國小師資生的師培課程，提早培育國小自然領域師資之可行性。本研究採用質量並重的混合研究法，以43 位國小師資生為對象，設計「昆蟲學」18 週師培課程，內容包含：昆蟲學認知、繪製概念圖、飼養昆蟲技能、昆蟲戶外教學技能、評析國小昆蟲科展及設計國小自然教案等；除採用國小自然領域教師昆蟲概念認知測驗（ICTS）、概念圖（CM）檢核國小師資生的學科內容知識（CK）外，並評析飼養昆蟲學習單、昆蟲戶外教學學習單、評析國小科展紀錄、國小自然教案設計等質性資料，以探討國小師資生學科教學知識（PCK）的成長。結果顯示：(1)從ICTS 前、後測t 檢定得知，師資生學習「昆蟲學」能獲得較多的昆蟲認知概念；(2)師資生所繪製的概念圖階層框架還不夠正確，但連接詞能完整呈現；(3)師資生具備飼養昆蟲的技能，具備戶外調查昆蟲的科學過程技能，具備評析昆蟲科展的能力，具備設計國小自然教案的能力；(4)「昆蟲學」轉化為師培課程是可行的，但仍需加入昆蟲學實驗活動，可以在評析昆蟲科展時順便加入昆蟲實驗。英文摘要：As elementary school pre-service teachers are required to learn the pedagogical content knowledge of natural field, ”Entomology” course offered at the teacher training department was transformed into elementary pre-service teachers’ training course to early cultivate science teachers. This study adopted a mixed method research design. Forty-three pre-service teachers participated in the study and took the ”Entomology” teacher training course. The course covers insect concepts, concept map drawing, insect feeding skills, outdoors teaching skills for insect survey, assessment for insect science fairs and designing science lesson plans. Both quantitative data and qualitative data were collected and analyzed to investigate the development of pre-service teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge. The results were as follows: 1) ICTS pre- and post-testing t test results show that pre-service teachers gained more insect cognitive concepts from the Entomology course. 2) In the pre-service teachers’ drawings of conceptual diagrams, the class framework was partially correct, but the conjunctions were accurately presented. 3) Pre-service teachers demonstrated skills of rearing insects, outdoors teaching skills for insect, assessing insect science fairs, and designing science lesson plans. 4) The transformation of the Entomology course into a teacher training course was feasible; however, entomology experimental activities may be added into the curriculum when pre-service teachers assessed insect science fairs.起始頁-結束頁：105-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學11篇名：論大學與永續性理想相容的爭議、機會與方向並列篇名：On Compatibility Between University and Sustainability: Contentions, Opportunities, and Directions作者：蕭戎(Jung Hsiao)關鍵字：人文素養;永續發展;知識工廠典範;博雅教育典範;實用性典範;環境倫理;environmental ethics;humanities;knowledge factory paradigm;liberal education paradigm;pragmatic paradigm;sustainable development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：自伯利西宣言（Tibilisi Declaration）以降，永續性（sustainability）理想的支持者們多視大學為實現此理想的重要機構，大學因此成為許多相關倡議的對象。但本研究藉由文獻探討，要指出此現象儘管政治正確，卻存在爭議，並且爭議之關鍵乃在於「大學本質」的根本問題。換言之，本研究認為對於大學應如何實現永續性理想的思考，不可能不首先涉及「大學應以何種典範為其本質」的問題。藉由對實用性、知識工廠與博雅教育等數種著名典範的初步探討，以及對教育哲學的思考，本研究主張以博雅教育典範為根據來論述大學在回應與實現永續性理想上的合宜態度，並進一步指出大學在作為社會成員、職業相關教育機構、培養未來菁英領袖之機構、以及培育人文素養與追求知識之團體的四種層次上能有何作為。其中尤其強調，相較於社會上的其它機構，大學在培養和發展與此理想相關的人文素養與環境倫理上的獨特潛力與優勢，是其亟待發揮的部分。英文摘要：The advocates of sustainability have started to regard universities as an important means to realize sustainable development since the Tbilisi Declaration in 1977, making universities a target of many initiatives to this day. However, as this study argues in accordance with the result of literature review, this phenomenon is politically correct as much as controversial. The reason lies in the fundamental question about the nature of university. In other words, the talk about how to realize the ideal of sustainable development through universities has to involve first the question of ”what is the paradigm for universities?” As this study argues in light of rudimentary inquiries of the three paradigms and the reflection on educational philosophy, the university is better when it is based on the paradigm of ”liberal education” rather than that of ”knowledge factory” or ”pragmatism.” The study suggests that universities should adhere to the paradigm of liberation education as the most appropriate response to the ideal of sustainable development. Not only so, this study further points out what universities can do on the basis of their roles in the society: a member in the society, a vocational education institution, a training center for future leaders, and an organization for humanity and knowledge. It is especially worth noting that universities have potentials and advantages for the development of humanities and environmental ethics that are yet to be discovered and expanded.起始頁-結束頁：139-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學12篇名：走出象牙塔－以德國雙元制高等教育為例並列篇名：Beyond the Ivory Tower: A Study of Germany's Dual System of Higher Education作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：德國高等教育;德國教育;德國雙元制高等教育;German Education;German Higher Education;Germany's Dual System of Higher Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文透過文獻分析，探究德國雙元制高等教育，包含巴登．符騰堡邦、北萊茵．威斯特法倫邦與巴伐利亞邦三種模式，了解該教育體制裡的學生如何能夠高度滿足企業對應用型高級人才之需求，甚至在巴登．符騰堡邦雙元制高等學校有高達85%在校生即已獲聘於特定企業。長期以來大學與社會保持一定距離，但隨著現代社會的發展，二者的關係愈來愈密切，由此大學開始走出象牙塔，並轉型為服務站的角色。在此脈絡下，高等教育與職業教育的聯繫逐漸趨於緊密，此聯繫基礎涉及國家社會的需求、認識論基礎的轉換、競爭型國家之崛起，以及高等教育學用落差之困境。臺灣高等教育長期陷於學用落差與人力供需失衡問題，或許德國的雙元制高等教育能提供一些借鑑。英文摘要：In this paper, document analysis was used to investigate the Germany's dual system of higher education. Notable examples include the models of Baden-Wurttemberg, Nordrhein-Westfalen and Bayer. Students in this system of education can satisfy the demands of industry; the job prospects of graduates has been enhanced where 85 percent of those who graduate from Baden-Wuerttemberg Cooperative State University found work in their field prior to graduation. For a long time, there has been a distance between higher education and the realities of the wider society; however, due to recent developments in modern times, academia is becoming more relevant and connected to the society as a whole. As a result, a close relationship has been developed between university education and vocational education. This relationship is based not only on the needs of the society, but also on changes in epistemology, the rise of the competition state, and the difficulties arising from the gap between what students learn at universities and the actual needs of the industry. Germany's dual system of higher education is seen as a paragon. By contrast, in Taiwan there remains a large gap between what students learn at universities and the actual needs of the industry, resulting in an imbalance of supply and demand in the labor market. Thus the educational authorities in Taiwan may consider the applicability of adopting the German system of dual education.起始頁-結束頁：169-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學13篇名：運動教練知識的探索－對「經驗知識」結構的揭露並列篇名：An Inquiry into Athletic Coaches' Knowledge: Revealing the Structure of Experiential Knowledge作者：吳忠誼(Chung-Yi Wu)關鍵字：現象學;運動教練;經驗知識;athletic coach;experiential knowledge;phenomenology期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：30卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：運動教練的知識一直被視為是提升選手運動表現的重要方向。在運動學界中，運動知識的研究取徑大致分為自然科學與人文社會兩種面向。近年來，「運動科學研究」介入運動表現日益增加，造成對自然科學的依賴程度提高，相對也促成對運動教練「經驗」的忽視。但運動是一種實踐與應用的場域，教練經驗的存有應當具有其特定且不可取代的位階。因此，本研究採取胡塞爾（Husserl，1859-1938）現象學方法，深入教練經驗中探尋其知識的本質。在進入自然態度的澄清之前，希望能夠獲取更豐富、多元與隱晦的資料，故先行以教練敘說為主軸，透過教練之說來建構自身故事，期盼在故事中尋找出更多的指涉與現象。研究發現，在教練的自然態度中，教練的知識存有著兩種立場，分別為既定的科學知識結構與在經驗的脈絡中身體圖式的概念。透過現象學還原深入探究其本質，發現科學知識具有控制、一貫、同一、秩序等特色，身體圖式則具有想像、領會、交融與確信等指涉。為了釐清教練經驗知識的存有狀態，透過第二次的本質還原，企圖回到教練知識的形構階段，揭露出教練經驗知識的根源具有整體性、延續性與穩定性的三種特質，並且在運動的實踐場域中流動與幻化著。英文摘要：Knowledge of athletic coaching has always been regarded as an important approach toward improving athletes' performances. In the sports and exercise sciences circle, the channels of athletic knowledge research are generally divided into scientific and human social aspects. In recent years, scientific research studies on sports and exercise has put more emphasis on athletic performances, thus enhancing the reliance on scientific results and disvalued trainers' experiences accordingly. However, sports and exercise are science of practice and application, the existence of trainers' experiences should be respected and not to be replaced. Therefore, phenomenology established by Edmund Husserl (1859-1938) was applied in this research to go deep into athletic coaches' experiences and explore their essential knowledge. The results shows that there are generally two sets of knowledge in the natural mindsets of trainers, which are fixed scientific knowledge structure and experiential human body diagram. After restoring, digging and exploring the essence through phenomenology, scientific knowledge is found to have the characteristics of control, consistency, unification, and order, whereas the features of body diagram are imagination, realization, mix and mingle, and conviction. In order to clarify the existing conditions of coaches' experiential knowledge, a second essence restoring was made attempting to return to the forming stage of coaches' knowledge. The results show the coaches' experiential knowledge is integral, long-lasting, and consistent, and works smoothly in the sports fields.起始頁-結束頁：211-236資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學01篇名：台灣品德教育轉型與困境及其歷史脈絡的宏觀剖析並列篇名：The Transformation and Predicament of Character and Moral Education in Taiwan and a Macro-analysis From the Historical Context作者：李琪明(Angela Chi-Ming LEE)關鍵字：品德教育;宏觀剖析;台灣教育;character and moral education;macro-analysis;Taiwanese education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在針對台灣品德教育自1949年迄今的轉型與困境，及其歷史脈絡作宏觀剖析。首先，梳理台灣背景脈絡，其經濟由開發中國家邁向已開發國家，政治由威權戒嚴而至民主自由體制，社會文化由單一趨向多元樣態，然而卻面臨新自由主義與全球化、文化與國家認同、個人主義與相對主義等挑戰。其次，探究台灣品德教育課程變遷，由戒嚴時代蘊含政治意識型態、解嚴初專業逐漸浮現、2000年以來形成廣義課程化及多元價值融入等三個時期的特點。再者，論述台灣品德教育在這結構歷程中產生的四個主要困境。最後，提出促進品德教育永續發展的建議，包括對於意識型態的批判反思、解構迷思並重建專業、強化對話溝通以促進認同，以及秉持彰顯正義與關懷弱勢的信念。英文摘要：This article aimed to inquire about the transformation and predicament of character and moral education (CME) in Taiwan from a macro-analysis on the historical context beginning in 1949. Firstly, the author described the background of Taiwan, including from a developing to an industrialized country, from the authoritarianism of Martial Law to full-fledged democracy, and from a single orientation to multiple traits in the sociocultural environment. However, CME has inevitably been facing a number of challenges, i.e., neoliberalism and globalization, national and cultural identity, individualism and relativism etc. Secondly, the author explored CME characteristics of three curriculum periods, including political ideologies at the time of Martial Law enacted, an emerging profession for CME in the initial stage after the lifting of Martial Law, and a broad meaning and multiple values for CME which has been transformed since 2000 until the present day. Moreover, the author discussed the four predicaments of CME. Finally, suggestions and concluding remarks on the development of CME were offered, which include developing a critical thinking on ideologies, rebuilding professions, improving communication to reach identity, as well as insisting on values of justice and caring.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：霸權的轉移：高中歷史課綱微調事件之論述與再製並列篇名：The Shift of Hegemony: The Discourse and Reproduction of the ”Minor Revision of the Senior High School Curriculum Guidelines of History Study”作者：黃彥文(Yen-Wen HUANG);姚明俐(Ming-Li YAO)關鍵字：課程改革;高中歷史科;批判論述分析;知識分子;curriculum reform;senior high school history;critical discourse analysis;intellectuals期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：公民社會的論述挑戰官方處於知識論述的位置，使知識產生的過程與內容多元化。本研究以台灣教育部2014年1月17日公布〈普通高級中學歷史科課程綱要部分修正表〉所引起的歷史課綱事件為例，採用批判論述分析，並以期間的報紙內容為資料，探究當時知識分子如何發展論述，在此基礎上論證社會論述如何建構合法性與合理性的觀念，從而引起公共參與。本研究發現：知識分子在論述事件的過程中，塑造官方論述為不合法與非理性，隨<U+7740>論述開展，將該事件由教育議題再製為涵蓋層面更廣的社會和國族議題。這個現象展示了知識分子的論述如何塑造公共輿論，並影響教育決策，說明教育經由上層與下層溝通的實踐特徵，標示當代台灣教育進展的里程。英文摘要：This study argues that civil society challenges the official hegemony in knowledge production and the domination of education, by investigating the discourses of intellectuals with regard to ”Minor Revision of the Senior High School Curriculum Guidelines of History Study” of 2014. Newspapers were analyzed using critical discourse analysis. Focusing on the discussion on the legitimacy of policy and the rationale of historical narratives of textbooks, intellectuals not only depicted this case, with its social meaning, as illegitimate and irrational, but also from an educational perspective to encompassing broader issues of state hegemony and Taiwan's national identity. This resulted in the reshaping of this case as a social and political issue. Research findings suggest how social discourse influenced the official power in policymaking and knowledge production, marking the progress of educational modernization of contemporary Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：25-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：確認公民教育的宗教面向：香港基督宗教社群回應德育及國民教育科的論述並列篇名：Affirming the Religious Dimension of Citizenship Education: Hong Kong Christian Community's Discourse in Response to the School Subject ”Moral and National Education”作者：謝均才(Thomas Kwan-Choi TSE)關鍵字：宗教教育;基督宗教教育;香港;愛國;公民教育;religious education;Christian education;Hong Kong;patriotism;citizenship education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：宗教教育與政治關係的爭論由來已久。以2010年香港政府建議在小學和中學引入德育及國民教育作必修科目及其後兩年有關爭議的背景下，本文追溯基督宗教教育在香港的發展，並分析本地基督宗教社群回應該新科目建議的論述。研究發現基督宗教的論述常圍繞三個突出主題，分別是：（1）兩個國度和基督徒及世俗的多元身分；（2）有條件的愛國精神；（3）以普世價值為正當的美德和教育目的。這些主題都有<U+7740>更廣泛的理論和實踐啟示，即有關國家認同問題、宗教和世俗身分間的關係，以及教育的性質（包括其目標和方法）。基督宗教社群的回應有助探討宗教面向於公民教育的積極作用。英文摘要：The relationship between religious education and politics has long been debated. Against the backdrop of the Hong Kong government's proposal to introduce Moral and National Education as a compulsory subject in primary and secondary schools and the related controversies, this article outlined the development of Christian education in Hong Kong, and then analyzed the discourse of local Christian communities in response to the proposed new subject. Three salient themes commonly revealed in the Christian discourse were: (a) two kingdoms and plural Christian and secular identities; (b) conditional patriotism; (c) universal values as proper virtues and aims of education. These themes carry broader theoretical and practical implications concerning the issues of national identity, the relationship between religious and secular identity, and the nature of education, including its aims and pedagogy. And they could elucidate the positive roles of the religious dimension for citizenship education.起始頁-結束頁：43-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：論Eurydice的比較教育研究精神並列篇名：The Spirit of Eurydice on Comparative Education Research作者：黃柏叡(Bo-Ruey HUANG)關鍵字：Eurydice;Jullien;歐盟;比較教育;Eurydice;Jullien;European Union;comparative education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文採用文獻分析和歷史研究方法，分析歐盟教育研究機構Eurydice的任務、工作和角色，並闡述Eurydice對比較教育研究精神的承襲與彰顯。Eurydice是歐盟這國際組織的官方教育研究機構，在任務、工作和角色等三方面可視為承襲了比較教育之父Jullien有關比較教育研究的倡議和精神。兩百年前，Jullien在〈關於比較教育工作之計畫與初步意見〉中提出的比較教育研究目的、研究方法和研究範圍等方面，都在Eurydice的研究工作和成果上獲得發揚與彰顯。在比較教育研究目的方面，Eurydice分析各國教育並提供教育決策，即是Jullien最初倡議的教育改革目的；在比較教育研究方法方面，今日Eurydice各項教育指標和資料庫的建立，正是Jullien當時提出邁向教育科學的呼籲；而在比較教育研究範圍方面，Eurydice身為歐盟教育研究機構，致力提供歐洲地區各國最完善的教育資訊。英文摘要：This article analyzed the mission, work and role of Eurydice, and expounded its inheritance and manifestation of Jullien's comparative education research sprit by literature analysis and historical research methods. As an official educational research institution of the European Union, Eurydice can be considered as inheriting from the initiative and spirit of Jullien's comparative education research. The research purpose, research methods and scope of comparative education initiated by Jullien in the ”Plan and Preliminary Views for a Work on Comparative Education” two hundred years ago was demonstrated and developed in Eurydice's research work and achievements. Regarding the research purpose of comparative education, Eurydice aims to do educational analysis for policymaking, which is the purpose of educational reform initiated by Jullien. As for the research methods of comparative education, Eurydice establishes educational indicators and databases, demonstrating Jullien's appeal for educational science. With regard to the research scope of comparative education, Eurydice, being an educational research institution of the European Union, is committed to providing the latest and comprehensive educational information of European countries.起始頁-結束頁：67-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：外在規限和專業自主張力下的教師合作並列篇名：Teacher Collaboration Under the Tension Between External Constraint and Professional Autonomy作者：喬雪峰(Xuefeng QIAO);黎萬紅(Manhong LAI)關鍵字：教師合作;專業學習社群;專業自主;公開課;teacher collaboration;professional learning community;professional autonomy;open class期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：教師合作浸潤於獨特的社會文化情境中，在外部規限和內在自主的張力下呈現出差異化走向。中國內地致力於推動公開課比賽，以發展學校合作文化，提升教師的專業性。然而，公開課比賽中教師合作處於外部規限和專業自主的張力下，面臨發展困境。合作議程和規則受制於固化的規則體系，普通教師缺乏話語權，專業性的提升受到抑制。改進教師合作需要擺脫工具理性傾向，突破「樣板戲」式的表演，並賦權予教師。英文摘要：Situated in a special sociocultural context, teacher collaboration moves away from its original purpose under the tension between external constraint and professional autonomy. The Chinese mainland promotes ”open class” match to develop collaborative school culture and to enhance teacher professionalism. However, it reveals that teacher collaboration encounters difficulties when it is under the tension between external constraint and professional autonomy. Activity agenda and rules are under the control of administrators and academic authorities. Teachers are forced to follow external disciplines, and their professionalism is suppressed. In order to improve teacher collaboration, it needs to get rid of instrumental rationality, get out of ”model play,” and empower teachers.起始頁-結束頁：85-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：成就目標和課室目標對情境興趣的直接影響與課室目標的潛在調節效果分析並列篇名：Analyzing Direct Effects of Achievement Goals and Classroom Goals and Latent Moderated Effects of Classroom Goals on Situational Interest作者：吳中勤(Chung-Chin WU)關鍵字：成就目標;課室目標;情境興趣;潛在調節效果;潛在調節結構方程模式;achievement goals;classroom goals;situational interest;latent moderated effect;latent moderated structural equation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在檢視成就目標和課室目標對情境興趣的直接影響，並探討課室目標對成就目標和情境興趣間關係的潛在調節效果。研究對象為來自52所國中的2,334名學生。研究會檢視成就目標、課室目標和情境興趣間關係的三個假設效果：直接效果、一致的增強調節效果和不一致的削弱調節效果。研究發現：（1）個人精熟目標和二向度課室目標對情境興趣具直接影響效果；（2）課室精熟目標對個人精熟目標和情境興趣間關係具一致的增強效果；（3）課室表現目標對個人表現目標和情境興趣間關係具一致的增強效果；（4）課室表現目標對個人精熟目標和情境興趣間關係具不一致的削弱效果；（5）包含了直接影響效果和調節效果的整體模式解釋了情境興趣約70%的總變異。英文摘要：This study aimed to: (1) examine the direct effect of achievement goals and classroom goals on situational interest; (2) investigate the latent moderated effect of classroom goals on the relationship between achievement goals and situational interest. Three hypotheses of the relationships among achievement goals, classroom goals, and situational interest were proposed and examined in order - direct effect, congruent reinforcing effect of moderation, and incongruent weakening effect of moderation. Results showed that: (1) single achievement goal (mastery goal) and two-dimensional classroom goals (classroom mastery and performance) exerted direct effects on situational interest; (2) classroom mastery goal had a congruent reinforcing effect on the relationship between mastery goal and situational interest; (3) classroom performance goal had a congruent reinforcing effect on the relationship between performance goal and situational interest; (4) classroom performance goal had an incongruent weakening effect on the relationship between mastery goal and situational interest; (5) the latent moderated structural equation modeling, consisting of both direct and moderated effects, explained about 70% variation of situational interest.起始頁-結束頁：107-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所7篇名：國小自然科教師從事兒童科學讀物創作之合作行動研究並列篇名：A Study of an Elementary Science Teacher Writing Science Reading Materials for Children: A Collaborative Action Research作者：葉翠英(Tsuei-Yin YEH);靳知勤(Chi-Chin CHIN)關鍵字：全球暖化;自然科教師;合作行動研究;兒童科學讀物;科學寫作;global warming;science teachers;collaborative action research;children's science books;science writing期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以一位國民小學自然科教師為個案，探討她與指導教授進行發展兒童科學讀物的合作行動研究。前者為行動研究者，在寫作讀物歷程中與後者持續討論，關注所遇問題、採取因應策略、評量成效並反思。首先聚焦「全球暖化」主題，初步體驗創作；之後大量寫作，並運用多種文體，諮詢不同人士，以刺激反思；最後運用既有的童話情境，融入環保元素，賦予文本新的意義，並交由學生閱讀後試繪插圖，以此應用於教學。研究期間，教師創作了18篇作品，並將發生的事件與省思寫成札記，敘寫創作體驗。本研究運用敘述分析，整理各類札記後，呈現研究時的問題困境、策略方案、互動交流與突破發展等結果。文末，提出綜合省思和未來發展方向。英文摘要：This study focused on an elementary science teacher who conducted collaborative action research with her supervising professor to write science reading materials for children. The teacher interacted with her professor while writing the reading materials. This study especially paid attention to the problems they encountered, the strategies adopted, and the effect achieved. At first, ”global warming” was selected as the theme for practicing writing. Then, to facilitate self-reflection, the teacher was requested to produce more products in a variety of genres. Finally, well-known storylines were adopted as guidelines for her to infuse with environmental elements, and the new version of storylines was implemented in the classroom. During the 16-month research period, the teacher produced 18 reading materials. She also wrote reflective diaries based on her engagement in the writing process. This study used narrative writing to report the problems she faced, the strategies for solving the problems, the interaction with various persons and tasks, and the improvement through stages. At the end of this article, the authors reflected on the whole process of action research, and proposed the possible trend of writing science reading materials in the future.起始頁-結束頁：137-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所8篇名：香港高中學生閱讀文言文的表現與困難並列篇名：Hong Kong Senior Secondary Students' Performance and Difficulties in Reading Classical Chinese Texts作者：劉潔玲(Dinky Kit-Ling LAU);谷屹欣(Yixin GU)關鍵字：文言文閱讀;字詞認讀;篇章理解;文言文教學;Classical Chinese reading;decoding;comprehension;Classical Chinese instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究針對香港中學生文言文閱讀能力不足的問題，以古今漢語的差異和認知心理學的閱讀研究為理論基礎，結合量化和質化方法，探討學生在字詞認讀和篇章理解兩個層面的閱讀表現和困難。參與研究的對象共454名中四學生，他們來自4所不同能力的中學。研究先以文言文語譯測驗和閱讀理解測驗測量全體學生在不同層次的文言文閱讀表現，再在每所學校隨機選取12名學生合共48人進行半結構小組訪談，以深入了解學生閱讀文言文的相關知識、策略和困難。研究結果反映香港中學生在字詞認讀和篇章理解兩個層面的文言文閱讀能力均欠佳，其中又以認讀層面的表現較弱；研究亦發現學生的古漢語知識薄弱，對文言文語譯和理解策略的認識和運用能力均不足。針對學生閱讀文言文的問題，本研究提出了一些教學建議，以供教師思考如何提高學生的文言文閱讀能力。英文摘要：In response to Hong Kong students' poor ability in Classical Chinese (CC) reading, the study adopted both quantitative and qualitative methods to examine Hong Kong students' performance and difficulties at the decoding and comprehension level of CC reading based on the theoretical foundation of linguistic analyses and reading studies from cognitive psychology. A total of 454 Secondary 4 students from four schools with students of different ability levels participated in the study. All students received a CC translation test and a CC reading comprehension test to assess their CC reading performance at different levels. Twelve students from each school with a total of 48 students were randomly selected to participate in semi-structured group interviews to explore their knowledge, strategy use, and difficulties in CC reading. Findings of the study indicated that students' performance in both decoding and comprehension level was unsatisfactory. Their decoding ability was especially weak. The findings also revealed that students' knowledge in CC language and their use of translation and comprehension strategies were poor. Suggestions for teachers to reflect how to improve students' CC reading ability are discussed based on these findings.起始頁-結束頁：161-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所9篇名：香港與台灣高中課程照顧個別差異的課程策略並列篇名：Curricular Strategies of Catering for Individual Differences in Senior Secondary Schools in Hong Kong and Taiwan作者：林智中(Chi-Chung LAM);白穎穎(Yingying BAI);周淑卿(Shu-Ching CHOU)關鍵字：學生差異;香港;台灣;課程策略;individual differences;Hong Kong;Taiwan;curricular strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：照顧學生個別差異既是教師的道德責任，亦是實際需求。學生的個別差異往往隨學齡增加而擴闊，因此年級愈高，處理個別差異的難度愈大。近些年，香港和台灣先後普及高中教育，設計課程時均考慮到個別差異的問題。本研究發現香港和台灣均採取了一系列課程策略以照顧學生的個別差異。比較之下，香港在課程上所採用的策略相對較少，且未能有效照顧學生的個別差異。台灣正在推行新高中課程改革，然而，就以往課程實施的經驗來看，台灣把相關高中課程策略付諸實踐時，亦將困難重重。英文摘要：Catering for students' individual differences is not only the moral responsibility of teachers, it is also a practical task that they need to carry out. Students' individual differences tend to widen with age. Therefore, it is much more difficult to deal with individual differences for senior form students. In recent years, Hong Kong and Taiwan have extended or plan to extend free education to senior secondary school education. Ensuring all students are properly catered for is a challenge to both curriculum planners and teachers. This study found that both Hong Kong and Taiwan have adopted a range of curricular strategies to cater for students' differences. Comparatively, the strategies adopted in Hong Kong are less rich and fail to meet the challenge of catering for individual differences. Taiwan is yet to implement the reform. However, based on past experiences of curriculum implementation, Taiwan is likely to face many difficulties in putting the senior secondary school curricular strategies into practice.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所10篇名：你累了嗎？國中生學習倦怠之多層次成長模式分析並列篇名：Are You Exhausted? An Examination of Hierarchical Linear Growth Models of Junior High School Students' Burnout作者：施淑慎(Shu-Shen SHIH);巫博瀚(Po-Han WU)關鍵字：學習倦怠;完美主義;成就目標;自主支持;心理控制;academic burnout;perfectionism;achievement goals;autonomy support;psychological control期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以315位國中生為研究對象，探究他們自八年級上學期開始連續三個學期學習倦怠感受的變化，以及這段期間個人因素（完美主義傾向、成就目標）與環境因素（教師自主支持、心理控制）對學習倦怠的影響。本研究採多層次成長曲線模型進行分析，研究結果顯示：國中生普遍隨年級增長而有愈高的學習倦怠。在學習倦怠的影響因素部分，不適應性完美主義、逃避表現目標、教師心理控制皆能正向且顯著地解釋學習倦怠；適應性完美主義、趨向精熟與趨向表現目標、教師自主支持則負向解釋學習倦怠。根據上述結果，本研究提出學習輔導及未來研究的相關建議。英文摘要：This study attempted to track down the changing trajectory of burnout of 315 eighth graders for three consecutive semesters, and to explore the influences of individual (i.e., perfectionistic tendencies and achievement goals) as well as environmental factors (i.e., teacher autonomy support vs. psychological control) on academic burnout during the above period of time. Hierarchical linear growth models were employed for analyzing the data. Results indicated that junior high school students experienced higher levels of burnout as they proceeded to higher grades. Regarding the determinants of academic burnout, maladaptive perfectionism, performance-avoidance goals, and teachers' psychological control exerted significantly positive influences on students' burnout, whereas adaptive perfectionism, mastery-approach goals and performance-approach goals, together with autonomy support provided by teachers negatively affected burnout. Implications for counseling practices and future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：21-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所11篇名：從PISA剖析香港青少年對升讀高等教育的期望並列篇名：Analyzing Hong Kong Adolescents' Expectations for Pursuing Higher Education from PISA作者：何瑞珠(Esther Sui-Chu HO);黃善國(Raymond Sin-Kwok WONG);姜培芝(Chrysa Pui-Chi KEUNG);岑國榮(Kwok-Wing SUM)關鍵字：教育期望;高等教育;學生能力國際評估計劃;青少年;educational expectation;higher education;Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA);adolescents期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：1965至1985年間，香港高等教育的發展相當緩慢，只有不足5%的適齡青年可升讀由大學教育資助委員會資助的大學學位課程，及至20世紀80年代中起，大學學位開始大量增加，進入大學的適齡人口百分比提升至18%。2000年，香港特別行政區行政長官更進一步提出要在十年內令香港高等教育的普及率達到60%。由2000-2001至2005-2006學年，高等教育參與率已增加至超過60%。本文探討在香港高等教育擴張後期，中學生對升讀高等教育期望的變化。本文研究數據來自2009年和2012年的學生能力國際評估計劃（以下簡稱PISA）。2009年香港的PISA調查在該年5至6月間進行，而2012年的調查則在該年4至5月間進行。本研究嘗試探索以下四個範疇：（1）學生的教育期望在兩次調查期間（2009至2012年）的變化；（2）學生的家庭社經背景與教育期望間的關係；（3）學生能力與教育期望間的關係；（4）家庭社經背景與學生能力等因素對學生期望升讀大學的相對影響程度。英文摘要：From 1965 to 1985, the development of higher education was very slow in Hong Kong. Less than 5% of age-eligible adolescents were admitted to UGC-funded university degree program. However, since the mid-1980s, there has been an expansion of university places and the university admission rate has increased to 18% of the age-eligible population. In 2000, the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region proposed that the admission rate of higher education be increased to 60% within ten years. As a consequence, the participation rate of higher education was increased to over 60% from the school year 2000-2001 to 2005-2006. This article focuses on the change in expectation for pursuing higher education of Hong Kong secondary school students during the post-massification of Hong Kong higher education. The data of this article originates from two cycles of the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) - PISA 2009 and PISA 2012. PISA 2009 in Hong Kong was conducted from May to June 2009, while PISA 2012 was conducted from April to May 2012. This article attempts to investigate the following four areas: (1) the changes in students’ educational expectation during 2009 to 2012; (2) the relationship between students' family socioeconomic background and their educational expectation; (3) the relationship between students' ability and their educational expectation; (4) the relative impact of family socioeconomic background and students' ability on their educational expectation toward the pursuit of university education.起始頁-結束頁：47-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所12篇名：國小學生對社會性科學議題學習環境之知覺：個人學習動機、小組合作能力與教室環境知覺並列篇名：Elementary Students' Perception of Socioscientific Issue-based Learning Environment - Perspectives of Personal Learning Motivation, Group Cooperative Ability, and the Classroom Environment作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin CHIN);吳靜宜(Ching-Yi WU)關鍵字：小組合作能力;自然科學習動機;社會性科學議題;學習環境知覺;group cooperative ability;motivation toward learning science;socioscientific issues;perception of learning environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以「探索、概念引介、釐清爭議、概念應用」學習環模式，設計「台灣能源的利用與現況」社會性科學議題（socioscientific issues，下稱SSI）模組，探討在教學前、後，國小五年級學生對學習環境知覺的改變。此知覺包含三層次：（1）學生的自然科學習動機，（2）學生在小組中的合作能力，及（3）學生對教室環境的知覺。在課程結束後，並調查學生對此SSI教學模組的感受。本研究採混合研究法，在教學過程中以質與量並重的方式蒐集資料，研究對象為台灣中部某國小一班五年級學生共28人；利用綜合活動時間進行教學，共經歷6週11節課。研究資料包括：問卷、學習單、課程回饋問卷、半結構訪談等。結果顯示：（1）經SSI教學後，學生對自然科學習動機、小組合作能力、教室環境等的知覺均有顯著提升；（2）大多數學生表示喜歡學習此課程內容，學到如何蒐集資料、討論和發表，以及能源議題的相關知識。最後，依據研究結果，對未來SSI教學與研究提出建議。英文摘要：This study used a model of learning cycle with four phases - exploration, introduction of concept, clarification of controversy, and application of concept - to develop a socioscientific issues (SSI) module entitled ”Energy Uses and Situation in Taiwan” for assessing the change of 5th graders' perception of learning environment. Such a perception covered three facets: (a) student's personal motivation toward learning science, (b) student's cooperative ability in small groups, and (c) student's perception toward the classroom environment. After learning the module, students' feedbacks on what they preferred and what have learned were also investigated. Mix methods approach was adopted, collecting both quantitative and qualitative data. The subject was a class of Grade 5 students (N = 28). The module, with 11 sessions, was conducted in 6 weeks during the time for integral learning. Research data were collected through three questionnaires, seven worksheets, a feedback questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews. The findings revealed that: (a) students' motivation toward learning science, cooperative ability in small groups, and perception of classroom environment were significantly enhanced; (b) the majority of students expressed their preference to learning the SSI module, got the ability in information collection, discussion and presentation, and the knowledge of energy-related issues. Based on the findings, this study proposes recommendations for SSI teaching and studies in the future.起始頁-結束頁：71-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所13篇名：亞洲小學生全球公民素養量表之發展：以台灣小學生為探索個案並列篇名：The Development of Asian Primary Students' Global Citizenship Literacy Scales: An Exploratory Study of Taiwan Primary Student作者：吳時省(Shih-Sheng WU);蔡清華(Ching-Hwa TSAI)關鍵字：全球教育;國際教育;全球公民;全球公民素養;驗證性因素分析;global education;international education;global citizenship;global citizenship literacy;confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究主要目的在發展一份全球公民素養量表，作為台灣過去這些年來對於小學階段全球教育努力成果的檢視。透過文獻分析，研究者歸納出全球公民素養四個構念，分別為「全球公民權利與義務」、「全球公民能力」、「全球公民參與」、「全球公民反思」，並根據這四個構念進行量表的編制和信效度的檢核。研究樣本為台灣各地小學生，總計1,112名。量表整體信度為.868，與各個效標工具的相關亦都至少達到.05顯著水準；模式的考驗方面，除了內在品質的聚斂效度稍嫌不理想外，其餘結果都達到預期。英文摘要：This study aimed to develop an instrument to measure the effect of Taiwan’s policy on global education. Four constructs were developed, namely rights and responsibilities of global citizenship, competencies of global citizenship, participation of global citizenship, and reflection of global citizenship. The instrument was tested with a sample of 1,112 elementary school students in Taiwan. Content validity was established. Exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis confirmed construct validity. All the indexes were satisfied except the convergent validity.起始頁-結束頁：99-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所14篇名：國小學生數位學習機會影響因素之研究：以學生、家長與學校觀點探討並列篇名：A Study on the Influential Factors of E-learning Opportunity for Elementary School Students: Perspectives from Students, Parents and Schools作者：陳宇芃(Yu-Peng CHEN);林豐政(Feng-Jeng LIN)關鍵字：數位學習機會;資訊近用;基本技能與素養;個人危機;權益侵害;e-learning opportunity;information access;basic skills and information literacy;personal crisis;rights violation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以中央研究院學術調查研究資料庫中「102年〔2013年〕學生數位學習及數位機會」的學生、家長、學校三方調查資料為基礎，整合建立「學校給予學生數位學習機會」對「家庭數位學習機會影響學生數位學習機會」階層線性模式，探討當中的影響；亦進一步於學生數位學習機會的不同分量下，探究影響因素的變化。結果顯示：（1）數位級區對於學生數位學習機會影響力極大，原因可能是數位級區愈高的學校可提供的數位資源較多，學生接觸數位學習的機會亦較頻繁；（2）學生擁有的設備愈齊全及對基本技能有一定素養，對其數位學習機會相對影響較大；（3）家長須留意學生的數位學習情形，防止因過度使用反而造成身心損害，學校亦應向學生加強宣導個人資料隱私的重要性；（4）學校應儘可能強化軟體與科技融入教學，期能消弭因數位級區造成的差距。英文摘要：Based on the data from students, parents and schools of the 2013 Survey of Student Digital Ability and e-Learning Opportunity from the Academia Sinica's Survey Research Data Archive, this article constructed a hierarchical linear model to analyze how students' e-learning opportunity is related to the multilevel influence effects of school- and parent-level covariates. Quantile regression was also used to study different covariate effects at different quantile levels of student e-learning opportunity. Results indicate that: (1) Digital Level Area is a very important influential factor for students' e-learning opportunity due to the reason that schools in higher Digital Level Area have more digital resources, and students are likely to have more opportunity for access to and frequent use of e-learning; (2) the more IT equipment or IT literacy students have can greatly affect their possession of e-learning opportunity; (3) parents should pay special attention to problems of their children resulting from overuse of e-learning resources which could cause harm to their children both mentally and physically; moreover, schools should widely promote the awareness of personal information security to students; (4) in order to eliminate the digital divide caused by Digital Level Area, schools need to strengthen the integration of software and information technology into instruction as far as possible.起始頁-結束頁：131-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所15篇名：鄉立幼兒園太魯閣在地文化課程融入學習區的歷程並列篇名：The Process of Implementing Local Cultural Curriculum With Culturally Responsive Practice in Learning Areas of a Truku Preschool作者：胡美智(Mei-Chih HU);鄭雅莉(Ya-Li CHENG)關鍵字：文化回應;在地文化課程;太魯閣族;學習區;culturally responsive practice;local cultural curriculum;Truku;learning areas期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探究一所太魯閣族幼兒園接受教育部公私立幼兒園適性教保輔導後，課程改變的發展脈絡。本研究具體目的有三：（1）探討鄉立幼兒園在地文化課程融入學習 區的實踐；（2）分析鄉立幼兒園在地文化課程融入學習區的改變歷程；（3）了解鄉立幼兒園在地文化課程融入學習區的實施困境與解決策略。兩位研究者透過訪談及文件蒐集等方法，整理、歸納與分析該幼兒園以文化回應教學取向，將在地文化融入學習區的漣漪效應；並透過該園五位教保服務人員，在園內擔任課程領導的角色，共同協助研究五個分班落實在地文化融入學習區的可能性。本研究結果發現：（1）設置文化主題區，透過多元文化素材，豐富在地文化課程與學習區的內涵；（2）教保服務人員學習設計統整而不分科的在地文化課程，培養小小太魯閣族人解決問題的能力；（3）真實面對在地文化課程融入學習區的困境，自製文化教具與主題繪本。英文摘要：This study investigated the curriculum changes and development of a Truku preschool that received educational care from the Ministry of Education. It aimed to: (a) study how local cultural curriculum with culturally responsive practice was implemented in learning areas of the preschool; (b) analyze how the behaviors of preschool educators and preschoolers changed after implementing this practice; (c) explore the difficulties that teachers faced regarding the integration of local cultural curriculum into learning areas and their remedies. The study found that: (a) the preschool educators implemented culturally responsive curriculum practice by setting culturally related themes, placing culturally relevant materials in learning areas, and exploring teacher-made materials relevant to cultural responsiveness; (b) through adopting local culture-integrated curriculum, the problem-solving ability of little Truku children could be nurtured; (c) facing difficulties including the lack of story books and teaching materials related to Truku cultures in the communities, the preschool educators tried to produce culturally related teaching materials or picture books by themselves.起始頁-結束頁：157-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所16篇名：師資培育學系網頁行銷與品牌形象對學生忠誠度影響之研究並列篇名：The Relationships Between Webpage Marketing, Brand Image, and Student Loyalty in Teacher Education Departments作者：陳玉娟(Yu-Chuan CHEN)關鍵字：品牌形象;網頁行銷;學生忠誠度;師資培育學系;brand image;webpage marketing;student loyalty;teacher education department期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：伴隨網際網路的發達，網站建置提供師資培育學系一個優質的行銷工具，令學系可以藉由網站，直接跟學生互動聯繫。本研究目的即在探究：師資培育學系網頁行銷、品牌形象與學生忠誠度之間關係的建構驗證。研究者利用自編問卷蒐集資料，以師資培育學系就讀學生為問卷調查對象，收回有效問卷1,171份，進行驗證性因素分析和結構方程模式建構。研究發現，品牌形象在網頁行銷與學生忠誠度之間扮演完全中介角色，這結果突顯了品牌形象對此類型學系經營管理的重要性，師資培育學系可以在品牌形象功能性、象徵性、經驗性三方面<U+7740>力，對於提升學生的忠誠度將有助益。最後，文章提出對未來有志於進行此範疇研究的相關建議。英文摘要：Teacher education departments take advantage of webpages as a marketing tool to have interaction with students. This study aimed to investigate the relationships among webpage marketing, brand image, and student loyalty in teacher education departments. Self-administered questionnaires were distributed to teacher education departments in different universities and 1,171 valid ones were returned. The confirmatory factor analysis demonstrated a satisfactory fit of the theory, and structural equation modeling was used to validate the research model. Empirical results revealed that brand image played an effective and positive intermediary role in the research model. Brand image, including the functional, experiential and symbolic factors, has proved useful and influential on student loyalty. The research findings provide insight into the management of teacher education departments, and suggest areas for future research.起始頁-結束頁：181-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：任意實數計分之改進廣義多元計分順序理論並列篇名：Improving Generalized Polytomous Ordering Theory for any Real Number Scoring作者：劉湘川(Hsiang-Chuan Liu);許天維(Tian-Wei Sheu);蔡顯<U+9E9E>(Hsien-Chang Tsai);丘錦發(Kim-Fatt Khiew);郭素珍(Sue-Jane Guo)關鍵字：問題語意結構分析;試題順序理論;試題關聯結構理論;item ordering theory;item relational structure theory;semantic structure analysis theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：順序理論又稱為次序理論（Ordering Theory），可分為問題順序理論與試題順序理論，其原理相同，只是順序係數之方向相反。為節省篇幅，本研究只論述改進之廣義多元計分順序理論，如何能滿足本文所提完備化順序理論之六準則：(1)關聯性準則；(2)公平性準則；(3)規格性準則；(4)單調性準則；(5)完全性準則；(6)決定性準則。Airasian與Bart（1973）首先提出第一類順序理論，簡稱OT理論；Takeya（1980）提出較靈敏之第二類順序理論，也就是試題關聯結構理論（IRS）；上述兩類理論均不夠完備，尚需改進發展。本研究專論第一類完備化順序理論，第二類完備化順序理論將另文發表。當各試題之多元計分只為等選項依序排列之整數時，Takeya（1987）提出最簡單之規格化順序理論，也就是問題語意結構分析理論（semantic structure analysis, SS）。但當各試題之多元計分為任何實數計分時，劉湘川（2003）兼顧鑑別度，提出混合型問題語意結構分析理論（mixing semantic structure analysis, MS），該理論已是鑑別度最大之廣義多元計分順序理論；之後，劉湘川、楊志良（2003）再以全距代替標準差，提出另一種劉氏簡明之混合型問題語意結構分析理論（Liu's simple mixing semantic structure analysis, LS），並將之應用於醫學調查問卷，此模式亦可適用於任何混合計分及實數計分，但兩者比較基準不同，中心度不如標準值具鑑別力，故LS遠不如MS靈敏。林原宏（2007）也提出非等選項依序排列等級計分之廣義多元計分順序理論（generalized polytomous ordering theory, GPOT），但GPOT只是LS 在整數計分時之特例。上述諸順序理論都屬第一類順序理論，都未臻完備。本研究將MS與LS使其滿足關聯性準則，分別提供可隨選項數改變之動態決斷值，提出改進之廣義多元計分順序理論。本研究證明此二新理論能滿足完備化順序理論之六大準則外，亦討論各種順序理論之關係，非但比既往對應順序理論更為嚴謹靈敏，且同時適用於常用之等選項等級計分以及非等選項任何混合計分與任意實數計分之試卷或問卷。英文摘要：The basal principal of Ordering Theory for testing and questionnaire are the same, only their ordering coefficients have the opposite direction. For saving space, this study only discusses how to completely modify the method of the former, according to following six criteria: (a) association, (b) fairness, (c) normalization, (d) monotonicity, (e) totality, (f) determination. Airasian and Bart (1973) proposed the first kind of ordering theory (OT). Takeya (1980) proposed the second kind of ordering theory: Item Relational Structure theory (IRS). Both of them are not completed to be modified. Liu (2003) proposed a standardized ordering theory: the mixing Semantic Structure Analysis (MS). It can be applicable to ordering theory with rating scale by any real numbers, and it is one of the most generalized polytomous ordering theory. Liu and Yang (2003) replaced the standard deviation of the ordering coefficient of MS with the range to propose a more simplified method called Liu's simple mixing semantic structure analysis (LS) and had applied to a medical questionnaire. But it is not so sensitive like Lin (2007) also proposed his generalized polytomous ordering theory (GPOT), it can also be applicable to any two items with unequal options, but GPOT is a special cases of LS. All of above mentioned ordering theories are not completed ordering theories, they did not satisfy the association criterion, all of them did not prove the fairness property, and do not provide any dynamic cutoff score of their ordering coefficient based on its deferent integers of options. This study has completely modified MS and LS to satisfy the association criterion, to prove the fairness as supplement, and to provide the dynamic cutoff score of their ordering coefficient based on its deferent integers of options for any real number scoring. These two new methods are more sensitive than previous ordering theories and can be applicable to any test and questionnaire whose any two items with equal options or unequal option, and its arithmetic series options are arranged in sequence for any real number scoring.起始頁-結束頁：295-312資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：認知本位電腦化學習評量系統的應用效益與拓展方向：以攜手計畫課後扶助方案科技化評量系統為例並列篇名：A Computerized Cognitively Based Learning Assessment System for the Students of After School Alternative Program of Taiwan作者：洪碧霞(Pi-Hsia Hung);林素微(Su-Wei Lin)關鍵字：電腦化教育評量系統;認知本位評量;數學能力模型;學習進展;cognitively based assessment;educational assessment system;learning progressions;mathematics competency model期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文首先藉由Bennett與Gitomer（2009）有關新世代認知本位學習評量系統建置的願景，簡要說明學習科學依據的教育評量發展趨勢。接著，研究者再以攜手計畫課後扶助方案科技化評量系統（After School Alternative Program technology-based testing，簡稱ASAP-tbt）為例，呈現臺灣電腦化教育評量資源的建構理念和應用現況。文中的實徵證據是攜手課後扶助計畫（after school alternative program, ASAP）四年級學生之三次數學成就測驗資料的分析，用以說明該題庫對學生學習成長評量的具體應用效益。結果顯示，ASAP 評量資源能提供學生學習表現與成長的具體回饋，這樣一項具備發展性模式雛形的教育評量系統，宜活化應用並進階拓展，讓臺灣的教育評量資源能持續以最省約有效的投入與時俱進。文章最後對ASAP-tbt 的更新擴展提出建議。英文摘要：This article started with a brief discussion of the trends of learning science-based educational assessment by following the theme of the computerized cognitively based learning assessment system (Cognitively Based Assessment of, for, and as Learning) (Bennett & Gitomer, 2009). Then, a description of the After School Alternative Program technology-based testing (ASAP-tbt) was provided, as an example, to present the rational and validity of computerized educational assessment resources in Taiwan. The data set of three sequentially administered computerized adaptive mathematics achievement tests of the fourth graders who participated in after school alternative trial program was analyzed by HLM. The results suggested that ASAP-tbt provided valid and useful feedbacks for students' performance and growth in learning. The reporting design of ASAP-tbt assessment revealed the cognitively based learning spirits. Such a promising prototype of educational assessment system deserves further investment. Finally, some suggestions for future development of ASAP-tbt were included.起始頁-結束頁：313-339資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：A Computer-Based Test for Chinese Dyslexia Diagnosis並列篇名：基於電腦化測驗系統的中文閱讀障礙診斷測驗作者：曹傑如(Chieh-Ju Tsao);廖晨惠(Chen-Huei Liao)關鍵字：Chinese dyslexia;Computer-Based Tests;中文閱讀障礙;電腦化測驗系統期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Traditional Chinese dyslexia testing requires one-on-one test methods. However, it cannot provide massive surveying or show what the advantages of screening are in a wide range of reading disorders. In the past, a computerized reading diagnostic system was often limited by the childrens' lack of computer skills and therefore could not be tested on early learners. Consequently, it is unable to achieve the goal of lowering the degree of dyslexia in advance by early intervention. The study aimed at establishing the Computer-Based Tests (CBT), an instrument turning individual tests into group test and effectively identifying young children who may be suffering from reading difficulties. Through the use of CBT, we recruited 216 grade one students in Taiwan elementary schools as our research subjects. We aimed to understand how the five cognitive variables of morphological awareness, orthographic processing, visual perception skills, phonological awareness, and rapid naming speed tests composed Reading Cognitive Skills. Through structural equation modeling (SEM), we have established a Chinese dyslexia research model. Through the results of this research we have found two results. The first one is that the five cognitive variables are essential to reading cognitive skills. The second one is that the model fit of reading cognitive skills appears to be sound. The results suggest that the CBT based on this research model can be greatly and efficiently utilized on diagnosing children with Chinese dyslexia.英文摘要：傳統中文閱讀障礙的檢測是使用一對一的施測方式，這種測驗方式的缺點是受限於經費與人力的不足而難以進行大規模施測，導致學生到了國小中年級才發現閱讀困難，錯失早期介入的機會。電腦化測驗系統可以解決上述問題，不過以往的電腦化閱讀障礙診斷系統受限於兒童電腦技能不足，而不能對幼兒進行測試，以致於無法及早發現疑似閱讀障礙的兒童，達到早期介入與早期發現的目的。本研究旨在發展一個基於電腦化測驗系統（CBT）的閱讀障礙診斷測驗，目的是可以將個別施測轉化為團體施測，並能有效識別疑似閱讀障礙的幼兒。本研究以216 名臺灣的國小一年級學生作為對象，使用詞素覺識、字型處理、視知覺技巧、聲韻覺識和快速唸名等五個認知變項所組成的閱讀相關認知能力做為基礎，透過結構方程模型建立中文閱讀障礙研究模型。研究發現有二：一是五個認知變項是中文閱讀相關認知能力的重要組成因素；二是中文閱讀障礙研究模型的模型整體適配度良好。結果顯示，本研究所建立的閱讀障礙診斷測驗可以取代傳統測驗，能大量且快速的檢測國小一年級學童，可提供給後續研究與學習輔導之用。起始頁-結束頁：341-366資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：中文版「師資培育學程選擇動機量表」之修訂與分析並列篇名：Validation and Refinement of Chinese Version of the Motivations for Choosing Teacher Education Scale作者：張炳煌(Ping-Huang Chang)關鍵字：師資培育;量表編製;複核效化;選擇動機;choice motivation;cross-validation;scale construction;teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在修訂中文版「師資培育學程選擇動機量表」（FEMOLA 量表），並檢視其在臺灣之適用性。FEMOLA 量表係基於期望價值理論，具有良好的信度與效度，考量臺灣師資培育脈絡與當前研究需求，值得加以修訂後供國內相關研究使用。研究參與者取自12 所師資培育大學中等學校師資培育類科之師資生，有效樣本為656 人。本研究將有效樣本隨機分割為建模樣本與驗證樣本兩組，以進行模式建構與複核效化分析。研究結果顯示，本測量模式之整體模式適配度良好，且具區辨效度與聚斂效度，故本量表具有良好的建構效度。各分量表內部一致性係數介於.835至.936，故本量表具有良好的信度。複核效化考驗結果顯示，本量表具有良好的穩定性與效度延展。本研究指出，「師資培育學程選擇動機量表」之模式由7個因素所組成，分別為：「自我能力信念」、「主修科目興趣」、「教育興趣」、「任務難度較低」、「時間效用性」、「經濟效用性」與「社會影響」。此外，本研究結果大致與國外相關研究結果相似，惟經濟效用性因素之重要性較高，呈現出臺灣師資培育的特點。最後，本研究提出討論與後續研究建議，作為結論。英文摘要：This study aimed to refine the Chinese version of the ”Motivation for Choosing Teacher Education Scale” (FEMOLA scale), and to examine its suitability in a Taiwanese context. Based on the expectancy-value model and a novel research approach, the FEMOLA scale offered an integrative theoretical framework to guide the selection and organization of factors that influence the motivation to teach. Participants in this study were 656 students enrolled in teacher education programs for secondary schools at 12 universities in Taiwan. They were randomly divided into two subsamples: a calibration and a validation sample. This study conducted confirmatory factor analysis to examine and replicate the scale structure of the original scale. Furthermore, convergent and discriminant validity coefficients were calculated, demonstrating the scale's sound psychometric properties. A cross-validation approach using measurement invariance procedures across the two subsamples further supported the validity and stability of this scale. Results of this study suggested that an amended seven-construct structure showed better validity than the original factor structure. Thus, seven constructs were identified: educational interest, subject-specific interest, time compatibility utility, financial utility, ability beliefs, low task difficulty, and social influences. Moreover, the scale showed sufficient internal consistency, their Cronbach's α coefficients ranged from .835 to .936. Consistent with prior German studies, this study found that intrinsic factors were generally more influential than were extrinsic factors. However, social influences and financial utility also received high ratings from the Taiwanese students, highlighting the specific features of the Taiwanese teacher education system. Finally, this paper concludes with a discussion of theoretical correspondences and potential applications of the scale.起始頁-結束頁：367-402資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：監控評分者效果的Yes/No Angoff標準設定法之效度檢核：以國中教育會考數學科為例並列篇名：Validation of the Rater-Effects-Monitored Yes/No Angoff Standard-Setting Method: Using the Taiwan Comprehensive Assessment Program for Junior High School Students Math Exam as an Example作者：曾芬蘭(Fen-Lan Tseng);林奕宏(Yi-Hung Lin);邱佳民(Jia-Min Chiou)關鍵字：效度;國中教育會考;評分者效果／評分者效應;標準設定法;Comprehensive Assessment Program for Junior High School Students;rater effects;standard-setting method;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究為先前研究「監控評分者效果的Yes/No Angoff 標準設定法」之延伸，目的在於蒐集各種效度來源的資料，驗證前述標準設定法結果之效度，據以檢核該標準設定法是否適用於國中教育會考。先前的研究將評分者效果的監控整合在標準設定流程裡，運用試題反應理論的部分計分模式來分析學科專家在標準設定流程中對試題難度的判定資料，提出了前述的標準設定法。本研究則依據Kane（1994）以及Pitoniak（2003）建議的程序、內部、外部等多元效度證據的觀點，以2013年國中教育會考數學科測驗資料為例，蒐集不同來源的效度資料來評估此標準設定結果之效度。結果發現：(1)專家們同意本標準設定法之執行過程是合理的；(2)本標準設定法在方法內、專家內、專家間的結果具有高度一致性；(3)本標準設定法與群聚分析取向標準設定法之分類結果具有89.82%的一致性；(4)本標準設定法分類結果與考生的國中三年在校成績分類之相關達.75。以上這些結果指出本標準設定法的程序及產出具有理想的效度，可供相關測驗機構進行標準設定時的參考。英文摘要：This study is an extension of the newly proposed ”rater-effects-monitored Yes/No Angoff standard-setting method,” and the purpose of it is to collect validity evidence from various sources to verify the standard-setting results and to examine whether this method is applicable to the Taiwan Comprehensive Assessment Program for Junior High School Students (CAPJHSS). This method uses the partial credit model of the item response theory to analyze content experts' rating data generated in the standard-setting process to monitor the rater effects. Based on suggested procedure proposed by Kane (1994) and Pitoniak (2003), this study combines validity evidence collected from procedural, internal, and external sources to examine the 2013 CAPJHSS Math test data. The results reveal that: (a) content experts agree that the implementation process of this standard-setting method is reasonable, (b) the standard-setting results generated within-method, within-expert, and between-experts are consistent, (c) the consistency between the results from this method and the cluster-analysis-approach method is 89.82%, and (d) the correlation between the classification outcomes from this method and students school grades is .75. These results indicate that this standard-setting method possesses adequate validity, and could be considered by other testing organizations. Suggestions for future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：403-432資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「短式BASIC量表」精神病傾向分量表的發展與信效度檢驗並列篇名：Development and Validation of ”the Psychotic Tendencies Subscale of BASIC Short- Form Scale” (PT-BASIC-SF)作者：吳佳純(Chia-Chun Wu);王佳琪(Chia-Chi Wang);鄭英耀(Ying-Yao Cheng)關鍵字：BASIC量表;Rasch;短式量表;國軍;BASIC Scale;military;Rasch analysis;short-form scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究之目的在發展一份「短式BASIC 量表」精神病傾向分量表之工具，期能以最有效、最經濟，又可達到相同效益的方法對新兵進行心理健康評估，作到「及早發現，及早預防」，提高心輔人員的實務評估效率，以增進助人工作的效能。研究對象為海軍新訓中心1,749 名受訓人員，將「BASIC 量表」精神病傾向分量表的36 題，以多向度Rasch 研究方法精簡為20 題，其中包括「精神分裂症傾向」、「躁症傾向」、「憂鬱症傾向」及「自殺意念」等四個向度，其受試者分離信度（person separation reliability）分別是.67、.63、.70、.70，並針對「短式BASIC 量表」精神病傾向分量表提供內容、結構、類推、解釋及本質效度證據。本研究以實徵資料驗證柯永河等人（2001）根據多年臨床經驗所發展的「BASIC 量表」題目之有效性診斷，且與全球人口罹患相關疾病之盛行率互相呼應，在臨床實務上具有貢獻。此外，長短版量表二者之相關為.94，精神分裂症傾向分量表之相關為.88，躁症傾向分量表之相關為.93，憂鬱症傾向分量表之相關為.89，自殺意念分量表之相關為.84，均為顯著正相關。可見本研究發展之短式量表足以代替原始量表，未來為增加受試者之填答意願，確保評估效度，可善用「短式BASIC 量表」，進行心理健康之評估。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop ”the psychotic tendencies subscale of BASIC Short-Form” (PT-BASIC-SF) as a mental health measurement for military. 1,749 students from Naval Recruit Training Center were recruited. The PT-BASIC-SF included four dimensions: schizophrenic tendencies, manic tendencies, depression tendencies, and suicidal ideation. We cut down 36-item psychotic tendencies subscale to form 20-item in using multidimension Rasch techniques. They were applied to assess model-data fit and to provide the multiple validity evidence of the PT-BASIC-SF. The person separation reliabilities of the measures from four dimensions were .70, .67, .74 and .57, respectively. In this study, the findings supported the study based on many years of clinical experience by Ko et al. (2001) and have a contribution in clinical practice. In addition, the significant positive correlation between length version and short version of schizophrenic tendencies, manic tendencies, depression tendencies and suicidal ideation were .88, .93, .89 and .84. The results indicated that the PT-BASIC-SF could be replaced with the original scale to increase participants' motivation as a better way to assess mental health.起始頁-結束頁：183-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：「預期演奏焦慮量表」及「臨場演奏焦慮量表」之編製研究並列篇名：The Development of ”Anticipatory Music Performance Anxiety Inventory” and ”Stage Music Performance Anxiety Inventory”作者：蘇郁惠(Yu-Huei Su);何育真(Yu-Chen Ho);鄭逸如(Yih-Ru Cheng);陳恆順(Heng-Shuen Chen)關鍵字：年輕音樂家;音樂演奏焦慮;評量;預期演奏焦慮;臨場演奏焦慮;anticipatory music performance anxiety;assessment;music performance anxiety;stage music performance anxiety;young musicians期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究擬編製高中及大學音樂主修學生適用之演奏焦慮量表，包含準備期的「預期演奏焦慮量表」及臨上台前的「臨場演奏焦慮量表」，樣本共500 人。「預期演奏焦慮量表」共21題，內部一致性.94，三因素為：「對演奏能力及表現的擔憂」、「焦慮的生理及心理反應」與「對演奏現場及過程的擔憂」，分別可解釋變異量為43.43%、6.65%、5.35%，總體可解釋變異量為55.43%。「臨場演奏焦慮量表」共14題，內部一致性.93，兩因素為：「生理焦慮」及「臨場擔憂」，分別可解釋變異量為51.38%、11.24%，總體可解釋變異量為62.62%。大學音樂系學生與高中音樂班學生的預期演奏焦慮沒有顯著差異，高中與大學音樂主修學生的演奏焦慮無顯著差異，唯大學音樂系學生「對演奏現場及過程的擔憂」顯著高於高中音樂班學生（t = 2.75，p ＜ .01），高中與大學學生的臨場演奏焦慮總分無顯著差異。本研究建議，未來可發展職業演奏家的焦慮量表及演奏焦慮行為檢核表，與測量臉部肌肉及肢體動作等焦慮反應的生理量測法，及研發認知改善策略，以降低大學音樂系學生「對演奏現場及過程的擔憂」。英文摘要：In this study music performance anxiety (MPA) inventories including Anticipatory Music Performance Anxiety Inventory (AMPAI) of preparation period and Stage Music Performance Anxiety Inventory (SMPAI) of stage performance period were developed and tested on 500 high school and college music major students. AMPAI has 21 items with excellent internal consistency Cronbach's α .94. The factor analysis showed three factors including ”worry about capability and achievement of performance”, ”physiological and psychological symptoms of anxiety”, and ”worry about environment and process of performance” with explained variance 43.43%, 6.65% and 5.35% respectively, and total explained variance was 55.43%. SMPAI has 14 items with excellent internal consistency Cronbach's .α 93. The factor analysis showed two factors including ”physiological symptoms of anxiety” and ”stage worry” with explained variance 51.38% and 11.24%, and total explained variance was 62.62%. There was no significant difference of AMPAI between high school and college music major students, however in AMPAI the subscore ”worry about environment and process of performance” of music major college students was significant higher than that of high school students（t = 2.75, p ＜ .01）. There was no significant difference of SMPAI between high school and college music major students. In future prospect, we suggest to develop a standard music performance anxiety inventory and a checklist of music performance anxiety behavior for professional music performers, physiological measurements of face muscle and body movement related to anxiety reaction, and strategies of cognitive behavior intervention to reduce ”worry about environment and process of performance” among music major college students.起始頁-結束頁：207-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：兒童封閉式創造力潛能測量：「兒童版中文詞彙遠距聯想測驗」之編製及信、效度研究並列篇名：Assessing Children's Closed-ended Creative Potential: The Development of Chinese Word Remote Associates Test for Children作者：羅珮文(Pei-Wen Lo);游勝翔(Sheng-Hsiang Yu);黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);施依伶(Yi-Ling Shih);林緯倫(Wei-Lun Lin)關鍵字：中文詞彙;兒童;封閉式創造力;遠距聯想測驗;children;Chinese words;closed-ended creativity;remote associates test期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：測量成人創造力潛能的工具可分為開放式與封閉式兩類，近來研究顯示此兩類創造力涉及不同的歷程，與諸多心理因素的關係也不同。然而，目前測量兒童創造力潛能的現有工具仍以開放式創造力為主。本研究係根據Mednick的理論觀點，以「中文詞彙遠距聯想測驗」為基礎，考量國小學童的語文詞彙程度，擬發展一套適用於國內兒童（國小中、高年級學生）封閉式創造力潛能測量的工具，即「兒童版中文詞彙遠距聯想測驗」（CWRAT-C）。本研究經過對75 題預試題目的項目分析，挑選出40 題正式題目，編製為整體難度相同的甲、乙兩式題本，接著以北、中、南、東部國小三至六年級之721 名學童為對象進行施測。研究結果顯示，學童的表現隨著年級而逐漸提高；女童的表現優於男童；不同區域學童的表現並無差異。在信度考驗上，甲、乙兩式的內部一致性係數為.79及.76。在效度考驗上，以「頓悟問題作業」考驗效標關聯效度，顯示效果量達中等程度以上的正相關（rs = .44，.50），且在不同年齡層、性別間皆很穩定；以「報紙的不尋常用途測驗」考驗區辨效度，結果顯示與部分指標存在低至中度效果量的相關，與有些指標則無相關（rs 介於-.11∼.38）。CWRAT-C 具有良好的信度與效度，為適合國小學生使用的封閉式創造力測量工具。英文摘要：Instruments for assessing adults' creative potentials can be distinguished as open-ended and closed-ended types. Recent studies have demonstrated that these two types of creativity involve different processes and exhibit different relationships with various psychological factors. However, available instruments for assessing children's creative potentials are mostly the open-ended type in Taiwan. With regards to Mednick's association theory and adults' Chinese Word Remote Associates Test, the aim of this study is to develop the Chinese Word Remote Associates Test-Children version (CWRAT-C) for assessing children's closed-ended creative potentials. Based on the results of item analysis in pilot study, 40 items were chosen from 75 items and were split into Form A and Form B, which were equal in difficulty level. 721 Grade 3 to Grade 6 children from different regions of Taiwan were then recruited to participate in the study. The results showed a significant ascending trend across age. Girls performed better than boys. There was no performance difference across regions. The Cronbach's of Form A and Form B was .79 and .76, indicating a good internal consistency. As for criterion- related validity, the correlations between two Forms and Insight Problems were .46 and .50, with a medium effect size. As for discriminant validity, the correlations between two Forms and Unusual Uses of the Newspapers Test ranged from -.11 to .38, with a low to medium effect size. In conclusion, CWRAT-C has good reliability and validity and could be an effective instrument for assessing children's closed-ended creative potentials.起始頁-結束頁：237-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：Development of the Mathematical Beliefs Scale for Junior High School Students並列篇名：「國中學生數學信念量表」之編製作者：林雅雯(Ya-Wen Lin);曾志隆(Chih-Lung Tseng)關鍵字：beliefs;confirmatory factor analysis;mathematical beliefs;scale development;structural equation modeling;信念;結構方程模型;量表發展;數學信念;驗證性因素分析期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Among students, the indispensable element of learning motivation arises from their beliefs of positive values. The Mathematical Beliefs Scale (MBS) was developed to address the mathematics study needs of Taiwan junior high school students. For cross validation, there were two major stages, a pre-test questionnaire was then developed, and purposive sampling was used to select 114 students to participate. Reliability under the Cronbach's α was 0.850. Finally, 639 students were selected using random sampling to participate in the official questionnaire, and a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was conducted. The results demonstrated good reliability and validity.英文摘要：學生是否願意主動學習的關鍵要素之一，是學生本身對於學習任務的興趣、自信、價值和難度等所抱持之信念是否是正向。本研究的目的是擬發展一份適合國中學生使用之「數學信念量表」（MBS），以供研究及輔導上之應用。本研究提出，MBS 發展有兩階段：第一階段是採立意取樣，抽取114 位學生為預試樣本，進行預試問卷的信效度分析，總量表之Cronbach's α為.850；第二階段以分層隨機抽樣抽取639 位學生為正式樣本，進行正式問卷的驗證性因素分析（CFA），結果顯示MBS具有良好的信效度，亦有著良好的模式適配。起始頁-結束頁：259-293資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會10篇名：Development and Validation of an Instrument for Measuring Stress in Vietnamese Undergraduate Students並列篇名：「越南大學生壓力量表」之編製與效度驗證作者：潘氏秋月(Thi Thu Nguyet Phan);莫慕貞(Magdalena Mo Ching Mok);郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo)關鍵字：stress factors;stress scale;undergraduate students;validity;大學生;因素分析;效度;壓力量表期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The purpose of this study is to develop and validate an instrument to measure stress in undergraduate students. The sample comprised 2,085 students from four universities in Vietnam. A conceptual model was developed from the literature, which pointed to the multidimensionality of stress, with sources in academics, student-lecturer relationship, and financial and familial factors. Further, stress can manifest both psychological and behavioural symptoms. Six Likert-type scales were developed based on this understanding. The total sample was split into two subsamples for development and validation purposes. Exploratory Factor Analysis was undertaken on subsample one and five latent factors were identified consistent with the multidimensional understanding, except that psychological and behavioural symptoms were underpinned by one common factor. Confirmatory Factor Analysis was undertaken on subsample two, and evidence was found in support of the five-factor model. The total scale and the five subscales were found to be internally consistent with Cronbach's alpha ranging from .729 to .881.英文摘要：本研究主要目的為發展「越南大學生壓力量表」與效度驗證，研究樣本包含2,085位來自四所越南大學的大學生。此壓力量表為多維度模型參考相關文獻，壓力來源共分為學業、師生關係、財務及家庭等四大方面；此外，壓力的外在表現可以分為心理和行為症狀。本研究基於四種壓力來源與二種外在表現，編製了六種Likert式量表。為了開發和驗證目的，將總樣本分成兩個子樣本。子樣本一用於探索性因素分析，用以識別五個潛在因素的多維度模型，除了心理和行為症狀由一個共同因素支撐，其他四個因素分別為上述所提及的四種壓力來源。子樣本二用於驗證性因子分析，結果支持五因素模型。總量尺和五個子量尺其內部一致性Cronbach's α係數分別介於.729到.881之間。起始頁-結束頁：75-106資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：臺日與臺新交流對小學生跨文化溝通之認知能力的影響並列篇名：THE IMPACTS OF TAIWANESE-JAPANESE AND TAIWANESE-SINGAPOREAN EXCHANGE ACTIVITIES ON PRIMARY STUDENTS' COGNITIVE COMPETENCE IN INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION作者：黃文定(Wen-Ding Huang)關鍵字：國際交流;跨文化溝通;認知能力;小學;international exchange;intercultural communication;cognitive competence;primary schools期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的　本研究之目的在探討兩所臺灣小學國際交流活動（一所為臺日，另一所為臺新）對小學生跨文化溝通之認知能力的影響。研究設計／方法／取徑　本研究以開放式問題問卷（學習單）與半結構式訪談蒐集資料，由研究者設計問卷，發放參與交流的小學生填寫，並訪談40 位參與交流的小學生。研究發現或結論　本研究之發現有以下四項：一、就文化知識而言，國際交流活動有助於小學生對交流國家文化的認識，但無法促進對其文化體系的系統性理解。二、就溝通規則而言，小學生對溝通規則的覺知乃是建立在師長所強調的「禮貌」概念上，但對於溝通內容之適當性的認識有限。三、就連結與比較而言，國際交流活動有助於小學生印證所學或打破刻板印象，了解文化異同，但小學生未能展現比較不同國家深層文化內涵的能力，也易以偏概全。四、就詮釋與認知彈性而言，交流過程所累積的異文化經驗與知識有助於學生運用認知彈性進行詮釋。整體而言，小學生的詮釋類型多元，但有歸因錯誤、流於空洞以及本質主義的問題。研究原創性／價值　回顧國內外針對小學生實體國際交流之研究，未見針對跨文化溝通之認知能力的專門研究，就此而言，本研究可彌補此不足之處，具有其開創性。此外，本研究對小學生跨文化溝通之認知能力的分析成果與建議，亦有助於未來小學生國際交流活動與跨文化溝通訓練課程之規劃。英文摘要：Purpose The purpose of this research was to explore the impacts of two primary schools' international exchange activities (one Taiwanese-Japanese and the other Taiwanese-Singaporean) on primary students' cognitive competence of intercultural communication. Design/methodology/approach Open-ended questionnaires (worksheets) and semi-structured interviews were employed to collect data in this research. The researcher designed the questionnaires which were completed by primary students participating in exchange activities. The researcher also interviewed 40 participating primary exchange students. Findings This research derived four findings: 1. Regarding cultural knowledge, international exchange activities promoted the primary students' knowledge of exchange countries' cultures, but they did not facilitate systematic understanding of their cultural systems. 2. Concerning communication rules, the primary students' perception of communication rules was based on the concept of manners as emphasized by their teachers. However, the primary students' perception of the appropriateness of communication content was limited. 3. With respect to relating and comparison, international exchange activities contributed to the primary students' confirming what they had learned, eliminating stereotypes and learning cultural similarities and differences. Nevertheless, the primary students exhibited little competence of comparing in-depth cultural contents between different countries and demonstrated the fallacy of hasty generalisation. 4. Regarding interpretation and cognitive flexibility, the accumulated experience and knowledge of other cultures through the process of exchange facilitated the primary students' employment of cognitive flexibility in interpretation. Generally, the primary students' interpretations were diverse but exhibited the problems of misattribution, a lack of meaning, and essentialism. Originality/value In previous research on primary students' face-to-face international exchange activities, cognitive competence in intercultural communication has been neglected. The present research is original in that it compensates this deficiency. In addition, the analytical results and suggestions provided by this research on primary students' cognitive competence in intercultural communication can facilitate the design of primary schools' international exchange activities and intercultural communication training programmes.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2502.012篇名：臺灣國中教師對共同備課、公開觀課與集體議課的實施目的、關注內容以及專業成長知覺之研究並列篇名：PERCEPTIONS ON THE PURPOSES OF AND CONCERNS ABOUT COLLABORATIVE LESSON STUDY IN THE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT OF TAIWANESE SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS作者：劉世雄(Shih-Hsiung Liu)關鍵字：共同備課;公開觀課;教師專業成長;教師協同;collaborative lesson preparation;open classroom observation;teacher professional development;lesson study期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的　近年來，臺灣部分學校教師借鏡國外經驗，實施共同備課、公開觀課與集體議課，但其實施目的與關注焦點以及是否著實提升自己的教學專業，是臺灣推動此教育改革之當下需要檢視的。本研究之目的在於瞭解臺灣國中教師在共同備課、公開觀課與集體議課的實施目的、關注內容以及在教學專業成長的知覺。研究設計／方法／取徑　本研究自編問卷，針對臺灣國中教師進行調查研究，以縣市進行分層立意叢集方式抽取2,374 位教師，其中753 位教師有共備、觀課與議課的完整參與經驗，741 位教師從未有過類似經驗，其餘則有部分參與經驗。本研究以獨立樣本t 考驗和Friedman 等級變異數分析「完整參與」和「從未參與」的兩群教師，在實施目的、關注內容和教學專業成長知覺上的差異以及在其分項知覺的高低情形。研究發現或結論　本研究發現完整參與教師在實施目的、關注內容和教學專業成長知覺均顯著高於未曾參與的教師。而完整參與教師在實施目的之分項（教學專業能力、學科教材知識和學生學習成效）均有等同程度的知覺，然而，從未參與的教師較少以促進學生學習成效為目的。在關注內容上，兩群教師仍比較在乎教學策略的應用，較少關注學科知識與學習能力的培養。研究原創性／價值　臺灣學校早期的教學觀摩多是行政作為，教師是被觀察的對象，而學校教師的專業成長多為聆聽知識或資訊的活動。透過本研究的實證結果，可以更瞭解參與共同備課、公開觀課與集體議課的教師之國中教師的協同經驗，並提出透過教師協同進行教學專業成長的改善建議。英文摘要：Purpose Many Taiwanese teachers have begun implementing the activities of collaborative lesson preparation, open classroom observation, and discussion on completed lessons, according to teacher collaborative practices in foreign schools. The perceptions on the purposes of and concerns about these activities as well as their effectiveness in the professional development of teachers warrant investigation. Therefore, this study compared Taiwanese teachers experienced in collaborative lesson study and their inexperienced counterparts. Design/methodology/approach A survey was conducted to collect data from 2,374 secondary school teachers from 21 regions by using stratified random cluster sampling. Of these teachers, 753 were experienced in collaborative lesson study, 741 were inexperienced, and the remaining teachers were partly experienced. The independent-samples t test and Friedman rank analysis were used to compare the ranking of various variables between the experienced and inexperienced teachers. Findings Significant differences were observed between the study groups in the perceptions on the purposes of and concerns about collaborative activities and the effectiveness in professional development. Friedman rank analysis of the experienced teachers revealed identical rankings on the purposes of collaborative activities, namely professional ability, subject matter knowledge, and students' learning effectiveness. However, students' learning effectiveness was less considered by inexperienced teachers in collaborative activities. Moreover, regardless of whether collaborative activities were implemented, the teachers were more concerned about instructional strategies than subject matter and learner abilities when collaborating. Originality/value Previously in Taiwan, classroom teaching demonstration was considered an administrative affair, in which the focus was often on the demonstrating teachers' behaviors rather than students' learning performance. The present findings provide a more comprehensive outlook on the experiences of Taiwanese secondary school teachers in collaborative lesson preparation, open classroom observation, and discussion on completed lessons, thus enabling further improvements in teacher collaborations for professional development.起始頁-結束頁：43-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2502.023篇名：析論英國高等教育研究經費分配機制之運作及其對我國的啟示並列篇名：RESEARCH FUNDING ALLOCATION MECHANISM IN HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE UNITED KINGDOM AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR TAIWAN作者：劉秀曦(Hsiu-Hsi Liu);楊瑩(Ying Chan)關鍵字：英國;高等教育;績效本位研究經費分配制度;雙軌支援系統;United Kingdom;higher education;performance-based research funding system (PRFS);dual support system (DSS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的　在新自由主義影響下，各國政府在對大學挹注研究經費的同時也開始重視學校的績效責任，遂讓「績效本位研究經費分配制度」應運而生。至2010 年時，全世界至少有14 個國家或地區採用此種制度來分配研究經費，其中又以英國運作最久且最具代表性，英國政府透過著名的「雙軌支援系統」來分配高等教育研究經費，藉此保障研究活動的穩定與卓越發展。與英國相同，我國高等教育研究經費亦分為教育部與科技部兩大財源管道，且同樣採取擇優獎助原則為之，實施以來雖有助於厚植國內研究產能，但亦引起各界對於高等教育資源配置合理性的論辯。由於英國高等教育研究經費分配機制之運作與改革經常受到其他國家關注與仿效，故本研究期能借鏡英國經驗做為精進我國相關政策之參考。研究設計／方法／取徑　本研究採用文件分析法，就英國政府機關所公布之文件記錄、統計資料與報告書進行梳理與分析。研究發現或結論　根據研究發現提出下列啟示：一、釐清政府職能與角色定位，保障大學研究與創新的自主性；二、鼓勵大學開拓更多元的財源管道，因應卓越發展的財務需求；三、協助大學支應研究活動之間接成本，確保研究活動與人才培育的持續性；四、提高政府經費分配過程的透明度和規範性，強化公民社會監督體系；五、建構政策執行成效評估機制，重新思考經費配置的優先順序；六、研究經費的集中挹注僅為短期手段，長期應有更宏觀的規劃。研究原創性／價值　國內尚無以英國「雙軌支援系統」與「績效本位研究經費分配制度」為題進行分析，並提出對我國高等教育經費分配問題改進建議之研究。故本研究除有助於增進讀者對於英國高等教育研究經費配置方式之理解外，亦可做為精進我國相關政策之參考。英文摘要：Purpose With the influence of neoliberalism, governments worldwide have begun to emphasize the performance and responsibilities of universities in research funding. This has led to the creation of performance-based research funding systems in 14 countries and regions as of 2010. The oldest and most representative example is that in the United Kingdom. The UK government famously employs a dual support system to distribute its higher education research funds and safeguard the stability and development of research activities. Similarly, higher education research funding in Taiwan is provided by the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Science and Technology and is performance-based. Although this research funding system has enhanced the research capacity in Taiwan, it has also attracted controversy regarding its rationality. The operations and reform of the UK higher education research funding system have received attention and been replicated by other countries. Therefore, this study referenced the history of research funding in the United Kingdom to enhance research funding policies in Taiwan. Design/methodology/approach Documentary research was conducted to organize and analyze the documentary records, statistical data, and reports issued by UK governmental units. Findings 1. The functions and roles of the government must be clarified to ensure the autonomy of university research. 2. The government must enable universities to develop more diverse financial resource to fulfill the financial requirements for outstanding research development. 3. The government must assist universities in paying the indirect costs of research activities to safeguard the sustainable development of these research activities and the cultivation of talent. 4. The transparency and normativity of research funding must be improved to strengthen the supervision of civil society. 5. An effectiveness evaluation and feedback system must be established for research funding distribution, and priorities for fund usage must be reconsidered. 6. The concentration of research funds is only a short-term approach; a more macroscopic plan is required for the long-term development of research funding. Originality/value No previous studies have investigated the dual support system and performance-based research funding system in the United Kingdom and proposed suggestions to resolve the problems associated with higher education research funding in Taiwan. This study further clarified the distribution mechanism in the United Kingdom and provides a reference for strengthening related policy making in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：77-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2502.034篇名：《書評》－對於主動公民的解構與重建：評《在學校與社會之中學習民主》並列篇名：BOOK REVIEW ON LEARNING DEMOCRACY IN SCHOOL AND SOCIETY: EDUCATION, LIFELONG LEARNING AND THE POLITICS OF CITIZENSHIP作者：陳淑敏(Amy Shu-Min Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：113-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2502.045篇名：以心智習性為主之數學教科書內容比較研究並列篇名：COMPARISON OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL MATHEMATICS TEXTBOOKS BASED ON HABITS OF MIND作者：陳嘉皇(Chia Huang Chen)關鍵字：幾何圖形;教科書;心智習性;線對稱;plane figures;textbooks;habits of mind;line of symmetry期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的　本研究旨在透過分析教科書內容，瞭解國小高年級階段教科書設計的幾何圖形主題包含的心智習性類型和比例為何？並比較幾何圖形主題之特色，提供教學實務應用。研究設計／方法／取徑　資料蒐集與分析採質、量併陳方式，針對國內南一、翰林與康軒三版本教科書有關幾何圖形內容進行分析，以「題」為記錄單位，將課本的佈題依據分析類目進行分類計數。依次計算三套教科書中幾何圖形主題之單元數，在心智習性類型：一般化、關係的推理與探索不變性之題數與百分比；並針對心智習性類型之佈題作質性描述與分析。研究發現或結論　一、三版本之幾何圖形主題心智習性的內容，以關係的推理和探索不變性兩項數學心智習性為主，兩心智習性合計比例約在89 至94%，三版本教科書彼此之間比例相差不大。二、N 版教科書在提供命名、單位換算、物件形體變化和轉換等內容，比例較其他版本多；H 版在辨識與分類、描述特徵關係和利用公式運算解題等內容比例最高；K 版在進行物件組合與分解操作、繪圖等心智習性的內容比例最高。三、K 版教科書特色為：透過鏡射理解線對稱圖形定義，操作與觀察實物理解等周長不等面積之圖形變化，應用圓概念之生活工具實測距離，提供示例建立平行四邊形與三角形面積關係；H版特色為：利用全等三角形各角組成平角瞭解三角形內角的和，利用圓圖形部分與整體關係介紹圓心角，提供繪圖步驟指導放大與縮小圖之實作；N 版特色為：利用幾何圖形折疊實作，探討線對稱現象，運用釘板教導線對稱圖形的繪製，利用顏色的扣條彰顯圖形特徵，工具測量探索圓周率、圓周和直徑的關係，圓規檢視與驗證扇形特徵。研究原創性／價值　擴展先前研究集中在教科書之單元數、題數、表徵比較分析的主題和範圍，將重點轉移至對教科書內容有關認知成分的探討，提供不同的研究領域和觀點；研究者並對日後研究與教學實務提出建議，作為精進教科書比較分析之參考。英文摘要：Purpose The purpose of this study was to analyze the contents of textbooks regarding the topic of plane figures. The mainly focus was to explore the habit of mind subject and further to compare the characteristics of several textbooks from different publishers for reference in teaching practice. Design/methodology/approach Quantitative statistics and qualitative descriptions were used to analyze the contents of the three textbooks. Findings The research found the main two focus of three textbooks were the reasoning with relationships and investigating invariants, and the proportions of these two habits of mind in the contents were ranging from 89% to 94% in three textbooks. Furthermore, Textbook N offers the most content regarding nomenclature, unit conversion, and the variations and conversions of plane figures more than the other two textbooks. Textbook H provides explanations regarding recognition and classification, describes relationships among characteristics, and uses formulas to solve problems. Textbook K contains the most content regarding drawing and composition and decomposition of figures. Additionally, Textbook K uses mirror reflections to explain symmetric figures, manipulates and observes figures to explain that perimeter does not equal area, practices circle concepts to measure distance, and provides examples to establish the relationship between the areas of parallelograms and triangles. Textbook H applies congruent triangles to explain that the angles within a triangle form a straight angle, uses the relationships between parts and wholes in circles to explain central angles, and explains the enlarging and reducing of figures via drawing procedures. On the other hand, Textbook N practices the folding of figures to explore symmetry, uses pegboards to teach how symmetric shapes are drawn, uses colors and buckles to accentuate figure characteristics, applies instruments to measure and explain the relationship among PI, circumference, and diameter, and examines and verifies the characteristics of sectors using a compass. Originality/value The research extend the findings of previous studies on investigating the number of units and the theme and scope of characterization, shift focus to explore the cognitive components in textbooks, and provide research in different fields and perspectives. Suggestions are provided for future research, educational practices, and the improvement of textbook comparison and analysis.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2501.016篇名：INVESTIGATING CHINESE EDUCATIONAL LEADERS' CONFUCIAN ETHICS AND VALUE ORIENTATIONS IN A TRANSNATIONAL LEADERSHIP PROGRAM並列篇名：從跨國領導課程探索中國教育領袖的儒家倫理及價值取向作者：彭新強(Nicholas Sun-Keung Pang);王婷(Ting Wang)關鍵字：leadership preparation;leadership strategy;Confucianism;value orientation;transnational program;ethics and values;Chinese culture;領導培訓;領導策略;儒家思想;價值取向;跨國課程;倫理與價值;中國文化期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Purpose Scant empirical research has explored the perceived practices of Confucian ethics and values in educational management and leadership in China. Based on a conceptual framework, this study compared the personal values of a group of Chinese educational leaders and those espoused by their working institutions. This study aimed to determine whether the Confucian ethics and values of hierarchical relationships, collectivism, humanism, and self-cultivation continue to be emphasized in contemporary Chinese educational institutions. Design/methodology/approach A standardized instrument, the Institutional Values Inventory, with 53 value statements, was used to assess educational leaders' value orientations in their respective institutions. The subjects of the study were a group of 67 Chinese educational leaders enrolled in an Australian transnational leadership program in Zhejiang Province, China. Findings The major findings show that the educational leaders had a higher regard for collectivism, humanism, and self-cultivation than their institutions in how an education institution should be operated. Interestingly, hierarchical relationship was the most important institutionally espoused value which also constituted the least favored value held by the individual educational leaders. Originality/value This study sheds light on leadership roles in enhancing productivity, effectiveness, and performance, and contributes to the field of educational leadership and effectiveness research through exploring the existence of Confucian ethics and values in leadership practices, especially in Chinese cultural contexts.英文摘要：研究目的　鑑於過往探討中國教育領導之儒家倫理和價值取向的實證研究十分貧乏，本研究藉著有關的理念架構，研究一組中國教育領袖的個人及其機構的價值取向。本研究旨在檢視當代中國教育機構是否仍然注重儒家倫理的價值觀，以及評估教育領導及其機構在日常管理工作中，在「等級關係」、「集體主義」、「人文主義」和「自我修養」等價值的注重程度。研究設計／方法／取徑　本研究制定了一套具有53 項價值陳述的機構價值量表（IVI）的標準工具，以評估教育領袖在日常的管理環境下的價值取向。而研究之對象為67 位參加了在中國浙江省舉行的澳洲跨國領導碩士課程中的教育領袖。研究發現或結論　主要研究結果顯示，與營運教育機構相比，教育領袖在個人層面上更推崇集體主義、人文主義和自我修養這三個方面。而有趣的是，等級關係是機構所擁護的最重要的價值，卻同時是最不受個人所青睞的價值。研究原創性／價值性　透過探索現有儒家倫理和領導實踐中之價值，本研究揭示了在中國文化背景下教育領導在促進生產、效能和績效方面的職能; 以及推動了教育領導與效能研究領域的發展。起始頁-結束頁：45-78資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2501.027篇名：TEACHER PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS AND USE OF TEACHING STRATEGIES AT SCHOOLS IN GOOD STANDING VERSUS FAILING SCHOOLS並列篇名：從教師角度研究教學策略在信譽良好學校及信譽不良學校的實施及有效性作者：黃金雁(Jinyan Huang);Kurt J. Minervino關鍵字：effective schools;instructional strategies;generalizability theory;effectiveness of teaching;likelihood of implementation;有效學校;教學策略;概化理論;教學有效性;實施可能性期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Purpose The purpose of this quantitative study was to examine K-12 teacher perceptions about the instructional strategies in terms of the likelihood that they would implement in their classroom teaching as well as the effectiveness of these instructional strategies in both schools in good standing and schools not in good standing. Design/methodology/approach Using SPSS and generalizability theory analyses, this study examined how 73 teachers at a variety of public K-12 schools (i.e., schools in good standing and schools not in good standing) in Western New York would employ and evaluate the perceived effectiveness of 13 teaching strategies. Findings The results show that some instructional strategies are more likely to be utilized and perceived to be more effective in high performing schools; the same should be employed at schools that are not in good standing. Policy implications for continued professional development and implementation of highly effective teaching practices can be made and substantiated by the statistical results of this study. Originality/value The results of this study have important educational policy implications. It is suggested that the State Education Department increases funding to schools which are not in good standing to allow for more resources to assist with the diversified needs of their student population.英文摘要：研究目的　本量化研究從K-12 教師角度分析在信譽良好學校及信譽不良學校實施各種教學策略的有效性及可能性。研究設計／方法／取徑　本研究使用SPSS 和概化理論分析了來自紐約州西部公立學校（含信譽良好學校及信譽不良學校）73 名K-12 教師實施13 種教學策略的可能性及有效性。研究發現或結論　研究結果表明在信譽良好學校某些教學策略更易實施且更有效；這些策略應同樣在信譽不良學校實施。本研究統計結果暗示應制定持續職業發展及實施有效教學策略政策。研究原創性／價值性　本研究對教育政策制定有重要意義。紐約州教育部應該增加對不良學校的教育經費撥款，使之享有更多教育資源來滿足學生不同的需求。起始頁-結束頁：79-107資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2501.038篇名：APPLYING THE ACTION MODEL/CHANGE MODEL SCHEMA IN PLANNING THE LEARNING COMMUNITY PROGRAM IN TAIWAN並列篇名：應用行動模式／改變模式之圖式規劃臺灣的學習共同體方案作者：潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Wendy Pan);陳惠次(Huey T. Chen)關鍵字：action model;change model;program evaluation;leadership for learning;learning community;行動模式;改變模式;方案評鑑;學習領導;學習共同體期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Evaluation is often the final step in running social betterment programs. For improvement, evaluation findings inform program planners and stakeholders about program shortcomings. However, interest has recently grown in applying evaluation tools and principles to programs from the design stage, to improve planning. We discuss the application of a relatively new evaluation tool, the action model/change model schema, for guiding the planning of a large-scale education program, the Learning Community under Leadership for Learning (Learning Community Program) in Taiwan and serving as a framework for evaluation at the same time. We organized work-group meetings for the development of an action model/change model schema for the Learning Community Program. The participants discussed the components of the schema and how they related to the program, as well as the lessons learned from the experience of developing the schema. Content analysis was applied to the qualitative data collected during the work-group meetings. The participants indicated that the schema provided an effective platform for discussing and developing the program plan. The schema also stimulated critical thinking, helped identify the major components of the program, and provided a holistic guide for the evaluation design. The action model/change model schema is a relatively new tool used by evaluators to assist stakeholders in describing or designing a program more effectively. Few published articles discuss its applications in public health programs. This study investigated the application of the schema to an education program outside the United States. The lessons learned from this application can promote the schema as an effective tool for planning and designing the evaluation of education and other programs, as well as encourage the use of evaluation planning tools for strengthening program designs in the future.英文摘要：評鑑通常在促進方案改進的歷程中是最後一個步驟，評鑑結果可以提供方案計劃者與利害關係人了解方案缺失，以便在下一階段謀求改善。不過，近來在設計階段即運用評鑑工具與原則以改進方案計劃的歷程上，有日益繁增的興趣。在本文，我們討論了一個較為新近發展的評鑑工具－行動模式／改變模式，作為引導臺灣一項大型教育方案－學習領導下的學習共同體（簡稱學習共同體方案）的規劃，同時也作為評鑑架構之用。我們組織了工作小組會議發展學習共同體的行動模式／改變模式之圖式（schema）。在會議中，參與者討論了圖式中的要素、要素與方案的關連，以及從圖式的發展中所習得的經驗。而針對會議中蒐集的質性資料，採內容分析法進行分析。經過整個圖式發展的過程後，參與者表示行動模式／改變模式之圖式提供了一個討論與發展方案計畫的有效平台，激發了批判性思考，有助於確認方案的主要要素，且提供了評鑑設計一個整全性的引導。該圖式是一個較為新近發展的工具，能俾利評鑑者與利害關係人清楚描繪方案或設計方案，只是目前在少數發表的論文中僅見其應用於公共健康方案。故而，本研究所獲得的結果，一方面可提升教育與其他方案使用該圖式進行方案計劃與評鑑設計，另一方面對於未來在評鑑計劃工具的運用上，亦有鼓勵作用。起始頁-結束頁：109-131資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2501.049篇名：由經濟學的觀點到政治學的關注：評《高等教育財政的政治經濟學》一書並列篇名：BOOK REVIEW ON ”THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCE: THE POLITICS OF TUITION FEES AND SUBSIDIES IN OECD COUNTRIES, 1945-2015”作者：劉秀曦(Hsiu-Hsi Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：133-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2501.0501篇名：以學童為對象之遊戲式漢字學習系統並列篇名：Game-Based System for Pupils' Chinese Character Learning作者：劉玟毅(Wen-Yi Liu);陳志洪(Zhi-Hong Chen)關鍵字：手寫;遊戲式學習;漢字學習;handwriting;game-based learning;Chinese character learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：漢字本身具有複雜的形體結構，必須累積大量的字形或手寫經驗方能達到漢字精熟，然而，學習者普遍對書寫漢字欠缺動機，加上難以維持書寫興趣，使得漢字學習面臨諸多挑戰。本研究以寵物同伴、開放學習者模型與舞臺展演作為設計原則，開發遊戲式漢字學習系統－文字獸，將漢字部首角色化，並探討漢字學習過程中，此遊戲系統對學習者學習成效、動機與興趣之影響。本研究採用準實驗研究法之不相等控制組設計，參與者為48位國小三年級學生，控制組23位使用純學習系統，實驗組25位使用遊戲式學習系統進行漢字學習活動。研究結果發現：一、雖然兩組學習成效皆有進步，但兩組並無顯著差異；二、實驗組於學習動機的「注意」面向顯著高於控制組；三、實驗組於學習興趣的「延趣」面向顯著高於控制組。英文摘要：Since Chinese character possess complicated structure, a great mount of handwriting experience is essential to learning Chinese characters. However, young learners often lack motivation for writing Chinese characters, and are hard to maintain their writing interest. In order to help them overcome their learning difficulties, a game-based Chinese character learning system, called CharacterMonster, is developed based on three design principles: Animal companions, open learner models, and learning stages. The purpose of this study is to investigate the effects of game-based system on young learners' learning achievement, motivation, and interest. The study used a quasi-experimental between-group design, where 48 third graders participated in the experiment. Participants in the control group (n = 23) used a learning system and those in the experiment group (n = 25) used a game-based learning system. The results indicated that: (1) Young learners in both groups gained increased learning achievement but no significant difference was found. (2) Young learners in the experimental group had more increased motivation in the ”attention” than those in the control group. (3) Young learners in the experimental group had higher interest in the ”extension” than those in the control group.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20171009040012篇名：透過同儕回應寫作環境培養國小學生的讀者意識並列篇名：Cultivating Primary Students' Audience Awareness in Peer Response Writing Environment作者：廖長彥(Calvin Chang-Yen Liao);陳秉成(Bing-Cheng Chen);張菀真(Wan-Chen Chang);陳德懷(Tak-Wai Chan)關鍵字：同儕回應;自我修改;線上寫作;讀者意識;peer response;self-revising;online writing;audience awareness期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：在國小寫作活動中，學生作文的讀者通常只有教師，缺少與其他讀者互動的機會，可能導致學生缺乏讀者意識，即學生在寫作時不會預設文章的可能讀者。因此，本研究在寫作過程中加入同儕回應活動，提供學生來自真實讀者的同儕回應，讓學生與同儕讀者進行面對面與線上的同儕回饋互動，以了解其對學生讀者意識的影響。本研究對象為110位國小四年級學生，分為同儕回應組與個人寫作組，進行為期一學期共四次的寫作活動。兩組學生先進行「讀促創」活動，完成文章初稿；接著同儕回應組學生進行「聊促修」活動、個人寫作組學生進行「自我修改」活動。為了比較兩組學生讀者意識的差異，本研究蒐集讀者意識的前後測、閱讀與寫作自我覺察問卷，並抽樣12位學生在模擬寫作過程進行訪談。研究結果顯示，透過同儕回應活動，可幫助學生提升寫作的讀者意識。相較於個人寫作組，同儕回應組學生具有較高的比例認為其他同學為讀者，且較能嘗試從讀者的角色來修改自己的文章。故同儕回應寫作環境的搭設能讓國小學生在心中建立新的讀者觀點，從需依賴同學所扮演的真實讀者，成長為自身能依需求而假想不同的虛擬讀者。英文摘要：Primary students usually can't attend to the informational needs of their readers because they may lack audience-awareness in writing. The purpose of this study is to improve elementary school students' audience awareness through providing feedback for their writing products by real readers in online peer response writing environment. Hence, this study adopted peer response activity in students' writing process to help them aware the existing of the readers and reinforce audience-awareness. The participants were 110 fourth grade students assigned to peer-response group and independent-writing group. Two groups produced their drafts by ”reading for creating” activity, but revised their drafts by different methods, respectively ”talking for revising” and ”self-revising.” An audience awareness test was used as a pretest and posttest to evaluate the effect of peer-response on students' audience awareness. Through the questionnaire to compare the two groups in the difference of audience awareness. Furthermore, 12 students participated in an interview in a simulated writing process. The results indicated that significant effects on audience-awareness were found in favor of the peer-response group. In contrast to the independent-writing group, peer-response group students could regard not only their teacher but also other students as their audiences. Besides, peer-response activity facilitates peer-response group students to revise their articles from the role of the reader in the writing process. By providing opportunities for students to face real audiences and receive word-base feedback, it helps students find out various new reader perspectives. In the process, students revised their writing products based on virtual readers, their need, rather than real readers, their classmates. Overall, the writing environment and the activity ”talking for revising” promote students develop audiences' awareness in comparison with the self-writing model.起始頁-結束頁：25-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20171009040023篇名：Adopting Electronic Annotations in Online Collaborative Reading Activities of Taiwanese Elementary-Aged Learners of English並列篇名：臺灣國小英語學習者在線上合作閱讀活動使用數位註記之研究作者：余立棠(Li-Tang Yu)關鍵字：collaborative reading;elementary school students;online annotations;second language;合作閱讀;國小學童;線上註記;第二語言期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Advances in computer technology have transformed annotations from paper-based to digital forms, allowing readers to take electronic notes for interaction and collaboration with other readers. However, little research has been conducted to explore how second-language learners of English, especially elementary-aged students, perform online collaborative reading activities that involve electronic annotations. Thus, the present study examines two classes of fifth graders (N = 54) that were assigned to either an individual-annotation group as a control group or a collaborative-annotation group as an experimental group. A mixed method was used to analyze the content of the students' electronic annotations, perceptions of usefulness and enjoyment of using annotation for reading activities, and responses to text-based recall interviews about their reading processes. The findings show that both annotation groups used annotations to perform various functions that fell into nine types. Additionally, the collaborative-annotation group appreciated annotation-making significantly more than the individual-annotation group, regardless of the similar perceptions both groups expressed about the usefulness of making annotations. Both groups provided varied responses about the advantages and disadvantages of annotation-making and why they made annotations or not. Particularly the collaborative-annotation students expressed their reasons to respond to peers or not. Possible factors impacting the willingness to make annotations were considered, such as student readiness for such tasks, the type of reading texts, and student preferences for and perceptions of using technology tools. Implications for the use of annotations are discussed, with recommendations for adequate training in using electronic annotation tools and note-taking strategies, as well as an emphasis on group dynamics among students when they engage in collaborative reading activities.英文摘要：科技的進步讓註記從紙本轉變為數位化，讓讀者能使用電子筆記來和其他讀者互動、合作。然而，鮮少有研究探討英語為第二語言學習者，尤其是國小學童，在線上合作閱讀活動使用電子註記。基於此，本研究調查兩班共54位國小五年級學生，將他們分派在個別註記組（對照組）或合作註記組（實驗組）。研究分析採用混合式方法，探討學生電子註記內容、比較在閱讀活動中做註記的實用度和喜愛度，以及進行閱讀過程中基於文本之回憶訪談。研究結果發現，兩組學童的註記具有多項功能，可劃分為九類。此外，與個別註記組相較，合作註記組顯著地喜歡在閱讀過程中做註記，即使兩組對於註記的實用度看法相似。兩組提供許多做註記的優缺點，並說明他們為何會做或不做註記。合作註記組特別說明他們是否會回應同儕的原因。本研究亦找出影響學生做註記意願的可能因素，如閱讀任務的要求、所閱讀文體、學生對於科技使用的偏好和感受。文末討論研究啟示，如適當訓練學生使用電子註記之工具和學習筆記策略、在學生參與合作閱讀活動時，強調學生間團體動能。起始頁-結束頁：53-79資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20171009040034篇名：大型英語教學網站設計及使用者偏好分析並列篇名：Compiling a Comprehensive Website for English Teaching and Learning and Analyzing User Preference作者：楊定瑜(Ting-Yu Yang);劉貞妤(Chen-Yu Liu);劉玉涵(Yu-Han Liu);郭屹恩(Yi-En Kuo);蔡宜庭(Yi-Ting Tsai)關鍵字：中小學生;使用者偏好分析;英文學習平臺;elementary and junior high students;user preference analysis;English learning platform期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著世界各國間的交流愈加頻繁，英文已然成為國際間最為通用的語言之一，英文能力也成為學生增加國際競爭力的基礎要件之一，然而，臺灣學生的英語能力仍有相當大的進步空間，且英文能力的培養也應向下扎根，從中低年齡層的學生開始培養其英文基礎。因此，為增進臺灣中小學生之英語能力，本研究建置了包含多項課內外英文學習資源之Cool English英文線上學習平臺，透過結合教育性及娛樂性的活動與遊戲來激起學生對英文之學習動機與興趣，進而提升其英文水平。同時，本研究亦針對平臺之使用者數據進行分析，以探究學生與教師使用者於本平臺之使用情形及偏好，同時了解平臺未來改善方向，以更符合使用者之需求，進而輔助增進臺灣中小學生之英語能力。分析結果顯示，無論是學生或是教師都較偏好使用影片動畫與遊戲進行英語教學，而分析平臺的使用情形後也發現，使用者較著重於英文聽、讀技能之培養，對於英語說、寫技能則較不重視。本研究透過分析使用者行為了解使用者對於不同學習方式之偏好，並藉此資訊加以改善平臺之功能與內容，以更符合使用者之需求，達到增進臺灣中小學生英語能力之目標。英文摘要：With the increasing connections across countries in the world, English has become the most common language. Hence, developing English proficiency is one of the essential requirement for the students in Taiwan to join the global society. However, students in Taiwan still need great improvement on their English proficiency and it is especially important to start promoting the learning of English from young learners. Thus, to improve young learners' English proficiency in Taiwan, this study has built a comprehensive online platform for English teaching and learning especially for junior high and elementary school students. The design of this platform is to motivate students to learn English through a variety of educational and interesting activities, animations and games. Also, to better the service and the design of this learning platform, this study further explores the user preference based on the data collected from the student users and teacher users of this platform. The result shows that both students and teachers tend to use more videos, animations and games to facilitate English learning and teaching. In addition, it is also found that users focus more on training the receptive language skills, such as listening and reading, and less on the productive skills of speaking and writing. The finding reveals user preference, and this study thus can base on the finding and further improve the learning platform to better cater the user and to help improve the English proficiency of the students in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：81-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20171009040045篇名：歷史文化學習之數位體感遊戲開發與成效評估並列篇名：The Development and Learning Evaluation of Digital Somatosensory Game for Learning History and Culture作者：林昱廷(Yu-Ting Lin);林長信(Chang-Hsin Lin);施如齡(Ju-Ling Shih);曾家俊(Chia-Chun Tseng)關鍵字：GNS遊戲理論;遊戲式學習;體感遊戲;GNS game theory;game-based learning;kinetic game期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來，遊戲式學習被廣泛地應用在各個學科領域的教學中，成為目前資訊時代下重要的學習方式之一。本研究以數位遊戲式學習模型結合GNS遊戲理論，設計一款結合歷史文化學習的數位體感遊戲。遊戲設計多元的體感操作方式，讓學習者透過肢體與遊戲進行有意義的互動與學習。為了解不同的遊戲方式分別對學習成效的影響，本研究開發電腦與體感兩種版本遊戲，探討兩種遊戲方式間是否會造成學習成效的差異。另外，更透過GNS遊戲理論，進一步探究不同遊戲環境的學習者沉浸感受與專注面向的比較。研究結果顯示，電腦版遊戲與體感版遊戲的學習，皆能顯著提升學習成效，但對於學習成效無顯著差異的影響。體感遊戲相較於電腦遊戲而言，在遊戲性、敘事性及模擬性沉浸的感受是更佳的。英文摘要：In recent years, Game-based Learning was one of the important learning methods and was widely applied in different subjects. In this study, a historical digital kinetic game combining digital game-based learning model and GNS game theory was developed. The game has pluralistic somatosensory interactions, thus, students could learn learning contents through meaningful body motion. This study aimed to investigate the influence between different platforms and learning effectiveness. We developed two versions: kinetic and computer version to figure out the difference from two versions. Moreover, this study tried to compare users' flow with the GNS game theory while playing the two different versions. The results showed that through game-based learning, the learning effectiveness was not significant between two versions; however, both versions could increase the learning effectiveness significantly. Feedbacks to the kinetic version regarding the Gamism, Narrativism, and Simulationism aspects of the GNS game theory were better than the feedbacks to the computer version.起始頁-結束頁：109-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20171009040056篇名：臺灣大學生網路學習概念之研究並列篇名：A Study on Taiwanese Undergraduates' Conceptions of Internet-Based Learning作者：沈冠名(Kuan-Ming Shen);吳琦翎(Chi-Ling Wu);李旻憲(Min-Hsien Lee)關鍵字：大學生;現象圖學法;網路學習概念;undergraduate;phenomenography;conceptions of Internet-based learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在了解臺灣大學生之網路學習概念，並發展量化研究工具且進一步比較科學相關科系與非科學相關科系大學生在網路學習概念上的差異。研究過程分三階段，第一階段訪談40位大學生，並利用現象圖學法進行資料分析以了解大學生的網路學習概念，作為後續問卷發展的依據。第二階段採用400位大學生之樣本，進行問卷發展及因素分析與信、效度檢定。第三階段則根據科學相關科系及非科學相關科系大學生之問卷作答反應進行差異分析，以了解兩類學生在網路學習概念上之差異。研究結果顯示：臺灣大學生網路學習概念可區分為「單向學習」、「複習」、「資料搜尋」、「增加知識」、「自我調節學習」及「理解」六個概念。此外，本研究發展之「網路學習概念」問卷具有良好的信、效度。再者，科學相關科系大學生在「單向學習」及「資料搜尋」與非科學相關科系大學生有顯著差異。本研究並根據研究發現提出實務及未來研究上之建議。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to understand Taiwanese undergraduates' conceptions of Internet-based learning, and explore the differences of conceptions of Internet-based learning between science-related majors and non- science-related majors. The study consisted of three major parts. First, 40 undergraduates were interviewed to identify conceptions of Internet-based learning through phenomenographic method. Second, a questionnaire was developed, based on these interviews, and validated, with 400 students. Third, the collected data, including 143 science-related majors and 257 non-science related majors, were analyzed by independent sample t-test. The research findings indicated that six categories of conceptions of Internet-based learning were identified, including Internet-based learning as one-way learning, rehearsing, information searching, increase of knowledge, self-regulating, and understanding. In addition, the conceptions of Internet-based learning questionnaire developed in this study has good reliability and convergent validity. Moreover, there were significant differences in the two constructs of conceptions of Internet-based learning, one-way learning, and information searching, between science-related majored and non- science-related majored undergraduates.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170709030017篇名：科技如何輔助科學學習？高中生的概念繪圖分析並列篇名：How Would Technology Assist Science Learning? A Drawing Analysis of High School Students' Conception作者：蔡祐翔(Yu-Hsiang Tsai);葉睇(Heng-Yi Yeh);張欣怡(Hsin-Yi Chang)關鍵字：科技輔助科學學習;對學習的概念;繪圖分析;technology-assisted science learning;conception of learning;drawing analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以概念繪圖的方法，調查116位公立高中自然組學生對科技輔助科學學習的概念。研究分析學生的繪圖，得到七個主要概念類別：一、對於科技的表徵；二、學習活動的地點；三、學習活動的形式；四、學習活動的內容；五、學習活動的參與者；六、科技對學習的優勢；七、科技對學習的成效。顯示這些高中生對科技輔助科學學習的概念，不僅含有具體且描述性的、對科技物件、學習活動、地點、形式、內容與人物的表徵，亦能涵括到抽象且分析的、屬於科技對學習之本質的概念，包括科技對學習的優勢與成效之表徵。比較學生在理想與實際科技輔助科學學習概念的差異，發現學生在以下四個面向的部分子面向展現了顯著的差異：對科技的表徵、學習活動的形式、科技對學習的優勢和科技對學習的成效。研究結果顯示，學生的實際經驗與理想概念具有差距。本研究並根據研究結果提出建議與未來研究方向。英文摘要：This study employed a drawing analysis to investigate 116 senior high school students' conceptions of technology-assisted science learning. The coding and results suggest that the students' conceptions include seven categories: Representations of (1) technology, (2) location of learning, (3) types of learning activities, (4) content of learning, (5) participants of learning activities, (6) affordance of learning technology, and (7) effects of learning technology. The results indicate that the students' conceptions include not only descriptive objects and representations relating to learning events, but also analytic concepts involving the nature of learning technology. When comparing the differences between conceptions of ideal versus actual technology-assisted science learning, we found significant differences in students' conceptions in four categories, indicating the possible gaps between ideal and actual technology-assisted science learning and teaching. Implications and future investigations are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：23-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170709030028篇名：應用數位說故事環境支援學生建構科學解釋並列篇名：Applying Digital Storytelling Tools to Support Construction of Scientific Explanation作者：張家榮(Chia-Jung Chang);劉晨鐘(Chen-Chung Liu)關鍵字：多元表徵;科學解釋策略;數位說故事;學習科學方法;學習科學概念;multiple representations;scientific explanation strategies;digital storytelling;approaches to learning science;conceptions of learning science期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究應用數位說故事環境支援學生使用多元表徵建構科學解釋，探索學生在數位說故事環境中如何建構科學解釋，以及對學生的學習成效、學習科學概念和方法的影響。因此，本研究在教室課堂中進行「預測－觀察－解釋」的科學探究活動，蒐集42位學生在數位說故事環境中使用多元表徵建構的科學解釋、學習測驗及學習科學觀點問卷。結果發現，數位說故事環境對學生學習科學具有正面的效益，不僅支援學生使用多元表徵建構科學解釋，且以說故事方式能清楚地呈現學生建構科學解釋使用的策略，這些策略包含簡單生活經驗描述、參考資料總結、類推過程描述與分析過程描述。研究結果顯示，這樣的學習環境有助於提升學生科學學習成效，改善學生以記憶、為了考試、練習與計算的學習科學概念，提高學生以應用的觀點學習科學，以及促進學生使用深層策略和深層動機學習科學。最後，本研究根據實驗結果提出建議作為教師與未來研究的參考。英文摘要：The study applied a digital storytelling environment to support students in constructing scientific explanation using multiple representations. The purpose of this study is to explore how students construct their scientific explanation in the digital storytelling environment, and to investigate their learning performance, conceptions of and approaches to learning science. The study engaged students in a Prediction-Observation-Explanation (POE) inquiry learning activity, and analyzed their scientific explanations, learning tests, and their perceptions toward conceptions of and approaches to learning science during participating in the environment. The result showed the positive effect of the digital storytelling environment on learning science. The environment supported students to construct scientific explanation using different representations with multiple strategies: The study identified four significant strategies, including simple life experience description, referential data summarization, analogical process depiction, and analytical process depiction. It was also found that the environment enhanced students' science learning performance while reducing their tendency to consider learning sciences as memorizing, testing, calculating and practice. Moreover, the environment facilitated them to use deep strategy and motivation to learning science. The limitations of the results and suggestions for teachers and future research were discussed based on findings of this study.起始頁-結束頁：45-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170709030039篇名：社會性科學議題線上教學模組對高中生多元面向決策的影響並列篇名：The Influence of the Online Learning Module on the Multi-Perspective Decision-Making of High School Students作者：吳貞儀(Jen-Yi Wu);許瑛玿(Ying-Shao Hsu);張文馨(Wen-Xin Zhang);方素琦(Su-Chi Fang)關鍵字：決策能力;社會性科學議題;科學素養;視覺化工具;鷹架;decision-making ability;socio-scientific issue;scientific literacy;visualization tool;scaffold期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究依據證據導向的決策框架來發展社會性科學議題課程，利用網路探究學習平台將社會性科學議題所蘊含多元面向和理性決策的素材媒體和視覺化工具予以整合成線上教學模組。本研究探討此社會性科學議題線上教學模組的學習鷹架設計，對高中生多元面向決策的影響。從學生在各決策活動步驟填寫的線上學習單內容，歸類出四個考量立場的面向：一、目標利益的考量；二、顧及他人的考量；三、史蹟自然的考量；四、科技管理的考量。分析每個決策步驟中學生考量的立場面向類型和多寡，以及決策步驟之間立場面向的變化與對應情況。研究發現，此教學模組提供決策框架、視覺化工具和文字提示等鷹架協助，幫助學生在辨識議題、建立判準、蒐集證據和確認決策等步驟有多元面向的考量，並相互對應後做成決定。然而，部分學生無法就其重視的面向來蒐集相對應的證據，建議課程設計除了在決策框架和判準條件提供鷹架協助之外，未來可加強引導蒐集對應證據的鷹架設計，協助學生形成具有證據的決定，並提升學生針對社會性科學議題進行證據導向決策的能力。英文摘要：With the evidence-based decision-making framework, this study developed an online learning module for a socio-scientific issue. The materials and scaffolds about the multi-perspectives and rational decision-making of the socio-science issue were integrated into the online learning module. This study explored the influence of the scaffolds on the multi-oriented decision-making of high school students. Students' answers in the worksheets of the decision-making activities were categorized into four perspectives: (1) goal-profit, (2) concern-for-other people, (3) thought-for environment; (4) administration. Students' categories and numbers of perspectives in each stage of decision-making, and the alignments of perspectives between stages were analyzed. The analysis results showed that the decision-making framework and scaffolds in the learning module help students to recognizing the decision problem, generating criteria, collecting and analyzing data, and making a decision with reasoning from multi-perspectives, and their perspectives could be consistent during the decision-making process. However, some students are unable to collect data as evidence corresponding to their consideration. To promoting students' evidence-based decision-making ability, it is suggested that in addition to providing assistance in the decision-making framework and the judgment of criteria, the curriculum design should strengthen the guidance for students collecting the corresponding evidence to form an evidence-based decision.起始頁-結束頁：69-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201707090300410篇名：機器人課程教材鷹架對高中生未來關鍵學習能力的影響並列篇名：The Impacts of Material Scaffoldings on Students' Learning Competencies in High School Robotics Curriculum作者：趙嘉浩(Chia-Hao Chao);梁至中(Jyh-Chong Liang);蔡孟蓉(Meng-Jung Tsai)關鍵字：教材鷹架;機器人課程;關鍵學習能力;instructional scaffolding;robotics curriculum;learning competency期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來，機器人在教育上的應用被認為是具有提升學生五大關鍵學習能力（批判思考能力、問題解決能力、溝通討論能力、協同合作能力及創造創新能力）的有效課程之一，但文獻上關於機器人學習課程對學生這五項關鍵學習能力的影響仍不十分清楚。本研究透過機器人課程中不同程度的鷹架教材，探究其對高中生關鍵學習能力的影響。研究樣本為臺北市某普通高中選修機器人課程的兩個班級，共63位學生，實驗課程總計15週，其中一個班級提供高程度鷹架的輔助教具，另一個班級則提供低程度鷹架的輔助教具，其他所有課程與教學活動均相同。本研究以關鍵學習能力量表進行實驗前、後測，並於課程結束後，選取部分學生進行焦點訪談。研究結果發現，兩組學生在批判思考能力和問題解決能力兩面向上並無顯著差異；然而，在協同合作能力、創造創新能力，以及溝通討論能力三個面向上則發現低程度鷹架教材反而具有較正面的影響，焦點訪談資料分析亦佐證此一發現。此研究結果可對未來機器人課程與教材設計提供相關建議。英文摘要：In recent years, robotics education has been regarded as a potential approach to enhance students' five learning competencies (i.e., critical thinking, problem solving, collaboration, communication, as well as creative thinking). However, empirical studies regarding the impacts of robotic curricula on learners' learning competencies are still very limited. In this study, we used two different scaffolding materials to explore the impact of the robotics teaching materials on students' learning competencies. The sample of this study was 63 high school students who enrolled in a 15-weeks robotics course, intact in two classes, in a public high school of Taipei. The two scaffolding materials were randomly assigned to the two classes. A questionnaire was used to assess students’ five learning competencies before and after the robotics curriculum. ANCOVAs were used to compare the five competencies between the two groups. The results showed that no significant difference was found in critical thinking and problem solving competencies between the two groups. However, the low scaffolding group showed significantly higher competencies in collaboration, communication and creative thinking. The result was confirmed by a follow-up focused interview. The results of this study can provide some suggestions for future teaching material designs for the robotics education.起始頁-結束頁：95-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201707090300501篇名：競選期間選民對候選人評價的變化：以2012年台灣總統選舉為例並列篇名：Change in Voters' Candidate Evaluation during a Political Campaign: A Case Study of the 2012 Presidential Election in Taiwan作者：蕭怡靖(Yi-ching Hsiao)關鍵字：政治競選;候選人評價;政黨認同;political campaign;candidate evaluation;party identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：24卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：競選期間，隨著投票日的接近，選民暴露在資訊愈趨多元與豐富的政治環境中，同時也因選情逐漸緊繃，各項競選策略紛紛出現，強化台灣政黨對立的政治氛圍。這意味著選民的政治態度將隨著投票日的到來，不但立場愈明確、好惡更明顯，同時也將與自身的政黨認同更為緊密連結。本文以2012年台灣總統選舉為例，利用選前「滾動式橫斷面電話訪問」(rolling cross-sectional telephone interview)，針對選民的候選人評價進行分析。研究發現，隨著競選活動的進行，愈接近投票日，選民對候選人的情感好惡確實愈趨明確與對立，尤其對於關注選舉的選民愈是如此。此外，選民對候選人的情感好惡，乃至於對總統施政滿意度，也隨著投票日的接近，與自身政黨認同的關連性顯著提升，證實了競選期間政黨認同影響力的強化。英文摘要：The political context to which the electorate is exposed is filled with a variety of political information and becomes more and more competitive during political campaigns. This seems to mean that a given campaign facilitates the electorate to create for itself clearer and more drastic political preference based on party identification up to voting day. The author utilizes the pre-election survey data from rolling cross-sectional telephone interviews during the 2012 Taiwan's presidential election to detect the influence of party identification on candidate evaluation during the political campaign. It was found that the electorate had a significantly clear preference between the main candidates up to voting day, especially for the more involved voters. Furthermore, the correlations between voters' party identification and its political attitudes including candidate evaluation and government performance become increasingly tighter as voting day approaches. In conclusion, this study proves the reinforcement of the party identification effect during political campaigns and suggests that it would be worthy to investigate it in a different political context in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2017.24.02.01-382篇名：政治知識的性別差異：測量內容之探討並列篇名：Gender Difference in Political Knowledge: A Measurement Perspective作者：林瓊珠(Chiung-chu Lin);徐永明(Yuan-ming Hsu);黃秀端(Shiow-duan Hawang)關鍵字：女性政治人物政治知識;制度政治知識;政治知識;性別差異;political knowledge of female politicians;political knowledge of institutions;political knowledge;gender difference期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：24卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文主要從測量角度，探討政治知識的性別差異是否存在，此性別差距是否會因題目設計而縮小，以及導致差異存在的因素為何。本文分析台灣選舉與民主化調查2013年的調查資料(TEDS2013)，將政治知識區分為女性政治人物、制度知識、以及總體政治知識題組，以迴歸模型針對性別間的政治知識差異進行分析。本文發現無論何種類型內容的政治知識題目，男性政治知識確實顯著高於女性，但是本文也發現，女性在女性政治人物認知題型的答題情形優於其他類型，此顯示當政治世界的女性成分增加時，有助於女性政治意識提升，縮小兩性間的知識差距。導致兩性差異存在的可能因素，主要包括教育程度、媒體接觸、政治興趣、婚姻狀況、以及對總統表現滿意度。教育程度愈高、以報紙為主要資訊來源、已婚、對政治愈有興趣、對總統表現愈不滿意，有助提升政治知識。英文摘要：This paper aims to study the gender difference on political knowledge from a measurement perspective. It asks if the gender difference becomes smaller when the questionnaires are more related to female essentials, and it further examines the factors that lead to gender difference. By using survey data from the TEDS2013, this paper breaks down the concept of political knowledge into three categories: knowledge of female politicians, knowledge of political institutions, and overall political knowledge. Based on the results from multiple regression models, the findings are clear that males have a better political knowledge than females in general. Females, however, demonstrated a better performance on the knowledge of female politicians. This shows an increasingly clear pattern of female political knowledge when the questionnaires are more closely associated with female essentials. The factors that lead to gender differences include the level of education, exposure to newspapers, political interest, marital status, and the degree of satisfaction with the president's performance. People with a higher level of education, with more exposure to newspapers, with a greater degree of political interest, those who are married, and express less satisfaction with the president's performance display higher political knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：39-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2017.24.02.39-633篇名：住宅電話與手機雙底冊調查的組合估計：以2016總統選舉預測為例並列篇名：Post-Stratified Estimation Procedures for the Dual Frame Telephone Survey in Taiwan: The Case of the 2016 Presidential Election作者：張鐙文(Teng-wen Chang);黃東益(Tong-yi Huang);洪永泰(Yung-tai Hung)關鍵字：涵蓋率;唯手機族;雙底冊電話調查;事後分層組合估計;2016總統選舉預測;coverage rate;cellphone-only;dual frame telephone survey;post-stratified estimation procedures;the 2016 presidential election forecasting期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：24卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著資通訊技術的進步與人們生活型態的轉變，使得傳統住宅電話調查面臨愈來愈多限制。尤其在資通訊載具（如手機、網路電話及App等）漸趨多元的情況之下，單一調查工具涵蓋率不足的問題逐漸明顯，而如何確保樣本代表性和對母體推估的準確性則成為當代電話調查最嚴峻的挑戰。為補救代表性的問題，過去台灣電話民調實務界主要是使用戶籍資料作為加權的依據。但愈來愈多的研究證實，這樣的方式不僅過度簡化不同人口特徵族群的差異性，且無法解決單一調查工具涵蓋率不足的問題。爰此，本研究提出組合估計的策略，嘗試結合住宅電話與手機的調查資料，並納入不同電話使用族群的權值計算，以改善傳統單一電話調查工具在涵蓋率及樣本代表性的不足。最後，透過2016年總統大選的電話調查資料進行檢證。結果顯示，在考量「樣本涵蓋率」的前提之下，若從整體估計差距的角度觀察，「住宅電話調查為主，唯手機族資料為輔」應是最佳的權值組合方式，而「完整的住宅電話及手機調查」與「手機調查為主，唯住宅電話族資料為輔」則是次佳的權值組合。換句話說，「最經濟又實惠」的策略就是進行住宅電話調查並搭配手機調查中的唯手機族。如此一來，所得的調查資料將可兼顧主要電話使用族群的特質，又能夠有效地降低調查的成本。英文摘要：The advancement of information and communication technologies has greatly changed the lifestyle of people while using landline surveys in soliciting precise public opinion is becoming limited. As people use a variety of devices such as cellphones, internet phones and APPs in daily communication, problems of insufficient population coverage arise from relying only on landline phones to reach respondents. Therefore, a daunting task in the telephone polling industry is to ensure sample representation for obtaining precise population parameters. To achieve such an objective, a common practice by pollsters in Taiwan is to use household data as weighting statistics. Many cases, however, have shown this practice to be inappropriate. To solve the above-mentioned problem, this study proposes an estimation method based on a dual frame survey that combines landline phones and cellphones. We further use data from the 2016 presidential election to compare different estimations based on a dual frame survey. Our results demonstrate that a ”landline survey supplemented by cellphone-only” is the best combination, considering sample coverage and estimation error. The second-best alternatives are ”cellphone survey supplemented by landline-only” and ”use both landline and cellphone.” In other words, ”the most economical and efficient” strategy of a dual frame survey is to conduct a traditional landline survey and incorporating cellphone-only respondents. The data collected in such combination not only reflect the characteristics of the population, but also cost much less than other strategies.起始頁-結束頁：65-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2017.24.02.65-964篇名：Politicized to Mobilize? A Longitudinal Study of First-Time Voters' Voting Intentions in Taiwan, 2004-2016並列篇名：政治化到動員？2004-2016年台灣首投族投票率的縱貫性研究作者：Karl Ho;Cal Clark;Alexander C. Tan關鍵字：young voters;participation;voting behavior;mobilization;first-time voters;年輕選民;參與;投票行為;動員;首投族期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：24卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Much has been made about the ”coming of age” of many Taiwanese young and new voters as an important factor contributing to the gratifying electoral result of the DPP and its pan-Green allies. The Taiwanese case, then, may be considered an aberration as the increased political activism among the younger Taiwanese voters stands in some contrast to the supposed apathy of their counterparts in the Western world. Indeed, this particular generation of young Taiwanese voters may have been ”politicized” so much so that they are also easily ”mobilized.” In this paper, we examine whether Taiwanese new voters are indeed politicized and whether their politicization translates to voting intentions. Using longitudinal TEDS surveys to detect common patterns of first-time voters' voting behavior, preliminary results from our multivariate analysis indicate that first-time voters are not different in likelihood of participating in voting compared to other voters. The subtle difference, however, resides on the viable options with which these young cohorts can identify. This can be part of the reason they are more supportive of the new parties than merely the traditional parties.英文摘要：近年台灣青年與新興選民的「崛起」，可視為是造成民進黨及泛綠陣營勝選的重要因素。西方國家的年輕選民多半政治冷漠，相較之下台灣的年輕選民政治積極性增高，算是一個異數。這一代台灣年輕選民，可能因為高度「政治化」，以致於更容易被「動員」。本篇文章探討：台灣新興選民是否受到「政治化」的影響，以及「政治化」是否能進而轉換為實質上的政治參與或投票行為。若以「台灣選舉與民主化調查」的縱貫性研究做為依據，探討首投族投票行為的常見模式，可以發現，首投族的投票意向與其他選民相比，並無太大的差異。他們的差異－儘管細微，取決於這些年輕人如何辨識不同的選項。這也可能是年輕人更為支持新政黨，而非傳統政黨的部分原因。起始頁-結束頁：97-115資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2017.24.02.97-1155篇名：Do Contacts Matter? Public Impressions of a Rising China in Taiwan並列篇名：接觸有效嗎？民<U+8846>對於崛起中國的普遍印象作者：吳重禮(Chung-li Wu)關鍵字：rising China;contact theory;group threat theory;image of China;social distance;中國崛起;接觸理論;團體威脅理論;中國印象;社會距離期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：The emergence of China as a first-tier world power is a critical issue both politically and economically, but what is often overlooked is how more frequent interaction with China influences public opinion. This study is aimed at assessing two competing approaches, ”contact” theory and ”group threat” theory, in an effort to understand how exposure to and contact with China influence Taiwanese citizens' impressions of China. More specifically, it focuses on how, as cross-Strait relations develop, the public in Taiwan may either have positive views or negative feelings toward China. Methodologically, in addition to the objective measurement of contact (exposure to China) employed in the previous literature, the paper uses a subjective measurement of contact (willingness to interact with China). This study analyzes both individual-level and aggregate-level datasets in the models; in doing this, it takes advantage of a 2014 nationwide telephone survey and considers the effects of the regional context. The findings demonstrate that the subjective measurement shows more variance in public opinion on China than the objective measure, and the contextual variables exert conditional influences upon Taiwanese people's overall disposition toward China. The results by and large confirm the validity of contact theory, but also indicate that it is too simplistic and straightforward, and therefore in need of revision. The data reveal that greater exposure is not enough to foster greater trust and cooperation between the two sides; it is increased willingness to interact that creates more favorable impressions.英文摘要：中國崛起成為世界重要的強權國家，就政治和經濟而言，這無疑是個關鍵課題，然而與中國更多的交流互動如何影響民眾觀感，這項議題仍有待探索。本文旨在檢證兩個相互競逐的觀點，亦即「接觸理論」(contact theory) 和「團體威脅理論」(group threat theory)，以試圖瞭解兩岸交流互動如何影響臺灣民眾對於中國的印象。更確切地說，本文聚焦於，隨著兩岸接觸益形頻繁密切之際，臺灣民眾對於中國的整體觀感，究竟產生正面效果還是負面認知？在研究方法方面，除了沿用既有學術文獻使用的客觀接觸測量（前往中國的次數）之外，本文採用主觀接觸測量（與中國互動的意願）。在研究模型方面，本文分析個人層級和集體層級的資料；前者為2014 年全國電話調查數據，後者則是縣市地區的脈絡效果。實證資料顯示，主觀接觸測量比客觀接觸測量更能解釋民眾的中國觀感；其次，地區脈絡變數對於臺灣民眾對於中國的整體認知，也有若干的解釋效果。整體而言，研究結果支持接觸理論的適用性，儘管如此，本文認為，該理論可能有流於簡化和直觀之虞，因此有其修訂之必要。相關數據證實，徒然增加雙方往來的頻繁次數，並不足以促進兩岸的信任和合作；反之，提升交流互動的主觀意願，始有助於提升彼此的正面觀感。起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2017.24.01.01-316篇名：總統選舉事件對股市之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Presidential Elections on Taiwan's Stock Market作者：陳怡諠(Yi-shuan Chen);卓翠月(Tsui-yueh Cho);白詩婷(Shih-ting Pai)關鍵字：總統選舉;不確定訊息假說;累積平均異常報酬率;presidential elections;Uncertain Information Hypothesis;Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文採用事件分析法，針對1996 年至2016 年開放民選後之的六次總統選舉結果，利用選前民調的差距是否顯著，將樣本區分為可預期和不可預期兩組，探討選舉結果對市場的影響。本文發現，不論選舉結果可否預期，選前因兩黨對峙的不確定性，使得選前均呈現顯著負報酬，而選後因不確定性降低出現顯著上升之調整行情，但不可預期組之正面調幅小於可預期組。再依據企業選前的表態區分為藍、綠概念股兩組，檢驗個別概念股與政黨輪替的選舉效應。結果發現，在歷屆的選舉事件中，選前會因民調的差距及投資人的偏好，而使預期敗選的政黨概念股選前出現較小之報酬，然整體事件期則產生較大之累積異常報酬，隱含臺灣股市投資人選前有高估壞消息傾向，使選後對壞消息之調整幅度顯著較大，實證結果支持不確定訊息假說。英文摘要：We use the event study approach to examine the impact of six direct presidential elections from 1996 to 2016 on the Taiwan stock market. Based on whether the pre-election polls show a significant winner or not, we separate all samples into expected and unexpected subsamples. We find a negative abnormal return during the pre-election windows and a positive abnormal return for the 30-day election period for the whole samples. However, the Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns (CAR) are not greater for the unexpected subsamples than they are for the expected subsamples, an outcome not consistent with the prediction of the Uncertain Information Hypothesis (UIH). Moreover, according to entrepreneurs' support for a specific candidate before the election dates, we divide their shares into the ”Kuomintang-party-concept” and the ”Democratic-Progressive-Party-concept” stocks. We investigate the election effect on these two concept stocks, as well as on their subsidiary company shares. Moreover, we find that the expected-losing-party stocks have a smaller CAR during the pre-event window but a greater CAR during the whole 30-day window than the expected-winning-party shares, as predicted by the UIH. These findings suggest that investors in the Taiwan stock market have a stronger reaction to bad news than to good news.起始頁-結束頁：33-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2017.24.01.33-607篇名：政黨形象與原住民投票抉擇並列篇名：Party Image and Indigenous Voting Choice: A Case Study of the 2016 Presidential Election作者：包正豪(Cheng-hao Pao)關鍵字：原住民選民;政黨形象;政黨認同;投票抉擇;indigenous voter;party image;party identification;voting choice期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：目前台灣社會對於原住民選舉政治的認識與理解，非常仰賴以深度訪談、民族誌等方法，甚至偏向強調「應然面」的規範性研究。這些研究豐富了我們對於原住民選舉行為的認識，但不同訪談對象與研究個案，加上詮釋角度的差異，雖然可以從不同觀點來理解原住民選舉政治，卻難以建立通則性解釋。本文作為國內學界首篇以量化實證研究方法探討政黨形象和原住民投票抉擇之間關係的研究，有助於增進對原住民投票行為的認識，並為未來相關研究奠定理論基礎。研究結果顯示，即便控制政黨認同，政黨形象對原住民選民投票抉擇的影響依然顯著。換言之，概念上，政黨形象與政黨認同確實有所不同，而各自對選民投票抉擇產生不同程度的影響。當政黨形象評價方向和政黨認同一致時，投票抉擇趨向一致，而當選民無特定政黨偏好時，由於民進黨的正面政黨形象是「重視原住民且持續有進步，並勇於改變現狀的政黨，年輕人比較有機會」，相較於國民黨的保守封建，且正面形象又是侷限於選民對該黨過往溫和執政的肯定，民進黨較能夠抓住「求新求變的新鮮感」，而使中立選民傾向將選票投給民進黨。英文摘要：Due to inherent difficulties of minority surveys, our understanding of indigenous election politics largely depends on qualitative studies. However, such studies usually lead to contradictory results because of different cases or interviewees. It is hard to develop a general explanation. This paper, as the very first one to study the relationship between party image and indigenous voting choice by implementing a quantitative method in Taiwan, can improve our understanding of indigenous voting behavior and lay a foundation for future relevant studies. The research results indicate that indigenous voting choice is influenced by party image. Party image affects voting choice significantly. Even under the condition of controlling party identification, the influence of party image on voting choice is still significant. In other words, party image is differs from party identification conceptually but both affect voting choice. This study found that when the direction of party image is the same as party identification, voting choice tends to be consistent with party image and party identification. However, for political neutrals, due to the fact that the DPP's party image is ”making progress, changing the status quo, and offering more opportunities to young people,” which is more attractive than the KMT's party ”conservative” image, they tend to vote DPP.起始頁-結束頁：61-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2017.24.01.61-968篇名：超越藍綠？政治版圖在2014年臺北市長選舉的新應用並列篇名：Transcending Ideological Barriers for Voting? New Applications of Political Territory Analysis in the 2014 Taipei City Mayoral Election作者：張順全(Shun-chuan Chang);莊文忠(Wen-jong Juang)關鍵字：政黨認同;政治極化;Mann-Kendall 檢定法;Theil-Sen 斜率推估法;變動點分析;political party identity;political polarization;Mann-Kendall test;Theil-Sen slope estimator;change-point detection期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：2014 年臺北市長選舉由一位過去偏向綠營，但選戰中既標榜白色力量，又不斷號召「One City One Family」的無黨籍候選人柯文哲醫師最後以壓倒性票數勝出。因而，臺北市已打破傳統壁壘分明、根深蒂固的藍綠政治版圖之說甚囂塵上。然而，「超越藍綠」出現在首善之都臺北市究竟是迷思抑或是事實？本研究為深究其代表意義，乃以臺北市藍綠政治版圖為基礎，引入多種分析趨勢變遷之無母數統計方法互為發凡，提出多項統計證據佐證，並演繹其在臺北市長選舉的新應用。申言之，本研究充分應用中央選舉委員會之總體選舉資料的特性，以臺北市各里為分析單位，使用集群分析展現臺北市的政治版圖。其後以Mann-Kendall 檢定法，據以定性分析國民黨候選人得票率在版圖內的時空相對變動趨勢，並以Theil-Sen 斜率推估法進行趨勢斜率的定量估算，再進一步評估變遷中顯著的改變點。最後以政治版圖為基礎，整合取自總體選舉資料之衍生變數，得到代表特定政黨或藍綠陣營吸票實力的相關訊息，同時觀察政黨催票的影響效果。研究結果除了發現2014 年臺北市長選舉結果的確出現超越藍綠的現象，更進一步討論表象背後真正的意涵。英文摘要：The 2014 Taipei City mayoral election was overwhelmingly won by a grass-roots candidate, Dr. Wen-je Ko, who has been regarded as ”Deep Green” in terms of Taiwan's political spectrum, but promoted the slogan ”One City One Family” for new white power in this campaign. The rooted voting behaviors described by traditional political territories in Taipei City were supposed to be on the verge of imminent collapse, and whether the signal of transcending ideological barriers for voting in this case was grounded in reality or myth, is still worth exploring. This study conducted several tests for trend analyses used in nonparametric statistics and interpreted new applications based on political territory in this mayoral election. Furthermore, this study has three primary innovative perspectives. First, based on the voting database from the Central Election Commission for election studies, this study can explain how to utilize the basic unit of household address, such as Li, for building political territories, and our models presented the grouping political spectrum structures of voting behaviors of voters living in Taipei City by clustering analysis. This study can also develop a more novel approach to the combination of domestic political territory research and trend analyses embedded in nonparametric statistics, such as the Mann-Kendall test, the Theil-Sen's slope estimator, and Pettit test statistics for change-point detection, which are all adapted to analyze the trend characteristics for changing voting behaviors in Taipei City. Finally, based on built political territories, and linked with relevant concepts of political polarization, political party identity, and allocation effects when political parties drum up votes, the research results can determine and gain insight into the transcending of ideological barriers for voting in the 2014 Taipei City mayoral election.起始頁-結束頁：97-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.2017.24.01.97-13201篇名：評論「建構跨法域（大陸與港澳地區）自由貿易區商事爭議解決機制之構想」作者：張顯超期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：103-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201703_60(1).00062篇名：書評－China Dreams: China's New Leadership and Future Impacts作者：陳宗巖期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：60卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：109-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201703_60(1).000701篇名：系統性樂悲觀之建構及其在身心適應之功能並列篇名：The Construction and Function of Systematic Optimism/Pessimism in Mental Adjustment作者：周芸安(Yun-An Chou);陳坤虎(Kun-Hu Chen)關鍵字：心理適應;功能性樂觀;防衛性悲觀;樂觀;Defensive pessimism;functional optimism;mental adjustment;optimism期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：49期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去普遍認為樂觀可為個體帶來較佳的身心適應，且亦能採取較主動的因應方式。然而過去學界對於「樂觀有利於個體身心適應」及「悲觀不利於個體身心適應」的觀點仍存有疑慮，例如Schwarzer（1994）認為「防衛性樂觀」可能會為個體帶來身心的損害。Cantor等人（1987）則認為「防衛性悲觀」雖會預期負面的結果，卻會採取行動避免負向結果，是一種可為個體帶來正面效益的悲觀型態。本研究認為，在思考樂觀或悲觀之特性時，不僅需考量正負向預期，亦需考量個體的因應型態為何。據此，本研究旨在以「正、負向預期」和「投入、脫離因應方式」兩向度，將樂觀與悲觀區分為「功能性樂觀」、「失能性樂觀」、「功能性悲觀」和「失能性悲觀」等四種型態，發展出「系統性樂悲觀量表」，並探討其特性及在身心適應中所扮演的功能。本研究以134名大學生為對象，以問卷調查法蒐集資料。研究結果顯示，本研究發展的「系統性樂悲觀量表」具有良好的信、效度，且不同的樂悲觀型態在不同的心理健康或行為指標上，扮演著不同的功能。其中，功能性樂觀最能預測生活滿意度；功能性悲觀最能預測憂鬱與焦慮症狀；失能性樂觀則最能預測拖延習慣。綜合上述，本研究結果有助於釐清了過去學界對於「樂觀有利於個體身心適應」及「悲觀不利於個體身心適應」觀點的疑慮。英文摘要：Optimists are individuals who expect good things to happen to them; pessimists are individuals who expect bad things to happen to them. Optimists and pessimists differ in several ways that have varying degrees of impact on their lives and adaptations. They differ in how they perceive stressed they encounter, and they differ in the manner with which they cope with life's difficulties. Past research generally considered optimism a character that brings individuals better physical and mental health, and more active coping strategies. For example, optimists differ from pessimists in the subjective well-being they enjoy when experiencing various kinds of adversity and difficulties. Optimists usually perceive lower stress and have better physical and mental health than pessimists (Chang & Farrehi, 2001; Iwanaga, Yokoyama, & Seiwa, 2004). Optimists also have lower degree of depressed and anxious levels while encounter life's difficulties. Besides, optimists more adopted active and proactive coping strategies than pessimists (Brissette, Scheier, & Carver, 2002). In other words, optimists are faster to accept the reality of a challenge to their current lives. They appear to engage in more focused, active coping when such efforts are likely to be productive. They are less likely to show signs of disengagement or giving up pursuit of their goals (Carver & Scheier, 2003). There is also evidence that optimism was related to better physical and mental health outcomes in certain circumstances (Carver & Scheier, 2001; Wrosch & Scheier, 2003). However, researchers still doubt about the perspectives of ”whether optimism is beneficial to mental adjustment” (Norem & Chang, 2002) and ”whether pessimism is not beneficial to mental adjustment” (Schwarzer, 1994; Wallston, 1994). For example, Schwarzer (1994) indicated that ”defensive optimism” might bring individuals physical and psychological harms. Cantor et al. (1987) considered ”defensive pessimism” as contributing to negative expectations, yet bring action to avoid potential risk. This study suggested that elucidating characters of optimism and pessimism should include the positive/negative expectations and the types of coping simultaneously. Different combinations of expectations and coping would demonstrate different working mechanisms in mental adjustment. However, past researchers although provide different concepts of optimism/pessimism (e.g., defensive optimism and defensive pessimism), lack of measuring tools to tackle with these concepts. Therefore, the goal of the study adopted ”positive/negative expectations” as well as ”engagement /disengagement” as two dimensions to distinguish optimism and pessimism to ”functional optimism”, ”dysfunctional optimism”, ”functional pessimism” and ”dysfunctional pessimism.” This study further investigated the functions of mental adjustment with these four optimistic and pessimistic types. The data was collected from a total of 134 college students (Female = 60.4%; Male = 39.6%) and the researchers of this study conducted item analysis, exploratory/confirmatory factor analysis, internal consistency, criterion-related validity to examine the scale’s reliability and validity. The results showed four optimistic and pessimistic types (i.e., functional optimism, dysfunctional optimism, functional pessimism, ”dysfunctional pessimism) have good reliability and validity. In addition, the study found that each type played different roles in metal adjustment. In the hierarchical analysis, functional optimism and dysfunctional optimism positively predicted to satisfaction of life, functional pessimism negatively predicted to satisfaction of life. Among them, functional optimism was the best predictor to satisfaction of life. Functional optimism positively predicted to depressed symptoms, functional pessimism negatively predicted to depressed symptoms. Among them, functional pessimism was the best predictor to depressed symptoms. Functional pessimism was the only and positive predictor to anxious symptoms. Dysfunctional optimism was the only and positive predictor to procrastination. In summary, the results of the study helps to clarify the issues of ”optimism is beneficial to mental adjustment” and ”pessimism is not beneficial to mental adjustment.”起始頁-結束頁：113-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620170800490052篇名：輔導教師之焦點解決督導員訓練成效研究並列篇名：The Effects of a Solution-Focused Supervisors' Training Program for School Counselors作者：許維素(Wei- Su Hsu);游于萱(Yu-Hsuan Yu)關鍵字：Kirkpatrick四層次教育訓練成效評估;焦點解決督導;督導員訓練;學校輔導教師督導;Kirkpatrick's four-level evaluation model;school counselor supervision;Solution-Focused Supervision;supervisors' training期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：49期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究目的在探討輔導教師接受焦點解決督導員訓練方案之成效。此8.5日共51小時的訓練方案，邀請15位高中職輔導教師參與受訓，於訓練過程，受訓者填寫單元課後滿意度問卷、諮商督導量表、個人準備度評估問卷及學習效果自陳問卷，並於訓練結束時及一個月後參與焦點團體訪談，其中4位全勤受訓者亦接受個別訪談。本研究以量化與質化方法分析各研究資料，研究結果以Kirkpatrick四層次教育訓練成效評估模式呈現之：（1）課後反應：受訓者對方案感到滿意，講師、同儕、課程為主要因素；（2）學習效果：受訓者經訓練後，於諮商督導能力之認知概念、情意態度及行為技巧有顯著提升。同時亦習得焦點解決督導（SFS）與高中職輔導教師督導相關知能，提升擔任督導員之預備度；（3）實際行為：能執行SFS於學校輔導工作（如提供督導、諮詢）及自我督導；以及（4）訓練成果：提升學校輔導工作效能與人力資源（如行政效率與夥伴關係）。最後，本研究根據研究結果，針對影響訓練成效之因素、SFS與校園文化的適配性等進行討論，並對未來相關訓練、研究與制度提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to examine the effect of a Solution-Focused Supervision (SFS) training program for senior high school counselors. This study used a mixed method design. Fifteen senior high school counselors underwent a total of 51-hours of SFS training over 8.5-days The program contained four parts: (a) supervision, including instruction on basic concepts, rules, forms, and ethics of supervision; (b) SFS, including the important characteristics, components, processes, skills, and forms of SFS; (c) discussing the multi-faceted role of the school counselor and existing school counselor supervisory models; and (d) how to combine SFS with school counselor supervision and how to prepare for an SFS supervisor. All the trainees attended two focus-group interviews, one right after training and the second one month later. During the interviews, all trainees completed reaction sheets and the learning self-report inventory. All participants also completed the Supervisory Competence Scale and readiness assessment sheets before and after their training. After one month of training, all trainees were required to submit one supervisee's feedback sheet. To solicit more detailed feedback about the training program, 4 trainees who had full attendance participated in semi-structured interviews. The data of the reaction sheets and learning self-report inventory were analyzed through descriptive statistics while a paired-sample t test was conducted on the readiness assessment sheet and supervisory competence scale. After performing a homogeneity test, a dependent sample t test was conducted. In addition, the qualitative data was analyzed by qualitative methodology. The method used by the qualitative analysis team was open coding. The Kirkpatrick's Four-Level Model was used to evaluate the effect of this SFS training program. The main four levels of the Kirkpatrick's Four-Level Model include: (a) Reaction, the trainees' feelings toward the program; (b) Learning, the degree of trainees' acquisition of knowledge, skills, and attitudes; (c) Behavior, what has been learned is expressed in trainees' concrete behaviors; and (d) Results, the impact of training on the trainees' organization. Different qualitative and quantitative research data were selected and analyzed for each level. The results found trainee improvements in all four levels of Kirkpatrick's model. For the Reaction level, trainees reported high satisfaction with the program, and especially appreciated the content of the program and training methods. Peer learning and peer support were mentioned positively by most of the trainees. For the Learning level, there was a significant difference in the scores for the Supervisory Competence Scale, which demonstrates that the trainees improved their knowledge (t = -7.22, p ＜ .001, d = 4.13), attitudes (t = -5.56, p ＜ .001, d = 2.97), and behaviors (t = -6.36, p ＜ .001, d = 3.40). The difference between the pretest and posttest scores on the learning self-report inventory was also significant. Moreover, this SFS training program enhanced the trainees' readiness to supervise school counselors, ability to conduct self-supervision, and also simultaneously increased their competencies as a school counselor. For the Behavior level, trainees implemented SFS as a supervisor. They additionally internalized the concepts of the solution focused approach into their work and changed behaviors in their personal lives. Finally, for the Results level, both the trainees and their supervisees achieved their supervision goals and felt empowered during the process of supervision. The clients of supervisees also reported positive changes. All trainees indicated their school counseling work and communication with staff became more efficacious. This study supports the SFS model as an effective and highly practical model, and fits campus culture in Taiwan. Based on these findings, the study discusses the factors present in this SFS training program that either facilitated or hampered learning, and provides suggestions for SFS training, government policies for the supervision system in school, and future studies.起始頁-結束頁：147-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620170800490063篇名：主編的話－期待兩種心理學之中道發展並列篇名：Editor's note - Call for Harmony between Two Counseling Psychologies作者：劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang);夏允中(Yung-Jong Shiah);孫頌賢(Sung-Hsien Sun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：48期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：1-3資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會4篇名：當靈性與心理諮商相遇－諮商師的觀點並列篇名：When Spirituality Meets Counseling: The Counselor's Perspective作者：陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);范嵐欣(Lan-Hsin Fan);詹杏如(Shing-Ru Chan);范馨云(Hsin-Yun Fan)關鍵字：融入靈性的諮商;靈性;spirituality;spiritually incorporated counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：48期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去二十年來，西方心理學界越來越肯定宗教／靈性帶給人超越的力量及生命意義感，諮商心理學研究也顯示諮商師認為在諮商中與案主探討靈性議題是合宜的、採用靈性介入的方法能夠為個案帶來好的諮商效果。這樣對宗教與靈性持正面與開放的態度，為諮商師在諮商工作中開啟了一個新的視野。近年來在台灣的諮商界，一些有宗教／靈性背景的諮商師，也逐漸會把宗教／靈性放在諮商中與案主工作，因此本研究的目的即在探討有宗教／靈性背景的台灣諮商師在諮商中的靈性工作經驗。本研究以16位有宗教／靈性背景的諮商師為研究參與者，其中四位為基督徒，四位為天主教徒，四位為佛教徒，四位為具為有新時代靈性觀或是兼具認同新時代與佛教的諮商師。研究者透過半結構的個別訪談收集資料，以主題分析的方法分析資料。研究結果發現七個主題：諮商師的靈性取向、結合靈性與諮商發展的心路歷程、融入靈性於諮商之使用時機、靈性介入的方法、肯定靈性介入的正向結果、成為融入靈性的諮商師之意義、融入靈性的諮商倫理。研究的討論與建議於本文末提出。英文摘要：In the past twenty years, Western psychology research increasingly affirms that religion/spirituality can bring people transcending power and meaning in life. Counseling psychology research also supports the exploration of the client's spirituality in counseling as beneficial and can bring about effective counseling outcomes. Some counselors in Taiwan also incorporate religion/spirituality into their counseling works. However, it rarely has been researched. The purpose of the present study was to explore the experiences of counselors who included religion/spirituality in their practice. Sixteen research participants with different religious/spiritual backgrounds participated in the study. Among them, four were Christians, four were Catholics, four were Buddhists, and four were New Age believers or individuals who integrated New Age with Buddhism. Semi-structured individual interviews were conducted for data collection. Thematic analysis was employed for data analysis. Themes that emerged from the data included: (a) counselor's spiritual orientations, (b) the developmental process of incorporating spirituality into counseling, (c) the timing for incorporating spirituality into counseling, (d) using the spiritually incorporated counseling interventions, (e) positive outcomes of incorporating spirituality in counseling, (f) the meaning of being a counselor who incorporates spirituality in practice, and (g) the ethics of conducting spiritually incorporated counseling. Suggestions for future studies were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：5-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620170400480015篇名：建立初入安置機構兒童之定向遊戲治療工作模式並列篇名：Development of an Orientation Play Therapy Model for Newcomers in the Residential Child Care Institutions作者：蔡群瑞(Chiun-Ruei Tsai);高淑貞(Shu-Chen Kao)關鍵字：初入安置機構兒童;定向遊戲治療工作模式;定向輔導;結構遊戲治療;newcomers in the residential child care institutions;orientation play therapy model;orientation;structured play therapy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：48期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究依循行動研究精神，以結構遊戲治療取向為基礎，發展協助兒童進入安置機構初期生活銜接和適應的定向遊戲治療工作模式。研究者從個人實務經驗出發，透過文獻探索、與在安置機構工作之同儕和遊戲治療領域專家討論後，擬定行動計畫。本研究共有六組成員參加，各組成員均包括遊戲治療師、初入安置機構兒童、機構主要照顧者，透過三個階段的行動循環產生和累積知識，逐步修改定向遊戲治療工作模式內涵，最後徵詢安置機構專家與遊戲治療專家的意見，形成定向遊戲治療工作模式。研究結果：定向遊戲治療工作模式內涵，包括緒論、實施架構、定向結構遊戲方案、使用指南四部分，其中詳列兒童進入安置機構初期可介入的輔導目標。最後提出相關建議，供遊戲治療師、安置機構工作人員及未來研究參考。英文摘要：Based on Structured play therapy, this study aimed to utilize an action research approach to establish an Orientation Play Therapy Model (OPTM) for faciliting positive adjustment of newcomers in their initial transition period to residential child-care institutions. The author of this manuscript integrated her practical experience, discussion with experts and peer researchers, and related literature in designing an original orientation structured play project. The structure and contents of the OPTM were developed through three stages. Six groups of participants were involved. Each group was composed of a play therapist, a newcomer, and at least one child caretaker. The OPTM was established after consultations with the residential child care institutions and play therapy experts. The findings showed that OPTM includes introduction, structure implementation, theme and contents of project, practicing notes, and a handbook of orientation structured play project. Implications and suggestion were provided at the end.起始頁-結束頁：37-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620170400480026篇名：客體角色轉化在非複雜性哀傷諮商影響之初探並列篇名：The Effects of Psychotherapeutic Ritual on Uncomplicated Griever: Transforming Role of a Deceased's Internal Object作者：吳秀碧(Sophie Woo)關鍵字：文化與諮商;哀悼;哀傷;客體關係;儀式;bereavement;culture and counseling;grief;object relation;ritual期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：48期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探究客體角色轉化假說和治療儀式在非複雜性哀傷諮商的影響。使用質化研究中現象學取向的重要事件研究法，探究23名選修哀傷諮商課程的研究生，參與該課程學習方式當中所包括的體驗性學習之經驗。該課程共有10次小團體方式的體驗性學習，每週實施一次，每次1小時（課程每週3小時）。本研究資料為學生體驗學習的第九單元「創造死者死後的世界」儀式活動之單次心得報告。資料蒐集方法，於期末獲得參與者同意書之後，以該一單元的心得報告作為分析的資料。資料分析和研究之可信賴度，採取質化共識研究分析方法，於資料匿名後，由研究者與兩名編碼者一起共同進行分析。研究結果，在參與者主觀知覺中，不但沒有負面影響，還發現11項有益的元素，包括8項治療因子和3項個人成長，可歸納為「安頓死者獲得療傷和復原」與「學習與成長」兩層面的獲益。最後並根據本初探研究的結論，對於未來研究和諮商實務提出具體建議。英文摘要：According to traditional Chinese culture, a family system includes two sub-system: one is the living family members and the other is ancestors. Instead of being excluded from family system, it is presumes that soon after any one of the family member died will be transformed his/her role by funeral ritual into one of the members of ancestor system, and a spiritual nature of continuing bond was reestablished. Based on the role transformation of traditional Chinese culture, a psychotherapeutic ritual was designed by researcher and applied to help trainees transforming role of their internal object of a deceased. This article reports research that utilized critical incident methodology to explore the perceived experiences of 23 participants. They were master and doctorate level counselor trainees who participated in experiential grief counseling groups as part of their Death, Dying and Grief Counseling course work. Data were collected from one of their weekly reflection journals. The specific journal was to reflect trainee's experience of participating in that ritual activity of ”Creating an afterlife and world for your beloved deceased”. The results show that participants identified 11 elements as contributing to their recovering from grieving a deceased. These 11 elements were then categorized into two dimensions which were 8 therapeutic factors and 3 obtained benefits of learning and growth. The finding results were discussed in light of the current literature of continuing bonds and psychotherapeutic rituals. Implications for counseling practice and future research were recommended.起始頁-結束頁：71-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620170400480037篇名：表達性藝術治療運用於華人文化下乳癌婦女團體方案介入之要素探究並列篇名：Essential Elements of Group Intervention for Chinese Women with Breast Cancer Using Expressive Arts Therapy作者：賴念華(Nien-Hwa Lai);張祐誠(Yu-Cheng Chang);黃傳永(Chuan-Yung Huang);龔庭溱(Ting-Chen Kung);林葳婕(Wei-Chieh Lin)關鍵字：表達性藝術治療;乳癌病友;華人文化;團體心理治療;Chinese culture;expressive arts therapy;group psychotherapy;women with breast cancer期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：48期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討表達性藝術治療運用於華人文化下乳癌婦女團體方案設計之要素，包含影響團體發展之脈絡、方案介入及成效。採取質性研究的現象學觀點，透過個別與焦點團體訪談，探討乳癌婦女團體成員和帶領者在表達性藝術治療團體中之經驗。結果顯示：（1）影響團體運作脈絡有：「華人女性多重角色與犧牲奉獻的特質」、「團體成員病程相異促進交流」、「成員出席受家庭與生理因素之限制」、「疾病的不確定性促進團體動力」；（2）表達性藝術治療介入和效果有：「多元表達形式中回到當下體驗」、「圖像視覺化能再度關注自我意象」、「隱喻破除社會框架緩衝焦慮」、「非語言溝通產生共鳴」、「可控性找回自我能力感」、「再建構轉化生命態度」、「跨越時空與角色交換擴展視框」、「作品保存見證改變」；（3）華人乳癌病友團體帶領方向：「帶領者去專家化」、「團體成為訊息分享平台」、「從乳癌談及自我概念」、「重要議題為家庭、親密關係、失落、自我照顧」；（4）方案成效為促進成員「內在覺察與整合」以及「人際間表達與連結」。最後，依據研究結果提出討論，並提供後續方案設計參考。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the intervention plan, mediating factors, and effects of expressive arts therapy for the group work for women with breast cancer in Chinese culture. Using qualitative methods as well as individual interviews and focus groups, we tried to understand the experiences of members and leaders in an expressive arts therapy group for women with breast cancer. The results showed: (1) The factors mediating the group work are ”multiple roles and the self-sacrificing and devoting trait of Chinese women,” ”differences in the illness process promoting member interaction,” ”member attendance restricted by family and physiological reasons.” and ”the uncertainty of illness promoting group dynamics.” (2) The characteristics of the intervention plan are ”turning to the present using diverse forms of expression,” ”re-focusing on self-image by image visualization,” ”breaking social framework and buffering anxiety using metaphors,” ”creating resonance by non-verbal communication,” ”finding self-efficacy in controllability,” ”reconstructing lift attitude for transformation,” ”expanding perspectives across time and space in role reversals,” ”keeping artwork to witness changes.” (3) Suggestions for leading groups for Chinese women with breast cancer: ”leader taking a non-expert stance,” ”using the group as a platform for sharing information,” ”using breast cancer to talk about self-concept,” ”important issues including family, intimate relationships, loss, and self-care.” (4)The effects of the intervention plan are promoting members ”to gain inner awareness and integration” and ”to express and connect interpersonally.” Finally, discussions based on these results and intervention plans for future work were provided.起始頁-結束頁：107-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620170400480048篇名：運用舞蹈治療概念提升國中生情緒知能之研究－Vico理念的實踐並列篇名：The Application of dance therapy concept to enhancing the emotional intelligence of 8th grade junior high school students -The G. Vico approach作者：劉玉玲(Yu-Ling Liu)關鍵字：合作式行動研究;情緒知能;教學轉化;舞蹈治療;Vico理念;dance therapy;Vico approach;collaborative action research;emotion intelligence;teaching transformation期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：48期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究係以合作式行動研究協助國中表演藝術課程，主要目的在探討個案教師與研究者之合作式行動研究歷程、研究者與個案教師轉化Vico理念，藉舞蹈治療概念於國中表演藝術課程，探究教學之困難及解決的歷程，及學生接受此教學成效。為達上述目的，本研究主要以質性研究中的參與觀察法、半結構訪談與文件分析法，輔以問卷調查法。以新北市某區某國中八年級某班學生為研究對象，為使研究結果更具客觀性與代表性，以「情緒知能量表」進行前測，課程實施九週後，再進行後測。本研究結果顯示，（1）合作式行動研究個案教師與研究者在規劃階段、實施階段，反省與修正階段三個階段，透過不斷溝通對話調整教學內容與節奏，合作歷程特點是各司其職及相互合作；（2）情緒輔導方案的實踐不僅提升學生的情緒知能，也讓個案教師與研究者更加注意自己情緒管理，以便身教與言教能知行合一；（3）研究者依理念設計課程草案，並與個案教師討論以確立教學活動、個案教師依教案落實，並彈性調整教學活動；研究者與個案教師不斷溝通、合作以修改教學活動是教學轉化的關鍵要素。研究之建議可供青少年輔導工作者、「綜合活動」、「表演藝術」領域之教師教學時的參考。英文摘要：The purposes of the study are: (1) to familiar with how to conduct collaborative action research to aid teacher-researcher gain or get an insight into their teaching life. (2) to investigate how to assist a performing arts teacher in developing her insights and how to enhance junior high students' emotional intelligence. (3) to understand teachers' transformative processes of applying Vico's thought and dance therapy concepts. To achieve these purposes, the qualitative data include audio and video recording, interviewing with teacher and students, and documents produced at course design meetings. The quantitative data collection includes pre- and post-tests on emotional intelligence. The results showed that: (1) Conducting collaborative action research facilitated communication between teachers and school faculty; it increased awareness and reflection of issues that affected learning and professionalism. (2) Emotional mentoring program were not only enhancing students' emotional intelligence, but also improving teachers and school faculty professional development. (3) Collaborative action research was a way for helping teachers interpret at the process of teacher inquiry teaching transformation from Vico's thought and dance therapy concepts to implement and experience curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：137-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186201704004800501篇名：書評：Public Participation for 21st Century Democracy〔21世紀民主的公眾參與〕by Tina Nabatchi and Matt Leighninger〔蒂娜•娜芭琪與麥特•藍尼格〕（John Wiley & Son, Inc., 2015, Hardback, 351pp., ISBN 9781118688403）並列篇名：A review of Public Participation for 21st Century Democracy by Tina Nabatchi and Matt Leighninger作者：傅凱若(Kai-Jo Fu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：147-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：世界民主大事紀：2017年4-6月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: April-June 2017期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：153-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：周育仁(Yu-jen Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：台灣民眾對社會福利的態度－體制評價、道德經濟、階級與世代的影響並列篇名：Public Attitudes towards Social Welfare Policy in Taiwan: The Influences of Regime Evaluation, Moral Economy and Class-Generations作者：葉崇揚(Chung-yang Yeh);蔡明璋(Ming-chang Tsai);呂建德(Jen-der Lue)關鍵字：福利態度;民主體制;階級;世代;道德經濟;welfare attitude;democratic regime;class;generation;moral economy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：為什麼有些民眾支持福利政策，有些民眾卻反對福利政策呢？此一研究問題是福利國家研究的核心研究問題之一。本文嘗試以民主基金會於2015 年時針對台灣民眾所做的「台灣社會公平正義滿意度調查」為基礎，進行台灣民眾的福利態度的分析。本研究發現三個影響台灣民眾福利態度的因素。第一，體制評價（對民主體制的評價以及對台灣民主制度的滿意度）對「福利—稅收」和「福利—經濟」有顯著影響；其次，個人規範性信念（個人失敗歸因於政府），對三個福利態度的依變項都有顯著影響。第三，台灣福利態度的分立，並非來自於「階級」，而主要來自於「世代」之間的差異。英文摘要：A core issue of welfare state studies is the discrepancy in public support for welfare. This study uses ”the 2015 Survey on Social Justice in Taiwan” of Taiwan Foundation for Democracy to analyze the general attitude towards welfare in Taiwan. This paper identifies three main factors that affect public opinion on the matter. First, the citizens acclimation and satisfaction with democratic ideals have spurred support for welfare even though it would mean an increase in taxes and a slower economy. Second, support for welfare expansion increases when people believe the government is at least somewhat, responsible for the poor economic situation for many individuals. Third, age, rather than class, appears to be the main social attribute that divides attitude on welfare.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：韓國政治勢力間權力競爭變化－從地域主義至陣營對峙並列篇名：Changes in Power Competition among Political Groups in South Korea: From Regional Confrontation to Conflict Between Conservatives and Progressives作者：河凡植(Bum-sig Ha)關鍵字：韓國選舉;政治權力;地域主義;陣營對峙;South Korea's Election;Political Powers;Regionalism;conflict between conservatives and progressives期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：由於韓國民主化，結束了民主和反民主的政治鬥爭，但因民主陣營分裂和「進步」派政府出現，出現「地域主義」和「保守」與「進步」陣營的對峙。就韓國的「地域主義」和「保守」與「進步」「陣營對峙」的特徵而言，全羅地域帶有「進步」色彩，而慶尚與「忠清地域」的「保守」色彩較為濃厚。「地域主義」和「陣營對峙」在選舉時產生巨大影響，成為決定政治權力結構的主要因素。韓國政治菁英成立以地域為基礎的政黨，形成與選民聯合的選舉，且政黨在選舉上選擇地域與理念分裂，使此問題成為論證的焦點，並透過提出自身的意見來謀求選民的支持。在此基礎上，「民主黨」和「新世界黨」分別成為代表全羅和慶尚地域、「進步」和「保守」陣營的政治權力，而「保守」色彩的「忠清地域」政黨也能保持一定的政治權力。但由於「進步」勢力的擴大和「陣營對峙」的加深，「忠清地域」政黨被「慶尚地域」政黨合併，故韓國政治權力結構從以地域為基礎的競爭轉換為以陣營為基礎的競爭。從實現民主化至第19 屆總統選舉30 年來，經由政治權力競爭的轉折，亦即1990 年代著重於「地域主義」的權力競爭，2000 年代靠理陣營峙的競選與進步勢力接近保守勢力，2016 年以後進步勢力超越保守勢力，占據了韓國政治權力。英文摘要：In South Korea, due to democratization, the pattern of democratic and antidemocratic competing for political power is eliminated. But, there is growing concern about regionalism and confrontation between conservative and progressive caused by the split of liberal party and formation of liberal government. The development of regionalism in South Korea is like Jeolla region is progressive, and Gyeongsang and Chungcheong region is very strong conservative. Korean political elites has been engaged in forming a joint election with voters through establishing region-based political parties. South Korean political parties in the election choose to exercise control over certain regions that share the party's same ideologies. On this basis, Democratic Party and Saenuri Party became the representative political power for Jeolla and liberals; Gyeongsang regions and conservatives. Chungcheong was another region-based conservative party that maintained a certain political power in Chungcheong. However, by expansion of the progressive forces and deepening of the confrontation between progressives and conservatives, the Chungcheong regional political party (i.e., Liberty Forward Party) was merged by Gyeongsang regional party (i.e., Saenuri Party). As a result, South Korean political power structure was converted from region-based competition to ideology-based competition. From democratization to the 19th presidential election 30 years, South Korean has been Experiencing the transition of political power competition, that is, power competition in the 1990s focused on the regionalism, power competition in the 2000s focused on conflict between conservatives and progressives, and progressive forces are close to conservative forces, progressive forces on and after 2016 has been overtaking conservative forces and has been occupying the political power of South Korea.起始頁-結束頁：49-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：族群操作及其效果－新加坡選舉史中的不和諧記憶並列篇名：Ethnic Manipulation and Its Effects: Memory of Disharmony in Singapore's Election History作者：劉曉鵬(Philip Hsiaopong Liu);黃奕維(I-wei Huang)關鍵字：族群和諧;華人沙文主義;李光耀;集選區;新加坡總統選舉;Ethnic Harmony;Chinese Chauvinism;Lee Kuan Yew;Group Representation Constituency;Singaporean Presidential Election期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文回顧1950 與1960 年代新加坡族群衝突的建構、1980 年代反對力量的興起、集選區制協助少數民族進入國會的說法，與2017 年總統選舉的族群考量。作者認為新加坡不斷出現的族群衝突記憶乃政治操作的結果。政府藉此以族群和諧為由設計確保少數民族參政的選舉制度，但實際上卻有利執政黨及其多數族群中的政治菁英。結果是執政黨為了鞏固政權，強化少數民族的負面刻版印象，使族群不和諧持續重現。英文摘要：This paper reviews the making of Singapore's ethnic conflicts during the 1950s and 1960s, the rise of opposition forces during the 1980s, the theory asserting that the Group Representation Constituency has helped the minority groups enter the Parliament, and contemporary ethnic concerns in 2017 Presidential election. The authors argue that Singapore's ceaseless memory of conflicting ethnic relations is the product of political management. The Singapore government therefore creates an electoral system that ensures minority representation in politics, but is in fact favorable to the ruling party and its political elites from the majority group. As a result, the ruling party consolidates its power by strengthening negative stereotypes of the minority, and continues to reproduce ethnic disharmony.起始頁-結束頁：87-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：書評：Open Versus Closed: Personality, Identity, and the Politics of Redistribution〔開放性遇上封閉性—人格、認同、與重分配政治〕by Christopher D. Johnston, Howard G. Lavine, and Christopher M. Federico〔克里斯多福．詹斯頓、霍爾德．拉文、克里斯多福．費德里科〕並列篇名：A review of Open Versus Closed: Personality, Identity, and the Politics of Redistribution by Christopher D. Johnston, Howard G. Lavine, and Christopher M. Federico作者：王宏恩(Austin Horng-En Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：115-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：書評：Responsibility for Justice〔追求正義的責任〕by Iris Marion Young〔艾莉斯．馬利雍．楊〕並列篇名：A review of Responsibility for Justice by Iris Marion Young作者：葉明叡(Ming-jui Yeh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：121-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：世界民主大事紀：2017年1-3月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: January-March 2017期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：129-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：周育仁(Yu-jen Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：政黨認同如何影響民<U+8846>對政府清廉的評價並列篇名：The Influence of the Public's Political Identification on the Perception of Government Integrity作者：莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);徐明莉(Ming-Li Hsu);黃東益(Tong-Yi Huang);李仲彬(Chung-Pin Lee)關鍵字：清廉;貪腐;政黨認同;政治環境;民意調查;integrity;corruption;party identification;political environment;opinion poll期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：民主政治是討論與解決公共事務的制度設計，提供人民參與決策的機會，但並不保證會產生廉能政府，廉潔治理 (integrity governance) 乃成為多數人民的期待與政府的正當性基礎，因之，吾人除了瞭解政府如何致力於宣導反貪觀念、設計防貪機制及掃除貪腐弊端外，民眾如何認知政府的清廉表現及其影響因素，亦值得探究。台灣在民主化過程中，大多數民眾都曾經歷地方或中央政府層級的政黨輪替執政經驗，他們對政府的清廉評價是否仍受政黨因素所影響，值得吾人採取循證途徑探索之。本研究利用全國性民意調查資料，以政府的清廉評價為依變數，利用個人和環境層次的政黨因素作為解釋變數，分析政黨因素是否為影響民眾對政府清廉評價的主因。實證分析發現，個人的政黨認同依然具有顯著解釋力，認同泛藍政黨者傾向對泛藍主政的政府給予較高的清廉評價，認同泛綠政黨者傾向給予較不清廉的評價，證實民眾仍難以跳脫其個人心中「藍綠」的政治框架；而環境層次的政黨因素則不具顯著解釋效果。此外，本研究也發現，民眾對政府的清廉評價與政府施政滿意度、政治信任之間有高度的關聯性，說明了民眾對政府的施政評價與信任程度也會影響其對政府的清廉印象。英文摘要：Democracy is the institution designed to discuss and solve public issues, providing the public with opportunity to participate in the policy-making process. This institution, however, does not guarantee the integrity and effectiveness of government. Integrity governance becomes the expectation of the public and the foundation of the legitimacy of government. Therefore, other than understanding government’s effort in anti-corruption campaigns, anti -corruption mechanism and eradication, the public’s perception of government integrity and its influence are worth study. Such studies could increase our knowledge about the public’s understanding of government’s anti-corruption measures, whether these measures eliminate the public's concern of corruption and improve the public’s trust in government. Due to the fast pace of democratization in Taiwan, the public has experienced political party alternation in loc al and central governments. Whether party factor affects the public’s perception of government integrity worth the effort in evidence-based studies. This study uses public opinion polls conducted nation-wide in Taiwan to test three models. In the models, integrity perception towards ”the government as whole,” ”President Ma” and ”central government” are dependent variables in each model, while the individual and environmental level of party factors are main variables. Empirical analysis shows party identification has significant influence, people who have leanings toward the pan-blue coalition tend to give higher integrity ratings to governments run by the KMT (blue party), but the people who have leanings towards the pan-green party tend to give lower integrity ratings, which proves that it is difficult for the public in Taiwan to think outside of the ”Blue-Green” political framework. However, the environmental level of party factors seems to have a less significant influence. This study also finds that public satisfaction and trust with government significantly influences their integrity perception.起始頁-結束頁：93-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：調查研究之有效空間抽樣分析－以2010、2012 TEDS資料為例並列篇名：Comparing Validities of Spatial Sampling Methods－A Case Study of 2010, 2012 TEDS Data作者：徐永明(Yung-Ming Hsu);吳怡慧(I-Hui Wu)關鍵字：空間抽樣;選舉研究;總統選舉;直轄市長選舉;支持率;投票率;spatial sampling;electoral study;presidential election;mayoral election;voting behavior;TEDS期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：35卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：選舉研究常使用電訪或面訪等調查方法蒐集資料，並且考量樣本須具有足夠的代表性，抽樣過程運用「抽取率與抽出單位大小成比例」（probabilities proportional to size，簡稱PPS）的原則抽出受訪者，這些受訪者所在的位置，受到抽樣成本與便利性的限制，在空間中分布並不均質；但是選舉研究中常探測的參數，像是投票行為、政黨認同、派系等，卻具有地域性的差異，因此受訪者所在的位置，對於後續研究進行空間效果分析時，是重要且有影響的。本文為了解決空間特性對於選舉行為的影響，引用並發展新的抽樣方法：1. 在已完成的調查資料中（本文使用TEDS2012總統與TEDS2010 直轄市長的選舉資料），加入空間結構（人口數）考量，重新加權計算資料的數值； 2. 考慮選舉研究變項的空間自相關性（spatial autocorrelation）與空間異質性（spatial heterogeneity），提出新的空間抽樣概念，同樣在既有的抽樣調查資料上，進行樣本數縮小與樣本分布特性的修正。本文以「投票率」、「支持率」來進行相關方法的分析比較。結果發現，方法一以人口數的空間結構差異來加權，重新統計調查資料的投票率與支持率， 雖然校正結果較原本TEDS的結果更接近真實資料，但是方法二以空間特性為考量，依照空間物理性的距離為再抽樣的依據，其樣本的推估值與真實選舉資訊更為接近，顯然，驗證變項行為與實際政治行為之間的相關性，二維的抽樣設計方式更能有效的推估選舉行為所探測的參數。英文摘要：This study aims to develop several spatial sampling methods to check with TEDS data. This spatial technique is considered valuable for further research for several reasons. First, it is a way of optimal design for existing samples. Second, it avoids spatial autocorrelation and spatial heterogeneity to produce a better measurement. This study applies voting data from the 2012 presidential election and 2010 mayoral election of TEDS to test validity. As expected, the two-dimension spatial sampling method is a more accurate estimation for election studies.起始頁-結束頁：143-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：Gary King on Reverse Engineering Chinese Government Information Controls作者：Gary King期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：78期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201812_(78).00012篇名：論宗教脈絡在理解霍布斯政治義務理論中的角色：以「自由的恰當意涵」為例並列篇名：On the Role of Religious Context in Understanding Thomas Hobbes' Theory of Political Obligation: In the Case of 'The Proper Signification of Liberty'作者：梁裕康(Yu-kang Liang)關鍵字：湯瑪斯．霍布斯;宗教;自由;昆丁．史欽納;莎莉．羅伊德;Thomas Hobbes;Religion;Liberty;Quentin Skinner;S. A. Lloyd期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：78期出版年：2018中文摘要：究竟主權者的權威是來自事實權力抑或上帝授權？針對這個問題，本文首先要介紹史欽納（Quentin Skinner）對霍布斯的自由（liberty）此一概念的詮釋，其次討論羅伊德（Sharon Anne Lloyd）的論點，最後則根據史欽納的方法，對羅伊德的宗教性詮釋提出批評。若本文的論點得以成立，可以說明以下觀點：史欽納雖然說明某種科學脈絡影響了霍布斯的政治義務理論，但他卻忽略了宗教脈絡同樣也發生了效力。就這點而言，羅伊德的角度可以作<U+7232>史欽納觀點的補充。英文摘要：Does Thomas Hobbes think that the authority of the sovereign is generated from God or from its own plenary power? This article tries to approach this issue by comparing Quentin Skinners' conception of 'proper signification of liberty' and S. A. Lloyd's religious interpretation of Hobbes' theory. I argue that although Skinner's interpretation of liberty can account for some philosophical parts of Hobbes' theory of political obligation, it fails to account for the other historical or religious parts of the theory. Apart from the philosophical or scientific context, the historical or religious context also plays a significant role, which is well demonstrated in Lloyd's theory. The combination of these two can lead to a better understanding of Hobbes' theory of political obligation.起始頁-結束頁：23-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201812_(78).00023篇名：伊朗核協議對國際核燃料供應建制發展的影響並列篇名：JCPOA's Impacts on the Development of the International Nuclear Fuel Supply Assurance Regime作者：曾雅真(Yea-jen Tseng)關鍵字：核不擴散;供應保證;出口控制;建制建構;國際造法;規範變異;聯合全面行動計畫;Non-proliferation;Assurance of Nuclear Fuel Supply;Export Control;Regime Construction;International Law-making;Norm Transition;JCPOA期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：78期出版年：2018中文摘要：伊朗以核能和平利用<U+7232>訴求，主張自我建構核燃料製造的鈾濃縮技術，確保核燃料的供應安全。鈾濃縮乃發展核武的敏感技術，美歐國家憂心，一旦放任此種發展，則有核武擴散之慮。隨著聯合全面行動計畫（Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, JCPOA）的簽署與生效，核燃料供應保證的國際造法歷程，意外促成核不擴散建制既有規範的差序化。回顧不擴散核武器條約（Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, NPT）建制重塑，伊朗核燃料供應保證談判的國際造法歷程，以及美國川普政府試圖重新剝奪伊朗核子能力的議程設定，可以發現，操作核不擴散建制的國際強權，不但可以透過外交談判等權力互動，置入核燃料供應保證的新概念，並且得以運用國際造法，添附NPT規範支柱的規範前提，透過規範變異限縮NPT非核國核能和平使用的權力；霸權更能恣意以單邊否決手段，去除不符其利的規範安排，<U+7232>規範建制的再度重塑，添附更多的運作空間。英文摘要：Iran has been advocating the peaceful use of nuclear energy allowing for the development and possession uranium enrichment technology, which is a core element for nuclear fuel manufacturing, while claiming that it is the right of a sovereign state to ensure its secure supply of nuclear fuel. However, as uranium enrichment is a key technology for the development of nuclear weapons, the U. S. and European countries are concerned that once such development has been granted to Iran, there is a potential risk for the proliferation of nuclear weapons. After the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) came into force, international law-making processes for the assurance of nuclear fuel supply had accidently constructed the normative hierarchy of the NPT principles. By recalling the regime reconstruction process of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), law-making for the nuclear fuel supply assurance during the JCPOA negotiations, as well as the agenda-setting initiated by Trump administration's attempt to comprehensively re-deprive Iran's nuclear capability, this article discovers that the great powers that manipulated the NPT regime could input new ideas. These ideas include the assurance of nuclear fuel supply through the interaction of powers during international negotiations, which add new preconditions for the implementation of the principle of the peaceful use of nuclear energy and constrain the rights under which non-nuclear states of the NPT regime can peacefully use nuclear energy. The hegemony can unilaterally veto the normative arrangement that are against its interests and create extra space for the normative reconstruction of international regimes.起始頁-結束頁：69-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201812_(78).00034篇名：中小型國家的安全策略及其路徑演變：以塞爾維亞、亞美尼亞與烏克蘭為例並列篇名：The Security Strategies and Path Development of Small and Medium-Sized States: Case Studies of Serbia, Armenia and Ukraine作者：楊三億(San-yi Yang)關鍵字：安全策略;塞爾維亞;亞美尼亞;烏克蘭;Small and Medium-Sized States;Security Strategies;Serbia;Armenia;Ukraine期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：78期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文集中在中小型國家的策略選擇及轉型研究，本文釐清哪些因素是影響中小型國家策略選擇的主要變因，由此理解這些國家<U+7232>何選擇此種策略選擇的起因。根據這些國家的初始定位及演進過程，本文將勾勒出中小型國家可能的策略變化，以此探索這些變化過程可能原因。本文首先假定影響中小型國家策略選擇的主要因素<U+7232>政治菁英遞嬗、經貿交流與區域安全威脅，這些因素在不同國家產生的效果不盡相同。其次，本文假定策略變化的軌跡可區分<U+7232>以經濟依賴<U+7232>主的經濟避險（Hedging for Profit）類型、以平衡威脅<U+7232>主的安全避險（Hedging for Security）類型、以及因內部分裂的政治暴力（Political Violence）類型，這三種類型分別代表中小型國家策略變化的基本架構。<U+7232>能更清楚說明這些基本類型的具體圖像，本文透過觀察塞爾維亞、亞美尼亞與烏克蘭三國具體案例，說明這三國策略轉變的多樣面貌及其與本文分析架構之關聯，最終並提出個案研究的經驗觀察。英文摘要：This paper attempts to clarify small and medium states' (SMSs) security strategies in the face of global power competition. It tries to explain SMSs' versatile security choices between balancing and bandwagoning and analyses their path development. First, the author argues that the shift from balancing to bandwagoning is based on the effect of ”hedging for profit,” which depicts the importance of economic dependency. Second, ”hedging for security” is also the author's idea for explaining why SMSs re-adjust their policies, and it explains the balance of threat. Finally, the changes in some SMSs' security choices may not come from external factors; instead, political violence or revolution from within is another major factor in explaining causal relations. This article uses the cases of Serbia, Armenia and Ukraine as reference points for delineating different path developments.起始頁-結束頁：105-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201812_(78).00045篇名：歐盟整合理論的新發展：後功能主義對傳統整合理論之挑戰並列篇名：Recent Developments in Integration Theory: Challenges of Post-Functionalism to Traditional Integration Theories作者：賴昀辰(Yun-chen Lai)關鍵字：歐洲聯盟;整合理論;後功能主義;功能主義;認同;EU;Integration Theory;Post-functionalism;Functionalism;Identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：78期出版年：2018中文摘要：歐洲統合運動自上世紀展開以來，學界針對區域整合提出許多理論，其中最被廣<U+7232>討論的<U+7232>新功能主義及政府間主義。然而，傳統整合理論在解釋近來限制歐洲統合進程的新政治現象，包括公眾對於歐洲統合運動的關注度上升、國族認同影響歐洲統合運動，以及新型態政治光譜出現等新現象時，面臨頗大困境。後功能主義將「後實證學派」強調之「認同」整合進本屬「實證學派」之功能主義脈絡，具有理論之突破性，因此，後功能主義在觀察歐洲統合進程最新發展及限制上可提供新的視角。本文發現，基於現今公眾對歐洲議題的關注，以及認同在歐洲整合議題扮演的重要性持續上升，後功能主義觀點<U+7232>當代歐洲統合研究帶入新變項及新思維。本文亦希望藉由帶入後功能主義觀點，<U+7232>國內歐洲研究學界帶來新思考方向。英文摘要：Since the beginning of the regional integration of Europe in the 1950s, scholars have developed numerous theories to explain European integration. The most discussed theories are neo-functionalism and intergovermentalism. Neo-functionalists state that the spillover effects brought about by successful cooperation causes integration to become enlarged and expanded, while intergovernmentalists argue that the construction of international regimes requires the consent of national states. The debate between neo-functionalism and intergovernmentalism has been mainstream in EU studies. However, traditional integration theories provide poor explanations for the new political phenomenon in Europe. Politicization and identity constrain the development of European integration. To explain the new political phenomenon, Liesbet Hooghe and Gary Marks proposed a new integration theory, i.e., post-functionalism. Post-functionalism integrates identity, which is the emphasis of post-positivism, into functionalist viewpoints that originated from positivism. Thus, it provides a new perspective for observing European integration.起始頁-結束頁：137-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201812_(78).00056篇名：Gary King on Simplifying Matching Methods for Causal Inference作者：Gary King期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：77期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201809_(77).00017篇名：中國民本思想再議並列篇名：Take People-center Political Thought Seriously作者：許雅棠(Ya-tang Hsu)關鍵字：民本;民主;政道（權）;治道（權）;People-Center Political Thought;Democracy;Politics;Governing期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：77期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在<U+7232>傳統中國政治思想中的「民本」主張辯護，辯護民本思想及其相應的治道主張，自有其客觀與獨立的政治意義，不必依附於昔日君主政體，也不是當今民主體制應該排斥的敵人。本文嘗試說明，民本治道基本道理的落實，不僅是各種政體得否穩固的基石，也是<U+7232>政者無法忽視或逃避的治理責任。英文摘要：This article defends the doctrine of Chinese people-centered political thought. The basic tenet of my arguments is that the people-centered doctrine has objective and independent meaning and value. It's not an addition to the traditional imperial system or a trivial part of political regimes such as modern democracy. On the contrary, without conforming to principles of the doctrine, the regimes, whether authoritarian or not, seldom can be good polities, and can hardly win the trust of the people. Even worse, the regimes cannot be sustained for too long.起始頁-結束頁：33-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201809_(77).00028篇名：中國大陸民眾社區權益表達行為與影響因素之分析並列篇名：An Analysis of Citizens' Rationality on Community Participation in China作者：郭銘峰(Ming-feng Kuo);丁太平(Tai-ping Ding)關鍵字：中國大陸;基層治理;社區參與;沉默的大多數;理性選擇途徑;多層次模型;Mainland China;Grassroots Governance;Community Participation;the Silent Majority;Rational Choice Approach;Multilevel Models期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：77期出版年：2018中文摘要：邇近20餘年來，中國大陸欲倡導社會創新與社區治理，盼強化基層治理能量。惟實際情況未見成效，民眾參與熱情不高、動力不足。相較文獻普遍關注基層投票與維權類型影響要因，有關群眾<U+7232>何選擇沉默，消極社區參與的研究相對少見。本文意欲分析當前中國大陸治理體制與社區發展背景下，居民在各類利益表達渠道上保持沉默的理性邏輯與背後結構限制。透由中國綜合社會調<U+67FB>（CGSS）全國面訪資料，本文透過理性選擇途徑與多層次模型的輔助，得到如下發現：（1）民眾在制度性動員和抗爭性社區參與兩種渠道上之成本及效益項考量，存在偏好結構上的異質性，其中欲求體現民主治理價值之變數僅在居民的抗爭性社區參與呈現顯著影響；（2）民眾的所得水準、受教育年限、及政黨身分，對於此二類型社區參與渠道的決策也影響各異，並也證實中國大陸社會情境下居民的社會經濟條件與政治身分背景確實將制約社區參與之理性偏好。本文另闢從居民社區參與沉默的分析，對於洞悉當代中國大陸社區治理內涵與社區參與渠道的改善，具重要參考價值。英文摘要：Over the last two decades, Mainland China has promoted the policies of social innovation and encouraged its citizens to participate in community governance in order to improve the capacity of grassroots governance. However, in practice, these policies do not impassion citizens to engage more in community affairs or the process of interest articulation. Most existing literature has focused on the typologies and relevant factors influencing grassroots voting behaviors and rights protection actions, while scant literature has discussed the unique phenomenon of the ”silent majority,” which examines why citizens are not willing to participate in community affairs or the process of interest articulation. This article explores the behavioral logic and constraints of why citizens are not willing to engage in the community interest articulation process under China's post-totalitarian authoritarian regime. Using the rational choice approach and multilevel modeling, this study employed data from the Chinese General Social Survey (CGSS). The analysis highlights several important results. First, the costs-benefits incentive structures are different when citizens make decisions on whether to participate in both the organized association community interest articulation process or the contentious community interest articulation process. The variable of 'democratic governance value' only influences citizens' participation in the process of contentious community interest articulation. Second, the socioeconomic variables of income, accumulated years of education, and party identity showed different effects on the two kinds of community interest articulation processes, thereby demonstrating that citizens' socioeconomic status under the context of China's governance do constrain their rationale in terms of choice preferences in community participation. This study enriches our understanding of citizens' community participation behavior and provides several clues for enhancing community governance capacities and designing public participation processes in Mainland China.起始頁-結束頁：65-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201809_(77).00039篇名：東亞新興民主國家政黨體系制度化的比較並列篇名：Comparing Party System Institutionalization in East Asia's New Democracies作者：魏德榮(Mark Weatherall)關鍵字：政黨;政黨體系制度化;政黨認同;選舉波動;東亞;Parties;Party System Institutionalization;Party Identification;Electoral Volatility;East Asia期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：77期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文主要討論議題<U+7232>東亞新興民主國家民主化時機與政黨體系制度化之間的關係。多數政黨體系制度化研究者依循著Huntington的理論，且研究區域侷限在西歐民主國家，或東歐、拉美等新興民主化國家，只有少數研究著墨於東亞新興民主國家政黨體系制度化的問題。本文根據總體選舉資料與亞洲民主動態調<U+67FB>（Asian Barometer Survey，簡稱ABS）的調<U+67FB>資料，發現東亞新興民主國家的政黨體系逐漸趨於穩定，政黨存在時間也不斷拉長。但同時，東亞地區公民對政黨的信任卻很低，而且不認<U+7232>選舉能提供人民<U+771E>正的選擇。所以，即使政黨體系在菁英層次趨於穩定，但這樣的發展並沒有向下和選民建立更強的連結關係。因此政黨體系即使日益穩定，也只能被認<U+7232>是「部分制度化」。然而，如何解釋即使政黨和選民之間的連結薄弱，同時選舉結果的可預測性卻升高，且政黨體系趨於穩定？經由研究東亞五個新興民主國家的案例，本文主張東亞國家民主化的時機點，可以解釋<U+7232>何政黨和選民之間沒有發展高度的連結。此外，多數決選制的採用使得即便缺乏政黨與選民高度的連結，也能出現使政黨得票的變動呈現下降的現象。英文摘要：This study explores the institutionalization of party systems in new democracies in East Asia and its relationship with late democratization. Following Samuel Huntington's work on institutionalization, there have been numerous studies on party and party system institutionalization. However, these studies have been largely focused on Western countries as well as emerging democracies in Eastern Europe and Latin America; only a few studies have looked at party system institutionalization in East Asia. This study uses election data as well as survey data from the Asian Barometer Survey (ABS) to explore party system institutionalization in the region's new democracies. The study finds that party systems in East Asia are increasingly stable and parties are surviving for longer. However, East Asians have low levels of trust in parties and do not believe that elections offer voters a genuine choice. In other words, although party systems in new democracies in the region are increasingly stable at the elite level, this development has not corresponded with a strengthening of links between parties and voters. Therefore, this study argues that the increasing stability of party systems in East Asia can only be described as ”partial institutionalization.” How can we explain the increasing predictability of elections that is happening at the same time as the continued weakness of linkages between parties and voters? The five cases in this study suggest that late democratization can explain why parties have not developed strong linkages with voters. At the same time, the adoption of majoritarian electoral systems can explain declining electoral volatility despite the absence of strong party-voter linkages.起始頁-結束頁：113-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201809_(77).000410篇名：美國主導伊拉克「聯盟臨時行政當局」的策略與成效分析並列篇名：An Analysis of Strategies and the Effectiveness of US Intervention in Iraq and Its Leadership of the Coalition Provisional Authority作者：王順文(Shun-wen Wang)關鍵字：後衝突國家重建;伊拉克聯盟臨時行政當局;臨時政府的設置;外來干預者的角色;Post-conflict State Building;Coalition Provisional Authority;Interim Government;Foreign Intervener期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：77期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文試圖了解外來干預者在臨時政府設置的角色，並探討美國主導伊拉克聯盟臨時行政當局的設置與相關政策、命令及其成效，包括去復興黨化與解散軍隊、治理委員會的組成，中央與地方的分權、歸還主權時程、民主選舉與自由市場機制等案例，並檢討其對美國戰略的影響。有別於許多文章較強調制度設計或重建成效，本文主張探討外在干預者於後衝突的臨時政府設置時，制度的引進或「善治」與否並非主要因素，相對地，似應先探討干預者如何看待自己的角色以及國家利益考量，同時，被干預國在國際體系中的地位、周邊行<U+7232>者與當地行<U+7232>者對於重建措施立場，將是主要影響臨時政府設置與政策的因素。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to understand the role of foreign interveners in the formation of post-conflict interim governments. It explores several policies and orders of the US-led Coalition Provisional Authority as well as the effects of these policies and orders, such as de-Ba'athification, the dismantling of Iraq's army, the Iraqi Governing Council's composition, separation of powers between the central government and governorates, returning sovereignty, democratic elections, and the introduction of a free market system during the Coalition Provisional Authority period. The purpose of this paper is to understand the role of foreign interveners in the formation of post-conflict interim governments. It explores several policies and orders of the US-led Coalition Provisional Authority as well as their effects such as de-Ba'athification, the dismantling of Iraq's army, the Iraqi Governing Council's composition, separation of powers between the central government and governorates, the returning of sovereignty, democratic elections, and the introduction of a free market system during the Coalition Provisional Authority period. Differing from the numerous articles that place greater emphasis on institutional design and / or the results of the reconstruction process, this paper considers that establishing an institution, or so-called ”good governance”, might not be the primary concern of interveners. Instead, the interveners are likely affected by how they view their role(s), grand strategy, and their own country's interests. This paper elaborates on how the status of fragile states in the international system, as well as the regional and local actors' positions on reconstruction, are also factors concerning the evaluation of an interim government and its policies.起始頁-結束頁：141-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201809_(77).000501篇名：「昆蟲學特論」課程培育國小在職教師的科技學科教學知識(TPACK)並列篇名：Training In-Service Teachers to Develop Technological Pedagogical and Content Knowledge (TPACK) by ”Advanced Entomology” Courses作者：盧秀琴(Chow-Chin Lu);方慧娟(Hui-Chuan Fang)關鍵字：昆蟲數位遊戲教材;昆蟲學特論;思考智能測驗;科技學科教學知識;科學過程技能測驗;Insect Digital Game Teaching Material;”Advanced Entomology” Course;Thinking Intelligence Test;Technological Pedagogical and Content Knowledge;Science Process Test期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：因應數位遊戲學習的時代，需要培育具備設計能力的國小在職教師，本研究採個案研究，以28名國小在職教師為研究對象，進行「昆蟲學特論」課程教學以培育他們具備研發昆蟲數位遊戲教材(Insect Digital Game Teaching material, IDGT)和高層次思考試題的能力。首先，授課教師以講述式教導昆蟲學知識、ADDIE模式、電腦軟體發展IDGT、如何配合IDGT設計「科學過程技能測驗」(Science Process Test, SPT)及「思考智能測驗」(Thinking Intelligence Test, TIT)。其次，國小在職教師試玩「示範的IDGT」後，以焦點團體法討論如何開發IDGT、設計SPT及TIT。最後，使用「數位遊戲教材設計評鑑表」(Digital Game Teaching Material Design Evaluation, DGDE)、「科學過程技能測驗評鑑表」(Science Process Test Evaluation, SPTE)、「思考智能測驗評鑑表」(Thinking Intelligence Test Evaluation, TITE)檢核之。結果顯示：一、國小在職教師學習昆蟲學知識後，能利用ADDIE模式，Scratch, Flash, PowerPoint, Smart Apps Creator軟體來開發IDGT。二、經過DGDE檢核，10組國小在職教師所開發的IDGT獲得A到AAA級的評鑑。三、經過SPTE檢核，10組國小在職教師所設計的SPT，評鑑獲得良到優的等級。四、經過TITE檢核，10組國小在職教師所設計的TIT，評鑑獲得良到優的等級。英文摘要：In response to the era of game-based learning, it shows the need to cultivate in-service teachers with the design capability. This study used case study and aimed at training 28 in-service teachers to have the ability to develop Insect Digital Game Teaching material (IDGT) and high-order thinking questions by ”Advanced Entomology” courses. First, a professor taught entomology knowledge, how to use ADDIE model and software to develop IDGT and how to design ”Science Process Test, SPT” and ”Thinking Intelligence Test, TIT” according to IDGT. Secondly, after playing demo IDGT, in-service teachers discussed how to design IDGT, SPT, and TIT through focus group method. Finally, it applied Digital Game Teaching Material Design Evaluation (DGDE), Science Process Test Evaluation (SPTE), Thinking Intelligence Test Evaluation (TITE) to evaluate IDGT, SPT, and TIT. The results showed that: 1. In-service teachers could use entomology knowledge, ADDIE model, Scratch, Flash, PowerPoint and Smart Apps Creator to develop IDGT. 2. In DGDE, the IDGT developed by a total of 10 group in-service teachers received A to AAA-level evaluation. 3. In SPTE, the SPT designed by a total of 10 group in-service teachers achieved good to excellent degree. 4. In TITE, the TIT designed by a total of 10 group in-service teachers achieved good to excellent degree.起始頁-結束頁：75-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.2017.2501.0401篇名：Caring-for-Self of Undergraduates: An Investigation of What Undergraduates Concern並列篇名：大學生「關懷自身」之調查研究–大學生關心自己哪些事？作者：郭丁熒(Ding-Ying Guo)關鍵字：care;caring-for-self;self;undergraduate;大學生;自身;關懷;關懷自身期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Caring-for-self, which originates from the concepts of Foucault and Noddings, explores the self-concept, self-discovery, self-performance, and self-shaping. This study investigated the current status of undergraduate caring-for-self and explored the differences in caring-for-self of undergraduates with diverse backgrounds. In total, 1,361 undergraduates participated in this study, which used the Caring-for-Self Inventory for Undergraduates as a valid and reliable instrument. The data obtained were statistically analyzed using descriptive statistics and a multivariate analysis of variance. The caring-for-self of the undergraduates surveyed was categorized into 5 dimensions: career, learning, spiritual, physical, and recreational. Among the 5 dimensions, the spiritual dimension was the most cared-for dimension of undergraduates, likely because of the influence of the Sunflower Student Movement which provided active discussion environment for undergraduates. Significant differences in undergraduate caring-for-self were observed for factors of grade, gender, religion, school location, and college. However, school sponsor and socioeconomic status factors revealed no significant difference on students' caring-for-self. Compared with Noddings's 4 vital concerns of peoples' caring-for-self, undergraduate caring-for-self in this study contains an additional learning dimension and excludes religion from the spiritual dimension. The added learning dimension indicated the salient role of undergraduates, whereas the absence of religion from the spiritual dimension may result from the cultural differences between the United States and Taiwan. This study offers 4 suggestions for undergraduates, educators, and university administrators and further researches respectively.英文摘要：「關懷自身」源自Foucault 與Noddings對自我概念、自我發現、自我實踐、自我形塑等概念。本研究旨在探討大學生關懷自身之現況及其相關因素，以自編「大學生關懷自身量表」對1,361位大學生進行調查研究。並以描述性統計、單因子多變項分析、薛費多重比較分析法進行資料處理與分析。研究結果發現：（1）大學生關懷自身之向度包含出路、學習、精神、身體、及休閒五個層面，並以精神層面之關心程度最高，此可能與太陽花學運提供討論氛圍有關。（2）大學生關懷自身之層面因其年級、性別、宗教信仰、學校所在地、及學院別而有顯著差異，但不因就讀學校公私立別及學生社經背景而有顯著性差異。與Noddings 所提出關懷自身之層面相比較，本研究發現臺灣大學生關懷自身之向度，多了「學習」，且精神層面不含宗教，此可能與學習是大學生的顯著角色及美國、臺灣間文化差異有關。根據研究發現，本研究提出大學生可多與他人對話、大學教師可採取議題中心取向教學、大學可建構資訊平台等建議，來增進大學生對自身之關懷。起始頁-結束頁：591-610資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201608252篇名：「精緻化推論教學課程」對國小弱勢低年級學童策略運用、閱讀理解與故事重述表現之影響並列篇名：The effect of 'elaboration curriculum' on the reading strategy, reading comprehension and story retelling for 2nd grade students作者：陳茹玲(Ju-Ling Chen);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);蘇宜芬(Yi-Fen Su)關鍵字：故事重述;策略運用;精緻化推論教學課程;閱讀理解;elaboration curriculum;reading comprehension;story retelling;use of reading strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探討「精緻化推論教學課程」對國小弱勢低年級學童之策略運用、閱讀理解與故事重述表現的影響。本研究以37 名北部偏遠地區國小二年級學童為對象，隨機分配至實驗組與控制組。實驗組接受為期九週、18 節課的精緻化推論教學課程，控制組自由閱讀，兩組學生於實驗的前測與後測分別接受中文年級識字測驗、二年級閱讀理解篩選測驗（複本A、B）、放聲思考測驗以及故事重述測驗。精緻化推論教學以直接教學法、放聲思考、以及責任逐漸轉移的教學模式進行。結果顯示：實驗組在策略運用、閱讀理解優於控制組，兩組在故事重述表現之差異接近顯著。英文摘要：The present study explored the influence of ”elaboration curriculum” on reading strategy, reading comprehension, and story retelling for 2nd grade students. Thirty-seven 2nd grade students from remote areas were randomly assigned to the experimental group and the control group. The experimental group received 9 weeks of elaboration curriculum, whereas the control group did not. All the students were required to take the following tests both before and after the experiment: (i) a word recognition test, (ii) the Standard Reading Comprehension Test (parallel form A and B), (iii) a thinking aloud test, and (iv) a story retelling test. The elaboration curriculum utilized direct instruction, thinking aloud, and a gradual release of responsibility teaching model. The results showed that the experimental group outperformed the control group in reading strategy and reading comprehension.起始頁-結束頁：303-327資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201509223篇名：從局部統合到整體統合的發展－以道德思考為例並列篇名：From Local to Global Coherence: The Development of Moral Thinking作者：林慧慈(Huitzu Lin);林文瑛(Wenying Lin);王震武(Jennwu Wang)關鍵字：矛盾;局部統合;道德思考;認知發展;整體統合;cognitive development;contradiction;global coherence;local coherence;moral thinking期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Piaget 主張，解決認知衝突，達成內在認知與現實的均衡，是促進認知發展的主要機制，因此，其理論顯然蘊含著，認知發展是解決認知矛盾，朝向認知統合發展的基本假設。同樣的，Kohlberg的道德發展理論，從情境利我取向到普世正義原則的發展，也意味著從特定情境的局部統合到整體統合之發展趨勢。據此，本研究想要探討道德思考的統合（coherence）程度是否會隨著年齡而越來越整體統合（global coherence），以驗證Piaget 與Kohlberg 理論背後的基本假設。本研究以兩個研究測試此假設，方法是編製有關偷竊、作弊、欺騙、守信主題的四個道德情境故事，針對故事主角的行為，提供兩個彼此矛盾的道德評價，要求參與者分別評估對這兩個矛盾說法的贊成程度。研究一以小學二年級、三年級及六年級學生作為參與者，研究二則以小學六年級、高中生、大學生到大學以上的學生作為參與者。兩個研究分別發展出具有年齡合宜性的實驗材料。參與者對於兩個矛盾說法若呈正相關，代表思考越局部統合，會同時接受兩個矛盾的說法，若呈負相關，代表思考越整體統合，對矛盾說法會接受其一，拒絕其一。研究結果支持Piaget 與Kohlberg 的發展假設，在多數的情況底下，道德思考隨年齡增加而越趨整體統合，但是由於「守信行為」情境在兩個研究中均為唯一的例外，因此思考統合性的領域特定性顯然是必須更進一步加以釐清的因素。英文摘要：The implicit assumption of Piaget's and Kohlberg's cognitive developmental theory is the development of cognitive coherence (equilibrium between internal cognitive structure and external environmental world) via resolution of cognitive conflict. The present study aims to investigate whether the global coherence of moral thinking develops by age. The researchers utilized four moral scenarios to evaluate the participants' responses to two contradicting arguments regarding behaviors of stealing, lying, cheating in an exam, and breaking a promise. The degree of coherence was evaluated by the correlation of the two responses. Since assessment materials should be developed differently for younger children and older subject, the researchers designed two separate studies for different age groups: Study 1 for elementary school children, and Study 2 for older subjects. Study 1 results showed that sixth graders' moral judgment was more coherent than third graders' except for the ”Breading Promise” scenario. Study 2 showed that college students' moral judgment was more coherent than sixth graders' except for the ”Breaking Promise” scenario, as well. Taking both Study 1 and Study 2 into account, coherence of moral thinking increases by age which supports Piaget and Kohlberg's theoretical hypothesis.起始頁-結束頁：329-349資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201601284篇名：寬恕教育課程對國小五年級學生寬恕態度與幸福感之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Forgiveness Education Course on Forgiveness Attitude and Well-being of Fifth-grade Students作者：楊鳳玲(Feng-Ling Yang);陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen)關鍵字：幸福感;寬恕教育課程;寬恕態度;forgiveness attitude;forgiveness education course;well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究從正向心理學的寬恕教育對於國小五年級學生進行一系列的寬恕教學，採用準實驗設計輔以學生回饋資料了解學生的學習成效，研究者探討寬恕教育相關文獻，瞭解與寬恕相關的教學活動在教學上的相關性與實際效益。研究樣本取自某國小五年級兩個班的學生，實驗組27 人，控制組30 人，共57 人。先實施「恩萊寬恕量表」和「兒童幸福感量表」前測，再對實驗組班級進行八次的寬恕教學，課程結束後一週，再實施「恩萊寬恕量表」和「兒童幸福感量表」後測。本研究發現：接受過為期四週的寬恕教育課程之實驗組學生，在寬恕態度與幸福感的後測得分上顯著優於接受一般綜合活動課程的對照組學生。學生經由寬恕教育課程可提升幸福感是具體可行的，並且能達到良好的教學成效，而且學生能夠接受寬恕教學的課程安排。最後根據研究結果與發現，提出若干建議以作為教師改進與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：This study utilized a quasi-experimental design and students' feedback to investigate the effectiveness of forgiveness education. A series of positive-psychology-based forgiveness courses were taught to 5th-graders and its effects on students’ forgiveness attitude and well-being were examined. The participants in this study are from two 5th-grade classes in an elementary school. A total 57 students were divided into two groups: an experimental group of 27 students, and a control group of 30 students. We first conducted a pretest using Enright Forgiveness Inventory (EFI) and Children Well-Being Scale, and then we provided eight forgiveness classes to the experimental group. A week after the completion of all classes, we collect post-test data through class observation, research team feedback, learning and feedback sheets for analysis. Students in the experimental group participated in a four-week forgiveness education course, while those in the control group participated in a course with integrated common activities. Results showed that students in the experimental group had higher scores on the forgiveness attitude and well-being post-tests than the students in the control group. Results indicate that enhancing 5th-graders' well-being through forgiveness education is practical, acceptable, and highly effective. To achieve optimal effectiveness, the teachers should take into account the teaching environment, duration of time, and presence status of students. Based on our results, we further propose several suggestions for teachers' improvement and future research.起始頁-結束頁：351-370資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201602235篇名：未來取向之自我調整學習模式考驗暨檢驗課室目標結構的調節效果並列篇名：Test of a model of future-oriented self-regulated learning and an examination of the moderating effect of classroom goal structures in the model.作者：彭淑玲(Shu-Ling Peng)關鍵字：未來目標;自我調整學習;個人目標導向;課室目標結構;classroom goal structures;future goal;personal goal orientation;self-regulated learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究統整未來目標與成就目標理論，建構「未來取向之自我調整學習模式」，以解釋學習者的未來、近側目標對其自我調整學習（SRL）之影響；此外，本研究加入情境因素，探討課室目標結構（情境）與個人目標導向（個人）之交互作用對SRL 的影響。為完成上述目的，本研究以768 位國中生為觀察資料，並以結構方程模式進行統計分析。結果顯示本研究提出的理論模式受到國中生觀察資料支持，並指出未來內在目標最能預測趨向精熟目標，未來外在目標最能預測趨向表現目標，而趨向精熟目標對SRL 的預測效果最高。再者，研究結果支持課室目標結構在個人目標導向與SRL 之關係上的調節效果：當學習者知覺到精熟目標結構時，能提升趨向表現目標對SRL 的正向預測效果；當學習者知覺到表現目標結構時，則降低趨向表現目標對SRL 的正向預測效果。本研究依據研究結果提出建議，以作為提供國中教學輔導與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：This study integrates future goal theory and achievement goal theory. This study aims to (a) construct a model of future-oriented self-regulated learning to explain the relations among students' distant goals, proximal goals, and self-regulated learning (SRL), and (b) investigate the moderating effect of students' perceptions of classroom goal structures within the model. 768 junior high school students were recruited to participate in the study. Structure equation modeling was used for data analysis. The results showed that the proposed model was supported by the observed data and truly suitable to interpret the relations among future goals, personal goal orientation, and SRL among Taiwanese students. Future intrinsic goal was found to be most strongly related to approach-mastery goal, whereas future extrinsic goal most closely associated with approach-performance goal. Also, approach-mastery goal had the strongest positive influence on SRL. Regarding the moderating role, it was found that classroom goal structures moderated the relation between personal goal orientation and SRL; namely, the small, positive relationship between approach-performance goal and SRL was enhanced within mastery classroom goal structures but was reduced within performance classroom goal structures. This empirical study not only contributes to theory development but also sheds light on the practice of teaching and mentoring.起始頁-結束頁：371-397資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201603046篇名：臺灣青少年憂鬱情緒與偏差行為之縱貫性研究並列篇名：A Longitudinal Study of Depressive Mood and Deviant Behavior in Taiwanese Adolescents作者：賴慧敏(Hui-Min Lai);鄭博文(Po-Wen Cheng);陳清檳(Chin-Pin Chen)關鍵字：青少年;偏差行為;臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;縱貫性研究;憂鬱情緒;adolescents;deviant behaviors;depressive moods;longitudinal study;Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：目前多數研究通常將青少年憂鬱情緒與偏差行為分開檢測，且多為橫斷面研究。本研究旨在探討青少年國一至高三階段，憂鬱情緒與偏差行為的關聯性及發展變化，並細究男女的差異性。本研究採用縱貫性調查，以臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（Taiwan Education Panel Survey, TEPS）之2001年、2003 年、2005 年及2007 年國高中職學生資料，四個時間點的重覆測量資料，共計3,506 位固定樣本追蹤資料，以交叉延宕模型（Autoregressive Cross-Lagged Model, ARCL）及潛在成長曲線模型（Latent Growth Curve Model, LGCM）進行資料分析。研究結果發現：（1）青少年憂鬱情緒與偏差行為好發於國三時期。整體來看，國三階段為憂鬱情緒與偏差行為出現的高峰轉折點；（2）從性別差異來看，國一至高三期間，女學生憂鬱情緒明顯高於男學生，男學生偏差行為明顯高於女學生；（3）憂鬱情緒與偏差行為起始狀態具有顯著相關；（4）憂鬱情緒與偏差行為存在相互影響效果，男女生具有不同的發展路徑。文末，根據研究結果進行討論與建議。英文摘要：Many studies have explored adolescent depressive mood and deviant behavior separately, and much of this research is cross-sectional. The purpose of the present study is to investigate the relationship between depressive mood and deviant behavior, developmental changes, and gender differences in adolescents from 7th to 12th grade. Using a longitudinal approach, panel sample data were collected from 3,506 junior and senior high school students with the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS) in four waves in 2001, 2003, 2005, and 2007. Data analysis was performed using the autoregressive cross-lagged model (ARCL) and the latent growth curve model (LGCM). Results showed the following: (1) Depressive mood and deviant behavior generally occur during ninth grade. Ninth grade is a critical turning point in adolescent development that often leads to depressive mood or deviant behavior. (2) Regarding differences in gender, girls experience a higher magnitude of depressive mood, and boys exhibit a higher magnitude of deviant behavior. (3) The correlation between the initial status of depressive mood and the initial status of deviant behavior was positive. (4) The cross-lagged effect of depressive mood on subsequent deviant behavior is significant, and the cross-lagged effect of deviant behavior on subsequent depressive mood is also significant, with boys and girls following significantly different paths when developing depressive mood and deviant behavior. Further suggestions are also presented based on the study results.起始頁-結束頁：399-426資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201603087篇名：師生戀變奏曲？－女大學生師生性騷擾之經驗歷程並列篇名：A Variation of Professor-Student Affairs?-The Sexual Harassment Experiences of Female College Students作者：彭秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Peng);黃<U+56C7>莉(Li-Li Huang)關鍵字：大學女生;性騷擾經驗;師生性騷擾;female college students;sexual harassment between professors and students;the experiences of sexual harassment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學女學生遭受男性教師性騷擾的經驗歷程。研究係以深度訪談法進行資料蒐集的質性研究，受訪者為曾遭遇男老師性騷擾的10 位女大學生，事件均發生在大學就學期間。事件發生距受訪時間一年以內者6 人，距一年以上者4 人。資料的收集與分析之過程採用紮根理論的理念。研究結果顯示，女大學生在師生性騷擾的經驗歷程為：一開始是無以名之的困惑與不舒服，接著可能因對師者權威的尊敬、感恩或好感而出現自我催眠式地否認，也可能雖確認性騷擾的存在卻因擔心、害怕而加以忍耐、壓抑或疏離，只有憤怒才會覺醒，在有足夠支持時才可能伸張正義並考慮採取行動，這些都會影響事後的適應。本研究嘗試討論先前不同的師生關係對性騷擾經驗的影響，藉以作為未來性騷擾調查以及進一步輔導諮商與治療之參考。英文摘要：This study investigated female college students' experiences of sexual harassment by male professors. In-depth interviews were used to collect data. The participants in this qualitative research were 10 female students who had been sexually harassed by male professors during their undergraduate career; for six of the participants, the incidents had occurred within one year of the interview, whereas for the other four participants, the incidents had occurred over one year before the interview. Data collection and analysis were conducted based on the grounded theory. The results indicated that the participants went through a series of processes, which affected future adaptation. First, not being able to put a name to the harassment with confusion and discomfort. Then, self- persuasion to deny the truth in the reverence or acknowledgement or good- impression of the teacher, or tolerance, repression, or dissociation in fear and anxiety even when they confirmed and realized the truth. When they received support from others and discovered other victims, the awakened rage would activate the will to seek justice. This study also discussed how the relationships between professors and students had affected the incidents of sexual harassment. The results can be used as a reference in future investigations of sexual harassment and during counseling and psychotherapy.起始頁-結束頁：427-448資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201604278篇名：Examining Learners' Self-regulatory Behaviors and Their Task Engagement in Writing Revision並列篇名：英作課程實施成效：學習者態度及自我調整如何影響其多稿寫作之過程作者：張中倩(Karen Chung-chien Chang)關鍵字：learner's attitudes/beliefs;learner autonomy;Relative Autonomy Index;self-regulated behaviors;自我調整行為;相對自主指數;學習自主;學習者態度期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：48卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Autonomous learners are described as those who assume responsibility for and take charge of their own learning. However, research has pointed out that autonomy does not represent a fixed state but a developmental continuum, making it difficult to measure those in the transition of becoming autonomous. As one's autonomy development can be explained by one's self-regulatory behaviors, a learner's development of autonomy can be investigated through how he/she evaluates his/her participation in a learning task. This study aimed to explore students' self-regulation levels in the participation of writing assignments and revisions and their task engagement during the multi-drafting revision process. Twenty-eight students participated in this study. In an 18-week semester, the students were required to complete four writing projects, each with three drafts. The students received teacher feedback for revising their works. Data collection tools included one survey, students' drafts, and one interview. The survey assessed the students' learning attitudes/beliefs and their behavioral regulation; the writing drafts were used to identify their task engagement in revising from the first to the final drafts; the interview was further conducted to investigate factors affecting the students' development of self-regulatory behaviors and task engagement. The findings showed that more than 90% of the students perceived writing as a good way to improve their analytical skills, master the English language, gain a sense of pride in their own ability, and enhance their future career. In addition, among the 28 students, 18 students demonstrated consistency between their Relative Autonomous Indexes (RAIs) and their task engagement levels. Another ten students were further interviewed, and their responses indicated that semester workload, extracurricular activities, and genre preference could impact one's task engagement level in the revision process.英文摘要：本文著重探討大學生英文寫作之學習，主要檢視其自我調整程度及學習投入程度之間的關係。本研究設計以台灣北部某一國立大學應用外語系的學生為研究主體，共28 人，寫作課程採多稿設計，學生們在一學期18 週中，須完成四個文體寫作，每個文體須採三稿制，教師在每稿均提供反饋，學生藉由了解教師反饋、進行修稿，來精進自身的英文寫作。本研究探討兩個問題，首先透過自我決定理論問卷，來檢視大學生參與英文多稿寫作的動機因素，並透過問卷結果計算出學生個人的相對自主指數，藉以檢視學生參與寫作、修稿的原因為何？第二，本研究檢視學生一稿到三稿所接到的教師評語回饋減少程度，藉此探討學生在修稿方面的投入程度，總共檢視224 份文稿。研究結果發現，絕大部分學生積極參與英文寫作及修稿是因為想要增進自身的分析能力、英文寫作能力，並希望對其未來生涯有所助益。另外，在28 位學生中，有18 位學生的「相對自主指數」與其「自我調整行為」顯示強烈的一致性，學生「相對自主指數」的高低，可以對應到他們「自我調整行為」的高低，進一步的訪談結果顯示學生的學期課程負荷量、個人課外活動多寡、對文體的喜好程度，都會影響他們在寫作、修稿時的投入程度。起始頁-結束頁：449-467資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.2016020201篇名：學校推廣閱讀活動對國小四年級學童課後閱讀參與的影響：以悅讀101計畫為例並列篇名：The Effect of Schools' Reading Promotion Activities on Fourth Graders' Reading Engagement Outside of School: A Study of Happy Reading 101 Program作者：張芳華(Fang-Hua Jhang)關鍵字：PIRLS;多層次模型下傾向分數配對法;悅讀101計畫;閱讀活動;PIRLS;propensity score estimates in multilevel models;the HR101P;reading activities期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:2期出版年：2017中文摘要：在閱讀教育推行政策中，悅讀101計畫是屬於大規模推動的閱讀計畫，以推動閱讀活動為主軸，其目的之一在促進學生的閱讀參與。為評估學校閱讀推廣活動對於學生課後閱讀參與的效用，本研究參考概念導向閱讀教學的三個活動要素，運用2011年「國際閱讀素養進展測驗」（Progress in International Reading Literacy Study, PIRLS）資料，以多層次模型下傾向分數配對法進行分析。研究發現有：一、常接觸校內閱讀活動，即常給予學生自由選書和安靜閱讀機會，能提升課後閱讀參與；二、常接觸校內閱讀活動的平均效果並不受學校層級推行閱讀活動的影響。文末依據研究發現提出具體建議，作為推行閱讀活動與未來研究的參考。英文摘要：Among educational policies promoting reading, the Happy Reading 101 program (the HR101P) is a large-scale and activity-based reading educational program. The HR101P aims to increase students' reading engagement. In order to assess the effects of schools' reading promotion activities on students' reading engagement outside of school, this study took the three activity elements of concept-oriented reading instruction into account and used the propensity score in multilevel models to analyze data from the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS). The results are as follows. First, the fourth-graders frequently exposed to school reading activities with more opportunities of choosing preferred books and quiet reading became more engaged in reading outside of school on average than those counterparts without these opportunities. Second, the average effect of being frequently exposed to school-wide reading activities did not depend on the extent of the school-level reading promotion activities. Finally, based on the findings, this study concludes with suggestions and references to the authorities of reading promotion activities and to future researchers.起始頁-結束頁：101-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170663020032篇名：書評：Henry A. Giroux著《可拋棄式青年、種族化的記憶與殘暴文化》並列篇名：Book Review: Disposable Youth, Racialized Memories, and the Culture of Cruelty作者：鍾明倫期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：135-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170663020043篇名：寧為雞首，不為牛後？班級排名對個人學業能力的影響並列篇名：Rather Be a Big Fish in a Little Pond? The Impact of Class Ranking on Academic Performance作者：鄭皓駿(Hao-Chun Cheng);陳婉琪(Wan-Chi Chen)關鍵字：大魚小池;同儕效應;社會比較;學業能力;big-fish-little-pond effect;peer effect;social comparison;academic performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:1期出版年：2017中文摘要：身為班級的「雞首」或「牛後」，對一個人會有影響嗎？依照「大魚小池效應」（類同「雞首牛後」），學生每天長時間與班上同學一起上課、學習，班上同學的學業表現往往成為個人對自我學業表現評價的重要依據，進而影響其未來的學業發展：在班上排名前面（雞首），可讓學生更有自信去增進學業表現；反之，落後的班級排名（牛後）則減損個人自信。然而，「牛後」卻也同時意味著優秀同儕的正面影響。因此，在評估「大魚小池效應」時，如何排除同時存在的同儕因素，是一大挑戰。本研究利用「臺灣長期教育追蹤資料庫」與「一階差分模型」避免內生性與遺漏變項可能造成的估計偏誤。研究發現：一、對低學力的學生來說，身為雞首有相當大的正效應；反之，對程度較好者，雞首卻有負影響。二、同儕平均學業能力對所有人都有正面影響，但對程度較低者影響更強。英文摘要：Existing literature investigating the Big-Fish-Little-Pond Effect (BFLPE) emphasizes the dependence of academic achievements and self-evaluations on students’ levels of performance in comparison to those of other students. Being a ”small fish” (and the self-evaluations that result from it) is often assumed to negatively affect one’s intellectual developments. However, studies of peer effect imply that being surrounded by more extraordinary peers (i.e., being a small fish in a big pond) also benefits students' intellectual development. It is therefore necessary to separate the ranking effect from the peer effect if we want to evaluate either of the two. Using the data from Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS), this study attempts to provide a more adequate estimate of BFLPE by first-difference models. Our analysis indicates that, the academic performances of fellow students being controlled, higher class rankings are beneficial for low-achievers’ academic progresses but disadvantageous for those of high- achievers. It also suggests that the average academic performance of a student’s peers has a uniformly positive effect, although it is stronger for low achievers. This study contributes to existing knowledge by showing that BFLPE may not be a homogeneous effect for different groups.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170363010014篇名：大學學習成果總檢驗：合頂石－總結性課程並列篇名：A Total Inspection of College Student Learning Outcomes: Capstone Courses as Summative Courses作者：符碧真(Bih-Jen Fwu)關鍵字：合頂石;學習成果;總結性評量;總結性課程;capstone course;learning outcomes;summative evaluation;summative course期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:1期出版年：2017中文摘要：第二輪大學系所評鑑及中華工程教育學會的國際認證都強調學習成果導向，然如何檢驗學習成果，各系所莫不苦思解決之道。「總結性課程」被視為檢驗學習成果最典型的方式。本文旨在探討：一、總結性課程是學習成果總檢驗的好方法嗎？二、總結性課程要發揮功效，需有哪些配套措施？結果指出，總結性課程的初衷在幫助學生達到統整、收尾、反思、銜接的功能，而學生最後產出的學習成果展現系所的教學成效，順勢檢驗核心能力達成程度，故同時被視為大學學習總檢驗真實可靠、有效果、高效率的方法。其次，學生學術準備度是總結性課程成敗的關鍵，系所宜系統性規劃課程，使學生具備紮實的學術基礎後，總結性課程才能發揮功效。對於總結性課程這個新概念，希望拋磚引玉，引發更多討論，以於實踐時更臻完善。英文摘要：Student learning outcomes have been gradually emphasized in university program evaluation and IEET’s accreditation. Every program is striving to determine the best way to assess student learning outcomes. Capstone courses have been viewed as a typical assessment of learning outcomes. This study investigated if capstone courses are an appropriate method to evaluate student performance, and searched for relevant measures to make capstone courses work. The results showed that capstone courses not only help students with integration, closure, reflection and transition, but also serve as an authentic, effective and efficient way of summative evaluation for student learning outcomes. Moreover, a systematic restructure of university curriculum, including implementation of prior cornerstone and keystone courses, is necessary to make capstone courses work successfully. Since capstone courses are an imported idea, the present article hoped to provoke more discussions on this issue, thus making future implementation of capstone courses more smoothly.起始頁-結束頁：31-67資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170363010025篇名：縣市教育資源對學習共同體擴散影響之研究並列篇名：The Effect of Local Level Education Resource on the Diffusion of School as Learning Community作者：阮孝齊(Hsiao-Chi Juan);王麗雲(Li-Yun Wang)關鍵字：事件歷史分析;空間分析;政策擴散;學習共同體;擴散;event history analysis;spatial analysis, policy diffusion;school as learning community;diffusion期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:1期出版年：2017中文摘要：擴散指一項創新從一地逐漸散布到其他地區的過程，在政府部門中代表決策受到別處創新的影響。目前臺灣在政策及方案擴散的模式及影響因素的研究相當有限，其理論仍待探究。在國外研究中，在地政府的鄰近縣市影響以及內在資源，被視為是重要的影響因素。本研究的目的在透過空間分析以及事件歷史分析的模式建構，探究臺灣學習共同體擴散的過程，分析其中的資源影響因素。研究主要發現為：一、各縣市存在不同學習共同體採用時間及方式；二、學習共同體擴散在研習次數上具有鄰近效應；三、資源影響因素包括教師負擔、財政依賴度、平均教育水準、相關研習辦理。據此，本研究對中央財政及縣市教育實務提出相關建議。英文摘要：Diffusion is the process of one innovation spreading to other areas. To the governments, diffusion means policy making affected by the innovations in other places. In Taiwan, the research on the factors affecting policy and program diffusion as well as its models is under development. In previous studies, the neighborhood effect of nearby local jurisdictions and their internal resources are seen as important factors of diffusion. In this research the process and the resources affecting the diffusion of school as learning community in Taiwan are analyzed via spatial analysis and event history analysis. The result shows that (1) there exist differences in terms of time and models among different counties; (2) neighborhood effect exists in the diffusion of activities for school as learning community; (3) internal factors included subsidy dependence, teacher-student ratio, the higher education students population ratio, and the impact of the hours of teacher training courses in the previous semester. Recommendations for central government and local educationauthorities are provided based on findings.起始頁-結束頁：69-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820170363010036篇名：偏鄉與弱勢？法規鬆綁、空間治理與教育創新的可能並列篇名：Remote Areas and the Disadvantages? Law Deregulation, Space Governance, and the Possibility of Education Innovation作者：王慧蘭期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：63:1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：109-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201703630100401篇名：「閱讀理解策略融入音樂欣賞」之音樂批判性思考教學行動研究並列篇名：An Action Research on the Application of Critical Thinking in Music to Examine the ”Music Appreciation Program Employing Reading Comprehension Strategies”作者：李宛倫(Wan-Lun Lee)關鍵字：音樂批判性思考;閱讀理解策略;音樂欣賞教學;critical thinking in music;reading comprehension strategies;music appreciation teaching program期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以「閱讀理解策略」進行音樂欣賞方案的教學設計與實施，欲達成「音樂批判性思考」的教學目的。以「閱讀理解策略」設計的音樂欣賞方案實施歷程中，研究者發現可達成「音樂批判性思考」成效如下：一、預測策略有助於描述與觀察辨別音樂的問題或情境。二、連結策略運用了核心思考技巧解決音樂的問題，並且以「音樂本身」進行實際的思考與行動。三、作筆記策略有效協助學生組織樂段並記錄。四、以公開的創意舞蹈表現出自身對音樂元素的連結與假設，符合音樂反思的最後階段。五、以心智圖作筆記，提出對於音樂作品中的觀察與感受，自我監控學習成果。英文摘要：This study adopted ”reading comprehension strategy” in the design and implementation of the Music Appreciation Program in order to achieve ”critical thinking in music.” In the music appreciation teaching program that employed reading comprehension strategies, five research findings are as follows: (1) Prediction strategies can help to observe and describe the musical problems or situations. (2) Connection strategies use core thinking skills to solve musical problems, and to ”the music itself” actual thinking and action. (3) Notes' strategies can help students organize section and record music. (4) Creative dance in a public can show their own connection and hypothesis of the musical elements that corresponds with the final stages of musical reflection. (5) Mind map can display observation and feelings of musical works as well as self-monitoring learning outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：65-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420170613020032篇名：熬煉成為女教授的遙迢長路：德國女性學術人員生涯發展之管漏現象探析並列篇名：The Long Journey of Striving for Female Professorship: A Study on the ”Leaky Pipeline” Phenomenon in German Female Academics' Career Development作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：管漏現象;人事制度;性別平等;leaky pipeline;personnel system;gender equality期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究透過文件分析法，探究德國女教授的生涯發展所受的歧視與險阻；在德國大學發展的歷史長河，隨著社會變遷與女性運動所帶來的壓力，自20世紀初大學做為女性的禁地才慢慢解凍，但至1990年代末，通過教授備選資格的女性，獲得教授任命的機會仍遠低於男性，此因學術成就與卓越的認定深具男性色彩，再加上女性學術網絡貧乏，而導致其學術成果難以獲得相應的重視，因此女性學術人員的「管漏現象」一直存在著。近年來女性教授任命的比例雖已大幅改善，但女性常被任命為較低職級的教授，此因學術界之男性色彩烙印難以根除，學術結構不利於女性之發展。英文摘要：In this paper I use document analysis to investigate the gender discrimination and professional difficulties faced by female faculty members of universities in Germany. During its long history, as a result of the social changes brought about by the feminist movement, this situation slowly began to change during the early twentieth century. Nonetheless, despite having the requisite qualifications, by the 1990s relatively few women gained academic appointments. The main reasons for this have been male bias in the evaluation of academic achievements and the less extensive academic network of females, which resulted in their achievements receiving less recognition. This situation has given rise to what has been referred to as the ”leaky pipe” phenomenon. Although in recent years the proportion of female faculty has begun to increase, they tend to occupy lower positions in the academic hierarchy. At present, the gender bias in German academia continues to thwart the professional development of female academics.起始頁-結束頁：103-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420170613020043篇名：從臺灣國民小學新住民語文教育現況論師資培育並列篇名：Suggestions for New-Immigrant Language Teachers' Training: Current Implementation of Education Approach in Taiwan Elementary Schools作者：張雅粱(Ya-Liang Chang)關鍵字：師資培育;教師職能;新住民語文;國民小學;teacher training;teacher competency;new-immigrant language;elementary school期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：新住民語文教育教師職能不足，在教法、教材和評量上都出現教學困境，凸顯出師資培育（師培）的重要性，但現階段的師培對教學困境的協助有限，顯示教學困境與師培間的供需關係未能有效建立。本文採質化研究，包含焦點團體訪談、深度訪談與入班觀察；研究目的是要從新住民語文教育現況了解師培的問題。研究發現師培的問題有三：（一）欠缺常設機構主導。（二）師培課程實用性不足，且強調華語文教案書寫。（三）欠缺合宜教材。上述問題來自結構，可能也是教學與師培間未能有效建立供需的主因。本文剖析新住民語文教育困境，並輔以新住民語文老師對師培的需求，提供可行之短期師培案與建議。英文摘要：New-immigrant language courses will be implemented as quickly as the 107 academic year in Taiwan elementary schools. Because of the lack of teacher competency, difficulties with teaching methods, teaching materials and teaching assessment have emerged. For the above reasons, teacher training has become very important. Currently, the effectiveness of teacher training is limited because of the supply-demand relationship between teaching and teacher training has not been established. The research method of this article is qualitative research, including focus groups, depth interviews and classroom observations. The aim is to understand questions related to new-immigrant language teachers' training in Taiwan elementary schools. The results of this study point to three problems about new-immigrant language teachers' training: (a) the lack of a permanent establishment to lead the way; (b) the courses lack practicality and emphasize writing teaching plans in Chinese language; (c) the lack of appropriate teaching materials. The above problems arise from the current structure and may explain the failure to establish an effective supply-demand relationship between teaching and teacher training. This paper analyzes the plight of new-immigrant language education, refers to teachers' opinions, and provides a short-term teacher training plan to address the above problems.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420170313010014篇名：「教師評鑑2.0」：美國的經驗與對臺灣之啟示並列篇名：”Teacher Evaluation 2.0”: Learning for Experiences of the United States of America and Implications for Taiwan作者：方朝郁(Chao-Yu Fang);方德隆(Der-Long Fang)關鍵字：教師評鑑;教師專業發展;零件效應;教師專業發展評鑑;teacher evaluation;teacher professional development;Widget Effect;Teacher Evaluation for Professional Development (TEPD)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：美國是最早實施教師評鑑的國家之一，近年研究卻發現評鑑功能不彰，暴露出「零件效應」（Widget Effect）的問題，無助教師專業發展。相對於美國實施教師評鑑已有多年經驗，臺灣繼推動教師專業發展評鑑之後，刻正進行教師評鑑立法，尚未正式實施。他山之石，可以攻錯。本文旨在分析美國教師評鑑的問題與革新之道，作為臺灣教師評鑑立法的參考。本研究採用文獻分析法，首先探討美國傳統教師評鑑的問題，歸納分析美國教師評鑑的革新方向與初步成果。接著，介紹臺灣教師評鑑的發展沿革，蒐集目前立法規劃的相關資料，條析評鑑制度草案之內容重點。然後，以彙整相關研究所得之教師評鑑制度設計要素作為分析架構，包括：評鑑目的、評鑑設計、評鑑內容、評鑑方法、評鑑人員、結果應用及配套措施等七個面向，剖析美國經驗的啟示，作為臺灣教師評鑑立法及實施的參考。英文摘要：The United States of America is one of the first countries to implement teacher evaluation. However, recent studies have found that evaluation tends to be dysfunctional due to the ”Widget Effect”, which is not helpful for teacher professional development. This study aims to analyze the problems and renovation of teacher evaluation in US to gain implications for the legislation of teacher evaluation in Taiwan after try-outs of Teacher Evaluation for Professional Development (TEPD). In this project, the literature analysis method was adopted to first review the history and problems of teacher evaluation in US, summarize and analyze the suggestions for improvement of traditional teacher evaluation to propose the innovative directions for ”Teacher Evaluation 2.0” and the initial results in the US. Secondly, the history and relevant information of the current Taiwanese teacher evaluation legislation was gathered and the content and focus of the draft was analyzed. Finally, the elements of the evaluation system design summarized in related researches were utilized as the analytical framework, including the following seven dimensions: evaluation purpose, evaluation design, evaluation content, evaluation methods, evaluators, the application of evaluation results and supporting measures. The implications were suggested to provide the reference for legislation and implementation of teacher evaluation in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：31-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420170313010025篇名：弱勢學生閩南語學習態度、口說能力與影響因素之研究並列篇名：A Study of Disadvantaged Students in Learning Taiwanese作者：林信志(Hsin-Chih Lin);謝名娟(Ming-Chuan Hsieh);簡瑋成(Wei-Cheng Chien)關鍵字：弱勢學生;閩南語口說能力;閩南語學習態度;disadvantaged students;Taiwanese oral proficiency;learning attitude for Taiwanese期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來，本土語文在十二年國民基本教育課程中占有一席重要地位，因而探究國中小學生對於本土語文學習態度與能力表現成為重要之課題。此外，弱勢學生在一般學習過程中往往比一般學生更顯得不利，本土語文學習上是否也是如此，值得實際研究探討。據此，本研究以參與國中小第三學期閩南語課程計畫的新北市五所學校，共計144位弱勢學生與367位一般學生為研究對象，進行前、後測的閩南語學習興趣與知覺口說能力調查。最後得到四點主要研究結論：一、對於閩南語的學習態度，弱勢學生明顯比一般學生為佳，但在知覺口說能力上兩者則無明顯差異；二、弱勢與一般學生的閩南語學習態度都會正向影響知覺口說能力；三、國中階段弱勢學生對於所抱持的閩南語學習態度明顯較國小弱勢學生為差；四、與媽媽同住、爸爸是閩南人會正向影響國中小一般學生的閩南語學習態度；與祖父母同住、媽媽是閩南人有助於國中小一般學生的閩南語口說能力；且國中一般學生口說能力表現明顯較國小一般學生為佳。英文摘要：In recent years, the native languages have attained an important position in Taiwan educational reform, and thus it is a necessary task to learn more about students' attitude and ability toward learning native language. Disadvantaged students in the general school education process are in less favorable position than nondisvantaged students, so it is worth exploring their differences in learning Taiwanese. This study surveyed five New Taipei City school students, and sampled 144 disadvantaged and 367 the others. Four major findings are as follows: (a) disadvantaged students are better than nondisvantaged students in attitude towards learning Taiwanese language, but there is no statistically significant difference in oral proficiency; (b) the learning attitude of disadvantaged students and nondisvantaged students both have a positive impact on oral proficiency; (c) the learning attitude of the junior high school disadvantaged students is worse than elementary school disadvantaged students; (d)”living with mother” and ”father is a Taiwanese” have a positive impact on nondisvantaged students' learning attitude; ”living with grandparents” and ”mother is a Taiwanese” also have a positive impact on nondisvantaged students' oral proficiency; junior high school nondisvantaged students' oral proficiency is better than elementary school nondisvantaged students.起始頁-結束頁：63-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420170313010036篇名：南美洲「南南合作」型國際高等教育區域合作探析並列篇名：A Study of Regional Higher Education Cooperation in South America作者：洪小萍(Hsiao-Ping Hung)關鍵字：南南合作;高等教育;區域整合;南美;南方共同市場;South-South Cooperation;higher education;regional integration;South America;MERCOSUR期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：兩極對立的冷戰結束後，世界經濟全球化與區域化進程加速。拉丁美洲亦循南南合作型態投入經濟區域整合建設的行列中。其中，南美的南方共同市場（Mercado Comun del Sur, MERCOSUR）希冀透過國際高教南南型區域交流合作計畫，促進區域整合進程。本研究採文件分析法為研究工具，旨從區域組織及大學聯盟兩個層次，解析南美國家以南南型高教區域合作為策略促進其區內高教國際化及區域整合發展之作為、成效及挑戰。研究發現南美洲之南南合作似有區域霸權的出現，須避免區域國家間不對稱發展，故宜弱化區域強國主導之體系結構；其次，不同組織各循途徑致力南南型高教合作，應協作及互補以達加乘效果；再者，南南型之區域高教計畫可運用的經費有限，尚須尋求區外經費的挹注，且有鑑於區際交流的重要性，北南合作仍不可或缺，而南北南三方合作模式持續發展中；最後，國內主政當局宜積極構思如何透過高教學術全面國際合作與交流之途徑，開創參與區域發展之多元性及可能性。英文摘要：After the end of the bipolar confrontation of the Cold War, the globalization of the world economy and the process of regional integration have accelerated. This worldwide phenomenon has attracted Latin America involvement in the construction of regional economic integration through South-South Cooperation (SSC). Among different zones of regional integration in Latin America, Southern Common Market Treaty (MERCOSUR) was established in 1991 that not only has gained progress in economy, but also has promoted the regional cooperation in education. Furthermore, higher education is considered as one of the key propellers of regional integration. The aim and meaning of this research lay in the analysis of the characteristics of MERCOSUR regional policies in the area of higher education as part of the broader political project within the integration agreement, focusing on the relevant discussions and problems of such regional policies and its relationship with the national definition of public policies. The research methods include literature analysis and document analysis. This research, by means of the examination of related bibliographies, attempts to analyze the planning and application of the above-mentioned topics.起始頁-結束頁：91-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201703130100401篇名：國民中學校長績效責任領導困境與策略之研究：質性分析取徑並列篇名：Difficulties Facing the Accountability Leadership of Junior High School Principals and the Strategies They Employ: A Qualitative Approach作者：張文權(Wen-Chuan Chang);范熾文(Chi-Wen Fan);陳成宏(Cheng-Hung Chen)關鍵字：校長領導;國民中學;紮根理論;績效責任領導;accountability leadership;grounded theory;junior high school;principal leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究目的為探究國民中學校長實踐績效責任領導的困境與實踐情形。採質性研究方法，以紮根理論進行編碼分析。第一階段焦點團體座談，主要在瞭解績效責任領導的困境及策略；第二階段個案學校訪談是延續焦點團體座談結果，並以立意抽樣選取具實務績效之個案學校，探求實務作為。研究結論發現：一、校長績效責任領導困境包含：衝突情境與權責失衡、信念落差與不信任感、成員觀望與保守文化及外界社區期望與阻力，此四項來自於個體與團體、制度與文化兩方面阻力之交互作用；二、校長績效責任領導之策略包含：發展願景與賦權增能、聚焦教育意義與承諾、形成承擔責任規範、推動親師共責並建立值得信任的品牌，此四項可建構個體與團體、制度與文化兩方面的交互支持系統；三、在校長實踐績效責任領導的個體歷程中，領導者信念及賦權增能等領導作為有其重要性；四、透過溝通歷程建立教師負起績效責任之共責的規範文化，是校長推動績效責任領導團體歷程中的關鍵作為。英文摘要：This study investigated the difficulties junior high school principals face regarding accountability leadership and examined strategies for resolving problems. A qualitative research method was employed, and a grounded theory approach was used for coding and analysis. The first investigation stage consisted of a focus group discussion chiefly intended to gain an understanding of the difficulties encountered and strategies used in accountability leadership. The case interviews employed in the second stage built upon the results of the focus group discussion, and purposive sampling was used to identify the practical behavior of the interviewees. The results of this study are as follows: First, the difficulties encountered in accountability leadership-owing to resistance from ”individual and group” and ”structure and culture”-include: (1) conflict situations and an inbalance between power and responsibility; (2) school members’ belief gaps and distrust; (3) the conservative culture in the teaching community; and (4) community expectations and resistance. Second, the strategies used in accountability leadership-which involve the construction of mutual support systems for ”individual and group” as well as ”institution and culture”-include the shaping of vision and empowerment, emphasizing educational meaning and commitment, cultivating norms for assuming responsibility, improving parent-teacher coaccountability, and promoting a trustworthy brand. Third, it is crucial that a principal’s belief and empowerment be emphasized during the exertion of accountability leadership. Fourth, establishing a normative culture of teacher coaccountability through communication is critical if principals are to enforce accountability leadership among group members.起始頁-結束頁：57-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(3).032篇名：教師參與海洋環境教育專業發展方案的投入程度：關注階層架構之運用並列篇名：Teacher Engagement in Professional Development for Marine Environmental Education Implied by the Stages of Concern Framework作者：李弘善(Hung-Shan Li);劉湘瑤(Shiang-Yao Liu);陳麗淑(Li-Shu Chen);葉庭光(Ting-Kuang Yeh);葉佳承(Chia-Cheng Yeh)關鍵字：海洋環境教育;實務社群;關注階層;community of practice (CoP);marine environmental education;stages of concern (SoC)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：海洋與環境教育已列為中、小學課程重大議題之一，以融入既有學科領域課程的方式進行教學，教師必須有能力選取適當素材、運用有效的教學法並選擇適當的時機在課室中實施，因此凸顯教師專業發展的需求。本研究規劃一個以建立海洋環境教育實務社群為目標的專業成長方案，分成招募期、媒合期和協作期等三階段。本研究報導此專業成長方案在招募階段對29位參與者所做的問卷調查結果，據以推估其持續參與專業成長方案和實施教學的意願。報名前施以問卷結果顯示，多數教師參與本研習課程的期望是充實海洋與環境議題的內容知識和蒐集可用的教學資源。運用關注階層問卷診斷教師對議題融入教學的關注類型，結果顯示僅七位參與者屬於有經驗的使用者，能關注此類教學對學生產生的影響和尋求合作管道，其中六位能積極投入專業成長方案；多數參與者仍屬於非使用者，處於覺察和資訊的關注階層，較低比例願意加入實務社群。本研究結果驗證理論模式，當參與者對革新課程的關注階層愈高，則持續參與專業發展的意願也愈高。建立實務社群作為專業成長方案的目標，可因應高關注階層的參與者對於尋找合作機會和提升學生學習成效的需求。英文摘要：Marine environmental education is a crucial topic that should be addressed by elementary and secondary school curricula. Teachers are expected to be capable of implementing marine education by adopting appropriate materials and effective teaching strategies. Consequently, there is an increasing need for teachers’ professional development to consider this educational field. A community of practice (CoP) professional development program was designed in this study to meet this need. The program has three phases: recruitment, stimulation, and collaboration. This article mainly reports the survey results of 29 participants collected during the teacher recruitment phase. In the recruitment survey, the majority of participants expressed motivation to increase their knowledge regarding marine environmental issues as well as to gather teaching resources. Data collected from the Stages of Concern (SoC) questionnaire revealed that only seven participants considered themselves experienced at teaching marine environmental science. These participants were either concerned about the effect on students of teaching in this field or interested in working with others. Six out of these seven participants continued to be active in the CoP program. Unfortunately, the majority of participants presented nonuser traits, had the highest concerns regarding stage 0 (awareness) or stage 1 (informational), and were less willing to remain in the program. This study endorses the theoretical model of the SoC, finding that the higher level of concern a participant has, the more likely he/she will be to continue to engage in professional development. The results also suggest that CoP as the goal of a professional program may fulfill the demands of experienced users regarding collaboration and improving learning outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：95-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(3).043篇名：國小教師使用教用版電子教科書之滿意度：以學校地區、資訊素養與教學環境狀況為探討因素並列篇名：School Region, Teachers’ Information Literacy and Teaching-Related Environmental Factors as Variables in Taiwanese Elementary School Teachers’ Satisfaction in Using Teacher-Version Electronic Textbooks作者：余心蓓(Shin-Pei Yu);魏彗娟(Huei-Chuan Wei);周倩(Chien Chou)關鍵字：使用滿意度;國小教師;教學環境;資訊素養;電子教科書;electronic textbooks;elementary teachers;information literacy;teaching environmental factors;user satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以臺灣各地區具有使用教用版電子教科書經驗之756位國小教師為對象，以問卷調查法瞭解教師對電子教科書的整體滿意度，並探討教師的個人背景因素是否會影響此滿意度，進一步研究外在環境在教師資訊素養與使用電子教科書滿意度之間的中介效果。研究發現有：一、國小教師對於電子教科書的整體使用滿意度佳，尤其是對「教學便利性」滿意度最高。二、教師的電子教科書使用滿意度會因個人任教學校之「學校規模」、「學校地區」、「是否處於偏遠地區」而有所不同。三、國小教師的資訊素養與其電子教科書使用滿意度之間，受到教學環境狀況之「資訊設備」中介影響。最後，本研究針對上述發現，進行討論，並提出若干建議供未來研究、教師及行政人員參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this survey study was to determine if Taiwanese elementary school teachers' satisfaction with teacher-version electronic textbooks differed because of demographic differences. Furthermore, the current study investigated the mediating effect of perceived environmental factors on the relationship between teachers' information literacy and satisfaction with electronic textbooks. The participants were 756 teachers at elementary schools in all areas of Taiwan. The major findings of this study were as follows: (1) In general, teachers were satisfied with the use of electronic textbooks. The dimension of ”convenience” received the most favorable score. (2) ”Number of school classes,” ”school region,” and ”teaching in remote/non-remote areas” had significant effects on satisfaction with electronic textbooks. (3) Environmental factors exhibited a mediating effect between teachers' information literacy and satisfaction with electronic textbooks. This study discussed the statistical results obtained and proposed suggestions and implications for teachers and future studies.起始頁-結束頁：125-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(3).054篇名：對話即實踐：網絡學習社群專業資本積累之個案研究並列篇名：Dialogue as Practice: A Case Study on the Accumulation of Professional Capital by the Networked Learning Communities作者：陳佩英(Pei-Ying Chen)關鍵字：專業資本;對話即實踐;網絡學習社群;dialogue as practice;networked learning communities;professional capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探究網絡學習社群之教學探究活動及其專業資本積累之實踐路徑與意義。履行者個案由七位臺北市立六所公立高中的國文教師組成。本研究為期2年，資料蒐集包含深度訪談與焦點訪談、觀察紀錄、問卷與文件分析等。本研究結合網絡學習社群、專業資本與對話即實踐之概念，以之深描與詮釋該社群之發展歷程與專業資本累積之關聯。研究結果除了說明國內網絡學習社群的發展脈絡，也討論了履行者成員投入跨校社群的理由、在實踐中形塑社群主體、善用社群媒體平台打破時空限制、透過教學探究的文本生成循環而使得專業資本得以積累，以及跨校社群的網絡擴散和未來發展。社群成員因理念相通而集結，當成員參與備課－觀課－議課之時，便是創造第三空間的集體探究活動。跨校社群經由集體活動中的言談與文本的生成循環，漸漸形成跨文本的理解，共享的優勢言談可以穿越學校城牆與教室，形成具備公共議題的敘事文本，並於教學文本的生成循環中進行探討和反思，繼而共創教育價值並賦予課程與教學新的實踐意義。英文摘要：This research explored the pedagogical inquiry activities of the networked learning communities (NLCs), and the path and meaning of its professional empowerment. The case study focused on a group of teachers named the ”Navigators,” comprised of seven Chinese Literacy teachers from six public high schools in Taipei. This study lasted 2 years and data collection included in-depth interviews, focus group interviews, field observation, and document analysis. The concepts of NLCs, professional capital, and dialogue as practice were employed to provide thick description and a thorough interpretation of the processes and changes involved in the NLCs. The results explain the context in which the NLCs originated, the drivers of participation, how agency was developed through collaboration, the use of social media for constraint-free communication, the use of professional enquiry and reconstructed lesson texts for accumulation of professional capital, and the network expansion that led to further development of new NLCs. When participants gathered for meetings and held discussions regarding lesson plans and instructional observation, they created a ”third space” for collective inquiry. Through cycles of professional dialogue and the recurrent production of lesson texts, a shared pedagogy was strengthened that guided professional discourse and enabled common understanding. This discourse was then continued within the teachers' respective schools to form a public narrative on educational practices. Along the process of recurrent production of talks and texts then practiced collaborative inquiry and reflection. This, in turn, shaped educational values and empowered the Navigators to be innovative with their curriculum and instruction.起始頁-結束頁：159-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(3).065篇名：The Trajectory of Cultural Taste: Influence of Intergenerational Educational and Class Mobility on Cultural Taste並列篇名：文化品味的軌跡：代間教育與階級流動對文化品味的影響作者：莊致嘉(Chih-Chia Chuang);林大森(Da-Sen Lin)關鍵字：cultural omnivores;cultural taste;habitus;intergenerational class mobility;intergenerational educational mobility;文化品味;文化純食;代間教育流動;代間階級流動;習癖期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Over the past two decades, Taiwan has undergone considerable industrial and social transformation. However, few studies have examined the relationship between cultural taste and social mobility from the perspective of social change. This study adopted Bourdieu's perspectives on habitus, cultural taste, and social trajectory as the theoretical framework and used the 1997 and 2007 data from the Taiwan Social Change Survey to investigate the effects of changes in cultural taste influenced by intergenerational social mobility. The results show that an extensive variety of cultural taste permeated cultural consumption behaviors in both survey years, a finding that contradicts the logic of class distinction proposed by Bourdieu; cultural taste can be used to effectively distinguish groups according to educational level and social class. In addition, the results of this study support the argument that social mobility trajectories affect cultural taste variety. The trajectories of intergenerational educational and class mobility were the key factors shaping variety in cultural taste. People whose class had been elevated intergenerationally exhibited more diverse cultural tastes than did those without upward mobility. Moreover, the number of strata crossed through upward mobility is positively and significantly related to cultural taste variety; people who experienced intergenerational educational upward mobility and those who crossed more strata through upward mobility exhibited greater variety in cultural taste than did those whose educational level was identical to that of their fathers. However, notably, people who experienced intergenerational downward educational mobility also exhibited greater variety in cultural taste than did those with no mobility. This observation deviates from observations among people who experienced downward mobility in class. Therefore, the trajectories of intergenerational educational and class mobility differ in their influences on cultural taste variety.英文摘要：在過去的20年間，臺灣經歷明顯的產業調整和社會轉型。但很少有研究從社會變遷的脈絡去瞭解文化品味與社會流動的關係。本研究以Bourdieu對生存心態、文化品味和社會經歷軌跡的討論作為理論基礎，使用1997年和2007年施測的《台灣地區社會變遷基本調查》去探討臺灣社會的文化品味變遷及代間社會流動對文化品味的影響。研究發現，1997年和2007年的文化消費行為都是以文化品味的多樣性為主要的特質，而非Bourdieu的秀異邏輯。子代的教育是影響個人文化品味多樣性的最主要因素，其次才是客觀階級。本文的研究結果也支持社會流動軌跡會影響文化品味多樣性的論點。代間的教育和階級流動軌跡是形塑文化品味多樣性的重要因素。代間階級向上流動者比非向上流動者有更多樣化的文化品味，而且向上流動的跨階數與文化品味多樣性呈正向顯著相關。代間教育向上流動者或向上流動跨階數愈多者都比再製父代教育位階者的文化品味更多樣化。但一個值得注意的現象是，代間教育向下流動者的文化品味多樣性也明顯高於未流動者，這個情形與階級向下流動者不同。因此，代間的教育和階級流動軌跡對於文化品味多樣性的影響作用並不全然一致。起始頁-結束頁：193-223資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(3).076篇名：數位學校實踐與展望並列篇名：Practice and Prospect of Digital Schools作者：陳德懷(Tak-Wai Chan);廖長彥(Calvin Chang-Yen Liao);鄭年亨(Hercy Nien-Heng Cheng);張菀真(Wan-Chen Chang);簡子超(Tzu-Chao Chien)關鍵字：一對一數位學習;家長投入;教師發展;實踐型研究;學習內容設計;adoption-based research;learning content design;one-to-one technology enhanced learning;parent engagement;teacher development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：一對一數位學習觀念已逐漸被社會所接受，但對實際教學現場的影響仍十分有限；這是因為將數位學習落實於教室，進而形成「數位學校」仍遭遇許多困難。研究團隊歷經十多年發展，自2009年，以長期採納實踐的模式為主，探索並驗證學生、教師與家長投入數位學習的意願與改變，逐步發展支援親師生的數位學習模式與平台，目標分別為：學生利用各式的數位資源主動投入自主學習或同儕互動；教師發展與落實數位教學的能力與課程；家長善用數位設備與資源來幫助學生。目前導入至數位學校已6 年，發展全國第一所由家長為自己孩子採購電腦的BYOD 模式，並達成學生學科成就明顯提升、教師學與教的典範轉移與家長態度從忐忑到信任等成果。後續將基於此成果與模式持續推廣與擴散。英文摘要：Although the notion of one-to-one learning technology is a recent development, its impact on schools has thus far been limited. To develop a feasible model for digital schools based on one-to-one learning technology, the present study employed an adoption-based research methodology to investigate how students, teachers, and parents have engaged with digital learning platforms since 2009. Through the process of understanding their willingness to use digital learning platforms as well as reasons for changing for better learning and teaching, the researchers gradually developed digital learning models and corresponding platforms. The study objectives are described as follows: (1) to facilitate students' active participation in self-directed learning and collaborative learning by using various digital resources; (2) to assist teachers in developing their capabilities for adopting digital teaching in classrooms; and (3) to assist parents in helping their children through appropriate use of digital devices. Based on these objectives, the present study established the first digital school in Taiwan using a bring-your-own-device model, where parents prepare personal tablet computers for their children. The results show that learning outcomes significantly improved among the students. In addition, the teachers transformed the paradigm of learning and teaching in classrooms, and the parents developed trust in digital learning. Based on these outcomes, the model designed in this study could be used in schools in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(2).017篇名：數位學習實驗研究品質評估與現況分析：以行動學習為例並列篇名：Quality Assessment and Situational Analysis of Experimental E-Learning Designs: A Case Study of Mobile Learning作者：李漢岳(Han-Yueh Lee);楊介銘(Je-Ming Yang);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung)關鍵字：行動學習;研究品質;實驗設計;experimental design;mobile learning;research quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：由於近年來行動裝置與教育應用軟體的快速發展，探討行動裝置輔助學習效果的實驗研究大量增加。然而，目前尚缺乏以評估實驗研究品質為主題所進行的回顧性研究。因此，本研究的目的即為廣泛蒐集ERIC 和SSCI 資料庫自2003 年至2013 年間，197 篇以行動裝置輔助學習的實驗研究，並探討其在實驗設計嚴謹度、統計考驗之過程與結果的正確性，以及成效評估工具的品質等議題。研究結果顯示，實驗設計以準實驗研究占最多數（61%），但有四分之一的準實驗研究未考量實驗組與控制組之起點能力均等性問題。統計結果效度部分則發現，半數以上研究未符合統計基本假設，七成研究所採用之樣本數偏低，使其統計考驗力低落，效果值估計情形未臻精準。成效評估工具品質部分，則發現半數研究者未提供相關的測驗信度與效度資訊。最後，本研究根據研究結果與討論，對未來研究者提出相關建議。英文摘要：Because of the substantial development of mobile devices and educational software in recent years, the results of mobile learning-based interventions represent a popular research topic for investigation. Although experiment quality is the basis of empirical research, few studies have explored this issue. Thus, the present study investigated the shortfalls in existing experimental research designs related to mobile learning over the past decade and offers suggestions in this paper. The researchers collected data from all 197 experimental studies on mobile learning published in the Education Resources Information Center and Institute of Science Index from 2003 to 2013. The findings of the present study are described as follows: (1) Quasi-experimental designs represent the most frequently used design type (61%); however, among the quasi-experimental studies, 25% did not consider baseline equivalence. (2) Over half of the studies may not have met basic statistical assumptions, and approximately 70% used insufficient sample sizes, leading to low statistical power and imprecise effect size estimation. (3) Half of the studies did not provide information on test reliability and validity. Finally, this paper discusses the results and their implications for future research and practice.起始頁-結束頁：31-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(2).028篇名：線上閱讀研究之回顧與展望並列篇名：Online Reading Research: A Selective Review作者：劉宜芳(I-Fang Liu);柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko)關鍵字：中小學;評估行為;網路搜尋;線上閱讀;整合能力;evaluation study;integration ability;online reading;school education;web searching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著網路的普及，線上閱讀已成為重要的生活與工作能力，其內涵複合了閱讀與資訊及通訊技術（ICT）操作，並以搜尋、評估與整合為關鍵能力。我國及許多先進國家與國際評量均已著手推動線上閱讀相關的教育政策。本文以評量研究為基礎，回顧網路興起前後，資訊、資訊及通訊技術與閱讀素養衍生的定義變革，綜觀近20年線上閱讀能力的研究發現，與國內中文線上閱讀相關研究，提出對未來教育與研究的展望，以期深耕國內線上閱讀教育，培養未來公民所需的能力。文獻回顧發現，國內、外研究皆顯示五到九年級學生之搜尋、評估與整合能力的表現不甚理想，且整合能力之發展有以搜尋與評估能力為基礎之趨勢。而中、小學生線上中文閱讀教學與學習困難的研究，在我國仍算少數。本文建議，未來教學研究可朝探究學生學習中文線上閱讀的困境、開發學習輔具與發展教材；教育政策面向則建議加強上述項目的教師專業培育，以及於國小高年級階段增設相關的學習指標，以利培養學生線上閱讀素養。英文摘要：With the development of the Internet and digital technology, online reading abilities have become critical in daily life, including in work and education. These skills, which include information searching, evaluation, and integration, are combined with reading and ICT skills. Many countries have started to reconstruct relevant policies in reading education, and the international literacy test organization has also rebuilt the test definitions to fit this new reading environment. This paper indicates how the definitions of ICT skills and reading ability have transformed in the Internet era. Studies focusing on students’ online reading skills published during the last two decades were included in the review, and Taiwan’s contribution to the field was also reviewed. The literature review indicated that students from the fifth to the eighth grades did not show adequate web searching, evaluation, and integration abilities. Some studies have demonstrated that the development of integration ability might depend on web searching and evaluation abilities. Moreover, few studies have focused on Chinese online reading teaching and learning. Thus, future studies should explore instructional programs and learning difficulties to ensure students’ acquisition of online reading abilities. Educators and policy-makers should support teachers to improve students’ learning and establish additional guidelines for the online reading literacy curricula for fifth- and sixth-grade students.起始頁-結束頁：61-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(2).039篇名：取得中學教職的關鍵因素：運用決策樹探勘師資培育歷程並列篇名：Critical Factors of Becoming Secondary School Teachers: Mining the Process of Teacher Education by Decision Trees作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang);葉怡芬(Yi-Fen Yeh);許瑛玿(Ying-Shao Hsu);曾元顯(Yuen-Hsien Tseng)關鍵字：決策樹;教師證書;教職;學科教學知識;decision tree;pedagogical content knowledge;teacher certificate;teacher job期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在透過大量的教育數據，運用資料探勘技術中的決策樹演算法，分析師資生於現行的師資培育歷程中，取得中學教師資格與取得正式教職的關鍵因素，以作為改進師資培育的參考。本研究以一所傳統師範體系的綜合大學2003~2010 年入學的師資生為對象，運用開源碼軟體Weka分類演算法中的決策樹，針對每位師資生經歷5 年培育歷程中修課與培訓的數據，進行資料探勘，用以瞭解取得教師證書與正式教職的關鍵因素。本研究主要結果為：一、三個主要學院（文、理、教育學院）的師資生取得教職所需年限有別（特別是理學院差異較大）；二、取得教師證書的關鍵因素是教育專業知識，而取得正式教職的關鍵因素則為專門知識與學科教學知識。此外，師資生拓展多元經驗亦有機會取得教職，且目前結果顯示教育實習成績並非是取得教師證書與教師工作的關鍵因素。本研究再以各類文獻驗證上述部分結果，提供師資培育較佳作法的參考建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to identify the critical factors leading teacher students to successfully receive teacher certificates and become secondary school teachers by mining vast educational data using decision trees in order to provide actionable suggestions to improve teacher education. The five-year learning evidence of the teacher students enrolled during 2003-2010 school years from a normal university in Taiwan was collected and then analyzed with the open source data mining software Weka by use of its decision tree algorithms. The major findings include: (1) Years spent to receive a teacher job were different among the three major colleges, namely colleges of Education, Liberal Arts, and Science; (2) Education knowledge is the critical predictor to receive a teacher certificate, while pedagogical content knowledge and content knowledge play the most critical roles to obtain a teacher job. In addition, more practical experiences were also useful to obtain a teacher job, and the score of education practicum was an ineffective predictor, as the current result shows. This study verifies part of the findings with previous work to provide solid suggestions for better teacher education practice.起始頁-結束頁：89-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(2).0410篇名：應用決策樹探索大學以上畢業生薪資之影響因素並列篇名：Decision Tree for Investigating the Factors Affecting Graduate Salaries作者：鄭永福(Yung-Fu Cheng);許瑛玿(Ying-Shao Hsu)關鍵字：大學畢業生薪資;台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;台灣教育長期追蹤資料來源後續調查;決策樹;迴歸樹;college graduate salaries;decision tree;regression tree;Taiwan Education Panel Survey;Taiwan Education Panel Survey and Beyond期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年由於高等教育的快速擴充，導致教育市場的競爭壓力激增，大學以上畢業生在勞動市場上的供需失衡，其薪資的變化逐漸成為社會大眾關注的議題。近20 年，已有諸多文獻探討大學畢業生薪資的影響因素，也建立相當完整的薪資理論架構。本研究目的在探究大學畢業生薪資的影響因素，研究以台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（TEPS）以及台灣教育長期追蹤資料來源後續調查：教育與勞動市場的連結（TEPS-B）為資料，採用資料庫的變項共1,303 個，設定研究三種薪資模型，分別是畢業初薪資、入職場後薪資以及薪資變動等模型，研究採用大數據資料探勘作法，分別對三個模型進行決策樹資料探勘，因薪資為連續變項，故採用決策樹中的迴歸樹方法，研究結果顯示：一、畢業初薪資模型篩選出教育程度、公司組織規模以及高中職二年級時的綜合分析能力。二、入職場後薪資模型篩選出公司組織規模、工作職務、工作時數以及高中職二年級時的綜合分析能力。三、薪資變動模型篩選出工作職務。本研究結果亦顯示，決策樹分析能夠有效地發掘出既有薪資理論之外的薪資影響因素，即高中職二年級時的綜合分析能力及答對題數。英文摘要：In recent years, the rapid expansion of higher education has led to a surge in competitive pressure in the education market and has increased the excess in university-educated labor supply. Thus, the salary of graduates is a major societal issue. Over the past two decades, a number of studies have explored the factors that positively affect graduate salaries, and have constructed a complete theoretical scheme. Our studies explored these factors by analyzing data from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey and Taiwan Education Panel Survey and Beyond, which together comprise 1,303 variables. The following three types of model were investigated: the initial model, workplace model, and change model. Data mining for the three models was conducted using a regression tree, a type of decision tree method for analyzing big data. The major findings of this research are described as follows: (1) Three variables, educational level, firm size, and academic achievement, were selected in the initial model. (2) Four variables, firm size, job title, working hours, and academic achievement, were selected in the workplace model. (3) One variable, job title, was selected in the change model. In summary, the decision tree effectively determined that academic achievement positively affects graduate salaries.起始頁-結束頁：125-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(2).0501篇名：空間能力的高階層因素結構模式競爭並列篇名：Model Competition of Higher-order Spatial Factor Structures作者：鄭海蓮(Hi-Lian Jeng);俞皓維(Hao Wei Yu);區雅倫(Helen Ou)關鍵字：高階層驗證性因素分析;參數估計;標準化空間能力測驗;模式競爭;Higher-order confirmatory factor analysis;model competition;parameter estimation;Standardized Spatial Ability Test期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究透過高階層驗證性因素分析與模式競爭，為標準化空間能力測驗找尋最佳的最簡約模式，因為根據該測驗的編製發展歷程，共有七個可能的理論模式，從一階、二階到三階均有。本研究樣本資料為臺灣地區高一學生1,641人，測驗共計18題，分屬四個題型與兩個空間能力因素，測驗資料屬二元計分變項。本研究同時採用最大概似估計法和對角線加權最小平方法進行參數估計，以比較不同參數估計方法對於分析結果的影響。結果發現，對角線加權最小平方法能估計與適配的模式較多，共有六個模式。而在最佳模式的競爭上，兩種估計法皆選擇同樣的一個二階模式架構，其第一階潛在變項為四個題型，第二階潛在變項為空間能力。研究結果確認該測驗具高階層模式架構，但是其他的高階模式不盡然比低階模式更為簡約，未來在測驗的應用上，本研究結果的二階層模式能有最好的解釋。惟研究結果可能受限於該測驗在因素、題型與試題數量上的限制，未來修訂測驗時，若能適度擴增因素、題型與試題數量的組合，其高階層結構的穩定性將更為可期。英文摘要：The purpose of the study is to find the best parsimonious explanatory model for the Standardized Spatial Ability Test (SPAT) through higher-order confirmatory factor analysis and model competition. This is because there are seven possible structure models including first-, second-, and third-order models according to the test development and construction of SPAT. The data used is the norm of SPAT, which is a sample of 1,641 first-year senior high school students. There are 18 binary test items categorized into four item types within two spatial factors. For parameter estimation, maximum likelihood estimation (ML) and diagonally weighted least squares (DWLS) are both used to compare their differential impact. Results show that there are six models fitted well by DWLS, more than those fitted by ML. Through model competition, the best parsimonious model chosen by both ML and DWLS is the same second-order structure of which, the first-order latent variable is the four item types, and the second-order is the spatial ability. It is confirmed in the study that higher-order structure models exist in SPAT, however other higher-order structure models are not necessarily better than the lower-order ones. The chosen second-order structure can provide best explanation in future SPAT applications. The results may be restricted by the limited numbers of spatial factors, item types, and items in SPAT. If there is revision of SPAT in the future, increasing the spatial factors, item types and items would lead to more promising and stable higher-order structure.起始頁-結束頁：107-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：臺灣民<U+8846>「美感素養量表」之建構與調查並列篇名：A Study of Scale Construction and Situation of Aesthetic Literacy作者：吳冠嫻(Kuan-Hsien Wu)關鍵字：美感素養;美感素養量表;aesthetic literacy;Aesthetic Literacy Scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究之目的是為了了解臺灣民眾美感素養，建構適合一般民眾的「美感素養量表」，透過文獻與專家建議，建構美感素養的面向，經過專家效度與項目分析，發展為「美感素養量表」。研究過程係以網路與紙本問卷方式對20歲以上之成人進行調查，並以變異數分析了解不同背景變項下的美感素養狀況。研究發現：美感素養會因為不同的性別、年齡、教育程度而有顯著差異，所處地區則無顯著差異。本研究透過建構「美感素養量表」，提供觀察美感素養的一種方式，希望在有利於迅速檢核美感素養之同時，還能顧及對重要美感構面的表現，並且帶入日常生活的美學化。藉由臺灣民眾的美感素養調查，能看到態度與習慣養成的重要，思索影響美感素養的因素，為後續的相關研究提供討論與深入研究的契機。英文摘要：This study aimed to understand the aesthetic literacy of people. According to the literature and expert advice, the dimensions of aesthetic literacy was built. Aesthetic Literacy Scale was constructed after item analysis and content validity. The researcher adopted both online and paper questionnaires to collect the data of adults above 20 years old. The study found that: different gender, age and education, would be significant differences in aesthetic literacy, and no significant differences in different areas. This study provides a way to observe the aesthetic literacy through the construction of the scale. Researcher expect a quick check of aesthetic literacy, while containing important aesthetic aspects, and the aestheticization of everyday life. To understand the importance of attitude and habits development, and rethinking the factors that affect people's aesthetic literacy. Provide discussion and further research direction to others.起始頁-結束頁：131-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：「高中（職）學生學習與讀書策略量表」修訂之研究並列篇名：The Development of the Revised Learning and Study Strategies Inventory: High School Version作者：吳淑禎(Shu-Chen Wu)關鍵字：高中職學生;常模;學習策略;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;high school student;learning strategies;norm期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在修訂「高中（職）學生學習與讀書策略量表」，以協助學生了解自己的學習與讀書策略，並作為學習輔導之參考。原「高中（職）學生學習與讀書策略量表」，係李<U+548F>吟、張德榮、林本喬、賀孝銘、洪寶蓮（1995）根據Weinstein的學習策略概念及其所編製之中學版「學習與讀書策略量表」發展而成。本研究延續前述架構，補充相關學習理論說明以及新增資訊載具題目，進行量表修訂。二次預試，分別蒐集456名及473名高中（職）學生資料，經預試分析（含項目分析與因素分析）以及專家訪談，確立所編修之學習與讀書策略量表內涵符合原架構。正式施測，將全國高中職學校分為北、中、南、東及離島四區，進行分層抽樣，計有3,321位高中（職）學生為受試者。研究結果顯示：(1)全量表之Cronbach's α為.94，間隔2週的再測信度為.82；(2)驗證性因素分析所得組合信度介於.80∼89，平均變異解釋量介於.41∼.58，且有良好之效標關聯效度，顯示發展之量表具有良好信效度；(3)編修完成之正式量表，包括：「學習興趣」、「學習動機」、「學習專注」、「閱讀與考試」、「時間管理」、「自我測驗」、「焦慮調節」、「訊息處理」與「問題解決」等九個向度，每向度有6題，計有54題；(4)針對正式施測樣本，除建立整體常模，並依不同性別、年級、學校屬性與地區，分別建立百分等級常模，作為相對地位的參照；(5)不同背景變項的受試者，其在學習與讀書策略的表現具有顯著差異。本研究並依據所得結果，提出學習輔導運用與未來研究建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to develop the Revised Learning and Study Strategies Inventory: High School Version, based on Lee, Chang, Lin, Ho, & Hung's (1965) inventory. Their inventory is originally constructed based on the theories of Weinstein and his development of Learning and Study Strategies Inventory: High School Version. Our development of the RLASSIHS is a new development with opinions from experts on youth learning studies in Taiwan. The sample of the twice pilot study for the development of the RLSSIHSV includes 456 and 473 youth and that of the formal study includes 3,321 stratification selection participants located in the north, central, south and east part of Taiwan. The results show that: Firstly, the Cronbach's α of the RLASSIHS is .94, retest reliability that interval 2 weeks is .82. Secondly, confirmatory factor analysis showed the composite reliability between .80∼89, average variance between .41∼.58, and good criterion-related validity. Thirdly, the RLSSIHSV has 54 items, consisted of nine factors: learning interest, learning motivation, learning concentration, study and examination, time management, self-check, anxiety regulation, information process and problem solution. Fourthly, the norms are established for the total, gender, grade, school attribute, and area. Finally, there are significant differences in the nine factors among the different demographic participants. Suggestions are provided for learning guidance and future research.起始頁-結束頁：155-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：結合輔助訊息之單向度試題反應理論能力值估計探究並列篇名：Exploring the Quality of Ability Estimates through Incorporation of Ancillary Variables based on Unidimensional Item Response Theory作者：吳慧<U+73C9>(Huey-Min Wu);楊智為(Chih-Wei Yang);辛柏緯(Po-Wei Hsin)關鍵字：可能值方法;能力值估計;試題反應理論;臺灣學生學習成就評量資料庫;輔助訊息;ability estimation;ancillary variables;item response theory;plausible value;Taiwan Assessment of Student Achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在以單向度試題反應理論的三參數模式為基礎，探討結合輔助訊息之不同參數估計方法對於群體能力值之估計效益。文獻顯示在估計過程中，若能加入輔助變數，將有助於提升能力參數估計精準度。本研究採用之參數估計方法有期望後驗估計法、納入輔助訊息之期望後驗估計法與可能值方法三種，等化連結設計採平衡不完全區塊設計，題本長度共設計為15題與30題兩種，並使用TASA 2010國二數學科之實徵資料，探討納入背景變項後對於能力值估計之影響。研究結果顯示：在估計群體能力值之平均數方面，納入輔助訊息之期望後驗估計法與可能值方法皆遠優於期望後驗估計法；在群體標準差方面，可能值方法優於期望後驗估計法與納入輔助訊息之期望後驗估計法，故可能值方法較適用於群體能力值之估計；在估計群體能力參數部分，增加試題長度有助於提升估計精準度；在實徵資料部分，納入輔助訊息之期望後驗估計法與可能值方法於受試者群體能力平均數估計時有相近的估計結果。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the influence of different estimation methods based on a unidimensional three parameter logistic model. Many researches have showed that incorporating student’s background variables such as gender, age, race, and grade level into the estimation process can lead to unbiased and more precise ability estimates. This study was to explore the performance in ability estimation under different estimation methods (expected a-posteriori method, expected a-posteriori method with ancillary variable and plausible value method), and test length (15 and 30 items). In addition, the usefulness of the estimation methods was examined through its application to the Taiwan Assessment of Student Achievement 2010 eighth-grade mathematics test. The results showed that the performance of the expected a-posteriori method with ancillary variable and plausible value methods are better than that of the expected a-posteriori method when estimating the group means. The plausible value method gets better results than other methods in estimating group standard deviations. The result showed that when the test lengths increased, the estimation accuracy in abilities increased. In the real data experiment, the expected a-posteriori method with ancillary variable and plausible value method have similar result in estimating group means.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：運用調整後之標準化殘差法檢視賴氏人格類型之分類並列篇名：Examining Classifications of the Li Personality Types through Adjusted Standardized Residual Analysis作者：方將任(Jiang-Ren Fang);黃財尉(Tsai-Wei Huang);謝文軒(Wen-Hsuan Hsieh);林佩蓉(Pei-Jung Lin)關鍵字：人格類型;調整後之標準化殘差;賴氏人格測驗;adjusted standardized residual (ASR);The Li Personality Test;types of personality期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：「賴氏人格測驗」為國內廣泛使用與肯定的人格分類工具，然實務上常發現有些特質難以歸類，再加上其分類標準的統計效果未見討論；因此，本研究欲進一步運用調整後之標準化殘差（adjusted standardized residual, ASR）法輔助檢視此人格測驗分類系統於統計上的適切性。本研究以450位大學學生為樣本，在.05與.01統計顯著水準下，檢視每位受試者在五種人格類型分數得分上的相對差異情形，並交叉比較分類結果。本研究發現，手冊中被歸為疑問型的人格類型，包含人格特質並不突出的真正疑問型，以及出現明顯雙重特質的「兼型」人格類型。另外，在各類型的分類標準中，發現A’、C’、D’等亞型人格分類分數的下限過低，以致有被歸入F型而彼此區辨不清的現象。文末根據發現並提出上修亞型人格的下限分數、縮小疑問型的界定範圍、增加「兼型」人格類型的歸類，以及注意內外向人格因素的解釋等建議。英文摘要：The Li Personality Test is one of famously applied personality tests in Taiwan. However, no evidences were shown its five-typed criteria supported statistically. Through a nonparametric statistical test (adjusted standardized residual, ASR, approach), the study intends to examine the appropriateness of personality categorized system provided by the Li Personality Test. There were 450 university students participating in the test. Two critical levels of significance, .05 and .01, were used as criteria of classification. Findings showed that ”non-identified” personality type can be classified into the ”obscured” and the ”compatible” ones. Additionally, the lower bound of the classification for subtypes in manual (A’, C’, D’) were too low to distinguished from each other and were dominantly classified as presented with the F type. According to the findings, suggestions of adjusting the lower bounds of personality subtypes, narrowing down the bounds of ”obscured” personality types, adding possible ”compatible” personality types, and concerning the interpretations of introversive and extroversive personality factors, were provided in the end of text.起始頁-結束頁：27-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「自發性量表」之編製及其信效度分析並列篇名：The Development of Spontaneity Scale作者：賴志超(Chih-Chao Lai)關鍵字：心理適應;自發性;自發性量表;psychological adaptation;spontaneity;Spontaneity Scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：自發性是心理劇治療的核心構念，與心理適應有密切關係。本研究旨在編製華人的「自發性量表」並評估量表之品質。研究一以251名參與者進行探索性因素分析，再以251名參與者進行驗證性因素分析，發現自發性為「自在」、「愉悅」、「有信心」、「有愛」、「活力」五因素模式；自發性與創造傾向、創新行為有顯著正相關。研究二針對研究一的參與者，間隔5週後再度施測，計有361名的參與者。自發性與其五分量表皆有良好的再測信度。此外，自發性與心理適應指標有顯著相關，與正向心理適應有高度正相關，特別是正向情緒與心理資本，相關係數都大於.70。自發性與常見精神疾病有中度負相關，與負向情緒有顯著負相關，惟相關較小。研究三以另外289名參與者交叉驗證分析下，適配度指標支持自發性測量模式有跨樣本穩定性的假設，表示本量表具有模式的穩定性。最後，本研究針對自發性研究與應用進行討論，並提出未來研究的建議。英文摘要：Spontaneity, a core construct of psychodrama group therapy, is highly related to psychological health. This research aims to develop a Chinese Spontaneity Scale and evaluates the quality of this self-reported scale. Data in study 1 were collected from a sample of 502 university students which were equally split into two groups. Exploratory (n = 251) and confirmatory (n = 251) factor analyses supported the five factor structure of the 21-item Spontaneity Scale. The five factors were named as ”free”, ”pleasure”, ”confidence”, ”felt love”, and ”vigor”. The Spontaneity Scale and its five subscales, with good reliabilities, were significantly related to creativity tendency and innovation behavior. In study 2,361 participants, previously tested, were asked to complete another questionnaire for a five-week retest of the measure. The result revealed good reliability and test-retest reliability. Spontaneity was correlated with several indices of psychological a daptation. Spontaneity was positively correlated positive affects and psychological capital, with correlations greater than .70. Spontaneity was negatively correlated with common mental disorders and negative affects. With another 289 participants, study 3 with cross-validation analysis revealed a well-constructed stability model. Finally, potential theoretical and practical applications of the scale were discussed, and several recommendations were proposed for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：51-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：經濟弱勢青少年的教師支持、同儕支持、家庭凝聚力與心理資本之關係：台灣貧窮兒少資料庫分析並列篇名：ECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED ADOLESCENTS’ TEACHER SUPPORT, PEER SUPPORT, FAMILY COHESION AND PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL: ANALYZING THE TAIWAN DATABASE OF CHILDREN AND YOUTH IN POVERTY作者：江守峻(Shou-Chun Chiang);陳婉真(Wan-Chen Chen)關鍵字：心理資本;教師支持;同儕支持;家庭凝聚力;經濟弱勢;貧窮;psychological capital;teacher support;peer support;family cohesion;economically disadvantaged;poverty期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的本研究旨在探究經濟弱勢青少年的心理資本狀態，以及釐清教師支持、同儕支持與家庭凝聚力對心理資本之影響。此外，本研究亦檢視教師支持、同儕支持、家庭凝聚力對心理資本之影響力是否存在性別上的差異。研究設計／方法／取徑資料來源為家扶基金會提供之台灣貧窮兒少資料庫，研究對象為曾受家扶基金會扶助之經濟弱勢的國中青少年，人數共計1,289人。資料分析採結構方程模式（Structural Equation Model, SEM）檢驗潛在變項之間的因果關係。並且，再以多群組分析發現測量關係的性別差異。研究發現或結論在描述統計發現，經濟弱勢青少年知覺到中高程度的教師支持、同儕支持以及家庭凝聚力，並且擁有中度的心理資本。在SEM結果發現，教師支持、同儕支持與家庭凝聚力皆為正向並顯著地影響心理資本，亦即三者皆可有效提高經濟弱勢青少年的心理資本程度。進一步以多群組分析發現，對提升男性心理資本之影響力依序為教師支持、同儕支持和家庭凝聚力，對提升女性心理資本之影響力則依序為家庭凝聚力、教師支持和同儕支持。另外，家庭凝聚力對心理資本之關係呈現女性顯著地高於男性；同儕支持對心理資本之關係則為男性高於女性。最後，教師支持對心理資本之關係並無性別上的差異。研究原創性／價值擁有良好的心理資本，有助於經濟弱勢青少年維持較佳的心理健康，並增加其在未來邁向成功的可能性。雖然近年來國內已累積部分探討心理資本的相關文獻，但較少探討國中學生的心理資本，或是以經濟弱勢青少年為對象之實徵研究。因此，本研究釐清教師支持、同儕支持、家庭凝聚力確實可以提升經濟弱勢青少年所擁有的心理資本程度，並發現可著重於不同層面，以達到有效地提升經濟弱勢男性與女性青少年的心理資本之目標。英文摘要：Purpose This study explored the psychological capital (PsyCap) status of economically disadvantaged adolescents and clarify the effects of teacher support, peer support, and family cohesion on PsyCap. Additionally, this study examined gender-based differences in the effects of teacher support, peer support, and family cohesion on PsyCap. Design/methodology/approach The data were retrieved from the Taiwan Database of Children and Youth in Poverty, provided by the Taiwan Fund for Children and Families. Participants were 1,289 junior high school students. Data were analyzed through structural equation modeling (SEM) to examine the causal relationships among the latent variables. Furthermore, the study applied multi-group analysis to reveal the gender-based differences in the estimated relationships. Findings Descriptive statistics indicated that the levels of teacher support, peer support, and family cohesion were medium high and that the level of PsyCap was medium for the economically disadvantaged adolescents. The SEM results indicated that teacher support, peer support, and family cohesion positively and significantly predicted PsyCap; that is, teacher support, peer support, and family cohesion could enhance the PsyCap level of the economically disadvantaged adolescents. Moreover, the multigroup analysis revealed that the factors influencing the PsyCap of boys are, in decreasing order of influence, teacher support, peer support, and family cohesion; for girls, they are, in decreasing order of influence, family cohesion, teacher support, and peer support. Additionally, the relationship between family cohesion and PsyCap is significantly stronger in boys than it is in girls, but the relationship between peer support and PsyCap is stronger in boys than it is in girls. Finally, no difference was observed between the genders in the relationship between teacher support and PsyCap. Originality/value Maintaining high-quality PsyCap supports economically disadvantaged adolescents' mental health and improves their opportunities for success in the future. Although several studies have investigated PsyCap in Taiwan, few have focused on junior high school students or economically disadvantaged adolescents. Therefore, this study explored the effects of teacher support, peer support, and family cohesion on PsyCap among economically disadvantaged adolescents and revealed that different perspectives can be emphasized to effectively and efficiently improve the PsyCap of economically disadvantaged girls and boys.起始頁-結束頁：11-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2504.012篇名：為弱勢教育而生：逆轉聯盟能力檢核表之發展與應用並列篇名：CREATION FOR DISADVANTAGED EDUCATION: DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATION OF THE ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY CHECKLIST FOR THE ”TAIWANESE TURNAROUND ALLIANCE”作者：陳秋政(Jose Chiu-Cheng Chen);柳憶柔(Yi Jou Liu)關鍵字：弱勢教育;逆轉聯盟;組織能力;檢核表;政策德爾菲法;層級分析法;Disadvantaged Education;Taiwanese Turnaround Alliance;Organizational Capacity;Checklist;Policy Delphi Method;Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的本文探討「社團法人台灣逆轉聯盟協會」如何創造協力工具，作為實踐其會員組織間大手拉小手的協力策略，文中也為前項工具的應用與限制提出說明。研究設計／方法／取徑依序執行次級資料分析法、實務觀察分析、兩回合政策德爾菲問卷、專家座談會，以及層級分析問卷調查等研究方法。研究發現或結論在政府服務能力不足、民間社會蓬勃發展之際，教育類非營利組織涉入弱勢教育議題的形式也日趨多元。在逐漸由與政府機關、營利組織合作，邁向與非營利組織協力之際。本研究為逆轉聯盟會員夥伴發展了「課輔機構營運發展檢核表」，以利推動同質性非營利組織間分享資源、網絡及經驗的願景。前述檢核表內容由6 項主構面、21 項次構面、80 項具體問項，以及主構面、次構面的權重值分配所組成。研究原創性／價值本研究突顯同質性非營利組織協力的價值與發展潛力，強調機構擁有檢核內容與條件的設定權，納入機構自評與專家複評的檢核彈性，同時主張個別扶植計畫對建構會員組織能力的重要性，藉此展現逆轉聯盟能力檢核表之建立目的是協力互助，其應用原則是自主、適性與陪伴。英文摘要：Purpose In this article, we explore the methods with which the Taiwanese Turnaround Alliance has created collaborative tools for carrying out the ”coach and partner” strategy for its member organizations, as well as depict the application and limitations of those tools. Design/methodology/approach Various research methods, including secondary literature review, participatory observation, two-round survey of the policy Delphi, group discussion, and AHP questionnaire survey are applied to carry out this study. Findings Due to insufficient government services and the vigorous development of civil society, non-profit educational organizations have developed a variety of ways to engage the issues of disadvantaged education. In general, the trend has moved from cooperation with government bodies and for-profit organizations toward collaboration with non-profit organizations. Meanwhile, the Taiwanese Turnaround Alliance created ”the checklist for agencies' operation and management” to carry out the vision of sharing resources, networks, and experiences among similar non-profit organizations. The checklist includes six dimensions and 21 subdimensions with respective weights, as well as 80 required or selective question items. Originality/value This article presents the value and potential of collaboration among homogeneous non-profit organizations. The checklist was designed so that the partner agencies of Taiwanese Turnaround Alliance enjoy the right to determine their own goals. With regard to implementation, the checklist provides self-assessment options and expert reviews for users. Furthermore, to continuously improve partner agencies' capacity, the importance of an ”Individual Support Plan (ISP)” had been emphasized. In summary, the aim for creating the checklist was to fulfill the collaborative beliefs of the Taiwanese Turnaround Alliance, under the practical principles of autonomy, adaptability, and accompaniment.起始頁-結束頁：51-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2504.023篇名：探索教育活動融入服務學習計畫對都會心靈弱勢兒童之影響研究並列篇名：IMPACT OF OUTDOOR ADVENTURE ACTIVITIES IN THE SERVICE-LEARNING PROGRAM ON EMOTIONALLY DISADVANTAGED CHILDREN IN METROPOLITAN AREAS作者：鍾啟暘(Chi-Yang Chung)關鍵字：服務學習;都會心靈弱勢;體驗學習;探索教育活動;service-learning;metropolitan emotionally disadvantaged;experiential learning;outdoor adventure activities期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的為利服務學習理念根植校園，教育部自2007 年起系統性推動大專校院服務學習，包括鼓勵各大專院校成立服務學習推動單位、規劃服務學習課程等，並自2014 年開始，推動大專校院以其辦理服務學習經驗結合服務學習課程的方式，透過客製化方案輔導鄰近高中職及國中小學，期使服務學習能向下紮根。而研究者即自該年度起連續三年參與相關整合型計畫，並擔任子計畫主持人，以「手牽手牽手」為主軸，由大學師資生的「大手」、帶領高中學生的「小手」、一起服務小學生的「小小手」。由於服務對象身處都會區學校，雖擁有較豐富的物質資源，但心靈上卻因為生活步調緊湊缺乏反思、家庭功能失調缺乏關愛、人際關係疏離缺乏安全感等原因，而產生心靈貧乏的現象，是屬於都會心靈弱勢族群。因而期望藉由本研究了解大學生帶領高中生以「探索教育活動」為服務內容，參與之兒童能否彌補心靈上相關之不足；另外也期望了解服務學生在服務過程中是否滿足被服務者的需求，並能透過反思獲得學習與成長。研究設計／方法／取徑本研究以所有參與的高中、小學教師與學生（包含大學、高中、小學）為研究對象，運用個別訪談、焦點團體訪談、活動中參與式觀察、反思心得之文件分析等研究方法蒐集研究資料，試圖了解都會心靈弱勢兒童透過此服務學習計畫之體驗學習後，其在各方面的影響為何，並以紮根理論的方法進行資料分析並形成結論。研究發現或結論研究發現此服務學習計畫透過探索教育活動的實施，對於都會心靈弱勢兒童主要有三個層面的影響，包括對自我的認識、對團隊的認同、以及對生活的體驗。其中對自我的認識涵蓋了「我希望是那樣的人」、「別人是如此看我的」與「原來我是這樣的人」三個部分；而對團隊的認同則包含「有人一起真好」與「我們是一個班」兩個面向；另外對生活的體驗則有「不是只有柴米油鹽」與「原來還有粗茶淡飯」等兩個方面。最後綜合討論上述之影響，並對於相關服務學習計畫的延續及未來研究提供建議。研究原創性／價值本研究首次針對國內之都會心靈弱勢兒童進行研究，透過大學生帶領高中生藉由體驗學習的歷程，使參與之兒童能彌補心靈上相關之不足；另外也了解服務學生在服務過程中，除能滿足被服務者的需求，亦能透過服務學習過程中的反思，達成互惠的結果。英文摘要：Purpose In an effort to bring the concept of service-learning to school campuses in Taiwan, the Ministry of Education initiated the systematic promotion of service-learning in higher education in 2007. The implementation process included encouraging institutions of higher education to establish their own service-learning centers and to design service-learning courses. In order to introduce servicelearning to younger students, the Ministry of Education requested higher-education institutions in 2014 to use their experience in service-learning to customize programs for nearby high schools, junior high schools, and elementary schools. Since 2014, the present author has participated in these customized programs, specifically as the director of the ”Hand-in-Hand-in-Hand” program in which college teacher trainees act as the ”big hands” that lead the ”small hands” (high-school students), who in turn lead the ”tiny hands” (elementary-school children). The ”tiny hands” children selected for the program reside in metropolitan areas and have access to a wide range of resources. However, several factors have negatively influenced these children such that they are classified as emotionally disadvantaged. These factors include the following: lack of introspection due to fast-paced lifestyles, lack of care due to dysfunctional family situations, and emotional insecurities arising from the lack of interpersonal relationships. This study is expected to be used to gain an understanding of whether college students can lead high-school students during the implementation of ”outdoor adventure activities” as the service content for elementary-school children. The study also seeks to determine whether the participating children can improve related mental health issues as a result of the program, and whether the service students meet the needs of the service, as well as learn and grow through reflection. Design/methodology/approach The participants of this research are the students and teachers of all participating institutions (higher-education institutions, high schools, and elementary schools). Data were collected through oneon- one interviews, focus-group interviews, participant observation, and reflection papers. Grounded theory was used for analysis. Findings This research found three areas of impact: self-awareness, team awareness, and life experience. Self-awareness was further divided into three dimensions: ”I want to be that kind of person,” ”this is how others see me,” and ”I am actually like this.” Team awareness was subdivided into ”it is good to be with others” and ”we are in the same class” dimensions; life experience was further grouped into ”it's not just the ingredients” and ”there's also the finished product” dimensions. The author discusses the combined influence of these impacts and makes recommendations for the development of future service-learning programs. Originality/value No other study has allowed college students to lead high-school students in facilitating experiential learning for metropolitan-based elementary-school students with emotional disadvantages in order to examine the latter. Through experiential learning, the emotionally disadvantaged children were able to improve their emotional capacity, while the older students were able to reflect on the personal fulfillment that comes from the giving of oneself through humanitarian work.起始頁-結束頁：91-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2504.034篇名：偏鄉青少年完成高中職學業的促進因素研究：以某偏鄉國中畢業生為例並列篇名：FACILITATING FACTORS ON THE COMPLETION OF HIGH SCHOOL DEGREES BY ADOLESCENTS IN REMOTE AREAS: A CASE STUDY OF GRADUATES FROM A REMOTE JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL作者：林淑君(Shu-Chun Lin);王麗斐(Li-Fei Wang)關鍵字：偏鄉青少年;完成高中職學業;促進因素;偏鄉國中;adolescents in remote areas;completion of senior high and vocational school;facilitating factors;junior high schools in remote regions期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的本研究擬探討能成功完成高中職學業或穩定就學的偏鄉青少年的適應歷程，探究他們克服這些困難和挑戰的策略，並找出有助於偏鄉青少年學業適應的因素與適應歷程脈絡，以成為其他偏鄉青少年們的標竿，有助於未來偏鄉青少年的高中職就學適應。研究設計／方法／取徑本研究採取半結構式訪談方式蒐集資料，邀請某偏鄉國中畢業生已完成高中職學業或目前穩定就學者為研究參與者，探究他們在高中職就學期間所遭逢的困境、他們如何克服，以及有助於他們完成高中職學業的因素。共進行五次訪談，接受訪談的偏鄉青少年共有16 位，橫跨四屆，其中女生5 人，男生11 人，已經高職畢業者6人，專科五年級3 人，高三6 人，高二1 人。六位已經自高中職畢業的學生中，五位已經進入職場，一位進入大學就讀。研究發現或結論研究發現，這群青少年在高中職就讀的挑戰包括：學業困境、到陌生環境的緊張不安、生涯未定向的壓力、以及經濟困難。支持這群青少年完成高中職學業的核心信念是「追求夢想」，透過不斷的自我鼓勵，或尋求家長、師長、同儕的協助以幫助自己克服困難。至於就讀高中職的意義，對他們來說是為了獲得未來工作的競爭力，想要獲得更好的生活；期待因為自己的爭氣，而能讓自己和家人有面子；以及夢想的自我實現。研究原創性／價值透過本研究結果，了解促進偏鄉青少年完成高中職學業的有利因素，可提供日後規劃偏鄉青少年輔導方案之參考，及早協助偏鄉孩子；也能在偏鄉青少年離家求學前為他們預作心理準備，以提高他們獲得成功的機會；本研究亦提供對偏鄉青少年之教育與輔導實務及研究之建議。英文摘要：Purpose The main purpose of the current investigation was to explore the adaptation process of adolescents in remote areas who were able to successfully complete their senior high or vocational school degrees. Thus, we examined the strategies by which they overcame these difficulties and challenges, and studied the factors and adaptive process contexts that help adolescents in remote areas to adapt successfully. The goal was to find academic benchmarks for adolescents in other remote areas and to aid adolescents in remote areas to adapt to senior high or vocational schools in the future. Design/methodology/approach Graduates from a junior high school in a remote area who had already completed senior high or vocational school degrees or were currently in stable study situations were invited to participate in the study. Five interviews were conducted; 16 adolescents across four classes in a remote area were interviewed. Five girls and 11 boys participated in the study; six had graduated from senior vocational school, three were fifth-year students in junior college, six were thirdyear students in senior high school, and one was a second-year student in senior high school. Of the six graduates, five were already working, and another attended university. Findings The study revealed that the challenges faced by this group of adolescents in senior high or vocational school included: academic difficulties, anxiety and unease at being in a strange environment, stress from lack of career direction, and financial difficulties. The core belief that supported this group of adolescents as they completed their senior high and vocational school degrees was the ”pursuit of dreams.” Through continuously encouraging themselves or seeking assistance from parents, teachers, and peers, they were able to overcome difficulties. For them, the significance of studying at senior high or vocational school was to acquire competitive abilities for future work and to live better lives; to experience positive feelings about themselves and gain the respect of family members through being assertive; and to self-actualize their dreams. Originality/value The results of this study can be used to understand the beneficial factors that facilitate the completion of senior high and vocational school by adolescents in remote areas. This can serve as a reference for the future planning of counseling programs for adolescents in remote areas to assist them early and to help adolescents in remote areas prepare psychologically before leaving their homes for school, thereby elevating the chances of success. This study also provides recommendations for the practices of education, counseling, and research of adolescents in remote areas.起始頁-結束頁：127-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2504.045篇名：從磁振造影研究探討數學學習障礙之認知神經機制並列篇名：THE COGNITIVE NEURAL MECHANISM OF MATHEMATICAL LEARNING DISABILITIES: INSIGHTS FROM MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING STUDIES作者：張葶葶(Ting-Ting Chang);龍姿蓁(Tzu-Chen Lung)關鍵字：數學學習障礙;磁振造影;神經網絡;介入研究;Mathematical learning disabilities;magnetic resonance imaging;neural network;remediation regions期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：數學能力不僅對學業與專業表現的成就來說相當重要，也是日常生活中，數量推理能力極為重要的一環。然而有一群人，包含學齡兒童、青少年甚至年輕人卻因其大腦結構與功能上的缺陷，而存在著根本的數學學習困難， 這樣的困難被稱為數學學習障礙（mathematical learning disabilities, MLD）。MLD 是一種智力與其他認知功能正常，只有在數學或數字方面有缺失的疾患。本文回顧當代腦造影研究中探討MLD 神經機制之文獻，探討主題包含：（1）MLD 者之認知與行為能力的缺損，包括相當初階之數量概念能力與基礎算術能力；（2）大腦中與數學能力相關之腦神經網絡，包括後頂葉、前額葉、內與外顳葉、及枕葉與顳葉交界，以及（3）MLD者的大腦在這些數學相關網路之結構與功能上出現的明顯缺陷；（4）在MLD 族群進行的介入研究與補救教學，以及其對MLD 者所產生之數學相關的表現改變與神經可塑性。本文末根據所回顧的文獻，提出幾個對於本土認知神經科學家以及教育者而言，仍待解決的重要議題。期待透過不斷進步的神經造影技術，我們將能翻開這個人類認知歷程中，數學是如何被學習的新篇章。英文摘要：Mathematical cognition is a cognitive domain that is crucial not only for academic and professional success but also for quantitative reasoning in daily life. However, a wide range of individuals, including school-age children, adolescents, and even young adults, have difficulties in learning mathematics, which originates from their innate deficits in the structural and functional aspects of the brain. This type of difficulty, which is also known as mathematical learning disability (MLD), is a serious disorder with specific deficits in numerical and mathematical abilities, although intelligence and other cognitive skills remain intact. In this review, we discuss about contemporary studies that have used neuroimaging techniques to investigate the neural mechanisms of MLD, highlighting (1) the cognitive and behavioral impairments in numerical quantities and basic arithmetic problem-solving; (2) the neural circuits of numerical problem-solving encompassing the posterior parietal cortex, prefrontal cortex, anterior and lateral temporal lobes, and ventrotemporal occipital cortex; (3) the neurofunctional deficits of MLD anchored in the numerical problemsolving network; and (4) the interventional studies on MLD and the tutoring effect that induces behavioral and widespread neural plasticity. Finally, based on the current literature, we propose critical issues that remain unsolved for local cognitive neuroscientists and educators. Through the lens of the state-of-the-art neuroimaging techniques, the understanding of how individuals learn mathematics that is the hallmark of human cognition will be uncovered.起始頁-結束頁：173-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2504.056篇名：THE QUALITY OF SINGLE-CASE RESEARCH FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS IN JAPAN AND TAIWAN: AN INVESTIGATION OF INTER-RATER RELIABILITY AND TREATMENT FIDELITY並列篇名：從評分者間信度與實驗處理忠實度評析日本與臺灣自閉症單一個案研究品質作者：Ee Rea Hong;蔡欣玶(Shin-Ping Tsai);陳佩玉(Pei-Yu Chen);龔麗媛(Li-yuan Gong);Jennifer B. Ganz關鍵字：autism spectrum disorder;single-case research;inter-rater reliability;treatment fidelity;Japan;Taiwan;自閉症;單一個案研究;評分者間信度;實驗處理忠實度;日本;臺灣期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Given this era of identification of evidence-based practices, previous reviews have provided a snapshot of the current status of the research quality of autism spectrum disorder (ASD)-focused studies. However, including only studies in English language journals does not represent the quality of the literature published in journals of languages other than English. To evaluate the overall quality of ASD intervention research in non-English-language journals, this systematic review summarizes the current status and trends of inter-rater reliability (IRR) and treatment fidelity in ASD-focused single-case research published in major academically oriented Japanese and Taiwanese special education journals. To conduct this review, the following three steps were taken: (a) literature search of the seven prominent special education journals in Japan and Taiwan, (b) assessment of potential studies against pre-set inclusion and exclusion criteria, and (c) study coding and analysis of descriptive study characteristics and measures of IRR and treatment fidelity. A total of 194 articles met the inclusion criteria for the review. The results show that an overall increasing trend in the number of articles that reported IRR data with acceptable levels were observed over time in the Japanese journals while no such trend was found in the Taiwanese journals. In contrast, it was found that no article published in the Japanese journals had reported treatment fidelity data while a small number of articles that reported treatment fidelity data with acceptable quality degrees were observed in the Taiwanese journals. As to the overall quality of ASD research, researchers in Japan and Taiwan are increasingly attending to quality with regard to collecting and reporting acceptable IRR data for outcome variables in their single-case autism-related articles. Yet, the evaluation of treatment fidelity and its IRR is still at the initial stage. To improve the overall quality of ASD intervention research, efforts should be made to report both IRR and treatment fidelity data based on the suggested standards with acceptable quality degrees in Asian-language journals.英文摘要：近年來國內外皆倡導選擇有實證研究支持其介入成效的策略或方案，目前國外已有數篇文獻聚焦於探討自閉症研究品質，然而這些文獻所分析的研究主要發表於英語系期刊中，故結論無法推論至發表於非英語系期刊的研究品質。為了瞭解非英語系期刊中 自閉症研究的品質，本研究採系統性文獻回顧，分析日本與臺灣主要之特殊教育學術研究導向期刊，以探討其刊登之所有自閉症單一個案研究的評分者間信度與實驗處理忠實度之現況與趨勢。本研究依（1）從日本與臺灣共七份主要特殊教育研究期刊中，搜尋文獻；（2）依預先設定的文獻選取與排除準則，進行研究評估；（3）針對文獻中描述之評分者間信度與實驗處理忠實度，進行資料編碼與分析等三步驟，最後進行194 篇符合選取準則之文獻評析。本研究結果如下：在評分者間信度方面，日本於過去數十年間符合單一個案研究評分者間信度標準的研究數量，整體而言呈現增加的趨勢，臺灣文獻則未呈現同樣的趨勢；在實驗處理忠實度方面，日本尚未有單一個案研究描述研究的實驗處理忠實度，而臺灣則已有數篇研究符合國際間檢視實驗處理忠實度資料的標準。就整體研究品質而論，日本與臺灣的自閉症單一個案研究已逐漸符合評分者信度間的標準，然而對於實驗處理忠實度的敘述仍處於初步發展階段。為了提升自閉症介入方案的研究品質，本研究建議在亞洲地區的相關學術研究論文應依建議的指標與標準說明各研究之評分者間信度與實驗處理忠實度。起始頁-結束頁：207-231資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2504.067篇名：跨域社會化經驗：候用校長教育局處行政實習實踐之分析與反省並列篇名：THE CROSS-FIELD SOCIALIZATION EXPERIENCE: EXPLORING ASPIRING PRINCIPALS’ ADMINISTRATION INTERNSHIP PRACTICE IN THREE LOCAL EDUCATION BUREAUS作者：陳宏彰(Hung-Chang Chen)關鍵字：校長培訓;行政實習;校長實習;另類實習;社會化;教育局處;principal preparation;administration internship;principal internship;alternative internship;socialization;local education bureau期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的：候用校長教育局處行政實習【局處實習】是臺灣校長培訓的一項新興方案。局處實習讓候用校長的行政實習，從學校場域跨域到教育行政機關。本研究旨在探究三個縣市個案中局處實習的實施情形。研究目的為瞭解局處實習的內容特徵、實習校長的實踐經驗，分析並反省局處實習對於實習校長和教育局處所產生的可能影響。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究採取質性取向的多重個案研究，依立意抽樣選擇三個縣 市之局處實習方案為研究個案。資料蒐集方法以深度訪談和文件分析為主，三個個案縣市總計訪談29人。研究發現或結論本研究之結論有四：（一）個案縣市中局處實習方案的內容特徵包含：以行政工作為本位的場域實習模式、長期集中式的實習規劃、官方論述展現出從行政支援轉向校長培訓的合理化趨向；（二）局處實習實踐使實習校長跨域社會化於行政科層規範與體制，獲得不同於學校校務實習的教育行政經驗；（三）在個體層面上，局處實習增益實習校長的行政能力、系統性思維、政策理解與執行動力、局處運作的理解和局處人脈網絡的建立；（四）在組織層面上，局處實習為教育局處暫時緩解內部人事頻繁更迭的問題，充實內部人力資源；亦有助於形塑「校長－局處」更緊密的互惠連結關係，有利行政業務推動，強化政策落實的績效。研究原創性／價值：近十年間候用校長局處實習方案已迅速遍及臺灣各縣市政府中，然在本研究進行之前，國內外鮮少有局處實習的實徵性研究。本研究結果除可補足國內過去鮮少關注局處實習的研究罅隙，亦可作為各縣市政府規劃與推行候用校長局處實習之參考。同時，本研究結果亦增進了國內外校長培訓研究對於「另類實習」的理解。英文摘要：Purpose The aspiring principals’ administrative internship (AI) set at the local education bureau is an emerging principal preparation program implemented throughout Taiwan. The program enables aspiring principals to develop administrative practices that can be transferred from the school campus to educational administration units. This study aims to explore how the AI program was implemented in three different cities/counties and to investigate the program features as well as the participation experience of the aspiring principals. Furthermore, this study analyzes and reviews the impact of the AI program on the aspiring principals and the local education bureaus. Design/methodology/approach The research adopted a qualitative approach with a multiple case study design. A purposive sampling method was utilized to select the AI programs of the three cities/counties as the cases to be studied. Data were mainly collected through in-depth interviews and document analysis, and a total of twenty-nine participants were interviewed from the three cities/counties. Findings This study came to four conclusions: 1. The case study revealed the following features of the AI program: the program is an administration-based, field-practice-oriented internship; the program is long term and intensive; the role of the AI has discursively shifted from providing administrative support to providing principal training programs. 2. Participation in the AI program provides a cross-field socialization opportunity to the aspiring principals to develop an understanding of the educational regulations and systems from a government administrative perspective and obtain an educational administration experience that would otherwise not be encountered in the regular campus environment. 3. On an individual level, the AI program has improved the aspiring principals’ administrative capabilities, systematic thinking, and understanding of both the policies and the policy implementation process as well as the operation mechanisms of local education bureaus. The program has also allowed the establishment of a network with bureau members. 4. On an organizational level, the AI program serves as a temporary solution to reduce staff turnover within the education bureau and provides much-needed manpower. The program has also facilitated the formation of a two-way relationship between principals and the bureau, and in so doing, the AI program has contributed to the bureau’s administrative operation and facilitated the effective execution of policy. Originality/value The aspiring principal AI program set within local education bureaus has been implemented across numerous cities/counties throughout Taiwan over the last ten years. However, prior to this study, there have been limited domestic or foreign empirical studies that have explored this subject. The findings of this study contribute to the gap in literature and provide a reference for municipal and county governments in the future planning of AI programs for aspiring principals. The results also create an enhanced understanding of alternative internships in the academic study of principal preparation programs at home and abroad.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2503.018篇名：我國國民教育階段學生輔導與管教之家長義務：協力義務觀點並列篇名：THE PARENTAL DUTY OF STUDENT GUIDANCE AND DISCIPLINE IN PRIMARY AND JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL: A COLLABORATION DUTY PERSPECTIVE作者：王等元(Deng-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：家長參與;協力義務;學生輔導與管教;懲戒法規;parental involvement;collaboration duty;student guidance and discipline;discipline rules and regulations期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究目的：本文旨在以家長學校「夥伴關係」，以及協力義務的觀點，建構我國國民教育階段學生輔導與管教之家長協力義務理論；具體而言，其研究問題為：一、學生輔導與管教行為之性質為何？二、學生輔導與管教之家長協力義務的理論基礎為何？三、學生輔導與管教之家長權利義務內涵為何？四、家長對學生輔導與管教之具體協力義務為何？最後，提出結論與建議供實務工作者參考。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究採用文獻分析方法，以蒐集、整理、分析我國國民教育之協力關係。（三）關於學生輔導與管教之家長權利與義務，前者係父母居於子女輔助者地位，所擁有之利他性權利；後者則為由該利他性權利所導出之協助其子女實現學習權之義務。（四）我國國民教育階段學生輔導與管教之家長協力義務難以落實實踐，亟待未來推動法制化與親職教育工作；美國中小學家長之經驗，殊堪借鏡。研究原創性／價值：本文跳脫傳統家長參與教育權之研究論述觀點，轉而從家長協力義務觀點探討我國國民教育階段學生輔導與管教之家長義務，可謂具有學術研究之原創性。另外，其研究發現與結論，對我國國民教育決策者與國民教育階段學生輔導與管教實務工作者具有參考應用價值。階段學生輔導與管教之家長協力義務相關文獻，兼以法釋義學解釋方法進行相關法律文本之詮釋分析。研究發現或結論：本文對於研究問題獲致以下結論：（一）學生輔導與管教行為 之性質，乃教師之學生管教權與家長之子女教育權之具體實踐。（二） 學生家長輔導與管教協力義務之法理基礎有三：其一為教育基本法重要本質理論；其二為家長協力義務理論；其三為學生家長與學校之協力關係。（三）關於學生輔導與管教之家長權利與義務，前者係父母居於子女輔助者地位，所擁有之利他性權利；後者則為由該利他性權利所導出之協助其子女實現學習權之義務。（四）我國國民教育階段學生輔導與管教之家長協力義務難以落實實踐，亟待未來推動法制化與親職教育工作；美國中小學家長之經驗，殊堪借鏡。研究原創性／價值：本文跳脫傳統家長參與教育權之研究論述觀點，轉而從家長協力義務觀點探討我國國民教育階段學生輔導與管教之家長義務，可謂具有學術研究之原創性。另外，其研究發現與結論，對我國國民教育決策者與國民教育階段學生輔導與管教實務工作者具有參考應用價值。英文摘要：Purpose The purpose of this paper is to describe the parental responsibilities for student guidance and discipline by interpretative epistemology of administration law from a Collaboration Duty Perspective. First, it explains the attributes of student guidance and discipline. Second, it discusses the parental rights and responsibilities for children. Third, it explores the theoretical foundations of parental collaboration duty. Finally, it makes some recommendations to practitioners and policymakers for future amendments of related laws and regulations. Design/methodology/approach Literature review and law hermeneutics are employed to discuss the abovementioned problems from a Collaboration Duty Perspective. Findings Research findings are: 1. The nature of Student Guidance and Discipline is both the practices of teachers’ rights to student discipline and parents’ rights to education participation. 2. The foundations of jurisprudence to the Parental Collaboration Duty for Student Guidance and Discipline are the essence theory of Education Basic Law, the Parental Collaboration Duty theory, and partnership theory. 3. The parental rights and responsibilities for student guidance and discipline include the altruistic rights to help their children and the responsibilities for helping their children to secure the rights to learn. 4. The state- of- the- art Parental Collaboration Duty for Student Guidance and Discipline is not good enough, and therefore we have to do our best to improve and promote parenting education in the near future. Originality/value This study holistically explicates the Parental Responsibility for Student Guidance and Discipline from a Collaboration Duty Perspective, and shows its originality in research methodology. Moreover, the results have the potential of high reference values for education policymakers and school teachers in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：41-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2503.029篇名：TASK- AND NON-TASK-SPECIFIC FACTORS CLASSIFYING PROBLEM-SOLVING EXPERTS AND NOVICES: COMPARING STUDENTS OF THE TOP TEN HIGH-PERFORMING EASTERN AND WESTERN ECONOMIES IN PISA 2012並列篇名：區分問題解決專家和新手的任務和非任務特定因素：比較PISA 2012前十名東西方經濟體學生之表現作者：金松麗(Songli Jin);張國祥(Kwok-Cheung Cheung);薛寶嫦(Pou-Seong Sit)關鍵字：problem solving;educational data mining;log file;classification and regression tree (CART);PISA;問題解決;教育數據探勘;log文檔;分類與回歸樹;PISA期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Purpose The purpose of this study is to make use of the computer-generated log files to derive task-specific indicator variables of problem-solving processes of an exemplary problem task (TRAFFIC) to examine factors of relative importance and thereby classify and differentiate high-performing problem-solving experts from low-performing problem-solving novices. Added to the task-specific indicators are non-task-specific variables collated from questionnaires administered in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2012 study. Design/methodology/approach The participants are 2,651 fifteen-year-old high-performing problem-solving experts and low-performing problem-solving novices who have responded to the TRAFFIC problem task coming from the top ten high-performing economies in the PISA 2012 digital problem-solving study. The educational data mining tool Classification and Regression Tree (CART) is the main analytic technique used. Factors found for the students of the top ten high-performing Eastern economies are compared with those of high-performing Western economies. Findings The factors affecting student performance in Eastern and Western high-performing economies share commonalities and differences. In the Eastern economies, the factors identified in descending order of relative importance are: Discovery of the optimal solution path of the problem task, mathematics self-efficacy, and experience with pure mathematics tasks at school. In the Western economies, the factors identified in descending order of relative importance are: Mathematics self- efficacy, discovery of the optimal solution path of the problem task, familiarity with mathematical concepts, and mathematics work ethics. Originality/value Based on the findings, educational practitioners may be informed how to design problem-based learning (PBL) in their respective economies. Furthermore, it is hoped that the methodologies developed are useful in furnishing new ideas to the future studies of digital problem solving.英文摘要：研究目的：本研究旨在利用電腦生成的log 文檔探索「交通」這道題解難過程中的任務特定指標變量，然後加上整理自「學生能力國際評估計劃（PISA）2012」問卷資料的非任務特定變量，檢視區分高表現問題解決專家和低表現問題解決新手有哪些相對重要的因素。研究設計／方法／取徑：本研究在PISA 2012電子問題解決測試排名前十名的高表現經濟體的15歲學生中，選取參與回答「交通」這一道題的高表現問題解決專家和低表現問題解決新手，人數合共2,651名。接著將學生分為東方高表現經濟體組和西方高表現經濟體組，分別以教育數據探勘工具「分類與回歸樹」作為主要的分析技術，找出區分高表現問題解決專家和低表現問題解決新手的因素，並將影響東方高表現經濟體和西方高表現經濟體學生表現的因素進行比較。研究發現或結論：影響東方高表現經濟體和西方高表現經濟體學生表現的因素有同有異。在東方經濟體中，探索出的影響因素按重要性排序依次為：找到任務的最佳解決路徑，數學自我效能感，和在學校中完成純數學任務的體驗。在西方經濟體中，結果依次為：數學自我效能感，找到任務的最佳解決路徑，熟悉數學概念，和數學中的敬業態度。研究原創性／價值性：根據研究結果，有助教育工作者在各自的環境中設計基於問題的學習方案。此外，本研究的分析方法，亦能夠為未來的電子問題解決研究提供新的思路。起始頁-結束頁：71-103資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2503.0310篇名：領導、能力建立與學校改進：概念、主題及影響並列篇名：LEADERSHIP, CAPACITY BUILDING AND SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT: CONCEPTS, THEMES AND IMPACT作者：陳文彥(Wen-Yan Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：105-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2017.2503.0401篇名：結合體感互動於國小五年級自然與生活科技領域之悅趣化學習的探究並列篇名：Effects of Motion Sensing Human Computer Interaction Technology and Game-Based Learning Environment for Elementary School Students作者：陶淑瑗(Shu-Yuan Tao);莊宗嚴(Tsung-Yen Chuang)關鍵字：悅趣式數位學習;虛擬實境;學習動機;體感互動技術;game-based learning;virtual reality;learning motivation;motion sensing interaction technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來結合資訊科技於學習活動以提升學習成效中一項甚受矚目的技術是，提供虛擬實境環境讓學生進行悅趣式學習活動，而體感互動技術應用於學習策略的變革也影響了數位化悅趣式學習活動的人機互動模式。本研究整合體感人機互動技術並導入悅趣式學習機制以建置體感互動之悅趣式學習環境，探討這些機制和環境對於學生學習的影響。本研究以國小五年級的自然與生活科技領域為研究之實證場域課程，在導入體感互動悅趣式學習活動後，分別以學習評量的前後測、與基於ARCS動機模式在引起注意、切身相關、建立信心、獲得滿足四個面向之學習經驗量表的分析，以檢測參與者的學習成效和探討其學習動機在此四個面向的影響。研究結果顯示，輔以體感互動悅趣式學習活動對於參與者的學習動機具有正面影響，且有助於增進學習成效；參與者也表示，體感技術支援之人機互動於操作面的便利性有助於引領進入沉浸情境。本研究並根據研究結果歸納研究結論，提出未來相關研究建議。英文摘要：With the emergence of motion sensing technology has brought learning strategy revolution and affected the learning performance of students. This ICT integrated with virtual reality and game-based learning as learning activities in learning environment could affect student's learning. Thus, this study combined motion sensing and virtual reality technology to build a virtual learning environment to support game-based learning activities. The purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of the learning environment on nature and life technology learning performance of the fifth and sixth graders. Students' learning performance was evaluated through comparing the pre-test and posttest. Through the process of playing games, the learning motivation was investigated in the note of attention, relevance, confidence, and satisfaction. The results reveal that the positive impact of motion sensing technology on engagement in learning activities, and enhance the learning performance. In addition, the game-based learning environment supported by motion sensing human computer interaction is not only convenient but also to lead into immersion situation. The results of the study are discussed and implications are provided.起始頁-結束頁：115-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170709030062篇名：結合即時診斷機制的行動學習與自我調整學習模式對學生運用概念圖的學習成就與行為之影響並列篇名：Effects of Real-Time Diagnosis on Mobile Learning and Self-Regulation Mechanism on Students ’ Learning Achievement and Behavior of Using Concept Mapping作者：伍柏翰(Po-Han Wu)關鍵字：自我調整學習;行動與無所不在學習;學習歷程;self-regulated learning;ubiquitous learning;learning portfolio期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：自我調整學習是指學生在學習活動中，進行連續循環及回饋反思的學習歷程。以往大部分的無所不在學習系統只提供真實情境的有限引導，並非整合過去的學習成果與學習內容加以引導與回饋，往往造成學生只了解片段的知識而無法確切掌握知識的全貌，導致學生產生學習上的迷失或困難。因此，本研究發展一套以結合即時診斷機制的行動學習與自我調整學習模式。探討在行動學習與自我調整學習模式中，學生使用概念圖學習與即時診斷機制的概念圖學習之比較。經實驗結果發現，具即時診斷機制的行動學習模式有助於實地觀察時新舊知識進行有效的連結，達成有意義的學習。且此學習模式有助於學生在時間學習歷程中不斷進行自我調整學習，進而提升學習成效。英文摘要：Self-regulated learning refers to students preceding the learning process with continuous cycle, feedback, and reflection in the learning activity. Nevertheless, most ubiquitous learning systems merely provided limited guidance in real-life situation, rather than giving guidance and feedback by integrating past learning outcome and learning contents. As a result, students simply understood fragments of knowledge, but not exactly mastered the complete picture of knowledge. Students therefore could hardly reflect the learning process through self-regulation mechanisms. A self-regulation mechanism based mind tool assisted mobile learning portfolio system is developed in this study. Mobile learning and self-regulated learning mode are discussed, students use concept map and real-time diagnostics the concept map study of comparative. The experimental results show that the learning mode with real-time diagnostics the concept map functions could assist in effective connection between new and old knowledge in the field observation to further achieve the meaningful learning. The students could also constantly precede self-regulated learning in the time learning process to promote the learning outcome.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170409020013篇名：行動科技應用於博物館導覽對學習注意力與成效之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Mobile Technology Application for Museum Tour Guiding on Students’ Attention and Learning Achievement作者：金凱儀(Kai-Yi Chin);李可風(Ko-Fong Lee);王慶生(Ching-Sheng Wang)關鍵字：行動學習系統;注意力理論;博物館導覽模式;學習成效;擴增實境技術;mobile learning system;attention theory;museum tour guiding mode;learning effectiveness;augmented reality technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來隨著數位科技的進步，博物館的導覽與學習模式也逐漸趨向多元化，亦帶動了行動式導覽模式的興起；相較之下，行動式導覽模式比起傳統文字導覽模式，提供較多的音訊、視覺、動畫等多媒體元素，而當這些元素過多時，學習者的注意力往往備受考驗，且容易受到干擾而分心。因此，透過行動式導覽模式進行學習活動，是否會影響學習者的注意力與學習成效，一直是備受重視的議題。故本研究發展一套具有多媒體展示效果的行動式數位學習系統，透過多媒體與擴增實境等技術的應用，整合並展示出具有歷史意涵的教材內容，進而讓學習者從事馬偕文物與建築物的學習活動。此外，本研究採用分組（傳統書面資料學習模式與行動式數位學習模式）測驗的方式，比較兩組學習者於學習成效及注意力上，是否會受到數位裝置或多媒體元素的影響，進而證明行動式導覽模式的學習成效；而本研究的實驗結果發現，實驗組學生不論是在學習成效還是專注力的表現上，都明顯優於對照組學生，如此的發現，也進一步證實，就算是在博物館這類有豐富實體資源的學習環境中，行動式導覽模式還是具有推動學習成效的優勢。英文摘要：In recent years, with the development of digital technology, the museum tour guiding and learning mode is also developed towards diversification gradually and thus leads to the rise of mobile tour guiding mode. In contrast, the mobile tour guiding mode can provide more audio, visual, animation and other multimedia elements than the traditional paper tour guiding mode. However, when these elements are too many, the students' attention is often challenged and they are easily get distracted due to interference. Therefore, whether the study activity through the mobile tour guiding mode would affect the students' attention and learning achievement has become a main issue. This study developed a mobile learning system that is used to present multimedia materials and content. This system also integrated multimedia and augmented reality technologies to introduce the historical story and present the 3D model of physical objects, and to provide different learning elements for students. In this study, the students are arranged to conduct the Mackay cultural relics and building study activity mainly with our mobile learning system and the group (traditional paper learning group and mobile learning group) test method is adopted to find out whether the study effect and attention would be affected by the digital device or multimedia element by way of comparison between the two groups of students thus to further prove the study effect of the mobile tour guiding mode. Our experimental results indicated that students assigned to the learning system achieved better results than participants learning via conventional methods. We believe that the mobile tour guiding mode is advantageous because it enhances student learning performance and attract their attention, even during museum environments that have rich physical resources. Thus, we conclude that the mobile tour guiding mode can create a learning experience that both interests and engages students.起始頁-結束頁：29-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170409020024篇名：Impacts of Integrating the Team Achievement Division (STAD) Strategy Into the SQ4R-Guided E-Book Learning on Students' English Reading Comprehension並列篇名：SQ4R導入電子書學習策略結合小組成就區分法對於學生英文閱讀之影響作者：吳婷婷(Ting-Ting Wu);王怡婷(I-Ting Wang);張紫翎(Tzu-Ling Chang)關鍵字：e-books;reading comprehension;SQ4R;student team achievement division (STAD);電子書;閱讀理解;SQ4R;小組成就區分法期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：In learning language, reading comprehension plays an important and critical role. However, for English as Second Language (ESL) learners or English as Foreign Language (EFL) learners, a large number of unfamiliar words and sentence patterns could present a barrier to reading comprehension and lead to a lack of interest in the reading activity. To eliminate these learning barriers, many teachers have been using reading strategies to enhance reading comprehension and reading motivation SQ4R, a reading method helps students make sense of unfamiliar informational texts; it can be broken down into many different and separate skills, which are necessary for successful implementation. However, SQ4R is a self-directed learning strategy. This study adopted Student Team Achievement Division (STAD), which is one of the widely used collaborative teaching strategies, to strengthen students' reading comprehension. What's more, in today's digital world, spreading knowledge is no longer limited to the medium of paper. Increases in digital content and electronic books have initiated a wave of reading revolution, overturning the traditional reading experience. In the study, the reading material is switched from traditional textbook to e-books. In this way, the multi-function of e-book, like translation and pronunciation, improves students' cognitive abilities. The main purpose of this study is to use the reading method and effective teaching strategy to enhance students' English reading learning outcomes, and analyze if the strategies reach students' learning satisfaction and make them be willing to learn. A total of two classes, including 48 students were recruited to participate in this study. One class used SQ4R and STAD strategies with e-books; the other just used SQ4R and e-books. The collected data included pre- and post-test reading scores, satisfaction questionnaires, and students' participation records in class. After analyzing the data, the researcher concludes that the students used SQ4R and STAD methods with e-books getting higher scores than only used SQ4R method with e-books. Besides, two groups of students are very satisfied with their teaching methods, and have positive perspective about heterogeneity grouping and interactive activities. Therefore, most students are willing to continue using these teaching strategies in English learning.英文摘要：閱讀能力在語言學習中占有極重要的角色，然而，對於以英語作為第二語言或外語之學習者而言，如有大量不熟悉的字詞和句子，會對閱讀理解產生障礙，並導致對閱讀活動缺乏興趣。為了消除這些學習障礙，現階段已有許多教師採用不同的閱讀策略來提高閱讀理解力和閱讀動機；而其中SQ4R是一種可有效幫助學生增進閱讀能力之閱讀策略，其由許多不同步驟漸進式地引導學生進行自我學習；此外，小組成就區分法也為廣泛用於加強學生閱讀理解之協同教學策略；再者，隨著資訊科技的發展，知識傳播不再局限於傳統紙本方式，數位內容與電子書的興起，更為閱讀方式帶來革命性的浪潮與嶄新的體驗。因而，本研究的學習者於學習過程中，採用電子書學習系統進行英語閱讀活動，運用電子書的多元化功能，以提升學習者之認知能力。此外，另一項研究目的是導入適當之閱讀方法和教學策略，以提高學習者之英語閱讀能力與學習滿意度，並探討在此教學策略中是否樂於學習。實驗對象為兩班級之學生，共計48位。其中一班採用SQ4R閱讀策略及小組成就區分法搭配電子書進行學習；另一班則僅採用SQ4R閱讀策略搭配電子書教學。資料蒐集包括：前測及後測之成績、滿意度問卷分析和學習歷程紀錄。實驗結果顯示，使用SQ4R閱讀策略及小組成就區分法搭配電子書進行教學的學生，測驗分數高於僅使用SQ4R閱讀策略搭配電子書學習的學生。此外，兩組學生對其授課使用之教學策略皆感到非常滿意，並對異質性分組方法及小組成員間互動共學的過程持有正面看法。因此，大多數學習者願意持續使用此閱讀策略進行學習。起始頁-結束頁：53-84資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170409020035篇名：A Case Study on How a User’s High Altitude Experience in a Virtual Reality Game Affects Emotional Experiences並列篇名：虛擬實境高空體驗遊戲中情緒感受歷程影響之研究作者：許于仁(Yu-Jen Hsu);溫郁韻(Yu-Yun Wen)關鍵字：adventure education;survival of desperate adventure;virtual reality game;高空體驗教育;survival of desperate adventure;虛擬實境遊戲期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The aim of this research is to help develop a virtual reality game based on a high-altitude experience, with the expectation that this game would decrease negative feelings associated with high altitude and expand the range of experiences among the elderly, disabled and fearful. This study used mixed research methods including a questionnaire, interview and course video to collect data. For data analysis, the researchers used descriptive statistics to analyze game satisfaction and emotional feelings, derived from a questionnaire, as well as video encoding. In addition, a Mann-Whitney U test is used to verify whether the virtual reality experience revealed the emotional impact of the game. The result of the descriptive statistics shows that while most players felt nervous or fearful during the game, they also felt immersed in the game environment. From the results of the surveys on game satisfaction and emotional feeling it was found that the degree of game satisfaction for most players was high. The results implied that the game was able to simulate an actual high-altitude emotional experience. However, from the interviews and videos, some participants found the game to be less difficult than anticipated, especially in the operation of picking up and removing props from the toolbar. The result of the Mann-Whitney U test shows no significant differences in having the virtual reality experience in relation to the emotional feelings aroused by the game. This result suggests that the virtual reality high altitude game developed in this study would not reduce the novelty, fear, tension, accomplishment and pleasure of experiences and achievements in the game, simply because they took place in a virtual reality environment.英文摘要：本研究的目的在於開發一款虛擬實境高空體驗遊戲，並期望透過此遊戲降低高空體驗的門檻擴大體驗族群，如高齡者或是部分身障者。研究採用調查研究法，並以問卷、訪談、歷程錄影作為蒐集資料的工具。資料分析部分採用描述性統計進行遊戲滿意度及情緒感受問卷、錄影編碼的分析，進一步採用曼惠特尼U考驗分析有無虛擬實境經驗對於遊戲情緒感受的影響。本研究結果顯示，大部分玩家在遊戲進行中會有緊張、害怕的情緒，也能夠有身臨其境的感受，且由遊戲滿意度調查及情緒感受調查上，大部分玩家對此款遊戲有高的滿意度，也覺得可以從中獲得樂趣，顯示此款遊戲可以模擬實際高空情境的情緒感受，並由曼惠特尼U考驗的結果發現，有無虛擬實境經驗對於遊戲的情緒感受沒有顯著影響，表示本研究所開發的虛擬高空遊戲不會因受試者有虛擬實境經驗而降低其對遊戲的新奇感、恐懼感、緊張感、成就感及樂趣。起始頁-結束頁：85-108資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170409020046篇名：數位繪本或擴增實境融入國文教學對學習之影響：以科技大學資訊與非資訊學院學生為例並列篇名：The Effects of Digital Picture Books or Augmented Reality Integrated Into Chinese Teaching on Learning Motivation, Cognitive Load and Learning Outcomes: An Example of Information and Non-Information Students in a Technology University作者：錢昭萍(Chao-Ping Chien);梁麗珍(Li-Jeng Liang);黃國豪(Gwo-Haur Hwang);黃恆霖(Heng-Lin Huang)關鍵字：科技大學生;認知負荷;學習成效;學習動機;擴增實境;technology university students;cognitive load;learning outcomes;learning motivation;augmented reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以前後測設計的準實驗法，檢視數位繪本或擴增實境融入國文教學，對不同學習領域的科技大學生之學習動機、認知負荷與學習成效的影響。實驗對象為臺灣中部某科技大學資訊與非資訊學院各兩班大一國文課的學生，研究者以自製的數位繪本為教具，讓學生們學習四篇六朝志怪小說，以提升其上課的情境興趣；並隨機將擴增實境融入不同領域各一班課程。課程前後，讓學生們各填寫一份問卷與測驗，而得到194份有效樣本。以雙因子共變數與變異數分析資料之結果顯示：一、學習動機：資訊學院學生以數位繪本高於擴增實境教學，非資訊學院學生以擴增實境高於數位繪本教學；擴增實境教學以非資訊學院明顯高於資訊學院的學生，數位繪本教學則資訊學院與非資訊學院學生無顯著差異。二、認知負荷：資訊學院明顯重於非資訊學院的學生，擴增實境明顯重於數位繪本教學。三、學習成效：非資訊學院優於資訊學院的學生，數位繪本優於擴增實境教學。由於資訊學院擴增實境教學的學生整體學習表現皆不理想，故探討高科技應用於教學的功能性、適性性與實質效益，當是改進教學的另一思考方向。英文摘要：A quasi-experiment is used in this study with a pretest-posttest design. We intend to investigate the effects of augmented reality integrated into Chinese teaching on learning motivation, cognitive load and learning outcomes of technology university students. The experimental subjects are four classes of freshmen whose majors are information and non-information in a technology university in the middle of Taiwan. They learn five chapters of mysterious stories in six dynasties with digital picture books. Both groups are randomly offered augmented reality once. The subjects need to fill out a questionnaire and take a test before and after learning. There are total 194 effective samples obtained in the experiment. The collected data were analyzed by double covariance (ANCOVA) and variance. The results show that 1). Learning motivation: Digital picture books improved subjects from information major are better than augmented reality; on the other hand, the augmented reality improves subjects of non-information major better than digital picture books. Furthermore, augmented reality improves the learning motivation of subjects of non-information major better than that of subjects of information major. Digital picture books show no significant difference in either of the two groups. 2). Cognitive load: The subjects of information major have higher cognitive load than the subjects of non-information major. The effects of cognitive load of augmented reality are higher than digital picture books. 3). Learning outcomes: The subjects of non-information major show better performance than those of information major. Digital picture books are better teaching aids than augmented reality. The overall performance of the information students on augmented reality is unfavorable. The study finds that high-tech application to teaching should be taken into consideration by its functionality, adaptability, and tangible benefits.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170109010017篇名：情境感知Facebook社群網路英文字彙學習系統對學習成效影響之研究並列篇名：A Context-Aware English Vocabulary Learning System on Facebook作者：區國良(Kuo-Liang Ou);蕭顯勝(Hsien-Sheng Hsiao);曾郁庭(Yu-Ting Zeng);陳仁澤(Jen-Tse Chen)關鍵字：同儕學習;社群網路;情境感知;語文學習;peer learning;social network;context-aware;language learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討情境感知教學與傳統網頁教學之「Facebook社群網路英文字彙學習系統」對學習者學習成就、學習保留及學習動機的影響。其中「Facebook社群網路英文字彙學習系統」為自變項，「教學內容」和「教學輔具」為控制變項，「學習成就」、「學習保留」及「學習動機」為依變項。研究對象為某一公立大學之學生共60人，將學習者非隨機選取實驗組與對照組各30人，分別以「情境感知教學」及「傳統網頁教學」之Facebook社群網路英文字彙學習系統進行為期8週的教學實驗。教學實驗後進行學習成就測驗與學習動機檢測，評量學習者的學習成就、學習保留及學習動機，以取得本研究所需之研究數據，並針對測驗結果進行單因子變異數分析及必要的後續考驗。研究結果發現，使用「情境感知教學」及「傳統網頁教學」對學習成就均有顯著性的提升，但兩者間無顯著的差異；使用「情境感知教學」之實驗組，在延宕測驗的成績顯著優於對照組，顯示使用「情境感知教學」在學習內容與實境打卡地點間之場所相依性，較能增加學習者於學習過程的記憶，增進學習保留；使用「情境感知教學」之實驗組在學習動機的表現，顯著高於對照組，顯示透過情境認知的方式學習，有助於提升學習者的學習動機。英文摘要：In this study, a context-aware English vocabulary learning system is constructed for both individual learning and peer learning environments on Facebook. The multiplechoice questions of vocabularies, which are related with the current location, will be proposed on the students' ”wall” when checking-in with mobile devices on Facebook. Students could learn the context-aware vocabularies by answering the questions and enhancing the learning retention. Meanwhile, the interactions, which are the replying and discussion on each vocabulary learning activity, between the friends on Facebook supports students a causal style of peer-learning environment and improves the learning motivation.The results illustrate that students in experimental group (context-aware learning with Facebook) and control groups (situated learning with Facebook) both improved their English vocabularies learning achievement. Moreover, students in experimental groups represent the learning retention and learning motivation are much better than control groups, which means students using of the context-aware English vocabulary learning system on Facebook can increase both the learning memory effects for a long duration, and motivate students to learn actively.起始頁-結束頁：33-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170109010028篇名：The Role of Learning Antecedents and Quality in Predicting OpeCourseWare Utility: Preliminary Evidence From University and Public Learners並列篇名：學習前置變項、學習品質對開放式課程效用之預測力：來自大學生與外部學習者的初步證據作者：林明佳(Ming-Chia Lin);林世昌(Eric S. Lin)關鍵字：content satisfaction;future use of OpenCourseWare;learning effectiveness;public learners;university learners;內容滿意度;開放式課程的未來使用;學習有效性;外部學習者;大學生期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：OpenCourseWare (OCW) denotes digital free college-lessons published by worldwide universities. The study reports on university learners' (n = 127) and public learners' (n = 86) perceptions of roles of instructor-charisma importance and independent access in explaining OCW learning quality (i.e., learning efficiency, content usefulness) and outcomes (i.e., learning effectiveness, content satisfaction, future use of OCW). The OCW was developed at a university in Taiwan, and featured with science-engineering-related courses. The seven variables and demographic information were surveyed online by item-measures analyzed via Mplus 7.11. Results of single-group analyses (i.e., the university and public communities) confirmed instructor-charisma importance and independent access directly predict learning quality, and indirectly predict learning outcomes via quality. Results of multi-group analyses were noteworthy. Instructor-charisma importance and learning effectiveness negatively explain content satisfaction from the university learners' perceptions, but positively from the public. The greater instructor-charisma importance and learning effectiveness the university learners endorsed, the lower content satisfaction they expressed, vice versa. From the university learner's perceptions, three paths showed larger magnitude than their counterpart: 1) from instructor-charisma importance to content usefulness; 2) from content usefulness to content satisfaction; 3) and from content usefulness to future use of OCW. Implications for how to enhance OCW utility for varying learners are discussed.英文摘要：開放式課程是指由全球不同大學出版的數位課程。本研究呈現大學生與外部學習者知覺到教學者魅力的重要性、獨立存取性如何解釋開放式課程的學習品質（即學習效率、內容有用性）與結果（即學習有效性、內容滿意度、開放式課程的未來使用）。這個開放式課程來自一所臺灣的大學，以科學與工程的課程聞名。七個變項與人口統計訊息以問卷方式調查，後續使用Mplus 7.11版進行分析。單組的分析結果（針對大學生、外部學習者各自分析）驗證了教學者魅力的重要性，獨立存取性可直接預測學習品質，亦可透過品質間接預測學習結果。多組分析結果也值得注意。在大學生的知覺中，教學者魅力的重要性、學習有效性負向解釋內容滿意度；在外部學習者的知覺中，這兩個變項卻能正向解釋內容滿意度。大學生所知覺到三條路徑的解釋力強度大於外部學習者：一、從教學者魅力的重要性到內容有用性；二、從內容有用性到內容滿意度；三、從內容有用性到開放式課程的未來使用。文末討論開放式課程對不同使用者的效用意涵。起始頁-結束頁：71-104資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20170109010039篇名：從接應關係分析社會學科的想法翻修活動：以權威訊息的建構性運用原則為例並列篇名：The Adjacent Contributions Among Collaborative Knowledge Builders in a Social Science Classroom: Taking the Principle of Constructive Uses of Authoritative Sources as an Example作者：陳斐卿(Fei-Ching Chen);蔡宗良(Tsung-Liang Tsai);楊程喻(Cheng-Yu Yang);張芷瑄(Chih-Hsuan Chang)關鍵字：知識翻新;社會學科;討論串分析;權威訊息的建構性運用;knowledge building;social science;threaded analysis;constructive uses of authoritative sources期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：9卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：資訊世代的人們既依賴提取現有的權威訊息，也需要進行知識創新。學校向來教導學生汲取權威訊息，但該如何培養知識創新呢？學生對於想法翻修活動又如何評價呢？本研究以大學師資培育中心的師資生為對象，根據知識創新活動的「權威訊息的建構性運用」原則設計課程，輔以知識論壇平臺進行為期8週的線上討論。為了深探想法翻修的實際歷程，本研究發展一套想法翻修回合數的概念，以分析大學生互相翻修他人想法的特徵與有待鷹架之處。研究結果顯示，一方面從知識論壇資料來看，學生往往以權威訊息為佐證展開論述，前後文章的銜接性質，以反駁意見多於認同意見，顯示想法翻修活動不難展開；另一方面從知識翻新問卷來看，學生對彼此促進想法之活動的認同性與可行性卻未提升，究其原因，訪談資料顯示：想法翻修展開之後，同儕之間經歷多回合的討論，卻仍難感受到想法得到精進。本研究揭露社會科學領域進行知識翻修想法的種種困難，有待未來更進一步探析。英文摘要：Citizens in the age of information receive external authoritative resources, as well as engage in knowledge building. Academia traditionally favors the former. However, how do we foster an environment for knowledge building and idea improvement? This paper uses students from center for teacher education as subjects of study. The courses were designed based on the principle of constructive uses of authoritative sources, and used Knowledge Forum to help student learn collaboratively online during an 8-week period. Instead of using the conceptual inquiry thread as the unit of analysis, this study developed round of idea improvement to explore the responsive engagement of knowledge builders in each thread in order to reveal achievement or failure of deeper levels of knowledge advancement. Results indicate that students preferred to present their argument with authoritative resources at beginning of discussion, and then revised their ideas throughout the session, indicating that idea improvement is likely. However, from the results of the idea improvement inquiry, students are less favorable to the idea improvement activities. After investigation, throughout rounds of idea improvement, students did not feel that their ideas have been improved. This paper aims at revealing the difficulties in idea improvement in the realm of social sciences, and anticipates further discussion.起始頁-結束頁：105-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201701090100401篇名：誰要議題所有權？立法委員立法提案與議題所有權的建立並列篇名：Who Wants Issue Ownership? Legislators' Initiatives and Pursuit of Issue Ownership in Taiwan作者：黃士豪(Shih-hao Huang)關鍵字：議題所有權;立法提案;立法專業化;Issue Ownership;Legislative Initiatives;Legislative Professionalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文試圖從議題所有權的角度分析立法提案在議題上的分布情形，探索何種因素影響立法委員的提案模式。為此，本研究提出「議題所有權指數」來測量立法委員的提案是否有建立議題所有權的可能性。結合立法委員和委員助理的深度訪談、國會助理的問卷調查以及第8屆立法委員（2012-2015）提案的分析，本研究發現有些立法委員會以提案來建立自己的品牌和專業形象，並專注在特定議題來提案，而不僅是回應選區需求；有些立法委員的提案則是較為分散於各個不同的議題，較無建立議題所有權的可能性。本研究更發現，立法委員的專業背景是影響立法委員提案模式的重要因素，而不分區立法委員和區域立法委員在提案上的差異也來自於立法委員的背景。不論由何種選舉制度選出，具有專業背景的立法委員，比起其他立法委員，其提案模式較有建立議題所有權的可能性。此外，資深程度越高的立法委員，其提案模式越不具有建立議題所有權的可能性。本研究的發現提供了一個分析立法提案的視角，也為個別政治人物建立議題所有權的過程和影響因素提供了初步的解答，更為提升立法專業性提供了一個思考的方向。英文摘要：This paper aims to analyze the distribution of legislative initiatives across issue areas through the lens of issue ownership and explore factors affecting the patterns of bill-introduction activities. Toward this end, this research proposes an index of issue ownership to evaluate individual legislators' potential to earn issue ownership. Through in-depth interviews, a survey of legislators' staffs and content analysis of legislative initiatives in the 8th Legislative Yuan (2012-2015), I find that some legislators are more likely to focus their bill-introduction efforts on particular issue areas, lending them with the potential to earn issue ownership, while others' initiatives are more widely spread across issue areas. This research further demonstrates that legislators with a particular professional background are more likely to pursue issue ownership than those without. Moreover, controlling for the backgrounds, the difference between legislators elected from different electoral rules is not significant, meaning that legislators' backgrounds, rather than the electoral rules, can better account for the patterns of bill introduction. Additionally, senior members are less likely to pursue issue ownership than junior ones. Important implications for legislative professionalization and representation can be drawn from these findings.起始頁-結束頁：1-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：前南斯拉夫國際刑事法庭的政策對波赫刑事司法體系結構轉型之影響並列篇名：Policies of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Their Impacts on Structural Change of the Judicial Criminal System in Bosnia-Herzegovina作者：陳紀安(Chi-an Chen);蔡季廷(Chi-ting Tsai)關鍵字：波士尼亞—赫塞哥維納（波赫）;前南斯拉夫國際刑事法庭;轉型正義;刑事司法體系;社會影響機制;涵化;Bosnia-Herzegovina;International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY);transitional justice;criminal judicial system;mechanisms of social influence;acculturation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：為處理南斯拉夫內戰中所發生的種種戰爭罪、種族滅絕（genocides）與反人類罪（crimes against humanity），聯合國安全理事會在1993年通過第827號決議（Resolution 827），決定依《聯合國憲章》第七章的規定成立「前南斯拉夫國際刑事法庭」（International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, ICTY）。該刑事法庭是聯合國成立的第一個刑事法庭，運作至今，也是現存最久、起訴最多人的國際刑事法庭。這些條件加起來都使得評估與分析ICTY對戰後前南斯拉夫的影響獨具其研究意義，有助於人們了解從國際層次施加的制度措施如何影響衝突後國家的轉型正義實踐。波士尼亞—赫塞哥維納（簡稱波赫）作為內戰中最主要的戰場，其戰事的終結亦是南斯拉夫內戰的終點。發生於其上的種種惡行不僅是促使國際社會成立ICTY的契機，同時也是ICTY承接案件的主要來源。基於此，本文試圖探究國家在經歷大規模衝突暴力後，ICTY如何以及為什麼能促成波赫在戰爭罪審判與刑事司法體系改革上的轉型正義實踐。本文欲使用Goodman與Jinks（2013）所提出的三種社會影響機制作為分析途徑，以此切入討論當「促進轉型正義」成為一項國際規範時，國際層次如何透過這些機制將轉型正義的實踐導入波赫，使之順從國際規範。本文發現，ICTY於成立前期的「道路規則計畫」（Rules of the Road）雖然減緩了波赫國內泛政治化的任意拘捕問題，但該政策強調物質誘因與層級權威的機制設計，卻削弱了波赫國內進行戰爭罪審判和刑事司法體系改革的動機。直到成立後期，ICTY透過案件下放至國內的「完成策略」（Completion Strategy），才開始讓波赫產生基於涵化與物質誘因的動機進行改革。除此之外，為使完成策略順利進行，波赫法院及其戰爭庭在初始之際以混合法庭的面貌呈現，也有利國際社會透過說服機制將國際規範導入波赫，甚而可能促進規範於在地的深化。英文摘要：From 1991 to 1995, a bloody civil war in former Yugoslavia shocked whole world. Given that many war crimes, genocides, and crimes against humanities raged in the former Yugoslavia, the United Nations Security Council adopted the Resolution 827 in 1993 to establish the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to deal with these atrocities. The ICTY is the first international criminal tribunal run by the United Nations. It is not only the oldest criminal tribunal which exists until now, but also the international criminal tribunal which conducts the most trials. Therefore, the ICTY would be a significant case for people to analyze how a legal institution established at the international level influences the practice of transitional justice in a post-conflict state. Bosnia-Herzegovina (BiH) was the main battlefield in the civil war. Atrocities happened in BiH were the catalyst for the United Nations to establish the ICTY. With three mechanisms of social influence proposed by Goodman & Jinks in 2013 as the theoretical tool, this article tries to analyze how the policies imposed by the ICTY can have impact on war crimes prosecutions and criminal judicial reforms in BiH. The article finds that although the policy ”Rules of the Road” imposed by the ICTY in the early stage ameliorated the problem of arbitrary detention, the drawbacks which over-emphasized the elements of material inducement and coercion in policy design weakened BiH's motivation to prosecute war crimes and to reform its criminal judicial system. However, when the ICTY turned to ”Completion Strategy” later, the policy transferring cases to domestic level gave BiH incentives, which arose from acculturation mechanism and were strengthened by material inducement mechanism, to begin criminal judicial reforms. In addition, the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its War Crimes Chamber designed in a hybrid way initially creates a positive environment for the operation of persuasion mechanism, which might contribute to deepening international norms in BiH.起始頁-結束頁：53-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：「NHK排灣族歧視訴訟」的部落批判理論反思並列篇名：Redeeming De-colonization from Recolonization: A TribalCrit Analysis of the NHK Defamation Case作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-Tung Huang)關鍵字：NHK排灣族歧視訴訟;部落批判理論;日英博覽會;歧視;言論自由;NHK;TribalCrit;Japan-British Exhibition of 1910;discrimination;freedom of speech期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：A review of日本放送協會（NHK）於2009年播出了「NHK日本登場系列特集」（NHK<U+30B9><U+30DA><U+30B7><U+30E3><U+30EB>「<U+30B7><U+30EA><U+30FC><U+30BA> JAPAN <U+30C7><U+30D3><U+30E5><U+30FC>」）。該系列第一集，以「亞洲的『一等國』」（<U+30A2><U+30B8><U+30A2><U+306E>“一等<U+56FD>”）為題，嘗試對日本殖民歷史進行檢視，並具體以1910年英國倫敦舉辦的「日英博覽會」（Japan-British Exhibition of 1910）為檢證對象。採訪期間，NHK來台訪問了排灣族耆老和當時赴英參加博覽會的當事人後裔。未料，節目播出時製作單位卻在訪問片段中加上了「人間動物園」等具有歧視意味的字樣。播出後輿論一片譁然。台日兩地共約1萬人，隨後對NHK提出了集體訴訟。審理過程中，日本法院卻出現了見解不一的狀況。由於本案涉及言論自由、歧視等議題，還涉及對歷史進行評價的過程中對目前當事人產生傷害的問題，實有必要對相關議題進行檢視。在分析的視角上，本文選取了「部落批判理論」（Tribal Critical Race Theory, TribalCrit）為工具，並嘗試在判決與法律分析之外輔以實證訪談資料來對全案進行全面性的反思。質言之，本文嘗試把本案當成理論運用的場域，嘗試在本土實證經驗的基礎上，達到理論與實際的相互印證，並對相關爭議進行檢討。英文摘要：In 2009, the Japan Broadcasting Corporation (NHK) aired a contentious ”Series Japan's Debut” documentary. In its first episode, ”Asia's first-class country”, careful scrutiny of the ”Japan-British Exhibition of 1910” revealed that the Japanese empire took several tribesmen of Paiwan, including the lead plaintiff's father, to London as exotic ”exhibits”. A French scholar was then quoted as saying that this kind of exhibition is a ”Human Zoo”. In the wake of this documentary, a total of 10,335 plaintiffs sued NHK for defamation as the derogatory term of human zoo implies that the Paiwan people were uncivilised. This lawsuit is then dubbed the NHK defamation or the human zoo case. This article examines this lawsuit through the lens of Tribal Critical Race Theory (TribalCrit). Using legal exposition in tandem with interviews from plaintiffs, stakeholders and indigenous groups, it seeks to demonstrate NHK's de-colonizing mindset in the making of the documentary. For NHK, they specifically chose the provocative term ”human zoo” to accentuate the colonial wrongness. It is argued that their intentions, after all, are self-criticism. Despite full of ”good” intentions, to NHK's surprise the Taiwanese aborigines however argued that program in general and the term in specific imposed a patronising moral value on them. That is, NHK implied that the ”uncivilised” did not, perhaps still do not, recognise the real meaning of the exhibition. Therefore, it is NHK's responsibility to inform and then somehow”save” them from the brutal colonial rule. As it turned out, this documentary for decolonization was considered a behaviour of re-colonization. My TribalCrit message is that, in such a history-sensitive case, the court should not reject or accept a case simply on the basis of legal technicality or precedents. Too often, as the courts have delved into the immediate judgement, the voice of indigenous peoples have gone unnoticed. Given that history and emotions are inextricably intertwined in the process of de-colonization, detailed analysis is a must.起始頁-結束頁：95-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：書評：Foreign Pressure and the Politics of Autocratic Survival 〔國際壓力與威權生存的政治學〕 by Abel Escriba-Folch and Joseph Wright 〔艾波．厄斯克利巴佛屈、喬瑟夫．萊特〕（Oxford University Press, 2015, Paperback, 296 pp., ISBN 9780198746997）並列篇名：A review of Foreign Pressure and the Politics of Autocratic Survival by Abel Escriba-Folch and Joseph Wright (Oxford University Press, 2015, Paperback, 296 pp., ISBN 9780198746997)作者：薛健吾(Chienwu (Alex) Hsueh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：133-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：書評：Dictators and Their Secret Police: Coercive Institutions and State Violence 〔獨裁者與他們的秘密警察－強制機構和國家暴力〕 by Sheena Chestnut Greitens 〔喜娜．葛來敦〕（Cambridge University Press, 2016, Hardcover, 336 pp., ISBN 9781107139848）並列篇名：A review of Dictators and Their Secret Police: Coercive Institutions and State Violence by Sheena Chestnut Greitens (Cambridge University Press, 2016, Hardcover, 336 pp., ISBN 9781107139848)作者：陳方隅(Fang-yu Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：145-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：世界民主大事紀　2016年10-12月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: October-December 2016期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：153-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：趨向精熟目標與趨向表現目標在提取引發遺忘現象上的角色並列篇名：Roles of Mastery-Approach Goal and Performance-Approach Goal in Retrieval-Induced Forgetting作者：黃佳君(Chia-Chun Huang);吳昭容(Chao-Jung Wu)關鍵字：記憶策略;提取引發遺忘;趨向表現目標;趨向精熟目標;mastery-approach goals;memory strategies;performance-approach goals;retrieval-induced forgetting期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探討趨向精熟與趨向表現目標對國中生「提取引發遺忘」（RIF）之影響，亦即探討成就目標如何影響個人重複提取練習部分記憶材料，而造成後續遺忘與該提取材料相關的材料之現象。前導研究以86 位國中生對詩人王維、杜牧的瞭解，從華人七大基本性格的90個形容詞中挑選實驗材料，以形成非國中生原有知識且具詩人整體印象之特質材料。由於透過指導語暫時改變受試者成就目標的實驗操弄未成功，無法探討操弄受試者之成就目標對記憶的影響，故依據受試者在趨向精熟目標、趨向表現目標之自評，將受試者分為高精熟／高趨向表現組182 位、高精熟／低趨向表現組21 位、低精熟／高趨向表現組14 位，與低精熟／低趨向表現組35位，以探究持不同成就目標與RIF 現象之間的關係。結果發現，高精熟／高趨向表現、高精熟／低趨向表現組皆未顯現RIF，而低精熟／高趨向表現、低精熟／低趨向表現組皆有RIF。亦即，持高低精熟目標與有無RIF 有關，但持表現目標則無關。接著，根據有無RIF，將四組受試者合併成高、低精熟兩組，並比較其記憶策略、第一、二次國文段考成績，與自評認真程度。最後，本研究亦從文獻上影響RIF 之因素與研究所得之資料進行討論，並對教育與後續研究提出建議。英文摘要：The present study examined how the mastery-approach goal and performance-approach goal affect retrieval-induced forgetting. In a pilot study, 86 junior high school students with characteristics from the Chinese Big Seven personality dimensions were selected based on their knowledge of the poets Wang Wei and Du Mu. The purpose of this pilot study was to verify that the aforementioned characteristics did not represent the prior images of the poets held by the students, and to ensure that the characteristics enabled the students to construct distinctive overall impressions of the poets. In this formal study, we manipulated the achievement goals using task instructions followed by a typical retrieval-practice paradigm to assess retrieval-induced forgetting. Our experimental manipulation failed; therefore, we could not verify the effects of the achievement goals on the students' memories. To explore the relationships between various achievement goals and retrieval-induced forgetting, we divided 262 participants into four groups based on their degree of achievement goal self-verification. The results showed that 182 participants belonged to the high-mastery/high-performance group, 21 belonged to high-mastery/low-performance group, 14 belonged to the low-mastery/high-performance group, and 35 belonged to the low-mastery/high-performance group. In addition, the results indicated that retrieval-induced forgetting was eliminated in the high-mastery/high-performance and high-mastery/low-performance groups but not in the other two groups. These results also showed that the elimination of retrieval-induced forgetting was related to the mastery goal rather than the performance goal; therefore, the four groups were combined into high- and low-mastery groups, and subsequently we compared memory strategies, academic achievement, and self-evaluation seriousness in the two groups. We discussed the factors influencing retrieval-induced forgetting as indicated in the literature and collected data, and formulated concrete proposals.起始頁-結束頁：153-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(2).062篇名：晚清戊戌維新前官民對英國教育的引介初探並列篇名：The Introduction of British Education in Late Ch’ing China Before 1898作者：周愚文(Yu-Wen Chou)關鍵字：英國教育;教育遊記;教育轉移;晚清;British education;educational transfer;late Ch'ing;traveling records in education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：在清光緒早期使英外交官介紹英國教育之前，19世紀起即已有傳教士及官民編著史地書籍介紹之，本研究據此分析其對英國教育的引介。研究發現戊戌維新前，有24種書記錄了英國教育措施，其要點如下：一、範圍以中小學及大學最多，少數兼及幼兒園、軍校、其他類學校及教育行政機關。二、地區以英格蘭為主，蘇格蘭次之。 三、中小學方面，以小學為主，內容涵蓋其慈善性質、入學年齡、校數、人數、學費、學習內容、男女分校，兼及免費及強迫。但未注意《小學教育法》公布後，形成的董事會學校與自願學校雙元制及其影響。四、大學方面，多介紹牛津、劍橋、愛丁堡及都柏林等老大學的分布、名稱及數量。少數述及其學習內容、考試、學位等第及教師。但對於大學與所屬學院的關係為何、三地體制有所不同，及19世紀後半新興的地方級學院等問題，多未提及。五、諸書戊戌維新前已出版，且後人曾閱讀或引用，但實際流通量與影響不易評估。六、此期透過遊記去理解英國方式，近似比較教育「旅人故事時期」的作法。七、因英制偏地方分權而分歧複雜，清人很難一窺全貌，諸書僅是初步、片段的介紹；且因社會仇外，故此階段無法進行教育借入。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to explore the introduction of British education in late Ch'ing China before 1898. Twenty-four historical and geographical books and traveling records written by priests, officials, and intellectuals were analyzed. The main findings were as follows. (1) The focus was on elementary and secondary schools and universities and colleges. Few authors mentioned kindergartens, military academies, other schools, or administrative authorities. (2) The educational establishments in England were focused, and some in Scotland and Ireland were introduced. (3) The nature of charity, school age, number of schools and pupils, tuition fees, curriculum, and gender limitations of elementary schools were recorded; some sources mentioned compulsory and free education. However, the formation of dual systems of board and voluntary schools after the enactment of the Elementary Education Act in 1870 was not recorded. (4) The name, location, and number of universities in Oxford, Cambridge, Edinburgh, and Dublin were introduced in most books. However, few books mentioned their curriculum, examinations, degrees, and faculty. (5) Although all the books were published and read before 1898, their concrete circulation and influence was difficult to estimate. (6) The introduction of British education during this period was similar to that of the period of traveling's tales in comparative education development. (7) Because of the complexity of British localized education, the books were unable to completely describe it. Furthermore, because an antiforeigner climate existed in China at that time, educational borrowing was unlikely.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(1).013篇名：閱讀策略教學對高二學生數學學習表現的影響並列篇名：Effects of Teaching Reading Strategies on Senior High School Student’s Mathematics Performance作者：蘇慧珍(Hui-Chen Su);楊凱琳(Kai-Lin Yang);陳佳陽(Chia-Yang Chen)關鍵字：交互教學法;數學教學;閱讀策略;mathematics teaching;reading strategies;reciprocal teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究參考交互教學法之閱讀策略設計運用閱讀來學習數學的課程，透過實驗研究檢驗此課程是否有助於提升高中二年級學生的數學學習成就、數學閱讀理解以及策略使用的表現。教學實驗共歷時6週，研究採前後測準實驗設計，以臺北市立一所公立高中二年級兩個班級學生為研究對象；其中一班為實驗組，實施閱讀策略教學，另一班對照組則未實施閱讀策略教學，兩班皆由同一位數學教師教學，有效樣本共計74人。研究者共設計四份評量工具檢驗教學實驗的成效，內容包含數學成就測驗、數學閱讀理解測驗以及閱讀策略使用情形自我評估，分別用於實驗前的前測、6週實驗後的第一次後測、經過1週的第二次後測，以及6週實驗後2個月的延後測，再以廣義估計方程式分析測驗資料。研究發現運用閱讀來學習數學課程的成效包含：一、有利於提升學生讀課本時使用各項閱讀策略的頻率；二、有利於提升學生當下的數學成就與數學閱讀理解；三、有利於提升學生使用提問與澄清策略來閱讀未學過的數學文本。但是，隨著教學實驗後所經過的時間愈久，對數學成就與數學閱讀理解的效果會逐漸消失，最後只有利於提升學生使用提問策略來閱讀未學過的數學文本。本研究將針對未如預期的延後測實驗結果提出可能的原因，作為未來進一步改善數學閱讀教學與研究的建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the effect of teaching reading strategies involving textbooks for senior high school students. Two classes of 11th-grade students participated in this study; one was the experimental class and the other was the control class. The experiment was designed to teach cognitive reading strategies through reciprocal teaching using a mathematics textbook to improve mathematics performance. The quantitative instruments included a mathematics achievement test, reading comprehension test, and self-assessment of reading strategy usage. These instruments were used at four different times: (1) the pretest before the experiment; (2) the first posttest after the experiment; (3) the second posttest 1 week after the experiment; and (4) the delayed measurement 2 months after the experiment. The data obtained were analyzed through the generalized estimating equation method. The results revealed that the teaching experiment effectively promoted students' use of all types of strategies when reading the mathematics textbook. However, the math achievement and reading comprehension tests only demonstrated improvement at the first posttest. After the teaching experiment, these effects gradually disappeared. Regarding the use of reading strategies, the teaching experiment effectively promoted students' use of questioning and clarifying. This effect also gradually disappeared after the teaching experiment. Several explanations of the unexpected results are provided in this paper.起始頁-結束頁：33-58資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(1).024篇名：學生知覺教師期望、能力信念、實用價值與內在價值對臺灣八年級學生數理成就之影響：以TIMSS 2011多層次結構方程式模型為例並列篇名：Effects of Perception of Teachers’ Expectations, Ability Beliefs, Utility Values, and Intrinsic Values on Math and Science Achievement Among Eighth-Grade Students in Taiwan: A Multilevel Structural Equation Model Using TIMSS 2011作者：陳敏瑜(Min-Yu Chen);游錦雲(Ching-Yun Yu)關鍵字：多層次結構方程式模型;次級資料分析;國際數學與科學成就趨勢調查2011;期望價值理論;數理成就;expectancy-value theory;math and science achievement;multilevel structural equation model (MSEM);secondary data analysis;trends in mathematics and science study (TIMSS) 2011期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以期望價值理論為架構，進行國際數學與科學成就趨勢調查（TIMSS）2011年臺灣八年級學生數學和科學成就之多層次結構方程式模型分析，瞭解學生層次（學生知覺教師期望、能力信念、實用價值、內在價值）及班級層次（班級知覺教師期望、班級能力信念、班級實用價值、班級內在價值）重要變項之影響力，並探究能力信念在學生知覺教師期望與數理成就之間的中介效果。本研究發現，學生層次和班級層次的模型結構並不相同，在學生層次的分析中，數學和科學的能力信念對學生學業成就的直接效果最大，而在數學與科學的班級層次分析中，班級能力信念皆對班級學業成就產生相當大的直接影響。此外，學生能力信念在學生知覺教師期望與數理成就之間扮演中介角色。最後依據研究結果提供建議，以供實務應用及未來研究之參考。英文摘要：On the basis of expectancy-value theory, multilevel structural equation models and trends in mathematics and science study 2011 data were applied to investigate the effects of the student-level variables (perception of teachers' expectations, ability beliefs, utility values, and intrinsic values) and their respective class-level variables on math and science achievement, and to test the mediation effect of ability belief between students' perception of teachers' expectations and the math and science achievements of eighth-grade students in Taiwan. The study revealed the following results: (1) The student-level and class-level structures exhibited differences. (2) At the student level, students' ability belief had the strongest effect on their math and science achievement; the class level of ability belief had a positive effect on math and science achievement. (3) Ability belief had a significant mediating effect between the perception of teachers' expectations and math and science achievement. Finally, according to the results, some suggestions for practical applications and future research were introduced.起始頁-結束頁：59-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(1).035篇名：社交自我效能與害怕負面評價在害羞對憂鬱之影響的中介效果並列篇名：Mediation Effects of Social Self-Efficacy and Fear of Negative Evaluation on the Influence of Shyness on Depression作者：蘇素美(Su-Mei Su)關鍵字：中介效果;社交自我效能;害怕負面評價;害羞;憂鬱;depression;fear of negative evaluation;mediation effects;shyness;social self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討社交自我效能和害怕負面評價在害羞對憂鬱之影響的中介效果。本研究 以407位大學生為對象，以「害羞量表修訂版」、「社交自我效能量表」、「害怕負面評價量表」及「台灣人憂鬱症量表」為研究工具，採用結構方程模式進行分析。研究的主要結果為：一、害羞對大學生的社交自我效能有負向的直接效果，對害怕負面評價有正向的直接效果。二、社交自我效能對大學生的憂鬱有負向的直接效果，而害怕負面評價對大學生的憂鬱有正向的直接效果。三、社交自我效能和害怕負面評價可以完全中介害羞和憂鬱之間的關係。針對研究結果，本研究對教育與輔導，以及未來的研究方向提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the mediation effects of social self-efficacy and fear of negative evaluation on the influence of shyness on depression. The subjects were 407 undergraduates in Taiwan. Structural equation modeling was used to analyze the data. The following results were revealed: (1) Shyness has a direct negative effect on undergraduates' social self-efficacy and a direct positive effect on fear of negative evaluation. (2) Social self-efficacy has a direct negative effect on undergraduates' depression. Fear of negative evaluation has a positive direct effect on depression. (3) Social self-efficacy and fear of negative evaluation mediate the relationships between shyness and depression. Suggestions and implications for education, counseling, and future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：103-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(1).046篇名：學習的意義感：建立、失落及再創生並列篇名：Meaning of Learning: Construction, Loss, and Reconstruction作者：黃<U+56C7>莉(Li-Li Huang);洪才舒(Tsai-Shu Hung)關鍵字：生命意義;華人文化腳本;意義感;學習;Chinese cultural script;learning;meaning;meaning of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：62卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探究華人學習意義感之建立、失落及再創生之歷程。研究採用質性研究法，針對17位成人（九位男性和八位女性）進行深度訪談，研究者再以Baumeister（1991）的「意義連結論」、Park與Folkman（1997）的「整體意義」與「情境意義」，以及華人的「讀書文化腳本文化」為形式理論，對受訪者的自我敘說資料二度詮釋並揭露其存在處境的置身結構。資料分析結果顯示，此歷程包含四部分，首先，意義的建立主要透過連結，例如，與自我的連結、與生命及世界信念的連結、與學習信念的連結。接著，意義的失落則來自斷鏈、存在的空虛、與學習信念脫<U+920E>。意義失落後，會將意義暫時擱置，讓自己回歸到現實，設下停損點，並試者去看到未來的各種可能性。最後再藉著轉化與代償而得以再創造新的學習意義感。本研究最後也討論文化之意涵、敘說研究之限制及未來可發展之方向。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to explore the processes and mechanisms of the construction, loss, and reconstruction of meaning in the context of learning. A qualitative method was implemented, and 17 adults (9 men and 8 women) were interviewed. Baumeister's (1991) connection theory of meaning-making, Park and Folkman's (1997) global meaning and situational meaning theory, and the Chinese cultural script of learning were all adopted as formal theories for the secondary interpretation of the participants' self-narrative data, and also for the disclosure of the situational structures of existential contexts. The results showed the process to consist of four parts. First, connection is the key mechanism of meaning-building; for example, connecting with oneself/others or with one’s own beliefs about life and the world, or with belief in learning. Second, loss of meaning is a result of disconnection, such as disconnecting from the belief of learning, engendering thoughts about the vacancy of existence. Third, meaning is defined in terms of reality and cost consideration, and being able to see future possibilities. Finally, the reconstruction of meaning results from transformation and compensation. This paper also discusses the implications of culture, the limitations of self-narrative data, and the potential for future research.起始頁-結束頁：133-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2017.62(1).0501篇名：服務人員之情緒要求如何與何時減損服務績效？工作要求－資源模式的觀點並列篇名：How and When Do Service Provider's Emotional Demands Impair Service Performance? The Perspective of Job Demands-Resources Model作者：吳宗祐(Tsung-Yu Wu);鍾佩芳(Pei Fang Chung);王瑜榛(Yu Zhen Wang);高凌政(Ling Cheng Kao);吳溫真(Wen Chen Wu);邱淑芬(Su Fen Chiu);葉穎蓉(Ying-Jung Yeh)關鍵字：工作要求—資源模式;情緒要求;工作倦怠;服務績效;職業認定;job demands-resources model;emotional demands;job burnout;service performance;occupational identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究依據工作要求—資源模式的觀點，以探討服務人員在工作上的情緒要求如何與何時減損服務績效；具體而言，本研究假設服務人員之情緒要求會透過工作倦怠之中介以減損服務績效（健康耗損歷程），而此一中介歷程會被服務人員之職業認定所調節。本研究透過問卷調查法，蒐集主管與部屬（服務人員）有效對偶資料共211筆，結果發現，服務人員之情緒要求會透過工作倦怠之中介以減損服務績效，服務人員之職業認定會削弱上述中介效果。本研究之理論與實務意涵以及研究限制與未來研究方向，將在最後提出討論。英文摘要：Based on the perspectives of job demands-resources model, we explore how and when service provider's emotional demands impair service performance; specifically, we predict that emotional demands negatively affects service performance via the mediator of job burnout (health impairment process), and that this mediating process is moderated by service provider's occupational identity. Using questionnaire survey, we collected supervisor-subordinate (service provider) dyad data and obtained 211 valid pairs of data. Results showed that emotional demands impair service performance via the mediator of job burnout. Occupational identity weakens this mediating process. We discussed the theoretical and practical implications as well as limitations and future research directions at the end.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201712_17(4).00012篇名：真誠領導、團隊敬業貢獻、正向心理資本與員工創造力：一個跨層次的研究並列篇名：Authentic Leadership, Team Work Engagement, Positive Psychological Capital and Employee Creativity: A Cross-Level Study作者：彭瑞振(Jui-Chen Peng)關鍵字：真誠領導;心理資本;團隊敬業貢獻;創造力;authentic leadership;psychological capital;team work engagement;creativity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究採取跨層次架構來探討團隊主管之真誠領導與團隊成員個人創造力之間的關係。本研究以台灣地區6家遊戲軟體設計公司的研發團隊成員和其團隊主管為研究對象，採問卷調查方式，共計回收38份團隊主管資料、223份員工樣本資料。階層線性模式分析之結果顯示：個體層次員工正向心理資本和團隊層次員工敬業貢獻是為團隊真誠領導和員工創造力正向關係之間的中介因子。研究意涵、研究限制與及未來研究方向亦一併提出討論。英文摘要：This study aims to examine a cross-level framework to further explicate how team leaders' authentic leadership is related to team members' individual creativity. Data were collected from 38 research and development (R&D) team leaders and 223 team members of six game software design companies in Taiwan. Hierarchical linear modeling results revealed that the positive psychological capital of individuals and team-level work engagement mediated the positive relationship between team leaders' authentic leadership and team members' individual creativity. The implication of this study and limitations and directions for future research are then discussed.起始頁-結束頁：37-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201712_17(4).00023篇名：轉換型領導如何提升員工創新行為？以競爭氣候、合作氣候、授權賦能觀點探討並列篇名：How Does Transformational Leadership Promote Innovative Behavior of Employees? Based on the Perspective of Competitive Climate and Collaborative Climate, and Empowerment作者：李庭閣(Tingko Lee);費吳琛(Wu-Chen Fei);嚴國晉(Kuo-Ching Yen);梁瓏嘉(Long-Chia Liang)關鍵字：轉換型領導;創新行為;授權賦能;競爭氣候;合作氣候;transformational leadership;innovative behavior;empowerment;competitive climate;collaborative climate期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：轉換型領導對創新行為影響已被過往文獻調查且獲得普遍性地支持。本研究延伸這個主軸，深入探討團隊競爭與合作氣候及個人知覺的授權賦能是否可成為團隊層次的轉換型領導與部屬創新行為之間關係的中介因子。本研究採問卷調查法，以國軍高司幕僚單位之部屬及其主管為研究對象，蒐集66個幕僚團隊共計305份有效對偶樣本，並採用階層線性模型（hierarchical linear modeling）進行假設檢驗。研究結果指出，團隊層次的轉換型領導可透過合作氣候對創新行為有正向顯著效果；然而，競爭氣候的中介效果未達顯著水準。此外，授權賦能對團隊層次的轉換型領導與創新行為之間存在中介效果。最後，根據研究結果提出學術及實務意涵加以討論。英文摘要：The influence of transformational leadership on innovative behavior has been surveyed and widely supported by prior literatures. This study extends existing studies and further examines whether the relationship between team-level transformational leadership and subordinate innovative behavior would be linked by mediating factors, including team competitive and cooperative climates and empowerment. A total of 362 samples were collected from 79 team members of the staff divisions in military officers, and all hypotheses were examined by using hierarchical linear modeling (HLM). The results indicate that transformational leadership can positively promote innovative behavior by fostering the cooperative climate but competitive climate not. Moreover, empowerment can positively mediate the relationship between team-level transformational leadership and innovative behavior. Finally, the academic and practical implications along with research results are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：61-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201712_17(4).00034篇名：社會影響觀點探討建言行為的有效影響途徑：情感型信任及知覺同事網絡中心性的調節校果並列篇名：From the Perspective of Social Impact to Explore the Effective Impact Path of Voice Behavior: Affect-Based Trust Moderates the Moderating Effect of Co-worker's Network Centrality作者：洪贊凱(Tsang-Kai Hung);嚴之妤(Chih-Yu Yen)關鍵字：建言行為;建言安全感;情感型信任;網絡中心性;社會衝擊理論;voice behavior;psychological safety;affect-based trust;social network centrality;social impact theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究欲從社會影響的觀點探討同事建言行為如何透過個體建言安全感影響個體建言行為的途徑，以及情感型信任與知覺同事網絡中心性的調節效果。本研究採立意抽樣，共計發出429份問卷，最後以301份有效樣本進行驗證。研究結果顯示：（1）建言安全感在同事建言行為與個體建言行為之間具有部分中介效果；（2）知覺同事網絡中心性對同事建言行為和心理安全感之關係的調節效果，會受到情感型信任的調節。依據研究結果，本研究亦進一步提出學術與實務意涵。學術上，本研究填補建言行為的研究缺口，並嘗試以社會影響的角度探討建言行為的有效影響途徑。實務上，領導者可針對關鍵員工多加發揮影響力，以藉此帶動其他員工的建言行為。英文摘要：In view of the importance of the voice behavior, both scholars and practitioners try to find an effective way to increase employee voice behavior. In terms of social impact, one's voice behavior will be under the influence of others'. Social Impact Theory suggests that the influence level partly depends on other's ability, status and closeness between individual and the source of the influence. Therefore, this study tried to explore the potential antecedence and consequence of voice behavior and to discuss the mediating process of voice behavior and the moderating effects of affect-based trust and coworker's social network centrality. With convenience sampling, data were collected from a sample of 429 employees and resulted in 301 valid samples. Results revealed: (1) Psychological safety partial mediated the relationships between co-worker's voice behavior and individual's voice behavior. (2) Affect-based trust moderated the moderating effect of coworker's network centrality between co-worker's voice behavior and psychological safety.起始頁-結束頁：91-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201712_17(4).00045篇名：適配的「適配」：關係適配與理性適配的互動並列篇名：”Fit” about Fits: The Interaction between Relational Fit and Rational Fit作者：莊璦嘉(Aichia Chuang);沈其泰(Chi-Tai Shen)關鍵字：個人與工作適配;個人與組織適配;個人與主管適配;個人與群體適配;多元適配模型;person-job fit;person-organization fit;person-supervisor fit;person-group fit;multidimensional model of PE fit期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究的目的在探討關係適配（個人與主管適配、個人與群體適配）對於理性適配（個人與工作的需求—能力適配、個人與工作的需要—供給適配、個人與組織適配）和結果變項間之關係的干擾效果。透過328 份主管與部屬的對偶資料，進行polynomial 迴歸分析。研究結果顯示：除了關係適配對於個人與工作的需求—能力適配和離職傾向間之干擾效果不顯著外，關係適配和理性適配之間存在互動的效果。具體來說，當其中一種適配指標達到高契合程度，或者當兩種適配指標同時都達到高契合的程度時，員工會展現出較高的工作績效、工作滿意、以及較低的離職傾向。最後，則對於本研究結果與貢獻、研究限制、未來研究方向、以及實務上的管理意涵進行討論。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the moderation effect of relational fit (person-supervisor fit and person-group fit) on the relationships between rational fit (demands-abilities fit, needs-supplies fit, person-organization fit) and employee outcomes. A total of 328 manager-employee dyads were analyzed using polynomial regression analysis and response surface methodology. Results show that in a majority of the cases, relational fit and rational fit interact to predict outcome variables. Specifically, when either relational fit or rational fit was high, or when they were both high, employees had higher job performance and job satisfaction, and lower intent to quit Theoretical contributions, limitations, future research, and managerial implications were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1703.016篇名：The Effect of Supervisor Neuroticism on Employee Voice Behavior: A Moderated Mediation Model of Emotional Exhaustion, Self-Efficacy and Emotion Regulation並列篇名：主管神經質對員工建言行為的影響：情緒耗竭、自我效能與情緒調節的調節式中介模式作者：何瑞枝(Jui-Chih Ho);蔡啟通(Chi-Tung Tsai)關鍵字：supervisor neuroticism;emotional exhaustion;self-efficacy;emotion regulation;voice behavior;主管神經質;情緒耗竭;自我效能;情緒調節;建言行為期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：In this study, the conservation of resource theory was adopted to investigate the mediating effects of emotional exhaustion on the relationship between supervisor neuroticism and employee voice behavior. In addition, we examined the moderating effects of self-efficacy and emotion regulation on the indirect effect that supervisor neuroticism exerts on employee voice behavior through emotional exhaustion. This study collected 226 sets of valid data on employees and their respective supervisors by using multiple data sources. Through hierarchical regression and analysis of moderated mediation, this study determined that emotional exhaustion can mediate the negative relationship between supervisor neuroticism and employee voice. Furthermore, self-efficacy and emotion regulation can respectively moderate the relationship between supervisor neuroticism and emotional exhaustion. An analysis of moderated mediating effect revealed that self-efficacy and emotion regulation can moderate the indirect effect that supervisor neuroticism exerts on employee voice behavior through emotional exhaustion. The present study also provided relevant theoretical and practical implications.英文摘要：本研究以資源保存理論的觀點探討情緒耗竭在主管神經質到員工建言行為的中介效果，以及自我效能、情緒調節如何調節主管神經質經情緒耗竭對員工建言行為的間接效果。本研究透過多重來源的研究設計，蒐集226 份的有效員工及其主管配對資料，經由階層迴歸分析與調節式中介分析的檢驗步驟，本研究發現情緒耗竭可中介主管神經質與員工建言之間的負向關係。再者，自我效能、情緒調節可分別調節主管神經質與情緒耗竭之關係，且調節式中介效果的分析也發現，自我效能、情緒調節可調節主管神經質經由情緒耗竭進而影響員工建言的間接效果。本研究結果也提供了相關的理論及實務意涵。起始頁-結束頁：33-57資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1703.027篇名：工作團體多工作業多元性團體表現：團體時間規劃程度、任務相依性的調節式中介模式並列篇名：Work Group Polychronicity Diversity and Group Performance: A Moderated Mediation of Team Temporal Planning and Task Interdependence作者：林姿葶(Tzu-Ting Lin);何其霞(Chi-Hsia Ho)關鍵字：多工作業;團體成員多元性;團體表現;團體時間規劃程度;任務相依性;polychronicity;group member diversity;group performance;temporal planning;task interdependence期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探究多工作業多元性對團體表現之影響，包括團體績效與效率，及其中介機制與適當情境，並以調節式中介模式進行效果驗證。採問卷法施測，共蒐集88 份有效之團體成套問卷，包含553 名全職工作者。研究結果發現，控制團體成員關係與作業多元性、團體背景變項後，多工作業多元性、團體時間規劃程度皆有助於團體績效與團體效率之表現；而團體時間規劃程度會中介團體多工作業多元性與團體表現間關係，對團體績效、團體效率皆具有完全中介效果。調節式中介模式分析結果也驗證任務相依性的情境效果，多工作業多元性對團體表現的直接與間接效果，在低度或中度任務相依性的團體中較為顯著。最後進行討論，並說明理論貢獻、人資實務意涵以及未來研究方向。英文摘要：This study developed and tested a moderated mediation model linking work group polychronicity diversity and group performance, including of group effectiveness and efficacy, as well as it intermediary mechanism and appropriate situation. A total of 88 sets of effective group questionnaires with 553 full-time workers were collected. Results reveal that after controlling for relation-oriented and task-oriented diversity, and group characteristics, both group polychronicity diversity and temporal planning have a positive effect on both types of group performance. In addition, team temporal planning fully mediates such relationship. Results from moderated mediation model testing verify the contextual effect of task interdependence. That is, the direct and indirect effect of polychronicity diversity on group performance is stronger among teams with low or moderate interdependence. The article concludes with a discussion of theoretical contribution, human resource practical implications and future research suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：59-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1703.038篇名：The Relationships among Pay Secrecy, Distributive Justice, and Job-Related Outcomes並列篇名：薪資保密、分配公平與工作相關結果關係之研究作者：葉忠興(Chung-Hsing Yeh);陳建佑(Chien-Yu Chen)關鍵字：pay secrecy;distributive justice;task performance;job satisfaction;organizational commitment;薪資保密;分配公平;任務績效;工作滿足;組織承諾期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Pay secrecy has been a contentious issue in many organizations for a long time. Given the ambiguous explanations regarding its efficacy in organizations today, a deeper understanding of pay secrecy and its effects is warranted. Specifically, the purpose of this study is to fill this gap by examining the relationships between pay secrecy, distributive justice and job-related outcomes for employees. Data from 290 employees in Taiwan indicate that pay secrecy has both direct and indirect negative influences on task performance. Distributive justice fully mediates the relationship between pay secrecy and job satisfaction and the relationship between pay secrecy and organizational commitment. This study contributes to the theory, practice, and clarification of the relationships between pay secrecy and job-related outcomes.英文摘要：多年來薪資保密一直是許多組織的爭論性議題，由於薪資保密對於組織效能的關係仍存在模糊不清的解釋，有必要深入探討薪資保密之影響效果。本研究目的在探討薪資保密、分配公平和工作相關結果之關係，針對台灣290 位全職員工進行問卷調查，實證結果顯示薪資保密對於任務績效具有直接與間接效果。分配公平對於薪資保密與工作滿足關係以及薪資保密與組織承諾關係具有完全中介效果。本研究結果釐清薪資保密與工作相關結果之關係，並且提出相關理論貢獻與管理意涵。起始頁-結束頁：85-110資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1703.049篇名：職場霸凌對員工幸福感之影響：社會資本與心理資本的調節作用並列篇名：The Relationships between the Perception of Workplace Bullying and Employee Well-Being: Moderating Effects of Social Capital and Psychological Capital作者：吳美連(Melien Wu);張振傑(Chen-Chieh Chang);王秀菁(Shiou-Jing Wang)關鍵字：職場霸凌;幸福感;社會資本;心理資本;workplace bullying;well-being;social capital;psychological capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：霸凌事件不僅會影響員工身、心理之狀態，亦會影響團隊及組織績效，而且已是一個重要的社會議題。本研究運用情感事件理論（Affective Events Theory, AET）探討職場霸凌、社會資本與心理資本如何影響員工的幸福感，以及統合性壓力模式探討社會資本與心理資本對於職場霸凌與幸福感二者之間的調節作用。本研究以嘉義市、台南市與高雄市之公務人員為對象，採便利抽樣法發放500份問卷，回收468份，有效問卷428份，有效回收率為85.6%。研究結果發現，職場霸凌顯著負向影響幸福感、家庭社會資本顯著正向影響幸福感、心理資本之希望及樂觀兩構面顯著正向影響幸福感、心理資本之希望及韌性兩構面在職場霸凌與幸福感皆具有顯著調節作用。本研究根據研究結果提出後續研究與實務建議。英文摘要：Workplace bullying not only imposes a high level of mental stress on employees, but also weakens organizational performance. The purpose of the current research investigates the influences of workplace bullying on employees' well-being, as well as the moderating effect of social capital and psychological capital on the aforementioned relationship. We collected empirical data from civil servants in cities of Chaiyi, Tainan, and Kaohsiung. A total of 500 questionnaires were collected and 428 valid samples were retrieved, representing the valid response rate of 85.6%. The results showed that the perception of workplace bullying has a significant negative influence on employees' well-being, whereas social capital has a significant positive influence on employees' well-being. The dimensions of senses of hope and optimism of psychological capital have positive influences on employees' well-being. Both hope and resilience of psychological capital moderated the relationship of workplace bullying to well-being. Based on the results, suggestions are proposed for future studies and practical implications.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1702.0110篇名：部屬目標導向與上司知覺部屬忠誠、關係、及能力之關聯並列篇名：Relationships of Subordinate's Goal Orientation to Supervisory Perception of Subordinate's Loyalty, Guanxi and Competence作者：陳嵩(Song Chen)關鍵字：目標導向;能力;對上司忠誠;上司－部屬關係;goal orientation;competence;loyalty to supervisor;supervisor-subordinate guanxi期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：部屬的能力、對上司的忠誠、及與上司的關係，是影響華人主管員工歸類及管理行為的三個重要準則，惟部屬具備何種特質較能贏得上司對其「忠誠、關係、及能力」的正面認知與評價呢？本研究應用目標導向理論，探討部屬的學習及表現導向與上司知覺「部屬忠誠、上司－部屬關係、部屬能力」的關聯，並以198組跨產業的上司－部屬配對樣本為問卷調查實證對象。迴歸分析結果顯示，上司對高學習導向部屬有較高的忠誠度及關係認知、較高的能力評價；對高表現導向部屬有較低的忠誠度認知及較低的能力評價，不過部屬的高學習導向能有效緩減上司對高表現導向的負面認知與評價。最後，本研究分別說明實徵結果的理論及管理涵意，並對未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：Subordinates' competence, loyalty, and guanxi are three important criteria affecting Chinese leaders' employee categorization and managerial behaviors. However, what kind of employee characteristics could assist subordinates to gain positive evaluations and perceptions from their supervisors? This study, applied the goal orientation theory, examines the relationships of subordinate's learning and performance goal orientation to supervisory perception of subordinate competence, loyalty to supervisor, and supervisor-subordinate guanxi. One hundred and ninety-eight supervisor-subordinate dyads across different industries in Taiwan were sampled as empirical subjects. The results from regression analysis indicate that subordinates with higher learning orientation were evaluated higher competence, and perceived higher loyalty to supervisors and guanxi by their supervisors. In contrast, subordinates with higher performance orientation were evaluated lower competence and perceived lower loyalty to supervisors by their supervisors. However, the negative relationships of performance orientation to perceived competence and loyalty to supervisors could be effectively mitigated by higher learning orientation. Finally, the theoretical and managerial implications were drawn based on the study findings, and recommendations for future researchers were made.起始頁-結束頁：27-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1702.0211篇名：印象管理動機與組織公民行為之關係：政治技能之調節角色並列篇名：The Relationship between Impression Management Motive and Organizational Citizenship Behavior: Moderating Role of Political Skill作者：李旭梅(Hsu-Mei Lee)關鍵字：印象管理動機;政治技能;組織公民行為;impression management motive;political skill;organizational citizenship behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Rioux與Penner（2001）將組織公民行為的動機分為：利社會價值動機、組織關懷動機與印象管理動機。印象管理動機對組織公民行為的影響關係，現有的研究結果呈現不一致性。故本研究援引社會影響理論中的政治技能，探究其在印象管理動機與組織公民行為之間扮演的調節角色。研究資料來自8間公司的258套問卷（部屬與主管配對）。研究結果發現個體的印象管理動機對主管評價其組織公民行為有正向影響。政治技能強化了印象管理動機與主管評價其組織公民行為的正向關聯。當個體的政治技能愈佳時，印象管理動機與主管評價的組織公民行為的正向關係將愈強。針對以上結果，本研究提出相關的理論與實務意涵。英文摘要：Rioux & Penner (2001) identified three motives of organizational citizenship behavior: prosocial values motives, organizational concern motives, and impression management motives. The findings of studies on the relationship between impression management motive and organizational citizenship behavior are inconsistent. Therefore, this study examined the moderating role of political skill which from social influence theory in the relationship between impression management motive and organizational citizenship behavior. Data were collected from 258 subordinates and 258 supervisors of 8 companies in Taiwan. The results showed that the impression management motive had positively related to organizational citizenship behavior. Also, we found the positive interactions between impression management motives and political skill as the predictor of organizational citizenship behavior. In details, the higher degree of political skill, the stronger relationship between impression management motive and organizational citizenship behavior. Based on the results, theoretical and practical implications were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：55-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1702.0312篇名：部分複相關係數在管理研究之探究－控制變數與軟體配合應用並列篇名：On Partial Multiple Correlation Coefficients in Managerial Studies -- The Combined Application of Control Variable and Software作者：龔千芬(Chien-Feng Kung)關鍵字：部分複相關係數;控制變數;檢定力計算;假設檢定;樣本數決定;partial multiple correlation coefficient;control variables;power calculation;hypothesis testing;sample size determination期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：控制變數在管理、組織、與心理各個領域皆被研究者廣泛應用，Organizational Research Methods在2012年更以專刊介紹控制變數相關議題，可見控制變數在研究中應用普遍與重要性。控制變數應用於研究者在控制基本變數下，專注於主要變數對於反應變數的結果，就統計方法而言，部份複相關分析較實用，但卻僅少數學者進行相關議題的研究，因為部份複相關分析理論結構十分複雜，形成重要關卡，更缺乏完整統計軟體支援。本研究著重利用部份複相關分析於假設檢定、檢定力計算、以及樣本數等議題，利用Excel介面的親和性與普及性，提供全面性且實務性的介紹作為研究規劃與分析之用。最後，配合個案詳細的說明如何運用此軟體於規劃研究決策或教學展示上。英文摘要：Control variables are widely used by researchers in various fields, including management, organization and psychology. In 2012, Organizational Research Methods made an exclusive description of the topics about control variables, which demonstrated the ubiquity and importance of control variables in researches. Control variables are applied when researchers control basic variables and focus on the effects of main variables on response variables. As far as the statistical methodology is concerned, the partial multiple correlation analysis is more practical than the multiple correlation analysis. Currently, only a small number of scholars are exploring the topics about the practical partial multiple correlation analysis. The reason for this is that the theoretical structure of the partial multiple correlation is very complicated, which sets a high threshold, and that there is lack of complete statistical software application to support. This research inferences exact probability density function of the partial multiple correlation coefficients, and a extensive accessibity of Microsoft Excel software, the associated computer routines for hypothesis testing, power calculation, and sample determination are developed. With the compatibility and popularity of the Excel interface, this study gives an introduction to its comprehensiveness and practicability to offer reference for research planning and analysis. Finally, a research case is cited for a detailed description of how to apply the software in planning, research and decision-making or instruction presentation.起始頁-結束頁：73-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1702.0413篇名：員工建言行為：回顧與未來並列篇名：Employee Voice Behavior: A Review and Future Research Agenda作者：林守紀(Shou-Chi Lin);周麗芳(Li-Fang Chou);任金剛(Chin-Kang Jen);曾春榮(Chun-Jung Tseng)關鍵字：員工建言行為;建言行為的中介與調節因素;多層次員工建言模式;本位取向;華人建言行為;employee voice behavior;mediating and moderating factors of voice behavior;multiple level model of employee voice;emic approach;Chinese voice behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：員工的建言行為不僅能幫助組織發現內部潛藏的問題，更提供了多樣化、具創意的觀點，有助於組織因應日愈複雜的競爭環境。相較於建言行為受到西方組織管理學者與實務者的重視，台灣有關員工建言行為研究相對還在起步階段，為數不多的建言行為研究亦多複製西方研究或追隨西方觀點。因此，本文針對西方與台灣建言行為研究進行文獻回顧與整理，首先，釐清建言行為的概念內涵、特性及測量；其次，從多層次的角度，整理西方研究中有關建言行為之前因與結果、中介與調節機制；第三，檢視台灣建言行為研究的現況。在前述的基礎上，進一步提出建言行為研究的未來方向、並提供本位取向之華人建言行為研究的切入點，期盼有助於台灣對建言行為研究的深化與理論建構。英文摘要：Employee voice behavior (EVB) can help organization detecting hidden problems and offer organization various and creative viewpoints to face the environment with growing competitions. Compared to being highly valued with fruitful research findings by Western organizational behavior researchers and practitioners, the studies on EVB are relatively scarce in Taiwan and most of them just replicated researches or followed perspectives from Western studies. Therefore, this article aims to conduct literature review of EVB studies for both in Western and Taiwan to, firstly, clarify the concept, characteristics, and measurement of EVB; secondly, analyze the EVB-related antecedent and consequent factors, mediation and moderation mechanisms, from Western studies; thirdly, examine current status of EVB studies in Taiwan. Then, based on the results stated above, the future research directions on EVB are further discussed with emic approach on Chinese voice behavior to facilitate deepening development of EVB studies and theory building in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1701.0114篇名：急性子主管不好嗎？主管時間緊迫性格對不當督導之影響並列篇名：Are Urgent Leaders Bad for Subordinates? The Influence of Leader Time Urgency on Abusive Supervision作者：汪美伶(Mei-Ling Wang);李俊賢(Chun-Hsien Lee)關鍵字：領導部屬交換理論;時間緊迫性格;不當督導;相對剝奪理論;leader-member exchange theory;time urgency;abusive supervision;relative deprivation theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究整合領導部屬交換（leader-member exchange，簡稱LMX）理論與相對剝奪理論，驗證主管的時間緊迫性格、LMX 等前因變項，對不當督導的直接影響，並探討主管的時間緊迫性格對LMX 與不當督導關係間的調節效果。是故，本研究以金融機構的小額信貸電話行銷團隊主管及其部屬為研究對象，利用問卷方式蒐集53 位團隊主管與361 位部屬之資料，採用二層次階層線性模式進行分析。結果發現，團隊主管的時間緊迫性格、LMX 均對不當督導產生負向影響，主管的時間緊迫性格亦會減緩LMX 對不當督導的負向影響。針對上述結果，本研究提出理論意涵與管理建議。英文摘要：Integrating leader-member exchange (LMX) theory with relative deprivation theory, this study investigated the effects of leader time urgency and LMX on abusive supervision and explored the moderating effect of leader time urgency on the negative relationship between LMX and abusive supervision. Data was collected from 53 team managers and in their 361 subordinates in charge of promoting small loans by telemarketing in the financial institution of Taiwan, and was analyzed conducting two-level hierarchical linear modeling. The results show that both leader time urgency and LMX had positive effects on abusive supervision. In addition, leader time urgency weakened the negative effect of LMX on abusive supervision. Both theoretical and practical implications are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：35-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1701.0215篇名：當員工覺得不得不從事公民行為的結果：一項心理抗拒觀點的探討並列篇名：The Consequence when Employees' Feelings are Involuntary to Do OCB: A Perspective of Psychological Reactance Theory作者：朱志傑(Chih-Chieh Chu);周麗芳(Li-Fang Chou);曾春榮(Chun-Jung Tseng)關鍵字：公民行為被迫知覺;公民行為動機;心理抗拒理論;compulsive perception of citizenship behavior;citizenship motives;psychological reactance theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究採心理抗拒理論的觀點，探討公民行為被迫知覺對員工情緒耗竭與組織公民行為的影響，並檢視公民行為動機在上述關係中的調節效果。以台灣企業282 對直屬主管與部屬為研究對象，發現：(1) 公民行為被迫知覺與情緒耗竭間有正向關係，但與組織公民行為（主管評）沒有顯著關係；(2) 當利社會價值之公民行為動機較高時，會強化公民行為被迫知覺與情緒耗竭之間的正向關係；(3)當利社會價值與關心組織動機較高，公民行為被迫知覺與組織公民行為之間具有負向關係；反之，當利社會價值、關心組織較低時，公民行為被迫知覺則與組織公民行為具有正向關係。最後，本研究進行研究貢獻與未來建議的討論。英文摘要：We used psychological reactance theory to discuss the effect of compulsive perception of citizenship behavior (CPCB) on employee’s emotional exhaustion and organizational citizenship behavior (OCB), and the moderating roles of citizenship motives on above relationships. Using a sample of 282 supervisor-subordinate dyads collected from Taiwan companies, we found the positive relationship between CPCB and emotional exhaustion, but no siginicant relationship between CPCB and OCB. In addition, the results demonstrated that higher citizenship motive of prosocial values strengthened the positive relationship between CPCB and emotional exhaustion. Further, the relationships between CPCB and OCB were negative when citizenship motive (prosocial values and organizational concern) was higher, while the relationships were positive when citizenship motive (prosocial values and organizational concern) was lower. Finally, the implications and future suggestions were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：59-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1701.0316篇名：部屬團隊認同與領導者對部屬績效評估的連結：部屬外顯行為與領導者內隱知覺的中介效果並列篇名：The Linkages between Subordinates' Team Identification and Leaders' Performance Ratings: The Mediated Effects of Subordinates' Explicit Behavior and Leader's Implicit Perception作者：胡宛仙(Wan-hsien Hu);林家五(Chia-wu Lin)關鍵字：內隱部屬理論;績效評估;組織公民行為;團隊認同;implicit followership theories;performance rating;organizational citizenship behavior;team identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：17卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究連結部屬端的社會認定理論（social identity theory）與領導者端的內隱部屬理論（implicit followership theories, IFTs），探討部屬團隊認同與領導者績效評估之間的關係中，部屬的組織公民行為（organizational citizenship behavior, OCB）與領導者對部屬知覺的中介作用。從台灣14家旅館中，蒐集314 組領導者與部屬的對偶資料進行檢驗，MPLUS 分析結果顯示，部屬的團隊認同程度愈高，愈可能轉換為具體的角色外行為（即組織公民行為），而領導者感受到部屬組織公民行為程度愈高，則愈可能將該部屬視為理想的員工，也就是原型部屬（prototype employee），進而得到領導者給予較高的績效評估。此外，以Bootstrap 法檢驗中介效果，結果顯示部屬團隊認同程度愈高，會透過組織公民行為間接影響領導者對原型部屬的認知，進而得到較高的績效評估。最後的結論與討論，包含理論與實務意涵，研究限制與未來研究建議。英文摘要：Drawing on social identity theory and implicit followership theories (IFTs), this study examined the sequential mediated effects of subordinates' OCB and leader's IFTs within the relationship between subordinates' team identification and leaders' performance ratings. Data collected from 314 leader-subordinate dyads of 14 hotels in Taiwan. The MPLUS analysis revealed that subordinates' team identification could predict their OCB. Moreover, leader regards these subordinates as prototypical employees in turn leads to rate employees as higher performers. Our results suggest that leaders' ratings of job performance are susceptible to prototypical beliefs based on subordinates' team identification and OCB. Theoretical and practical implications, research limitations, and future research directions are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：87-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.2017.1701.0401篇名：主編的話作者：陳端容期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：55期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press2篇名：研究經費、生命週期因素、與學術生產力—臺灣物理學者的實證分析並列篇名：Research Grants and Life-Cycle Academic Productivity: An Empirical Study of Taiwan's Physicists作者：吳慧瑛(Huoying Wu)關鍵字：師資結構老化;人力資本;研究經費;學術生產力;研究產出;aging faculty;human capital;research grants;academic productivity;research output期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：55期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在探討研究經費、生命週期因素、與學術研究生產力的關係，以物理學為主要研究領域，研究對象包括任職於具物理學博士班的11所大學教師以及中央研究院物理所研究人員，共327位物理學者，平均每位學者約有7.1個年觀測值。學術生產力以5種指標衡量：未調整作者人數的SCI論文數（指標1）、未調整作者人數的核心期刊論文數（指標2）、列名通訊作者或第一作者的核心期刊論文數（指標3）、經調整作者人數的核心期刊論文數（指標4）、經調整作者人數的SCI論文數（指標5）。考慮到取得博士學位的年齡會影響日後學術高峰期出現的時間，本文以取得博士學位後至論文發表時的年資來衡量生命週期的階段。本文使用隨機效果Tobit模型估計，實證結果顯示年資與研究經費對學術生產力的影響呈現倒U型式的現象，主要出現在指標1與指標2。換言之，隨著年資或研究經費的增加，未調整作者人數的論文數，不管是一般期刊或核心期刊，會先上升然後再下降，且研究經費對生產力的影響，又比年資的影響來得顯著。控制研究經費與其他解釋變數之後，以指標1與指標2衡量的物理學者的學術生產力高峰約在取得博士學位後的19-20年間。英文摘要：This paper explores the life-cycle academic productivity among Taiwan's physicists, by taking into account the role of research grants. Our sample consists of 327 physicists from Academia Sinica and 11 universities with Ph.D. programs in physics. The academic productivity of each scholar is assessed yearly by the number of publications in 5 various measures. On average, there are 7.1 annual observations per scholar. The life-cycle phase is gauged by professional age, which is defined as years since receiving a Ph.D. degree. By employing the random-effects Tobit model, our empirical results show that both professional age and research grants exert a significant impact upon academic productivity. Research grants reveal an even stronger effect than professional age does, particularly in the number of SCI articles as well as in the number of core-journal articles. In terms of these two unadjusted author-number publication measures, life-cycle academic productivity rises and then falls as scholars age and/or research grants increase. Ceteris paribus, the academic productivity of Taiwan's physicists is found to peak at 19-20 years after the receipt of their Ph.D. degree.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2017.55.013篇名：北京城市新移民的空間流動與社會流動：「去」與「留」之間並列篇名：The Spatial and Social Mobility of New Migrants to Beijing: Staying or Leaving?作者：宋郁玲(Yu-Ling Song);陳金永(Kam Wing Chan)關鍵字：空間流動;社會流動;邊緣中產階層;城市新移民;北京;spatial mobility;social mobility;marginal middle class;new migrants;Beijing期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：55期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文在探討中國城市新移民是否能透過空間流動而影響社會流動，進而成為未來的中產階層，達到中國「擴大中產階層」的社會發展目標。在戶籍制度仍具有深刻影響力的中國社會當中，城市新移民的空間流動與社會流動之間存在著複雜的關係，本文提出的問題是：影響中國城市新移民社會流動的因子是什麼？空間流動能否克服制度障礙成為積累資本形成社會流動的途徑？我們將城市新移民的特性分析並加以分類，透過田野調查與深度訪談57位受訪者，以疊圖與主題分析城市新移民中各個群體的空間流動與社會流動的關係。我們依據城市新移民的階層狀態分為：「邊緣專業」、「邊緣白領」、「邊緣知識」與「邊緣富裕」等四類。整體而言，在戶籍制度產生集體排除的狀態下，對戶籍制度有較多負面感受者，他們更傾向於透過空間流動來尋找社會階層向上流動的可能，如「邊緣專業」與「邊緣富裕」，文化資本則無法成為城市新移民社會流動的關鍵因素。反之，對戶籍制度逐漸漠視或者順從制度的壓力者，繼續透過移動累積資本的可能性較小，如「邊緣白領」、「邊緣知識」。他們雖然是中國「擴大中產階層」的對象，但生活空間卻在都市發展政策下被一步步逼退，考驗著「去」或「留」的抉擇。英文摘要：This paper investigates whether new migrants to Beijing have achieved upward social mobility to become the middle class through spatial mobility. Expanding the size of the middle class is one of China's development goals. With the household registration system still exerting a strong influence on Chinese society, there exists a complex relationship between spatial and social mobility among new migrants. This research asks two questions: What are the factors affecting the social mobility of new migrants to Beijing? Can spatial mobility overcome institutional obstacles on the path to social mobility? Our research focuses on analyzing the characteristics and grouping of new migrants through fieldwork and in-depth interviews of 57 respondents. Based on their social class status, we divide the new migrants into four groups: ”marginal professionals,” ”marginal white-collar,” ”new college graduates,” and ”marginal new rich.” The relationship between social and spatial mobility of the individual groups of new migrants are identified through overlapping their major features. Our findings show that among the four groups, the ”marginal professionals” and ”marginal new rich”, who possess the most and the least cultural capital, respectively, have more opportunities to accumulate capital through spatial mobility and continue their movement in the future. The ”new college graduates” also have plentiful cultural capital, but their experience in spatial mobility is all education-related. These moves cannot be turned into the capital to increase social mobility. For new migrants to Beijing, cultural capital cannot become the key driver of social mobility. The unique phenomenon of Beijing's marginal middle class also shows in their view of the hukou system. Because of the exclusion by the hukou system, groups having more negative views of the hukou system tend to search for the possibility of social mobility through spatial mobility. On the other hand, groups which are indifferent to the hukou system or succumb to the pressure of the hukou system are are less likely to accumulate capital through spatial mobility. Though they are candidates for the new middle class, their living space in the city has been increasingly reduced under the new urbanization policy. They face a difficult decision as to whether to stay, or leave Beijing.起始頁-結束頁：39-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2017.55.024篇名：臺灣原住民族死亡率<U+66C1>生命表編撰研究並列篇名：A Study of Taiwan Indigenous Peoples Mortality and Life Table Construction作者：王信忠(Hsin-Chung Wang);余清祥(Jack C. Yue);王子瑜(Tzu-Yu Wang)關鍵字：原住民生命表;小區域估計;死亡率模型;臺灣原住民基礎開放研究資料庫;平均餘命;aboriginal life table;small area estimation;mortality models;Taiwan Indigenous Peoples Open Research Data;life expectancy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：55期出版年：2017中文摘要：原住民族在許多國家均屬於弱勢族群，除了社經地位偏低，在教育、福利與醫療等資源分配也普遍存在不公平的現象，我國政府一直致力於消匿弱勢團體的劣勢，其中提升族群平等、尊重各民族多元文化等政策頗多進展，在國際間具有較為正面的形象。近年來因為整體經濟成長遲緩、國民薪資倒退、生育率下降、壽命延長等高齡化問題陸續顯現，國家財政日益拮据，可能影響原住民族的資源分配。有鑑於此，本研究以編算原住民族的生命表為目標，期望做為衡量原住民族的需求與資源分配參考，以及政府政策績效的客觀指標。本文採用臺灣原住民基礎開放研究資料庫（Taiwan Indigenous Peoples Open Research Data, TIPD），依據2013年3月-2016年4月合計三年的全體原住民及人口較多的阿美族、泰雅族、排灣族三族之婚姻、居住區域、教育別等死亡率資料，並考量小區域估計方法（王信忠等 2012）編算生命表，提供各界參考。研究發現，本文結合過去歷史資訊視為參考大母體的方法，搭配Whittaker比值、Partial Standard Mortality Ratio （PSMR）等修勻方法，可以取得較穩定的統計數值。另外，根據TIPD得出的原住民0歲平均餘命，仍明顯低於內政部公佈的結果，可能因為資料使用時間、編算方法不同，未來仍需持續追蹤、查核及檢討，確定原住民族資料品質及生命表編算結果的可靠度。英文摘要：Indigenous peoples are underprivileged groups in many countries, and usually have low socioeconomic status as well. Unfortunately, often there are not sufficient resources for education, welfare, and medical care to lead them to a higher socioeconomic class. Taiwan's government has been dedicated to improving the living environment and life quality of Taiwan's aborigines, with more public resources being allocated to the indigenous peoples. However, slow economic growth and rapid population aging further restrict the allocation of public resources. For example, Taiwan’s government has issued (or is planning) a lot of elderly-related social policies, including the New Labor Pension Act, National Pension System, and Long-term Care Insurance. We need to construct suitable measures, in addition to demographic statistics, to efficiently design public policies for the indigenous peoples. The mortality rates (and life expectancy) are good indicators for measuring life quality, and we will explore the mortality rates of Taiwanese aborigines in this study. We use data from the Taiwan Indigenous Peoples open research Data (TIPD) database maintained by the Council of Indigenous People, and focus on tribes with larger population sizes: Amis, Atayal, and Paiwan. Since the population size of Taiwanese aborigines is small, we consider graduation methods to smooth the age-specific mortality rates, including the Whittaker Ratio method, Partial Standard Mortality Ratio (PSMR), and stochastic models. We expect that the results of this study can serve as a reference for policy making for Taiwanese aborigines.起始頁-結束頁：99-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2017.55.035篇名：人類壽命上限值探討—以臺灣為例並列篇名：Maximum of Human Life Span－An Example in Taiwan作者：劉士嘉(Shih-Chia Liu);林正祥(Cheng-Hsiang Lin)關鍵字：平均餘命;生命表熵;疾病去除;平均餘命上限;life expectancy;life table entropy;elimination of causes of disease;maximum life span期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：55期出版年：2017中文摘要：近日，學術期刊《Nature》之研究報告顯示，人類的壽命上限為115歲，能達到125歲的可能性微乎其微。人口學家和生物學家都在爭論，認為人類的最長壽命還會繼續延長。但是有研究學者指出，人類壽命在1990年代就已經達到最高峰。他們分析了人類死亡數據庫（Human Mortality Database）中40多個國家的人口資料，發現人類壽命幾乎在1990年代已達到高峰，多項科學及醫療技術的發展，都有助於延長人類壽命。不過也有專家對此項研究持不同意見，認為過去的科學家們也曾聲稱人類壽命的上限為65歲、85歲、105歲，後來這些斷言都被推翻。並質疑該研究沒有應用人口和統計數據來檢測相關假設的準確性，稱「這類研究對人們將會活多久沒有提供任何科學根據」。我國近20年來國民所得、生活及醫療水準均已臻先進國家水平，整體國民平均壽命2015年為80.2歲，惟近年來增長幅度有限，甚而在2013-2014年間有些微下降。本研究以臺灣生命表資料利用統計學隨機概念進行探討，就臺灣一、1953-2015年生命表變化；二、出生、中年及老年的平均餘命與生命表熵之和及三、疾病去除平均餘命獲得變動趨勢，分析探討平均餘命上限相關問題。研究結果顯示臺灣男、女平均餘命上限大致為93歲及95歲。英文摘要：Recently, a research paper in Nature claimed that the maximum human life span is 115 years old, with very little chance to attain 125 years of age. Although demographers and biologists are arguing that increases in human longevity continue, some researchers have pointed out that the human lifespan reached its peak in the 1990s, based on an analysis of demographic data of more than 40 countries in the Human Mortality Database, and attributed this to the progress of science and medical technology. However, others have pointed out that although scientists claimed that the upper limit of human life is 65, 85 or even 105 years in the past, all these assertions were later overturned. Critics of the study point out that it did not use demographic and statistical data to verify the accuracy of the relevant hypotheses, saying that ”this kind of studies do not provide any scientific evidence for how long people would live.” In Taiwan, the national income and living and medical standards have reached the level of developed country in the past two decades. Although the life expectancy in 2015 was 80.2 years old, the life expectancy growth rate has been limited recently. In 2013-2014, there was even a slight decline in life expectancy. This paper intends to use the statistical data on life expectancy in Taiwan by means of the idea of randomization in statistics to explore (1) trend of life table changes, 1953-2015, (2) the sum of life expectancy in birth, middle age and old age with life table entropy, and (3) trends of the gains of life expectancy by elimination of the causes of death to discuss related issues about the maximum life span. Our study reveals the maximum life span in Taiwan is about 93 and 95 years of age for males and females respectively.起始頁-結束頁：133-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2017.55.046篇名：主編的話作者：陳端容期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：54期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press7篇名：日治時期臺灣女性婚育生命史序列分析並列篇名：A Sequence Analysis on Marriage and Birth Trajectories of Taiwanese Female in Hsinchu Area during Japanese Colonial Period作者：楊文山(Wen-Shan Yang);李怡芳(Yi-Fang Lee);黃郁麟(Yu-Lin Huang)關鍵字：日治時期;婚姻型態;生命歷程;序列分析;Japanese colonial period;marriage type;life course;sequence analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：54期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去百年來臺灣的婚姻生活模式產生重大改變，婚姻型態的變遷不僅重塑夫妻性別角色的關係，伴隨近代教育、職業、家庭與法律等制度的變革，亦改變不同性別尤其是女性的生涯發展。本文嘗試引入生命歷程的觀點，將婚姻視為一種多元且離散的連續過程，透過建構不同女性的生命序列模式，探討女性婚育行為的生命歷程。本文使用生命史序列分析技術，分析日治時期臺灣新竹地區戶籍資料，研究結果顯示，日治時期新竹地區超過85%女性的婚育行為模式大抵符合傳統華人文化的想像與期待，早婚生子，並且可區分為五種類型：第一類「傳統型」占全體分析樣本的71.48%，特徵為早婚多育；第二類「守寡型」占全體分析樣本的14.12%，特徵為晚婚喪偶；第三類「早逝型」占全體分析樣本的4.08%，特徵為早逝少育；第四類「再婚型」占全體分析樣本的5.91%，特徵為再婚多育；第五類「未／晚婚型」占全體分析樣本的4.40%，是特徵為未婚或晚婚少育。英文摘要：Marriage type in Taiwan has dramatically changed in the past centuries. Along with the reforms of education, employment, family and legislation, the changing marriage type not only remodeled the sex role of spouses but also altered female life planning. This article applies the concept of life course, and regards marriage as a sequence of discrete transitions. We aim to uncover marriage and birth trajectories of Taiwanese females in the Hsinchu area during the Japanese colonial period through constructing the female life history processes. In order to describe the single-to-marriageto- birth transitions, we use optimal matching algorithm and cluster analysis methods to analyze Japanese household registries in the Hsinchu area. The analysis reveals that over eight in ten Taiwanese females aged 15 to 40 in the Hsinchu area got married and started on birth considerably early in their life trajectories; and these could be divided into a five-cluster typology, including the Typical type (71 percent), Widowed type (14 percent), Early death type (4 percent), Remarriage type (6 percent) and Single/Late marriage type (4 percent).起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2017.54.018篇名：父系家庭傳承制度下的收養形式與決策模式並列篇名：Changing Adoption Practices under the Male-Centered Family System作者：陳奕潔(Yi-Jie Chen);陳玉華(Yu-Hua Chen)關鍵字：收養;過繼;父權體制;代間傳承;adoption;relative adoption;patriarchy;intergenerational transmission期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：54期出版年：2017中文摘要：當夫妻無法透過自然或人工生殖技術生兒育女，收養就是獲得子女主要的替代方式。儘管現代收養法令與制度日趨完備，近年的收養案例顯示強調親屬血緣關係的傳統過繼形式仍是臺灣社會常見的收養類型。本研究徵得十個收養家庭的同意，經過數次深入訪談，蒐集收養過程的相關資料，比較不同收養形式家庭的特質及其決策過程，藉以說明父系傳承體制如何影響無子嗣家庭的收養類型。研究結果顯示，家庭結構與居住型態對於收養類型具有關鍵的影響。在主幹家庭與大家庭中，由於公婆干預或主導收養過程，最可能採行強調血緣與性別的親屬過繼類型。在無子的夫婦家庭中，妻子雖有較多話語權，假若丈夫是長子或獨子，也無法完全免除雙方親屬介入收養決策。儘管臺灣家庭型態已由男性中心的父子軸轉向兩性平等的夫妻軸，一旦觸及與家庭延續有關的收養行為，父系傳承制度的運作與影響隨即顯現。然而，隨著生育率逐年下降，親屬之間可供過繼的子女數量明顯不足，收養的範圍勢必擴及非親屬網絡。考量人口特性的變化以及女性在家庭地位與決策能力的提升，可預期臺灣家庭收養的過程與決策將逐漸朝向無血緣的收養形式。英文摘要：Adoption is a viable and alternate form of family formation, if a couple cannot conceive and give birth to a child. While the Protection of Children and Youths Welfare and Rights Act has been enforced and the legal adoption matching services are available in Taiwan, the data compiled from a report on the registration of adoptive children indicate that adoption of relatives is still preferred and practiced through kinship networks. Using in-depth interviewing data collected from ten families, we analyze how childless families made adoption decisions under the norm of patrilineality within the Chinese family system. The results indicate a strong link between preferred adoption patterns and the family structure. Within stem and extended families, elderly parents not only have the final say on adoption decision but also show a strong preference for the pattern of relative adoption. While a wife has more bargaining power in the conjugal relationship, it is hard to exclude intervention from parents on both sides if her spouse is the oldest son or only child. Concerning the sociocultural importance assigned to children and the patriarchal root of the institution of relative adoption, the significance of conjugal relationship has continuously been downplayed in the Chinese family context. However, there is a shortage of babies because of the decline of fertility in the past few decades. It is also worth mentioning that the presence and status of women in paid employment has improved dramatically, which in turn enhances their decision-making power. Undoubtedly, the pattern of non-relative adoption should become prevalent among childless couples and families eventually.起始頁-結束頁：39-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2017.54.029篇名：性別角色態度對臺灣老人居住安排的影響並列篇名：The Impacts of Gender Role Attitude on Living Arrangement among Elderly in Taiwan作者：張慈佳(Tzu-Chia Chang)關鍵字：性別差異;老人居住安排;父系文化規範;性別角色態度;gender differences;elderly living arrangements;patriarchal norms;gender role attitudes期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：54期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去國內對於老人居住安排的討論，較少延伸至性別差異這個議題，本文試圖藉由性別角色態度與父系文化規範等角度，來觀察臺灣高齡者的居住安排情況與其性別差異。透過多項羅吉特模式的分析，實證結果顯示，僅納入社會及人口變數時，傾向「與擁屋子女同住」的老人特徵為年紀較大、教育程度較低、自評健康程度較佳，以及無偶的女性；而年紀較輕、外省籍，以及有偶的男性，則是以「提供家庭支持」的角色與子女共居，由此可知臺灣老人的居住安排有顯著的性別差異，並且比較適合以kin-keeping假設來解釋。若進一步將性別角色變數納入模式中，則發現男性老人的影響因素不變，但對於「內外分工與家庭優先」、「至少生一個男孩」等傳統觀念認同程度較高的女性，她們「與擁屋子女同住」的機率會提高，顯示性別角色態度對於女性老人的居住安排有顯著的影響。本文因此建議，儘管kin-keeping假設可適用於解釋臺灣的老人居住安排現況，使得無偶女性老人與子女共居的機會提高，但由於臺灣女性的性別角色態度逐漸趨向平等，在女性平均餘命較長的情況下，政府仍要關注經濟資源較差的女性老人。另一方面，人力資本條件較差的無偶男性，或許是最為弱勢的一群，也需要政府提供較多的社區照顧支持。英文摘要：Gender differences in living arrangements of the elderly have received little attention in the literature. This study examines gender differences in living arrangements of the elderly, by taking gender role attitudes and patriarchal social norms into account, to illustrate the differences not only in propensities of coresidence with children among men and women, but also among those women with various gender role attitudes. Firstly, the result of a multinomial logit model shows that the elderly who tend to live with their homeowner children are females without a spouse, older, and healthier, and those with lower educational attainment. Meanwhile, the homeowning elderly who are Mainlanders, younger, and with a spouse have higher chances of living with their unmarried children than of living without children. This indicates gender differences exist among the elderly in terms of living arrangements in Taiwan. Secondly, adding gender role attitude variables to the model would improve the goodness of fit in terms of specifications of the model, and change the relationship between educational attainment and living arrangements among women. As there are significant associations between gender role attitude variables and elderly living arrangements among women, I suggest that the changing gender role attitudes of Taiwan's women should be taken into account when we assess the applicability of the kin-keeping hypothesis in Taiwan. The results of this study also suggest emerging needs for social support among the elderly who are widowed and economically disadvantaged.起始頁-結束頁：81-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2017.54.0310篇名：社會資本及幸福感相關性之跨國與跨年齡層比較並列篇名：Social Capital and Happiness: An International Comparison across Three Generation Groups作者：王友惠(You-Hui Wang);翁慧卿(Hui-Ching Weng)關鍵字：幸福感;社會資本;跨國比較;跨年齡層比較;老年人;happiness;social capital;cross-country comparisons;the elderly期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：54期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以跨國資料探討在不同年齡層中社會資本對幸福感的影響，並使用跨層次交互作用分析影響幸福感之相關因素。本研究使用三個資料庫。樣本來自國際社會調查，包含30個國家及49,504個人樣本。本研究將樣本分為三個年齡層，年輕（20-34歲）、中年（35-64歲）和老年（65歲以上）。個人層次變項取自國際社會調查，國家層次變項取自世界銀行資料庫與全球繁榮指數。使用階層線性模型（Hierarchical Linear Modeling）分析30個國家之個人層次和國家層次變項對不同年齡層幸福感的影響。本研究結果顯示（一）30個國家中，有25個國家在三個年齡層幸福感呈現顯著差異。其中有20個國家老年人幸福感是三個年齡層中最低的。（二）透過階層線性模型，顯示老年人幸福感的差異有14%的變異受到國家因素影響，是三個年齡層中影響最大的。（三）國家層次變項中，發現社會資本對老年人幸福感有顯著正向影響。（四）對老年族群而言，居住都市化程度與社會資本之交互作用達顯著，表示社會資本愈高的國家，會弱化居住都市化對幸福感的影響力。英文摘要：Happiness of the people is an important index of social development. This study focuses on the correlation between social capital and happiness and the comparison of international data. Three data sources are used. Samples are taken from the International Social Survey (ISSP) across 30 countries, providing a total of 49,504 people who are divided into three age groups: the young (20-34 years old), the middle-aged (35-64 years old), and the elderly (over 65 years old). This study uses hierarchical linear modeling to measure the cross-level effects of happiness from different age groups (young, middle-aged, and elderly) in 30 countries. The results find (1) of the 30 countries, there is a significant difference in the happiness level of the three age groups in 25 of these countries. The score of the elderly's happiness is shown to be the lowest out of the three age groups in 20 of the countries. (2) The elderly's happiness is affected the most by country factors, about 14% in the three age groups. (3) National level factors have significant positive effects on the elderly's happiness. (4) Social capital acts as a buffer against the adverse effects of urbanization and educational degree on the mental well-being of the elderly.起始頁-結束頁：123-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2017.54.0411篇名：「高齡社會下的政策新挑戰、服務新需求與研究新課題」學術活動紀實作者：吳孟蓉;余玥貞期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：54期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：171-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.2017.54.0501篇名：編輯報告作者：吳嘉苓期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：41期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室2篇名：「我和案主在兩個不同的世界裡」：合意性行為青少女自我保護服務之建制民族誌分析並列篇名：”It Seems Clients And I Are on Different Planets”: An Institutional Ethnography of Social Workers Managing Adolescent Girls Engaging in Consensual Sex作者：程婉若(Wan-Juo Cheng);王增勇(Tsen-Yung Wang)關鍵字：合意性行為;性侵害;自我保護;青少女;保護性社工;建制民族誌;consensual sex;sexual assault;self-protection;adolescent girls;youth protection social worker;institutional ethnography期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：41期出版年：2017中文摘要：青少年合意性行為在台灣被視為「性侵害」案件，強化自我保護能力及輔導正確兩性交往觀念，是後續追蹤社工與遭受「性侵害」青少女個案主要的工作目標。然而，面對個案的「不配合」，社工常歸因於自己專業能力不足。本研究從社工的專業工作和經驗出發，以建制民族誌為研究取徑，勾勒性侵害自我保護建制如何透過文本主導及支配社工的專業行動，使得社工和個案的工作關係難以建立，並說明自我保護工作中的社會權力關係。研究發現青少女個案的真實經驗在性侵害建制中被轉譯，她們的「不配合」是在挑戰性侵害建制邏輯，而此邏輯則是透過文本顯現出來的性別化分類及治理原則。後追社工因「保護性社工」的位置而需要遵循建制的工作規則，完成建制認定的工作；透過建制文本及規訓，社工被綑綁在這個權力關係的複製及擴張，原本意欲充權個案的目標不僅加深個案的邊緣化，自我保護服務亦淪為維護社工工作安全及專業尊嚴的手段，更使社工在與個案的工作中進入「性管制」的位置。專業實務建議包括擴大社工專業裁量權，及以情慾的覺察和情感關係的經營與處理代替防堵式的自我保護服務。英文摘要：Adolescent sexual activity with consent is legally considered sexual assault in Taiwan. According to the law, social workers deliver self-protection services to the teenage girls as ”victims of sexual assault” with the goal of preventing the clients from re-victimization. However, they often experience clients' resistance to self-protection services and then attribute their failures to professional deficiency. This study adopts institutional ethnography, i.e. taking everyday practice of the social workers to examine how the institutional definitions of sexual assault create difficulty between the social workers and their clients, and further it explicates not only the ruling relations that dominate local practice but also the power relations embedded in the self-protection services. The results indicate that reluctance of the clients may be viewed as a confrontation with the institutional logic of gendered categories and governance of teen sex, as defined in legal texts. The social workers have to follow through with institutional norms and complete the institutional requirements of providing ”protection”. All the above intensifies the inimical relationship between the social workers and the clients. The social workers have been confined to a role that is an expanded reproduction of social power, and inevitably attempt ”sexual regulation” of the clients. So in effect the self-protection services that intend to empower the clients have deepened their marginalization; ironically, their work has become merely a means for the social workers to protect their job security and professional dignity. Implications of this research for professional practice include granting the social workers more discretionary power and shifting the focus of the professional services to sexuality awareness and relationship management.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2017.41.13篇名：另類科學母職與順勢療法並列篇名：Alternative Scientific Motherhood and Homeopathy作者：范代希(Daisy Fan)關鍵字：另類與補充醫療;順勢療法;另類科學母職;華德福教育;培力;complementary and alternative medicine (CAM);homeopathy;alternative scientific motherhood;Waldorf education;empowerment期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：41期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文探討母親作為醫療資源使用者，在對主流醫療有疑慮時，如何藉由自己的資源與行動，為孩子做出最有利亦符合理念的醫療抉擇。本文聚焦在一群崇尚自然、高文化資本的台灣母親，以源自西方的另類醫療－順勢療法作為育兒照護首選的考量與歷程。透過「另類科學母職」的概念，這篇文章試圖捕捉這群母親穿梭在科學與自然、主流與另類醫療間的母職實作。運用深度訪談與參與式觀察，研究發現，對自然療癒的信念與另類社群的推動力量，是這群母親能夠接觸並認同順勢的重要推力。同時，她們對主流醫學並非採取全然拒絕的態度；相反地，對科學資訊的掌握與詮釋也是促使她們做出另類選擇的重要驅力。值得注意的是，她們的社經位置所帶來的文化、經濟與社會資源，使她們有充分條件運用「另類科學母職」與「順勢為主、西醫為輔」的醫用策略，拿回孩子醫療的主導權，並且極大化成功的可能性－亦即讓孩子復原，同時避開西藥可能的傷害。過去的研究顯示，女性可能透過另類醫療的使用歷程而培力。本研究發現，即使是以母職角色使用另類醫療，女性也能因此對母職更有認同與勝任感，但仍限於個人與社群的層次，對既有性別與醫療體系影響有限。英文摘要：This study addresses the issue of how mothers (as medical users) utilize their resources to act and respond when they are dissatisfied with conventional health care for children. Focusing on a group of Taiwanese women with high social capital and strong preferences for natural lifestyles, I explore their decision-making processes for considering ”homeopathy,” an alternative medical system, as a top healthcare choice for children. I introduce a concept of ”alternative scientific motherhood” to illustrate their motherhood journey in which they shuttle back and forth from science to nature, from biomedicine to complementary and alternative medicine (CAM). Through in-depth interviews and participant observation, results of this study suggest that these mothers' endorsements of homeopathy come from their beliefs in natural healing and the popularity of homeopathy in their affiliated communities. Even so, western medicine is never abandoned, and their understanding and reflection on modern science and medicine may rather serve to justify their unconventional choices. Meanwhile, it is important to note that in utilizing the strategy of ”alternative scientific motherhood” combined with the action of ”homeopathy first, western medicine second,” these mothers' relatively privileged social status offers many necessary social, cultural, and economic resources, with which they maximize chances for success (e.g. children recover from illness without medication). Previous research indicates that participating in CAM empowers women. This study further extends previous findings by showing that motherhood with CAM can empower women as well. However, their empowerment is still limited to the scope of individual or community level, but does not relate to collective action to change healthcare and gender relations.起始頁-結束頁：51-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2017.41.514篇名：台灣原住民女性藝術創作：生命故事與族群意識的再現並列篇名：The Art of Taiwanese Female Aborigines: The Representation of Their Life Stories and Ethnic Consciousness作者：許如婷(Ju-Ting Hsu)關鍵字：女性藝術;視覺藝術;原住民;族群;認同;女性;women's art;visual art;Taiwanese aborigines;ethnic;identity;women期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：41期出版年：2017中文摘要：台灣原住民女性身處「族裔」與「性別」的多重邊緣身分，經常為社會忽視與遺忘。原住民女性從事藝術創作，不論人數和活躍程度都遠在男性藝術家之下，且因其創作向來與生活結合而幾乎總是被貶抑為「工藝」，甚至在台灣藝術史中鮮少留下紀錄。有鑑於此，本研究以原住民女性藝術創作者為主題切入，探討其藝術作品如何再現女性的生命經驗／故事與族群認同。本文發現她們透過藝術作品圖像描繪自己的生命故事和歷程，並視創作為自我療癒與敘寫的過程。她們擅長於創作中以圖騰、符號與意象傳達自己對族群／部落的認同。在原住民的身分下，她們歷經離開部落生活，不斷遷移、游離的過程，因而寄情於創作以尋根、找尋身分。此外，在族群認同方面，她們以部落為創作場域，開闢工作室、工作坊，藉由集體藝術行動凝聚部落意識，傳承原住民文化。英文摘要：Taiwanese aboriginal women living in their multiple-identity of the ”ethnic” and ”gender” have been long overlooked and generally forgotten by our society. Aboriginal women engaged in artistic creation, regardless of their numbers and the level of their activity, have been represented far less than the male artist. Their artistic creation has always been understood as a part of everyday life, being classified as ”craft” in a derogatory way. There are only a few mentions of aboriginal women in Taiwan's art history. Therefore, this research looks forward to probing into Taiwanese aboriginal women's art as its theme, exploring how their artistic expression manifests their life experiences, life stories, and tribal identity. The historical context and relevant existing literature of Taiwanese aboriginal women's art will be reviewed. It will be shown that through their art they express their life stories, and that this expression also serves as narrative therapy. They also transmit the consciousness of their tribal identity through the use of totems and symbols. Regarding research methods, the research will employ textual analysis, and in-depth interviews with Taiwanese aboriginal women artists. It will try to analyze aboriginal women's art and their life experiences, showing aboriginal women's art creation as part of their gender awareness, memory, and cultural identity even as they are separated from their traditional tribal life and forced to migrate. Finally, this project will be an interdisciplinary, cross-cutting one, combining issues of indigenous peoples and women/gender, and art and cultural identity-oriented research. The most important goal is to outline a complete picture of Taiwanese aboriginal women's art.起始頁-結束頁：105-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2017.41.1055篇名：女性史的三種讀法：從洪郁如《近代台灣女性史：日治時期新女性的誕生》讀起並列篇名：Ways of Reading Women's History: A Review Essay on A History of Modern Taiwanese Women: The Birth of ”Shin Joset” in Japanese Colonial Period作者：梁秋虹(Chiu-hung Liang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：41期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：147-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2017.41.1476篇名：與之共老的酷兒情感倫理實作：老T搬家四探並列篇名：Queer Ethics of Aging Together: ”Moving House”, Fourth Visit作者：趙彥寧(Antonia Chao)關鍵字：老T;酷兒倫理;非凡感知;死亡;照顧;older lesbian tomboy;queer ethics;extraordinary experience;dying;caregiving期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：40期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文為「老T搬家」系列論文的第四輯。在此系列首文〈老T搬家〉中，我藉由「老T」（或「uncles」）報導人的醫療和租屋經驗，以分析台灣社會的社會福利分配制度，如何緊密鑲嵌於既存的異性戀家戶邏輯之中，故而在拒斥中老年女同志的文化公民身分之時，也間接地對他們造成了生存物質條件的相對性排除效應。在〈老T搬家續探〉中，我藉由晚近十年這些報導人的往生送死的情感表述和公開儀式的展演，以探討他們如何同時兼顧且衡量原生家庭和「圈內」友誼關係對於自身的意義，並據此進行雙邊倫理實作。延續我對於另類酷兒倫理的關懷，〈老T搬家三探〉比較分別在1960年代末期和1990年代初期「出道」的兩代「T」報導人的生命經驗，以金錢和禮物授受與親密關係之建立的互動關係為切入主題，試圖探究整體社會的政經結構變化，可以如何直接或間接地形塑此二世代女同志對於廣義親密關係的衡量模式。本文延續〈老T搬家三探〉兩個世代報導人的生命史研究，藉由出神與死亡的非凡感知體驗，以分析貌似現在完成進行式的「老了」這個自我敘事關鍵詞的潛在可能性，並討論希望與照顧的酷兒意義。英文摘要：This article is the fourth installment of the ”Moving House” series. The first piece of the series examined how Taiwan's social welfare devices, in particular those regarding housing and medical care, discriminate implicitly against older lesbian tomboys owing to their deep entrenchment in the social logic of the heteronormative household. It was followed by the second installment that addresses issues of negotiating ”in-circle” friendships in the face of heterosexual birth family members. The third piece of the series tracked queer ethics practiced by two generations of lesbian tomboys, with a particular focus on how to give and receive gifts in intimate relationships. With a continuing interest in exploring notions of intimate ethics, this fourth piece analyzes the extraordinary experience of mental engagement with, and witnessing the dying of, the loved one, as experienced by the two generations of informants. It examines also the potentiality of the present perfect progressive tense of ”having been old” - an expression lesbian tomboys have fairly often utilized in intimate discussion with each other. It concludes with a discussion of the possibility of queer caregiving with hope.起始頁-結束頁：5-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2017.40.57篇名：非常規性實踐的性別化態度：男「性」特權、性別分工和婚家體制的角色並列篇名：Gendered Attitudes Toward Non-Conforming Sexual Practices in Taiwan: The Impacts of Male Sexual Privileges, Sexual Division of Labor, and Familism作者：王維邦(Wei-Pang Wang);陳美華(Mei-Hua Chen)關鍵字：非常規性實踐;異性戀常規性;同居;同性戀;婚外性;性別;non-conforming sexual practices;heteronormativity;cohabitation;homosexual;extramarital sex;gender期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：40期出版年：2017中文摘要：台灣民眾是否對婚外性、同居、同性戀等非常規性實踐抱持不同態度？其中是否蘊涵性別差異？又與哪些因素有關？本文運用「2012台灣社會變遷調查：六期三次性別組」來回答前述問題，並發現：國人對非常規性實踐的開放度，由高至低是同居、同性戀和婚外性。其中，男女對同居的態度無顯著差異，但男性的婚外性開放度顯著高於女性，女性的同性戀開放度則顯著高於男性。接著，男「性」特權、傳統性別分工以及傳統婚家體制等三組假設皆部分說明非常規性實踐的性別化態度。在婚外性開放度上，男「性」特權假設獲得廣泛支持，傳統性別分工和傳統婚家體制假設的支持相對有限。在同性戀開放度上，三套假設皆獲得驗證。由於男「性」特權有效說明婚外性的性別化態度，加以男性較低的同性戀開放度，因此，如何鬆動異性戀常規性成為促進台灣性／別多元的關鍵。英文摘要：This study investigates whether Taiwanese men and women demonstrate different attitudes toward non-conforming sexual practices such as extramarital sex permissiveness (EMS), cohabitation and homosexuality, and examines the mechanisms that shape these gendered attitudes. Using the 2012 Taiwan Social Change Survey, this study presents the following major findings. First, cohabitation is the most accepted non- conforming sex in Taiwan, then homosexuality, and EMS as the least accepted. Furthermore, men and women share a similar attitude toward cohabitation; however, they display opposite attitudes toward EMS and homosexuality; i e. Taiwanese men are more approving of EMS and disapproving of homosexuality, and vice versa for women. Finally, the gendered attitudes toward non-conforming sex are partially resulted from male sexual privileges, sexual division of labor, and familism. Male sexual privileges are the strong links between sex and EMS permissiveness. In addition, gendered attitudes toward homosexuality are substantially explained by male sexual privileges, sexual division of labor, and familism. As male sexual privileges underline men's acceptance of EMS, and men are less likely to accept homosexuality, changing heteronormativity is an essential approach to achieve gender equality.起始頁-結束頁：53-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2017.40.538篇名：從「現身」到「關係」：台灣性別社會變遷與女同志親子協商並列篇名：From Visibility to Relationality: Changing Socio- Gender Structure and Lesbian Parent-Child Negotiation in Contemporary Taiwan作者：胡郁盈(Yu-Ying Hu)關鍵字：現身;父系家庭;婚姻壓力;女性親屬角色;女同志認同;coming-out;patrilineal family;marriage pressures;women's kinship roles;lesbian identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：40期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以台灣中產階級都會女同志在同性情慾實踐與親子關係維繫之間的折衝與協商為分析對象，探討同志認同與原生家庭的動態互構與辯證關係，並指出在理解台灣同志主體之認同實踐時，「現身」單一視角的不足之處。首先由跨國性向（transnational sexuality）研究出發，回顧「同志現身」與「華人家庭」如何經由「現代」相對於「傳統」的框架，被預設為靜態的二元對抗關係，進而耙梳當代學者對於華人同志集體慾望「正常」的重新省思，指出華人同志協商家庭與認同的行動邏輯，不僅呈現家庭關係與親屬角色在形塑同志認同上不可或分的意義，也彰顯「常規」（normativity）的多元意涵與歷史變化。本文同時由女性主義視角切入，凸顯在高度性別化的華人父權家庭親屬結構中，婚姻壓力與女性親屬責任如何成為台灣女同志在橋接家庭與認同時的主要考量。奠基於這些學術討論，本文旨在探討台灣現代化歷程中，蓬勃發展的女性主義意識形態與家庭婚姻結構的劇烈變化，如何促使中產階級都會女同志基於其性別（女性）與親屬（女兒）角色而發展出獨特的家庭對抗與協商策略，並指出在此脈絡中，以「關係」互動（interactional）而非「現身」對抗（confrontational）的思維模式重新架構並理解同性情慾認同實踐與異性戀家庭規範之關係的可能性。英文摘要：This article analyzes the ways in which middle class lesbian women in Taiwan negotiate parent-child relations. It focuses on the complex and dynamic relationship between their sexual identification and relations with family of origin in order to challenge the privileged status of the concept ”coming-out” in understanding Taiwanese tongzhi identity formation. Starting with scholarship on transnational sexuality, this article first traces how ”coming-out” and ”Chinese family” are opposed to each other through binary dimensions of ”global-local” and ”modern-traditional.” This article is also informed by recent reflections on the collective desire of Chinese tongzhi for ”being normal,” which not only displays multiple meanings of and historical transformation in family as a heteronormative institution, but also elucidates how tongzhi subjectivity formation is inevitably entangled with kin relations and responsibility. This article further highlights a feminist perspective, as gendered division in the Chinese patriarchal family makes marriage pressure and women's changing kin responsibility and status the principle concern for lesbian women who wish to live their family life in concert with their sexuality. Building on this scholarship, this article intends to further explore how Taiwanese middle-class lesbians develop unique strategies of confrontation and negotiation according to their status of gender (woman) and kin (daughter). It emphasizes the possibility of understanding the relationship between lesbian identification and heterosexual familial norms through the framework of relational interactions instead of confrontational coming-out. This is placed in the context of drastic and continuous change in the social-familial structure in contemporary Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：107-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2017.40.1079篇名：酷兒感官書寫：徐堰鈴《踏青去》(2015)的戲劇策略並列篇名：Towards A Queer Sensory Writing: The Theatrical Tactics of Skin Touching (2015)作者：鄭芳婷(Fan-Ting Cheng)關鍵字：酷兒;女同志;踏青去;感官書寫;台灣劇場;queerness;lesbian;Skin Touching;sensory writing;Taiwan theater期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：40期出版年：2017中文摘要：《踏青去》歷經十年，於2015年復刻搬演，無論在戲劇文本、藝術美學、行銷策略及社會批判上，皆銘刻台灣性別議題的繁複推演過程。本文結合現象學、心理學、當代酷兒理論及在地性別議題，聚焦於本劇發展脈絡、敘事結構與劇場手法三種面向，並提出「酷兒感官書寫」的概念。酷兒主體得以藉由拼貼的諧擬、多層次的挪用、高張的視聽感官與流動的慾望投射，擾亂父權異性戀、理體中心主義式的語義邏輯與正典詮釋。本文首先自歷史脈絡扼要耙梳台灣當代酷兒劇場，從中分析《踏青去》自2004年以來之發展脈絡，為之定位；其次詳析本劇編劇策略上的三層性別運作，並援引Slavoj Zizek 之驅力心理學，以聚焦其梁祝挪用中的酷兒歸返；再則拓展Sara Ahmed 之酷兒現象學概念，探究本劇實際演出所形構之感官書寫美學；結論縱觀本劇所指涉之當代性別策略意義，並提示未來可能之探問方向。英文摘要：A decade after its premiere, Skin Touching, a Taiwanese lesbian play, was revived for the stage in 2015. This production, through its dramatic text, theatrical aesthetics, marketing strategies, and social critique teased out the complex evolution of local gender issues. Working at the intersection of phenomenology, psychology, queer theory, and domestic gender analysis, this paper examines the narration and the staging of Skin Touching, which mobilizes the critical framework of queer sensory writing The first section articulates the historical context of contemporary queer theater in Taiwan with a special focus on the original development of Skin Touching in 2004; the second section employs Zizek's psychoanalytic model to investigate the layered drag operations designed into the theatrical strategy of the script: the third section extends Ahmed's queer phenomenology to underscore the hyper-sensuality of stage presentation.起始頁-結束頁：153-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.2017.40.15301篇名：闇夜是為陽昇之前奏？陳映真〈永琲漱j地〉的版本差異、新詮、及相連的啟發並列篇名：Does Dark Night Bring Dawn? New Interpretations and Enlightenments Inspired by the Discovery of Different Versions of Chen Yingzhen's ”Eternal Earth”作者：張立本(Li-Pen CHANG)關鍵字：陳映真;〈永琲漱j地〉;文學與思想;政治;歷史;Chen Yingzhen;”Eternal Earth”;literature and thought;politics;history期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文指出〈永琲漱j地〉有結局迥異的兩個版本。在嘗試詮釋初刊版時，作者參照過往研究發現，主要源於當前陳映真研究方法的內在決定性限制，衍生了多層次的閱讀錯位。相對於長期以1979年的改動版解釋1960年代陳映真思想而無疑的研究現況，作者主張重讀初刊版，目的不僅在於重新認識〈永琲漱j地〉，也在於重新認識1960年代寫作當時陳映真政治思索的可能性與思想狀態。作者也建議以跟著思想者行走於歷史的心情，體會陳映真如何感受與回應現實，以使版本差異的議題能豐富陳映真思想圖像的討論。英文摘要：The essay points out that there are two versions of Chen Yingzhen's short story ”Eternal Earth,” with very different endings. While attempting an analysis of the earlier version by referring to previous critical literature, it finds that the existing Chen Yingzhen studies in general is not only unaware of the differences between the two versions but highly limited by its research method, resulting in several levels of misunderstandings. In contrast, this essay goes back to the early version for a close reading of the story's original design so that Chen's political thinking in the mid-1960s (when the original version was penned) could be examined more accurately. In the end, the essay suggests that critics should continue to pay attention to this issue of the different versions of Chen's works so that we could understand better how Chen experienced and reacted to the political reality at different historical junctures, as well as to expand the scope of issues that could be covered by critical studies of such a significant author.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：拒絕「翻譯」：李國修的「風屏劇團」並列篇名：Against the ”Representation of Translation” Hugh K. S. Lee's ”Fong-Ping Tetralogy”作者：汪俊彥(Chun-yen WANG)關鍵字：翻譯建制;文化翻譯;李國修;風屏劇團;傳統;西方;regime of translation;cultural translation;Hugh K. S. Lee;Fong-Ping Troupe;tradition;the West期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文透過閱讀屏風表演班之「風屏四部曲」《半里長城》（1989）、《莎姆雷特》（1992）、《京戲啟示錄》（1996）與《女兒紅》（2003），一方面細查這四部作品彼此之間的互文關係，另一方面也解讀屏風表演班編排「風屏劇團」的美學手法。除了模擬、對照與後設之外，李國修如何以編寫風屏劇團進入現代中國／臺灣的歷史軌跡，重複地以風屏劇團演出中的失敗，拒絕了現代性翻譯建制。本文最後期待透過對於風屏四部曲的再認識，批判性地重新省視臺灣現代戲劇之於「回歸傳統」或是「翻譯西方」的當代位置。英文摘要：The article aims to look into the inter-textuality and the historicity of Hugh K. S. Lee's ”Fong-Ping Tetralogy”: The Half-Mile Great Wall, Shamlet, Apocalypse of Beijing Opera, and Wedding Memories. By examining the aesthetic forms of mimicking and meta-dramatizing, the question as well as the problematic is raised in the article regarding the way in which the Fong-Ping Troupe (the reverse of Ping-Fong Troupe) led by its S. K. Lee (the reverse of K. S. Lee) continuously fails in its productions of translating Shakespeare's Hamlet and reproducing a history play. The article argues that it is by against the regime of translation as conceptualized by Naoki Sakai that Hugh K. S. Lee provides a critical perspective on the discursive formation of Taiwan modern theater.起始頁-結束頁：39-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：陌生人總幹事？一位客家人成為原住民部落公共事務推動者過程中的認同政治並列篇名：A Stranger-Executive Secretary? The Politics of Identity in the Case of a Hakka Anthropologist Managing the Public Affairs of an Indigenous Community in Taiwan作者：蔡政良(Futuru C. L. TSAI)關鍵字：陌生人國王;認同;原住民性;都蘭;阿美族;民族誌;田野工作;stranger-king;identity;indigeneity;'Atolan;'Amis;ethnography;fieldwork期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以作者自身的經歷來討論研究者在舉家遷徙並定居於原為田野場域的都蘭部落之後，「被迫」成為部落推動公共事務的「總幹事」過程中，都蘭部落內部認同政治的原住民性，以及民族誌的知識生產與倫理性質。本文作者為出身於新竹的客家人，在完成人類學博士學位之後，於原田野地都蘭部落所在區域的大學取得教職，並舉家遷徙至都蘭部落定居。由於作者長期參與都蘭部落年齡組織，在新任部落領袖（kakita'an）上任後，無法拒絕地被指定擔任部落總幹事的職務，部落中包含祭儀在內的相關公共事務皆由作者來統籌。同時由於這個新的發展，使得部落內部產生各種討論、爭辯與想像，具體再現了都蘭部落內部認同政治的原住民性乃交織在部落與國家力量之間的關係上。此外，在民族誌的研究過程中，作為一位研究者與被研究者同體的研究者而言，意識到自己無可避免地必須面對部落內部社會關係與文化正統性的爭論，進一步在書寫上意識到作為一個從被研究者主體視角出發的民族誌寫作，如何與知識生產之間產生關聯性。英文摘要：This paper explores the politics of identity as indigeneity based on a self-ethnography of my own experience as an outsider being gradually ”forced” to act as the manager of public affairs in the indigenous 'Amis community, 'Atolan (Dulan), which was the field site for my doctoral dissertation project. I was originally a Hakka ethnic born in Hsinchu and then migrated to A'tolan with my family after getting my Ph.D. degree. In 2015, I was asked by the newly elected headman (kakita'an) to be the executive secretary of 'Atolan 'Amis to manage its public affairs (such as rituals), and this has caused vigorous debates in the community. My experience of being a ”stranger-executive secretary” represents the indigeneity of 'Atolan 'Amis as being shaped in the interactions between the community and the state. Although myself as an anthropologist and an informant (for being one of the elites in the community) at the same time makes it impossible to avoid controversies in the community, it provides me with an unusual opportunity to explore the complicated ambiguities of subjectivity not only in indigeneity but also in ethnography.起始頁-結束頁：65-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：陳映真的第三世界：瓦解「本／外省人」、「台灣／中國人」、「美國人」、「歐洲人」……﹝下﹞並列篇名：Chen Yingzhen's Third World Decolonzing ”Taiwanese,” ”Chinese,” ”American,” ”European”...[Part II]作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing CHEN)關鍵字：陳映真;第三世界;分斷體制;外省人;本省人;失鄉人;Chen Yingzhen;Third World;division system;mainlander;homelandless期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017中文摘要：1949年起中國大陸與台灣之間所逐漸形成堅固的對峙機制，或許可以用韓國思想家白樂晴的分析概念「分斷體制」來描繪，五十年後，雖然這個體制在弱化當中，但早已深入社會身體的主體性構造。自1960年起的四十多年來，分斷及其克服初步成為陳映真思想與文學核心關切的主題，甚至是具有籠罩性的前提命題。分斷體制牽扯龐雜，本文嘗試將分析聚焦於一個切面：外省失鄉人，指稱的是1949年以後從大陸遠離家鄉流亡台灣的人，他們存在的特性在於，他們不同於一般在國內暫住他鄉的外地人，也不是移居國外的移民，而是因為國家內部的政治分化造成的強制性遷移，有家歸不得。相對而言，「外省人」沒法孤立存在，他的對應關係是「本省人」，在陳映真筆下是在家鄉歷經滄桑的「淪落人」。理解外省人與本省人的精神處境與困境，可以說是陳映真在台灣內部克服民族分斷的實踐。本文透過細讀陳早期的小說〈貓牠們的祖母〉（1961），〈將軍族〉（1964）、〈一綠色之候鳥〉（1964）、〈第一件差事〉（1967）、〈永恆的大地〉（1966），〈纍纍〉（1967），中期的〈夜行貨車〉（1978）、〈雲〉（1980），與近期的〈歸鄉〉（1999）與〈忠孝公園〉（2001），重新勾勒外省人在半世紀的歷史進程中生命與政治道路的起伏。本文試圖在思想上深化對於第三世界精神狀況的理解。英文摘要：From 1949 onward, a solid set of antagonistic mechanisms was gradually established between Taiwan and Mainland China, which can be conceptualized, in Korean thinker Paik Nak-chung's terms, as the formation of a ”division system.” Fifty years later, the system is weakening and in crisis, but the long term effects remain deeply seated in social body and the structure of subjectivity. Since the 1960s, division system (and its overcoming) has been at the center of Chen Yingzhen's thought and literature to the extent that it has become a presupposition encompassing all his work. Due to the complexity of the division system, this essay focuses on only one plane of the problematic subject: waishengren or mainlander who lost their home. Waishengren refers to those who moved from their mainland homeland to be ”in exile” in Taiwan. Different from the situation of ”diaspora,” they are neither immigrants dwelling in a foreign territory, nor temporarily residing in other parts of one's own country, but are forced to move by the political conflicts within ta nation, and hence cannot return to their home. In relational term, waishengren co-exists with benshengren, i.e. people ”native” to the Taiwan island. To understand the difficult mental conditions of both waishengren and benshengren has been Chen Yingzhen's practice to overcome the division of the nation within Taiwan. This essay reads closely Chen's stories written over the time span of forty years, starting from the earliest ”Cats and Their Grandma” (1961), via ”The Cloud” (1980) of the middle period, to the latest ”Loyal-Filial Park” (2001). With an attempt to give an account of the lives and political paths of waishengren, the essay contributes to a deeper understanding of the mental conditions of life in the Third World.起始頁-結束頁：105-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：網路小說與中國特殊性：評謝奇任《致我們的青春：臺灣、日本、韓國與中國大陸的網路小說產業發展》並列篇名：Web Fictions with Chinese Characteristics Review of Chi-Jen Hsieh's Salute to Youth: Internet Novel Industries in Taiwan, Japan, Korea, and China作者：馮建三(Chien-San FENG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：157-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：文學史的發明或發現？評紀大偉《同志文學史：台灣的發明》並列篇名：The Invention or Discovery of Literary History? Review of Ta-wei Chi's A Queer Invention in Taiwan: A History of Tongzhi Literature作者：朱偉誠(Wei-cheng CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：165-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：往事並不如煙：汪立峽訪談並列篇名：The Past Does Not Simply Go with the Wind: Two Interviews with Wang LiXia作者：林麗雲;陳筱茵;蘇淑芬;陳瑞樺;郭佳期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：183-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：批判與解構「玉山計畫」－導言並列篇名：Critiques and Deconstruction of Yushan Project-Editorial Introduction作者：王增勇(Frank T. Y. WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：207-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：玉山計畫的謬誤與非預期後果並列篇名：The Fallacy and Unintended Consequences of Yushan Project作者：周平(Ping CHOU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：213-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：玉山計畫背後的個人主義式思考並列篇名：The Individualistic Thinking behind Yushan Project作者：黃厚銘(Hou-ming HUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：225-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：玉山計畫與哥倫布計畫的適法性分析並列篇名：Some Legal Issues of Yusan and Columbus Projects作者：陳竹上(Jwu-Shang CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：233-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：消失中的青年學者並列篇名：The Vanishing Academic Career作者：林柏儀(Por-Yee LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：247-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：玉山計畫的性別影響評估並列篇名：Gender Impact Assessment for Faculty Merit Pay System in Yushan Project作者：戴伯芬(Po-Fen TAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：108期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：257-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：高付出需求機構中的組織與心理面向：日月明功的個案並列篇名：The Organizational and Psychological Aspects of Greedy Institutions: A Case Study of Ri Yue Ming Gong作者：丁仁傑(TING Jen-Chieh)關鍵字：日月明功;高付出需求機構;新興宗教;全控機構;依附;Ri Yue Ming Gong;greedy institution;new religions;total institution;attachment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017中文摘要：「高付出需求機構」指對成員有極高的要求和完全佔有性的組織。不過，在「高付出需求機構」中，組織對成員並不是以強制為手段，而是機構會涵蓋整個的人格需求，而得以獲得成員無條件的順服與參與。本文藉由Coser所提出的這個概念，希望能有助於說明日月明功這個團體的內部運作。經由有限的資料，本文也想要探討形成日月明功「需求高付出性」背後的社會心理基礎。由「高付出需求機構」這個概念出發，會提醒我們避免過度單一地將日月明功視為是一個心靈控制和洗腦的場所，而能夠正視下列事實︰在這個團體中，許多成員都是主動全心投入，以追求其家庭和自我成長，其領導者也是在這些目標圍繞中而慢慢增長其影響力。日月明功團體的「需求高付出性」反映在︰成員參與時間長，內部互動緊密，空間的隔絕性高，領導者高度涉入學員日常生活並具有管教的權威，學員之間出現了「整理」與「分享」的相互監督與批判的聚會形式，以及領導人對學員出現了體罰的管教方式等。日月明功以上這種種特徵的出現，背後曾經歷了一個發展階段上的累積和變化。關於成員參與日月明功的心理因素，本文嘗試提出「修復式依附」（修復個人在社會中、出於結構性原因所造成的人生態度層面與情感依附層面上的缺憾）的說法，即成員選擇一個具有雙親形象般的領導者、和具有親密社會關係的團體氛圍，來作為解釋他們之所以加入和得以持續參與的主要因素。本文對「高付出需求機構」概念的適用範圍，和它如何可能得到一個較為平衡性發展的議題，也提出了進一步的分析與討論。英文摘要：”Greedy institution” is a sociological concept put forth by Lewis A. Coser. It designates institutions that issue all-encompassing demands on their members and seek their exclusive, undivided loyalty directed at them. Yet it does not reach those demands through coercion, but rather by engulfing in its spell the entire personality of its members, from whom they obtain unanimous approval and compliance. From this perspective, this study tries to get into the inner side of a group called Ri Yue Mong Gong, which has drawn popular attention in 2013 when the big news broke out in Changhua County, Taiwan, that a 17-year-old high school student was taken by the group into custody and died. Retrospectively speaking, as the original goal of inner self-growth was gradually externalized as group sharing and expressing gratefulness to the teacher, Ri Yue Ming Gong had begun to deeply intervene and even monopolize its members' family and personal life. Thus, as the issue of teenage discipline came up, many unresolved inner contradictions became salient, and eventually put an end to the development of this group by this tragic incident. Based mainly upon semi-structured interviews and attainable court files, this study explores both the organizational and psychological dimensions of the group. It also proposes the concept of ”reconstructing attachment” to explain why participants continued to adhere to this group even after it had evolved into a greedy institution. At the end, it also touches upon the issue of whether a greedy institution could possibly maintain a rather balanced development.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：暗黑記憶的文化轉生：韓國光州與台灣高雄的人權紀念地景並列篇名：The Cultural Reincarnation of Dark Memories: The Memorial Landscapes of Human Rights in Gwangju and Kaohsiung作者：高郁婷(Yu-Ting KAO);王志弘(Chih-Hung WANG)關鍵字：暗黑襲產;轉型正義;文化治理;城市行銷;dark heritage;transformative justice;cultural governance;city marketing期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文探討民主化歷程中，創傷記憶場址如何在人權宣告及以文化為名的都市行銷裡，通過襲產化、景觀化和遊憩化等手段重組，轉生成為引渡轉型正義的紀念地景。作者結合文化治理、文化經濟與批判的襲產研究等觀點，運用文獻分析和田野觀察，比較韓國光州與台灣高雄這兩個非首都且擁有抵抗歷史的城市，其重塑創傷場址、治理暗黑記憶的異同之處與內蘊張力。作者主張，創傷場址的人權紀念地景塑造，體現了台灣與韓國民主化進程中，中央與地方政府在政治及經濟方面的複雜考量，通過文化轉生機制而彰顯出來，捲入了地方認同營造、城市經濟振興、以及區域政治抗衡。置身農業地帶的光州，比起仰望海洋城市策略的高雄，更依賴暗黑記憶的襲產化與文化經濟。相對的，在高雄追趕式的大型文化館舍興建風潮下，暗黑記憶與人權地景宛如聊備一格的點綴。然而，無論光州或高雄，人權紀念地景的文化轉生可能將歷史傷痛予以物質化和符號化，構成疏離的他者奇觀，卻錯失了轉型正義的實質內涵。英文摘要：This article explores how the reincarnation of traumatic sites as memorial landscapes, which are expected to represent justice during democratization, might be the results of city marketing strategies conducted in the name of human rights and culture, such as heritagization, landscape-making, and recreationalization. The perspectives of cultural governance, cultural economy, and critical heritage studies are adopted as the analytical frameworks for understanding the two cases of Gwangju in South Korea and Kaohsiung in Taiwan, both of which are non-capitals with a history of resistance. The article discusses the respective transformation of their dark memories by shedding light on how their strategies differ according to specific urban agendas and on how the inherent tension is hence evoked in either case. It is argued that the reshaping of traumatic sites into landscapes of human rights embodies the complicated political and economic contestations between the central and local governments. In both cases, the tensions are made clear through the mechanism of cultural reincarnation, which involves local identification, urban revitalization, and regional counterbalance. Situated in the agricultural area, Gwangju appeals to the heritagization of dark memories and cultural economy more than the harbor city of Kaohsiung; the latter, in contrast, is more intent on building imposing cultural venues and thereby renders the landscape of dark memories and human rights rather decorative. Despite these differences, however, the memorial landscapes reshaped through cultural reincarnation in both cities still materializes and symbolizes historic traumas. While alienated spectacles are thus reassembled, the justice needed for successful social transformation might also be covered up.起始頁-結束頁：47-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：有生權力與性／別立法：從德國歷史經驗解讀台灣《刑法》的性政治並列篇名：Biopower and Sexual Offences Legislation: Decoding the Sexual Politics of Taiwan's Criminal Law with the Experience of German History作者：許雅斐(Ya-Fei HSU)關鍵字：妨害風化罪;優生學;種族化的身體;性價值;生命政治;法益;進化論;sexual offenses against morality;eugenics;racialized bodies;sexual value;biopolitics;legal interest;evolutionism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文運用傅科的有生權力概念，探察刑法妨害風化罪背後的性價值體系所涉及的社會進化論與法益界線。在20世紀初期，德國科學研究者曾運用一套特定的優生學論述，促使國家積極管制女人與兒童的性，以強化集體「效益」。作為一種生物決定論，它的核心概念是總人口的健康超越個人的利益。立基於此概念，性被用來作為退化的主要指標，根據性反常、遺傳與退化的相互關連，從德國到歐美許多國家，乃至於1920年代的中國，都以刑法的妨害風化罪章則作為性管制的工具。然而，國家制度的功能必須是客觀的，猥褻或不道德的行為不能因特定群體的利益而遭受刑事懲戒，必須以特定法益受到侵害為前提。倘若欠缺所要保護的法益，立法者不得恣意創設「構成要件」。台灣現行的妨害風化罪條款真能符合刑法維護法益的比例原則嗎？所謂的社會風化，難道不正是為了實現以「種族化的身體」為核心概念所形成的性價值體系？英文摘要：This article uses the Foucauldian concepts of ”biopolitics,” in company of the discourse of eugenics, to study the historical developments of views on sex crimes in Taiwan. Toward the beginning of the 20th century, with an increasing interest in sexual politics associated with genetic findings, the ”gender order” of eugenics and medical knowledge entered the German political arena. The anxieties about perversion-heredity-degeneration demanded the political managements not only of woman's sexuality. But to control ”abnormal” sex drives, the criminal systems also came to severely regulate sexual behavior, aiming at the exclusion of the underprivileged and enforcing a return to sexual morality. Consequently, in the 1920s, eugenics and sex hygiene facilitated the national regulation of gender/sexuality in China, whose legal system Taiwan inherited. However, the later critical developments in Germany prompt us to ask: how far should the state intervene in the sexual lives of its citizens? Contrasting this critical thinking with the strategies and rhetoric of regulating sexuality in Taiwan, what is really necessary now is to bring the eugenic dynamics behind criminal law into a sharper view for examination.起始頁-結束頁：97-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：陳映真的第三世界：瓦解「本／外省人」、「台灣／中國人」、「美國人」、「歐洲人」……〔上〕並列篇名：Chen Yingzhen's Third World: Decolonzing ”Taiwanese,” ”Chinese,” ”American,” ”European”...[Part I]作者：陳光興(Kuan-Hsing CHEN)關鍵字：陳映真;第三世界;分斷體制;外省人;本省人;失鄉人;Chen Yingzhen;Third World;division system;mainlander;homelandless期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017中文摘要：1949年起中國大陸與台灣之間所逐漸形成堅固的對峙機制，或許可以用韓國思想家白樂晴的分析概念「分斷體制」來描繪，五十年後，雖然這個體制在弱化當中，但早已深入社會身體的主體性構造。自1960年起的四十多年來，分斷及其克服初步成為陳映真思想與文學核心關切的主題，甚至是具有籠罩性的前提命題。分斷體制牽扯龐雜，本文嘗試將分析聚焦於一個切面：外省失鄉人，指稱的是1949年以後從大陸遠離家鄉流亡台灣的人，他們存在的特性在於，他們不同於一般在國內暫住他鄉的外地人，也不是移居國外的移民，而是因為國家內部的政治分化造成的強制性遷移，有家歸不得。相對而言，「外省人」沒法孤立存在，他的對應關係是「本省人」，在陳映真筆下是在家鄉歷經滄桑的「淪落人」。理解外省人與本省人的精神處境與困境，可以說是陳映真在台灣內部克服民族分斷的實踐。本文透過細讀陳早期的小說〈貓牠們的祖母〉（1961），〈將軍族〉（1964）、〈一綠色之候鳥〉（1964）、〈第一件差事〉（1967）、〈永恆的大地〉（1966），〈纍纍〉（1967），中期的〈夜行貨車〉（1978）、〈雲〉（1980），與近期的〈歸鄉〉（1999）與〈忠孝公園〉（2001），重新勾勒外省人在半世紀的歷史進程中生命與政治道路的起伏。本文試圖在思想上深化對於第三世界精神狀況的理解。英文摘要：From 1949 onward, a solid set of antagonistic mechanisms was gradually established between Taiwan and Mainland China, which can be conceptualized, in Korean thinker Paik Nak-chung's terms, as the formation of a ”division system.” Fifty years later, the system is weakening and in crisis, but the long term effects remain deeply seated in social body and the structure of subjectivity. Since the 1960s, division system (and its overcoming) has been at the center of Chen Yingzhen's thought and literature to the extent that it has become a presupposition encompassing all his work. Due to the complexity of the division system, this essay focuses on only one plane of the problematic subject: waishengren or mainlander who lost their home. Waishengren refers to those who moved from their mainland homeland to be ”in exile” in Taiwan. Different from the situation of ”diaspora,” they are neither immigrants dwelling in a foreign territory, nor temporarily residing in other parts of one's own country, but are forced to move by the political conflicts within ta nation, and hence cannot return to their home. In relational term, waishengren co-exists with benshengren, i.e. people ”native” to the Taiwan island. To understand the difficult mental conditions of both waishengren and benshengren has been Chen Yingzhen's practice to overcome the division of the nation within Taiwan. This essay reads closely Chen's stories written over the time span of forty years, starting from the earliest ”Cats and Their Grandma” (1961), via ”The Cloud” (1980) of the middle period, to the latest ”Loyal-Filial Park” (2001). With an attempt to give an account of the lives and political paths of waishengren, the essay contributes to a deeper understanding of the mental conditions of life in the Third World.起始頁-結束頁：129-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：新書論壇：《台灣戰後經濟發展的源起》－編按並列篇名：Roundtable on The Causes of Taiwan's Postwar Economic Growth: The Why and How of Late Development-Editorial Introduction作者：瞿宛文(Wan-Wen CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：185-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：揭開國家機構的謎團並列篇名：Unbundling the State作者：朱雲漢(Yun-han CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：187-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：「回歸歷史」：發展意志與制度建立並列篇名：Bringing History Back in: The Will to Development and the Establishment of Development Institutions作者：王振寰(Jenn-Hwan WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：107期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：193-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：主編的話　為有源頭活水來－學術工作的傳承與創新並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：汪宏倫期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_00012篇名：男性青少年群體同嗨（high）的打鬧遊戲：「阿魯巴」並列篇名：Aluba as a Form of Male Youth ”High” Culture in Play作者：畢恆達(Herng-dar Bih);黃海濤(Haitao Huang);洪文龍(Wen-lung Hung);潘柏翰(Bo-han Pan)關鍵字：阿魯巴;性霸凌;陽剛特質;男性青少年文化;打鬧遊戲;bullying;hazing;masculinities;adolescent;play期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017中文摘要：「阿魯巴」是一種流行於台灣男性青少年間，象徵性地以生殖器撞擊柱狀物的校園遊戲。本文推測此遊戲最早可能出現於1980年代中期，為台灣多個世代青少年男性難忘之集體經驗。然而，報章媒體與教育專家過度關注少數被阿者受傷的個別案例，建構了阿魯巴的高度風險性，也促使教育部與國防部對阿魯巴發出禁令。2011年，立法院通過《性別平等教育法》修正案，阿魯巴成為討論性霸凌最常引用的實例。教育界、兒少保護團體、醫界等都將阿魯巴視為性霸凌。本研究在深度訪談基礎上，結合報紙新聞和影像文本分析，從假裝、意圖、自願、權力階序等面向，探討阿魯巴究竟是霸凌還是遊戲，並說明支持校園阿魯巴的物質基礎與文化脈絡，以及阿魯巴的性別意涵。英文摘要：Aluba is a popular high-school campus activity among adolescent males that had been transformed from pole-racking. In aluba, however, the real groin attack became a make-believe one; more people participated in the play, including the shouters; and the ablubaee was a buddy rather than an outsider. This play started to become popular in the mid-1980s, around the time of the abolition of martial law. It has been a precious memory of adolescent males for decades. There is, however, a lack of empirical studies on this form of male culture. Aluba has been depicted as a kind of sexual bullying and was abolished by both Ministry of Education and Ministry of National Defense. Based on 45 interviews and visual texts, this research tries to analyze and answer the question: Is Aluba play or bullying? In addition, the authors show the development of aluba, its gender implications, and the reasons for its popularity on high-school campuses.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_34.00023篇名：從建制民族誌探討大專校院性平處理機制的客體化歷程並列篇名：Objectification of the Gender Equity Education Act in Higher Education: An Institutional Ethnographic Exploration作者：廖珮如(Pei-ru Liao)關鍵字：建制民族誌;性平法;性平業務承辦人;客體化;工作知識;Institutional Ethnography;Gender Equity Education Act;frontline workers;objectification;work knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017中文摘要：在2004年通過實施《性別平等教育法》之前，校園內的性騷擾、性侵害事件多礙於權力關係未能揭露或獲得適當的處理，而該法通過實施後，各級學校遇到性侵害、性騷擾等相關事件便有一套標準化的工作流程。本文採用建制民族誌觀點來探討《性平法》的在地建制過程，透過參與觀察及訪談六名大專校院性平業務專職承辦人，研究者描繪出不同文本如何協調出性平業務承辦人的建制能動者位置。從性平業務承辦人的立足點出發探究他們建立的工作知識，勾勒出協調承辦人日常工作業務的「高階文本」、「調查案件文本」、「行政文本」、以及「非正式文本」。本文透過上述文本描繪出性平業務承辦人穿梭於性平建制及在地行政體系之間，發展出個別工作知識的可能性與其受限之處。英文摘要：Enforcement of the Gender Equity Education Act has enabled schools at all levels to properly and legally process cases of sexual harassment, sexual assault, or bullying on campus. This Act standardizes and generalizes the procedure for handling gender-based violence at all school levels. The researcher incorporates Institutional Ethnography as a method of inquiry, a starting point to forma problematic, and an analytic tool to map out the process of objectification of frontline workers. Starting from frontline workers' standpoint, this article presents the way in which different ”texts” coordinate frontline workers' everyday work and their relations with other administrative staff. Identifying four types of texts in the local setting, the researcher demonstrates how frontline workers establish work knowledge based on the Act as well as the administrative system, as well as the workers' potential for utilizing work knowledge and its limits.起始頁-結束頁：45-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_34.00034篇名：全球化下的勞工困局？以1969年至2015年的罷停工資料分析並列篇名：Globalization and Laborers' Dilemma: Analyzing Strike and Lockout Data for the 1969-2015 Period作者：張文揚(Wen-yang Chang)關鍵字：罷工;停工;全球化;貿易;對外直接投資;strikes;lockouts;globalization;trade;foreign direct investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究紀要旨在探討全球化時代下，勞工的罷工與停工現象，究竟是變得更為頻繁？抑或是有所減少？鑒於過去的實證研究中研究者大多從區域或特定國家著手，而較少將焦點放在全球性的數據上，本文擬以國際勞工組織(International Labour Organization, ILO) 1969年至2015年間全世界共98個國家的罷停工數據，分析經貿以及其他面向受全球化影響而日趨緊密的情況下，勞工的罷停工頻率的變化情形。初步的研究結果顯示：(1)在全球貿易與對外直接投資等多重因素更為緊密的情況下，勞工罷停工的次數為之減少；(2)這個結果經過多重插補以後，也呈現一致的結果。這對我們理解勞工以罷停工方式爭取自身權益上，具有初步的觀察與政策意涵。英文摘要：This research note examines whether, during the globalization era, laborers increase the use of strikes and lockouts for specific purposes. Previous empirical studies tend to pay more attention to specific regions or countries, while few of them focus on global data. To know whether strikes and lockouts increase or decrease in the face of economic and other consequences of globalization, this note applies data from the International Labour Organization (ILO) covering the 1969-2015 period of 98 countries. Initial findings confirm that, first, the likelihood of strikes and lockouts is negatively correlated with trade, foreign direct investment, and globalization-related indicators, respectively. Second, such findings are consistent when we apply the multiple imputation technique. This observation helps us understand whether laborers can improve their working conditions by strikes and lockouts and provides policy implications.起始頁-結束頁：91-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_00045篇名：戰爭與台灣的高等教育，1945-1990並列篇名：War and Higher Education in Taiwan, 1945-1990作者：黃金麟(Jinlin Hwang)關鍵字：內戰;冷戰;高等教育;大學理念;Civil War;Cold War;higher education;idea of university期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017中文摘要：研究台灣的高等教育演變，有兩個突兀的階段值得做深入探討。一個是1950年代前後，高等教育在台灣的急速增加；一個是1990年代前後，因應教育改革運動而出現的大學林立現象。前後兩個階段各有其特定發生脈絡，其對個人、大學和社會造成的影響，正隨時間拉長而浮現。這種綿延不絕的走向，和其引致的對高等教育的不滿，必須放在1945年後國民黨政權經歷的內戰與冷戰來觀看才不會有漏失。政權生存和經濟發展雖然是明顯可見的因素，但這兩個因素還不足以解釋1945年後的台灣高等教育，為何會有戲劇性與特定性的演變。這個變化必須和戰爭扣連起來才有清楚答案。將戰爭帶回來，不是要否定前兩者的作用力，而是要在更大的框架下，察看台灣高等教育的發展究竟受到哪些力量的交錯牽制，而這種交錯發展又和戰爭的發生與進行脫離不了關係。戰爭的生產性、目的性和限制性，如何反映在大學系統的建立與發展上？其對大學的性格塑造和對教育正義的滲透也需要受到正視。過去只以國民黨政權的威權政治，和經濟發展對人力資源的需求等，來討論台灣的高等教育，這些論斷容或豐富，其立論卻是將戰爭隱形化或只是當作背景因素，一筆帶過。這個簡化和不足正是本文想要澄清、補足之處。英文摘要：This article investigates the remarkable development of Taiwan's higher education system from the 1950s to the 1990s. Differing from the prevalent arguments that generally identify economic needs and regime survival as the main reasons for the growth of higher education, this article brings the Civil War and Cold War that Taiwan was encountering back into the field of higher education, and elaborates how and why the two wars shaped Taiwan's higher education system. More than just nursing specific areas of study, to mobilize society for war, the two wars also confined the character of university, as well as the concept of justice of education in a fundamental way. Taking a macro perspective, rather than situating war as a hidden factor or a background component, I highlight the impacts of war on education.起始頁-結束頁：123-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_34.00056篇名：評〈戰爭與台灣的高等教育，1945－1990〉並列篇名：Review of 〞War and Higher Education in Taiwan, 1945-1990〞作者：黃庭康(Ting-hong Wong)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：169-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_34.00067篇名：評〈戰爭與台灣的高等教育，1945－1990〉並列篇名：Review of 〞War and Higher Education in Taiwan, 1945-1990〞作者：藍適齊(Shi-chi Lan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：177-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_34.00078篇名：書評：跨界的學術困境：評《挑釁的提問：台灣研究的歷史與社會探索》並列篇名：The Predicament of Disciplinary Analysis: Book Review of Provocative Inquiry: A Sociological and Historical Exploration of Taiwan Studies作者：葉高華(Ko-hua Yap)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：183-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_34.00089篇名：書評：評《自下而上的改革：中國地方經濟發展的路徑分歧》並列篇名：Book Review of Reform from Below: Divergent Paths of the Local Economic Development in China作者：鄭志鵬(Chih-peng Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：191-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_34.000910篇名：書評：分裂的自我與完整的神話：評《邊緣主體：性別與身分認同政治》並列篇名：Fractured Selves and the Myth of Totality: Book Review of Marginal Subjects: Gender and Identity Politics作者：張君玫(Chun-mei Chuang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：205-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_34.001011篇名：書評：評Family, Work and Wellbeing in Asia並列篇名：Book Review of Family, Work and Wellbeing in Asia作者：郭貞蘭(Chen-lan Kuo)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：34期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：209-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201712_34.001112篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor’s Note作者：汪宏倫期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：33期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-iv資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2017.33.i13篇名：把疾病帶回來？病患實作中的多元疾病客體化並列篇名：Bring Disease Back In? Exploring Modes of Disease Objectification in Patients' Practices作者：林文源(Wen-yuan Lin)關鍵字：疾病;患病;科技與社會研究;邊界客體;疾病客體化;Disease;Illness;Science;Technology and Society Studies (STS);Boundary object;Disease objectification期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：33期出版年：2017中文摘要：社會學已發展多種患病研究取徑，分析疾病的社會面。在近年跨界整合趨勢中，批評者指出「患病社會學」忽視疾病的特性、臨床指標與實務規範，因此倡議「疾病社會學」。本文回應此倡議，但進一步提出批判，指出問題不在於患病與疾病的區分與結合，也不能只帶回生物醫療的疾病。本文藉由科技與社會研究的實作本體論，以及相關客體化實作分析取徑，尤其是邊界客體與多重疾病概念，對稱分析多元醫療實作的疾病客體化，包括生物、中醫、偏方、超自然醫療體制，如何促成慢性腎病、證型、對應與超越疾病客體，以及各種交會模式。本文帶回多元客體化實作，藉此反省現有理論分析的限制，提出正視本地多元醫療—社會現實的社會學。英文摘要：Medical sociologists have developed various paradigms for the social analysis of illness. Critics highlight that the sociology of illness reduces disease into social categories and ignores the specificity of diseases, clinical indexes, and practical norms and call for a sociology of disease. This paper critically follows the initiative without following the divide and convergence between disease and illness and bringing only disease back in. Drawing from practical ontology and studies of objectification practices, especially those of boundary and multiple disease objects, from science, technology, and society studies, this paper explores the multiple disease objects and modes of objectification symmetrically. By examining kidney patients' multiple medical practices that interfere with each other, this study shows that we cannot bring the biomedical chronical kidney disease back in without taking multiple disease objects and modes of objectification into account. The conclusion examines the agenda of this approach, with a reflection on the specificity of existing theoretical tools, and proposes a sociology that faces multiple medical practices in a specific medico-social context.起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2017.33.0114篇名：受地方限定的工廠：中國大陸內遷台資製造業勞動體制之變遷並列篇名：A Place-Bound Factory: Changing Labor Regimes in Taiwanese Manufacturers to Inland China作者：鄧建邦(Jian-bang Deng)關鍵字：台商轉型與未來;遷移;全球生產網絡;農民工;勞動體制;transformation and future of Taiwanese businesses;migration;GPNs;rural migrant workers;labor regime期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：33期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去在廣東模式的發展下，中國大陸沿海地區的外資企業—尤其是台資工廠，主要是以進城的長距離遷移農民工作為生產的主體，這些企業或工廠常使用高壓的方式進行工廠管理。雖然近來在管理方式上有某種程度的改變，但整體上仍維持「移工」勞動體制（migrant labor regime）的特徵。然而，這種刻板印象並無法充分解釋晚近，特別是2008年以後前往內陸布局設廠的台資工廠在勞動管理上的實際運作情形。本文試圖從全球生產網絡（GPNs）與Michael Burawoy對勞動體制的觀點出發，探討台資製造業廠在遷移到內陸後所發生的勞動體制的變遷及其與在地社會的關係。研究資料是2011至2015年間，研究者多次拜訪已遷移內陸的台資工廠進行田野研究所蒐集而來。這些資料主要包括田野觀察及163份與當地勞工、管理者及地方官員深入訪談的記錄。本研究發現（1）台資工廠在地理空間上的移動會促使不同行動尺度的農民工重新組合。內陸台資廠的員工大量替換為本地居民，員工的「移工」屬性因而大幅下滑；（2）台資廠遷往內陸後，勞工對工廠生產勞動的依賴度、勞動的價值觀、勞工的社會關係等，都產生相當程度的變異。內陸作為一地理尺度，具體地影響著遷移當地的台資工廠的運作；（3）遷移內陸的台資工廠，在勞動管理關係上，呈現出一個深受勞工所處（農村）社會網絡與地方（農村）經濟生活所影響的勞動體制。從鑲嵌的角度來看，這是一種領域性的鑲嵌型態，在此鑲嵌型態下的台資工廠，將無可避免地成為一個「受地方限定的」工廠。英文摘要：Past studies on the labor regimes of foreign companies in Southern China show that there was a prevalent and coercive workplace discipline, particularly within Taiwanese factories. Even though certain changes were found in new labor management studies, labor control in these factories was still dominant, possessing the characteristics of a ”migrant labor regime.” This kind of labor management, however, failed to reflect the reality of the workplace within inland Taiwanese factories. This paper employs theories from Global Production Networks, as well as Michael Burawoy’s perspective regarding the factory regime, to explore the changing labor regimes of Taiwanese factories in inland China. Empirical material for this paper was generated from two phases of fieldwork, in which 163 in-depth interviews were conducted from 2011 to 2015 with Chinese employees and Taiwanese managers, as well as other research-related interviewees. It is argued that a re-combination of ”two scales of action” towards rural migrant workers in inland Taiwanese factories developed as these factories moved from coastal to inland China. Instead of the past recruitment practices of long-distance migration laborers moving to coastal areas, factories mostly recruited inland employees (so-called local workers) from nearby villages and towns. These local workers showed, in many aspects, less similar characteristics to those of migrant workers in Southern China, including their conditions of dependence, moral values, and social relationships. ”Inland,” from this viewpoint, not only is a geographic term; it also functioned as a geographic scale, having an enormous impact on the labor regime of migrated Taiwanese factories. Factories located inland were forced to respond to workers' systematic needs, including those related to familial reproduction, seasonal farming, and community. Moreover, adjustments to the labor regime of inland Taiwanese factories brought them to become ”territorially” embedded in workers' localized networks and inland rural economies. Factories thus became place-bound.起始頁-結束頁：63-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2017.33.6315篇名：有效治理的桎梏：當代中國集體抗爭與國家反應並列篇名：Policing Protest in China: Findings from Newspaper Data作者：陳志柔(Chih-jou Jay Chen)關鍵字：集體抗議;群體性事件;鎮壓;維穩;社會衝突;social movement;collective protests;coercion;stability maintenance;social conflicts期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：33期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文聚焦於當代中國國家對社會抗爭的反應，由此呈現國家治理的制度邏輯。本研究資料來源是1萬餘件集體抗議新聞事件，從2000年至2015年。藉由警察在抗議現場的反應模式，呈現其影響因素。在經驗現象上，本研究的主要發現包括：（1）2000年到2015年，警察以武力回應集體抗議的比例，節節升高；警察對社會抗爭，越來越傾向強力鎮壓；（2）在空間分布上，警察對農村抗爭的鎮壓最為顯著，次為二級城市，最後是大城市。大城市的警察，對於集體抗爭最為容忍；（3）暴力抗議，是導致警察出動到抗議現場及警察逮捕抗議者的重要原因之一；（4）當抗議規模越大時，警察越可能出現在抗議現場，但相反的，警察傾向逮捕小規模抗議的抗議者；（5）警察的行為，受到「誰在抗議」的影響最大，而不見得是「為什麼事情抗議」或「抗議誰」。當抗議對象是地方政府（而非中央或省級政府），當抗爭議題是行政及幹部相關時，看起來會招來警察出現且增加被逮捕的機會，其實背後真正的原因是抗議者是弱勢群體（訪民、宗教群體及少數民族、權益受損群體）；一旦抗議者不是弱勢團體，即便抗議目標是地方政府和地方官員，並沒有增加被逮捕的機會。地方政府對社會抗爭的壓制，是因人、因事、因地而異，它是為了適應地方政府既要服膺中央權威又要達成有效治理兩者之間的緊張關係。地方政府慣用的反應模式足以快速弭平抗爭，但卻犧牲弱勢群體權益，也無法促進社會衝突制度化，更加彰顯當代中國國家與社會之間的緊張關係。英文摘要：This paper examines state responses to social protests in contemporary China, thereby demonstrating the institutional logic of governance. The data source for this research is a database of more than 10,000 news events on mass protests from 2000 to 2015. Empirically, the main findings of this study include the following: (1) Between 2000 and 2015, the percentage of police responding to collective protests by force increased steadily; the police were more and more inclined to crack down on social protests. (2) The police’s suppression of protests in rural areas was the most serious, followed by those in second-tier cities, and last, by those in large cities. Police in large cities were the most tolerant of collective protests. (3) Erupting violence was one of the main factors leading to police attendance at protest scenes, as well as the arrest of protesters. (4) The larger the scale of a protest, the more likely the police were to appear on the scene. By contrast, the police were more inclined to arrest protesters at small protests. (5) Police responses were influenced first and foremost by who was protesting and not necessarily by the protest issues or targets. When protests targeted local governments (rather than central or provincial governments), police were more likely to attend the protests and arrest protesters. The underlying reason for police attendance and arresting protesters, however, was that the protesters were members of disadvantaged groups. To pursue effective governance and protect the authority of the central government, local governments faced with collective protests habitually resort to modes of reaction that enable them quell protests quickly, while sacrificing the interests of disadvantaged groups, making the institutionalization of social conflicts impossible.起始頁-結束頁：113-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2017.33.11316篇名：評《食農社會學：從生命與地方的角度出發》並列篇名：Book Review of Shinong shehuixue: Cong shengming yu difang de jiaidu chufa作者：王驥懋(Chi-mao Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：33期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：165-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2017.33.16517篇名：評《全球現代性的危機：亞洲傳統與可持續的未來》：一個生態人文的觀點並列篇名：Book Review of The Crisis of Global Modernity: Asian Traditions and Sustainable Future: An Ecological Humanities' Point of View作者：林益仁(Yih-ren Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：33期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：175-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2017.33.17518篇名：評《族群、民族與現代國家：經驗與理論的反思》並列篇名：Book Review of Ethnicity, Nation, and the Modern State: Rethinking Theory an d Experience on Taiwan and China作者：張隆志(Kung-chih Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：33期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：185-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.2017.33.18501篇名：誰是住宅新推個案市場中的黑羊？－台北市和新北市住宅新推個案房價指數分析並列篇名：Who is the ”Black Sheep” in the Presale Housing Market? An Analysis of the Presale Housing Price Index of Taipei City and New Taipei City作者：袁淑湄(Shu-Mei Yuan)關鍵字：DFFITS;最小消去平方法;再加權最小平方法;房價指數;穩健迴歸;DFFITS;least trimmed squares (LTS);reweighted least squares (RLS);housing price index (HPI);robust regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：26卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以國泰建設公司住宅新推個案市場調查資料，建立預售屋特徵價格模型。以「最小平方法(ordinary least squares, OLS)」為基準，比較DFFITS和「最小消去平方法(least trimmed squares, LTS)」異常點刪除技術的表現。LTS尋求配適多數樣本的迴歸參數，當樣本殘差值大於門檻值則賦予權重0，視為異常點，再以OLS校估參數，稱為「再加權最小平方法(re-weighted least squares, RLS)」。實證結果發現：1. RLS和DFFITS模型表現較OLS佳。2.住宅新推個案的異常點特色，來自特定區位和特定行政區的產品定位。3. RLS和DFFITS模型的房價指數，長期波動大致雷同，惟若觀察短期變化，不同異常點處理技術的房價波動不同，影響短期解讀。英文摘要：The study employs the presale housing market survey data of the Cathay Real Estate Development Company to establish presale housing hedonic models. To observe the effects of outliers, ordinary least squares (OLS) is employed as a benchmark to compare the model performance of two outlier deletion techniques, DFFITS and least trimmed squares (LTS). LTS is aimed at fitting a regression model to most of the data while identifying the outliers as the points with large residuals. By giving a zero weight to the cases with residuals larger than a threshold value, the outliers are disregarded in the following OLS calibration process. The technique is referred to as reweighted least squares (RLS). The results demonstrate that: 1. the RLS regression and DFFITS models outperform the OLS models; 2. most outliers come from a specific area and product positioning from specific districts; and 3. in the long term, these different estimation techniques do not affect housing price indices-however, if we observe the movements season by season, the different estimation techniques yield different price movements, which affect the interpretation of short-term presale housing market data.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會2篇名：房市泡沫與總體經濟關係並列篇名：Relationship Between Housing Bubbles and Macroeconomic Factors作者：鄧筱蓉(Hsiao-Jung Teng)關鍵字：房市泡沫;狀態空間模型;衝擊反應函數;housing bubble;state-space model;impulse response function期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：26卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去文獻指出台北市於2005-2008年有顯著的房市泡沫出現，泡沫的形成除了受投資人樂觀預期心理影響外，亦受總體經濟因素的影響。為進一步研究房市泡沫的成因，本文透過租金推估房價基值，並使用狀態空間模型先估計台北市1976年6月至2014年9月的泡沫價格。後續透過因果關係、衝擊反應函數及變異數分解分析台北泡沫價格與總體經濟變數之間的關係。實證結果發現房市泡沫價格主要受M1b、股價指數及匯率等因素影響，與利率關係較小。顯示充裕的資金是造成房市泡沫的主因，政府應審慎採取適當的貨幣政策避免房市泡沫破裂引發金融危機。英文摘要：The housing bubble in Taipei was not only affected by investors’ optimistic expectations, but also by macroeconomic variables. This paper focuses on the determinant factors of a housing bubble. First, this paper regards the housing fundamental as the sum of the expected present value of rent and applies the state-space model to measure the bubble price from June 1976 to September 2014 in Taipei City. Second, Granger causality analysis and VAR modeling methods are used to investigate the causes of the housing bubble. The empirical findings show that money supply, the stock price index, and the exchange rate were the causes of the housing bubble, and that real interest rates were not. The results imply that sufficient funding was the main cause of the housing bubble; therefore, the Taiwan government should implement a prudent monetary policy to avoid the bursting of the housing bubble, which would trigger a financial crisis.起始頁-結束頁：27-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會3篇名：頂級豪宅價值結構之分析：需求者行為觀點並列篇名：Analysis of the Value Structure of Top Luxurious Apartments: A Perspective from the Homebuyers and Their Behavior作者：洪志興(Chih-Hsing Hung)關鍵字：豪宅價值;奢侈價值;消費價值;投資價值;luxurious apartment value;luxury value;consumption value;investment value期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：26卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：頂級豪宅的價值通常與一般住宅的價值不一樣，除了一般住宅的消費價值與投資價值之外，頂級豪宅還會多一個奢侈價值。本研究是利用實質選擇權法來評估頂級豪宅價值，在各種參數分析下，分析頂級豪宅價值與三個組成價值的變化。研究發現，住宅資本利得稅、住宅租金收益率與住宅價格指數會正向影響頂級豪宅消費價值。因此，當頂級豪宅價格有泡沫時，則可以透過增加一般住宅資本利得稅或降低不動產價格指數變異，讓豪宅價值下降，改善市場投機的行為。本研究也可以提供政府理論模型，利用政策對住宅價格調控，使國民對國內住宅政策有正面肯定。英文摘要：The value of a top luxurious apartment is different from the value of a regular residential house because of additional luxury value besides the value of consumption and investment. The study adopts the real option approach to decompose the value of luxurious apartments into three values and explore how they are affected by given parameter setups in the model. The paper finds that a tax on capital gains, the return rate of rental income and the price index of the residential index tend to positively affect the consumption value in luxurious apartments. The interest rate, return rate of rental income and price index of the residential index will positively affect the luxury value. Therefore, policies to impose higher taxes on capital gains from housing transactions and reduce the variation in the residential price index will decrease the value of luxurious apartments and the investment value recognized by speculators. This paper provides theoretical support for governments to enact possible policies to affect housing prices in the market.起始頁-結束頁：51-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會4篇名：股票與不動產投資信託的蔓延效果及安全投資轉移：以希臘主權債務危機為例並列篇名：Contagion or Flight to Quality between the Stock and REITs Markets: Greek Debt Crisis作者：高子荃(Tzu-Chuan Kao);高偉舜(Wei-Shun Kao);林楚雄(Chu-Hsiung Lin);蔡繡容(Hsiu-Jung Tsai);鍾沛璇(Pei-Hsuan Chung)關鍵字：蔓延效果;安全投資轉移;不動產投資信託(REITs);VC-MGARCH模型;contagion;flight to quality;REITs;VC-MGARCH model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：26卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究建構一個整合的估計模型，稱為t分配下與時俱變相關係數多變量GJR模型(VCMGJR-t model)，以檢定蔓延效果與安全投資轉移的現象。本模型拓展Tse & Tsui(2002)與時俱變相關係數多變量GARCH模型(VC-MGARCH model)，可同時捕捉變異數異質性、波動不對稱性、與時俱變的相關係數、外溢效果以及高峰胖尾分配型態的金融資產報酬特性。結果顯示在希臘主權債務危機的衝擊下，除義大利的REITs市場外，其餘國家的REITs蔓延效果皆呈現不顯著。此外，希臘的RETIs市場在危機發生後一至三個月，皆呈現安全投資轉移的現象。本文建議REITs能作為危機發生時之避險工具，投資人可透過REITs商品以避免投資損失。英文摘要：This study sets up an integrated multivariate GJR model with time-varying correlation based on the t distribution (VC-MGJR- t) to test the contagion effect and flight to quality during a financial crisis. We extend the MGARCH model by Tse & Tsui (2002) to address conditional heteroskedasticity, asymmetric volatility, time-varying correlation, spillovers, and fat-tailed distributions simultaneously. The empirical results reveal the presence of a contagion effect only in Italy during the Greek debt crisis period. The flight-to-quality effects from stocks to REITs were found to exist in Greece 1-3 months after a financial crisis. We therefore suggest that investors could use REITs for hedging and decreasing their losses.起始頁-結束頁：75-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會5篇名：信任、互惠與都市更新合作意願相關性之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Correlation between Trust, Reciprocity and the Willingness to Cooperate in Urban Renewal作者：邊泰明(Tai-Ming Ben);彭佩瑩(Pei-Ying Peng);陳玉嬌(Yu-Chiao Chen)關鍵字：都市更新;集體行動;信任;互惠;合作;urban renewal;collective action;trust;reciprocity;cooperation期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：26卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：都市發展過程中、民主規劃程序下，都市更新透過集體行動過程，成就土地產權整合與開發利益分配，為促進土地有計畫再開發利用之規劃手段。本文建構在集體行動與互惠理論基礎，分析都市更新合作過程中，實施者與土地權利人之互惠關係，對都市更新合作之影響。實證結果發現信任至互惠，以及互惠至合作之正向路徑關係，顯示實施者提升自我能力、善意、正直之特質，可促進其與土地權利人合作關係中之互惠程度，而實施者與土地權利人所建立之良好互惠關係，對於都市更新之合作有所助益。英文摘要：Urban Renewal is a way to improve land use and the quality of public facilities, with a view to promoting a well-planned redevelopment of urban land and increasing social welfare. Built on the theories of collective action and reciprocity, this study explores the reciprocal relationship between developers and landowners in the hope that the issues revolving around collective action can be resolved during the urban renewal process. The results reveal that the level of trust has a positive effect on the level of reciprocity, which in turn has a positive effect on the level of cooperation. Therefore, this study shows that reciprocity can stimulate cooperation in urban renewal and that the level of reciprocity in the cooperation can be increased when the developers in urban renewal projects expand on their capacity, kindness, and integrity.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會6篇名：臺灣家庭擁屋決定因素分析：性別和地區差異並列篇名：Determinants of Housing Tenure Choice in Taiwan: Gender Inequality and Regional Differences作者：李佳霖(Chia-Lin Li);謝文真(Wen-Jen Hsieh)關鍵字：家庭擁屋機率;住宅租擁選擇;兩階段迴歸;probit模型;性別差異;區域差異;probability of owning a house;tenure choice;two-stage regression;probit model;gender inequality;regional differences期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：26卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文採行政院主計處家庭收支調查中，有提供居住縣市的最後一年(2006)資料，並根據戶長性別以及臺灣七大區域區分樣本，分析不同類別家庭擁屋機率的影響因素。考量恆常所得和家庭財富內生性，研究方法採兩階段probit模型。性別實證結果顯示，恆常所得、配偶存在、公部門任職對兩性戶長之家庭擁屋機率具正向影響，惟財富僅對男性有利。區域別實證結果中，恆常所得是所有地區的重要因素，退休年齡戶長和都市化程度也影響多數地區，然財富僅對北高兩市家庭影響較大。本文建議政府應改善性別社經地位及區域間資源分配的不均，促進國民福祉與社會和諧。英文摘要：This study employs data from the Survey on Family Income and Expenditure (hereafter, SFIE), compiled by the Taiwan Government, to analyze the determinants of housing tenure choice. The data have been re-categorized based on the gender of the household head and regions in Taiwan. Owing to the non-availability of information on the actual residence location post-2006, a two-stage probit model has been applied to the 12,838 SFIE observations for 2006. The OLS regression on permanent income and family wealth for the first stage, and a probit model on the second stage have been adopted to estimate the marginal effects of two proxies of permanent income and family wealth and other demographic variables. The empirical results based on gender inequality suggest that a higher permanent income, employment status with the public sector, and the status of being married have positive effects on the probability of owning a house for both female- and male-headed households, while the wealth variable only contributes to the male-headed households. As for the choice of housing tenure among regions, the estimated results indicate that permanent income is the key determinant, while the status of being married, being the retired head of a household, and the degree of urbanization are also influential in most regions. However, family wealth merely contributes to Taipei City and Kaohsiung City, the two largest cities in Taiwan. It is suggested that the central and local governments should mitigate the gender inequality, regional differences, and thereby effectively enhance socio-economic well-being and social harmony.起始頁-結束頁：31-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會7篇名：The Optimal Luxury Tax Policy and Its Exit Mechanism並列篇名：最佳奢侈稅政策與其退出機制作者：李建強(Chien-Chiang Lee);陳國興(Kuo-Shing Chen);徐守德(David So-De Shyu);曾至宏(Jhih-Hong Zeng)關鍵字：luxury goods;optimal tax policy;luxury tax;exit mechanism;economic growth;奢侈品;最佳稅率政策;奢侈稅;退場機制;經濟成長期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：26卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：After experiencing the global financial crisis and the European debt crisis, most governments have tended to cut their budgets. Although imposing a tax on luxury goods is a good way to increase government revenue, it also induces negative consumption externalities and thereby leads to a possible distortion in economic behavior. In addition to a theoretical demonstration of the negative influence of a luxury tax on economic growth and the capital stock, this paper, more importantly, theoretically deduces the timing for starting the exit mechanism of the luxury tax, which is related to several economic conditions. In addition, we simulate the optimal luxury tax for Taiwan. Our results should serve as valuable reference to policy-makers.英文摘要：在歷經全球金融風暴及歐債危機後，多數政府採取了撙節預算的方針來因應。儘管課徵奢侈稅是增加政府稅收的另一好方案，但該政策卻也可能衍生負面的消費外部性及扭曲的經濟行為。除對奢侈稅負向的影響經濟成長及資本存量之理論推論外，本研究亦推導出奢侈稅之退場機制的最佳啟動時間點。另外，本研究亦提供台灣之理論奢侈稅率之模擬。相信本文研究能提供政府奢侈稅方面的政策參考。起始頁-結束頁：55-84資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會8篇名：我國不動產逆向抵押貸款評價並列篇名：The Valuation of Reverse Mortgages in Taiwan作者：陳勤明(Chin-Ming Chen);洪志興(Chih-Hsing Hung);李宜熹(Yi-Hsi Lee)關鍵字：逆向抵押貸款;年金;reverse mortgage;annuity期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：26卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：不動產逆向抵押貸款(reverse mortgage, RM)制度已受到高度重視並漸為普及，文獻上對其可貸年金之評價亦多所探討，惟其評價內容多未論及RM借方抵押房產續住權價值，及其死亡時房產繼承權問題。對此，本文以我國RM方案為例，納入此二因素考量，重新分析RM之生存與死亡收益，進而評估RM的價值。經試算發現我國RM年金給付水準略為低估，但若放寬房產剩餘價值可供繼承，則又出現高估現象。進一步分析也發現，只要契約約定房產剩餘價值歸屬繼承人，則難免形成RM總給付期望價值超越抵押不動產價值之財務缺口。基於擴大參與目的，本研究認為我國RM制度仍可放寬單身(無法定繼承人)長者的申辦限制，參酌市場利率、房屋租金率等生活條件因素，來訂定合宜年金金額，至於RM主辦者所承擔的虧損風險再透過社福預算或保險機制來達到財務平衡。英文摘要：The reverse mortgage (RM) has come into focus and has become popular in alleviating the financial strain on the government and in improving the living quality of the retiring elderly. While there is a large literature on the valuation of reverse annuity mortgages (RAMs), as yet no one has considered both the value of the house while the elderly are still living and the estate and inheritance issues. This study thus aims to reevaluate the benefits of RM both for those living and after death by including the two factors. Our financial analysis finds that the current payout level in terms of an annuity is undervalued. A further evaluation shows that the RM program may result in a financial gap for the lender as the total expected payout amount exceeding the collateral value and below the surplus value of the real estate belongs to the heir. Under the reasonable pricing formula proposed by this study, the residual risk loss could be balanced out by the social welfare budget and insurance mechanisms. Therefore, we suggest that Taiwan’s RM program could relax the application restriction due to the absence of legal heirs to the existence of legal heirs in order to include the participants.起始頁-結束頁：85-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會9篇名：邁向住宅需求資訊健全之路－住宅需求動向調查之現況與展望並列篇名：Towards the Integrity of Housing Demand Information: The Current Situation and Prospects for the Housing Demand Survey作者：朱芳妮(Fang-Ni Chu)關鍵字：住宅需求調查;住宅政策;housing demand survey;housing policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：26卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：「住宅需求動向調查」乃政府長期實施的住宅市場需求面之調查，實施目標乃蒐集可反映住宅需求面之各項資訊及指標。為符合政府整體住宅政策之施政方向與提供住宅租金補貼政策之參考資訊，在調查對象、地區、週期、方式上歷經數次變革。然在經費有限及調查限制下，所提供之市場資訊豐富性似逐漸減少且長期資料的累積難以延續。面對此困境，未來該調查應有整體性調整之必要，如可整合相關調查資源，從橫斷面調查轉為居住需求變遷追蹤調查，調查項目涵蓋居住安全、居住品質、居住環境及居住成本(價格)，預期將可提供政府全面性的住宅需求基本資料，亦可作為相關住宅計畫之重要參考基礎。英文摘要：The ”Housing Demand Survey” is a long-term survey on housing market demand. The implementation goal is to collect information and indicators that reflect the housing demand side. In order to comply with the government’s housing policy directions and provide reference information for its rental subsidy policies, the survey has, in terms of its objectives, regions covered, cycle and methods used, undergone several changes. However, given the survey’s limited budget as well as the constraints imposed on investigation, the richness of information has declined and the continuity of the data over the long term has been disrupted. A holistic adjustment of this survey is thus necessary to cope with these difficulties, such as the transition from a cross-sectional survey to a panel survey through the integration of relevant research resources. The themes of this transitional survey include living safety, living quality, the living environment and housing costs (prices). It is believed that a panel survey on housing demand could provide the government with comprehensive fundamental data on housing demand and could be a significant reference basis for relevant housing programs.起始頁-結束頁：101-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會01篇名：臺灣老人日間照顧服務從業人員職場疲勞之探究並列篇名：A Study on Job Burnout among Elderly Day Care Professionals in Taiwan作者：鄭怡世(Yi-Shih Cheng);巫麗雪(Li-Hsueh Wu);劉幸宜(Shing-Yi Liu)關鍵字：老人日間照顧;疲勞;工作要求;工作資源;工作過度投入;burnout;elderly day care;job demand;job resource;over-commitment to work期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探究臺灣老人日照單位從業人員職場疲勞的狀況，並透過「工作要求－資源」理論模型，瞭解工作要求、工作資源與個人人力資本、工作過度投入傾向對職場疲勞的效應。在分析362筆具完整資料的樣本後發現，日照單位從業人員的個人疲勞、工作疲勞高於全國受僱者的平均值，但對服務對象疲勞則是低於平均值。進一步的迴歸分析結果顯示，心理負荷與工作過度投入傾向是職場疲勞主要的預測因子；多數的工作資源有助於緩解職場疲勞，但個人人力資本與職場疲勞則無顯著的關連性；工作過度投入不僅提高職場疲勞的感受，同時也會抵銷工作資源所帶來的效益。本研究的發現可作為日照單位促進職場健康、提昇照顧品質，以及優化人力資源管理策略的參考。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the circumstances and correlates of job burnout among social workers, caregivers and nurses in the elderly daycare industry in Taiwan. Based on the Job Demands-Resources Model, we explore the effects of job demands, job resources, and over-commitment to work on the degree of burnout. Data for examining the hypotheses drawn from a mail survey was conducted in 2014. The Chinese version of the Copenhagen Burnout Inventory (C-CBI) is employed to measure the extent of burnout. The results indicate that employees in the elderly daycare industry have a higher degree of personal and work-related burnout, but have a lower degree of client-related burnout than the national average. Psychological workloads and over-commitment to work exert significant influences on the degree of burnout. Job-related resources variables tend to ease workplace fatigue (except for the effects of work influence on the client-related burnout), however, human capital does not have a significant effect on it. Over-commitment to work not only increases workplace fatigue, but also mitigates the benefits of job resources. Our findings can provide policy implications for health promotion, care quality, and human resource management strategies in elderly daycare services.起始頁-結束頁：1-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201712_21(2).00012篇名：「部落介入」親密關係暴力之經驗與態度：以四個族別的原住民部落為例並列篇名：Experiences and Attitudes of Tribal Involvement for Indigenes' Intimate Partner Violence: Examples of Four Tribes作者：沈慶鴻(Ching-Hung Shen)關鍵字：介入;原住民族;部落;親密關係暴力;involvement;indigene;tribe;intimate partner violence期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：部落介入、部落參與是國內外不少研究者建議的原鄉親密關係暴力防治策略，研究者於是想要透過部落在地成員的經驗，了解和探索部落介入親密關係暴力的現況和可能性。研究者從聯繫到資料收集完成的六個月內，走訪了四個縣市，進行了五次、四族別的焦點團體訪談，總計邀請了27位在部落中具重要性且熱心地方事務，或曾受邀參與部落家暴網絡會議之在地成員參與焦點團體。研究發現，因尊重隱私及不便介入他人家庭事務等原因，多數成員並無直接介入暴力事件處理的經驗，若有介入，也僅只針對受暴婦女提供單方面的協助。雖然家族和耆老的調解是部落處理家庭事務的慣習，但在傳統文化消散、宗教約束力減弱的現況下，已無法有效約束相對人的暴力行為，多數焦點團體成員因此也對「部落介入」親密關係暴力的做法感到悲觀；然相較於泰雅、阿美和魯凱等族，排灣族焦點團體的成員較支持「部落介入」的做法，也較認可其對相對人暴力行為的約束成效。據此，研究者認為「部落介入」親密關係暴力之策略要能落實，須將「個人事」、「家務事」之親密關係暴力觀點轉化為「公共議題」，促進部落民眾對暴力的覺察；並且增權部落的主體性、結合專業人員，才能提升「部落介入」的有效性，為原鄉暴力防治的工作帶來質變。英文摘要：Given that ”tribal involvement” and ”tribal participation” were recommended by numerous researchers as appropriate strategies of preventing intimate partner violence in indigenous communities, the researcher of this study anticipated getting close to tribal members' experiences in real settings, in order to explore the current situations and operations in the tribes. Five focus group interviews were held during six months to collect data. A total of 27 tribal members, who were influential and enthusiastic about tribal affairs, or who had been participated in network meetings for tribal domestic violence, were invited to be interviewed. The participants who had been interviewed were from four tribes and four counties. This study found that in order to show respect to others' family affairs, most of the participants only gave one-way support to those women who were being abused. This leaded to only a few participants having direct experience of dealing with violence. Although the family elders' meditation and involvement had been the habits of dealing with family disputes, this strategy could not restrain the batterers' violence any more, as the traditional culture dissipated and the religious constraints weakened. As a result of invalid family involvement, most participants were pessimistic about the strategy of ”tribal involvement”. However, compared to Atayal, Amis and Ruka, participants in the focus group of Paiwan were more supportive to the strategy of ”tribal involvement”. Participants from Paiwan also recognized the positive outcome of the ”tribal involvement”. According to the findings of this study, transforming ”family affairs” of intimate partner violence into ”public issues”, and promoting public awareness were seen to be crucial. Empowering the subjectivity of the tribes and combining with the assistance of professionals were also important, in order to enhance the effectiveness of ”tribal involvement”. These would bring qualitative changes for the preventions and treatments of indigenes' intimate partner violence.起始頁-結束頁：55-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201712_21(2).00023篇名：原住民長期照顧管理服務之研究：照顧管理者的服務處境與困境並列篇名：Services of Long-term Care Management for the Indigenous Population: Challenges and Perspectives from the Public Care Managers作者：侯建州(Chien-Chou Hou);郭慈安(Tsu-Ann Kuo)關鍵字：照顧管理;社會照顧;長期照顧;原住民;服務輸送;care management;social care;long-term care;indigenous population;service delivery期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：在高齡的社會環境中，健康的維持與照顧的持續乃重要的議題，但對於身處健康、經濟、地理等不利條件的原住民而言，將加重長照的負擔，且其長照需求亦較主流社會要高。長照十年計畫以照顧管理為理念，照管專員有行政法定權威且扮演著關鍵性角色，但照管專員也面臨勞動條件限制等困境，故其處境與困境值得被探討。本研究目的係探究原住民長照管理服務，並以照管專員的處境與困境為研究目標，期待本研究給予政府當局及照管中心政策與服務建議，且能對原住民的長照福祉做出貢獻。本研究採取質化研究，針對中北部某兩縣市之照管中心之照管專員及照管督導進行六場個別訪談與一場焦點團體訪談，共收集10位受訪者的資料。研究發現，受訪者認為需求評估及評估工具並未針對原住民之特有文化加以考量，服務上也難以滿足原住民的需要；計畫擬定上的阻礙則是原住民難以支付部分負擔。至於服務輸送上，機構式照顧成本偏高，原住民難以負荷；而原鄉社區式照顧因幅員廣闊、交通不便等因素影響難以普及，居家式照顧相對而言較為可行，惟原鄉交通與人力的限制也讓居家服務的提供遭逢困境。綜上所述，本研究提出以下建議：一、需全面檢討照顧管理之需求評估表單對於原住民之適用性，重要的是原住民長照服務體系需以原住民文化思維來提供服務。二、明確界定照管專員的角色，並能賦予其實質職權。三、對於處於弱勢經濟條件的原住民，應能針對其經濟能力、現金需求等來設計靈活的服務供給項目。四、需積極引導與建構社會資源成為長照資源，且政府應投入更多資源並發揮整合協調的功能。英文摘要：The maintenance of health and continuum of care for all are important issues in the aging society, however, the indigenous people are more likely to encounter disadvantageous health, economic and geographic statuses resulting in heavier long-term care needs and caregiving burden compared with the people in mainstream society. In the current long-term care system in Taiwan, care managers may be given professional and official roles, however, they may simultaneously face a limitation of job stability. The purposes of this study are as follow: First, to explore the challenges and working situations of the care managers when providing long-term care services for the indigenous population. Secondly, to propose constructive suggestions on policy and practice in order to develop better long-term care services as well as social welfare services for the indigenous population. The methodology this study adopted was qualitative approach. A total of ten care managers from two counties were invited to participate in one focus group and 6 individual in-depth interviews. The results of the study found that care assessment and the assessment tool did not consider the cultural characteristics of the indigenous population; many indigenous users could not afford the cost of institutionalized care or the co-payment of the care plan designed for them. On the long-term care delivery system, the vast geographic area to cover for the indigenous population limited community-based care and transportation, thus making home-based care more doable. However, finding enough human resources and care workers to provide home-based care was a challenge. Based on the research findings, four suggestions were proposed. First, the care assessment and evaluation tools need to be culturally sensitive which fit indigenous lifestyle. Secondly, the care managers should take the role of authority while they were given responsibilities. Thirdly, the long-term care services could be provided more flexibly that the indigenous people who were economic disadvantageous could be benefited. Fourthly, the government could take a pro-active role and invest more resources to establish a comprehensive service system for long-term care.起始頁-結束頁：117-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201712_21(2).00034篇名：原住民族社會資本之研究並列篇名：A Study on Social Capital of Indigenous Peoples作者：莊俐昕(Li-Hsin Chuang)關鍵字：結合型社會資本;橋接型社會資本;連結型社會資本;社會排除;社會福祉;bonding social capital;bridging social capital;linking social capital;social exclusion;social well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討原住民族社會資本的現況，及其個人、家庭狀況與社會資本的關係。主要測量工具為研究者參與編製之社會資本量表，社會資本區分為結合型、橋接型與連結型三種類型，各類型皆包括信任、網絡與規範三項要素。樣本係以55個遍布於台灣地區（含蘭嶼）的原住民族家庭服務中心為平台，每一中心邀請15位年滿20歲以上之原住民接受面訪，計收回有效問卷790份。研究發現，原住民族社會資本的存量偏高，各類型與各要素之間有顯著的正相關。性別、教育程度、家庭經濟狀況、居住區域及居住地理位置，對社會資本的存量皆有不同程度的影響，其中，以居住區域對社會資本的貢獻力最為顯著。經對研究結果進行分析和討論後，本研究從社會資本觀點，提出五項有助於改善或促進原住民族生活機會或社會福祉的相關建議，以供相關政策或實務參酌。英文摘要：This empirical study aims to explore the profile of social capital of indigenous peoples as well as the factors influencing social capital, in particular the factors of individual traits and family status. The main survey instrument is the Social Capital Scale established by a team that the researcher has been devoted to. The social capital is divided into 3 types, including bonding, bridging and linking. Each type includes 3 elements which are trust, network and norm. The target population is the collection of indigenous peoples aged over 20. 790 successful samples, introduced by 55 indigenous family service centers, were collected and the data were put into analysis. The results show that social capital of indigenous peoples is rich. Besides, there are significantly positive correlations between types and elements of social capital. Variables that influence the stock of social capital include gender, education, economic condition, residential distract and geographical location, while geographical location makes the most significant contribution. According to the findings of the study and based on a social capital perspective, five suggestions related to improving life opportunities and social well-beings of social capital of indigenous people are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201706_21(1).00015篇名：災難復原力保護因子量表之建構與發展研究並列篇名：The Development of the Protective Factors of Disaster Resilience Scale作者：謝文中(Wen-Chung Hsieh);鄭夙芬(Su-Fen Cheng);陳毓文(Yu-Wen Chen)關鍵字：災難復原力;災難復原力保護因子量表;探索性因素分析;驗證性因素分析;莫拉克風災;disaster resilience;protective factors of disaster resilience scale;exploratory factor analysis;confirmatory factor analysis;typhoon Morakot期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究目的為編製並驗證一份適用臺灣本土、簡潔、涵蓋完整與具有效能的災難復原力保護因子量表，期待作為評估災難情境下復原力保護因子狀況之工具，提供災難社工服務介入與相關研究之參考。立意取樣377位莫拉克風災災民（預試樣本32位、正式樣本345位），發展過程遵照嚴謹量表發展理論，進行文獻檢閱、建立量表題庫與初稿擬定，經專家審查、預試、團隊討論修改、正式施測，進行量表修訂之項目分析、內在一致性檢驗、探索性因素分析、驗證性因素分析與外部建構效度分析等編製程序，完成六個構面（決心與問題解決技巧、個別性支持、正向特質、穩定的人際關係、自信及自我平衡與社交技巧），28個題項，沒有重複及無關項目，皆為有意義項目的量表。研究結果發現災難復原力保護因子量表題項品質良好，有好的組合信度、因素效度與某種程度的外部建構效度，且具有合理的模式適配情形。最後根據量表建構與發展結果提出實務與研究上的建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a reliable, valid and efficient Protective Factors of Disaster Resilience Scale to evaluate resilience of disaster victims. Purposive sampling yielded 377 victims of Typhoon Morakot to participate in this study voluntarily. Data collected from 32 participants were used in the pretest, while the rest (N = 345) were used in final analyses. The researchers first reviewed literature to establish all items in this scale, then conducted item analysis and internal consistency using the pretest sample. We then conducted exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis with the formal sample. The results indicate 6 factors in the Protective Factors of Disaster Resilience Scale, including ”determination and problem-solving skills”, ”personal support”, ”positive traits”, ”stable interpersonal relationships”, ”assertiveness”, and ”balance-of-self and social skill.” A total of 28 items can demonstrate good composite reliability and average variance extracted. We suggest related professionals could use this scale to assess resilience both in practice and research.起始頁-結束頁：49-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201706_21(1).00026篇名：從生產性福利體制到社會投資福利國家：臺灣與韓國的比較並列篇名：From Productivist Welfare States to Social Investment Welfare State: Comparing Taiwan and Korea作者：葉崇揚(Chung-Yang Yeh);古允文(Yeun-Wen Ku)關鍵字：臺灣;南韓;生產性福利體制;社會投資;制度遺緒;Taiwan;(South) Korea;productivist welfare regime;social investment;institutional legacies期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文嘗試比較兩個發展程度類似且都被視作是東亞生產性福利體制的臺灣與韓國，解釋為何在民主化後韓國為何能夠相對順利且快速地進行社會投資的轉型，而臺灣為何不行。不同於Bonoli的理論觀點，本文嘗試將三個因素納入分析，壓縮現代性、制度結構遺緒和偶發事件。本文假設兩國民主化後在面臨壓縮現代性時，都以建立和再制度化傳統社會保障體系以解決舊社會風險和爭取政治支持；然而，兩者卻在社會投資轉型過程中，因為不同的歷史制度結構遺緒的限制下，有著不同的步調。臺灣在國家財稅能力和改革能力受到限制的情況下，政治行動者在面臨新社會風險時無法有效地將社會支出導引至積極性社會政策。相反地，韓國未成熟的社會保障體以及1997年的亞洲金融危機，使得國家有充裕的財政空間和改革的機會之窗，能夠讓政治行動者利用積極性社會政策回應新社會風險以及爭取女性和其他弱勢族群的支持。結果即是韓國目前是逐漸朝向「生產性（productive）－保障性（protective）」的方向，而臺灣則是著重於保障性社會政策。英文摘要：This article aims to compare the social investment turns in two Productivist welfare states, Taiwan and (South) Korea, with a similar economic level, to illustrate why Korea could and Taiwan could not transform welfare system into social investment states. In contrast Bonoli's perspective, we argue that compressed modernity, institutional legacies and contingencies should be taken into account. Although Taiwan and Korea both faced compressed modernity and prioritised traditional social protection systems to deal with old social risks and vie for political supports, they have different speeds and paths of social investment turn due to different national institutional legacies. In Taiwan, the state's capacities of finance and reform were severely constrained by its institutional legacies. Therefore, political actors could not channel social expenditure from protective social policies into active social policies. By contrast, Korea's immature social protection system and the 1997 Asian financial crisis not only led to higher financial capacity but also provided opportunities which helped political actors to introduce active social policies to deal with new social risks and vie for political supports from female and other vulnerable groups. As a result, Korea has been transforming towards Productive-Protective welfare state, but Taiwan still placed more emphasis on protective social policies.起始頁-結束頁：97-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201706_21(1).00037篇名：老人照顧服務社會工作者之職能、專業認同、成就感與離職傾向並列篇名：A Study of Competency, Professional Identity, Accomplishment and Turnover Intention of Social Workers in Elderly Care作者：蕭文高(Wen-Kao Hsiao)關鍵字：職能;專業認同;成就感;離職傾向;老人社會工作;competency;professional identity;accomplishment;turnover intention;gerontological social work期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著人口結構變遷，我國老年人口群對於照顧服務需求增加，也亟需社會工作專業人力之投入，但是有關實務工作者老人專業職能之研究仍相當不足，對於職能及其影響變項之討論也較為缺乏。因此，為了瞭解老人照顧服務社會工作者之職能、專業認同、成就感與離職傾向，本研究採取調查研究並以郵寄問卷搜集資料，經整理分析181份有效問卷，呈現受訪者在知識職能的自評分數較低，且人口背景變項影響職能、專業認同、成就感與離職傾向；進一步採取階層多元迴歸分析自變項對離職傾向的預測效果，發現知識職能、技巧職能與成就感為主要預測變項。最後，就統計分析結果，本研究提出有關社工職能與留任議題之討論，並建議應該採取以職能為基礎模式，檢視教育訓練課程之內容與成效，並深化相關議題之研究。英文摘要：Due to changing demographics, there are growing numbers of older people in need of care services in Taiwan. Despite the escalating demand for geriatric social workers, there was a lack of studies dealing with social workers' competency and its relationship with outcome variables. In order to understand the description and relationship about competency, professional identity, accomplishment and turnover intention, this study used survey method and mail questionnaire to analyze opinions of social workers in elderly care. After counting and analyzing 181 questionnaire data, it was found that respondents' self-assessment knowledge competency displayed the lower scores, and demographic characteristics affected competency, professional identity, accomplishment and turnover intention. Furthermore, hierarchical multiple regression was used to understand the predictors of turnover intention. Results demonstrated that knowledge, skill competencies and accomplishment were the most important predictor variables for turnover intention. Finally, the implications and suggestions for competencies and retention of social workers were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：149-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201706_21(1).00048篇名：臺灣年金改革基礎的重構：新社會公民地位之社會平等觀點並列篇名：New Social Citizenship and Pension Reform in Taiwan作者：黃志隆(Chih-Lung Huang)關鍵字：基本收入保證;年金改革;新社會公民地位;民主參與;社會平等;basic income guarantee;pension reform;new social citizenship;democratic participation;social equality期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：臺灣未能考量人口老化趨勢而產生基金缺口之公共年金制度，於2016年民進黨重新執政後再度啟動改革規劃。然而因個別制度而形成的結構化利益，使得不同職業、身份，甚至是世代團體的對立和衝突不斷。本文由新社會公民地位理論出發，透過對社會平等的重新界定，析論臺灣年金改革的可能。現行以職業和身份別為主的社會保險與社會津貼等第一層公共年金制度，隨著社會結構的變化，使得國家補貼所造成的社會不平等現象正日益擴大。而解決的方法，是將現行國家補貼予以回收，以作為全民基礎年金。透過以稅收為財源之全民老年基本所得保證制度的建立，不僅可作為各個團體在年金改革上的全民共識，亦可因應新興社會問題的出現，從而重構公民社會參與的基礎。英文摘要：The pension reform in Taiwan has restarted since the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won the presidential election in 2016. However, the configured interest struggle from different occupations, identities, and generations made the formation of consensus on pension reform very difficult. This article tried to adopt the new social citizenship theory in analyzing the possibility of pension reform through redefining social equality. There were too many state subsidies for the first tier of pension system in Taiwan in accordance with different occupations and other identities, and the social inequalities will continue to expand in the future. The resolution lied in recovering the existing national subsidies as the basis of minimum income guarantee. Through the institutional establishment of tax-based basic income system, we wished that it would not only become the foundation for the pension reform consensus, but also reframe the basis for civic participation in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：197-236資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201706_21(1).000501篇名：A Re-examination of Collusion under Hard and Soft Information並列篇名：組織勾結與資訊性質作者：邱敬淵(Chiou, Jing-Yuan)關鍵字：Career Concerns;Collusion;Hard Information;Soft Information;事業誘因;勾結;硬性資訊;軟性資訊期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：53卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study takes a closer look into the equivalence result of Baliga (1999) namely, that a principal obtains the same optimal collusion-proof payoff for both hard and soft information. In the procurement model of Baliga (1999), we consider the sensitivity of equivalence to monitoring technologies, the agent's type-dependent reservation utility, and the supervisor's career concerns. We also show that career concerns may exacerbate the collusion problem. In response, the principal refrains from fully revealing the supervisor's performance to the future employer, hence generating informational frictions in the labor market.英文摘要：相較於硬性資訊，軟性資訊容許資訊蒐集者更多詮釋、操弄資訊的自由。但Baliga (1999)的分析顯示，當負責蒐集資訊的監督人可能與代理人勾結時，委託人所得到的利潤不因資訊性質為硬性資訊或軟性資訊而改變。本文從數個觀點驗證這個等價結果是否仍然成立，包括引進不同資訊蒐集技術、允許代理人的保留價格隨其私有資訊變異、以及考慮監督人的事業誘因等等。本文同時發現監督人的事業誘因可能加重或減緩組織內的勾結問題。而當事業誘因加深勾結問題時，委託人不會對未來雇主充分揭露監督人的工作表現，使得未來雇主無法雇用最有能力的監督人。亦即，勾結問題可能產生就業市場上的資訊摩擦。起始頁-結束頁：181-223資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系2篇名：風險與不確定性下最適電源配比之研析並列篇名：The Study of Optimal Electricity Portfolio Planning under Risk and Uncertainty作者：王京明(Wang, King-Min);郭婷瑋(Ting-Wei Kuo);蕭子訓(Tzu-Hsun Hsiao);林祐民(Yo-Min Lin)關鍵字：電源配比;資產組合理論;再生能源;平均數－變異數分析;Generation Mix;Portfolio Theory;Renewable Energy;Mean-Variance Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：53卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：能源價格的波動是影響能源安全的關鍵因素之一，臺灣長年能源進口依存度達九成以上，能源安全的脆弱度深受國際能源價格不確定性的影響，使我國在能源投資上面對相當大的風險。本研究採用財務學上之資產組合理論中的平均數－變異數分析方法搭配風險效用理論，探討台灣電力公司其發電最適能源配比組合，並評估在此最適情況下能源配比的預期報酬、風險與溫室氣體排放情況。結果顯示若不考慮再生能源，增加核電的配比可提高發電系統的預期報酬，但隨著核電配比的提高，成本風險也將上升；若考慮加入再生能源時，提高再生能源的使用配比可以在維持既定的發電報酬下降低能源風險，且隨著再生能源發電效率的提高與成本的降低，而提升整體能源配比的發電效益，並可大幅降低溫室氣體排放。本文的貢獻在於對電力最適配比的風險管理與彰顯再生能源的資產組合效益，但所探討分析的能源風險僅代表經濟市場面向的價格波動下能源市場財務風險，與一般傳統所認知的能源安全風險所涉及的多面向多準則分析有所不同，這是本研究的限制。英文摘要：Fossil fuel price volatility is one of the key factors impacting energy security. Taiwan relies upon imported energy for more than 90% of its total energy usage, making it highly vulnerable and deeply influenced by the uncertainty of international fuel markets. Therefore, Taiwan's energy investment decision is confronted with risk from fossil fuel prices. To understand how to set up electricity portfolio planning under risk and uncertainty, this study adopts a Mean-Variance Analysis of portfolio theory and employs the expected utility theorem to explore the optimal electricity portfolio for Taipower Company, the resultant expected return and risk of the generation system, and the condition of CO_2 emissions. The results indicate that, under the case without renewables, using more nuclear energy in the portfolio can increase the expected return, but at a cost of slightly higher risk. In the case with renewables added, the results demonstrate that using more renewable energies has the advantage of hedging against the fuel price risk while maintaining the same expected return level. Therefore, if generation efficiency and cost of renewables can be improved by technological progress, then the return of the electricity portfolio can be increased and CO_2 emissions can be mitigated significantly. Our study contributes to the risk management of electricity portfolio planning and to the advantages of employing renewables in the energy generation mix. However, the risk matter in the study is limited to the fossil fuel price risk in financial markets. This is not total energy risk as related to the conventional concept of energy security, but it should be taken into consideration by a multi-dimensional analysis in a future study.起始頁-結束頁：225-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系3篇名：整合型市場之下的混合雙占－價格與數量競爭並列篇名：Price Competition versus Quantity Competition in a Mixed Duopoly with Integrated Markets作者：林瑞益(Lin, Ruey-Yih);孫嘉宏(Chia-Hung Sun)關鍵字：混合雙占;整合型市場;數量競爭;價格競爭;Mixed Duopoly;Integrated Market;Quantity Competition;Price Competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：53卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文在混合雙占模型下，探討由國內與國外消費者所共同組成之整合型市場中，廠商的內生化競爭策略選擇（數量策略或價格策略）。研究結果發現：(1)當商品具有互補關係，或是商品具有替代關係，且公營廠商的目標函數中對消費者剩餘的權重（國內消費者比例）大於商品的替代程度時，公營廠商與民營廠商的優勢策略，皆為選擇價格策略；(2)當商品具有替代關係，且公營廠商的目標函數中對消費者剩餘的權重（國內消費者比例）小於商品的替代程度時，隨著消費者剩餘的權重愈趨不重要，兩家廠商的策略選擇，陸續從價格策略轉變為數量策略。當消費者剩餘的權重適中時，此模型的均衡結果會出現，一家廠商選擇數量策略，而另一家廠商選擇價格策略的混合數量－價格競爭；當消費者剩餘的權重較低時，公營廠商與民營廠商的優勢策略皆為選擇數量策略。英文摘要：This paper investigates the theory of endogenous choice of the competition strategy in a mixed duopoly model, in which the public and private firms compete in an integrated market with both domestic and foreign consumers. We present the following findings. First, if the goods are complements, or if the goods are substitutes and the weight of consumer surplus (the fraction of domestic consumers) is greater than the degree of product substitutability, then choosing price is the dominant strategy for each firm. Second, if the goods are substitutes and the weight of consumer surplus (the fraction of domestic consumers) is less than the degree of product substitutability, then the optimal choice of the two firms will gradually change from the price strategy to the quantity strategy. In particular, when the weight of consumer surplus is relatively moderate, mixed quantity-price competition arises as an equilibrium outcome. When the weight of consumer surplus is relatively low, both firms choosing quantity is a dominant strategy equilibrium in a mixed duopoly.起始頁-結束頁：261-294資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系4篇名：過度教育與產業生產力－以二欄位製造業為例並列篇名：Overeducation and Industrial Productivity: Evidence from Two-Digit Manufacturing Industries作者：蔡<U+5F63>涓(Tsai, Wehn-Jyuan)關鍵字：過度教育;生產力;動態追蹤資料;Overeducation;Productivity;Dynamic Panel Data期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：53卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文主要使用1998年至2000年與2002年至2005年的「工廠校正暨營運調查」與「人力運用調查」，評估過度教育對產業生產力的淨效果。本文採取動態追蹤資料聯立模型的估計方式，試圖解決因遺漏變數、產業生產力狀態相依的現象，以及產業生產力與人力資本相關變數（包括過度教育年數、職需教育年數與低度教育年數）兩者決定的同時性等來源所造成的內生性的問題。實證結果顯示過度教育對產業生產力的影響主要係展現於200人以上的大型企業，以及年輕的勞動者身上：年輕勞工平均的過度教育年數每增加一年，則大企業的每人營收將因而提升15.72%至31.46%。英文摘要：This paper uses the 1998-2000 and 2002-2005 waves of Factory Adjustment and Operation Surveys and Manpower Utilization Surveys to estimate the net effects of overeducation on industrial productivity. We primarily apply the dynamic system GMM estimator to control for time-invariant unobserved industry characteristics, simultaneity issues and dynamics in the adjustment process of productivity. The findings present an effect of overeducation on productivity in big-scale enterprises and for young workers. The estimates show that an additional year of overeducation among young workers increases sales per worker in big-scale enterprises by 15.72%-31.46%.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系5篇名：Integration, R&D and Economic Growth並列篇名：整合、R&D與經濟成長作者：王葳(Wang, Vey);胡士文(Shih-Wen Hu);賴鐘惠(Chung-Hui Lai)關鍵字：Endogenous Growth;R&D;Vertical Integration;Bargaining;Subsidy;Social Optimum;內生成長;R&D;垂直整合;談判;補貼;社會最適期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：53卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：To explore the performance of R&D along the growth path of an economy, this paper considers a vertically connected imperfectly competitive market structure in the context of an endogenous growth model, where the intermediate goods firms and final goods firms interact with each other and the government implements a subsidy/tax policy. Our findings show that the amount of aggregate profits generated after forward or backward integration is based on the number of intermediate goods firms in relation to the number of final goods firms. In addition, when the firms engage in forward integration, the R&D activities will lead to ambiguous results according to the degree of competition in the final goods markets. If the final goods market is more imperfectly competitive, there will be too little R&D activity at the market equilibrium. Since the market equilibrium economic growth rate is lower than the socially optimal economic growth rate, the government should implement a subsidy policy so as to increase economic growth. On the other hand, if the final goods market is perfectly competitive, then there is too much R&D activity, and the government should implement a tax policy to boost economic growth. Lastly, the government can enforce the optimal subsidy/tax rate to increase the welfare of balanced growth equilibrium to the level of social optimum.英文摘要：本文於R&D內生成長模型內鍵入連續的不完全競爭市場結構，討論中間財廠商與最終財廠商之間的互動，以及政府實施補貼政策或課稅政策對經濟成長的影響。我們發現中間財廠商與最終財廠商向前垂直整合或向後垂直整合的總和利潤大小，決定於中間財與最終財的廠商數目大小。在廠商向前垂直整合的例子中，若最終財市場的競爭程度較低，則市場經濟下產生的R&D較少，以致於存在較低的平衡成長率，因此政府應實行補貼R&D政策以提升經濟成長率；反之，若最終財市場為完全競爭，則R&D生產過多，因此政府應實行課稅政策以讓平衡成長率接近社會最適成長率。在福利水準方面，若政府採行最適補貼（或課稅）政策，將使得競爭均衡的福利水準等於社會最適的福利水準。起始頁-結束頁：51-85資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系6篇名：Common-Pool Resources, Ecotourism and Sustainable Development並列篇名：資源共有、生態旅遊與永續發展作者：黃登興(Huang, Deng-Shing);黃幼宜(Yo-Yi Huang)關鍵字：Ecotourism;Common-Pool Resources;Sustainable Development;Tragedy of Commons;生態旅遊;資源共有;永續發展;共有地的悲劇期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：53卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This paper establishes an ecotourism model to analyze the role of local residents and government in achieving sustainable development. By incorporating into the model the properties of common-pool resources to which the tourism activities are linked, we prove that ecotourism does not guarantee sustainable development for a rural area unless it is accompanied by suitable policies of reducing firm numbers and/or the levying of a tourist tax. More specifically, we find two stable equilibria: one characterized by low or even a zero level of natural resources, and the other has a high level of natural resources. In low equilibrium, the extinction or zero stock of natural resources occurs under open access of zero transport cost and marginal environmental maintenance cost. High equilibrium corresponds to greater social welfare, which can be guaranteed through policies of a tourist tax, license fee, limiting the number of firms, and restrictions on the population of potential tourists. More importantly, we prove that although high equilibrium is better than low equilibrium, it may not be socially optimal. The maximum welfare can only be achieved by a direct tax on tourists and not solely by policies controlling the number of firms.英文摘要：生態旅遊是建築在自然資源上的，但生態自然資源往往有著資源共有的問題。本文旨在建構一個納入資源共有屬性的生態旅遊模型，分析永續發展中在地居民與政府的角色。我們證明發展生態旅遊，未必保證生態園區得以永續發展，除非伴隨適當政策，例如減少生態區經營業者，和/或課徵生態旅遊稅。具體而言，我們證明存在兩個穩定均衡：一是生態資源存量較低或甚至為零的均衡，另一個是高資源存量的均衡。在低存量均衡，當沒有旅運成本的自由進入，以及無任何的環境維護成本下，則生態園區自然資源將會滅絕，出現共有地的悲劇。高資源存量均衡對應更高的社會福利，可以透過相關政策，例如生態旅遊稅、調整經營業者許可費、限制潛在遊客人數、或控制經營業者數量以達成。更重要的是，我們證明雖然高資源存量均衡比低資源存量均衡更好，但可能不是社會最適化的結果。社會福利極大只能透過直接對遊客課生態旅遊稅達成，不能僅僅藉由控制經營業者數量來達成。起始頁-結束頁：87-128資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系7篇名：動態因子波動度模型與股票預期報酬：建基在無跡卡爾曼濾波分析法與自我相關條件異質變異模型並列篇名：Dynamic Factors Volatility and Expected Stock Return Based on the Unscented Kalman Filter Method and GARCH Model作者：王睦舜(Wang, Mu-Shun);林基煌(Chihuang Lin)關鍵字：公司特有風險;樣本外預測;無跡卡爾曼濾波;定價偏誤;動態因子波動度;Idiosyncratic Volatility;Out-of-Sample Predictability;Unscented Kalman Filter;Pricing Bias;Dynamic Factors Volatility期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：53卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文提出一個動態多因子波動度模型並分別測驗此模型在橫斷面上和時間變異上對價格的影響。動態因子的產生係經由無跡卡爾曼濾波法則(unscented Kalman filter)及一般化自我相關條件異質變異模型，進而討論組合波動度與報酬之間的關係。相對於靜態模型，動態因子係以Fama and French (2015)的五因子模型來進行研究，此一特色包括了市場組合、公司規模、價值效果、營運利潤與投資類型所計算出來的預期報酬。我們提供了事後因子與落後事後因子實證研究，發現在橫斷面迴歸上有助於增進解釋力並提高在樣本內與樣本外預測對組合報酬的預測能力。我們的分析指出公司規模與帳面對市值比的分類組合會產生正面且顯著的風險溢酬，但是以市值來預期的動態因子對組合報酬的影響卻是顯著的負面效果。我們也再執行向前一期的樣本外預測並與其他模型進行配對以比較預測的正確性，此比較採用Diebold-Mariano測試的方法。我們發現動態因子對營運利潤溢酬和投資獲利溢酬會產生顯著的正面效果，此結果更加支持Bali and Cakici (2008)的理論可測性。而且我們的實證結果也進行了穩健性測試，相較於其他不同的模型設定和估計結果都要穩妥。英文摘要：This paper proposes a dynamic factors volatility model and examines its cross-sectional and time-varying impacts on assets prices. The dynamic factors were extracted by using both the unscented Kalman filtering method and the GARCH model. We then investigated the relationship between the volatility of the portfolio dynamic factors and the portfolio returns. In contrast to the static model, the dynamic factors incorporate features of Fama and French 5-factor models, which capture the characteristics of market portfolio, size, value effect, operating profitability, and investment patterns in average returns. We provide evidence that the ex post and lagged ex post factors can improve cross-sectional explanatory power and can increase the predictability of portfolio returns both in-sample and out-of-sample. Our analyses demonstrate that the size and book-to-market sorted portfolios earn a significant positive variance risk premium. However, the dynamic factors predicted by market value have significant negative effects on portfolio returns. We also perform the one-prior-period out-of-sample Diebold-Mariano test of forecasting accuracy paired with other models and find that the dynamic factors have significant effects on the risk premia of both operating profitability and investment policies. This finding supports the theoretical prediction of Bali and Cakici (2008). Finally, our evidence is robust to various specifications and estimation results.起始頁-結束頁：129-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系01篇名：MESSAGE FROM THE EDITOR作者：Mei-Ling Chen期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：399-399資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002552篇名：A Study of Interpersonal Conflict Among Operating Room Nurses作者：Tsui-Fen Chang;Chung-Kuang Chen;Ming-Jia Chen關鍵字：operating room;nurses;interpersonal conflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Team collaboration is an important factor that affects the performance of the operating room (OR). Therefore, the ability of OR nurses to adapt to and manage interpersonal conflict incidents properly is very important. Purpose: The aims of this study were to investigate the interpersonal conflict management capabilities of OR nursing staffs and to find the relationships among the demographics of OR nurses and the following: work-related variables, interpersonal conflict management style, and target of interpersonal conflict. Methods: This study investigated 201 OR nurses who had worked for more than 6 months at the target hospitals, which were located in the three counties of Changhua, Yunlin, and Chiayi. The questionnaire that was used to collect data included three components: a demographic and work-related variables survey, interpersonal conflict management factor analysis scale, and interpersonal conflict parties and frequency scale. Data were analyzed using independent t test, analysis of variance, Scheffe's test, and Pearson's correlation coefficient. Results: The main findings were as follows: (a) Integration and arbitration were the major interpersonal conflict management strategies adopted by the participants; (b) medical doctor, OR nurses, and anesthetists were the primary targets of conflict for the participants; (c) the factors of educational background, job position, experience in other departments, seniority, attending courses in conflict management, and level of hospital significantly affected the strategies that participants used to manage interpersonal conflict; and (d) license level, experience in other departments, seniority, and inclination toward serving in the OR were each found to relate significantly to the target of interpersonal conflict and the frequency of interpersonal conflict incidents. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The main implications of this study are as follows: (a) The environment for communication in the OR should be made more friendly to encourage junior OR nurses to adopt constructive interpersonal conflict management strategies; (b) prior experience in other departments should be one of the most important factors of consideration when recruiting new nurses for the OR; and (c) hospitals should provide more interpersonal conflict management training courses to support the capability of OR nursing staffs in terms of adopting cooperativeness strategies and coping effectively with all types of interpersonal conflicts.起始頁-結束頁：400-410資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001873篇名：Nurses' Perceptions of Psychosocial Care and Barriers to Its Provision: A Qualitative Study作者：Cassandra Siyun Chen;Sally Wai-Chi Chan;Moon Fai Chan;Suk Foon Yap;Wenru Wang;Yanika Kowitlawakul關鍵字：acute hospital;barriers;experience;nurses' perception;psychosocial care期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Psychosocial care is the culturally sensitive provision of psychological, social, and spiritual care through therapeutic communication. Current evidence suggests that effective psychosocial care improves patients' health outcomes and quality of life. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore nurses' perceptions and experiences in providing psychosocial care to patients and to identify the related barriers and challenges. Methods: An exploratory qualitative design using semistructured, individual, face-to-face interviews was adopted. A purposive sample of 18 registered nurses was recruited from the geriatric, medical, and surgical wards in an acute general hospital in Singapore. Interviews were audio-recorded, transcribed, and analyzed thematically. Results: Four major themes emerged: patient-centered care, communication, interprofessional care, and barriers to psychosocial care. Nurses perceived that psychosocial care consists of providing holistic care, spiritual care, support to the patient and family members, and showing empathy. Furthermore, psychosocial care is composed of communication between nurses and the patient and family members as well as communication among nurses. In addition, psychosocial care involves collaboration between healthcare professionals as well as multidisciplinary care. Barriers that are perceived by nurses include lack of time, language barriers, being task-oriented, excessive documentation, lack of family involvement, and fear of complaints. Conclusions: This study highlighted the perceptions of nurses regarding psychosocial care and the challenges in providing this care. Future studies are needed to explore ways to overcome these barriers and to enhance nurses' competencies in providing psychosocial care. The findings indicate a need to plan future interventions to provide nurses with both skill development and support to improve their ability to integrate psychosocial care, which will improve patient outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：411-418資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001854篇名：Psychometric Testing of a Religious Belief Scale作者：Yi-Chien Chiang;Hsiang-Chun Lee;Tsung-Lan Chu;Chin-Yen Han;Ya-Chu Hsiao關鍵字：instrument;religion;spirituality期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Nurses account for a significant percentage of staff in the healthcare system. The religious beliefs of nurses may affect their competence to provide spiritual care to patients. No reliable and valid instruments are currently available to measure the religious beliefs of nurses in Taiwan. Purposes: The aims of this study were to develop a religious belief scale (RBS) for Taiwanese nurses and to evaluate the psychometric properties of this scale. Methods: A cross-sectional study design was used, and 24 RBS items were generated from in-depth interviews, a literature review, and expert recommendations. The RBS self-administered questionnaire was provided to 619 clinical nurses, who were recruited from two medical centers and one local hospital in Taiwan during 2011-2012. A calibration sample was used to explore the factor structure, whereas a validation sample was used to validate the factor structure that was constructed by the calibration sample. Known-group validity and criterion-related validity were also assessed. Results: An exploratory factor analysis resulted in an 18-item RBS with four factors, including ”religious effects,” ”divine,” ”religious query,” and ”religious stress.” A confirmatory factor analysis recommended the deletion of one item, resulting in a final RBS of 17 items. The convergent validity and discriminate validity of the RBS were acceptable. The RBS correlated positively with spiritual health and supported concurrent validity. The known-group validity was supported by showing that the mean RBS between nurses with or without religious affiliation was significant. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The 17-item RBS developed in this study is a reliable, valid, and useful scale for measuring the religious beliefs of nurses in Taiwan. This scale may help measure the religious beliefs of nurses and elicit the relationship between these beliefs and spirituality.起始頁-結束頁：419-428資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001975篇名：Effects of an 8-Week Aerobic Dance Program on Health-Related Fitness in Patients With Schizophrenia作者：Shu-Li Cheng;Huey-Fang Sun;Mei-Ling Yeh關鍵字：aerobic dance;schizophrenia;muscular endurance;flexibility;cardiorespiratory endurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Both psychiatric symptoms and the side effects of medication significantly affect patients with schizophrenia. These effects frequently result in a sedentary lifestyle and weight gain, which increase the risk of cardiovascular disease and premature death. Purpose: This study developed an aerobic dance program for patients with schizophrenia and then evaluated the effect of this program on health-related fitness outcomes. Methods: An experimental research design was used. Sixty patients with schizophrenia were recruited from a daycare ward and rehabilitation center at a psychiatric hospital in Taiwan. Paticipants were assigned randomly into an experimental group, which received the 8-week aerobic dance program intervention, and a control group, which received no intervention. All of the participants were assessed in terms of the outcome variables, which included bodyweight, body mass index, muscular endurance, flexibility, and cardiorespiratory endurance. These variables were measured before the intervention (pretest) as well as at 8 weeks (posttest) and 12 weeks (follow-up) after the intervention. This study used a generalized linear model with a generalized estimating equation method to account for the dependence of repeated measurements and to explore the effects of the intervention on health-related fitness outcomes. Results: Twenty-six participants were in the experimental group, and 28 were in the control group. Significant between-group differences were observed at posttest and in the follow-up for all of the health-related fitness outcomes with the exception of muscular endurance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study suggests that an 8-week aerobic dance program may be an effective intervention in patients with schizophrenia in terms of improving bodyweight, body mass index, flexibility, and cardiorespiratory endurance for a period of at least 4 months. Furthermore, although muscular endurance was postively affected during the short-term period, the benefits did not extend into the follow-up examination. On the basis of these findings, aerobic dance is recommended as a nonpharmacological intervention for patients with schizophrenia who are in daycare or rehabilitation settings.起始頁-結束頁：429-435資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002006篇名：Assessment of a Health Promotion Model on Obese Turkish Children作者：Berna Eren Fidanc<U+0131>;Nalan Akbayrak;Filiz Arslan關鍵字：obesity;health promotion;Nola J. Pender;pediatric nurse;self-confidence期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Studies of childhood obesity have shown that fostering healthy life behaviors is more important than losing weight. However, studies reporting this result did not use a theoretical nursing model, which offers a systematic approach and scientific basis for studying the concepts and principles of nursing practice. Purpose: The aim of this study was to determine the effects of an intervention that is based on Nola J. Pender's Health Promotion Model (HPM) on the healthy life behaviors and self-confidence of obese children. Methods: This quasi-experimental study enrolled 86 obese children and their parents (48 in the experimental group and 38 in the control group) as participants. The data collection tool was composed of an adaptation of a Pender's model-based evaluation form and the ”Piers-Harris Self Confidence Scale.” The experimental group received HPM-based individual and group education, whereas the control group received routine follow-up only. Whereas qualitative data were analyzed using content analysis, quantitative data were analyzed using a paired t test and Mann-Whitney U or Wilcoxon test. Results: At the end of the education and follow-up program, experimental group participants showed a significant increase in healthy eating habits such as noting food portions (Z = 5.231, p ＜ .001) and choosing water instead of sugary drinks (Z = 4.130, p ＜ .001) and spent significantly less time per day in front of a television or computer (Z = 5.085, p ＜ .001). Furthermore, after the intervention, experimental group participants had reduced their total body mass index standard deviation score (Z = 6.031, p ＜ .001) and had an average self-confidence score that differed significantly from the control group (Z = 3.796, p ＜ .001) and that was significantly higher than the average preintervention score (Z = 5.971, p ＜ .01). Conclusions: Health professionals must recognize the physical, psychological, and social risks of obesity in children and focus on these problems to identify appropriate solutions. It is recommended that education and nursing follow-up programs be developed based on nursing models. This study found that patient education based on Pender's HPM increased healthy life behaviors (e.g., healthy nutrition and increased exercise time) and decreased sedentary activity substantially in the experimental group. This study further suggests that, although Pender's HPM has not been tested on obese children, this model offers effective guidelines for nursing activities that are targeted on developing healthy life behaviors in children.起始頁-結束頁：436-446資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002387篇名：The Lived Experience of Gynecologic Cancer Survivors in Taiwan作者：Li-Yun Tsai;Kung-Liahng Wang;Shu-Yuan Liang;Jung-Mei Tsai;Shiow-Luan Tsay關鍵字：gynecologic cancer survivors;lived experience;qualitative method;phenomenology期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Although it is now possible to achieve permanent remission in a large percentage of gynecologic cancer (GC) cases, many GC patients in remission experience side effects or complications that influence their physical function and family relationships. Compared with other types of cancer patients, survivors of GC face greater challenges in terms of physical and psychological adaptations, and many of these do not receive sufficient assistance. An in-depth understanding of the lived experiences and demands of GC survivors is key to constructing comprehensive related healthcare services. Purpose: The aim of this study was to understand the lived experience of GC survivors in Taiwan to help their return to a healthy life. Methods: This was a phenomenological study. Twenty-three survivors of GC participated in semistructured interviews that were held in a private environment. The transcripts were based on synchronous recordings from the interviews. Giorgi's phenomenology analysis was adopted for data analysis. Results: Three themes with six subthemes were extracted from the data, including (a) the inner struggle of living with cancer and recurrence: repeatedly exploring the causes of cancer and treatment and facing a fear of cancer recurrence, (b) the interpretation and adjustment to cancer treatment: filled with fluctuating physical and mental distress and working to adopt a different perspective, and (c) the long passage of finding a desirable lifestyle: adjusting to long-term coexistence with side effects and realizing the strength of society, body, and mind. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The journey of rehabilitation for GC survivors is very long. The participants in this study faced different respective challenges during the diagnosis, treatment, and adjustment phases. Conventional disease-oriented medical care cannot satisfy the requirements of cancer patients because of patient-decentralized services. Our results indicate that GC survivors face diverse problems, both physically and mentally. Healthcare professionals should work to facilitate the psychological adjustment of cancer survivors and provide timely professional advice in combination with social resources. These results may serve as a reference for cancer care professionals who are navigating healthcare services.起始頁-結束頁：447-454資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002298篇名：Parents' Reactions to the Diagnosis of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy: Associations Between Resolution, Family Functioning, and Child Behavior Problems作者：Roberto Baiocco;Paola Castelli Gattinara;Giorgia Cioccetti;Salvatore Ioverno關鍵字：Duchenne muscular dystrophy;diagnosis resolution;reaction to diagnosis interview;family functioning;children's adjustment process期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is the most frequent inherited form of muscular dystrophy during childhood. DMD is a severe and progressive disease. Children initially have no symptoms, but the diagnosis is often delayed until the child is about 5 years old. Purpose: Although few studies have addressed parent reactions to DMD, parental reactions to other serious childhood conditions have been documented. This study aims to understand the resolution styles that parents use in the context of their children with DMD. Methods: Data were collected on 39 parents residing in central Italy, comprising 23 mothers and 16 fathers of children with DMD of a mean age of 12 years. The participants attended a single assessment session lasting 60-80 minutes in which they were interviewed and completed the questionnaire. The participants completed the Reaction to Diagnosis Interview, which is composed of five open-ended questions about parents' memories, thoughts, and feelings about their child's diagnosis. The interviews were videotaped, transcribed, and coded. The Reaction to Diagnosis Interview classifies parents into two main classifications: ”resolved” and ”unresolved.” In addition, the participants responded to questions about their perceptions of family functioning and about the behavioral problems of their children. A hierarchical multiple regression analysis was used to examine the role of child characteristics, disease severity, resolution classification (yes/no), and family variables as predictors of child behavior problems. Results: The proportion of the resolved cases found in this study (41%) was lower than the mean proportion of resolved cases (60%) found in previous studies. Within the resolved category, ”thinking oriented” was the most prevalent subcategory. Resolved participants reported significantly higher scores for family functioning and family satisfaction than unresolved participants. No differences were found between the groups in terms of perceptions of family communication. The hierarchical multiple regression analysis showed that a lower level of family functioning was the strongest predictor of child behavior problems. Having a higher level of disease severity and being unresolved were also identified as predictors of child behavior problems. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Results highlight the relevance of parent resolution in the adjustment process of children. The findings of this study may assist professionals in the medical field to focus on family variables and the parent process of diagnosis resolution as the primary goals in the prevention of child behavior problems.起始頁-結束頁：455-463資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001869篇名：Difficulties in Surgical Decision Making and Associated Factors Among Elective Surgical Patients in Taiwan作者：Mei-Ling Lin;Ching-Huey Chen關鍵字：difficulties in decision making;elective surgery;patient participation;medical decisions期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Respect for the autonomy of patients is essential in life-threatening medical decisions such as surgery. Even if a patient has the competency to make decisions, many obstacles exist that may influence his or her willingness to participate in the surgical decision-making process. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the perceived difficulties in surgical decision making and related factors among elective surgical patients. Methods: This was a cross-sectional correlational study. A convenience sampling method was used to recruit patients from a medical center in southern Taiwan. Patients who had received elective surgery, were older than 20 years old, and were competent to make medical decisions were invited to participate. A structured questionnaire was developed by the researchers to collect demographic data, decision patterns, and perceived difficulties in surgical decision making. Acceptable validity and reliability of the questionnaire were confirmed before data collection. Results: Over 80% of the participants made the surgical decision by themselves or in collaboration with their family or physician. Less than 15% expected to make the surgical decision by themselves. Illness-related suffering was the greatest difficulty that participants faced. The patients who tended toward passive decision making faced greater difficulties in the dimensions of ”do not understand information,” ”physician's lack of concern,” and ”difficulty in freely communicating with the physician” than their active decision-making peers. Male participants reported having more difficulty in communicating with their physician than their female peers. Age, education, and marital status were not significantly associated with perceived difficulties in surgical decision making. Conclusions: Family participation in the medical decision-making process is expected by most patients. Although less than 20% of the participants in this study were categorized as passive decision makers, this group reported more difficulties than the active decision-making group. Healthcare professionals should be more active in communicating with patients who are largely silent during the decision-making process to elicit their preferences and needs with regard to surgical decisions.起始頁-結束頁：464-470資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000018810篇名：Psychometric Evaluation of the Adolescent Health Promotion Scale in Chile: Differences by Socioeconomic Status and Gender作者：Cristian A. Rojas-Barahona;Jorge Gaete;Esterbina Olivares;Carla E. Forster;Eugenio Chandia;Mei-Yen Chen關鍵字：healthy behaviors;adolescents;Adolescent Health Promotion Scale;psychometric properties期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: The promotion of healthy behaviors is a relevant issue worldwide, especially among adolescent populations, as this is the developmental stage where most unhealthy behaviors become ingrained. Purpose: The aim of this study was to analyze the psychometric properties of the Spanish version of the Adolescent Health Promotion Scale (AHPS) in a Chilean sample of early adolescents. Methods: The sample was composed of 1,156 adolescents aged 10-14 years from schools in San Felipe, Chile. Item structure was assessed using exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses; reliability was measured using Cronbach's alpha; and differences in terms of gender, age, and socioeconomic status (SES) were established using analysis of variance. Results: The analyses of item structure identified all of the six original factors (nutrition behaviors, health responsibility, social support, life appreciation, stress management and exercise behavior) as significant. However, eight items did not fit the Chilean population well. Therefore, the AHPS in Chile has been reduced to 32 items. The Cronbach's alpha of the 32-item Chilean AHPS was .95, with the subscale coefficients ranging from .76 to .94. In addition, female subjects performed better than male subjects, and individuals of higher SES scored higher than the middle and lower socioeconomic groups. No differences on AHPS scores were found in different age groups. Conclusions: The AHPS appears to have good psychometric properties in terms of item structure and reliability. Consistent with studies carried out in other countries, health promotion behavioral differences were observed in association with gender and SES. The results support the Chilean version of the AHPS as an appropriate instrument for measuring the health promotion behaviors of early adolescents in Chile and for comparing results with those from other countries.起始頁-結束頁：471-480資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000019611篇名：Message from the Editor作者：Chung-Hey Chen期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：327-327資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000023712篇名：The Lifestyle Change Experiences of Cancer Survivors作者：Shiow-Luan Tsay;Wang-Sheng Ko;Kuan-Pin Lin關鍵字：lifestyle;cancer survivors;qualitative study期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Leading a healthy lifestyle not only alleviates the physical problems but also improves the quality of life of cancer survivors. Healthcare professionals should understand the benefits of altering lifestyle behaviors to provide effective intervention programs to assist cancer survivors to improve their health. Purpose: The aim of this study was to understand the experiences of cancer survivors in changing their lifestyle after a cancer diagnosis. Methods: A qualitative descriptive study was conducted on 13 cancer survivors who were sampled purposively from a regional teaching hospital in central Taiwan. Data were collected using in-depth interviews that were guided by semistructured, open-ended questions and analyzed using content analysis. Results: The analysis of interview data revealed four main themes: motivation of lifestyle change, exploring ways toward a healthy lifestyle, making adjustments in lifestyle, and feeling the benefits of lifestyle changes. In striving for survival, an unwillingness to bear the suffering from treatment and their acceptance of responsibility and gratitude to family members prompted most of the participants to change their lifestyle proactively. They had received inadequate lifestyle guidance and sought health lifestyle information on their own. After a period of research and self-contemplation, most of the participants adopted a consistently healthy lifestyle, changed their dietary consumption habits, abstained from tobacco and alcohol, and managed emotional problems that were caused by the disease. Participants who changed to a healthy lifestyle realized benefits in the physical, emotional, and life domains. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: It is hoped that these findings help healthcare professionals to better appreciate that a cancer diagnosis is a critical opportunity to link the disease to lifestyle choices in the minds of cancer survivors. Healthcare professionals should ask cancer survivors about their lifestyle and then provide appropriate advice and education on healthy lifestyles and related benefits.起始頁-結束頁：328-335資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000017813篇名：Life Experiences of Patients With Glaucoma: A Phenomenological Study作者：Emine Iyigun;Sevinc Tastan;Hatice Ayhan;Halise Coskun;Gulsah Kose;Tarkan Mumcuoglu關鍵字：patients with glaucoma;life experiences;phenomenological study;nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Studies that describe the experiences of patients with glaucoma from different cultures may help health professionals gain a broader perspective on this issue. Currently, few qualitative studies describe how patients with glaucoma in Turkey cope with daily life. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the experiences of patients with glaucoma. Method: This descriptive phenomenological study used purposive sampling to enroll 20 patients with glaucoma. A qualitative, in-depth, face-to-face interview technique was used to collect data during January and February 2014. The data were analyzed using to the Van Kaam method. Results: Seven themes were identified, including confirming the diagnosis by acute symptoms or unrelated symptoms, grateful to God for having a non-life-threatening disease, feeling happy after receiving more accurate information, coping with the disease by using eye drops and attending follow-up examinations regularly, managing daily life to avoid further damage to eyesight, emotional reactions related to going blind, and urging family members or friends to attend regular glaucoma checkups. Conclusions: Patients with glaucoma experience physiological and psychological problems throughout the course of their disease. Being informed and cultural practices such as ”praising God” and ”resignation” helped patients cope with the disease. Furthermore, because of the cultural characteristic of social collectivism, participants acted to protect the health of others by informing them about glaucoma. Implications for Practice: Understanding the experiences of patients with glaucoma is important for nursing practice. Nurses should be encouraged to take a greater role in the care of patients with glaucoma by becoming the primary source of glaucoma disease, treatment, and care-related information.起始頁-結束頁：336-343資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000017214篇名：Begin Again and Continue With Life: A Qualitative Study on the Experiences of Cardiac Rehabilitation Patients作者：Fariba Jokar;Hojatllah Yousefi;Alireza Yousefy;Masoumeh Sadeghi關鍵字：cardiac rehabilitation;behavioral change;thematic analysis;self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Cardiovascular diseases are a main cause of mortality worldwide. However, new diagnostic techniques and treatments have increased the rate of survival for patients with cardiovascular disease. Cardiac rehabilitation programs aim to maintain and enhance the quality of life of patients and improve the secondary prevention of coronary artery disease. Suboptimal participation in rehabilitation programs, early exit from these programs, and not achieving lasting changes are cardiac rehabilitation challenges that are associated with health issues, including the increased need for medication, repeated hospitalization, failure in the secondary prevention programs, and long waiting lists. Exploring the meaning of behavioral changes in the context of cardiac rehabilitation may facilitate the design of effective interventions that are critical to achieving the goals of cardiac rehabilitation programs. Purpose: This study explored the mechanisms that underlie behavioral changes within cardiac rehabilitation centers. Methods: We used a descriptive qualitative approach, which is widely acknowledged as the best approach for eliciting in-depth descriptions of behavioral changes in the context of cardiac rehabilitation centers. Using purposive sampling, 15 men and 8 women with coronary heart disease were referred to the two cardiac rehabilitation centers participating in this study. The inclusion criteria were participation in four cardiac rehabilitation sessions and ability and willingness to participate. The data were collected using semistructured in-depth interviews, and the inductive thematic analysis method was used for analysis. Results: ”Trying to stay alive” and ”begin again” arose as the two main themes related to behavioral change. These themes include the changes in cognition and values that lead to improvements in the process of behavioral change as a major outcome of cardiac rehabilitation. Conclusions: Using psychosocial interventions such as creating and strengthening hope and meaningful intrinsic motivation in the context of rehabilitation centers often helps deal with these challenges. ”Trying to stay alive” may take place before referral to a cardiac rehabilitation center. Therefore, psychosocial nursing interventions such as motivational interviewing are designed to improve a process that may be already underway. Thus, stress and anxiety may be treated based on beliefs and emotions. The primary emphasis in cardiac rehabilitation should include changing the beliefs of the patient and motivating her or him to achieve sustainable behavioral change.起始頁-結束頁：344-352資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000022015篇名：Career Obstacles Faced by Female Nurse Academicians in Turkey作者：Burcu Alacam;Serap Altunta<U+015F>關鍵字：female nurse academicians;nursing;career obstacles;female期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Most academicians in the nursing field are women, and they face many difficulties throughout the course of their careers for various reasons. Purpose: This study aims to determine the career difficulties faced by female academicians in the nursing field. Methods: This study is descriptive, sectional, and comparative. The study was conducted in cooperation with female academicians in the nursing field (n = 132) from 11 different nursing schools in Turkey's Eastern Anatolia Region providing undergraduate education in nursing. Data were collected using the Female Academicians' Career Obstacles Scale. Ethics committee and required official permissions were obtained from the relevant institutions. Data analysis was conducted in an electronic environment using SPSS for Windows 22.0 package software for statistics. Results: In terms of research outcomes, it was determined that the most significant obstacles reported by female academicians were ”organizational culture and politics” (M = 43.92 ± 12.64) and ”playing multiple roles[ (M = 31.35 ± 10.15); the most insignificant obstacles were reported to be ”organizational conditions” (M = 21.43 ± 7.06) and ”stereotypical prejudices” (M = 20.44 ± 6.31). Other obstacles mentioned by the academicians were working as a research assistant with a bachelor's degree, being married with children, studying with young and inexperienced academicians, and serving as department head. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Organizational culture and politics in particular should be reviewed at educational institutions from the perspective of career obstacles, and these principles should be rearranged so that they constitute a supportive work environment.起始頁-結束頁：353-360資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000017616篇名：Care, Autonomy, and Gender in Nursing Practice: A Historical Study of Nurses' Experiences作者：Paola Galbany-Estragues;Dolors Comas-d'Argemir關鍵字：professional autonomy;nursing care;nursing practice;gender;Spain期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017英文摘要：Background: Care is the essence of the nursing role and is closely related to the concept of professional autonomy. Autonomy is implicated in power relations between doctors and nurses and between men and women. These relationships are closely linked to care practices and the inequality of nursing and medicine. Purpose: The aim of this study was to analyze nursing discourse regarding the concept of care and its relationship to the concept of autonomy and gender. Methods: This is a historical study based on oral interviews that took place between November 2008 and February 2011. We interviewed 19 nursing professionals who currently worked at the Hospital of the Holy Spirit (near Barcelona) or had worked there between 1961 and 2010. Semistructured interviews were recorded, transcribed, and analyzed. Results: We highlight four main themes: ”a real nurse'; ”more technology, less care”; ”the fragility of autonomy”; and ”the invisibility of nursing work.” These themes show the contradictions in the nursing profession that are based on the concept of care. However, in daily practice, the concept of care varies. Time pressure distances the nursing practice from its theoretical context. Changes in the concept of care are related to transformations in the health system and nursing work. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Changes related to the autonomy of nursing are related to changes in the concept of care. In practice, care has a biomedical orientation. Care has become technologized and bureaucratized, which reduces the time that is spent with the patient. In a context in which medical authority predominates, nursing's struggle for autonomy is based on the recognition of the value of care. When care becomes invisible, the autonomy of nursing as a profession is threatened. This conclusion allows reflections about shifts in the concept of care and how they affect clinical practice and the autonomy of the nursing profession.起始頁-結束頁：361-367資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000018417篇名：Health Sector Reform, Emotional Exhaustion, and Nursing Burnout: A Retrospective Panel Study in Iran作者：Ahmad Kalateh Sadati;Farnaz Rahnavard;Seyed Taghi Heydari;Soroor Hemmati;Najmeh Ebrahimzadeh;Kamran Bagheri Lankarani關鍵字：nursing burnout;emotional exhaustion;health sector evolution plan;Iran期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Nursing burnout is affected by various factors, including work overload. Since the inauguration of the Health Sector Evolution Plan (HSEP) in Iran in 2014, government hospitals have been required to provide health services to the public at all levels. This decision, however, has increased the volume of patients admitted to government hospitals. Because nurses are on the front line of health services, they are faced with a greater load of care provision. Purpose: This study aimed to evaluate nursing burnout before and after HSEP in Iran, with an emphasis on the differences between government and private hospitals. Method: This retrospective panel study used Maslach's burnout inventory to evaluate nursing burnout in 371 nurses working in government and private hospitals in Shiraz, Iran, before and 7 months after the health sector reform. Chi-square test and paired t test were used to compare burnout scores. Results: The results showed that nursing burnout had changed significantly after HSEP was launched (p = .030). A more detailed assessment found that burnout and emotional exhaustion had both increased significantly in the government-hospital group (ps = .014 and .001, respectively). However, no significant change in burnout was found in the private-hospital group over the same period. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings of this study indicate an increase in nursing burnout in government hospitals. An important issue in every health sector reform is nursing resource management, with a focus on burnout. Accordingly, policymakers should consider the work overload situation of nurses and work to prevent increased burnout, especially emotional exhaustion.起始頁-結束頁：368-374資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000018318篇名：Comparison of the Quality of Informal Care of Community-Dwelling Taiwanese Older People作者：Chia-Yi Chiao;Yen-Ju Lin;Chiu-Yueh Hsiao關鍵字：community-dwelling;foreign caregiver;quality of care;older people期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: With social structures changing and the average life-span of individuals increasing, Taiwan is experiencing a steady rise in its elderly population. Thus, caring for older parents is an urgent problem. Many foreign caregivers have been hired to care for older parents. However, measuring the quality of informal care has not yet been fully explored in Taiwan, particularly among older people who are cared for by foreign caregivers in home settings. Purpose: The purposes of this study were to understand the differences in quality of care for older Taiwanese and to explore the predictors of quality of care in two types of caregiving. Methods: A comparative descriptive study design was conducted. The study was held in several community healthcare centers in the middle and southern regions of Taiwan. Study data were collected over an 18-month period between 2012 and 2014. t Tests were used to compare continuous variables according to the types of caregiving. Multiple linear regressions with group analyses were performed to evaluate the underlying statistical assumptions. Results: One hundred fifty-nine participants were included. The study results showed that age, activities of daily living level, and quality of care were significantly different between the two types of caregiving. Relationships with caregivers, social support, and depressive symptoms contributed to the quality of care in family caregiving, explaining 50.2% of the variance. Social support and depressive symptoms contributed to the quality of care in foreign caregiving, explaining 36.6% of the variance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The study results support that the types of primary caregiving affect the quality of care that is received by elderly Taiwanese. This study may be used as a reference for families whose family members need long-term care when considering hiring foreign caregivers as an alternative option to Taiwanese caregivers.起始頁-結束頁：375-382資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000018019篇名：Correlates of Perceived Social Support in Chinese Adult Child Caregivers of Parent Stroke Survivors作者：Yuqin Pan;Patricia S. Jones關鍵字：parent stroke survivors;adult child caregivers;perceived social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Prevalence of stroke and traditional filial responsibility involve adult children in caregiving to their parent stroke survivors in China. Support resources are insufficient because of the shrinking size of family and the underdeveloped support system. Purpose: The aim of this study was to identify the correlates of perceived social support among adult child caregivers of parent stroke survivors in China. Methods: A cross-sectional correlational design was used in this study. A nonproportional quota sample of 126 adult child caregivers was recruited from Zhejiang Province, China. Data were collected at either the hospital stroke units or the respondents' homes using structured questionnaires of care-giving dyadic demographics and care-giving characteristics, 14-item Activities of Daily Living, 15-item Mutuality Scale, and 12-item Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support. SPSS 17.0 was used for analysis. Results: Caregivers' mutuality, education, full employment or being retired, monthly income, having a co-carer, and having a father as the care receiver were significantly positively associated with caregivers' perceived social support. However, mutuality was not significantly associated with caregivers' perceived social support after the other factors were adjusted. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Adult child caregivers with higher levels of mutuality, education, or monthly income; who are fully employed or are retired; who have a co-carer; or who are caring for a father perceived more social support. Nursing strategies and social policies need to be directed to enhance caregiver mutuality and support caregiving efforts.起始頁-結束頁：383-391資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000017320篇名：Renal Transplant Recipients: The Factors Related to Immunosuppressive Medication Adherence Based on the Health Belief Model作者：Pen-Chen Kung;Mei Chang Yeh;Ming-Kuen Lai;Hsueh-Erh Liu關鍵字：kidney transplant;immunosuppressive medication adherence;health beliefs期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Kidney transplant failures are caused primarily by lack of adherence to immunosuppressive medication regimens by patients after transplantation. A number of studies have indicated that health-related beliefs are an effective predictor of health-related behavior. Purpose: The aim of this study is to understand the influence of the personal characteristics and health-related beliefs of patients on adherence to treatment with immunosuppressive medication based on the Health Belief Model. Methods: This cross-sectional study distributed questionnaires to patients who had been recruited via purposive sampling at one medical center in Taipei. All of the potential participants had undergone kidney transplantation at least 6 months previously. The self-developed questionnaire collected data in three areas: personal characteristics, health-related beliefs regarding transplant rejection, and adherence to the immunosuppressive medication regimen. One hundred twenty-two valid questionnaires were received. The collected data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, independent t test, one-way analysis of variance, Pearson's correlation, and multiple regression. Results: Participants who had received dialysis treatment or had experienced rejection perceived susceptibility to rejection more strongly than those who had not. Participants who had undergone transplantation in Taiwan, had experienced more drug-related symptoms, or had contracted severe to extremely severe infections in the past showed lower rates of adherence to treatment with immunosuppressive medication. Adherence to medication regimens correlated negatively with length of time since transplantation. Length of time since transplantation, drug-related symptoms, perceived susceptibility to rejection, and perceived benefits of treatment were identified as major predictors of adherence to immunosuppressive medication regimens. Conclusions: The results partially conformed to the concepts of the Health Belief Model. Perceived susceptibility to rejection and perceived benefits of adherence to treatment were found to predict adherence rates. Patient education should be enhanced to reduce the risks of rejection and increase adherence rates to improve outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：392-397資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000018101篇名：MESSAGE FROM THE EDITOR - SHINING A LIGHT ON NURSING EXCELLENCE作者：Cheryl Chia-Hui Chen期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：261-261資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002192篇名：The Lived Experience of Midlife Women With Major Depression作者：Ching-Chu Li;Bih-Ching Shu;Yu-Ming Wang;Shih-Ming Li關鍵字：depression;women;lived experience;midlife期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Midlife, a significant developmental phase for women, is a period of biological, psychological, and social role changes. However, not all women transition smoothly into middle age, with those who experience depression typically bearing significantly greater physical and psychological discomforts in midlife. Despite the expanding body of research on women and depression, little is understood about how depressed women handle the midlife transition. Purpose: The aim of this study was to gain a deeper understanding about the lived experience of middle-aged women with major depression. Methods: This study used a phenomenological design. Four women between 43 and 55 years old with a diagnosis of major depression were interviewed. There were seven transcripts in total. A 62-year-old depressed woman was also interviewed to verify the results. Results: After data analysis, ”a harder life” emerged as the core of these women’s experiences. Two themes with two respective subthemes were identified. The theme ”struggling to redefine the self” was associated with the subthemes ”taking pills in the dump” and ”the inane life.” The theme ”swinging to develop new social interactions” was associated with the subthemes ”being alienated from former social contacts” and ”starting new social interactions.” Results indicate that the participants encountered greater challenges in adapting to middle age than their nondepressed peers. Conclusions: Much adaptation and help are needed for depressed women to experience a smooth transition into midlife. In caring for these women, their interpersonal relationships with others should be themain target. Meanwhile, nurses must understand what challenges depressed women typically encounter in midlife based on the developmental perspective and then assess how pharmaceutical treatments impact the view of self of women.起始頁-結束頁：262-267資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001593篇名：The ”Everything About the Existence” Experiences of Turkish Women With Infertility: Solicited Diaries in Qualitative Research作者：<U+0130>lkay Boz;Hulya Okumu<U+015F>關鍵字：infertility;solicited diaries;qualitative research;women's experiences期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Infertility as a gynecological illness causes many psychological problems. In Turkey, only a limited number of studies have used qualitative methods to explore the experiences of infertile women. Purpose: The aims of this study are to investigate the infertility experiences of women using Watson's Theory of Human Caring as a guide and to sensitize healthcare professionals to the importance of the personal stories of these women. Methods: A phenomenological approach was used to guide our exploration of the stories of infertile women during their treatment for infertility. This study involved 18 infertile women in Turkey. Data were collected using solicited diaries and were evaluated using thematic analysis. Results: The findings identified the following themes: (a) losing control of everything, (b) facing up to the angst, (c) living with the unknown, (d) alienation from the fertile world, (e) existential faith and hope, and (f) nonhealing environment. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study identified ”existentialist philosophy” as the most important aspect of the infertility experience. Participant experiences highlighted that they lived with a despair that was brought about by losses resulting from the infertility diagnosis and its treatment. Nurses should help infertile women reorganize the meaning of infertility to reach a healthy interpretation of infertility.起始頁-結束頁：268-275資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001664篇名：Rebuilding Life: Investigating the Long-Term Homecare Needs of Clients With Spinal Cord Injuries作者：Mei-Ying Chang;Hsiao-Yu Chen;Mei-Li Cheng;Hsin-Yin Liu關鍵字：spinal cord injury;long-term care;care needs;focus group;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Clients with a spinal cord injury (SCI) must learn to manage their disabilities and may never be able to resume their previous lifestyle. Therefore, receiving relevant information and support from care practitioners and institutions is essential for clients with long-term SCI. Purpose: This study investigated the long-term homecare needs of clients with SCIs. Methods: A qualitative approach was used in this study. Data were collected from March to May 2013. Four SCI associations were selected using purposive sampling, and four focus group interviews were conducted in Northern, Central, Southern, and Eastern Taiwan. Each focus group was composed of 7-12 participants. In-depth interviews (1.5-2.5 hours) were conducted. A content analysis method was adopted for data analysis. Results: Thirty-eight participants took part in the study. The long-term care needs of clients with SCI require the following dynamic processes for rebuilding their lives: physical care and complication prevention, life planning, social support, discovery of the value of existence, and sexual satisfaction. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results reveal the long-term care needs of clients with SCI. Nurses are expected to provide client-centered care, emphasize prevention rather than treatment of complications, initiate life planning at the early stages of a client's rehabilitation, enhance a client's social support, encourage a client's search for companionship and search for the value of existence and a life purpose, and be attentive to the sexual concerns of people with physical disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：276-282資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001715篇名：Evaluating the Effectiveness of Using a Progressive Muscle Relaxation Technique on the Self-Efficacy of Breastfeeding in Mothers With Preterm Infants作者：Soheila Karbandi;Seyedeh Maryam Hosseini;Seyedeh Asieh Hosseini;Farshad Sadeghi;Maryam Hesari;Reza Masoudi關鍵字：breastfeeding self-efficacy;relaxation;postpartum period;preterm infant期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Breast milk is a God-given gift that conveys a mother’s love and compassion and that is made according to the needs and age of the child. Mothers who are interested in the welfare of their newborns tend to breastfeed their children. Training programs have been shown to improve breastfeeding self-efficacy in terms of both duration and amount. Purpose: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of using the progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) technique on the self-efficacy of breastfeeding in mothers with preterm infants. Methods: A clinical trial approach was used. Sixty mothers with preterm infants were randomly assigned to either the intervention or control group. The clinical trial ran for a period of 2 months for both groups. At 24-72 hours postpartum, the researcher used the Jacobson method to provide 30-45 minutes of individual training to the intervention group participants on PMR. Under the Jacobson method, mothers contract the 16 groups of muscles until they experience the feeling of pressure and then relax these muscles. The tools used in this study were the standard questionnaire of Dennis breastfeeding self-efficacy, which was completed by the participants at baseline, at the end of the fourth week, and during the eighth week. Data were analyzed using SPSS software. Results: No significant difference was observed between the intervention and control groups in terms of demographic variables (p ＞ .05). Independent t tests found no significant difference between the two groups (p = .45) in terms of mean score of maternal breastfeeding self-efficacy at pretest and significantly higher scores for the intervention group than the control group at both 4 (p = .001) and 8 (p ＜ .001) weeks posttest. Furthermore, the analysis of variance test showed significant differences in the mean score of breastfeeding self-efficacy for the intervention group between pretest and the first posttest and between the first posttest and the second posttest, respectively (p ＜ .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Considering the effect of relaxation training on the breastfeeding self-efficacy of mothers with preterm infants, training and performing these exercises as an effective and low-cost method to improve the health of mothers, particularly mothers of preterm infants, are recommended. The PMR technique facilitates the self-efficacy of breastfeeding in mothers with preterm infants and should be considered as an effective strategy to improve nursing care and the provision of better support services for mothers who breastfeed their infants.起始頁-結束頁：283-288資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002176篇名：Effect of Simulation on the Confidence of University Nursing Students in Applying Cardiopulmonary Assessment Skills: A Randomized Controlled Trial作者：Loai I. Tawalbeh關鍵字：simulation;cardiopulmonary assessment;confidence;nursing students;Jordan期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Simulation is an effective teaching strategy. However, no study in Jordan has examined the effect of simulation on the confidence of university nursing students in applying heart and lung physical examination skills. Purpose: The current study aimed to test the effect of simulation on the confidence of university nursing students in applying heart and lung physical examination skills. Method: A randomized controlled trial design was applied. The researcher introduced the simulation scenario regarding cardiopulmonary examination skills. This scenario included a 1-hour PowerPoint presentation and video for the experimental group (n= 35) and a PowerPoint presentation and a video showing a traditional demonstration in the laboratory for the control group (n = 34). Confidence in applying cardiopulmonary physical examination skills was measured for both groups at baseline and at 1 day and 3 months posttest. Results: A paired t test showed that confidence was significantly higher in the posttest than in the pretest for both groups. An independent t test showed a statistically significant difference (t(67) = -42.95, p ＜ .001) between the two groups in terms of the difference between the first posttest and second posttest scores (t(67) = -43.36, p ＜ .001) for confidence in applying physical examination skills. Conclusions: Both simulation and traditional training in the laboratory significantly improved the confidence of participants in applying cardiopulmonary assessment skills. However, the simulation training had a more significant effect than usual training in enhancing the confidence of nursing students in applying physical examination skills.起始頁-結束頁：289-295資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001707篇名：The Effectiveness of Health Education on Maternal Anxiety, Circumcision Knowledge, and Nursing Hours: A Quasi-Experimental Study作者：Shu-Fang Chang;Chich-Hsiu Hung;Yu-Yun Hsu;Yi Liu;Tsu-Nai Wang關鍵字：child circumcision;health education;maternal anxiety;maternal knowledge;nursing workload期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Many studies have shown that providing health education before surgery may significantly increase health knowledge and decrease anxiety in both patients and their family members. However, few studies have compared the effects on pediatric outpatient surgery outcomes of different health education instruction modes. Purpose: This study compares the effects of two health education delivery modes on maternal knowledge and anxiety, the number of unexpected early hospital follow-up visits, and the time spent by nurses on health education. Method: A quasi-experimental design with pretest and posttest was used to compare the effect on the outcomes of pediatric circumcision of a multimedia compact disc (CD) and a printed material. Seventy mothers of children who underwent Plastibell circumcision participated in this study. Results: Both the printed material and the multimedia CD significantly increased the knowledge and reduced the anxiety levels of the participants. However, no significant differences in unscheduled early hospital follow-up visits postsurgery were found between the two modes of instruction. Furthermore, we found that significantly fewer hours were spent by nurses on health education for the multimedia CD group in comparison with the printed material group. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: In the current clinical environment of common staffing shortages, information tools may be used to cost-effectively assist and simplify nursing work. The findings of this study may provide a reference to medical centers that are working to reduce the time spent by nurses on health education for outpatient surgery patients. Furthermore, audiovisual health education tools are recommended to increase nursing effectiveness and save nursing time.起始頁-結束頁：296-303資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001778篇名：Mentoring Nurse Practitioners in a Hospital Setting作者：Rodica S. Pop關鍵字：grounded theory;mentoring;nurse practitioner;self-defining期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Nursing philosophy is the foundation of nurse practitioner (NP) training. However, NP practice is based on the medical care model. Thus, the necessity of mediating between these two approaches is often problematic for new NPs who are transitioning into their new roles. Mentoring has been used successfully to facilitate role transition and role understanding for nurses, NPs, and physicians. However, mentoring has been rarely studied in NPs. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to develop a theory of mentoring for new NPs in a hospital setting. Methods: Grounded theory methodology was used. The sampling approach was initially purposive and was then shifted to theoretical to ensure the collection of meaningful data. Semistructured interviews were recorded and transcribed into Word documents for analysis. The three-phase analysis developed by Corbin and Strauss was initiated after the second interview. Results: Sixteen participants (eight mentors and eight mentees) were interviewed between February and June 2011. The core category that emerged from the data was ”defining self,” and the main categories were forming the relationship, developing the relationship, and mentoring outcomes. Conclusions: A well-designed formal mentoring program may greatly improve the transition of NPs into a new role. The theory generated by the data from these study participants provides clearly defined categories that may be operationally defined and utilized to develop evaluation tools for mentoring programs.起始頁-結束頁：304-309資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001619篇名：Falls and Related Injuries in Hospitalized Patients With Cancer in Taiwan作者：Li-Yun Tsai;Malcolm Campbell;Ching-Ju Chen;Ruey-Kuen Hsieh;Hui-Hsien Chien;Jung-Mei Tsai關鍵字：fall;fall injuries;hospitalized patients;cancer期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Falls and fall-related injuries are important indicators for quality of nursing care in institutions. Few studies have been conducted specifically on this topic for hospitalized patients with cancer in Taiwan. Purpose: The aims of this study were to understand falls and levels of injury; to identify associations among fall-related injuries, demographics, and causes of falling; and to predict fall-related injuries in hospitalized patients with cancer. Methods: A retrospective survey design was used. Data were retrieved from the Taiwan Patient-Safety Reporting system query fall incidences for persons hospitalized with cancer at a medical center in northern Taiwan from 2010 to 2012. Data were encoded and analyzed with descriptive statistics, the chi-square test, and multiple stepwise logistic regression analysis using IBM SPSS Statistics version 18.0. Results: One hundred fifty-six (85%) of the 184 hospitalized patients with cancer had fall-related injuries. Falling tended to be more frequent in men without a history of falls and more prevalentat night. The results of regression analysis showed that the variables being with companions at the time of a fall (OR = 5.411, 95% CI [1.619, 18.081]), lower limb weakness (OR = 0.284, 95% CI [0.097, 0.832]), postural hypotension (OR = 0.101, 95% CI [0.014, 0.733]), total score of fall risk factors (OR = 1.688, 95% CI [1.071, 2.660]), and a fall occurring at the bedside (OR = 3.493, 95% CI [1.119, 10.903]) were all positively associated with fall-related injuries, with a Nagelkerke R^2 of 42.8%. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The risk factors for falls that affect hospitalized patients with cancer are complex. Nursing staff must evaluate the risk factors and treatment methods for each patient and facilitate fall prevention measures to achieve safety-centered quality of care. This study provides an example for nursing staff when assessing factors associated with falls and working to reduce fall-related injuries among patients with cancer.起始頁-結束頁：310-318資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000017410篇名：Professional Values, Job Satisfaction, and Intent to Leave Among Nursing Managers作者：Filiz Kantek;Ayla Kaya關鍵字：nursingmanagers;professional values;values;job satisfaction;intent to leave期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: The professional values that are typically attributed to nursing managers influence the behaviors of staff nurses as well as of nursing managers. Therefore, the efficient planning and implementation of nursing services require that nursing managers raise their awareness of professional nursing values. Purpose: This study aims to investigate the correlations between professional values, job satisfaction, and intent to leave the job and the institution. Methods: This descriptive and cross-sectional study was conducted on 216 nursing managers in nine different hospitals in Turkey. The data were collected using a personal information form, Nursing Professional Values Scale, Minnesota Job Satisfaction Questionnaire, and scales on intent to leave the job and the institution. Results: Results indicate a positive correlation between the professional values of nurses and their job satisfaction and suggest a negative correlation between professional values and intent to leave the job and the institution. Furthermore, agency was found to be a determinant of job satisfaction. Conclusions: Strong professional values were found to increase job satisfaction and decrease the intent to leave the job and the institution.起始頁-結束頁：319-325資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000016411篇名：MESSAGE FROM THE EDITOR作者：Shiow-Ching Shun期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：173-173資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000021812篇名：Cultural Competence of Healthcare Providers: A Systematic Review of Assessment Instruments作者：Chia-Jung Lin;Chia-Kuei Lee;Mei-Chih Huang關鍵字：cultural competence;healthcare providers;instrument;systematic review期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Few articles in the literature identify and describe the instruments that are regularly used by scholars to measure cultural competence in healthcare providers. Purpose: This study reviews the psychometric properties of the several instruments that are used regularly to assess the cultural competence of healthcare providers. Methods: Researchers conducted a systematic review of the relevant articles that were published between 1983 and 2013 and listed on academic and government Web sites or on one or more of the following databases: CINAHL,MEDLINE, ERIC, PsycINFO, Psyc ARTICLES, PubMed, Cochrane, Pro Quest, Google Scholar, CNKI (China), and the National Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations (Taiwan). Results: This study included 57 articles. Ten instruments from these articles were identified and analyzed. These instruments included five that were presented in English and five that were presented in Chinese. All were self-administered and based on respondent perceptions. Five of the 10 instruments were designed to measure cultural competence, two were designed to measure cultural sensitivity, two were designed to measure transcultural self-efficacy, and one was designed to measure cultural awareness. The six cultural dimensions addressed by these instruments were attitudes, knowledge, skills, behaviors, desires, and encounters. An expert panel validated the content of the 10 instruments. The subscales explained 33%-90% of the variance in scores for eight of the instruments. The reliability of the 10 instruments was estimated based on the internal consistency, which ranged from .57 to .97. Conclusions: This systematic review may assist researchers to choose appropriate instruments to assess the cultural competence of healthcare providers. The findings of this review indicate that no single instrument is adequate to evaluate cultural competence in all contexts.起始頁-結束頁：174-186資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000015313篇名：The Effects of Quality of Life and Ability to Perform Activities of Daily Living on Mild Cognitive Impairment in Older People Living in Publicly Managed Congregate Housing作者：Chun-Feng Chang;Rea-Jeng Yang;Shu-Fang Chang;Yuan Hwa Chou;Ean-Wen Huang關鍵字：congregate housing;older people;mild cognitive impairment;quality of life;activities of daily living期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is characterized by a decrease in cognitive abilities that does not affect the ability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs). Therefore, this condition is easily overlooked. The prevalence and factors of influence for MCI in older people living in publicly managed congregate housing are currently unknown. Purpose: This study investigated the prevalence and distribution of MCI in older people living in publicly managed congregate housing and assessed the correlations among quality of life (QoL), ADL, and MCI. Methods: This study applied a correlational study design. The participants were older people who met the study criteria and who lived in public housing in Wanhua District, Taipei City, Taiwan. One-on-one interviews were conducted to measure the cognitive abilities of the participants, and 299 valid samples were collected. Results: The prevalence of MCI in older people living in publicly managed congregate housing was 16.1%. The X^2 test was employed to evaluate the distribution of MCI prevalence and indicated that the group with higher MCI prevalence exhibited the following characteristics: older than 81 years; married; lived in public housing for more than 20 years; cohabiting; had a history of drinking; and exhibited severe memory regression, physical disabilities, psychological distress, and low QoL. The difference between the groups achieved statistical significance (p ＜ .05). After performing logistical regression analysis to control demographic variables, we found that QoL and ADL were critical for predicting MCI. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study confirmed that QoL and ADL correlate significantly with MCI in older people. Maintaining an open and supportive community enables older people to maintain sufficient mental activity, which has been shown to reduce MCI. These findings may provide an important reference for policy makers, educators, researchers, and community practitioners in their development of service strategies for older people.起始頁-結束頁：187-197資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000014914篇名：A Study of Bullying Against Nursing Students作者：Hulya Karatas;Candan Ozturk;Murat Bektas關鍵字：bullying;nursing;nursing student;bullying in nursing student期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Many institutions have conducted research on the subject of bullying. The literature includes many studies of the effects of widespread bullying among primary and secondary school students. Bullying against hospital nurses and also bullying against university students are well-known and frequently discussed research topics. Yet, the exposure of nursing students to bullying has not been sufficiently explored, and few studies have focused on the issue of bullying against nursing students. Purpose: The aim of this study is to examine bullying against nursing students, including the rate of bullying, types of bullying, and responses to the negative effects of bullying. Methods: This study was conducted on 202 nursing students (including sophomores, juniors, and seniors) during the 2013-2014 academic year. The participation rate was 88.5%. The Negative Attitudes Scale was used to collect data, and descriptive statistics were used in data analysis. Results: Participants were evenly distributed between women (49.5%) and men (50.5%). The median age of participants was 21.58 ± 2.28 years; the frequency of bullying was 78.1%. The types of bullying were pejorative statements about the nursing profession (11.3%); low grades used as a form of punishment (9.9%); work, homework, and job rotation used as punishment in lieu of training (9.4%); impossible workloads (9.0%); and the spreading of rumors and gossip (7%). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study indicates that the participants were exposed to high levels of bullying. As exposure to bullying negatively affects the job attitudes of nursing students, further studies are necessary to develop strategies to prevent horizontal bullying.起始頁-結束頁：198-202資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000014415篇名：Changes in and Determinants of Quality of Life in Patients With Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Undergoing Initial Chemotherapy作者：Yu-Lee Dai;Cheng-Ta Yang;Kang-Hua Chen;Siew-Tzuh Tang關鍵字：quality of life;chemotherapy;advanced non-small-cell lung cancer期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Few studies have evaluated completely the changes in quality of life (QOL) that occur from pretreatment through the first four consecutive cycles of chemotherapy or determined its determinants in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the changes to and determinants of QOL in patients with advanced NSCLC under initial chemotherapy from pretreatment through Cycle 4 of chemotherapy. Methods: The QOL of 139 patients with advanced NSCLC was assessed from prechemotherapy through Cycle 4 of chemotherapy. Changes to and determinants of QOL were evaluated using multivariate linear regression, which used generalized estimation equation models. Results: No significant changes were observed in the global QOL or the physical, role, emotional, or cognitive functional domains of QOL during the course of chemotherapy. However, the social functional domain of QOL improved significantly at Cycle 3 in comparison with the prechemotherapy values. Better global QOL was determined as better performance status, less frequent physical symptoms, and less severe anxiety and depressive symptoms. Important determinants of better QOL in the five functional domains included younger age, better performance status, less frequent physical symptoms, less severe anxiety and depressive symptoms, and weaker perceived social support. Furthermore, patients who achieved a partial response after chemotherapy enjoyed stronger improvements in global QOL and the QOL emotional functional domain than those who did not. Conclusions: To help patients with advanced NSCLC optimize their QOL, healthcare professionals should enhance their ability to identify patients who are at elevated risk of poor QOL throughout the course of chemotherapy and to appropriately detect and manage the related physical symptoms and side effects, strengthen patients' social support, and lessen the anxiety and depressive symptoms of patients.起始頁-結束頁：203-215資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000014816篇名：The Revised Index for Social Engagement in Long-Term Care Facilities: A Psychometric Study作者：Ju Young Yoon;Hongsoo Kim關鍵字：social engagement;long-term care;reliability;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Social engagement is known to be an important factor that affects the quality of life and the psychological well-being of residents in long-term care settings. Few studies have examined social engagement in long-term care facilities in non-Western countries. Purpose: This study aimed to evaluate the validity and reliability of the revised index for social engagement (RISE), which was derived from the Korean version of the interRAI Long Term Care Facilities instrument. Methods: Three hundred fourteen older adults from10 nursing homes in Korea were included in the study. Convergent and discriminant validities were tested using correlation analysis and t tests, respectively. Factor analysis was adopted to examine the factor structure. The reliability of the RISE was tested using Cronbach's alpha values for internal consistency, and interrater reliability was tested using item kappa values and intraclass correlation coefficients. Results: The RISE showed excellent convergent validity with the average time involved in activities (r = .58). The known-group comparison showed a significant difference in the means of RISE between the group with cognitive impairment and the group without cognitive impairment, indicating satisfactory discriminant validity. Factor analysis showed a good model fit for two factors in the RISE: group involvement and interaction with others. The RISE showed satisfactory internal consistency (! ≧ .70) and adequate interrater reliability (≧.40). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The RISE is a valid and reliable tool for measuring the social engagement of nursing home residents in Korea. Furthermore, this tool may be a useful instrument for assessing older ethnic Korean residents who reside in nursing homes that are located outside Korea.起始頁-結束頁：216-223資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000015617篇名：The Reliability and Validity of the Arabic World Health Organization Quality of Life-BREF Instrument Among Family Caregivers of Relatives With Psychiatric Illnesses in Jordan作者：Heyam F. Dalky;Janet C. Meininger;Nahla M. Al-Ali關鍵字：reliability;validity;quality of life;caregiver;psychiatric illness;Jordan期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: The concept of quality of life (QOL) has increasingly attracted the interest of healthcare providers and is considered a valid end point for assessing the overall mental health of patients and their caregivers. Instruments with psychometric and cross-cultural validity are recommended for making accurate QOL assessments. Purpose: The aim of this study was to provide further validation of the Arabic World Health Organization (WHO)QOL-BREF for use among family caregivers of relatives with psychiatric illnesses in Jordan. Of the 26 items that constitute the scale, 24 are in the domains of physical health, psychological health, social interactions, and environment. Method: Of the 328 family caregivers approached, data for 266 respondents were kept for analysis. The Arabic WHOQOL-BREF internal consistency, item internal consistency, item discriminant validity, and construct validity were evaluated. Results: The Cronbach's alpha coefficient was ≧0.7. The 24 items constituting the evaluated domains reported an item internal consistency of ≧0.4 and met the item discriminant validity criterion of having a higher correlation with its corresponding domain than with other domains. Factor analysis revealed four strong factors that constituted the same constructs as in the WHO report. Conclusions: This study ascertains further validity of the Arabic WHOQOL-BREF scale for use among family caregivers of relatives with psychiatric illnesses in Jordan.起始頁-結束頁：224-230資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000014618篇名：The Effects of Kangaroo Care on the Sleep and Wake States of Preterm Infants作者：Farideh Bastani;Nahid Rajai;Zahra Farsi;Heidelise Als關鍵字：infant;kangaroo care;in-arms-holding;behavioral states;preterm;sleep and wake states期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Developing interventions that improve deep sleep and quit awake is important to improve the quality of care that is provided to preterm infants. Purpose: The aim of this study was to compare the effects of kangaroo care and in-arms-holding on the sleep and wake states of preterm infants. Methods: A randomized controlled trial design was employed in 2011-2012. Seventy-two stable preterm infants with gestational ages of 32-37 weeks and their mothers were recruited from the neonatal intensive care unit of Valiasr Hospital in Tehran, Iran. Seventy participants completed the trial. In the preintervention phase, nurses placed all of the infants, clad only in diapers, in supine position in their incubator for 20 minutes. Next, the infants in the kangaroo care group were placed onto their mothers' bare chest, whereas those infants in the in-arms-holding group were cradled in their mothers' arms, with the head and back supported by the mother's left arm. The intervention period lasted for 70 minutes. In the postintervention phase, the infants were returned to their incubators and placed in supine position for 20 minutes. The observer recorded the status of the infants during the three phases of study. Results: There were no significant differences between the two groups in terms of state distribution in the preintervention phase. However, the kangaroo care group had longer periods in deep sleep (p ＜ .001) and in the quiet awake/alert state (p = .004) during the intervention phase and less time in the light sleep or drowsy state (p ＜ .001) and in the actively awake state (p = .02) than the in-arms-holding group. No significant group differences were found in terms of crying. Conclusions: Kangaroo care appears to increase the length of time that preterm infants spend in deep sleep and quiet awake states as compared with simply being held in their mothers' arms. Replication of this research will strengthen the results.起始頁-結束頁：231-239資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000019419篇名：A Prenatal Coparenting Intervention With Unmarried Father-Mother Dyads: Fidelity of Intervention Delivery by Male-Female Community Mentor Teams作者：Selin Salman-Engin;Tara Little;Vikki Gaskin-Butler;James P. McHale關鍵字：coparenting;African American families;intervention;fidelity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Most prenatal preventive interventions for unmarried mothers do not integrate fathers or help the parents plan for the development of a functional coparenting alliance after the baby's arrival. Furthermore, properly trained professionals have only rarely examined the fidelity of these interventions. Purpose: This report examines whether experienced community interventionists (home visitors, health educators, fatherhood service personnel) with no formal couples' therapy training are capable of pairing together to deliver with adequate fidelity a manualized dyadic intervention designed for expectant unmarried mothers and fathers. Methods: Three male and four female mentors (home visitors, health educators, fatherhood personnel) working in paired male-female co-mentor teams delivered a seven-session ”Figuring It Out for the Child” curriculum (six prenatal sessions, one booster) to 14 multirisk, unmarried African American families (parent age ranging from 14 to 40). Parental well-being and views of fatherhood were assessed before the intervention and again 3 months after the baby's birth. Quality assurance analysts evaluated mentor fidelity (adherence to the curriculum, competence in engaging couples with specified curricular content) through a review of the transcripts and audiotapes from the sessions. Mentors also rated their own adherence. Results: Although the mentors overestimated adherence, quality assurance analyst ratings found acceptable levels of adherence and competence, with no significant male-female differences in fidelity. Adherence and competence were marginally higher in sessions that required fewer direct couples' interventions. Parents reported satisfaction with the interventions and showed statistically significant improvement in the family dimensions of interest at 3Y4 months posttreatment. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Findings support the wisdom of engaging men both as interventionists and as recipients of prenatal coparenting interventions-even in families where the parents are uncoupled and non-co-residential.起始頁-結束頁：240-250資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000016820篇名：Perspectives and Experiences Related to Help-Seeking Behaviors: A Content Analysis Study of Iranian Patients With Multiple Sclerosis作者：Leili Rabiei;HeidarAli Abedi;Parvin Abedi;Kourosh Zarea;Reza Masoudi關鍵字：help-seeking behavior;multiple sclerosis;qualitative research;Iran期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Patients with multiple sclerosis practice help-seeking behaviors largely because of the progression of this physically exhausting disease, which has far reaching psychosocial consequences and requires hospitalization during severe disease exacerbations. Purpose: The aim of this study was to describe the perspectives and experiences of Iranian patients with multiple sclerosis regarding help-seeking behaviors. Methods: A qualitative design, based on the content analysis approach, was used. Data were drawn from unstructured interviews that were held with 23 participants, who were referred from two teaching hospitals and from the Multiple Sclerosis Society in Ahvaz, Iran. Results: During the data analysis, four main themes emerged, including ”reliance on God and recourse to the imams,” ”striving to gain caring knowledge,” ”a need for comprehensive support,” and ”attention to spiritual care.” Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Healthcare team members, especially nurses, should pay attention to perspectives of patients with multiple sclerosis and try to address these patients' help-seeking behaviors to provide high-quality care. The authors hope that the findings of this study will inform the construction of interventional strategies to improve nursing care and facilitate the provision of better support services for people with MS.起始頁-結束頁：251-259資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000021601篇名：MESSAGE FROM EDITOR並列篇名：編者的話作者：周桂如(Kuei-Ru Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：85-85資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002062篇名：Psychological Care for Patients With Diabetes - Present and Future作者：Ruey-Hsia Wang期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：86-89資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002073篇名：Organizational Silence Among Nurses: The Impact on Organizational Cynicism and Intention to Leave Work作者：Esra Caylak;Serap Altuntas關鍵字：nursing;intention to leave work;organizational silence;organizational cynicism期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: In recent years, organizational silence and organizational cynicism, factors that have been shown to inhibit the improvement of organizations, have been highlighted in the health sector. Nearly every aspect of these two issues has been studied. Purpose: This research was conducted to identify the relationship between the organizational silence, organizational cynicism, and intention to leave work of nurses. Methods: This descriptive and correlational study was carried out in August and September 2013 with 323 nurses at a university hospital in Ankara. A questionnaire that includes a personal information form, the Organizational Silence Scale, the Organizational Cynicism Scale, and a question about intention to leave work was used. Ethics committee approval and institutional permissions were obtained. A statistician analyzed the data. Results: The present research found administrative and organizational reasons to be the most important reason why participants remain silent (M = 35.4 ± 13.1), with the tendency not to speak up about ethics and responsibility issues the second most important reason (M= 17.3 ± 6.5). The organizational cynicism of participants is at an intermediate level (M = 36.4 ± 9.6) and may be characterized as cognitive (M = 14.6 ± 4.3). Approximately half of the participants had never considered leaving work. For the participants in this study, organizational silence particularly influences organizational cynicism. The reasons for organizational silence in conjunction with organizational cynicism increase intent to leave work (R = .395, R^2 = .156, p ＜ .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study found that the reasons for organizational silence and organizational cynicism influence the intention of nurses to leave work. The reasons that lead nurses to become silent, to experience cynicism, and to leave work in healthcare environments should be identified. Programs and activities to replace negative ideas with positive ideas should be implemented.起始頁-結束頁：90-98資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001394篇名：Empowerment Program for People With Prediabetes: A Randomized Controlled Trial並列篇名：糖尿病前期個案之賦權計畫－隨機對照試驗作者：陳美芳(Mei-Fang Chen);洪淑玲(Shu-Ling Hung);陳淑玲(Shu-Lin Chen)關鍵字：empowerment;prediabetes;health-promoting lifestyle;blood sugar;self-efficacy;充能;糖尿病前期;健康促進生活型態;血糖;自我效能期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Practicing a health-promoting lifestyle is believed to be effective for delaying or preventing the onset of diabetes. However, although empowerment interventions have proven effective for encouraging the adoption of a health-promoting lifestyle in people with diabetes, these interventions are rarely promoted to people with prediabetes. Purpose: The aims of this study were to develop an empowerment program for people with prediabetes and to examine its efficacy in terms of the adoption of a health-promoting lifestyle and improvements in blood sugar, body mass index, and self-efficacy. Methods: A randomized controlled trial was conducted between May and December 2013. A convenience sample of people with a fasting blood sugar level of 100-125 mg/dl during the previous 3 months was recruited from the health examination center of a hospital in Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Participants were assigned to either the experimental group or the control group using block randomization with a block size of 8. The experimental group (n = 38) participated in a 4-month empowerment program (the ABC empowerment program), which encouraged participants to practice a health-promoting lifestyle in three phases: awareness raising, behavior building, and results checking. The control group (n = 40) received routine clinical care. Statistical analyses included descriptive statistics, independent t test, paired t test, and generalized estimated equations. Results: After controlling for the differences at baseline and considering the interaction between group and time from baseline to 1 week and 3 months after completing the intervention, the generalized estimating equation showed significantly larger improvements in a health-promoting lifestyle, blood sugar, and self-efficacy in the experimental group than in the control group (p ＜ .01). Furthermore, the experimental group achieved a larger reduction in body mass index than the control group at 3months after completing the intervention (p = .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The empowerment program was shown to have short-term, positive effects on behavioral, physical, and psychosocial outcomes in a Taiwan population with prediabetes. The results of this study provide a useful reference not only for healthcare personnel when implementing empowerment interventions in people with prediabetes but also for nursing educators and healthcare policymakers.英文摘要：背景　賦權介入可提升執行健康促進生活型態之結果，進而延緩或預防糖尿病的發生。然而，少有研究測試賦權介入對於糖尿病前期個案的成效。目的　發展賦權介入方案，並評價對於糖尿病前期個案健康促進生活型態、血糖、身體質量指數與自我效能之效果。方法　2013年5月至12月，進行實驗性研究。在高雄市某醫院健檢門診，以方便取樣，選取糖尿病前期個案，以隨機區塊方式，8人為一區塊，分成實驗組與對照組。38位實驗組接受為期4個月「ABC賦權介入方案」，依覺醒、行動與省思階段，協助個案能執行健康促進生活型態。40位對照組接受原本之醫院照護。統計方法包括描述性統計、獨立樣本t檢定、配對t檢定與廣義估計方程式。結果　從介入前至介入完成後1星期與3個月，實驗組比對照組在健康促進生活型態、血糖與自我效能有更大的改善（p ＜ .01）。從介入前至介入完成後3個月，實驗組比對照組在身體質量指數有顯著的降低（p = .001）。結論　賦權介入方案對台灣的糖尿病前期個案在行為、生理、心理與社會有短期正向結果，此可作為教育、實務及研究的參考。起始頁-結束頁：99-111資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001935篇名：The Effects of Intrapartum Supportive Care on Fear of Delivery and Labor Outcomes: A Single-Blind Randomized Controlled Trial作者：Gozde Gokce Isbir;Pinar Sercekus關鍵字：supportive care;labor;fear of delivery;intrapartum nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Supportive care during labor, the primary role of intrapartum nurses and midwives, provides comfort to pre-partum women and helps facilitate a positive labor experience. It has been argued that supportive care during labor reduces fear and anxiety as well as the resultant side effects. However, evidence supporting this argument is insufficient. Purpose: The aim of this study was to assess the effects of intrapartum supportive care on fear of delivery and on the key parameters of the labor process. Methods: This study used a single-blind randomized controlled trial approach. Randomized block assignment was used to assign 72 participants to either the intervention group (n = 36) or the control group (n = 36). Three women in the intervention group and six in the control group were later excluded from the study because they received emergency cesarean delivery. The intervention group received continuous supportive care, and the control group received routine hospital care. Results: No significant differences were identified between the two groups at baseline. The intervention group reported less fear of delivery during the active and transient phases of labor, higher perceived support and control during delivery, lower pain scores during the transient phase of labor, and a shorter delivery period than the control group (p ＜ .05). However, no significant difference in the use of oxytocin during delivery between the two groups was reported. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this evidence-based study suggest that continuous support during labor has clinically meaningful benefits for women and that all women should receive this support throughout their labor and delivery process.起始頁-結束頁：112-119資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001296篇名：Impaired Kidney Function and Associated Factors Among Rural Adults With Disabilities in Taiwan並列篇名：偏鄉身心障礙居民腎功能不全及其影響因素之探討作者：陳秋月(Chu-Yeh Chen);邱文南(Wen-Nan Chiu);林裕珍(Yu-Chen Lin);簡淑慧(Sui-Hwi Jane);江欣虹(Hsin-Hung Chiang);陳美燕(Mei-Yen Chen)關鍵字：disabilities;impaired kidney function;estimated glomerular filtration rate;chronic kidney disease;身心障礙;腎功能不全;腎絲球過濾率;慢性腎臟病期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: The results of numerous studies indicate that people with disabilities seek more healthcare than those who are not disabled, particularly for conditions such as chronic kidney disease, cardiovascular disease, and obesity. However, little is known about the incidence of impaired kidney function and its associated factors among adults with disabilities in Taiwan. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the prevalence and factors associated with impaired kidney function among adults with disabilities. Methods: This descriptive study was nurse led and was conducted as part of a health promotion program for disadvantaged rural adults with disabilities in Chiayi County, Taiwan. Health screening and a health needs survey were conducted between July and December 2013. Kidney function, physiological biomarkers, health-related behaviors, and demographic characteristics were examined. Results: Eight hundred ten rural adults with disabilities were enrolled. The most common disabilities included physical-related disability (33.1%), intellectual-related disability (26.7%), and hearing and vision impairment (18.6%). The prevalence of impaired kidney function in this population was 85%. According to classification for chronic kidney disease, 68.6%were in Stages 1-2, and 16.8%were in Stages 3-4. Univariate analysis showed that impaired kidney function was significantly associated with lower educational level (p ＜ .001), hearing or vision impairment (p ＜ .001), being overweight or obese (p ＜ .05), high systolic blood pressure (p ＜ .01), fasting blood glucose (p ＜ .001), total cholesterol (p ＜ .001), total triglyceride (p ＜ .05), older age (p ＜ .001), smoking (p ＜ .05), chewing betel nuts (p = .001), and low levels of participation in social activities (p ＜ .05). The final logistic regression model showed that residents with disabilities who were older or had less education, high fasting blood glucose, and high total cholesterol tended to have impaired kidney function after adjustment for other potential confounding variables. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Most participants showed impaired kidney function. The factors that were found to relate significantly to this impairment include being overweight, having hyperlipidemia, having hypertension, having high fasting blood glucose, and having an unhealthy lifestyle. Because of the lack of symptoms during the early stages of chronic kidney disease, a community-based health promotion program for these factors is an important element in health advocacy for this vulnerable population.英文摘要：背景　許多研究顯示身心障礙者相較於非此群體有較高之醫療照護需求，特別是慢性腎臟疾病、心血管和肥胖情況；但是國內少有有關身心障礙之腎功能不全及其相關因素之研究。目的　本研究主要目的是瞭解身心障礙者腎功能不全之盛行率與探討影響身心障礙者腎功能不全之相關因素，以作為推動健康促進策略之依據。方法　本文為護理領導之健康促進團隊在嘉義縣鄉村社區針對身心障礙成人照護計畫之部分成果，採描述性研究方法，於2013年7月至12月以社區為基礎之健康及其需求之調查。資料收集內容包括腎功能、生理指標、健康相關行為以及個人基本人口學屬性。結果　共有810位身心障礙成人參與本研究。其中肢體障礙占33.1%，心智障礙26.7%及視聽覺障礙18.6%。此群體在腎功能不全的盛行率為85%，根據慢性腎臟病的分類，有68.6%屬於第1-2期，16.8%屬於第3-4期。單變量分析顯示腎功能不全與低教育程度（p ＜ .001）、多重障礙（p ＜ .001）、過重或肥胖（p ＜ .05）、異常收縮壓（p ＜ .01）、飯前血糖（ p ＜ 0.001）、總膽固醇（p ＜ .001）、三酸甘油脂（p ＜ .05）及年齡較高（p ＜ .001）有關。目前有抽菸（p ＜ .05）、嚼檳榔（p = .001）及較少參與社區活動者（p ＜ .05）與腎功能不全有關；多變量分析顯示在調整干擾因素後，影響腎功能不全之因素主要為高齡、教育程度較低、較高的飯前血糖和總膽固醇。結論／實務應用　本研究發現多數參與者有腎功能不全現象且與過重、高脂血症、高血壓、以及不健康的生活方式有關。由於慢性腎臟病在初期不易出現症狀，因此推動以社區為基礎的健康促進措施，提供此弱勢群體早期發現健康問題是重要的策略。起始頁-結束頁：120-130資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001417篇名：Physical Functioning, Physical Activity, Exercise Self-Efficacy, and Quality of Life Among Individuals With Chronic Heart Failure in Korea: A Cross-Sectional Descriptive Study作者：Haejung Lee;Sunjoo Boo;Jihyoung Yu;Soon-Rim Suh;Kook Jin Chun;Jong Hyun Kim關鍵字：chronic heart failure;physical activity;quality of life;self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Both the beneficial relationship between exercise and quality of life and the important role played by exercise self-efficacy in maintaining an exercise regimen among individuals with chronic heart failure are well known. However, most nursing interventions for Korean patients with chronic heart failure focus only on providing education related to risk factors and symptoms. Little information is available regarding the influence of physical functions, physical activity, and exercise self-efficacy on quality of life. Purpose: This study was conducted to examine the impact of physical functioning, physical activity, and exercise self-efficacy on quality of life among individuals with chronic heart failure. Methods: This study used a cross-sectional descriptive design. Data were collected from 116 outpatients with chronic heart failure in Korea. Left ventricular ejection fraction and New York Heart Association classifications were chart reviewed. Information pertaining to levels of physical activity, exercise self-efficacy, and quality of life were collected using self-administered questionnaires. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, t tests, analyses of variance, correlations, and hierarchical multiple regressions. Results: About 60% of participants were physically inactive, and most showed relatively low exercise self-efficacy. The mean quality-of-life score was 80.09. The significant correlates for quality of life were poverty, functional status, physical inactivity, and exercise self-efficacy. Collectively, these four variables accounted for 50%of the observed total variance in quality of life. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Approaches that focus on enhancing exercise self-efficacy may improve patient-centered outcomes in those with chronic heart failure. In light of the low level of exercise self-efficacy reported and the demonstrated ability of this factor to predict quality of life, the development of effective strategies to enhance exercise self-efficacy offers a novel and effective approach to improving the quality of life of patients with chronic heart failure. Nurses should be proactive in advising patients with chronic heart failure to be more physically active and to enhance their self-confidence in diverse ways.起始頁-結束頁：131-139資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001508篇名：Development and Psychometric Evaluation of the Caring Scale for Institutionalized Elders並列篇名：機構老人關懷量表之發展與測試作者：黃慧莉(Huei-Lih Hwang);<U+51C3>金堂(Chin-Tang Tu);王秀紅(Hsiu-Hung Wang)關鍵字：caring;long-term care;older adults;scale development;關懷;長期照護;老人;量表發展期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: A scale that measures the efficacy of care from the perspectives of institutionalized older adults is needed to meet the growing need for better caring knowledge and skills among nurses and caretakers working in long-term care facilities. The currently available tools are insufficient for measuring the caring-related interactions of caretakers with institutionalized older adults. Purpose: The aim of this study was to develop and explore the psychometric structure of a caring scale for institutionalized older adults. Methods: The scale development process took place in two stages. In the first stage, a 34-item Caring Scale for Institutionalized Elders was generated using literature reviews and interviews with institutionalized older adults. Twenty-nine items were retained after item analysis and content validity testing, and then 19 items were retained after an exploratory factor analysis of 300 institution-dwelling older adults. The factor structure and reliability were further tested in 216 older adults using confirmatory factor analysis. The second stage provided evidence of the validity and reliability of the developed scale. This study was conducted between 2011 and 2013 in Taiwan. Results: Confirmatory factor analysis indicated that a 12-item scale with a two-factor structure best fits the data (X^2 =106.990, df = 53, p G .001, X^2/df ratio = 2.019, goodness-of-fit index = .926, comparative fit index = .958, Tucker-Lewis index = .948, root mean square error of approximation = .069). This scale had acceptable Cronbach's α values (range = .827-.907). Conclusions: This scale has satisfactory validity and reliability for measuring the efficacy of care that is provided to institutionalized older adults. Further studies are necessary to test the applicability of this scale to other populations.英文摘要：背景　為提供長期照護機構護理及照服人員對關懷技能的認知，有需要從機構老年住民的關懷感受開始。目前關懷量表未能充分測量專業照護者與老年住民間的關懷互動。目的　發展與探討機構老人關懷感受量表的心理計量結構。方法　本量表發展過程包含兩個研究，第一個研究是透過文獻查閱及質性訪談，草擬34個題項的機構老人關懷感受量表，透過內容效度測試及項目分析篩選29個題項，透過探索性因素分析取得19個題項，再經由驗證性因素分析驗證12個題項的量表之因素結構。第二個研究是測試量表的信度與效度。本文也透過標準的回覆翻譯流程發展英文版的量表。結果　驗證性因素分析顯示，以12個題項兩個因素結構是最合適本研究的樣本（X^2 =106.990,df = 53, p ＜ .001, X^2/df ratio = 2.019, goodness-of-fit index [GFI] = .926, comparative fit index[CFI] = .958, Tucker-Lewis index [TLI] = .948, root mean square error of approximation [RMSEA] = .069）。此量表擁有可接受程度的Cronbach's α係數（.827∼.907）。結論　本量表符合信度及效度的測試，未來有需要對華人機構之老年住民進行本量表之測試。起始頁-結束頁：140-148資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001479篇名：Exploring the Strengths of Patients With Psychiatric Disorders: A Qualitative Study作者：Jahangir Maghsoudi;HamidReza Oreyzi;Ali Zargham-Boroujeni關鍵字：content analysis;Iran;psychiatric patients;qualitative research;strengths期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Professional nurses typically pay significantly more attention to the weaknesses rather than strengths of their psychiatric patients. Thus, new approaches to care are needed to discover the strengths of these patients and to provide effective encouragement during the caring process. However, little is currently known regarding the strengths that psychiatric patients possess during their illness and healing. Purpose: The current study aimed to explore the self-perceptions and experiences of psychiatric patients regarding their strengths. Methods: Psychiatric patients were recruited through purposive sampling in Isfahan, Iran, from July to December 2012. Variables such as age, gender, and diagnosis were used to vet potential participants to ensure adequate sample diversity. All of the qualified individuals were informed verbally and in writing regarding the information that they would be asked to provide during the interview process, and the researchers obtained written and oral informed consent from each before enrolment. Twenty-one semistructured, qualitative interviews were conducted, and content analysis was performed to identify the themes. Results: Four major themes emerged from the interviews, including (a) life with spiritual factors, (b) responsibility, (c) love of learning, and (d) sources of support. Conclusions: A repertoire of strengths was identified among the participants. Furthermore, all of the participants voiced the opinion that healthcare providers rarely focused on their strengths. Therefore, mental health professionals, particularly nurses, should pay closer attention to the strengths of their psychiatric patients to use these strengths in advancing their care.起始頁-結束頁：149-155資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000020210篇名：The Lived Experience of Jordanian Parents in a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: A Phenomenological Study作者：Jamila Abuidhail;Mohammad Al-Motlaq;Lina Mrayan;Taghreed Salameh關鍵字：NICU;lived experience;phenomenology;support need期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Many international studies in the field of neonatal nursing have identified parental stress, coping difficulties, support issues, and various other experiences that are related to the birth of a preterm infant. However, no studies have assessed the interrelated issues of parental stress, social support, satisfaction, and nursing support in neonatal intensive care units (NICUs) in Jordan. Purpose: This study describes the lived experiences, needs in relation to care, and support systems of parents whose neonates were admitted to the NICU. Methods: A qualitative design using a phenomenological approach was used to explore the experiences of Jordanian parents who gave birth to neonates in the NICU setting. Participants were recruited from the NICUs of government, teaching, and private hospitals. Data were collected using semistructured interviews that were conducted with parents in a suitable place. Ten participants were interviewed: eight mothers and two fathers. After interviews were transcribed, the methodology suggested by van Manen (1990) was used to analyze the data. Results: The shock, worry, and anxiety experienced by parents; the influences of NICU admission on the experiences of parents and families; the information and assistance required and received by parents from healthcare professionals; and the emotions and satisfaction of parents were the main themes that emerged from the study to reflect the lived experience of parents of neonates in the NICU. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The parents in this study were satisfied with the healthcare process in the NICUs, even when this care did not fulfill their expectations or needs for their infants. Nurses in the NICUs must develop interventions and strategies that minimize the stress experienced by parents and that support the emotional capacity of parents to deal with this stressful situation.起始頁-結束頁：156-162資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000013411篇名：Factors Associated With Levels of Risky Drinking in Adolescent Alcohol Users in Taiwan: A Secondary Data Analysis並列篇名：台灣青少年飲酒行為危險類型相關因素－次級資料分析作者：洪兆嘉(Chao-Chia Hung);張新儀(Hsin-Yi Chang);江宜珍(Yi-Chen Chiang);吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu);李蘭(Lee-Lan Yen)關鍵字：adolescents;drinking risk levels;social influences;青少年;飲酒行為危險程度;社會影響期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Drinking is largely viewed as a socialized behavior; however, our understanding of factors associated with levels of risky drinking is limited in cultures where underage drinking is relatively unacceptable. Purpose: The aims of this study were to define the different levels associated with risky drinking and to examine the factors that are associated with these levels. Methods: We used data from the Child and Adolescent Behavior in Long-Term Evolution project. Of the 2184 students who participated in the 2006 Child & Adolescent Behavior in Long- Term Evolution survey, 1591 self-reported prior use of alcohol and had complete questionnaire data that could be used in secondary data analysis. The main study variables that were used in this study to assess levels of risky drinking included frequency of drinking, amount of drinking, and frequency of intoxication. We used ordinal logistic regression to analyze the relationships between levels of risky drinking and associated factors. Results: In the study sample, 9.55%were classified with high-risk drinking behavior, 22.51% were classified with medium-risk drinking behavior, and 67.94%were classified with low-risk drinking behavior. Having a mother or peers who used alcohol, being encouraged to consume alcohol by older adults or peers, high alcohol availability, high positive alcohol expectancies, low negative alcohol expectancies, and low alcohol refusal efficacy were all associated with higher levels of risky drinking. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Decreasing the availability of alcohol, developing appropriate alcohol expectancies, and increasing alcohol refusal skills may help decrease the development of high-risk drinking behavior in adolescents. Our study furthers the understanding of underage alcohol use in societies with low alcohol consumption.英文摘要：背景　飲酒是一種社會化行為，在未成年飲酒行為相對較不被接受的文化裡，對飲酒行為危險程度的相關因素了解非常有限。目的　本研究主要目的是確認曾飲酒的學生於九年級時飲酒行為危險程度及其相關因素。方法　研究利用兒童及青少年行為之長期發展研究計畫（Child & Adolescent Behaviors in Long-term Evolution）調查資料，進行次級資料分析。共有2184名九年級學生參與2006年的調查，其中1591名學生自述曾飲酒。主要研究變項是由飲酒頻率、飲酒量及酒醉頻率所分組而成的飲酒行為危險程度，利用序位邏輯斯迴歸分析探討與飲酒行為危險程度有關的因素。結果　研究結果顯示，9.55%的學生屬於高危險飲酒行為、22.51%的學生屬於中危險性飲酒行為、67.94%的學生屬於低危險性飲酒行為。結果顯示，母親飲酒、同儕飲酒，長輩或同儕勸酒，酒品可獲性愈高，正向飲酒結果期望愈高，負向飲酒結果期望愈低，拒酒效能愈低，都會提升青少年飲酒行為危險程度。結論／實務應用　降低酒品可獲性，建立青少年正確的飲酒結果期望，及增強拒酒的信心可有效降低青少年飲酒行為的危險程度。本研究結果有助於對低飲酒社會未成年飲酒行為的了解。起始頁-結束頁：163-172資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000015112篇名：Editor in Chief's Address並列篇名：主編的話作者：蔡秀鸞(Shiow-Luan Tsay);賴裕和(Yeur-Hur Lai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：1-1資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000020313篇名：Message from Editor並列篇名：編者的話作者：黃美智(Mei-Chih Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：2-2資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000020414篇名：Zika Virus Molecular Biology and Perspectives for Vaccine Development: A Review作者：Hsiao-Han Lin;Li-Min Huang;Suh-Chin Wu期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：3-6資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000020515篇名：The Current Status of Nursing Professionalism Among Nursing Faculty in Japan作者：Michiko Tanaka;Kikuko Taketomi;Yoshikazu Yonemitsu;Rieko Kawamoto關鍵字：professionalism;professional behavior;nursing faculty;Japan期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: The faculty of nursing schools plays an important role in the successful execution of nursing education. Therefore, faculty behavior strongly affects the professional development of nurses. However, few studies have examined professional nursing behaviors from the perspective of nursing faculty. Purpose: Members of nursing faculty in Japan were surveyed regarding their perspectives on behaviors related to professionalism. Methods: The model, Miller's Wheel of Professionalism in Nursing, was used as the theoretical framework. The Behavioral Inventory for Professionalism in Nursing (BIPN) was completed by 74 full-time nursing faculty who were currently working at 10 institutes of nursing education in Japan. Results: The mean BIPN score for the participants was 11.56 (SD = 6.08) of a possible total of 27. The highest and lowest BIPN category scores were for ”research development, use, and evaluation” and ”community service,” respectively. Professionalism was found to relate significantly to higher educational preparation (F = 32.17, p ＜ .0001). The Tukey-Kramer multiple comparison test found a significant association between having a graduate degree and higher scores for professionalism (p ＜ .0001). The Spearman correlation coefficient was significant and positive for the relationship between professionalism and both educational preparation (r = .85, p ＜ .0001) and number of years as a nursing educator (r = .31, p = .0077). Conclusions: The results support the idea that a higher level of educational preparation and more years of experience as a member of a nursing faculty are associated with higher levels of nursing professionalism. The professional behavior scores suggest that ”community service” is an issue that requires further improvement among Japanese nursing faculty. Awareness of extrinsic factors such as education is important to maximize nursing professionalism. The findings of this study may help nursing faculty continue their self-development.起始頁-結束頁：7-12資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000015516篇名：Dose-Response Relationships of Multisensory Intervention on Hospitalized Patients With Chronic Schizophrenia並列篇名：多感官療法對住院慢性思覺失調症病人的量效關係研究作者：鄭潔(Sunny Chieh Cheng);許文馨(Wen-Shin Hsu);沈淑華(Shu-Hua Shen);許玫琪(Mei-Chi Hsu);林梅鳳(Mei-Feng Lin)關鍵字：multisensory stimulation;chronic schizophrenia;crossover trial;emotion;physiological care;多重感官刺激;慢性思覺失調症;交叉試驗;情緒;生理護理期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Patients with chronic schizophrenia often show negative emotional responses because of cognitive impairment. Multisensory stimulation therapy has been shown effective in improving cognitive and emotional functions in cognitively impaired patients with dementia. However, very few studies have applied this multisensory intervention to patients with chronic schizophrenia. Furthermore, it is not known whether a dose-response relationship exists between the frequency and efficacy of this intervention. Purpose: The objective of this study was to evaluate the relationship between the effects and dose-response of the multisensory intervention on patients with chronic schizophrenia in a mental rehabilitation hospital. Methods: A crossover study design with a sample size of 60 was conducted. Participants were divided equally between an experimental group and a control group. The experimental group received the intervention in a multisensory stimulation room. Six sessions of the 30-minute sensory intervention were conducted on experimental group participants, who were allowed to select their preferred stimulants. In contrast, the control group received routine care only. After a 2-week washout period, participants in the experimental group were reassigned to the control group, and those in the control group were reassigned to the experimental group. Standardized questionnaires were applied to evaluate psychotic symptoms, emotional responses, and well-being of all participants. The NeXus-4 model wireless biofeedback system was used to measure the psychological-physiological parameters of participants at baseline and after the first, third, and sixth sessions of the multisensory intervention. A generalized estimating equation model was used to analyze the effects of the intervention Results: Although multisensory stimulation therapy had no significant effect on psychotic symptoms and well-being, this intervention may improve the negative emotional reactions of patients. In particular, the intervention significantly reduced the subjective anxiety level of participants and stabilized their objective respiratory and heart rates. Moreover, a positive correlation was found between the efficacy of the treatment and the frequency of the intervention. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Evidence from this study validated the multisensory stimulation therapy protocol. Therefore, this protocol may be incorporated into clinical interventions to improve quality of care and to alleviate the negative emotions of patients with chronic schizophrenia.英文摘要：背景　慢性思覺失調症病人因認知障礙而造成焦慮、憂鬱。多感官刺激療法在同為認知缺損之失智症族群中，可有效改善認知功能及情緒反應，但僅少數研究證實其於慢性思覺失調症族群之成效，且介入頻次與效果的關聯性亦尚未釐清。目的　探討多感官刺激對慢性思覺失調症病人的成效以建構實證療程模式。方法　本研究為交叉研究設計，樣本數60人，以分層隨機取樣，分派為實驗組或控制組各30人進行第一階段評量，經2週洗滌期後，實驗組與控制組互換，實驗組提供感官刺激室，病人依個人喜好選擇刺激物30分鐘，共計6次；控制組則提供常規照護。精神症狀、情緒反應及心理安適程度使用具良好信、校度的量表檢測，生理資料如呼吸、及心跳速率則以生理回饋儀評量。評值時間點為開始研究前測，及第一次、第三次和第六次介入後測。此些重複測量資料以概似化估計方程式分析。結果 雖然多感官刺激療法無法改善慢性思覺失調症病患的精神症狀和提升心理安適程度，但能穩定病人情緒反應，尤以減緩焦慮較為顯著，且隨著介入次數越多效益越好。實務應用　此研究以重複測量法檢視多次介入療程方案成效，建立具實證參照價值之多感官刺激療法方案於慢性思覺失調症病患之照護。起始頁-結束頁：13-20資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000015417篇名：Effects of a Home-Based Resistance Training Program on Recovery From Total Hip Replacement Surgery: Feasibility and Pilot Testing並列篇名：居家阻力復健運動於骨關節炎病人行全髖關節置換術後之可行性及初步成效探討作者：張靜芬(Ching-Fen Chang);林寬佳(Kuan-Chia Lin);陳威明(Wei-Ming Chen);簡淑慧(Sui-Whi Jane);葉淑惠(Shu-Hui Yeh);王采芷(Tsae-Jyy Wang)關鍵字：home-based training;resistance band;hip arthroplasty;total hip replacement;居家訓練;彈力帶;髖關節成形術;全髖關節置換術期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Postoperative exercise rehabilitation helps patients recover normal joint functions after total hip arthroplasty (total hip replacement surgery or THR) by strengthening the muscles that surround the replaced hip joint. However, the high cost of professionally supervised exercise rehabilitation programs limits access to program participation and, thus, to optimal recovery of normal joint functions. Therefore, the development of an effective home-based, self-monitored exercise rehabilitation program is critical to promote the optimal recovery of THR patients. Purpose: This study tests the efficacy of a home-based resistance-band exercise program on mobility, functional exercise capacity, and health-related quality of life in THR patients. Methods: This study uses a preexperimental repeated measures design. A convenience sample of 30 patients who underwent total hip replacement for osteoarthritis was recruited. All patients participated in a 12-week home-based resistance training program. Data were collected at baseline and at 2, 6, and 12 weeks postoperation on the following dimensions: up-and-go time, timed walking distance, and quality of life. In addition, intervention-related adverse events and the exercise adherence rate were monitored. Generalized estimation equations were used to analyze changes in the outcome variables across time. Results: The study included 21 women and nine men. The mean age of the participants was 67.9 years (SD = 8.1 years, range = 55-86 years). Results of the generalized estimation equations showed a statistically significant time effect for up-and-go time, 6-minutewalking distance, and health-related quality of life. After 12 weeks of training, the participants' up-and-go time decreased 40.33% from the baseline measurements, with a mean change of 6.38 seconds (p ＜ .001). The 6-minute walking distance increased 41.34%, with a mean change of 117.12 meters (p ＜ .001). The score for health-related quality of life decreased 78.94%, with a mean change of 39.10 (p ＜ .001). The average exercise adherence rate was 72.63%. The average score for the feasibility of the intervention was 8.8 (range = 6-10). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this study support the hypothesis that a home-based resistance training program is safe, feasible, and effective for improving the mobility, functional exercise capacity, and health-related quality of life of THR patients. Considering the low cost and convenience of a home-based resistance training program, health professionals should consider this and similar exercise programs when providing guidance to THR patients.英文摘要：背景　復健運動對全髖關節置換術後病人的復原及關節功能十分重要，髖關節周圍肌群訓練更是復健運動的關鍵，考量於醫療院所或復建中心進行的復健計畫費用昂貴，因此，發展與測試術後居家復健運動訓練有其必要性。目的　探討「居家彈力帶阻力復健運動」對改善髖關節置換術後病人下肢功能與生活品質的可行性和初步成效。方法　採重複測量之前實驗研究設計，以方便性取樣，招募骨關節炎單側初次進行全髖關節置換術病人為研究對象，以彈力帶進行12週漸進性阻力居家復健運動訓練。於術前一天、術後2週、6週及12週進行資料收集，包括計時起走量測、六分鐘步行距離測試及關節炎相關之生活品質量表填答。結果　共30位病人參與本研究，其中21位女性、9位男性，平均年齡67.9歲（標準差8.1，範圍55-86），GEE的結果顯示計時起走、六分鐘步行距離測試及生活品質在隨時間的進展上均有統計上顯著意義，計時起走花費時間從術前到術後12週減少40.33%，平均減少6.38秒（p ＜ .001）。六分鐘步行距離增加41.34%，平均增加117.12公尺（p ＜ .001）。生活品質從術前到術後12週改善78.94%，平均改善39.10分（p ＜ .001）。運動的執行率高，平均為72.63%，對介入措施的可行性的平均得分是8.8（範圍6-10）。結論／實務應用　研究結果顯示居家彈力帶阻力復健運動是安全、可行的有效措施，其能增加病人的活動與運動功能及改善健康相關的生活品質。考量居家復健成本低、便利性高，根據本研究結果醫療人員應可對全髖關節置換的病患介紹居家彈力帶阻力復健運動。起始頁-結束頁：21-30資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000012818篇名：Depression and Its Associated Factors Among Rural Diabetic Residents並列篇名：偏鄉糖尿病居民憂鬱狀態及其相關因素之探討作者：李佳謀(Chia-Mou Lee);張瓊方(Chyong-Fang Chang);潘美玉(Mei-Yu Pan);許翠華(Tsui-Hua Hsu);陳美燕(Mei-Yen Chen)關鍵字：type 2 diabetes;depression;diabetes control;health promotion;第二型糖尿病;憂鬱;糖尿病控制;健康促進期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Type 2 diabetes is a huge burden both for individuals and society as a whole. Although depression has been negatively associated with ideal glycemic control, little is known about the prevalence of depression or its associated factors among rural Taiwanese adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus (type2 DM). Purpose: The purposes of this study were to investigate the prevalence of depression in rural-dwelling sufferers of type2 DM and to highlight the relationships between their depression status and health promoting behaviors such as physical activity, keeping active in life, sleep sufficiency, and adopting a diabetic diet. Methods: A cross-sectional, correlational design was used to recruit 696 participants from local healthcare centers in rural areas of Chiayi County, Taiwan. Data were collected from March 30, 2010, to August 30, 2012. The Chinese version of the Geriatric Depression Scale and its associated physiological biomarkers were used as screening tools. Logistic regression was used to identify the factors that were associated with depression status. Results: The prevalence of depression in this study was 16.8%. Factors found to be associated with depression included being female, having a low level of education, receiving reduced family support, having little physical activity, failing to follow a diabetic diet, frequent inactivity, and having insufficient sleep. There were no significant differences in the physiological indicators between the depressive and nondepressive groups. After controlling for confounding factors, a logistic regression model showed that depression status was associated with a lack of sleep (OR = 2.85, p ＜ .001), less frequent exercise (OR = 2.67, p ＜ .001), and frequent inactivity (OR = 2.35, p = .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study showed that the prevalence of depression among adults with type2 DM living in rural areas is relatively high. From the perspective of health promotion, future research should focus on how to improve quality of sleep by enhancing daily physical activity and on investigating the effect of promoting a more active lifestyle among those at risk on depression.英文摘要：背景　第二型糖尿病造成個人及社會的負擔極重，憂鬱狀況不利於第二型糖尿病的控制，國內有關偏鄉第二型糖尿病社區居民發生憂鬱之盛行率，以及研究此現象之影響因素仍然不足。目的　本研究目的是探討偏鄉第二型糖尿病居民憂鬱之盛行率，及其與健康促進行為，包括身體活動，保持有事做狀態，睡眠時間與採取均衡飲食之相關性。方法　本文採用橫斷面、相關性之研究設計，針對居住於嘉義縣18所偏鄉，共696位第二型糖尿病居民為對象。研究時間自2010年3月至2012年8月；研究工具包括中文版老年憂鬱量表-簡版，以及與憂鬱相關之生理指標測定；並採用多變量邏輯斯迴歸分析影響憂鬱之相關因素。結果　偏鄉地區第二型糖尿病社區居民出現憂鬱之盛行率為16.8%，影響此現象之相關因素有女性、教育程度較低、家庭支持度較少、運動較少、糖尿病飲食攝取較少、不常保持有事做及感覺睡眠不足者；但是在生理指標方面兩組則無差異。在調整干擾因素後多變量分析顯示，感覺睡眠不足（OR = 2.85; p ＜ .001）、缺乏運動（OR = 2.67; p ＜ .001），不常保持有事做者（OR = 2.35; p = .001）有較高之憂鬱傾向。結論／實務應用　本研究顯示偏鄉第二型糖尿病社區居民出現憂鬱之盛行率並不低，從健康促進的觀點，未來研究宜針對如何強化偏鄉第二型糖尿病社區居民每天運動量增加，改善睡眠不足和促進這些個案持續保持有事做的狀態，以降低憂鬱及其不良後果之發生。起始頁-結束頁：31-40資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000014319篇名：The Depressive Symptoms, Resourcefulness, and Self-Harm Behaviors of Adolescents並列篇名：青少年的憂鬱、智謀與自我傷害行為作者：楊鳳英(Feng-Ying Yang);賴倩瑜(Chien Yu Lai);顏正芳(Cheng-Fang Yen);許玉雲(Yu-Yun Hsu);Jaclene A. Zauszniewski關鍵字：adolescents;depression;resourcefulness;self-harm;青少年;憂鬱;智謀;自我傷害期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: A report published by the World Health Organization indicates that depression typically first manifests during youth. However, adolescents usually lack the capacity for self-help or to seek help proactively from health professionals or other related resources to relieve their emotional distress. Failing to manage depression appropriately places adolescents at risk for self-harm and suicide. Purpose: This study explored the correlations among the depressive symptoms, resourcefulness, and self-harm behaviors of adolescents. In addition, the impact of depressive symptoms and resourcefulness on the self-harm behaviors of adolescents was examined. Methods: A cross-sectional and correlational design was used. One hundred forty secondary school (junior and senior high school) students in southern Taiwan were recruited for data collection using three questionnaires that measured, respectively, their depressive symptoms, resourcefulness, and self-harm behaviors. Results: Depressive symptoms and self-harm behaviors correlated significantly and positively (r = .79, p ＜ .001). Resourcefulness correlated significantly and negatively with both depressive symptoms (r = -.35, p ＜ .001) and self-harm behaviors (r = -.29, p ＜ .001). Finally, depressive symptoms significantly predicted self-harm behaviors. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study provides new findings regarding the significant relationship between resourcefulness and self-harm behaviors in adolescents. Future research is suggested to explore the effect of interventions about resourcefulness training on the mental health of adolescents.英文摘要：背景　根據世界衛生組織的報告，憂鬱好發於青少年時期。但是青少年往往缺乏自助和主動尋求健康專業服務資源的能力，以減緩他們的情緒壓力。如果憂鬱沒有被適當地處理，青少年將有可能陷於自傷或自殺的危險。目的　本研究旨在探討青少年憂鬱程度、智謀程度與自我傷害行為三者之間的相關性，並且檢驗青少年憂鬱及智謀程度對其自我傷害行為之影響。方法　本研究屬橫斷性及相關性研究，對象為140位台灣南部某高級中學國、高中生，研究資料以三種結構式問卷收集青少年的憂鬱症狀、智謀程度，以及自傷行為。結果　研究結果顯示，青少年憂鬱程度與自我傷害行為呈顯著正相關（r = .79, p ＜ .001）；憂鬱程度與智謀程度呈顯著負相關（r = -.35, p ＜ .001）；智謀程度與自我傷害行為亦呈顯著負相關（r = -.29, p ＜ .001）。最後發現，青少年的憂鬱程度為其自我傷害行為之重要預測因子。結論／實務應用　本研究首度發現智謀與青少年自傷行為的顯著關係。建議未來研究可探討以智謀訓練為主的介入性措施對提升青少年心理衛生之效應。起始頁-結束頁：41-50資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000012720篇名：Quality of Life Among Mild Traumatic Brain-Injured Adults作者：Nutthita Petchprapai關鍵字：mild traumatic brain injury;mild head injury;quality of life;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Mild traumatic brain injury (MTBI) is a stressful life event that may impact various dimensions of life. Challenges to daily activities after MTBI may produce significant effects on quality of life (QOL). Purpose: The purposes of this cross-sectional descriptive study were to (a) explore QOL after experiencing MTBI, (b) determine the extent of social supports, and (c) identify factors that are associated with QOL in post-MTBI patients. Methods: A descriptive research method was used. Potential subjects were interviewed by telephone after they signed the consent forms. Results: The average score of total social support was 73, the average availability subscale score was 40, and the average satisfaction subscale score was 33. The average score of total QOL was 24, the average health and functioning domain score was 22, the average psychological and spiritual domain score was 25, the average social and economic domain score was 25, and the average family domain score was 27. QOL was then regressed simultaneously on all factors after adjustment of the outliers. The model was supported (adjusted R^2 = .246, F = 4.160, p ＜ .001). The contribution of all the stimuli explained 24.6% of the variance in QOL (p ＜ .0125). Social support was the most significant variable affecting the variance in QOL (the unstandardized regression coefficient = 1.105, the standardized regression coefficient = 0.414, t = 5.041, p ＜ .001). Conclusions: This study identified social support as the most powerful predictor for QOL. Several measures used in this study were reliable and may be used within the Thai cultural context. Further study to better understand why a small but clinically important percentage of subjects experience on-going disability after MTBI is needed.起始頁-結束頁：51-58資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000011901篇名：Pain, Anxiety, and Fatigue During Labor: A Prospective, Repeated Measures Study並列篇名：生產過程的疼痛、焦慮與疲憊：一項前瞻性、重覆量測研究作者：曾雅玲(Ya-Ling Tzeng);楊雅玲(Ya-Ling Yang);郭碧照(Pi-Chao Kuo);林雅娟(Ya-Chuan Lin);陳淑齡(Shu-Ling Chen)關鍵字：pain;anxiety;fatigue;epidural anesthesia;labor;產痛;焦慮;疲憊;減痛分娩;生產期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Pain, anxiety, and fatigue are known to significantly influence labor; however, the interacting relationships among the three symptoms have not been empirically shown. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the interrelationships among intrapartum pain, anxiety, and fatigue relative to the mode of delivery, with or without epidural analgesia (EDA). Methods: A prospective, repeated measures design was adopted, and women with uncomplicated pregnancies at term (N = 186) were enrolled. Self-reported visual analog scales were used to assess pain, anxiety, and fatigue during the four phases of labor, as determined by cervical dilation (e.g., Phase 1 = 2-4 cm, Phase 2 = 4-6 cm, Phase 3 =10 cm, and Phase 4 = immediately after delivery of the placenta). Of the 186 participants, 48 received EDA when their cervical dilation was 3-4 cm. Results: Throughout the process of labor, pain, anxiety, and fatigue were significantly correlated, no matter whether participants had received EDA, especially during Phases 1 and 3. For the participants undergoing EDA, the level of fatigue decreased more slowly than the levels of pain and anxiety. The participants who received EDA had significantly greater pain and fatigue in Phase 1 of labor than those who did not receive EDA. Mode of delivery was correlated with age, parity, and pain level in Phase 2 of labor and anxiety level in Phase 2 of labor. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Intrapartum pain, anxiety, and fatigue were strongly interrelated. Intrapartum pain management (EDA) led to a significant decline in anxiety and fatigue. Furthermore, fatigue accumulated during the course of labor and was not easily diminished. These findings provide a reference for maternity nurses to develop strategies for managing multiple symptoms.英文摘要：背景　疼痛、焦慮、疲憊顯著影響生產過程，然而此三種症狀的相互關係仍有待進一步驗證。目的　探討減痛分娩對生產過程疼痛、焦慮、疲憊相互關係的影響，及其與生產方式的關係。方法　採前瞻性重複測量設計，共186位無孕期合併症的產婦參與本研究。以視覺量表依子宮頸口擴張（第一期2-4公分；第二期4-6公分；第三期10公分；第四期為胎盤娩出後）分別測量疼痛、焦慮、疲憊程度，有48位產婦於宮口擴張3-4公分接受減痛分娩。結果　無論有無接受減痛分娩，疼痛、焦慮、疲憊程度皆顯著相關，尤其是在第一期和第三期。縱使接受減痛分娩，疲憊感下降程度仍比產痛和焦慮感來得緩慢，且接受減痛分娩婦女第一期的產痛和疲憊感顯著較未接受者高。生產方式與年齡、產次、第二期的疼痛與焦慮有相關性。結論／實務應用　產時疼痛、焦慮和疲憊密切關聯。疼痛處置能使焦慮和疲憊顯著下降，惟疲憊感易累積且較不易緩解。本研究結果可作為發展處理多種症狀策略時之參考。起始頁-結束頁：59-67資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001652篇名：Correlation Between Critical Thinking Disposition and Mental Self-Supporting Ability in Nursing Undergraduates: A Cross-Sectional Descriptive Study並列篇名：護理本科生評判性思維能力與心理自立的相關性分析－橫斷面調查研究作者：吳德芳(Defang Wu);羅陽(Yang Luo);廖昕宇(Xinyu Liao)關鍵字：critical thinking;mental self-supporting;undergraduate;nursing students;評判性思維;心理自立;本科生;護理專業學生期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: There is universal agreement on the essential role of critical thinking in nursing practice. Most studies into this topic have provided descriptive statistical information and insights on related external factors such as educational environment and teaching strategies. However, there has been limited research into the psychological factors that may predict the disposition of students toward critical thinking. Purpose: This study explored the relationship between the disposition of nursing students toward critical thinking and their mental self-supporting ability to obtain a profile and determine the psychological predictors of critical thinking. Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted in 2013 using a convenience sample from four nursing schools. Four hundred six Chinese nursing undergraduates completed two questionnaires including (a) the California Critical Thinking Disposition Inventory (Chinese version) and (b) the Mental Self-Supporting Questionnaire for University Students. Pearson's correlation and linear regression analysis were used to investigate the relationship between these two variables and the predicted positive psychological qualities for the critical thinking disposition of participants. Results: Average participant scores for critical thinking disposition and mental self-supporting were 280.91 ± 28.43 and 76.40 ± 8.47, respectively. Positive correlations were observed between these two variables (r = .583, p ＜.01) and participants' self-decision, self-cognition, self-confidence, and self-responsibility, which suggest that these factors play a significant role in critical thinking disposition (R^2 = .435, p ＜.01). Conclusions: The participants earned midlevel scores for both disposition toward critical thinking and mental self-supporting abilities. The four factors that had a major influence on critical thinking disposition included self-decision, self-cognition, self-confidence, and self-responsibility. Nursing educators should focus on improving the critical thinking ability of their students in these four aspects.英文摘要：背景　評判性思維在護理實踐中扮演著重要角色已成共識。目前該方面研究多為現狀調查及其外在影響因素如教學方法、教育環境研究，而關於其內在心理預測因數的研究則少有報導。目的　探討護理本科生評判性思維傾向和心理自立現狀及二者之間的關係，研究護生評判性思維傾向的內在心理預測因素。方法　本研究採用便利抽樣方法，通過《中文版評判性思維傾向測量表》和《大學生心理自立問卷》對四所護理院校的406名護理本科生進行橫斷面調查。採用Pearson相關和多元線性回歸對數據結果進行分析。結果　護理本科生評判性思維和心理自立得分分別為280.91 ± 28.43分和76.40 ± 8.47分；二者得分呈正相關（r = .583, p ＜ .01）。心理自立中的自我做主、自我認識、自我堅信、自我負責4個維度對評判性思維傾向影響顯著（R^2= .435, p ＜ .01）。結論　護理本科生評判性思維及心理自立能力均處於中等水準，心理自立中自我做主、自我認識、自我堅信、自我負責對評判性思維影響較大，護理教育者應注重培養護生上述方面的心理特質。起始頁-結束頁：68-75資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000001403篇名：Translation and Psychometric Testing of the Chinese Version of the Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness並列篇名：中文版多維度內在感受覺察量表之翻譯及測試作者：林鳳蓮(Feng-Lien Lin);許晴哲(Chin-Che Hsu);Wolf Mehling;葉美玲(Mei-Ling Yeh)關鍵字：mind-body;multidimensional assessment of interoceptive awareness (MAIA);scale;reliability;validity;身心;多維度內在感受覺察;量表;信度;效度期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Background: Mind-body interventions are used to alleviate physical and psychological symptoms. The multidimensional assessment of interoceptive awareness (MAIA), which is used to self-report the effects of mind-body interventions, is not currently available in Chinese. Purpose: This study aimed to translate the MAIA from English into Chinese (MAIA-C) and to examine the psychometric properties of the MAIA-C. Methods: This was a methodological study. The MAIA was translated forward and backward systematically, and content validity was assessed by a panel of experts. A convenience sample of adult participants with mind-body practice was recruited from social clubs in Taiwan. The MAIA-C was administered to study participants. Internal consistency and test-retest reliability were tested using Cronbach's alpha and intraclass correlation coefficient. Construct validity was assessed in two ways: using confirmatory factor analysis and using the differences between the known groups to divide the sample into two groups of highly experienced and less experienced participants. Results: The complete data for the 294 participants were analyzed. The eight-factor structure of the MAIA-C was confirmed. Cronbach's a was.91 overall and .46-.88 for the individual scales of the instrument. Intraclass correlation coefficient and composite reliability for the scales ranged from .60 to .85 and .55 to .87, respectively. The result of confirmatory factor analysis revealed a fair fit of the model to the data with a root mean square error of approximation of .076 and a comparative fit index of .95. Significant differences were found for the seven scales between the two groups. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The MAIA-C showed acceptable reliability and validity in psychometric testing. Therefore, this scale may be used in studies that assess interoceptive awareness in Chinese-speaking populations who are undergoing mind-body interventions.英文摘要：背景　身心介入可緩解生理及心理之症狀，而其介入成效可使用多維度內在感受覺察量表來評估。然而，目前缺乏該量表之中文版。目的　本研究旨在翻譯多維度內在感受覺察量表，並且測試其信度與效度。方法　本研究採方法學研究設計，以系統性翻譯及回覆翻譯量表，並由專家群評估內容效度。研究對象為參與身心活動社團的成人，採方便取樣。內在一致性及再測信度分別以Cronbach's α及組內相關係數呈現。建構效度採驗證性因素分析，並檢定經驗多與經驗少的身心活動已知族群的差異。結果　以294位參與者的資料確認中文版多維度內在感受覺察量表共有八構面。整體量表及各次量表的Cronbach's α分別為.91及.46<U+223C>.88。組內相關係數及組合信度分別為.60<U+223C>.85及.55<U+223C>.87。驗證性因素分析呈現適配結果，近似誤差均方根及比較適配指標分別為.076及.95。經驗多與經驗少的身心活動參與者在七個次量表有顯著差異。結論／實務應用　中文版多維度內在感受覺察量表具有可接受的信度與效度，且可用於華語族群之身心介入後的內在感受覺察評估。起始頁-結束頁：76-84資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000018201篇名：盧梭與康德的共和理念及其實現－共和範式到政治創建的比較並列篇名：The Republican Ideal and Political Innovation: A Comparison between Rousseau and Kant作者：劉岫靈(Hsiu-Ling Liu)關鍵字：自主的自我立法;民主共和;憲政共和;共和理念;政治創建;autonomous self-legislation;Democratic Republicanism;Constitutional Republicanism;republican ideal;political innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：盧梭的「民主共和」理論與康德的「憲政共和」理論是古典共和主義轉向現代共和主義過程中的兩組重要典範，本文旨在從規範論層次的「共和理念」面向與秩序論層次的「政治創建」面向分析這兩組共和理論的理路分歧。文中首先將分析兩人的「共和理念」，並概念化為兩組不同的共和範式。其次分析兩人的「政治創建」論述，說明兩組共和範式是如何在有限的時空中創造「共和政體」並維持自身存在。最後，對兩人的「共和理念」範式與「政治創建」論述進行比較，以釐清兩種理論的內在差異以及兩組典範之於現代共和主義的特殊意義。英文摘要：Rousseau's ”Democratic Republicanism” and Kant's ”Constitutional Republicanism” are two important albeit conflicting paradigms of the transition from classical to contemporary Republicanism. In this paper, we aim to analyze the differences between Republican Ideal and Political Innovation. At first, we compare the differences in the Republican Ideals of Rousseau and Kant by proposing two different schemes of ideas: Rousseau's ”autonomous freedom- general will-sovereignty-laws-republic” and Kant's ”autonomous freedom- principle of right-public will-the state in idea-republic”. Secondly, we analyze the two different discourses of Political Innovation in order to explain how they create a ”republic” and maintain their own existence in a limited spacetime (temporal finitude). In conclusion, through the above comparison of the Republican Ideal and Political Innovation, we try to clarify the differences between these two paradigms while indicating their distinctive meaning in terms of relevance of contemporary republicanism.起始頁-結束頁：485-525資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心2篇名：效益主義的發軔：初探邊沁的政治思想並列篇名：The Commencement of Utilitarianism: A Study of Bentham's Political Thought作者：陳建綱(Brian Chien-kang Chen)關鍵字：邊沁;效益主義;公共性;武斷主義;邪惡利益;原初契約;Jeremy Bentham;utilitarianism;publicity;ipsedixitism;sinister interests;original contract期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文聚焦於邊沁政治思想批判的三個主要對象，即道德哲學中的武斷主義、政治與法律場域中的邪惡利益，與政治哲學中的原初契約論，來闡述它們在邊沁眼中的缺點，以及邊沁如何以效益原則為化解之道。邊沁認為，這些現象共通的缺點，是律師、法官、貴族、富人、官員等當時英國社會中的中上階層，為了維護其自身利益而不惜以犧牲公共利益為代價，並壟斷司法、公共論述與政治體制中的話語權，不僅將公民的觀點與利益排除在外，也拒斥效益原則所象徵的公共福祉之落實。對於這些現象的批判性反思，構成邊沁政治思想的主要關懷。英文摘要：This article focuses on the three main objects criticized in Bentham's political thought, including ipsedixitism in moral philosophy, the sinister interests in political and legal systems, and the original contract theory in political philosophy, by introducing their defects in Bentham's view and the solutions Bentham proposed. For Bentham, what connects these phenomena is that the lawyers, the judges, the nobles, the opulent, and the officials, all of them represented the upper middle class and preserved their own interests at the cost of public interests. They monopolized the right of discourse in legal and political systems and in the forums. By doing so they not only marginalized the interests and opinions of the public, but also rejected the fulfillment of public welfare signified by the principle of utility. The main concern of Bentham's political thought was motivated by his critical reflection on these phenomena.起始頁-結束頁：527-562資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心3篇名：論黑格爾對盧梭普遍意志概念的批評並列篇名：On Hegel's Critique of Rousseau's ”General Will”作者：魏楚陽(Chu-yang Wei)關鍵字：盧梭;黑格爾;康德;普遍意志;社會契約;民主政治;Jean-Jacques Rousseau;Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel;Immanuel Kant;general will;social contract;democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在探討黑格爾（G. W. F. Hegel），在其《法哲學原理》一書之中，對於盧梭（J.-J. Rousseau）《社會契約論》（The Social Contract）「普遍意志」（general will）概念的理解與批評。黑格爾認為盧梭透過社會契約所建立的普遍意志，無法實現公共利益，而僅是個人利益的結合。究其根源，盧梭的普遍意志概念，源自於他對人性與民主政治的樂觀看法，而黑格爾對盧梭的批判，則與盧梭作為康德（Immanuel Kant）內在自由思想的先驅密切相關。黑格爾的看法，可被視為是對民主政治正當性的根本質疑，而盧梭的普遍意志論述，則展現出民主政治無法迴避的困難與挑戰。英文摘要：This article discusses G. W. F. Hegel's critique of J.-J. Rousseau's concept of ”General Will” in The Social Contract. According to Hegel, Rousseau's concept of ”General Will” cannot represent the public interest and is an only aggregate of private interests, because it is constructed from the social contract and democratic process. Rousseau's argument of ”General Will” is based on his optimistic judgement on human nature and democracy. Hegel's critique of Rousseau originates in Rousseau's role as the pioneer of Immanuel Kant's inner freedom, and can be understood as a fundamental mistrust of democracy. Yet Rousseau's concept of ”General Will” uncovers the difficulties and challenges of democracy, which cannot and should not be ignored.起始頁-結束頁：563-598資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心4篇名：Marginal Players and Intra-network Connections: New Perspectives on the Manila Trade, c. 1640-1780並列篇名：跨網絡聯繫中的邊緣參與者：重新審視馬尼拉貿易，1640-1780作者：Birgit Tremml-Werner關鍵字：Manila;Indian Ocean;China Seas;trade in saltpeter;Iberians;馬尼拉;印度洋;中國海;硝石貿易;依比利亞人期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Manila's far-reaching connections based on the trade in saltpeter have received little attention in the entangled histories of the Indian Ocean and the China Seas. Military supplies were not only in high demand among parties in conflicts in the Philippines and its surrounding waters but also frequently redistributed overseas. That way saltpeter came to link Manila and the Coromandel Coast around 1700. Spanish colonial accounts not only testify to the importance of the delicate matter of saltpeter imports, but also suggest that after 1640, following the trade rupture with Japan and interruptions with Fujian and Macau, maritime business patterns altered significantly. The example of saltpeter cargoes thus sheds light on maritime dynamics beyond the spheres of Iberian mercantilist control, including the agency of actors of various backgrounds including Armenians and Portuguese New Christians, as well as English, French and Danish company merchants.英文摘要：學者對於馬尼拉在印度洋與中國海間從事遠程硝石貿易此事，仍少有關心。軍事補給方面的需求，不僅來自對於菲律賓周邊海域互相衝突的各方，也由此向海外各地分別供給。如此馬尼拉便於1700年左右與印度東岸科羅曼得爾海岸產生了聯繫。西班牙文獻證據顯示，1640年代日本鎖國，並接連與福建、澳門斷航後，馬尼拉的貿易網絡便有所更動。硝石貿易的實例展現出伊比利亞商業菁英背後驅動此一變動的力量，當中亦有亞美尼亞商人、葡萄牙猶太人、英、法、丹麥商人的參與。起始頁-結束頁：599-626資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心5篇名：暴力知識結構與青少年暴力行為：一個社會認知理論的觀點並列篇名：Violent Knowledge Structure and Adolescent Violent Behavior: A Social Cognitive Perspective作者：陳易甫(Yi-fu Chen)關鍵字：暴力行為;暴力知識結構;社會認知;青少年;中介效果;violent behavior;violent knowledge structure;social cognition;adolescents;mediating effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去研究顯示，暴力行為的起因根植於青少年階段，因此，探討青少年暴力行為的起因甚是關鍵。本研究以晚近兩個整合性社會認知理論的觀點，來探討暴力知識結構（violent knowledge structure）在青少年暴力行為形成所扮演的重要角色。藉著分析一筆全國青少年暴力行為調查的資料庫，本研究發現：（1）青少年的暴力知識結構受家庭、個人受害經歷、所接觸的同儕特質與教師不公對待的影響；（2）暴力知識結構進一步影響著青少年暴力行為的產生；（3）青少年的暴力知識結構中介了青少年所處的學校脈絡與暴力行為之間的關聯。本文最後就所發現的成果進行理論上的詮釋。英文摘要：Past research has shown that the etiology of violent behavior has its roots during adolescence; therefore, investigating the causes of adolescent violent behavior is critical. The current study adopted two integrated frameworks of social cognitive theories on violence and aggression to investigate the important role of violent knowledge structure regarding the formation of adolescent violent behavior. On the basis of data from a national survey on adolescent violent behavior, the findings were: (1) Adolescent violent knowledge structure was influenced by family, personal victimization, affiliated peer characteristics, and unjust treatment of teachers; (2) violent knowledge structure, in turn, influenced adolescent violent behavior; (3) violent knowledge structure mediated the association between aforementioned school contexts and adolescent violent behavior. The theoretical implication of these findings was discussed.起始頁-結束頁：343-379資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心6篇名：三代之間：代間關係與中年生活福祉並列篇名：Between Adult Children and Aging Parents: Intergenerational Relationship and Well-being in Midlife作者：林如萍(Ju-ping Lin);黃秋華(Chiu-hua Huang)關鍵字：代間關係;中年;生活福祉;多世代家庭;台灣社會變遷基本調查;intergenerational relationship;mid-life;well-being;multigenerational family;Taiwan Social Change Survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究以「處於中年階段之『中間世代』」的觀點切入，立基於代間連帶（solidarity）概念，探討其與老年父母、成年子女之代間關係，並探討代間關係與中年生活福祉之關聯。運用「台灣社會變遷基本調查計畫」資料分析，結果顯示：代間關係確實顯著影響中年生活福祉。三代之代間支持交換為「主要獲得成年子女支持之『由下奉養型』」則生活福祉最佳，而「支持上下型」的中間世代生活福祉最低。由多世代家庭之代間關係與中年生活福祉的關聯可見，華人社會文化規範的價值觀形塑了代間支持的意義和期望。再者，三代之情感連帶亦攸關中年生活之福祉。英文摘要：This study examined the intergenerational relationships among individuals in mid-life, their aging parents and adult children. The connections between multigenerational relationships and a mid-life individual's life satisfaction were explored. According to intergenerational solidarity theory, intergenerational relationships are dictated by various components: living arrangements, intergenerational support exchange, intergenerational affection, and intergenerational norms. Data were obtained from the 2011 Taiwan Social Change Survey. In this study, only subjects aged between 40 and 64, with at least one aging parent (aged 65 and above) still alive and one adult child (aged 18 and above) were analyzed. Middle-aged adults, who gave support to their aging parents and adult children, the ”support up and down” type, were most unsatisfied with life. Cultural values reinforce the meaning and expectations of intergenerational support and shape the outcomes. This study also underscores the importance of the emotional component in intergenerational relationships to the wellbeing of middle-aged adults.起始頁-結束頁：381-414資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心7篇名：臺灣民<U+8846>對外籍配偶移民的態度：十年間的變化趨勢（2004－2014）並列篇名：Public Attitudes toward Marriage Migrants in Taiwan: The Ten-Year Change, 2004-2014作者：陳志柔(Chih-Jou Jay Chen);吳家裕(Ka-u Ng)關鍵字：移民政策;大陸配偶;東南亞籍配偶;婚姻移民;移民態度;immigration policies;mainland Chinese spouses;Southeast Asian spouses;marriage migrants;attitudes toward immigration期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文發現2004年到2014年期間，臺灣民眾對於中國大陸及東南亞籍的婚姻移民，接受的比例顯著增加。社經地位、族群、政黨支持，都對態度有顯著影響，但影響的內容有所改變。2004年時，本省人（相對於外省族群）及泛綠支持者（相對於泛藍支持者），較不支持東南亞女性配偶取得公民權，但2014年時，本省人和外省族群之間，泛綠支持者和泛藍支持者之間，對此議題的態度已經沒有顯著差異。2014年時，男性比女性更加接受大陸及東南亞籍女性配偶，鄉村地區居民最為接受大陸和東南亞籍女性配偶。影響民眾態度的機制，主要是政黨支持、價值觀念、經濟理性，以及社會接觸。英文摘要：This study finds that Taiwanese citizens have become more accepting of marriage immigrants between 2004 and 2014, and that the acceptance of Southeast Asian female spouses was higher than that of Mainland Chinese female spouses. In terms of factors affecting public attitudes toward immigration policies, socio-economic status, ethnicity, and political party support have all maintained a significant influence during those ten years. While in 2004, native Taiwanese (relative to Mainlanders) and pan-green supporters (relative to pan-blue supporters) showed less support for Southeast Asian female spouses' acquisition of citizenship, in 2014, there was no significant difference between the attitudes of native Taiwanese and Mainlanders or pan-green and pan-blue supporters. By 2014, men had become more accepting of marriage immigrants than women, while rural residents became the most accepting. The mechanisms affecting people's attitudes towards immigrants are mainly based on political party support, values, economic rationale, and social contacts.起始頁-結束頁：415-452資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心8篇名：反傾銷保護可改善臺灣提控廠商技術效率？並列篇名：Does Anti-dumping Protection Improve the Technical Efficiency of Complaining Firms in Taiwan?作者：林家慶(Chia-ching Lin)關鍵字：反傾銷;技術效率;臺灣廠商;anti-dumping;technical efficiency;Taiwanese firms期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：目前臺灣仍缺乏反傾銷保護對臺灣廠商技術效率影響的系統性研究，本研究以臺灣1984∼2010年所有包含上市公司的反傾銷控訴案例為研究對象，探討反傾銷相關事件對臺灣提控廠商技術效率之影響。研究結果指出，雖然平均而言反傾銷控訴對提控廠商技術效率有正面影響，但仍有約三成案例的實證結果是負面的。其中，對於低技術水準之提控廠商，反傾銷保護可使其技術效率有較大的改善，但這類廠商保護時間拉長後，卻反而會使其技術效率降低；同時，課徵反傾銷稅的時間拉長後，也會導致反效果。這些研究結果可提供政府在審理反傾銷控訴案件時做為參考。英文摘要：Currently, Taiwan lacks a systematic study on the effect of anti-dumping protection on the technical efficiency of Taiwanese firms. As such, in this study, all cases of anti-dumping complaints of companies listed in Taiwan during 1984 and 2010 are used to investigate the effects of anti-dumping complaints on the technical efficiency of Taiwanese firms. Our research results indicate that, although the average effect of anti-dumping complaints has a positive impact on the technical efficiency of complaining firms, there are still negative results in 30% of cases. Among them, anti-dumping protections can lead to great improvements in the low-technology manufacturers. However, if the protection time for these manufacturers is prolonged, their technical efficiency declines. Additionally, if the duration of imposed anti-dumping duties increases, it could also have the opposite effect. These results can serve as a reference for the government when presiding over anti-dumping complaints.起始頁-結束頁：453-483資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心9篇名：鮑桑葵的現代國家理論及其公民民族思想並列篇名：Bosanquet's Theory of the Modern State and Civic Nation Discourse作者：劉佳昊(Jia-hau Liu)關鍵字：鮑桑葵;民主治理;民族精神;現代國家;共同意志;Bosanquet;democratic government;the spirit of nation;modern state;the general will期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：鮑桑葵的現代國家理論因側重國家構成的整全性而被20 世紀宣揚個人自由的英美學者撻伐，並被視之為一套擁護國家中心主義的論述。相對於此，本文將指出：鮑桑葵的國家理論雖受維科、孟德斯鳩、盧梭和黑格爾等人影響，而重視國家整體民族精神的重要性；但鮑桑葵國家理論的特色實在於透過自我治理、共同意志、社會本務、愛國情操等概念，將民族精神與民主治理這兩個政治理念連結起來，並為民族國家的運作提出了一種合於自由民主精神的解釋。此外，在鮑桑葵的解釋中另也蘊含了一套公民民族論述，而有助吾人探索民族主義與普世人道主義的思想關聯。英文摘要：Bosanquet's theory of the State has been widely recognised as a masterpiece of British Idealism. However, since he underscored the wholeness dimension of the state, many 20th-century Anglo-American scholars, who espoused individual freedom, criticised his theory as a doctrine of Statism. In contrast with this criticism, this article argues that the following: the commentaries of Vico, Montesquieu, Rousseau and Hegel on the wholeness of the state and the spirit of nation are indeed important for Bosanquet to establish his arguments; however, by utilising the ideas of self-government, the general will, social duty and patriotism, Bosanquet's account of the intellectual connection between the spirit of nation and democratic government, two significant dimensions of modern politics, is in conformity with a liberal democratic spirit. Moreover, through his account of the modern nation state, Bosanquet also developed a civic nation discourse, which can give us some insights into the relationship between nationalism and humanitarianism.起始頁-結束頁：173-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心10篇名：史特勞斯論洛克並列篇名：Leo Strauss on John Locke作者：周家瑜(Chia-yu Chou)關鍵字：洛克;霍布斯;史特勞斯;自然法;自然權利;John Locke;Thomas Hobbes;Leo Strauss;laws of nature;natural right期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：以批判現代自然權利危機著名的列奧史特勞斯（Leo Strauss）在其經典著作《自然權利與歷史》中論證：洛克並不像一般以為的是一個傳統的自然法思想家，相反的，洛克的政治思想所呈現的只是一個「表面上的傳統基督教自然法」，另一方面，以唐恩（John Dunn）為首的洛克研究者則將洛克視為傳統的自然法思想家，並主張洛克的政治思想建立在明確的神學基礎上。在這篇文章裡所要指出的是：兩種詮釋似乎有共同的缺失，也就是他們共同假定「霍布斯主義就等同於霍布斯」，因此儘管在結論上相互對立，但實際上共享同一個比較基準。英文摘要：In his Natural Right and History, Leo Strauss argued that rather than being a traditional natural law theorist as usually thought, John Locke ”deviated considerably from the traditional natural law teaching and followed the lead given by Hobbes”. In contrast, John Dunn argued that the Hobbesian question is irrelevant to the political problem that Locke intended to tackle. In this essay, I intend to first examine the seeming opposition between the two camps. I argued that while the two sides seem to hold diametrically opposite conclusions about Locke's political philosophy in general, Locke's theoretical relationship with Hobbes in particular, they share the common basis of Hobbism in the sense that they both take for granted the main assumptions of Hobbism as they proceed with the comparison.起始頁-結束頁：213-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心11篇名：日治時期竹北地區家庭結構的動態發展並列篇名：The Dynamic Development of Family Structure in Chu-Pei Area during Japanese Colonial Rule作者：楊文山(Wen-shan Yang);吳佳穎(Chia-ying Wu);李隆洲(Lung-chou Lee)關鍵字：日治時期臺灣戶籍資料庫;傳統家庭結構;經濟狀況;族群;馬可夫模型;colonial Taiwan household registration database;traditional family structure;economic status;ethnic groups;Markov model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：臺灣傳統家庭結構為何，一直是家庭研究中頗受爭論的議題，不同領域學者利用不同的推論方式提出各自的觀點。本文不同於以往的家庭結構研究，主要由長時間之動態發展的觀點切入，利用日治時期竹北地區的戶籍普查資料，就各年期家庭結構分布的關連建立馬可夫模型，探究不同經濟狀況和族群的家戶在家庭發展週期的分裂與擴展狀況。研究結果顯示：（1）不同經濟狀況的家戶，家庭結構的演變會有差異，且發現聯合家庭並非只出現在富有的家庭中。（2）族群方面，閩南及客家族群的家庭結構轉移狀態非常相似。英文摘要：The traditional Taiwanese family structure is a controversial issue in family research. Past research by scholars has produced various results due to methodological differences. This research, which differs from previous studies, intends to delineate the internal split and reuniting processes within the family structure. The distributions of family structure from the Colonial Taiwan Household Registration Database is used to construct a Markov model, which analyzes the development of family structure in different economic status and ethnic groups. Findings show that households of different economic status have different development, and the joint families do not specifically limit to the minority of the rich. Last, the transitions of family structure in Minnan and Hakka households are very similar.起始頁-結束頁：241-277資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心12篇名：兩岸服務貿易協議「自然人移動」的勞動市場調控機制分析並列篇名：The Analysis of Labor Market Regulation Mechanisms for Movement of Natural Persons in Cross-Straits Agreement on Trade in Services作者：李健鴻(Chien-hung Lee)關鍵字：自然人移動;勞動市場調控機制;兩岸服務貿易協議;movement of natural persons;labor market regulation mechanisms;cross-straits agreement on trade in services期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文採取「制度比較分析」的研究途徑，分析兩岸服務貿易協議內關於「自然人移動」的勞動市場調控機制。研究發現，臺灣依照「自然人移動」條款所建構的規範，已經形成一種「相對不平衡」的勞動市場調控機制，即兩岸服務貿易協議與現行法令，對於中國的跨國企業內部調動人員及履約人士的限制規範，相較於臺灣提交世界貿易組織的入會承諾和臺灣已簽署的其它六項自由貿易協定的限制規範，相對都比較少。建議政府應該重新檢討兩岸服務貿易協議對於中國的跨國企業內部調動人員及履約人士進入臺灣的規範，使兩岸服務貿易協議朝向臺灣提交世界貿易組織的入會承諾原則趨於一致。英文摘要：This article adopts the institutional comparative research approach, and aims to analyze labor market regulation mechanisms in the Cross-Straits Agreement on Trade in Services. The finding is that Taiwan's regulations have been relatively imbalanced according to the provisions of ”cross-border mobility of natural persons”, that is, the restrictive regulations in the Cross-Straits Agreement on Trade in Services and regulations for Chinese intra-corporate transferees are fewer than Taiwan's World Trade Organization membership commitments and the regulations of six Free Trade Agreements signed by Taiwan. There are suggestions as follows: government should review and correct the regulations for Chinese intra-corporate transferees and contractual service suppliers in the Cross-Straits Agreement on Trade in Services, and make the regulations for Chinese intra-corporate transferees and contractual service suppliers consistent with Taiwan's World Trade Organization membership commitments.起始頁-結束頁：279-318資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心13篇名：社會運動與社交媒體之再思考：評〈網絡社會運動時代的來臨？〉作者：何明修期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：319-323資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心14篇名：人際連帶與網路動員在太陽花運動的影響：評〈網絡社會運動時代的來臨？〉作者：蔡佳泓期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：325-327資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心15篇名：作者回應：朋友、網友、臉書與太陽花作者：陳婉琪;張睇迄薔Z/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：329-333資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心16篇名：Schmitt 的思想是否可構成對普世帝國的批判？兼論「天下體系」作為一種普世帝國思想並列篇名：Schmitt's Thought Offers a Criticism against the Universal Empire? On the ”Tianxia” System as a Concept of the Universal Empire作者：楊尚儒(Shang-ju Yang)關鍵字：Schmitt;普世帝國;國際聯盟;永久和平;天下體系;Schmitt;universal empire;League of Nations;the eternal peace;Tianxia system期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：在政治思想史上有兩種達至永久和平的思考路徑：透過超越主權國家的普世帝國，或是透過主權國家彼此間建立的國際組織。Carl Schmitt 對於國際法以及國際關係的討論，便質疑了第二種和平理念。本文則將指出Schmitt 的批判中的兩項論點—1. 誰來決斷？2. 和平理想無法完全遏止戰爭，而只會使戰爭更激烈—也適用於普世帝國的和平。此外，本文也將簡短地討論目前在中國相當流行的概念—「天下體系」。天下體系作為一種創造和平的思路，本質上和普世帝國並無二致。因此，Schmitt對於普世帝國的和平所做的批判，也將構成對「天下體系」的質疑。英文摘要：In the history of political thought, there are two kinds of political ideas on how to achieve eternal peace: by means of a supranational universal empire or of an alliance based on the sovereign nation-states. Schmitt's writings about international law and order are the eminent challenge to the second pacifist idea. This article will point out two crucial arguments from Schmitt's challenge, which can also apply to peace in the universal empire: First, who is able to make decisions (quis judicabit), and second, the pacifist ideal will lead not to total abolition, but rather to the radicalization of wars. Furthermore, this article also mentions briefly the popular conception of ”Tianxia” system in China, recently. As a way to think of peacemaking, the Tianxia system is essentially nothing other than the universal empire. Therefore, Schmitt's criticism of peace in the empire also applies to the Tianxia system.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心17篇名：再探平等派的政治參與主張－以1647年普特尼辯論會為分界並列篇名：Levellers' Political Participation Revisited: Before and after the Putney Debates in 1647作者：賴芸儀(Yun-I Lai)關鍵字：平等派;普特尼辯論;請願權;選舉權;古憲法;共同法;Levellers;Putney Debates;right of petition;franchise;ancient constitution;common law期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：人民要求擴大政治參與的原因與論述，往往與當時所處的社會及政治發展脈絡相關。學者們回顧1647 年的普特尼辯論時，亦反映各自關懷的議題與研究取向。本文試圖探尋該辯論的重點之一—平等派政治參與的概念是如何由寄望古憲法與共同法中請願權及其他與自由相關之特權的運作來保障自身權益，而在歷經數次請願失敗後，進一步發展出擴大政治參與之訴求。藉由回溯不同文本的概念，本文呈現平等派之所以要求選舉權的前因後果，重構後世學者指稱為觀念史上人民參政轉捩點的普特尼辯論之始末，以期今日吾人重新思考人民參政之意義與相關制度之修正方向。英文摘要：This article proposes a revision to existing arguments that the Levellers demonstrated their idea of political participation based on the theory of natural rights. After attempts to petition Parliament concerning political and juridical issues by soldiers and civilians had failed, the idea was gradually developed from the right of petition, which was based on the ancient constitution and English common law. This shows that the development of the idea was closely related to its contemporary social and political background. This study demonstrates the transformation moment of the idea of franchise and sheds some light on the importance of the debates by reconstructing the story of the Putney Debates in detail. Finally, the study reconsiders the meaning of political participation nowadays and the revision of our political system.起始頁-結束頁：39-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心18篇名：薪資停滯？事實陳述與亞洲跨國比較並列篇名：Wage Stagnation? Fact Disclosure and Cross-Country Comparison作者：林常青(Chang-ching Lin);張俊仁(Juin-jen Chang);盧姝璇(Shu-shiuan Lu)關鍵字：勞動生產份額;實質工資與國內生產毛額共變性;工資與生產力差距;labor share;comovement of real wage and GDP per capita;difference between wages and productivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文根據總體經濟學的文獻，提出三個問題來了解臺灣勞工薪資的變化。首先我們用勞動所得份額的趨勢來討論勞動與資本所得分配是否惡化？第二，我們計算實質勞動薪資與實質平均每人國內生產毛額的相關係數來討論勞動薪資是否與國民所得產生脫鉤的現象？我們不僅討論景氣波動，同時考慮成長趨勢下二者的連動狀況。第三，我們觀察薪資與邊際勞動生產力的差距與變化，探討廠商是否依據勞動生產力提供合理的勞動報酬？另外，為釐清這些薪資的問題是否為臺灣獨有，我們也將臺灣勞動所得結果之觀察與鄰近國家的現象做系統性的比較。英文摘要：This paper sheds light on three important issues in the macroeconomics literature, and comes to a better understanding of Taiwan's wage stagnation. First, we explore the trend of labor income shares, namely the labor income-output ratios, in Taiwan. This enables us to understand the distribution or tradeoff between labor and capital shares. Second, we calculate the correlation coefficients between real wages and gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, showing that whether Taiwan's real wages and national income move in the opposite direction. Third, we calculate the gap between the marginal product of labor and real wage. This focus shows whether workers' salary is consistent with their productivity in Taiwan. Of particular importance, in all issues we compare the Taiwan case with neighboring countries in Asia. By these cross-country comparisons, we examine whether the wage stagnation in Taiwan is unique, or common in Asian countries.起始頁-結束頁：87-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心19篇名：公民教育的知識效果：一項定群追蹤的探索性研究並列篇名：The Knowledge Effect of Civic Education: A Pilot Study Using Panel Data作者：邱師儀(Albert Shihyi Chiu)關鍵字：公民教育;政治知識;學校教育;臺中;高中;civic education;political knowledge;school education;Taichung;high school期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：政治知識為構成政治文化的內涵之一，而「公民教育」的目的，為提升受教者的政治知識程度。然而，所謂的「公民教育效果有限論」是學界的主流論述，一直到了1990 年代後，才逐漸有公民教育能增進學生政治知識的實證研究，但國內這方面的研究仍舊缺乏。本文針對中部一所高中，以相同題目進行一年共兩波的定群追蹤調查，並採取固定與隨機效果混合併用法，有兩項發現：第一、公民教育能增進高中生部分的政治知識項目；第二、父親低學歷組與父親高學歷組的知識差距，在某些情況下被公民教育彌合是有可能的。這些發現均有民主意義，將在文中逐一討論。英文摘要：One of the goals of civic education is to enhance political knowledge. Practically, however, the question remains as to whether or not civic education enhances political knowledge. The research questions are two-fold. First, does civic education cause political knowledge? Second, does civic education have the function of diminishing the knowledge gap between the students from higher socioeconomic backgrounds and those from lower socioeconomic backgrounds? A panel analysis was conducted on data from interviews of students in Taichung in 2012 and 2013. The major finding is that, in some cases, the students who did not have equally good socioeconomic backgrounds were able to catch up with their more advantaged counterparts in terms of political knowledge by taking a course on civic education. The democratic implications of these findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：127-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心01篇名：知識現代、民間臺灣、恐懼政治－編輯室的話並列篇名：Modernity of Knowledge, Folklore Taiwan and Politics of Fear作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：4-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).00012篇名：關於「佛教中國化」概念形成的一種社會學想像並列篇名：The Sociological Imagination around the Conception of the ”Sinification of Buddhism”作者：林錚(Cheng LIN)關鍵字：佛教中國化;禪宗史;胡適;中國文藝復興;Sinification of Buddhism;History of Chan;Hu Shih;Chinese Renaissance期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：「佛教中國化」過程，也許可從當年進入中國的並非印度製佛教義理一事講起。也就是說，佛教在中國的永續發展與否，很少取決於它與印度傳統的關聯。而佛教對於中國文明的影響，既顯著又令人印象深刻。這是為何「佛教中國化」是一項能夠提供給研究者的有用的概念工具，藉以瞭解佛教從玄學傾向到禪宗（佛教自主性於焉建立）的發展歷程。然而，當「佛教中國化」的生產力愈加顯著，概念的問題也就愈形模糊。正如我們將要指出的，概念使用愈是頻繁，吾人就愈看不到一種意願，即想要瞭解誰是早期構思者或代表人物的意願，因為這將會涉及候選人的資格認定。誰有能力制訂這個概念？我們想到的是既研究哲學史也涉獵中國佛教史的學者。其中，胡適（尤其是他關於禪宗史的研究）也許屬於對「佛教中國化」概念之起點有所貢獻的第一批學者。此種辨識同時牽涉到另一個問題：胡適的相關研究想要表達什麼？不同於吾人過去所認為的，其研究特徵並非滿足他個人的反宗教心態，他的提問是在三種層次上展開，即禪宗史、中國文藝復興以及中國印度化。胡適的禪宗史研究原本是要區分中國／印度宗派的嘗試，卻在無意間告訴我們「佛教中國化」概念的一個可能故事。英文摘要：The process of ”sinification” would have an origin in the fact that what entered China as Buddhist ideas were not made in India. The sustainable development of Buddhism in China hardly has any relationship with the Indian tradition. And the Chinese influences on Buddhism are as obvious and impressive as Buddhism affected Chinese civilization. The word ”sinification” thus provides the researchers a very useful conceptual instrument to capture the main part of the Buddhist movement, from the Taoist tendency to the Chan school where Chinese Buddhism establishes its autonomy. The problem which follows is that the birth of the ”sinification”, treated as a concept, remains all the more vague when this term becomes more productive. As we shall observe, in the frequent uses of this term, there is not a will to know its early designer or representative. The task of this article is to trace the formation of this concept and understand its implication. It asks: Who is capable of elaborating this concept? A scholar that studies the history of Chinese philosophy and that of Chinese Buddhism, Hu Shih, in particular, with regards to his studies on the Chan School, is among others a possible candidate for taking on sinification as a concept. This identification implies simultaneously another question: what does Hu intend to express in this study? Against conventional understanding of Hu's work, the problem of his study is not characterized by his antireligious mentality, but rather lies in his conception of Buddhism in three stages, the history of Chan, the Chinese Renaissance and the ”Indianization of China”. Distinguishing essentially the Chinese school of Buddhism from what is Indian, Hu's study tells us a possible story of how the idea of ”sinification” was first conceived.起始頁-結束頁：9-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).00023篇名：儒學與日本現代性－丸山真男論江戶儒學－並列篇名：Confucianism and Japanese Modernity: Maruyama Masao's Discourses on Tokugawa Confucianism作者：藍弘岳(Hung-Yueh LAN)關鍵字：現代性;日本;丸山真男;荻生徂徠;儒學;Confucianism;Japan;Modernity;Maruyama Masao;Ogy<U+016B> Sorai期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：儒學與現代性的關係是許多學人關心的問題。在日本的話，這個問題主要討論對象之一是江戶思想家荻生徂徠及其思想系譜。因為日本戰後民主主義的大家丸山真男在其名著《日本政治思想史研究》中之主旋律就是徂徠學對朱子學的挑戰與其思想中之「近代意識的成長」。但特別是到了1960年代，丸山真男曾以朱子學為主，重新整理其江戶儒學思想論，並在課堂中講授。當時的上課內容已被整理為《丸山真男講義錄》中的「第六冊」與「第七冊」。在這兩次講義中，丸山對過去觀點再度修正。他一方面改從日本化的角度來理解江戶儒學，一方面又企圖探究江戶儒學中是否有可能成功嫁接人權、啟蒙理性等現代性思想的要素。所以，丸山在其前期與後期的江戶儒學論中，對於儒學與現代性問題的思考方向與論述重點並不同。本文擬探究丸山如何在《日本政治思想史研究》中展開對江戶儒學與日本現代性關係的思考。然後，再討論1960年代後，丸山如何理解江戶儒學與日本現代性的問題，以闡明丸山真男的思想發展，並論述儒學在二戰後日本社會中的位置。英文摘要：Researches on Confucianism and Japanese Modernity usually traced back to Confucian philosopher Ogy<U+016B> Sorai (1666-1728), because Maruyama Masao, one of the most influential thinkers in postwar Japan, described Sorai's Confucianism as going beyond the confines of Neo-Confucianism, and connected it to the ideas and practices of modernization in his Studies in the intellectual history of Tokugawa Japan during the 1940s. However, from the 1950s to the 1960s, Maruyama reconsidered this question and shifted the emphasis in his lectures, which were later published as Maruyama Masao k<U+014D>giroku (Collected transcripts of the lectures of Maruyama Masao) Volume 6 and 7. The concept of Japanization was applied here by Maruyama to interpret Tokugawa Confucianism, and how Neo-Confucianism helped Japanese intellectuals to accept modern thoughts from Europe also came into focus. Between Ogy<U+016B> Sorai and Neo-Confucianism, I note that there are changes in Maruyama Masao's discourses on Tokugawa Confucianism and modernity. Based on this, I attempt to discuss how Confucianism was treated in postwar Japan.起始頁-結束頁：43-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).00034篇名：「賣某少頭嘴」：從「以妻為貨」現象窺探臺灣底層社會的能動性（從清領到日治初期）並列篇名：”B<U+0113>-bo Chi<U+03CC> Thau-chhui”: Exploring Agency among the Substratum in Taiwan through the Phenomenon of ”Taking a Wife as a Commodity” (from the Qing Dynastyto the Early Era of Japanese Colonial Rule)作者：張孟珠(Meng-Zhu ZHANG)關鍵字：賣某少頭嘴;賣某做大龜;婚姻風俗;以妻為貨;招夫養夫;典賣妻;縱容通姦;能動性;”B<U+0113>-bo chi<U+03CC> thau-chhui”;”B<U+0113>-bo cho to<U+0101>-ku”;Marriage custom;Taking a wife as a commodity;Getting a husband to support a husband;Dianqi 典妻 (mortgaging a wife);Wife-selling;Abetting or tolerating illicit sex;Agency期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文探究清領到日治初期，臺灣中、下社會存在的「以妻為貨」現象。當丈夫貧極、病篤，無力治生養家時，唯有出此下策、典賣他所僅剩的資產－他的結髮妻子；或有生性浮浪、蕩盡家財，而以嫁賣、縱姦為續命之所憑。在生產方式保持穩定的時代，婚姻相對是傳統社會結構的原動力。作者利用清代刑科檔案、契約文書、日治報章時文、風俗調查報告、法院判決書等等，呈顯漢人婚姻、家庭體系中的女性交換，不乏在習俗實踐的表象下，挾帶走私了或暫或久、或隱或顯的賣春成分；同時揭露近代早期，潛藏於販夫走卒心態上的婚姻譜系與位階關係，他們的能動性格、及其對菁英價值的創造性轉化。英文摘要：This study examines the phenomena of ”taking a wife as a commodity” among the substratum in Taiwan from the Qing dynasty to the early era of Japanese colonial rule. In an era when the mode of production maintained stability, marriage stood at the center of the traditional social structure. However, men who were unable to support their family due to poverty, illness, indolence, or extravagance turned to wife-selling and mortgaging as a survival strategy. Sometimes the husband married off his wife to someone else, or else tolerated or abetted his wife's illicit intercourse. The author utilizes cases from the Qing legal documents, contracts, journalism, customs investigation reports, Japanese court verdicts, and other sources to investigate sex work within marital contexts. Understanding this topic allows researchers to reconstruct marital pedigrees in the Taiwanese substratum, and detect how they employed their agency to transform the values of the upper stratum.起始頁-結束頁：81-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).00045篇名：從「性別政治」論賣妻現象：評論張孟珠「賣某少頭嘴」一文並列篇名：Thinking ”Wife Selling” from the Perspective of Sexual Politics: A Response to Zhang's Article作者：林文凱(Wen-Kai LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：131-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).00056篇名：國家、象徵暴力與民間信仰：以鹿耳門天后宮為例的討論並列篇名：State, Symbolic Violence and Popular Religion in Taiwan: a Case Study of the Ru Er Men Tian Hou Temple作者：陳緯華(Wei-Hua CHEN)關鍵字：象徵暴力;資本;場域;國家歷史;國家文化;Symbolic violence;Capital;Field;National history;National culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：在世俗化的社會中，政治上的意識形態轉變如何能夠影響宗教的發展？本文討論的是臺灣民間信仰場域，透過一間廟宇個案的討論，闡述政治上的意識形態轉變，如何經由國家歷史與國家文化的重新建構，從而影響了民間信仰的發展。焦點放在戰後為了反攻大陸之需所進行的國家歷史敘事，以及1990年代本土化力量下的國家文化建構，如何影響了民間信仰活動的發展。透過對鄭成功相關祭祀制度與地景之建立，以及教科書編纂與媒體報導的描述，本文分析了「國家歷史」的建構如何影響民間信仰場域中「歷史時間」這項文化資本的內涵，並引發了廟宇之間對這項資本的長期爭奪行動。經由對「中華文化復興運動」、「全國文藝季」等國家文化建設運動及相關論述的分析，本文討論了新「國家文化」的建構是如何地在民間信仰場域中建構出「高文化」，成為廟宇追求的新文化資本，因而改變了廟宇的經營模式，促成了「新廟會文化」的誕生。本文指出，在1950年代與1990年代兩次政治意識形態的轉變過程中，國家象徵暴力在民間信仰場域中重新界定了資本的內涵，改變了場域的資本結構，因而促成了民間信仰活動面貌的轉變。英文摘要：Using Bourdieu's perspective of ”symbolic violence”, the author discusses how the rewriting of ”national history” influenced the development of the temple by depicting the worship institution, memorial landscapes of ”Zheng Cheng- Gong” constructed by the state and the relevant textbooks used in education institution after the World War II. Analyzing how the rebuilding of ”national culture” constructed ”high culture” in the field of popular religion through the description of ”the movement of the revitalization of Chinese culture” and ”the national session of literature and art” in the 1990s, the author discusses how a new form of cultural capital was constructed and gave rise to ”new temple festival culture”. The author points out that the temple discussed in this article had gone through two significant political ideology changes. They redefined the content of the capitals of the field and resulted in the change of popular religion. The first one influenced this temple by the rewriting of ”national history”. This rewriting influenced the implication of ”historical time” in the popular religion field and made the relevance to ”Zheng Cheng-Gong” an efficient capital. And that made the village people started to engage in developing their temple. The second one influenced the temple by the rebuilding of the ”national culture”. It defined new contents of the legitimate cultural factors in the field and therefore changed the course of the progress of this temple. This article points out that local society translates them into meaningful things according to the logic of the popular religion field while they face the national ideologies. And that redefines the contents of capital of the field and therefore changes the structure of the field.起始頁-結束頁：139-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).00067篇名：恐懼的政治性：養老保險與中國農民工並列篇名：Politics of Fear: Pension Insurance and Chinese Peasant Workers作者：史唯(Wei SHI);劉世鼎(Shih-Diing LIU)關鍵字：農民工;養老保險;恐懼的政治性身體;主體性;身分認同;Migrant worker;Pension insurance;Politics of fear;Body;Subjectivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：農民工的社會保障問題所引發的社會衝突，已經成為當今中國大陸社會危機的重要組成部分之一。本文主要以深圳慶盛工廠的農民工因為養老保險的問題所導致的集體罷工事件為主要的分析案例，從情感的、政治性的角度來探討農民工作為社會最弱勢的群體之一，在遭遇脆弱的社會保障時所產生的恐懼，以及由此而產生的政治行動。本文主要的問題意識，包括恐懼的政治性如何在一種關係性的權力架構中循環和相互作用，即權力集團基於自身對於失去權力的恐懼如何發展出一套「自上而下」的治理策略，通過長期的政策性歧視，以及與資本的共謀，造成了農民工們因未來生活沒有保障而感到恐懼，而這些處於弱勢的、「自下而上」的恐懼，又是如何轉化成為具體的政治行動，反過來強化了權力集團的恐懼。沿著這樣的分析路徑，本文著重探討這些性質不同、方向各異的恐懼的政治性，如何錯綜複雜地交織在一起，尤其是如何通過身體的控制以及主體性和身分認同的建構來展示政治對抗。對於處於多重壓迫下的農民工而言，恐懼的政治性作為一種培力實踐，反映出他們試圖擺脫既有權力關係的限制，重新定位自己，並努力以此生產出新的、更為公平公正的權力關係。英文摘要：The social conflict triggered by social insurance contributions has become a key component of the ensuing crisis of contemporary mainland China. This article focuses on an episode of the strike action staged by a group of migrant workers at a UNIQLO supplier in Shenzhen, exploring the vulnerable group's fear generated by the underpayment of social security and the political action that follows, from the perspective of affective politics. This paper investigates the ways in which politics of fear configures and articulates in a relational structure of power; the hegemony formulates a set of top-down strategies of governance out of the fear for losing power, which in turn create the fear of migrant workers through the long-standing prejudicial policies and complicities with capital; the transformation of government-inflicted fear into concrete political action from the bottom up and the intensification of fear of the hegemony. Through such analytic trajectory, this paper explores the heterogeneous political formations of fear, how they are interwoven in complex ways, and in particular how the performance of opposition is made possible through the body and the construction of identity. For the migrant workers under multiple forms of repression, the politics of fear may create a space of self-empowerment, allowing them to reshape self-identities and subvert the existing power relations in their adversarial confrontations.起始頁-結束頁：183-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).00078篇名：威權遺緒下的道德恐慌：民主轉型與臺灣的K他命政策並列篇名：Moral Panic and the Legacy of Authoritarianism: Democratization and the Policies on Ketamine in Taiwan作者：許良因(Liang-Yin HSU);劉名峰(Ming-Feng LIU)關鍵字：K他命（愷他命）;Elias;道德恐慌;文明進程;民主化;Ketamine;Elias;Moral panics;Civilizing processes;Democratization期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017中文摘要：由於青少年施用K他命的比例在這幾年來有明顯上升的現象，多位立法委員再三提案要求將K他命自原本的三級毒品提升為二級，藉此對K他命之施用者處以刑責，進而改善社會秩序與風氣。然而，對於立委們一再地提案，法務部毒品審議委員會在二年間（2011至2012年）共八次否決了這個提案。針對此一行政與立法部門間的政策緊張，本文以立委們對於K他命之升級案的論述為研究的焦點，指出這些言論雖然是生成於民主轉型之後的政治場域，但卻也表現了民主轉型之後的威權遺緒，本文分析了國、民兩黨對於這些語言的使用之不同。除了在具體個案上的分析之外，本文還試圖透過此一個案了解民主轉型對於公共政策的影響，並對第三代之「道德恐慌」理論進一步討論。本文提出，民主化作為一種文明進程，促成了減少國家暴力使用（去刑化），但也是反文明進程（入刑化）的道德恐慌生成的沃土，提供民主轉型後的威權遺緒發酵的機會。英文摘要：In Taiwan, ketamine use among the young people has increased in recent years. Some legislators have called for upgrading ketamine use to a more serious criminal offence. These calls have been repeatedly rebuffed - for the eighth time in two years - by the advisory council which sets drug policy. We examined the context in which the demand for reclassification and the harsher punishment of ketamine users has arisen. We draw on the concept of ”moral panic” and focused on the nature of the reaction to the problem by a particular group of people (legislators) in 2011 and 2012. Furthermore, we tied the concept of moral panic to Nobert Elias' arguments concerning the ”civilizing processes.” We situated this ”short-term” moral panic, which we regarded as a ”decivilizing” process, within the longer term ”civilizing” process of democratization. In this article, we argued that, in Taiwan, democratization (a civilizing process) has played an important role in fostering the conditions in which moral panics (a decivilizing process) can thrive, and showed that the rhetoric of moral panic - in the ketamine case at least - is heavily inflected by the legacy of authoritarianism.起始頁-結束頁：215-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).00089篇名：前言並列篇名：Introduciton作者：劉奕德(Petrus LIU);羅麗莎(Lisa ROFEL)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：254-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).000910篇名：「婦女與兒童優先」：《戰狼II》的大中國論述、矛盾以及男性氣質的危機並列篇名：”Women and Children First”: Jingoism, Ambivalence, and Crisis of Masculinity in Wolf Warrior II作者：劉奕德(Petrus LIU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：256-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001011篇名：中國特色毒性陽剛氣並列篇名：Toxic Masculinity with Chinese Characteristics作者：向在榮(Zai-Rong XIANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：260-261資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001112篇名：中非美關係的新世界之所知與迷思並列篇名：The Said and Unsaid of the New Worlding of China-Africa-U.S. Relations作者：羅麗莎(Lisa ROFEL)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：262-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001213篇名：中國式全球視角下的性別、種族與階級拼裝並列篇名：China's Emerging Global Gender Assemblages作者：瑪利亞•阿米利亞•比特里(Maria Amelia VITERI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：264-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001314篇名：「中國的偉大復興」並列篇名：”China's Great Restoration”作者：余愛莎(Aisha Chioma UDOCHI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：266-268資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001415篇名：這款「超級英雄」－中國製造，專供內銷並列篇名：New Superheroes Have Arrived: Made in China, for Domestic Consumption Only作者：蔡一平(Yi-Ping CAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：269-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001516篇名：「謝謝你，乾爹」－中非一家親：愛，復興，僱傭軍與生物醫藥並列篇名：”Thank you, Godfather”: Love and Rejuvenation, Mercenaries and Biomedicine Forge Africa and China into One Family in Wolf Warrior II作者：保羅•阿瑪爾(Paul AMAR)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：271-273資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001617篇名：新時代、新中國並列篇名：New China in New Times作者：王智明(Chih-Ming WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：274-277資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001718篇名：「帝國主義」為誰的遺產？評John Smith《二十一世紀的帝國主義》並列篇名：Imperialism: Theirs and Ours-A Commentary on John Smith's Imperialism in the Twenty-First Century作者：周世瑀(Shih-Yu CHOU);林封良(Feng-Liang LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：278-293資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001819篇名：認同政治書寫的認同與政治：評介《臺灣大眾文化與認同政治：撒嬌世代》並列篇名：The Identities and Politics of Academic Writing on Identity Politics - Notes on Identity Politics and Popular Culture in Taiwan: A Sajiao Generation作者：莊佳穎(Yin C. CHUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：25期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：294-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201802_(25).001920篇名：集體展示之餘：脫節、不安，或是另類生命狀態的張力？－編輯室的話並列篇名：The Remains of the Collective Exhibition: Out-of-place, Displaced, or Alternative Living States?作者：劉紀蕙(Joyce Chi-Hui Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：4-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).000101篇名：國家博物館與文化公民資格：杜正勝故宮改革中的多元文化與原住民並列篇名：National Museum, Cultural Citizenship and Indigenous Peoples: National Palace Museum Reforms under Tu Cheng-sheng作者：盧梅芬(Mei-Fen Lu)關鍵字：知識分類;接觸地帶;地位模式;南島;福爾摩沙展;Knowledge classification;Nation-state;Contact zone;Model of status;Austronesian;Formosa exhibition期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文研究範圍為杜正勝任故宮博物院院長時期(2000/05-2004/05)的故宮改革。探討杜正勝剛上任時，故宮的轉型定位為什麼是「多元文化國家博物館」？杜正勝如何以多元文化修正中華國族主義，以及如何論述與實踐「南島民族」是為國家公民成員？然而，杜正勝主張的「多元文化國家博物館」至2002年轉向「世界主義博物館」（含亞洲博物館）定位，此轉變又如何牽動中華國族主義的修正方式，以及原住民的文化公民資格？本文提出，原住民需要被肯認的不只是特殊的身分，還有普遍的文化公民。從文化再現與文化生產分析原住民同等參與國家文化再現的條件與困難，前者著重我群與他者的「共存」，後者著重博物館分類與行政階序等生產制度。結論指出，此時期的故宮改革，處於去國族、去中國與去政治的糾葛中，致未能聚焦於原住民如何同等參與國家文化再現；在「臺灣文化」與「中華文化」的二元對立下，「南島民族」受到重視的主要原因為「史前」祖源及「海洋」地理的建構；原／漢的共存關係－原住民的現代性、殖民相遇等共存經驗，未能受到反省。英文摘要：The focus of this study is on the reforms of the National Palace Museum during the time that Tu Cheng-sheng served as its director (2000-2004), including a deep exploration of why the museum transitioned to a multicultural national museum. How did Tu use multicultural identity to amend Chinese nationalism, as well as initiate discussions on and implement the objective of ”Austronesian peoples” as members of the national citizenry? In 2003, Tu's views on multicultural national museum changed direction toward that of Universal Museum (including Asian museum). How did this transformation influence the Chinese nationalism revision methods and the citizenship status of the indigenous peoples? Indigenous peoples need to be recognized, not just for their unique identity, but also as general cultural citizens. The author analyses both cultural representation and cultural production, with particular focus on the making of ”ourselves/coexistence”, museum classification and hierarchy. These were used to analyze the conditions for and the difficulties of indigenous peoples participating as peers in national cultural representation. In conclusion, the reforms of the National Palace Museum at the time were entangled in denationalization, deChinalization and depoliticization. This led to failure to concentrate indigenous peoples' participation as peers. Under the opposing duality of ”Taiwanese culture” and ”Chinese culture”, the main reasons why importance was placed on the Austronesian peoples were their ”prehistoric” ancestry and ”marine” geographical construct. Coexisting experiences, indigenous/Han Chinese relationship-the modernity of indigenous peoples, and the colonial encounter failed to be subjected to introspection.起始頁-結束頁：9-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).00022篇名：藝術、國家、個人：日本近代之例並列篇名：Art, the Nation, and the Individual in Japanese modern society作者：伊藤徹(ITO, Toru);李淑珠(Su-chu LI)關鍵字：岸田劉生;《白樺》派;高橋由一;外山正一;夏目漱石;Kishida Ry<U+016B>sei;Natsume S<U+014D>seki;Shirakaba-ha;Takahas hi Yuichi;Toyama Masakazu期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017中文摘要：我們通常將藝術理解為個人思想或感情的表現，但這樣的理解以及與此連動的「獨創性」，已逐漸成為過去式。在如此現況下，本論文檢討了在日本的近代化過程中，具有以自我表現為基礎的藝術觀以及具有以國家為創作原點的藝術觀的歷史交替。根據本論文的歷史見解，個人主義的藝術觀，從1904-1905年的日俄戰爭之後的明治末期到1923年的關東大震災為止，大約涵蓋整個大正時期，並由同時代致力於西洋美術受容的文學團體《白樺》派所代表。這種思潮的興起，可回溯至1890年前後，透過大日本帝國憲法的頒布與實施，明治日本具備了近代國家的形式。從這時候算起，大約十年的時間，本論文將之視為從國家主義到個人主義的移行期，以夏目漱石和外山正一等人為線索，確認思想上的變革後，依此描繪精神史的底圖，此外，也提出了在這個時期前後的兩個美術上的寫實主義(realism)。亦即，驚訝於西方油畫具有的再現性的敏銳，欲將之作為資訊傳達工具來報效國家而將其一生奉獻給此種技術的受容．展開．普及的高橋由一，以及一面以國家為基底來看待藝術，一面與《白樺》派有深交的岸田劉生；藉由探討此二人的軌跡，確認個人的獨創性因「自然」概念而得以普遍化的過程，作為美術上個人主義表現的具體範例。英文摘要：We normally take ”fine art” as an act by an individual creator, and his work as an expression of his personality. However such an image of ”fine art” has already lost its plausibility in the circumstances of today, which for example, often includes team production in the case of movies or animation films. This paper deals with two oil painters in the Japanese modern time, Takahashi Yuichi and Kishida Ry<U+016B>sei, and their realistic intentions, in order to explore their differing fundamental thoughts. Takahashi, the pioneer of Japanese oil painting, was impressed by the painting style introduced by the Western world during the Meiji Restoration and devoted himself to its acquisition and spread throughout Japan. His passion was sustained by his belief that the exact representation of oil painting could contribute to the modernization of Japan as state. On the contrary Kishida's realism has its background in individualism after the Russo-Japanese War. The individualistic style of thought shared by many contemporary artists and intellectuals tended to combine the individual personality with the transcendent named ”Nature” or ”Humankind”. In the case of Kishida the representation of ordinary things in paintings meant the assimilation of himself to ”the Great Nature”. Contrasting the differences between both painters, this article shows a change from the state to the individual in the intellectual history of Japanese modern time, which can provide the concept of ”fine arts” with a historical view point.起始頁-結束頁：53-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).00033篇名：展示建物與祭儀空間的神聖轉位：無土無村無屋無節慶之當代北海道愛努族的認同機制並列篇名：Displayed Houses as Sacralized Space: on Identity Mechanism of the Landless Hokkaido Ainu作者：謝世忠(Shih-chung Hsieh)關鍵字：愛努族;北海道;祭儀場所;神聖化;觀光展示;祖先供養;Ainu;Hokkaido;Ritual space;Sacralization;Touristic display;Ancestral worship期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017中文摘要：儀式展演是一個族群對自我文化的強化性認可。過去百年極端同化時期，所有公共祭典都無法舉行，愛努族人仍不放棄地在家遂行祖先供養儀式。今日，愛努係一無土無村無屋無慶典節日的族群，惟其個人成員，多會如實參與祖先祭儀呼喚。祭典儀式的文化復振在一般研究紀錄上極為常見，而愛努族的例子最為特殊者，就是觀光展示屋的轉為儀式屋繼而神聖化。母語所稱之Kotan(村)與chise(屋)被親切的呼喚使用，並很快地成為眾多族人朗朗上口之彼此認同身分的關鍵語彙。此等新村落與新家屋或稱新儀式建屋，顯得愈形重要。它讓族人找回了傳統建築文化，並且實踐了應有正確室內祭儀場所之文化需求。換句話說，相較於社區生活館樓房和現代形制住屋，依傳統樣態建造的戶外博物館展示建築，最為接近文化真實性。今天，縱使愛努已被承認為先住民族，但，大社會對於愛努仍是冷漠，政府亦從未有納入該族傳統為國家文化之一環的動機，百年悲情之後，今日能夠象徵性地「佔有/領有」展示屋，並賦予祭儀神聖性，對於無土無村無屋無節慶的愛努族人而言，總是往族群的希望躍進了一大步。英文摘要：In general an ethnic group strengthens self-identity through well-kept ritual performances. For the Ainu in Hokkaido, Japan, although almost of all public ceremonies had been prohibited they secretly continued practicing ancestral worship ritual at home during the era of severe assimilation policy by the Japanese government. Since the late 18th century, the rulers deprived the Ainu of lands and destroyed all natural villages in their territory. But the people grasped any possible opportunity to hold rituals of offering food and liquor to their ancestors. In present times some traditional public ceremonies have been gradually revived, while the crucial part of their activities remains the ancestral worship ritual. Activists of cultural revival movements often claim to have restored lost festivals, ceremonies, or rituals. Indeed the Ainu activists had contended that all traditional public rituals should return. But what they have done to transform particular buildings displayed for tourists in outdoor museum into sacralized space for holding ancestral worship rituals. In Hokkaido the museums with Ainu culture exhibits always come with several independent old-fashioned houses nearby. And many of them have been sacralized and called traditional names such as kotan (village/community) and chise (house/home) by the Ainu. In contrast to those modern buildings these ancient styled houses are considered much closer to cultural authenticity. The Ainu have been recognized as Japan's indigenous people since 2008 but mainstream society is still very indifferent to the Ainu situation. The newly-identified indigenes adopt alternative strategies to ”occupy” or ”own” traditional houses at the very moment of worshipping ancestors under the circumstance of losing their original territory and facing a landless daily life.起始頁-結束頁：81-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).00044篇名：《漁港夢百年》的香港殖民史敘事並列篇名：The Narrative of Hong Kong Colonial History in Centry-Old Dreams Of A Fishing Harbour作者：羅永生(LAW Wing Sang)關鍵字：盧亭;蜑家;殖民;後殖民研究;後人類主義;香港;莎士比亞;暴風雨;Luting;Tanka;Colonial;Post-colonial criticism;Post-humanism;Hong Kong;Shakespeare;The Tempest期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017中文摘要：自80年代開始，香港戲劇舞臺上不乏探討香港身分的本土劇作，但完整地以一百五十多年英國殖民時期的歷史為依據，為香港殖民史作一連貫敘事的劇作則甚少。而且，香港舞臺上雖然充滿了對身分焦慮的感覺和思考，但對香港殖民經驗的敘述，大都沒有脫離以中國為中心的視角。本文探討的劇作家黃國鉅，在他的近作《漁港夢百年》第一部曲〈初入夢鄉〉中則打破了這個傳統。他以盧亭這個本土神話人物，突破了關於香港大歷史敘事中習見的殖民主義史觀，也同時顛覆了處理香港殖民經驗時一貫慣用的中國國族主義角度。本文嘗試從後殖民研究的角度對《漁》劇進行解讀，指出《漁》劇如何開展了一種重新解讀香港殖民歷史的可能性。本文的分析亦會開展《漁》劇與莎劇《暴風雨》的對讀，並探討後人類主義對後殖民評論以及對香港本土主義的重要性。英文摘要：Since the bloom of local productions in Hong Kong theatre starting from the eighties, there are plenty of theatrical works dwelling on the identity issues of Hong Kong. However, seldom has any play attempted to give Hong Kong colonial past a coherent historical narrative. Moreover, even though feelings and thinking about the anxieties of one's belonging are often displayed vividly on the stage, few would go beyond the Chinese nationalistic frame to interpret historical events happened in the colony. However, local playwright Wong Kwok Kui has achieved a breakthrough in his recent work Century-old dreams of a fishing harbor (first installment) from this tradition. Making use of the mythic figure Luting, the play reconstructs a historical narrative of the city from neither a colonialist nor a Chinese nationalist viewpoint. This essay tries to offer, from a post-colonialist perspective, a reading of the play to unravel the intricacies embedded and to see how it makes a reassessment of Hong Kong colonial past possible. It will also attempt an inter-textual reading between Wong's play with Shakespeare's The Tempest. From this vantage point, the essay will argue for the important contributions of post-humanism to post-colonial criticisms, in general, as well as Hong Kong emerging localism, in particular.起始頁-結束頁：117-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).00055篇名：窘境美學：臺灣時尚部落格中的後殖民與後女性政略並列篇名：Towards an Aesthetic of Awkwardness: The Postcolonial and Postfeminist Politics of Fashion Blogs in Taiwan作者：鄭芳婷(Fan-Ting Cheng)關鍵字：時尚產業;部落格;酷異性;臺灣;窘境;在地性;Fashion industry;Blog;Queerness;Taiwan;Awkwardness;Locality期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017中文摘要：近十年，臺灣時尚部落格逐步成為時尚產業重要一環，實質參與在地認同的形構過程。時尚研究雖然漸為學界重視，所占討論席次仍然不足，以部落格為題之時尚研究更亟須開拓。阿多諾(Theodor Adorno)以降之社會學者、人類學者及反色情女性主義者多強調時尚符號的巧計幻象，少有注意消費者的能動抵抗。本文以臺灣近五年知名時尚部落格為例，細密檢視其中由時尚部落客、部落格讀者及大眾媒體三者所共同操演運作的產業模式及（抵）認同形構，重思部落格活動於消費網絡中的收編定位與抵抗潛力。本文自網路消費者理論、行為結構分析、時尚研究概念出發，結合當代後殖民主義與後女性主義論述，試圖發展出一套窘境美學，視時尚部落格為一種「窘境」展演：窘境乃主體於面對自身與他者之間文化、政治、經濟落差之際，所作諧擬挪用式的抵抗，以窘制霸，游移體制邊界。本文期盼在窘境美學的研究基礎上，延伸與發展更深遠的討論與對話，用以研究臺灣當代豐富多元的在地抵抗實踐。英文摘要：In the past decade, blogging has played a critical role in the fashion industry in Taiwan, taking part in the formation of the local identity. While gaining increasing visibility in academia, the intersection of fashion studies and media studies has not been investigated in any depth. The emphasis on the illusory tricks imbedded in fashion construction made by the Frankfurt School Marxists and anti-porn feminists ignore the resistant agency of the consumer. This paper takes renowned Taiwanese fashion blogs as examples, examining the power apparatus and identity formation worked by bloggers, readers, and the media. This paper further reconsiders the position and potential of fashion blogs/blogging in capitalist networks. Employing media studies, performative discourses, fashion discussions, as well as post-colonialist and post-feminist theories, this paper intends to develop a political aesthetic of awkwardness as demonstrated by local fashion blogs. An awkward scenario refers to a subject's conscious, tactical parody and appropriation when confronting its political, economic and cultural chasm with other(s). It is the ultimate goal of this paper to further elaborate on the aesthetics of awkwardness, developing it into a flexible methodology that contributes to the research on diverse/alternative practices of resistance in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：137-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).00066篇名：巴迪悟．318並列篇名：Badiou．318作者：朱元鴻(Yuan-Horng Chu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：168-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).00077篇名：回應〈巴迪悟．318〉並列篇名：Response to ”Badiou．318”作者：洪世謙(HUNG Shih-Chian)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：178-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).00088篇名：導論並列篇名：Introduciton作者：江燦騰(Chiang Tsan-teng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：191-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).00099篇名：評張崑將教授之《電光影堭椄K風：武士道分流與滲透的新詮釋》並列篇名：A Review of Prof. Chang, Kun-Chiang's ”To Sever the Spring Breeze in a Lightning Flash”: A New Interpretation of the Dissemination and Acceptance of Bushido作者：簡曉花(CHIEN Shiaw-hua)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：196-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001010篇名：在「原型」與「源流」之間的武士道：評張崑將《電光影堭椄K風：武士道分流與滲透的新詮釋》並列篇名：In the ”Prototype” and ”Origin” between the Bushido: Review of Kun-Chiang Chang's ”To Sever the Spring Breeze in a Lightning Flash”: A New Interpretation of the Dissemination and Acceptance of Bushido作者：藤井倫明(Michiaki Fujii)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：206-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001111篇名：書評：張崑將《電光影堭椄K風：武士道分流與滲透的新詮釋》並列篇名：A book Review: Chang, Kun-Chiang's ”To Sever the Spring Breeze in a Lightning Flash”: A New Interpretation of the Dissemination and Acceptance of Bushido作者：廖欽彬(Liao Chin Ping)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：215-221資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001212篇名：跨文化武士道：評《電光影堭椄K風：武士道分流與滲透的新詮釋》並列篇名：Transcultural Bushido: A Review on Chang, Kun-Chiang's ”To Sever the Spring Breeze in a Lightning Flash”: A New Interpretation of the Dissemination and Acceptance of Bushido作者：林永強(Lam Wing-keung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：222-227資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001313篇名：回憶社會學家黃金麟並列篇名：Reminiscence of a fine sociologist-Jinlin Hwang作者：傅大為(Daiwie Fu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：229-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001414篇名：海天寥廓立多時：追思黃金麟並列篇名：Standing Long in Front of the Immense Skies and Seas-In Remembrance of Jinlin Hwang作者：丘為君(Eugene W. Chiu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：233-238資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001515篇名：以人為本的歷史社會學：黃金麟的學術關懷及其貢獻並列篇名：Historical Sociology Based on Human Beings: In Remembrance of Jinlin Hwang作者：汪宏倫(Horng-luen Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：239-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001616篇名：懷念金麟並列篇名：In Remembrance of Jinlin作者：廖咸浩(LIAO, HSIEN-HAO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：247-248資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001717篇名：黃金麟（1961-2017）年表並列篇名：Jinlin Hwang (1961-2017): A Biography期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：249-253資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001818篇名：殘響世界抗歷史減噪？並列篇名：Realm of Reverberations: Against the noise reduction of the history作者：陳界仁(CHEN Chieh-jen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：24期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：254-271資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201710_(24).001901篇名：從美國經驗探討台灣長期照護制度改革並列篇名：An exploration of long-term care policy reform in Taiwan: what can we learn from the U.S. experience作者：傅健豪(Chien-Hao Fu);林翠芳(Tsui-Fang Lin)關鍵字：長期照護政策改革;居家照護;社區照護;社區居住照護法案;長期照護保險;long-term care policy reform;in-home care;community care;Community Living Assistance Services and Supports Act (The CLASS Act);long-term care insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文探討美國長期照護制度及近年長期照護政策改革方案，期望能借鏡美國經驗，提供我國發展長照政策之參考。綜觀美國近年長照改革，除強化機構服務品質外，並持續發展個人化、家庭化、及社區化的長照服務，鼓勵家庭照顧者成為長照體系的一環，建立在地化的服務輸送體系。美國長照政策改革失敗之主因繫於長照財務，1988年老年醫療保險擴張改革，因保費調漲及稅負分配問題引發反彈，而2010年隨醫改通過的社區居住照護法案，雖欲建立自願投保的公共保險，卻無法確保清償能力下仍能維持可負擔的低廉保費。借鏡美國經驗，我們認為長照2.0以發展居家照護與社區照護為主，政府應重視家庭成員提供失能者無償照顧背後隱含的龐大社會成本，考慮讓家庭成員成為長照產業供給人力，實施現金給付政策並提供完善喘息服務。此外，家庭化及社區化的長照服務可能易因地區收入間的差異，而導致服務品質落差。未來政策應強化照顧者專業能力，及確保照護品質的地域平等性。最後，待長照服務體系建置完善及照顧人力充足後，實施具互助精神且財源相對穩定之長期照護保險是政府可以思考的選項。參考美國改革之例，若日後實施長照社會保險，為避免嚴重之逆選擇問題，建議採強制納保，以維持保險制度之永續經營。英文摘要：The main purpose of this paper is to investigate the long-term care system and recent long-term care policy reforms in the United States (U.S.). Overall, recent policy reforms in the U.S. have focused on improving the quality of institutional care while pushing for more development in personalized in-home and community care. Previous attempts at major reforms in long-term care failed mostly because of issues in financing them. In 1988, the expansion of Medicare and Medicaid coverage and eligibility were quickly overturned due to concerns about rising costs and unequal contributions from taxpayers. Recently, the Community Living Assistance Services and Supports Act (The CLASS Act) was enacted as part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The CLASS Act would have established a voluntary national public insurance program for long-term care, but its design prevented the Act from satisfying the requirement to be actuarially sound while keeping the insurance premiums affordable. Learning from the U.S. experience, we suggest that the government should take into account the social costs associated with uncompensated care provided by family members. The government may consider using a cash payment policy and strengthening respite care programs. It is also worth noting that the quality of in-home care and community care might not be equal in different areas. Equipping caregivers with professional knowledge and ensuring the equality of services across regions are therefore critical in designing a successful service-delivery system. Finally, if the government plans to implement long-term care insurance in the future, then, in order to ensure its financial sustainability, a compulsory insurance scheme is needed to avoid adverse selection.起始頁-結束頁：531-544資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361061072篇名：Development of the School Health Education Program from the perspective of Comprehensive School Health Model: an example at a Higher Secondary School of Karachi, Pakistan並列篇名：從綜合性學校衛生計畫看學校健康教育的發展：以巴基斯坦卡拉奇一所高中為例作者：Saleema A Gulzar;Parvez Nayani;Syed Shajee Husain;Amna Khan關鍵字：school health;nurses' roles and responsibilities;health promotion;school health program;學校衛生;護士的角色和責任;健康促進;學校衛生計劃期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：Objectives: To assess need for school health program, common health issues, knowledge and attitude towards health, perceived needs of students, teachers and parents. Thereafter apply Comprehensive School Health Model in a higher secondary school of Karachi; and gather outcome of the program through anecdotal evidences from stakeholders. Methods: Baseline assessment was conducted through focus group discussions and individual views from through interactive activities from 250 students; focus group discussions with 35 teachers and administered questionnaires to 16 parents. We thematically analyzed the data. Based on the thematic analysis, assigned school health nurse developed and implemented health education curriculum. We gathered anecdotal evidence from stakeholders to gauge success of the program. Results: The responses of students were more inclined towards physical aspects of health, and those of parents on issues related to mental and social development. Teachers emphasized broad and important aspects of counseling on psychosocial problems of students. After implementation of the curriculum, there were developments like establishment of a cafeteria committee to ensure healthy food availability and extended counseling facilities to help students cope with daily life stressors. Conclusions: The program was successful in terms of executing health promoting initiatives for school children. The framework can act as a reference for other schools in developing countries that share similar needs and want to administer and direct the concept of school health promotion for their students.英文摘要：目標：透過將綜合性學校衛生計畫應用在巴基斯坦卡拉奇的一所高中，藉以評估學校健康教育計劃的需求、常見的健康議題、對健康的知識和態度，以及學生、教師與家長的自覺需求。方法：採焦點團體法與250位學生、35位教師進行訪談，以及對16名家長進行問卷調查，將收集到的資料進行主題分析，並依據主題，由一位學校保健室的護理人員制定並實施健康教育課程。結果：學生們傾向於注重身體健康，而父母則傾向於心理和社會發展的相關層面，教師則強調輔導學生的社會心理問題。在課程實施後，帶來一些新的影響，例如：食堂委員會的成立以確保供應健康的食物，以及增設輔導設施，協助學生應付日常生活壓力。結論：此計畫在執行學生健康促進方面來說是成功的，且此架構可作為發展中國家其他有相似需求，並希冀經營和指導學生有關學校健康促進之概念的參考。起始頁-結束頁：545-555資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361051183篇名：中文多面向健康識能量表（MMHLQ）之發展並列篇名：Development of Mandarin Multidimensional Health Literacy Questionnaire (MMHLQ)作者：魏米秀(Mi-Hsiu Wei);王英偉(Ying-Wei Wang);張美娟(Mei-Chuan Chang);謝至<U+93A0>(Jyh -Gang Hsieh)關鍵字：健康識能;測量;多面向;中文;成人;health literacy;measurement;multi-dimensions;Mandarin;adults期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本研究目的在發展一個適用於台灣成人的中文多面向健康識能量表。方法：首先經焦點團體訪談、專家內容效度、語文適讀修正等程序發展檢測題目；接著以566名成人為測定樣本，用以檢測量表心理計量特質及檢定測量模型適配度；最後以2,394名成人為效化樣本，用以檢測量表複核效度。結果：結果顯示二階五因素的測量模型適配度良好。量表包含五個面向：「獲取健康資訊」、「理解健康資訊」、「評估健康資訊」、「應用健康資訊」及「溝通與互動」，共20題自陳式題目。心理計量分析顯示量表的內部一致性信度、再測信度、建構效度、聚斂效度、區辨效度、效標關聯效度及已知群組效度表現良好。複核效度檢定結果，符合跨樣本的量尺不變性。最後，以標準參照方式訂出健康識能程度分級的切分點。結論：MMHLQ為具有良好信、效度的多面向健康識能測量工具，可用以評量群體的健康識能程度，也可做為教育介入的需求評估工具。英文摘要：Objectives: The objective of this study was to develop a tool capable of measuring multidimensional health literacy among adults in Taiwan. Methods: In the first phrase, we adopted focus-group interviews, consultations with experts, and readability check to formulate calibration items. In the second phrase, a calibration sample of 566 adults was recruited to examine the psychometric characteristics of the items and test the fitness of the measurement model. In the last phrase, a validation sample of 2394 adults was used for evaluating cross-validation. Results: CFA demonstrated the high degree of fitness of the proposed second-order five-factor model. The proposed scale covers the following five dimensions: accessing, understanding, appraising, and applying health information, and communication and interaction. The scale includes 20 self-reported items. Psychometric analysis demonstrated that the scale has high internal consistency and test-retest reliability as well as good construct, convergent, discriminant, criterion-related, and known group validity. Cross-validation analysis demonstrated the metric invariance of the scale across the two samples. Cutting scores were selected for criterion-referenced grading. Conclusions: Our findings indicate that the Mandarin Multidimensional Health Literacy Questionnaire (MMHLQ) is a reliable and valid measure of multi-dimensional health literacy. The tool is useful in evaluating the level of health literacy among adult populations as well as in needs assessments geared toward interventions to improve health literacy.起始頁-結束頁：556-570資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060614篇名：以理論為架構探討影響孕婦季節性流感疫苗接種意圖之相關因素：以臺北市立聯合醫院為例並列篇名：Factors associated with the behavioral intention towards receiving a seasonal influenza vaccine during pregnancy - an empirical study at Taipei City Hospital作者：蔡秉修(Ping-Hsiu Tsai);林陳立(Chen-Li Lin);施淑芳(Shu-Fang Shih)關鍵字：孕婦;流感疫苗;健康信念模式;行為意圖;pregnant women;influenza vaccines;Health Belief Model;behavioral intentions期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討影響孕婦接種季節性流感疫苗行為意圖之相關因素。方法：本研究為橫斷性研究，並運用健康信念模式及參酌相關文獻設計測量工具。研究對象為2016年8至9月間至臺北市立聯合醫院婦產科候診之孕婦共315位。本研究以SAS 9.4版進行資料處理，以STATA 13版進行多元線性迴歸分析。結果：孕婦自覺利益越大、自覺障礙越小、行動線索越多、自我效能越好、主觀規範程度越高、預期擔心越多，以及社會規範越低，其流感疫苗接種意願越高。結論：建議針對影響孕婦接種流感疫苗之重要因子如自覺利益、自覺障礙，以及自我效能等設計衛生教育策略，如強化接種疫苗對孕婦及胎兒的利益或移除其對疫苗安全性疑慮等障礙。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aimed to investigate the factors associated with the behavioral intention towards influenza vaccination. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study. The instruments were developed based on the Health Belief Model and related literature. The participants were the 315 pregnant women who had prenatal visits between August and September 2016 at the Fuyou Branch of Taipei City Hospital. We used SAS 9.4 for data processing, and STATA 13 for multiple linear regression analysis. Results: The participants with more perceived benefits, less perceived barriers, more cues to action, higher self-efficacy, higher subjective norms, more anticipated worry, and lower social norms were more willing to receive influenza vaccine. Conclusions: Our findings suggest that health education strategies should be designed with a focus on the important determinants influencing intention towards vaccination, such as self-perceived benefits, self-perceived barriers, and self-efficacy. Such strategies include enhancing perceived benefits for the pregnant women and their babies, and clarifying the safety issues to remove the barriers.起始頁-結束頁：571-588資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060855篇名：台灣台東縣學齡前兒童的咀嚼能力與進食行為之關係探討並列篇名：A study on masticatory ability and eating behaviors for preschool children in Taitung County, Taiwan作者：黃愫芬(Su-Fen Huang)關鍵字：咀嚼能力;進食行為;咀嚼力判定口香糖;masticatory ability;eating behaviours;color-changeable chewing gum期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在瞭解台東縣學齡前兒童咀嚼能力與進食行為之現況，及探討影響咀嚼能力之因素。方法：採用咀嚼力判定口香糖檢測咀嚼能力和研究者自編之「兒童進食行為調查表」為工具，以分層叢集抽樣方式，抽取台東縣滿五足歲403位學齡前兒童為研究對象。採用卡方檢定與多變項羅吉斯迴歸進行資料分析。結果：(一)約22.83%兒童咀嚼能力較弱，約26.30%經常會喜歡吃軟不喜歡吃硬的食物。(二)以多變項羅吉斯迴歸分析顯示，影響兒童咀嚼能力較弱之顯著因子包括：從不吃早餐、每天都吃零食、很偏食、不會吃東西細嚼慢嚥、經常會狼吞虎嚥、經常會吃東西咬一咬吐出來、經常會食物久含在口中、經常會喜歡吃軟不喜歡吃硬的食物、經常會邊吃飯邊看電視及經常會邊吃飯邊喝水或喝湯。結論：兒童咀嚼能力近二成半屬於弱的程度，進食時咀嚼動作愈不確實會提高咀嚼能力愈弱的風險，建議改變烹飪形式和提供稍微較硬的食物，並宣導牙齒保健和正確咀嚼進食，如不偏食、關掉電視專心吃飯及叮嚀細嚼慢嚥。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aimed to investigate the current status and factors related to the masticatory ability and eating behaviors of preschool children in Taitung County, Taiwan. Methods: The study subjects included 403 five-year-old preschool children in Taitung County, Taiwan. The study tools included a masticatory ability test (color-changeable chewing gum) and questionnaire on eating behaviors. All data obtained were analyzed using a chi-square test and multivariate logistic regression analysis. Results: (1) Among the children studied, 22.83% had reduced masticatory ability. Further, 26.30% avoided eating chewy foods regularly. (2) The multiple logistic regression analysis indicated various eating behaviors that were associated with the poor masticatory ability of preschool children. These behaviors were never eating breakfast, having a snack daily, having particular food preferences, unable to chew food properly, eating quickly, regularly spitting out after chewing, usually keeping food in the mouth for a long time, preferring soft foods to hard foods, eating while watching television, and generally eating while drinking water (other beverages) or consuming soup. Conclusions: Almost one-quarter of the included preschool children had poor masticatory abilities. The masticatory ability of the preschool children correlated with their eating behaviors. Based on these results, it is recommended to change cooking methods or to provide harder foods and to promote the concepts of good oral hygiene and eating behaviors such as a balanced diet, no television while eating, and eating slowly.起始頁-結束頁：589-602資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060926篇名：孕婦對羥基苯甲酸酯暴露之生物偵測及其對新生兒出生結果之健康影響並列篇名：Biological monitoring of parabens in pregnant women and the health effects on newborns作者：梁海薇(Hai-Wei Liang);張嘉晃(Chia-Huang Chang);黃鈺芳(Yu-Fang Huang);王培瑋(Pei-Wei Wang);黃禮偉(Li-Wei Huang);楊文理(Winnie Yang);陳美蓮(Mei-Lien Chen)關鍵字：對羥基苯甲酸酯;產前暴露;體重;體長;頭圍;paraben;prenatal exposure;birth weight;birth length;head circumference期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：對羥基苯甲酸酯具防腐之特性，故常被應用於各式消費產品中，造成民眾暴露機會大增。對羥基苯甲酸酯為已知的環境干擾物質，對於健康之影響，目前結果仍不明確。因此，本研究將建立台灣第一份對羥基苯甲酸酯之暴露資料、探討可能之暴露來源、並了解產前對羥基苯甲酸酯暴露與嬰兒出生指標之相關性。方法：本研究追蹤241位孕婦及其嬰兒、蒐集第三孕期尿液、並使用高效能液相層析串聯四極柱飛行時間式質譜儀檢測尿液中甲基、乙基、丙基、及丁基四種常見之對羥基苯甲酸酯。結果：對羥基苯甲酸酯（甲、乙、丙、丁基）的幾何平均濃度分別是37.3、1.00、3.04、0.84 ng/mL。與國外研究相比，本研究檢測濃度較低。乳液使用頻率及每周蔬菜攝入量較多者，對羥基苯甲酸酯暴露量較高。總對羥基苯甲酸酯高暴露組，對胎兒體重具相關性；乙基對羥基苯甲酸酯高暴露組，對胎兒體長具相關性。結論：本研究為台灣首次對羥基苯甲酸酯之暴露資料。可提供孕婦減少使用含對羥基苯甲酸酯產品之建議，以維護嬰兒健康發展。英文摘要：Objectives: Parabens are a group of esters of parahydroxybenzoic acid and widely used as antimicrobial preservatives. Human can be easily exposed to them through food additives and personal care products (PCPs). However, epidemiological studies on the adverse effects of paraben are limited. This study was to determine parabens levels in urine of pregnant women in Taiwan for the first time and the growth of newborns. Methods: In this study, pregnant women and their fetuses were followed-up. Maternal urine samples were collected at the third pregnancy trimester. We measured four common parabens (methyl, ethyl, propyl, butyl) in urine extract using off-line solid phase extraction-Ultra performance liquid chromatography- Quadrupole time of-flight mass spectrometer method and the concentrations were adjusted with creatinine. Results: The geometric mean levels of urinary MP, EP, PP, and BP were 37.3, 1.00, 3.04 and 0.84 ng/mL, respectively, which were lower than levels measured in most of other countries. Higher paraben exposure was associated with the frequency of using cosmetics and the weekly vegetable intake. Birth weight was associated with total paraben exposure (p＜0.05) and birth length was associated with ethyl paraben exposure (p＜0.01). Conclusions: Although the parabens exposures in pregnant women were lower in Taiwan than in western, the exposure may have association with fetus growth. Future study is needed to confirm the causal correlation, and we suggested reducing the use of parabens in PCPs products during pregnancy.起始頁-結束頁：603-612資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060897篇名：運用修正型德菲法與健保資料庫開發具可行性的兒科品質報告卡指標並列篇名：The use of modified Delphi method and health insurance database to develop feasible indicators for pediatric quality report card作者：陳宗泰(Tsung-Tai Chen);鄒國英(Kuo-Inn Tsou);徐世達(Shyh-Dar Shyur);蔡宜蓉(I-Jung Tsai);許巍鐘(Wei-Chung Hsu);鍾國彪(Kuo-Piao Chung);黃莉茵(Li-Ying Huang)關鍵字：兒科;品質指標;資訊公開;修正型德菲法;pediatric;quality measures;open disclosure;modified Delphi期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：訂出適合我國國情並能與國外接軌的兒科品質報告卡指標。方法：參考國際組織與國外文獻發展的兒科指標，並邀請兒科及家醫科等相關的專家，以按照重要性、效度及改善機會等準則來萃取出專家偏好的指標，最後再陸續以不同的方法（如專家會議、修正型德菲法及健保資料庫輔助）來產生最終的代表性指標。結果：本研究選擇了4項兒科領域（3項疾病領域）：氣喘、積液性中耳炎、尿道感染及一般結果（例如死亡率）等，此4項領域共辨識出49項相關候選指標，最後選出7項兒科品質報告卡代表指標，包括氣喘4項，積液性中耳炎1項，以及尿道感染2項，這7項品質報告卡代表性指標的比率大部分呈現逐年惡化的品質趨勢。結論：本研究以修正型德菲法選出7項適合我國國情以及與國際接軌的指標，政府單位可參考本研究成果發展兒科品質報告卡來改善品質。英文摘要：Objectives: To develop pediatric indicators of public report card that are suitable for Taiwan's context and aligned with international standards. Methods: We referenced the pediatric indicators developed by international organizations and the literature and invited experts with specialties in pediatric and family medicine in order to extract their preferred indicators according to the selection criteria of importance, validity, and feasibility. The final results of the representative indicators were subsequently produced through different methods (i.e. professional meetings, modified Delphi, and aid from the National Health Insurance Administration (NHIA)'s claims database). Results: We chose four pediatric disease fields: asthma, otitis media with effusion (OME), urine tract infection (UTI), and general outcomes (e.g. mortality). We next identified a total of 49 candidate indicators from these 4 fields (3 disease categories) and then finally selected 7 representative indicators for the pediatric quality report card, including 4 asthma-related indicators, 1 OME indicator, and 2 UTI indicators. The adherence rates for most of these indicators demonstrated steadily deteriorating trends of quality. Conclusions: We employed the modified Delphi method to elicit 7 representative indicators that are suitable for our context and aligned with international standards. The government can utilize our study's results to develop a pediatric quality report card for improving quality of pediatric care.起始頁-結束頁：613-622資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060548篇名：評論：運用修正型德菲法與健保資料庫開發具可行性的兒科品質報告卡指標並列篇名：Commentary: the use of modified Delphi method and health insurance database to develop feasible indicators for pediatric quality report card作者：洪錦墩(Chin-Tun Hung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：623-623資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201736106054019篇名：作者回覆：運用修正型德菲法與健保資料庫開發具可行性的兒科品質報告卡指標並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary; the use of modified Delphi method and health insurance database to develop feasible indicators for pediatric quality report card作者：陳宗泰(Tsung-Tai Chen);鄒國英(Kuo-Inn Tsou);徐世達(Shyh-Dar Shyur);蔡宜蓉(I-Jung Tsai);許巍鐘(Wei-Chung Hsu);鍾國彪(Kuo-Piao Chung);黃莉茵(Li-Ying Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：624-625資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060540210篇名：台灣診所之歇業與存活研究及其相關因素探討－以2000年至2010年新設西醫診所研究為例並列篇名：Taiwan's new clinic closures (survivals) and their associated determinants: 2000 to 2010作者：蔣靜怡(Rica Ching-Yi Chiang);郎慧珠(Hui-Chu Lang)關鍵字：診所;歇業;專科診所;存活曲線;市場競爭;clinics;closures;specialist clinics;survival curve;market competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷6期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：探討西醫診所存活趨勢並提供相關經營建言。方法：資料來源有二：1.2000-2010年國衛院「全民健康學術研究資料庫」。2.主計處「中華民國統計資訊網」之縣市社經指標。研究範圍排除外島、中醫與牙醫診所，統計分析以存活曲線（Survival Curve）以及Cox比例風險分析模式（Cox Proportional Hazard Model）探討各專科診所及縣市別之存活情況與生存風險。結果：西元2000-2010年新增加西醫診所7,347家，有5,361家存活，1,986家最終歇業。研究顯示西醫診所於經營約第700天皆進入歇業/存活之關鍵決定。歇業幅度最高之前三名科別：不分科（37.5%）、家醫科（33.9%）與復健科（28.7%）。存活診所其醫師較為年輕、醫事人員編制較大，診所收入點數與就診人次較高。歇業幅度最高之前三名縣市為雲林（41.3%）、台東（39.1%）與苗栗（37.0%）。結論：西醫診所經營前期700天為歇業/存活關鍵，等同為「診所黃金生存七百天」。家醫科歇業率居各專科診所之冠。台灣診所高歇業率地區多屬非都會區，與國外文獻指出歇業多發生於大城市的結果相異。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aimed to determine the survival trends in Taiwan clinics. We expect the results to provide important information for practitioners and the government for their operation and health policy making. Methods: We used 2000-2010 NHI claim data and statistics from the Statistical Bureau, National Statistics of Taiwan. Clinics located in outlying islands, as well as Chinese physicians and dentists, were excluded from this research. Survival curves and Cox regression were used to analyze the trends in clinic closures and explore the factors influencing the survival of clinics during the study period. Results: A total of 7,347 clinics were initiated between 2000 and 2010. Among the clinics, 5,361 remained open and 1,986 closed. The survival curve indicated that 7,347 clinics had significantly decreased after the 700th day of operations. The top 3 closure specialties were general medicine (37.5%), family medicine (33.9%), and rehabilitation medicine clinics (28.7%). The age of physicians, number of staff members, income, and clinic visits were significant determinants associated with closure. The top 3 counties of clinic closures were Yun-Lin, Tai-Tung, and Miao-Li counties. Conclusions: Between 2000 and 2010, of the 7,347 initiated clinics studied, closures occurred after the 700th day of operations. The highest three specialties of closure were general medicine, family medicine, and rehabilitation medicine.起始頁-結束頁：626-639資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610511011篇名：公共衛生與預防醫學的區別：歷史觀點並列篇名：The distinction between public health and preventive medicine: a historical perspect作者：江東亮(Tung-Liang Chiang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：423-426資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610607212篇名：醫院整合醫學照護制度之國際經驗與對台灣的啟示並列篇名：International experience with a hospital medicine care system and lessons for Taiwan作者：黃俊哲(CHUN-CHE HUANG);譚家惠(ELISE CHIA-HUI TAN);楊銘欽(MING-CHIN YANG)關鍵字：醫院整合醫學;醫院整合醫學科醫師;照護制度;hospital medicine;hospitalist;care system期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：醫院整合醫學（Hospital medicine）照護制度是由固定群組的主治醫師，採完整交接班的方式提供住院病人整合醫療照護，並與醫療團隊成員共同照護住院病人，以改善醫院和醫療照護體系執行成效，期藉此能達到促進住院病人安全、提升照護品質和妥善運用醫療資源之目標。美國是最早推行此制度的國家，隨後英國、加拿大、新加坡和日本等國家相繼仿效，並依各國健康照護體系的特色，發展照護模式及規劃專科醫師培育訓練，台灣亦在2015年6月起以試辦計畫方式於部分醫院推行。本文回顧與整理主要國家發展醫院整合醫學照護制度的沿革和實施經驗，期許對台灣發展醫院整合醫學照護制度的啟發。從國際經驗來看，本文建議加強醫院整合醫學科醫師招募、教育訓練和專業發展、提昇醫院高層管理者支持程度，以及提高病人對醫院整合醫學科醫師的認知與態度等因應措施，使台灣能朝發展在地化醫院整合醫學照護制度之目標邁進。英文摘要：A hospital medicine care system is a type of integrated care for inpatients provided by a fixed group of attending physicians with a complete handover system. They also work with other team members to take care of hospitalized patients in order to improve system performance. The objectives of this system are to promote the safety of inpatients, improve the quality of care, and utilize medical care resources more appropriately. The United States was the first country to implement this system, and was followed by the United Kingdom, Canada, Singapore, and Japan. Each country developed its care system and specialty training programs according to its own conditions. Taiwan also initiated a trial program in some hospitals in June, 2015. This paper reviews the development and practice experience of major countries with hospital medicine care systems, in hope of inspiring the development of hospital medicine in Taiwan. Based on international experience, the authors suggest strengthening the recruitment, training, and career development of hospital medicine specialists, elevating the degree of support from top management, and increasing the recognition by patients that hospital medicine specialists are key factors in helping Taiwan develop its own hospital medicine care system.起始頁-結束頁：427-438資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610603813篇名：癌症病人自殺流行病學綜合性論述並列篇名：Comprehensive interpretations of epidemiology of suicide among cancer patients作者：陳乃菁(NAI-CHING CHEN);廖佳怡(CHIA-YI LIAO);劉怡<U+5F63>(YI-WEN LIU)關鍵字：癌症;癌症病人自殺;流行病學;自殺防治;cancer;suicide among cancer patients;epidemiology;suicide prevention期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：癌症多變性的衝擊以及死亡威脅所產生的心理壓力，促使癌症病人有相對較高的自殺風險，但其流行病學、危險因子、自殺的時間點、不同癌症與自殺間的關係、自殺防治並無統一整理論述，因此本文藉由分析整理國、內外癌症病人自殺相關之研究資料，歸納釐清並探討導致癌症病人自殺的可能原因和機制，期望進一步將防治工作推展至臨床工作，降低癌症自殺率。經文獻整理得知在癌症確診後、癌症診斷初期、癌症遠端轉移與預後差、影響生活品質或功能之癌症有較高的自殺風險，且當身體功能障礙、合併憂鬱症與物質濫用者、失去獨立性與自主權、中老年、男性、失業、低收入、未婚、離婚、鰥寡者亦是癌症病人高風險的自殺因子，此外，不安全的就醫環境、不當的醫療評估、未適當培訓管理照護人員，無法辨識潛在的自殺隱憂，因此如何有效評估高危險癌症自殺族群與進行防治工作是照護過程甚為重要的課題。本文結果有助於提高臨床照護過程癌症病人自殺防治的敏感度，於診治過程利用自殺風險篩選工具即早確診病人心理層面的問題，即時提供預防措施，創造安全就醫環境，促進醫護團隊與癌症病人有效溝通。英文摘要：Psychological stress as the result of the impact of varieties of cancer and death threat leads to a relatively higher risk of suicide completion among cancer patients. Nevertheless, unified and comprehensive interpretations concerning relevant epidemiology, risk factors, time point of suicidal behavior, the relationship between different cancers and suicidal behavior, and suicide prevention remain scarce. With the analysis of previous studies about cancer patients' suicidal behavior, the current study probed into potential reasons and mechanism leading to suicidal behavior among cancer patients, hoping to upgrade relevant preventions to clinical fields and lower the cancer-related suicide rate. The results revealed that upon confirmation of cancers, higher risks of suicide existed in conditions as getting close to the initial diagnosis, metastasis, poor prognosis, or suffering from cancers that affected quality of life and functions. High suicidal factors were also found among cancer patients with physical disabilities, comorbid depression and substance use, loss of independence and decision-making power, middle-aged people, male, unemployed, having low income, single, divorced, widower/widow. Moreover, unsafe medical environments, inappropriate medical assessment, insufficient training of caretakers, and inability to identify potential suicide problems were also major challenges. Therefore, effective assessment of cancer patients with high suicide risk and relevant prevention has been vital in the care process. The results of the current study help enhance the sensitivity to suicide prevention in the clinical process of taking care of cancer patients, with suicide risk screening employed to have a timely confirmation of the patients' psychological issues, to provide prompt prevention measures, to create safe medical environments, and to enhance effective communication between the medical team and cancer patients.起始頁-結束頁：439-447資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610604314篇名：評論：防治癌症病人自殺：只有心理衛生篩檢足夠嗎？並列篇名：Commentary: suicide prevention among cancer patients: screening of mental health services is enough?作者：廖士程(Shih-Cheng Liao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：448-448資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060430115篇名：運用C4.5決策樹分析失眠症狀並列篇名：Applying C4.5 decision tree to analyze insomnia symptoms作者：蔡崇煌(CHUNG-HUANG TSAI);翁紹仁(SHAO-JEN WENG);周駿安(CHUN-AN CHOU);吳信宏(HSIN-HUNG WU);洪偉展(WEI-ZHAN HUNG)關鍵字：失眠;憂鬱症;健康管理;C4.5決策樹;insomnia;depression;health management;C4.5 decision tree期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：失眠是常見的主觀症狀，會影響生活品質及身體健康，本研究目的為運用C4.5決策樹工具，以找出影響失眠問題關鍵重要因素，以供相關人員參考。方法：本研究收集2015年1月至12月間到台中市某區域醫院接受全身健康檢查之20歲以上之民眾為樣本個案，共收集有效樣本1,223人，其中，男性佔756人（61.8%）。研究使用結構性問卷，有人口統計基本資料、失眠症狀、生活型態、憂鬱及泛焦慮症狀等資訊。本研究以SPSS 20.0分析資料，憂鬱、焦慮量表及總量表之內在一致性（Cronbach's α）值分別為0.78、0.78及0.86。本研究進一步使用Weka 3.8.1之「C4.5決策樹」以產生規則以了解哪些因素的組合可能容易導致失眠症狀。結果：入睡困難、夜眠中斷、早醒、醒後疲倦、嚴重失眠問題等各種睡眠障礙因素之間的彼此相關性高；男性與入睡困難、夜眠中斷問題的相關性比女性高；睡前喝水、睡前喝酒、飲咖啡習慣、飲茶習慣皆與嚴重失眠問題正相關；安眠藥與各種睡眠障礙正相關；民眾擁有職業可能會改善入睡困難與夜眠中斷的問題；家庭壓力、工作壓力與其他壓力皆可能會產生睡眠障礙；運動習性的養成，不管是增加運動頻率或是增加運動量皆有助於部份民眾降低失眠障礙；睡前喝酒在短期內有助於克服睡眠問題；戒除飲咖啡習慣對部份民眾將有助於減緩失眠障礙；服用藥物對身體除了可能會產生各種副作用外，亦可能會對部分民眾造成失眠問題；抽煙習慣亦會對部分民眾產生睡眠障礙，擁有職業可降低部份民眾的失眠問題。結論：本研究使用決策樹針對不同類型的民眾進行統計分析以產生規則，發現養成運動習性、少抽煙、少飲咖啡、少服藥物、從事職業活動、睡前避免喝水等，有助於部份民眾改善失眠問題。英文摘要：Objectives: Insomnia is a common and subjective symptom that influences individuals' quality of life and health. The goal of this research is to apply C4.5 decision tree to identify the key factors for the reference of relevant personnel. Methods: Using a structured questionnaire, we collected physical examination data of 1223 individuals (756 [61.8%] males) older than 20 years attending a Taichung regional hospital. The questions were related to basic demographic information, insomnia symptoms, life style, and mood (depression, anxiety, etc.). This research used SPSS 20.0 to analyze the data. Cronbach's α for depression scores, anxiety scores, and total scores was 0.78, 0.78, and 0.86, respectively. The C4.5 decision tree in Weka 3.8.1 were applied to generate a rule of which combination of factors are most likely to generate insomnia symptoms. Results: ”Difficulty falling asleep,” ”Interrupted night sleep,” ”Wake up early,” ”Wake up tired,” and ”Serious insomnia problem” were highly correlated. Males were more likely to score high on ”Difficulty falling asleep” and ”Interrupted night sleep.” ”Drinking water before sleeping,” ”Drinking alcohol before sleeping,” ”Habit of drinking coffee,” and ”Habit of drinking tea” were positively correlated with ”Serious insomnia problem.” ”Sleeping pills” was positively correlated with each kind of insomnia symptom. ”Difficulty falling asleep” and ”Interrupted night sleep” were less likely in individuals who were employed. Family pressure, work pressure, and other pressure, may also generate insomnia symptoms. Exercise was associated with reduced insomnia symptoms, irrespective of the exercise frequency and exercise volume. ”Drinking alcohol before sleeping” could overcome insomnia problems over the short-term. ”Abstaining from drinking coffee” allowed some individuals to reduce insomnia symptoms. Using medicine not only generated various side effects, but may also have generated different insomnia symptoms in some individuals. Smoking can also lead to insomnia symptoms in some individuals, while employment can decrease insomnia symptoms. Conclusions: This study used a decision tree to generate rules on insomnia based on data obtained from a cohort of individuals. We found that taking part in exercise, stopping smoking, drinking coffee, taking medicine, and drinking before sleeping, as well as having employment are likely to improve insomnia symptoms in many individuals.起始頁-結束頁：449-460資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610605516篇名：中老年人健康狀況、性別化家務工作與生活滿意度相關性之兩性差異並列篇名：Gender differences in the inter-relationships among health condition, gender-pattern housework, and life satisfaction in middle-aged and older adults作者：李青芬(CHING-FEN LEE);唐先梅(SHAIN-MAY TANG)關鍵字：健康狀況;性別化家務工作;生活滿意度;中老年人;health condition;gender-pattern housework;life satisfaction;middle-aged and older adults期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：瞭解不同性別的中老年人，健康狀況在「性別化家務工作」與「生活滿意度」關係中的調節效果。方法：資料來源為「台灣社會變遷基本調查第六期第二次家庭組問卷」，分析對象為當時55歲以上已婚有偶之中老年人計589人。使用多元迴歸分析，檢視健康狀況在「性別化家務工作」與「生活滿意度」間的關係。結果：(1)中老年人健康狀況越佳，生活滿意度也越高。(2)傳統男人家務與生活滿意度的關係，健康狀況具調節效果，且會因性別而不同。當中老年男性健康狀況較差，傳統男人家務參與愈多生活滿意度愈佳；但對身體較健康的男性，則傳統男人家務參與愈多生活滿意度愈低。對中老年女性來說，健康狀況愈好，傳統男人家務做越多生活滿意度愈佳；但對健康狀況較差的女性而言，做愈多傳統男人家務則生活滿意度愈差。結論：對未來家務工作與生活滿意關係的研究，除應考慮性別的議題，對中老年人更應加入身體健康的影響。此外，如何結合家務與健康使老年生活更為獨立與自主也是政策可考慮的方向。英文摘要：Objective: The aim of this study was to investigate how health status moderated the relationship between gender-pattern housework and life satisfaction from a sample of middle-aged and older adults living with a partner in Taiwan. Methods: The data source was the 6th issue of the ”Taiwan Social Change Survey”. The subjects (N=589) were restricted to people aged 55 or older. Multiple regression analysis was used to investigate how health status moderated the relationship between gender-pattern housework and life satisfaction. Results: (1) Health status was positively associated with life satisfaction for older adults. (2) The moderation of health status on the relationship between the performance of traditional masculine housework and life satisfaction varied by gender. Older male adults tended to have higher life satisfaction when they had poor health and did additional traditional masculine housework; however, they tended to have lower life satisfaction when they had good health, and did additional traditional masculine housework. Older female adults who were in good health and did additional traditional masculine housework, tended to have higher life satisfaction; however, when older women with poor health did additional traditional masculine housework, they tended to have lower life satisfaction. Conclusions: For future studies, the relationship between gender-pattern housework and life satisfaction should consider not only gender differences but also health status, especially for older adults. In terms of policy, housework and health status should be considered together as an important condition for the independent living of older adults.起始頁-結束頁：461-472資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610607017篇名：初級照護品質與可避免急診之探討並列篇名：The association of quality of primary care and the potentially avoidable emergency department (ED) visit作者：張婷(TING CHANG);郭年真(RAYMOND N. KUO)關鍵字：初級照護品質;門診敏感性病症;可避免急診;照護連續性;primary care;ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACSC);avoidable emergency department visit;continuity of care index (COCI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：經由分析急診病患特性與其門診利用情形，瞭解發生「可避免急診」病患之特性，並探討可避免急診與初級照護品質的關係。方法：本研究以2010年至2013年發生「可避免急診」之病患為主要研究對象，與同年未發生可避免急診之門診患者進行配對。使用「照護連續性」作為測量初級照護品質的指標，分析「病患特性」、「照護連續性」、「門診主要就醫機構層級」對於發生可避免急診的影響。結果：研究結果發現，男性、投保金額低的病患，發生可避免急診的機率較高。多變量分析結果發現，在控制其他變項後，照護連續性越低的組別，發生可避免急診機率越高（OR=1.924∼3.220）。相較於診所層級，區域醫院（OR=3.543）、醫學中心（OR=2.916）與地區醫院（OR=2.148）發生可避免急診機率較高。結論：本研究發現門診的照護連續性高則發生可避免急診之機率較低，因此建議應提昇民眾的照護連續性。此外建議可將「可避免急診」作為監控門診照護品質之指標。英文摘要：Objectives: This research aims to describe the characteristics and healthcare utilization of patients with avoidable emergency department (ED) visits and to explore the relationship between avoidable ED visits and the quality of primary care. Methods: Patients who had avoidable ED visit between 2010 and 2013 was selected as the case-group in this study and were matched to patients who had outpatient visits but without any avoidable ED visit in the same year. The continuity of care index (COCI) was used to measure the quality of primary care. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was applied to explore whether avoidable ED visits are associated with patients' characteristics, the continuity of care, and the type of providers as their usual source of primary care. Results: The study found that patient who was male or with lower income class were associated with higher probability of having avoidable ED visits. The result of multivariate analysis further revealed that the odds of avoidable ED visits were higher for patients with lower continuity of care (OR = 1.924 to 3.22), and for whom received primary care from regional hospitals (OR = 3.543) and medical centers (OR = 2.916). Conclusions: Higher continuity of care was found to significantly lower the risk of avoidable ED visits. Health policy stakeholders are therefore encouraged to improve continuity of care. We also suggest that avoidable ED visits should be used to monitor the quality of primary care routinely.起始頁-結束頁：473-486資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610608018篇名：台灣留學生狂飲行為之研究並列篇名：The study of binge drinking behavior among international Taiwanese college students作者：李曉昀(Hsiao-Yun Lee)關鍵字：狂飲行為;大學生;留學生;文化涵化;binge drinking;college student;international student;acculturation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：狂飲行為是最具危險性的飲酒行為，心理、環境、文化等因素皆可能影響狂飲行為產生。由於台灣留學生的狂飲行為長期受到忽略，本研究旨在探討上述各因子對於台灣留學生狂飲行為之影響。方法：本研究採自填式問卷於2012年收集資料，共522位在美國大學就讀的台灣留學生完成填答。研究以階層羅吉斯迴歸來分析影響狂飲行為的因子，迴歸分析輸入的順序為：(一)基本背景資料；(二)成癮物質使用習慣；(三)環境因素；(四)行為與心理因素；(五)文化涵化。結果：研究結果發現年齡較小、大學生（與研究生比）、與室友同住於校外、有吸菸習慣者較有可能出現狂飲行為。此外，同儕的飲酒態度、自己對飲酒的預期效果、飲酒導致負面事件與文化涵化等因子皆能預測台灣留學生的狂飲行為。性別、校園飲酒文化、與拒絕飲酒信心則未具有顯著預測力。結論：同儕態度、對飲酒的預期效果、飲酒導致負面事件以及美國文化的涵化程度為台灣留學生狂飲行為的重要危險因子。英文摘要：Objectives: Binge drinking is the most dangerous drinking behavior and could be influenced by psychological, environmental, and cultural factors. Due to limited studies of international Taiwanese college students' binge-drinking behavior, the aim of this study is to investigate the aforementioned factors influencing binge drinking behavior, focusing on international Taiwanese college students in the United States. Methods: A survey method was employed in 2012. In total, 522 valid responses were collected. A sequential logistic regression was applied to investigate determinants influencing binge-drinking behavior. Factors were entered by the following order: (1) demographics, (2) substance use, (3) environment, (4) behavioral and psychological factors, (5) acculturation. Results: The results showed factors of younger age, undergraduate status, living off campus with roommates, and being current smokers increased the likelihood of engaging in binge-drinking behavior. Moreover, peers' attitude toward drinking, drinking expectancy, negative consequences of drinking, and acculturation were significant factors predicting international Taiwanese college students' binge-drinking behavior. In contrast, gender, campus drinking culture, and confidence in refusing alcohol were not significant predictors. Conclusions: Peers' attitude toward drinking, drinking expectancy, negative consequences of drinking, and acculturation are risk factors of international Taiwanese college students' binge drinking behavior.起始頁-結束頁：487-496資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610604519篇名：第二型糖尿病患者的睡眠品質與血糖控制之相關性探討並列篇名：The association of the sleep quality on glycemic control in patients with type II Diabetes作者：羅琦(Chyi Lo);黃建寧(Chien-Ning Huang);郭青萍(Ching-Pyng Kuo);黃秀梨(Shiow-Li Hwang);廖玟君(Wen-Chun Liao)關鍵字：第二型糖尿病;主客觀睡眠品質;血糖控制;type 2 diabetes;subjective and objective sleep quality;glycemic control期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：第二型糖尿病與其所延伸健康問題威脅著台灣民眾的健康，本研究旨在探討第二型糖尿病病人之主客觀睡眠品質與血糖控制之間關係。方法：以立意取樣中部某醫學中心之第二型糖尿病患者共61位完成研究。主觀睡眠品質以匹茲堡睡眠品質指標量表（PSQI）測量，客觀睡眠品質以腕動計（wrist actigraphy）測量72小時（24小時*3天），並以病歷查閱方式追蹤病人收案後一年內的血糖控制生化值（HbA1c），資料以SPSS 17.0套裝軟體進行統計分析。結果：研究結果發現本研究族群血糖控制不佳，糖化血色素（HbA1c）平均為7.9±1.6%；飯前血糖值（AC sugar）平均為162.1±45.4 mg/dl，HbA1c＞7.0%佔72.2%。主觀睡眠品質之PSQI平均分數為6.6±4.1分，主觀睡眠品質不佳者（PSQI＞5分）佔57.4%；客觀睡眠時數平均為5.7小時，睡眠效率為75.3%，睡眠潛伏期為25.5分鐘、半夜醒來總時間為63.3分鐘。線性複迴歸分析結果發現，自覺睡眠效率（β=-0.040）、糖尿病罹病年數（β=0.07）、BMI（β=0.13）能預測糖化血色素值，解釋32.2%變異量。結論：主觀睡眠品質的好壞與第二型糖尿病患者的血糖控制具有相關性，本研究結果提供臨床照護者將睡眠品質評估納入糖尿病患者血糖控制的重要參考。英文摘要：Objectives: Type 2 diabetes and the health problems associated with type 2 diabetes threaten the health of the people in Taiwan. The purpose of this study was to determine the relationship between subjective and objective sleep quality on glycemic control of patients with type 2 diabetes. Methods: This study used a purpose sampling and cross-sectional study design to recruit type 2 diabetes patients from an outpatient endocrinology and metabolism clinic at a medical center in central Taiwan. A total of 61 patients completed questionnaires and were followed for 1 year. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) measurements and wrist actigraphy (Somnowatch) measures for 72 h (24 h * 3 days) were collected. Glycemic control was followed for 1 year by reviewing the glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) data in medical records. The SPSS 17.0 software package was used for statistical analysis. Results: The results showed poor glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes, with an average HbA1c of 7.9±1.6% and a fasting glucose value (AC sugar) of 162.1±45.4 mg/dl. The majority of patients (72.2%) had poor glycemic control (HbA1c＞ 7.0%). The subjective sleep quality was poor, with a global PSQI score of 6.6±4.1; 57.4% of patients had a PSQI score ＞ 5. The objective sleep hours were inadequate, as follows: average total sleep time, 5.7 hours; sleep efficiency, 75.3%; sleep latency, 25.5 min; and awake time after sleep onset, 63.3 min. Linear multiple regression analysis showed that perceived sleep efficiency (β=-0.040), duration of diabetes (β=0.07), and BMI (β=0.13) predicted the value of HbA1c with 32.2% of variance. Conclusions: Subjective sleep quality was shown to be associated with glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes. The results of this study suggest the importance of assessing patient sleep quality on managing glycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes.起始頁-結束頁：497-510資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610604820篇名：長期照顧政策是照顧老人還是失能者？－以蔡英文臉書為例探勘民眾認知並列篇名：The subjectivity of long-term care policies in Taiwan: seniors or disabled? - an example from Tsai's Facebook page作者：管瓊瑛(Chiung-Ying Kuan);謝寧(Ning Hsieh);陳潔(Chieh Chen);張桂萍(Kuei-Ping Chang);高翊瑋(Yi-Wei Kao);謝邦昌(Ben-Chang Shia);張嘉芳(Chia-Fang Chang);張耀懋(Yao-Mao Chang)關鍵字：長期照顧政策;老人;失能;文字探勘;內容分析法;long-term care policies;seniors;disabled;text mining;content analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本研究分析蔡英文在社群媒體（臉書粉絲專頁）上所發有關長照的文章，以及民眾留言，對於長期照顧政策之照顧對象的理解，究竟為「老人」還是「失能者」。方法：資料來源為蔡英文臉書粉絲專頁於2011年7月1日至2016年9月14日所發布的內容。以內容分析與文字探勘兩種方法分析，內容分析法將照顧對象的測量尺標分為六種，包含：無提及失能者或老人、聚焦失能者、偏向失能者、失能及老人兩者皆提及、偏向老人、聚焦老人；文字探勘則以詞頻、集群分析以及相關性測量長照相關發文及留言回應。結果：在內容分析法上，蔡英文發文及民眾留言的照顧對象之眾數皆在「聚焦老人」族群；以文字探勘法分析同一批資料，蔡英文臉書的發文中，「長照」與「老化」字詞的相關性為0.61，具有中度相關；以集群分析網友的留言，「長照」及「老人」字詞被歸在同一類中。結論：不論是蔡英文的發文或留言回應長照政策認知上，多於專注在老人族群，值得注意的是，長期照顧服務法之照顧對象應為身心失能持續已達或預期達六個月以上者，卻不是主要高度關注的對象。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to understand if people were able to discern the difference between ”seniors” and ”disabled” from Tsai's long-term care policies and the comments on Facebook by using content analysis and text mining. Methods: The data were retrieved from Facebook messages of Tsai Ing-wen from July 1^(st), 2011 to September 14^(th), 2016. We carried out content analysis by grouping the terms into six classifications: no mention, all disabled, some disabled, both disabled and seniors, some seniors, and all seniors. For text mining, we analyzed the frequency and relationship between keywords in the text. Results: Content analysis revealed that in most people's minds, ”long-term care” meant taking care of ”seniors”. Text-mining Tsai's Facebook posts revealed ”long-term care” and ”aging” to have a correlation coefficient of 0.61; analysis of comments on messages found that ”long-term care” and ”seniors” fell into one group. Conclusions: According to the Long-Term Care Services Act, long-term care means care in accordance with the needs of any individual whose mental or physical incapacity has lasted or is expected to last for six months or longer. Both research methods found ”long-term care” to be associated with seniors, while those with disabilities were neglected.起始頁-結束頁：511-520資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610601901篇名：利用公開資源於藥物流行病學研究建立藥品檔案並列篇名：Drug list compilation for pharmacoepidemiology studies using available public resource in Taiwan作者：林卉敏(Hui-Min Lin);阮義蓁(Yi-Chen Juan);陳豈<U+3806>(Chi-Dan Chen);陳建煒(K Arnold Chan)關鍵字：藥品檔案建立;台灣全民健康保險;ATC碼;pharmacoepidemiology;Taiwan National Health Insurance;ATC code期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷5期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：提供利用我國健康資料進行藥物流行病學研究時系統性整理出完整藥品檔案的方法，並探討WHO ATC碼於藥品檔案建立時之應用和注意事項。方法：利用衛生福利部食品藥物管理署（以下簡稱食藥署）和中央健康保險署（以下簡稱健保署）提供之公開網路資源，藉由藥物學名和WHO ATC碼分別搜尋，以建立阻塞性呼吸道疾病藥品（ATC碼R03類）在台灣的藥品品項檔案。此外，本研究除了比較食藥署和健保署對於同一成份藥品之ATC碼編輯情形之差異外，亦比較我國藥品ATC碼和WHO所建立的ATC碼是否相互對應。結果：有關ATC碼為R03藥品，食藥署網站共計958張許可證資料，於健保署網站和藥品壓縮總檔則共計1,071筆健保碼。健保署提供之R03藥品皆已編輯ATC碼，食藥署之公開提供資訊則有143張藥品許可證尚未編輯ATC碼，並有117張藥品許可證與健保署編輯的ATC碼不同。另健保署有18筆健保碼（為6張藥品許可證）之ATC碼未與WHO同步，而發現我國健保署藥品ATC編碼出現五種R03 ATC碼不存在於WHO分類中。結論：藥物流行病學研究中，以ATC碼可有效率的篩選藥品成分和劑型，然而食藥署和健保險署之編碼可能會有些許差異，且亦可能與WHO之編碼也有些許不同。因此建議除了以ATC碼取得特定成份和劑型藥品外，仍應以藥品學名再度檢查，以免造成藥品檔案之疏漏。英文摘要：Objectives: This technical report intends to share a process of compiling a comprehensive drug list for pharmacoepidemiology studies in Taiwan that utilize the National Health Insurance (NHI) data. In addition, it also explains the application of World Health Organization Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (WHO ATC) codes in research settings. Methods: Publicly available (web-based) resources provided by Taiwan Food and Drug Administration (TFDA) and National Health Insurance Administration (NHIA) were utilized in a study that evaluated drugs for obstructive airway diseases (R03 ATC category). We searched ATC codes and generic names in order to compile a comprehensive drug list for the R03 drugs. ATC codes for drugs from TFDA and NHIA information was compared against the official ATC categorization by World Health Organization. Results: Within the R03 ATC category, 958 TFDA-approved drug entities and 1071 unique NHI drug codes from NHIA were identified. Drugs in the information provided by NHIA were all coded with ATC codes whereas 143 TFDA-approved drug entities did not have ATC code from the TFDA file. In addition, information from the TFDA file for 117 TFDA-approved drug entities had ATC codes that were different from the ATC codes provided by NHIA. Six TFDA-approved drug entities (corresponding to 18 NHI drug items) had ATC code that were different from the WHO ATC coding system. Finally, 5 R03 ATC codes provided by NHIA did not have corresponding code in the WHO ATC system. Conclusions: In pharmacoepidemiology studies utilizing Taiwan NHI data, compilation of drug list of interest could start with ATC code since ATC code represents not only a molecule but also specifies its formulation. However, there may be minor discrepancy between the ATC information provided by TFDA and NHIA, and they may also differ from the WHO ATC coding. When applying ATC code to drug list construction, cross-referencing generic names, especially for combination products, and ATC codes from TFDA and NHIA is highly recommended.起始頁-結束頁：521-529資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361051082篇名：全球疾病負擔研究中的健康照護品質排名－以慢性腎臟病為例並列篇名：Ranking of healthcare access and quality in the Global Burden of Disease Study -- a closer look at the situation of chronic kidney disease in Taiwan作者：吳昀麇(Yun-Chun Wu);呂宗學(Tsung-Hsueh Lu);林先和(Hsien-Ho Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：315-318資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060643篇名：「健康台灣」的最後場域－以「健康」結合「健保」促成「健康監獄」並列篇名：The last setting for healthy Taiwan -toward healthy prisons through health promotion作者：李佳綺(Chiachi Bonnie Lee);鍾志宏(Chih-Hung Chung);陳孝平(Michael S. Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：319-323資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060394篇名：照護連續性議題的省思與未來發展方向並列篇名：Re-thinking continuity of care and future directions作者：陳啟禎(CHI-CHEN CHEN);陳麗光(LIKWANG CHEN);鄭守夏(SHOU-HSIA CHENG)關鍵字：照護連續性;測量指標;行政資料為基礎的測量;病患觀點;回顧;continuity of care;measurement;claim-based measurement;patient perspective;review期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來，許多研究者利用行政資料建構照護連續性的測量指標，且多數研究發現照護連續性可改善照護結果。然而，這種量性測量能否代表照護連續性的概念，值得深思。本文以「照護連續性的概念與測量指標之發展脈絡」、「應用量化照護連續性指標的限制」，以及「病人觀點的照護連續性測量工具的發展」三部份為主軸進行文獻回顧。結果發現，研究者普遍認為照護連續性為多範疇的概念，而以行政資料為基礎的量化照護連續性指標係測量一段時間內患者看診次數集中或分散於不同看診醫師間的程度，我們認為這無法反應照護連續性多範疇的概念。此外，量化指標亦無法反應在不同照護場域與醫療環境中照護連續性的本質。最後，以病患為觀點的照護連續性測量逐漸受到重視，建議研究者可以發展病患觀點的照護連續性測量工具，並探究量化指標與各範疇病患觀點指標間的相關性，與各類照護連續性測量指標對照護結果的影響。英文摘要：Along with the availability of administrative claim data in recent years, researchers have constructed claim-based continuity of care (COC) measurements and found that better COC was associated with favorable health outcomes. Can these claim-based COC measures, however, represent the concept of COC? This issue deserves investigation. This article reviews the following: (1) the evolution and implication of the concept and measurement of COC; (2) the limitation of application of claim-based quantitative measures of COC; and (3) COC measurement from the patient perspective. We found that COC was a multi-dimensional concept in previous studies; however, the claim-based COC measures describe the concentration or dispersion of physician visits among healthcare providers, and we consider that these quantitative measures might not reflect the multi-dimensional concept of COC. In addition, claim-based COC measures may not reflect the essence of care continuity in different care contexts and the medical care environment. Finally, COC measures from the patient perspective has gradually become more important. We suggest that researchers may develop measurement tools for COC from the patient perspective. Furthermore, researchers should examine the relationship between claim-based COC measures and COC measures from the patient perspective in various dimensions, and examine the effects of various COC measures on health outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：324-336資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060525篇名：高齡者久坐行為與健康之文獻回顧並列篇名：A review of sedentary behavior and health in older adults作者：薛名淳(MING-CHUN HSUEH);廖邕(YUNG LIAO);黃品瑄(PIN-HSUAN HUANG);張少熙(SHAO-HSI CHANG)關鍵字：靜態時間;坐式生活;流行病學;老年人;文獻回顧;sedentary time;sedentary lifestyle;epidemiology;elderly;literature review期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：久坐行為已經成為影響健康的重要危險因子。高齡者經常花費過量的時間在久坐行為活動上。國外已經有許多研究證實久坐行為會提升高齡者罹患疾病與死亡的風險，但有關久坐行為與健康結果的關係仍未被完整探討。本研究旨在透過有關高齡者久坐行為與各種疾病的流行病學研究證據，提出一敘述性的綜論供國內久坐行為臨床研究與實務之參考。本文採用文獻回顧方法搜尋PUBMED資料庫2007年1月至2016年12月的相關文獻，經搜尋與排除條件檢核後，共19篇文章符合篩選標準。結果發現高齡者長時間久坐行為會提高全死因死亡率之風險；久坐行為與糖尿病、代謝症候群和過重肥胖之關係有一致性的結果；久坐行為與腎臟惡性腫瘤之關係仍未被發現。本研究之文獻回顧結果支持久坐行為與高齡者健康之間的關係。未來相關研究宜採用大樣本調查與縱貫性研究設計，並應考量納入本研究所提之干擾因素較有研究證據力。此外，未來宜持續探討不同久坐行為類型（休閒、通勤、工作及家庭層面）對高齡者健康的影響，並建議同時採用主觀及客觀方式測量久坐行為。英文摘要：Sedentary behavior has emerged as a new risk factor for health. The elderly spend most of their waking time in sedentary activities. Despite the fact that several studies have demonstrated the impact of sedentary behavior on the health of older adults, few studies have been done with an older Taiwanese population. We systematically reviewed epidemiologic evidence for associations between sedentary behavior and multiple health outcomes in older adults in order to provide crucial information for clinical research and practice. We searched the PUBMED database for observational studies published from January 2007 to December 2016, and found 19 eligible articles. The results showed that greater sedentary time was related to an increased risk of mortality from all causes in older adults. Some studies showed consistent results and indicated a relationship between sedentary behavior and metabolic syndrome, overweight/obesity, and diabetes; the findings relative to cancer remain insufficient to draw conclusions. This systematic review supported the relationship between sedentary behavior and mortality in older adults. Further research on this topic should utilize a nationally representative sample, a large-scale prospective cohort study, and adjustment for multiple confounders. Furthermore, investigations of an ecologic model with different domains of sedentary behavior and data collection with a combination of subjective and objective measures of sedentary behavior are recommended.起始頁-結束頁：337-349資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060246篇名：Incidence and ocular comorbidities of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment among younger people in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣年輕群體之裂孔性視網膜剝離發生率與眼球共病作者：白麗雯(LEE-WEN PAI);楊素珍(SHU-CHEN YANG);林美玲(MEI-LING LIN);鍾月琴(YUEH-CHIN CHUNG);李宏謨(HORNG-MO LEE);郭疆和(CHIANG-HO KUO);邱淑卿(SHU-CHING CHIU)關鍵字：comorbidities;high myopia;lattice degeneration;health insurance research database;risk factor;共病;近視;周邊網膜變性（格子狀變性）;健康保險資料庫;危險因子期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Objectives: The ocular incidence rate and comorbidities of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) in young groups were analyzed. Methods: This retrospective study was population-based and data were analyzed using the Taiwan Longitudinal Health Insurance Database 2000. The ages of the subjects included in the young RRD group ranged from 0 years to 44 years. The annual incidence rate was calculated by dividing the number of new cases by the population size of individuals with health insurance coverage. Odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) was used to analyze the comorbidities. Results: From 2001 to 2010, the incidence rate of RRD for individuals under 45 years of age in Taiwan was 16.4 per 100,000. The young female group, aged 25-29 years, peaked first at 23.0 per 100,000, whereas the young male group, aged 40-44 years, increased continually and peaked at 28.3 per 100,000. The young RRD group was highly comorbid with some diseases and statistically more associated with high myopia (OR 7.38, 95% CI 3.97-13.72) than the young non-RRD group. Other pathological changes in the young RRD group were vitreous hemorrhage (OR 72.57, 95% CI: 9.93-530.55) and lattice degeneration (OR 5.11, 95% CI: 2.44-10.67) as compared with young non-RRD subjects. Conclusions: The young population of Taiwan shows high number of RRD cases dominated by males. The co-morbid analysis of high myopia and pathological changes of retinal degeneration can provide references for RRD prevention in young residents.英文摘要：目標：分析年輕群體眼球之裂孔性視網膜剝離發生率與共病。方法：本研究以全民健保資料庫為基礎，將健保之百萬人資料抽樣檔回溯追蹤十年2001-2010年資料，透過健保門診明細檔及醫令檔，分析0-44歲之裂孔性視網膜剝離個案每年新發生個案之發生率，並用勝算比及95%信賴區間統計共病資料。結果：臺灣2001-2010年45歲以下群體之裂孔性視網膜剝離發生率為每十萬人口16.4位，其中年輕女性高峰在25-29歲每十萬人口中有23位，年輕男性持續增加在40-44歲達到每十萬人口28.3位。再者，將已發生裂孔性視網膜剝離與未發生裂孔性視網膜剝離年輕群體相較，發現前者前一年的統計顯著疾病有高度近視（OR 7.38, 95% CI 3.97-13.72），其他病理性疾病有玻璃體出血（OR 72.57, 95% CI 9.93-530.55）、周邊網膜變性（格子狀變性）（OR 5.11, 95% CI 2.44-10.67）。結論：台灣年輕群體之裂孔性視網膜剝離人數居高不下，平均男性多於女性。統計發現高度近視和視網膜病理變化之共病結果，可以提供未來預防裂孔性視網膜剝離之參考。起始頁-結束頁：350-360資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060367篇名：台灣社區老人手部握力相關因素的探討－台灣南部社區民眾複合式健檢資料的分析研究並列篇名：Study on related factors of grip strength: integrated physical examination analysis of community-dwelling adults in southern Taiwan作者：秦秀蘭(HSIU-LAN CHIN);林裕珍(YU-CHEN LIN);蕭玉芬(YU-FEN HSIAO);莊華盈(HUA-YING CHUANG)關鍵字：手部握力;日常生活習慣;衰弱症狀;健康體能;複合式健檢;grip strength;lifestyle;frailty syndrome;physical condition;integrated physical examination期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本研究為南部某縣2015-2016年複合式健檢資料的分析，以了解社區老人的健康體能與衰老情形，以及影響手部握力的相關因子。方法：本次共收錄了1,002位65歲以上老年人（74.19±6.02歲）的資料，包括435位男性（74.97±6.28歲）、567位女性（73.56±5.74歲）。分析資料包括日常生活習慣，一般健檢的身高、體重、身體質量指數、骨密度、基礎代謝率、手部握力、身體靜態平衡力與動態平衡力。結果：男女和不同年齡層受試者在許多體能上都有顯著差異；性別、基礎代謝率和年齡是影響手部握力的三個關鍵因素，三個因素可決定受試者手部握力的49.2%（Adj R^2=.492）。其他影響因子依序為：身體靜態平衡力、身體質量指數、舒張壓、體重、就寢時間。結論：身體靜態平衡力、舒張壓對手部握力的預測力，是本次研究的重要發現。其中，身體平衡力與老化的關係是目前許多老化研究的重點；然而，舒張壓與手部握力表現的關係卻極少被討論到。本研究顯示，舒張壓對手部握力的預測力比體重、骨密度都高。此外，這些老年男性受試者的舒張壓明顯高於女性受試者；女性受試者的收縮壓與舒張壓的差異值明顯大於男性受試者，值得進一步追蹤與後續更大量的資料分析。英文摘要：Objectives: This study is about the Integrated Physical Examination of one county in Taiwan during 2015-2016. This study aims at understanding the physical health condition of community-dwelling adults in southern Taiwan and the related factors of grip strength. Methods: Participants incorporate 435 males (M=74.97±6.28 years old) and 567 females (M=73.56±5.74 years old) in southern Taiwan. The testing items include: lifestyle, body weight, blood pressure, body mass index, bone density, basal metabolic rate, grip strength and body balance. Results: The study shows significant difference between male and female and among age-groups in many variables as well. The main factors affecting grip strength performance are gender, basal metabolic rate and age, with the 49.2% of explanatory power (Adj R^2=.492). The other related factors are static body balance, body mass index, diastolic blood pressure, body weight, habit of bedtime. Conclusions: The study indicates high correlation between static body balance and grip strength, which is corroborated in the other research. The analysis also identifies a positive correlation between diastolic blood pressure and grip strength, and the explanatory power is even higher than body weight and bone density. Therefore, extended study and sampling should be carried out.起始頁-結束頁：361-374資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060518篇名：失智症家庭使用長期照顧服務的情形與不使用的原因並列篇名：Long-term care services use and reasons for non-use by elders with dementia and their families作者：施姵宇(PEI-YU SHIH);古鯉榕(LI-JUNG ELIZABETH KU);白明奇(MING-CHYI PAI);劉立凡(LI-FAN LIU)關鍵字：失智症;長期照顧;外籍看護工;服務使用;dementia;long-term care;foreign care worker;service use期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：分析失智症家庭使用長期照顧服務的情形與影響使用的因素，並探討家庭照顧者不使用長照服務的原因。方法：收案對象為台南某醫學中心失智症門診之病人及家庭照顧者共231組；以結構式的問卷與照顧者進行電話訪談。結果：失智者使用長照服務的比率僅8%，遠低於使用看護工的35%，或未使用任何服務的57%。失智者未使用服務的主因是照顧者不覺得失智者有需要使用服務（64%）、其次是照顧者表示服務項目不適合患者（20%）。至於未曾使用家庭照顧者支持服務的主因，是照顧者缺少相關服務的資訊（56%）。邏輯斯迴歸分析顯示使用服務的照顧者的長照資源相關資訊顯著高於未使用者（OR=1.76, 95% CI=1.19-2.61），但失智者特性包括認知功能和身體功能嚴重度皆與使用看護工顯著相關。結論：本研究的失智者和其家庭照顧者使用長照服務的比率皆偏低，由於照顧者缺少相關服務的資訊，建議政府應加強宣導，並提供更多給家庭照顧者的支持服務，才能在雇用看護工的方式之外，以多元的服務來滿足失智症全家照護的需求。英文摘要：Objectives: The goals of this study were to describe the pattern and predictors of long-term care (LTC) services utilization elders with dementia and their families, and to determine reasons for non-use of LTC services. Methods: The study sample included 231 elders with dementia and caregiver dyads recruited from a dementia clinic at a medical center in Tainan. Caregivers were interviewed via telephone using a structured questionnaire. Results: The LTC services use rate was 8% among the sample, 35% hired foreign care workers, and 57% did not use any LTC services. The main reasons given for families not using LTC services were the perceived lack of need (64%), followed by the service not meeting the patient’s needs (20%). The main reason for not using caregiver support services was caregivers being unaware of the availability of services (56%). Logistic regression results showed that knowledge about LTC resources (OR=1.76, 95% CI=1.19-2.61) was the only significant predictor of LTC services use, while the patient’s level of cognitive impairment and physical disability were significant predictors of hiring a foreign care worker. Conclusions: Because the utilization rates of LTC services by elders with dementia and their caregivers were low, and the main reason for non-use was due to caregivers being unaware of services, we recommend that the government strengthen educational campaigns for family caregivers and provide caregiver support services. There should be more choices regarding LTC services available to families caring for an elder with dementia in addition to hiring a foreign care worker.起始頁-結束頁：375-385資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060269篇名：兒童風濕疾病及其醫療利用與罹癌風險之探討並列篇名：A population-based cohort study of the risk of cancer in children with rheumatic disease and their precancerous medical utilization作者：馬震中(CHEN-CHUNG MA);蘇有村(YU-TSUN SU);林佟威(TUNG-WEI LIN);鄭怡婷(I-TING CHENG)關鍵字：兒童;風濕疾病;癌症;醫療利用;children;pediatric rheumatic disease;cancer;medical utilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：風濕疾病為一種慢性的炎症，可能會增加罹癌風險，因此本研究目的在探討台灣地區兒童風濕病人罹癌之風險及其罹癌前醫療利用之情形。方法：本研究採回溯性研究設計，運用次級資料分析，資料來源為全民健保資料庫，選取2000年至2012年診斷為風濕疾病之兒童，以紅斑性狼瘡及幼年特發性關節炎等八種風濕疾病進行觀察；使用Cox models分析罹癌症風險，並以Mann-Whitney U Test檢定病人罹癌前醫療利用之變化。結果：整體兒童風濕病人相較於兒童非風濕病人高出3.71倍罹癌風險，其中紅斑性狼瘡、幼年特發性關節炎與修格連氏症候群的罹癌風險分別為3.94倍、5.93倍與5.29倍；藥物中，曾使用免疫調節劑者罹癌風險約增加5.65倍，曾使用生物製劑罹癌風險高出約26.01倍；另外，兒童風濕病人在罹癌前的醫療利用變化呈現門診利用增加、住院利用減少，經Mann-Whitney U Test檢定均未達顯著差異。結論：綜合研究結果，兒童罹患風濕疾病會增加其罹癌風險，因此本研究建議衛生主管機關應加強重視兒童風濕病人的醫療照護，避免將來支出更多的社會成本。英文摘要：Objectives: A clinical manifestation of rheumatic disease is chronic inflammation that may increase the risk of cancer. The purpose of this study was to explore the risk of cancer and the precancerous medical utilization by children with rheumatism in Taiwan. Methods: This was a retrospective study with secondary data analysis. The data were drawn from the National Health Insurance Research Database from 2000 to 2012. Patients under the age of 18 with a diagnosis of pediatric rheumatic disease, including systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, Sjogren’s syndrome, scleroderma, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, vasculitis and Behcet’s disease. A total of 1,741 cases were identified. The Cox proportional hazards model was used to analyze the risk of cancer, and the Mann-Whitney U Test was used to assess whether the patient’s medical use was different from that in the year prior to the diagnosis of cancer. Results: The overall risk for children with rheumatism compared with non-rheumatic patients was 3.71 times the risk for cancer; for systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile idiopathic arthritis and Sjogren's syndrome, the cancer risk was 3.94 times, 5.93 times and 5.29 times, respectively. The risk for cancer was increased by 5.65 times in those who had used immunoregulatory drugs, and this was 26.01 times more than that of those who had used biological agents. For children with rheumatism, in the year before the diagnosis of cancer and in terms of overall medical use before cancer, the number of outpatient visits and expenses increased, but the number of hospitalizations, hospital days, and cost reduction were not significantly different. Conclusions: Based on the results of this study, we suggest that the health authorities pay more attention to the medical care of children with rheumatism in order to avoid future social costs.起始頁-結束頁：386-396資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610602710篇名：經濟弱勢兒童之多重飲食行為軌跡：以早餐、蔬果及零食飲料為例並列篇名：Multiple dietary behavior trajectories among economically disadvantaged children: an example of breakfast, fruits and vegetables, and snacks and beverages作者：蕭怡真(YI-CHEN HSIAO);陳俊元(CHUN-YUAN CHEN)關鍵字：多重飲食行為;兒童;經濟弱勢;群體基礎軌跡模型;multiple dietary behaviors;children;economic disadvantage;group-based trajectory modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：兒童時期的飲食行為對未來健康有著深遠影響。目前多數證據侷限於一般兒童與單一種飲食行為，本研究旨在探討經濟弱勢兒童由吃早餐、蔬果及零食飲料構成的多重飲食行為軌跡及其相關因素。方法：使用「台灣貧窮兒少資料庫：弱勢兒少生活趨勢調查」2009年、2011年與2013年部分資料，樣本共計1,001位國小學童（女生佔50.25%；初始平均年齡為9.07歲）。群體基礎多重軌跡模型和多類別邏輯斯迴歸為主要分析方法。結果：辨識出三種多重飲食行為軌跡，包含「飲食長期規律組」（21.28%），近乎每日吃早餐與蔬果但吃蔬果的頻率從第一時點至第三時點明顯減少；「早餐蔬果長期不規律組」（77.62%），吃早餐的頻率在所有時點皆為最低且有不規律吃蔬果的情況；以及「蔬果長期缺乏組」（1.10%），吃蔬果的頻率在所有時點皆為每週一天或以下。所有組別的零食飲料行為軌跡相似。年齡越大與雙親教育程度越低，不健康飲食行為的可能性越高。結論：吃早餐、蔬果及零食飲料行為之間的關係並非簡單的線性關係，且其發展具有異質性。此次發現的相關因素有限，未來研究應持續探討並剖析不同軌跡之影響機制。英文摘要：Objectives: Dietary behaviors in childhood have a great influence on future health. Currently, most of the evidence has been focused on non-economically disadvantaged children and single dietary behaviors. The aim of this study was to explore multiple dietary behavior trajectories of breakfast, fruits and vegetables, and snacks and beverages, and associated factors. Methods: The partial data for this study were obtained from the Taiwan Database of Children and Youth in Poverty in 2009, 2011, and 2013, with a total sample size of 1001 elementary school children (50.25% girls and 49.75% boys; mean age at baseline = 9.07 [standard deviation = 1.24] years). Group-based multi-trajectory modeling and multinomial logistic regression were the main analytic methods. Results: Three multiple dietary behavior trajectories were identified, as follows: (1) the ”regular eating” group (21.28%) with most children eating breakfast and fruits and vegetables daily, but the frequency of eating fruits and vegetables decreased significantly from time 1 to time 3; (2) the ”irregular breakfast and fruits and vegetables eating” group (77.62%) with the lowest frequencies of eating breakfast at all time points and having an irregular pattern of eating fruits and vegetables; and (3) the ”lack of fruits and vegetables” group (1.10%), in which children ate fruits and vegetables 1 day or less per week at all time points. There were similar trajectories of eating snacks and consuming beverages in all groups. Older age and parents with lower levels of education were associated with higher probabilities of unhealthy eating behaviors. Conclusions: The associations between eating breakfast, fruit and vegetable intake, and snack and beverage consumption were not as simple as linear relationships, with heterogeneity in the development of these dietary behaviors. Other potential factors were only minimally noted in our study. Future research should explore associated factors and mechanisms of different multiple dietary behavior trajectories.起始頁-結束頁：397-411資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610604111篇名：2015年中東呼吸症候群冠狀病毒（MERS-CoV）感染症疫情之旅遊衝擊與健康管理並列篇名：The impact on tourism and health management of the MERS-CoV outbreak in 2015作者：饒珍年(CHEN-NIEN JAO);王穎筠(YING-YUN WANG);吳智文(JHY-WEN WU)關鍵字：中東呼吸症候群;冠狀病毒感染;旅遊衝擊;健康管理;Middle East respiratory syndrome;coronavirus infections;tourism impact;health management期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：2015年5月至7月間南韓爆發中東呼吸症候群冠狀病毒感染症（Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infections）流行疫情，病例及死亡人數快速累積，嚴重的疫情重挫南韓經濟及旅遊業。本研究檢視南韓疫情期間，台灣出入境旅遊人數的衝擊相關影響，闡述國內防治作為及衛教民眾自我健康管理的重要性。方法：利用搜尋引擎以關鍵字「中東呼吸症候群冠狀病毒感染症」相關字串蒐集事件報導及文獻，分析南韓MERS-CoV疫情衝擊我國旅遊產業。結果：MERS-CoV疫情影響包含旅遊、航空運輸、經濟貿易、衛生政策及防疫機制等。我國防治策略包括：成立應變小組，加強疫情監視與風險評估等策略，確保國內防疫與國人健康。結論：疫情影響觀光旅遊產業，凸顯國際疫病藉由運輸傳播的危機，引發國際間旅遊秩序的改變。經由正確的疫情評估、實施有效策略及加強民眾健康管理策略，建立自我健康管理的共識，共同對抗傳染病帶來的考驗與挑戰。英文摘要：Objectives: An epidemic of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERSCoV) erupted in South Korea from May to July 2015. This research focused on the impact of the number of inbound and outbound tourists in Taiwan, elaboration of strategies for domestic prevention and control, and the importance of self-health management during the serious epidemic in South Korea. Methods: We used the search engine with keywords “Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Infection “and related words to identify events, reports, and the relevant literature. We analyzed the impact of theMERS-CoV epidemic in South Korea on the domestic tourism industry. Results: The MERS-CoV epidemic influenced t travel, air transportation, economics, trade, health policy and mechanisms for the prevention of epidemics. In response to the MERS-CoV epidemic, the government set up an emergency task force and strengthened surveillance and risk assessment strategies in order to ensure domestic safety and public health. Conclusions: The epidemic affected the tourism industry which magnified the crisis as the international epidemic spread through the transportation system and triggered changes in international tourism. With an accurate assessment of the epidemic, effective strategies and the strengthening of people’s health management strategies, the government can ensure the health management of the public and fight the challenge of epidemic diseases.起始頁-結束頁：412-422資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610605312篇名：Xylene exposure on auditory function among adults in selected occupational settings: a systematic review並列篇名：特定職場二甲苯暴露與成人聽覺功能之總體性評估作者：Francis T. Pleban;Laxmi Shrestha;Olutosin Oketop e;Shih-Chen Pleban關鍵字：xylene;ototoxicity;hearing;human exposure;二甲苯;耳毒性;聽力;人體暴露期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：A review study was conducted to examine potential adverse effects of xylene and xylene mixtures on the auditory system in workers employed in various settings. Utilizing internet-based databases EBSCO and PubMed, we searched peer-reviewed articles focusing on human subjects, published in English language, and spanning a 30 year time period (1985-2015). Studies included peer review full papers, case control studies, and case reports. Animal studies were excluded from the final analysis. Initial search results identified 56 studies. From studies meeting the inclusion criteria, the following data were extracted: publication date, study design, sample size, exposure setting and chemical, assessment method, and outcome. Six journals were retrieved for detailed examination. After detailed examination, six studies were included in the review. Studies were further subdivided into investigations related to xylene only (n=3) and investigations related to xylene mixed with other organic solvents (n=3), with or without the association of noise. As a whole, the results range from moderate associations between xylene or xylene mixtures and hearing, to altered hearing loss due to xylene and other confounders, such as aging, gender, and noise. Exposure to excessive noise, both in and out of the worksite, may contribute to decreased hearing in workers. However, findings suggest public health and medical professionals should be made aware of the future research needs pertaining to hearing dysfunction from occupational xylene exposure. It is recommended xylene-exposed individuals be routinely monitored for signs of auditory impairment; along with the implementation of pertinent industrial hygiene controls.英文摘要：本研究主要目的為評估二甲苯與二甲苯混合物對在不同作業環境工作下的勞工聽覺之潛在影響。利用網際資料庫（EBSCO以及PubMed）的英文期刊搜索發表的論文進行評估。期刊內容以研究人為主（不包括動物研究），涵蓋期限為三十年（1985-2015）。研究論文包含了同儕審查的論文，病例對照研究，案例分析，以及案例報告。初始搜尋出56件案例。依據研究設計、樣本大小、研究設置、研究日期、以及研究方法，6篇期刊論文被篩選來做更進一步的檢閱。經由詳細的評估，6項研究被取來審查。在有噪音以及無噪音的環境下，研究分為純二甲苯（n=3）與含二甲苯有機溶劑（n=3）二組。整體研究結果顯示，二甲苯與二甲苯混合物加上其他干擾因素（如老化、性別、以及噪音等）對人類聽力的影響程度可由輕微到嚴重足以喪失聽力。雖然，過度的噪音暴露可能影響勞工的聽力。但研究建議，公共衛生機構以及法令單位應多鼓勵關於二甲苯暴露與耳毒性相關的研究。除此之外，長期暴露於二甲苯的個體，應定期進行廣泛的聽力檢查，並實施工業衛生控制，以便早期偵測出聽力的損失。起始頁-結束頁：204-214資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610508513篇名：「男性間性行為者」捐血禁令之公共衛生倫理分析並列篇名：Public health ethical analysis of blood donor deferral policy on men who have sex with men作者：葉明叡(Ming-Jui Yeh);吳建昌(Kevin Chien-Chang Wu)關鍵字：捐血者延緩捐血政策;男性間性行為者;制度性歧視;效益主義;公共衛生倫理;blood donor deferral policy;men who have men with men (MSM);institutional discrimination;utilitarianism;public health ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：捐血者延緩捐血政策（blood donor deferral policy）藉著設定捐血者條件，達到控制風險、確保血液品質、以及維持穩定捐血量的目的。本文簡要回顧此政策在台灣的變遷歷程，分析當前法律對於曾進行男性間性行為者（men who have sex with men, MSM）永久不得捐血的規定。結果發現，運用重疊共識之方法學，效益主義、康德主義及社群主義之公共衛生倫理檢驗皆可支持廢除此禁令。因為：第一，根據效益主義的必要性與降低傷害的原則，此禁令並非限制最小的措施，無助於擴大愛滋病感染風險的防禦範圍；第二，根據效益主義的效益最大化觀點，此禁令無法提升捐贈血液之品質，反而可能降低捐血量，無法達到最大化良好品質捐贈血液數量的效果；第三、根據康德主義及平等權觀點，此禁令是國家對特定群體之制度性歧視，既不尊重自主，又不公平，甚至可能產生傷害的效果；第四、根據自由社群主義觀點，人們應能共同為了良好品質捐血的社會共同良善而努力，如此可超越威權社群主義維持禁令的主張。本文建議若政府無法提出合理的公共證成，應廢止此規定。英文摘要：Blood donor deferral policy aims at maintaining blood quality and a stable blood supply. In this ethical analysis, we review the transitions of the policy in Taiwan and focus on the lifetime ban on men who have sex with men (MSM). We subject the ban to a public health ethical examination based on three ethical theories. Using overlapping consensus as the methodology of justification, we have found that utilitarianism, Kantianism and communitarianism all support the repeal of the ban. First, we apply the doctrine of necessity and minimal harm and note that the ban cannot widen risk protection from HIV/AIDS. Second, we turn to the principle of maximizing utility and contend that the ban does not improve the quality of the blood, nor does it maximize the quantity of donated blood. Third, we apply Kantian and egalitarian perspectives to contend that the ban is actually a state-sanctioned act of institutional discrimination against MSM. Lastly, we apply liberal communitarianism and point out that virtuous society members would have the capacity to pursue the common good, which is maintaining the quality blood for the needy, if there were no such regulation unjustly targeting MSM. We suggest that if governmental authorities for the blood donor deferral policy cannot provide public justification for this regulation, it should be abolished.起始頁-結束頁：215-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610512614篇名：手機測皮膚癌、血壓？－談美國行動健康應用程式（mHealth app）發展與法制趨勢並列篇名：Using your smart phones to detect melanoma or measure blood pressure? - the latest developments and regulatory schemes regarding mobile health in the United States作者：孫文玲(Wen-Ling Sun);林于凱(Yu-Kai Lin)關鍵字：電子健康;行動健康;行動健康應用程式;醫療器材;electronic health (eHealth);mobile health (mHealth);mobile health applications;medical devices期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：運用資通訊技術於健康的電子健康（eHealth），已被世界健康組織（WHO）列作定期檢視項目；83%會員國更已致力推動行動健康（mHealth）。依最新調查顯示，於主要行動平台上架的行動健康應用程式（mobile health applications, mHealth app）已近26萬個，至2020年市場規模可達310億美元。然而，mHealth app是否屬於醫療器材？應適用哪些法令規範？對於多數為科技創新而非傳統健康照護產業背景的mHealth app業者來說，確屬攸關後續發展的議題。本文以美國立法例切入，首先檢視近兩年聯邦貿易委員會（FTC）就偵測黑色素瘤、量測心跳血壓兩款mHealth app的案例，繼而分析食品藥物管理局（FDA）指引與FTC mHealth app線上版指引工具的規範架構；最後，本文檢視我國在醫用軟體管理與個人資料保護相關法令最新發展，進而建議為建構可預見性高、遵法成本低的mHealth app法制架構，宜納入以下考量：以終端使用者區分設計規範架構，並考慮跨國規範議題；使業者簡單判分「是否屬於醫療器材」與「是否與如何適用其他法令」；兼顧「科技創新」與「健康」需求。英文摘要：As electronic health (eHealth) has played a key role on the WHO agenda, 83% of WHO member states have implemented mobile health (mHealth) policies. The latest survey shows that the total number of mobile health applications (mHealth apps) on main mobile platforms has reached 260,000 and its market value is estimated to reach 31 billion USD by 2020. Since the majority of mHealth app publishers are technology companies or app developers rather than traditional healthcare industries, however, uncertainty about whether mHealth apps should be regulated as medical devices and governed by other laws and regulations might hinder their growth and development. The aim of this paper was to investigate the latest Federal Trade Commission (FTC) cases regarding the use of mHealth apps to detect melanoma and measure blood pressure. It also examined the Federal Drug Administration's (FDA) guidance and the FTC's interactive web tool to determine the regulatory approaches taken in the United States. In Taiwan, the TFDA issued medical software guidelines in 2015 and the highly controversial Article 6 of the Personal Information Protection Act regarding health information came into effect in March, 2016. To encourage the development of mHealth apps in Taiwan, we suggest the following: set up rules for end-users with different backgrounds and solve cross-border problems; help developers decide easily if regulations for medical devices apply, as well as how they comply with other laws and regulations; strike the perfect balance between innovation and health.起始頁-結束頁：229-238資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610601515篇名：台灣版WHOQOL-OLD問卷之發展與驗證並列篇名：Development and validation of the WHOQOL-OLD in Taiwan作者：姚開屏(Grace Yao);錢承君(Cheng-Chun Chien);張育誠(Yu-Chen Chang);林韋伶(Wei- Ling Lin);王榮德(Jung-Der Wang);謝清麟(Ching-Lin Hsieh);林茂榮(Mau-Roung Lin)關鍵字：生活品質;老人;WHOQOL-100;WHOQOL-BREF;WHOQOL-OLD;quality of life;senior;WHOQOL-100;WHOQOL-BREF;WHOQOL-OLD期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：發展及驗證台灣版世界衛生組織老人生活品質問卷（WHOQOL-OLD）。方法：研究之初先以標準化程序進行問卷的翻譯，然後於2012年六至八月，以橫斷面研究設計在大台北地區與嘉義地區收集438名60歲以上社區老人的資料，包括WHOQOL-OLD、WHOQOLBREF、短式台灣老年憂鬱量表（Geriatric Depression Scale-15, GDS-15）、巴氏量表（Barthel Index, BI）、簡短式智能評估（Mini-Mental State Examination, MMSE）。心理計量分析包括內部一致性信度、內容效度、建構效度、同時效標關聯效度、預測效度與區辨效度，採用的統計方法有相關、迴歸、兩獨立樣本t檢定、驗證性因素分析等。結果：WHOQOL-OLD問卷之內部一致性係數介於0.71~0.86。問卷題目與自己所屬的向度之相關（r= 0.62~0.88）都高於跟其他向度之相關。驗證性因素分析（confirmatory factor analysis）大略支持WHOQOL-OLD為兩階層因素之理論模型。WHOQOL-OLD六個層面跟多個同時效標之相關雖然幾乎都達到0.01的顯著水準，但部分相關仍不如預期假設的強。在預測數個整體生活品質指標方面（除WHOQOLBREF的整體自評題G1、G2外），WHOWQOL-OLD六個層面的解釋力約達到四成，而且是一個可接受的外加模組。最後，WHOQOL-OLD可區別健康與較不健康的老人。結論：研究結果支持WHOQOL-OLD台灣版問卷有良好的信、效度，可以使用在如同本研究樣本較為健康的台灣六十歲以上的社區老人。英文摘要：Objectives: To develop and validate the WHOQOL-OLD-Taiwan version. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study. First, we translated this questionnaire by following standard procedure. After a pilot study, we collected data from 438 seniors over 60 years of age from communities in greater Taipei and Chiayi from June to October, 2012. In addition to filling out the WHOQOL-OLD, the participants also completed the WHOQOL-BREF, Geriatric Depression Scale-15, Barthel Index, and Mini-Mental State Examination as the criterion variables. We examined the following psychometric properties: internal consistency reliability, content validity, construct validity, concurrent validity, predictive validity, and discriminant validity by using correlation analysis, regression analysis, two independent group t-tests, and confirmatory factor analysis. Results: The internal consistency coefficients were between 0.71~0.86. The correlation coefficients between each item (r=0.62~0.88) and the facet of belonging were higher than those with other facets. Confirmatory factor analysis generally supported the idea that the WHOQOLOLD was a second-order factor model, which indicated that six factors were subsumed under an overall ”quality of life” factor. Most of the correlation coefficients between the facets of WHOQOL-OLD and several concurrent criteria were statistically significant (p ＜ 0.01), but some correlations were not as high as expected. Except for predicting G1 and G2, the WHOQOL-OLD explained about 40% of the variation in the overall quality of life indices. This study also showed that the WHOQOL-OLD was a good add-on module. Elderly people with better and worse health conditions could be discriminated by the WHOQOL-OLD through independent group t-tests (p ＜ 0.01). Conclusions: The WHOQOL-OLD-Taiwan version has good psychometric properties. The WHOQOL-OLD module appears to be a useful instrument for use with community-dwelling Taiwanese seniors.起始頁-結束頁：239-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610601816篇名：個人化之營養支持對於接受手術治療之大腸直腸癌病患其營養狀態、生活品質之影響並列篇名：The impact of individualized nutritional support for patients with colorectal cancer who had undergone surgery作者：郭雅琦(Ya-Chi Guo);劉仁沛(Jen-Pei Liu);季瑋珠(Wei-Chu Chie)關鍵字：營養;生活品質;大腸直腸癌;手術;PG - SGA;Nutrition;quality of life;colorectal cancer;surgery;PG - SGA期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：藉由早期個人化之營養支持與長期追蹤、比較病患其生理指標、生活品質與營養狀態之差異，以評估營養介入之成效。方法：本研究為前瞻性、隨機分派之對照臨床試驗研究，於2014年9月至2015年5月期間共收取84名罹患大腸直腸癌之受試者，分為營養介入組（實驗組）與常規照護組（控制組），各有42名受試者。受試者於手術治療並開始腸道進食後，經隨機分派分組行初次營養教育介入訪視並評估其營養狀態與收集生活品質相關問卷（EORTCQLQ - C30、EORTC QLQ - CR29）等，於初訪後第三個月進行後續資料收集，以評估個人化的營養支持對於大腸直腸癌病患後續之營養與生活品質相關成效。結果：於營養狀態方面，營養介入組（實驗組）於第三個月的營養狀態皆顯著優於常規照護組（控制組）；生活品質方面，在EORTC QLQ - C30問卷部份，受試者於第三個月追蹤發現其整體健康狀況與生活品質、身體功能、角色功能、情緒功能、認知功能、疲勞感、噁心與嘔吐、疼痛、呼吸困難與食慾不振等項目，營養介入組（實驗組）皆顯著優於常規照護組（控制組）；在EORTC QLQ - CR29問卷部份，受試者於第三個月追蹤發現其焦慮、體重、解尿頻率、血便與黏液便、尿失禁、腹痛、腹脹、口乾、味覺、大便失禁與肛門皮膚痠痛等項目，營養介入組（實驗組）皆顯著優於常規照護組（控制組）。結論：適時、適切與持續的個人化營養支持對於大腸直腸癌經手術切除病灶之受試者而言，能顯著提升攝食量而達到其自身營養需求，並能改善營養狀態與生活品質。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the impact of early individualized nutritional support on long-term physiology, quality of life (QoL), and nutritional outcome in patients with colorectal cancer after surgery. Methods: This prospective randomized clinical trial was carried out between September 2014 and May 2015; patients who were diagnosed with colorectal cancer and underwent surgery (n = 84), were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive either individualized nutritional counseling (intervention group, n=42), or the usual care (control group, n = 42). Nutritional intake (dietary history), status (Patient-Generated Subjective Global Assessment), and QoL (EORTC QLQ - C30, QLQ - CR29) were evaluated at baseline and three months after surgery. Results: At the three month follow up, the groups were compared and nutritional status was significantly improved in the intervention group (p ＜ .0001). There were significant differences in EORTC QLQ - C30 scores and QLQ - CR29 scores between two groups in terms of global health status/ QoL (p = 0.0017), physical function (p = 0.0005), role function (p = 0.0001), emotional function (p = 0.0228), cognitive function (p = 0.001), fatigue (p = 0.0002), nausea and vomiting (p = 0.0011), pain (p = 0.0431), dyspnea (p = 0.0006), appetite loss (p = 0.001), anxiety (p ＜ .0001), weight (p ＜ .0001), urinary frequency (p = 0.0185), blood and mucus in stool (p = 0.0061), urinary incontinence (p = 0.0042), abdominal pain (p ＜ .0001), bloating (p ＜ .0001), dry mouth (p ＜ .0001), taste (p = 0.0115), faecal incontinence (p = 0.0042) and sore skin (p = 0.0223). Conclusions: Early, timely and continuous individualized nutritional intervention was key to improvement in nutritional outcome and quality of life for patients with colorectal cancer after surgery.起始頁-結束頁：259-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610601617篇名：醫院退出市場因素之分析並列篇名：An empirical analysis of exits from the hospital market作者：劉亞明(Ya-Ming Liu);羅德芬(Te-Fen Lo);粘毓庭(Yu-Ting Nien)關鍵字：醫院退出;全民健康保險;總額預算;exit of hospital;National Health Insurance;global budget scheme期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本文主要在探討台灣實施全民健康保險後，影響醫院退出市場之因素，並瞭解醫院總額預算支付制度實施前後，影響醫院退出市場的因素是否有所不同。方法：利用全民健康保險研究資料庫，以1998年至2012年與健保署簽有特約之區域醫院及地區醫院為觀察對象，結束健保特約作為退出市場之代理變數，分為實施醫院總額預算制度前（1998-2002）及實施後（2003-2012）兩組樣本，利用Cox比例危險模型進行分析。結果：醫院的特性，如院齡、門診診次、住院診次，以及地區特性，如上年度進入率、最小有效規模、老年人口比例、家戶可支配所得、人口數等，為實施醫院總額預算制度之前影響醫院存活之重要因素。而在實施醫院總額預算制度後，地區醫院之權屬別、門診規模賀芬達指數、平均每公頃土地現值、門診與住院診次成長率，則成為影響醫院是否退出市場的主要因素。結論：台灣醫院市場在實施總額預算後，市場競爭與醫院權屬別成為影響醫院退出的重要因素，而醫療院所產業似乎也更朝向兩極化的不平衡發展。英文摘要：Objectives: Using the termination of the NHI contracts as a proxy for exit from the hospital market, this study investigated the factors that affect exits from the hospital industry, and compared these factors before and after implementation of the Global Budget Scheme (GBS) in July 2002. Methods: The data, including metropolitan and local community hospitals, were extracted from the NHI Research Database from 1998-2012. We divided samples into two parts (before the GBS [1998-2002] and after the GBS [2003-2012]), and used a Cox proportional hazards regression model to conduct our analysis. Results: The factors that affect exits from the hospital industry include the following: (1) characteristics of hospitals, such as the duration of hospitals, outpatient visit volume, and admission volume; and (2) characteristics of areas, such as the rate of entry last year, minimum efficient scale, proportion of aged population, disposable income per household, and population. After implementation of the GBS, ownership of the local community hospital, the Herfindahl-Hirschman index, the average current land value per hectare, the number of outpatient visits, and the admission growth rate became significant factors of exit from the hospital industry. Conclusions: After the implementation of the GBS, market competition and ownership of hospitals affect the exiting of hospitals. There is a more unbalanced development among large- and small-scale hospitals.起始頁-結束頁：273-286資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610600518篇名：評論：造成200家地區醫院歇業之真因為市場競爭或健保制度？並列篇名：Commentary: is it really the market competition or health insurance system cause the 200 district hospitals shut down?作者：郝宏恕(Horng-Shuh Hao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：287-287資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361060050119篇名：醫師面對老年病人時之電子病歷交換資訊需求與意願的初探研究並列篇名：A preliminary study of the information needed in Electronic Medical Records exchange and physicians' usage intention when treating elderly patients作者：佘明玲(Ming-Ling Sher);翁儷禎(Li-Jen Weng)關鍵字：電子病歷;電子病歷資訊;電子化醫療資訊;電子病歷交換;健康資訊交換;electronic medical records (EMR);information of EMR;electronic medical information;EMR exchange;health information exchange期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：從需求面探討面對老年病人時醫師需要其他機構電子病歷的項目，及其對醫師使用電子病歷交換之意願與可能性的影響。方法：由文獻歸納電子病歷交換需求項目，以德菲法修改問卷，再對某醫療體系之醫師進行調查。復以因素分析探討電子病歷需求之因素，並以之對醫師使用電子病歷交換之意願與在不同診療途徑之使用可能性進行複迴歸分析。結果：電子病歷交換資訊需求之因素分析呈現四因素，醫師需求依次為：個人特殊病史，檢驗檢查報告，療程變化記錄，家系資料與照護記錄。個人特殊病史有助於增進醫師取用意願與在住院和急診時取用電子病歷交換之可能性，家系資料與照護記錄則可增進醫師於預防保健時取用電子病歷之可能性。結論：醫師面對老年病人最需要的病歷內容非現行電子病歷交換平台之主要項目。建議電子病歷交換宜以使用者需求為出發點，將來可考慮自健保資訊系統自動擷取醫師所需之重要項目，或由醫師協助彙整提報，以增進電子病歷交換之臨床應用價值。英文摘要：Objectives: This study explored the information in Electronic Medical Records (EMR) exchange that physicians need when dealing with elderly patients, and the relationship between information needed and physicians' intention to use EMR exchange in clinical settings. Methods: A questionnaire containing items of EMR exchanges crucial in the treatment of elderly patients was constructed based on a literature review, revised by the Delphi method, and distributed to physicians in a medical care system. Factors underlying the items were revealed by factor analysis and subject to multiple regression analysis to determine their relationships with physicians' intention to use EMR exchange. Results: Four factors listed in a descending order of necessity for treating elderly patients were identified: Patient's Special History, Laboratory and Radiology Reports, Progress Notes, and Family Data and Healthcare Records. Patient's Special History could facilitate physicians' intention to use EMR exchange and the likelihood of adopting EMR exchange for in-patient and emergency care, while Family Data and Healthcare Records may enhance the possibility of using EMR exchange for preventive care. Conclusions: The information most needed in EMR exchange when treating elderly patients is not among the main retrieval items provided by the current EMR exchange platform. It is recommended that the information physicians need should be the major concern when designing an EMR exchange system. The items that physicians need the most can be retrieved automatically from National Health Insurance information systems or provided by physicians in order to enhance the clinical value of EMR exchange in the future.起始頁-結束頁：288-300資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610602320篇名：十字路口的長照：制度設計與社會價值並列篇名：Long term care at the crossroads: institutional designs and social values作者：葉明叡(Ming-Jui Yeh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：297-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610601101篇名：糖尿病患同時罹患B型或C型肝炎患者服用Statin藥物是否可以降低肝癌罹患風險？並列篇名：Is it possible for diabetics infected with HBV or HCV to reduce the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma by taking a Statin?作者：邱桂芬(Guei-Fen Chiu);張郁函(Yu-Han Chang);林昆德(Kun-Der Lin)關鍵字：肝癌;糖尿病;Statin;hepatocellular carcinoma;diabetes mellitus;Statin期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：探討Statin劑量效應與罹患肝癌之相關性。方法：本篇研究為病例對照研究，利用國衛院2010年承保抽樣檔納入50歲以上2005-2010年糖尿病之群體（ICD-9 code: 250.x）至少使用OAD或insulin三個月以上之個案往前回溯Statin暴露量。病例組為糖尿病且被確診肝癌個案（ICD-9: 155），對照組為糖尿病並未診斷肝癌之個案。結果：HBV（累積劑量＞298 DDDs:OR=0.41; 95% CI: 0.24-0.72）或HCV（累積劑量＞205 DDDs: OR=0.25; 95% CI: 0.13-0.48）糖尿病患者若服用Statin累積劑量越高與降低肝癌之風險呈現劑量效應關係（p＜0.001）。結論：HBV、HBC之糖尿病個案先前合併使用糖尿病藥物與Statin與降低肝癌之風險呈現劑量效應相關。英文摘要：Objectives: To determine the relationship between the dose effect of Statin and the risk of HCC. Methods: This study was a case-control study. All participants were ＞ 50 years of age and were diagnosed with diabetes (ICD-9: 250.x0, 205.x2) and were treated with an anti-diabetic agent for at least for 3 months according to the NHID, LHID 2010 (Longitudinal Health Insurance database 2010). We captured the use of a Statin before the index date in patients with type II diabetes. Patients diagnosed with a hepatoma (ICD-9:155) were defined as the case group. Results: The risk of hepatoma was reduced in patients with higher cumulative DDDs Statin use compared to Statin non-users (HBV population: cumulative dose＞ 298 DDDs [OR=0.41, 95% CI: 0.24-0.72]; HCV population: cumulative dose ＞ 205 DDDs [OR= 0.25; 95% CI: 0.13-0.48]). Conclusions: A dose-response relationship exists between lower risk for hepatoma and higher cumulative DDDs of Statin use.起始頁-結束頁：301-313資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361051132篇名：全球化下生殖旅遊現況與評析並列篇名：Current status and analysis of reproductive tourism in the context of globalization作者：孫佳婷(Chia-Ting Sun)關鍵字：配子;全球化;醫療旅遊;生殖旅遊;人工協助生殖技術;gamete;globalization;medical tourism;reproductive tourism;assisted reproductive technologies期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：在當代高度全球化的經濟脈絡中，以醫療為主、旅遊為輔的跨國醫療旅遊已成為市場裡快速崛起與擴張的產業，而生殖旅遊作為其新興的一支，提供了難以順利在母國懷孕，或者不符母國人工協助生殖手術對象的非婚人士另一醫療選擇。不過其跨國特質亦提高了懷孕過程中將面臨的可能風險，且引來如重營利而失醫療本質與優生學等面向的爭議。因此本文欲以人工協助生殖技術為徑，一探全球化下配子轉移與生殖旅遊之產業現況。經文獻探討後發現，使用者多以能提供高品質照護、費用低廉、生殖律法寬鬆且可快速取得精卵來源及手術服務的國家為目的地，生殖旅遊顯示了生殖政治的複雜性，其所需的經濟資本使其充滿階級差異，且配子的轉移與價格在不同國家亦有巨大的落差，使部分國家之捐贈/販售者易淪為被剝削的對象。因此，生殖旅遊之現象，實需政府積極研擬相關法規，以保障人民權利。英文摘要：In a highly globalized economic context, transnational medicine (which focuses on medical tourism) has become a rapidly expanding industry. Specifically, reproductive tourism provides more medical choices to people who are unable to become pregnant or unmarried people whose access to reproductive technologies in their home countries is prevented by law. However, this practice has been a source of controversy: its transnational character increases the risk of pregnant and has drawn accusations of eugenic practices and focusing on profit at the expense of medicine. Therefore, this article investigates the use of assisted reproductive technologies to analyze the role of gamete transfer and reproductive tourism in globalization. After conducting a literature review, we found that most patients choose countries that provide high-quality care, have low medical costs, allow patients to quickly undergo surgery and obtain gametes, and have relatively less rigorous laws. The economic capital required for reproductive tourism and the class differences it delineates demonstrate the complexity of reproductive politics. Moreover, the price of gametes differs greatly between countries, which in some cases leads to the exploitation of donors or sellers. Consequently, it is necessary to actively formulate relevant laws and regulations to protect people’s rights in reproductive tourism.起始頁-結束頁：95-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361050963篇名：評估結核病接觸者在不同接觸情境的潛在感染風險並列篇名：Assessing the infection risk of Tuberculosis (TB) contacts in different case-contact contexts作者：陳慈忻(Tzu-Hsin Chen);溫在弘(Tzai-Hung Wen);方啟泰(Chi-Tai Fang);詹珮君(Pei-Chun Chan)關鍵字：結核病接觸者;接觸情境;感染風險;接觸效率;Tuberculosis (TB) contacts;social contact;infection risk;contact efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討台灣結核病發病者與接觸者之間不同的接觸情境與社會經濟條件，對於結核病感染風險的影響。方法：研究材料是疾管署在2010-2012年的台灣結核病接觸者調查資料，本研究建立接觸者與指標個案之接觸網絡，以迴歸模式分析接觸者感染風險因子，以及結核病潛伏感染接觸效率較高的社會情境。結果：在3,297名接觸者中，控制痰塗片陽性與接觸者年齡因素下，指標個案為原住民族群、居住於低度都市化地區、指標個案學歷大學以下、低網絡連結數是接觸者感染風險的獨立預測因子。在831名感染的接觸者中，導致結核病感染的接觸效率較高的社會關係，主要是孩童與青少年的親戚關係、在低度都市化的社區近鄰關係，以及醫療照護的接觸關係。結論：本研究發現在缺乏接觸者個人社經資料的情況下，指標個案的社會經濟條件即可做為接觸者感染風險的預測因子；另一方面，利用接觸效率的概念，可證實致病風險在不同社會關係、城鄉與不同年齡層的社會情境下有別，區辨這些特性有助於防疫調查找出具有高度感染風險的接觸者。英文摘要：Objectives: The risk of tuberculosis (TB) infection within different case-contact contexts is unknown. This study aimed to assess the role of different social contacts in the risk of latent TB infection (LTBI). Methods: We analyzed the records of the TB contact investigation conducted by the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (CDC) between 2010 and 2012, including 3297 contacts. Among the 3297 contacts, 831 were infected. We propose two TB risk indices: the probability of getting infected; and contact efficiency for investigating the risk factors in terms of different social contacts and demographics using multivariate regression analysis. Results: After adjusting the smear-positivity and age of contacts, we identified statistically significant social-demographic characteristics of an index case who had a higher probability of spreading TB to contacts. These social-demographic characteristics included aboriginal race, residence in non-urban areas, lowlevel education, and low degree of contact. Among 831 infected contacts, we also identified the types of social contacts with high-contact efficiency for TB infection, including the relationships of relatives among young people 0-14 years of age, the relationship with neighbors ＞ 55 years of age in the non-urban areas, and interactions with home care providers. Conclusions: By analyzing case-contact contexts, we conclude that social-demographic characteristics of an index case can be used to assess the probability of TB spread. Furthermore, contact efficiency differs from case-contact contexts and implies that profiling significant types of social contacts could be beneficial to identify high-risk contacts in a TB contact investigation起始頁-結束頁：107-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361051254篇名：評論：評估結核病接觸者在不同接觸情境的潛在感染風險期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：122-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH201736105125015篇名：性別差異在宗教信仰與健康生活品質關聯性之研究並列篇名：Gender differences in the relationship between religion and Health-Related Quality of Life作者：林晏如(Yen-Ju Lin);梁景洋(Ching-Yang Liang);陳俊志(Chun-Chih Chen)關鍵字：性別差異;宗教;宗教活動;健康生活品質;gender difference;religion;religious activity;Health-Related Quality of Life期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：探討宗教與健康關聯性在性別間之差異，利用健康生活品質量表將健康生活品質分成生理、心理及一般健康等三方面，以比較不同健康層面在性別間之影響是否有所不同。方法：利用國家衛生研究院與國民健康署於2009年國民健康訪問調查（National Health Interview Survey, NHIS）之全國性抽樣資料，研究對象數計有15,978人，男、女性分別為7,553人、8,425人。控制個人年齡、教育程度、婚姻狀況、所得、慢性疾病、籍貫及居住地區等變數，以釐清信仰與健康關聯性在性別間是否存在差異。結果：不論是有無宗教信仰或宗教活動參與度和健康生活品質之關聯性，在性別間有顯著不同之迴歸結果。有宗教信仰及宗教活動參與度愈高男性，其一般健康較佳。有信仰女性的生理、心理及一般健康狀況均較無宗教信仰者差；隨宗教活動參與度的增加，其生理及心理層面的健康狀況易顯著較差。結論：男性之迴歸結果和既有文獻大致相符，女性則顯然不同，推測女性通常在遭遇困境時才尋求宗教協助，抑或女性宗教者的心理、生理及一般健康原本就比較差，藉由宗教以尋求慰藉及解脫，因此原本健康較差女性反而更積極投入參與宗教信仰活動。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this investigation was to explore whether the relationship between religion and health-related quality of life was different according to gender. Methods: This study utilized the 2009 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) obtained from the National Health Research Institutes and Bureau of Health Promotion. A total of 15,978 individuals (7,553 males and 8,425 females) were selected from the 2009 NHIS database. We divided health-related quality of life into three dimensions, including physical, psychological and general health, to analyze their associations with religion. After controlling for age, education, marital status, income, chronic diseases, race and geographic location, we examined the effects of religion on these three dimensions by gender. Results: Males with religious beliefs and more religious activities had better general health than those without. Females with religious beliefs had worse physical, mental, and general health than those without, and those with more religious activities had worse physical and mental conditions than those without. Conclusions: For males, the empirical findings were in complete accord with the literature. For females, however, the regression results were quite different from those of previous studies. One possible reason is that, because of poor original health status, females look for comfort and relief through religion. As a result, females with poor health are more religious or more likely to participate in religious activities.起始頁-結束頁：123-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361051016篇名：「家庭醫師整合性照護計畫」對民眾越級就醫之影響並列篇名：Impact of the ”Family Doctors’ Integrated Care Initiative” on patients’ behavior in seeking care at higher level health care institutions作者：徐婕(Chieh Hsu);李玉春(Yue-Chune Lee)關鍵字：家庭醫師整合性照護計畫;越級就醫;自行轉診;Family Doctors Integrated Care Initiative;upgrading health seeking behavior;selfreferral期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：民眾不經轉診，越級就醫在台灣是重要問題，中央健保局於2003年開始實施「家庭醫師整合性照護計畫」，簡稱家醫計畫，以提升基層照護的品質與持續性，並促進落實分級轉診制度，故本研究目的為探討家醫計畫對越級就醫的影響。方法：以事前事後控制組比較研究設計與差異中的差異法，以每半年皆有適合在基層就醫的疾病（A類疾病）就醫之病人為對象，以2007-2010初次加入家醫計畫者為實驗組，並以性別、年齡、重大傷病、共病症指數、收入與控制組1:1配對，探討加入家醫計畫者與未加入者在介入前後越級就醫的變化。結果：家醫計畫可以改善2007至2009年加入民眾的越級就醫情形，但加入時間越長，效果越差，且退出計畫後民眾越級就醫情形顯著上升。然而，計畫無法改善2010年加入者的越級就醫情形。結論：家醫計畫可短期降低民眾越級就醫情形，但此政策對慢性病患者及過去醫療花費較高的族群較無影響。英文摘要：Objectives: Seeking care at higher level health care institutions than should be (up-graded healthcare) is an important issue in Taiwan; therefore, National Health Insurance (NHI) has implemented the ”Family Doctors’ Integrated Care Initiative (FDICI)” since 2003 to enhance the quality and continuity of primary care and to enhance the referral system. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of the FDICI on patients’ behavior in seeking upgraded healthcare. Methods: The study used the pretest-posttest control group design and difference in differences method on patients who received medical care with a diagnosis which could be dealt with in primary care. The intervention group included patients who initially participated in FDICI between 2007 and 2010. This group was 1:1 matched with a control group of patients, who had never participated in FDICI during the same period, by gender, age, catastrophic illness or not, Charlson comorbidity index, and income. Results: The FDICI reduced the rate of patients seeking upgraded healthcare during 2007-9; yet, the effect decreased over time. Moreover, after people dropped FDICI, their rate increased. Besides, the FDICI showed no effect for people who initially joined in 2010. Conclusions: The FDICI can reduce the rate of patients seeking upgraded healthcare within a short period; however, the plan showed no effect on patients with chronic illnesses or those with high medical costs.起始頁-結束頁：137-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361050737篇名：論質計酬對於思覺失調症患者急診及急性再住院的影響並列篇名：The impact of pay for performance on emergency department visits by and acute readmissions of patients with schizophrenia作者：陳麗尼(Li-Ni Chen);龔佩珍(Pei-Tseng Kung);張鏸云(Hui-Yun Chang);蔡文正(Wen-Chen Tsai)關鍵字：思覺失調症;論質計酬;差異中的差異法;急診;再住院;schizophrenia;pay-for-performance program;difference-in-difference;emergency department visits;readmission utilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：全民健康保險2010年1月1日實施思覺失調症論質計酬方案，本研究旨在探討有無加入論質計酬方案，比較其急診及6個月內急性再住院發生的風險及其相關因素。方法：資料來源為全民健康保險研究資料庫，擷取2009年至2010年固定就診之思覺失調症重大傷病患者（6,713人），依其所屬院所分為有加入及未加入論質計酬方案兩組，採傾向分數（propensity score）1：1配對後，應用差異中的差異法（Difference-in-Difference）設計，以條件式羅吉斯迴歸模型（conditional logistic regression model）進行分析。結果：急診利用方面，加入論質計酬方案組在方案實施前為12.21%，方案後降為12.01%（p＜0.05）；未加入論質計酬方案組在方案前為13.3%，方案後降為11.80%（p＜0.05）。6個月內急性再住院加入論質計酬方案組在方案前、後皆為1.71%（p＞0.05）；未加入論質計酬方案組在方案前為2.01%，方案後降為1.19% （p＜0.05）。控制其他變項後，在條件式羅吉斯迴歸模型中之交互作用變項急診利用之勝算比（OR）為1.15倍（p＞0.05）、急性再住院之勝算比（OR）為1.89（p＞0.05），顯示加入論質計酬方案組在加入方案後急診利用及再住院下降幅度比未加入論質計酬方案組少。結論：患者經過配對後，院所加入思覺失調症論質計酬方案第一年，降低固定就診病患之急診利用及6個月內再住院之成效不佳。英文摘要：Objectives: On January 1, 2010, Taiwan began implementation of the Schizophrenia Payfor- Performance (P4P) program. The objective of this study was to investigate the impact of the P4P program on emergency department (ED) visits and acute readmissions within six months after discharge. Methods: The research data were obtained from the National Health Insurance Research Database. The study sample was made up of schizophrenic patients in the catastrophic illness registry for 2009-2010, whose regular visit institutions did or did not join the P4P program (n=6,713). The groups were matched using propensity scores in a ratio of 1:1. The conditional logistic regression model with difference-in-differences approach was then used. Results: For the P4P patients, the number of ED visits was 12.21% before the program and 12.01% after it (p ＜ 0.05). For the non-P4P patients, the number of ED visits was 13.3% before the program and 11.80% after it (p ＜ 0.05). Acute readmission utilization of the P4P patients both before and after the program was 1.71% (p ＞ 0.05). In the non-P4P patients, acute readmission utilization was 2.01% before the program and 1.19% after it (p ＜ 0.05). After adjustment for other variables, the interaction variable of ED visits in the conditional logistic regression model revealed that the odds ratio (OR) was 1.15 (p ＞ 0.05) and that of acute readmission utilization was 1.89 (p＞0.05). This finding showed that the reduction in the P4P patients was less than that in the non-P4P patients. Conclusions: When patients were matched, hospitals participating in the P4P program for patients with schizophrenia were ineffective in reducing emergency care and readmission within 6 months after discharge in the first year.起始頁-結束頁：148-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361050898篇名：急性心肌梗塞病患照護連續性與照護結果及醫療費用之關係並列篇名：Association of continuity of care with healthcare outcomes and expenses among acute myocardial infarction patients作者：江蕙如(Hui-Ju Chiang);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：急性心肌梗塞;照護連續性;照護結果;醫療費用;acute myocardial infarction;continuity of care;outcomes of care;medical expenses期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：過去研究發現，急性心肌梗塞（acute myocardial infarction, AMI）出院病人住院前有較高照護連續性，會有較佳的出院後照護結果；然未有研究探討AMI出院病人出院後照護連續性，是否與出院後照護結果有關，再者，未有研究同時探討AMI出院病患住院前與出院後的照護連續性，對出院後照護結果及費用之相對影響強度。方法：本研究利用全民健康保險研究資料庫全國代表性樣本，分析2007年至2011年AMI出院病人，共1,884位。本研究採用廣義估計方程式（generalized estimating equation, GEE）及Cox比例風險穩健夾擠估計模式（Cox proportional hazards model with robust sandwich variance estimates），探討住院前、出院後照護連續性對出院後1年再住院次數、死亡以及醫療費用之影響。結果：住院前照護連續性與出院後照護結果及醫療費用無顯著相關；出院後照護連續性高之病患，有較低的出院後1年死亡風險、再住院次數與醫療費用。結論：AMI病人出院後而非住院前照護連續性，與出院後照護結果及醫療費用有關，因此為改善出院後照護結果及醫療費用，健康政策制定者及醫療服務提供者可著重提升AMI病人出院後照護連續性。英文摘要：Objectives: Previous research has shown that discharged patients following acute myocardial infarction (AMI) who had higher continuity of pre-admission care had better post-discharge care outcomes; however, no study has determined whether or not discharged patients following AMI who had higher continuity of post-discharge care had better post-discharge care outcomes. Moreover, no study has determined the relative strength of influence of pre-admission and postdischarge care continuity on post-discharge outcomes and expenses. Methods: This study utilized data from the nationwide representative sample through the National Health Insurance Research Database, and analyzed 1,884 AMI patients discharged from the hospital between 2007 and 2011. Generalized estimating equation and Cox proportional hazard models with robust sandwich variance estimates were performed to examine the effects of pre-admission and post-discharge care continuity on 1-year post-discharge mortality, readmissions, and medical expenses. Results: There was no significant relationship of continuity of pre-admission care to post-discharge care outcomes and medical expenses. Patients with a high continuity of post-discharge care had lower 1-year post-discharge mortality, readmissions, and medical expenses. Conclusions: Among AMI patients, post-discharge care continuity, rather than pre-admission care continuity, is associated with post-discharge care outcomes and medical expenses. Therefore, to improve postdischarge care outcomes and medical expenses, health policy makers and providers might focus on enhancing continuity of post-discharge care for patients with AMI.起始頁-結束頁：161-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2017361051059篇名：醫師、醫院PCI服務量閾值與死亡之關係並列篇名：The relationship between physician and hospital PCI volume thresholds and mortality作者：周盈邑(Ying-Yi Chou);杜裕康(Yu-Kang Tu);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：經皮冠狀動脈介入性治療;醫院服務量;醫師服務量;照護結果;percutaneous coronary intervention;hospital volume;physician volume;outcomes of care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：過去研究發現，醫師或醫院經皮冠狀動脈介入性治療（percutaneous coronary intervention, PCI）服務量與病人結果有關，美國心臟病學院、美國心臟學會及美國心血管造影和介入學會推薦，醫師與醫院服務量一年最少各為50及200例，以維持治療能力，然過去少有實證研究探討，醫師及醫院PCI服務量與病人結果間關係是否有服務量閾值存在，故本研究目的為決定PCI之醫師及醫院服務量與病人死亡關係間之閾值。方法：資料取自全民健康保險研究資料庫，研究對象為2009年接受PCI之病人，共30,905人。本研究以限制性立方截斷式（restricted cubic splines）模型，決定醫師及醫院PCI服務量與30日死亡關係之閾值，以多階層邏輯斯迴歸，控制病人、醫師及醫院特質後，檢測醫師及醫院服務量閾值對30日死亡之影響。 結果：醫師PCI服務量達一年50例後，風險校正後30日死亡率下降趨勢呈現平滑，且病人由醫師執行PCI服務量達50例者醫治，相較未達50例者，有53.6%較低的30日死亡勝算。結論：病人由執行PCI一年達50例之醫師醫治，可降低死亡風險。英文摘要：Objectives: Previous studies have found that physician volume or hospital volume has been associated with outcomes for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The American College of Cardiology, The American Heart Association, and The Society for Cardiovascular Interventions recommend that the minimum annual PCI volumes for physicians and hospitals are 50 and 200 cases, respectively, in order to maintain competency. Few empirical studies have explored whether a relationship exists between physician or hospital PCI volume threshold and patient outcome; therefore, the objective of this study was to determine the relationship between physician and hospital PCI volume thresholds and mortality. Methods: This study used the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database. The study subjects were 30,905 patients who underwent PCI in 2009. A restricted cubic spline model was utilized to determine thresholds for the relationship between physician and hospital PCI volume and 30-day mortality. After adjustment for patient, physician, and hospital characteristics, a hierarchical mixed-effect logistic model was used to examine the impact of physician and hospital volume thresholds on 30-day mortality. Results: Once the annual physician volume reached 50 cases, the declining trend in risk-adjusted 30-day mortality rates began to flatten. Moreover, patients treated by physicians with volumes reaching 50 cases had 53.6% lower odds of 30-day mortality compared with those treated by physicians with volumes of fewer than 50 cases. Conclusions: Patients who are treated by physicians who perform 50 PCIs or more a year are at decreased risk for mortality.起始頁-結束頁：174-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610512710篇名：石綿暴露工作者的職業健康檢查制度與惡性間皮瘤監測機制：國際經驗與台灣現況並列篇名：Occupational health examination for asbestos-exposed workers and surveillance system for malignant mesothelioma: international experiences and conditions of Taiwan作者：蕭汎如(Fan-Ju Hsiao);鄭雅文(Yawen Cheng);李俊賢(Lukas Jyuhn-Hsiarn Lee)關鍵字：石綿;惡性間皮瘤;職業健康檢查;疾病通報;國際比較;asbestos;malignant mesothelioma;occupational health examination;surveillance;international comparison期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：石綿相關疾病潛伏期漫長，自暴露到發病可長達數十年。由於過去石綿被廣泛使用，導致至今石綿疾病仍持續出現，在許多國家，其認定與補償已成為重要職業健康議題。不少國家針對石綿暴露工作者建立離職後健康檢查制度，亦有些國家針對與石綿暴露有明確因果關係的惡性間皮瘤建立監測機制。方法：本文回顧文獻與政府網頁，探討先進國家的石綿工作者職業健檢制度與惡性間皮瘤監測機制。結果：日本、英國、德國、法國以職災保險或公共基金籌措財源，對石綿作業的現職工作者與離職者提供定期健康檢查服務，並對確認罹病者提供醫療照顧與補償。澳洲、法國與南韓對於惡性間皮瘤設有疾病監測機制，並對罹病者進行石綿暴露史調查，蒐集的資料成為政府制訂石綿疾病預防與補償政策的實証依據。結論：台灣應針對石綿作業工作者建立離職後職業健檢機制，並應考慮針對惡性間皮瘤建立監測機制，以全面了解石綿疾病的發生狀況與影響。英文摘要：Objectives: Asbestos-related diseases (ARDs) occur years or decades after the first exposure to asbestos. Secondary to its widespread use, the prevalence of ARDs continues to increase, making its recognition and compensation a major occupational health issue. Many countries have expanded occupational health examination programs to include workers currently and/ or previously exposed to asbestos. In addition, some countries have established surveillance systems for malignant mesothelioma (MM), a sentinel tumor for asbestos exposure. Methods: We reviewed existing literature and official websites of selected countries to understand the design of asbestos-related occupational health examination programs and MM surveillance systems. Results: In Japan, the United Kingdom, Germany and France, workers with ongoing or past occupational exposure to asbestos are eligible to participate in occupational health examination programs. These programs are financed either through workers' compensation insurance or public funds. Medical care and compensation are provided for individuals with ARDs. Surveillance programs for MM were established in Australia, France and South Korea, and MM cases identified through the programs were investigated on asbestos exposure history. Surveillance programs provide empirical evidence for prevention and compensation policies of ARDs including MM. Conclusions: The government of Taiwan should expand the scope of its occupational health examination program to include individuals with a history of occupational exposure to asbestos, and establish a surveillance mechanism for MM. This will allow Taiwan to understand the scope and impacts of ARDs.起始頁-結束頁：187-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610512311篇名：全球發展新紀元：從千禧年發展目標到永續發展目標並列篇名：Towards a new era of development: from MDGs to SDGs作者：曾育慧(Yu-Hwei Tseng);江東亮(Tung-Liang Chiang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610510412篇名：人工協助生殖科技的資料登錄與健康監測：跨國比較研究並列篇名：National registries and health surveillance of assisted reproductive technologies: a comparative study作者：吳嘉苓(Chia-Ling Wu);雷文玫(Wenmay Rei);鄧宗業()Chung-Yeh Deng;謝新誼(Hsin-Yi Hsieh)關鍵字：人工協助生殖科技;登錄制;多胚胎植入;健康監測;assisted reproductive technologies;registry;multiple embryo transfer;health surveillance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：全國性的資料登錄以及公共報告，是監測人工協助生殖科技健康風險的重要策略。本文透過跨國比較研究，探討各國登錄制的特性，母嬰健康風險的重視程度，以及資料使用的公共性。方法：本文選取英、美、瑞典、日本以及台灣，透過檔案資料與二手文獻進行制度比較，並針對台日參與政策制定的相關行動者進行深度訪談，作為補充資料。結果：英美瑞台都透過國家法令建立強制登錄制，日本則由醫學會主管，近年已達成100%的通報率。登錄內容逐漸趨向重視母嬰健康指標，而非僅是以成功率展示技術能力。英美瑞日台都十分重視體外授精的多胚胎植入數目以及多胞胎孕產率，有些並已提出「選擇性單一胚胎植入比例」，「足月、正常體重、單胞胎活產率」等新興指標。英美瑞在報告資料的詮釋與可讀性，提出創新設計；日台則僅限於專業社群閱讀，缺乏公共溝通性。結論：台灣是世界上少數全面長期追蹤人工協助生殖科技資料的國家，但是在母嬰健康風險指標的精進，以及公眾溝通的品質上仍十分不足，建議參考國際趨勢進行改革。英文摘要：Objectives: A national registry and public data reporting have together become an important strategy for health surveillance of assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs). We have analyzed the development of registry systems, the tendency to highlight maternal and infant health risk, and the formats for public reporting based on a cross-national comparison. Methods: We selected the UK, US, Sweden, Japan, and Taiwan as countries for comparison. Archival data, secondary literature, and in-depth interviews of relevant policy-makers in Japan and Taiwan were included. Results: The UK, US, Sweden, and Taiwan have achieved compulsory registry through legal requirement. The Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology has adopted a voluntary reporting system, and has recently achieved a 100% reporting rate. Most countries gradually focus on the health risk for mothers and infants, rather than merely display the technical competence by calculating success rates. The number of multiple embryos transferred during IVF, and multiple pregnancy and live birth rates were shown to serve as important indicators of health risk surveillance. Some countries report new indicators, such as ”elective single embryo transfer rate” and ”term, normal weight, and singleton” live birth rate. The UK, US, and Sweden provide innovative formats to make reporting data accessible, readable, and useful for the general public. Taiwan and Japan limit its readership to professionals and lack efforts for broader public communication. Conclusions: Taiwan has one of the most complete ART registry systems in the world, but the surveillance on maternal and infant health and the quality of public reporting remains inadequate. To build evidence-based policy-making and to improve ART safety, surveillance reporting in Taiwan needs to meet the global standard.起始頁-結束頁：6-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610509913篇名：罹患失智症對老人接受居家或機構護理照護結果之影響並列篇名：Effect of home or institutional health care on health outcomes in older people with dementia作者：黃敬淳(Ching-Chun Huang);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu)關鍵字：失智症;照護結果;居家照護;機構照護;dementia;health outcome;home health care;institutional heath care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：失智者會出現問題行為等徵狀，使其照顧比起一般人困難。國外研究發現失智者與非失智者在照護結果上存在差異，國內目前尚未有全國性研究探討失智者與非失智者在居家或機構護理之照護結果是否存在差異，故本研究目的為探討罹患失智症對居家或機構照護結果之影響。方法：採用回溯性世代研究，研究對象為2008年至2012年間首次使用健保居家照護時已滿65歲以上之新個案，依照護場域進行分層，並使用邏輯斯迴歸納入性別、年齡、共病症程度計算傾向分數後，以1：1方式進行失智組和參考組之配對。追蹤個案於收案日後一年內呼吸道感染、泌尿道感染、壓瘡、骨折及髖部骨折發生情形，並以Stepwise Cox proportional hazardmodel探討失智症與否對居家或機構照護結果之影響。結果：居家照護中失智組呼吸道感染（HR=1.11）、壓瘡（HR=1.43）風險顯著較高。結論：居家照護失智者呼吸道感染及壓瘡風險顯著較高。建議衛生主管機關持續透過機構評鑑增進機構照護結果及提升民眾失智症照護素養，建議服務提供者加強失智症照護技巧、協助轉介長照資源、給予家庭照顧者照顧指導。英文摘要：Objectives: Patients with dementia exhibit aggressive behavior, which makes it more difficult to care for them. Several studies have shown that there are differences in health outcomes between people with and without dementia; however, in Taiwan there has not been a national population-based study identifying whether or not health outcomes are different between people with and without dementia who receive home and institutional health care. Methods: The study adopted a retrospective cohort study design, and the subjects were elderly who used National Health Insurance Home Health Care for the first time between 2008 and 2012. Patients were stratified by care site and divided into two groups (dementia and non-dementia) using a propensity score with gender, age, and co-morbidity to match subjects. Each case was monitored from the day of entry until a respiratory tract infection, urinary tract infection, pressure ulcer, all fractures, or hip fracture occurred. Stepwise Cox proportional-hazards regression was used to analyze the effect of patients with dementia on health outcomes. Results: The dementia group receiving home health care had a higher risk for respiratory tract infections (AHR=1.11) and pressure ulcers (AHR=1.43) than the non-dementia group. Conclusions: Dementia patients are at a higher risk for respiratory tract infections and pressure ulcers than patients without dementia receiving home health care. Medical institutions should monitor health outcomes in the institutional setting and enhance the skills of family caregivers. Formal caregivers should strengthen the skills of dementia care, pass the long-term care information to patients who need it, and teach family caregivers the skills of caring for dementia patients.起始頁-結束頁：21-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610507414篇名：評論：罹患失智症對老人接受居家或機構護理照護結果之影響作者：邱亨嘉期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：31-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH2016361050740115篇名：台灣地區極低出生體重早產兒兩歲追蹤結果對於五歲發展預後之預測並列篇名：Predicting 5-year developmental outcomes in very low birth weight preterm infants based on the 2-year follow-up evaluation作者：張瑛珍(Ying-Chen Chang);吳明鋗(Ming-Jiuan Wu);楊長興(Chiang-Hsing Yang);詹偉添(Wai-Tim Jim)關鍵字：早產兒;極低出生體重;追蹤;（神經）發展預後;危險因子;preterm infants;very low birth weight;follow up;neurodevelopmental outcomes;risk factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：出生體重1,500公克以下的極低出生體重早產兒是發展遲緩的高危險群。研究目的在探討2歲追蹤結果對於5歲長期發展預後的預測。方法：本回溯性研究以2001-2005年出生的極低出生體重早產兒為對象，資料取自二十一家合約醫院登錄在台灣早產兒基金會聯合追蹤小組資料庫。資料收集含括：出生狀況、新生兒罹病情形、家庭背景、父母社經地位、教育程度；2歲貝氏嬰兒發展量表（Bayley Scales of Infant Development Second Edition, BSID-Ⅱ）評估心智發展指數（mental development index, MDI）、動作發展指數（psychomotor development index,PDI）；5歲魏氏量表（Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence-Revised, WPPSI-R）評估全量表智商（full scale intelligence quotient, FSIQ）指數等。並以多元邏輯斯回歸統計分析，探討影響5歲發展預後之預測因子。結果：940位早產兒中，111位（11.8%）2歲時心智發展正常（MDI≧85），5歲時心智發展遲緩（FSIQ＜85）。2歲MDI、PDI＜85、5分鐘ApgarScore＜6分、父親低學歷、出生體重≦1,000克及母親低社經地位等，是影響5歲心智輕微發展遲緩的重要因子（達統計顯著差異）。結論：極低出生體重早產兒2歲時發展雖然正常，但5歲時卻可能成為發展遲緩的高危險群。建議所有早產兒應追蹤直到5歲，並提供發展遲緩的孩子早期療育。英文摘要：Objectives: Preterm infants with a birth weight ＜ 1,500 gm (very low birth weight [VLBW]) are a high-risk group for developmental delay. The purpose of this study was to determine the predictors of 5-year developmental outcomes in VLBW preterm infants based on the 2-year follow-up evaluation. Methods: All VLBW preterm infants were retrospectively recruited in this study between 2001 and 2005 using a large population-based cohort of VLBW infants from 21 neonatology departments registered in the database of the Premature Baby Foundation of Taiwan. Data, including condition at birth, socioeconomic status, educational level, family background, and neonatal morbidities, were collected. The mental development index (MDI) and psychomotor development index (PDI) were determined according to the second edition of the Bayley Scales of Infant Development (BSID-II) at 2 years of age. Also, the full scale intelligence quotient (FSIQ) was determined according to the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence-Revised (WPPSI-R) at 5 years of age. Multiple logistic regression was used to identify the predictors of 5-year outcomes. Results: Among 940 VLBW preterm infants, 111 (11.8%) had normal development (MDI ＞ 85) at 2 years of age, but developmental delay (FSIQ ＜ 85) at 5 years of age. A MDI ＜ 85, PDI ＜ 85, APGAR score ＜ 6 at 5 min, birth weight <U+2264> 1,000 g, father with a low education level, or a mother with a low socioeconomic status were significant predictors of developmental outcomes at 5 years of age. Conclusions: VLBW preterm infants may have normal development at 2 years of age; however, VLBW preterm infants are also a high-risk group for developmental delay at 5 years of age. Thus, all VLBW infants should be followed until 5 years of age. Early intervention for developmental delay children is necessary.起始頁-結束頁：32-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610508416篇名：不吸菸者對於二手菸接受意願與願受價格之初探並列篇名：A pilot study to estimate the willingness to accept of the secondhand smoking from current non-smokers作者：李玉春(Yue-Chune Lee);張麗娟(Li-Chuan Chang);陳珮青(Pei-Ching Chen)關鍵字：二手菸;願受價格;second-hand smoking;willingness to accept (WTA)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：探究不吸菸者對二手菸接受意願以及願意接受補貼的價格及其影響因素。方法：本研究為橫斷性研究，資料來自國民健康署2013年及2015年菸品健康福利捐全國電話訪問調查，以統計次數及百分比呈現基本特質分佈情形，以邏輯斯迴歸分析影響二手菸接受意願因素，及多元邏輯斯迴歸分析二手菸願受價格因素。結果：研究對象為現在不吸菸者（含從未吸菸與過去吸菸者），兩年樣本為1,926人，樣本大多為女性（55.04%）、60歲以上（22.95%）、大學以上 （35.90%）、已婚（70.26%）、無職業（45.70%）、從未吸菸（90.05%）。不吸菸者有74.39%不願意接受補貼，願意接受二手菸補償價格平均為272元。邏輯斯迴歸分析發現，年代、性別、年齡、吸菸狀態為影響接受二手菸補貼意願之因素，即2015年、男性、較年輕族群（18-49歲）、過去吸菸者傾向願意接受二手菸之補貼。結論：不吸菸者約七成五不願意接受二手菸補貼，而願意接受二手菸補償價格平均為272元。過去吸菸、男性、年輕者會影響不吸菸者接受二手菸補貼之意願。初探研究成果可提供政府訂定二手菸排放汙染費最低標準之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: This study explores whether nonsmokers are willing to accept secondhand smoke, and factors associated with the behavior. Methods: The study design used the data of 2013 and 2015 Tobacco Health and Welfare Surcharge Telephone Survey obtained from the Health Promotion Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare. The two computer-assisted telephone interview (CATI) surveys recruited a nationally representative sample of adults aged 18 and older in 2013 and 2015. We analyzed factors associated with the acceptance of secondhand smoke exposure using logistic and multinomial regression analysis. Results: Among 1926 persons, there were 55.0% women, 23.0% over 60 years old, 35.1% with higher education, 70.3% married and 45.7% unemployed. With 90.05% of never smokers, most nonsmokers (74.39%) did not want to accept the subsidy. Those who were willing to accept secondhand smoke would like to have a mean subsidy of NTD 272, ranged from NTD 256 to 290 for each secondhand smoke exposure. Results of the logistic regression analysis showed that participants of year 2015 (compared to year 2013), males, younger groups (18-29 years, 30-39 years, 40-49 years), and former smokers (compared to never smokers) tends to be willing to accept subsidy for a second-hand smoke exposure. Conclusions: Approximately 75% of non-smokers were unwilling to accept the secondhand smoke subsidy. Ex-smokers and young men were more likely to accept the subsidies ranged from NTD 256 to 290 for each exposure.起始頁-結束頁：44-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610508817篇名：台灣學齡前兒童電視觀賞時間的相關因素及其對肥胖之影響：一項橫斷性研究並列篇名：Influence of amount time watching television on obesity and associated factors among preschool children in Taiwan: a cross-sectional study作者：張鳳菊(Feng-Chu Chang);陳清祥(Ching-Hsiang Chen);黃永寬(Yuan-Kung Haung);周宏室(Hung-Shih Chou);前橋明(Akira Maehashi);廖建彰(Chien-Chang Liao)關鍵字：學齡前兒童;電視觀賞;肥胖;preschool children;time of television viewing;obesity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本研究目的在探討台灣學齡前兒童電視觀賞時間的相關因素及其對肥胖之影響。方法：本研究在2015-2016年以系統隨機抽樣方式，對全台灣共54家幼兒園的2-6歲學齡前兒童進行問卷調查。問卷內容包括研究對象人口社會資料、身高、體重及生活型態。我們利用多變項羅吉斯迴歸分析，計算與電視觀賞時間過長的相關因素及電視觀賞時間與肥胖之勝算比及95%信賴區間。結果：在3,492位學齡前兒童中，肥胖盛行率為12.6%，每日電視觀賞時間平均為92.7分鐘。學齡前兒童肥胖、年齡、主要照顧者教育程度、晚餐前零食攝取、睡眠時間、早餐時的電視觀賞時間、遊戲時間及戶外遊戲時間是學齡前兒童電視觀賞時間過長的相關因素。相較於電視觀賞時間小於60分鐘的學齡前兒童，電視觀賞時間超過120分鐘的學齡前兒童肥胖勝算比為1.90（95%信賴區間=1.28-2.82），且每增加30分鐘的電視觀賞時間，學齡前兒童肥胖的風險增加（勝算比=1.10，95%信賴區間=1.06-1.15）。結論：台灣2-6歲學齡前兒童的電視觀賞時間與肥胖有關。英文摘要：Objectives: Sedentary behavior may be a risk factor for obesity. This study evaluated the association between the amount of time watching television and obesity among preschool children in Taiwan. Methods: We used systematic random sampling and questionnaires to survey preschool children 2-6 years of age among 54 preschools in Taiwan. The information elicited by the questionnaires included socioeconomic characteristics, height, weight, and lifestyle. We used multivariate logistic regressions to calculate the adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of obesity associated with the amount of time television was watched. Results: The prevalence of obesity was 12.6% and the average of amount of time television was watched was 92.7 min among 3,492 children. Obesity and age of preschool children, parents' level of education, pre-dinner snacking, duration of sleep, watching television during breakfast, amount of play time, and amount of time spent on outdoor physical activities were factors associated with excessive television viewing amongst preschool children. Compared with children who watched television for <U+2264> 60 min, children who watched television ＞ 120 min were at a higher risk for obesity (OR=1.90; 95% CI=1.28-2.82). Moreover, when preschool children increased the amount of time television was watched by 30 min, the risk of obesity was increased (OR=1.10; 95% CI=1.06- 1.15). Conclusions: The amount of time television was watched was associated with obesity among preschool children 2-6 years of age in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：54-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610509318篇名：電視食品廣告暴露對國小學童飲食相關行為的影響並列篇名：The influence of television food advertising exposure on eating-related behaviors among elementary school children作者：魏米秀(Mi-Hsiu Wei);陳建宏(Chien-Hung Chen)關鍵字：電視;食品廣告;廣告暴露;兒童;飲食行為;television;food advertising;advertising exposure;children;eating behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本研究目的在探討國小學童暴露於不利健康點心（unhealthy snacks [UHSs]）電視廣告對其飲食相關行為的影響。方法：採橫斷式問卷調查，研究對象為12所國小的3-6年級學童共1,043名。以結合兒童自我報告收視行為及電視食品廣告內容分析資料來測量UHS廣告暴露量。不利健康食品包括：「澱粉油炸類零食」、「餅乾、蛋糕、西點」、「糖果、巧克力」、「含糖飲料」及「西式速食」。資料分析方式為階層複迴歸。結果：在控制性別、年齡、BMI、靜態活動時間、UHS家庭可獲性及學校地區都市化程度後，「UHS廣告暴露」可顯著增加對「UHS食品慾望」（ΔR^2=.011, p＜.001）、「UHS食品要求」（ΔR^2=.004, p＜.05）及「UHS飲食頻率」（ΔR^2=.003, p＜.05）的解釋力。「UHS廣告暴露」與上述飲食行為呈正向關連，學童暴露於不利健康食品廣告愈多，不利健康飲食行為愈多。結論：不利健康食品電視廣告對兒童的健康飲食行為有負向影響。本研究實證結果支持政府採取規範兒童食品廣告的政策，並建議發展介入策略以提高兒童對不利健康食品廣告的防禦能力。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aimed to examine the relationship between exposure to television advertising for unhealthy snacks (UHSs) and subsequent eating-related behaviors among elementary school children in Taiwan. Methods: Third to sixth grade students were recruited from 12 elementary schools in Taiwan in order to conduct cross-sectional surveys based on questionnaires. The sample comprised 1043 students. Estimates for the exposure to UHS advertising were obtained by combining self-reported television viewing behavior with advertising data obtained from broadcasters. UHS products included ”starch-based fried snacks,” ”cookies, cakes, and desserts,” ”candies and chocolate,” ”sugar-sweetened drinks,” and ”fast-food meals.” Hierarchical multiple regression was used for data analysis. Results: After controlling for age, gender, BMI, sedentary time, availability of UHSs in the home, and the degree of urbanization of the school location, the UHS advertising exposure was shown to account for significant additional variance in children’s desires (ΔR^2 = .011, p ＜ .001) and requests (ΔR^2 = .004, p ＜ .05) related to UHSs as well as their consumption frequencies of UHSs (ΔR^2 = .003, p ＜ .05). Positive linear relationships were observed between the number of UHS advertisements to which children were exposed and their unhealthy eating-related behaviors. Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that television advertising for UHSs can have a negative effect on the healthy dietary behaviors of children. The findings provide evidence to support calls for regulating television advertising for food aimed at children as well as the development of interventions for improving children’s defenses against advertising for UHSs.起始頁-結束頁：64-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610510019篇名：以健康信念模式探討台灣北部大學生接種人類乳突病毒疫苗之行為意圖及相關因素研究並列篇名：Factors associated with university students' intention to receive human papillomavirus vaccination in northern Taiwan: a heath belief model approach作者：黃莉芸(Li-Yun Huang);張鳳琴(Fong-Ching Chang);苗迺芳(Nae-Fang Miao)關鍵字：健康信念模式;人類乳突病毒疫苗;HPV疫苗接種行為意圖;大學生;health belief model;HPV vaccine;HPV vaccination intention;university students期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在以健康信念模式探討大學生接種人類乳突病毒疫苗之行為意圖及相關因素。方法：本研究採立意取樣，選取103學年度第二學期就讀台灣北部3所大學的學生，以自填式問卷進行調查，共分析533人，有效問卷率97%。以複迴歸檢視影響大學生接種人類乳突病毒疫苗之意圖。結果：大學生HPV相關知識偏中高程度，HPV行動線索主要來源是從學校、媒體及衛生單位。HPV行動線索、HPV自覺罹患性、HPV疫苗自覺行動利益、HPV疫苗自我效能與HPV疫苗行為意圖呈顯著正相關；HPV疫苗自覺行動障礙與HPV疫苗行為意圖呈顯著負相關。整體而言，大學生HPV行動線索、HPV自覺罹患性、HPV疫苗自我效能可有效預測HPV疫苗接種行為意圖。依性別，影響男性HPV疫苗接種行為意圖之因子包括HPV自覺罹患性、HPV疫苗自我效能；而影響女性之因子為年級、HPV行動線索、HPV疫苗自我效能。結論：衛生單位可增加HPV疫苗訊息的暴露，來強化HPV行動線索，及增加HPV相關活動來提升大學生HPV自覺罹患性、HPV疫苗自我效能，增進學生HPV疫苗接種之意圖。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to explore factors associated with university students' intention to receive human papillomavirus vaccination (HPV). Methods: Using the purposive sampling method, the present study queried 533 undergraduate students from three universities in northern Taiwan in 2015. Self-administered structured questionnaires were used. The effective response rate was 97%. Multivariate regression was used to analyze the data. Results: Overall, university students had average/high scores for their level of knowledge about HPV. HPV cues to action were mainly from schools, media and healthcare providers. HPV cues to action, perceived susceptibility, perceived benefits, and self-efficacy were positively associated with intention for HPV vaccination, while perceived barriers was negatively associated with such intention. Generally speaking, HPV cues to action, perceived susceptibility to HPV, and self-efficacy could predict intention for HPV vaccination. By gender, the factors associated with male students' HPV intention included perceived susceptibility to HPV and self-efficacy; female students' factors included grade, cue to action and self-efficacy. Conclusions: We suggest that health sectors should increase exposure to messages about the HPV vaccine in order to increase cues to action, and conduct HPV educational activities to improve students' perceived susceptibility and self-efficacy with regard to HPV vaccination.起始頁-結束頁：77-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610509520篇名：台灣新竹縣市廢棄藥物檢收行為與品項調查並列篇名：Behavior and item survey of disposed medicines in Hsinchu, Taiwan作者：王四切(Tzu-Chueh Wang);李璧瑤(Pi-Yao Lee);陸海林(Hai-Lin Lu);王惠蓉(Hui-Jung Wang);許宮銓(Kung-Chuan Hsu)關鍵字：廢棄藥物;剩藥;醫療廢棄藥物;廢棄藥物檢收;medicine disposal;unused and expired medicine;medicine waste;disposed medicines期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：目標：藥物對環境造成的污染及生態改變為值得正視的問題，也是世界各國政府甚為關注之議題。各先進國家如美、英、加拿大等耗費在廢棄藥品及醫療廢棄物上的費用逐年增加。本研究目的為1.瞭解民眾對政府宣導廢棄藥物政策及處理方式的認知。2.瞭解其產出來源及種類。3.針對目前之處理機制提出建議及改善之道。方法：本研究自新竹縣市民眾至社區藥局或醫院藥局丟棄廢棄藥物者施以問卷調查，瞭解及分析藥物種類、成因及是否與醫療從業人員有關而導致的廢棄藥物。結果：年齡層與學歷於社區藥局與妥善處理廢棄藥品之認知，以71歲以上者較差；高中職以下者較佳且有顯著性差異性（p＜0.05）。年齡層與職業對家中廢棄藥物處理方式以71歲以上者較差；學生者較差且有顯著性之差異（p＜0.001）。檢收藥物數量排名以抗血栓藥Bokey（Aspirin 100 mg）最多；其次為輕瀉劑或制酸劑的MgO（Magnesium Oxide）與止痛藥Tinten（Acetaminophen 500 mg）。結論：發現在社區藥局檢收者希望居住社區可設有檢收站，檢收藥物中依數量以抗血栓、感冒、胃腸藥等最多；依金額則以抗腫瘤藥最高，未來廣設檢收點時可多了解廢棄原因以減少藥物的廢棄，並建議在用藥安全教育可帶入廢棄藥物檢收流程；於藥袋上標示藥物回收等標語，讓更多民眾了解廢棄藥物管道，以減少因錯誤處置對社會環境的傷害。英文摘要：Objectives: Pharmaceutical products are serious environmental pollutants all around the world. The introduction of the National Health Insurance Program has increased public accessibility to medication in Taiwan, but it has also led to large increases in medication waste. Methods: In this study, questionnaires were distributed to people disposing of medications at community pharmacies and hospitals in the Hsinchu area of Taiwan, and the names and quantities of medicines disposed of were analyzed. Results: The respondents suggested that there should be more medicine-receiving stations, as they were concerned that incorrect disposal of medicine waste would induce environmental pollution. The count of medicines showed that the most frequently disposed of medicines were Bokey (Aspirin 100 mg), followed by MgO (Magnesium Oxide) and Titen (Acetaminophen 500 mg). Conclusions: It is suggested that it is more important to know why people dispose of medicines than to establish more receiving stations. It is also recommended that methods of dealing with unused or expired medicines should be included in school education programs about safe use of medications. This could be implemented in many ways, such as by devising slogans, making and displaying posters, and using social media such as FB, Line, blogs, and other apps to publicize correct methods of medicine disposal. It is suggested that such measures can raise public awareness, and contribute to reducing this type environmental pollution.起始頁-結束頁：87-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH20173610511101篇名：聖俗共構、剛柔相濟：佛教道場男性氣概初探並列篇名：The Sacred and the Profane: Preliminary Study of Masculinity in Buddhism Mission作者：邱琡雯(Shwu-Wen Chiou)關鍵字：聖俗;善男子;廣論班;男性氣概;回顧式的參與觀察;the Sacred and the Profane;Kula-putra;Lamrim Chenmo Studying Class;Masculinity;Retrospectively Participant Observation期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文將男性氣概視為社會建構的動態過程，注重宗教與社會的互動關係，掌握制度性宗教中男性氣概的建制，分析男眾如何看待教團打造出來的男性氣概氛圍，如何面對教團內外男性氣概聖俗價值的衝突及其回應之道。研究方法主要採參與觀察法及訪談法，以臺北福智《廣論》班的中年男眾為對象，先從「回顧式的參與觀察」此一概念闡述研究動機；其次藉由「教團建構出的男性氣概」、「聖俗競合下的男性氣概」、「佛教教義中的男性氣概」三點，架設出佛教道場男性氣概研究的初步結構圖。再從教主、教團、教義、世俗價值等面向切入，將參與觀察資料與訪談資料進行交叉檢證，以「萬善根本從師出」、「菩提道上優婆賽」、「當善男遇見信女」三個命名呈現研究結果，勇於承擔（身）、清淨語業（語）、摧伏我慢（意）是福智男性氣概的主要特徵，他們也從教主身上以及與女眾的互動中，不斷去建構、去調整符合教團及自我標準的男性氣概。英文摘要：Masculinity is considered as social constructed dynamic process in thesis, to grasp interactive relationship between religion and society, to analyses masculinity's construction in institutional religion, male believers how to react the masculinity's atmosphere constructed by Buddhism mission, and how to deal with the conflict between the sacred and the profane concerning masculinity value. Participant observation and interviewing are accepted, middle-aged men in Blisswisdom's Lamrim Chenmo studying classes in Taipei are object. First, I elaborate research motive from the concept of ”retrospectively participant observation”. Second, I setup structural chart from three directions, namely, masculinity constructed by Buddhism mission, masculinity coopetition in the sacred and the profane, and masculinity in Buddhism doctrines. Third, by the founder, mission, doctrines, secular value dimensions, I carry out cross validation from the data of participant observation and interviewing. Finally, I denominate three findings ”all benevolence origin is revered master”, ”Up<U+0101>saka in dharma path”, ”When kula-putra meet kuladuhitri” to present research result. Taking responsibility, speaking good words, destroying arrogance are main three masculinity characters. Meanwhile, the male believers also construct and modulate the masculinity continuously from the founder and the female in order to accord with the mission's and themselves' standards.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：變遷中的平埔客認同與族群關係並列篇名：The Changing Identities and Ethnic Relationship in the Case of ”Pingpu-Hakka”作者：陳明惠(Ming-Hui Chen);王俐容(Li-Jung Wang)關鍵字：平埔客;客家研究;族群認同;文化混雜性;Pingpu-Hakka;the Hakka studies;Ethnic Identities;Cultural Hybridity期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：當代族群研究逐漸以變動與混雜的觀點來分析認同與文化的生成。臺灣客家族群內部的異質性，以及隨著族群與文化流動所帶來的多重認同與文化混雜的議題也逐漸被重視。過去臺灣的客家研究對於族群互動的探討，主要著重在「閩客關係」，而「原客關係」則是相對被忽略的研究議題。但隨著平埔運動與研究的興起，平埔客的議題開始得到新的關注。本研究主要的目的在於探究當代平埔客的發展脈絡及其認同發展與變化的歷程，進一步探索客家的多樣性，以及思考臺灣客家與平埔之間族群邊界的變動與發展。本研究發現，平埔客後裔文化認同的界定為一種持續轉變的過程，族群文化與認同總在不同的社會、歷史、政治、經濟脈絡下不斷混合、對話、重整與再建構。本研究認為平埔客的相關研究，深化並具體陳述出當代對於文化混雜性（cultural hybridity）與認同的相關議題，使我們認識到新身分、認同與文化形式的產製，都是策略性的切割與分類，或是暫時的穩定化；每個個體的認同都可能是在與當下的時空、文化與社會對話、互動所交織出的複雜現象。希望平埔客的研究得以推翻目前分類的對立性，找尋並建立一個新的情境來容納文化的彈性與變遷。英文摘要：Internal heterogeneity within the Hakka ethnic groups in Taiwan as well as the numerous confounding identity and cultural issues associated to the ethnic and cultural exchanges are gradually gaining attention. Through literature review and in-depth interviews, the primary objectives of this study were to explore the historical development context of the Pingpu-Hakkas and to further reflect on the change and development for the ethic relations and boundaries of the Taiwanese-Hakkas. We believe that the relevant Pingpu-Hakkas studies have deepened and specifically illustrated the relevant cultural hybridity and identity related topics to allow us to understand that the new identity, identification, and cultural format production were all designed for strategic excision and classification, or to achieve temporary stabilization. Each individual's identity may be a complex phenomenon interwoven by the present era, cultural, and social dialogues and interactions. We hope that the Pingpu-Hakka studies can overthrow the current classification contrariety as well as search and establish a new cultural context to accommodate the flexibility and transition of culture.起始頁-結束頁：47-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：讀俞樾《諸子平議•淮南子》記並列篇名：A Study of Huainanzi Pingyi in Yuyue's Zhuzi Pingyi作者：郭鵬飛(Pang-Fei Kwok);蔡挺(Ting Choi)關鍵字：俞樾;《諸子平議》;《淮南子平議》;《淮南子》;訓詁學;Yuyue;Zhuzi Pingyi;Huainanzi Pingyi;Huainanzi;Chinese Philology期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：德清俞樾（1821-1907），字蔭甫，號曲園，晚清樸學大家，徐世昌（1855-1939）《清儒學案．曲園學案》譽之曰：「同、光之間，蔚然為東南大師。」《諸子平議》一書，是子學訓釋的鉅著，乃俞樾代表作，足可與王念孫（1744-1832）《讀書雜志》雁行。俞樾嫻於古籍，通文字音韻，對語文有極其敏銳的觸覺，故其分析文意，常有新見，如《淮南子•道應訓》「可以窈」，俞氏讀「窈」為「幽」，《文子》正作「可以幽」。又同篇「而示諸先生」，王念孫謂「先生」二字於義無取，「先生」當作「民人」。俞樾則指「民人」與下文不合，而以「先生」二字無誤。此皆見俞氏卓見與深邃之語文功底。然而，俞氏亦有千慮一失之處，如《淮南子．精神訓》「使神滔蕩而不失其充」，俞改「充」為「元」，卻欠憑證，不知李善注引此句亦作「充」，而「充」釋為「實」，義本通暢，毋庸改字。又如《說林訓》「任動者車鳴也」，俞氏指「任」是「任木」。然「任木」無單言「任」者，「任」實取其「擔」義。凡此皆見俞氏勇於立說而有欠周密之失。今就俞氏《諸子平議．淮南子》部分，舉其精到見解，檢其可議之處，略陳己見，並就相關詞義問題，一併討論。英文摘要：Yuyue (1821-1907) was a distinguished Qing (1644-1912) scholar, whose tremendous achievements in the study of the Chinese classics and philology are greatly respected to this day. His work, Zhuzi Pingyi, continue to be essential references for Chinese philologists. However, the author of this paper argue that his commentaries on Huainanzi would benefit from further investigation and refinements. This paper is an attempt to re-examine some of their commentaries on Huainanzi and offer rectification to possible errors. Sixteen examples will be discussed in detail and it is hoped that the questions raised in this essay will form the basis for further research.起始頁-結束頁：85-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：論王夫之《禮記章句》與其所涉及之明清《禮記》學問題並列篇名：On Wang Fu Zhi's Li Ji Zhan Ju and the Related Issues of the Book of Rites in Ming Dynasty and Qing Dynasty作者：黃羽璿(Yu-Hsuan Huang)關鍵字：王夫之;《禮記章句》;〈學〉〈庸〉回歸;錯簡;明清《禮記》學;Wang Fu Zhi;Li Ji Zhang Ju;the Regression of ”the Great Learning” and ”the Doctrine of the Mean”;Wrong Compilation;the Study on the Book of Rites in Ming Dynasty and Qing Dynasty期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在透過闡繹王夫之《禮記章句》所運用之經學方法暨所開發之《禮記》學議題，觀察其對明代《禮記》學觀念之延續與變革，同時蠡測其對清代禮學產生之可能影響。研究結果為：船山的〈大學〉、〈中庸〉回歸論述一如郝敬，乃思透過註解經書的方式彰顯儒家聖學的正統地位，進而達到分殊陽明心學與二氏之學等異端思想的目的；其不同處則在於，船山在標榜朱子的前提下，〈大學〉仍從用〈補傳〉改本，且為駁詰陽明擇用之《古本大學》，更從根本上直接否定鄭注之《禮記》本〈大學〉。此種毫無顧忌地批評鄭玄，正是延續明代《禮記》學發展中「去鄭玄化」之傳統而來。此外，《章句》新創之〈禮運〉「錯簡說」，延續了宋明以來疑經改經之風氣，進而影響包括欽定《義疏》在內的清代學者，而成為《禮記》研究的新興議題。船山又同時變化運用「章句」之法，離析〈坊記〉、〈表記〉、〈緇衣〉等3篇經文，將過去認為盡屬孔子話語的「子曰」分為「孔子之言」與「記者之言」，亦啟發了包括陳澧在內的後世學者。而船山對《記》文中「子曰」之崇奉，則具體化為另種「尊經」的「表象」，大幅改變了明人動輒質疑經文的態度。惟其對經文之信從乃立基於「尊孔」之信仰，而非「尊經」之信念，故與乾嘉「神聖經典」指導原則下所建構之「絕對文本」概念仍有本質上的差別，亦見《章句》居明清禮學過渡中所蘊含之未成熟轉型條件。本文綜論王夫之身處明清之交所開展之多樣化禮學議題及新舊學術因革，對於船山之經學與明清《禮記》學史之發展研究當有實質助益，為其價值所在。英文摘要：This paper analyzed the approaches that Wang Fu Zhi had adopted in Li Ji Zhang Ju and different scools on the Book of Rites, and thus concluded the possible influences Wang had made on the study of the Book of Rites in Ming dynasty and Qing dynasty. The finding was that Wang held the same position as Hao Jing did, which was to emphasize the orthodox position of Confucianism. The differences between Wang and Hao lay in the fact that Wang completely denied Zheng Xuan's perspective on the Book of Rites, which was also the mainstream of the study on the Book of Rites in Ming dynasty. Furthermore, what Wang had proposed the wrong compilation of ”Li Yun” in Li Ji Zhang Ju became the new approach studying the Book of Rites. By analyzing ”Fang Ji”, ”Biao Ji”, ”Zi Yi”, Wang separated ”Confucius said” into two categories, ”what Confucius said”, and ”what the writer said”. In conclusion, the contribution of the paper was to provide a clear picture of Wang’s position in the study of the Book of Rites in his time and of the development of research on the Book of Rites.起始頁-結束頁：125-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：初探佛教心理學之思想起源與現代意義：以「軸心突破」為線索並列篇名：The Philosophical Origins of Buddhist Psychology and its Relevance to Modern-day Explorations of Mind: Taking the ”Axial Breakthrough” as a Clue作者：林建德(Chien-Te Lin)關鍵字：軸心突破;真心梵我;五蘊非我;心;業;Axial Breakthrough;<U+0100>tman;An<U+0101>tman;Mind;Karma期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以「軸心突破」為線索，初探佛教心理學之思想起源，認為佛教心理學之成形，可向前追溯到婆羅門教《奧義書》傳統，在「軸心突破」的背景下揚棄各種神巫信仰的規範，而回歸到生命主體之觀照，走向「內向超越」運動。然相對於《奧義書》的「真心梵我」說，佛教卻主張「五蘊非我」說，並在此獨到見解下展開心意識的相關理論，藉以實現解脫苦痛的目的。本文指出，此以解脫為關懷的佛教心理學暨唯心思想，截然不同於科學進路的心理學，其既不在於研究「腦」，也並非在於研究「行為」之表面，卻著重於德性的涵養和精神的鍛鍊。可知「心」之概念為一價值相關的語彙，「心」密切關乎「業」，而未必僅是大腦、心臟等之生物性或生理性指涉而已。如此的心理學可說是價值論、倫理學、救渡學等密切結合，迥異於現今心理學之研究向度，故期能藉由此唯心思想之重新審視，以助於「心」之整全性認識。英文摘要：This article focuses on the ”axial breakthrough” in an attempt to uncover the philosophical origins of Buddhist psychology. While the roots of Buddhist psychology can be traced back to the ancient Indian tradition of Brahmanism and the Upani<U+1E63>ads, the ”axial breakthrough” prompted a rejection of a ritualistic world-view in favor of renewed interest in the value of human life and the quest for ”inward transcendence”. Unlike the Brahmanist doctrine of <U+0101>tman (Soul/ Self), the Buddha propounded the concept of an<U+0101>tman (Non-Self) and on that basis developed a theory of mind and consciousness which is said to enable the cessation of suffering through mental cultivation. This soteriological concern of Buddhist psychology can perhaps in a sense be regarded as an idealist system built around the theme of transcendence. Rather than trying to discover the mechanisms of the physical ”brain” or attempting to decode the outward ”behavior,” it focuses instead on ethical cultivation and inward spiritual growth. In Buddhism therefore, mind is not merely seen as a biological or physiological referent, but rather as an axiological term closely related to karma. This unification of psychology with axiology, ethics and soteriology, though markedly different to the approach taken by modern psychology, could prove immensely beneficial in our quest to gain a more comprehensive understanding of mind.起始頁-結束頁：181-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：文藝復興時代的政治論述：白蘭度里尼的比較政體理論並列篇名：Political Discourse in the Renaissance: Brandolini's Theory of Comparative Polity作者：許國賢(Kuo-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：白蘭度里尼;文藝復興;共和國;君主國;Brandolini;the Renaissance;Republic;Monarchy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：文藝復興時代的政治書寫的主流，乃是「君王鏡鑑」（或稱「獻策書」）。自佩脫拉克以迄馬基維利，諸多的關心政治的人文主義者，皆留下了敬獻給不同的統治者，並以統治者所應具備之德性為探討要旨的「君王鏡鑑」。在此種書寫的氛圍底下，白蘭度里尼（Aurelio Lippo Brandolini, 1454-1497）在2009年才被重新發現的《共和國與君主國之比較》一書就顯得極為特殊了。在該書中，白蘭度里尼並非不關注統治者所應具備之德性，但他更注重的則是共和國與君主國孰優孰劣的整體比較，並以仿照柏拉圖的對話錄形式，展開論點的交鋒與辯論。雖然白蘭度里尼係是君主國的辯護者，但他對於以佛羅倫斯為代表的共和國的批判式檢視，一方面記錄了共和國的運作實況，另一方面則可謂是比較政府的先驅。本文將還原文藝復興時代義大利的歷史背景，以及當時的政治論述的整體脈絡，並在此一基礎上，從自由、正義、好的政體等角度，探討白蘭度里尼做為一個政治理論家的意義及特殊性。英文摘要：A special genre of political writing, the so-called mirrors for prince or advice-book, played predominate role in Renaissance Europe. Many celebrated humanists, from Petrarca, Pontano, Sacchi to Machiavelli and Erasmus, wrote their mirrors for prince to urge the virtue that princes or rulers should adopt and cultivate. In contrast to this genre of political writing, Aurelio Lippo Brandolini’s Republics and Kingdoms Compared, though relatively little known until today, exhibited a rather different prospect of political discourse. His concern was to evaluate and compare the two dominant forms of polity of his time, namely republic and kingdom, and, by doing so, to insist the superiority of kingdom over monarchy. By bringing him back to the political context and theoretical milieu of Quattrocento Italy, this essay asserts that Brandolini is both a modern precursor of comparative politics/government and a keen political theorist inheriting the long tradition of inquiring what a good polity should be.起始頁-結束頁：1-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：反身愛情的限制，或永生政治的挑戰並列篇名：The Limits of Reflexive Love, Or A Zoepolitical Challenge作者：高國魁(Kuo-Kuei Kao)關鍵字：反思／身性;激情;生活政治;生物政治;永生政治;Reflexivity;Passion;Life Politics;Biopolitics;Zoepolitics期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文旨在證成當代社會學家雖然採取了個體行動翻轉社會結構的觀點，發現日常生活對於功能系統的抵抗，但是他們更深陷在人類行動至上的現代性偏好中。文中指出，自1980年代以降有個後帕森思（Talcott Parsons）的思想病徵顯現在親密關係的社會學研究中，使得行動社會學和愛情社會學之間存在理論和經驗相互印證的共謀關係。具體地說，我們首先說明第二現代性論者如何想像反思愛情的溝通行動，其次解釋魯曼（Niklas Luhmann）為何重認反身愛情的溝通媒介，其三返回帕森思反省某種愛情的宗教秩序。文末還將解析由語言、身體和激情的綜合理性聚集而成的社會自我觀念，進而揭開生活政治、生物政治和永生政治施加在反身愛情上的三重限制。英文摘要：This essay argues that although contemporary sociologists adopt the perspective of individual action to subvert social structure, meanwhile discovering the resistance of daily life to functional systems, they lapse deeper into the modernist preference for the supremacy of human action. It indicates a post-Parsonian symptom emerged from the sociological researches of intimacy since the 1980s, inasmuch as the theoretical sociology of action and the empirical sociology of love have verified each other in a collusive manner. Firstly, we elaborate on the ways in which champions of the second modernity imagine reflexive love as a communicative action. Secondly, we explicate the reasons why Niklas Luhmann recognizes reflexive love as a communication medium. Thirdly, we go back to Talcott Parsons for reflecting upon a certain religious order of love. Finally, we analyze the notion of the social self assembled by the synthetic rationality of language, the body and passion with an aim to disclose the threefold limits of reflexive love imposed by life politics, biopolitics and zoepolitics.起始頁-結束頁：67-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：布洛爾的哲學立場及其波以耳案例研究並列篇名：David Bloor's Philosophical Stance and His Case Study of Robert Boyle作者：戴東源(Dong-Yuan Tai)關鍵字：科學知識社會學;科學哲學;波以耳;機械哲學;生機論;Sociology of Scientific Knowledge;Philosophy of Science;Boyle;Mechanical Philosophy;Vitalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：布洛爾是科學知識社會學的領航者，建立科學知識社會學的理論基礎並為之辯護，特別是強綱領及有限論。雖然布洛爾標榜知識社會學，但也擅長哲學論述，有其特定哲學立場。他早期曾運用強綱領方法，做過波以耳的科學史案例研究。本文目的是耙梳布洛爾哲學理路，闡述他為何反對「哲學家」，並從「理論脈絡」分析波以耳案例，對比布洛爾的「社會脈絡」分析，可顯露科學知識社會學的研究取徑的缺陷。從布洛爾早期案例研究來審視，顯示科學知識社會學早期案例研究操作，集中偏向社會原因影響科學家理論選擇。波以耳案例可視為一個科學知識社會學案例原型，這種強調社會面向的案例分析方式，部分地解釋為何科學知識社會學廣泛被認為是主張「社會因素完全地影響科學變遷」。布洛爾批評這是「誤解」，後來也一直為此辯護並澄清。英文摘要：David Bloor is the founder of the sociology of scientific knowledge (SSK). He constructs and defends the theoretical basis of SSK especially ”the strong programme” and ”finitism”. Bloor is probably most well known for his work in the knowledge of sociology but he also specializes in philosophical discourse. In the early days of SSK, he once carried out a case study in the history of science which targeted Robert Boyle using the method of the strong programme. The aim of this paper is to examine Bloor's philosophical discourse and elucidate his philosophical stance. This will help to explain why he opposes ”philosophers”. Moreover, this paper showcases a theoretical context approach to the case study of Boyle; one that differs from Bloor's social context approach. This will highlight shortcomings in Bloor's version of the SSK approach. By way of a case study comparison, it also shows the reasons why the ”causation” of SSK is widely regarded to be purely social; a charge that Bloor both denies and inveighs against.起始頁-結束頁：137-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：貓城崛起：新北市猴硐貓觀光地景形構並列篇名：The Rising of Cat-town: The Formation of Cat-tourism Landscape at Houtong, New Taipei City作者：葉文琪(Wen-Chi Yeh);王志弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：觀光;地方發展;自然建構;人與動物關係;動物權;Tourism;Local Development;Construction of Nature;Human-Animal Relationship;Animal Rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文運用批判的觀光研究觀點，以及動物倫理和人與動物的視角，探討新北市猴硐以貓為核心的觀光地景形構，及其引發的地方發展與動物保護爭議。作者通過文獻分析、實地觀察及訪談，獲得以下發現：首先，看似偶然形成的貓城，其實延續了當地以自然景觀和礦業襲產吸引遊客的觀光化發展。其次，貓觀光地景的形成涉及多重行動者的協調與衝突，呈現為不同論述、實作與物件的複雜網絡。第三，貓經濟的符號化與擬人化建構，塑造了貓的奇觀化存在，也促使居民生活及其他動物邊緣化。第四，貓觀光展現了地方追求發展的不懈邏輯，但動物權利理念也形成遊憩化地景中的異聲，萌生合宜的人與動物關係。英文摘要：This article discusses the configuration of the tourist landscapes centering on the cats in Houtong in the New Taipei City, and explores how controversial issues regarding local development and animal protection are triggered because of it. Through literature review, field observation and in-depth interviews, several implications can be made: Firstly, the recent accidental emergence of a Cat Town is a continuation of Houtong's tourism development based on the natural and industrial heritage of mining sites. Secondly, the emergence of the tourist landscapes of cats has involved multiple actors with their negotiations as well as conflicts in between, which then molds a complex network fabricated by various discourses, practices, and objects. Third, the symbolization of cats and their anthropomorphic configuration in the cat economy have made the cat a spectacle, but the residents' everyday life and the animals of other species have also been made marginalized as a result of this. The cat tourism demonstrates the humans' inexorable pursuit for further development. Calls for animal rights, however, still stand out as the dissent from the recreational landscapes, and breeding appropriate human-animal relationship.起始頁-結束頁：177-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：「文化記憶中的香港」專號導言並列篇名：Introduction作者：陳煒舜(Nicholas L. Chan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：1-16資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：空留古廟號侯王：論九龍城宋季古蹟的記憶及侯王廟記憶的歷史化並列篇名：A Study on Hou Wong Temple in Kowloon City with Reference to Song Wong Toi作者：姚道生(To-Sang Yiu);黃展樑(Chin-Leung Wong)關鍵字：記憶所繫之處;歷史所繫之處;記憶意圖;集體化;延續性;Lieux de Memoire;Lieux d' Histoire;Memorial Intention;Collectivization;Continuity期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：辛亥革命之後，一批前清遺老來到香港。他們懷著思念前清的「記憶意圖」，以詩文書寫了宋王臺、侯王廟等四個宋季古蹟。這些古蹟因此被組成一組文化景觀，成為了遺老的「記憶所繫之處」。遺老以宋王臺象徵政治與文化的正統，以侯王廟象徵忠臣死節，藉此建構其「遺民」身分。不過他們的「記憶意圖」因欠缺集體化與延續性而不為香港人理解；而古蹟亦無助於香港人建立身分認同，故未能成為香港人的「記憶所繫之處」。到了冷戰時期，有關的古蹟多已湮滅，「宋王臺」只剩下一個石碑，獨侯王廟保全完好。1949年，大陸政權易手，一批國民黨知識分子來到香港，剛巧遇上港英政府改遷宋王臺。他們把握了這個機會，透過歷史考證挪用了宋王臺的正統記憶，以表達「民國才是正統」的新記憶意圖，卻擺落了侯王廟的忠臣記憶，也否定了遺老的侯王廟書寫，結果侯王廟的記憶被歷史化，侯王廟則轉化為「歷史所繫之處」。因此，雖然「宋王臺」石碑的規模無法與侯王廟相比，但其記憶卻反因為改遷與國民黨人的挪用而得到一定程度的延續。可見「記憶意圖」對「記憶所繫之處」及身分建構實起了決定性的作用；也可見到，當歷史考證結果與記憶一致時，歷史是記憶的支援；若不一致，則歷史就是對記憶的撼動。英文摘要：Some Qing loyalists came to Hong Kong after the 1911 Revolution. They expressed their memorial to the Qing Dynasty, which was their ”memorial intention”, by their writings to four historical sites of late Song Dynasty, including Song Wong Toi and Hou Wong Temple. The sites became a group of cultural landscape and their Lieux de memoire. Song Wong Toi represented the orthodox view of the traditional Chinese politics and culture, and Hou Wong Temple represented the traditional loyalists. These representations helped the Qing loyalists to construct their identity. However, since their memorial intention lacked collectivization and continuity, no local Hong Kong people understood their ideas. In the Cold War era, The Chinese regime was handed over in 1949. Some former Kuomintang officials and educated elites came to Hong Kong. They made use of the memory of Song Wong Toi to express their new memorial intention that ”The Republic of China is the orthodox regime”, and negated the memory of Hou Wong Temple. So the memory of Hou Wong Temple was ”historicalised” and t became Lieux d' histoire. The memorial intention is the determining factor to Lieux de memoire and the construction of identity.起始頁-結束頁：17-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社12篇名：混血兒的身分認同與價值實現：香港報刊內外的施玉麒並列篇名：The Identity Formation and Value Realization of a Eurasian: Canon George Zimmern in and out of the Hong Kong Periodicals作者：陳煒舜(Nicholas L. Chan)關鍵字：施玉麒;混血兒;香港族群;身分認同;拔萃書室;Canon George Zimmern (1904-1979);Eurasian;Communities in Hong Kong;Identity Formation;Diocesan Boys' School期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：近年來，早已式微的香港混血群體引起了學界的關注，探討重點往往在於這些混血兒如何認同一己之身分、實現個人價值。出生於本地歐亞混血家族的施玉麒牧師（Rev. Canon George Samuel Zimmern,又稱Canon George She, 1904-1979），可謂一個特殊的個案。他童年就讀於中式書塾，其後負笈於聖公會開辦的拔萃書室和英國牛津大學，深受中西文化影響。其同代混血兒的生涯規劃，一般是成為專業人士、商人或公務員，生活洋化。而施玉麒由於童年困頓，加上學習環境的薰染，使他在取得大律師資格後選擇一條不同的道路，亦即成為社會活動家、神職人員和教育工作者，更多以華化的一面示人。本文在概述施牧生平後，先著眼於香港舊報刊中關於施牧之記載、報導，以見其價值實現的方式如何落實在(1)拔萃成員、(2)法律界人士、(3)社會活動家和(4)教育工作者的幾重身分之上，而這些身分又如何構造出他社會賢達的形象。然後，本文將視野移向報刊之外，從(1)家庭背景與政治傾向、(2)教育經歷與社會理念兩方面，論析施牧這種價值實現的背後又如何受到其身分認同之影響。英文摘要：In the recent years, academic interest in Eurasian community in Hong Kong, is usually focused on the identity formation and value realization of these Eurasians. Born in a local Eurasia n family, Canon George Samuel Zimmern (1904-1979) can be regarded as a unique case, who was deeply influenced by Chinese and Western cultures. The routine career planning of the Eurasians of his age was usually becoming a professional, merchant or civil servant with a Western lifestyle. However, the humble family background in childhood and the nurture in academic environment made Canon Zimmern's life path after the call to the bar a quite different one, i.e. becoming a social activist, a clergyman and an educator, whose sinicized characteristics were well remembered. After an introduction about his life, this article puts an eye on the records and reports about Canon Zimmern, so as to implore how his self-value was realized in terms of 1) a member of Diocesan Boys’ School, 2) a law practitioner, 3) a social activist and 4) an educator, and how these identities constructed his image of a prominent personage. Then, the attention of this article is drawn to 1) the family background and political orientation, and 2) education experience and social concept of Canon Zimmern, so as to study how the value realization was influenced by his identity formation.起始頁-結束頁：71-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社13篇名：1960年代以來香港初中中國歷史及歷史課本與二戰歷史記憶並列篇名：Junior Secondary History and Chinese History Textbooks and the Historical Memory of the Second World War in Hong Kong since the 1960s作者：朱維理(Wai-Li Chu)關鍵字：香港歷史意識;香港初中中國歷史及歷史教科書;二次世界大戰;Hong Kong Historical Memory;Junior Secondary Chinese History and History Textbook;Second World War;Hong Kong Political Culture;History and Memory期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：2015年5月13日，香港政府宣布向立法會提交「特別假期（2015年9月3日）條例草案」，將該日訂為一次過的額外公眾假期及法定假日，讓香港市民有機會與內地人民一同參與中國人民抗日戰爭勝利70周年紀念日的活動，引起公眾嘩然。此因自1945年光復後，港英政府訂定8月30日為香港的光復紀念日，本地報章每年都發表紀念文章。同時，左派報章又轉載國內「抗戰勝利」的論述，本地由是並存了兩套二戰的論述。但是在港英政府與本地社會主導下，重光紀念日的歷史論述一直主導了本地社會的二戰話語，與不滿中國的社會聲音，共同促成了是次的迴響。由是之故，香港社會對於第二次世界大戰的歷史意識成為了解當下香港社會思潮，以及香港政治格局的切入點之一。故此，本文從歷史教科書的編寫作為切入點，探討本地為主的「光復紀念」與中國歷史及歷史科結合的過程，呈現為殖民論述、本地需要及右派文化民族觀結合的主流詮釋，並在回歸後轉化為抵抗「共產黨領導抗日戰爭」的論述，揭示本地社群身分認同的構成與背後的政治權力更替，從而嘗試解釋現今香港的歷史意識。英文摘要：This paper discusses the relations between the historical memory of the Second World War and junior secondary history textbooks in Hong Kong since the 1960s. Borrowing Pierre Nora's 'lieux de memoire' framework, this study traces how the Hong Kong colonial government's commemoration of the colony's liberation from the Japanese occupation prevailed with the 'Cultural China' narrative in history textbooks and public discourse before 1997. This narrative, however, was taken over by those of China's victory of the Second Sino-Japanese War after the Chinese government resumed Hong Kong sovereignty in 1997. The different interpretations on Hong Kong's experience during the Second World War thus became one of the tensions between China and Hong Kong after 1997.起始頁-結束頁：123-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社14篇名：政治的法律化：冷戰時期香港的地緣政治處境及其法治的鞏固並列篇名：Legalization of Politics: The Geopolitical Situations of Hong Kong and the Consolidation of Its Rule of Law in the Cold War作者：蔡俊威(Sam C.W. Choi);李家翹(Nelson K. Lee)關鍵字：香港;法治;地緣政治;Hong Kong;the Rule of Law;Geopolitics期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文將探討1949至1967年間香港法治體系建設背後的政治與政府的策略考量。它將指出，縱然香港的法治制度在19世紀末已初具形態，但其發展至完備，關鍵就是1949年以後的二、三十年間。香港在該時段內面對敏感的地緣政治處境，為包括中國國民黨、共產黨，甚至美、蘇等外來勢力所爭奪，促使英殖政府強化香港的法治，使之有了今日所見法治的三個重要元素：法律的普遍適用性、司法獨立、檢察獨立。法治，對英殖政府而言，是其權力操作的工具。它將之完善，並把其所面對的地緣政治挑戰化為法律問題，交予法律程序處理，便能抽身於不易駕馭的政治問題，更因而獨善其身，有利其對香港的管治。這是政治的法律化。本文還將指出，香港的經驗並非孤立的本土經驗，以地緣政治的學術角度重新審視法治在香港建立與發展的歷史，會發現其特殊性與普遍性。地緣政治的角度，能為相關問題的思考提供現有的「文明使命論」、「法律強加論」及「互動論」以外的理論框架。英文摘要：This paper examines the consolidation of Hong Kong's rule of law system in 1949-1967. It points out that Hong Kong was delicately situated in a geopolitical environment in which it was claimed and contested by major players in the Cold War including the Chinese Communists, the Taiwanese Nationalists and the Americans. To sustain its rule against the geopolitical challenge, the colonial government strategically strengthened Hong Kong's legal framework according to the principles of generality of law, independence of the judiciary and independence of prosecution, making it an instrumentality of power. Political issues could then be depoliticized as legal cases and judgments were to be made by the courts. The government could refrain from taking sides in the political matters involving the contesting forces. In other words, the legalization of politics resulted in the reinforcement of Hong Kong's rule of law. The geopolitical analysis of the making of Hong Kong's rule of law presents an understanding that differs from the existing analytical approaches, namely, the ”civilizing mission” analysis, the ”imposition of law” explanation, and the perspective that focuses on the interactions between the colonizers and the colonized.起始頁-結束頁：187-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社15篇名：氣候變遷與耗水產業雙人舞：水資源治理之路徑依賴分析並列篇名：Pas de Deux of Climate Change and Water Consumption Industry: A Path Dependence Analysis on Water Resource Governance作者：周桂田(Kuei-Tien Chou);曾玟學(Wen-Hsueh Zeng)關鍵字：氣候變遷;永續發展;轉型管理;反身性治理;路徑依賴;Climate Change;Sustainable Development;Transition Management;Reflexive Governance;Path Dependence期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文主要探討臺灣面對氣候變遷缺水趨勢下水資源之轉型管理問題。從反身性治理的角度，作者脈絡性的檢視政府水資源治理相關之路徑依賴，並以供給耗水最劇之石化業為主的集集攔河堰與規劃中的大肚攔河堰之爭議案例，分析社會如何朝向永續轉型與創新的可能性。從耙梳水資源治理與決策的制度理性、決策科學知識、經濟模式、社會認知、環境與健康成本、民主參與等弊病，作者指出這些結構性的路徑依賴將臺灣的社會轉型鎖入（locked in）不永續的知識、價值與機制，而嚴重的遲緩社會的轉型與創新。因此建議，臺灣需要重新設定長程的、創新的社會轉型發展路徑，建立動態的水資源轉型管理價值與制度典範，並重擬社會與經濟發展路徑與藍圖。英文摘要：This study investigates the transition management problems of water resource under the water scarcity induced by climate change in Taiwan. From the reflexive perspective, the authors examine the path dependence related to governmental water resource governance contextually. By the disputable cases of Jiji Dam, which supplies primarily to the most water-consumed petrochemical industry, and Dadu Dam under planning, the authors analyze how the society could go toward a sustainable transition and innovation. Through detailed reading of malpractices in water resource governance and decision-making of institutional rationality, decision-making science knowledge, economic mode, social cognition, environmental and health cost and democratic participation, the authors point out these structural path dependences would set the social transformation in Taiwan locked into unsustainable knowledge, values and institutions and delay the social transformation and innovation gravely. So the authors suggest that Taiwan needs to reconfigure the long-term and innovative social transition path, to establish dynamic values of water resource management and institutional paradigms, and to redraft the path and blueprint for social and economic development.起始頁-結束頁：1-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社16篇名：清代臺灣與近代早期英格蘭的土地制度與經濟發展：一個統治理性的比較制度分析並列篇名：Land Regime and Economic Development in Qing Taiwan and Early Modern England: a Comparative Institutional Analysis of Governmentality作者：林文凱(Wen-Kai Lin)關鍵字：大分流;土地體制;傳統統治理性;近代統治理性;Great Divergence;Land Regime;Traditional Governmentality;Modern Governmentality期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以英格蘭與清代臺灣的土地體制與其經濟發展為比較個案，重新檢討晚近彭慕蘭（Kenneth Pomeranz）引發的有關中西經濟史何時大分流的辯論。本文同意彭慕蘭主張的，16-18世紀間的晚明／清代與英格蘭的市場經濟與經濟水平的確有類似的發展，中西經濟的確是在18世紀晚期英格蘭工業革命之後才明顯分流。但不同意大分流的原因是其所說的外生偶然因素，而主張兩地在18世紀晚期以來的分流係奠基於兩地在16-18世紀以來的不同制度發展路徑上。本文透過英格蘭與臺灣土地相關社會制度以及做為這些制度基礎的國家統治理性的比較，指出近代早期英格蘭以近代統治理性為基礎的各種社會制度之逐步發展，不僅有效降低了土地交易與市場經濟活動的交易成本，促成了全國性經濟市場的開展，而且也提供了工業革命發生所需的社會制度基礎。與此相對，清代臺灣奠基於傳統統治理性的一田二主土地制度與典賣等土地慣習，僅能有限降低地區性經濟活動的交易成本，難以支撐跨地區性土地與經濟市場的有效擴展，也不足以提供工業資本主義發展所需的充分制度基礎。英文摘要：Taking land regime and economic development in Qing Taiwan and early modern England as its point of comparison, this paper restudies ”the great divergence debate” incited by Pomeranz's book. This paper agrees with Pomeranz that there was a similar development on market economy and economic level in late Ming/Qing China and early modern England, and that these two economies underwent great divergence after England's industrial revolution in late 18th century. But it challenges Pomeranz's explanation that industrial revolution occurred because of exogenous and contingent factors. It demonstrates how different institutions underlying the development of market economy in the two regions gave rise to the great divergence. This paper provides a comparison of land regime and governmentality in two regions. It suggests that the development of English land regime and modern governmentality not only facilitated the great expansion of commercialized agriculture, but also formed the institutional basis for the Industrial Revolution. In contrast, Qing Taiwan's land regime and traditional governmentality could allow for the development of commercialized agriculture and a market economy, but it could not pave the way for industrial development.起始頁-結束頁：65-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社17篇名：「真迂闊」的儒者：葉適的事功之學並列篇名：A ”zhenyukuo” Confucian: on Ye Shi's Shi Gong School作者：劉芝慶(Jhih-Ching Liu)關鍵字：葉適;永嘉之學;事功之學;經世;儒家傳統;Ye Shi;Yongjia School;Shi Gong School;Statecraft;Confucian Tradition期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：葉適為永嘉之學的代表，他的學術特性，歷來多以「事功」稱之，故其重經世、講實利，向為通論。本文意在指出：他的事功之學，事實上也是傳統儒家講求的修身治國之道，這在葉適的言論中，屢見不鮮，只是他的事功究竟該如何聯到修身？他又怎麼定義修身？關於治國的種種具體政策，到底與修身有何關係？再者，他對於修身的理解，也與當時理學家不同，因此就形成了彼此的分歧，只是分歧何在？也正是他自覺與理學家相異之處。本文的研究，即是在這些問題上，說明他到底怎麼理解並運用這個傳統，來建構他的事功之學。英文摘要：Ye Shi is considered to be the representative figure of the Yongjia School whose research approach is often characterized by the so-called ”Shi Gong” preoccupation emphasizing some practical issues such as statecraft. This essay intends to point out that his ”Shi Gong School” is no less than the combination of the method of statecraft and the way of inner quest, both pursued and espoused by the traditional Confucianism. While this viewpoint is present almost everywhere in Ye Shi's thoughts, it is interesting to see in which ways his ”Shi Gong” is connected with the Confucian inner quest and to define what this quest is to him. The interest, therefore, lies in bridging the exterior statecraft and the interior pursuit. And since Ye Shi's understanding of this pursuit differs from that of his contemporaries from the school of principle, this essay would also like to scrutinize this difference, a difference that, according to Ye Shi himself, distinguishes exactly himself from his contemporaries. Based on these observations, this essay attempts to elucidate the ways how Ye Shi appropriates the Confucian tradition to construct his own Shi Gong School.起始頁-結束頁：129-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社18篇名：瑪拉布論創傷：創傷的一般理論與受創主體的再定位並列篇名：Catherine Malabou on Trauma: The General Theory of Trauma and the Reconfiguration of Traumatized Subject作者：蔣興儀(Hsing-Yi Chiang);魏建國(Chien-Kuo Wei)關鍵字：瑪拉布;創傷;意外;紀傑克;主體性;Catherine Malabou;Ttrauma;Accident;Slavoj Zizek;Subjectivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究闡述瑪拉布的創傷一般理論。創傷的一般理論重新定義創傷的本質，並說明創傷對受創主體所產生的構成性功能。內文包含三個部分。第一，創傷和病理學之間的聯繫要被解除。當下的意外事件並不回歸於早年的性創傷。創傷不再被病理學的起源論述和治療應用所規定。第二，創傷的意外的特徵要被強調。創傷並不關聯於主體的內在過去，僅關聯於當下的外在事件。第三，瑪拉布說明意外對主體所產生的衝擊。意外事件直接摧毀了主體的自我同一性。心靈的摧毀使得受創主體不再有任何經驗和感受，他因此才能夠倖存下來。創傷的一般理論揭示了受創主體如何被創傷之摧毀所構成。英文摘要：This essay elucidates Malabou's general theory of trauma that redefines the essence of trauma and explains trauma's constitutive function within the traumatized subject. This essay is composed of three parts. Firstly, the link between trauma and pathology is removed. Present trauma doesn't reactivate the early sexual trauma. Trauma is neither determined by the pathological discourse of etiology nor identified as an object of therapeutic treatment. Secondly, this essay clarifies the accidental character of trauma that is not mediated by subject's past but comes from the outside. Thirdly, Catherine Malabou explains the accident's impact on the subject. The event of accident causes the immediate destruction of subject's identity. It is because the subject is deprived of his status as the subject of experience who undergoes the traumatic accident that the subject can survive his or her own destruction. General theory of trauma reveals how traumatized subject is constituted by that which destroys him or her.起始頁-結束頁：165-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社19篇名：上古漢語特指疑問句的優選理論分析並列篇名：An OT Analysis of the Wh-Questions in Old Chinese作者：林怡岑(Yi-Chen Lin)關鍵字：優選理論;特指疑問句;疑問代詞;倒裝;Optimality Theory;Wh-Question;Wh-Word;Inversion期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：55卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：上古漢語的特指疑問句裡，疑問代詞賓語通常必須置於動詞或介詞之前，以及主語之後，如：「吾誰欺？欺天乎？（《論語．子罕》）」「百姓不足，君孰與足？（《論語．顏淵》）」前人（如王力〔1980/2004〕、馮利〔1994〕）多從歷史演變的角度出發，將這個現象視為原始漢語的殘留。本文則試圖站在共時平面的立場，直接分析其句法成因。本文依循「優選理論」（The Optimality Theory），設置「OPSPEC＞＞ STAY = OB- HD = PRE- STRAND ＞＞ CASE-AD(PRO) ＞＞ CASE-AD(WH)」這組制約與排序。其中， OP- SPEC、STAY、OB- HD這三條制約，格倫索（Jane Grimshaw, 1997）與崔海英（2010）曾分別用來分析英語與現代漢語的特指疑問句；CASE-AD(WH)、CASE-AD(PRO)，是我們根據格位理論（Case Theory）的「格位指派」（Case-assigner）與「鄰接條件」（Case Adjacency）所設的制約；PRE- STRAND則是依照魏培泉（Pei-Chuan Wei, 1999）提到的「介詞遺留」（preposition stranding）而設。運用這組制約，本文解釋了疑問代詞賓語在句中的位置如何形成的問題，並透過實際研究，展現了優選理論在句法分析上的靈活性與便利性。英文摘要：In Old Chinese, wh-words are usually put before verbs or prepositions and after subjects in wh-questions, such as ”Wu shui q<U+012B>? Q<U+012B> ti<U+0101>n h<U+016B>? (Lun Y<U+01D4> ”Z<U+01D0> H<U+01CE>n”)” and ”B<U+01CE>i xing bu zu, j<U+016B>n shu y<U+01D4> zu ? (Lun Y<U+01D4> ”Yan Yuan”)”. Previous researches (Wang Li, 1980/2004; Feng Li, 1994) regarded the phenomenon as the remains of primitive Chinese from the diachronic evolution viewpoint. Instead, we attemptto directly analyze the formation of syntax from the synchronic perspective. According to the Optimality Theory, we set up a group of conditions and the sequence is: OP- SPEC ＞＞ STAY = OB- HD = PRE- STRAND ＞＞ CASE-AD (PRO) ＞＞ CASE-AD(WH). Grimshaw (1997) and Cu<U+012B> H<U+01CE>i Y<U+012B>ng (2010) had respectively used OP-SPEC, STAY and OB- HD to analyze wh-questions in English and modern Chinese, and we set up CASE-AD(WH) and CASE-AD (PRO) based on Case-assigner and Case Adjacency in Case Theory. As for PRE- STRAND, we set it up in accordance with preposition stranding proposed by Pei-Chuan Wei (1999). We use the group of conditions to explain arrangement of wh-words and to show the flexibility and convenience of Optimality Theory for syntax analysis.起始頁-結束頁：211-237資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：Volume Information in Nikkei and TOPIX Futures Transactions並列篇名：日經與東證期貨之交易量資訊作者：Chyng Wen Tee;Christopher Ting關鍵字：Market microstructure;volume information;futures market;市場微結構;交易量資訊;期貨市場期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：According to the Kyle (1985) model of informed trading, information in trade size is likely to effect a permanent price impact. However, two prominent structural models in the literature do not include trade size in their framework. In this paper, we present a nesting relationship of major structural models and formulate a generalized model that includes all trade variables. A new measure to quantify the amount of information in the order flow is proposed. Our empirical analysis shows that it is indeed the ”surprise” in trade size that contributes significantly in reflecting the price change of Nikkei and TOPIX futures.英文摘要：根據凱爾(1985)知情交易模型，交易量資訊會對價格造成永久性影響。然而，文獻中市場微結構模型未把交易量列入考量。我們指出三大市場微結構模型之相互關係，亦由此推導出一個更具概括性之一般化模型，將重要交易資訊皆列入考量。實證分析發現，交易量資訊之變化顯著影響日經和東證期貨價格。起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(4).12篇名：Do Multi-Year Earnings Forecasts Help Identify Over-Investment for Future Business?並列篇名：分析師多年期盈餘預測能否協助評估企業投資未來價值？作者：黃承祖(Cheng-Tsu Huang);張竹萱(Chu-Hsuan Chang);林修葳(Hsiou-Wei William Lin)關鍵字：Analyst-based valuation;analyst multi-year earnings forecasts;investment strategy;residual earnings valuation model;value-relevance;分析師為基礎評價方法;分析師多年期盈餘預測;投資策略;超溢盈餘個股評價模型;價值攸關期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study examines the extent to which analyst multi-year earnings forecasts help investors assess values of the firms with substantial fixed and intangible assets. We explore the potential explanations for analysts to provide these forecasts and investigate whether the residual earnings valuation model benefits from incorporating them. Analysts issue more frequently multi-year forecasts for firms with greater investment in property, plant, and equipment, intangible assets, and/or research and development. We also find that given the prevalently adopted near-termed forecasts, analyst multi-year forecasts add significantly to explaining both short- and long-horizoned returns, especially for firms investing heavily for the future.英文摘要：本文納入分析師多年期盈餘預測於超溢盈餘個股評價模型，檢視其是否增益高額投資於不動產、廠房及設備與無形資產公司價值評估，以探究分析師同時提供多年期盈餘預測的原因。實證發現，分析師偏好提供此類公司多年期盈餘預測；而除文獻上慣常單獨使用的分析師當年度盈餘預測，將多年期預測帶入模型可提升短期與長期投資效益。起始頁-結束頁：45-81資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(4).23篇名：Volatility Forecasts of Alternative Bivariate GARCH Models: Evidence from the Stock Markets in Asia並列篇名：雙變量GARCH模型之波動性預測：以亞洲股票市場為例作者：蘇榮斌(Jung-Bin Su)關鍵字：Constant conditional correlation;parameter estimate method;stock market;Bivariate GARCH;volatility forecast;常數條件相關係數;參數估計方法;股票市場;雙變量GARCH;波動性預測期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study uses 12 bivariate generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH) models to forecast the volatility of stock-based portfolios in Asia, and then evaluates the forecast performance for the above models. Empirical results show that, the Student’s t does not own better forecast performance, the standard and nonstandard approaches have the same forecast performance, and the constant conditional correlation (CCC) has the best forecast performance among three covariance specifications. Regarding the six GARCH models composed of three covariance specifications and two parameter estimate methods the CCC specification with the standard approach has the best forecast performance irrespective of return distribution setting.英文摘要：本研究以亞洲股票市場投資組合日報酬率資料評估12個雙變量GARCH模型之波動性預測性能。由實證結果顯示Student's t分配未具較佳預測性能、標準法及非標準法具相同預測性能，而常數條件相關係數為三種共變異數中具最佳預測性能。此外，無論報酬率分配為何，有常數條件相關係數之標準模型具最佳預測性能。起始頁-結束頁：83-123資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(4).34篇名：Institutional Trading and Stock Returns around Dividend Announcements: Evidence from Taiwan並列篇名：股利宣告期間機構法人交易行為與股票報酬之研究：以臺灣股市為例作者：尤靜華(Ching-Hua Yu);陳泰源(Tai-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：Institutional investors;price impact;superior information;dividend;abnormal returns;機構法人;價格衝擊;資訊優勢;股利;異常報酬期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：This research examines whether or not institutional investors possess superior information and earn positive abnormal returns after dividend announcements. Our evidence suggests that institutional investors do not possess superior information around dividend increase announcements. Trading by domestic institutions induces temporary price impact but subsequently results in return reversals in longer holding periods. Mutual funds are the institutions which induce the largest price impact after the announcements. In addition, foreign institutions earn higher returns than domestic institutions do after dividend decrease announcements. Trading by domestic institutions is a reverse indicator for future stock prices.英文摘要：本研究分析股利宣告期間法人交易行為及機構法人是否具有資訊優勢。研究發現，法人於股利宣告增加時，並無資訊優勢；國內法人交易後會產生短暫價格衝擊，隨後股價將反轉。此外，在股利宣告減少後，外資具有資訊優勢且可獲得較高之異常報酬。本研究也發現國內法人之交易行為可用以做為未來股價之反向指標。起始頁-結束頁：125-149資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(4).45篇名：The Informational Effect of Trades around Macroeconomic Announcements並列篇名：總體經濟宣告下之交易資訊效果作者：張雅婷(Ya-Ting Chang);高櫻芬(Yin-Feng Gau)關鍵字：Bid-ask spread;macroeconomic announcement;information content;price impact asymmetry;foreign exchange market;買賣價差;總體宣告;資訊內容;價格衝擊不對稱;外匯市場期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Using the high-quality intraday transaction dataset of the Electronic Broking Services (EBS), this paper examines the impact of trade size on the level of information asymmetry in the electronic limit-order foreign exchange market. We find that the extent of information asymmetry increases with the trade size, implying that a large trade contains more private information than a small trade. Examining the variation in information asymmetry cost around the release of U.S. and Japanese macroeconomic announcements, we find evidence of asymmetric effect of trade size on the level of information asymmetry across positive and negative news surprises.英文摘要：本文採用外匯市場EBS電子仲介系統上之日內成交資料，分析交易規模大小如何影響資訊不對稱程度。研究結果顯示，資訊不對稱程度會隨著交易規模大小而增加。當美國以及日本地區總體經濟宣告發布時，交易規模對資訊不對稱程度之影響，會隨著未預料到正面及負面新聞發布，呈現不對稱現象。起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(3).16篇名：The Influences of the Plaintiffs/Defendants, Outcomes, and Settlements of Patent Litigations on the Stock Market並列篇名：專利訴訟之原被告、勝敗訴與和解對股市影響之研究作者：王瑪如(Ma-Ju Wang)關鍵字：Patent litigation;lawsuit verdict;abnormal return;buy and hold;corporate governance;專利訴訟;訴訟判決;異常報酬;買進持有;公司治理期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study examines market announcements and their long-term effects on patent litigation and lawsuit verdicts in Taiwan. In addition, we analyze how the financial and relevant litigation variables influence the cumulative abnormal return (CAR). We find that the plaintiff firms, firms winning the lawsuit, and reconciliation firms achieve significantly positive abnormal returns during the event period. The cumulative number of patents and the R&D ratio have significant positive influence on the CAR of patent litigation and lawsuit verdicts, respectively. During the period of lawsuit verdicts, for firms with weak corporate governance, the market reaction tends to be more negative.英文摘要：本文研究臺灣上市櫃公司於專利訴訟與判決宣告時期之市場反應與其後之長期績效表現，並探討財務與訴訟相關變數對異常報酬之影響。實證發現，當公司為原告、判決為勝訴或採和解時，事件期間有正顯著異常報酬。累積專利權數與研發費率分別在訴訟與判決時期對異常報酬產生正向影響，且公司治理品質較差者對公司價值有負面影響。起始頁-結束頁：47-90資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(3).27篇名：Institutional Investor Conference Calls and Information Diffusion Effect並列篇名：法人說明會與資訊擴散效果作者：王育偉(Yu-Wei Wang);鄭揚耀(Lee-Young Cheng);張椿柏(Chun-Po Chang)關鍵字：Institutional investor conference call;information diffusion effect;lead-lag effect;information environment;法人說明會;資訊擴散效果;領導落後效果;資訊環境期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：This paper explores the effects of information diffusion by investigating a sample of firms that voluntarily held institutional investor conference calls (IICCs) between 2004 and 2011. The empirical results reveal a positive correlation between the abnormal returns of IICCs and average industry returns, indicating that IICCs exhibit information diffusion effects and diffuse asymmetry. Moreover, the information environment (IE) of firms plays a critical role in information dissemination. For firms with an IE that is more conducive for information dissemination, the effects of information diffusion are enhanced. Firms with high information asymmetry have strong information diffusion effects.英文摘要：本研究蒐集2004至2011年召開法說會樣本，探討法說會資訊擴散效果，實證發現公司召開法說會當週股價累積異常報酬率與產業平均報酬率呈現顯著正相關，支持法說會資訊具有擴散效果且傳遞不對稱。此外，本研究也發現資訊環境扮演重要角色，當公司處在較佳資訊環境將增加資訊擴散效果，而且資訊不對稱較大公司的資訊擴散更為強烈。起始頁-結束頁：91-124資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(3).38篇名：Using the Generational Accounting Method to Evaluate the Reforms of the Labor Insurance Old-Age Pension Benefit並列篇名：應用世代會計法於勞工保險老年年金給付改革政策之評估作者：詹芳書(Linus Fang-Shu Chan);李永琮(Yung-Tsung Lee);邱詩怡(Shih-Yi Chiu)關鍵字：Labor insurance;old-age pension benefit;generation accounting method;generational account option;勞工保險;老年年金給付;世代會計法;世代會計選擇權期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study employs the generational accounting method to examine intergenerational transfers when there is a reform on old-age pension benefit of the Labor Insurance in Taiwan. We find that (1) ”a decrease of payment salary level,” ”a decrease of credit of yearly services,” or both are beneficial to the younger generations; (2) ”accelerating the increase of insurance premium rate” is beneficial to the elder generations; and (3) a reform containing the above-mentioned three approaches is beneficial to the mid-age generations.英文摘要：本研究應用世代會計法，探討勞工保險老年年金給付制度改革對於跨世代財務分配效果的影響。我們發現(1)僅透過降低給付薪資水準、僅降低給付基數、或兩者同時為之，對於年輕世代較為有利；(2)加速保險費率調漲進程則偏向有利於老年世代；(3)若同時納入三項改革方案，則對於中青世代較為有利。起始頁-結束頁：125-156資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(3).49篇名：Financial Depth, Crisis Intervention, and Economic Growth並列篇名：金融深化、危機干預及經濟成長作者：李建強(Chien-Chiang Lee);林俊偉(Chun-Wei Lin);謝孟芬(Meng-Fen Hsieh)關鍵字：Crisis intervention;financial depth;economic growth;financial liberalization;monetary conditions;危機干預;金融深化;經濟成長;金融自由化;貨幣政策期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study investigates the effects of government crisis interventions on economic growth under an international perspective. We also evaluate how financial depth shapes the effect of crisis intervention on economic growth. Our empirical result points out that the proxies of government interventions do have a significantly negative impact on economic growth. A higher level of banking development supports the enhanced moral hazard effect, while greater insurance and stock market developments mitigate this negative impact. Financial liberalization and monetary condition also help mitigate this negative impact under certain circumstances.英文摘要：本文以全球資料的觀點探討政府在危機期間採行干預政策對經濟成長之影響，也分析金融深化如何影響危機干預對經濟成長的關係。研究結果指出，政府干預的代理變數對經濟成長有顯著負向關係，且金融發展程度越高的國家支持道德危機加強效果，而保險或股票市場發展程度越高的國家，則會減緩前述的負向效果。起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(2).110篇名：A Comparison of Overreactions of REIT and Non-REIT Funds Using Options Data: The Role of the Financial Crisis並列篇名：以選擇權資料比較REIT和非REIT基金之過度反應：金融危機之角色作者：廖麗凱(Li-Kai Connie Liao);魏培煌(Peihwang Wei);王凱立(Kai-Li Wang)關鍵字：REITs;option valuation;volatility mean reversion;overreaction;REITs;選擇權評價;波動均數復歸;過度反應期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Li-Kai Connie Liao Peihwang Wei Kai-Li Wang Using Stein's (1989) methodology, we compare changes in option implied volatilities of two real estate investment trust (REIT) funds and four non-REIT funds. Results indicate that before the 2007-2009 financial crisis, strengths of reactions to information of a liquid REIT fund and a financial fund are less pronounced than other funds analyzed and the markets for the two funds are considered underreaction. However, during and after the crisis the two funds have the strongest degree of overreaction. A possible explanation is that a higher degree of leverage and regulation uncertainties make REIT and financial sectors vulnerable to extreme downturns.英文摘要：本文運用Stein (1989)之方法，分析比較兩檔REIT和四檔非REIT基金之選擇權隱含波動率之變動。結果顯示，在2007-2009金融危機前具流動性的REIT和金融類基金對資訊的反應程度較低，謂之市場低度反應；但在金融危機當時及之後，此兩檔基金則呈現高度的過度反應。可以高財務槓桿及主管機關政策不確定性解釋此二基金何以在市場極端空頭時反應力脆弱。起始頁-結束頁：51-73資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(2).211篇名：The Effects of Value Relevance of Accounting Information and Financing Activities on Idiosyncratic Risk並列篇名：會計資訊的價值攸關性和融資活動對異質風險之影響作者：林宜勉(Yi-Mien Lin);王登仕(Teng-Shih Wang);鍾惠民(Huimin Chung)關鍵字：Accounting information;value relevance;idiosyncratic risk;debt financing activities;equity financing activities;會計資訊;價值攸關性;異質風險;負債融資活動;權益融資活動期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study examines the relationships between the value relevance of accounting information, financing activities, and idiosyncratic risk. The findings show that debt financing activities are positively related to the value relevance of earnings but equity financing activities decrease with the value relevance of earnings. Both external financing activities and equity financing activities decrease with idiosyncratic volatility, and considering the interaction between financing activities and the value relevance of earnings or cash flows, these relationships still hold. Overall, investors face lower idiosyncratic risk when a firm chooses equity financing activities.英文摘要：本文驗證會計資訊的價值攸關性、融資活動及異質風險之間的關聯性。實證結果發現，負債（權益）融資活動與盈餘的價值攸關性呈正（負）相關。外部融資及權益融資活動負向影響異質波動性，在考慮盈餘或現金流量的價值攸關性與融資活動之交互關係後仍獲得一致結果。整體而言，公司選擇權益融資活動時投資人面對較低的異質風險。起始頁-結束頁：75-103資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(2).312篇名：Order Choices, Order Performance, and Price Discovery during Closing Call Auctions -A Case Study of Improved LOB Disclosure in Taiwan Stock Exchange並列篇名：收盤競價階段委託決策、委託成效與價格發現－臺灣集中市場限價簿資訊改善的實證研究作者：曾翊恆(Yi-Heng Tseng);張嘉玲(Chia-Ling Chang);王凱立(Kai-Li Wang)關鍵字：Closing call auction;market transparency;order aggressiveness;order performance;closing price discovery;收盤集合競價;市場透明度;委託積極度;委託成效;收盤價格發現期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The adoption of pre-close disclosure mechanism, since February 20, 2012, has made the limit order book (LOB) less opaque during the closing call. We find that after this reform, the order aggressiveness from individual investor has declined; however, foreign investors tend to place orders more conservatively for large cap stocks. A higher degree of transparency does not bring order prices closer to closing prices. Price discovery efficiency slightly declines at the commencement of the closing call, and the number of small cap stocks meeting criteria for price manipulation increases. Measures of delaying closing calls effectively calm the emotions of investors.英文摘要：2012年2月20日「收盤前資訊揭露新制」啟動後，收盤競價階段便擺脫限價簿資訊全盤晦暗狀態。本文發現，變革後自然人委託積極度略升，但外資對大型股出價反趨保守，投資人委託價格未普遍靠向收盤股價。此外，價格發現效率在收盤競價初期稍降，符合作價條件之小型股票家數增加。在延後收盤時，投資人激昂操作情緒顯著冷卻。起始頁-結束頁：105-156資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(2).413篇名：Default Option and Optimal Capital Structure in Real Estate Investment並列篇名：房地產投資之違約選擇權與最適資本結構作者：周治邦(Jyh-Bang Jou);李丹(Tan Charlene Lee)關鍵字：Default;optimal capital structure;real estate investment;real options;transaction costs;違約;最適資本結構;房地產投資;實質選擇權;交易成本期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This article investigates the determinants of optimal capital structure in real estate investment by using a real options framework. An investor chooses a purchase date and a loan-to-value (LTV) ratio that balances the tax shield benefit and the transaction costs. After the purchase, the investor acquires the option to default. Greater uncertainty in housing price inflation will enhance this option value such that the investor will purchase earlier and reduce debt financing. This is consistent with the recent U.S. experience in which high LTV ratios were observed before and low LTV ratios were observed around the subprime mortgage crisis.英文摘要：本文採用實質選擇權的架構，探討房地產投資的最適資本結構決定因素。投資人選擇購買時點與房貸比例，以便平衡稅盾利益與交易成本。房價上漲不確定性越高，會提高投資人未來違約選擇權的價值，因而促使其提早購買房屋且減少貸款比例。此與美國近來在次級房貸危機爆發前，貸款比例較高，而在爆發時，貸款比例較低的狀況吻合。起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(1).114篇名：Insider Trading, Abnormal Returns, and Intangible Resources並列篇名：內部人交易、異常報酬與企業無形資源之關聯性分析作者：顏子瑜(Tze-Yu Yen);周淑卿(Shu-Ching Chou);張敏蕾(Ming-Lei Chang);趙桓健(Huan-Jian Jau)關鍵字：Insider trading;abnormal returns;intangible resources;內部人交易;異常報酬;無形資源期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study examines whether insiders’ trading strategy relates to earnings announcement. Results show that favorable stock trading by corporate insiders before earnings reversal announcement leads to abnormal returns, particularly for increased earnings that turn to decreased ones. Further investigation shows that firms with intangible resources are prone to insider trading. The findings indicate that intangible resources may increase information asymmetry and trigger insider trading through earnings announcement.英文摘要：本研究檢視企業內部人是否利用內部資訊優勢，在盈餘宣告前進行持股操作，並觀察此持股變動是否與企業的無形資產相關。結果顯示內部人在盈餘反轉訊息－尤其是反轉為衰退－公開前，進行持股有利操作，在日後盈餘宣告期間有機會獲取異常報酬。另外發現無形資產提高盈餘資訊不對稱性，提供了內部人進行持股操作的空間。起始頁-結束頁：39-82資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(1).215篇名：The Effects of Bank Monitoring on a Firm’s Cash Holding Policy and Value of Cash並列篇名：銀行監督機制對公司現金決策及現金價值之影響作者：盧建霖(Chien-Lin Lu);張元晨(Yuanchen Chang)關鍵字：Bank loan;cash holdings;covenant violation;value of cash;銀行貸款;現金持有;借貸違約;現金價值期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This paper tests whether creditors affect a firm’s cash reserves and the value of cash via covenants and violations of bank loan contracts. Our results show that tight covenants induce firms to increase their cash balances. Borrowers tend to increase cash reserves after covenant violations by liquidating net working capital and reducing the payout ratio. We also find that covenant violations impact high growth firms, because they are more sensitive to changes in cash reserves. Finally, our results show that the effects of bank monitoring on a firm’s cash holdings are more significant during the financial crisis period.英文摘要：本文以銀行借貸條件及借貸違約討論銀行對公司現金決策及現金價值的影響。實證結果顯示，較嚴謹的貸款條件會促使公司增加現金部位。公司在貸款違約後，會以減少營運資本及股利的方式增加現金，且高成長性公司較容易受到貸款違約影響而提高現金持有。此外，銀行監督機制對公司現金決策的影響在金融海嘯期間會更加明顯。起始頁-結束頁：83-113資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(1).316篇名：The Impact of Business Groups' Structural Features on Risk Attitudes: Prospect Theory Explanations並列篇名：集團企業結構特徵對風險態度之影響－展望理論之應用作者：邱臙珍(Yen-Chen Chiu)關鍵字：Prospect theory;financial constraints;ownership structure;international diversification;展望理論;財務限制;股權結構;國際多角化期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study discusses and analyzes the risk attitudes of decision makers in business groups and the influence of business groups’ structural features on risk attitudes by applying the prospect theory. Empirical results indicate that the risk attitudes of decision makers in Taiwanese business groups above the reference point tend to be risk-avoidant, while the risk attitudes of those under the reference point tend to be risk-seeking. These findings are both consistent with the prospect theory. Additionally, business groups’ structural features have influences upon the risk attitudes of decision makers.英文摘要：本研究以展望理論為基礎，探討集團企業決策者之風險態度，並應用展望理論分析集團企業之結構特徵對風險態度的影響。實證結果顯示，參考點以上臺灣集團企業決策者之風險態度傾向趨避，參考點之下者風險態度則傾向風險愛好，符合展望理論之論述；集團企業結構特徵對決策者的風險態度會產生影響。起始頁-結束頁：115-170資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.2017.25(1).401篇名：雙占下的製程研發－一個完整的分析架構並列篇名：PROCESS R&D IN DUOPOLY: A COMPLETE ANALYTIC FRAMEWORK作者：鄭保志(P. C. Roger Cheng);周瑞賢(Jui-Hsien Stephen Chou);洪翎家(Ling-Chia Hung)關鍵字：製程研發;Cournot雙占;研發效率;角解;穩定均衡;Process R&D;Cournot duopoly;R&D efficiency;Corner solution;Stable equilibrium期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文跳脫文獻透過一階條件尋求內解的慣性，回歸以利潤極大化為基礎的反應函數，重新檢視Cournot雙占廠商在研發及生產上的決策問題，除了分析製程研發時可能存在的角解，也<U+8AAC>明過去的相關研究就廠商研發效率進行參數範圍限制的作法，其實是沒有必要的。此外，本文發現：即便在兩家廠商各項參數均對稱的設定下，對稱的均衡解未必穩定，而穩定的均衡策略未必對稱。在生產成本相對較高的情況下，製程研發能使市場結構由雙占轉為獨占。英文摘要：We reinvestigate decisions of a Cournot duopolist on process R&D and production by relaxing the restrictions on parameters that satisfy the second-order conditions of profit maximization. Returning to the firms' reaction functions derived from the profit maximization, this paper not only analyzes the case of corner solution but also suggests that restricting the values on parameters, as usually done in the literature, is unnecessary. In addition, we show that even in the symmetric firm case, the symmetric equilibrium is not necessarily stable, whereas a stable solution is not necessarily symmetric. Moreover, given sufficiently high production cost, process R&D could turn one of the two symmetric firms into a monopolist in the output market.起始頁-結束頁：473-501資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：盤前公開資訊、開盤價格發現與投資人委託決策並列篇名：PUBLIC INFORMATION, PRICE DISCOVERY AND ORDER CHOICES DURING THE OPENING CALL作者：曾翊恆(Yi-Heng Tseng);魏品揚(Ping-Yang Wei)關鍵字：臺灣證交所;開盤集合競價;價格發現效率;委託積極度;Taiwan stock exchange;Opening call auction;Price discovery;Order aggressiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：臺灣證交所在開盤集合競價維持逾十年限價簿資訊全晦暗狀態，這在國際市場間實屬碩果僅存，但剛好營造相對單純研究背景供本文評估盤前公開資訊在開盤價格發現與投資人委託決策上所扮演的角色。我們觀察到，象徵資訊弱勢方的自然人在開盤前委託出價保守，且半數委託群聚競價最初五分鐘（8:30－8:35 am）內;掌握資訊優勢的機構投資人每筆委託規模龐大，且愈早提出者價位愈急迫。開盤前，股價發現效率指標大抵呈現希臘字母「型態軌跡，意謂競價頭五分鐘市場便快速「學習」股票均衡價值，此時逾九成股票顯著拒絕「雜訊假<U+8AAC>」（Biais et al。，1999），雖然盤前公開資訊對開盤股價發現效率影響力孱弱，但依舊牽動多方面委託決策。自然人出價有隨盤前美股，臺期指漲跌與自身委買賣方向「順勢」程度加大而趨於急迫傾向，採取融資，券信用交易者約占三成，可隱約見到其「追逐行情漲跌」操作習性;機構投資人選擇借券賣出者，則似有乘臺期指開盤後走高之際逆勢佈空跡象。「公開資訊觀測站」揭露重大隔夜訊息頻率轉強時，雖刺激自然人提高出價積極度。惟對機構投<U+8D44>人價位急迫傾向影響趨於頓化，暗示所揭露事項之攸關性與及時性或許都有改善空間。2015年6月29日實施的「開盤前資訊揭露措施」，雖標誌著開盤集合競價一舉揮別昔日「摸黑交易」環境，但也輕微損傷小型類股開盤價格發現效率。參酌國際市場經驗可知，市場透明化是緩解資訊不對稱問題的常見處方，而由此衍生的揭露資訊品質不佳隱憂，則值得注意。英文摘要：The limit order book (LOB) of the Taiwan Stock Exchange (TWSE) has been fully opaque during the opening call in the past decade. This offers a relatively clear environment for investigating how public information affects price discovery and order choices during the opening call. We find that individual investors (symbolizing the un-informed traders) place conservative orders before opening and half of their orders cluster within 8:30-8:35 am. On the other hand, the order sizes from institutional investors (symbolizing the informed traders) are quite large and their orders tend to be more aggressive in the early stage of the opening call. The indicators of price discovery efficiency roughly emerge the I -shaped patterns, revealing that the market rapidly ”learns” about the equilibrium values of stocks particularly in the first five minutes of the opening call auction. At this time, more than 90% of sample stocks significantly reject the ”noise hypothesis” (Biais et al., 1999). Though public information has a weak influence on the price discovery efficiency, it nevertheless affects many aspects of order choices. Our results show that the individual investors are typical trend-followers. Their orders tend to be more aggressive when the buy or sell direction of these trades better conform to the current fluctuations of the US market index and the TAIEX Futures returns. We find that 30% of their orders belong to margin trading or short sales, and these traders somewhat chase the market prices. As for the institutional investors, it seems that they prefer short sales when the TAIEX Futures rises after market opening. Our results also suggest that though the intensity of the Market Observation Post System (MOPS) announcements significantly stimulates the order aggressiveness of individual investors, its influences on the order aggressiveness of institutional investors are much milder, indicating that there's still room for improvement with regards to the relevance and the timeliness of these announcements. Lastly, the implementation of the ”Pre-Opening Information Disclosure Mechanism” on June 29, 2015 marks the end of trading in ”black box” during the opening call auction in the TWSE, but nevertheless it slightly undermines the price discovery efficiency of small capital stocks. Based on the experiences learnt from leading exchanges in the world, it shows that the market transparency is the primary remedy for information asymmetry. It is noteworthy that the transparency improvement may probably lower the quality of unveiled parts of the LOB.起始頁-結束頁：503-597資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：躍過反傾銷稅直接投資與匯率波動－實質選擇權分析法並列篇名：ANTIDUMPING-JUMPING FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT AND EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY: A REAL OPTIONS APPROACH作者：林家慶(Chia-Ching Lin);陳坤銘(Kun-Ming Chen)關鍵字：反傾銷政策;外人直接投資;匯率;實質選擇權;Antidumping policy;Foreign direct investment;Exchange rate;Real options期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文應用實質選擇權分析法，同時探討匯率波動性，反傾銷政策以及外人直接投資間之關係。本文研究結果顯示，在匯率波動情況下，反傾銷政策有可能促使廠商進行躍過反傾銷稅直接投資，尤其是採取價格具結政策時更是如此。但若至第三國投資的固定成本較至提控國投資低很多，則躍過反傾銷稅直接投資將發生在第三國。此外，匯率不確定性的提高會產生更多躍過反傾銷<U+7A0E>直接投資。由此可知，匯率波動性，反傾銷政策以及外人直接投資間存在密切的連動關係。英文摘要：This paper applies a real options approach to theoretically investigate the relationship among exchange rate volatility, antidumping policy and foreign direct investment. Our results indicate that under exchange rate uncertainty, antidumping policy might stimulate dumping firms to undertake foreign direct investment, especially if the filing country adopts price undertaking measures. However, if the fixed costs of foreign direct investment are much lower in a third country than those of the filing country, the dumping firms tend to undertake foreign direct investment in the third country instead. In addition, the higher the exchange rate uncertainty is, the more likely the foreign direct investment is to occur. These results reveal the close interactive relationship among exchange rate volatility, antidumping policy and foreign direct investment.起始頁-結束頁：599-628資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：啞鈴模型與風險趨避廠商的區位選擇並列篇名：BARBELL MODEL AND THE LOCATION CHOICE FOR A RISK-AVERSE FIRM作者：余志民(Chih-Min She);楊雅博(Ya-Po Yang);吳世傑(Shih-Jye Wu)關鍵字：啞鈴模型;風險趨避;差別訂價;單一訂價;Barbell model;Risk aversion;Discriminatory pricing;Uniform pricing期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：在這篇文章裡，我們將市場需求不確定的因素納入啞鈴模型的架構中，以重新檢視單一訂價與差別取價所產生之經濟效果的異同，包括廠商區位選擇的問題與社會福利大小的比較。在將市場大小的角色允以中立化，並假設廠商具有風險趨避的特性下，我們的研究顯示了如下的重要發現：（i）在差別取價下，廠商會設定廠址在需求變異較小的市場，但在單一訂價下，只要各市場的需求變異不要差距太大，則廠址的位置就會落腳在連接市場的交通線上;（ii）在差別取價下，為了降低市場需求不確定性所帶來的風險損失，廠商對於遠端市場的訂價不一定會高於其在落腳市場的價格水準;（iii）當兩市場的相對需求變異程度差距較大或差距較小時，差別訂價下的市場期望總交易數量會小於單一訂價下的水準。反之，差別訂價下的市場期望總交易數量會大於單一訂價下的水準;（iv）只要差別訂價下的市場期望總交易數量大於單一訂價下的水準，其相對應的社會期望福利水準就會高於單一訂價下的社會期望福利水準;（v）當差別訂價下的市場期望總交易數量小於單一訂價下的水準時，只要兩市場的相對需求變異程度差距小於特定水準，則差別訂價下社會期望福利水準仍會高於單一訂價下的社會期望福利水準。英文摘要：In this article we highlight the role of demand uncertainty within the stylized framework of the Barbell model, which addresses the location problem of a monopolist firm which sells its products to two geographically separated and demand-independent markets that are connected by a highway. Our research reveals that market demand uncertainty is a crucial factor in determining the firm's location. In particular, under spatial uniform pricing, the monopoly may locate its plant at the interior post of the highway and stay away from the market with the greatest degree of demand uncertainty, whereas under discriminatory pricing, it will always locate at the market post with the least degree of demand uncertainty. Futhermore, we also find that the welfare under discriminatory pricing is greater than the welfare with uniform pricing as long as the discrepancy in the degree of demand uncertainty among markets is large enough. Our results are sharply different from works that follow the Barbell model developed by Hwang and Mai (1990).起始頁-結束頁：629-661資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：要素替代、要素密集與均衡（不）安定－關稅融通教育支出的角色並列篇名：FACTOR SUBSTITUTION, FACTOR INTENSITY AND EQUILIBRIUM (IN) STABILITY: THE ROLE OF EDUCATIONAL EXPENDITURES WITH TARIFF FINANCING作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);黃俊傑(Chun-Chieh Huang);曾憲政(Shian-Jang Tzeng)關鍵字：關稅;教育支出;平衡預算法則;固定替代彈性;自我實現預期;Tariff;Educational expenditures;Balanced-budget rule;Constant elasticity of substitution;Self-fulfilling expectations期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文引進關稅融通機制至一個兼有固定替代彈性的生產技術與具外部性的公設技能教育的兩部門小型開放經濟模型，據以探討均衡的(不)安定性。研究發現：若進口中間財和進口最終財課徵關稅的稅率相同，當最終財為勞力密集時，體系呈現鞍點穩定；最終財為非勞力密集時，體系呈現不安定的狀態。數值模擬分析發現：當中間財稅率小於最終財稅率時，若最終財為勞力密集，則動態體系具有馬鞍安定的均衡；若最終財為非勞力密集，且當(1)中間財生產要素替代性愈大；或(2)中間財與最終財稅率差異愈大;抑或(3)政府支出的生產外部性愈大，則動態體系愈容易產生多重收斂路經。而中間財稅率大於最終財稅率時，則無論最終財要素密集度為何，都不會有多重均衡的情形。英文摘要：This paper introduces a tariff financing regime into a two-sector small open economy model with CES technologies and skill education externalities. Under this theoretical framework, we study the occurrence of indeterminacy. Our main results are the following: given an equal rate tariff on both imported intermediate goods and final goods, agents’ expectations cannot be fulfilled, and thus indeterminacy disappears. We find that as long as tariff rates are equal, the economy exhibits saddle-path stability when the final good is relatively labor-intensive; whereas the dynamic system is unstable when the intermediate good is relatively labor-intensive. However, if the tariff rates are unequal, our numerical simulations show that the economy may exhibit indeterminacy depending on the relative magnitude among these structural parameters such as tariff difference, skill education externality, factor substitution in intermediate goods, and the endogenous factor-intensity in final goods.起始頁-結束頁：305-350資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：利率衍生性商品、風險曝露水準與公司績效並列篇名：INTEREST RATE DERIVATIVES, RISK EXPOSURE AND PERFORMANCE作者：劉憓諠(Hui-Hsuan Liu);許永明(Yung-Ming Shiu);王綺楓(Chi-Feng Wang)關鍵字：利率衍生性商品;風險曝露水準;公司績效;Interest rate derivatives;Interest rate risk exposure;Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文的目的在於：探討壽險公司利率衍生性商品的使用，與其利率風險曝露與公司績效的關係。我們建立結構模型，利用兩階段最小平方法，檢視壽險公司使為衍生金融工具對其利率風險曝露的影響，並分析公司的績效水準，是否與衍生金融工具的使用有關。結果顯示：整體而言，有使用且使用比較多利率衍生性商品的壽險公司，會有比較高的利率風險曝露與績效。我們也進行穩健性測試，主要變數之間的關係，仍然不變。根據本文所得到的結果，我們在文末提供數個實務意涵，供保險公司與主管機關參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to examine the relations between life insurers’ use of interest rate derivatives and their risk exposure and performance. Using structural equations and a two-stage least squares approach, we examine whether and how interest rate derivative use affects interest rate exposure and its relationship to firm performance. Overall, our results show that the use of interest rate derivatives is positively related to both interest rate risk exposure and firm performance. Several robustness checks have been conducted and results remain qualitatively unchanged. Based on our results, we offer several implications for practitioners and policymakers.起始頁-結束頁：351-383資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：十字型市場的空間差別定價－Bertrand與Cournot並列篇名：SPATIAL DISCRIMINATION IN A CROSS-STREET MARKET: BERTRAND VS. COURNOT作者：孫嘉宏(Chia-Hung Sun)關鍵字：十字型市場;空間差別定價;Bertrand競爭;Cournot競爭;Cross-streetmarket;Spatial discrimination;Bertrand competition;Cournot competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文在十字型市場的空間型態下，研究廠商的空間差別定價及區位競爭，我們同時討論生產同質產品的雙占廠商，做Bertrand的價格競爭與Cournot的數量競爭。研究結果發現，在Bertrand競爭之下，不存在對稱的區位均衡，而一家廠商坐落在十字型市場的中心點，另一家廠商與其區位分離，是唯一的區位均衡。在Cournot競爭之下，雙占廠商區位聚集在十字型市場的中心點是唯一的區位均衡。在福利分析方面，研究發現，Cournot競爭之下的消費者剩餘、產業利潤與社會福利，皆高於Bertrand競爭之下的消費者剩餘、產業利潤與社會福利，此結果隱含，此十字型市場的空間競爭模型，可以解決傳統非空間模型中，消費者、廠商與政府（社會規劃者）之間的誘因不一致問題。英文摘要：We investigate the theory of spatial discrimination in a cross-street market and discuss two types of market competition-Bertrand and Cournot-with homogeneous goods and endogenous location choices. The result is that asymmetric dispersion, where one firm locates at the market center while the other firm locates in the interior, is the unique location equilibrium under Bertrand competition. Duopoly firms choose to agglomerate at the market center under Cournot competition. We also find that consumer surplus, industry profits, and social welfare are all higher under Cournot competition than under Bertrand competition. This implies that introducing a spatial barrier to competition generated through transportation costs may solve the problem of inconsistency from the conflicting interests among consumers, firms, and a social planner.起始頁-結束頁：385-422資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：養兒育女對育齡婦女勞動市場結果的影響－論2009年育嬰假政策改革之效果並列篇名：THE EFFECT OF CHILDCARE ON FEMALE LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES: EVIDENCE FROM THE 2009 PARENTAL LEAVE POLICY REFORM IN TAIWAN作者：蔡<U+5F63>涓(When-Jyuan Tsai)關鍵字：育嬰假;就業;薪資;雙重差分法;Parental leave;Employment;Wage;Difference-in-differences期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：我國在2009年乃配合「就業保險法」的修訂正式規範育齡婦女可請領月投保薪資之六成以做為其在育嬰留職停薪期間的津貼補助。本文主要使用2002-2007年與2010-2014年的「家庭收支調查」，分析育嬰留職停薪津貼政策對育齡婦女勞動市場結果的影響。本文係以戶內育有0-3歲子女的婦女做為實驗組；其他45歲以上的婦女做為控制組，且應用雙重差分法，評估政策之就業與薪資的效果。其中，本文將主要探索育齡婦女的收入結構，且將領有育嬰留職停薪津貼的婦女重新編碼並轉換成就業者，以藉此校正相關婦女的就業比例。實證結果顯示育嬰留職停薪津貼改革將致使戶內育有1名1歲子女的婦女其就業機率下降約16.82%。另外，暴露於高政策強度的實驗組婦女(月投保薪資調漲之潛在族群}其薪資水準亦因育嬰留職停薪津貼政策的實施而產生下降的情形。英文摘要：The 2009 amendment in the Employment Insurance Act entitled mothers to a parental benefit for six months after childbirth. The amount of the parental benefit was based on 60 percent of average insured salaries during the last six pre-childbirth months of work. In this paper, we use the 2002-2007 and 2010-2014 waves of the Family Income and Expenditure Survey to study the effect of the paid parental leave policy on the labor market outcomes of women of childbearing age. By including mothers with children aged 0-3 as a treatment group and women aged 45 or above as a control group, we use a difference-in-differences method to evaluate the policy effects on employment and wages. We take advantage of detailed information on various sources of income and recode women who were recipients of a parental benefit as the employed in order to obtain an estimate of the true employment ratio. The empirical results suggest that, for mothers who had one child at the age of one, the paid parental leave policy will lead to a reduction in the likelihood of employment by 16.82 percent. In addition, our results show that the policy may have a negative impact on wages for those women who experienced an expansion of the parental benefit.起始頁-結束頁：423-467資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：2001年高中職多元入學方案對升學壓力、時間安排與課外活動和才藝表現的影響並列篇名：THE EFFECTS OF MULTI-CHANNEL ENTRANCE PROGRAM FOR HIGH SCHOOLS IN 2001 ON ENTRANCE-EXAM-RELATED STRESS, DAILY SCHEDULE, EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES, AND ART AND TALENT PERFORMANCE作者：劉家樺(Chia-Hua Liu);駱明慶(Ming-Ching Luoh);伊慶春(Chin-Chun Yi)關鍵字：多元入學方案;升學壓力;時間安排;課外活動;才藝表現;Multi-channel entrance program;Entrance-exam-related stress;Daily schedule;Extracurricular activities;Art and talent performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：教育部在2001年廢除聯考，實施高中、高職及五專多元入學方案，期望紓解學生的升學壓力。本文使用「台灣青少年計畫」（Taiwan Youth Project, TYP）在2000年調查，適用於新制和舊制入學制度之國一和國三生資料，分析2001年全面實施多元入學方案對學生升學壓力、時間安排與課外活動和才藝表現的影響。結果發現多元入學方案實施後，學生對升學壓力的感受上升，而且時間安排變得更緊湊。此外，本文利用2001年多元入學方案正式實施的時間點，以未受政策影響之舊制學生為對照組，受政策影響之新制學生為實驗組，採用差異中的差異法（differences-in-differences），檢視多元入學方案對學生課外活動和才藝表現的影響。實證結果顯示多元入學方案導致學生從事課外活動和才藝表現的行為增加。英文摘要：The Ministry of Education abolished the joint entrance examination and adopted a multi-channel entrance program for high schools and junior college in 2001, hoping to ease junior high school students' entrance-exam-related stress. The paper uses the Taiwan Youth Project in 2000, which surveyed 7th and 9th grade students who applied to the new and old entrance systems respectively to examine the effects of the program on students' entrance-exam-related stress, daily schedule, extracurricular activities, and art and talent performance. Results show that after the implementation of the program, the students' entrance-exam-related stress is amplified. They also have a busier schedule than they used to. Moreover, using the adoption of the program in 2001, this paper applies a differences-in-differences method to examine its effects on extracurricular activities and art and talent performance. This paper uses students applying to the old entrance system as the comparison group, and students applying to the new entrance system as the treatment group. Results indicate that the program leads to students doing more extracurricular activities and art and talent performance.起始頁-結束頁：165-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：通貨替代、價格調整與產出波動並列篇名：CURRENCY SUBSTITUTION, PRICE ADJUSTMENT AND OUTPUT FLUCTUATION作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);廖志興(Chih-Hsing Liao)關鍵字：不完全競爭;通貨替代;相對價格;產出波動;Imperfect competition;Currency substitution;Relative prices;Output fluctuation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文建構一個包含貿易財與非貿易財的兩部門特定要素模型，在不完全競爭市場的假定下，分析貨幣寬鬆對小型開放經濟商品相對價格、民眾對不同通貨持有量及實質產出的影響。研究發現：如果國外通貨膨脹率不為零，則寬鬆的貨幣政策就不具中立性，即穩固狀態下實質變數（例如相對價格、消費、產出等）也會發生變動。其中非貿易財相對價格是降或升，端視本國通貨和外國通貨究竟是毛替代或毛補充而定。一旦非貿易財相對價格變動，實質產出亦隨之變動，其變動的方向則取決於商品市場需求價格彈性及兩部門工資差異的相對大小。由於在貨幣政策採行的瞬間，已經衝擊非貿易財相對價格且發生過度反應，故其動態行為與穩固狀態的變動會呈相反的走勢，進而因商品和要素市場的相對不完全性帶動實質產出呈現不同樣貌的調整時徑。英文摘要：This paper incorporates the feature of imperfect competition in product and factor markets into a specific-factor two-sector (tradable and non-tradable goods) model to investigate the roles of currency substitution and market imperfections on the effects of monetary policy and on the output movements. It shows that the degree of currency substitution and the existence of foreign inflation are two crucial determinants in influencing the effects of monetary policy on the real exchange rate (hence the relative prices of non-tradable to tradable goods). The relative magnitude of the elasticities of demand for both goods and the wage differential influences critically the steady-state response and the dynamic path of output fluctuations. This dynamic general equilibrium model also shows that the impact of monetary policy on the real exchange rate (the relative prices of non-tradable to tradable goods) and the real output is greater than their steady-state changes. Therefore, it can be verified that these relevant variables behave in an opposite movement to approach their new steady-state values in the transition period.起始頁-結束頁：207-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：Detecting Causality and Long-Run Equilibrium Relationships of Mortality Rates across Countries for Developing Mortality-Linked Securities並列篇名：檢測跨國死亡率之因果關係及長期均衡－以發展死亡連結證券為例作者：黃志偉(Jr-Wei Huang);楊曉文(Sharon S. Yang)關鍵字：Mortality index;Panel co-integration;Causality;死亡率指數;追蹤共整合;因果關係期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The construction of a multi-country mortality index is essential for designing a mortality-linked security in the ”Life Market”. This paper investigates the relationships of mortality rates across countries. Particularly, we focus on the causality and long-run equilibrium relationships. To overcome the problem of the short time spans of mortality data sets, we adopt a panel co-integration approach instead of a traditional co-integration approach. Using the mortality index underlying the Swiss mortality bond, we detect the relationship of mortality rates in France, England, the United States, Italy, and Switzerland based on the Human Mortality Database from 1950 to 2009 as an example. We find the mortality rates in these countries exhibit co-integration effects, with a bi-directional short-run causality and long-run equilibrium relationships. However, such effects are not detected by a traditional co-integration approach. Understanding the relationships of mortality rates across countries can help in development of an effective capital market solution.英文摘要：建構多國死亡率指數對設計死亡率連結證券是相當重要的，本文探討跨國死亡率關連性，主要著重於因果及長期均衡關係。為能克服死亡率資料期間較短之問題，本研究採用追蹤共整合的方法代替傳統共整合的方式來檢測跨國死亡率之關連性，並以瑞士再保所發行的死亡率債券為跨國死亡率關連性之研究範例，該債券死亡率指數連結法國、英格蘭、美國、義大利及瑞士五個國家。依據HMD資料庫以資料期間1950至2009進行分析，本研究發現這些國家死亡率存在共整合效果且存在雙向短期因果關係及長期均衡，然而，此一現象並無法藉由傳統的共整合方法來發現。了解不同國家死亡率之關連性，可幫助資本市場發展出有避險效益的死亡率連結證券。起始頁-結束頁：251-278資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：Up-or-Out Policy in Universitiesa並列篇名：大學的非升即走制度作者：廖郁萍(Yu-Ping Liao)關鍵字：Up-or-out;Academic tenure;University competition;非升即走;終身教授職;大學競爭期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：For high school seniors with strong academic records who are choosing a university, one important factor is whether the university courses are taught by faculty members with strong academic ability. To recruit these students, universities implement an up-or-out policy with three features: (1) faculty members being promoted from assistant to associate professor are awarded permanent tenure, (2) those denied promotion to associate professor are asked to leave, and (3) the promotion decision is based on the quantity and quality of academic publications during the probationary period.英文摘要：對學業成績好的高中畢業生而言，申請大學時最重要的考量之一是：所修的課是否是由學術能力好的老師所教。為了爭取這些學生來申請，大學有意願實行具有下列三個特性的非升即走制度：（一）晉升為副教授者被授予終身教授職；（二）不被晉升者被要求離職；（三）晉升與否主要取決於發表的學術文章的質與量。起始頁-結束頁：279-304資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：Entrepreneurship and Welfare Gains from Trade並列篇名：企業家與貿易福利增益作者：陳清目(Ching-Mu Chen);彭信坤(Shin-Kun Peng)關鍵字：Heterogeneous agents;Entrepreneur;Welfare gains from trade;Trade integration;Globalization;異質性行為人;企業家;貿易福利增益;貿易整合;全球化期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This paper investigates the implications of heterogeneous entrepreneurs for the welfare gains from trade in a monopolistic competition model with a demand system of constant elasticity of substitution (CES). An agent selects her occupation between entrepreneur and worker according to her level of entrepreneurial capability, which determines the productivity of her launched firm. Although this model is isomorphic to Melitz's heterogeneous firm model in terms of the aggregate welfare gains from trade, it enables us to see the inequality in welfare gains from trade among heterogeneous agents. We find that firm owners always benefit more than workers due to an entrepreneurship premium, which is also a measure to quantify the disparity in welfare gains from trade between entrepreneurs and workers within a country. We also prove that globalization and agent heterogeneity make this disparity more severe.英文摘要：本文研究異質性企業家在獨占型競爭與固定替代彈性的架構下，對於貿易福利增益的影響與意涵。假設廠商的生產力取決於企業家的企業管理能力，則模型中的行為人便依據自己企業管理能力的高下，來選擇所從事的職業：企業家或工人。研究結果顯示，在總體貿易福利增益幅度上，本模型雖然與Melitz的異質性廠商模型得到相同的結果。但因本研究異質性行為人的模型設定，讓我們可以分別檢視異質性行為人間，個別貿易福利增益的不均程度。企業家總是比勞工享受到較高的貿易福利增益幅度。兩者的差我們稱之為企業家在貿易福利增益上的溢價，也作為貿易福利增益在兩種職業之間分配不均的指標。我們也證明了全球化程度越高，以及行為人能力分佈越異質，將使此一貿易福利增幅差異越大。起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：Productivity Effects of Exporting and Importing: Do What and Where You Trade Matter?並列篇名：出口與進口的生產力效果－與貿易內涵與目的地有關嗎？作者：林軒宇(Hsuan-Yu Lin);楊志海(Chih-Hai Yang)關鍵字：Trade heterogeneity;Productivity;Export;Import;貿易異質性;生產力;出口;進口期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This paper investigates the productivity effect of trade by focusing on various types of trades. Aside from trade volume, the trade heterogeneity we consider includes variety, destination, unit price, and trade type. Based on within-firm-product panel data on China's electronics industry, we confirm a productivity gain from export when firms trade with developed countries, undertake process trade, and have a higher unit price, but not for firms exporting a greater variety of goods. These heterogeneities in imports also matter to promoting productivity. Moreover, the productivity-enhancing effect of trade varies between domestic and foreign firms, whereby domestic firms benefit more from international trade.英文摘要：本文檢視貿易的生產力效果。不同於過去研究著重在貿易量的影響，本文考慮貿易內涵的異質性所可能產生的不同傳遞效果，包括貿易商品種類、國家、價格以及加工貿易型態。採用中國電子業的「廠商/商品別」合併資料進行實證研究，結果發現與先進國家進行出口，加工出口，以及具較高平均商品價格的出口，對於廠商的生產力具有正向顯著的影響，但出口商品種類數則無顯著關聯。相同的，進口的異質性也對廠商生產力具不同的影響。此外，中國國內廠商因貿易獲致的生產力效果大於外資企業。起始頁-結束頁：47-80資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：異質生產者、內生彈性及貿易與成長的關係並列篇名：HETEROGENEOUS FIRMS, ENDOGENOUS ELASTICITY AND THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE AND GROWTH作者：徐則謙(Tse-Chien Hsu)關鍵字：異質生產者;內生彈性;內生成長;國際貿易;最適貿易政策;最適產業政策;貿易與成長;Heterogeneous firms;Endogenous elasticity;Endogenous growth;International trade;Optimal trade policy;Optimal industrial policy;Trade and growth期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：我們延伸Arkolakis et al.（2010）的模型，在異質生產者的架構下，重新討論貿易與成長的關係。在考量了彈性的內生性後，只有在知識外溢效果源於產業生產力的提升時，模型才有可能出現穩定狀態下的內生成長。此機制使貿易不會如過往文獻所述，以短期生產力上升換取長期成長。若考慮對福利的影響，依模型參數的不同，對生產者的進入行為補貼或課<U+7A0E>後，亦不會出現長短期福利的抵換。英文摘要：Under the structure of heterogeneous firms, we extend Arkolakis et al. (2010) to an endogenous growth model to reconsider the short-run and long-run impact of trade liberalization. Because of endogenous elasticity, the engine of growth can only be generated by the knowledge spillover originated from industrial productivity growth. Therefore, different from previous literature, there is no trade-off between short-run productivity increase and long-run growth. Depending on the parameters of the model, after subsidizing or taxing entry of producers, there is also no trade-off in terms of welfare.起始頁-結束頁：81-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所16篇名：Agglomeration and Local Public Goods with Spillovers並列篇名：聚集與地方公共財之外溢作者：蔡智發(Jvh-Fa Tsai)關鍵字：New economic geography;Public goods;Spillovers;Core-periphery model;新經濟地理;公共財;外溢;核心邊陲模型期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study explores the impact of spillovers of public goods on industrial agglomeration based on the structure of the new economic geography. The model employed in this study is built on the Forslid and Ottaviano (2003) type of core-periphery model and the structure of taxation in Andersson and Forslid (2003). The endogenous provision of local public goods is explored for the cases of symmetric and asymmetric spillovers of the public goods. It is shown that the Nash equilibrium tax rate for public goods in each region causes a free-rider effect. Differing from the pattern of firms' distribution with Krugman (1991), symmetric distribution of firms does not emerge when the spillovers are asymmetric. Moreover, the spillover effect acts as a dispersion force for the distribution of mobile workers between two regions.英文摘要：本文探討在新經濟地理架構下，公共財的外溢效果對產業聚集的影響。所採用的模型乃建立在Forslid and Ottaviano（2003）型式的核心邊陲模型以及Andersson and Forslid（2003）的課稅結構之基礎上。針對公共財的對稱與非對稱外溢效果，探討內生提供之地方公共財及其對產業聚集的影響。研究結果顯示，地方公共財的納許均衡<U+7A0E>率會產生搭便車的效果。不同於Krugman（1991）的廠商分布型態，本研究得到：當外溢效果為非對稱時，廠商的對稱分布型態不會出現。而且，對於可移動勞工在兩區之分布，外溢效果扮演一個分散力量的角色。起始頁-結束頁：129-164資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：Consumer Preferences regarding News Slant and Accuracy in News Program並列篇名：消費者對新聞節目政治傾向與正確度之偏好作者：江淳芳(Chun-Fang Chiang);施琇涵(Hsiu-Han Shih)關鍵字：consumer preferences;news slant;news accuracy;消費者偏好;新聞政治傾向;新聞正確度期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：We use weekly audience ratings data from different regions in Taiwan to investigate the role of news slant and news accuracy in consumers' choices of TV news programs in Taiwan. We find that news programs leaning toward the Pan-Blue parties have more viewers from areas with more Pan-Blue supporters. Moreover, we find that consumers are more politically segregated in choosing news programs during political events than on ordinary days. The finding cannot be explained by reverse causality and suggests that consumers are inclined to watch news programs with a political ideology that approximates their own. Regarding consumer preferences for news accuracy, we examine changes in viewership caused by two well-known false news scandals involving reports that provided erroneous information. We find that the effects of these two incidents were either small or insignificant.英文摘要：本文使用台灣各區每周收視率之資料，檢視新聞節目之政治傾向和正確度對消費者選擇新聞節目的重要性。我們發現，泛藍之新聞節目在泛藍比例較高地區的收視率較高。此外，我們發現在特殊政治事件發生時，收視觀眾的政治偏好組成更為極端化。這個結果除了並非來自於反向的因果關係，更顯示出消費者傾向收看與自己政治意識形態相近之新聞節目。最後，本文使用兩個假新聞事件，探討消費者對新聞正確度的敏感度。我們發現假新聞事件對收視率的影響極小，甚或不顯著。起始頁-結束頁：515-545資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201712_45(4).00012篇名：短期利率與資訊透明度的決定：銀行擠兌模型的應用並列篇名：Deciding the Short-Run Interest Rate and Information Transparency: The Application of a Bank Run Model作者：金志婷(Chi-Ting Chin)關鍵字：全域賽局;銀行擠兌;訊息透明化;global game;bank runs;information transparency期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：Goldstein and Pauzner（2005）強調降低短期利率可以減低擠兌的機率，導致擠兌可能發生下的最適短期利率低於完全排除擠兌時的最佳水準；假設銀行絕不倒閉的情況下，Selvaretnam（2006）發現訊息透明化的措施可削減擠兌發生的機率，盡可能地將訊息揭露得以極大化存戶的期望福利。本文討論於社會最適的情況下，政府應同時選擇短期利率與訊息的透明度，透過數值模擬分析，我們發現：最適的短期利率與訊息的透明度都與存戶厭惡風險的程度以及長期報酬的函數有關，在我們所模擬的各種情況下，最適短期利率沒有低於最佳短期利率的必要性，且透明化政策並不能夠提升存戶的期望福利。英文摘要：Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) emphasize that a decrease in the short-run interest rate can cut down the probability of a bank run, so that the optimal interest rate is lower than the first-best interest rate. Suppose that banks never close down, Selvaretnam (2006) finds that information transparency reduces the probability of a bank run, and thus exposing as much information as possible can maximize the expected utility of depositors. This paper expands the models of Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) and Selvaretnam (2006) to situations in which the government chooses the short-run interest rate and information transparency at the same time. We simulate the optimal short-run interest rate and the optimal information transparency, and find that they are related with the risk-averse degree of depositors and a function of the long-run return. In a variety of situations that we simulate, the optimal interest rate is not necessarily lower than the first-best interest rate and exposing information does not maximize the expected utility of depositors.起始頁-結束頁：547-577資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201712_45(4).00023篇名：性別偏好與出生排序效果：重新檢視台灣家戶對子女教育資源之配置並列篇名：Son Preference and Birth-Order Effects: Re-Investigating Household Resource Allocations in Education among Children in Taiwan's Families作者：魯慧中(Huei-Chung Lu)關鍵字：性別偏好;出生排序;固定效果下有序羅吉特模型;birth order;son preference;ordered logit with fixed effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文利用「華人家庭動態資料庫」的合併樣本，以Ejrnas and Portner(2004) 所提出之「固定效果下有序羅吉特模型」進行「性別偏好」與「出生排序」的實證分析。我們發現「重男輕女」普遍存在於當時的台灣社會，且外省籍家庭「重男輕女」的程度並非所有族群中最輕微的。出生排序越後面子女的教育程度會越高，但是出生排序越後面的兒子與女兒間之教育成就差異則較低。前後手足的生育間隔對於該子女的教育成就具有「非對稱效果」：與相鄰兄姐的生育間隔愈大，愈有利於該子女的教育成就；與相鄰弟妹的生育間隔愈大，反而對該子女的教育成就有不利的影響。最後，雙胞胎的身份會降低該子女的教育成就。英文摘要：This research utilizes PSFD (Panel Survey of Family Dynamics) and conducts an empirical study on the ”son preference” and ”birth order” effects by using the ordered logit model with fixed effects proposed by Ejrnas and Portner (2004). We find that, first of all, there is a significant son preference effect found when parents make their education investment on children. However, the sex inequality of the education investment of mainlander families is not the smallest among all ethnic families as claimed by the existing literature. Secondly, children with later birth orders are found to have higher educational achievements. Furthermore, the difference in educational achievement among sons is less than that among daughters; and thus the difference between sons and daughters is decreased when they are in later birth orders. We also find that birth spacing will also have an asymmetric effect on a child's educational achievement. A child who was born at a distant time to the adjacent older sibling tends to have a higher educational achievement; while his/her achievement shows a negative relation with the spacing to the next younger sibling. Finally, being one of twins may have an adverse effect on his/her educational achievement.起始頁-結束頁：579-637資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201712_45(4).00034篇名：訊息不對稱下的產業內授權行為並列篇名：Insider Licensor's Licensing Strategies under Asymmetric Information作者：王光正(Kuang-Cheng Andy Wang);吳宜謙(Yi-Can Wu);梁文榮(Wen-Jung Liang)關鍵字：混合授權策略;分離授權策略,單位權利金授權;固定權利金授權;兩階段定價授權;pooling licensing strategy;separating licensing strategy;royalty licensing;fixed-fee licensing;two-part tariff licensing期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究探討訊息不對稱下的產業內授權契約。本研究討論，如果只有被授權廠商擁有其授權後的成本訊息，而授權廠商沒有此訊息時，授權廠商的最適授權策略與授權契約。在此研究中我們得到：第一、授權廠商可能採取混合授權策略與單一授權策略，但只有在被授權廠商授權後邊際成本可能較授權廠商低時，授權廠商才可能會採取分離授權策略。第二、授權廠商採取混合授權策略時，必定以單位權利金進行授權，且此單位權利金會大於效率較差廠商邊際成本的降幅。第三、若授權後被授權廠商的邊際成本較授權廠商的邊際成本低，且授權廠商採取單一授權或分離授權策略，最適授權契約呈現多樣性。最適授權契約可能為單位權利金授權，兩階段定價授權，或固定權利金授權。這種契約的多樣性符合現實世界中的實際觀察，也修正了傳統產業內授權文獻中，單位權利金授權優於固定權利金授權的結論。英文摘要：We examine the insider licensor's optimal licensing strategy and contract under asymmetric information, in which only the licensee owns the cost information post licensing while the licensor has no such information. We obtain the following results. Firstly, the insider licensor may choose to license to only one type of licensee and use the pooling licensing strategy, regardless of the relative marginal cost of the licensee post licensing to that of the licensor. However, the separating licensing strategy can only be used when the marginal cost of the licensee, post licensing, is smaller than that of the licensor. Secondly, when the licensor chooses the pooling licensing strategy, it must adopt a royalty licensing contract and the royalty rate will be greater than the amount of the reduction in the less efficient licensee's marginal cost. Lastly, provided that the licensee's marginal cost post licensing is smaller than that of the licensor and that the licensor chooses to license to only one type of licensee or use the separating licensing strategy, the optimal licensing contract can be royalty, two-part tariff or fixed-fee licensing. The diversity of the optimal licensing contract derived in this paper is consistent with observations in the real world, and is sharply different from the conventional result in which royalty licensing is always superior to fixed-fee licensing for an insider licensor.起始頁-結束頁：639-674資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201712_45(4).00045篇名：How Does Overseas Activity Affect Parent Firm Employment in Newly Advanced Economies? Evidence from Taiwan並列篇名：海外生產活動對國內就業的影響：台灣的實證研究作者：黃珈卉(Chia-Hui Huang);Eric D. Ramstetter;楊志海(Chih-Hai Yang)關鍵字：foreign direct investment;employment;propensity score matching;對外直接投資;就業;傾向配對法期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study explores the effects of overseas activity on parent firm employment in Taiwan's listed firms during 2000-2005. Propensity score matching estimates of discrete effects suggest that employment growth did not differ significantly between new parent firms and firms with no overseas operations. Generalized method of moments' estimates of marginal effects for all firms indicate that a statistically significant and positive correlation exists between the size of overseas investment and parent employment after considering factors potentially influencing firm employment. However, this employment effect is negative for non-electronics parents with investment in China.英文摘要：本文探討海外直接投資對母國廠商就業的影響。利用台灣上市製造業公司2000－2005的資料，傾向評分配對的估計結果顯示，新進行海外投資與未進行海外投資廠商的員工數成長率並無顯著差異。以一般動差法對所有廠商進行估計則發現，直接海外投資對就業的邊際效果為正向顯著；但對於非電子業廠商，特別是投資中國的廠商，母廠員工數受到負向顯著的影響。起始頁-結束頁：391-419資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.453.16篇名：中央銀行溝通政策對台灣利率與匯率之影響並列篇名：The Communication Effect of the Central Bank of Taiwan on Interest Rates and Exchange Rates作者：康濟虹(Chi-Hung Kang);王泓仁(Hung-Jen Wang);陳南光(Nan-Kuang Chen)關鍵字：中央銀行;透明度;溝通政策;central bank;transparency;communication policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文將台灣央行溝通政策實施方式，以「央行理監事會後發布之新聞稿」及「央行官員在媒體上的發言」兩種不同角度做分類，在每一種分類中，細分出「貨幣政策」、「匯率政策」、「經濟前景」等至多三種溝通政策內容，並以計量模型估計它們對利率及匯率的影響。若溝通政策的內容能有效揭露資訊，則我們預期在新聞稿或媒體新聞發布的當日或隔日，將引起市場上利率或匯率的變動，且變動方向應與政策意涵一致。資料顯示，央行鮮少在理監事會議後的新聞稿中對匯率走勢做出明確宣示，但新聞媒體中有關央行官員發言的報導，內容多數與匯率相關。實證結果顯示央行與匯率相關的政策溝通，並不能顯著地影響匯率走勢，但是與貨幣政策相關的內容，則對於多種利率都具有合乎理論預期的影響。此結果顯示，央行的確能利用溝通政策，顯著影響國內貨幣市場的利率，但對匯率的影響，則較不顯著。英文摘要：This paper studies the communication policy of the central bank of Taiwan. We analyze the issue by categorizing the central bank's communication efforts into ”news releases after the Board of Governors' meetings” and ”talks of central bank's officials in the media.” We further decompose the communications into three sub-categories: monetary policy, exchange rate policy, and economic perspectives, to estimate their respective effects on interest rates and exchange rates. IF communication policy is effective in terms of revealing new information to the market, then we would expect to observe significant changes in interest rates or exchange rates on the day the news is released or one day after, and the changes should be consistent with what policy makers had intended. Data show that the central bank of Taiwan seldom clearly indicates the potential movement of exchange rates in news releases after the Board of Governors' meetings. Nevertheless, media reports suggest that officials frequently communicate with the market on exchange rate related issues. We also find that communications about exchange rates do not significantly affect the movement of the exchange rates, while most communications concerning monetary policy significantly affect various market interest rates.起始頁-結束頁：421-452資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.453.27篇名：台灣立委選制改革對現任者競選優勢之影響並列篇名：How Does the Change in the System of Legislative Elections Affect Incumbency Advantage in Taiwan?作者：佘健源(Chien-Yuan Sher)關鍵字：現任者優勢;單一選區相對多數決制;單記不可讓渡投票制;巢狀勝算對數模型;incumbency advantage;first-past-the-post voting;single non-transferable voting;nested logit model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：現任者優勢指的是現任議員在選舉中，因現任者的身份，而享有的競選優勢。我國自2008年起，立委選舉發生兩大變革，一是選制由過去的單記不可讓渡投票制改為小選區相對多數制，二是人數減半。因此變革，之後的現任者將能嚇阻高素質挑戰者的投入，及擁有更多資源從事選區服務，從而使其具備強大的競選優勢。本研究使用「台灣選舉與民主化調查」的面訪資料，以多層次巢狀勝算對數模型分析後發現，在2012年的立委選戰中，現任立委享有相當顯著地競選優勢，但此現象在2004年的選戰中卻不明顯。由於此現象對我國民主發展有不利影響，吾人宜及早因應。英文摘要：Incumbency advantage is the benefit of being an incumbent in an election. In 2008, the legislative electoral system in Taiwan was switched from single non-transferable voting to first-past-the-post voting. The number of seats was also halved from 225 to 113. After this change, incumbents were able to deter quality challengers from running, and they could also deploy more resources in constituency services than their predecessors. Therefore, incumbents in the 2012 legislative election should have more advantage than those in the 2004 election. The author used a survey data set from Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study. The empirical results indicated that being an incumbent could offer statistically significantly advantage in the 2012 election, but incumbency advantage was not statistically significant in the 2004 election. In light of the damage of incumbency advantage in the U.S. democracy, we should seriously consider measures to mitigate the damage.起始頁-結束頁：453-494資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.453.38篇名：招生賽局：研究所入學考試的撞期分析並列篇名：The Enrollment Game: Conflicting Entrance Examinations of Graduate Schools in Taiwan作者：高一誠(Yi-Cheng Kao);林健暉(Chien-Hui Lin)關鍵字：招生機制;日期決策競爭;頂尖大學;entrance mechanism of graduate schools;competition in time;top universities期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：國內研究所入學考試每年均發生撞期事件，若將學校分為頂尖大學、一般大學與技職院校等三類型，則實際資料顯示不同類型學校間考期有錯開的趨勢。本文針對此現象建構賽局模型加以解釋，發現當考試結果具有不確定性，出現能力最佳學生不一定考最高而程度最差學生不一定考最低之衡量誤差，則學生報考學校組合會有策略性考量。考期錯開現象是不同類型學校間競爭好學生的均衡結果。另外，當考試結果之不確定性隨時間增加，頂尖學校會提早考試以降低衡量誤差，來提高錄取能力最佳學生的機率。英文摘要：Concerning the entrance mechanism of graduate schools in Taiwan, the conflict of examination dates has been a crucial issue over the years. In particular, top, middle, and lower universities cluster their examinations during February, March, and April, respectively. In this paper, we developed a model to explain this phenomenon of diverging dates. The model shows that when the examination exhibits measurement error, i.e., the best (worst) student may not have the highest (lowest) testing scores, the phenomenon is an equilibrium among universities competing for better students. Specifically, when the measurement error increases, a top university will have an earlier examination to decrease the error and raise the probability of enrolling best students.起始頁-結束頁：495-513資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.453.49篇名：Purchasing Power Parity and Nonlinear Real Exchange Rate Adjustment: Evidence From High-Growth Countries並列篇名：購買力平價及實質匯率非線性調整：高成長國家之實證作者：陳鳳琴(Feng-Chin Chen)關鍵字：purchasing power parity;nonlinear unit root test;asymmetric;AESTAR test;high-growth countries;購買力平價;非線性單根檢定;非對稱;AESTAR 檢定;高成長國家期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study applies nonlinear KSS unit root test (Kapetanios, Shinb, and Snell, 2003) and an Asymmetric Exponential Smooth Transition Auto-Regressive (AESTAR) unit root test, proposed by Sollis (2009), to investigate the validity of long-run Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) for six high-growth countries. The empirical results indicate that PPP holds for five of the six high-growth countries studied, namely Brazil, China, Indonesia, Mexico and South Korea, using the KSS test. Furthermore, using Sollis (2009) AESTAR unit root test reveals that real appreciations in the value of the Indonesia Rupiah-U.S. and Korea Won-U.S. dollar exchange rate are slower to revert do the mean (nonlinearly) than depreciations of the same proportionate amount, and the adjustment toward PPP is found to be nonlinear and asymmetric. On the other hand, Brazil/USD, China/USD and Mexico/USD adjustments are found to be nonlinear and symmetric. The governments of these five countries can use PPP to determine whether a currency is overvalued or undervalued, as well as if the country is experiencing differences between domestic and foreign inflation rates. These results have important policy implications for the emerging high-growth economies in this study.英文摘要：本文利用非線性KSS 單根檢定及Sollis (2009) 提出的非對稱指數平滑移轉自我迴歸(簡稱AESTAR) 單根檢定，檢測六個高成長國家(巴西、中國、印尼、印度、墨西哥和南韓)在1990年1月至2012年7月間長期購買力平價是否成立。實證結果顯示，採用KSS 單根檢定，除了印度外，巴西、中國、印尼、墨西哥和南韓長期PPP 成立。進一步，利用Sollis (2009) 提出的AESTAR 單根檢定，結果發現，印尼盾和韓圜對美元購買力平價具非線性和非對稱特性，巴西、中國和墨西哥兌美元匯率則具非線性和對稱性質。印尼盾升值時修正至均衡值速度，較貶值時均數復歸速度緩慢;韓圜則是貶值時修正至均衡值速度，較升值時均數復歸速度緩慢。當國內外通膨率有所差異時，這五國政府可以利用購買力平價預測匯率是否過高或過低，此結果對新興成長國家財政政策決策者具有重要意涵。起始頁-結束頁：195-224資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.452.110篇名：計量與財務如何為司法討論違反證交法155條之股價操縱案開一扇窗並列篇名：How Can Econometrics and Finance be Used to Help Judges Identify Stock Manipulation作者：葉錦徽(Jin-Huei Yeh);張芸菁(Yun-Ching Chang);朱珊瑩(Shan-Ying Chu)關鍵字：股價操縱;意見不一致;效率市場假說;反操縱條款;stock price manipulation;difference of opinions;efficient market hypothesis;anti-manipulation clause期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以葉錦徽，林怡諄，與朱珊瑩(2015)的觀點延伸，嘗試回顧1990年至2010年之間以違反證交法155條業經一或二審裁定股票操縱的案例公司為研究樣本，揭露國內相關判決中所顯示法官對相關法條認定的歧異性: 相同事實可有相反判決、每個庭判決的不一樣、審級間經常大逆轉。專業審理判決的一致性對台灣的司法正義與司法之社會教育有重要的意義，而本文所呈現的方法為這個方向提供了一個可能性的初探。對金融或經濟犯罪的案件，本文雜揉專業的財經理論學理，並適當地搭配可以反映事實的資料導向計量分析，做為基礎論證案件。本文的方法可以便利地編制、重製與觀察個股股價，並定期發布做為偵測股價操縱的預警模式。此預警模式不但可以防範有心人的操弄、提升交易訊息透明度與降低資訊不對稱、保護資訊相對弱勢的股民，還可以讓法院與檢調體系對金融、經濟犯罪的審理、量刑多了一項科學工具。如此程序除了可形成對事實與法條認定一致的標準，也可凝聚司法判決實務運作的共識！英文摘要：Using the court-sentenced cases dealing with violations of the Anti-Manipulation Clause No. 155 in the Securities Exchange Act of the R.O.C. from 1990 to 2010 as our study sample, we find a variety of disagreement among the judgments, determinations and decisions of the courts at different levels. Such a vast difference of opinions among judges and the verdicts may lead to undesired controversies and disputes in society. It also brings up some implementation issues in the judicial and legal system. Our paper demonstrates that, with help from simple concepts from finance and modern econometrics tools, there is an objective data-driven fact-based approach to identify pump and dump manipulation. The proposed approach is easy to implement, hinges on stock prices only, and can be adaptively updated for ex post identification and ex ante early warning purposes. We believe such a scientific approach based on professional field knowledge has the potential to build up trust and fortify consensus among court judges and the public, thus strengthening the social capital of our society.起始頁-結束頁：225-298資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.452.211篇名：大租權土地制度之分析並列篇名：An Analysis on Ta-tsu Rights作者：吳聰敏(Tsong-Min Wu)關鍵字：財產權;大租;小租;property rights;ta-tsu right;hsiao-tsu right期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：清國統治時期，台灣盛行「一田兩主」制度，一塊土地同時有大租戶與小租戶兩位地主。文獻上普遍認為，在大小租制度下，土地所有權不明確。財產權制度是市場經濟的基礎，若大小租使財產權不明確，農民投資土地的誘因會下降。本文說明大租的起源，解釋台灣為何盛行大小租制度，並推論大租比率高的地區是台灣較早開發之地。本文的實証結果發現,至少在日治初期之前，大租權存在對於財產權之負面影響並不大，並對此一結果提出解釋。英文摘要：During Ch'ing rule, much of Taiwan’s land had two owners, ta-tsu (large rent right owners) and hsiao-tsu (small rent right owners). Property rights are essential for economic development, and it is often argued that a land with ta-tsu would be less well-protected. This study explains the origin of Taiwan’s ta-tsu rights system, and why it was widespread in Taiwan. We argue that an area with a larger ta-tsu ratio was cultivated earlier. Did the ta-tsu system have a negative effect on agricultural investment? Our analysis shows that the negative effect, if any, was relatively minor. We also propose an explanation for the result.起始頁-結束頁：299-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.452.312篇名：政府持股與規模對台灣銀行業風險及外部援助之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Government Ownership and Size on Bank Risk and External Support in Taiwan作者：黃玉麗(Yu-Li Huang);林昆立(Kun-Lin Lin);遲淑華(Shu-Hwa Chih)關鍵字：政府持股;銀行規模;銀行風險;信用評等;外部援助;government ownership;bank size;bank risk;credit rating;external support期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以2002至2012年間，獲得穆迪與惠譽信評公司給予評等的台灣銀行為研究對象。發現本國銀行獲得的銀行個別評等較差，而獲得的發行體評等相對較佳,顯示信評機構認為本國銀行的營運風險高，但違約風險不高。政府持股比率高的銀行，獲得較差的穆迪銀行財務強度評等及惠譽的銀行個別評等,表示信評機構將政府持股比率較高的銀行視為營運風險較高。當銀行規模愈小，信評機構視為違約風險較大，但大規模銀行則無論政府持股高低，不影響違約風險。信評機構評估銀行獲得外部援助的程度，將政府持股比率超過20%的大銀行視為出事時可以獲得較多的外部援助。英文摘要：This paper uses banks assigned ratings by Moody’s and Fitch from 2002 to 2012 as our sample and uses individual ratings as proxies for operational risk and issuer ratings as proxies for default risk. The results show banks in Taiwan obtain better individual ratings and worse issuer ratings, suggesting higher operational risk but lower default risk. Banks with higher government ownership obtain worse individual ratings, suggesting higher operational risk. Small banks face higher default risk and large banks have lower default risk no matter the ownership structure. Banks with more than 20% government ownership can obtain more external support.起始頁-結束頁：339-389資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.452.413篇名：Residential Real Estate in the U.S. Financial Crisis, the Great Recession, and their Aftermath並列篇名：住宅不動產市場：美國金融危機、大衰退及其後果作者：Stephen Malpezzi關鍵字：financial crisis;recession;leverage;housing price volatility;government policy;金融危機;經濟衰退;槓桿;房價波動;政府政策期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Circa 2007 through 2009, the United States experienced a financial crisis, and a recession, that by many measures was the largest adverse economic event the U.S. has experienced since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Furthermore, these events had large negative repercussions on other economies around the world. The Great Financial Crisis and Great Recession were complex, and scholars will be arguing over important details of their causes and effects for decades to come. This paper reviews a number of contributing elements, focusing especially on two fundamentals of the twin ”Greats:” excessive leverage, and excessive volatility in housing prices. The paper includes a package of 10 proposed reforms in real estate and financial markets that can mitigate the costs of future real estate-related downturns.英文摘要：大約從2007年至2009年，美國經歷了金融危機與經濟衰退，就諸多衡量標準而言，這是美國自1930年代大蕭條以來所經歷最嚴重的經濟倒退。同時，此事件對世界其他經濟體也造成巨大的負面影響。此次「大金融危機」與隨之而來的「大衰退」，其前因後果相當複雜，學者們對其原因和影響重要細節的爭論將會持續幾十年。本文回顧了一些可能的原因，特別著重過度槓桿和房價過度波動這兩個根本的因素。本文也提供關於房地產和金融市場的10項改革建議，可望減少未來與房地產市場相關的衰退所造成的成本。起始頁-結束頁：5-56資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.451.114篇名：資產證券化，房屋價格，與銀行貸放標準並列篇名：Securitization, House Prices, and Bank Lending Standards作者：江永裕(Yeong-Yuh Chiang);張興華(Hsing-Hua Chang);曾秉倫(Ping-Lun Tseng)關鍵字：資產證券化;房屋貸款;擴張信用;房屋價格;事前審核;securitization;mortgage;credit expansion;house prices;screening期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究建立一理論模型，在銀行利用證券化募集的資金於房屋貸款市場擴張信用的情況下，探討證券化與房屋價格的互動如何影響銀行事前審核技術的發展。若銀行比例出售貸款(loan sales)，均衡房屋價格的提高將減少清算房屋貸款的損失,降低銀行事前審核的誘因；若銀行保留權益層級(equity tranche)證券，出售債權層級(debttranche)證券，將增加清算抵押房貸的損失，提高銀行事前審核的誘因，同時隔絕房屋價格對事前審核誘因的影響。若資產證券化使銀行形成未來房屋價格上漲的預期，預期房屋價格上漲幅度愈大，清算房貸的損失愈小，會降低銀行發展事前審核技術的誘因。英文摘要：We develop a model in which banks raise funds through securitizing their mortgage assets and use the funds to expand credits in the mortgage market, resulting in appreciation in house prices. Houses are used as collateral in mortgage contracts. Appreciation in prices of houses affects banks' incentive to screen mortgage applications. How securitization affects banks' incentive depends upon the way banks sell their securities backed by mortgages. If banks sell a proportion of their securitized packages, an appreciation of house prices lowers losses from mortgage default, and thus decreases banks' incentives to screen. If banks retain the equity tranche and sell the debt tranche, losses from mortgage default reduce banks' profits and thus banks have more incentives to screen mortgage applicants. However, changes in house prices do not affect the banks' incentives to screen mortgage applicants. Furthermore, if credit expansion by securitization leads banks to expect house-price appreciation in the future, the higher the expected appreciation, the less the expected losses from mortgage default, and the lower the banks' screening incentives.起始頁-結束頁：57-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.451.215篇名：Housing Collateral Scarcity and Recessions: An Empirical Perspective並列篇名：房屋擔保品缺乏與景氣衰退：一個實證的分析作者：周有熙(Yu-Hsi Chou)關鍵字：housing collateral;recession;probit model;房屋擔保品;景氣衰退;累積常態機率函數模型期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：In this paper, we investigate the dynamic link between the scarcity of housing collateral and economic recessions in the US. First, we use vector error-correction models to identify negative transitory shocks to collateralizable housing wealth, which are used as proxies of housing collateral scarcity. We then use probit models and time-varying transition-probability Markov-switching autoregressive models to investigate how the housing collateral scarcity affects the probability of recession. Using several measures of housing wealth, we find that the probability of economic downturns increases when the housing collateral is scarce, and that an increase in housing collateral scarcity may push the economy from expansion to recession.英文摘要：本文以實證的方式研究美國時間序列資料中房屋擔保品缺乏度和景氣衰退的動態關係。我們先以向量誤差修正模型萃取對房屋財富的負向暫時性衝擊作為對房屋擔保品缺乏度的近似指標，再以累積常態機率函數模型和具有因時變動遞移機率的馬可夫轉換自我迴歸模型檢驗房屋擔保品缺乏度和景氣衰退機率之間的關聯性。以數種房地產財富資料的實證結果顯示，房屋擔保品缺乏度增加會提高經濟進入景氣衰退的機率，且可能將經濟體系由景氣擴張階段推入景氣衰退階段。起始頁-結束頁：125-161資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.451.316篇名：人口結構變遷對房價影響分析並列篇名：The Effects of Demographic Structure Change on Housing Prices作者：彭建文(Chien-Wen Peng);蔡怡純(I-Chun Tsai)關鍵字：生育率;扶老率;追蹤資料;共整合分析;fertility rate;dependency rate;panel data;cointegration test期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：45卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：扶養比是人口結構改變的重要指標，可反映生產人口的經濟壓力，以往許多文獻探討扶養比對儲蓄與財富累積的影響，但對於人口結構改變對房地產市場的影響鮮少討論。在台灣生育率持續下降的同時，人口也逐漸的老化，人口結構失衡已經衍生為台灣的重要國安問題。在此同時住宅需求卻無止盡的增加，也推升了國內的房價，究竟這樣的房價上升是否與人口結構變化有關? 長期而言，房價是否反映少子化與人口老化的影響? 本文的實證結果顯示房價分別與生育率和扶老率有長期的整合關係，房價會隨著生育率和扶老率變化，生育率增加會帶動房價的上升，扶老率增加則會降低房價，故當前日益嚴重的少子化與人口老化趨勢，可能會對未來房價產生負面衝擊。英文摘要：The dependency rate is an indicator of demographic structure that usually is used to measure the pressure on productive population. A high dependency ratio can cause serious problems for a country if a large proportion of a government’s expenditure is on health, social security and education, which are most used by the youngest and the oldest in a population. Many previous studies have found that the dependency rate was the main determinant of household saving or wealth accumulation. This study tries further to clarify whether demographic changes, especially the dependency rate, affects housing prices. The empirical results reveal that house prices are cointegrated with the fertility rate and old dependency rate, respectively. In the long run, an increase in the fertility rate increases house prices. However, an increase in the old dependency rate reduces house prices. The expected demographic change in 2015 is an important signal of housing price change.起始頁-結束頁：163-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.2017.451.401篇名：Factors Influencing Consumer-Brand Relationships from the Perspective of Online Brand Communities並列篇名：從線上品牌社群觀點探討消費者－品牌關係形成之影響因素作者：謝佩玲(Pei-Ling Hsieh)關鍵字：Online brand community;brand relationship marketing;value co-creation;線上品牌社群;品牌關係行銷;價值共創期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Although numerous studies have investigated the effect of consumer participation in online brand communities (OBCs) on establishing consumer-brand relationships, the understanding of this topic remains limited. By referencing theories on community and relationship marketing, information systems, and social psychology, we designed a model for examining the establishment of consumer-brand relationships from the perspective of OBC participants. On the basis of two surveys completed by 864 participants, we confirmed that switching costs, value co-creation, shared values, and opportunistic behaviors were critical factors that affected consumers when they established relationships with brands. In other words, these factors revealed close relationships among brand commitment, trust, and loyalty. This finding, the most crucial management and theoretical contribution of this study, verified the potential spillover effect of the virtual world into the real world. In addition, we propose recommendations for revising the marketing model regarding OBC-brand relationships. The results of this study can serve as a reference to companies as they strategically plan to strengthen consumer-brand relationships through OBCs.英文摘要：儘管文獻屢屢提及，然線上品牌社群參與過程對消費者－品牌關係形成之影響的探討，仍不完整。本文參考社群和關係行銷、資訊系統及社會心理的理論，以便從線上品牌社群參與者之角度，設計參與過程－品牌關係形成之模型。在兩項調查、864位參與者之基礎上，本研究顯示轉換成本、價值共創、分享價值及機會行為確實是參與者後續與品牌建立關係時的重要影響因素，亦即其將與品牌承諾、信任及忠誠產生緊密之關連性。此證實了虛擬世界對實體世界所可能產生之外溢效果，而這正是本研究最重要的管理和理論貢獻。同時，本研究也針對OBC－品牌之關係行銷模型提出修正建議。預計研究結果將能為擬透過線上品牌社群以深化消費者－品牌關係的廠商，提供策略思考之面向。起始頁-結束頁：117-145資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2017.19(2).012篇名：探討網路社群消費者共同生產行為：以線上遊戲為例並列篇名：The Antecedents and Consequences of Coproduction: An Empirical Validation of Online Games作者：李家瑩(Chia-Ying Li);鄭傑云(Chieh-Yun Cheng)關鍵字：消費者連結;產品連結;情境連結;共同生產;顧客忠誠度;Consumer link;product link;situational link;coproduction;customer loyalty期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：為了迎合消費者的需求，線上遊戲開發商逐漸開始透過線上公測，讓消費者共同參與遊戲內容的設計。過去研究對於影響消費者參與共同生產之成因及結果之因素相當有限，因此本研究主要從情境連結、消費者連結及產品連結等三種連結，探討消費者共同生產前置變數，更進一步探討顧客參與共同生產之因素及共同生產對於產品評價與顧客忠誠度之影響。本研究透過便利抽樣蒐集問卷，共回收有效問卷304份。結果顯示，消費者連結中的知覺控制、成就感及專業知識，產品連結中的有趣性，以及情境連結中的互動性與情感承諾會對共同生產有正向顯著影響，共同生產會進一步影響產品評價及行為忠誠度。此外，產品評價對於行為忠誠度也有顯著影響。英文摘要：As rapid development of the Internet, online games have mushroomed, and consumers have sufficient information to search for and choose online games, according to individual preferences. In order to satisfy consumers' need, online game companies have to provide high quality product with diverse contents. Besides, online game companies start to allow consumers to participate in the design of the game content. Past research related to the antecedents and consequences of consumer participation in coproduction is limited. However, the phenomenon of coproduction is crucial for online game companies and consumers. This study investigated the antecedents of coproduction from consumer link, product link, and situational link, and also explored the influence of consumer coproduction on product evaluation and customer loyalty. Sampling frame is online game players who have ever participated in public beta online game tests. By using a convenience sampling, a total of 304 copies were usable. The results indicated that perceived control, achievement and consumer expertise of consumer link, playfulness of product link, and interaction and affective commitment of situational link have positive influences on coproduction, which further affects product evaluation and loyalty. Besides, product evaluation has positive influences on the behavior loyalty.起始頁-結束頁：147-176資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2017.19(2).023篇名：A Secure and Efficient Receivables Finance Model in Supply Chain Finance Environment並列篇名：建構安全性暨高效率的帳款融資機制於供應鏈金融環境作者：蔡建華(Chien-Hua Tsai);蘇品長(Pin-Chang Su)關鍵字：Supply chain finance;receivables finance;elliptic curve cryptography;cybersecurity;供應鏈金融;帳款融資;橢圓曲線密碼體制;網路安全期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The use of information technology services has become increasingly popular with commercial applications over the past few years. Enterprises need to involve e-business activities in their business plans to enhance their competitiveness and realize the benefits in the increasingly competitive global economy. E-business not only has revolutionized the way companies conduct business, but also raises the relationship between buyers, supplier and their banks in the conduct of business processes. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) generally play a vital role of economic development, stability and prosperity in many countries. However, due to small size of firm and lack of market credibility for the SMEs as suppliers, it is a significant obstacle to obtain access to loans and financing from banks. For the sake of settling the matter, supply chain finance (SCF) yields a set of solutions that optimizes cash flow by allowing buyers to lengthen payment terms, while also providing bank finances to suppliers to get paid early throughout the supply chain. Moreover, in order to ensure the security of electronic services, an online collaborative platform in SCF has to provide a highly secure environment for transaction processing and information sharing between multiple parties. This paper presents an alternative scheme which uses elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) features to yield higher security and better performance for receivables finance in a SCF communication platform. Considering cybersecurity risks, we analyze the security scenarios and implement proper countermeasures against growing cyberthreats. Furthermore, our estimation results indicate that the proposed scheme can achieve excellent performance at significantly smaller parameters. With such an appropriate design, the scheme will certainly lead to more effective and efficient safeguards for SCF programmes.英文摘要：資訊科技在商業應用日益普及，企業必須以e化來強化競爭力，已是無可避免的趨勢。電子化企業正在全世界造成熱潮，不僅已徹底改變了企業經營模式，更強化了供應商與金融機構間的關係。弱勢的中小企業在世界各國經濟發展中扮演著重要的基石，卻因規模小、抵押品不足，導致融資取得不易。為了激活供應鏈的運轉，供應鏈金融（Supply chain finance, SCF）運用大企業的經濟規模優勢，解決中小企業融資不易的問題。本研究導入橢圓曲線密碼體制（Elliptic Curve Cryptography, ECC）技術，利用其快速運算和高困難度的特性，建構應用於供應鏈金融環境的帳款融資機制，除了能提昇帳款融資作業效率外，並能確保交易訊息及數位內容的安全，以營造一個安全有效率的電子化供應鏈金融環境。起始頁-結束頁：177-203資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2017.19(2).034篇名：行動排隊服務對消費者排隊心理影響之研究並列篇名：The Influences of Mobile Queuing Service on Consumers' Queuing Psychology作者：周至宏(Chih-Hung Chou);韓揚銘(Yang-Ming Han);邱建達(Jian-Ta Chiou);范錚強(C. K. Farn)關鍵字：時間知覺;網路口碑;從眾行為;社會比較心理;行動排隊服務App;Time perception;e word-of-mouth;conformity;social comparison;mobile queuing services app期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：過去排隊被消費者視為負面體驗，而現在需要排隊的店家反而被認為是受歡迎的象徵而讓消費者願意排隊。行動排隊服務App 在目前已成為消費者排隊消費的選項，本研究欲探討虛擬排隊如何影響消費者的排隊意願。本研究以時間知覺、從眾心理以及社會比較心理為理論基礎，以實驗研究法探討行動排隊服務如何能降低排隊的負面影響，並相對提供正向的影響。研究結果發現，「排隊方式」則會影響消費者的「時間知覺」進而影響「排隊意願」；「網路口碑」會影響消費者的「排隊意願」，而「排隊資訊」會調節「網路口碑」和「排隊意願」之間的關係；「從眾心理」與「社會比較心理」會影響消費者的「排隊意願」。最後，本研究提供學術上的意涵及實務上的建議。英文摘要：Queuing is a negative experience for most consumers and reduce their intention to consume. In real-life, a long waiting line outside a store may also affect consumers' perception, that is a popular one, and increase their consumed intention. As mobile technology mature, mobile queuing services App may be a good alternative to physical waiting lines. How does this virtual queuing influence queuing intentions? In addition, how do the influences of the e word-of-mouth and queuing information provided by the mobile queuing service App affect on consumers' conformity (or herding behavior) and queuing intention? This study attempts to look into the effects of consumers' conformity and social comparison in waiting lines, and also the consumers' waiting time perception. Through this laboratory experiment, we hope to find out ways to reduce consumers' negative experiences from waiting, and also provide positive influences. Results reveal that ”queuing method” can affect consumers' ”time perception”; and then influence their ”queuing intention”. ”e word-of-mouth” can also affect consumers' ”queuing intention”; and ”queuing information” moderate this relationship; Consumers' ”conformity” and ”social comparison” can affect their ”queuing intention”. Finally, this study offers implications and suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：205-238資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2017.19(2).045篇名：混合型資料集的K-means分群演算法並列篇名：A k-means Based Clustering Algorithm for Mixed-Attribute Data Sets作者：黃宇翔(Yeu-Shiang Huang);王品鈞(Ping-Chung Wang);方志強(Chih-Chiang Fang)關鍵字：叢集分析;k-means;順序屬性;距離量度;Clustering analysis;k-means;ordinal attribute;distance measure期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：叢集分析為資料探勘分群技術之一，由於目前網路環境快速發展，資料屬性的種類與數量大量增加，導致傳統分群技術執行的效能大幅降低，傳統k-means 分群方法將難以應付。因此後續的相關研究則是針對數值、類別、順序等屬性資料的處理作為研究的重點。本研究以Ahmad and Dey（2007）所提出k-means 之衡量距離定義為基礎，針對三種屬性同時存在的資料集做叢集分析，並以各自不同的衡量距離定義作為分群考量，提出基因演算法以求得最佳衡量指標最好之群心組合，希望能提供各界應用，解決因三種混合的資料屬性所造成分群困難的實務問題。英文摘要：Clustering is one of the most important analysis methods in data mining. In the wake of the fast development of networks technology, various types of data attribute and large numbers of data items cause the substantial inefficiency of data processing for clustering. Among different clustering approaches, partitioning clustering is relatively easier to implement and faster to perform than other ones. Different types of data attributes make clustering complicated. Most of literature focuses on numerical and categorical attributes or only ordinal attributes, respectively, but the results turn out to be less satisfactory in terms of accuracy and execution time. The proposed clustering approach, based on Ahmad and Dey (2007) k-means method, is advantageous in dealing with the three attributes: numerical, categorical and ordinal attributes simultaneously in which Euclidean distance is used to define the numerical similarity, the frequency of each value’s rank is used to indicate the categorical similarity, and the normalized distance is used to measure the ordinal similarity. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is evaluated by the use of an essential concept of clustering which is to minimize the ratio of the within cluster errors to the between cluster errors. A generic algorithm is also developed for reducing the execution time in dealing with the clustering of the three types of attributes at the same time. We hope the proposed method can provide a useful clustering technique for applications in practice.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2017.19(1).016篇名：新型態之電子投票機制設計並列篇名：New E-Voting Mechanism Design作者：蘇品長(Pin-Chang Su);葉昱宗(Yui-Chong Yeh)關鍵字：電子投票;代理盲簽章;多文件簽密法;E-voting;proxy blind signature;multi-document signcryption期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：網際網路的普及，改變了傳統的生活方式與行為模式，便利的同時也帶出了許多網路安全的課題。以應用於電子投票為例，已有許多國家致力於在電子投票發展，以降低傳統選舉所耗費之社會資源。安全評估一直是無法滿足的議題，因此，如何達到更具有效率且安全的防護設計，同時擁有代理的即時性與合乎匿名投票原則的機制為研究重點。本研究以植基於橢圓曲線密碼系統的快速運算為基礎，利用代理盲簽章的盲化特性與代理特性，提出多份電子選票執行一次簽密的方法，可增加密文破解難度，提升整體運算過程中的效率及安全的防護，此新型態設計更適用於未來多合一選舉之電子化投票機制參考。英文摘要：The popularity of Internet has altered the traditional way of life and behavioral patterns. Indeed, while the Internet has brought great convenience, it has also highlighted numerous issues for network security. Many countries are committed to the development of e-voting, which would help societies reduce the amount of resources allocated for traditional elections. However, most literatures exploring the signature mechanisms of electronic elections only address research and technology pertaining to the single voting scheme and single blind signature mechanism. Further, these electoral processes typically exploit only blind signature rather than encryption. This research focuses on the implementation of the Elliptic Curve Cryptosystem and its capacity to generate computations rapidly as its foundation. The properties of blind signature and proxy signature in proxy blind signature are engaged to facilitate the signcyrption of multiple ballots simultaneously. It further harnessed the avalanche effect in the design of encryption to increase the difficulty of deciphering ciphertext. In all, these designs, which enhance the overall efficiency and security of the e-voting system, would be applicable to an e-voting mechanism that features multiple and varied polls in the future.起始頁-結束頁：29-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2017.19(1).027篇名：以知識本體技術塑模會計知識之研究並列篇名：Using Ontological Technologies to Model Accounting Knowledge作者：周濟群(Chi-Chun Chou);周國華(Kuo-Hua Chou);戚玉樑(Yu-Liang Chi)關鍵字：會計;知識本體;知識工程;分類架構;正規語意;Accounting;ontology;knowledge engineering;taxonomy;formal semantics期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究利用本體（Ontology）技術發展一個知識庫系統，用於解決會計領域的專業問題，系統開發參考TOVE 程序，將會計知識建置為階層架構及正規語意描述的領域本體，實務問題則以任務本體表達。本研究以IFRS 和ROC GAAP 對長期工程合約之規範為例，探討會計處理、交易認列判斷條件上之異同，並以測試交易案例來驗證知識推論。主要設計包括：(1) 釐清議題的知識內涵；(2) 將通用知識建置為領域本體；(3) 將會計實務發展為任務本體；(4) 利用推論機制推導隱含性知識。簡言之，本研究以本體為方法論、OWL 為知識表達語言、Protege 為本體開發的工具。由實驗結果顯示：本研究已初步實現會計知識轉移至資訊系統，達成知識再利用的目標，研究成果將可提供未來建置智慧化會計系統的參考。英文摘要：This study utilizes ontological techniques to develop a knowledge model and a knowledge base system for the domain of accounting profession. It uses TOVE (TOronto virtual enterprise) to develop an accounting domain taxonomy and formal semantics for the expression of the content knowledge. The ”long-term construction contract” defined in IFRS and ROC GAAP is a case example for demonstrating the consistencies and differences in accounting processing and transaction recognition. The research design includes: (1) clarifying the knowledge content; (2) building a domain ontology based on general-purpose knowledge; (3) creating a task ontology based on a goal-oriented and problem-solving knowledge; and (4) using inference mechanisms to obtain implicit knowledge. In short, this study uses ontology as the methodology, OWL as the language of knowledge representation, and Protege as the editing tool for developing ontology. The experiment results show that the knowledge classification and integration developed in this study have preliminarily achieved the objectives of human-machine knowledge transfer, domain knowledge sharing and reuse. The results of this study also can provide reference for building next generation accounting systems.起始頁-結束頁：51-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2017.19(1).038篇名：負面在線評論和商家反饋對消費者購買意願的影響研究並列篇名：The Effects of Negative Online Reviews and Seller's Feedback on Consumer Purchase Intention作者：劉夢曉(Meng-Xiao Liu)關鍵字：負面在線評論;商家反饋;購買意願;產品涉入度;信任傾向;Negative online reviews;seller's feedback;purchase intention;product involvement;trust propensity期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著網絡購物的蓬勃發展，在線評論，尤其是負面在線評論，已經成為影響產品銷量的關鍵因素。因此，越來越多的網絡商家開始進行在線反饋，以期減少負面在線評論對消費者的影響。本研究通過對12 種虛擬情景下248 份有效問卷的數據進行方差分析和多元回歸分析，得到負面在線評論和商家反饋對消費者購買意願的影響模式，並討論了消費者的不同產品涉入度和信任傾向對這種影響的調節作用。結果表明：負面在線評論數量占比和負面在線評論質量負向影響消費者購買意願；商家反饋對消費者購買意願有正向影響；產品涉入度和信任傾向部分調節商家反饋對消費者購買意願的影響過程。英文摘要：With the rapid development of online shopping, online review, especially the negative online review, has become a key factor for product sales. As such, more and more online sellers choose to reply online, hoping for less effect of negative online reviews on potential consumers. Through variance analysis and multiple regression analysis based on 248 valid questionnaires which are distributed to 12 purchase scenarios, this study analyzes the effect model of negative online reviews and seller's feedback on consumer purchase intention, and discusses the moderating role of consumer product involvement and trust propensity. The results indicate that the proportion and quality of negative online reviews influence consumer purchase intention negatively. Seller's feedback has a positive impact on consumer purchase intention. Moreover, product involvement and trust propensity partially moderate the effect of seller's feedback on consumer purchase intention.起始頁-結束頁：83-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.2017.19(1).0401篇名：複合商業模式創新：網路視頻服務的跨域經營機制並列篇名：Hybrid Business Model Innovation: The Cross-Boundary Mechanism for Over-the-Top Organizations作者：歐素華(Su-Hua Ou);蘇慧慈(Hui-Tzu Su)關鍵字：複合商業模式;使用者需求;跨域創新;網路視頻服務;互動設計;Hybrid Business Model;User-Centric Innovation;Cross-Boundary Innovation;OTT Service;Interaction Design期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：網路視頻服務正透過網際網路與數位科技衝擊傳統電視台的經營模式。本研究以兩大視頻媒體網飛與愛奇藝為調查個案，探索在自製內容成本高漲、多元端口建置複雜、會員經營不易下，網路視頻服務業者如何由使用者需求出發，發展跨域複合機制。網飛「以會員為主，串媒體需求為輔」，建立「中央廚房制」的跨國經營機制，並綁定各地硬體端口廠商，滿足會員的移動需求，創造水平式複合的服務價值。愛奇藝則是「以會員為主，多重身分需求為輔」，建立「產銷一條龍」的垂直複合機制，從藝人經紀、電子商務、到圓夢計畫等，滿足會員在粉絲、購物、與圓夢身分的多重需求。在理論貢獻上，本研究由使用者的內容需求、互動需求與跨域需求，分析複合商業模式形塑過程，水平與垂直的系統性複合較過去單純的開放商模更具系統觀。在實務貢獻上，本研究提出在網路視頻時代，創新者應由使用者需求出發，重新建構與同業間的競合關係，與電信業者間的依存關係，以及與上下游業者的鏈合關係，從而有全新的跨域經營之道。英文摘要：The over-the-top (OTT) service model is out-competing traditional television business models and ushering in a new paradigm for the digital media industry. This study investigated two outstanding business models in the OTT industry, namely those of Netflix and iQIYI. The results revealed that both of these services have innovated their business models by systematically fulfilling user demands. Netflix and iQIYI do not rely only on membership fees to cover production costs and information technology (IT) investment; instead, by satisfying users' content, interaction, and cross-boundary service demands, these services have appropriately used content and media innovation to develop specific business models. Netflix applies a horizontal integration approach and establishes ”effectual” hybrid models. It produces high-quality content and cooperates with local suppliers to embed its service into various video devices. By contrast, iQIYI applies a vertical integration approach and establishes ”multiplication” hybrid models. Through artisan selection, incubation, and brokering, iQIYI has established vertical business models and earned profit from agencies, fan clubs, and e-commerce sources. This paper provides theoretical contributions based on hybrid and open business models and highlights the relevance of synergy creation for systematic vertical and horizontal integration. OTT services can establish idiosyncratic hybrid business models only by using a systematic approach. This paper also contributes to the Internet+ concept in terms of three perspectives. For cable TV, OTT content (and thus Internet+) provides new cooperation opportunities. For telecommunications companies, OTT content (and thus Internet+) can generate mutual interdependency. For key stakeholders in the OTT industrial supply chain, Internet+ can offer an opportunity for systematic integration.起始頁-結束頁：1-15資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.4.CNI.0012篇名：物聯網創新創業的構框競賽並列篇名：Framing Contest of Innovation and Entrepreneurship in the Internet of Things作者：簡琬莉(Wan-Li Chien);李傳楷(Chuan-Kai Lee)關鍵字：產業架構;構框競賽;物聯網;Industry Architecture;Framing Contest;Internet of Things期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：新產業架構(industry architecture)的形成通常會歷經激烈的角力過程，不同的陣營爭奪著新產業的話語權，進行著一場圍繞著產業架構的構框競賽(framing contest)。本文以方興未艾的物聯網(Internet of Things)為例，以Cisco和Google分別作為傳統資通訊產業及新興網際網路產業的代表，探討他們如何透過構框，來影響並形塑物聯網的產業架構。透過質性研究的編碼過程，本文將新產業架構的構框收斂為願景(envisioning)、整軍(roadmapping)、誓師(alleging)、及對戰(campaigning)等四個階段，分析構框者如何考量自身的能力，進行內部跨部門資源整合和組織重整；再廣邀技術社群參與技術突破；最後與市場領導者共同構框，執行市場型先導計畫，來打造符合自己利益的新產業架構。在無法單打獨鬥致勝的物聯網時代，這些發現或可提供台灣企業結盟時的參考。英文摘要：The formation of new industry architectures does not typically occur without contention; instead, it occurs through intense combative processes. The industry takes on the form of a battleground, with different camps competing for the power of discourse to frame the new industry and define its rules. Thus, establishing an industry architecture based on vision and strategies is called a framing contest. In this paper, the emerging Internet of Things (IoT) industry is used an example. Within this industry, Cisco and Google are the two main framers. Cisco leads the traditional communications industry and Google leads the Internet industry. Through the encoding process of qualitative research, we explored how both companies act as active framers to influence and shape the network of industry architectures. We organized the framing process of new industry architectures into four stages: envisioning, roadmapping, alleging, and campaigning. Based on these stages, we analyzed how the framers rebuilt their ability to perform internal cross-department resource integration and reorganization. We then invited a technical community to participate in technological breakthroughs. Finally, they framed the market leaders together to assist them in implementing market-oriented pilot programs and pursuing their own interests in framing the new industry architecture. In the era of the IoT, a company cannot fight and win without help. These findings may serve as a reference on forming an alliance for Taiwanese enterprises.起始頁-結束頁：17-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.4.CNI.0173篇名：以創新擴散及創新抵制理論檢視共享經濟信任機制並列篇名：Analyzing the Trust Mechanism of the Sharing Economy Based on Innovation Diffusion Theory and Innovation Resistance Theory作者：黃柏欽(Pai-Chin Huang);侯傑智(Chieh-Chih Hou);陳家祥(Ja-Shen Chen)關鍵字：創新擴散理論;創新抵制理論;共享經濟;信任機制;Innovation Diffusion Theory;Innovation Resistance Theory;Sharing Economy;Trust Mechanism期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：共享經濟在互聯網中，讓任何閒置資源都能出租，不論是技能、空間或是物質資產，任何被認為有價值之資產皆可進行交易。本研究提出運用創新擴散理論，解釋共享經濟是如何滲透與擴散進入我們的生活；運用創新抵制理論解釋，如何透過評價機制讓人們降低風險，才有可能接受共享經濟，進而停止抵制；以社會交換理論，來探討人們互相提供報酬，形成共享經濟之信任機制。以四個閒置空間型態之個案公司，應用本研究之理論機制，建構共享經濟中的創新擴散、減少抵制與增加信任，當人們的互信涉及其中時，使得共享經濟效應，藉由互聯網科技的力量，將人們凝聚在一起，讓世界各地的人彼此互相推薦與互信，進而產生價值。英文摘要：In the modern Internet sharing economy, any idle resources can be rented out. Skills, spaces, physical assets, and other assets can all be traded. This study employed innovation diffusion theory to explain how the sharing economy permeates and spreads into people’s lives. Innovation resistance theory was used to explain how rating mechanisms reduce risks for people participating in the sharing economy. Subsequently, this study referred to social exchange theory to investigate how people offer rewards to one another to form the trust mechanism required for the sharing economy. This study performed a case analysis on four firms providing four types of idle spaces. The theoretical mechanisms developed in this study were applied to establish a model of innovation diffusion in the sharing economy that reduces resistance and enhances trust. When mutual trust is established among people, the effects of the sharing economy can connect and cohere people through the power of Internet technologies, thereby facilitating the spread of mutual recommendations and trust among people worldwide, and thus creating value.起始頁-結束頁：39-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.4.CNI.0394篇名：農業供應鏈金融之安全認證機制並列篇名：Secure Authentication Scheme for an Agricultural Supply Chain Finance Environment作者：蔡建華(Chien-Hua Tsai);洪崇文(Chung-Wen Hung);蘇品長(Pin-Chang Su)關鍵字：供應鏈金融;融資平台;橢圓曲線密碼體制;網路世界;Supply Chain Finance;Financing Platform;Elliptic Curve Cryptography;Cyberspace期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著資訊科技與網際網路的迅速發展，促使金融領域產生許多創新的應用，在此波金融科技衝擊之下，供應鏈金融(Supply Chain Finance, SCF)的興起就是其中之一，為了加強對供應鏈金融發展，各國均積極提出許多相關輔導措施，例如，墨西哥、中國大陸及台灣。相同於製造業與服務業，農業生產亦非常適合以此架構來推動融資平台(Financing Platform)，然而目前本國農產業尚未具完整的供應鏈管理系統與交易身分驗證機制，將會形成農業供應鏈金融推動的障礙，因此本研究導入橢圓曲線密碼體制(Elliptic Curve Cryptography, ECC)技術，建構創新應用於農業供應鏈金融平台的認證機制。本方法具有以較短金鑰長度達到相同之安全強度外，另透過電子支付協定，保障金融交易的公平及安全性，除了能提昇融資作業效率外，並能於網路世界(Cyberspace)確保交易訊息及傳輸內容的完整，以營造一個高安全暨有效率的農業電子化供應鏈金融環境。英文摘要：The rapid development of information technology and popularization of the Internet have driven many innovative applications in the finance sector. The adoption of supply chain finance (SCF) is an example of this new wave of innovations in financial technology. SCF yields a set of solutions that optimizes cash flow by enabling large buyers to lengthen payment terms while providing bank finances to small and medium-sized enterprises, thereby enabling them to receive early payments throughout the leverage connection. To strengthen the development of SCF programs, major national governments have adopted a succession of control measures, such as the Ocean Garden finance program in Mexico, the Alibaba-Suning, the JD.com China-based SCF solutions, and the Hon Hai/Foxconn Technology Group’s SCF platform in Taiwan. According to the model that has revolutionized manufacturing and services, promoting this financing platform for agricultural production is also appropriate. This technology-based platform is an interoperable infrastructure that systematizes the execution of an agricultural SCF process, thereby bringing agricultural financing to agricultural productive cooperatives, farmer households, and financial institutions as an effectively automated financial management solution. Additionally, an online collaborative platform in agricultural SCF must provide a highly secure environment for transaction processing and information sharing between multiple parties. Accordingly, this paper presents a novel scheme that uses elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) features to offer high security and reliable performance and enable the use of innovative financing mechanisms in an agricultural SCF communication platform. By considering malicious activities in cyberspace, we analyzed security scenarios and implemented proper countermeasures against growing cyber threats. Furthermore, our estimation results indicated that the proposed scheme can achieve excellent performance with extremely small parameters. With such an appropriate design, the scheme will likely lead to more effective and efficient safeguards for the agricultural SCF program.起始頁-結束頁：55-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.4.CNI.0555篇名：知識密集型服務業的創新保護－以資訊服務業為例並列篇名：Innovation Protection in Knowledge-Intensive Business Services: The Case Study of IT Services作者：陳旻男(Min-Nan Chen);張元杰(Yuan-Chieh Chang);孫禎罄(Chen-Ching Sun)關鍵字：知識密集型服務業;創新保護;資訊服務業;Knowledge-Intensive Business Services (KIBS);Innovation Protection;IT-Service Firms期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究旨在探討知識密集型服務業的創新保護模式，透過延伸Howells et al. (2003)知識統理架構，增加知識種類的觀點提出三種專業知識：產品知識、管理知識與顧客知識；並將創新保護機制區分成正式化與非正式化機制，用以建構知識密集型服務業的創新保護模式。本研究以三家資訊服務業為實證對象：精誠資訊、訊連科技與趨勢科技，採用質性紮根的比較個案研究法進行文本編碼與質性型態配飾分析。研究結果指出三家資訊服務個案公司有相似的創新保護型態，管理知識與顧客知識創新保護的累積有助於產品知識保護的形成；此外個案公司多會採用混合創新保護機制，結合正式化與非正式化機制混合使用。本研究歸納出五項理論性命題，提供具體混合創新保護作法，其結果可提供知識密集型服務業創新保護理論貢獻與實務參考。英文摘要：This study examined how innovations in knowledge-intensive business services can be protected. On the basis of the extension of the knowledge regime framework proposed by Howells et al. (2003), a qualitative research was conducted to construct appropriability modes for IT service firms by emphasizing three types of knowledge (product, management, and customer) and two forms of appropriability (formal and informal). We purposefully selected three cases by using the grounded comparative approach and conducted text analysis by utilizing a pattern-matching technique. The results revealed that these three IT service firms have homogeneous patterns that form appropriability modes of product knowledge, and that they conduct mixed appropriability strategies to protect their innovations through a combination of formal and informal methods. We propose five theoretical propositions that offer insightful implications regarding the mixed usage of appropriability modes and outline some of the theoretical and managerial contributions of this study.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.3.CNI.0016篇名：集團國際化、家族控制與新股折價關聯之探討並列篇名：Business Group Internationalization, Family Control and IPO Underpricing作者：謝存瑞(Tsun-Jui Hsieh);陳俞如(Yu-Ju Chen);蔡學章(Hsueh-Chang Tsai)關鍵字：集團企業;國際化;家族控制;新股折價;Business Group;Internationalization;Family Control;IPO Underpricing期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究主要在探討集團的國際化程度對分子企業在初次上市時折價幅度之影響，集團國際化的衡量包含了集團海外資產比例、集團海外營收比例和集團海外子公司數。本文以2001年到2010年屬於集團之IPO公司(IPO: initial public offering)為研究樣本，結果發現，當採用集團海外資產的比例和集團海外營收比例來衡量國際化，集團國際化程度愈高，分子企業初次上市時的折價幅度會愈大，在集團海外營收比例的衡量中，國際化程度愈高使得折價幅度愈大的現象在家族集團控制的企業更為明顯。由於國際化加重分子企業經營上的代理衝突和經營風險，使得投資者對分子企業在初次上市時會要求較高的補償，造成較大的折價。此外本文也同時發現，隨著集團所有權愈高，集團和分子企業的經營目標愈一致，可降低分子企業因集團國際化所增加的新股折價幅度。英文摘要：This research aims to investigate the impacts of business group internationalization on the underpricing of IPO firms affiliated to business groups. Business group internationalization considers aspects from group foreign assets, group foreign sales and foreign subsidiaries. This study selects sample from IPO firms affiliated to business groups ranging from 2001 to 2010. The results showed that IPO firms with higher degree of group internationalization will have greater degree of IPO underpricing. Group internationalization has pronounced impact on IPO underpricing when group internationalization was measured by foreign sales. Group internationalization worsens companies’ agency problems and operating risks, which leads to greater IPO underpricing due to investors expecting premiums. Furthermore, our study finds that higher group ownership will enhance the goal alignment between groups and their affiliated firms, reducing the degree of IPO underpricing arising from group internationalization. This study contributes to the current literature in the areas of international business, family business and financial accounting.起始頁-結束頁：21-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.3.CNI.0217篇名：社群經濟下之行動社群廣告、口碑順序與情緒關係研究並列篇名：Socialnomics: The Relationships between Mobile Social Advertising, Word-of-Mouth (WOM) Order, and Emotion作者：林郁翔(Yu-Hsiang Lin)關鍵字：互聯網+;社群經濟;行動社群廣告;口碑順序;情緒;Internet+;Socialnomics;Mobile Social Advertising;Word-of-Mouth Order;Emotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：行動社群已成為互聯網+企業不可或缺之重要工具。然而，由於消費者常暴露於廣告和正反口碑充斥的行動社群環境中，當廣告搭配先正面後負面口碑呈現順序時，抑或搭配先負面後正面口碑呈現順序時，對消費者情緒之影響為何仍未得知。此亦為過去探討單一訊息論點對情緒影響之層級效果模式所無法解釋。本研究應用「初始—新近」效果，探討行動社群廣告和不同正負面口碑順序對消費者情緒之交互影響效果。主要結果顯示，瀏覽同理心行動廣告會誘發初始效果發生，進而使前端的正或負面口碑對消費者情緒產生較大影響，其中又以先正後負面口碑順序對正面情緒的影響最大。反之，瀏覽刺激性行動廣告會誘發新近效果發生，進而使後端的正或負面口碑對情緒產生較大影響，其中又以先正後負面口碑順序對負面情緒的影響最大。額外檢驗發現，正面情緒與購買意願呈倒U字型關聯。英文摘要：Mobile social media has become an indispensable tool for Internet+ businesses. However, consumers are often exposed to the environment of mobile social media through advertisements that are full of positive and negative word-of-mouth (WOM) content. The influence of advertising combined with a positive-negative WOM order (or vice versa) on consumer emotions is poorly explained by the current ”impact of a single message” argument through the hierarchy-of-effects model. Therefore, this study utilized the primacy-recency effect theory to examine the interactive effects of social advertising and different WOM orders on consumer emotions in mobile social media. Our main findings revealed that consumers who view empathetic content social advertising are mainly affected by the primacy effect, indicating that early positive or negative WOM content has a higher effect on consumer emotions. This effect also allows for a positive-negative WOM order to have a larger impact on the positive emotions of consumers. By contrast, consumers who view stimulating content social advertising are mainly affected by the recency effect, indicating that the later positive or negative WOM content has a larger impact on consumer emotions; this effect also allows for a positive- negative WOM order to have a larger impact on the negative emotions of consumers. Further examination revealed that consumers’ positive emotions have an inverted-U effect on purchasing intention.起始頁-結束頁：43-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.3.CNI.0438篇名：社群媒體分析：代言人類型與廣告訴求對顧客參與成效之影響並列篇名：Social Media Analytics: The Effects of Endorsers and Advertising Appeals on Customer Engagement作者：劉秀雯(Hsiu-Wen Liu);林育理(Yu-Li Lin);吳芳軒(Fang-Hsuan Wu)關鍵字：品牌社群;顧客參與;代言人類型;廣告訴求;Brand Community;Customer Engagement;Endorser Type;Advertising Appeals期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：社群媒體的發展使企業可直接與顧客在社群媒體上進行互動，因此業者更加關心品牌的訊息能否引起顧客在社群媒體上的參與行為。在此動機下，本研究乃針對台灣美妝品牌粉絲專頁中產品介紹之廣告訊息進行分析，探討不同類型代言人(名人、專家、KOL/部落客、素人)、以及不同的廣告訴求(理性、感性)對於顧客參與行為之影響。本研究根據台灣地區美妝產業之粉絲專頁粉絲人數排序，從歐洲、美國、日本、韓國以及台灣的品牌來源國中，各選出2個美妝品牌 的粉絲專頁為研究對象，總共蒐集1,230則貼文。研究結果顯示：(1)不同的代言人類型確實影響粉絲專頁顧客參與行為，其中以名人代言人效果較佳。(2)代言人類型對於理性、感性訴求對顧客參與行為存在干擾效果。英文摘要：Managers are concerned about their ability to foster customer engagement on social media. This concern motivated us to examine the combinations of message content that induce customer engagement on Facebook pages. Messages in product introduction posts were analyzed to explore the effects of different types of endorsers (e.g., celebrities, experts, key opinion leaders, bloggers, and ordinary persons) and advertising appeal (e.g., rational and emotional appeal) on customer engagement. We also investigated whether the effects of advertising appeal are moderated by different types of endorsers. On the basis of the number of fans that follow their Facebook pages, ten cosmetics brands available in Taiwan were selected for analysis. Media content regarding product introductions were selected as the target sample, and 1,230 message posts were collected for analysis. Our results suggest that marketers should tailor their messages according to different endorser categories.起始頁-結束頁：69-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.3.CNI.0699篇名：趣吧－網路共享旅遊平台並列篇名：Tripbaa-Online Sharing Travel Platform作者：王耀德(Wang, Yao-Ter Owen);蔡瑞煌(Rua-Huan Tsaih)關鍵字：共享經濟;電子商務;銷售分潤;損益兩平點;Sharing Economy;E-Commerce;Sales Profit-Splitting;Break-Even point期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：趣吧電子商務平台媒合旅遊達人與消費者，讓自由行遊客能夠透過平台接觸到達人所提供的各種遊程。趣吧自2015年營運之初，營業額成長緩慢，在經過調整行銷策略之後，於2016年時已有明顯增長，但是整體獲利表現仍不佳，故趣吧需要構思還能夠再增加獲利的方式。本個案以趣吧為例，用以呈現許多共享經濟平台在營運時難以獲利的問題，平台不容易獲利之主因，常與分潤機制的設計不佳有關。透過分析趣吧現有的分潤機制，並進行計算來討論趣吧與達人之間應採用何種分潤機制，可使趣吧加速獲利突破損益兩平並且持續營運。透過重新設計的分潤機制，找出讓達人與趣吧都可以接受的方式，使雙方能夠共享合理分潤得到雙贏，亦能提早達到公司所預定的損益兩平之目標。英文摘要：The e-commerce platform of Tripbaa is run in the form of sharing economy with the mission to create a match between the travel experts (”Daren”) and the consumers, so that individual tourists from home and abroad are given chance to learn about various tours through this platform, and make such purchases in advance before reaching their destinations. In the initial stage of Tripbaa’s operation in 2015, its business volume and the number of tour participants grow slowly. After making adjustments in the marketing strategies, the year 2016 has seen obvious growth both in the business volume and the number of tour participants. In spite of this relatively fast growth since 2015, the overall profit-making performance is still no good. As a result, Tripbaa needs to think about ways to make better profits after the mentioned adjustments in marketing strategies and growth in the turnover. We take Tripbaa as an exemplary case, to represent some problems of profit-making difficulties for many sharing economy platforms. The revenue of the sharing economy platforms comes primarily from the profit split with the platforms’ service providers, or from the service charge. Therefore the main reason behind the difficulties in making profit of such platform is frequently related to poorly designed profit-sharing mechanism. After an analysis of the current profit-sharing mechanism and relevant calculations, we’ve discussed about the reasonableness of the profit-sharing method between Tripbaa and the ”experts” on current conditions. We have also figured out what profit-sharing mechanism we can adopt to have Tripbaa make fast profits and break even for sustainable operation. Through newly designed profit-sharing mechanism, we can provide a choice accepted by both sides, who can mutually enjoy reasonable profits in a win-win situation. For the platform operators, the expected objective to break even can be reached ahead of schedule.起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.CNI.00110篇名：承億文旅：設計思考家的創新三箭與挑戰並列篇名：Hotelday+: Three Types of Innovation Strategy and Challenges in Design Thinking作者：陳俊良(Chun-Liang Chen);林耀欽(Yao-Chin Lin)關鍵字：設計思考;五感體驗設計;設計創新;文創旅店;資通訊科技;Design Thinking;Sensory Experiential Design;Design Innovation;Cultural Creative Hotel;Information and Communication Technology (ICT)期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：文創旅店在面度高度競爭的旅館經營業，如何擴張既有的市場佔有率與提升客戶間的情感連結，讓服務不再只是強調品質，進而滿足顧客的需求，是目前旅宿業者面臨的重要課題。承億文旅經營策略以「在地文化風物體驗」為本，蘊含著在地風物與細入人心的情感，創造一個嶄新定位的「旅人他方歸屬」體驗空間。在公司領導人倡導設計思維下，公司內部主管主動提出創意構想方案，希望透過同理心以資通訊互動設計住房系統，讓旅客可以選擇並入住自己所設計的房型，從而吸引年輕新客群的入住，創造美好的顧客體驗；同時也希望透過資通訊科技連結在地的工藝家與藝術家等，以設計創新帶動地方的共生與共榮。但是設計思考家戴俊郎董事長陷入融入科技應用的五感體驗設計創意構想方案是否要投資與執行的決策兩難，一方面他必須支持同仁以設計思維解決問題與強調情感連結的努力，但又必須面對理性分析經營績效的總經理建言。當設計思考的感性分析遇上事業經營的理性分析思考，他應該如何進行策略思考與決策？才能克服面對設計創意與營運效率的衝突與挑戰。英文摘要：Hotel operators are facing the question of how to expand on existing market share and deliver satisfying customer service in an intensely competitive industry. As service innovation can be easily imitated by other operators, hotels must develop emotional experiences that not only meet customer requirements but are also novel and unique. The business strategy of the HotelDay+ chain is built on integrating local cultural features into guest experience. With its beautiful design and personal service, the facility has succeeded in tempting a growing number of people to indulge in light travel oriented around nature and culture. HotelDay+ President Dai has emphasized that the integration of ICT with design innovation must be considered from design thinking and emotional value. HotelDay+ will develop an interactive accommodation system that allows guests to book customized rooms for their stay, choosing elements such as the bedroom furniture, decorations, and refreshments. The ICT service deployment will also link company information systems with upstream suppliers and local craftsmen, thereby creating differentiated, innovative services. In this case, the design thinker President Dai was faced with a difficult choice when deciding to launch the creative ICT innovation project: whether to continue with profitable emotional services or to develop new ICT services despite their unfamiliarity.起始頁-結束頁：17-18資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.CNI.01711篇名：京東到家－O2O生活服務平台並列篇名：Jingdong to Home-O2O Life Service Platform作者：陳菡(Han Chen)關鍵字：O2O電子商務模式;共用經濟;營運流程管理;損益平衡;O2O E-commerce Model;Sharing Economy;Business Process Management;Break-Even Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文為圖書館個案。主要探討自2005年「懶人經濟」在大陸興起以來，越來越多的供需商機從 大宗行業逐步轉移到零售行業的小商品上，並顯現出迅速地上升的趨勢。隨著網際網路技術與共用經濟的蓬勃發展，結合急劇增長的零售行業供需商機，京東集團發現了大陸O2O平台的價值，並將其開發<U+7232>「京東到家」O2O移動端應用，為LBS移動定位處3公里內消費群體提供生活用品服務。本個案需要解決的問題為京東到家自2015年上線以來虧損的主要原因。個案本文將對京東到家之O2O電子商務模式在大陸環境下的創新營運流程，以及運營之財務數據進行整理和描述，並在教學手冊部分對京東到家營運流程和財務績效進行分析和計算，解決京東到家目前虧損的主要原因不是營運模式的問題，而是他承擔全部眾包物流的巨額費用使其入不敷出。最後，教學手冊中還會針對京東到家虧損原因，進行討論和給予建議性解決方案，探討達到損益兩平可行的方案。本個案之主要教學目標是訓練學生系統分析能力和財務績效估算能力，讓學生學會在研讀個案本文後可以自行繪製京東到家營運流程圖，清晰地分析營運流程中不合理的業務流向。同時也會讓學生學習到，如何估算京東到家財務績效，以及如何適當調整公司運營規劃，提出解決方案，幫助公司扭虧為盈，得以更好的發展。英文摘要：Since 2005, the rise of ”Lazy Economy” in the mainland China caught focuses, and recent more and more business opportunities in supply and demand gradually shifted from large industry to the retail industry, commodity, showing rapidly rising trend. With the dramatic development of Internet technology and the ”Sharing Economy”, combined with the rapid growth of the retail industry supply and demand opportunities, Jingdong Group discovered the value of mainland China O2O platform, as soon as established as ”Jingdong to Home” - the O2O mobile client application. ”JD to Home” is given functions from LBS mobile positioning to provide goods and services that are living within 3-km. The case will consolidate and describe how this innovative O2O e-commerce business process and financial structure operate in the environment of the mainland China, and will analyse and address that the main problem of financial loss is responsible for the huge cost of logistics fees by Jingdong to Home, not the operation mode of O2O platform. At last, will discuss suggested solutions for current status of the Jingdong to Home to reach the break-even or explore the profits in the teaching manual of this case. The teaching aims of the case are training students abilities to analyse systematic process by learning flow-charting, as a result of indicating unreasonable business flow belong to working process clearly; and estimate the financial performance of Jingdong to Home; as well as how to adjust operational plans and put forward solutions to be profitability, for the better development of Jingdong to Home.起始頁-結束頁：37-38資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.CNI.03712篇名：天池溫泉會館－櫃檯服務流程並列篇名：Tianchi Hot Spring Hotel - Counter Service Process作者：陳銘薰(Ming-Shiun Chen);秦大智(Ta-Chih Chin)關鍵字：顧客區隔理論;服務傳遞系統;關鍵事件法;柏拉圖;要因分析圖;Customer Segmentation Theory;Service Delivery System;Critical Incident Technique (CIT);Pareto Chart;Cause and Effect Diagram期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：天池溫泉會館位於北臺灣著名的礁溪溫泉，舒涵是第二位櫃檯小姐，大學剛畢業是個社會新鮮人，在執行客務作業過程中，由於謹守櫃檯服務流程，卻面臨老顧客抱怨的壓力。經過一陣子的低潮與反省之後，舒涵調整心態再出發，積極地與經理溝通工作上所面臨的問題，為了滿足老顧客需求改變之目的，運用學校所學習的服務流程設計相關知識及技能，藉由調整櫃檯服務流程之手段，達成經理設定的改善目標。本個案為田野個案，讓學生學習繪製改善前、後櫃檯服務流程，透過顧客區隔理論、服務傳遞系統及相關分析工具進行服務流程設計，使學生經由個案的議題討論，從實際案例中瞭解並學習相關理論的重要概念，以及在實務上的管理意涵。英文摘要：The Tianchi Hot Spring Hotel is located in the well-known Jiaoxi Hot Springs area in northern Taiwan. Shu-han is the second receptionist and a fresh university graduate. In the course of providing customer services, she suffered from the pressure of customer complaints due to compliance with the counter service process. After a period of frustration and reflection, Shu-han adjusted her mentality and started again. She actively communicated with the manager regarding the problems encountered at work. In order to meet the changing needs of regular customers, she made use of the knowledge and skills regarding the service process design, as obtained at school, and achieved the goal of making improvements, as set by the manager, by adjusting the counter service process. This case study is a field case, and is designed to instruct students in developing counter service processes before and after improvements are made. Service process design is conducted based on the customer segmentation theory, service delivery system, and related analysis tools, which allows students to learn and understand the important concepts of relevant theories, as well as practical management implications, through topical discussions relevant to the case study and from actual cases.起始頁-結束頁：55-56資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.CNI.05513篇名：<U+6ED9>豐銀行－貿易融資優化並列篇名：HSBC: Trade Finance Optimization作者：李鐘培(Jong-Peir Li);管郁君(Eugenia Huang)關鍵字：貿易融資;ABCDE計畫;授信風險偏好;金融科技;Trade Finance;ABCDE Project;Credit Risk Appetite;Fintech期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：全球經濟衰退，消費不振導致各國的進出口需求降低。台灣是一個高度依賴經常帳順超的經濟體，當進出口連續14個月衰退後，銀行業的貿易融資業務也遭遇到非常大的衝擊。本個案的目的主要是引導學生瞭解整個供應鏈相關的貿易融資業務面對了哪些挑戰，以及應該如何因應這些挑戰。除了貿易融資傳統的競爭對手，銀行業也面對了來自網路業者的競爭。網路業者挾著原本在B2B市場裡的優勢，逐漸對銀行的本業蠶食鯨吞，不論是利用演算法來提供授信的額度，或是利用大數據來瞭解客戶的需求，各種創新都是銀行在發展貿易融資業務時，值得參考學習的對象。為了幫助電子化的有效實施，本個案將銀行業優化貿易融資的因應方案歸納成三大類的系統需求，並且對貿易融資網路業者已經提供的各式功能做深入的分析，其可行性、優缺點，並配合政府ABCDE計畫實施之電子化精神，重新規劃未來短期及中期的貿易融資優化策略。銀行除了改善本身的系統來增加貿易融資的市場競爭性，同時也可以和網路業者策略聯盟來提升市占率。近來非常熱門的區塊鏈技術，本文也有探討其用於貿易融資的可行性。英文摘要：The global economic downturn and sluggish consumption have reduced countries' demand for exports and imports. Taiwan's economy is highly reliant on current account surpluses. When imports and exports decline for a consecutive period of 14 months, the trade finance business is also severely impacted. The purpose of this case study is to guide students to understand what challenges overall supply chain and trade finance businesses are facing, and how they can respond to these challenges. In addition to the traditional competitors in the trade finance business, the banking industries are facing competition from Internet companies. Armed with their existing advantages in the B2B market, the Internet companies are gradually seizing banks’ core business. The use of algorithms to provide lines of credit and the application of big data to understand customer needs are two innovations used by Internet companies that banks should refer to when developing trade finance business. This study summarizes the trade finance optimization solutions for banks into three system requirements, and analyzes in detail the feasibility, advantages, and disadvantages of the various functions already provided by Internet companies for trade finance. Subsequently, the core concepts of the ABCDE Project directed by the government are used to redefine the short-term and medium-term strategies for the Hong kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation to optimize its trade finance business.起始頁-結束頁：73-74資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.CNI.07314篇名：台灣藺草學會：小而美或大而全？並列篇名：Taiwan Yuan-Li Handiwork Association: The Beauty of Small or the Fullness of Big?作者：張寶蓉(Bau-Jung Chang);汪浩(Hao Wang)關鍵字：社會企業;定位與營運模式;非營利組織社會企業化;Social Enterprise;Positioning and Business Model;Enterprisization of Nonprofit Organization期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：台灣藺草學會從山腳社區發展協會分支獨立而來，學會的葉理事長從2003年起，就開始嘗試找回即將遺失的藺編工藝，這將近300年歷史的手藝；經過了一番苦心，終於前後找回10幾位阿姨重拾當年的藺草編織，重新啟動了保存藺編技術與藺編文化的工作。然而，社會企業的混合特性，使得學會在營運決策中，時常面臨兩難局面。本個案的教學目標是讓學員了解社會企業的特性，以及其所面臨之挑戰與困境，並能了解社會企業在定位與營運模式選擇所需考量的焦點。英文摘要：The Taiwan Yuan-Li Handiwork Association emerged from the San-Jiao Community Development Association. Since 2003, president Yeh has worked to recover the disappearing rush-weaving craft, which has a history of almost 300 years. In this effort, more than ten women with rush-weaving skills have been located and their old memories stirred, and the inheritance of rush-weaving craft and culture has been restarted. However, the mixed nature of social enterprises involves decision-making dilemmas about operations. To promote traditional rush-grass weaving crafts, the Taiwan Yuan-Li Handiwork Association has held many workshops and won awards in a various product design competition. Should the association’s future development focus on the comprehensive cultural and creative industry that combines eco-development of rush grass, rush-weaving inheritance, product design, and marketing, or should it retain its original intention, cultural preservation focused on propagating rush-weaving skills and product design? This case’s objectives are to enable students to understand social enterprises’ characteristics, challenges, dilemmas, and their positioning in choosing business models.起始頁-結束頁：89-90資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.CNI.08915篇名：雙連安養中心－服務國際輸出並列篇名：Service Export of Suang-Lien Elderly Center作者：林秀碧(Hsiu-Pi Lin);許玉容(Yu-Jung Hsu)關鍵字：安養中心;服務創新;服務輸出;管顧服務;風險管理;Elderly Center;Service Innovation;Export Of Service;Management Consultancy Services;Risk Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：面對全球人口高齡化，老人照顧服務的需求越來越大。2012年雙連安養中心發現境外參訪團體明顯成長，加上參訪後許多機構希望雙連提供後續的協助，經濟部工業局所提的服務國際化輔導案讓蔡芳文執行長思索著，從有形的勞力照護轉為無形管理know-how的輸出，似乎是雙連轉型與服務創新的好契機。然而，面對大陸快速的複製能力，服務輸出好嗎？會有市場嗎？用什麼模式來進行比較好？可能面臨哪些風險？自己的核心優勢是什麼？服務國際化要輸出哪些內容？本個案呈現雙連安養中心從有形的勞力照護轉為無形管理know-how輸出的一連串決策思維與作法。英文摘要：Facing the global aging issues, demand for elderly care is getting stronger than ever. In 2012, Suang-Lien Elderly Center found that the growth in terms of number of group coming to visit is evident, and there were quite many requests from those institutions for providing further assistance after their visit. The CEO, Mr. Fang-Wen Tsai, who recently was informed of a service internationalization counseling plan initiated by the Industrial Development Bureau of Ministry of Economic Affairs, started to ponder whether it might be opportune for Suang-Lien to transform itself through service innovation, from providing tangible labor care to the exportation of intangible management know-how. However, would it be suitable for service exportation considering the fast duplication capability of Mainland China? How about the market potential? Which mode of transformation to pursue is better? What would be the risks involved? What might be Suang-Lien’s core competitive advantage? What are to be exported for service internationalization? This case is to demonstrate its decision- making process and the approaches taken by Suang-Lien transforming from tangible labor care to exporting intangible management know-how.起始頁-結束頁：105-106資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.CNI.10516篇名：Tripbaa-Online Sharing Travel Platform作者：Wang, Yao-Ter Owen;Rua-Huan Tsaih關鍵字：Sharing Economy;E-Commerce;Sales Profit-Splitting;Break-Even point期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The e-commerce platform of Tripbaa is run in the form of sharing economy with the mission to create a match between the travel experts (”Daren”) and the consumers, so that individual tourists from home and abroad are given chance to learn about various tours through this platform, and make such purchases in advance before reaching their destinations. In the initial stage of Tripbaa's operation in 2015, its business volume and the number of tour participants grow slowly. After making adjustments in the marketing strategies, the year 2016 has seen obvious growth both in the business volume and the number of tour participants. In spite of this relatively fast growth since 2015, the overall profit-making performance is still no good. As a result, Tripbaa needs to think about ways to make better profits after the mentioned adjustments in marketing strategies and growth in the turnover. We take Tripbaa as an exemplary case, to represent some problems of profit-making difficulties for many sharing economy platforms. The revenue of the sharing economy platforms comes primarily from the profit split with the platforms' service providers, or from the service charge. Therefore the main reason behind the difficulties in making profit of such platform is frequently related to poorly designed profit-sharing mechanism. After an analysis of the current profit-sharing mechanism and relevant calculations, we’ve discussed about the reasonableness of the profit-sharing method between Tripbaa and the ”experts” on current conditions. We have also figured out what profit-sharing mechanism we can adopt to have Tripbaa make fast profits and break even for sustainable operation. Through newly designed profit-sharing mechanism, we can provide a choice accepted by both sides, who can mutually enjoy reasonable profits in a win-win situation. For the platform operators, the expected objective to break even can be reached ahead of schedule.起始頁-結束頁：139-139資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.ENG.13917篇名：Hotelday+: Three Types of Innovation Strategy and Challenges in Design Thinking作者：Chun-Liang Chen;Yao-Chin Lin關鍵字：Design Thinking;Sensory Experiential Design;Design Innovation;Cultural Creative Hotel;Information and Communication Technology (ICT)期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Hotel operators are facing the question of how to expand on existing market share and deliver satisfying customer service in an intensely competitive industry. As service innovation can be easily imitated by other operators, hotels must develop emotional experiences that not only meet customer requirements but are also novel and unique. The business strategy of the HotelDay+ chain is built on integrating local cultural features into guest experience. With its beautiful design and personal service, the facility has succeeded in tempting a growing number of people to indulge in light travel oriented around nature and culture. HotelDay+ President Dai has emphasized that the integration of ICT with design innovation must be considered from design thinking and emotional value. HotelDay+ will develop an interactive accommodation system that allows guests to book customized rooms for their stay, choosing elements such as the bedroom furniture, decorations, and refreshments. The ICT service deployment will also link company information systems with upstream suppliers and local craftsmen, thereby creating differentiated, innovative services. In this case, the design thinker President Dai was faced with a difficult choice when deciding to launch the creative ICT innovation project: whether to continue with profitable emotional services or to develop new ICT services despite their unfamiliarity.起始頁-結束頁：153-153資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.ENG.15318篇名：Jingdong to Home-O2O Life Service Platform作者：Han Chen關鍵字：O2O E-commerce Model;Sharing Economy;Business Process Management;Break-Even Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Since 2005, the rise of ”Lazy Economy” in the mainland China caught focuses, and recent more and more business opportunities in supply and demand gradually shifted from large industry to the retail industry, commodity, showing rapidly rising trend. With the dramatic development of Internet technology and the ”Sharing Economy”, combined with the rapid growth of the retail industry supply and demand opportunities, Jingdong Group discovered the value of mainland China O2O platform, as soon as established as ”Jingdong to Home” -the O2O mobile client application. ”JD to Home” is given functions from LBS mobile positioning to provide goods and services that are living within 3-km. The case will consolidate and describe how this innovative O2O e-commerce business process and financial structure operate in the environment of the mainland China, and will analyse and address that the main problem of financial loss is responsible for the huge cost of logistics fees by Jingdong to Home, not the operation mode of O2O platform. At last, will discuss suggested solutions for current status of the Jingdong to Home to reach the break-even or explore the profits in the teaching manual of this case. The teaching aims of the case are training students abilities to analyse systematic process by learning flow-charting, as a result of indicating unreasonable business flow belong to working process clearly; and estimate the financial performance of Jingdong to Home; as well as how to adjust operational plans and put forward solutions to be profitability, for the better development of Jingdong to Home.起始頁-結束頁：171-171資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.ENG.17119篇名：Tianchi Hot Spring Hotel - Counter Service Process作者：Ming-Shiun Chen;Ta-Chih Chin關鍵字：Customer Segmentation Theory;Service Delivery System;Critical Incident Tech- nique (CIT);Pareto Chart;Cause and Effect Diagram期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The Tianchi Hot Spring Hotel is located in the well-known Jiaoxi Hot Springs area in northern Taiwan. Shu-han is the second receptionist and a fresh university graduate. In the course of providing customer services, she suffered from the pressure of customer complaints due to compliance with the counter service process. After a period of frustration and reflection, Shu-han adjusted her mentality and started again. She actively communicated with the manager regarding the problems encountered at work. In order to meet the changing needs of regular customers, she made use of the knowledge and skills regarding the service process design, as obtained at school, and achieved the goal of making improvements, as set by the manager, by adjusting the counter service process. This case study is a field case, and is designed to instruct students in developing counter service processes before and after improvements are made. Service process design is conducted based on the customer segmentation theory, service delivery system, and related analysis tools, which allows students to learn and understand the important concepts of relevant theories, as well as practical management implications, through topical discussions relevant to the case study and from actual cases.起始頁-結束頁：185-185資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.ENG.18520篇名：HSBC: Trade Finance Optimization作者：Jong-Peir Li;Eugenia Huang關鍵字：Trade Finance;ABCDE Project;Credit Risk Appetite;Fintech期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The global economic downturn and sluggish consumption have reduced countries’ demand for exports and imports. Taiwan’s economy is highly reliant on current account surpluses. When imports and exports decline for a consecutive period of 14 months, the trade finance business is also severely impacted. The purpose of this case study is to guide students to understand what challenges overall supply chain and trade finance businesses are facing, and how they can respond to these challenges. In addition to the traditional competitors in the trade finance business, the banking industries are facing competition from Internet companies. Armed with their existing advantages in the B2B market, the Internet companies are gradually seizing banks’ core business. The use of algorithms to provide lines of credit and the application of big data to understand customer needs are two innovations used by Internet companies that banks should refer to when developing trade finance business. This study summarizes the trade finance optimization solutions for banks into three system requirements, and analyzes in detail the feasibility, advantages, and disadvantages of the various functions already provided by Internet companies for trade finance. Subsequently, the core concepts of the ABCDE Project directed by the government are used to redefine the short-term and medium-term strategies for the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation to optimize its trade finance business.起始頁-結束頁：203-203資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.ENG.20301篇名：Taiwan Yuan-Li Handiwork Association: The Beauty of Small or the Fullness of Big?作者：Bau-Jung Chang;Hao Wang關鍵字：Social Enterprise;Positioning and Business Model;Enterprisization of Nonprofit Organization期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The Taiwan Yuan-Li Handiwork Association emerged from the San-Jiao Community Development Association. Since 2003, president Yeh has worked to recover the disappearing rush-weaving craft, which has a history of almost 300 years. In this effort, more than ten women with rush-weaving skills have been located and their old memories stirred, and the inheritance of rush-weaving craft and culture has been restarted. However, the mixed nature of social enterprises involves decision-making dilemmas about operations. To promote traditional rush-grass weaving crafts, the Taiwan Yuan-Li Handiwork Association has held many workshops and won awards in a various product design competition. Should the association’s future development focus on the comprehensive cultural and creative industry that combines eco-development of rush grass, rush-weaving inheritance, product design, and marketing, or should it retain its original intention, cultural preservation focused on propagating rush-weaving skills and product design? This case's objectives are to enable students to understand social enterprises’ characteristics, challenges, dilemmas, and their positioning in choosing business models.起始頁-結束頁：217-217資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.ENG.2172篇名：Service Export of Suang-Lien Elderly Center作者：Hsiu-Pi Lin;Yu-Jung Hsu關鍵字：Elderly Center;Service Innovation;Export Of Service;Management Consultancy Services;Risk Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Facing the global aging issues, demand for elderly care is getting stronger than ever. In 2012, Suang-Lien Elderly Center found that the growth in terms of number of group coming to visit is evident, and there were quite many requests from those institutions for providing further assistance after their visit. The CEO, Mr. Fang-Wen Tsai, who recently was informed of a service internationalization counseling plan initiated by the Industrial Development Bureau of Ministry of Economic Affairs, started to ponder whether it might be opportune for Suang-Lien to transform itself through service innovation, from providing tangible labor care to the exportation of intangible management know-how. However, would it be suitable for service exportation considering the fast duplication capability of Mainland China? How about the market potential? Which mode of transformation to pursue is better? What would be the risks involved? What might be Suang-Lien’s core competitive advantage? What are to be exported for service internationalization? This case is to demonstrate its decision-making process and the approaches taken by Suang-Lien transforming from tangible labor care to exporting intangible management know-how.起始頁-結束頁：233-233資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.2.ENG.2333篇名：零售業顧客關係之動態研究並列篇名：A Dynamic Examination of Customer Relationship in Retailing作者：黃明新(Min-Hsin Huang);鄭兆宏(Zhao-Hong Cheng);蘇香樺(Hsiang-Hua Su)關鍵字：關係動態理論;信任;承諾;變動速率;潛在成長曲線模型;Relationship Dynamics Theory;Trust;Commitment;Relationship Velocity;Latent Growth Curve Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：儘管過去文獻指出顧客關係會隨時間而變動，大多數實證研究仍採一次性構念測量作法驗證理論模型，因此，本研究整合承諾—信任理論與關係動態理論，提出信任與承諾變動速率概念，並驗證關係變動速率如何影響顧客忠誠度，藉由潛在成長模型分析326 筆零售服務業顧客追蹤資料，本研究發現信任與承諾隨時間之變動速率皆正向影響顧客忠誠度，而關係投資能加速關係構念之成長。研究結果除了深化關係行銷理論外，亦提供行銷經理人重要實務意涵。英文摘要：Although previous literature has suggested that the relationship between a company and its customers should change over time, most empirical studies still examine the theoretical model by using the level of relational constructs measured at a specific time point. Based on commitment-trust theory and relationship dynamics theory, this study proposes the concepts of trust velocity and commitment velocity, and examines how relationship velocity influences customer loyalty. Using the latent growth curve model to analyze the longitudinal data of 326 customers in a retail service context, we find that both trust velocity and commitment velocity positively affect customer loyalty. We also find that investing in the relationship has a positive influence on relationship velocity. Our findings extend the extant knowledge of relationship marketing theories, and provide several important implications for marketing managers.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.1.CNI.0014篇名：股票市場自由化與依賴股票市場籌資公司的融資限制：台灣之證據並列篇名：Equity Market Liberalization and Financing Constraints of Equity-Dependent Firms: Evidence from Taiwan作者：黃一祥(I-Hsiang Huang);陳俊銘(Chun-Ming Chen);李樑堅(Liang-Chien Lee)關鍵字：融資限制;股市自由化;資本投資;投資對現金流量的敏感度;Financing Constraints;Equity-Market Liberalization;Capital Investments;the Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文實證具有外生性權益融資衝擊的有利股市自由化，能否降低依賴股票籌資以融通資本投資的公司之融資限制。本文利用1991 年台灣股市首次自由化之有利經驗為實證對象，發現依賴股票籌資公司之投資對現金流量的敏感度在股市自由化之前顯著為正，於股市自由化之後則顯著降低。不過，非依賴股票籌資公司則無此現象。我們也發現，最可能遭遇融資限制的無發放股利之公司的實證結果，與依賴股票籌資公司的實證有相同的結果。然而，較不可能有融資限制問題的有發放股利之公司的實證結果，則與依賴股票籌資公司不同。英文摘要：We test whether favorable equity-market liberalization, an exogenous supply shock to equity- financing channel, could reduce financing constraints of equity-dependent firms that depend on external equity to finance their productive investments. Using Taiwan's first stock-market liberalization starting in January 1991, which experienced a significant reduction in expected returns, we find that investment-cash flow sensitivity for equity-dependent firms was primarily positive before liberalization and declined significantly after liberalization, but not for non-equity-dependent firms. We also find that the same pattern exists for non-dividend-paying firms that are most likely to suffer from financing constraints, but does not exist for dividend-paying firms.起始頁-結束頁：23-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.1.CNI.0235篇名：投資大陸市場台商之經驗特質、心智模式、風險知覺與進入模式之因果關係研究並列篇名：Empirical Study the Casual Relationships of Entry Mode Selection and the Characteristics, Mental Model, and Risk Perceptions of Taiwan Investors in China作者：石素娟(Su-Chuan Shih);侯璇宜(Shiuan-Yi Hou)關鍵字：進入模式;高階管理團隊;心智模式;風險知覺;Entry Mode;Top Management Team;Mental Model;Risk Perceptions期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：台商赴大陸投資是推動台灣近幾年經濟持續成長的重要原因之一，而公司的高階管理團隊則是制定該項投資的重要決策者。本研究旨在探討進入大陸市場之台灣廠商，其高階管理團隊成員之經驗特質、心智模式與風險知覺等行為決策因素對進入模式選擇之影響，同時檢驗這些因素之間的因果關係，利用結構方程模式進行模型驗證。研究證實高階管理團隊經驗特質、心智模式、風險知覺三者，皆會直接影響進入模式之選擇決策。同時也發現團隊成員的風險知覺，在進入模式決策過程中扮演重要的中介角色。本研究的結果不僅對學理上有所貢獻，也提供台商瞭解團隊成員行為對決策結果所可能造成的影響。英文摘要：The investments of Taiwan firms in China contributed a great deal of Taiwan's economic growth in recent years. The aim of this research is to study the influence factors of the decision- makers in selecting investment entry modes. We employ Structural Equation Model to analyze the casual relationships among the three independent main factors: top management team's characteristics, mental model, and risk perceptions, and the dependent factor: entry modes. The empirical study shows the three independent factors significantly affect the dependent factor. We also found that risk perception plays as mediate factor and is affected by top management team's characteristics and also has effects on entry modes. The paper concludes with a discussion of the theoretical and managerial implications for Taiwan investors.起始頁-結束頁：37-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.1.CNI.0376篇名：溫度與觸摸需求對尋求多樣化行為之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Temperature and Need for Touch on Variety-Seeking Behavior作者：林鴻銘(Hung-Ming Lin);顏于翔(Yu-Xiang Yen);林鴻洲(Hung-Chou Lin)關鍵字：內具認知;溫度;尋求多樣化行為;觸摸需求;Embodied Cognition;Temperature;Variety-Seeking behavior;Need for Touch期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：消費者為滿足內在對新奇與新穎事物的渴望，趨使其展現出多樣化的選擇行為。在選購產品前，消費者經常會使用雙手觸摸產品，檢視產品的觸覺屬性(材質、重量、硬度、溫度)，正當其身體經驗到這些屬性時，可能因此影響其尋求多樣化的行為。本研究根據內具認知的觀點，探討溫度對尋求多樣化行為的效果。本研究採實驗法，實驗一結果顯示，無論溫度感知是來自於產品或是環境，低溫會導致較高的多樣化選擇行為。實驗二結果進一步指出，產品溫度與觸摸需求程度具有交互作用，對於高觸摸需求者而言，低溫產品導致他們有較高的多樣化行為，而對於低觸摸需求者而言，產品溫度對尋求多樣化行為並無顯著影響。英文摘要：Consumers are inherently eager for novelty or change, and thus exhibit variety-seeking in their choice behavior. Consumers often use their hands to touch products and inspect haptic attributes (i.e., texture, weight, hardness, and temperature) prior to purchase. These physical experiences affect consumers' variety-seeking behavior. Based on the perspective of embodied cognition, this study explores the effect of temperature on variety-seeking behavior. Two experimental studies were conducted to test the proposed hypotheses. Study 1 showed that low temperature led subjects to display greater variety seeking regardless of whether the temperature originated from the product or the indoor climate. The findings of Study 2 indicated that the effect of product temperature was moderated by individual differences in need for touch (NFT), because variety seeking was only affected by holding low-temperature products in individuals with a high NFT compared to those with a low NFT.起始頁-結束頁：55-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.1.CNI.0557篇名：A Dynamic Examination of Customer Relationship in Retailing作者：Min-Hsin Huang;Zhao-Hong Cheng;Hsiang-Hua Su關鍵字：Relationship Dynamics Theory;Trust;Commitment;Relationship Velocity;Latent Growth Curve Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Although previous literature has suggested that the relationship between a company and its customers should change over time, most empirical studies still examine the theoretical model by using the level of relational constructs measured at a specific time point. Based on commitment-trust theory and relationship dynamics theory, this study proposes the concepts of trust velocity and commitment velocity, and examines how relationship velocity influences customer loyalty. Using the latent growth curve model to analyze the longitudinal data of 326 customers in a retail service context, we find that both trust velocity and commitment velocity positively affect customer loyalty. We also find that investing in the relationship has a positive influence on relationship velocity. Our findings extend the extant knowledge of relationship marketing theories, and provide several important implications for marketing managers.起始頁-結束頁：87-102資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.1.ENG.0878篇名：Empirical Study the Casual Relationships of Entry Mode Selection and the Characteristics, Mental Model, and Risk Perceptions of Taiwan Investors in China作者：Su-Chuan Shih;Shiuan-Yi Hou關鍵字：Entry Mode;Top Management Team;Mental Model;Risk Perceptions期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：The investments of Taiwan firms in China contributed a great deal of Taiwan's economic growth in recent years. The aim of this research is to study the influence factors of the decision-makers in selecting investment entry modes. We employ Structural Equation Model to analyze the casual relationships among the three independent main factors: top management team's characteristics, mental model, and risk perceptions, and the dependent factor: entry modes. The empirical study shows the three independent factors significantly affect the dependent factor. We also found that risk perception plays as mediate factor and is affected by top management team's characteristics and also has effects on entry modes. The paper concludes with a discussion of the theoretical and managerial implications for Taiwan investors.起始頁-結束頁：105-120資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.1.ENG.1059篇名：The Effects of Temperature and Need for Touch on Variety-Seeking Behavior作者：Hung-Ming Lin;Yu-Xiang Yen;Hung-Chou Lin關鍵字：Embodied Cognition;Temperature;Variety-Seeking behavior;Need for Touch期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：36卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：Consumers are inherently eager for novelty or change, and thus exhibit variety-seeking in their choice behavior. Consumers often use their hands to touch products and inspect haptic attributes (i.e., texture, weight, hardness, and temperature) prior to purchase. These physical experiences affect consumers' variety-seeking behavior. Based on the perspective of embodied cognition, this study explores the effect of temperature on variety-seeking behavior. Two experimental studies were conducted to test the proposed hypotheses. Study 1 showed that low temperature led subjects to display greater variety seeking regardless of whether the temperature originated from the product or the indoor climate. The findings of Study 2 indicated that the effect of product temperature was moderated by individual differences in need for touch (NFT), because variety seeking was only affected by holding low-temperature products in individuals with a high NFT compared to those with a low NFT.起始頁-結束頁：121-132資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.2017.36.1.ENG.12101篇名：On the Waterfront: Contending Visions of an Urban Future and Shimin Life in Kaohsiung並列篇名：水岸風雲：高雄都市未來與市民生活想像競奪作者：許<U+701E>文(Ching-wen Hsu)關鍵字：Kaohsiung;railway;street;infrastructure of mobility;modern planning;高雄;鐵道;街道;交通基礎建設;現代規劃期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：The seaside neighborhood of Hamasing materialized from the construction of Kaohsiung Harbor in the 1900s and declined as the city's transportation center moved eastward and inland. With the inauguration of a rapid transit system in 2009 and the redevelopment of the coastal region for commerce and tourism in recent years, it reemerged and metamorphosed into a tourist destination. As the city government moves ahead with the new transport network and developing tourism, local organizations center their arguments for a more inclusive city on the preservation of railway facilities and reclaiming neighborhood streets via a number of new activities. By considering on one hand the redevelopment of the waterfront by a city government trying to rebrand Kaohsiung as a global capital and secure popular support, and on the other, local efforts to preserve a train station from the Japanese colonial period and other actions taken to (re)claim city streets, this article examines how a cityscape designed for capital flow and political control is reinvented and reinterpreted by its residents as the Hamasing neighborhood is squeezed in the city’s post-industrial transformation.英文摘要：鐵道和港口交通建設在日治時期促進了高雄市哈瑪星一帶的聚落發展，也成了近年高雄市都市藍圖裡的要素。碼頭邊的水岸休閒空間、舊車站改裝的鐵道故事館與公園等，皆透過實體建築強調交通流動與現代都會，藉此建立高雄在臺灣經濟發展的地位，和成為未來商業與文化連結點的可能性。然而，這些發展也產生了交通混亂及鐵道和老街廓的保存抗爭，保存團體同樣援引交通建設與全球連結的歷史元素，重塑街區生活樣貌，並企圖藉由街道市集、步行導覽、戶外電影放映等緩慢的移動方式，吸引不同的人進入街區。本文企圖拆解殖民建設下的交通設施與街道空間如何形塑哈瑪星的歷史，又如何被援引、詮釋、使用，在種種敘事與行動中被（再）賦與意義。起始頁-結束頁：7-44資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所2篇名：「養水種電」的行動者網絡分析：地方政府、光電廠商與在地農漁民並列篇名：An Actor-Network Analysis of the ”Building Solar Farms over Fish Ponds” Scheme: Local Government, Solar PV Firms, and Local Farmers作者：楊弘任(Hung-jen Yang)關鍵字：太陽能電廠;行動者網絡理論;基礎設施;異質治理;轉譯;Solar farms;Actor-Network Theory;Infrastructure;Heterogeneous Governance;Translation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：「養水種電」是屏東平原地層下陷區晚近出現的太陽光電與農漁牧產業共生的現象，其中，充分展現出技術性與社會性相互交織的基礎設施的變動狀態。2009年夏天，正值莫拉克風災之後，由當時的屏東縣長組成跨局處的綠能工作小組，嘗試將災後重建、國土復育與綠能轉型三項目標合而為一。災後重建過程中，綠能工作小組成為各種異質元素（heterogeneouselements）之間最重要的轉譯者（translator），這樣的轉譯者角色進一步可稱為異質治理者（the actor of heterogeneous governance）。綠能工作小組以地方政府之角色，往上連結中央政府經濟建設委員會，形成跨部會國土治理之機制。同時，藉由共同會診問題、共同尋找解決方案的協作與學習模式，綠能工作小組也將地方政府的相關局處首長與承辦人員編排進與在地師傅、文史保育社團、光電廠商、協力廠商的交互學習與在地創新機制之中。本研究以行動者網絡理論（actor-network theory, ANT）為主要之分析架構，研究過程中追隨綠能工作小組、蓮霧農園與養殖魚塭的地主們、各類本業或跨業的光電廠商，以及陸續進場的各種技術物或技術系統，在人與非人對稱分析的取向下，考察異質治理者如何將異質元素連結於共同的行動趨勢或興趣取向之中，如何來回協商地方知識與專家知識、在地範疇與外來範疇，如何在遠端的異質元素進場時仍能讓近端的在地性保有適度位移之後的彈性邊界，以及，如何成為重要的權力平衡機制，讓光電科技的綠能資本在進入地方社會時仍能受到在地性之適度節制。英文摘要：The scene of the solar PV industry coexisting with agricultural and aqua-cultural industries has recently appeared on the Pingtung Plain, particularly in the areas where land subsidence becomes serious. This phenomenon, resulting from the project of ”building solar farms over fish ponds,” shows the dynamic aspect of an infrastructure characterized by the interweaving of the technical and the social. In the summer of 2009, after Typhoon Morakot, the county magistrate of Pingtung formed an interdepartmental working group on green energy, endeavoring to integrate three tasks, i.e. post-disaster reconstruction, area restoration, and green energy transformation. In the process of post-disaster reconstruction, the working group on green energy functioned as a significant translator among heterogeneous elements, a role that could be further called an ”actor of heterogeneous governance.” As a representative of the local government, the green energy working group coordinated with the Council for Economic Planning and Development of the Executive Yuan to form an inter-departmental mechanism for area restoration. Meanwhile, with a working mode of cooperation and learning, which emphasized joint efforts to diagnose the problems and seek the solutions, the green energy working group established a new mechanism for mutual learning and local invention in which diverse roles were included, such as department directors and members of the local government, local experts, organizations for cultural preservation and ecological conservation, solar PV firms, and subcontractors. Through the application of Actor-Network Theory, this analysis follows the green energy working group, farmers of wax-apples and aqua-cultural fish ponds, various solar PV firms, and other technical artifacts and technological systems. Using a symmetrical approach to humans and nonhumans, this paper seeks to explore how the actor of heterogeneous governance connected heterogeneous elements and facilitated a common trajectory of action in their common interest, how the negotiations between local knowledge and expert knowledge, between local categories and global categories, were brought about, how the locality could maintain a flexible border after shifting when a distant heterogeneous element took part, and how the actor of heterogeneous governance could serve as a mechanism for power balance, allowing the green energy capital of the solar PV industry to be properly harnessed by the locality.起始頁-結束頁：45-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所3篇名：基礎設施、水利社會與行動者的交織：陳有蘭溪流域Kalibuan社區共同灌溉系統建造與營運並列篇名：The Interweaving of Water Infrastructure and Society: A Case Study of the Construction and Management of Irrigation in Kalibuan Community, Taiwan作者：林靖修(Ching-hsiu Lin)關鍵字：基礎設施;山區灌溉;水資源管理;財產關係;布農族;infrastructure;irrigation;water management;property relations;Bunun people期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：台灣山區原住民長期面臨缺水與供水不穩定的問題，如何找出適當的水資源管理模式以成為當務之急。在思索水資源管理議題上，本文認為位於陳有蘭溪流域的布農族Kalibuan社區是一個值得參考與學習的案例，社區不但擁有營運健全的水資源機制與規章，還有少見的共同灌溉系統。在關於社區共同灌溉系統運作的田野調查（2011年到2014年）基礎上，以及在結合「行動者網絡理論」與財產關係的人類學研究的理論脈絡上，首先，本文探討由塑膠水管、水塔與因天災而毀壞的水圳所構成的水利基礎設施（infrastructure）如何形成一個由人（human）與非人（nonhuman）行動者所共構的網絡，並探討該網絡如何被鑲嵌在在地的政治、文化與社會脈絡之中。其次，本文闡明在建造與營運社區共同灌溉基礎設施網絡的過程中，不同類型的（至少涉及個人與集體的和社區與社區之間）動態財產協商；說明這些財產協商不但形成關於社區水資源的擁有方式與型式，同時也定義了社區水資源管理範圍的邊界。本文認為社區能定義出水資源管理範圍邊界是形成有效管理機制、水利社會與形塑水利公民的關鍵。最後，本文分析族人如何從布農族文化觀點來反思既有的水資源管理模式，藉此說明社區如何在既有的基礎上思索更適合於布農族文化與社會的管理模式。本文認為若要反思現有的山區水資源問題與尋找解決方案，必須從在地脈絡的視野探索因應每個特殊的文化、社會、政治與自然環境的合適水資源管理模式。英文摘要：Based on ethnographic research from 2011 to 2014 in Kalibuan community, in the Chenyuland River Catchment in Taiwan, this article examines how indigenous people have constructed and shaped their own irrigation system and methods of water management. This case study has significant implications for addressing problems relating to water access in indigenous communities. The majority of residents in Kalibuan community are from the Bunun people, and their communal irrigation system is unique. Generally, most communities in mountain areas do not use communal irrigation systems; rather, farmers individually maintain private, small-scale irrigation systems. As a consequence, many communities have experienced water shortage and conflicts over access to water. This article focuses in particular on how engagement with the infrastructure of irrigation systems is experienced and interpreted within local social, political, and cultural contexts. Drawing on theoretical insights from Actant-Network theory and anthropological perspectives on property relations and ownership, I describe how interactions between actors are involved in the dynamic processes of property negotiations. This research suggests that property negotiations not only generate ongoing ways of owning and using water, but also define a geographical and ideological boundary in the community's irrigation infrastructure network. I argue that this boundary is key to enabling residents to form effective methods of water management, to turning their community into a 'hydro-society', and to shaping good 'hydro-citizens'. Finally, this article discusses Bunun thinking in relation to irrigation infrastructure, and how they have attempted to find better ways of water management that reflect Bunun concepts of 'human-water' relations, social structure, and culture.起始頁-結束頁：97-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所4篇名：高等教育轉型的人類學反思：以社會實踐課程的經驗為例並列篇名：Reflections on the Transformation of Higher Education in Contemporary Taiwan: A Study on the Courses of Social Practice作者：陳怡方(Yi-fang Chen)關鍵字：高等教育;學習;學徒制;基礎設施;社會創新;higher education;learning;apprenticeship;infrastructure;social innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文以民族誌作為方法，透過在教學現場的研究以反思當前高等教育中的人文社會學科所扮演的角色，以及教育作為社會性基礎設施的意義。面臨當代社會的各種變化與困境，教育應該具有什麼樣的內涵？甚至，教育如何成為改善困境的方式？在市場化、財團化、貧窮化、官少子女化的危機下，教育成為在學術公共財與學術資本主義之間的拉扯。然而，教育之於一個社會，具有基礎設施（infrastructure）的意涵，教育系統對於維持國家的文化和社會水準具有重要性。過去十年來在大學進行的各種具有社會實踐性質的計畫，嘗試在既有的困境中尋找新的可能性，計畫執行的過程中經常期待藉由課程帶學生進入真實社會中學習，同時強化大學與在地社會的關係，以及強調大學的社會責任。本文主張，教育固然需要因應時代做出調整，然而不同的教育目標，對應的是不同的基礎設施的建置。當大學的教育目標改變，從追求知識的場所轉為與社會緊密連結的機構時，所需要搭建起來以供學習的系統也將有所差異，忽略該差異會使得轉向的教育系統面臨困境而無法達成設定的目標。英文摘要：Higher education is going through dramatic transformation globally. Education is regarded as social infrastructure which is significant to the development of theculture and society of a country. 'Education' refers to the process of giving and receiving systematic instruction at schools or universities, whereas 'learning' is informal and usually related to cultural transmission. In the past ten years, the government of Taiwan set up various projects to forge the connection between universities and their local societies. These projects establish courses with the intention of bringing students to engage in practical study within actual society, working with people in local communities. However, I argue that, due to changes in the goals of education, a new infrastructure needs to be established. Without awareness and the establishment of a new system, the goal is not likely to be achieved.起始頁-結束頁：147-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所5篇名：Book Reviews: Critical Christianity: Translation and Denominational Conflict in Papua New Guinea作者：黃淑莉期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：186-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所6篇名：評論：從人類學「作者效應」角度讀《明清文學中的西南敘事》作者：何翠萍期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：194-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所7篇名：評論：文學．人類學：從《明清文學中的西南敘事》借鏡「文本感知力」作者：劉斐玟期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：199-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所8篇名：回覆：敘事以抒情作者：胡曉<U+771E>期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：205-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所9篇名：末婆、嬤嬤、娘娘與我：反思壯族儀式研究的田野經驗與知識生產並列篇名：Mopo, Mama, Niangniang and I: Reflecting on Fieldwork Experiences and Knowledge Production of Zhuang Ritual Study作者：高雅寧(Ya-ning Kao)關鍵字：壯族;性別;田野經驗;知識生產;自我／自傳式民族誌;Zhuang people;gender;fieldwork experience;knowledge production;autoethnography期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文採取「自我／自傳式民族誌」（autoethnography）的方法與文類，回顧與反思筆者在廣西壯族地區以女性為主的儀式團體中進行田野工作的經驗，與自身知識生產及其影響，並討論未來透過「合作式民族誌」（collaborative ethnography）的方式與壯族研究夥伴進行知識生產的可能性。身為一名臺灣女性民族誌工作者，在廣西壯族農村進行壯族女性儀式專家（末婆）的研究，首先要突破的是「臺灣人」的身份障礙，順利取得當地人的信任後，女性研究末婆的優勢才能顯示出來。在反省知識生產的過程中，我發現身份差異、性別意識轉換、參與觀察程度的深度，都會影響知識生產。最初，我被當地人視為具有威脅的臺灣間諜或騙子，接著成為參加觀察末婆主持的家屋與社區儀式的學徒或記者，最後我成為末婆口中的「大姐」與儀式支持者的「乾女兒」，參與觀察末婆／末公與乾媽家舉行的儀式。研究的主題也從描述末婆生命史與家屋儀式，轉變至討論性別區隔的社區儀式展演，及維繫儀式專家與支持者（嬤嬤、娘娘）關係的「燒衣儀式」。目前壯族宗教儀式研究有性別區別的傾向，即大部份本土與外來男性研究者研究男性儀式專家而非女性儀式專家。末婆／末公的儀式以口傳為主，且末婆／末公的生物性別與舉行儀式時的性別並不一定相同，儀式中他們扮演與他們生物性別不一樣的人物。目前我的研究成果對壯族研究界的影響大於對研究對象本身的影響。身為一名民族誌工作者，我期望運用「合作民族誌」的方法，與儀式專家、本地與外地壯族研究者、一般民眾與政府官員共同參與壯族儀式專家的「影音」民族誌的生產，以超越性別、身份、族群、書寫的限制，並透過彼此協商各自知識生產的差異與衝突，發展出一種可以同時傳遞與傳承壯族宗教與人類學知識的方法。英文摘要：At present, research on Zhuang rituals reveals an obvious division of labor between the sexes. Most male researchers, both local or and foreign, have focused their studies on male ritual specialists. However, this gendered division of labor is at odds with the realities of Zhuang ritual. For example, mopo and mogong ritual specialists conduct ritual orally and-because both male or and female dead ritual masters, ancestors, and spirit soldiers may pos-sesses her/himthem-their sex is not always the same as their gender in the ritual. This article offers an autoethnography as I explore my own fieldwork experience among women-dominated Zhuang ritual groups and investigate how status, gender and the degree of participant-observation impact knowledge production. In discussing this research and my experience as an ethnographer, this article makes a case for ”collaborative ethnography” as a method-cooperating with ritual specialists, local and outside researchers, common people, and government officials-to produce an ethnography on Zhuang ritual specialists. I argue that this method will help research participants negotiate conflicts in the process of knowledge production while at the same time transcending the barriers of gender, status, ethnic group and literacy to develop a new way to transmit and inherit both Zhuang religious and anthropological knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：1-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所10篇名：從田野到視野：跨性別／肉身的體現、重置與挑戰並列篇名：From Site to Sight: Embodiment, Repositioning and Challenge of Transgender Corporeality作者：林文玲(Wen-ling Lin)關鍵字：跨性別;性別;性慾特質;肉身;田野工作;transgender;gender;sexuality;corporeality;fieldwork期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文將有別於田野工作「去性／別化」的經驗視角，著重田野過程中研究者所帶有或沒有的性與性別意識，如何糾結於研究者自身的文化、社會與個人背景及其所形塑的關於性別姿態、性別關係以及女性（男性、中性）化等想像，影響田野觀察、互動之進行與意義的生發。田野場域的研究者與研究對象之間因身分（identity）、社會位置（positionality）與地點（location）的差異，使得各自擁有或許不同的性／別觀想與實踐，彼此遭逢並經歷協商或磨合的過程，修正或開啟研究者認識或理解的向度，進而對知識形構產生影響。前述過程透過研究者的反思、自我置位與書寫，將映射出議題的公共化面向以及論辯的潛在動能。本文將以跨性別（transgender）之田野研究場域，對上述現象進行探討與分析。英文摘要：In contrast to the usual asexual experiential perspective of fieldwork methodology, this article examines how the entanglement of sex/gender consciousness and the socio-cultural background of the researcher affect his/her observation, interaction, and meaning-creating in the field. Due to the divergences in identity, positionality, and location, the researcher and her research subjects develop different sex/gender concepts and practices. The processes of encounters and negotiations modify or open the dimension of knowing and understanding of the researcher, which then influences the formation of knowledge. The public dimension of sex/ gender issues and the potential dynamics of related debates are revealed in the researcher's reflection, positioning, and writing. This article will explore the above-mentioned phenomena via the transgender fieldsite.起始頁-結束頁：53-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所11篇名：非正式標準化與道德經濟：深圳工廠對全球標準的因應與協商並列篇名：Informal Standardisation and Moral Economy: The Response and Negotiation of Global Standards in an Electronic Factory in Shenzhen, Post-Mao China作者：方怡潔(I-Chieh Fang)關鍵字：全球化;非正式性;道德經濟;去鑲嵌;情緒;global standard;informal sphere;moral economy;disembeddedment;emotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：為回應全球市場的擴張，彈性化是晚近資本主義生產模式中備受矚目的過程，但標準化也在同時擴張。我所研究的深圳電子廠泰效採用標準化的品質管理系統ISO 9000為該廠取得進入全球市場的認證。執行ISO 9000標準化過程可說是一種全球市場力的滲入，理論上，將造成生產模式與生活的去鑲嵌並轉換社會關係。本研究試圖透過長期田野觀察分析泰效電子廠內ISO9000的執行與教育訓練過程來釐清在多大程度上ISO 9000會瓦解並穿透社會邊界。本研究採道德經濟的觀點來看標準化過程，其強調日常生活脈絡中社會行動者對於市場滲透過程所展現的能動性與協商，以此修正政治經濟觀點中的市場。本研究發現，廠方與農民工在面對ISO 9000強加而下的管理要求時，他們的回應並非拒絕與抵抗，而是表面迎合，私下卻透過各種無聲的情緒與姿態以道德經濟為本，逕行實踐出一套「非正式標準」的管理法則。此處的道德經濟，並不與市場化的發展反向並拖慢了市場化的力量，反而與標準化過程及市場經濟互補相生。工廠也因而得以在充滿制度性缺陷的情況下繼續運行不輟。市場經濟和道德經濟攜手同行。這使得深圳一家地方電子廠在面對全球市場力的「遠距治理」與「去鑲嵌」時，得以找到自由詮釋的空間，並把社會關係重新「再鑲嵌」回在地的道德共識（此處的道德更近似於「倫理」ethics）與意義秩序當中。英文摘要：In response to the expansion of the global market, flexibility is the significant process drawing lots of attention in the late capitalist's mode of production, but the standardization is still worth discussion in the global South. The factories coastal Chin like Shenzhen, the labour force ('workers') are mostly young people from rural village. The factory adopts the ISO 9000, a standard operational and management system, which provided by International organization for standardization (ISO) to re-organized itself. It intends to quickly establish a mechanism to convert migrant workers' subjectivity to fit into the mode of production of global capitalism. Through ISO 9000, the factory gains the certificate for its products to enter into global market. Theoretically, implementation of ISO 9000 is arguably the invasion of global market forces, which will result in the separation of production mode and society, and the 'disembeddedment' will then follow. This paper investigates the extent to which ISO 9000 will break down existing social relations and penetrate social boundaries by conducting long-term fieldwork in an electronics factory observing how ISO 9000 implement and its required programs of education and training. This study looks at the process of standardization from a perspective of moral economy, which emphasizes the consensus and negotiations between social actors in the context of daily life, in order to correct the market in the political economy view. The study found that when the factory and the migrant workers in the face of imposed ISO 9000, their response is not to reject or resist, but to accommodate at the first glance. However, privately they de-standardization the ISO 9000 and at the same time 'restandardization' the implicit rules of their interactions and exchange by their own way, through emotions and gestures, which are both silent and invisible in the documents. The tacit agreement between workers and managers co-exist in the factory with ISO 9000 market rules. This allows migrant workers find the cracks to negotiate their agency under the scientific management, to retrieve the rhythm of the work process, and to rebuild the social relationship which market penetrates. It is arguable that due to the moral economy and the market economy go hand in hand, it makes Chinese factories in the global market disembedded while reembedded in the society.起始頁-結束頁：103-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所12篇名：Book Reviews: Language Choice and Identity Politics in Taiwan作者：傅可恩(P. Kerim Friedman)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：168-171資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所13篇名：書評：Cannibal Metaphysics作者：鄭瑋寧期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：172-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所01篇名：編輯序言作者：王儷玲;羅紀<U+743C>期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：年金改革與建立臺灣永續年金制度並列篇名：PENSION REFORMAND BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE PENSION SYSTEMIN TAIWAN作者：王儷玲(Jennifer L. Wang);黃泓智(Hong-Chih Huang);楊曉文(Sharon S. W. Yang);陳彥志(Yen-Chih Chen);鄭惠(Mark Hui-Heng Cheng)關鍵字：年金改革;勞保;退休基金;金錢價值;財務永續性;世代公平性;Pension reform;Labor insurance;Retirement fund;Money's worth ratio;Financial sustainability;Intergeneration inequality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著人口結構的快速改變，世界各國的年金制度皆在進行改革，以期建立財務永續的新年金制度。臺灣的退休年金制度因累積太高的潛藏負債，基金已提存比率又太低，造成退休基金面臨即將破產的財務危機，但在多年以來的年金改革歷程中，卻仍未建立健全的財務控管機制。本研究以勞保基金為探討對象，進行現金流量試算，評估多元改革方案對勞保基金之財務影響，試圖找出可以達到至少30年以上財務健全的年金改革解決方案，並透過金錢價值比率的分析，找出同時做到世代不均影響最小的可行解決方案。本研究所提出的年金改革建議與健全財務缺口機制可以為臺灣的年金制度提供同時兼具財務永續性和世代公平性的改革方案。英文摘要：Rapid demographic change has caused a global trend of pension reform. Many countries have adopted different procedures to build new, financially sustainable pension systems. The pension system in Taiwan now faces critical challenges because severe underfunding has caused bankruptcy problems of pension funds. This study proposes a multi-factor reform approach to build a financially sustainable pension system which will maintain at least 30 years' financially adequacy. By examining the cash flows of the pension fund and the money worth ratio, we propose reform solutions to build a financially sustainable system for Labor Insurance in Taiwan. Our approach helps to overcome both financially bankruptcy and intergenerational inequality problems for Labor Insurance and the other pension funds. The findings in this study offer practicable ways to resolve financially problems and provide reform solutions to all of the pension systems in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：既患不均，可不患寡、不患貧乎？－從財政永續性與世代間不均的角度看臺灣的年金改革並列篇名：PENSION REFORMIN TAIWAN: AN APPLICATION OF GENERATIONAL ACCOUNTINGMETHOD作者：董安琪(An-Chi Tung);謝餘慶(Kevin Yu-Ching Hsieh)關鍵字：國民移轉帳;世代會計;財政永續;世代不公;人口老化;年金改革;National transfer accounts;Generational accounting;Fiscal sustainability;Generational inequity;Population aging;Pension reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：年金改革是當前臺灣的一個大困局：如果不改革，世代之間極度不公，且國家財政勢必崩壞，全民同受其害；但在目前官方的改革方案下，除了全民無不同感被剝奪，勞工與公教之間互不信賴，不同世代間也出現嚴重衝突，完全背離年改原本想帶來的社會和諧與穩定。臺灣並非特例，許多國家都同樣深陷年金危機之中，原因是既有的年金制度多採確定給付式的隨收隨付制，透過世代間的移轉功能，將未來的財務責任轉嫁給後代承擔。然而當這個制度所賴以存續的條件（特別是人口紅利與經濟成長）改變，年金制度的永續性面臨嚴峻的挑戰。臺灣的世代間不均嗎？國家財政可以永續嗎？政府年改方案有效嗎？有其他選擇嗎？針對這些疑問，本文採世代會計方法來加以探討。我們發現，目前臺灣的財政既不永續，世代也不公平，改革刻不容緩。但是，當前官方的年改方案缺少長久的目標及全盤的財務精算，未來勢需作一波又一波更嚴厲的改革。然而，若要根本解決，巨大的改革力道勢將引起社會所難以承受的動盪。我們認為，建立一個完整的年金改革方案的第一步是確立根本目標，並作總體精算；第二步是作通盤規劃，採多重政策：以修補年金制度替總體財政止漏，藉經濟成長強化各世代負擔能力，以提高基金報酬率來減少國家負債，藉增稅以完成財政平衡，並採漸進改革方式以減少社會衝擊；最後，政府應對民眾善盡溝通之責，使官民同心推動改革。英文摘要：Pension reform has been a major issue in Taiwan in recent years, because of the huge public financial deficits and acute intergenerational inequity, both of which became exacerbated under rapid population aging and weakening economic growth. A series of questions are asked: (1) How serious is intergenerational inequity in Taiwan? (2) How severe is the long-term fiscal insolvency? (3) Does the proposed pension reform solve these two problems? (4)What options do we have regarding pension reform? To address these questions, we apply the Generational Accounting method to 2014 NTA data and official population projections. We calculated the generational accounts under different scenarios. The results suggest that both fiscal insufficiency and intergenerational inequity are serious, calling for immediate response. However, the current government proposal is far from adequate, as there are only piecemeal and short-term considerations. Therefore, we suggest the government start with a comprehensive review of all social programs and public finance, and then enact a combination of fiscal, financial and economic policies to ensure the feasibility and effectiveness of the pension reform.起始頁-結束頁：41-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：年金制度與世代公平－我國不同世代公務員退休保障的比較並列篇名：EQUITY ON OLD-AGE BENEFIT SYSTEM: COMPARISONS OF IRR ANDMULTIPLIERS ACROSS CIVIL SERVANTS’ GENERATIONS作者：邵靄如(Ai-Ju Shao);傅從喜(Tsung-Hsi Fu)關鍵字：年金改革;世代公平;公務員年金;內部報酬率;Pension reform;Intergenerational equity;Civil pension;Internal rate of return期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：我國近幾年針對年金改革的討論中，有關年金保障世代差異的問題一直受到高度重視，本文即聚焦於此一議題進行探討。本文針對公務人員退休保障制度，進行實證的分析，比較1971年、1981年、1991年與2001年開始任職的四個不同世代的公務人員之退休保障差異。本研究發現，若從年金獲益倍數(總給付對總繳費的比值)來看，每一個世代的公務員都享有明顯的年金獲益。但比較這四個世代，發現各世代的獲益倍數從11倍到38倍不等，越早開始任職的世代其年金獲益倍數越高。各世代的年金內部報酬率(IRR)亦是越早期的世代越高，從11.0%-23.3%不等。本研究也發現，1995年公務人員退撫新制的改革對於世代公平的影響差異甚巨，新制年資越長、舊制年資越短者，其總繳費越高。整體而言，公務人員，其終身繳費總額有重大的差異，但其終身給付總額差異不大，這與Musgrave(1986)所界定的「恆定調整替代率」(fixed replacement rate) 途徑接近。本文並針對行政院年金改革辦公室於2017年初年金國是會議中所提出的各項改革內容進行試算，發現不同的改革項目對不同世代公務人員之退休總給付的影響大不相同。本論文的研究，不僅有助於瞭解在既有制度之下不同世代公務人員的退休保障差異，亦有助於釐清不同的改革途徑對各世代所造成的不同效果。英文摘要：The recent development of Taiwan Pension Reform has primarily targeted the issues of intergenerational equity. This paper focuses on the empirical analysis of equity within the civil servants, old-age income system, and conducts comparisons for four generations of cohorts whose service years started in 1971, 1981, 1991 and 2001 respectively. This study shows that multipliers of benefits to contribution vary across generations, ranging from 11 to 38; the earlier into the system, the higher the multiplier. Internal rates of return, which are derived in the range of 11.0% to 23.3%, display a similar pattern, which is the earlier into the system, the higher the IRR. These findings pinpoint the controversial issues back to the 1995 reform which was biased in favor of those who entered the public sector prior to 1995 and accordingly deteriorated the system's financial strength. In summary, though the young generation pays more into the system, the benefits received among different cohorts all reflect a high level in terms of the replacement rate and dollar amount. This phenomenon corresponds to the fixed replacement rate theory by Musgrave (1986). In addition to presentation of the current system, this paper also conducts analysis of IRR and multipliers based on the reform draft concluded from the Pension Reform National Symposium of 2016. The degree of impact on the old-age security of civil servants by generation is estimated and presented.起始頁-結束頁：75-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：Major Taiwanese Pension Funds' International Investments and Currency Hedging Strategies並列篇名：臺灣退休基金之國際投資與匯率避險策略作者：邱顯比(Shean-Bii Chiu);賴興國(Hsing-Kuo Lai)關鍵字：Pension fund;Currency hedging strategy;International investment;退休基金;匯率避險策略;國際投資期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：International investments constitute more than 40% of the assets of major pension funds in Taiwan. However, exchange rate fluctuations also affect funds' short-term returns significantly. Taiwanese pension funds' managers use their experience and intuition to determine whether to and how much to hedge currency risks. In this paper, we follow the framework of Campbell et al. (2010) and combine information on international financial markets and major Taiwanese pension funds' asset allocation to produce the currency hedge ratios which minimize the variance of quarterly returns of each fund. For foreign bond investment, the risk-minimizing strategy is basically 100% hedge. The risk-minimizing hedge ratios of foreign stock portfolios depend on the respective stock markets and currencies. Exposures on the US and Japan stock markets should not be hedged, while exposures on Australia and Canada should be over-hedged. Using actual asset allocations of pension funds in January 2016, we suggest that managers do not need to hedge USD exposure. These results are striking, as they differ significantly from managers' intuition and current practice. We demonstrate a model to determine currency hedging strategies for pension funds. We shed light on potentially huge hedging cost savings as well as portfolio risk reductions.英文摘要：臺灣主要退休基金有超過40%資產投資於國外，而匯率變動將影響其國際投資之損益，此對基金短期報酬率往往有很大的影響。臺灣退休基金的經理人基本上運用他們過去的經驗與直覺去決定是否從事匯率避險以及避險比率。本文結合Campbelletal.(2010)的架構，各投資商品及匯率歷史資料，與臺灣主要基金的資產配置，計算各基金在極小化季報酬率波動性下的外匯避險比率。國外債券投資之極小化季報酬率波動性的避險策略是完全避險。國外股票投資之極小化季報酬率波動性的避險比率則依各國股市及幣別而有所不同。投資於美國及日本股市不應做外匯避險，而投資澳洲及加拿大股市應超額避險。運用各基金2016年1月的資產配置，我們發現國際投資不需要對美元進行避險。這個結果與目前各基金經理人的直覺和外匯避險實務有較大差距。本研究替實務界演示一套系統方法以決定外匯曝險(避險)，此可能節省鉅額的避險成本，並降低基金報酬率的波動性。起始頁-結束頁：105-139資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：壹、2017年臺灣經濟情勢總展望之修正作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：141-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田;彭信坤;張靜貞;蔡文禎;殷壽鏞期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：145-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷1期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：171-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：臺商被美國提控反傾銷之實證分析－中國大陸第三國效果存在嗎？並列篇名：THE IMPACT OF U.S. ANTIDUMPING FILINGS ON TAIWANESE FIRMS: ARE THERE THIRD COUNTRY EFFECTS FROMCHINA?作者：林家慶(Chia-Ching Lin);林昱君(Yuh-Jiun Lin)關鍵字：反傾銷;中國大陸;美國;臺商;第三國效果;事件研究法;Antidumping;China;U.S.;Taiwanese firms;Third country effects;Event study approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：由於臺灣與中國大陸在經濟上高度連結，故有臺商被控訴反傾銷是否受中國大陸牽連的疑慮。本研究使用1991-2014 年27 件美國對臺商提控之反傾銷案例為研究對象，使用事件研究法之實證結果指出，和大陸相關案例顯著對臺商超額報酬有負面影響，大陸未涉案案例反而有可能是正面影響。進一步，影響被控超額報酬的決定因素中，廠商特性和反傾銷判決是主要決定因子，其中，和中國大陸相關變數幾乎都對被控超額報酬有顯著負面影響。也就是說，在臺商被美國提控的反傾銷案件中，應存在中國大陸的第三國效果。英文摘要：Given the high degree of economic linkage between Taiwan and China, there have been concerns that antidumping action against Taiwanese firms may have some connections with China. This study examines 27 antidumping cases brought by the U.S. against Taiwanese firms over the period 1991-2014. The empirical results obtained using the event study approach indicate that antidumping cases relating to China had a significant negative impact on the abnormal returns of Taiwanese firms, whereas those cases not relating to China appeared more likely to have a positive impact. Furthermore, we showed that the main factors determining the impact on abnormal returns were the characteristics of the individual firm and the ruling handed down in the antidumping case. Finally, China-related variables almost all showed a significantly negative impact on abnormal returns; in other words, it appears that Taiwanese firms might suffer injury in U.S. antidumping filings resulting from the third country effects from China.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：由多邊附加價值貿易分析兩岸貿易關係之演變並列篇名：MULTI-LATERAL VALUE-ADDED TRADE AND CROSS-STRAIT TRADING RELATIONSHIP作者：林晉勗(Jin-Xu Lin);林晏如(Yan-Ru Lin);林師模(Shih-Mo Lin)關鍵字：附加價值貿易;世界投入產出表;多區域投入產出分析;兩岸;Value added trade;World input-output tables;Inter-regional input-output analysis;Cross-strait期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文參考目前國際上探討貿易財附加價值含量的分析趨勢，以歐盟所編製之多國投入產出表為基礎，建立一涵蓋兩岸及日、韓之區域間投入產出模型，估算出我國、中國大陸及日韓等國貿易財附加價值含量，以探討過去十餘年來我國與中國大陸產業間貿易關係的演變，並掌握我國產業發展面臨瓶頸之關鍵原因為何，提供相關機關及企業參考。此外，本文也利用附加價值出口占比之分解分析，探討我國、中國大陸及日韓貿易財在1995 年到2011年間，造成其出口附加價值含量變動的關鍵因素為何；最後，本文更以指數分解法探討造成兩岸貿易之附加價值變動的關鍵驅動因素為何。本文研究結果發現,近20 年來，中國大陸之貿易附加價值成長快速，遠超過臺灣及日韓，顯示其製造規模及生產技術都有長足的成長；此外，從雙邊貿易的情況來看，中國大陸進口的附加價值來自臺、日、韓的比重逐漸下降,然而臺灣不論出口或進口的附加價值，中國大陸的比重都呈現相當大的成長，這顯示臺灣愈來愈仰賴中國大陸的市場及其所生產的零組件，然而臺灣在大陸產業價值鏈中的地位卻愈來愈式微，這樣的發現值得我國在重新思考產業發展策略及定位時之參考。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the evolution of industrial coopetition between Tai- wan and China over the past two decades to figure out the key factors attributable to the current development bottlenecks encountered by the Taiwanese industries. We apply the concepts of value-added trade and use the world input-output tables compiled by the European Union to establish our inter-regional input-output models. Decomposition analyses are also carried out to identify the factors most responsible for driving the changes in value-added trade for both Taiwan and China. Our results indicate that China's manufacturing value added embodied in trade has been growing quickly as compared to Taiwan, Korea and Japan. From the bilateral trade point of view, the share of value added embodied in China's imports sourced from Taiwan, Korea and Japan has been declining significantly. Conversely, Taiwan relies more and more heavily on the value-added sourcing from China. This development is certainly not a good sign for Taiwan, as it points to the fact that the competitive advantage position of Taiwanese firms in China has been deteriorating.起始頁-結束頁：37-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：中國大陸城鎮社區對外來人員之主觀態度研究並列篇名：THE ANALYSIS OF ATTITUDES TOWARD NON-LOCAL RESIDENTS IN URBAN CHINA作者：溫芳宜(Fang-I Wen)關鍵字：中國大陸;外來人口;主觀態度;China;Non-local residents;Attitudes期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究針對中國大陸城鎮社區對於外來人員在「生活便利」、「就業威脅」以及「公共服務壓力」等議題之主觀看法進行研究。數據資料來自2007年中國家庭收入調查之城鎮社區問卷結果，實證模型採用Ordered Probit 模型。實證結果發現,城鎮社區對於外來人員形成的就業威脅感受，主要受到社區所處城市之人口密度以及外來人員在當地就業之聚集程度所影響。若社區所在城市之人口密度越高、或是外來人員聚集於同一企業工作，則社區感受到的就業威脅越大。而人口密度變數同樣加深了城鎮居民對於外來人員造成當地公共服務壓力之觀感。此外，當社區的外地人員比重越高，則當地居民越感受到外來人員帶來的公共服務壓力。然而，若社區中外來人員與城鎮居民的往來越密切，則城鎮社區越能夠感受到外來人員對於城市生活便利之幫助。英文摘要：The aim of this study is to investigate the factors influencing the attitudes of the urban community towards non-local residents in China. An ordered-probit model is employed to estimate the community data drawn from the Chinese Household Income Project (CHIP) in 2007. The empirical results show that residents of urban communities with higher population density are more likely to feel that non-local residents increase labor market competition as well as pres- sure on local public services. Also, local residents are more likely to feel labor market competition when most of the non-local residents work in the same enterprise. However, if the non-local residents have more contacts with local residents, then local residents are more likely feel that non-local residents provide various services to urban residents and make urban life more convenient.起始頁-結束頁：79-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：Asymmetric Effects of Unexpected Monetary Policy on Equity Returns in China並列篇名：未預期貨幣政策對中國股票報酬之不對稱影響作者：鄭漢亮(Han-Liang Cheng);劉曦敏(Shi-Miin Liu)關鍵字：Asymmetric effect;Unexpected monetary policy;Markovswitching models;Money supply;不對稱效果;未預期貨幣政策;馬可夫轉換模型;貨幣供給期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study investigates how Shanghai A-share and B-share returns are affected by China's unexpected positive and negative money supply shocks during boom and bust markets using Markov-switching models with both fixed and time-varying transition probabilities. We find that the effects of unanticipated monetary policy on Chinese stock returns are indeed asymmetric not only in terms of positive and negative shocks, but also during boom and bust economic states. The real activity effect seems to explain these findings well. Moreover, the B-share investors interpret the tight monetary policy during bust periods differently from the A-share investors in the Shanghai stock markets.英文摘要：本研究使用固定與隨時間變動之馬可夫轉換模型，探討非預期貨幣供給成長增加與減少在股市繁榮(boom) 和蕭條(bust) 時期，對於上海A 股和B 股股票報酬之影響。實證結果顯示，非預期貨幣供給成長在蕭條時期對中國股市報酬有正面的效果，但在繁榮時期的影響則不明顯，存在著不對稱性。非預期的貨幣供給成長對股價報酬的正向影響可被文獻中所提出的實質活動效果(the real activity effect) 解釋。此外，上海B 股與A 股投資人在蕭條時期對於貨幣當局緊縮政策的看法存在分歧。起始頁-結束頁：111-148資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：壹、2017年臺灣經濟情勢總展望作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：149-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田;彭信坤;張靜貞;蔡文禎;殷壽鏞期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：153-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017起始頁-結束頁：179-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：The Unlikely Blessings of Living on Borrowed Time in a Leased Land-Michael Chabon’s The Yiddish Policemen’s Union並列篇名：離散借貸的生命出口：麥可．謝朋的《猶太警察工會》作者：張淑麗(Shuli Chang)關鍵字：counterfactual;conspiracy;diaspora;fundamentalism;exceptionalism;架空歷史;陰謀論;離散;基本教義主義;例外主義期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：The culture of violence committed in the name of faith, a malady which plagues our world today, is the subject matter of Michael Chabon’s 2007 speculative fiction, The Yiddish Policemen’s Union, which is based on the historical premise that Israel, in losing the Arab-Israeli War in 1948, was destroyed, and millions of Jewish refugees given temporary shelter in Alaska, on a 60-year lease with the United States of America. The novel opens in 2007, when the Reversion is to take effect, and Diasporic Jews once again face homelessness. Against this counterfactual background of collective anxiety, Chabon has his detective-protagonist follow a murder case only to unravel a conspiracy to ”basically force [the] Messiah to come.” Recognized as one of the most important Jewish American writers of the present time, Chabon posits in his novel a provocative question by placing Jews in the awkward position presently occupied by the Palestinians: having to live on borrowed time, on land not their own, with Diaspora an everyday reality. How are peace and redemption possible under such circumstances, given that contingencies tend to divert history from rationally calculated paths onto unintentional detours? Chabon’s counterfactual fiction proffers a strident critique of religious fundamentalism in all its forms, especially fundamentalisms bound up with nationalism. Neither Diaspora nor Zionism guarantees Jews their long-awaited redemption; however, small-scale redemption is readily available when the redemptive fantasy is placed in suspension, thus opening up space for ”the blessings of more life.”英文摘要：謝朋於2007 年出版的虛構歷史小說《猶太警察工會》提出一個假設的歷史命題：以色列於1948 年以阿戰爭中慘敗滅國，上百萬之猶大難民暫居於阿拉斯加特區。60 年後，美國即將收回特區，猶太人又該何去何從：再次離散，還是不計代價而獨立建國。小說主人翁為特區猶太刑警，在調查一宗謀殺案件時，意外發現一樁政治陰謀：美國政府擬藉猶太復國主義者之手，毀滅阿拉伯世界，而焦躁的猶太人亦藉此重建故國。謝朋的小說由猶太人千年流亡主題切入猶太救贖議題，提出與其借道國族主義，來終結由猶太離散，不如回歸日常生活，藉由觀點的流動而落實猶太神學虛實相應的恩典。起始頁-結束頁：395-432資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201712_47(4).00012篇名：裴爾士難題以及邏輯情操並列篇名：Peirce’s Puzzle and Logical Sentiment作者：鄭喜(Hsi-Heng Cheng)關鍵字：裴爾士;帕特南;邏輯;情操;機率;Charles S. Peirce;Hilary Putnam;logic;sentiment;probability期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：裴爾士在1878 年提出了一個跟「機率觀念」以及「個人在什麼條件下有正當性依據機率來進行推論」有關的難題，並且提出了「社會情操」(或稱「邏輯情操」) 來作為解答方案。雖然美國當代著名哲學家蒯因與帕特南都曾經評論與詮釋過這個難題以及裴爾士的解答方案，而且帕特南將此難題稱為「裴爾士難題」並給予相當的重視，但是他們的評論與詮釋都不夠清晰，也未盡忠實。筆者在本文中區分了「邏輯」與「合乎邏輯性」，將「邏輯情操」從「利他的道德關懷」及「個人利益」中區隔出來，並且直接根據裴爾士的機率觀念汲取出他所提出的這三個邏輯情操的內容；藉由這些做法，筆者得以給出一個更為可信與忠實的詮釋。英文摘要：In 1878, Peirce provided a puzzle concerning both his conception of probability and under what conditions one is permitted to reason in accordance with probability; he then offered social sentiment (or logical sentiment) as solution. Quine and Putnam, two well-known contemporary American philosophers, commented upon and interpreted “Peirce’s puzzle” and his proposed solution. However, their comments and interpretations are neither illuminating nor faithful, leaving Peirce’s thought obscure. In this paper, a more credible and faithful interpretation is suggested with the help of the distinction between logic and logicality, of the separation of logical sentiment from both altruistic moral concern and personal interest, and of the derivation of the contents of Peirce’s three logical sentiments from his conception of probability.起始頁-結束頁：433-469資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201712_47(4).00023篇名：美國重返亞洲對中日兩國戰略競爭的影響（2011-2016）－安全困境理論的分析視野並列篇名：Examining the Impact of the U.S. Return to Asia on Sino-Japanese Strategic Competition (2011-2016)-A Perspective of the Security Dilemma Theory作者：陳亮智(Liang-chih Evans Chen)關鍵字：重返亞洲;戰略競爭;安全困境;美日同盟;軍備競賽;return to Asia;strategic competition;security dilemma;U.S.-Japan alliance;arms races期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷4期出版年：2017中文摘要：美國重返亞洲對中日戰略競爭造成什麼影響？本文認為，中日兩國的戰略競爭是隨著美國重返亞洲而迅速地走向惡化。原先美日同盟所具備之「嚇阻中國及北韓武力威脅」與「壓制日本再軍事化」的雙重作用，一方面正被中國迅速的軍備擴張所突破，另一方面則是被日本安全政策的改變所挑戰。其關鍵乃是北京在經濟與軍事上的崛起。此發展已悄然地改變Thomas Christensen 於1999 年所提出的論點——美日同盟的建立可以降低中日之間的安全困境問題，並削弱雙方發生軍備競賽、軍事衝突、戰爭的可能性。英文摘要：What is the impact of the U.S. return to Asia on Sino-Japanese strategic competition? This paper argues that as Washington pivots to the Asia-Pacific, situation of their competition deteriorates quickly. Previously, the U.S.-Japan alliance, as described in Thomas Christensen’s theory in 1999, possessed dual deterrence and was able to preserve peace and stability in East Asia-deterring military threats from China and North Korea, andpreventing the remilitarialization of Japan. Currently, however, these functions have been disrupted by China’s military modernization and challenged by Japan’s security transformation. The key to this situation is Beijing’s rise, economically and militarily, in recent years. This development is subtly undermining Christensen’s 1999 argument that the U.S.-Japan alliance could resolve problems associated with the China-Japan security dilemma and lower the likelihood of arms races, military confrontations, and war between these two nations.起始頁-結束頁：471-527資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201712_47(4).00034篇名：Engaging Politically from the Margin-Critical Cosmopolitanism in the Works of Kamila Shamsie並列篇名：從邊緣投入政治：卡美拉．森絲作品中批判的世界主義作者：廖培真(Pei-chen Liao)關鍵字：politics;critical cosmopolitanism;Offence;Burnt Shadows;A God in Every Stone;政治;批判的世界主義;《冒犯：穆斯林個案》;《灼痕》;《每一塊石頭都有神》期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：This essay explores Pakistani British writer Kamila Shamsie’s engagement in local and global politics, focusing in particular on her book-length non-fiction Offence: The Muslim Case (2009) and two recent novels, Burnt Shadows (2009) and A God in Every Stone (2014), which mark two significant temporal points in Shamsie’s life: 9/11, and her acquisition of British citizenship. Bringing to the fore the impact of international events, immigration, and national allegiance on Shamsie’s political engagement, I argue that these three books bear witness to Shamsie’s critical cosmopolitanism, which is locally rooted, universally diverse, and essentially self-reflective. Shamsie’s cosmopolitanism issues forth from the perspectives of silenced and marginalized Pakistanis, Muslims, migrants, and women, but it does not take plurality simply as the goal when challenging universal norms that are essentially ethnocentric, as exemplified by the global designs of British imperialism and American nationalism. At the same time as it addresses uneven international and cross-cultural relations, it also acutely discerns, from a micro-societal perspective, changes within personal, national, and other local identities. It reflects internally and reflexively on the problems of Islamic fundamentalism, divided loyalties and nationalism, as well as gender politics in Pakistan. Shamsie’s works ultimately and paradoxically show that, rather than mobility across borders, reflexive self-understanding is a core component of cosmopolitanism, on the basis of which connection to the world is critically established.英文摘要：本文藉由巴基斯坦裔英國作家卡美拉．森絲的三部作品——長篇散文《冒犯：穆斯林個案》(2009) 與兩本小說《灼痕》(2009)和《每一塊石頭都有神》(2014)，探討作者對地方政治與全球政治的投入。此三部作品合併來看，彰顯出作者生命中兩個關鍵點——九一一事件和成為英國公民，進而凸顯了國際事件、移民和愛國心對其政治投入的影響。本文主張，此三部作品印證了森絲的世界主義是帶有批判動能的，其根植於地方，強調多元化的普遍性，且本質上是自我反思的。此批判的世界主義透過巴基斯坦、穆斯林、移民和女性的視角，為被邊緣化的沉默者發聲；在其挑戰如英國帝國主義和美國國族主義等具種族中心本質的普世規範之時，並非單純以多元主義為目標。森絲的世界主義在關切不平等的國際和跨文化關係的同時，也深入洞悉個人、國家與其他在地身分的變化，此舉可從她以微觀社會的觀點對巴基斯坦境內伊斯蘭基本教義派、分裂的忠誠與民族主義、以及性別政治的內省反思中看出。森絲的作品最終弔詭地顯示了世界主義的核心不是越界流動，而是反身的自我理解，以此為基礎才來建立起與世界的批判性連結。起始頁-結束頁：263-297資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201709_47(3).00015篇名：Decomposing Youth Poverty in 22 Countries-Contributions of Household Composition, Social Welfare, and the Market to Cross-national Variations in Youth Poverty並列篇名：解構青年貧窮：檢視家戶組成、社會福利與市場等對22國青年貧窮的影響作者：戴翠莪(Tsui-o Tai)關鍵字：youth poverty;decomposition;household composition;social welfare;青年貧窮;解構;社會福利;家戶組成期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：Based on 2010 Luxembourg Income Study data, this research examines cross-national patterns of rates of youth poverty, using Taiwan as a representative of East Asian welfare regimes and comparing it to 21 countries. With decomposition analyses, I investigate the ways in which three structural factors-household composition, market income poverty, and social welfare-contribute to divergent patterns of youth poverty. Taiwan is a society in which intergenerational coresidence is prevalent but in which young adults and young parents are eligible for limited social provisions. The results show that in Scandinavian countries, leaving the parental home is associated with high levels of poverty, although generous social provisions offset some of the poverty risks of young adults. In East Asian countries, despite limited welfare benefits, the prevalence of intergenerational coresidence and lower levels of market income poverty have strong mitigating effects on youth poverty.英文摘要：本文使用Luxembourg Income Study 資料庫，探討造成22 個國家青年貧窮率差異的結構性因素。本研究採用解構法，檢視的三大結構因素為家戶組成、社會福利、與市場收入相對貧窮率，並以台灣為參照國家，與21 個工業化國家進行比較。主要的研究目標是解構三大結構性因素對青年貧窮率差異的相對影響。根據資料分析結果，北歐青年貧窮率最高，雖然其社會福利有效地降低貧窮，但是北歐青年離家甚早，加上這些青年的市場收入很低，因此仍有高比例的北歐青年面臨貧窮問題。相對而言，台灣、南韓、日本等東亞國家，即使社會福利有限，由於成年子女與父母同堂的居住安排普遍，並且市場收入貧窮率較低，因此東亞青年貧窮率遠低於許多西方國家。起始頁-結束頁：299-343資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201709_47(3).00026篇名：美國食品安全現代化法淺析：以進口食品監管制度為中心並列篇名：A Preliminary Analysis of the Import Safety Regulatory Framework under the United States Food Safety Modernization Act作者：林勤富(Ching-Fu Lin)關鍵字：食品安全;美國食品安全現代化法;進口監管;food safety;US FDA Food Safety Modernization Act;import regulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷3期出版年：2017中文摘要：隨著經濟全球化與食品供應鏈大規模擴張，近年來食品安全議題已不受國境邊界拘束，對各國造成衝擊，成為棘手的全球治理議題。即令美國一般高度發展國家，亦無法避免大規模食品安全事件發生，許多論者更指出美國食品安全管理制度存有許多瑕疵。美國食品安全現代化法即係相應誕生之法律，透過擴張行政管制權責、監控食品供應鏈及「預防」管制哲學，嘗試解決嚴重的食品安全問題。新法更針對進口食品制定創新監管制度，促使進口與國產食品遵循相同規範。本文檢視新法三大改革主軸，詳盡分析進口食品監管規範內涵，包含外國供應商查證計畫、自願性合格進口商計畫、進口食品驗證與第三方認驗證制度等，研討不同制度設計之管制優勢與潛在問題。英文摘要：Together with the globalization of economic activities and the expansion of food supply chains, food safety has emerged as a challenging global governance issue which transcends borders and impacts public health in individual nation-states. This challenge is shared by both developed and developing countries, including the United States, where regulatory flaws and food safety outbreaks are commonplace. The Food Safety Modernization Act was recently introduced to address the regulatory inadequacies in the United States, and aims to expand administrative authorities in regulating food products as well as to monitor the entire supply chain based on a ”preventive” regulatory philosophy. The new law also mandates a series of reforms in the regulatory system governing import food safety, with the general objective of ensuring the same level of safety and law compliance between domestic and imported products. This article judiciously examines the three major axes of regulatory reform under the Food Safety Modernization Act, with a particular analytical focus on the import safety rules, including the Foreign Supplier Verification Program, Voluntary Qualified Importer Program, and Third Party Audit and Certification Systems. Based on the analysis, the article concludes by offering an in-depth evaluation on the challenges and opportunities arising from the innovative institutional designs of the new law.起始頁-結束頁：345-394資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201709_47(3).00037篇名：Advanced Education and Mortality Compression in the United States並列篇名：美國中老年人口之教育程度與死亡壓縮作者：邱紀尊(Chi-Tsun Chiu)關鍵字：Education;mortality compression;modal age of death;standard deviation above the mode;教育;死亡壓縮;死亡年齡眾數;眾數之上標準差期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Studies regarding education as a ”fundamental cause” of health disparities have shown that people who are more-educated enjoy longer life expectancy and a compression of mortality compared with their less-educated counterparts. Previous studies have shown the significance of education for mortality compression, but may have overlooked heterogeneity and the importance of education-mortality compression association with postsecondary schooling. This study aims to examine whether advanced education has become increasingly important in determining the life chances of individuals in the United States using the Health and Retirement Study. The results not only show the educational gradients of longevity along with mortality compression, but also imply that advanced education has become increasingly important in determine life chances in the United States.英文摘要：將教育視為「根本原因」(fundamental cause) 的研究指出，教育程度較高者和教育程度較低者相比，享有較長的平均餘命和較壓縮的死亡年齡區間。然而，過去研究雖然指出教育對於死亡壓縮之影響力顯著，但忽略了高等教育範圍內「教育─死亡壓縮」之異質性和重要性。本研究使用具美國全國代表性之長期追蹤調查資料庫(Health and Retirement Study)，探討學士（含）以上教育程度是否在個體生存機會中扮演日漸重要之角色。研究結果不僅顯示了壽命與死亡壓縮之教育梯度，亦指出學士 (含) 以上教育程度在美國確實已經逐漸成為個體存活機會之重要指標。起始頁-結束頁：143-175資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201706_47(2).00018篇名：Ethnic Variations in Characteristics of First Unions among Asian American Young Adults並列篇名：亞裔美籍青年初婚與首次同居的族群差異作者：鄭雁馨(Yen-hsin Alice Cheng)關鍵字：Asian American;race/ethnicity;marriage;intermarriage;cohabitation;亞裔美國人;種族／族群;結婚;通婚;同居期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：This study investigates the characteristics of first cohabitations and first marriages formed by Asian American young adults, focusing specifically on ethnic variations between East Asian, Filipino, and South Asian Americans. The fourth wave of Add Health data, which collects complete union histories of all respondents between the ages of 25 to 32 in years 2007-2008, offers a unique opportunity to study first unions formed by recent young immigrants. The findings show that the level of cohabitation is very similar across all Asian subgroups when socio-demographic covariates are considered. East Asians and Filipinos delay marriage longer than do South Asians. Filipinos are more likely to turn a first cohabitation into a marriage and to have a first marriage preceded by cohabitation than are the other two groups. Finally, East Asians are significantly more likely to have a white cohabiting or married partner. Compared with their East Asian peers, Filipinos are more likely to cohabit with Asian coethnics or with individuals from other minority groups than with whites. The analyses presented here reveal that ethnic variations should not be overlooked when studying cohabitation and marriage among Asian Americans.英文摘要：本研究探討亞裔美籍青年初婚與首次同居的特徵，並聚焦於不同族群如東亞裔、菲律賓裔、與南亞裔的美籍青年之間的差異。本研究運用第四波的美國青少年健康長期追蹤資料庫 (National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health, Add Health) 作為資料來源。本波資料收集了在2007-2008 年間25-32 歲的所有受訪者完整的親密關係與婚姻資訊 (union histories)，這為研究青年移民的初婚與首次同居經驗提供了絕佳的研究素材。研究發現顯示，在考慮了社會人口特徵之後，同居經驗的普及率在各族群間相當類似。就婚姻而言，東亞裔與菲律賓裔的美籍青年較南亞裔青年更容易延遲結婚。菲律賓裔青年較其他兩族群青年有更高比例將首次同居關係轉為婚姻，也有更高比例在婚前同居。而就親密伴侶而言，東亞裔青年有更高比例會與白人同居或是結婚。與東亞裔青年相比，菲律賓裔青年則較容易與其他亞裔青年或是其他少數族群同居，而不是與白人同居。本研究的發現顯示族群差異在研究亞裔美籍青年的同居或結婚是一個重要且不可忽視的變項，反映亞裔族群整體的多元性與在家庭行為上的差異。起始頁-結束頁：177-214資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201706_47(2).00029篇名：”OMNIUM GATHERUM” -Representations of the Intellectuals in ”Aeolus”並列篇名：「群英會」：〈埃俄羅斯〉中知識分子群像作者：周幸君(Hsing-chun Chou)關鍵字：”Aeolus,” James Joyce;intellectuals;Ireland;〈埃俄羅斯〉;詹姆斯．喬伊斯;知識分子;愛爾蘭期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷2期出版年：2017中文摘要：Intellectuals, admittedly, have dominated central parts in the pages of modern Irish history, and James Joyce incorporates a diverse array of intellectuals into his texts. The ”Aeolus” episode in Ulysses depicts members of the professional intelligentsia in journalism, law, and education. However, the picture of the independent and nonconforming intellectual functioning as the conscience of the people and speaking truth to power seems gravely distorted in ”Aeolus.” Instead of acting as society's conscience, these Dubliners corrupt the national spirit: their idleness, flatulence, alcoholism, and nostalgia result in failure and unfulfillment, and, more grievously, signify the degeneration of the intelligentsia. Retrospective rather than innovative, dedicated to the borrowed rather than the self-created, these ”talents” fail to live up to their calling. In contrast with Joyce's portrayal of his protagonists, his depictions of these ”talents” offer critiques of the corruption of certain intellectuals, his dialogue with those who exercised profound influence on modern Ireland, and his rethinking of the role of the intellectual.英文摘要：無可否認，知識分子在現代愛爾蘭歷史扮演重要角色。詹姆斯．喬伊斯在作品中寫入不少知識分子。《尤利西斯》的〈埃俄羅斯〉一章描繪隸屬於知識階層的新聞記者、律師與教育家。然而，原本應該獨立且拒絕服從、身為人民良知、向權勢說真話的知識分子形象在此章嚴重扭曲。這些都柏林人非但未成為良知，反而敗壞國家精神：其無所事事、吹噓空談、貪杯酗酒以及留戀懷舊不僅造成其個人的挫敗與失意，更影射所有知識分子的頹廢墮落。緬懷過往而不積極創新，致力於仿效挪用而不願自行創造，這些所謂「人才」完全辜負其名。鋪陳這些「人才」以對比其筆下的主人翁，喬伊斯一方面批判這群知識分子的腐敗，另一方面也與深刻影響現代愛爾蘭社會的知識群英對話，並且重新思考知識分子的定位。起始頁-結束頁：215-261資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201706_47(2).000310篇名：”There is no tongue that moves” - Female Healers and the Therapeutic Female Tongue in The Winter's Tale並列篇名：「萬語莫奈何」：莎翁《冬天的故事》中的女性醫者與女性療癒語言作者：林熒嬌(Ying-chiao Lin)關鍵字：The Winter's Tale;woman healers;midwifery;Paracelsus;sixteenth-century England;《冬天的故事》;女性醫者;助產士;帕拉賽爾塞思;十六世紀英國期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：This reading of Shakespeare's The Winter's Tale focuses on the theme of female healers or medical practitioners, both as we see them in the play itself and as their history contributes to the cultural background of the play. While the female healer, Pauline, may be said to stand squarely within this tradition, Queen Hermione is less directly representative of it. More precisely, the reading focuses on the central role played by the voices, tongues, and forceful speeches of these two women. Empowered by their words and wits, these two wise women, in particular Paulina, the play's central female figure and my main focus, transform their traditional gender roles, acting as female healers whose wits and tongues remove blockages within the public order and the minds of the men who control it, restoring circulation in both to a state of health. On the one hand, Paulina's words, which operate both magically and therapeutically, turn King Leontes's diseased speech into what sounds like repentance. On the other hand, the marble-like statue of his queen, Hermione, who has supposedly been dead ever since the trial at which her husband accused her of adultery, is ”reanimated” by Paulina's magical utterance. Here we have the traditional midwife enabling a symbolic rebirth in the final scene of the play, which again suggests the restoration of a healthy public order, or in alchemical and Paracelsian terms, the refinement or transmutation of lead/death into gold/life.英文摘要：本文援用西方十六世紀醫者派帕拉賽爾塞思之醫學理論，探討莎翁《冬天的故事》中的女性醫者角色，並對比在此時期歷史文化背景下真實女性醫者。本文分析劇中女主角寶琳娜為女性醫者之典範，期以呈現女性的語言為一療癒砭石。寶琳娜透過適當的語言運用，巧妙地化解了存在於國王與皇后間的誤解紛爭，重新恢復皇室健康秩序。寶琳娜如醫藥般的話語，神奇地轉化國王盛怒之語為懺悔柔語。而被認定死去已久的皇后，她如石塊般的雕像身軀，竟能在寶琳娜的話語指導下被喚醒而「重生」。這象徵性的重生，乃鍊金醫學的最高境界：賤金屬／死亡轉化為黃金／生命。起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201703_47(1).000111篇名：通訊監察與民主監督：歐美爭議發展趨勢之反思並列篇名：Surveillance and Democratic Supervision-Reflections on Tendencies in Developments in Europe and the United States作者：劉靜怡(Ching-Yi Liu)關鍵字：通訊監察;資訊隱私;歐洲人權法院;後設資料;巨量資料;surveillance;informational privacy;European Court of Human Rights;metadata;big data期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文從民主社會應如何監督政府通訊監察行為出發，檢視歐洲人權法院的相關判決，並與美國相關爭議比較，以探究歐美通訊監察法制爭議之發展趨勢，對我國有何啟示，藉此探討通訊監察法制應有的民主監督形貌。本文認為：歐洲人權法院在資訊隱私權領域已累積豐富的判決，往往決定締約國通訊監察或監控法制的改革。值得注意的是，歐洲人權法院在適用歐洲人權公約第8 條規定時，經常把重點放在「依法」的解釋與分析上，而非「民主社會所必需」要件。此一趨勢可能導致締約國僅以內國立法表面回應，民主社會所需的資訊隱私保護架構仍有改進空間。英文摘要：Pursuing an inquiry into how a democratic society is supposed to monitor government surveillance, this essay examines the attitude of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) towards litigation derived from laws on surveillance in European nations, and juxtaposes the findings with relevant disputes in the United States; the purpose of this inquiry is to explore how these traditions might shed light on the situation in Taiwan and how the landscape of democratic supervision is to be shaped under modern surveillance law. This essay argues that the European judiciary is well-experienced in the realm of informational privacy, and that reforms to surveillance law in European nations is generally determined by ECtHR case-law. Of particular significance is the emphasis that the ECtHR lays on the interpretation and analysis of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), specifically the focus on the notion ”in accordance with the law” rather than ”necessary in a democratic society.” Such tendency might lead to the fact that the State Parties to the ECHR are merely willing to introduce domestic legislation. Accordingly, there is still plenty of room for improvement in the protective framework of informational privacy essential for a democratic society.起始頁-結束頁：43-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201703_47(1).000212篇名：氣候模擬模型的確證問題並列篇名：Confirmation of Climate Models作者：趙相科(Hsiang-Ke Chao);邱獻儀(Hsien-I Chiu)關鍵字：氣候變遷;科學模型;氣候模擬模型;確證;不確定性;climate change;scientific models;climate simulation models;confirmation;uncertainty期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：47卷1期出版年：2017中文摘要：模擬方法不僅是氣候變遷研究的主流研究方法，亦使用在估算氣候變遷對於經社效益影響的政策分析，故當代氣候研究不但是模型化科學的代表，同時具體地表示模擬模型所在開放複雜體系的研究中所扮演的重要角色。換言之，除氣候模擬的討論可作為科學模型的案例，顯著地反映科學模型的相關重要科哲議題之外，並可展現科學家使用抽象的模型以探討不可控制的開放複雜體系的研究之方法論、知識論、至本體論層面的探討。本文以氣候模擬模型為例，說明傳統邏輯實證論的確證理論不敷科學實作之需，應重新檢視哲學的確證理論與科學模型所扮演的角色。英文摘要：By critically appraising the logical positivist theory of confirmation and the philosophical accounts for climate simulation models, this paper investigates the issues of model confirmation in the contexts of scientific practice of climate study. The epistemic merits of simulation models, which are regarded as fictions due to the idealization in the model building process, are to serve as heuristic tools the model users use to achieve a certain purposes. In climate sciences, models are thus evaluated according to whether or not they are adequate for the purposes of empirical examinations.起始頁-結束頁：107-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201703_47(1).000301篇名：影響台灣民眾政治參與的因素：從公民規範認知的觀點出發並列篇名：Determinants of Political Participation in Taiwan: From A Viewpoint of Citizenship Norms作者：俞振華(Eric Chen-hua Yu);翁定暐(Ting-wei Weng)關鍵字：政治參與;公民規範認知;文化價值途徑;社會結構途徑;心理態度途徑;political participation;citizenship norms;cultural model;social structure model;attitudinal model期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：38期出版年：2017中文摘要：為什麼民眾參與政治活動？本研究利用2004年及2014年兩波調查資料，探討公民規範認知（即民眾對於「好公民」的想法）如何影響政治參與，並進一步結合其他解釋途徑，分析這十年間民眾政治參與變遷的主因。首先，我們根據Russell Dalton（2008; 2009）的理論，將民眾的公民規範認知區分成兩個構面，包括義務規範認知（duty-based citizenship norms）及參與規範認知（engaged citizenship norms），並探討這兩個規範構面與政治參與行為的連結。我們的發現可以歸納為以下三點：（1）參與規範認知比較會影響個人積極性的政治參與；（2）義務規範認知會影響個人的投票行為；（3）這兩個構面都不會影響一個人是否成為政黨黨員。其次，本文將前述文化價值的分析途徑結合社會結構途徑及心理態度途徑，並利用這三個途徑所建構的影響因素，分析2004年到2014年政治參與的變遷。我們發現：十年間積極性政治參與及政黨參與的改變，主要是因為影響機制產生結構性的變化；而投票參與的改變，主要取決於各個影響因素本身的變化。英文摘要：Why do citizens participate in politics? This study utilizes two waves of survey datasets in 2004 and 2014, respectively, and focuses on the extent to which citizenship norms (i.e., perceptions of ”good” citizenship) affect political participation. Specifically, this study combines different explanatory approaches and analyzes why political participation has changed over the ten-year period of time. By adopting Dalton's (2008, 2009) theoretical framework that divides citizenship norms into two dimensions-namely, duty-based citizenship norms and engaged citizenship norms, our findings regarding the linkages between norm perceptions and participation behaviors are threefold: first, the perception of engaged citizenship norms may have a significant impact on active political participation; second, the perception of duty-based citizenship norms may affect voting behavior; and third, neither type of citizenship norm has any impact on affiliation with political parties. Additionally, we further utilize a counterfactual analysis to dissect different components that may have caused the change in political participation from 2004 to 2014. We found that over the period of time, the changes in active participation as well as party affiliation have been mainly affected by structural changes of the linkages between political participation and its determinants. On the other hand, the change in voting behavior is mainly affected by the changes in determinants.起始頁-結束頁：9-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心2篇名：Women's (No) Naming Right under the Shadow of Patronymy: Changes in the Public Attitudes in Taiwan between 2002 and 2012並列篇名：父權陰影下的子女姓氏決定：比較台灣民眾在2002到2012年間的態度轉變作者：陳昭如(Chao-ju Chen);彭渰雯(Yen-wen Peng);張晉芬(Chin-fen Chang)關鍵字：patronymy;matronymic naming;gender and family;legal reform;Taiwan Social Change Survey;父權;從母姓;性別與家庭;法律改革;台灣社會變遷基本調查期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：38期出版年：2017中文摘要：Patronymy is the norm by which children's surnames are based on their fathers' surnames; and/or wives' surnames are to follow their husbands'. Taiwan is one of the countries where the practice of patronymy prevails. Before 2007, it was legally required that children assume the father's surname, albeit with some exceptions. In 2007, the legislature passed a milestone amendment of family law that permits parents to decide the surname of the child through mutual agreement, but governmental statistics show that on average only 1.7% of all newborns in the past 9 years took their mother's surname. Whether people in Taiwan are indeed overwhelmingly dominated by patronymic thinking despite the legal amendment, or there is a disjuncture between people's attitudes and behavior on nontraditional surnaming as revealed by existing literature, is the main question that we want to probe. Drawing on data from the 2002 and 2012 Taiwan Social Change Survey, we analyze people's attitudes a decade apart, and the factors that influenced and differentiated people's attitudes. Based on binomial logistic analysis of the two surveys, we find significant impacts of demographic and socio-economic status on the naming practices in the family. While in general Taiwanese endorsement of patronymy declined after the law passed, men are significantly more likely to support patronymic naming than are women. Respondents with higher education and upper non-manual workers seem to be more flexible in bestowing children's last names. We also confirm that when people support gender equality and when women are better educated, families are more likely to accept the taking of mothers' surnames. To change the practice of patronymic surnaming, therefore, we suggest a more radical legal reform approach accompanying continuous feminist activism to empower women and change men's gender ideology, and to encourage the decision to give children the mother's surname.英文摘要：父╱夫姓常規是指子女應從父姓、妻子應改為夫姓或冠夫姓。在台灣，除了少數法定例外，子女依法須從父姓。歷經多年婦女運動的努力，〈民法〉2007年廢除子女應從父姓的規定，改由父母自行約定。官方數據顯示，新法實施九年以來，所有新生兒中只有1.7%從母姓。台灣人民的態度真與新法大相逕庭、如此支持父姓常規嗎？本文分析2002和2012年「台灣社會變遷基本調查」資料，以瞭解台灣人對於從父姓或母姓的態度變化及影響態度的因素。二元邏輯迴歸分析結果顯示，父權意識形態與社經地位對於子女從姓態度有顯著影響。儘管民眾對父姓常規的支持度明顯下降，男性仍較支持子女從父姓；教育程度較高者、白領階級、較具性別平權意識者、母親社經地位較高者對從母姓較為認同或開放。但男性社經地位並無影響。因此若要改變父姓常規並縮減態度與實踐上的落差，似乎需採行更基進的法律來回應夫妻協商立足點的不平等，並持續推動女性主義運動以培力女性地位，並提高男性對性別平等的支持。起始頁-結束頁：57-97資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心3篇名：Life Course and Cohort Impacts of Education on Depression in Taiwan並列篇名：教育對憂鬱作用的生命歷程和世代模式作者：王維邦(Wei-Pang Wang)關鍵字：Education;Depression;Aging;Cohort;教育;憂鬱;生命歷程;世代期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：38期出版年：2017中文摘要：A growing body of literature has demonstrated that the impacts of education on physical health vary across the life course and across birth cohorts in Western societies. However, since aging effects and cohort effects are difficult to disentangle empirically, most previous studies have estimated one effect while ignoring the other. In addition, whether the temporal impacts of education can be extended to depression and whether they exist in non-Western societies are much less known. Thus, this study is conducted to elucidate the patterns between education and depression across the life course and across cohorts in Taiwan, by using age-cohort regression models on the sequential cross-sectional data pooled from the Taiwan Social Change Survey and using latent growth curve models on the longitudinal data obtained from the 1989-2003 Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan. The main findings are: (1) both approaches consistently indicate a favorable direction of life-course relationship in depression for the well educated within the same cohort. Thus, the age-specific rates of change in depression differ across levels of education in a manner that progressively enlarges the gap in late life, supporting the cumulative advantage hypothesis; (2) the education-based difference in depression is larger and appears earlier for younger cohorts, which is consistent with the rising importance hypothesis; and (3) evidence for the age-as-lever hypothesis appears in the TSCS analyses, but is limited in the latent growth analyses obtained from the elderly panels. The cross-sectional analyses are affected by selective mortality. Thus, the convergence of depression by levels of education in late life may be illusory.英文摘要：本文以累積優勢論、老化槓桿論和世代重要論等三種視角，來剖析教育對憂鬱作用的跨生命歷程和跨世代模式。藉由年齡世代迴歸模型分析「台灣社會變遷基本調查：1990、1995、2000、2005」和潛在成長模型探究「台灣中老年身心社會生活狀況長期追蹤調查：1989、1993、1996、1999、2003」，本文發現：（1）「教育」和「教育與年齡交互項」皆與橫斷面的憂鬱以及縱貫面的憂鬱斜率有顯著負向關係。當教育對憂鬱的主效果和年齡交互效果皆為負向時，因教育而別的憂鬱差異隨生命歷程而擴大。此外，較低教育者的憂鬱在中年後攀升，但較高教育者的憂鬱隨年齡增加維持平緩，故累積優勢論獲得支持；（2）「教育」和「教育與世代交互項」與憂鬱有顯著負向關係。對年輕世代而言，教育對憂鬱的影響出現較早且程度更高，故符合世代重要論；（3）橫斷面分析契合老化槓桿論，但縱貫分析僅提供有限的支持，故老化槓桿論仍需商榷。起始頁-結束頁：99-160資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心4篇名：賠上身心健康的信用卡債務：中介影響路徑之探查並列篇名：Physical and psychological toll of credit card debt: An investigation of the mediating pathway作者：翁志遠(Chih-Yuan Weng)關鍵字：信用卡債務;健康梯度;壓力過程;中介分析;間接效果;credit card debt;SES gradient of health;stress process;mediation analysis;indirect effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：38期出版年：2017中文摘要：本研究援引「壓力過程」的理論架構，佐以「健康梯度」之相關文獻，提出兩個主要假設：（1）即便在控制社會人口特徵與社經地位背景之後，相較於不含信用卡債務的借貸，含有信用卡債務之借貸與個人的身心福祉具有更強烈且顯著的負向關聯；（2）信用卡債務較有可能透過增加心理憂困從而提升生理失調，而非藉由生理影響心理。分析「2007年台灣社會變遷基本調查計畫：第五期第三次（問卷一：階層組）」所得的發現支持上述兩個假設。第一，當債務與信用卡無涉時，雖然仍有可能增加些微心理憂困，但並不至於顯著地提升生理失調。但當個人借貸之中包含了無擔保、高利率、以提供日常生活消費所需為特徵的信用卡債務時，其與健康在身心兩個層面上皆有顯著關聯。第二，中介分析顯示，當債務與信用卡無涉時，幾乎不會提升生理失調，因其增加的心理憂困相對有限；相較之下，信用卡債務透過心理憂困影響生理失調的相對間接效果既強烈又顯著（相對於無債務以及其他類型債務）。英文摘要：Drawing on the abundant literature of 'SES gradient of health' and the theoretical framework of 'stress process', this study proposes two major research hypotheses: (1) carrying credit card debt has a significant and stronger adverse impact on physical and psychological wellbeing than carrying other types of debt, even after adjusting for socio-demographic and socioeconomic backgrounds; (2) it is more likely for carrying credit card debt to be associated with higher level of physical dysfunction through increase in psychological distress, than to be linked to greater psychological distress via growing physical dysfunction. Findings based on ”2007 Taiwan Social Change Survey (Round 5, Year 3): Social Stratification” support both hypotheses. First of all, when debt had nothing do with credit card outstanding balances, it was positively predictive of psychological distress only to a moderate extent, but it was not associated with significant gain in physical dysfunction. However, the debt-health relationship was significant and much stronger in terms of both physical and psychological dimensions when any part of the debt was accrued on credit cards. Secondly, the mediation analyses revealed that debt without credit card outstanding balances was barely related to elevation of physical dysfunction given limited increase in psychological distress. On the contrary, the relative indirect effect of credit card debt on physical dysfunction through psychological distress was both strong and significant (relative to no debt at all as well as other types of debt). Alternative models indicated that the relative indirect effect of credit card debt on psychological distress through physical dysfunction failed to reach statistical significance. Implications for future research and public policy are then discussed in detail.起始頁-結束頁：161-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心5篇名：環境汙染保險之願付價值－以中油個別加盟店為例並列篇名：The Willingness to Pay of Environmental Pollution Insurance: An Empirical Study of CPC Franchised Gas Stations作者：曾真真(Jen-Jen Tseng);葉寶文(Powen Yeh);周炳宏(Ping-Hung Chou)關鍵字：環境汙染保險;願付價值;保險費;風險認知;環境管理;environmental pollution insurance;willingness to pay;premium;risk perception;environmental management期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：37期出版年：2017中文摘要：環境汙染保險制度的推動，須先瞭解潛在顧客的需求，保險的需求取決於企業對環境風險的主觀認知及對環境管理的涉入程度。此外，以貨幣形式表示其願意支付的環境汙染保險的價格，即願付價值，而本研究旨在探討潛在汙染業者對汙染風險的認知、環境管理的涉入程度與願付價值之關係。實證時，以中油個別加盟業者為對象，採用問卷調查搜集302 個有效樣本進行分析，研究結果發現在設定的承保條件下，單界二分選擇模型之願付價值，分別依Probit 及Logit 兩種模型推估出之願付金額分別為92,466 元及92,159 元；雙界二分選擇模型之願付價值，則介於93,025 元與96,761 元間。此外，汙染的風險認知、環境管理的涉入程度與加油站業者的支付意願呈正向顯著的關係。英文摘要：In order to promote an environmental pollution insurance system, the first thing is to understand the demand from potential consumers. The demand for insurance is determined by the subjective perception of environmental risk and the involvement in environmental management by companies. In addition, consumers have a subjective value for the price of environmental pollution insurance, which is then turned into a monetary form as the willingness to pay. This study attempts to explore the relationship among the risk perception of pollution, environmental management involvement, and willingness to pay of potential polluters. Empirically, the study chooses CPC-franchised gas stations as research targets, and 302 valid questionnaires were recovered. Under the assumed insurance condition, research results indicate that the willingness to pay using a single-bound dichotomous choice model is NTD 92,466 and NTD 92,159 as estimated by probit and logit models, respectively. The willingness to pay is between NTD 93,025 and NTD 96,761 using a doubled-bound dichotomous choice model. Besides, both the risk perception of pollution and environmental management involvement significantly and positively affect the willingness to pay of gas station operators.起始頁-結束頁：7-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心6篇名：層級式時間序列的組合預測並列篇名：Forecasting Hierarchical Time Series by Using Combined Forecasts作者：林豐政(Feng-Jeng Lin);康銘仁(Ming-Ren Kang)關鍵字：層級式預測;組合預測;獨立成分分析;白化;Hierarchical Forecasting;Combined Forecasting;Independent Component Analysis;Whitening期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：37期出版年：2017中文摘要：本文主要針對具層級的時間序列資料，提出一套結合獨立成分分析（Independent Components Analysis, ICA）中白化過程產生的特徵值比例為權重之組合方式，應用於多個預測方法的兩階段組合預測流程：第一階段為不同預測方法間預測值的組合預測，第二階段為top-down 與bottom-up 流程預測值的組合預測。為能評估與比較兩階段組合預測流程於具層級的時間序列中之可靠性與實用性，研究中以行政院主計總處總體統計資料庫之來台旅客人數的時間序列為實證資料；同時，採行算術平均、變異加權、ICA 加權等三種組合方式進行實際績效的評比。結果發現：（1）單一方法的預測績效非常不一致，但都可能具有所需要的正確訊號，故而應用組合預測予以整合之，實屬可行的方法；（2）在一階段之方法間組合預測評比中，加入ICA 權重的組合方式，相對更具有效整合單一方法的預測序列，並可降低預測誤差的雜訊；（3）在兩階段之程序間組合預測評比中，同樣是以ICA加權的組合預測結果績效最佳。由此可知，研究中所提之兩階段的組合預測流程，並採行ICA 加權的組合方式，確實可以有效提升預測績效。而在實務上，尚有許多領域的資料序列是具層級性的，故而本研究的組合預測概念亦可應用於相似的領域上。英文摘要：This paper examines a process that integrates the concept of combined forecast with the eigenvalue proportions resulted from the matrix formed by whitening of independent component analysis (ICA) as applied to forecast time series data with a hierarchical mode. In this process, the stage of combined forecast will be executed twice. The first stage will combine the several forecasts that derive from different forecasting methods, whereas the second stage will combine the forecasts that operate in a top-down and bottom-up manner. To evaluate and compare the reliability and applicability of the proposed process as practiced on time series data with a hierarchical mode, the official monthly number of inbound tourists to Taiwan, as obtained from the Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics (DGBAS), will be used in this paper. Meanwhile, three combining methods (arithmetic average, variance-weighted, ICA-weighted) will also be adopted to assess their forecasting performance. As a result, we will note three important findings in this empirical study: (1) Although the forecasting performance is very inconsistent in each forecasting method, some correct signals are all required, therefore, using a combined forecast to integrate these correct signals is an optimal alternative. (2) The ICA-weighted method can decrease the error signals and be more efficient in integrating correct signals in the first combining stage. (3) The ICA-weighted method still outperformed the other two combining methods in the second combining stage. In summary, the findings demonstrate that the proposed forecasting process is feasible and reliable. The results suggest the possibility of applying forecast of hierarchical time series data to other areas as well.起始頁-結束頁：53-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心7篇名：網路算命使用者行為與特徵分析：資料探勘技術之應用並列篇名：Characteristics and Behavior Analysis of Online Fortune Telling Users-A Data Mining Approach作者：帥嘉珍(Jia-Jane Shuai);陳杏枝(Hsinchih Chen);陳耀斌(Yao-bin Chen)關鍵字：網路算命;資料探勘;約略集合理論;決策樹;貝氏網路;online fortune telling;Data Mining;Rough Set Theory;Bayesian network;Decision Tree期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：37期出版年：2017中文摘要：命理在華人社會中一直有很大的影響力，近年來隨著使用網際網路的人口快速增長，在台灣命理相關網站日漸風行。本研究使用資料探勘工具，針對台灣民眾使用網路算命行為，分析網路算命使用者的個人特質、使用行為以及使用者動機。本研究以約略集合理論（Rough Set Theory）、決策樹（Decision Tree）與貝氏網路（Bayesian Net-work）的資料探勘方法來進行分析，希望能區隔民眾使用網路算命之特徵、偏好，以瞭解台灣民眾使用網路算命的趨勢。研究發現：網路算命使用者與其個人宗教信仰以及網路宗教的使用密切關係，有朝向上班族及高學歷兩種趨勢，本研究結果將有助於增進對網路算命研究課題之瞭解，同時也可以提供網路業者做為經營參考。英文摘要：Fortune telling has always been influential in Chinese society. In recent years, internet users have increased considerably in number. This has led to attention to internet-related behavior and characteristics. This study aims to understand the motivation and behavior pattern for Taiwanese users of on-line fortune telling. This paper proposes a method that links the rough set theory, Bayesian network and decision tree modeling for causal analysis. According to our research, usage of on-line fortune telling is related to users' religion and online religion experience. On the other hand, there are a growing number of well-educated people and full-time workers who use online fortune telling. Data mining results for targeting marketing to on-line users can offer Internet enterprises information for marketing decision making. Based on the findings of this study, conclusions and implications for management are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：97-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心8篇名：以因素混合分析評估青少年偏差行為的異質性：自我控制理論的詮釋並列篇名：Introducing Factor Mixture Analysis to Evaluate Heterogeneity of Adolescents' Deviance: Interpretation from Self-Control Theory作者：吳中勤(Chung Chin Wu)關鍵字：因素混合分析;偏差行為;異質性;潛在類別分析;delinquency;factor mixture analysis;heterogeneity;latent class analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：37期出版年：2017中文摘要：多數偏差行為研究著重於偏差行為嚴重程度的探究，可能忽略青少年群體異質性，而少數研究雖注意到偏差行為的群體異質性，但卻忽略群體內青少年在偏差行為嚴重程度上的變異性。因素混合分析（Factor Mixture Analysis, FMA）可在相同測量模式中，以潛在類別分析（Laten Class Analysis, LCA）捕捉偏差行為的群體異質性，並以因素分析（Factor Analysis, FA）來描述次群體內青少年在偏差行為嚴重程度上的差異，但仍較少受到研究者的重視。有鑑於此，本研究主要目的在於，評估LCA、FA 與FMA 應用於國中青少年偏差行為研究的實益。研究結果發現：<U+2474> 2 類別1 因素FMA 模式，較適合描述國中青少年偏差行為的群間與群內異質性。<U+2475>在同時考量偏差行為的類型與程度後，FMA 出現與LCA 不同的分類結果。最後於文末根據研究結果，提出相應之建議。英文摘要：Most research on deviance has emphasized investigating the severity of deviance. This may result in ignoring the heterogeneity in the population. Although, a few studies have addressed this heterogeneity, the variation in the severity of deviance within a class was still overlooked. Factor mixture analysis (FMA) incorporates latent class analysis (LCA) with factor analysis (FA) to capture the heterogeneity in a population and to depict the severity of deviance within a class, respectively, within a single model. However, it has received insufficient attention to date. The main purpose of this study was to evaluate the benefits of applying LCA, FA, and FMA to investigate adolescents' deviance in junior high school. The results showed: (1) A two-class, one-factor F MA model was suitable for depicting heterogeneities between and within classes for junior high school adolescents. (2) After taking type and degree of deviance into account, FMA had results differing from that of LCA. Corresponding suggestions were proposed based on the present results at the end of this article.起始頁-結束頁：155-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心
