01篇名：兩岸房屋租賃法制比較與效益研究並列篇名：Comparative Study on Housing Leasing Legal System between Taiwan and Mainland China作者：林清汶(Chin-Win Lin)關鍵字：房屋租賃法制;兩岸租賃;租賃市場;承租人保護;Housing leasing legal system;Cross -strait lease;Leasing market;Tenant protection期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：21卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：兩岸制度之差異，乃歷史、文化、地理環境背景使然，鑑於兩岸商業型態之密切與持續發展，以及大量人口湧入城市，租屋法制乃成為城市重要課題，房屋租賃成為市場重要趨勢。為此乃就兩岸房屋租賃法制分析，以各自特有房屋租賃法制，及相近房屋租賃法制作論述比較，並作效益探討。本文經研究認為，由於商業行為之轉型與居住型態變動，兩岸若干房屋租賃法制已不合時宜，相關法制應作調整與修正。英文摘要：The differences system between Taiwan and China are the consequences of dissimilar historical, cultural and geographical backgrounds. The close ties commercial relationships between cross-strait as well as large number of populations moved into the big city, the legal rental system has become an important subject of the city. This research analyzes the regulations and legal system on both side of the strait, looking at the features unique to either of the systems, and makes a comparison between similar characteristics in the two systems. In this paper, the study highlight the transformation of business practices and changes in the way of residence, a number of housing leasing on both sides of the legal system were outdated, it can be consider, above all, this article also proposing amendments, adjustments and revise to the relevant legal system.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2018.21.01.001-0222篇名：從「仕紳化」到「仕紳化想像」：員山鄉七賢村的個案研究並列篇名：From ”Gentrification” to ”Imaginary of Gentrification”: A Case Study of Qixian Village, Yuanshan Towship, Yilan County作者：王文誠(Wen-Cheng Wang);李崇恩(Chong-En Li)關鍵字：上濾作用;仕紳化;仕紳化想像;佔領;階級替代;Displacement;Gentrification;Imaginary of gentrification;Occupation;Upward-filtering期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：21卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：關於「仕紳化」的定義，最早見於英國社會學者露絲．格拉斯（Ruth Glass）的文章。惟，仕紳化的意義在階級涇渭分明的西方國家有其嚴謹的社會脈絡，臺灣以中小企業發展、中產階級為中堅的社會脈絡，所對應之空間發展或許並不完全符合其定義與辯論。然而，當下不少地區正經歷著巨大變遷，包括建成環境改變、不動產價格上漲、仕紳遷入跡象明顯、遷入家戶人口較少、原居民和移居者之間的人際關係疏離、土地利用轉趨為複雜的消費空間等。這些現象似乎都歸因於仕紳的遷入與佔領，所導致土地使用上劇烈改變，它帶來的影響似乎不亞於所謂的仕紳化衝擊。然而兩者存在與其定義上最根本的不同，臺灣案例並沒有如同文獻中所謂「階級替代」或「上濾作用」跡象。這種特殊的現象，本研究不認為是與西方文獻「仕紳化」對話的社會背景，而是學術界邁向某種「仕紳化想像」的關懷。本文以宜蘭縣員山鄉七賢村為例，透過現地問卷與面對面訪談，仔細地檢驗當地的現況是否符合仕紳化的社會關係與過程。最後，從個案研究證據中，我們提出異於西方對於仕紳化想像，及其與仕紳化理論差異。期許能透過這篇文章討論，反思西方理論在臺灣社會的應用。英文摘要：The term 'gentrification' was initially coined by the British sociologist, Ruth Glass, in 1964. Based on the class displacement, she exerted it to investigate the process of urban changes that were beginning to affect inner London. However, the social background differs from the Western situations that make the conceptual application problematic in Taiwan. Nevertheless, nowadays regions are facing tremendous changes, such as built environment changing, property price surging, invasion of gentries, less members in household, old- and new-comers aliening, land use complicating and transforming into consuming space and so on. These phenomena seem to be attributed to the occupying process by gentries. These impacts on the society and the environment could not be neglected. However, the former is not acknowledged as the results of gentrification with the class replacement or upward filtering, which is the fundamental definition for gentrification. This paper attempts to explore this particular phenomenon in our society. The Qixian Village in Yuanshan Township, Yilan County, is a suitable and applicable investigation as a case study, followed by a series of critical reviews on gentrification and gentries. We collected data via questionnaire and face-to-face interviews to the locals of the Qixian Village. Finally, evidence from the case study, we find there is no significant 'gentrification' happened here but an imaginary to 'gentrification' discussed in Taiwan. We propose that it is towards an ”imaginary of gentrification” to differ from the Western concept. Expectations according to our results and discussions in this paper reflect on the application of Western theory in the context of Taiwanese societies.起始頁-結束頁：23-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2018.21.01.023-0593篇名：綠建築標章之溢價率分析－以新北市住宅大樓為例並列篇名：The Price Premium of Green Building Certification - A Case Study of New Taipei City Residential Building作者：陳奉瑤(Fong-Yao Chen);梁仁旭(Jen-Hsu Liang)關鍵字：特徵價格模型;新北市;綠建築溢價;臺灣綠建築標章;Green building premium;Hedonic model;New Taipei City;The EEWH green building labeling system期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：21卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：綠建築之推動為各國政策發展方向，無論透過市場機制或政策推廣綠建築，綠建築價格及綠效能將是重要關鍵，多數研究也證實綠建築溢價的存在。我國自2000年開始推動綠建築標章制度迄今，為何民間興建綠建築佔同期間取得使用執照的比例不及0.1%？難道綠建築相對於非綠建築在市場上沒有溢價？本文運用2012年至2014年新北市實價登錄資料，以特徵價格迴歸模型進行分析。實證結果顯示，新北市擁有綠建築標章之電梯大樓，平均溢價率約7.5%；合格級、銅級、銀級與黃金級的溢價率分別為13.3%、1.3%、1.9%及4.5%，與依序遞增的假說不符；就價格分布而言，高價住宅與低價住宅之溢價率分別為3.1%與14.6%，以低價住宅的綠建築溢價較明顯；就空間地域而言，市中心區之綠建築溢價率較低，郊區之溢價率相對較高且以合格級居多。綜言之，三高住宅（位於高房價區、高價住宅、高標章等級）的溢價率有相對偏低的現象。英文摘要：Governments around the world have focused promotion for green buildings either through market mechanism or governmental policies. Many researches have proven a price premium for buildings with green features and pointed out price and efficiency is the key. Why the construction of green buildings accounted for the same period to obtain the building use permit less than 0.1% since 2000? Is the green building relative to the non-green building in the market there is no premium? This study examines the price premium of the green label in New Taipei City with hedonic regression model by actual selling price data from 2012 to 2014. The result shows that buildings certified have an average price premium of 7.5%; whereas Certified, Bronze, Silver and Gold level each has average price premium of 13.3%, 1.3%, 1.9% and 4.5%. Hypothesis of increasing premium with higher level has been overturned. As for the property type, lower-end condominiums have higher price premium of 14.6% comparing to those of higher-end of 3.1%, and are more statistically significant. Location-wise, price premium is higher in the suburb, with more Certified-level buildings, comparing to those in CBD. Reasoning behind lower price premium in higher-priced districts, higher-end condominium and higher certification level might be worth discussing further when promoting green building labeling system.起始頁-結束頁：61-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2018.21.01.061-08501篇名：勞動黨在工運政治化中有關選舉的經驗並列篇名：Elections in Labor Party's Experiences of Politicization作者：高偉凱(Wei-Kai KAO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：269-274資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：對當前工運「政治化」的概念釐清與目標設定並列篇名：What Does ”Politicization” Mean to the Current Labor Movement and What Should Be its Goal?作者：陳柏謙(Po-Chien CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：275-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：談「工運政治化」的初嘗試並列篇名：A Preliminary Attempt at Discussing the Politicization of the Labor Movement作者：吳靜如(Jing Ru WU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：285-295資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：綜合討論並列篇名：Questions & Answers作者：林奕志;葉瑾瑜;林岱頡;吳靜如;陳柏謙;林佳瑋;高偉凱;黃德北;羅美文;丘延亮期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：297-317資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：左翼不進步－專題導言並列篇名：Cultural Politics of a Non-Progressivist Left-Introduction作者：丁乃非(Naifei DING);林建廷(Chien-Ting LIN);黃道明(Hans Tao-Ming HUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：等待醫治的斷指：冷戰自由人文主義的國／種族殘缺敘事並列篇名：Fixing the Severed Fingers: The Militarization of Injured Nationalism and Racialized Cold War Liberal Humanism作者：林建廷(Chien-Ting LIN)關鍵字：軍事主義;科學人文主義;冷戰自由主義;醫療現代性;種族;殘疾;militarism;scientific humanism;Cold War liberalism;medical modernity;race;disability期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018中文摘要：面對後冷戰社會主義的不斷消解，以及當下各式右翼民粹主義運動萌發，大量以民族國家為首的民主化運動重整之歷史時刻，有越來越多的文獻重新探討冷戰自由主義，尤其關於自由、民主與人文主義等進步話語，如何構築美國帝國主義的跨太平洋歷史形構，並影響後殖民亞洲國家的民主化歷程。將吳念真1996年的電影《太平天國》中關於1960年代冷戰台灣的再探，視為冷戰現代性歷史敘事的一環，本文一併回顧國際科學人文主義的冷戰系譜，試圖深化冷戰敘事中關於醫學現代性與軍事主義的問題意識詰問，同時探究後冷戰文化生產中的自由人文主義想像，並重新問題化此一新殖民主義的歷史延續與斷裂。透過分析電影敘事呈現的有關美國在亞洲的軍事佈局，以及故事主人翁對於美國現代醫學與科技的想像，一方面詰問台灣解嚴民主化與醫療現代化過程中軍事帝國主義的文化重構，也分析後冷戰文化批判當中的人文主義想像，如何挪用並置換了殘疾與種族的議題，並論證這個置換的過程正是台灣與美國現代性權力共構一個種族化的展現，也是理解美國跨太平洋新殖民權力關係部署與後殖民亞洲國家的國族主義發展一個重要的視角。英文摘要：At the current historical moment as witnessed by the rise of right-wing populism in various nationalist movements in the name of democratization across the globe, a number of critical scholarship has called for a reevaluation of the historical formations of Cold War liberalism in transpacific contexts. Considering Wu Nien-Jen's film, Buddha Bless America (1996), as an integrated part of the Cold War historical narratives, this paper looks at how this cultural text renders visible the Cold War problematics about the dual process of militarization and medicalization articulated through liberal categories of freedom, democracy and scientic progress. To read this film as presenting the Taiwan Cold War history under the transnational genealogies of scientific humanism, this paper further explores how this Post-Cold War liberal cultural critique rehearses some familiar language of liberalism itself in a series of displacements of race and disability in the mutual constitutions of US-Taiwan modernities. The critical view of the continuous racialized displacements in this colonial-imperialist nexus of power is much needed for imagining a ”third world” de-colonializing project.起始頁-結束頁：5-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：狐狸的叫聲：左派「進步」話語政治中的路翎創作並列篇名：Calls of the Fox: Lu Ling's Writing in the Leftist ”Progressive” Discursive Politics作者：宋玉雯(Yu-Wen SUNG)關鍵字：路翎;現實主義;革命;傷痕文學;苦難敘述;落後;左翼文學;Lu Ling;realism;revolution;scar literature;narratives of suffering;backwardness;leftist literature期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018中文摘要：路翎（1923－1994），四十年代「國統區」代表性作家，主要以小說揚名載入文學史冊，著重描寫人物「異樣」的內心世界。1955年因「胡風反革命集團案」入獄，關押期間身心崩解。八十年代初以詩作「復出」，受到肯定的同時也經常被指為「美化現實」，晚年累計約五百五十萬字的十餘部中、長篇小說則無處發表，少數讀過部分內容的研究者多半表示只是重複毛時代的教條，「一生兩世」，昔日的天才作家如今只能一再覆誦語境相似的過時頌歌。本文嘗試對詩人與詩的「落後」提出不同看法。「傷痕文學」當令的年代，路翎繼續說述社會主義理想，在「不信」的時代主調中表述「相信」，在紛紛「控訴」的巨大聲量中如此節制。這樣一個遭際「酷烈」的創作者，本有雄厚的「政治受難資本」供其言詮，但路翎拒絕戲劇化的陳述，不以個人苦難作為重回文學道路的通行證，在他節制有度乃至時現漠然的敘述姿態裡，呈現出另種「倖存者」的身分意識。我認為路翎並非不述說苦難，也非美化苦難，而是盡其所能地選擇了另種呈現苦難迎對生活的敘述。英文摘要：As a representative writer of the ”Kuomintang District” in the 1940s, Lu Ling (1923-1994) is renowned in Chinese literary history for his novels that focus on the ”strange” interior of his characters. While imprisoned in 1955 due to the case of ”Hu Feng Counterrevolutionary Clique,” he had a nervous breakdown. In the 1980s, Lu Ling ”returned” with his poetry, which was well received but also considered as ”embellishing the reality.” The novellas and novels written in his later years could not find a means to publishing. According to few critics who have read parts of those unpublished works, they simply repeat the orthodoxies of Mao's era. It's declared that the once talented writer was now reduced to repeating again and again those obsolete eulogies in a similar context. This essay attempts to provide a different perspective on the ”backwardness” of the poet Lu Ling and his poems. When the ”Scar Literature” was in season, Lu Ling kept articulating socialist ideals-he enunciated ”belief” in the epochal tune of ”disbelief,” and remained reserved within the roar of ”accusation.” A writer who had experienced such ”brutality,” in his own right, would have been able to capitalize the rich ”political suffering” for speech and interpretation. Lu Ling nevertheless refused making dramatic statements or appropriating one's own misery as a warrant for returning to the path of literature. In his reserved-and at times disinterested-posture of narration, Lu Ling demonstrated an identity consciousness as an alternative ”survivor.” Hence I argue that Lu Ling neither verbalized nor embellished suffering; rather, he strived for an alternative narrative to reveal suffering and confront life.起始頁-結束頁：37-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：「盡忠追尋過去，大步走向醉生夢死，期待重生」：田啟元的愛滋生命與左翼酷兒劇場初探並列篇名：Living with History/AIDS: Tien Chi-yuan and the Theatre of Queer Left作者：黃道明(Hans Tao-Ming HUANG)關鍵字：田啟元;小劇場;冷戰分斷;愛滋;性／別;酷兒;去殖民;Tien Chi-yuan;Little Theatre;Cold War Division;HIV/AIDS;gender/sexuality;queer;decolonization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018中文摘要：因愛滋病逝的劇場鬼才導演田啟元（1964－1996），於1988年與詹慧玲等人成立「臨界點劇象錄」、擔任該劇團藝術總監，近十年的劇場生涯裡共創作、編導了25齣戲，咸認是台灣八○、九○年代小劇場運動的核心人物。田啟元的劇作因衝撞黨國威權體制、挑戰「性」的文化禁忌而廣被視為「前衛」，然而在冷戰分斷體制的持續作用下，他鮮明的左翼反帝旗幟及其蘊含的性／別政治眼界，迄今未被本地學界及同志運動所正視。本文為田啟元的左翼酷兒劇場初探，企圖透過劇作分析、手稿及臨界點前團員訪談，勾勒田啟元的愛滋生命與社會實踐，看他如何在解嚴時刻的歷史當下，以接合「性」與政經批判的史詩劇場介入冷戰國族文化，繼而審視他如何處理婚家體制裡的慾望矛盾、直剖愛滋污名根源。本文將揭示，田啟元不但提出一種批判正典菁英主體養成及冷戰失語精神狀態的異端政治，同時也藉由文化傳統及民俗的再造，反思現代性規範的撕裂暴力，從而在中國文化基體裡提出一套有別於當下新自由主義多元修辭、接納異質性的生命倫理。在亞際文化研究置疑西方現代性的普世暴力、去西方知識殖民之際，田啟元劇場的抗殖左翼政略及倫理探尋為我們提供了許多彌足珍貴的在地思考資源，對眼下的性／別文化研究有著重要的提示作用。英文摘要：Taiwanese playwright and director Tien Chi-yuan (1964-1996) was a key figure in the Little Theatre Movement, which emerged in response to rapid political liberalization in the post-Martial Law era. Tien co-founded the Critical Point Theatre Phenomenon Troupe in 1988 and went on to produce over twenty plays before dying of AIDS in 1996 at the age of thirty-two. Openly challenging the party-state regime and broaching the cultural reticence around the subject of sex, Tien's theatre is widely regarded as 'avant-garde', yet, due to the ongoing effects of Cold War division, this label has to date failed to truly reflect the blatant anti-imperialist, socialist thrusts in his major plays. This essay makes a preliminary attempt to carve out Tien's theatre of the queer left. Through reading Tien's plays, manuscripts, as well as interviewing former troupe members, it shows how Tien's epic theatre ventures a sexual critique of the body politic to bring comprador elite subjectivity and Cold War aphasia into sharp relief. Further, it shows how Tien, in his attempts to counter the violence of neocolonial modernity, reinvents the popular within the Chinese cultural tradition to engage questions of desire and the AIDS stigma. Tien's aesthetic experimentations, this essay argues, work through the limitations of identity politics as they gesture toward an alternative ethic of inclusive living, one that is premised on, first and foremost, self-critique. Insistent on the question of decolonization, Tien leaves behind him a powerful spiritual legacy that has profound implications for rethinking the queer and the political in neoliberal times.起始頁-結束頁：73-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：歐洲產業遺址再造下的勞動文化資產保存：以芬蘭坦佩雷市為例並列篇名：The Preservation of Labour Culture Assets in Europe's Reconstructed Industrial Heritage Sites: A Case Study of Tampere, Finland作者：鄭怡雯(Yi-Wen CHENG)關鍵字：勞動文化資產;產業遺產;都市社會運動;文化轉向;勞工博物館;labor culture assets;industrial heritage;urban social movement;cultural turn;labor museum期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018中文摘要：歐洲在1960年代起拉開了後工業社會的序幕，往後的數十年間產業外移持續發生。伴隨著一波波的關廠風潮，在這些過往的工業城市土地上，取而代之的是一個又一個產業遺址的浮現，如何在這些產業遺址上進行空間再造，成了城市治理的新鬥爭場域。在這個背景下，倡議打造見證該地勞動歷史和階級文化的勞工博物館運動，從上世紀七○年代開始在歐洲興起。這波浪潮後續在全球化城市治理的「文化轉向」下，進入了另一個發展的階段，一家家勞工博物館從上世紀八○年代陸續成立。本文以芬蘭的老工業城坦佩雷市為主要個案，透過實地訪談和文獻資料整理，來分析該市是如何將產業遺址改造成勞工博物館，以推動勞動文化資產的保存與發展，並進而探討在城市文化治理和右翼政治勢力的衝擊下，勞工博物館經營所面臨的挑戰與因應之道。英文摘要：After the shift to a post-industrial society in the 1960s, more and more industrial heritage sites in place of closed/relocated factories appeared in Europe. In this context, how to reuse the left industrial sites turned into another battlefield of urban governance. Against the backdrop, the campaign for building labor museums to preserve working-class culture and historical memories emerged in the 1970s and turned out to be another type of urban social movement. Under the ”cultural turn” since the 1980s, the movement entered a new stage and thus several labor museums have been formally established. Taking Tampere, the old industrial city in Finland, as a case study, this article demonstrates how the city reconstructed the industrial heritage sites to promote the preservation of labor culture assets during the past decades. The ways the labor museum has responded to the challenges under current political climate is also discussed through interviews and document analysis.起始頁-結束頁：117-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：內在於歷史－現實脈絡與生機的人文學並列篇名：Humanities Immanent in the Context and Vibrancy of History-Reality作者：余暘(Yang YU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：147-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：找一條照顧的路回到原鄉－編按：福利殖民的複製抑或解殖返鄉的起點？並列篇名：Searching for a Way Back to the Indigenous Home via Long Term Care- Editorial Introduction: Reproduction of Welfare Colonialism or Decolonization for Indigenous People?作者：王增勇(Frank T. Y. WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：173-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：滾動倒退的原鄉長照政策並列篇名：The Rollback of Long Term Care 2.0 Policy for Indigenous Elderly作者：張竣傑(Steven J. J. CHANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：179-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：從地方看滾動式修正的長照2.0政策及跨部門整合並列篇名：Examining the Rolling Management of Long Term Care Project 2.0 and Inter-Departmental Integration: The Perspective of a Frontline Worker in Local Government作者：蘇建仁(Cooper SUE)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：187-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：台灣原住民族長期照顧政策中的文化安全議題並列篇名：The Issue of Indigenous Cultural Safety in the Long Term Care Policy of Taiwan作者：日宏煜/Umin．Itei(Hung-Yu RU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：199-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：原住民族長照機構面臨的建物與土地問題根源：以蘭嶼居家護理所為例並列篇名：The Land Use Problems of Long Term Care Institutions in Taiwan's Indigenous Areas: A Case Study of Home Nursing Care Institute in Lanyu作者：林嘉男(Chia-Nan LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：215-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：原鄉組織參與長照2.0的困境並列篇名：Barriers and Difficulties in Long Term Care 2.0 for Local Indigenous Organizations作者：吳雅雯(Yabung．Haning)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：233-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：原鄉長照的瓶頸與突破之道並列篇名：In Search of Future for Long Term Care in Indigenous Communities作者：王增勇(Frank T. Y. WANG);Ciwang Teyra;日宏煜/Umin．Itei(Hung-Yu RU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：243-254資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：綜合討論並列篇名：Questions & Answers期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：109期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：255-268資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：法律、道德與自然必然性：論哈特的自然法最低限度內容並列篇名：Law, Morality and Natural Necessity: On Hart's Minimum Content of Natural Law作者：莊世同(Shih-Tung Chuang)關鍵字：法律;道德;自然法最低限度內容;自然必然性;實證道德;批判道德;law;morality;minimum content of natural law;natural necessity;positive morality;critical morality期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：64期出版年：2018中文摘要：法律與道德無必然關連的分離命題，主要涵蓋內容、效力及證立分離三項命題。法實證論者大多支持前兩個命題，對證立分離命題卻有分歧看法。哈特主張法律與法體系的存在不必然要有某種道德證立觀點，拉茲和麥考密克則認為必然得訴諸道德證立，而富勒、德沃金、芬尼斯等非法實證論者皆以「厚實」道德觀點批評這三個分離命題。然而，這些論者卻鮮少對哈特辯護證立分離命題的重要論點，即「自然法的最低限度內容」進行深入檢視和批判。是以，本文嘗試審視和反思這個論點，首先指出自然法最低限度內容蘊含「自然事實論證」與「道德可謬性論證」（二），接著批評這兩個論證難以有力支持證立分離命題（三、四），最後是結論（五）。英文摘要：The positivist separation thesis that there is no necessary connection between law and morality consists of three sub-theses: they are the separations of content, validity, and justification. Contemporary legal positivists usually defend the first two but have divergent opinions on the third. Hart insists that the existence of law and legal systems does not necessarily depend on moral justification, whereas MacCormick and Raz endorse the opposite view. Likewise, non-positivists all repudiate these sub-theses from a ”thick” moral viewpoint of law. Nevertheless, critics rarely pay attention to Hart's most important argument in defending the justification separation thesis. It is the argument of the minimum content of natural law. I argue that Hart's account is based on the natural fact argument and the moral fallibility argument. The first is not, as he defends it, a descriptive statement, but a prescriptive one. It also violates ”the naturalistic fallacy” he uses to criticize classical natural law doctrine. The second is not a morally neutral argument to describe the existence of an evil legal system. I shall argue that the minimum content of natural law is premised on the moral justification of ”natural necessity”.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201803_(64).0012篇名：重新認識現代性的必要：來自概念史與知識社會學的初步反省並列篇名：The Necessity to Re-cognize Modernity Again: Some Preliminary Reflections from the Conceptual History and Sociology of Knowledge作者：湯志傑(Chih-Chieh Tang)關鍵字：現代性;概念史;西方;歐洲中心;台灣立足點;modernity;conceptual history;the West;Eurocentrism;Taiwan as standpoint期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：64期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文主張，對台灣人來說，重新認識現代性既是認識論的，也是倫理學的要求。一旦我們敢於拋棄習以為常的觀點，將現代性問題化，梳理它在歷史中的偶連性與複雜性，將清楚認知到，主流的現代性理解實是套歐洲中心的霸權論述，不但形塑出許多關於歐洲的迷思，亦常令我們誤認自身的歷史，乃至樂於此而不自知。本文將透過對現代、現代性的概念史研究，以及對現代化、現代性研究的知識社會學考察，將它們擺回到東、西方與歐、美霸權消長的實際歷史脈絡中，探究西方概念涵括對象的變化，具體論證現代性何以是霸權論述。秉此認知，本文呼籲，我們應尋找在地立場的認識論位置，以之打造符合台灣主體性的世界觀與歷史觀。英文摘要：This paper argues that it is both an ethical and an epistemological necessity to re-cognize modernity from a native perspective. Once we dare to give up the conventional perspective, problematize modernity, and explore its contingencies and complexities in history, we will know that the mainstream understanding of modernity is a Eurocentric hegemonic discourse. This discourse has not only created many myths about Europe, but also has led us to misunderstand our own history - we were even glad to do so. This article explores the conceptual history of ”modern” and modernity as well as the sociology of knowledge about research on modernity and modernization. Putting them back in their historical context of the alternating hegemony between the East and West on the one hand and between Europe and the USA on the other hand, and exploring the changing meaning of the reference to ”the West”, I demonstrate why modernity is a hegemonic discourse. Finally, I appeal for an active search for Taiwan's standpoint and, with this, build a local view about the world and history.起始頁-結束頁：49-112資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201803_(64).0023篇名：不可能的見證：從「創傷的敘事」到「敘事的創傷化」並列篇名：The Impossible Testimony: From the ”Narrative of Trauma” to the ”Traumatization of Narrative”作者：蔣興儀(Hsing-Yi Chiang)關鍵字：紀傑克;構成性創傷;敘事;證詞;存有之匱乏;大屠殺;Slavoj Zizek;constitutive trauma;narrative;testimony;lack of being;Holocaust期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：64期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文基於當代心理分析的觀點，闡述倖存者的敘事與先前創傷的關聯。經歷了創傷的倖存者要在他／她的敘事中見證創傷的事件。敘事和創傷的雙重結構會重疊起來，一個是說出來的歷史創傷，另一個是在敘說中發生的構成性創傷。本文主要依據紀傑克的「構成性創傷」論述，闡述主體要在敘說過程中再度經歷一次創傷化。透過敘說，主體以他／她的存有之核心來承擔創傷的裂隙。本文指出亞里斯多德式的融貫敘事典範並不充分，並以費歐曼和勞勃的「不可能的見證」、李維的「證詞的空隙」、策蘭的「想要說虛無」等，來說明創傷敘事必然是非融貫與破碎的。英文摘要：This essay explicates the survivor's narrative and its relation to the previous trauma from a contemporary psychoanalytical perspective. The survivor, as the one who undergoes the traumatic experience, bears witness to the traumatic event in his or her narration. The essay renders manifest the twofold structure of narrating the trauma, in which the narrated historical trauma overlaps with a more constitutive trauma that occurs along with the act of narrating. Based on Zizek's thematics of constitutive trauma, the essay explicates the subjective dimension of re-traumatization through narrating the trauma and shows how the narrator assumes the traumatic gap at the core of his or her being in the act of narrating. The essay states the insufficiency of the Aristotelian coherence paradigm and explicates the necessary incoherence and fragmentation of the trauma narrative in terms of Shoshana Felman and Dori Laub's impossible testimony, Primo Levi's lacuna of testimony and Paul Celan's wanting-to-say-nothing.起始頁-結束頁：113-179資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201803_(64).00301篇名：清真的電擊：關於動物福利與伊斯蘭屠宰的一段道德技術史並列篇名：Halal Stunning: A techno-moral history of animal welfare and Islamic religious slaughter作者：趙恩潔(En-Chieh Chao)關鍵字：清真;電擊致暈;宗教屠宰;動物福利;科學與宗教;Halal;stunning;religious slaughter;animal welfare;science and religion期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：26期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文探討當代國際「清真」（halal）肉品是如何由眾多技術物中介的道德論述、科學實驗、人與動物等行動者之共構（co-production）才誕生，而非僅僅是伊斯蘭教義延伸至實驗室與屠宰場的結果。我所關注的例子是「清真電擊」（halal stunning）的建立。在此案例中，重劃清真邊界的過程涉及「人道屠宰」（humane slaughter）的辯論、「可逆轉式電擊」（reversible stunning）的建構、以及穆斯林法學者的宗教釋令（fatwa）與科學家的合作。為突顯此議題的重要性，本文先從全球宗教屠宰爭議談起，簡述特定動物福利團體、國際媒體與特定國家將「動物權」與「宗教自由權」對立，以及將「科學」與「宗教」對立的現象，並指出這些爭議的盲點在於其低估了宗教與科學合作的密切程度。透過「共構」（Jasanoff, 2004）與「被啟動的行動者」（Law and Mol, 2008）觀點，我描繪了一種伊斯蘭推動科學實踐，而科技也重構清真內涵的現象。這是一段「清真電擊」如何在串連起科學實驗、人道屠宰、國際貿易、宗教釋令與動物身體之後，最終誕生於紐西蘭，並經由推廣而成為穆斯林佔多數的國家（Muslim-majority countries）所接受之屠宰技術的歷史，也是一段宗教與科學相互滲透的道德技術史。對此現象的了解，將有助於理解當代重要的食品倫理議題，並拓寬宗教的科技與社會研究之視域。英文摘要：This essay explores the ways in which halal meat is produced through a network of techno-moral discourses, scientific experiments, and non-human actors, rather than as the result of an easy introduction of Islamic doctrines into labs and slaughter houses. The case examined here is the invention of ”halal stunning.” The boundaries of halalness had to be redrawn, which involved debates around ”humane slaughter,” the construction of ”reversible stunning,” as well as cooperation between religious scholars and scientists. This paper starts with the recent global controversy over religious slaughter, describing the ways in which specific animal welfare groups, media, politicians, and governments have come to construct a false opposition between ”animal rights” and ”freedom of religion,” and between science and religion. Such a perspective, I argue, underestimates the extent to which religion and science are compatible and ignores the fact that they have long closely worked together. Through the idea of ”co-production” (Jasanoff, 2004) and ”the enacted actors” (Law and Mol, 2008), I describe a phenomenon in which Islamic decrees promote scientific practices, and technologies also reconstitute the content of what is considered halal. In sum, this article narrates the techno-moral history of ”halal stunning,” which, as the procedure came to be systematically materialized in New Zealand and successfully accepted by Muslim-majority countries, brought together scientific experiments, humane slaughter, international trade, religious law, and animals. This case study helps deepen our understanding of the complexity of food ethics in the contemporary world, and broadens our horizonof religion within the field of STS.起始頁-結束頁：7-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：十九世紀福爾摩沙醫學教育溯源：打狗慕德醫院及其附設醫學校並列篇名：Western Medical Education in Formosa in the 19th Century: David Manson Memorial Hospital and its Medical Education Scheme作者：呂佩穎(Peih-Ying Lu);賴淑芳(Shu-Fang Lai)關鍵字：蘇格蘭醫師;醫學教育;傳教士;慕德醫院;福爾摩沙打狗;Scottish physician;medical education;missionaries;The David Manson Memorial Hospital;Takow Formosa期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：26期出版年：2018中文摘要：始於19世紀的傳教醫療，除加速早期西方醫學東進，並更驅動了西方醫學教育的全球移動。此大時代背景驅使大英帝國醫師外移，其中有一群蘇格蘭醫師傳教士含馬雅各等人也在1860年代隨通商而來到打狗（今高雄），就此為福爾摩沙展開了東西方醫學的接觸區，在打狗港口邊悄然的掀開了台灣醫學教育的序幕。本文將藉由研究史料，如英國皇家外科學會、衛爾康圖書館、英國國家文獻館、格拉斯哥大學文獻館等收藏的手稿本、及其他台灣相關文本資料，試圖探究這所位於打狗，可謂是台灣第一所醫學校的慕德醫院及其附設醫學校之時代背景、演進、地理位置、興榮與影響，同時爬梳並勘正目前文獻上的訛誤。從這醫學教育計劃，課程安排之嚴謹度，到其承受異地社會、文化語言的挑戰與衝擊，處處可見蘇格蘭醫學教育的影響。本文除深入討論這個醫學教育計畫之內涵，並比較其與當時蘇格蘭本土醫學教育之異同外，並映照彼時此醫學教育與當時大時代環境數個值得研究的議題。英文摘要：The rise of missionary medicine in the 19th century promoted the advance of Western medicine to the East as well as the global movement of Western medical education. In the 1860s, following the port opening for trade, a group of Scottish physician/missionaries, beginning with James L. Maxwell, arrived in Takow (now Kaohsiung), Formosa. They opened up a medical contact zone for the East and West, and also established the prelude to Taiwan's western medical education. The David Manson Memorial Hospital was founded in 1878 at Takow port and its medical education scheme, considered the first western medical education program, started in 1884. This paper used the first-hand manuscripts and archives of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, the Wellcome Library, the National Archives, the University of Glasgow Archive, and other related historical materials to attempt to recover some historical facts about the hospital and its Medical Education Scheme. This article also explores the contemporary historical and social context, the medical scheme's content, and its rise and fall and influence. Although faced with ”foreign” cultural and language challenges, this pilot medical education had a well-organized curriculum and rigorous requirements for graduation, with apparent influence from Scottish medical education. We explore the multi-faceted perspectives of the interaction between the contemporary Taiwanese society and western medical education.起始頁-結束頁：55-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：醫療的政治性：從社會、知識到本體論政治與本地醫療實作的本體論政治研究題綱並列篇名：Politics of Medicine: From societal to epistemic and ontological politics, and a proposal for local research作者：林文源(Wen-Yuan Lin)關鍵字：醫療社會學;社會政治;認識政治;本體論政治;實作本體論;行動者網絡理論;Medical Sociology;Societal Politics;Epistemic Politics;Ontological Politics;Practical Ontology;Actor-network Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：26期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文結合醫療社會學以及科技與社會研究成果探討醫療的政治性。經由釐清醫療異質連結中的權力與權威安排，以及在其中發生的活動的研究成果，本文區分醫療的社會、認識與本體論政治性，以嘗試拓展本體論政治取徑，並提出本地多元醫療實作體制的研究題綱。本文指出，第一、醫療社會學在「社會化」疾病，創造患病的分析典範時，以醫療對非醫療事務的入侵、社會群體藉由醫療擴張權力等，指認醫療如何成為社會鬥爭的工具、場域與方法，發展社會政治批判。第二，在科技治理與公眾科技理解的認識論政治中，對稱化專家與常民的宣稱而深入醫療知識，強調不同認識模式的正當性競逐與分配中，各種利害關係人的知識構框與其價值。第三，本體論政治取徑探討異質實作，強調現實構成、我們共存的可能性條件，以及介入所形成的連結，如何造成存在模式、可能性條件競逐，與被實現的存在與價值差異。最後，本文指出拓展本體論政治的體制方向，並嘗試由多元醫療體制為例提出建議題綱。英文摘要：This paper explores the politics of medicine illuminated in the studies of Medical Sociology and Science, Technology and Society Studies. Drawing on those researches, this paper not only specifies three modes of societal, epistemic and ontological politics, but also proposes an agenda for studying the ontological politics of local medical regimes. It is argued, first, that in the societal critiques of the invasion of medicine into social life, medicine is identified as the method, field and tool for social struggles. Second, in the epistemic politics of technoscientific governance and public understanding of science, the contested claims by both experts and lay people are symmetrically treated so as to investigate the differences of epistemic framings and the values of the various stake holders. Third, the ontological politics approach explores heterogeneous medicosocial practices. It emphasizes how the linkages made between the constitution of reality, the condition of possibility of our coexistence and our interventions enact the differences specific modes of existence and value. Finally, this paper proposes to extend the scope of the ontological politics approach with regime analysis for studying local medical regimes and practices.起始頁-結束頁：115-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：台灣工程倫理回顧兼論工程論理的科技與社會取徑並列篇名：A Review of Engineering Ethics in Taiwan from the STS perspective作者：戴東源(Dong-Yuan Tai);洪文玲(Wen-Ling Hong)關鍵字：工程倫理;工程教育;專業倫理;倫理教育;科技與社會;價值;engineering ethics;engineering education;professional ethics;ethical education;STS;value期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：26期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文目的是回顧台灣工程倫理的研究成果，並建議工程倫理領域加入新興的「科技與社會」（STS）研究取徑。本文將依序討論：（一）台灣工程倫理領域的緣起、成果及文獻回顧。（二）澄清並評論現今台灣社會中，有關工程倫理最常被提起的議題。（三）解析「倫理的衝突與抉擇」及學者所提供的解決方法；（四）論述西方STS研究取徑，並對比傳統工程倫理的方法。（五）呈現兩個STS方法所分析的案例研究。（六）回應對於工程倫理之STS取徑的批評。英文摘要：The aim of this article is to review the results of research on engineering ethics in Taiwan and to propose a Science, Technology and Society (STS) approach to the subject. In this article, we will 1) outline the origin and achievements of engineering ethics in Taiwan; 2) comment on popular ideas and recent debates; 3) analyze how ethical conflicts have arisen and been resolved; 4) introduce an STS approach and compare it with the traditional approach to engineering ethics; 5) introduce two case studies of the STS approach; 6) reply to some criticisms of the STS approach.起始頁-結束頁：185-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：精神病社區關懷照顧計畫：東部地區關懷訪視員的經驗與觀點並列篇名：Community Care Plan for People with Mental Illness: Care Visitors' Experiences and Perspectives in Eastern Taiwan作者：王金永(Jin-Yong Wang)關鍵字：個案管理;精神病患;關懷訪視員;case management;mentally ill patients;care visitors期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：37期出版年：2018中文摘要：為協助社區精神病患定期服藥及減低症狀復發所造成的自傷傷人事件，衛生福利部自2006年開始實施「精神病社區關懷照顧計畫」，但計畫執行的成效仍未有足夠的實證研究探討。本研究藉由東部地區關懷訪視員的經驗調查，試圖瞭解此計畫的執行情形與服務成效。研究結果歸納有以下四點發現：第一，有關關懷訪視員扮演的角色、服務內涵與工作對象，關懷訪視員對於專業角色的認知相近，角色功能以疾病相關之醫療問題處置為優先，工作對象與服務期程在東部三縣有所差異。第二，在關懷訪視服務的價值與成效上，關懷訪視員彌補了社區精神病患服務人力的缺口，也提供了家屬許多協助。第三，計畫構想與實務之間存在落差，服務輸送過程中亦發現幾項窒礙難行之處。第四，關懷訪視員在服務過程中可能面臨包含如何兼顧案量與品質的兩難，以及人身安全威脅等挑戰。根據上述研究發現，本研究針對相關議題提出進一步的討論與建議。英文摘要：To help mentally ill patients in the community take their medication regularly and reduce the incidences of self-harm and injuries caused by the relapses of mental illness, the Department of Health and Welfare launched the 'Care Scheme for Community Mentally Ill Patients' and started to employ community care visitors in 2006. There hasn't yet been a thorough investigation on the cost-effectiveness of this scheme. This study explored care visitors' experiences in Eastern Taiwan in seeking to find the scheme in actual practice, as well as its cost-effectiveness. The research results are summarized into four points. First, regarding care visitors' roles, services and target population, the interviewed care visitors share similar perceptions concerning their roles, with illness-related medical problems as their service priority. The target population and service period in these three counties differ. Second, in terms of value and cost-effectiveness of the visiting service, care visitors make up for the shortage of service staff for community mentally ill patients and offer their family members a lot of help. Third, there are gaps between service planning and service implementation. Also, some problems were found in the process of service delivery. Fourth, care visitors face the dilemma of balancing service quantities and quality, and the potential threat to their personal safety also causes care visitors' concern. Further discussions about relevant issues and suggestions are proposed according to the research results mentioned above.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2018.37.012篇名：原鄉部落社會資本與部落營造關聯性之研究並列篇名：Correlation Between Social Capital and Community Building of Indigenous Tribes作者：黃源協(Yuan-Shie Hwang);莊俐昕(Li-Hsin Chuang);吳品儀(Pin-Yi Wu)關鍵字：原鄉部落;連結型社會資本;部落營造;結合型社會資本;橋接型社會資本;indigenous tribe;linking social capital;community building;bonding social capital;bridging social capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：37期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討原鄉部落社會資本與部落營造之間的關聯性，據以提出有助於原鄉部落營造的相關建議。社會資本區分為三種類型：結合型、橋接型與連結型，各類型皆包含信任、網絡與規範三個要素；部落營造區分為六個面向：人文教育、產業發展、社福醫療、部落安全、環境景觀與環保生態。研究對象為年滿20歲以上之不同家戶原住民成人，樣本為座落於全臺灣原鄉部落的48個原住民族家庭服務中心所介紹，實際用於分析之有效問卷為679份。研究發現，原鄉部落的社會資本是偏高的，依序為結合型、橋接型與連結性；部落營造滿意度由高至低分別為社福醫療、部落安全、人文教育、環保生態、景觀環境與產業發展。社會資本和部落營造各面向之間的關係並不一致，一般而言，連結型社會資本對部落營造的貢獻最大，橋接型社會資本次之，結合型社會資本對部落營造反而是不利的。依據研究發現和討論，本研究提出五項有助於營造永續原鄉部落的相關建議。英文摘要：The study aims to explore the correlation between social capital and community building among indigenous tribes in Taiwan. The main instrument consists of social capital and community building scales created by the researchers. The social capital is divided into 3 types: bonding, bridging and linking. Each type includes 3 elements: trust, network and norm. The community building involves 6 aspects: humanities and education, industrial development, welfare and health care, tribal security, environment and landscape, and environmental protection and ecology. The population is indigenous people aged over 20; 679 successful samples, referred by 48 indigenous family service centers located across the whole island and offshore, were collected and analyzed. The results show that the stock of indigenous social capital is rather high, and the degree of satisfaction with the 6 aspects of community building is diverse. The correlation between social capital and community building is also various. In general, the linking social capital contributes the most to community building, followed by bridging social capital. However, bonding social capital produces a negative effect on community building. According to the findings and analyses, we propose five suggestions for building a sustainable community.起始頁-結束頁：47-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2018.37.023篇名：兩代「三老」家庭照顧轉銜與老年遷移：老年父母、中老年智障者與手足並列篇名：Care Transition and Moving in Old Age Among Older Two-Generation Families: Older Parents, Ageing Offspring with Intellectual Disability and Their Siblings作者：周月清(Yueh-Ching Chou);李婉萍(Wan-Ping Li);王文娟(Wen-Chuan Wang)關鍵字：手足;老年遷移;智障;照顧轉銜;雙老家庭;sibling;moving in old age;intellectual disability;care transition;older two-generation family期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：37期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的在瞭解老年父母及其中老年智障者雙老家庭的照顧需求，並以Clapham（2005, 2010）提出的”housing pathways”模式探討其照顧與居住、社會與個人因素的關係。深度訪談新竹市30個雙老家庭：30位與父母同住且年齡40歲以上中老年智障者及其老年父母（60歲以上）。以主題分析方法進行資料分析。發現「雙老」家庭也可能是兩代「三老」家庭，老年衰弱父母及中老年智障者，由中老年手足照顧；多數中老年智障者及其老年父母未使用社會服務。智障者照顧轉銜和父母老年遷移綁在一起，前者途徑形式為「有規劃」和「未規劃」；後者為「不想搬」與「有搬遷」計畫；兩者途徑形式受家庭經濟與家庭互動關係，及父母個人自主性、對傳統照顧文化與房舍認同所影響；已經或可能接手照顧雙老的中老年手足的經濟狀況與照顧文化認同，必須納入考量。父母與手足個人傳統照顧文化認同、經濟及家庭互動關係，大過於失能程度與正式支持系統的影響。兩代「雙老」或「三老」家庭就地老化健康與社會照顧需求，亟待納入長照服務。英文摘要：This study aims to explore care and moving in old age among older parents and their ageing sons/daughters with intellectual disability (ID), named as ”older two-generation family”. Also, ”housing pathways” (Clapham, 2005, 2010) is employed to study the patterns and factors in relation to these families' housing and care transition. Thirty families, including older parents (<U+2265>60 year-old) and their ageing sons/daughters (<U+2265>40 year-old) with ID were invited and completed the in-depth interview which was conducted at their homes in Hsinchu City. A thematic approach was used in the analysis of the qualitative interviews. The findings showed that an older two-generation family might include not only older parents and ageing offspring with ID, but also the ageing siblings of the ageing adults with ID. These ageing siblings were likely to be the carers of older and frail parents and ageing adults with ID. Families including older parents and ageing adults with ID rarely used services which are provided for people with disability and older people from formal systems. The parents' care transition plan for ageing adults with ID and their own moving plan in old age were intersected, connecting parents' and siblings' individual, family and social contexts. Two types of pathways to both areas, namely care transition of ageing offspring with ID and older parents' moving, were identified: ”planned” vs. ”not planned” and ”not considering moving” vs. ”considering moving”. The types of pathways of moving in old age and care transition among these families are related to individual parents' autonomy and parents home identity and both parents' and siblings' cultural identity as well as with the relationship and financial conditions of both the original and siblings' families. This study suggests that both the health and social care needs of these older two-generation families including older parents, ageing adults with ID and their ageing siblings should be considered a high priority by the long-term care scheme which is currently one of the main social policies in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：99-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr2018.37.0301篇名：Does CEO Reputation Matter to Financial Reporting Quality?並列篇名：CEO聲譽會影響財務報導品質嗎？作者：周雅英(Yaying Mary Chou Yeh);林品馨(Ping-Shin Lin)關鍵字：CEO reputation;earnings quality;family firm;CEO聲譽;盈餘品質;家族企業期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Financial reporting credibility is important because decision-useful information is greatly appreciated by all market participants. From a sample of 303 incumbent CEOs from Taiwanese listed electronics firms during the period from 2006-2008, the present study explores to what extent CEO reputation affects a firm's earnings quality. The efficient contracting hypothesis predicts reputed CEOs produce higher quality financial reports while the managerial opportunism hypothesis posits the opposite. Empirical findings indicate that the efficient contracting hypothesis dominates in explaining such relationships. Moreover, the positive CEO reputation effects persist in family firms because of their strong incentive to protect the longevity and reputation of the family, supporting the alignment of interest argument. Overall, our results provide additional evidence on variations in CEO reputation-earnings quality relationships using an international setting with distinctive features related to concentrated ownership and the abundance of family firms.英文摘要：資本市場參與者仰賴財務資訊進行重要決策，而高品質的財務報表提供可信及有用的資訊，更能反映企業的經濟實質。本文以2006-2008間303家台灣電子業之現任CEO為樣本，檢視CEO聲譽是否會影響企業之盈餘報導品質。效率契約假說預期CEO因聲譽考量會採取效率報導行為，故其盈餘品質較高；但管理投機行為假說則認為高聲譽CEO會因投機目的進行盈餘裁量，故其盈餘品質較低。實證結果顯示，CEO聲譽效果確實會影響企業之財務報導決策，且當CEO聲譽愈高時，企業之盈餘品質愈佳，支持效率契約假說。此外，CEO之聲譽效果在家族企業中仍然存在，支持利益一致之觀點。本研究以所有權高度集中及家族企業林立之國家為樣本，隱含CEO聲譽－盈餘品質之關係需考量機構背景不同而下定論。起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201812_28(3).00012篇名：資訊揭露評鑑透明度對盈餘資訊性與未來績效之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Information Disclosure Transparency and Transparency Rankings on Earnings Informativeness and Future Earnings作者：薛敏正(Min-Jeng Shiue);曾乾豪(Chien-Hao Tseng);邱彥毅(Yan-Yi Chiou)關鍵字：資訊透明度;資訊揭露評鑑系統;盈餘資訊性;information transparency;information disclosure and transparency ranking system;earnings informativeness期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在深入分析與討論資訊揭露評鑑透明度及其更動對盈餘與股價關聯性及未來績效的影響。以財團法人證券暨期貨市場發展基金會建置之「資訊揭露評鑑系統」之評鑑結果，作為資訊透明度及其更動之替代變數。研究樣本選自2005年至2010年間於國內公開交易之上市、櫃公司。研究結果發現，資訊透明度較佳的公司會有較高之盈餘資訊性。同時，實證結果亦發現評鑑結果的調升與盈餘資訊性間呈現顯著正相關。此外，本文發現資訊透明度的程度對未來會計績效有正向的關聯性，及對未來財務報表可比較性也有正向提升的效果，但資訊透明度的更動與未來會計績效沒有顯著的關聯性。英文摘要：This study examines how firm disclosure activity affects the relationship between annual stock returns and changes in annual earnings. This study uses the Taiwanese Information Disclosure and Transparency Ranking System (IDTRS) as a proxy for disclosure activity, and samples were collected from Taiwanese publicly traded firms between 2005 and 2010. Our results show that the informativeness of accounting earnings is stronger for firms ranking higher in transparency than for other firms. In addition, we find that changes in disclosure activity are incrementally positively related to changes in current earnings for returns, and that disclosure activity is significantly and positively associated with firms' future performance, though changes in disclosure activity is not. Last, the results show that disclosure activity is positively and significantly associated with the comparability of firms' future financial reports.起始頁-結束頁：47-82資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201812_28(3).00023篇名：Use of Implicit User Feedback to Support Semantics- Based Personalized Document Recommendation並列篇名：應用隱性回饋機制支援語意基礎之個人化文件推薦作者：顧宜錚(Yi-Cheng Ku);李彥賢(Yen-Hsien Lee);林純誼(Chun-Yi Lin)關鍵字：document recommender system;implicit user feedback;spreading activation model;semantic network;concept-expansion;文件推薦系統;隱性回饋機制;擴散促動模式;語意網絡;概念擴展期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：The development of the Internet and digitized documents has made it possible for data and information to be easily transferred, exchanged and shared online. However, for Internet users, this easy access to information also carries the risk of information overload. Document recommender systems are becoming an indispensable tool, helping Internet users effectively retrieve the information they need from the millions of documents available online. In this study, we design and evaluate an Implicit-feedback-based Concept-Expansion (ICE) document recommendation technique to address the difficulties inherent in acquiring relevant feedback. The ICE technique determines a focal user’s preferred documents by implicitly observing and analyzing his or her browsing behavior in order to make appropriate document recommendations. Using a domain concept heterarchy (e.g., domain ontology) and employing the Spreading Activation Model (SAM), the ICE technique expands the concepts existing in the preferred documents. Documents with a greater number of related and/or expanded concepts are then considered to be potentially appealing to the focal user and are recommended as such. A laboratory experiment was conducted to compare the system performance of the ICE technique with that of three benchmark document recommendation techniques: Explicit-feedback-based Concept-Expansion (ECE), keyword-based, and random. The results of the experiment show that the ICE approach proposed by this study is more effective than random or keyword-based document recommender systems. Although there is no significant performance difference between ICE and ECE, the ICE technique is expected to cost less in terms of user effort. Overall, the findings of this study provide some interesting implications for improving the quality of document recommender systems.英文摘要：為協助網路使用者從大量文件中取得所需的資訊，文件推薦系統已成為必要的支援工具。本研究設計與評估以隱性回饋為基礎的概念擴展文件推薦技術（ICE），其採用隱性觀察與使用者瀏覽行為分析，來克服擷取使用者回饋的困難，並加以利用領域本體論與擴散促動模式，擴展已知的偏好文件中的概念，以推薦合適的文件給使用者。此研究利用實驗室實驗法來評估ICE系統與另外三個指標系統的差異，包括：顯性回饋為基礎的概念擴展文件推薦技術（ECE）、關鍵字基礎技術、及隨機推薦系統。實驗結果顯示ICE績效顯著優於隨機推薦及關鍵字推薦，與ECE雖無顯著差異，但是預期ICE能降低使用者的心力耗費。整體而言，此研究結果提供改善文件推薦系統品質之實務意涵。起始頁-結束頁：83-106資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201812_28(3).00034篇名：信以為真的神奇作用：以錯誤記憶為戲劇節目置入手法的機制效果並列篇名：The Magic of Believing: The False Memory Effect of Product Placement in Dramas作者：陳怡如(Yi-Ju Chen);周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou)關鍵字：戲劇節目;置入性行銷;錯誤記憶;dramas;product placement;false memory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：越來越多企業投入台灣戲劇節目進行置入性行銷，然過去研究討論的作用機制多侷限於情感移轉，本文則聚焦於錯誤記憶，探討觀眾是否有可能在收看戲劇節目中的產品置入畫面後，隨時間的經過，而誤以為自己也曾經使用過該產品。實驗結果發現：（1）高圖像化的置入形式，可增加無產品經驗觀眾的錯誤記憶，進而產生較佳的產品態度；（2） 經時間推移，錯誤記憶較真實經驗組，有更好的產品態度、態度強度與購買意願；（3）戲劇涉入會強化高圖像化置入的產品態度效果；（4）正向劇情置入相較於負向，更易產生錯誤記憶；（5）透過喜愛度高的演員傳遞置入訊息，可引發錯誤記憶及較佳產品態度；（6）高圖像化置入的錯誤記憶和產品態度效果，只存於正向劇情或演員喜愛度高的情況。英文摘要：Many companies place their brand products in Taiwanese dramas. Most studies discuss the effect mechanism of product placement only in terms of affective transfer. Focusing on false memory, this study explores whether audiences adopt the mistaken belief that they have used a product after seeing it placed in a drama. The results of two experiments reveal the following. (1) High-imagery placement increases false memories in audience members who have never used the placed product and generates more favorable product attitudes. (2) As time goes by, the false memory group generates more favorable product attitudes, greater attitude strength, and higher purchase intentions than does the real experience group of using the product. (3) Drama involvement strengthens the product attitude effects of high-imagery placement. (4) Placing products in emotionally positive plots is more likely to lead to false memories than placement in emotionally negative plots. (5) Product messages delivered by the audience's favorite actors induce false memories and more favorable products attitudes. (6) The false memory and product attitude effects generated by high-imagery placement occur only when emotionally positive plots and the audience's favorite actors are involved.起始頁-結束頁：107-143資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201812_28(3).00045篇名：總經理管理任期對企業不當作為之影響：以台灣半導體企業為例並列篇名：Does CEO Career Horizon Lead to Corporate Misconduct? Evidence of Taiwanese Semiconductor Firms作者：李振宇(Cheng-Yu Lee);吳學良(Hsueh-Liang Wu);李佳蓉(Chia-Jung Lee)關鍵字：總經理管理任期;企業不當作為;董事會規模;董事背景多樣性;CEO career horizon;corporate misconduct;board size;board functional diversity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：隨著企業社會責任的愈受重視，實務與學術界不斷關注對企業不當作為的成因與後果。根據相關理論與實證研究，總經理管理任期被認為對企業營運決策的良窳有著高度的關連。爰此，本研究進一步探討總經理管理任期是否對於企業不當作為產生影響。本研究利用台灣半導體產業作為研究對象，根據1,124筆公司－年資料的分析結果，發現總經理管理任期與企業不當作為之間存在著非線性的倒U型關係。為降低企業不當作為發生的機率，本研究進一步考量董事會治理的調和作用，研究結果顯示（1）董事會規模的增加對於總經理管理任期在企業不當作為的影響無顯著調和效果；（2）董事會成員的功能背景之多樣化能夠有效緩解總經理管理任期與企業不當作為之關係。綜上，本研究之研究成果進一步填補相關文獻在探討企業不當作為上的不足。英文摘要：In the wake of corporate social responsibility, the academia and practitioners are increasingly concerned with the causes and consequences of corporate misconduct. Among theoretical and empirical probes into the issue, a CEO's career horizon is thought to be a key factor of the quality of executive decision making. In a sample of 1,124 firm-year observations in semiconductor industry in Taiwan, the study argues that CEO career horizon has an inverted-U effect on the incidence of corporate misconduct. Further considering the monitoring roles of board size and board functional diversity, we found that a board with members from diverse functional backgrounds is better able to mitigate the detrimental effect of CEO career horizon on corporate misconduct rather than a large-sized board. This study contributes to the literature by highlighting the critical roles of CEOs and boards in corporate irresponsible behavior.起始頁-結束頁：145-176資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201812_28(3).00056篇名：結合管制：效率與公平間之取捨並列篇名：Merger Regulations: A Trade-off between Efficiency and Equity作者：馬泰成(Tay-Cheng Ma)關鍵字：反托拉斯;結合;公平;效率;antitrust;merger;equity;efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：依據Williamson理論：結合所產生的綜效必然大於其限制競爭的無謂損失。因此，所有結合案的整體經濟利益都會超過限制競爭的不利益，從而有利於經濟效率提升。即使結合可能導致獨占力提升與價格上漲，減損消費者福利，甚至形成所得分配不公，但只要公平會按照公平法第13條規定，僅考慮「經濟效率」，但忽視「政治公平」，就應當核准所有的結合申請案件，競爭法對於結合的規範也就形同虛設。因此，本文援引新制度經濟學的主張與各國反托拉斯潮流，建議：反托拉斯政策不僅要解決市場失靈的經濟效率問題，更要顧及潛在的政治公平問題（例如：貧富差距），必須經濟與政治並重，求取公平與效率間的平衡。英文摘要：Williamson proposes that the synergies arising from a merger are mostly larger than its deadweight losses. This implies that the economic benefits from a merger would outweigh its disadvantages from competition restraint. Hence, most of the merger cases could promote economic efficiency. If, pursuant to the provisions of Article 13 of the Fair Trade Law, the TFTC considers only economic efficiency but not political equity, then Williamson's theory implies that a merger should not be prohibited by the law even though market power is created, consumers are hurt by price hikes, and poverty gap is further widened. Based on this, this article uses the perspective of New Institutionalism and global trend of law enforcement to show that the antitrust has to address both market failures and political issues (such as wealth concentration). Only from both economic and political considerations can antitrust achieve a balance between efficiency and equity.起始頁-結束頁：177-203資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201812_28(3).00067篇名：台灣集團企業之中國大陸市場成長：管理限制觀點並列篇名：Taiwan Business Groups Growth in Chinese Market: Managerial Limitations Perspective作者：林玟廷(Wen-Ting Lin);李曼琪(Man-Chi Li)關鍵字：Penrose效應;管理限制;中國大陸市場;集團企業;penrose effect;managerial limitations;Chinese market;business groups期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討台灣集團企業中國大陸市場成長衍生台灣集團總部之管理限制，以中華徵信所2008年至2012年台灣194家集團企業為樣本進行實證，結果顯示台灣集團總部投資中國市場不同區域，將耗損不同程度管理能力，致使集團總部成長受到管理限制的程度不同；投資區域越分散與中國大陸隸屬公司所有權越低，則集團總部成長受到管理限制的程度越低。若集團企業多角化程度高，會因經驗累積減緩管理資源消耗，弱化中國市場成長與集團總部成長受到管理限制之關係。英文摘要：This paper examines the managerial limitations, mostly concerning those business groups whose headquarters are in Taiwan and the group-affiliated firms are investing in China. We used cross section data on China-oriented investment undertaken by 194 business groups from 2008 through 2012 to test the hypotheses. The empirical results indicate that business groups face a different degree of managerial limitations in various locations, and in particular, that the smallest managerial limitations occurred in Central China. Moreover, (1) when business groups invest in many areas at the same time and (2) the equity stake in group-affiliated firms held by business-group headquarters is low, the Penrose effect would be low. Finally, when business groups have rich diversified experiences, the Penrose effect owing to business groups' growth in Chinese market would be weakened.起始頁-結束頁：205-231資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201812_28(3).00078篇名：醫療財團法人的租稅優惠與社區公益服務並列篇名：The Relationship between ”Tax-Exemption” and ”Community Benefit Service” of Not-for-Profit Hospitals作者：梁志民(Chih-Min Liang);郭振雄(Jenn-Shyong Kuo);李怡慧(I-Huei Li);何怡澄(Yi-Cheng Ho)關鍵字：醫療財團法人;租稅優惠;社區公益服務;not-for-profit hospitals;tax benefit;community benefit service期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：政府常透過租稅優惠的方式間接補助非營利組織，鼓勵其從事社區公益服務。本文探討我國的醫療財團法人從事社區公益服務的支出，與其所享有的免稅利益間關聯性。方法：本文採用我國2006-2010年43家醫療財團法人資料，估計追蹤資料的固定效果模型與工具變數法，分別估計醫療財團享有之免稅利益與其從事之醫療社會服務活動、教育研究活動及 社區公益服務等支出的關聯性。結果：迴歸結果顯示免稅利益與醫療社會服務支出呈現反向關係，但與教育研究發展支出呈正向關係，且與社區公益服務支出沒有顯著的關係。結論：社會大眾與主管機關普遍認為給予醫療財團法人租稅優惠，是為了鼓勵其提供醫療資源貧乏者免費醫療等醫療社會活動，而非與社區民眾公益較為間接的教育研究活動。實證結果顯示醫療財團法人取得之免稅利益對其從事教育研究活動有正面的助益，卻對醫療社會服務活動 呈現反向關係。至於免稅利益與社區公益服務總支出無顯著關聯，可能是醫療財團法人提供 社區公益服務受其他因素影響，或其取得免稅地位與提供社區公益服務無關所致。英文摘要：Purpose: The government often subsidizes nonprofit organizations with tax benefits to encourage their engagement in community benefit services. This paper discusses the connection between community benefit service expenditure and the tax-exempt interest of not-for-profit hospitals in Taiwan. Method: We used the panel data from 43 not-for-profit hospitals in Taiwan from 2006 to 2010 and analyzed the data with fixed effects model and instrumental variables models. The above mentioned method is utilized for the examination of the relationship between the tax-exempt interest and the expenditure of medical juridical persons (not-for-profit hospitals) in uncompensated care services, educational research activities, and community benefit services. Results: Regression results show that tax-exempt interest has a negative relationship with uncompensated care services spending, a positive relationship with educational research and development expenses, and no significant relationship with community benefit service expenditure. Conclusion: The public and the authority generally consider that the main purpose of granting not-for-profit hospitals tax benefits is to encourage more medical social activities, such as providing free medical care and healthcare, rather than to improve research momentum or educational quality, although educational research activities are indirectly related to community benefits. However, empirical results show that gaining tax-exempt interest can make a positive contribution to not-for-profit hospitals in engaging in educational research activities, while has a reverse relationship with uncompensated care services. Tax-exempt interest and total expenditure of community benefit services are not significantly related, possibly because not-for-profit hospitals provide community benefit services which are mainly affected by other factors, or maybe because the tax-free status has no connection with the supply of community benefit services.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201808_28(2).00019篇名：集團企業活動外關係人交易對盈餘持續性之影響：委託同一會計師事務所查核財務報表之效果並列篇名：The Impact of Non-Operating Related Party Transactions by Affiliated Business Groups on Earnings Persistence: The Effect of Audits from the Same CPA Firm作者：方俊儒(Chun-Ju Fang);張瑞當(Ruey-Dang Chang)關鍵字：集團企業;盈餘持續性;營業活動外關係人交易;affiliated business group;earnings persistence;non-operating related party transactions期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：關係人交易是集團企業經常採用之方式，正常之關係人交易可以提升經營績效。然而，不當之關係人交易，卻是集團企業管理者操弄財務報表的工具。集團企業之會計師若能瞭解關係人交易的內容與特性，將有助於其判斷關係人交易的合理性，進而能抑制不當之關係人交易。本文發現整體而言，國內大部分集團企業仍然委託不同事務所查核，會計師因無法完整瞭解關係人交易，故集團企業會利用營業外活動，進行不當之關係人交易，導致財務報表的盈餘持續性較低。然而，相較於委託不同事務所查核，當集團企業委託同一事務所查核，其營業活動外關係人交易較不會降低盈餘持續性。而此結果僅限於集團企業委託同一大型事務所查核，或是集團企業屬於大型者。英文摘要：Related party transactions are conducted between components within an affiliated business group and these transactions in the normal course of operations are beneficial for the improvement of the operating performance of the group. However, abnormal related party transactions can be used by managers of the group to manipulate financial statements. If auditors of the group can better understand the content and characteristics of related party transactions, then they can determine the rationality of the transactions and further inhibit improper transactions more accurately. The findings of this study indicate that most components of an affiliated business group are audited by auditors from different CPA firms that do not fully understand the nature of related party transactions. As such, affiliated business groups may conduct related party transactions by means of non-operating activities, which could decrease earnings persistence. Yet, when components of the affiliated business group are audited by the same firm, as opposed to being audited by different firms, earnings persistence would not be decreased. It is noteworthy that the results have to do with the significance of the companies under discussion for the following: either the CPA firm conducting the audits is big or the affiliated business group itself is big.起始頁-結束頁：33-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201808_28(2).000210篇名：汽車製造商自中國採購之供應鏈風險關鍵因素分析並列篇名：Key Factors of Supply Chain Risk for the Procurement of Automobile Manufacturer from China作者：邱榆淨(Yu-Jing Chiu);邱守序(Shou-Hsu Chiu)關鍵字：供應鏈風險;決策實驗室法;網路程序分析法;supply chain risk;Decision Making Trial and Evaluation Laboratory (DEMATEL);Analytic Network Process (ANP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：因應企業脈動與汽車市場供應鏈變化，中國成為全球最具潛力的市場及零組件供應者。台灣車廠為達精準的採購策略轉而擴大向中國供應商採購。而自中國採購的供應鏈存在不確定性與風險，如能提前解析，方能保障台灣車廠採購安全與效率。本研究主要目的是分析C公司自中國採購的供應鏈存在那些關鍵風險？且如何因應與管理？本文應用德爾菲法、DANP (DEMATEL-Based ANP)法及簡單加權法作為研究方法。研究顯示，關鍵構面為「供應風險」及「環境風險」，而關鍵準則是「品質風險」及「交期風險」；最後藉由個案實際之供應商的風險評估發現，自中國採購之供應商風險為動態變化之形勢，須依個別供應商之風險分析項目結果以提出具體的因應策略，以期能達到供應商風險預警效果。英文摘要：In response to the changing needs of enterprises and changes in global automobile market supply chain, China has become the most promising automobile market and components supplier in the world. Taiwanese automobile manufacturers aspire to achieve a more rapid, effective, and accurate procurement strategy to expand sourcing from suppliers in China. However, considerable uncertainty and risk are involved in purchasing goods from supply chains in China. Improved understanding and analysis can safeguard the procurement of security and efficiency. This research examines the key risk factors involved in purchasing goods from supply chains in China by investigating an individual case of purchasing strategy adjustment. How do enterprises respond and manage these risk factors? The concept framework of this research was created through a literature review and expert interviews. The Delphi method was employed to achieve consensus and identify a study framework comprising 4 dimensions and 15 criteria. Finally, the Decision-Making Trial and Evaluation Laboratory-based Analytic Network Process method was used to weight and rank the dimensions and criteria. The key dimensions were ”supply risk” and ”environmental risk” and the key criteria were ”quality risk” and ”delivery risk.” The actual supplier risk assessment of three cases revealed that procurement from Chinese suppliers entails risks in a dynamic situation. Therefore, individual supplier risks should be analyzed to provide coping strategies and to achieve an effective early risk warning for suppliers.起始頁-結束頁：61-96資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201808_28(2).000311篇名：國際化與績效之分量迴歸分析並列篇名：Internationalization and Performance: An Application of Quantile Regressions作者：李揚(Yang Li);吳錦錩(Ching-Chang Wu);劉怡君(Yi-Chun Liu);劉華順(Hua-Shun Liu)關鍵字：國際化;績效;企業規模;分量迴歸;internationalization;performance;firm size;quantile regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：國際化與績效之研究一直未能獲得一致之結論，我們認為不一致的結果導因於不同規模廠商在整體結構上存有相當程度的差異，這些差異導致國際化對於廠商的績效產生不同的影響。本研究根據經濟部統計處(2006)的「製造業對外投資實況調查」之問卷資料，應用分量迴歸模型分析國際化對台灣製造業經營績效的影響，實證結果顯示：國際化對不同規模企業之邊際貢獻呈現非線性之關係；其中，國際化深度對規模越大企業之影響越大，國際化經驗對小型企業之貢獻明顯高於大企業，而國際化廣度有益於大企業之績效表現，但無助於中型企業，甚至不利於小型企業。英文摘要：As previous studies have yet obtained a consistent relat ionship between internationalization and performance, we propose that the contributions from internationalization on performance may vary with the scale of firms. This study employs quantile regression to analyze the influence of internationalization on the performance of Taiwan's manufacturing firms. Empirical results indicate that the relationship between internationalization and performance is non-linear. First, the larger the firm size, the higher the marginal effects are for the depth of internationalization. Second, the contribution of international experience on small firms is significantly higher than that on large firms. Third, the breadth of internationalization is only positively related to the performance of large firms, but is not significant to medium firms, and is even negative upon small firms.起始頁-結束頁：97-127資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201808_28(2).000412篇名：查核品質屬性、財務報表可比性與投資效率並列篇名：Auditor Quality Attributes, the Comparability of Financial Statements and Investment Efficiency作者：李貴富(Kuei-Fu Li)關鍵字：可比性;查核品質;投資效率;comparability;audit quality;investment efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在探討查核品質屬性（事務所任期與會計師經驗）是否會影響可比性的幅度與可比性是否會影響投資效率，參照De Franco, Kothari, and Verdi (2011)衡量可比性，並以2005年到2011年間台灣上市櫃公司資料進行實證分析。實證結果發現當會計師事務所任期愈長或會計師個人簽證年資愈長者，公司之可比性愈高。再者，本文亦發現僅在事務所查核初期與中期時，會計師個人簽證年資才有助於可比性的提升。最後，在可比性的經濟後果方面，本文發現當公司可比性愈高時，可減少投資不效率的情形，但僅限於投資不足的改善。而進一步分析結果顯示可減少資本支出過度投資與投資不足的情形，但對於非資本支出之投資效率無顯著影響。英文摘要：The aim of this paper is twofold: to investigate the impact of audit quality attributes, namely audit firm tenure and auditor partner experience on firm-level comparability, which was developed by De Franco, Kothari, and Verdi (2011), and to analyze the economic consequences of comparability by examining its effect on investment efficiency. After analyzing these aspects of Taiwanese publicly traded firms throughout 2005 to 2011, the empirical evidence shows that comparability increases with the level of audit firm tenure and audit partner experience. Furthermore, for short and middle tenure engagements, this paper finds that audit partner experiences are positively related to the level of comparability. Alternatively, the long tenure results indicate an insignificant relation between audit partner experience and the level of comparability. Finally, this paper provides evidence that documents a conditional positive association between the level of comparability and investment for firms operating in settings more prone to underinvestment. After decomposing total investments into two components, namely capital and non-capital expenditures, this paper finds that a higher level of comparability can mitigate investment inefficiency, including both under- and overinvestment in capital expenditures; however, it has no effect on investment inefficiency in non-capital expenditures.起始頁-結束頁：129-164資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201808_28(2).000513篇名：供應鏈關係不確定性對公司信用風險影響之研究並列篇名：Supply Chain Relationship Uncertainty and Corporate Credit Risk作者：陳宗岡(Tsung-Kang Chen);廖咸興(Hsien-Hsing Liao);廖崇佑(Chung-Yu Liao)關鍵字：信用風險;供應鏈關係不確定性;公司債利差;credit risk;supply chain relationship uncertainty;bond yield spreads期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究利用2000年至2008年美國公司債資料探討供應鏈關係不確定性對公司信用風險的影響。實證結果顯示，在控制其他影響公司債利差的公司特性及債券特徵變數後，公司與顧客間的關係不確定性與公司債利差成顯著正相關，但公司與供應商間的關係不確定性對公司債利差的影響則為不顯著。此結果顯示公司與顧客間的關係不確定性為影響公司信用風險的重要因素之一。此外，本研究亦發現公司與顧客間的關係不確定性對公司債利差的影響將不受景氣循環而顯著改變。最後，本研究結果在改用其他供應鏈關係不確定性的加權變數或控制其他影響現金流量波動風險的變數下仍成立。英文摘要：This study explores the effects of supply chain relationship uncertainty (SCRU) on corporate credit risk by American bond market data from year 2000 to 2008. Empirical results show that the firm-customer relationship uncertainty (FCRU) is significantly and positively related to bond yield spreads, whereas the firm-supplier relationship uncertainty (FSRU) exhibits nonsignificant effects when controlling for other well-known bond yield determinant variables. In addition, this research also finds that business cycle condition non-significantly changes the FCRU effect on bond yield spreads. Finally, the results we derive by evaluating SCRU variables through other weighted methods or by controlling for additional variables affecting cash flow variations are robust.起始頁-結束頁：165-203資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201808_28(2).000614篇名：Key Risk Factors of Financial Holding Companies in Taiwan: An Integrated Approach of DEMATEL-Based ANP and Risk Management Balanced Scorecard並列篇名：分析台灣金控公司之關鍵風險因子：以風險平衡計分卡結合決策分析實驗室法為基礎之分析網路法作者：吳吉政(Jei-Zheng Wu);花毓華(Yu-Hua Hua)關鍵字：risk management;balanced scorecard (BSC);analytic network process (ANP);風險管理;平衡計分卡;分析網路程序法期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：The objective of this study was to establish an evaluation mechanism of risk management performance for financial holding companies (FHCs) in Taiwan based on four dimensions (i.e., financial, customer needs, internal business process, and learning and growth). This study explored the key factors of risk management and their interrelation by applying a hybrid method of the balanced scorecard (BSC) and the DEMATEL method combined with the analytic network process (DANP). To fulfill these objectives, we collected data in two ways: semi-structured interviews with senior-level managers and a questionnaire distributed to experts employed in the risk management departments of FHCs. The DEMATEL results revealed that strategic, integration, management, and leadership risks have high prominence in the core factor zone of the relationship diagram. By contrast, risk factors such as credit, profitability, cost, reputation, trust, operation, and competitive risks require instant indirect control through the management of root-cause risk factors. In conclusion, combined with the DANP results, these results suggest that management and leadership risks were the two most important factors, and positive management tools as well as coordination and communication between head offices and branches are key to reducing risk in large and complex organizations such as FHCs. Standardized and regulated governance procedures are required. In addition, the results of a comparison between the DANP and AHP validated the necessity of using the DANP for evaluating interdependent dimensions and criteria in the context of the risk management BSC.英文摘要：本研究目的係以平衡計分卡的學習與成長、內部流程、顧客與財務四大構面，分析風險管理與金控公司，同時以2012年7月台灣已掛牌上市上櫃的金融控股公司為研究範圍，將問卷將分成兩部份收集：1.高階主管深度訪談調查；2.風管部門從業人員問卷調查，以決策分析實驗室法(DEMATEL)結合分析網路程序法(Analytic Network Process, ANP)之DANP分析關鍵風險因子之交互影響關係。研究結果顯示，策略風險、整合風險、管理風險及領導風險為降低風險的核心因子，同時具有高度的影響及被影響總分及高度的影響扣除被影響的總差額。另一方面，信用風險、利潤風險、成本風險、信譽風險、信用風險、作業風險及競爭風險等關鍵風險因子，則應透過核心因子及驅動因子等原因因子來間接控制。最後，結合上述DEMATEL的結果與DANP推導出管理與領導為最關鍵兩個風險因子的結果，組織複雜且龐大的金控公司應以建立管理工具及強化領導、溝通、協調總部及分公司以降低風險、增進風險管理效能，而標準化及制度化的公司治理為重要的基礎。DANP與分析層級程序法(Analytic Hierarchy Process)的比較結果再次確認前者更適用於RM-BSC此類具有交互影響關係的相對重要性分析中。起始頁-結束頁：205-242資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201808_28(2).000715篇名：Customer-supplier Relationship and Cost Structure並列篇名：顧客與供應商關係與成本結構作者：許文馨(Wen-Hsin Hsu);林杰(Chieh Lin);劉心才(Hsin-Tsai Liu)關鍵字：cost behavior;customer-supplier relationship;customer-base concentration;成本僵固性;顧客與供應商關係;顧客集中度期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Traditional model of cost behavior assumes that cost changes proportionally with sales. However, Anderson, Banker, and Janakiraman (2003) show that costs may behave ”sticky” in the sense that costs increase in response to the increase in sales, but do not decrease proportionately when sales decrease by the equivalent amount. This study investigates whether a firm's relationship with its major customers affect the level of cost stickiness. The evidence shows that costs are less sticky for firms which have higher concentrated customer bases. Our findings suggest that when suppliers (firms) have more information from their customer-supplier relationship through better information transfers along the supply chain, suppliers are more certain about future demand, thus adjusting their costs accordingly in time. Overall, our study shows importance of customer-supplier relationship when analyzing a firm's cost behavior.英文摘要：傳統的成本模型指出變動成本應與銷貨收入成等比例的變動。然而Anderson, Banker, and Janakiraman (2003)的研究指出許多成本具有僵固性－成本在銷貨收入上升時的調整幅度大於當銷貨收入下滑時調整之幅度。本研究調查顧客與供應商關係對於公司成本結構的影響。實證結果指出，當供應商的顧客集中度越高時，該供應商的成本結構較不僵固。我們的實證結果指出，供應商與顧客關係將使雙方有更密切的資訊交流，供應商與顧客的資訊交流溝通使得供應商能及時調整產能，因此成本較不僵固。本研究指出供應商與顧客關係應為研究公司成本結構時應考量之因素。起始頁-結束頁：243-282資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201808_28(2).000816篇名：Tax Avoidance and Pyramidal Layers並列篇名：公司避稅與金字塔結構作者：許文馨(Wen-Hsin Hsu);劉心才(Hsin-Tsai Liu)關鍵字：pyramidal layers;tax avoidance;effective tax rate;金字塔投資層級;企業避稅活動;有效稅率期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study investigates whether the span of corporate pyramids (as measured by the number of ownership layers) is associated with a firm's tax avoidance activities. Using a unique sample of publicly traded non-financial firms of Taiwan, which are required to disclose information on all of their affiliates, we measure the span of corporate pyramids using the number of layers in them. Consistent with corporate pyramids generating higher agency costs and information asymmetries, we find that firms with a large number of layers engage in more tax avoidance activities, leading to lower effective tax rates. Furthermore, we find that the well-documented positive association between the level of tax avoidance and having investees in tax havens becomes more pronounced as the number of layers increases. Overall, the results support the argument that the length of pyramidal layers allows the parent firm to conduct intercompany transactions to prevent inappropriate tax avoidance activities from detection.英文摘要：本文探討公司金字塔結構的投資層級多寡與公司避稅活動的關聯性。本文預期，當投資層級愈多，公司與金融市場之間的資訊不對稱及代理問題愈大，公司愈容易透過投資層級進行避稅，降低公司的有效稅率。因台灣公開交易公司依法需揭露其所有的關係企業，故本文以台灣公開交易的非金融公司為樣本，實證發現，投資層級的數量與公司避稅活動（有效稅率）呈現正向（反向）關係。此外，當公司較多的關係企業設立在避稅天堂時，此正向關係更為明顯。整體而言，實證結果支持以下論述－當公司投資層級愈多，母公司愈容易透過關係企業之間的交易來進行避稅活動並避免檢查。起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201804_28(1).000117篇名：應用賽局理論探討信用擔保機制於供應鏈採購模式之研究並列篇名：Applying Game Theory to Credit Guarantee Mechanism on Supply Chain Sourcing Model作者：蔣明晃(David Ming-Huang Chiang);吳成<U+5CEF>(Cheng-Feng Wu);葉明憲(Ming-Shian Ye)關鍵字：中小企業;信用擔保機制;供應鏈;賽局理論;small and medium enterprise;credit guarantee;supply chain;game theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：中小企業在臺灣扮演著舉足輕重的角色，不但與大企業形成完整的供應鏈，也是就業機會的主要提供者，因此中小企業是經濟發展的基礎重心所在。中小企業成長時需要資金融通，然而卻因其資訊不透明、財會制度不健全等因素，且無力提供擔保品下，而無法取得銀行授信。本研究透過供應鏈中製造商與銀行間達成違約時債務分攤協議，提供上游中小企業供應商信用擔保，並確保銀行放款後的期望投資報酬，降低銀行的風險，提升銀行放款意願，進而達到供應鏈雙方與銀行三方皆贏的模式。本研究建構一領導者與追隨者的賽局模型，上游供應商為一資金缺乏之中小企業，並在供應鏈中為追隨者，下游製造商為領導者，建立一雙方極大化自身利潤之供應鏈採購模型，透過逆向歸納法(Backward Induction) 獲得各狀況下雙方之最佳決策與利潤，並進行敏感度分析並提出結論，冀望能提供未來供應鏈運作面臨資金融通議題時的決策參考。英文摘要：Small and medium enterprises (SME) have been a major force in Taiwan. They play the part as a bridge between larger enterprises. In short, SMEs are essential foundations for the economic development in Taiwan. However, due to unhealthy financial/accounting systems which result in the risk of loaning, SMEs are required to provide collateralization as a guarantee when applying for financial support. This study is aimed to discuss the credit guarantee mechanism. The manufacturer provides collateralization for upstream SMEs as well as the expected return after the loan is lent by the bank, in order to reduce the risk of loaning and to make loaning easer; thus, achieving a win-win situation for the supply chain. A leader-follower game is introduced in this paper, with the upstream suppliers as a follower, and the downstream manufacturer as the leader. Both sides of parties are seeking to maximize profit and build up their supply chain purchase model. Backward induction is applied to obtain the optimal decision and profit maximization; additionally, certain important factors in the sensitivity analysis are discussed. The results provide references and solutions to the loaning decision making process for all parties in supply chain financing.起始頁-結束頁：43-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201804_28(1).000218篇名：The Impact of Media Reputation on Stock Market and Financial Performance of Corporate Social Responsibility Winner並列篇名：媒體聲譽對企業社會責任得獎企業其股市表現與財務績效之影響作者：魏裕珍(Yu-Chen Wei);盧陽正(Yang-Cheng Lu);陳振南(Jen-Nan Chen);王丹薐(Dan-Leng Wang)關鍵字：corporate social responsibility;media reputation;stock market performance;financial performance;content analysis;企業社會責任;媒體聲譽;股市表現;財務績效;內容分析期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：We investigate the ways in which the reputation of a firm created by the media can affect its stock market and financial performance during 'corporate social responsibility' (CSR) award announcement periods in Taiwan. The CSR 'winners' in this study are selected from the Global Views and Common Wealth Magazines, with content analysis being used to capture the information implied in the media reports. Our empirical results show that since media coverage can provide stakeholders with a superior image of CSR firms, non-CSR firms are provided with sufficient motivation to try to manipulate the media coverage and the overall level of news sentiment degree in the firm, in order to close the gap between their image and that of the CSR winners. Our results also indicate that media reputation relating to CSR winners is found to be higher than that for non-CSR firms and that the stock returns of CSR winners are likely to be significantly higher than those of non-CSR firms for a period of four to five months after CSR announcements. We argue that when investors are making investment decisions during periods of CSR awards announcements, they can be guided by the signals of CSR awards and media reputation.英文摘要：本研究以天下及遠見雜誌評選之企業社會責任得獎公司為研究樣本，剖析企業社會責任獎項公告期間，媒體聲譽對公司股市表現與財務績效之影響。本研究應用內容分析法捕捉財經新聞報導隱含之資訊，實證結果發現媒體報導可向利害關係人傳遞企業之聲譽評價，未獲獎企業有動機在得獎公告前提升其媒體曝光程度與報導之淨樂觀程度，避免與獲獎企業之形象差距過大，但平均而言獲獎企業的媒體聲譽仍顯著高於未獲獎企業。此外，本研究發現事件公告後約四至五個月，獲獎企業之市場真實報酬顯著優於未獲獎企業。投資人於獎項公告期間進行投資決策時，可考量媒體聲譽優良之獲獎企業作為標的選擇。起始頁-結束頁：87-139資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201804_28(1).000319篇名：Popularity Information and Online Purchases: Consumer Interpretation as the Moderator並列篇名：產品受歡迎資訊與網路購物：以消費者解讀為干擾變數作者：李藍瑜(Lynne Lee);吳玲玲(Ling-Ling Wu)關鍵字：popularity information;social comparison;product quality;signal;online purchase behavior;產品受歡迎資訊;社會比較;產品品質;指標;網路購物行為期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Popularity information of products, frequently observed by consumers for making purchase decisions, has become an even more common point of reference in E-commerce where such information is readily updated. This study investigates how consumers interpret breadth of appeal and sales volume, which are two common kinds of popularity information that often co-exist on the Internet, with different inferences (quality evaluation or social comparison) under conditions when the two kinds of popularity information are congruent or incongruent. It is hypothesized that when a product’s breadth of appeal and sales volume are incongruent, the probability of purchasing a narrow-appeal product significantly increases compared to the condition of congruence; moreover, the magnitude of increase between the two conditions of congruency is higher for consumers with the inference of quality evaluation compared to that of social comparison. The method of laboratory experiment was adopted, with 200 participants. The empirical results strongly supported the proposed hypotheses and provided practical implications for e-commerce.英文摘要：產品受歡迎資訊往往是網路消費者做購物決策時的重要指標。這種資訊在網路上可以即時更新，所以特別受到網路消費者的重視。這個研究主要在探討消費者如何解讀兩種產品受歡迎資訊－產品市場（反映產品在市場上的需求量）與產品銷售量。這兩種資訊在網路上常常是共同存在的，而且通常會引發兩種不同的解讀（品質評估與社會比較），當小眾產品的銷售量與大眾產品的銷售量相同時，大多消費者會把這種訊息解讀為產品品質的指標，認為小眾產品的品質較好。然而，同樣的資訊也可以被解讀為潮流的指標，會吸引消費者去跟其他消費者做比較，而且覺得自己應該要得到那些消費者所擁有的東西。這種比較的過程，就是所謂的社會比較。這篇研究假設，當產品的市場大小與銷售量是不一致時（例如：小眾產品的銷售量大過於大眾產品時），購買小眾產品的機率會比當產品的市場大小與銷售量是一致的狀況下來得高，而其增加的量是以用產品品質為聯想的狀況高過於以社會比較為聯想的狀況。這個實驗是以實驗法，讓200位受試者在網路上進行實驗。最後的實證結果強烈支持我們的假設，並且對電子商務提供了許多實質的意涵。起始頁-結束頁：141-174資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201804_28(1).000420篇名：The Impact of Investment Opportunities and Investor Protection on the Dividend Policies of Ultimate Owners並列篇名：投資機會和投資者保護機制對控股股東派息的影響作者：許仁茂(In-Mu Haw);梁碩玲(Olivia Leung);劉洋(Yang Liu);吳毓武(Woody Wu)關鍵字：dividend policies;investment opportunities;legal institutions;ultimate owners;派息政策;投資機會;投資者保護機制;控股股東期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Given the findings of two influential studies of higher dividend payouts in countries with strong investor protection (La Porta et al., 2000) and firms with controlling shareholders (Faccio et al., 2001), this study examines the governance role of legal institutions in the dividend payout policy of the ultimate owners of firms in which shareholder power is not aligned with the ”divergence” force. Based on a broad firm-level ultimate ownership data set from 22 East Asian and Western European countries, we find the coefficients of the interactions among the legal protection of investors, control divergence, and investment opportunities to be negatively and significantly associated with dividend payouts, which suggests that the high dividends paid by controlling shareholders with control divergence are lowered when the reinvestment opportunities of firms are good in countries with strong legal protection. Our findings imply that the enhancement of legal institutions, especially in emerging markets in which governance systems are weak, can mitigate the efforts of controlling shareholders to mask their expropriation activities from minority shareholders. Our results indicate that shareholder ”power” and the ”divergence” force of controlling shareholders cancel each other out.英文摘要：La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000) 和 Faccio, Lang, and Young (2001)這兩篇文章分別講述了在投資者保護較好機制的國家和控股股東兩權分離的情況下，公司會有較高派息。本文主要研究投資者保護機制在公司治理中的作用，具體而言，在絕對控股股東的投票權高於分紅權（兩權分離）時，研究投資者保護機制對派息的影響。本文用22 個東亞和西歐的公司層面股東資料，發現投資者保護機制、兩權分離程度、投資機會三者連乘後，與派息水平顯著負相關，說明投資者保護機制越好的國家，投資機會越好的公司，會削弱文獻中已發現的派息水平與有兩權分離控股股東的正相關關係，也就是說，即使控股股東兩權分離度高，但投資機會越好，投資者保護機制越好的時候，派息會下降。實證檢驗結果也顯示，尤其在缺乏公司治理的發展中國家，好的投資者保護機制，可以讓控股股東在做為公司長遠發展有益的決策時，不用刻意粉飾自己可能會損害少數股東的行為。最後，結果也說明，在好的投資者保護機制下，少數股東要求派息的權利和絕對控股股東兩權分離的影響相抵消。起始頁-結束頁：175-211資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201804_28(1).000501篇名：接軌「都市化與環境變遷」國際研究－台灣研究議題並列篇名：International Research on Urbanization and Environmental Change and Research Issues for Taiwan作者：黃書禮(Shu-Li Huang);李盈潔(Ying-Chieh Lee);李叢禎(Tsung-Chen Lee);周素卿(Sue-Ching Jou);林子倫(Tze-Luen Lin);張昱諄(Yu-Tsun Chang);張學聖(Hsueh-Sheng Chang);葉佳宗(Chia-Tsung Yeh);詹士樑(Shih-Liang Chan);蔡育新(Yu-Hsin Tsai)關鍵字：科技部;都市化;環境變遷;驅動力;Driving force;Environmental change;Ministry of Science and Technology;Urbanization期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：都市化是21世紀全球環境變遷重要的現象與主因之一，都市化與環境系統之間的複雜關係已受到國際研究重視。台灣於20世紀起的快速都市發展，以及全球環境變遷愈趨嚴重之衝擊下，逐漸發展都市化與環境變遷議題之相關研究，而科技部自然司永續學門於2013年進行永續相關議題之核心計畫研究發展與推廣，共七個核心計畫。本文針對「都市化與環境變遷」核心計畫對於台灣接軌國際之研究所建構之科學計畫研究架構，提出四大研究議題—「都市化的驅動力與影響」、「都市化對 環境系統的影響」、「環境變遷對都市系統的影響」、「都市對環境變遷的因應與成效」，以了解都市化與環境變遷的交互作用與反饋過程，並從國際最新研究趨勢與國內現況及政策環境，提供各議題之未來研究思考方向。英文摘要：Urbanization is one of the main causes and phenomena of global environmental change in the 21^(st) century, and the complicated relationships between urbanization and environmental system have been recognized by international researches. Due to the rapid urban development in Taiwan in the 20^(th) century and the increasing awareness of global environmental change, the core project of urbanization and environmental change was proposed as an important research issue of sustainable development by the Department of Natural Sciences and Sustainable Development of Taiwan’s Ministry of Science and Technology in 2013. Based on the science plan of the core project ”Urbanization and Environmental Change”, four major themes were proposed: (1) the driving forces and influence of urbanization; (2) urban processes that contribute to global environmental change; (3) pathways through which global environmental changes affects the urban system; and (4) consequences of interactions within urban systems on global environmental change. This study aims at discussing the interaction and feedback process between urbanization and environmental change, and proposing suggestions of future research on the basis of the trends of international research and current issues of Taiwan's urbanization and environmental change.起始頁-結束頁：93-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2018.21.02.93-1102篇名：土地資源核心議題－土地系統動態變遷之因果與機制研究並列篇名：Land Resources Core Project - Modeling Dynamic Change and Mechanisms of Land Systems作者：林裕彬(Yu-Pin Lin);詹士樑(Shih-Liang Chan);陸曉筠(Shiau-Yun Lu);江莉琦(Li-Chi Chiang);徐家雯(Chia-Wen Hsu);林昭遠(Chao-Yuan Lin);劉小蘭(Hsiao-Lan Liu);吳振發(Chen-Fa Wu);林峰田(Feng-Tyan Lin);李慧琳(Huey-Lin Lee);陳佳正(Chia-Jeng Chen);莊振義(Jehn-Yih Juang);羅敏輝(Min-Hui Lo);簡旭伸(Shiuh-Shen Chien);連宛渝(Wan-Yu Lien);余佳珍(Chia-Jen Yu);吳岱蓉(Dai-Jung Wu);林士淵(Shih-Yuan Lin)關鍵字：土地利用覆蓋變遷;全球土地資源計畫;Land Use/Cover Change;Global Land Programme期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：土地利用與覆蓋變遷（LUCC）主要由社會經濟發展（人為力量）和全球氣候與環境變化（自然力量）所引起，並直接或間接地與區域性的地球物理產生相互作用，從而影響地質、大氣、氣候和水文環境，過程中可能會引起災難，加上土地利用與覆蓋變遷，有可能使得該情況加劇。此外，環境條件與經濟、發展和治理的聯結至關重要，這樣的交互影響若是無合理的整合與規劃，可能影響國家的永續發展。台灣是一個致力於發展永續性策略與管理的國家，然而過去二十年來仍持續的發生大面積的土地利用與覆蓋變遷，洪水、乾旱和山崩事件頻發，且災害嚴重性顯著的增加。有鑑於此，本研究首先檢視台灣土地系統的驅動因素，動態變遷和機制，並討論都市、鄉村、坡地、海岸地區的發展現狀和關鍵議題，進一步探討自然力量與人為制度間的整合性策略，從而建立一個可以用於評估和促進台灣土地資源 韌性和永續性的綜合框架。英文摘要：Significant land use/cover change (LUCC), primarily induced by socioeconomic development (anthropogenic forcing) and global climatic/environmental change (natural forcing), can interact directly or indirectly with regional geophysical processes, thereby affecting atmospheric, climatic and hydrological conditions. Some of these conditions could cause devastating disasters, which might be further aggravated by LUCC. The relationship that these conditions have with economy, development and inter-sectoral governance is of utmost importance. Such intersections have the potential to encumber the sustainable management ideology of a nation if inappropriate acts are implemented and citizens struggle to cope. Taiwan is a country devoted to sustainable management. Despite this, it has been experiencing tremendous LUCC as well as notable increases in the frequency and severity of floods, droughts, and landslide events during the last two decades. Therefore, this study investigated the driving factors, dynamic changes and mechanisms of land systems in Taiwan, review and identify the current status and critical issues in urban, rural, slope and coastal areas, to further examine the necessary strategy that could conduct the natural and institutional dimensions, and thus, build an integrated framework that assess and promote the resiliency and sustainability of land resources in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：111-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2018.21.02.111-1363篇名：「生態系服務與永續發展」科學計畫並列篇名：Ecosystem Services and Sustainable Development Science Plan作者：李玲玲(Ling-Ling Lee);趙榮台(Jung-Tai Chao);邵廣昭(Kwang-Tsao Shao);林幸助(Hsing-Juh Lin);方國運(Kuo-Yun Fang);郭奇芊(Chi-Chien Kuo);黃意鈞(I-Chun Huang);李芃(Perng Lee)關鍵字：生物多樣性;生態系服務;永續發展;核心計畫;biodiversity;core research programmes;ecosystem services;sustainable development期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：聯合國於2005年提出的「千禧年生態系評估」報告指出，全球各類生態系能提供攸關人類福祉的四大類服務，包括：支援、供應、調節、文化等。然而人類為了滿足各類發展需求，以空前的速度與規模改變了各地的生態系，雖然促進了經濟發展，卻也導致生態系服務退化、環境風險升高及貧困程度日益惡化等問題。因此，國際科研組織陸續推展各項計畫，以處理全球生物多樣性喪失、生態系與其服務變遷而影響人類永續發展的複雜科學問題；2014年起，更在既有研究的基礎上，整合相關計畫、方案及倡議，正式啟動以研究全球永續發展為主軸的「未來地球」國際科學合作平台，該平台的全球計畫中亦包括數項與生態系服務相關之研究計畫，期望科學研究能回應政策制定者所需要解決的永續發展議題所需的科學依據，足見生態系服務研究的重要性。台灣的生態系十分多元，這些生態系的健全與其所能提供的服務，攸關我國永續發展。因此，科技部自然司「永續學門」於2013年針對該學門未來研究發展所規劃的七個核心計畫中，即包含了「生態系服務」的主題。本文擬透過回顧國際間此一研究領域之發展，考量該領域在國內發展之現況與需求，提出符合我國國情與需要之生態系服務優先研究課題之建議。英文摘要：According to ”the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment” published by the United Nations in 2005, the global ecosystems can provide four categories of services, i.e. supporting, provisioning, regulating and cultural services, which are vital to human welfare. However, ecosystems around the world have been modified at an unprecedented speed and scale to meet the various development needs of mankind. While promoting economic development, these changes have also caused serious degradation of ecosystem service, elevating environmental risk and the extent of poverty, etc. Therefore, international scientific organizations initiated several projects and programmes to deal with the complex issues of impact on sustainable development due to global loss of biodiversity and changes of ecosystem service. In 2014, these research projects and programmes were integrated into ”the Future Earth”, which is an international scientific platform aiming to study scientific issues of global sustainable development. The platform's global plans also include a number of research projects associated with ecosystem services, which are expected to provide scientific knowledge to meet the needs of policy makers in addressing the issue of sustainable development. The diverse ecosystems of Taiwan can provide multiple services which are critical to national sustainable development. Therefore, ”ecosystem services” was included as one of the seven themes included in the core research programmes of the Department of Natural Science and Sustainable Development of the Ministry of Science and Technology in 2013. Natural divisions of the Department of science and technology ”sustainable” in 2013, according to the school’s future in the seven core programmes of research, development and planning, which includes the ”ecosystem services” theme. In this article, we provided recommendations on research priorities of ecosystem service that will meet the needs of sustainable development in Taiwan, by recalling the global progress in ecosystem service research, and taking into account the status of relevant research and scientific knowledge needed by the government and societal in this field in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：137-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2018.21.02.137-1524篇名：「氣候變遷災害衝擊之整合性風險治理」永續科學計畫並列篇名：Sustainability Science Plan of Integrated Risk Governance of Climate Change Disaster Impact作者：陳亮全(Liang-Chun Chen);郭士筠(Shih-Yun Kuo);周桂田(Kuei-Tien Chou);林子倫(Tze-Luen Lin);林李耀(Lee-Yaw Lin);林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin);洪鴻智(Hung-Chih Hung)關鍵字：永續科學;災害衝擊;氣候變遷;整合性風險治理;Climate Change;Disaster Impact;Integrated Risk Governance;Sustainability Science期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：21世紀全世界各國皆須面對許多影響地球與人類永續性的衝擊，這些潛在風險逐漸呈現「高度科學複雜性及不確定性」、「高度政治經濟敏感度」、「牽涉議題及部門多元化」，以及「影響層面跨國界、跨世代」的趨勢，這些特性帶給科學家以及決策者在發掘及解決這些風險問題上極大的挑戰。也因如此，學界們開始發展「跨領域整合」、「成果應用落實」的「永續科學研究」。受氣候變遷之影響，臺灣的極端天氣與氣候事件之強度及頻率已逐漸改變，再加上長期工業與經濟發展造成的環境、社會、土地之變遷，災害風險已顯著增加。這不僅將改變我國水文氣象類型災害的特性（如：空間特性），更將直接挑戰現有災害防救體系。換言之，「未來氣候變遷災害風險是否超過各地現有的承載力與因應能力」、「環境變遷是否會驅動災害風險，災害風險又會影響哪些土地利用型態」、「我國的政府體制又該如何因應這些災害風險」，這些是影響國人安全與國家發展永續性的重要議題，因此，「氣候變遷災害風險」是我國現階段亟待探討的永續科學研究議題及政策問題。因此，本文檢視國內外推動現況、回顧相關文獻、分析我國目前的科研缺口，發現氣候變遷災害風險治理必須整合體制政策、科學研究、公民社會等三面向，故本文將「氣候變遷災害衝擊之整合性風險治理」擇為核心議題，並具體規劃科學計畫，包含四項研究方向和其項下12項研究重點，希望我國學者及相關單位未來能投入此議題之研究，並將之落實應用，最終能發展建構出針對氣候變遷災害衝擊，且適合我國國情的整合性風險治理架構及機制。英文摘要：In the 21st century nearly every country in the world needs to face numerous impacts that affect the sustainability of the earth and human beings. These potential risks have been observed as ”high scientific complexity and uncertainty,” ”high political and economic sensitivity,” ”diverse issues and sectors involved,” and ”transboundary and intergenerational influence.” These characteristics bring tremendous challenges to scientists and decision makers in discovering and solving these risk problems. Hence, academia begins to develop Sustainability Science, a research area emphasizing interdisciplinary integration and the application and implementation of research outcomes. The intensity and frequency of extreme weather and climate events in Taiwan have changed because of changing climate. In addition, due to the environmental, societal, and land use changes caused by long-term industrial and economic development, disaster risks have been significantly enhanced. This problem not only would change the features of hydro-meteorological hazards in Taiwan (e.g., spatial feature), but also would directly challenge the existing disaster management system. In other words, questions such as ”whether future climate change disaster risks will exceed a place's current carrying capacity and response ability,” ”will environmental change drive disaster risks and which land use type will be affected by disaster risks,” ”how will our government and institutions respond to these disaster risks” are important inquiries that may influence the nation's citizens' safety and sustainability. Thus, climate change disaster risks are key issues in terms of sustainability science research and policy. Therefore, this article examines current reality and literature, analyzes the scientific research gaps, and finds out that climate change disaster risk governance needs to integrate three dimensions (i.e., institution and policy, scientific research, and civil society). This article proposes ”Integrated risk governance of climate change disaster impact” as the core issue, and plans the sustainability science plan which includes four research directions and twelve research subjects. It anticipates that researchers and agencies can involve in this research and apply the outcomes. Ultimately a framework of integrated risk governance that focuses on climate change disaster impacts and suits for Taiwan's condition can be developed and constructed in the country.起始頁-結束頁：153-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2018.21.02.153-1805篇名：氣候智慧水資源核心研究並列篇名：A Core Study of Climate Smart Water Resources作者：童慶斌(Ching-Pin Tung);曹榮軒(Jung-Hsuan Tsao);彭柏文(Po-Wen Perng);陳沛芫(Pei-Yuan Chen);李苑華(Yuan-Hua Li);鍾秉宸(Bing-Chen Jhong)關鍵字：水服務;知識管理;氣候智慧;開放API;智慧建模;數位基礎建設;Water Service;Knowledge Management;Climate-smart;Open API;Wisdom Modeling;E-infrastructure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：水資源是社會經濟發展與生態環境保育的重要元素，氣候變遷為水資源帶來新的挑戰，同時也產生新的機會。氣候智慧旨在正確的時間執行正確的作為以處理氣候之影響，並在規劃未來發展的過程中，了解氣候變遷所帶來的風險與益處，進而降低風險並取得機會。本文探討整合性水資源管理之研究議題與如何建立氣候智慧水資源服務系統，藉由回顧過去水資源管理的應用方式及成果，整理出未來面對氣候風險時所應具備的知識與需要發展的能力。服務系統的開發將以整合性水資源管理作為出發點，在供給面整合地面水與地下水；在需求面整合公共用水與農業用水，以此建構決策支援系統落實在不同使用者以及不同層級的需求。未來在因應氣候變遷可能帶來之影響，必須從中央、地方、民眾等不同層級同時推動調適措施，社區層級是在政策治理的過程中的最小治理單位，故藉由建構社區尺度的調適措施而形成的分散式系統來面對可能高衝擊與高不確定性的未來。整合性水資源管理亦必須強調不同領域對水資源管理之影響，與水資源管理對其他領域之影響，故以水資源做為出發點討論跨領域之間的交互作用已然是重要的課題。研究中所有的服務開發流程將依循智慧建模的概念，並說明如何在執行過程中循序漸進，建置概念性模型、邏輯性模型與實體性模型，並探討如何以開放資料、開放模式與開放API的方式，廣納群眾共同設計服務系統，善用群眾的智慧共同定義問題、收集資料、評估現況與未來發展、落實系統服務與後續監測，透過公民科學的參與，強化科學研究與政府部門服務的實用性與信賴感。藉由本研究所規劃的數位基礎建設系統服務，整合水資源領域研究能量，除了降低氣候變遷所帶來的風險之外，更期盼能讓所有利害關係人都能夠邁向智慧與永續的未來。英文摘要：Climate smart aims at promoting the idea of performing correct actions at the right time. The process of implementing climate smart in planning future development helps us understand the risks and opportunities of climate change, and can further reduce the risks and obtain benefits. The goals of this study are to discuss integrated water resources management and how to establish water resources services. The system incorporates a series of Application Programing Interface (API), which is organized based on the methodologies of knowledge management. Through the open API provided by the system, people in the fields of water resources, including the programmers, the customers, the governmental agencies, or the general publics, are able to use a bunch of simple code to achieve the most efficient knowledge integration and exchange by means of machine to machine (M2M). The development of the service system will take water resources as a starting point. The system integrates surface water and underground water at the supply side and public use and agricultural use at the demand side, and establishes integral assessment model for water resources for further cross-disciplinary application and evaluation. The services developed in this study are all based on wisdom modeling, and the concept, logic, and physical data model are built step by step through the three years. Moreover, the service system is also co-designed, co-produced, co-delivered incorporating public opinion, using the wisdom of the masses to jointly define the problem, collect data, assess current and future status, implement the services and conduct follow-up monitoring. The citizen science not only bridges the scientific research and government departments, but also strengthens the practicality and reliability. The system service of electronic infrastructure proposed by this study integrates the research resources in the field of water resources. It helps reduce the risk of climate change and moves all stakeholders a step towards a smarter and more sustainable future.起始頁-結束頁：181-208資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2018.21.02.181-2086篇名：「氣候變遷與健康調適」科學計畫並列篇名：Science Plan of ”Climate Change and Health Adaptation”作者：龍世俊(Shih-Chun Candice Lung);周淑婉(Shu-Wan Chou);陳正平(Jen-Ping Chen);溫蓓章(Pei-Chang Wen);蘇慧貞(Huey-Jen Jenny Su);蔡宜君(I-Chun Tsai);沈育生(Yu-Sheng Shen)關鍵字：共效益;系統性方法;健康衝擊;健康預警系統;跨領域整合;Co-benefit;Early Warning System;Health Impact;Systems Approach;Transdisciplinary期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：21卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：全球氣候變遷對人類健康造成許多威脅，世界各國政府皆對其衝擊影響及其調適策略極為關注；這不僅是全球性之政策議題，也需要科學方法研究自然環境、人為基礎設施、健康政策等諸多因素，以提出具體有效之可行健康調適策略。因此，本文評析國際趨勢、本土政策需求與科學研究缺口，提出「氣候變遷與健康調適」課題之科學規劃，以期科學研究成果能順利為研擬健康調適策略提供紮實科學基礎，降低氣候變遷對健康衝擊。此科學計畫提出以系統性方法聚焦自然環境、建成環境及健康影響三個系統，並整合性地探討此三個系統之交互作用影響途徑及變項，且由其影響歷程釐清可能介入之健康調適策略。我們提出四大研究方向，一是建立氣候健康衝擊（包含傳染病及非傳染病）之整合性預警模式，二是具有減緩氣候變遷與促進健康之共效益健康調適策略研究，三是新型態氣候變遷與健康調適之衛生教育或健康促進工具發展及策略研究，四是深化本土氣候變遷與健康調適研究之科學能量。同時，強調「以解決問題為導向」跨領域合作以及利害相關人之參與，以解決實務上之困難，確實降低氣候變遷對健康之衝擊。英文摘要：Evidences have showed that human health are affected by climate change in many ways. Worldwide, governments are concerned about health impacts of climate change and the corresponding health adaptation strategies which should be supported by scientific evidences evaluating the interactions among variables of natural environment, manmade infrastructure, and health status. This paper presents a science plan for ”Climate Change and Health Adaptation” considering the global trend of sustainability science, the policy needs of Taiwanese government, and the gaps of research findings. Systems approach is used to evaluate the interactions among systems of natural environments, built environments, and health impacts; potential health adaptation strategies could be identified by interrupting the influential pathways among them. Four research directions are proposed, namely (1) establishing integrated early warning systems to reduce health impacts, (2) exploring co-benefit strategies for health adaptation and mitigation of climate change, (3) developing strategies of health promotion and health education with new types of scientific tools, and (4) building capacity for ”climate change and health adaptation”. Moreover, solution-oriented, stakeholder-engaged, and integrated transdisciplinary collaboration should be encouraged in order to tackle the difficulty encountered in reality and reduce the health impacts of climate change effectively.起始頁-結束頁：209-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.2018.21.02.209-23901篇名：「RIP，426」：解析「大陸地區旅台學位生」的國族經驗並列篇名：”RIP, 426”: Analyzing ”National Experiences” of the Degree-Pursuing Mainland Students in Taiwan作者：汪宏倫(Horng-Luen Wang);張可(Ke Zhang)關鍵字：陸生;凡常民族主義;日常生活;兩岸關係;現象學的社會學;lusheng (students from mainland China);banal nationalism;everyday life;cross-strait relations;phenomenological sociology期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：65期出版年：2018中文摘要：2011年，台灣正式開放「大陸地區學生」（簡稱「陸生」）來台求取高等教育學位，為兩岸交流注入新元素。許多政府高層與民間支持者都樂觀認為，開放陸生來台可增進兩岸年輕世代的相互理解，甚至可以培養未來大陸的「親台派」，有助於和緩兩岸關係、促進兩岸和平。本研究透過深度訪談、參與觀察等方式，從制度、認識框架與情感結構三個層次來解析陸生來台之後在「國族問題」上所感受的經驗，發現陸生的國族經驗產生「推力」與「拉力」，分化出三種不同類型的陸生，其中兩類對台灣的反感或敵意增加，對中共現行體制的認同度則上升。這樣的結果，與原先開放陸生來台的政策預期似乎有所牴觸。本文最後則根據上述分析，提出本研究對和平與和解的啟示。英文摘要：In 2011, the Taiwanese government launched a new policy to open opportunities for students from mainland China (also known as ”lusheng”) to pursue higher education degrees in Taiwan. Many high officials and supporters optimistically expected that such a policy would advance mutual understandings between the younger generations across the Strait; some may even have thought that this policy would foster ”Taiwan-friendly circles” that, in turn, would contribute to peace-building by reducing tensions across the Strait. Using data collected from in-depth interviews and participatory observations, this paper investigates mainland students' experiences regarding the ”national question” through three levels: institutions, cognitive frames, and structures of feeling. It is found that ”national experiences” of mainland students generate both ”pushes” and ”pulls” that further differentiate three types of students. Among them, two types of students have become more hostile to Taiwan and more supportive to the communist regime in China. Such a result seems to contradict the initial policy expectation. In conclusion, we explore the implications from this analysis for future reconciliation between the two sides across the Strait.起始頁-結束頁：1-88資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201806_(65).0012篇名：法律的根據與法律義務的性質並列篇名：The Grounds of Law and the Nature of Legal Obligation作者：王鵬翔(Peng-Hsiang Wang)關鍵字：法律實證論／非實證論;法律與道德;法律的根據;義務;規範性;理由;legal positivism/non-positivism;law and morality;the grounds of law;obligations;normativity;reasons期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：65期出版年：2018中文摘要：法律實證論與非實證論的傳統爭論，近來常被視為關於法律根據的爭議。本文指出，這個爭議的來源之一是雙方關於法律義務的性質有不同的看法。實證論者認為，法律義務是一種特定觀點下的義務，它只具有擬似而非真正的規範性；非實證論者則認為法律義務是一種真正的義務，它乃是一種來自於法律實踐的道德義務。本文試圖辯護非實證論的法律義務觀，並說明何以構成法律實踐的社會事實或制度行動具有影響或改變道德義務的規範重要性：它們透過改變相關事實或情境，來影響我們所擁有的規範理由，並以此形塑了道德義務的內容。英文摘要：Recently, the debate between legal positivism and non-positivism has been framed as a controversy about the grounds of law. This article points out that the controversy results from their disagreement about the nature of legal obligation. According to legal positivism, legal obligations as obligations from the legal point of view are apparently rather than genuinely normative. By contrast, non-positivism holds that legal obligations are genuine obligations, i.e., moral obligations generated by our legal practices. This article defends a non-positivist view of legal obligation and attempts to explain the normative impact of social facts or institutional actions which constitute legal practices: Legal practices affect our normative reasons by changing the relevant facts and circumstances, thereby shaping the content of moral obligations.起始頁-結束頁：89-152資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201806_(65).0023篇名：如何證成新政權統治之正當性：馬區蒙特•尼德姆與承諾服從爭論並列篇名：Legitimacy of Revolution and Representative: Marchamont Nedham and the Engagement Controversy作者：賴芸儀(Yun-I Lai)關鍵字：尼德姆;承諾服從爭論;事實論;法理論;神意論;Marchamont Nedham;Engagement Controversy;de facto theory;de jure theory;providentialism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：65期出版年：2018中文摘要：政治服從學說從過往的天命說或血統論，到近代的人民同意論，不論內容如何變遷，都涉及統治者與受治者雙方如何面對權力移轉之處境。尼德姆（Marchamont Nedham）在英格蘭政治體制丕變，從王政到共和之際，其主要著作《為英格蘭共和國辯護》奠定共和國統治論述之基礎。本文分析尼德姆如何透過政治神學證成共和國統治的事實論（de facto theory）與法理論（de jure theory）之雙重基礎。本文主張尼德姆對此時期論述的重要貢獻，在於因應局勢變遷，透過神意論（providencialism），將議會政府的統治論述從事實論轉向法理論。尼德姆引入神意論替共和國尋找新的統治基礎－根據自然法的自保原則及政治神學上的論證、統治體制之優劣比較等，指出人民應當服從並效忠由神賦予權柄的英格蘭共和國。英文摘要：This article examines the context of Marchamont Nedham's works concerning the Engagement Controversy and attempts to demonstrate the transformation of the ideal of political legality and legitimacy during the Interregnum. In 1649, the Commonwealth of England proclaimed herself a commonwealth and free state by the supreme authority of the nation, i.e., the representatives of the people in Parliament. Nevertheless, contemporaries questioned by what right the new ruler, the House of Commons, could transfer the supreme authority from the hands of the King and the Houses into its hands. Nedham's main contribution to the controversy was that he provided a new theory of political order and ruling combining the laws of nature, political reality, religious faith, and reviewing different constitutions. This article shows that he added de jure theory to the controversy instead of de facto theory alone. Contrary to monarchy, which was based on the English political tradition, the newly established republican government constructed a new theory to support its legality and legitimacy of rule based on laws of war, republicanism, and providentialism. His political thought defines a new argument of the legitimacy of governing through the theory of consent and the republicanism.起始頁-結束頁：153-195資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201806_(65).00301篇名：中醫做為方法：STS如何向多元中醫學習？並列篇名：Chinese Medicine as Method: How can STS Learn from Chinese Medical practices?作者：林文源(Wen-Yuan Lin)關鍵字：中醫;中醫做為方法;規範;實作;行動者網絡理論;Chinese Medicine;Chinese Medicine as Method;Normativity;Practice;Actor-network Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：27期出版年：2018中文摘要：在科技與社會研究（STS）由實作反思中醫的經驗意涵的豐富成果上，本文釐清當前中醫實作者的經驗模式與規範架構，探討如何以中醫經驗作為拓展研究視野的方法。本文首先介紹對中醫多元發展與轉變的研究。其次，本文根據訪談資料，定位八種台灣中醫與西醫的互動經驗類型，並釐清四種規範架構。最後本文藉由這些重新定位，提出以中醫做為方法的三種策略：第一種，發展正視經驗為基礎的理解。第二種，釐清多元認識規範架構存在與影響。第三種，以中醫認識空間拓展研究視野，如何挑戰如行動者網絡理論等既有STS理論與方法。本文藉此由在地中醫經驗與視野出發，開拓STS的格局與想像力。英文摘要：Based on the fruitful STS studies of Chinese Medicine (CM), this paper further explores how the diverse practices and embedded normative frameworks of CM practitioners can enrich STS perspectives. It first introduces and reflects on the studies of development of CM within hegemonic biomedicine. Drawing on interviews with CM practitioners in Taiwan, this paper discerns eight modes of relations between CM and biomedicine in four normative frameworks. Finally, this paper elaborates three strategies for using CM as method: first, making sense of the experiences of CM; second, exploring the multitude of normative frameworks; third, expanding our research perspectives on the basis of CM methods to challenge STS theoretical approaches, such as actor-network theory. This paper aims to expand the scope and imagination of STS on the basis of those situated CM experiences and perspectives.起始頁-結束頁：7-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：承擔抑或抗辯：醫者醫療刑事責任在民初之轉變（1912-1949）並列篇名：To Accept or Contest: The Transformation of Criminal Liability for Medical Practitioners in the Early Years of the R.O.C. (1912-1949)作者：曾宣靜(Hsuan-Ching Tseng);林昭庚(Jaung-Geng Lin);孫茂峰(Mao-Feng Sun)關鍵字：刑事責任;醫療過失;醫療糾紛;醫療訴訟;醫病關係;criminal liability;medical negligence;medical malpractice;medical lawsuit;physician-patient relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：27期出版年：2018中文摘要：辛亥革命（1911）後，中國政體由帝制改為民主共和，法律規範方式亦隨之變動，由諸法合體到六法分離，繼受自近代歐陸法系國家之刑法理念逐漸導入傳統中國社會中，醫療刑事規範因此日趨嚴密。民初醫療刑事規範除轉換清刑律中「庸醫殺人」為「業務過失致人於死」、「業務過失傷害」外，更添增「墮胎罪」、「偽造文書印文罪」、「妨害秘密罪」等。醫療事件涉及之法律責任雖可區分為刑事、民事及行政上之責任，然而進入訴訟程序之醫病糾紛常以刑事爭議為主，因此，本文嘗試從醫者角度出發，以醫療刑事責任為研究核心，分析民初醫療刑法條文之重要內容、變遷歷程，探究在司法實踐過程中，刑法條文與實際案件之適用狀況，從法律層面了解當時醫療刑事責任之認定方法及判斷標準，進而發現當時困擾醫者的並非刑法中業務過失概念之模糊，而是證據與待證事實間評價的不確定性。英文摘要：After the revolution in 1911, the Chinese political system had changed from a monarchy to a democratic republic. Hence, legal norms also changed, from an integration of all laws to a separation of laws into six types. The concept of criminal law, derived from modern civil law countries, had gradually been established in traditional Chinese society. As a result, the criminal norms on medical treatments had become more and more complete. In the process of revising criminal norms from the Qing dynasty to the early years of R.O.C., ”quake physician homicide” turned into ”homicide from malpractice of medical treatment” and ”bodily harm by malperformance of practice.” In addition, ”the offence of abortion” , ”offence of forging instrument and seal” , ”offence against privacy” and others were added. Although the legal liability involved in medical affairs can be divided into criminal, civil and administrative responsibilities, the disputes between the physician and patients often centered on criminal issues. This article focuses on the laws surrounding criminal liability in medical treatment in the early years of the R.OC. from the perspective of medical practitioners. This study also explores the application of criminal law provisions and actual cases in judicial practice, as well as how the methods and standards of medical criminal liability were determined within the contemporary legal system. The research results show that the practitioners were plagued with uncertainty regarding evidence and the facts to be proved rather than by the ambiguity of the concept of business negligence in criminal law.起始頁-結束頁：59-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：從養生到衛生：自肉食論述考察日本明治期健康觀變遷並列篇名：The Transformation of Health Concepts in Meiji Japan in the Case of Meat-eating作者：黃靖嵐(Ching-Lan Huang)關鍵字：養生;衛生;健康觀;明治日本;肉食;yojo;hygiene;concept of health;Meiji Japan;meat-eating期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：27期出版年：2018中文摘要：明治時期是日本轉型為現代國家的變革期，伴隨大量西洋知識、技術、文化的引進，而對諸多領域產生衝擊，健康領域也不例外。本文旨在以當時肉食論述為例，考察明治日本的健康概念變遷過程。日本自657年天武天皇頒佈殺生禁令以來，禁止宰殺家畜並視食肉為污染，由於此社會背景，促使誕生於中國、不禁止肉食的《本草綱目》傳入日本後，日本醫家對於如何詮釋書中肉類健康效益之描述產生分歧。進入明治，衛生論傳入日本並取代養生論成為主流健康論述，飲食亦成為象徵國家權力之衛生警察的監控對象。伴隨明治時期肉食解禁，以營養科學等現代科學知識為基礎，肉食從個人身體維護轉變為富國強兵政策的一環，進而被列入國家治理的對象。在此過程中，並非簡單地「養生論／批判肉食vs.衛生論／鼓勵肉食」此對立構圖，而是呈現出對健康與肉食的多重詮釋。英文摘要：In the Meiji era, Japan transformed into a modern country. The massive influx of Western knowledge, technology and culture in this period was deeply felt throughout the society, and health was no exception. This article examines changes in concepts of health in Meiji Japan by taking the meat-eating discourse of the time as an example. After Emperor Tenmu issued the order prohibiting the killing of livestock killing in 657, Japanese stopped slaughtering livestock for food and regarded meat-eating as a kind of pollution. Given this socio-historical background, when Compendium of Materia Medica was introduced from China to Japan, and notably contained no meat prohibition, differences arose in Japanese physicians' interpretation of the health value of meat. During the Meiji era, the Hygiene theory was introduced to Japan, replacing the status of Yojo theory and becoming the mainstream health theory. Diet also became a target of control for hygiene medical police, in an assertion of national power. Following the lifting of the meat-eating prohibition in the Meiji period, the purpose of meat-eating on the basis of modern science, such as nutriology, transformed from health care to strengthening the national economy and military prowess as it became a target of national governance. This transformation was much more than a confrontation between two theories, i.e. ”Yojo theory/criticism of meat-eating vs Hygiene theory/encouragement of meat-eating”; rather, different theorists from various groups had divergent interpretations of health and meat-eating on the basis of their different habits and interests.起始頁-結束頁：121-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：書評：科技、安全、壟斷與知的權利－評《Seeds of Deception》（欺騙的種子）兼論《把吃什麼的權力要回來》及《餐桌上的危機》並列篇名：Book Reviews: Technology, Safety, Monopoly and Right to Know作者：柯一嘉(Yi-Chia, Ke)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：223-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：醫務社工在器官捐贈過程中與家屬工作之經驗探討並列篇名：Working with Families on the Organ Donation Process: The Experiences of Medical Social Workers作者：林芳怡(Fang-Yi Lin);沈慶盈(Ching-Ying Shen)關鍵字：意願徵詢;器官捐贈;器官勸募;醫務社工;willingness consultation;organ donation;organ procurement;medical social worker期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：38期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解醫務社工在器官捐贈過程中與家屬工作的歷程，以建構出醫務社工對於器官捐贈工作的主觀經驗，並分析醫務社工在器官捐贈過程中所遭遇的困境及解決策略，以累積實務工作方法；另透過器官捐贈實務工作方法的統整分析，提供未來器官捐贈工作的參考，期能提升更好的照顧及服務品質。本研究邀請12位曾經或目前從事器官捐贈工作的醫務社會工作者，利用質性研究方法，透過主題分析來探討醫務社工在器官捐贈過程中與家屬的工作經驗。研究結果發現，醫務社工傾向以「意願徵詢」取代「器官勸募」的方式來與家屬展開器官捐贈工作，工作目標為「悲傷輔導」為主，「器官勸募」為輔。過程中持續地陪伴關懷、明確醫療說明及器捐相關資訊等是家屬需要的，後續的追蹤關懷更是不可少。醫務社工面臨的困境挑戰，包含來自於醫院或醫療過程、社工本身，以及捐贈者家屬，亦提出因應的解決策略。最後，研究者針對制度層面、社工實務及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to understand the procedure of medical social workers working with family members in the process of acquiring organ donation. This paper aims to reconstruct the medical social workers' subjective experiences in seeking organ donations and to analyze the struggles faced by the medical social workers in the process of guiding families to acquiesce in organ donation as well as the solutions derived thereby in order to accumulate practical work methods. In addition, through the integration and analysis of practical work methods related to organ donation, this study provides reference for future organ donation work, aiming to enhance care and service quality. This study, adopting a qualitative method, invited 12 medical social workers who had been engaged in, or were currently engaged in organ donation to discuss their working experience with family members during the process of organ donation. Thematic analysis was used to analyze 12 texts. The results showed that medical social workers tend to carry out organ donation with family members by willingness consultation instead of purely focusing on organ procurement. The main work target is grief counseling supplemented by organ procurement. Family members need continuous company and care, clear medical explanation and information related to organ donation; in addition, follow-up care is essential. The dilemmas and challenges faced by medical social workers affiliated with hospitals or medical treatment process, social workers themselves and family members of the donors. Solutions are proposed in this study. Finally, the author offers some suggestions on institutional level, social work practices and future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201812_(38).00012篇名：團隊合作的社會基礎：多元專業團隊協助男性口腔癌存活者重返工作之實踐經驗並列篇名：Social Foundation of Teamwork: The Practical Experience of a Multiple Disciplinary Team in Assisting Male Oral Cancer Survivors to Return to Work作者：林東龍(Dong-Long Lin);陳武宗(Wu-Tsung Chen);李家和(Ka-Wo Lee);曾良鵬(Leong-Perng Chan);高郁勛(Yu-Hsun Kao);周映君(Ying-Chun Chou)關鍵字：男性口腔癌存活者;重返工作;多專業團隊;專業間團隊;跨專業團隊;male oral cancer survivor;return to work;multidisciplinary team;interdisciplinary team;transdisciplinary team期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：38期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要探究「多元專業」團隊協助男性口腔癌存活者重返工作之實踐經驗。此「多元專業」團隊不同於現有醫療機構以確立癌症分期和治療計畫為目標的專業團隊，嘗試連結衛生福利與勞政兩大體系的專業者，整合成以協助男性口腔癌患者重返工作為目標的「多元專業」團隊。此「多元專業」團隊涵蓋11種專業，歷經團隊籌組期、服務規劃期、服務提供與修正期及結束期等四個階段，共1年11個月，11位男性口腔癌存活者接受此服務，其中有8位重返工作。本研究重要發現有三：一是，因患者確診初期仍未覺察重返工作的重要性、無法配合團隊服務時間、信任感不足，以及缺乏友善勞動環境等原因，造成服務提供與接受之間存在落差；二是，此專業團隊符合「專業間團隊」模式，尚未達「跨專業團隊」模式，主要原因在於專業角色擴展有所限制；三是，既有人際網絡、單位主管支持、明確共同目標與成員認同、開放溝通的氛圍，以及通訊科技協助等因素，是此專業團隊穩定運作的重要因素。英文摘要：This article focuses on the practical experience of a multiple disciplinary team in assisting male oral cancer survivors to return to work. This multi- discipline team was different from the professional team for cancer staging and treatment planning presently in the hospital, and attempted to connect professionals of the two systems of health welfare and labor and integrate them to help male oral cancer survivors return to work. It covered 11 professionals working in various periods including team preparation, service planning, service provision and revision, and a conclusive period, for a total of 1 year and 11 months. Eleven male oral cancer survivors received this service, and eight of them returned to work. There were three major findings. Firstly, there was a gap between service provision and use due to the fact that the patient was still unaware of the importance of returning to work at the initial stage of diagnosis, was unable to cooperate with service time, displayed lack of trust, lack of a friendly working environment; secondly, this multiple disciplinary team met the ”interdisciplinary team” model but had not yet reached the ”transdisciplinary team” model; the main reason being that the branching out of professional roles into other fields was limited; and thirdly, the interpersonal network, unit supervisors support, clear common goals and members commitment, open communication atmosphere, and communication technology were determined to be important factors for the stable operation of this multiple disciplinary team.起始頁-結束頁：51-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201812_(38).00023篇名：當「不標準的病人」遇到醫療專業體制：身心障礙者就醫經驗的質化分析並列篇名：When ”Non-Standard Patients” Encounter the Medical Professional System: A Qualitative Analysis of Medical Experiences among People with Disabilities作者：林昭吟(Chao-Yin Lin);鄭雅之(Ya-Chih Cheng);張睇(Heng-Hao Chang)關鍵字：身心障礙;就醫經驗;醫用關係;醫療專業;disability;medical experiences;user-professional relationship;medical profession期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：38期出版年：2018中文摘要：隨著人權意識的興起，身心障礙者的健康權亦受到關注。身心障礙者為醫療服務的經常使用者，但在講求標準化的專業醫療體制中，常被視為是「不標準的病人」而面臨就醫障礙。本研究目的為呈現障礙者於就醫時所面臨的問題；並以「醫用者」觀點探討障礙者在醫療體系下所展現的主體性與行動性。本研究以質化研究方法，探討12位肢體障礙者與14位智能障礙者及其照顧者的就醫經驗，輔以三位醫療人員的訪談資料，分析障礙者在醫療體系下的處境。研究發現，障礙者在醫療體制中顯得格格不入，例如，不適用於某些檢驗設備、有共病症狀問題、不易與醫療人員溝通。障礙者在面臨就醫困境時，有些可以自身經驗引導醫療人員發展出合作模式、有些則因處置問題而產生二度傷害、有些則因過多失敗經驗而選擇放棄醫療或檢查。建議針對標準化醫療設備或流程，能考慮合理調整原則、醫學教育應強化對於障礙者的認識與知能、政府單位於相關機構評鑑時，可考量服務使用者的意見。英文摘要：Along with the increasing awareness of human rights, the right to health of people with disabilities is also receiving considerable attention. People with disabilities are regular users of medical services. In the standardized professional medical system, they are often regarded as ”non-standard patients” and face many medical barriers. The purpose of this study was to present the problems faced by disabled people in medical environments, and to explore their opinions and actions under the medical system from the perspective of ”medical service users”. This study employed qualitative research methods to explore the subjective medical experiences of 12 physically disabled persons and 14 intellectually disabled persons and their caregivers, supplemented with interview data on three medical professionals to analyze the situation of people with disabilities in the medical system. This study found that people with disabilities appeared to be out of place in the standardization of the medical system, such as non-applicability to certain testing or inspection equipment, the occurrence of secondary or comorbid conditions, and difficulty to communicate with medical personnel. In the face of medical difficulties, some people with disabilities could guide the medical staff to develop a cooperative mode; some of these patients had secondary injuries due to improper treatments, while others chose to give up medical treatment or examinations due to excessive failure experiences. The suggestions of this study include reasonably adjusting standardized medical devices or procedures, strengthening the understanding and knowledge regarding disabled persons in medical education, and incorporating the voices of medical service users into agency evaluations conducted by the central or local governments.起始頁-結束頁：99-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201812_(38).000301篇名：The Effects of Consumer Emotion on Nine-Ending Prices並列篇名：消費者情緒在九尾數定價效果的影響作者：鄭尹惠(Yin-Hui Cheng);莊世杰(Shih-Chieh Chuang);黃千容(Molly Chien-Jung Huang)關鍵字：fluency;emotion;nine-ending price;流暢;情緒;九尾數定價期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Previous research has ignored the influence of emotional processing on nine-ending price effect. Building on the theory of fluency, Studies 1a, 1b and 2 investigate the influence of incidental emotion on the level and image effects of nine-ending prices and on the effect such prices have on product image under the mediating role of processing fluency. The empirical results of Studies 1a, 1b and 2 demonstrate that consumers who feel happy have higher purchase intention with respect to items with nine-ending prices than do consumers who feel sad. Study 3 distinguishes between the influences of incidental emotional certainty and uncertainty on the quantity of nine-ending priced items purchased. Study 4 shows that consumers are less affected by nine-ending prices under the joint evaluation mode than they are under the separate evaluation mode. These findings provide important insights into the perspectives of incidental emotion and processing fluency on the nineending prices.英文摘要：過去的研究忽視了情緒處理對九尾數定價效果的影響。在流暢理論的基礎上，研究1a，1b和研究2探討情緒對九尾數定價水準和意象效應的影響，以及在流暢程度做為中介變數的情況下，情緒對以九尾數定價產品之意象效應的影響。研究結果顯示，相對於感到悲傷的消費者而言，感到快樂的消費者對於九尾數定價的商品具有較高的購買意向。研究3將情緒的確定性和不確定性對購買九尾數定價物品的數量的影響進行區分。研究4顯示，相對於在單獨評估模式下的消費者，在聯合評估模式下的消費者受到九尾數定價的影響較小。在情緒與流暢程度對九尾數定價影響的觀點上，本研究提供了重要的見解。起始頁-結束頁：213-254資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201804_28(1).00062篇名：Do Both SOX 404 and AS5 Reduce ICFR-Disclosure Errors?並列篇名：沙賓法404條及審計準則第5號是否會減少內部控制揭露錯誤？作者：邱<U+732E>良(Hsien-Lian Chiu);周玲臺(Ling-Tai Lynette Chou)關鍵字：SOX 404;AS5;ICFR-disclosure errors;quality of internal control disclosure;internal control audit;沙賓法404 條;審計準則第5 號;內部控制揭露錯誤;內部控制揭露品質;內部控制查核期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：28卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：The purpose of this study is to examine the effect of both SOX 404 and AS5 on ICFR-disclosure errors. We follow the rationale and method developed by Knechel and Vanstraelen (2007) and regard restatement companies (nonrestatement companies) as those with weak (effective) internal controls and greater (lower) likelihood to receive adverse ICFR opinions. We presume that deterioration in ICFR-disclosure quality is shown by an increase in the likelihood of Type II errors (a restatement company fails to conclude that its internal control system is ineffective for the restated period) or an increase in the likelihood of Type I errors (a nonrestatement company concludes that its internal control system is ineffective for the nonrestatement period). Our evidence indicates that the enactment of SOX 404 reduces the Type II errors of ICFR disclosures, without the side effect of increasing Type I errors. In addition, we find that even though the more flexible and less prescriptive AS5 can enhance the efficiency of ICFR audits by reducing Type I errors, it inadvertently lowers public ICFR-disclosure quality, measured as increased Type II errors.英文摘要：本研究旨在研究沙賓法404條及審計準則第5號對於內部控制揭露錯誤的影響。本研究參考Knechel and Vanstraelen (2007)的方法，將重編公司視為內部控制較不健全之公司，這些公司理應較可能會收到內部控制否定意見，反之亦然。本研究假定若重編公司報導內部控制系統為有效，此時意味犯型二錯誤的機率較高；若非重編公司報導公司內部控制系統為無效，此時意味犯型一錯誤的機率較高。型二及型一錯誤皆代表內部控制品質降低。本研究發現實施沙賓法404條後可以使型二錯誤發生機率降低，並不會使型一錯誤發生機率增加。此外本研究也發現較具彈性的審計準則第5號可以使型一錯誤發生機率降低，有助提高查核內部控制之效率。但審計準則第5號卻會使得型二錯誤發生機率增加，損及內部控制揭露品質。起始頁-結束頁：255-286資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201804_28(1).000701篇名：論法律經濟分析之科學性並列篇名：On the Scientific Nature of Law and Economics作者：簡資修(Tze-Shiou Chien)關鍵字：法律經濟分析;科學性;寇斯定理;合約安排;實證法學研究;漢德公式;補償規則;economic analysis of law;positive economics;Coase theorem;empirical legal studies;Hand formula;liability rules期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：66期出版年：2018中文摘要：法律經濟分析如今的蓬勃發展，可說歸功於其科學性之宣稱。前期的法律科學，例如普通法的藍德爾主義與大陸法的法教義學，是被其視為形式主義或概念法學，而不是科學。如今主流的法律經濟分析，是訴諸數理模型之建構以及計量統計之分析。但科學之意義，在於其可以經驗驗證，這表現在模型建構之時，即須將經驗考慮其中，而非以理所當然之前提（例如功用極大化或改進市場失靈等）去建構數理模型，然後再以可量化的資料去尋求因果關係或甚至只是相關性之展現。法律經濟分析的研究對象是法律─法律是經驗事實，經濟分析是方法─因此法律經濟分析之科學性，在其模型建構之時，即不可偏離法律之所以是法律的系統規範性，而不是其數理模型或統計分析。英文摘要：The continuing success of economic analysis of law can be attributed to its claim of science. The former ”legal science” such as Langdellism in common law or doctrinal study in continental law has been downgraded to formalism or conceptualism, and is thus not science. The current economic analysis of law has been based on mathematic models and statistical analysis. However, the usual separation of models and data from experience, i.e., the real legal rules and legal system, makes it pseudo science. Law has been seen as incentive to achieve policy goals such as maximizing social welfare or correcting market failures in mathematic models and statistical analysis. To be a real science, economic analysis of law should see law as contractual arrangements reducing the dissipation of rent in society. A consistent and coherent legal system would minimize the costs of delimiting rights.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201809_(66).0012篇名：沉默時代的道德辯護：雅斯培論國家行動的罪與責並列篇名：Moral Defense in the Era of Silence: Karl Jaspers on Guilt and Responsibility for State Action作者：石忠山(Chung-Shan Shih)關鍵字：雅斯培;國家行動;納粹;罪;責任;Jaspers;state action;Nazi;guilt;responsibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：66期出版年：2018中文摘要：二戰結束後，人們開始針對納粹罪行展開了激烈的辯論，在這場世紀爭辯中，最引人矚目的，莫過於海德堡哲學家雅斯培（Karl Jaspers）的論述。他在1946年所出版的專著《罪的問題：論德國的政治責任》（Die Schuldfrage: Von der politischen Haftung Deutschlands）中，徹底反省了納粹統治期間國家行動的罪責問題。他提出了四種罪的類型，並且詳細論述了德國人在面對這幾種不同類型的罪的時候所應持有的態度。雅斯培之所以致力這項任務，乃因他相信，惟有深入這個問題，人們才能避免陷入有關德國戰爭罪責的平庸論述。本文因此致力探討，本書的核心關懷究竟是甚麼？前者為何被視為二戰結束後清算納粹罪責最深刻的道德反省？它對我們堅持或棄絕某種價值立場所具備的規範涵蘊究竟何在？英文摘要：After World War II, people began to introspect on the Nazi crimes. Among the diverse argumentation, the thinking of the Heidelberg philosopher Karl Jaspers attracted the most attention. In his monograph Die Schuldfrage-Von der politischen Haftung Deutschlands published in 1946, he thoroughly recounted the culpability of the state action of the Nazi regime. He proposed four types of guilt and expounded the attitude which Germans should hold when facing these different types of guilt. The reason why Jaspers committed to this task is that he believed that only by doing so can people avoid a mediocre discussion about the war crimes of Nazi Germany. This article therefore focuses on exploring the following questions: What is the core concern of this book? Why is the former regarded as the deepest moral reflection in respect of the question of German guilt after World War II? What is the normative implication of this reflection for our insistence on or rejection of certain value positions?起始頁-結束頁：43-101資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201809_(66).0023篇名：人之苦難，機器恩典必看顧安慰：人工智慧、心靈與演算法社會並列篇名：All Watched Over By Machines of Loving Grace: AI, Mind and Algorithm Society作者：顏厥安(Chueh-An Yen)關鍵字：人工智慧;墨闇碑;心靈;內在觀點;社會功能;演算法社會;Artificial Intelligence (AI);monolith;mind;internal point of view;social function;Algorithm Society期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：66期出版年：2018中文摘要：要物質運作基礎，關鍵在於是否展演出心靈的能力。AI沒有內在觀點，但是可以自我觀察，也可以展演出具有心靈能力的外觀功能，與人類進行互動溝通。即使明知對方是AI，人們仍願意將其視為人類。這主要是因為社會關係與互動方式，早已經社會功能化，只要能完成這些功能，是由人類或AI來進行，並無差異。具有人類外觀的機器人AI並不是真正的挑戰。真正的問題在於，社會功能大量由AI所履行的演算法社會已經逐漸浮現。而我們並不清楚，不具備內在觀點與自主意識的演算法，會以如何的發展速度與運作結構，來取代既有的社會功能履行方式，並進而產生現在尚無法清楚預估的高複雜度系統風險。英文摘要：Artificial Intelligence (AI), human mind and society are the main subjects of this article. The proper functions of mind rely on some physical operation in the material world, but what counts as most important is to perform abilities that only mind has. AI does not and cannot have any internal point of view, but can be capable of communicating and interacting with human beings. Even if they know they are interacting with AI, people are still inclined to treat it as a human being. This is mainly because many social relations and interactions have already become social functions. Insofar as those social functions are fulfilled, whether they are done by human beings or AI makes no difference. This also means whether AI has a human shape is not the real issue. The real trouble is that the Algorithm Society, most social functions of which are performed by AI, will soon become a reality. We are not clear about the evolutionary speed and operational structures of those algorithms, which hold no internal viewpoints or human self-consciousness. Nevertheless, they will take over most social functions we need and bring about highly complicated system risks which we cannot yet estimate.起始頁-結束頁：103-150資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201809_(66).00301篇名：論支持健康照護權利的正義理據並列篇名：On the Just Rationale for the Right to Helath Care作者：林耕漢(Keng-Han Lin)關鍵字：健康照護;運氣平等主義;正常機會範圍;分配正義;health care;luck egalitarianism;normal range of opportunity;distribution;justice期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：67期出版年：2018中文摘要：這篇論文旨在探討什麼樣的正義理論適合作為健康照護權利的基礎。本文主要聚焦在兩項理論，即西格爾（Shlomi Segall）的運氣平等主義與丹尼爾斯（Norman Daniels）的正常機會範圍論述。許多人已經承認，健康照護權利應公平地賦予所有人。在這標準之下，本文將指出運氣平等主義不適合作為支持健康照護權利的理據，因為它對責任概念的強調不可避免地會使得它排除對健康不負責任者。正常機會範圍的論述雖然可以克服這項問題，但它對追求人生計畫的強調會使得它排除無行為能力者。即便如此，本文認為只要正常機會範圍論述經過適當的修正，相較於運氣平主義它更適合作為支持健康照護權利的理據。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore what kind of theory of justice is suitable as the basis for the right to health care. It mainly focus on two theories, namely Shlomi Segall's luck egalitarianism and Norman Daniels's account of normal range of opportunity. Many people have already acknowledged that the right to health care should be given to all people fairly. Under this standard, this article will point out that luck egalitarianism is not suitable as a rationale for the right to health care, because its emphasis on the notion of responsibility will inevitably make it rule out health irresponsible people. Although the account of normal range of opportunity can overcome this problem, its emphasis on pursuing life plans will make it exclude incapacitated persons. Even so, this article believes that as long as the account of normal range of opportunity is properly modified, compared to luck egalitarianism, it will be more suitable as the rationale for the right to health care.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201812_(67).0012篇名：愛情的詭計：反思親密關係中的個體化議題並列篇名：The Intrigue of Love: A Re-thinking of Individualization in Intimate Relationships作者：阮曉眉(Hsiao-Mei Juan)關鍵字：個體化;魯曼;浪漫愛;夥伴關係;Individualization;Niklas Luhmann;Romantic Love;Partnership期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：67期出版年：2018中文摘要：個體化的議題提供我們一個有趣的觀點來觀察現代的親密關係，本文嘗試從魯曼的理論來觀察現代親密關係─作為一個社會系統─如何透過個體化的語意來進行自我組織及自我更新。現代親密關係必須一再製造愛情與個體性來維持自身的存有，並且將內部的弔詭性（不是愛，不是個體性）予以去弔詭（再製案情，再製個體性）。在激進個人主義化的過程中，愛情透過時間的延宕，弔詭地一再透過自我否定來肯定愛情及個體性。在愛情的弔詭中，期待完全的相知與融合在某些情況下反而成為一股難以承受的壓力，成為動搖關係的問題所在，因為隨著越來越激進的個體化現象，兩個心理系統完全重疊的同一性是或然率極低的狀況。英文摘要：The theme of individualization offers us a fruitful and interesting standpoint to observe intimate relationships in modern society. Initially, this article will discuss the impact of individualization on intimate relationships. It will then go on to address the following issues. Firstly, it will focus on the social conditions that lead to individualised intimate relationships and the mechanism (romantic love) that the individualised intimate relationships are based on. Secondly, it will discuss how romantic love shows individuality in practice and how it responds to its criticism. Thirdly, the challenges that romantic love faces will be considered and a new form of intimate relationship, namely partnership, as an internal response to the crises of intimate relationships, will be introduced. Fourthly, following the discussion above, it will try to understand the complex relationships amongst romantic love, partnerships and individuality. In the process of radical individualization, the paradoxical nature of love keeps ensuring intimacy and individuality, whilst negating them at the same time. Finally, it concludes that the expectation of mutual understanding and consent with one's partners in every respect could be a potential breeding ground of conflicts in intimate relationships.起始頁-結束頁：49-102資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201812_(67).0023篇名：法意識探索：關係自我的情感衡平並列篇名：Exploring Legal Consciousness: Relational Self and Emotional Balance作者：王曉丹(Hsiao-Tan Wang)關鍵字：法意識;關係自我;情感;衡平;敘事;合法正當性;公共性;legal consciousness;relational self;emotion;balance;narrative;legitimacy;publicity期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：67期出版年：2018中文摘要：如何描繪法律在日常生活或糾紛／衝突中所扮演的角色？本文提出一個法意識（legal consciousness）理論的文化模型，從「關係自我」（relational self）的情感衡平活動，探索由三個層次構成的集體法意識：事實建構、合法正當性（legitimacy）、公共性（publicity）。在最基礎的「點」，個體尋求合情合理的敘事，讓自我在其中占據較好的道德位置，此種「情」的事實建構形成了人與法律聯繫的根源；許多「點」累積為「線」，雙方在衝突過程各自追求自我認同（identity），找到自我在「權威」關係中的恰當地位，從中建構法律的合法正當性；在較大層次的「面」，社會集體透過參與而確認自我與他人連結上合宜的屬人模式，此種「公共性」的建構同時決定了法律的社會角色。英文摘要：This paper explores a model of investigating legal consciousness as a process that is dependent on culturally embedded, emotionally driven concepts that are essential to establishing relationships with others and consequently the law. Based on the concept of the ”relational self,” this paper proposes a model of relational legal consciousness and advocates for its study to consider the subjective and emotional activities of individuals in their pursuit of self-acceptance and respect within interpersonal relationships and the community. In the socio-cultural context of Taiwan, this model can be described through three levels of emotional balancing activities: point, line, and face. At the point level, individuals construct a reasonable narrative to allow the self to occupy a better moral position while deciding the nature of the event in relation to law; at the line level, disputants seek appropriate identities while challenging their relationship with authority and constructing social acceptance of law's legitimacy; at the face level, members of society participate in public relations establishing a social recognition mode of the role of law. This paper contributes to the trend in legal consciousness research that depicts it as not constant, organized, or rational but subjective, relational and emotional.起始頁-結束頁：103-159資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201812_(67).00301篇名：中國的新型全球化模式與路徑探討並列篇名：Looking at the Mode and the Strategy of China's Neo-Globalization作者：吳佳勳(Chia-Hsuan Wu)關鍵字：中國方案;新型全球化;一帶一路;發展型國家;China's Solution;Neo-Globalization;the Belt and Road;Developmental State期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：全球金融風暴後，中國更積極於各種國際場合支持全球化的推動，突顯其由被動參與轉變為主動倡議。本文主張中國的「新型全球化」係具有中國特色的全球化模式，內容主要聚焦於經貿層面，以多元角度探討其推動「新型全球化」訴求的新內涵，並透過具體客觀數據佐證，分析其「新型全球化」的現階段表現與可能面臨的挑戰。最後，剖析中國所具備推動「新型全球化」的相關優勢條件，研判其推動的可能路徑與成效。本文主張：中國提出「新型全球化」的動機係為維繫當前全球化的發展格局，藉以維護其受惠於全球化下的利益。其推動「新型全球化」之訴求，雖有矯正當前全球化所衍生的缺失，解決分配與發展失衡等問題，但所推廣的「中國方案」力主政府應持續扮演積極的「發展型國家」角色，亦有明顯維繫其國有資本體制的意圖。政策工具方面，中國以「一帶一路」具體落實其新型全球化倡議，企圖凝聚發展中國家之間合作，包裹其爭取成為發展中國家利益的領導者。但客觀條件上，中國迄今的全球化表現仍然偏中段，並不利爭取國際尤其是發展中國家對其新型全球化主張的認同，故研判中國仍需藉由龐大內需市場，同時結合數位科技創新應用模式，提升其推動新型全球化的條件與成效。英文摘要：After the global financial crisis, China has become more aggressive in promoting its globalization at various international events, highlighting the shift from its passive participation to the initiatives. China's ”neo-globalization” initiatives depart from the contemporary globalization in many dimensions. Set against the above backdrop, this study mainly focuses on the economic and trade issues, and begins with exploring the insides and appeals of neo-globalization from multiple perspectives. It further analyzes neo-globalization's possible challenges and limits in China with quantitative evidences. Finally, China's relevant advantages for promoting neo-globalization are outlined to explore the strategic choices and possible outcomes. As suggested by this study, neo-globalization can be regarded as a globalization with Chinese characteristics. The motivation for China to promote neo-globalization is not only to keep globalizing the economic society but also to maintain its self-interests derived from engaging in the globalization. Neo-globalization mainly aims to overcome the contemporary globalization's weakness, in particular, the imbalance of cross-country income distribution and economic development. Neo-globalization with the ”China's solution” suggests the state plays a more aggressive role like ”the developmental state,” which may support the development of China's state-owned capital institution. In achieving neo-globalization, China performs ”the Belt and Road” initiative for driving the cooperation among developing countries, highlighting its leadership role in the developing world. Additionally, it is controversial that based on various statistical indicators, China's ongoing globalization ranks comparatively low. Accordingly, this may be a barrier for the international society, especially the developing world, to echo China's neo-globalization initiative. In paving the way for promoting neo-globalization, China at least may rely on the scale of domestic demands and the innovative application of digital technologies.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201812_61(4).00012篇名：中國國家治理轉變與挑戰專刊編輯導言並列篇名：The Transformation and Challenges of Chinese Country Governance作者：劉孟俊期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：ii-iv資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201812_61(4).00003篇名：經濟國策與企業行為：「一帶一路」倡議與中國大陸石油與鐵路產業的發展並列篇名：Economic Statecraft and the Behavior of Firms: ”One Belt One Road” Initiatives and the Development of China's Petroleum and Railway Industries作者：劉致賢(Chih-shian Liou)關鍵字：一帶一路;國有企業;新古典現實主義;經濟國策;One Belt One Road;State-owned Enterprises;Neoclassical Realism;Economic Statecraft期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：近幾年來中國大陸隨著自身經濟實力的增長，經濟國策在其大戰略的規劃中扮演著越來越重要的角色。從國際權力結構的分布我們可以合理期待身為強權的中國大陸採取擴張型的經濟國策，例如本文所探討的「一帶一路」倡議。然而經濟國策需要靠企業的經營行為予以落實，實際執行狀況不可避免地受到國內政商結構的影響。因此本文將企業視作經濟國策中最關鍵的執行者，並採取新古典現實主義的理論架構，探討企業與全球市場聯結度如何造成經濟國策政策預期以及具體實踐之間的落差。透過比較中國大陸石油與鐵路兩個產業，本文發現同樣受到中國大陸在國際政治權力格局中崛起的有利影響，兩個產業因市場化程度不同而受到全球市場波動的衝擊也不同，導致在執行「一帶一路」倡議時多元化的企業行為。英文摘要：With the strengthening of its economic muscle, China has often adopted economic statecraft, rather than military forces, to alter other countries' behavior. The ”One Belt, One Road” (OBOR) strategy that was initiated in 2013 is a good example. This article, building upon a neoclassical realist framework and using the cases of petroleum and railway firms, explores the variations in firms' behavior when they carry out the agendas of OBOR. The article also argues that while China's expanding economic statecraft is a function of its rise to great power status in international politics, the firms involved also impact how the agendas are performed, despite them not being the primary player of the OBOR agendas. For example, when a firm links to the global market at a higher degree, it behaves more like a commercial actor rather than as policy agent.起始頁-結束頁：31-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201812_61(4).00024篇名：中國大陸金融監管困境的制度性分析並列篇名：The Institutional Analysis of the Regulatory Predicaments in China's Financial Sector作者：蔡中民(Chung-Min Tsai)關鍵字：中國大陸;金融產業;政府監管;一行三會;China;Financial Industry;State Regulation;Yihang Sanhui (One Bank and Three Commissions)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：中國大陸在經歷了多年的高速經濟增長後，許多問題也相應而生，例如鋼鐵產能過剩、煤電矛盾、太陽能板企業破產、股市狂跌、地方政府債務高築等，無一不對中央政府造成嚴重的挑戰。就金融產業而言，快速成長的同時也突顯了監管體系的脆弱。國有企業較私有企業享有更為容易的銀行融資以及政策優惠，甚至有能力對抗監管單位的約束。為何過往的一行三會監管架構無法有效治理？監管體制的設計有何缺陷？為何在威權主義國家中，竟然會產生監管俘虜的困境？本文旨在回答上述問題，並以新制度主義的研究途徑，從歷史制度論的角度切入檢視中國大陸金融產業監管體制的演進過程。本文認為監管體制的不足之根源在於制度設計的矛盾，亦即中國大陸在採用西方國家新自由主義式的監管體制時，配合國家特殊的政治體制而轉換為行政主導式的監管邏輯。以致監管單位無法規範市場行為，陷入監管失靈的困境。本文嘗試釐清中國大陸政府監管的政治經濟學，以提供威權體制下的國家與市場關係進一步的思考。英文摘要：After undergoing rapid economic development for many years, China is beginning to see many new problems emerging, such as overproduction, contradiction between the coal and electricity, bankruptcy of the solar panel industry, the crash of the stock market, a huge local debt, and others. In the financial industry, while there has been a rocketing growth and a rise in innovative production, the regulatory system still has failed to manage the market. The state-owned enterprises enjoy easier banking loan and preferential policies than their private counterparts and are even able to challenge the regulatory agencies. Why has the former regulatory structure of yihang sanhui (one bank and three commissions) been unable to govern the industry? What are the problems about the regulatory designs? Why did the regulatory capture happene in an authoritarian state? This article aims to answer these questions by adopting a new-institutionalist approach and exploring the evolvement of regulatory system in China's financial industry. This article also argues that the insufficiency of regulatory capacity has its roots in the institutional contradiction. That is to say, while China was adopting the Western style neoliberal regulatory system, it also has converted the system into an administrative-oriented one in order to fit into China's unique political regime. In the end, the regulatory agencies have been unable to regulate the market and suffered from regulatory failure. This article illustrates the political economy of China's state regulation and sheds lights on the state-market relationship in the authoritarian state.起始頁-結束頁：57-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201812_61(4).00035篇名：工人組織的轉變與路徑差異：東南沿海地方工會與勞工NGO的比較分析並列篇名：Organizations' Transition and Path Differences: A Comparative Analysis between Unions and Labor NGOs in South China作者：劉焱(Yan Liu)關鍵字：工人組織;地方工會;勞工NGO;路徑差異;Local Union;Labor NGO;Organization's Transition;Path Differences期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文基於對東南沿海地方工會與勞工NGO的考察，從國家統合主義與組織能動實踐的視角出發比較分析了當代工人組織轉變的獨特背景與路徑差異。工會與NGO在新時期面臨著工人行動增加、國家制度調整以及組織間競爭關係所帶來的合法性危機，兩者均對傳統的工作方式做出調整，分別依託各自的行政力量與結社力量以不同的方式遊走於國家與工人之間，並在介入勞資糾紛、推動集體談判的實踐中呈現出了不同的工作路徑。官方色彩濃厚的工會力圖透過地方性改革走近工人，強大的行政力量與體制資源在為其帶來優勢的同時也在一定程度上形塑了其變革的走向。生發於民間的草根NGO借助多元的社會力量與分散的資金來源發展出了靈活的組織策略，但也面臨著巨大的政治風險，如何在國家治理運動中尋求工人維權與基層維穩的微妙平衡成為其生存的關鍵。英文摘要：Based on the comparative analysis between a local union and a labor NGO, this paper explores the unique background and path differences of labor organizations' transition in South China. According to the research, China's labor organizations are faced with structural changes in the new era, which bring legitimacy challenges with different emphasis to local unions and NGOs in promoting the two organizations' transition. During the transition, they both participate in labor disputes and organize collective bargaining, but show different working paths in practice. The local union, situated in the governmental system, tries to get close to workers in order to strength the legitimacy and authority. The strong administrative power provides the union with advantages as well as limitations. The NGOs, originating from the civil society, seek to balance the relationship between right-safeguarding and stability-maintaining in order to explore bigger living space. The strong associational power makes the flexible strategies possible, as well as bringing huge political risks and uncertainty.起始頁-結束頁：75-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201812_61(4).00046篇名：社會轉型期中國民眾政治傾向的持續與變遷：一個類型學的分析並列篇名：Continuity and Change of Political Orientation among Citizens in Transitional China: An Analysis of Typology作者：陳陸輝(Lu-Huei Chen);楊貴(Gui Yang)關鍵字：社經轉型;政治傾向;價值觀念;治理績效;Socio-Economic Transition;Political Orientation;Cultural Value;Governmental Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究結合政治信任和政治效能感這兩類重要政治態度，建構了中國大陸權威體制下民眾的四類政治傾向。在權威體制和傳統政治文化的雙重影響下，中國民眾出現高政治信任卻低政治效能感的政治順從特徵。不過隨著改革開放的進行，中國社會經濟的整體轉型，民眾政治傾向會如何變化值得關注。本研究使用亞洲民主動態調查的兩波資料，並採用政治文化途徑與治理績效途徑，比較分析中國社經發生重要變化的過程中，影響民眾政治傾向及其持續與變遷的因素又為何。研究結果顯示：儘管民眾的政治信任出現下降，但政治效能感卻有所提升。這樣的變化也讓民眾政治傾向產生變動，讓政治疏離型和政治抗議型的民眾增多，但政治順從型和政治忠誠型民眾卻減少。本研究也發現政治文化和治理績效是影響民眾政治傾向的重要因素，不過在社會轉型期，中國權威體制下的政治文化和治理績效，對民眾政治支持的影響力卻有所下降。此外結果顯示，諸如年齡、戶籍、教育和社會階級等社會結構因素也在型塑民眾的政治傾向。英文摘要：By combining political trust and political efficacy, this study presents a typology of citizen's political orientation in authoritarian China. Under the dual influences of authoritarian rule and traditional political culture, citizens in Mainland China demonstrate a tendency of political obedience, characterized by high political trust but low political efficacy. However, this common tendency has undergone transformations of its continuity and changes in rapidly developing China, which calls for more research on this topic. Based on two waves of Asian Barometer Survey datasets from 2002 and 2011, this study employs both cultural and institutional approaches to shed light on the determinants of citizen's political orientation and its continuity and change. The study found that in the context of rapid social and economic change, citizens' political trust declined from 2002 to 2011, but political efficacy among the public increased slightly. Additionally, the proportion of politically loyal citizens and politically obedient citizens decreased as well in 2011, while the proportions of politically alienated and protesting citizens increased significantly. The study also found that cultural values and governmental performance turn out to be the key factors in shaping citizen's political orientation, despite both factors becoming less influential on political support in a transitional society of authoritarian China. In addition, elements in social structure such as age, hukou（place of household registration）, education and social class, etc. also exerted significant effects on the formation of citizens' political orientation.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201809_61(3).00017篇名：香港立法會直選制度變革與政黨體系之演變並列篇名：Changes of LEGCO Elections and Evolution of Party System in Hong Kong作者：殷俊(Francis Yin);馬春暖(Chun-Nuan Ma)關鍵字：香港政治;選舉制度;政黨體系;比例代表制;Hong Kong Politics;Electoral System;Proportional Representation;Party System期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：香港的選舉制度在幾十年內經歷顯著變化，其中立法會地區直選制度從最初的雙議席雙票制改為單議席單票制，最終確定為比例代表制。本研究旨在分析選舉制度變革的政治後果，特別是對香港政黨體系的影響。通過對歷次選舉結果的量化分析，本研究發現香港選舉制度變革的後果既有符合經典理論的一面，亦有不符合的一面。制度變革造成政黨體系的分化、弱化和激進化，也在一定程度上限制了香港政治的發展。英文摘要：The electoral system in Hong Kong had experienced significant changes in past decades. The electoral system of geographical constituencies in LegCo had been changed from ”double-seat, double-vote” to ”single-seat, single-vote”, and then proportional representation. The purpose of this study is to analyze the political effect of electoral reform, especially its impact on the party system in Hong Kong. By quantitative analysis of electoral results, it is found that there are effects according to classical theories, as well as different characteristics. The reform of electoral system had led to fragmentation, weakening, and radicalization of party system, and confined political development in Hong Kong.起始頁-結束頁：33-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201809_61(3).00028篇名：借助外力的動員：澳門社會運動中的外部動員機制並列篇名：Mobilizing with the External Forces: An External Mechanism of Mobilization within the Anti-Welfare Package Movement in Macau作者：廖志輝(Chi-Fai LIO)關鍵字：反離補運動;機制與過程;社會運動;台港澳;Anti-Welfare Package Movement;Mechanisms and Processes;Social Movements;Taiwan;Hong Kong and Macau期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：近年兩岸四地的公民社會持續振動。當中，對於2014年分別發生在台灣、香港和澳門的大型社會運動，已有研究透過比較或概念性的分析，嘗試探討其背後的共同成因與差異性。卻鮮少有研究從微觀層次探討台港澳三地社會抗爭的互動過程。透過以發生在2014年澳門的「反離補運動」的動員過程與後續影響作為研究個案，本文認為是運動組織者靈活地運用來自香港媒體與台灣的相關抗爭論述作為資源，重新構框出適合在地脈絡的動員論述，從而成功地促進了在封閉的政治結構與貧乏的動員渠道下的動員能力，造就這場澳門回歸後最大型的社會運動。這一動員機制在後續的抗爭事件中亦同樣出現，並有進一步發展的可能性。英文摘要：The civil society of Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao has been vibrant in recent years. Many researchers aim to identify this phenomenon via comparative and conceptual approaches, especially concentrating on the unexpected social movements that occurred during 2014 in these three respective places. However, few studies attempt to examine the interactive processes of such movements. To fill the gap, this article draws on the Anti-Welfare Package Movement in Macao in 2014 as a case study to demonstrate how movement organizers flexibly and successfully framed the mobilizing discourses by using various articles from Hong Kong media and The Sunflower Movement in Taiwan; thereby, enhancing the mobilization within an unfavorable political structure and media environment. This initiative process seems to become a mechanism for playing a role in subsequent protests.起始頁-結束頁：53-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201809_61(3).00039篇名：The Impact of Housing Market Activities on the Inequality of Economic Opportunities in China並列篇名：中國大陸房地產景氣波動對於經濟機會不平等影響之研究作者：李明軒(Ming-Hsuan Lee)關鍵字：Housing Market;Income Structure;Economic Opportunities;China;房地產市場;所得結構;經濟機會;中國期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study empirically examines the impact of housing market activities on the income structure of Chinese households and, based on the findings,draws inferences on the impact of housing market activities on the equality of economic opportunities faced by Chinese citizens. We establish a panel dataset consisting of 31 provinces from 2000 to 2011 and adopt a dynamic panel data model with system GMM (Generalized Method of Moments)estimators as the empirical strategy. The results show that among urban households, the booming housing market in China caused a larger increase in the share of property and investment-related income than wage and business income by 20% to 30%, implying that economic opportunities were more skewed to the rich. Conversely, among rural households, the booming housing market caused greater growth in wage and household operation incomes, implying more equal economic opportunities.英文摘要：本研究檢視中國大陸房地產市場景氣波動對於中國家戶所得結構的影響，並由此結果推論中國大陸房地產景氣波動對於中國人民經濟機會不平等的影響。研究所使用的資料為2000年至2011年之中國省級追蹤資料，估計方法為動態追蹤資料模型與系統GMM估計式（The Dynamic Panel Data Model with System GMM estimator）。估計結果顯示房地產市場景氣攀升帶動中國城鎮家戶之財產與投資所得上升幅度大於薪資與經營所得之上升幅度，兩者相差幅度達20%-30%，顯示經濟機會傾向於富有階級，漸趨不平等。相反的，房地產市場景氣攀升帶動中國農村家戶之薪資與經營所得上升幅度大於財產與投資所得的上升幅度，隱含著房地產市場景氣攀升於農村地區所創造的經濟機會較為平均。起始頁-結束頁：87-116資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201809_61(3).000410篇名：Health-Oriented Overseas NGOs and the New Overseas NGO Law in China並列篇名：中國的境外健康領域非政府組織和新的境外非政府組織法作者：Jonathan Schwartz關鍵字：Overseas-NGO Law;Impacts;Interpretations;Overseas Health- Oriented NGOs;境外非政府組織法;影響;解釋;境外健康領域非政府組織期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：How will the Overseas Non-Governmental Organization (ONGO) Law influence the ability of Health-Oriented Overseas NGOs (HONGOs) to function in China? Will they be heavily constrained, or will their roles as providers of health care services offer them protection? I address these questions by focusing on state-NGO relations through the lenses of Regulation, Negotiation, and Societalization. Whereas, in the pre-Xi Jinping era, state-NGO relations trended towards greater Negotiation and Societalization - reflecting the growing cooperation between state and civil society - the ONGO law suggests that state-NGO relations will take a shift back towards greater state Regulation. However, given the state's goal of maintaining control while benefiting from the contributions ONGOs make to development, we can anticipate ”good” ONGOs - those whose activities are seen as supporting state goals (such as HONGOs) - will potentially benefit from aspects of the law and a benign interpretation of its strictures. I conclude that because HONGOs provide important and helpful services to the state, they will not be adversely affected. Ultimately, this derives from the reality that the requirements of the ONGO law itself matter less than how China's leadership chooses to target, interpret and implement it.英文摘要：境外非政府組織法（Overseas Non-Governmental Organization Law）將如何影響健康領域的境外非政府組織（Health-Oriented Overseas NGOs,HONGOs）在中國的運作能力？他們是否會受到嚴重限制，還是他們作為醫療服務提供者的角色會為他們提供保護？本文透過法規管理，談判和社會化的視角來關注國家與非政府組織的關係，從而回答這些問題。在習近平之前的時代中，國家與非政府組織關係趨向於更多的談判和社會化──反映國家和公民社會之間不斷加強的合作──境外非政府組織法的出現則反應了國家與非政府組織關係轉向更重視法規管理的層面。然而鑑於國家的目標是維持控制，同時從境外非政府組織的的貢獻中受益而得到發展，可以預見「好的」境外非政府組織──那些活動被視為支持國家目標的（如健康領域的境外非政府組織）──可能受益於這個法律的某些層面以及對其規範的良性解釋。本文結論，由於健康領域的境外非政府組織為國家提供重要和有益的服務，他們將不會受到不利影響。源於現實，境外非政府組織法律本身並不比中國領導層如何選擇目標，解釋和實施它來得更為重要。起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201806_61(2).000111篇名：「習近平下的國際非政府組織」專刊編輯導言並列篇名：Introduction to the Special Issue-International NGOs in Xi Jinping's China作者：陳至潔(Titus C.Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：iii-viii資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201806_61(2).000012篇名：Different Localizations: Development Paths of INGOs in China並列篇名：不同類型的在地化：國際非政府組織在中國的發展路徑作者：成瑤(Yao Cheng);蕭新煌(Hsin-Huang Michael Hsiao)關鍵字：Internationalization;Localization;Chinese Government;Political Sensitivity;國際化;在地化;中國政府;政治敏感期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：The thousands of international non-governmental organizations (INGOs), operating in China, continued to grapple with the enduring issue of their legal and institutional status as China introduced rules governing their operations in China with the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Administration of Activities of Overseas Non-Governmental Organizations within the Territory of China in January 2017. So far, the law has received mixed reviews. For the first time, it allowed INGOs to apply for legal status, however, their work will now be monitored and controlled by the Public Security Ministry. INGOs must now work out how to cope with these changes. The government has always controlled INGOs in China, and over time some of them developed approaches to secure legitimacy for their longterm programs. Choosing one INGO as a case study, we investigated the processes and strategies that they can use to develop within Chinese political and institutional contexts. The INGO in this study has been able to navigate the Chinese context for nearly two decades, taking on multiple identities (INGO, local organization, foundation, enterprise and so on) to adapt to different circumstances. This history makes it particularly well-positioned to handle the new law. It has tended towards localization; yet, it has neither completely abandoned its international organization identity nor practices. We find that INGO development in China can be divided into two distinct paths across different times and different regions. Organizational change revolves around a central question that is often extremely challenging-even contradictory- for INGOs in China: Should it insist on fulfilling its organizational mission or maintain its status as an INGO and hence operations in China?英文摘要：數千個國際非政府組織（International Non-Governmental Organizations, INGO）先後在中國開展工作，其中大部分都長期面臨著法律和體制上的身分問題。〈中華人民共和國境外非政府組織境內活動管理法〉首次明確規定了對INGO的管理，它受到來自各方的不同評論。一方面，INGO能夠獲得法律地位，其工作將有法律依據。但另一方面，政府，特別是公安機關，已經被賦予新的權力來監控INGO。如何應對不斷變化的環境和趨勢是每個在中國的INGO都必須面對的常態議題。政府對INGO的管理和監督一直存在，一些INGO在其長期工作中發展出獲得合法性的方法。本文調查了在中國政治和制度背景下一個INGO發展的過程和策略。在過去近二十年中，這個INGO為適應中國不斷變化的情況發展出多種身分（國際非政府組織、地方組織、基金會、企業等）。因此，新法案並未對它造成較大衝擊。該INGO在中國的轉型大方向是在地化，但它並沒有完全放棄其國際組織的身分和實踐。我們發現INGO在中國的不同時空下發展出兩條不同路徑。對於所有在中國的INGO來說，組織變遷圍繞著一個中心問題展開，這個問題往往極具挑戰性，甚至相互矛盾，即是應該堅持履行其組織使命還是維持其國際組織身份並在中國長期運作？起始頁-結束頁：23-49資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201806_61(2).000213篇名：25 Years of Feminist NGOs in China: Reflections on Neoliberalism and its Resistances並列篇名：中國女權主義非政府組織25年：對新自由主義及其阻力的思考作者：Sharon R. Wesoky關鍵字：Feminism;Gender;Neoliberalism;NGO;女權主義;性別;新自由主義;非政府組織期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：This article traces the development of post-Mao independent women's organizing in China, especially through the evolution of the concept of the non-governmental organization(NGO)and the(de)politicization of feminist organizing. In the 1980s and 1990s, new women's organizations were founded in China, creating a vibrant community of feminist researchers and activists that existed alongside, and often in cooperation with, the Partystate. As ”gender” emerged as a sphere of critique of post-Mao inequalities, much of this organizing demonstrated tensions between creating collective concepts of women's liberation and promoting women's individualistic selfhood. This contributed to elements of women's organizing being compatible with neoliberal, privatized, ”depoliticized” modes of governance, and thus continued de facto gender discrimination in China's political and economic realms.英文摘要：本文主要透過「非政府組織」概念的演變和女權主義組織的「『非』政治化」（（de）politicization）的演變來追溯後毛澤東時代獨立女性組織的發展。在20世紀80年代和90年代，新的女性組織於中國成立，創建了一個充滿活力、黨國共存、並經常與其合作的之女權主義研究者與社會運動者社群。隨著「性別」成為後毛澤東時代對不平等展開批判的主題，這些社群中產生對於創造整體女性解放的概念、與促進個體女性自主之間的緊張局勢。這造成這些組織成分的發展與新自由主義、私有化、治理的「非政治化」模式相通，且因此在中國政治和經濟領域中，繼續接受實際上的性別歧視。起始頁-結束頁：51-71資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201806_61(2).000314篇名：The Legal Environment for Foreign and Domestic NGOs in China: What Was Accomplished in 2016 and 2017 and What Remains to be並列篇名：中國境內和境外非政府組織的法律環境：2016年和2017年完成哪些工作，還有哪些工作尚待完成作者：奚文雅(Karla W. Simon)關鍵字：China;NGOs;ONGO Law;Charity Law;中國;非政府組織;境外非政府組織法;慈善法期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：The laws affecting non-governmental organizations(NGOs)in China are multiple and varied and with the adoption of the Overseas NGO Law (ONGO Law), they have become even more complex. In the ”revolutionary” year of 2016, China adopted two new laws - the ONGO Law and the Charity Law - as well as a number of regulations, putting into place a ground-breaking new framework for NGOs and setting out new rules over efforts to provide social and economic justice to China’s citizens. This paper looks at the results of this unprecedented regulatory and legal activity affecting NGOs and attempts to place them into an analytical framework.英文摘要：影響中國非政府組織的法律多種與多樣，隨著境外非政府組織法（ONGO Law）的通過之後，情形又變得更加複雜。在2016年的「革命」年，中國通過了兩項新法律──「境外非政府組織法」和「慈善法」──以及一些行政法規，為非政府組織製定了突破性的新框架，為中國公民提供社會和經濟正義的各種努力加上新的規範。本文著眼於這些前所未有的監管和法律活動的結果，並試圖將它們納入一個分析框架之中。起始頁-結束頁：75-95資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201806_61(2).000415篇名：「改革開放」前彭真與鄧小平政治關係之研究（1938~1976）並列篇名：The Political Relationship between Peng Zhen and Deng Xiaoping before the Reform and Opening-up Period （1938~1976）作者：鍾延麟(Yen-Lin Chung)關鍵字：彭真;鄧小平;中央書記處;中共黨史;Peng Zhen;Deng Xiaoping;Central Secretariat;Chinese Communist Party History期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：關於中共早期政治要人彭真和鄧小平之間的政治關係問題，無論是中國大陸或是海外學界都未曾對之進行專門研究和深度考察，僅有淺薄、甚至含有偏差認識的簡單論述。本文對彭真、鄧小平早年政治關係梳理和重建如下：彭真、鄧小平都是毛澤東喜愛並予器重的所謂「國王人馬」，兩人皆信從毛澤東而看似合作無間，實則存有隱而不顯的微妙競爭；這可能也與毛澤東的政治操作有關。彭真在1940年代前半期協助毛澤東推展延安整風而躋身中央高層；鄧小平立有戰功和歷經黨內鬥爭後，1950年代中期躍升中央核心，權位反居彭真之前。1956年起，鄧小平獲命領導中共中央書記處，負責貫徹中央決策、管理黨日常工作，進而監管政府工作；鄧小平讓副手彭真承擔書記處的實際工作，後者足堪重任，同時也擅使重權。1960年代初，在與毛澤東保持立場一致的問題上，彭真略勝鄧小平一籌；1964年底毛澤東批評鄧小平「搞獨立王國」後約略一年的時間，他甚至有親彭疏鄧的意向和跡象。彭真政治氣勢如虹之際，迅速陷入爭論漩渦，反而垮台在鄧小平之前。英文摘要：Peng Zhen and Deng Xiaoping had been two important leaders of the Chinese Communist Party. During the period before the eruption of the Cultural Revolution, they both acted as Party Chairman Mao Zedong's main political assistants and followed his lead carefully. The political relationship between these two political figures has received little research attention in Chinese-language publications published in Mainland China and Western academic works. In fact, there has been no detailed empirical study related to the issue. Based on newly available materials and recent interviews, this study demonstrates the following: Peng devotedly assisted Mao in implementing the Yan'an Rectification Movement during the first half of the 1940s. Consequently, he was not only elected to be a Politburo member, but was also nominated by Mao to be the alternate secretary of the Central Secretariat, the de facto supreme policy-making organ of the Party at the time. Much later than Peng, Deng’s political status soared after making a great military contribution during the civil war and playing a significant role in the Gao Gang-Rao Shushi Incident, becoming a political rising star in the mid- 1950s. In 1956, with strong support from the Party center led by Mao, Deng was appointed to be a member of the Politburo Standing Committee and also the General Secretary in charge of leading the Central Secretariat and handling the daily works of the Party center. As a senior member of the Politburo, Peng was appointed the second-ranking leader of the Central Secretariat, a position he was entrusted with great responsibility by Deng, and exerted substantial power and influence over Chinese politics. Prior to the Cultural Revolution, Peng and Deng cooperated well in implementing central policies and running the Party-state on behalf of the central authority. However, it is noteworthy that in contrast to Deng who drew criticism from Mao due to the economic adjustments in 1962, Peng and Mao had similar views over the issues involved. As a result, Mao trusted him even further. Furthermore, after Mao criticized Deng in late 1964 for trying to establish an ”independent kingdom” politically, Peng continued to be in Mao’s good graces until spring 1966 when the Supreme Leader was about to launch the Cultural Revolution. Before and even during the Cultural Revolution, Mao seemed to intentionally manipulate the unspoken competition between Peng and Deng to serve his own political interests.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201803_61(1).000116篇名：天津濱海新區產業發展之演變：城市治理下中央政府的角色並列篇名：The Industrial Development Path of Tianjin BNA: Role of Central Government in Urban Governance作者：陳蓉怡(Rung-Yi Chen);廖小娟(Hsiao-Chuan（Mandy）Liao)關鍵字：濱海新區;于家堡;路徑依賴;路徑創造;Tianjin Binhai New Area;Yujiapu CBD;Path Dependence;Path Creation期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：城市產業的發展是否必然具有高度路徑依賴的特質？路徑依賴的概念長期以來被大量用於解釋中國大陸城市產業的發展模式，但學者同時也強調國家與地方政府重點策略推動的影響同樣不可忽視，這其中的矛盾和折衝又如何獲得妥協與解決，始終是政治經濟學中備受關注的議題。天津重化工業一直是其經濟成長的基礎，然而2010年天津卻被列為國家首批低碳城市試點，原來高碳消費之重化產業面臨轉型。如此巨大轉折究竟如何產生？本文由路徑依賴途徑討論中央政府與地方需求之間的折衝，發現天津近來的發展更符合路徑創造之解釋，尤其是中央政府在天津發展過程中，不僅是城市發展監管者，同時也是促使城市發展出現轉折的關鍵行為者。天津市成為低碳城市試點的路徑選擇，除了增益路徑依賴與路徑創造的討論，亦提供城市治理與發展的新思維。英文摘要：Whether a city's economic growth depends more on upward development driven by local characteristics or downward request from a central government has been an important issue in the field of political economics. From the perspective of city development, pillar industries in a city should be related with the competitive advantage of a city, such as geopolitical location and industrial structure, so that the economy can grow fast. That is, the development of city economy is associated with the framework of path dependence. In the case of Tianjin, heavy industries have been the foundation of economic growth. The Tianjin Binhai New Area （TBNA）is no exception and becomes a strategic town of petrochemical industries. However, in 2010, Tianjin was selected as a low-carbon trial city by the central government and the Yujiapu CBD in TBNA was promoted as the first Low Carbon Model Town of APEC. This low-carbon development clashes with Tianjin’s industrial foundation. Specifically, Tianjin’s transformation to a low-carbon city means that it has to greatly change its industrial structure from high carbon consumption to green industries. Path creation explains the transformation route of city development in Binhai of Tianjin and emphasizes the role of the central government, both as a supervisor and a main driver, in the creation of a new path. Overall, the development of TBNA supplements the discussion of path creation and provides a new thinking for city development and governance.起始頁-結束頁：31-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201803_61(1).000217篇名：中國崛起與「國家利益」的概念演變（1980~2016）：一個權力結構轉變的視角並列篇名：China's Rise and Its Evolutionary Narrative of ”Core Interest”（1980~2016）: An Analysis from the Perspective of Power Structure Transition作者：艾約銘(Yue-Ming Ai);葉曉迪(Xiao-Di Ye);張登及(Teng-Chi Chang)關鍵字：中國崛起;權力結構轉變;核心利益;外交戰略;Rising China;Power Structure Transition;Core Interests;Foreign Strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：近年來，中國大陸關於「核心利益」的概念範圍逐漸擴大。雖然核心利益的概念逐漸成為中國大陸與其他大國博弈的重要工具，但是現有對中國大陸核心利益的研究仍侷限於個案的討論，系統性的研究並不多見。本文以華爾茲的「體系理論」作為理論基底，將國際權力轉變的結構性壓力作為解釋變項，輔之以中國大陸不同時期的戰略選擇與周邊國家的回應作為中介變項，試圖構建一個能夠較為全面追溯中國大陸利益概念變化的分析架構。本文初步判定，自二十世紀八十年代以來，中國大陸利益概念的變化可主要歸結為三大類型，亦即：「內需型國家利益」、「外衍型國家利益」與「對抗型核心利益」。並且，基於本文分析架構的預測，若國際權力結構繼續增大，中國大陸的「核心利益」概念將會向「聯盟型共同利益」轉變。英文摘要：The scope of China's ”core interest” narrative is largely extended with its growing capability and increasing regional influence. Although the ”core interest” has become China's one of the most important instruments in competing with other great powers, the current literatures are still limited to case studies, which means that systematic research on such concept is rare. By selecting power structure in international politics as the independent variable, and adding China's foreign strategic choice and the responses from surrounding countries as the intervening variable, this article attempts to construct a theoretical framework useful to trace the evolutionary narrative of China's ”core interest,” and predict forthcoming changes in the future. In accordance with the theoretical framework, the evolution of China's ”core interest” narrative can be divided into three phases since 1980s: domestic demand national interest, extensible national interest, and adversary core interest. If external pressure from international power structure continues to grow, adversary core interest will evolve into alliance common interest in near future.起始頁-結束頁：63-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201803_61(1).000318篇名：兩岸關係的再平衡：一個雙層賽局的觀點並列篇名：Rebalancing Cross-Strait Relations: A Two-Level Game Model作者：石冀忻(Chris Shih)關鍵字：兩階段賽局;偏好改變;兩岸關係;兩岸協議;Two Level GamePreference Change;Cross-Strait Relations;Cross-Strait Agreements期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：61卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：2008年馬英九當選總統後兩岸關係趨向和緩，在相互合作的氣氛中，2010年6月，兩岸簽訂海峽兩岸經濟合作架構協議（ECFA）。這項協議被視為兩岸關係的重大進展。然而，3年後，作為ECFA後續協定的海峽兩岸服務貿易協議（CSSTA）卻遭受到了民間大量阻力而遲遲無法實行，還在2014年3月爆發了太陽花學運。太陽花學運可以說是反應出臺灣民意的變化。而同時，在2012年習近平上臺以後，中共的各項政策也都做了為幅不小的改變進而也影響中共對臺政策的優先性。本文以兩階段賽局（two-level games）為架構，分析民眾偏好的改變對該國政府外交政策的影響，及其政策應調整的方向。並以兩岸關係為例，說明當臺灣民眾及中國新領導人的政策偏好發生變化，而且變化的方向一致時，例如同時都更加重視臺灣的主權問題，此時兩岸間將可能爆發重大衝突。但是如果雙方所關注的焦點不同，雖然可能造成僵局或關係的倒退，但卻會是一個雙方都能滿意的結果。英文摘要：On March 2014, the Sunflower Student Movement broke out in Taiwan in protest of the Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement（CSSTA）after the Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement（ECFA）was signed just 4 years prior. The Sunflower Student Movement signified a shift of public opinion in Taiwan. Meanwhile, in 2012, Xi Jinping took the office as the new leader of Mainland China. In a different environment with new challenges, Xi has different policy priorities from his predecessor. In this paper, I employ a two-level game model to analyze how the change in Taiwan's public opinion indirectly influences Taiwan's diplomatic policy. I also use the cross- Strait relations as an example to illustrate that when Taiwan’s new public opinion and Mainland China's new leader both change in the same direction, for example, with Taiwan's sovereignty issue as a common focus, a big conflict may break out. However, if they do not share a common focus, even at the expense of cross-Strait relations deadlock or backtrack, both sides would be satisfied with a new situation.起始頁-結束頁：89-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201803_61(1).000401篇名：台灣輔導與諮商專業的繼承與開展：本土輔導與諮商專業發展的回顧與探索並列篇名：Inheritance and Development of Taiwan's Guidance and Counseling Profession: Review and Exploration of the Development of Local Guidance and Counseling Profession作者：林幸台(Hsin-Tai Lin);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：文化的繼承與融合;本土化;台灣輔導與諮商學會;回顧與展望;國際化;Indigenization;internationalization;inheritance and integration of culture;retrospect and prospect;Taiwan Guidance and Counseling Association期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：53期出版年：2018中文摘要：台灣輔導與諮商學會創立即將屆滿六十年，一甲子的耕耘與貢獻使台灣輔導與諮商專業的發展達到了一個空前的高度，中華輔導與諮商學報為紀錄與慶賀這一個專業發展的光輝時刻，特別規劃台灣輔導與諮商專業發展的回顧專題，透過對輔導與諮商學界進行邀稿與徵稿的程序，廣邀台灣輔導與諮商的優秀學者共同撰文，就輔導與諮商各專業研究領域之重要主題進行台灣輔導與諮商專業發展的回顧與展望，專題的發行則依稿件徵集與審查通過的進度分期刊出，本期的回顧與展望專題共收錄有五篇稿件，分別就家族治療、靈性諮商、敘事研究、心理位移與倫理研究等主題進行了本土發展的專業回顧與展望。這五篇論文不約而同的都提出了對台灣輔導與諮商專業本土發展與反思的議題，論文中既仔細回顧了輔導與諮商專業在家族治療、靈性諮商、敘事研究、心理位移與倫理研究等主題上的過去發展，也深入的反思其不足之處，更指出了未來可能的發展方向，一甲子的歲月正適宜進行回顧與展望，台灣輔導與諮商專業多年來在國際化與本土化等重要議題的激盪下，如何在台灣本土進行持續的發展以及如何在亞洲與世界扮演積極貢獻的角色，這是本專題與本學報所關切的議題，對此，本文也在本專題論文的共識基礎之上，展望未來，提出文化的繼承與融合是台灣輔導與諮商專業的有利發展方向。英文摘要：The establishment of the Taiwan Guidance and Counseling Association is about to celebrate its 60th anniversary. The development and contribution of Taiwan's Guidance and counseling profession has reached an unprecedented height. The Chinese Journal of Guidance and Counseling hopes to record and celebrate this professional development. At the glorious moment, the special issue of ”Review of Taiwan's Counseling and Counseling Professional Development” was planned. Through the process of invitation submit papers, the outstanding scholars in Taiwan who are working on guidance and counseling were invited to jointly write a review of Taiwan's Guidance and counseling professional development from different professional research fields. The special issue is published in the current journal based on the invited papers. This review of the special issue consists of five papers on the professional development and exploration of the topic of family therapy, spiritual counseling, narrative research, psychological displacement and ethical research. These five papers focused on the local development and reflection of Taiwan's counseling and counseling professions. They not only carefully reviewed the past developments of counseling and counseling in family therapy, spiritual counseling, narrative research, psychological displacement and ethical research. They also deeply reflect on their shortcomings, and point out the possible future development direction. The years of a Jiazi (sixty years) are suitable for retrospective and forward-looking. Under the influence of internationalization and indigenization, the special issue also delineates how the guidance and counseling professions should develop in Taiwan and what role they would play in Asia and the world. Finally, the paper proposed that the strategies to inherit Chinese culture and integrate Chinese culture with Western culture are positive development directions for Taiwan's guidance and counseling profession in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620181000530012篇名：反思含攝文化下的Bowen理論及其運用在華人文化中並列篇名：Reflection on Culture-inclusive Concept of Bowen Theory and Practice in Chinese Culture作者：李岳庭(Yueh-Ting Lee)關鍵字：Bowen家族治療理論;自我分化;含攝文化;家族治療;Bowen's family theory;culture-inclusive;differentiation of self;family therapy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：53期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究在探索西方文化發展下的Bowen家族治療理論如何含攝到華人文化中，其中介紹Bowen家族治療理論的哲學觀及其焦慮與自我分化的基本概念。接著探討國內對Bowen理論相關研究，並根據研究後的反思，在含攝文化下對此理論提出建議。其中論及關係中的焦慮是普世的概念，但自我分化卻不是，因此在華人文化治療中應將降低焦慮為處遇的方向，並不一定著重於提升個體的自我分化程度。其次個體的分化程度，在本土文化中並不能完全推論其建立關係的運作好壞。分化程度為個體差異的參考，不是失功能的判定。重新建構本土化之自我分化量表，基於分化的理論要義，以本土化的語言建立量表問句，並建立本土分化常模，以呈現集體社會文化下個體分化程度的樣貌。最後西方個人主義下所建構之Bowen理論含攝到集體主義的華人文化中，需要再多走一里路，除了照顧好自己的焦慮外，也要照顧好他人的焦慮，特別在孝道的文化中，要協助照顧父母的情緒，以符合本土文化中孝道的倫理。最後筆者建議，家族治療理論的進展，應該開始發展以儒、釋及道三家本土文化為基礎，建構本土的家族治療理論，以符合本土文化的需求。英文摘要：The present research examined how Bowen's family therapy theory, developed under the Western culture, could be culture-inclusive in the Chinese culture. The research introduced the philosophy and concepts of self-differentiation and anxiety in Bowen's family therapy theory. Reflecting on Bowen theory through a culture-inclusive process, this study provided three suggestions. Bowen's family therapy theory offered a different perspective in understanding family relationships in the context of the Taiwanese culture through illuminating the emotional projection processes. In addition, the researcher reviewed domestic studies conducted in relation to Bowen theory, and found that concepts of the theory could be applied to the Chinese Culture. However, some of the domestic studies suggested that the techniques of Bowen theory should be modified and cultural issues should be considered in practice. Finally, this study attempted to provide culture-inclusive suggestions toward the theory. First, the anxiety aspect in the relationship is a universal concept, but the differentiation of self is not. In Western culture, self-differentiation was based on individualism, whereas collectivism was developed in Eastern culture; these two represent different cultural norms. Thus, the practice of this family therapy approach in Chinese culture should focus on decreasing the anxiety level, and not necessary on increasing the individual's differentiation of self. Second, from the perspective, an individual's differentiation level cannot fully predict whether the relationship is healthy or unhealthy. The differentiation level serves only a reference for individual differences, and cannot be used to determine dysfunction. A person's differentiation level might not be high, but that could facilitate the fulfillment of cultural expectations and maintain a good relationship with other family members. Thus a person's differentiation level can only represent his/her own individual status, not good or bad. A Differentiation of Self Scale should be constructed that incorporates the theory of differentiation and adapts to the localized language of the Chinese culture. If possible, the definition of self-differentiation should be modified to reflect Chinese culture and some items in the scale should be edited. Furthermore, a localized norm needs to be established to illuminate the aspects of differentiation among individuals in the collectivist culture. Constructed using an individualism perspective, In addition to taking care of one's own anxiety, it is also critical to take care of the anxiety of others. In respect to the cultural importance of filial piety, taking care of the parents' emotions is an imperative aspect according to the theory of filial piety. Lastly, family therapy theories have been adopted from the Western culture for almost forty years, and there is not a single family therapy theory that has been developed in the Chinese culture so far. The author suggests that the development of family therapy theory needs to incorporate localized research as a foundation geared towards the needs of the Chinese culture. It is important have a family therapy theory that is based on Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism for our own culture.起始頁-結束頁：23-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620181000530023篇名：融入宗教／靈性的心理諮商在臺灣：回顧與展望並列篇名：Religiously/Spiritually Integrated Counseling in Taiwan - Reviews and Future Directions作者：陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);黃奕暉(Yi-Huei Huang);范嵐欣(Lan-Hsin Fan)關鍵字：宗教;融入宗教／靈性的心理諮商;靈性;Religion;religiously/spiritually integrated counseling;spirituality期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：53期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣是宗教人口密度高且多元宗教的社會，諮商師需要重視有宗教／靈性背景個案的特殊期待與需要。本論文回顧過去30年臺灣諮商界對融入宗教／靈性於心理諮商之相關研究，依以下七個主題作出文獻整理與闡述：（1）宗教／靈性在臺灣社會民眾的普遍與多元性；（2）宗教／靈性與臺灣心理學及諮商專業的關係；（3）宗教、靈性、及融入宗教／靈性的心理諮商之定義；（4）融入宗教／靈性的心理諮商相關研究，含括諮商師／案主對於諮商中談論宗教／靈性或使用宗教／靈性介入的態度、靈性介入與介入成果研究、諮商師的信仰／靈性對個人及諮商工作的影響；（5）融入宗教／靈性的心理諮商教育訓練與督導：含括諮商師需具備的靈性議題處理能力、教育訓練課程的設計、融入宗教／靈性的諮商督導研究；（6）融入宗教／靈性的心理諮商之倫理；（7）融入宗教／靈性的心理諮商在臺灣的未來發展：含括透過學會與專業組織的推動、研究方法的多元化、將宗教／靈性融入心理諮商養成教育與繼續教育訓練、擴展在諮商實務的應用場域及對象、建立有文化觀點的融入宗教／靈性的諮商模式、建構融入宗教／靈性之諮商本土化及多元宗教／靈性諮商的對話平台、建立倫理守則或指引。研究者於文末呼籲國內諮商心理專業人員，需開始注意在諮商中融入宗教／靈性議題，也需要接受融入靈性的諮商訓練，以具備對有需要案主提供服務的能力。英文摘要：Recent large scale surveys of religions in Taiwan showed over 80% of the surveyed subjects identified themselves with religious beliefs and practices, 85% of the subjects agreed religion can help people find inner peace and happiness, and ease the pains and discomforts. The 2014 American Pew Research Center's Religious and Public Life Program reported Taiwan ranked second on the Global Religious Diversity Index.These findings indicated Taiwan has a high variety of population in religion and is a multi-religious society. Western counseling literatures showed that clients with religious/spiritual backgrounds brought problems into the counseling embedding their religious/spiritual perspectives and copings towards their problems. Counselors need to inquire and understand how these clients viewed their problems religiously/spiritually so that counselors may integrate religious/spiritual interventions into counseling properly and effectively to serve clients in need. However, religiously/spiritually integrated counseling (abbreviated as r/s integrated counseling) in Taiwan is a new area and the related research is limited. The present article presents findings of reviewing the research in religiously/spiritually integrated counseling (abbreviated as r/s integrated counseling) in Taiwan in the past thirty years. Our literature review identified few r/s integrated counseling empirical studies before 2010 in Taiwan. However, after 2010, on the literature of religion/spirituality counseling has increased, and various topics on studying religion and spirituality in counseling also expanded. In the present article, the authors presented seven themes: (1)The popularity and high diversity of the religious population in Taiwan; (2) Religious/spiritual studies in psychology/counseling psychology in Taiwan, which consists of two sub-themes: the research trend of religious/spiritual studies in psychology and counseling psychology professions in Taiwan, and the research evidences support the positive function of religion/ spirituality to mental health and counseling; (3) Definitions of religion and spirituality, and r/s integrated counseling. The authors proposed the definition of r/s integrated counseling as counselors providing religiously/ spiritually integrated counseling services to clients in need, including the match of counselor's and client's religious background, and counselors exploring clients' religious and spiritual issues and employing spiritual interventions.; (4) Research findings in r/s integrated counseling practices and outcomes. Three sub-themes were organized: positive attitudes of counselors and clients toward exploring religious/spiritual issues and employing religious/spiritual interventions in counseling especially for clients with strong religious/spiritual backgrounds, various religious/spiritual interventions were employed in counseling and positive outcomes were identified by counselors and clients, and counselors' religious backgrounds and spiritual orientations influenced their personal lives and counseling works; (5)Research on r/s integrated counselor training and supervision. Three sub-themes were presented: r/s integrated counseling competencies, r/s integrated counselor training courses and outcomes, and r/s integrated counselor supervision issues and models; (6) Ethical principles of practicing r/s integrated counseling identified by counselors and clients; (7) Future directions were proposed by the authors, including promoting r/s integrated counseling through professional organizations and educational institutions, employing diversified research methodologies, integrating religion and spirituality into counseling courses and counselor continuing education classes, applying r/s integrated counseling to clients with religious and spiritual needs, , generating culturally inclusive and indigenous r/s integrated counseling theories and models, building a platform to facilitate dialogues among diverse r/s oriented and indigenous counseling professionals, and developing ethical guidelines for practicing r/s integrated counseling. The authors call attention to Taiwanese counselors/ educators/supervisors to be sensitive to the issues of religion and spirituality that clients may bring into counseling. There is a need for Taiwanese counseling profession to promote and develop the new specialty so that clients with religious/spiritual needs or issues may be better served in the future.起始頁-結束頁：45-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620181000530034篇名：臺灣心理與諮商敘事研究之回顧與展望並列篇名：Review and Prospect of Narrative Research in the Field of Psychology and Counseling in Taiwan作者：林美珠(Meei-Ju Lin);溫錦真(Chin-Chen Wen)關鍵字：回顧與展望;敘事研究;Narrative research;review anad prospect期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：53期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文主要目的在透過臺灣心理與諮商領域的敘事研究期刊論文之回顧，捕捉敘事研究的特色與意義，同時展望未來敘事研究的可能研究理路。本文以敘事的定位、方法論、及回顧性文獻作為分析之視野，從心理與諮商相關學術期刊論文中對於自我定位為敘事研究或敘事分析者，進行爬梳、分析、與詮釋。本文從研究範例發現臺灣心理與諮商敘事研究具有故事的力量、心理諮商與治療改變的隱喻、敘事分析方法多元與複雜化、以及助人工作者反身梳理等特色。展望未來，本文提出五項敘事研究的可能研究理路：（1）百花齊放的研究取向或現象，預告人文與社會科學學科的跨界發展。（2）多數敘事研究採用整體－內容分析法，忽略敘事形式與層次，以及定位及方法未明之問題，回歸敘事的語言本質是可能的解決徑路。（3）對於不同的研究典範之掌握、什麼是健康的敘事、好的敘事研究之判準等，有待未來更多的釐清與探討。（4）從故事到實務工作的提升，兩者間存有的斷裂情形有待未來研究補強。（5）臺灣走過敘事研究多年，仍需進一步的聚合與串連，以達本土化理論之建構。本文因取樣的有限性，研究結果之推論有其限制。最後本文回顧與展望所得結論乃暫時、非唯一的真理，期待未來研究者可以經由更多的對話，開啟敘事研究所帶來的不同意義與啟發。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is three fold: (1) Review narrative studies published in psychology and counseling journals in Taiwan; (2) highlight features and significances of narrative research; and (3) discuss future research directions for improving this literature. This paper is grounded on the definition of the word of narrative, methodology of narrative research, and reviews from counseling professions. Included in this review were 67 narrative studies in journals of psychology and counseling which could be described as narrative research or using the method of narrative analysis. By the method of probing, analyzing, and interpreting, this paper presents four aspects and related research examples to illustrate significances of current narrative studies in Taiwan. (1) Narrative studies show the power of story which characterizes the dialectical relationship between personal and social construction. (2) The concept of narrative can be served as the metaphor of counseling process and changes, and can be applied to studies across counseling and psychotherapy approaches. (3) The idea of holisticcontent analysis from Lieblich, Tuval-Mashiach and Zilber was preferred and adopted in most studies, however researchers claimed that method of narrative analysis should be more diverse and complex. (4) Self-narrative studies encourage helping professionals and learners to reflect on themselves and generate their own helping knowledge, which would subsequently empower themselves and others. Although significant features were found from the review of existing narrative research, current trends of narrative studies still reveal many challenges today, especially those issues from methodology, which need to be clarified and improved. Accordingly, this paper presents five prospects for future narrative research in the field of psychology and counseling. First, from mono-tone to multiple-tone, there are diverse approaches and phenomena shown in narrative studies. Further, there is a tendency to develop toward a new paradigm of qualitative research by the refinement of cross-disciplinary study of humanities and social science. Second, with the majority of narrative research adopting the perspective of holistic-content in the analysis of narratives or stories, possible falls into the mere induction of themes would occur, and it is possible to disregard the narrative form and multi-level analysis. Moreover, there arise problems of lacking clarity in the definition and research method. And the way to work with such challenges is to return to the ”language” nature of narrative. Third, there is a need for more exploration and clarification for issues such as adopted research paradigm, what is healthy narrative, and what are the criteria for good enough narrative research. Moreover, whether the focus of study is based on the perspectives of macro vs. micro, or narrative coherence vs. complexity, also need to be clarified. Forth, there is a gap between stories studied and promotion of counseling practice. In other words, with many stories collected, it is time to work on filling this gap. Finally, there has been many years in the development of narrative research in Taiwan, and many indigenous life stories and counseling stories have been accumulated. More efforts need to be invested in the convergence and connection at the level of theory construction. Conclusions of this paper are tentative, and are not the only truth. This paper invites more researchers to engage in more dialogues and exchanges their perspectives regarding narrative research.起始頁-結束頁：81-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620181000530045篇名：心理位移：位格特性與療癒效應研究之回顧與展望並列篇名：Review and Prospect of Psychological Displacement Writing Paradigm: Pronouns Characteristics and Its Beneficial Effects作者：金樹人(Shuh-Ren Jin)關鍵字：心理位移;心理距離;回顧與展望;Psychological displacement;PDPD;psychological distance;review and prospect;writing therapy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：53期出版年：2018中文摘要：從第一篇心理位移日記書寫法的研究報告問世（金樹人，2005），國內外已有數十篇的相關論文或文獻陸續發表。本文的主旨，在於從這些發表的研究中進行回顧性的整理與分析，聚焦於彙整心理位移的位格特性、影響效果與療癒效應，探究此法可能的限制，同時對於未來研究的方向提出建議。回顧分析結果發現，在位格特性方面，質性與量化的多元研究取向，豐厚了「我」「你」「他」以及「再回到我」等位格特性的深度與廣度。在影響效果部分，經由深度書寫後，臨在的狀態逐漸從外在歸因轉為關注於內在自我關係或人我關係，進而產生諸多情緒、認知與行為的改變。然而，這種書寫法也遭遇到一些負面效應或毫無效果的質疑與挑戰。在心理位移書寫為何會產生療癒效應的部分，本研究發現改變的效應緣於（1）不同位格的逐步推移與轉化；（2）你位格的客體轉化效應；（3）他位格的累積轉化效應；（4）「再回到我」的中庸全局思維；（5）心理距離改變促成的認知轉化；以及（6）多重視角重複書寫的全景效應等等面向。最後，本文針對心理位移研究的回顧與分析，提出未來在心理諮商實務應用，以及心理位移書寫法本身有待解決的主題與建議。英文摘要：Since the first research on Psychological Displacement Paradigm in Diary-writing (PDPD) was published (Jin, 2005), there have been dozens of related papers or articles published at home and abroad. The PDPD requires participants to write about their daily events specifically with negative emotions using a fixed sequence of different personal pronouns (from I to you, then to he/she). To sort out, analyze and review these published studies, the main purpose of this paper was focus on reviewing the characteristics of pronouns and the healing effects of psychological displacements, explore the possible limitations of this method, and analyze the directions and topics for further research in the future. In terms of four kinds of pronoun characteristics, the qualitative and quantitative research orientation enriched the depth and expanded nature of the pronoun characteristics as follows. (1) When writing in the ”I” pronoun, people usually felt intensive emotional reactions. The characteristics of an ”I” perspective include magnifying thoughts and feelings in a narrow vision, and expressing self-disclosed information via discourse model. (2) When they recounted the same life events using ”you” as the subject, the contents sounded as if they were described by significant others with both self-caring and self- criticism attitudes. The ”you” pronoun might rebuke the ”I” occasionally as an adult disciplines a child’s misconduct. The characteristics of a ”you” perspective signaled more rational with self-empathy and self-concern accordingly, and the negative emotion gradually eases. In addition, the pronoun of ”you” was mainly based on the discourse model of consolation. (3) Lastly, when the same events stated using ”s/he” as pronoun, the writer executed to be the most rational and least emotional. In this position, people detached themselves even further from the facts in a greatest psychological distance, and they took the widest range of perspectives as well. They told the story as if they were impartial and detached bystanders. The mentality was calm and rational, as the pronoun of ”s/he” was based on the discourse model of audit. (4) When the ”I” finally returned to the ”I” position again, after experiencing the psychological spatial displacement, the individual could clearly apprehend the problem in the incident and also had obvious relief in a calmed emotional feeling. The pronoun of ”back to I” focused on the discourse model of policymaking and consolation. In the part of impact effects from PDPD, after rotated writing by the author, the state of highly presence gradually shifted attentions from external attribution to inner self-relationship, or interpersonal relationship, and then produced significant emotional, cognitive and behavioral changes. However, this writing paradigm also encountered some negative effects or questioning on no effective. As to the reason why psychological displacement writing caused healing effects, this study founded that the effect of change in PDPD, which was the unique aspect of PDPD than other psychological distance studies, were primarily due to (1) the gradual shift and transformation of different pronouns, (2) the self-object transformation effect of ”you” pronouns, and (3) the cumulative conversion effect of ”s/he” pronoun, (4) the ”back to I” moderation of Zhong Yong global thinking, (5) the cognitive transformation caused by the change of psychological distance, and (6) the panoramic effect of repeated writing of multiple perspectives. Finally, based on the reviewing and analyzing on the previous research of PDPD, this thesis proposed several topics and suggestions for future applications on psychological practice and empirical research as well.起始頁-結束頁：117-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620181000530056篇名：台灣諮商輔導倫理研究之回顧與展望並列篇名：A Review Study of Counseling Ethics Research between 1986 - 2017 in Taiwan作者：洪莉竹(Li-Chu Hung)關鍵字：回顧研究;輔導倫理;諮商倫理;諮商倫理研究;整合研究;Counseling ethics;counseling ethics research;integration study;review study;school counselor期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：53期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究蒐集1986年到2017年台灣諮商輔導倫理的研究51篇，運用描述性統計分析論文數量、研究方法、研究主題及發展趨勢，並針對各論文的研究結果進行整合分析，進而提出台灣諮商輔導倫理研究未來發展的方向。本研究發現：（1）台灣諮商輔導倫理研究，呈現逐漸增多的趨勢，2011年之後的論文數量佔了整體論文數量的58.8%。（2）研究方法以質性研究最多，量化研究次之，採用混合設計的論文篇數很少；2001年之後質性研究明顯增加。（3）研究主題以「倫理認知與倫理行為」、「倫理困境與因應」和「倫理實務問題處理經驗」三類論文居多，1986-2000年代，研究主題集中在「倫理認知與倫理行為」；2001年之後，探討「倫理困境與因應」和「倫理實務問題處理經驗」之研究佔多數；「倫理教育」的研究數量較少。（4）研究結果分析發現幾個重要現象：（a）倫理議題的判斷信心、信念，在不同研究有不同的結果，倫理認知與行為之間有不一致的現象；（b）實務工作者面對倫理問題時會考量多元脈絡，兼顧多方需求，發展彈性因應的策略；反思倫理守則的適用性與侷限性，更看重專業倫理與諮商輔導專業之核心精神；處理過程需要持續對話與評估。依據研究結果討論，本研究對台灣諮商輔導倫理研究的未來發展，提出6項建議。英文摘要：There were 51 studies on counselling ethics in Taiwan from 1986 to 2017. Descriptive statistic was used to analyze the number of research papers, research methods, research topics and development trends, and analyze the research results of each paper. The results indicate: (1) The number of counselling ethics researches in Taiwan showedan increasing trend. The number of papers in 2011-2017 accounted for 58.8% of the total number of papers. Master's and Doctoral thesis accounted for 64.7% of the total research volume. The advisor of thesis and the authors of journal focused on specific scholars. The counseling ethics research of Taiwan began with the discussion of the ethical judgment of the school counselors. However, the proportion of papers with the school counselors gradually decreased. (2) Research methods were mostly qualitative research and the numbers of quantitative studies was less than the qualitative studies. Very few studies were mixed designs. There was only one qualitative study in 1997. The number of qualitative studies in 2001-2010 is more than quantitative research. Qualitative research in 2011-2017 accounted for 73.3% of the numbers of papers in the same period. (3) Most of the studies targeted at ”ethical cognition and ethical behavior”, followed by the studies of ”ethical dilemmas and coping” and ”experiences in dealing with ethical issues”, and then followed by ”ethical thinking and decision-making”. The studies of ”ethical practice ” and ”ethical education” were the least. From 1986 to 2000, research topics focused on ”ethical cognition and ethical behavior”. After 2001, the studies of ”ethical dilemmas and coping”, ” experiences in dealing with ethical issues ” and ”ethical thinking and decision-making” has increased significantly. The studies of Taiwan's counseling ethics, which accounted for 33.3% of research on specific ethical issues. The remaining research topics were divided into two categories: (a) The overall discussion of the ethical cognition and ethical behavior of practitioners; (b) The ethical issues involved in some practical situation or specific form of service. (4) Analysis of the results of the researches revealed several important phenomena: (a) There were different results about ethical judgments and ethical beliefs. (b) There were inconsistencies between ethical cognition and ethical behavior. (c) Practitioners took into account multiple contexts, took into account the needs of multiple parties, and developed strategies that respond flexibly when they faced with ethical issues. (d) Practitioners reflected on the applicability and limitations of the ethical code, and paid more attention to the core spirit of professional ethics and counseling. They believed that the process of dealing with ethical issues required continuous dialogue and evaluation. Based on research results, six suggestions for the future development of Taiwan’s counseling ethics researches were proposed: (1) The research and publication of Taiwan's counseling ethics requires more researchers to invest. (2) The ethical issues and ethical practical experience faced by school counselors need to continue to pay attention. (3) Both qualitative and quantitative research have their own contributions and limitations. The research method of counseling ethics should be combined with the advantages of qualitative research and quantitative research to balance development. (4) On the research topic, more studies focused and in-depth exploring can be made on specific ethical issues involved in specific practical situations and diverse service forms. (5) The content and connotation of professional ethics education curriculum and support program needs to be expanded, taking into account the professional ethics and individual cultivation. Researchers actively develop diverse professional ethics education courses and ethical support programs, and explore their effectiveness. (6) Researchers collaborate with practitioners to conduct situational research. Researchers depict the ethical practical experience of Taiwanese practitioners in-depth and develop ethical decision and practice models with a cultural perspective.起始頁-結束頁：151-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620181000530067篇名：證據導向實踐的諮商專業發展並列篇名：Counseling Professional Development of Evidence-Based Practice作者：孫頌賢(Sung-Hsien Sun);劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang);夏允中(Yung-Jong Shiah)關鍵字：科學家—實務者模式;諮商專業能力;諮商專業發展;諮商教育;證據導向實踐;Counseling education;counseling professional competencies;counseling professional development;evidence-based practice;scientist-practitioner model期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：52期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文透過本期所收錄的三篇文章與相關文獻，看見以「證據導向實踐」的諮商專業發展特性，以及三種諮商專業能力的重要性。在諮商專業發展部分，過去常以「科學家—實務者模式」做為基礎，強調科學理論在實務現場的實踐。而證據導向實務的諮商專業發展，更強調應從「落身之知」中獲得，需要從實務現場看到問題、發現問題、並進而解決問題。但落身之知往往是混淆的，需要經過科學檢視與整理，學習者本身也會經驗模糊矛盾感。本文認為，若能採取「證據導向實踐」的精神與原則，透過學術研究的探究精神，協助受訓者獲得更符合實務需求的落身之知。並在個人諮商專業發展上，朝向「諮商取向」、「諮商風格」、「德行風範」的成長。本文也從所收錄的三篇研究中，看見三種重要的諮商專業能力，包括：個人化諮商模式的發展力、系統合作的社會力以及自我覺醒的成長力。同時，若能以華人儒家思想所提供的倫理素養，更能促使諮商專業人士朝向「德行風範」的諮商專業發展。最後，本文亦提出對台灣諮商教育與訓練上的建議。英文摘要：With three articles from this 52th issue and the support of the relevant literature, this paper aimed to explore two key subjects, namely, counseling professional development of evidence-based practice and counseling professional competencies. In the past, the counseling professional development and counseling education were often advocated based on the scientist-practitioner model, emphasizing the practice of scientific theory in the practice field. We try to discuss the benefits of the evidence-based practice in the counseling professional development. The learning carried out in the counseling profession could be categorized as a form of embodied knowing. In the counseling professional development of evidence-based practice, the counselors not only need to learn theoretical knowledge, but also need to learn action knowledge and embodied knowing. However, embodied knowing can often cause confusion and has to be scientifically reviewed and consolidated, and learners may also experience unclear and contradictory situations. If the spirit and principles of evidence-based practice can be adopted, the resulting application of the spirit of inquiry originating from academic research will help trainees to acquire embodied knowing that is more effective, and allow them to undergo development that emphasizes counseling approach, counseling style, and integrity. We also saw three important counseling professional competencies in the three papers included in this issue, such as the development strength of individualized counseling models, the social forces of systematic cooperation, and self-awakening growth. At the same time, in the counseling profession development, if it can be based on the ethical literacy provided by Chinese Confucianism, it can promote the development of counseling professionals to the ”integrity”. Finally, this paper also presents several suggestions on counseling education and training in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620180800520018篇名：優勢中心生涯諮商與生涯召喚之諮商效果與影響經驗探究並列篇名：Strength-Centered Career Counseling and Career Calling: The Effect and Affective Experience作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang)關鍵字：大學生;生涯召喚;優勢中心生涯諮商;Career calling;strength-centered career counseling;undergraduate student期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：52期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討優勢中心生涯諮商對提升生涯召喚之效果與影響經驗。以混合研究進行，量化研究透過實驗方法，探討優勢中心生涯諮商方法對提升大學生在生涯召喚經驗、生涯自我效能以及降低憂鬱的影響。參與者為28位大學生，其中男生7人，女生21人，平均年齡為21.54歲（SD = 0.98）。隨機分配參與者至優勢組和測驗組，兩組分別在介入前、介入後以及40天後的追蹤時間，進行生涯召喚量表、生涯自我效能以及憂鬱量表的測量，以無母數統計（nonparametric statistics）進行分析。結果發現優勢中心生涯諮商對參與者整體之生涯召喚與自我效能有明顯成效。質性研究目的在了解參與優勢中心諮商的影響經驗與助益因素。參與者為一22歲之大四同學，進行3次個別之半結構訪談，以主題分析方法進行分析。在諮商影響經驗結果方面，包括開啟、連結和整合等歷程。從經驗的敘說中，透過不同時空的自我的連結與對話，產生正向眼光，形成自我整合。在助益因素的結果方面，包括諮商師正向態度以及有效介入因素，像是以問句和打開對話空間；諮商師的理解與同在；以探索召喚與意義感的問句，幫助個案發現熱情與意義；協助個案覺察過去韌力；以及透過探索內在核心優勢力量，對未來產生希望。最後根據結果，提出綜合討論與建議。英文摘要：For undergraduate students who are going to experience a role transition process from student life to work life, the objective of career guidance and counseling in school is to help these students facilitate self-exploration, job discovery, and employment preparation in order to be better prepared for an unknown future of employment. Being aware of and developing career calling experience are helpful for these young adults to confront and cope with a chaotic and constantly-changing environment. The current study aimed to explore the effect of strength-centered career counseling on improving career calling experience and the affective experience of career calling. The study used a mixed-methods research design. The quantitative study explored the effect of strength-centered career calling on improving career calling experience and career self-efficacy and reducing depression of undergraduate students. The participants were 28 undergraduate students in Taiwan, 7 men and 21 women, whose average age was 21.54 (SD = 0.98). The participants were randomly assigned to an experimental group and a control group. The former received strength-centered counseling treatment and the latter took tests. Both groups completed the career calling scale for college students, career self-efficacy scale, and depression tendency scale before, immediately after, and 40 days after treatment. The collected data were analyzed via nonparametric statistics. The results indicated that the strength-centered career counseling treatment had a great effect on improving participants' overall career calling experience and career self-efficacy. The qualitative study aimed to understand the affective experience and enablers of the counseling in participants in the strength-centered career counseling treatment. The participant was a senior undergraduate student at the age of 22. The study designed an interview outline and conducted three interviews. The thematic analysis concluded that affective experience was involved with several processes including initiation, connection, and integration. Enablers were induced into two categories as attitudes and intervening factors within which were several themes. The quantitative results of this study indicated that strength-centered career counseling effectively and immediately promoted career calling experience of the participants and this finding corresponded to some previous studies. Besides, studies in the past reported that strength counseling was effective in promoting individuals' happiness and well-being. This indicates that the strength-centered counseling may be significantly more effective in the influence on implicit, spiritual, and meaning dimensions in life of individuals. The value of the current study is to confirm that the strength-centered career counseling treatment had an effect on improving undergraduate students' career calling experience and their career self-efficacy. Hence, we put forward some suggestions for the practice of strength-centered counseling that: (1) The core target of strength-centered counseling is to help individuals integrate and balance all self aspects and apply which to promote inner, spiritual, and meaning dimensions in life. We suggest promoting and integrating strength counseling with other counseling approaches for enhanced effectiveness. (2) We suggest helping individuals to explore their core or signature strengths and link which to different life dimensions and to different selves. This process requires more exploration processes via dialogues to identify and magnify individuals' strengths in more depth. (3) Career calling experience can be fostered through counseling intervention. In addition to administering strength-centered career counseling treatment, we propose that school courses or group guidance that are related to career exploration may adopt a series of questioning techniques to assist individuals in raising the awareness of career calling experience. Also, from this study we can learn that strength-centered career counseling treatment may significantly improving career calling experience of individuals. We suggest that in future, practitioners may apply strength-centered career counseling treatment to the groups with different backgrounds as well as try to undersand its following effectiveness in them.起始頁-結束頁：19-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620180800520029篇名：多元性別議題諮商能力：訓練方案對知識、覺察與技能影響之研究並列篇名：LGBT Issues and Counseling Competency: The Impact of Training on Enhancing Knowledge, Awareness and Skills作者：張曉佩(Hsiao-Pei Chang);李宜蓉(Yi-Jung Lee)關鍵字：多元性別議題;訓練方案;諮商能力;Counseling competency;LGBT issues;training program期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：52期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要目的在設計與發展一套以諮商系所研究生為對象的多元性別議題諮商能力訓練方案，並探討研究生參與訓練方案以裝備多元性別議題諮商能力的經驗。四十位研究參與者接受四十小時的訓練，課程包括六大主題，分別為自我認同發展歷程、人際與親密關係、現身與家庭關係、生涯發展歷程、污名化以及系統合作。研究者透過焦點團體訪談與內容分析法探討訓練方案所產生之影響、影響內涵與促進改變的因素。研究結果發現本訓練方案對於提升研究參與者的多元性別議題諮商能力有正向助益，內涵包括促進研究參與者對多元性別議題有更深入的認識，裝備豐厚的知識、覺察自身在多元性別議題上顯而易見或隱而未顯的刻板印象、在態度上轉變為開放、彈性與欣賞、多元思考與討論、勇敢與倡導、真誠一致與同理以及提升包括同理、敏感度與傾聽、資訊提供、系統合作與倡導、視覺化媒材的運用等技能。此外，研究結果也發現讓研究參與者認為在接受訓練的過程中能達到有效學習的關鍵因素包括多方討論、換位思考、體驗性活動與現身說法這四項。依據研究結果與討論，研究者整理出解構文化膠囊的思考慣性、脈絡性地裝備多元性別諮商能力以及促進反思性學習等三點建議，做為培育諮商心理師的教育者未來在設計與推動多元性別諮商能力訓練課程時的參考。英文摘要：Research showed that lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) individuals have a higher prevalence rate of mental disorders than heterosexuals. Mental health is related to different factors, such as race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, gender, sexual orientation, etc. Stressors that are unique to LGBT individuals, such as homophobia, stigma, prejudice, discrimination and hate crimes, create a hostile environment for LGBT individuals. According to literature, a stressful social environment is related to higher risk of mental disorders, substance abuse, and suicidal behaviors. For LGBT adolescents, it is rather common to experience bully in school, which has a negative impact on their mental health. Moreover, their functioning level related to life and school usually decline, such as lower academic achievement, dropping out of school, etc. Research indicated that being bully during adolescence is related to depression, suicide ideation, lower life satisfaction, and lower self-esteem in adult life. Being rejected by others is also related to fear of establishing close relationships, lack of positive outlook of life, difficulty of expressing emotions, etc. For LGBT adults, they often need to deal with differential treatment in the work environment. For example, transgender individuals' income is usually lower than non-transgender individuals. Those unique stressors related to LGBT individuals indicate that they are in great need of professional help. However, it is rather difficult for LGBT individuals to find satisfying mental health services, which reflects the lack of appropriate and effective training in the counseling graduate programs. This study aimed at designing and developing a training program for counseling graduate students to enhance their multicultural counseling competency to serve LGBT clients, and exploring their experience in the training program. Participants were recruited from counseling-related graduate programs. Participants included 40 graduate students from counseling-related programs. The training program was designed based on the framework of multicultural counseling competence (i.e., knowledge, attitude, and skills), cognitive developmental theory, relevant literature, and discussions with professionals of LGBT issues. Participants received 40 hours of training related to LGBT issues which included six themes. The training themes were self-identification development process, interpersonal and romantic relationships, ”coming out of the closet” and family relations, career development process, stigma, and systematic collaboration. Each theme was taught by a different lecturer, who was selected based on their expertise. This was to make sure that the training program covered three areas of multicultural counseling competence (i.e., knowledge, attitude, and skills). The impact of the training program was evaluated by focus group interviews and the content analysis. The results showed that this training program had positive impact on participants' competence to serve LGBT clients. The results indicated changes in three areas: knowledge, attitudes and skills. Participants reported more in-depth knowledge related to LGBT issues. They stated that they became more aware of their own explicit and implicit biases toward LGBT issues. They started to show changes of attitude, such as becoming more open-minded, flexible, and courageous in terms of advocating for LGBT individuals. Participants indicated enhancement of their skills, such as active listing, empathy, information providing, systematic collaboration, utilization of different media in counseling, etc. The results also showed that multiple formats of discussions, perspective-taking, experiential activities and learning LGBT individuals' personal experience were the key factors related to effective learning. The results have import implications for training and promoting LGBT counseling competence. It is suggested that deconstructing cultural encapsulation, contextual factors, and reflective learning are important elements. Students need to be aware of their own stereotypes of LGBT individuals and issues in order to deconstruct their habitual way of thinking. The training also needs to take students' background and learning level into consideration. It seems to be more effective to utilize reflective learning method to help students develop and enhance their multicultural counseling competence. Those three elements are essential for educators to design and advocate for LGBT counseling competence training program in the future.起始頁-結束頁：51-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186201808005200310篇名：生態系統取向班級輔導活動設計實施與成效：以建立班級友善氣氛為例並列篇名：An Action Research on Ecological System Approach Guidance Activities Applying to Rebuild Class Friendly Atmosphere作者：林淑君(Shu-Chun Lin)關鍵字：反霸凌;生態系統取向;行動研究;班級友善氣氛;班級輔導活動;Action research;anti-bully;class guidance activities;class positive/friendly atmosphere;ecological system approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：52期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究採取行動研究探討專業輔導人員運用生態系統取向班級輔導以解決學生欺凌問題。「生態系統取向班級輔導活動」是指針對班級的特別需求或問題「量身打造」可以滿足其需求、或解決其問題的輔導活動；強調評估與理解系統動力對該問題的影響，採取生態系統角度，將導師納入合作團隊，以提升輔導成效。介入前需評估班級動力，擬定介入策略，最後評鑑實施成效。反霸凌對班級欺凌問題恐怕只是治標，更重要的是重建學校或班級的正向氛圍與團體凝聚力。本研究分為五階段，（1）評估學生特別需求；（2）發展行動方案─獎勵學生利社會行為；（3）評鑑省思與回饋─對獎勵制度的反思與行動修正；（4）發展行動方案─運用繪本建立班級友善氛圍；（5）評鑑省思與回饋。研究結果發現，這二種策略都能改善班級正向互動，然而獎勵學生利社會行為雖然能夠得到成效，但卻有隱憂：學生是為了得到獎賞才表現出好行為。為了解決此隱憂，第二次介入從情意到認知，最後到行為層面，是較為完整的輔導活動歷程，不僅可收成效，亦可避免第一次行動的隱憂。這個介入方式符合以生態系統觀為核心的WISER模式之精神，亦即初級發展性輔導不僅預防問題發生，也可以運用班級層級的輔導活動來解決學生已經發生的問題。最後研究者提出對本方案的省思與未來研究與實務上的建議。英文摘要：The study adopted action research to treat bully problems in junior high school classes. The purpose of this study was to explore a school counselor or counseling psychologist how to deal with students' bully problems, by ecological system approach guidance activities. ”Ecological approach guidance activities” meant to evaluate and understand students' needs and problems before intervention, then design guidance activities to meet students' needs and solve their problems. The ecological system approach guidance activities emphasized evaluating and understanding the class and students' interaction dynamic, instead of treating one or few of the students as a ”problem student” or ”trouble maker”. After understanding the class dynamic, the next step was adopting ecological system approach intervention strategies, and facilitating the teacher/mentor to collaborate with the school counselor. In simple terms, the school counselor had to evaluate class dynamic at first, then drew up intervention strategies, carried out the intervention, and assessed the outcome after implementing. There were three data resources evaluating class dynamic: (1) discussed with the teacher or mentor, (2) observed the group interaction, and (3) interviewed students. To resolve bully problems in class, anti-bully activities could only treat the symptoms but not the root cause. The most important was rebuilding school or class positive and friendly atmosphere, and enhancing group cohesion. The action research process had five stages: (1) Before action: evaluated students' and group's specific needs and problems. This was a 7th grade class, in the beginning of the first semester, the students often treated others in a mean way, for example: to irritate each other, describe others in a negative way, supplant some disadvantaged students, threaten, rumor, and physical aggression, etc. In this situation, if the school counselor discussed anti-bully directly, the adolescents may feel be blamed, and arouse their defense. The students needed to learn how to treat others friendly, not only be requested to stop improper behavior, and the class had to rebuild positive and friendly atmosphere, and support students' proper interpersonal behavior. (2) The first action: adopted encouraging altruistic behavior strategy to solve students' and group's problems. In this stage, the researcher invited the class mentor as a partner to carry out the guidance activities together, and applied encouraging system to inspire students' altruistic behavior. The strategy transferred the negative focus (students' improper behavior) to positive focus (altruistic behavior). (3) After the first action: evaluation and feedback - to think back over the encouraging system, and revise the action. Encouraging students' altruistic behavior was effective. But it seemed to occur together with a secret concern: students' altruistic behavior was from internal? Or just for reward? If we take the reward away, the students would continue their altruistic behavior? To solve the concern, the researcher developed the next action. (4) The second action: applying a picture book and series activities to rebuild class positive and friendly atmosphere, and enhance their cohesion. The action implemented in another year, a new 7th grade class which also had bully behavior. The researcher invited the class mentor for cooperation to resolve the problem. There were series guidance activities, including: (a) Line game: helped students finding their common ground, (b) read the picture book ”The Original Warm Fuzzy Tale”, (c) discussed and created class ”warm fuzzy” environment. (5) After the second action: evaluation and feedback. The action research found the strategy improving group's positive and friendly interaction effectively. This intervention matched WISER model which based on ecological system approach: primary and developmental guidance activities not only prevent problems, but also resolve the occurred problems.起始頁-結束頁：81-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186201808005200401篇名：協力神話的崩壞？我國地方政府與非營利組織的協力現況並列篇名：The Fall of Collaborative Governance? Current Collaboration between Local Governments and Non-Profit Organizations作者：林淑馨(Shu-Hsin Lin)關鍵字：地方政府;非營利組織;協力;委託;組織文化;local government;non-profit organization;partnership;procurement;organizational culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：55期出版年：2018中文摘要：目前我國許多公共服務的輸送都已經引進非營利組織的力量，以協助公部門提供多元公共服務。理論上，型塑理想協力關係的要素，包含「對等」、「共同目標」、「信任」等多項要素，但在實務運作上卻常出現對協力要件的認知不同而產生衝突與摩擦的情形。因此，本文透過深入訪談來瞭解台北、新北、台中、台南、高雄和台東六縣市和十一家非營利組織對協力的認知，除描繪我國地方政府與非營利組織協力的概貌外，並探討雙方在協力時所面臨的問題，進而尋求降低協力落差的方法。研究結果發現，造成地方政府與非營利組織協力落差的影響因素有三：一是協力動機影響公部門內部的組織文化與結構；二是「委託」的協力型態影響雙方對「對等」和「互信」關係的認知；三是「組織類型」和「業務性質」是影響協力型態與關係的重要因素。基於此，為了降低協力落差，作者嘗試提出：（一）簡化協力過程的官僚程序，唯有跳脫官僚體制的框架，將委託者視為夥伴，才能建構正向協力循環；（二）破除官僚組織文化，建立有效的溝通管道；（三）非營利組織本身也需強化人才培育與募款能力，才能增強自主性，並提升協力的對等地位三項解決途徑。起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201809_(55).00012篇名：誰在虛擬社會中做什麼？非營利組織資源與官網資訊的內容分析並列篇名：Who are They and What are Their Behaviors on the Internet? An Analysis of the Organizational Resources and Website Information of Social Welfare Nonprofit Organizations作者：韓意慈(Yih-Tsu Hahn);徐煒勛(Wei-Hsun Hsu)關鍵字：線上社群;非營利組織;線上責信;倡議;社福機構;online society;civil society;accountability;advocacy;social welfare nonprofit organizations期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：55期出版年：2018中文摘要：網際網路的發展產生了虛擬社會及特有的社會互動方式，當募資平台、線上連署、大數據等已成為當今大眾熟悉的新概念，社福機構在線上社會的面貌，卻較少被深入探討檢視。本研究欲探究社福機構是如何扮演與公民社會息息相關的線上責信角色，包含揭露、倡議、及邀請參與三方面，以及其與組織背景特質及資源的相關性？本研究透過社福組織的官方網站資訊為研究場域，以台灣公益團體自律聯盟的社福型組織為研究對象，經由兩次的施測並進行內容分析研究。本研究共蒐集到113間社福型非營利組織的資料，研究發現整體而言線上揭露的分數高於線上倡議及邀請參與；受測組織的總收入較低、社會捐贈不多、獲得政府資源較少者，運用網站以達到整體線上責信的比例明顯較高。本研究指出中小型社福機構傾向於高度運用官方網站以達到組織責信，亦指出組織可能期待網站責信帶來更多潛在捐款者的重視。然而中小型社福組織如何獲得適切資源以長期維護網站責信值得關切。本研究也提出相關實務與政策的建議。英文摘要：We know very little about nonprofits' behaviors in virtual society, while the public has recently become familiar with fundraising platforms, online petitions, and big data. This study concerns how social welfare nonprofits play accountability roles on the internet, with respect to disclosure, advocacy, and invitation, and their relation to organizational characteristics and financial factors. This study focused on 113 social welfare nonprofit organizations of the Taiwan NPO Self-Regulation Alliance by analyzing their official website information and financial data. The analysis found that overall scores of online accountability showed a higher degree in disclosure, but a lower one in advocacy and in invitation, indicating nonprofits' online participation still needs to be encouraged. Organizations with lower total revenue, less income from donations, and lower government subsidies have a higher score on online accountability. Organizations serving women, children and the disabled have a higher degree of online accountability based on the scores. Findings indicate social welfare NPOs are active in online civil society and are not limited by resources. Related implications on practice and policy are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：37-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201809_(55).00023篇名：褐地社區修復式環境正義的興起、實作、與條件－美國南卡州斯巴坦堡社區重建政策之個案分析並列篇名：The Initiation, Practice, and Prerequisites for Pursuing Restorative Environmental Justice in Brownfield Community: A Case Study on Redevelopment Policy in Spartanburg, South Carolina作者：李翠萍(Tsuey-Ping Lee)關鍵字：修復式環境正義;褐地重建政策;環境治理;環境政治;社區再生;restorative environmental justice;brownfield redevelopment policy;environmental governance;environmental politics;community revitalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：55期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究透過深度訪談、歷史文件資料分析、與在地觀察，從美國南卡羅來納州斯巴坦堡一個典型環境不正義社區的重建過程，剖析修復概念如何在主流的報應正義與賠償正義中興起並付諸實作，藉此探討在環境不正義社區中實踐修復概念的支持條件。本文基於修復式環境正義的定義發展三個觀察修復概念實作的面向，分別是受害者的傷害與需求如何被重視、利害關係者導正社區中環境不正義的責任感如何啟發、以及利害關係者的溝通參與如何被強調。研究發現，在集體訴訟求償條件不佳的情況下，修復式環境正義觀點成為社區在集體訴訟與社區福祉之間的權衡選擇。然而修復導向的觀點之所以能於斯巴坦堡褐地社區逐步實踐，有著社會、政治、與法律面的支持條件。社會面的條件包括在地非營利組織與意見領袖、基督教信仰、與非裔傳統鄰里互助文化；政治面的條件包括社區政治參與的提升、網絡連結與口碑效應、與迫使公部門積極參與的策略；法律面的支持條件則是集體訴訟求償條件不佳與利於褐地重建的法規訂定。英文摘要：This study intends to investigate the initiation, practice and prerequisites for pursuing restorative environmental justice in an environmental injustice community located in Spartanburg, South Carolina through in-depth interview, observation, and historical document analysis. Based on the definition of restorative environmental justice, three dimensions, that is, emphasizing the harms and needs of victims, cultivating stakeholders' sense of responsibility on correcting environmental injustice, and facilitating stakeholder communication and participation, were utilized to analyze the practice of restoration in brownfield community. This study found that, under the circumstances unfavorable to law suit and indemnity request, restorative environmental justice is chosen by the community as a result of considering the trade-off between benefits from class action and integrated community well-being. Social, political, and legal prerequisites provided strong support for pursuing restorative environmental justice in the community. The social factors include a community-based organization that embraces restorative perspective and is trusted by the residents, Christianity and traditional African culture. The political factors include an increase in political participation, network partnership and word-of-mouth effect, and strategy for motivating participatory willingness of the government. Legal factors include unfavorable conditions for class action and indemnity request, and brownfield redevelopment-oriented law-making.起始頁-結束頁：73-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201809_(55).00034篇名：臺灣縣市政府貪腐現象的再檢視：以地方法院司法判決為例作者：吳重禮期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：55期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：109-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201809_(55).00045篇名：跨越界限的混合性組織與政策議題：「社會經濟」觀點與美國實例解析初探作者：謝文琪期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：55期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：123-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201809_(55).00056篇名：與生俱來與後天培養：影響公務人員創新態度與行為的因素分析並列篇名：Innate Personality and Acquired Ability: Factors Affecting Innovation Attitude and Behavior of Public Servants作者：李仲彬(Chung-Pin Lee)關鍵字：政府創新;人力資源管理;公務員;公共服務動機;心理特徵;policy innovation;human resource management;public servant;public service motivation;psychological characteristics期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：54期出版年：2018中文摘要：組織成員的創新動能（意願態度、行為）是組織創新的重要關鍵，現有文獻認為影響人員創新的因素包含內在心理素質（例如人格特質或動機）以及外來人力資源發展措施（例如輪調、激勵、訓練），可惜的是，過去相關研究多以私部門為背景，對公部門的解釋力不足。本文主要研究問題為影響公務人員創新態度與行為的因素有哪些？內部心理素質因素、外來人力資源發展措施的影響效果各自如何？透過對近兩千位地方政府基層主管的分析，本文發現外來與內在力量都會產生影響。外來人力資源發展措施中，工作自主性對公務人員創新的態度與行為都有提升效果，繼續進修則僅會加強創新的態度意願，對行為沒有顯著影響。此外，政治型領導方式對公務人員創新的態度與行為都有提升作用，這可能與我國政府的創新常是一種政治（行政強制性）力量驅使有關。至於內在心理素質部分，正向人格特質（包含樂觀、幽默、自信等）對創新態度與行為有最顯著的推力，保守的人格特質則是最顯著的阻礙特質。由於心理人格特質是每個人從小至大社會化的養成結果，是一種較難撼動的力量，若公務人員缺乏正向人格特質，只能仰賴後天、外來人力資源管理措施加以平衡或甚至對抗，以綜合產生正向的創新態度與行為。英文摘要：By using data from a questionnaire survey aimed at local government first-line managers, the purpose of the present study is to discuss the influence of intrinsic and extrinsic forces on the innovative behavior of civil servants. Intrinsic psychological forces are the psychological characteristics of individual public servants, e.g., public service motivation, egoism. Extrinsic forces are the attempts made by public sector organizations to enhance human resources, e.g., job rotation (in order to increase task diversity), educational training, flexible personnel regulations, rewards, authorization, team creation, leadership opportunities, informal group creation, etc. These two types of independent variables are used to predict public servants’ innovative behavior. The results of this research have important implications for practitioners. It is directly related to the effectiveness of public servant human resource development programs and the development strategy of public servant human resource management. Public servants' willingness to innovate is also directly tied with government performance. The theoretical implications of the results are also important, since they allow for a reconciliation of human resource development activities with individual innovative behavior, thereby bridging a gap often ignored in past literature.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201803_(54).00017篇名：協力決策後的績效弔詭：以性別影響評估和生態檢核表為例並列篇名：Performance Paradox after Collaborative Decision-Making: Lessons from the Gender Impact Assessment and Eco-checklist Initiatives in Taiwan作者：彭渰雯(Yen-Wen Peng);林依依(Yi-Yi Lin);楊和縉(Ho-Chin Yang)關鍵字：協力治理;績效管理;績效弔詭;課責;雙圈學習;collaborative governance;performance management;performance paradox;accountability;double-loop learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：54期出版年：2018中文摘要：在民主化的趨勢之下，民間團體進入體制內參與決策過程的協力治理模式，日愈受到公部門的肯認與重視。不過，經由協力與共識討論出的政策、計畫或工具，真的能將民間進步理念帶入官僚體系嗎？或者成為形式化的書面作業？既有的協力治理研究，多半著重於中觀或微觀層次討論協力治理成功的所需條件或影響因素，而較少探討在仍受績效管考機制支配下的公部門行政體系，如何可能達到原本民間團體參與協力決策的初衷？因此，本文以性別主流化與水庫集水區保育治理兩個政策個案為研究對象，檢視由官方與民間委員共同決策討論出的政策工具—性別影響評估和生態檢核表—實際執行時產生的弔詭現象。透過內容分析法及訪談法的運用，本文呈現了這兩個協力決策下的政策工具在執行過程的「績效弔詭」現象—即使在代表性、參與品質、回應性方面，超過半數以上並不理想，卻照樣可通過「結果導向」的管考程序（測量失靈）；更嚴重的是出現許多故意的操弄、欺瞞或迴避作為（負面效應），使得協力改革的理念推動不僅事倍功半，更對行政倫理與基層士氣造成傷害。對此本文建議，對於協力治理的實踐不能停留在決策層級的改變，而必須從制度層級，以協力的方式共同思考如何建立對話、學習導向的課責體系與組織文化；同時在操作層級，也透過真正平等伙伴的協力模式，降低績效失靈與弔詭的困境。英文摘要：Under the tendency of democratization, the model of collaborative governance through which NGOs participate in policy decision-making process is becoming more widely recognized and valued by the public sector. However, could a policy plan produced through a collaborative process really bring progressive ideas into to a bureaucratic system? Or does it just produce more formalist paperwork? Existing literatures often focus on the necessary institutional arrangements or interpersonal factors contributing to the success of collaborative governance. Few studies assess the actual process of implementation and evaluation after a collaborative decision is made. This study uses the Gender Impact Assessment and the Eco-checklist initiatives in Taiwan as two cases to address the above-mentioned concerns. In particular, it reviews how both tools initiated by collaborative efforts between the government and NGOs are enacted in practice.  Using content analysis and in-depth interview approaches, this paper reveals how both initiatives encountered ”performance paradoxes.” More than half of the GIA and Ecological checklist reports were unable to survive our evaluation in terms of representation, quality participation, and responsiveness, but these problems were not identified in the result-based performance management mechanism. More seriously, there were unintended and deliberate performance paradoxes that need to be addressed at the normative level, namely by replacing or revising the idea of performance management per se. In conclusion, the authors emphasize that the discussion on collaborative governance should place more attention at the implementation as well as the institutional levels, and efforts should be put into collaborative innovation of a learning-oriented, dialogue-based accountability system.起始頁-結束頁：41-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201803_(54).00028篇名：初探我國地方政府從事災害防救組織協力之動機：理論與實務的比較並列篇名：Searching Motivations of Local Governments in Taiwan to Conduct Disaster Management Collaborations: Comparisons between Theoretical and Practical Perspectives作者：張鎧如(Kaiju Chang)關鍵字：災害防救;組織協力動機;垂直型災防府際協力;水平型災防府際協力;跨部門災防組織協力;disaster management;motivations of organizational collaboration;vertical central-local collaboration;horizontal inter-local collaboration;horizontal cross-sector collaboration期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：54期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究以探討我國地方政府從事災防組織協力動機為出發點，透過訪談中央與地方災防公務人員，蒐集質性資料，歸納分析直轄市和縣市政府從事垂直型災防府際協力、水平型災防府際協力、以及跨部門災防組織協力之動機，並藉由理論與訪談資料的比較，進行綜合性的討論，進一步提 出穩固與強化地方政府災防組織協力機制之政策建議。研究結果顯示，直轄市和縣市政府從事垂直型災防府際協力的動機，權威的服從與追求、資源的依賴與交換、取得與提升正當性、共同目的價值觀與信念等四種理論角度，提供了較完善的解釋。針對水平型災防府際協力，本文所彙整的五種理論面向皆提供了部分的解釋力。而資源的依賴與交換、取得與提升正當性、共同目的價值觀與信念等三種理論角度，對於跨部門災防組織協力則提供了較佳的說明。此外，在探討直轄市和縣市政府從事不同類型的災防組織協力動機的同時，亦需考量過去的災害經驗、面臨的災害規模、以及地方首長對於災防的重視程度等背景因素的影響力。英文摘要：This paper explored motivations of local governments in Taiwan to conduct vertical and horizontal disaster management collaborations based on the following five theoretical perspectives: obedience and pursuit of authority, resource dependence and exchange, legitimacy formation or enhancement, common values and beliefs, and catalytic leadership. This paper further made comparisons between theoretical perspectives and practical situations by collecting qualitative data through interviewing disaster management personnel at the central government, special municipal governments, and county governments to understand why and how local governments collaborate with the central government, other local governments, and non-governmental organizations. The results indicated that resource dependence and exchange, obedience and pursuit of authority, legitimacy formation or enhancement, and common values and beliefs provide theoretical explanations about motivations of central-local disaster management collaboration. All proposed five theoretical perspectives explained a portion of why local governments seek horizontal-inter- local disaster management collaboration. As for reasons why local governments collaborate with non-governmental organizations in disaster management, resource dependence and exchange, legitimacy formation or enhancement, and common values and beliefs offer better explanations. This paper also found that past disaster experience, size of disaster, and local government leaders' attitude on disaster management could be key contextual factors to influence rationales behind local governments in conducting collaborations.起始頁-結束頁：79-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201803_(54).00039篇名：芝麻掉了？讀〈公共服務動機：回顧、反思與未來方向〉有感作者：孫同文期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：54期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：127-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201803_(54).000410篇名：芝麻要是掉了，掉多點才好：對暨大孫同文老師評論〈公共服務動機：回顧、反思與未來方向〉的回應作者：陳重安期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：54期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：139-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201803_(54).000501篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：贏在關鍵時刻－競選廣告訴求內容與發佈時點分析並列篇名：How to Win at the Critical Moment: Analysis of Appeal in and Release Time of Campaign Advertising作者：周軒逸(Hsuan-yi Chou);李瑞清(Jui-ching Lee);吳秀玲(Hsiu-ling Wu)關鍵字：競選廣告;解釋水平理論;廣告訴求內容;廣告發佈時點;政黨偏好一致性;campaign advertising;construal-level theory;appeal in advertisements;release time of advertisements;party consistency期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：在世界各地的選舉活動中，競選廣告仍持續扮演著政治行銷裡非常關鍵的一環，然而過去對於競選廣告訴求內容效果的討論仍顯不足，且甚少考量選民可能的抗拒反應與多波廣告之搭配關係。本研究旨在測試若特定政黨發起前、後兩波競選廣告，廣告中訊息建構水平對於選民態度反應、投票意願的影響，基於選民不同的訊息處理心態和心理距離，也檢視競選廣告發佈時點和選民政黨偏好一致性的干擾效果。實驗結果發現：政黨偏好一致者和獨立選民較偏向採取「接收說服」的心態處理廣告訊息，反之，政黨偏好不一致者則偏向採取「抗拒說服」的處理心態；此外，競選廣告發佈時點和選民的政黨偏好一致性，會干擾廣告訊息建構水平的效果，並使其作用於不同指標。本研究除了對於政治傳播領域中的競選廣告、解釋水平理論、抗拒說服等相關研究，提供理論上的貢獻與突破外，並可在選舉實務上，提供候選人與政黨如何針對不同選民，擬定競選廣告訴求內容、媒體選擇、發佈時點之策略參考。英文摘要：Campaign advertising has continually played an important role in political marketing for elections around the world. However, the effects of using appeals in advertisements are under-researched, and few previous studies have discussed the possible resistance that voters may have towards campaign advertising and the match-up relationship between multi-wave campaign advertisements. Setting the research condition as a specific party delivering two-wave campaign advertisements at different time points, this study examines how the construal levels of message content in advertisements affect voters' attitudinal responses and voting intentions. In addition, based on voters’ different message-processing mindsets and psychological distance, the moderation of campaign advertisement release time and party consistency is explored. Experimental results reveal that party-consistent and independent voters tend to process campaign advertisement messages as they are open to accepting persuasion, but party-inconsistent voters tend to resist the persuasiveness of the advertisements. The release timing of the advertisement and the party consistency moderate the relative effects of messages in different construal levels and make them function on different indices. This paper makes theoretical contributions to campaign advertising in the field of political-communication, construal-level theory, and resistance to persuasion. For candidates and political parties, the research findings also provide valuable suggestions for decisions regarding the use of appeals in advertisements, medium choices, and the release timing of advertisements to generate better effects on different voters.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：原住民族的遺骨怎麼還？－以日本愛努遺骨返還政策為檢討核心並列篇名：The Repatriation Policy of Indigenous Remains: The Ainu Case in Japan作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-tung Huang)關鍵字：原住民族;遺骨返還;愛努;《聯合國原住民族權利宣言》;indigenous peoples;indigenous remains and bones;Ainu;repatriation policy;UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：過去40餘年來，原住民族遺骨返還一直是國際原住民族運動與原住民族研究（indigenous studies）共同關心的議題。2007年《聯合國原住民族權利宣言》通過之後，學界也多依其揭示的精神，試圖透過「權利取徑」來做為論證的根基；本文則嘗試從「政策」的角度，來思考返還的各項制度性安排。對此，本研究以田野調查蒐集而來的資料為基礎，輔以日本政府的各項會議、報告、政策方針等，來對該國的愛努遺骨返還政策進行分析，進而瞭解各界在返還討論上的爭點、成效、及其未盡課題所在。具體來說，日本政府自2007年起，便開始對返還的工作進行檢討與推動，也陸續制訂各項方針來作為政策的依循。即便整套制度頗為完整，實務還是遭遇眾多困難，致使作業屢屢延宕。本文分析後發現，政府的角色定位與財務支援的提供是影響返還工作能否順利推動的兩大關鍵。從日本的案例可以發現，不管是在相關訴訟還是政策上，政府皆非直接當事人，而更近似於業務的督導者。在這樣的角色定位下，日本政府僅督導返還工作卻不提供財務等支援，更避談責任問題。這些都使大學等返還方更容易採取個案處理的方式，進而導致整體返還進程出現延宕。有鑑於此，本文認為唯有國家在責任面的確實承擔與積極任事，才能加速各項返還工作，「尊嚴慰靈」也才得以早日實現。英文摘要：For the past forty years, in indigenous movements and indigenous studies the return of human remains has been a contentious subject. Most relevant studies employ a rights-based approach. This article however examines the issue through the lens of policy. The article carefully analyzes the Japanese repatriation policies on Ainu remains/bones along with the Japanese government reports and fieldwork data. Since the passage of UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in 2007, the Japanese government has introduced a series of policies stipulating the process of repatriation. These policies are straightforward and detailed, covering almost every step; they are nevertheless by no means a clear-cut success. This now gives rise to the following problems: First, since the Japanese government fails to deliver an official apology, most remains holders, i.e. universities, are reluctant to deal with the issue. Second, without financial support, universities lack any incentive to expedite the process. As a result, most cases face long delays, and are treated in a time-consuming case-by-case fashion. This article argues that in a repatriation case, the government is not a superintendent who partially monitors the procedure; it is the most important interested party in the process. Therefore, an official apology to indigenous people issued by the Japanese government is indispensable. Accepting full responsibility, the Japanese government should also provide full financial support to facilitate the return of Ainu remains. In so doing, it helps to accelerate the process and reduce the conflict of returning human remains to indigenous communities.起始頁-結束頁：57-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：逍遙法外的自在－轉型正義在東南亞並列篇名：Ease with Impunity: Transitional Justice in Southeast Asia作者：顏永銘(Yung-ming Yen)關鍵字：特赦;免責;轉型正義;東南亞;amnesty;impunity;transitional justice;Southeast Asia期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：轉型正義伴隨第三波民主化以及冷戰結束，成為國際社會肯認的價值規範。然在東南亞地區，除柬埔寨與東帝汶外，如何面對過往重大權利侵害情事似仍未得到足夠重視。本文針對東南亞轉型正義經驗進行調查性分析，以理解區域內國家對於轉型正義的態度與制度選擇，主要觀察國家包括菲律賓與印尼的實踐經驗，以及緬甸和泰國所面臨的挑戰。本文以為，轉型正義在東南亞尚未形成擴散之勢，既有的實踐若非成效不彰，便是遭相關行為者操弄而背離其核心精神。普世人權規範未能深入人心，免責文化依舊盛行，民間社會對於正義的期待不足以產生影響，只能以確保記憶作為努力目標。英文摘要：While the idea of human rights has been gradually accepted by regional states, whether Southeast Asian societies face past atrocities with sincere desire for justice remains the point of concern. In addition to the eye-catching cases in Timor-Leste and Cambodia, how did other Southeast Asian states respond to serious violations of human rights in past decades? This survey article intends to offer a general picture of transitional justice in Southeast Asia where major mechanisms, namely, trail, truth commission, and amnesty, were considered by regional countries. By examining the record of practice in the Philippines and Indonesia, and the continuing crises in Myanmar and Thailand. It is believed that what Kathryn Sikkink called ”justice cascade” failed to occur in Southeast Asia yet. Lack of political will, insufficient external support, political manipulation by stake holders, and limited consensus in the civil society are believed to be associated with the limited, if any, recovery of justice value.起始頁-結束頁：95-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：廉政治理量測與台灣的民主鞏固－台灣透明組織並列篇名：Integrity Measurement and Democratic Consolidation: Transparency International Chinese Taipei作者：陳俊明(Chun-ming Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：133-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：書評：The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power﹝監控資本主義時代－新權力邊疆的人類未來之戰﹞by Shoshana Zuboff並列篇名：A review of The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power by Shoshana Zuboff作者：李宣緯(Hsuan-wei Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：143-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：世界民主大事紀2018年7－9月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: July-September 2018期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：153-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：邊沁論權利－他的批判與證成並列篇名：Bentham on Rights: His Criticisms and Justification作者：陳建綱(Brian Chien-kang Chen)關鍵字：邊沁;效益主義;權利;社會關係;社會羈絆;Jeremy Bentham;utilitarianism;rights;social relations;social bonds期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文聚焦於權利概念於近代之沿革最重要的文件之一，即頒布於法國大革命期間的《人權與公民權宣言》，並探討效益主義之父傑若米．邊沁（Jeremy Bentham）對此文件的檢閱與批判。邊沁的論述涵蓋以下三項：首先，《人權與公民權宣言》提倡的價值如自由與平等過於抽象，背離了人類真實的社會境況。其次，《人權與公民權宣言》倡導自然權利，但對於行使權利的界限缺乏妥善的界說與釐清，容易使個人間因權利相互衝突而僵持不下。第三，當自然權利成為主要的公共語彙，社會將陷於無止盡的騷動之中。邊沁身後的人類政治情勢之發展，似乎逐一印證了他的觀點。故而，通過探討邊沁的觀點，本文旨在為現代人的道德困境思索可能的處方。英文摘要：This essay focuses on one of the most important documents in the modern development of the idea of right, i.e. The Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen composed during the French Revolution. The purpose is to explore Jeremy Bentham's, who is the founding father of utilitarianism, examination and criticisms of this document. Bentham's arguments are threefold. First, The Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen proposes an abstract understanding of values such as liberty and equality, so that it deviates from the real condition of men's social life. Secondly, The Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen preaches natural rights, whereas it fails to define the proper boundaries of rights. The consequence is the predicament caused by the conflicts of rights among individuals. Thirdly, society tends to fall into endless chaos and disorder, once natural rights become the main public discourse. By discussing Bentham's views, this essay aims at finding a possible solution for the moral predicament of the moderns.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：道德潛能抑或社會成就？格林與鮑桑葵論權利的倫理根源並列篇名：Moral Capacity or Social Achievement? Green and Bosanquet on the Ethical Roots of Rights作者：劉佳昊(Jia-hau Liu)關鍵字：格林;鮑桑葵;權利承認;倫理實踐;道德潛能;Green;Bosanquet;rights recognition;ethical practice;moral capacity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：權利理論，乃是現代道德與政治思想中至為關鍵的一環。惟因權利理論與西方自然法及自然權利思想傳統素有淵源，故在這套理論向非西方地區散布、推廣的過程裡，其理論實踐的基礎往往容易遭受質疑。本文所將探究的課題，即是格林與鮑桑葵這兩位十九世紀的英國政治思想家，他們經反思、批判自然權利學說所開展的權利承認理論，對現代權利理論的發展與應用之啟發。準此，於說明格林和鮑桑葵的權利理論與自然權利思想之關聯後，本文將從「權利的起源」、「權利的建制」，以及從這二者延伸出來的「權利資格的認可」三個面向，論說格林和鮑桑葵的權利承認理論之特色與承繼。從中我們將會發現，格林和鮑桑葵雖然對權利得獲證成的核心，該是人的道德潛能或社會身分有不同見解，但對他們來說，權利作為國家保障、約束個人自由的法定規範，是從人們的日常實踐、社會關係及體現於二者之中的倫理規範為根源化育而來。對非歐洲地區來說，這套理論見解遂可為發展在地權利論述的重要思想參照。英文摘要：Theory of rights is one of the most important parts of modern moral and political thought. However, since the theory has close relationship with the Western natural law and natural rights tradition, its development and practice in the non-Western world have encountered criticisms and doubts. Hence, the present article aims to explore and demonstrate what the rights recognition theory, which has developed by Green and Bosanquet, the two famous nineteenth-century British political thinkers, from their criticisms of natural rights theory, can illuminate and inspire us concerning the practice of modern rights theory. The article will discuss Green's and Bosanquet's theory and their continuity and difference from three dimensions: the origin of rights, the institution of rights, and the recognition and requirement of being a right-holder, after indicating the connections between their criticisms of natural rights theory and their theories. By these, we can find that although Green and Bosanquet have different views of the crux of rights justification, for it be moral capacity by human nature or social achievement, the right, as a legal device set by the state for protecting individual freedom, its root for both of them is people's ordinary practices and social relationships, and the ethical norms embodied in them. For the non-Western world, this rights recognition theory would thus provide some insights in finding the local rights discourse.起始頁-結束頁：39-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：婦女保障名額制度與選舉競爭對女性參政的影響：以2000年至2010年縣市議員選舉為例並列篇名：The Effects of the Electoral System and Electoral Competition on Female Candidates Elected: A Case Study of City and County Council Elections作者：莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);林瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Lin);鄭夙芬(Su-Feng Cheng);張鐙文(Teng-Wen Chang)關鍵字：婦女保障名額;選舉競爭;女性參政;議員選舉;政黨提名;Female Reserved Seat Systems;Electoral Competition;Female Political Participation;City and County Council Member Election;Party Nomination期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：在社經資源分配不均、政治機會結構、政治社會化及性別角色衝突等因素的影響下，使得女性在政治參與過程中常居於劣勢與被邊緣化的一方，加上女性候選人在選舉過程中往往處於較不利的競爭態勢，因而影響女性參選意願和當選機會，是以，各國無不透過各種制度設計與誘因機制，藉此強化與提升女性參與政治的動機和機會。由於過去較少實證研究檢視婦女保障制度與選舉競爭程度對女性參政的實質影響，為填補此一研究缺口，本研究旨在探討制度因素與選舉過程對於女性參選意願和當選機會的影響，一方面探究婦女保障名額多寡對於女性參選的誘因與效果；另一方面從選舉過程出發，分析選舉競爭程度對女性參政機會的影響。本研究蒐集整理2002年至2010年三次縣市議員選舉的得票資料，利用量化分析方法評估制度設計與選舉競爭對女性參政的影響。實證分析結果獲得幾個重要的研究發現：（1）婦女保障名額制度的確可激勵政黨提名女性參選，尤其是在有1席保障名額的選區，其誘因效果最為明顯；此外，本研究亦發現除了婦女保障名額外，尚有其他因素會影響國民黨和民進黨的女性提名。（2）從選區的觀點，婦女保障名額對女性候選人的參選意願和當選機會有顯著的正向影響；不過，選舉競爭激烈程度對女性參選意願和當選機會則是顯著的負向影響。（3）從候選人的觀點，婦女保障名額對女性的當選機會沒有顯著影響，反而是選區競爭程度、現任因素、政黨提名等變數有較顯著的解釋力；另一方面，選區競爭程度對女性候選人的得票率沒有顯著影響，但婦女保障名額、選舉年度、都市化程度、現任者比例、地理區域、政黨提名及年齡等因素則對女性候選人的得票率有顯著影響。英文摘要：Many factors lie behind women being under-represented in politics, such as an uneven distribution of social, economic, and political resources, or traditional gender role expectations for females. These limitations prevent women from standing for elections. Few empirical studies have been conducted on examining the association between an electoral system, an electoral competition and the gender differences of running for elections and getting elected. This article aims to bridge the gap on this matter by focusing on the influence of the female reserved seat system in Taiwan. As such, this article further discusses if the reserved seat system serves as an incentive for political parties in nominating female candidates. The degree of electoral competition also plays a role in affecting the chances of getting elected. In this article we will examine this issue as well. By analyzing city and county council election results from 2002 to 2010, with the electoral district and candidates as the unit of analysis, this article concludes that: (1) political parties tend to nominate more female candidates as the electoral magnitude increases; (2) more females are willing to run in the elections as there are more reserved seats available, with the electoral district serving as the unit of analysis. However, the results show that the incumbent, electoral competition, and party nomination are important factors accounting for a female's success, with candidates as the unit of analysis; (3) the more competitive the electoral districts are, the less possible it is for females to run in elections and get elected.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201812_22(2).00012篇名：政府責任與課責行為：理論與測量並列篇名：Government Responsibility and Accountability in Taiwan: Theory and Measurement作者：蔡宗漢(Tsung-han Tsai);游清鑫(Ching-hsin Yu)關鍵字：課責;政府責任;委託人與代理人理論;測量;項目反應理論;Accountability;Government Responsibility;Principal-agent Theory;Measurement;Item Response Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文重新檢視政治課責的理論依據，即委託人與代理人理論，討論其在選舉課責的應用上可能存在的問題。本文認為人民向政府課責的前提是人民必須先認知某些事務是政府的責任，並在此前提下評估政府的施政表現，且透過選舉獎懲現任者（或連任政黨的候選人），此種獎懲過程與結果即為政治課責的表現之一。根據這些對於政治課責在理論上的修正，本文認為當民眾認為政府負責的事務相當廣泛時，較有可能對政府課責。相對地，當民眾認為政府的責任是相當有限時，則較不會將社會問題歸咎於政府或現任者。為驗證本文的理論假設，本文採用新的指標測量人民對於政府責任的認知，並以2014年高雄市長選舉和2016年新北市與台中市立法委員選舉進行分析。研究結果顯示政府責任認知與施政滿意度對於現任者支持的影響有兩種模式：其一為民眾認為政府的責任相對較大的時候，滿意現任者施政的民眾較不滿意者有較高的機率會投票給現任者（2016年新北市立委選舉）；其二為當民眾認為政府的責任範圍較有限時，施政（不）滿意度與現任者（不）支持之間並非正（負）相關（2014年高雄市長選舉和2016年的台中市立委選舉）。英文摘要：When applied to a discussion of political accountability, the principal-agent theory implicitly assumes that citizens fully understand what the government is responsible for. Given their understanding of government responsibility, citizens can reward or sanction the incumbent based on the government's performance. This paper reexamines the above assumption and the applicability of the principal-agent theory in political accountability. To be specific, we investigate how citizens perceive government responsibility and how the perception influences citizens' support for the incumbent. We argue that when they regard the government as being more responsible for social problems, citizens are more likely to hold the incumbent government accountable for its performance. To test our hypothesis, we analyze data for a survey conducted in Kaohsiung City, New Taipei City, and Taichung City. The results show that the voters in New Taipei City are more likely to hold the incumbent government accountable when they think the government should be more responsible for social problems. This finding, however, does not hold in our analysis of Kaohsiung City and Taichung City.起始頁-結束頁：47-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201812_22(2).00023篇名：公諸於<U+8846>：淺析同盟合作中的盟友間爭端並列篇名：Entanglement in Public: A Study on Intra-Alliance Disputes in Security Cooperation作者：陳秉逵(Ping-Kuei Chen)關鍵字：安全同盟;同盟爭端;聯盟管理;同盟可信賴度;同盟關係;Security Alliance;Alliance Disputes;Alliance Management;Alliance Reliability;Alliance Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文探究安全同盟成員間對於安全合作的爭端，主要目的為瞭解成員在何種狀況下會公開質疑同盟關係，以及公開同盟爭端對同盟關係的長遠影響。國家基於安全需求加入同盟條約，由於盟國的安全利益與履約能力隨著國際政治波動而變化，盟友可能對同盟的效益產生歧見，進而對同盟關係產生爭執。但是將聯盟合作的問題公諸於世，可能使外部威脅懷疑同盟的可信度，因此公開聯盟爭端的出現表示同盟關係出現變化，值得吾人瞭解背後的成因與其影響。本文檢視冷戰間成立的雙邊同盟，分析外部威脅、盟友間國家實力對比、以及民主化程度三個變數，結果顯示，如果同盟不能反映聯盟內外變動帶來對安全利益的需求，或是盟友想要展現解決同盟問題的決心時，盟友會提出抱怨、質疑、或要求改善同盟關係，即使盟國瞭解公開內部不和可能帶來安全風險，他們仍願意提出爭端。本文進一步發現，曾出現公開爭端的同盟關係更容易破裂、同盟持續期間較短，這表示同盟爭端為觀察安全同盟未來發展的重要指標，盟友能否保持友好同盟關係，端賴於爭端是否獲得妥善解決。英文摘要：This paper examines why members of a security alliance raise disputes with their allies in public and the impact of such disputes on alliance relations. Allies sometimes have problems when they cooperate under a security alliance. Members of an alliance may have different views about how to enforce the alliance agreement; they may find their allies incapable of providing the security benefit they promised; or they may claim that their allies' actions are harmful to mutual security interests. Allies may raise disputes to address these concerns on alliance cooperation. This paper examines the 187 bilateral alliance treaties between 1945 and 2007 with original data on alliance disputes. The large-N analysis shows that the rise of external threats, power preponderance between allies, and joining a democracy have a positive impact on members' decisions to raise public disputes. This paper further finds that public disputes increase the risk of treaty violations. Alliances that have experienced open arguments about security cooperation are less likely to be sustained.起始頁-結束頁：103-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201812_22(2).00034篇名：在地社會創新網絡：以人文創新與社會實踐計畫在地實作為例並列篇名：Social Innovation Networks in Practice: A Case Study of the Humanity Innovation and Social Practice Project作者：周睦怡(Muyi Chou);熊慧嵐(Huei-Lan Xiong);陳東升(Dung-Sheng Chen)關鍵字：社會創新;社會實踐;社區營造;夥伴研究;行動者網絡;Social Innovation;Social Practice;Community Empowerment;Partnership Research;Actor-Network Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文深度描繪人文創新與社會實踐計畫下的大學與社區在地實作行動者網絡，以及連結建立後的轉譯過程，嘗試提出新的社區營造理論取徑，即一種由下而上小型、在地、開放與持續組裝（Bottom-up-Local-Open-Reassembling，以下簡稱BLOR）的行動者網絡。在全球化影響下的風險社會中，BLOR行動者網絡是可以容錯與彈性調適的組織型態，因此有利於掌握在地脈絡、開放參與以及運用群眾智慧來提出創新解決方案。本文將社區視為異質的組成且具開放性，大學行動者與社區形成夥伴關係，共同開展BLOR行動者社會創新網絡，來回應在地所遭遇的挑戰與需求。它嘗試突破傳統社區營造（以下簡稱為社造）的封閉性和權力中心化等問題，透過大學行動者媒合不同議題所交織和開放參與的在地實作網絡，持續在不同社群的文化習性中進行轉譯和重新組裝，創造異質性群體能夠共存共同發展的有利條件。BLOR行動者網絡強調的不只是其特徵，更重要的是讓這些條件能夠串起來發揮作用且持續運作的機制，本文將以案例說明這些機制的形成與運作方式。英文摘要：This paper focuses on analyzing the actor-network which has been built by university and local communities based on the Humanity Innovation and Social Practice (HISP) project. We intend to explore the complicated translation processes between different actors after linking them together. Accordingly, we suggest a new theoretical approach in community empowerment studies, that is, a Bottom-up-Local-Open- Reassembling (BLOR) actor-network. Confronted by a risk society derived from globalization, the BLOR actor-network particularly fits such a context due to its fault-tolerant and malleable traits. These traits make it beneficial to appreciate the local context and open participation, and facilitate collective brainstorming to find innovative solutions. This paper assumes the community to be a place with heterogeneous components and openness. The university works in partnership with local communities and co-constructs a social practice actor-network to respond to social problems. The university-community partnership seeks to overcome the limitations of current community empowerment projects such as working as a closed system and power centralization. The university serves as a medium for linking different issues with different groups of community actors and translating different cultural traits among diverse actors, which generates an open and intertwined social practice network, namely, the BLOR actor-network, which is rooted in this region. The BLOR actor-network is not fixed. Instead, it reassembles itself according to the changes in its components, needs and social context, in order to enable heterogeneous components to coexist. In this paper, we emphasize not only the traits of the BLOR actor-network, but also the mechanisms that enable these components to co-function. With this objective in mind, we adopt two cases from the HIPS project to illustrate what the mechanisms are and how they function.起始頁-結束頁：147-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201812_22(2).00045篇名：選制變遷對投票參與的影響：以台灣立委選舉為例並列篇名：Effects of Electoral System Change on Voter Turnout: The Case of Legislative Elections in Taiwan作者：黃紀(Chi Huang);林啟耀(Kah-yew Lim)關鍵字：投票參與;選舉制度;選制變遷;準實驗設計;定群追蹤分析;Voter Turnout;Electoral System;Electoral System Change;Quasi-Experiment;Panel Data Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：選舉制度是否影響投票參與，一直深受國內外學者所關注，而選舉制度改革是否對投票參與造成影響更是頗多爭論。本研究以台灣立委選舉為分析對象，探討選制變遷對投票參與之效應。在方法上，本研究採「準實驗設計」，以鄉鎮市民代表選舉為比較組，評估選制變遷對立委選舉投票率之影響。此外，本研究進一步以「台灣選舉與民主化調查」TEDS2008L針對TEDS2004L成功樣本之定群追蹤資料，分析台灣同一群選民在新舊選制下投票參與的穩定與變遷。研究結果發現，雖然選制變遷對總體投票率並沒有產生顯著的影響。不過，個體選民對新舊選制的主觀評估及他們的個人特徵，則顯著影響他們投票參與的穩定與變遷。尤其是評估新選制比舊選制更讓人不想去投票的選民以及小黨支持者，都比較傾向在舊選制下有去投，但新選制下不去投。本研究認為透過上述結合總體與個體層次的分析，讓我們對選舉制度變遷如何影響國會選舉投票率以及個體選民的投票參與，都有更深入的瞭解。英文摘要：For a long time, scholars both at home and abroad have paid close attention to the effect of electoral systems on voter turnout. However, the effect of these changes in the electoral system on participation in voting has not been conclusive. This study investigates the influence of electoral reforms on voter turnout by analyzing legislative elections in Taiwan. We first adopted a quasi-experiment design with township councilors as the control group to assess the effect of electoral reforms on voter turnout. Then we used panel data from the TEDS2008L to analyze the stability and changes in voting participation for the same voters under different electoral systems. The research results show that electoral system changes did not significantly influence the turnout rate but significantly affected the stability and changes in the voting behavior of individual voters. As regards the willingness to vote, those who considered the new electoral system to be more discouraging for voting compared to the old electoral system, as well as small-party supporters, had a higher probability of deciding not to vote under the new electoral system. We hold that the aforementioned analysis at the macro and micro levels can help us to understand more about the effect of system changes on the turnout rate and voting behavior of individual voters.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201806_22(1).00016篇名：以激情解釋民族特性，以效益創造道德對話：休謨政治思想的一個側面並列篇名：Explaining National Characters by Passions, Creating Moral Dialogue by Utility: An Aspect of Hume's Political Thought作者：陳建綱(Chien-kang Chen)關鍵字：休謨;激情;意見;民族特性;效益;David Hume;Passions;Opinion;National Characters;Utility期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：休謨的政治哲學之影響，是在啟蒙時代的世俗化趨勢中，為人類的政治與道德生活建立以激情與人性為主的基礎。在這個倫理自然主義的哲學方案中，休謨雖以視理性從屬於激情而著稱，但他在《人性論》第二卷中對人類激情的深入剖析，長久以來卻較為研究者所忽視。本文的目的，是希望指出休謨的激情理論對其政治哲學之貢獻。在這個休謨思想的側面中，我們看到他將社會秩序的根基，建立在人類本性中對他人意見的在乎。此一本性不僅足以在群體中形成秩序，還將逐漸形塑出每一個民族獨有的道德特徵與價值體系。面對各民族在文化與價值上的殊異，休謨認為，從人類歷史與經驗中所歸納出的效益原則，足以作為調和價值衝突、進以開展道德審議的立基點。英文摘要：A significant influence of Hume's political philosophy lies in his developing a foundation based on passions and human nature for men's political and moral spheres, in the trend of secularization that characterized the Age of Enlightenment. In this philosophical project known as ethical naturalism, although Hume is famous for treating reason as subordinate to the passions, his elaboration of the passions as found in the second book of the Treatise has long been undervalued by Hume scholars. The purpose of this article is to contest this account of Hume by revealing the contribution of Hume's theory of the passions to his political philosophy. In this dimension of Hume's thought, we find that he establishes the social order based on man's care regarding the opinions of others. More than securing the social order, the force of opinion still shapes the moral character and the value systems of each nation. However, when faced with the differences between each nation's culture and values, Hume indicates that the principle of utility, which he derives inductively from human history and experience, may well be used to reconcile conflicting values, and to secure a basis for moral deliberation.起始頁-結束頁：51-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201806_22(1).00027篇名：全球各國貪腐與電子治理發展之關係：空間異質性的初探並列篇名：The Association between Corruption and E-governance in the World: A Pilot Study on Spatial Heterogeneity作者：廖興中(Hsin-chung Liao)關鍵字：電子治理;貪腐控制指數;地理加權迴歸;空間異質性;地理資訊系統;E-governance;Control of Corruption;Geographically Weighted Regression;Spatial Heterogeneity;Geographical Information System期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要是利用地理加權迴歸（geographically weighted regression, GWR）分析電子治理與貪腐控制之間相關程度的空間異質性。傳統線性迴歸的結果顯示，在電子治理常提及的電子化政府和電子化參與等兩個概念，從整體的角度來看，對於降低腐敗現象，可能是強有力的工具。研究結果顯示，在電子化政府與電子化參與的模型中，確實存在空間異質性。以亞洲的中國大陸為例，本研究的結果發現相較於其他區域，其電子化政府的發展程度與其貪腐控制的正向關係程度較高。再者，本研究發現電子化參與的程度與貪腐控制程度正向相關程度較高的區域在非洲的東部與南部。根據本研究的分析結果來看，未來在進行貪腐研究時，應該可以納入空間異質性的思考，產生因地制宜的策略。英文摘要：This study empirically investigates the spatial heterogeneity of the association between e-governance and the control of corruption by utilizing a geographically weighted regression (GWR). The results from using OLS reveal that e-government and e-participation are powerful tools in reducing corruption globally. In addition, the results of the GWR show that spatial heterogeneity exists among the different models (e-government and e-participation), and that the GWR provides better insight into the association between e-governance and the control of corruption. It can thus serve as a useful instrument in studies on corruption.起始頁-結束頁：89-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201806_22(1).00038篇名：配偶間政治態度一致性的分析並列篇名：An Analysis of Spousal Similarity in Political Attitudes in Taiwan作者：陳光輝(Kuang-hui Chen)關鍵字：政治社會化;婚姻;配偶;政治態度;調查研究;Political Socialization;Marriage, Spouse;Political Attitude;Survey Research期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文主要目的在於藉由分析配對經驗資料評估配偶間對政治議題的態度一致性，以瞭解是否存有性別上的落差。使用的資料來源是於2011年6月執行的配對電話調查，共計有354對夫妻參與調查完成訪問。除了評估配偶間在政治態度上的一致性之外，我們進一步以配偶間婚後的互動狀況以及代表婚前社會化影響的相對教育程度與省籍背景等因素來解釋配偶間的政治態度一致性。整體而言，配偶間在政治議題上有一定的一致性。此外，夫妻間討論政治的頻率以及省籍背景對於彼此之間政治態度一致性存有顯著的關連性。本文的結論是配偶間政治態度的一致性同時來自婚前與婚後兩類因素的影響，但應有較多的政治態度一致性是婚前即已存在的。英文摘要：This article is designed to assess whether husbands and wives have similar political attitudes in Taiwan. A telephone survey was conducted in June 2011, and a nationally representative sample was obtained with 354 pairs of husbands and wives being successfully interviewed. This paired survey data set was then analyzed to examine whether there existed a gender gap with regard to how people respond to survey questions on political issues. Furthermore, the observed similarity between husbands and wives was explained by the couples' marital characteristics that mainly focused on their frequencies and intensity of interactions as well as their ethnic background and educational attainment, which represented the lasting effect of early political socialization. It was found that couples in Taiwan have a certain amount of agreement in regard to their political attitudes. It was also found that ethnic background and discussions about politics between husbands and wives are positively related to spousal similarity in political attitudes. It was therefore concluded that although spousal similarity is shaped by both pre-marital as well as post-marital factors, most of the observed similarity already existed before marriage.起始頁-結束頁：143-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201806_22(1).00049篇名：Examining the Relationships between Personality Traits and Political Participation Using the Rational Choice Framework作者：Ching-hsing Wang;Marwa M. Shalaby關鍵字：Personality Traits;Political Participation;Rational Choice;Mediation Analysis;SEM期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study incorporates the Big Five personality traits into the rational choice theory to explain individual political participation. It argues that three factors in the rational choice framework - self efficacy belief, perceived benefits and civic duty - play a pivotal role in mediating the relationships between personality traits and political participation. In accordance with previous research, this study finds that extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness and openness to experience exhibit significant direct impacts on political participation. More importantly, the Big Five personality traits apart from agreeableness also exert significant positive indirect effects on political participation through self-efficacy belief, perceived benefits and civic duty. To sum up, this study provides new insights into the relationships between personality traits and political behavior and shows that dispositional traits can play some role in the rational choice framework to account for individual political participation.起始頁-結束頁：187-234資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201806_22(1).000501篇名：行為主義導向的公共政策研究：以政策工具「推力」為核心的初探並列篇名：The Direction of Behavioralism in Public Policy Research: A Review on ”Nudge” as a Policy Tool作者：賴怡樺(Yi-Hua Lai);林水波(Shoei-Po Lin);陳敦源(Don-Yun Chen)關鍵字：公共政策;行為科學;行為經濟學;行為政策學;推力;public policy;behavioral science;behavioral economics;behavioral public policy;nudge期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：67期出版年：2018中文摘要：行為經濟學（behavioral economics）崛起自1990年代，促使經濟學研究轉向關注人類行為，近十年來被大量應用於公共政策領域，催生了「行為政策學」（behavioral public policy）。然而，領域的快速竄起，卻萌生出既有知識與發現過於雜亂混淆等問題。本文旨在界定與釐析行為政策學的理論與應用，聚焦於探討該領域當前最核心的政策工具：推力（nudge）。透過文獻檢閱，試圖討論幾個關鍵問題：行為政策學是新玩意或舊把戲？行為政策學從何而來？行為政策學是什麼？如何透過行為政策學「推」出影響「力」？細析「推力」一定正當且有效嗎？行為政策學只是一時之熱？研究發現行為政策學整合了傳統行為學派與行為經濟學的新元素，強調跨領域觀點與實驗法，可用以測試、設計與校準公共政策；其在西方正處於蓬勃發展階段，目前尚無止息的跡象，相對而言，臺灣的公共行政學門對此領域卻仍在草創的階段。推力訴求以效率方式改變政策標的行為，須具備五個要件，有六種常見策略；其可能存在倫理爭議且未必有效，關鍵在於與政策問題的適配。期使本文的初探能推開後續研究之門，促進國內公共政策領域學子乃至政府部門，對於行為政策學有更好的理解與應用，進而提升領域發展與實質的推動成效。英文摘要：Behavioral economics -arose in the 1990's- criticized the assumptions of rational self-interest in traditional economics and led the economic research to transfer its focus to human behaviors. Those findings have been applied more and more to the field of public policies for decades and facilitated the domain of behavioral public policy. However, it is found that the concepts and findings in the field are too messy and confused due to its rapid development. This study aims to clarify the theories and applications of behavioral public policy, with a focus on the core concept ”nudge”. Through the literature review, we try to answer several key questions: Is behavioral public policy a new or an old idea? Where does behavioral public policy come from? What is behavioral public policy? How to nudge? Does nudge always work and valid? Will behavioral public policy just be a temporary fashion? Findings indicate that behavioral public policy integrates traditional behavioral approach and new elements of behavioral economics, and focuses on interdisciplinary aspects and experiments methods. It can be applied to test, design and adjust public policy. The field has been booming in the West, while still in the initial stage in Taiwan comparatively. Nudges can be used to change target behaviors effectively. There are five components and six common strategies of nudges. Nudges might be ethically controversial or ineffective, while the key is the adaptiveness to policy problems. This study can contribute to the clarification of behavioral public policy, and benefit to better understanding and application.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系2篇名：貪腐為何難以界定？Q方法論在廉政研究之應用並列篇名：Why Is It Difficult to Define Corruption? The Use of Q Methodology in Integrity Research作者：余致力(Chilik Yu);方凱弘(Kai-Hung Fang);蘇毓昌(Yu-Chang Su)關鍵字：貪腐認知;貪腐容忍;廉政研究;Q方法論;corruption perception;corruption tolerance;integrity research;Q methodology期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：67期出版年：2018中文摘要：過去數十年間，全球學術界與實務界針對貪腐議題的研究迅速成長，對於貪腐源起、本質、樣態以及結果的瞭解也與日俱增。儘管現存關於貪腐的學術研究已經卷帙浩繁，但對於「何謂貪腐」這個基本關鍵問題，全球各地的學者專家迄今仍無法明確定義。爰此，本文採取Q方法論，嘗試從主觀的認知進行研究，更深入地理解何謂貪腐。透過32位廉政學者專家之Q排列，本文找到濫用權力論、獲取私利論、文化風俗論、目的結果論與功過相抵論等5種貪腐認知類型，除確認濫用權力與獲取私利這兩項有助於形成貪腐認知的因子之外，也指認出文化風俗、目的結果以及功過相抵等3個貪腐容忍的因子。本文藉此初步打開貪腐定義的黑盒子，試圖推進此一領域的理論研究與實務應用。英文摘要：Issues concerning corruption have attracted growing scholarly attention and the interest of practitioners in recent decades. There has been, accordingly, a better understanding of the origin, nature, patterns, and consequences of corruption. Yet, despite the huge academic literature on corruption, how to define it remains a significant challenge to scholars and practitioners in the world. Using Q methodology, this article attempts to address the problem of defining corruption by examining perceptions of corruption. Based on interviews with 32 scholars who are specialized in integrity research, the article identifies five major patterns of corruption perceptions. Corruption is perceived and, thus, defined as the abuse of entrusted power, the gain of private benefits, the behaviors justified by cultural norms, the means justified by the ends, and metaphor of the ledger. The findings indicate that while the first two perceptions help people better understand what is corruption and its detrimental nature, the latter three result in tolerance of corruption. By opening the black box of how corruption is defined, the article seeks to contribute to corruption studies and the practice of controlling corruption.起始頁-結束頁：39-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系3篇名：非例行性績效業務重要性之研究：公部門管理中失落的拼圖並列篇名：The Importance of Governmental Non-Routine Performance Tasks: A Piece of Missing Puzzle in Public Sector Management作者：張佳璇(Jia-Syuan Chang);胡龍騰(Lung-Teng Hu)關鍵字：非例行性業務;非例行性績效資訊;例行性績效資訊;績效管理;non-routine tasks;non-routine performance information;routine performance information;performance management期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：67期出版年：2018中文摘要：熟悉公部門運作者一定瞭解，在公務人員的日常業務工作中，經常會有許多「非例行性」（non-routine）的事件發生，需要公務同仁盡快回應和處理。這些非例行性業務在公部門中，不僅為機關首長及同仁所在意與重視，同時更佔據了多數的工作時間，甚至是排擠了公務同仁投注在例行性業務上的心力。但，弔詭的是，對於這些充斥在公務人員生活中非例行性業務的處理，除實務上未必有合適的評價機制來正視並獎償在過程中付出心力的同仁，在學術上亦鮮少受到過往研究的關注，不僅形成一研究缺口，同時造成實務者對於現行管理制度脫離實情的批評。為填補此一研究空隙，本研究期望透過實證性研究，嘗試回答以下兩大研究問題：第一，相較於具有例行性指標的業務而言，非例行性業務的處理與績效表現，對於公務人員日常的工作實情，是否更具壓力和影響性？第二，面對非例行性績效業務時，身處現行績效體制的公務機關，如何詮釋非例行性績效業務對現行業務的影響？為回答上述研究問題，本研究透過文獻彙整及深度訪談蒐羅在公務機關中經常發生之非例行性事件及業務，並將其與現行機關績效評核制度中之例行性績效業務二者併陳；再透過層級分析法進行前述二類績效業務的相對重要性比較，並輔以訪談法，探究重要性排序結果背後所反映的真實原因。透過公部門實務同仁對於例行和非例行性績效業務之權重比較，發現非例行性業務與例行性業務相比重要性並不低，同時也證實了非例行性業務在公務部門日常業務的運作上是真實存在，具有一定程度的重要性且不容忽視。其次，不同業務屬性之角色，如機關屬性、人員職務層級等差異，對各項業務重視程度亦有所不同。最後，公務同仁在面對兩種類型的績效業務，亦有不同的回應方式，亦即當非例行性業務來臨時，公務同仁常會選擇優先處理較急迫的非例行性業務。英文摘要：Practitioners and scholars who are familiar with the daily operation of public organizations know that the non-routine tasks, such as responses to 1999 hotline requests or councilmen's inquiries, are quite prevalent in the public sector's workplaces. The non-routine tasks not only emerge unexpectedly but also occupy organizational members' regular time for their routine works. Besides, it is stressful for public employees as they encounter these unexpected non-routine tasks. Ironically, the study of non-routine tasks is overlooked in public administration scholarship. To fill this research gap, the present study aims to answer the following two questions: First, would public employees undergo more pressure in working with non-routine tasks in contrast to those routine and measurable tasks? And, how do they consider the importance between the non-routine and routine tasks? Second, how do public employees deal with the situation while the non-routine and routine tasks come to their desk simultaneously? To answer the research questions, this study used two-round in-depth interviews and the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) technique as main methods. Regarding the importance of routine and non-routine tasks, public employees weighted non-routine tasks quite equally to their routine works. Moreover, the results of this study point out that the non-routine tasks do really exist in the public sector while we do not have any valid measure to assess members' performance as well as to recognize their efforts on those non-routine tasks. Also, this study finds that different subjects, such as performance evaluation department vs. professional business departments or supervisors vs. subordinates, have different viewpoints about routine and non-routine tasks. Finally, the non-routine and routine tasks are treated differently by public employees. They may give priority to the emergent non-routine tasks and address their routine works later after the regular working time. Based upon the findings of this study, it is pinpointed that the negative influence of and the pressure comes from the non-routine tasks should be taken into account seriously and needs more academic attention on this issue.起始頁-結束頁：79-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系4篇名：臺灣地方文化活動契約委外的績效觀感：客家節慶利害關係人的角度並列篇名：Perceived Performance of the Local Cultural Campaign Contracting Out in Taiwan: The Stakeholder Perspectives of the Hakka Festivals作者：孫煒(Way Sun)關鍵字：文化活動;契約委外;績效觀感;績效衡量;客家節慶;cultural campaign;contracting out;perceived performance;performance measurement;Hakka festival期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：66期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣地方民選行政首長熱衷舉辦各種文化活動，而且大多數採用契約委外由民間廠商承辦，往往耗費巨資卻鮮少進行較嚴謹的績效衡量。本文採用績效觀感的研究途徑，並依據文化活動的複雜性質，發展出創新、負責、品質與效能等四項衡量文化活動契約委外階段的核心績效指標，進一步運用地方客家節慶包括傳統典慶（義民祭）與現代慶典（桐花祭）為經驗研究對象，透過委託人－代理人架構，針對契約委外的客家行政機關、承辦廠商以及地方公民團體和參與民眾等利害關係人進行訪談，分析它們對於客家文化活動的績效觀感，並深入探討績效觀感之間的差距及其原因，並根據文化活動契約委外的研究發現，提出提升績效的建議。英文摘要：Taiwan's elected local administrative leaders have been keen to organize cultural campaigns, most of which are contracting out to private vendors. However, given the large amount of money spent, rigorous performance measurements are often lacking. Based on the complex nature of cultural campaigns, this article employed perceived performance approach and developed four core performance indicators to measure innovation, accountability, quality and effectiveness in outsourced cultural campaign stages. The article targeted local Hakka festivals, including traditional festivals (Yi-Ming Festival) and contemporary festivals (Tong Blossom Festival). Using a principal-agent framework, this article interviewed stakeholders including the Hakka administrative agencies contracting out the campaigns, the contractors, local nonprofit organizations and participating public to determine their perceptions of campaign performances. Furthermore, the reasons for differences in performance perceptions are also explored. Finally, according to the research findings on the outsourced cultural campaigns, this article recommended policy suggestions and institutional revision to improve performances.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系5篇名：臺灣公共行政領域智識流動的研究：治理概念擴散與連接之初探並列篇名：Exploring the Knowledge Transfer of Public Administration in Taiwan: The Connection of Governance Research作者：謝儲鍵(Chu-Chien Hsieh);張鐙文(Teng-Wen Chang);陳敦源(Don-Yun Chen)關鍵字：公共行政;知識轉移與分享;後設分析;社會網絡分析;治理;public administration;knowledge transfer and sharing;meta analysis;social network analysis;governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：66期出版年：2018中文摘要：自1930年代，「公共行政」從「政治科學」的領域分離之後，「認同危機」（identity crisis）持續地備受關注而成為研究主題，對此，Dwight Waldo便大聲疾呼樹立公共行政之獨特核心價值的必要性，以舒緩自我認同的問題。然而，在二十一世紀初，隨著「治理」時代的來臨，這兩門共生的學科的相互影響，自然就更值得加以關注。爰此，本研究以當代公共行政炙手可熱的概念－治理，作為觀察公共行政與政治科學之間智識連結的基礎，並聚焦於「誰影響誰」（who influence whom）的課題。藉由回顧臺灣2001年到2017年政治學門TSSCI收錄期刊與治理議題相關之論文，透過後設分析、書目計量學與社會網絡分析等方法，試圖回答：1.治理研究在政治學門的發展趨勢為何？2.相關作者的屬性為何？3.從知識轉移的觀點觀察，存在何種智識網絡的結構？以及4.公共行政在該智識網絡中的角色與功能？根據本研究的實證結果，第一，治理概念在2001-2005年出現，超過十篇文章發表於七個主要的TSSCI期刊中。第二，治理概念初期（2001-2005年）由政治科學領域的學者引入，並應用於國際關係與地方政府的研究。然而，在2011-2017年，大量的公共行政領域學者投入治理研究，並將其應用於各式各樣的學術議題。第三，透過網絡結構的分析，說明公共行政學者不僅扮演關鍵角色，同時也發揮知識掮客的功能，尤其鑽研於公私合夥與社區治理等議題的公共行政學者，更是舉足輕重。整體而言，本研究發現臺灣公共行政領域在引介治理概念到學術界的過程中，具備十分重要的角色與功能。其藉由知識形塑與轉化的歷程，促成治理概念跨領域的流動，也就是，先將治理概念「內向引進」（inbound）於公共行政領域，接著經歷理論的磨合及融合，再將治理概念「向外輸出」（outbound）至其他相關領域。此一結果，說明公共行政在政治科學的領域中，扮演智識掮客之特殊角色。英文摘要：As the public administration (PA) separated from the field of political science (PS) in 1930s, the problem of identity crisis is an ongoing subject of research that leads to Dwight Waldo's call for efforts to build distinct core values for PA to ease the crisis. However, as both fields moving into the ”governance” era in the beginning of the twenty-first century, the interplay between the sibling disciplines is worthy of scholarly attention. In this research, the key question is to unveil ”who influence whom” issue in the moving of concept ”governance” between the two disciplines by tracking the publications from 2001 through 2017 of Taiwan Social Science Index (TSSCI) journals in the category of PS. The idea of meta-analysis and social network analysis technique will be utilized to discuss 1) the developing trend, the percentage of publication related to the concept of governance; 2) the dynamic process of knowledge transfer between the two disciplines concerning the governance concept. Based on the empirical evidence collected in this research, first, the concept of governance appeared in 2001-2005 through more than ten papers published in seven TSSCI journals in the beginning from 2001 through 2005, PS scholars bring the concept to the filed such as international relation and local government. However, in the later stage of the development in 2011-2017, PA scholars flood in and help to popularize the concept in the academia. Third, through the network analysis of structural hole, the PA scholars not only play the critical role, but perform the function of knowledge broker as well. Especially for those PA scholars who are specialized in researching PPPs and community governance contributed the most. Through the empirical investigation of this research, we found that the field of PA has play an critical role to introduce the governance concept to Taiwanese academia by shaping the knowledge flow and transforming from ”inbound” of receiving governance perspectives into PA field to ”outbound” of affecting scholars in adjusting fields. The unique role of PA as knowledge broker in the field of PS is realized.起始頁-結束頁：39-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系6篇名：日本「愛努諮問機關」之研究：原住民族研究觀點的制度性反思並列篇名：An Analysis of the Ainu-Related Councils: A View from Indigenous Studies作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-Tung Huang)關鍵字：愛努;原住民族;諮問機關;審議會;日本;Ainu;indigenous peoples;Japan;advisory council期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：66期出版年：2018中文摘要：在當代政府體系中，各種委員會形式的決策機制所在多有。這種決策模式，也對當代民主課責產生了重大的影響。在各個先進國家裡，日本大概是使用這類委員制度會最多的國家之一。從中央到地方，該國存在了各類型的「諮問機關」。其中，愛努議題更是當中顯例。由於日本並未設置「原住民族代表性行政機關」（indigenous representative agency），因此該國的原住民族政策，都是透過懇話會、有識者懇談會、政策推進會議等「諮問機關」模式推動。由此可知，日本的模式相當特殊。對此，本研究擬以愛努政策為核心，透過理論與實證的交相辯證，來對日本諮問機關制度、原住民族政策進行探究，進而對之批判地檢討。由於日本制度發展多年，過程中也歷經多次改革，相信日本的經驗可以成為他國原住民族與委員會政策的重要參照點。英文摘要：The Japanese government recognized the Ainu as ”an indigenous people with a distinct language, religion and culture” in 2008. This official recognition was a turning point in Japan's indigenous policy. However, since there is no indigenous representative agency in Japan, its Ainu policies are decided through a series of advisory, or policy promotion councils. That is, although bureaucrats and politicians still play an important role in the decision-making process, most decisions are made through expert councils/panels. Given such a clear distinction, this article attempts to analyze Japan's indigenous policy through Ainu-related councils. It argues that expert-based councils under the Office of Cabinet Secretariat have shaped its current policy. Therefore, looking into Japan's advisory council system is the only way to reach a fuller understanding of its system. In so doing, this article further aims to clarify its limits and possibilities. Hopefully, Japan’s experience can be learned and used in other indigenous contexts.起始頁-結束頁：85-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系01篇名：半總統制次類型、府會關係與族群抗議並列篇名：The Subtypes of Semi-presidentialism, President-Parliament Relations, and Ethnic Protest作者：李鳳玉(Feng-Yu Lee)關鍵字：半總統制;總理總統制;總統議會制;府會關係;族群抗議;Semi-presidentialism;Premier-Presidentialism;President-Parliamentarism;President-Parliament Relations;Ethnic Protest期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：半總統制已成為許多民主國家所普遍採用的政府體制，但對於半總統制如何影響族群衝突，既有文獻少有相關的探討。本文試圖從總統議會制以及總理總統制所提供的誘因機制，探討半總統制次類型在不同的府會關係下，如何影響族群抗議。本文以1985－2003年期間採用半總統制且有族群分歧的民主國家作為研究對象，進行量化研究。本文發現，在其他條件相同的情形下，相較於總理總統制國家的一致政府與分立政府時期以及總統議會制國家的一致政府時期，總統議會制國家的分立政府時期將增加族群抗議的強度。本文在文後也提供個案分析，以探討半總統制次類型效果的內生性問題。英文摘要：While semi-presidentialism has been widely adopted in many democratic countries, there have been very few studies exploring how the subtypes of semi-presidentialism affect ethnic conflict. This paper explores how the subtypes of semi-presidentialism, through the incentive mechanisms they provide, affect ethnic protest under different president-parliament relations. Through a large-N study on all the semi-presidential democracies for the period 1985 to 2003, which have suffered from ethnic divisions, this article finds that, other things being equal, compared to premier-presidential systems during both periods of unified and divided governments, and to president-parliamentary systems during periods of unified governments, president-parliamentary systems during periods of divided governments lead to more intense ethnic protest. This article also provides case studies to address the endogeneity problem of the effects of the subtypes of semi-presidentialism.起始頁-結束頁：1-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：總統國會制權力行使、支持基礎與民主運作並列篇名：Power Enactment, Supporting Basis, and Democratic Operation in President-parliamentarism作者：蔡榮祥(Jung-Hsiang Tsai)關鍵字：總統國會制;民主制衡;政策僵局;總統去職;民主崩潰;president-parliamentary systems;democratic balancing;policy deadlock;presidential breakdown;democratic breakdown期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文主要的問題意識是為何有些總統國會制國家的總統在面對多元分歧的國會較容易逾越憲法的權限而進行單邊的獨裁統治，相反地為何有些總統國會制國家的總統卻選擇與國會妥協或讓步，透過權力分享來共治。本文主要的研究問題是總統國會制下，特定政治因素的配套如何促成總統國會制的總統選擇走上獨裁的道路，進而造成民主崩潰或是特定政治因素的結合如何讓總統國會制的總統之權力行使受到抑制，讓民主持續運作。本文的研究發現如下：當國會存在著固定反對多數和總統仍獲得國會少數支持的配套下會產生民主制衡，如烏克蘭的情形。當國會存在著固定反對多數與國會少數不支持總統兩個因素互動之後，較可能會產生總統去職的結果，如祕魯的情形。國會中浮動的反對多數和總統只獲得少數支持的結合，會產生總統和國會的政策僵局或是勢均力敵，如俄羅斯第二共和的情形。最後，國會中浮動的反對多數和少數不支持總統的連結，最容易產生民主崩潰的可能，如俄羅斯第一共和的瓦解。英文摘要：The research question of this paper is to analyze how the combination of specific political contingencies entices the president to embark on dictatorship or restrains the president to encroach constitutional authority in president -parliamentary systems. First, when the majority of the opposition is stable and the force of supporting the president is relatively solid, then it can provide the mechanism of checks and balances to the ambitious president, such as the case in Ukraine. Second, as the majority of the opposition is staunch and the co-partisans of the president in the parliament are defecting, it is highly possible to produce the outcome of presidential breakdowns, as shown in Peru. Third, when the opposing majority is in flux and the supporting minority of the president is firm, it can cause policy deadlock on landmark bills like the situation in Russia during the presidency of Boris Yeltsin (1993-1999). Finally, when the opposing force is atomized and the supporting force of the president is feeble, the chance of democratic breakdown looms large as in the period of the Russian First Republic.起始頁-結束頁：59-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系3篇名：台灣城市治理的困境與出路－從Lefebvre「對於城市的權利」談起並列篇名：Predicament and Way Out of City Governance in Taiwan An Analysis from Lefebvre's ”Right to the City”作者：許文英(Wen-Ying Hsu)關鍵字：城市治理;對於城市的權利;公民身份;city governance;the right to the city;citizenship期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：台灣城市治理在都市化與全球化浪潮下，使得居民人權不斷面臨挑戰。晚近法國新馬克思主義空間理論學者Henri Lefebvre提出「對於城市的權利」（the right to the city），對於新自由主義思潮下的主流政治經濟論述提出批判回應。本文以歷史文獻分析法從全球化下城市發展問題及城市權利規範倡議面向，論析「對於城市的權利」內涵，繼而探討台灣城市發展治理過程中有關「對於城市的權利」爭辯性，最後探討該概念在台灣城市民主治理進程中對於促進居民人權保障之啟發意涵。本文研究認為，台灣城市發展治理過程中過度以城市空間交換價值主宰凌駕於使用價值之弊病，導致城市居民民主與公民權衰落現象；台灣城市治理當局、企業、地方派系形成的非正式但相對穩定政權聯盟，以及社會運動者自身面臨建構跨域非政治性認同聯盟遭遇之挑戰，皆使得以「對於城市的權利」概念推動新公民身份權利與新社會契約規範立法遭遇莫大阻力。儘管如此，包括台灣在內有關全球城市權利運動和積極政策作為，仍可望對既有民主體制產生創造性衝撞作用。面對城市發展規劃諸多迷思，仍賴更多城市居民形成以人權取向為發展依歸之市民文化底蘊，方能超越烏托邦理念與激進社會革命兩者之純粹爭辯，從而建構更具實際存在感之「對於城市的權利」。英文摘要：Under a wave of urbanization and globalization, Taiwan's city governance is facing the challenge of protecting the human rights of city residents. The French neo-Marxist of space theory, Henri Lefebvre, proposed the idea of the ”right to the city” together with city governance initiatives and social movements based on this concept, offering a critical response to the political and economic discourses of neoliberalism. This paper applies analysis of historical documents, analyzing the content of Henri Lefebvre's ”right to the city” from the perspective of city development under globalization, the development of the city rights movement and norms initiatives. This paper explores the concept of the ”right to the city” for the promotion of the human rights of residents in the process of city governance in Taiwan and as the future development strategy of the city rights movement. This paper argues that Taiwan's experience shows that in the process of city development and governance, much of the city space is dominated by its exchange value rather its use value, and also resulted in the decline of democracy and enfranchisement in cities. The informal but relatively stable alliance between Taiwan's city governance authorities, enterprises and local factions as well as the challenges faced by social activists in creating collective nonpolitical identities mean that when city rights activists promote legislation for new citizenship rights and a new social contract based on the concept of the ”right to the city”, they have encountered strong resistance. However, city social movements and proactive city policies around the world, including in Taiwan, may produce a creative collision with existing democratic institutions. In the face of various myths about city development planning, there is growing dependence on city residents to form a civil cultural based on human rights orientated development. This possibility may transcend the pure argument between utopian ideals and radical social revolutions, thereby constructing a ”right to the city” with a real presence.起始頁-結束頁：131-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系4篇名：大國與區域整合集團中貿易自由化程度變化之研究並列篇名：Regional Great Powers and the Variation of Trade Liberalization between and within Regional Integration Blocks作者：薛健吾(Chien-Wu Hsueh)關鍵字：核權力分佈;大國利益;貿易自由化;區域整合;Power Distribution;Great Power Interest Similarity;Trade Liberalization;Regional Integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：從二戰結束後至今，全球區域化的發展形成幾個主要的區域整合集團，然而過去的研究和經驗資料卻顯示，雖然各個區域整合集團發展至今都有著自由貿易協定的簽署，但不同集團彼此之間的貿易自由化程度卻有著極大的差距，而且在同一個區域整合集團中，貿易自由化的程度也會隨著時間而有所不同，文獻中關於區域整合或是自由貿易協定的理論，並未能有效解答貿易自由化的程度在「區域內」和「跨區域」的變化。根據「囚徒困境賽局」和「獵鹿賽局」的建議，本文試圖建立一個結構性的理論來解釋這個現象。本文認為，區域中貿易自由化的推動與區域中大國與小國之間的策略互動有關：對於區域中的大國來說，貿易合作就像是「囚徒困境」賽局，此時，若大國的數量愈少，且彼此的利益相似程度愈高，則愈有利於囚徒困境的破解，貿易合作愈容易成功；而對於區域中的小國來說，貿易合作就像是「獵鹿」賽局，當區域中的大國開始合作，則自己最好的策略就是加入合作，以避免受到「貿易轉移」的負面效果，或是被邊緣化失去談判籌碼，反之，當區域中的大國並不積極合作，則自己最好的策略就是持觀望態度，以避免受到「選邊站」的負面影響。在這兩個賽局的邏輯建議之下，本文預期，若該區域整合集團中的大國數量愈少，且這些大國彼此之間的利益相似程度愈高，則該區域整合集團貿易自由化的程度也將愈高，來自全球各個主要區域整合集團從成立以來迄2014年的經驗證據支持了本文的說法。英文摘要：Since the end of World War II, the process of global regionalization led to the emergence of several regional integration blocks. The literature and empirical evidence have both demonstrated that although countries participating in regional integration blocks sign numerous regional trade agreements or preferential trade agreements, there are salient differences in the degree of trade liberalization across regions, and even within the same region over time. Theories regarding regional integration or preferential trade agreements are not able to offer satisfying explanations to account for why the degree of trade liberalization varies between and within the regional integration blocks. By applying two game-theoretical models - the prisoners' dilemma and the stag-hunt game - I construct a structural argument to account for this phenomenon. I argue that the promotion of regional trade liberalization is strongly related to the strategic interaction between great powers and secondary powers. As for the great powers, their mutual trade cooperation is similar to the prisoners' dilemma scenario. Thus, when the number of great powers in the region is limited and when these great powers have more similar interests, it is easier for them to solve the dilemma and reach trade cooperation. As for the secondary powers, trade cooperation with other countries in the region is similar to the stag-hunt game scenario, which has two equilibria: if the great powers in the region start to cooperate, the secondary powers tend to actively participate, in order not to suffer from the trade diversion effect or to lose the bargaining power in the future due to being isolated; instead, if the great powers do not cooperate, the secondary powers' best strategy is to wait and see, so they avoid the negative impacts resulting from taking side. Based on these two game-theoretical models, I expect that the degree of trade liberalization in the region will increase with the decrease of ”the number of great powers” and their ”interest dissimilarity”. Empirical evidence from seven main regional integration blocks across the world confirms my argument.起始頁-結束頁：181-249資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系5篇名：政務事務互動關係：台灣文官對政治的容忍之研究並列篇名：The Interaction between Political Appointees and Career Officials: A Study of Bureaucrats' Tolerance of Politics in Taiwan作者：黃建<U+52F2>(Chien-Hsun Huang);陳敦源(Don-Yun Chen)關鍵字：政務事務關係;回應性;政治控制;政治行政二分;對政治的容忍;political-administrative relations;responsiveness;political control;dichotomy;tolerance of politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：在政務事務互動中，永業文官回應政務官員具有規範性及經驗性意義。但是，過去研究文獻大多採取由上而下的角度解釋雙方互動與事務官回應。即使後續研究認為政務事務互動是一個動態過程且強調雙方混合或合作關係，不過仍然對於事務官回應政務領導之瞭解甚少。此外，在國內民主轉型環境下，如何讓事務官願意回應政務領導具有理論與實務價值。本文採取由下而上的觀點，應用事務官對政治的容忍之態度，探討事務官看待政策過程的民主政治運作是否影響他們回應政務領導。本文使用2008年台灣文官調查資料庫進行檢驗並發現，當事務官對政治的容忍程度愈高時，行政回應立場也較為正面。本文貢獻在於探討過去文獻較少關注文官本身的政治認知，即對政治的容忍，希望補充既有國內外政務事務關係與官僚回應研究之不足。最後，本文提出一些後續研究與實務建議。英文摘要：How to make career officials more responsive to executive leaderships is critical in political-administrative interactions. According to past literature, while the relationships of political appointees and career officials are illustrated by political control or dichotomy, these studies explain their interactions from top-down perspective. Some researchers have even argued the matter of cooperation, or mixed model between their interactions. However, they paid little attention to how career officials respond to political appointees. This study aims at examining tolerance of politics and career officials' responsive attitudes to political appointees by discussing their perception of political influence in the policy process of democracy and responsiveness. By using the survey data of the TGBS（Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey）from 2008 and the sample of top and middle level officials in central government, this study finds that career officials ' response to executive leadership is positively associated with their attitudes toward tolerance of politics. The findings fill a gap in the past literature about [the] political-administrative relations by focusing on a bottom-up view of career officials' attitudes toward political systems. Also, this study systematically exams the interactions between central government level's political appointees and career officials after the first turnover of ruling party in Taiwan. In the final section, research limits and further suggestions are provided for scholars and practitioners.起始頁-結束頁：1-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系6篇名：土地政治下的偏離者－政策遺緒與天津市政府行為研究（1982-2018）並列篇名：Deviation in Land Financing Politics: Policy Legacy and Local Government's Behavior of Tianjin作者：陳蓉怡(Rung-Yi Chen)關鍵字：成長機器;房地產開發導向;政績導向;路徑依賴;growth machine;property-led development;performance-oriented;path dependence期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：房地產開發導向能否適用於討論所有中國大陸城市的發展模式？既有文獻多強調中國大陸地方政府扮演如同企業家型的角色，透過城市經濟增長下所創造的土地交易價值而獲利。天津在2002年後的土地新政基本上依循著上述的思維而展開，卻在官僚及一般民眾間引發了相當程度的反彈。本文試圖印證，在政績導向的機會主義考量下，天津地方官員在1980年代選擇維穩重於成長的發展道路，造成天津在房地產市場與管理結構的特殊性；其次，此一政策遺緒進一步限制了天津土地新政的開展。天津的發展經驗背後反映出，從政績機會主義的角度切入，可以豐富對於成長機器的討論。在城市經濟轉型的過程中，城市既有的政策遺緒亦將對制度的改變施加力量。英文摘要：Can we use the pattern of ”property-led growth” to generalize urban development programs in China? The existing literature that attempts to explore the dynamics of urban development in China has been made predominantly on the basis of the ”local state entrepreneurship” model, which takes that the growth of cities is characterized by inter -scalar competition and big projects motivated by real estate speculation. From this perspective, urban housing demolition and relocation in Tianjin is a typical case and the city's new land policies symbolize the mayor's ambition to move the city forward as China's northern economic center. However, people were annoyed by the new deals that stipulated by the Tianjin administration. New policies over land reform had been modified after the mayor resigned from office. This article challenges the traditional thinking about land politics in China and exemplifies that Tianjin's experience significantly highlights difficulties faced by the local governments when they are confronted with the 'path dependency' and ”political tournament” dilemma in economic transition.起始頁-結束頁：65-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系7篇名：The Extent of Policy Integration and the Formation of Urban Regimes in the U.S.: An Exploratory Theoretical Structure並列篇名：政策整合程度與美國城市治理體制的形成：一個探索性的理論架構作者：王輝煌(Huei-Huang Wang)關鍵字：regime politics (urban regimes);governing coalition;extent of policy integration;machine politics;consensual regimes;two-tiered methodology;體制政治（城市體制）;治理聯盟;政策整合程度;派系政治;共識型體制;二層級方法論期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Since Clarence N. Stone's study on the transformation of the governing regimes of postwar Atlanta, regime politics has been considered one of the major theories with the potential to integrate the various nuances of urban phenomena. However, many scholars, including Stone himself, have expressed their dissatisfaction with the dearth of theorization in the literature of regime politics up to this point. The aim of this paper is to continue Stone’s work by constructing for it an exploratory theoretical framework. To do so, this paper distills from Stone’s original work a more concrete theoretical hypothesis about the extent of policy integration and the types of urban regimes. Essentially, I argue that Atlanta's postwar governing elite formed consensual, cohesive coalitions because they chose large-scale and highly complementary development programs. These elite collectively bore great insecurities. Then, by extending that line of argument to the political economies of three stylized regime politics (consensual/corporatist, confrontational/progressives, and machine politics), this paper develops an exploratory theory for the formation of urban regimes. Such a theory is based on a two-tiered methodology. The aforesaid theoretical hypothesis is the basic and homothetic tier, which allows the possibility for further generalizations. The second is the heuristic tier, which accommodates idiosyncratic and dynamic factors of regime formation. Such a methodology emulates Emile Durkheim’s study on suicide and allows for more effective theory building. Finally, the theoretical and empirical implications of the above theory are discussed.英文摘要：此假設主張，亞特蘭大戰後的治理菁英之所以能夠形成具共識、有凝聚力治理聯盟主要乃因他們選擇大規模且高度整合的發展政策，並因此而承受很高的集體不安全感之故。本文接下來將根據此一假設檢視三種在美國城市治理文獻中常被提及，相當流行且標準化的城市體制，亦即共識型、對抗型及派系型體制，並針對城市的形成歸納出一個在方法論上具有兩層次的理論架構。此一理論架構乃以前述的理論假設做為基礎，作為理解三種不同城市體制的一般性理論，具同質性以及可再後續一般化的特性。第二的層次則是屬於異質性的分析，容許針對個別城市體制類型的形成提出殊異且動態的闡釋。這樣的理論仿效涂爾幹的自殺論，在理論的建構上比較有效。最後，本文也將針對上述的理論與實證分析加以延伸討論。起始頁-結束頁：131-211資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系8篇名：憑據猜答或盲目猜答？以政治知識測量為例並列篇名：Informed Guessing or Blind Guessing? The Case of the Measurement of Political Knowledge作者：潘心儀(Sin-Yi Pan);蔡宗漢(Tsung-Han Tsai)關鍵字：政治知識;選擇題;實驗設計;盲目猜答;憑據猜答;political knowledge;multiple-choice item;experimental design;blind guessing;informed guessing期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文主要在探究受訪者回答選擇題型的政治知識題目時的猜答行為，以東吳大學學生為研究對象，其資料性質屬於調查實驗資料。由於選擇題題目提供選項讓受訪者選擇，所以一般會認為不知道答案的受訪者能夠藉由盲目猜答的方式選到正確答案，因而造成政治知識程度被高估的問題。然而，本文從理論上分析受訪者的政治知識程度與其在開放題和選擇題的回應模式，認為當受訪者不確定答案時，會根據其擁有的部份知識或錯誤知識進行憑據猜答。分析結果顯示受訪者在選擇題進行猜答時，有很高的機率會選擇正確答案，而非等機率的選擇選項，意謂受訪者是憑據猜答而不是盲目猜答。此結果另一個意涵為選擇題比開放題有較高的答對率，是來自於內在知識的反映而非隨機猜答。英文摘要：This article examines respondents' guessing behavior in multiple-choice items for the measurement of political knowledge. Some researchers suspect that using multiple-choice items to measure political knowledge would overestimate observed knowledge because respondents could correctly answer some questions just by blind guessing. We argue, however, that informed guessing is more common than blind guessing. This is because successful guessing requires certain levels of knowledge, which implies that respondents' observed knowledge is not seriously higher than their actual knowledge. Analyzing survey experimental data, we show that, when the respondents answer political knowledge questions by guessing, they are more likely to select the correct answer. This result implies that respondents tend to guess the answer based on their partial knowledge rather than by chance.起始頁-結束頁：213-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系9篇名：公民參與和核安治理－核四安全監督委員會與新北市核能安全監督委員會之比較並列篇名：Public Participation and Nuclear Security Governance: The Comparison of the Forth Nuclear Plant Safety Monitoring Council and Nuclear Safety Monitoring Council in New Taipei City作者：陳潁峰(Ying-Feng Chen)關鍵字：核安治理;公民參與;資訊透明;公眾諮商;跨部門合作;地方自主治理;nuclear security governance;citizens' participation;information openness;public consultation;trans -sectoral collaboration;local self-governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：自日本福島核能災變以來，我國為了回應公民參與監管核能安全的聲浪，2005年由原能會成立「核四安全監督委員會」，2013年則由新北市成立「核能安全監督委員會」。本文從「資訊公開」、「公眾諮商」、「跨部門合作」與「地方自主治理」等四項公民參與指標分析上述兩項核安機制的成效，研究結果顯示：兩項機制在公民參與的成效都仍有進步空間，在初期也都面臨「議題發散」與「資訊不充足」的問題。值得一提的是，由於中央主辦的「核四安監會」對納入在地風險觀點和開展互動討論較為抗拒，因此其運作雖能滿足「資訊公開」與「公眾諮商」的形式要求，卻難以進行「跨部門合作」與「培養地方治理能力」。反觀「新北市核安會」雖然因為缺乏專業編制與預算而在前兩項指標表現較為遜色，卻能透過創意機制合作協調，提升對話者信心，促進地方在核安風險治理的自主性與獨立性。本文結論認為：而在核安議題中，政府機關應當擺脫以往僅將公民參與視為點綴程序的思維，而地方政府基於地緣利害關係和選舉誘因，加以具有制度彈性與在地脈絡的優勢，似乎有更高的潛力能讓公民參與邁向「合作」與「自主決定」，因此如何給予地方政府更多的制度性支持，似也是未來核安治理能否獲得公眾信任的關鍵。英文摘要：Owing to Fukushima nuclear accident, in order to respond to the public, Taiwan's Atomic Energy Council (AEC) established ” the Fourth Nuclear Plant Safety Monitoring Council ” (FNPSMC) in 2005, and the New Taipei City government also formed its Nuclear Safety Monitoring Council (NSMC) in 2013. Both organizations aimed to facilitate collaborative monitoring among civil experts and governmental branches via public participation. This article examines the effectiveness of public participation in these two mechanisms by adopting the parameters of ”information openness”, ”public consultation”, ”trans-sectoral collaboration”, and ”local self-governance”. The research findings suggest: Both mechanisms share common problems of overly dispersed issues and a lack of information transparency at early stages. Having said that, while the FNPSMC could general ly meet the requirements of ”information openness” and ”public consultation”, the AEC's aversive attitude in incorporating local perspectives and launching interactive dialogues could hardly have achieved ”trans-sectoral collaboration” and ”local self-governance.” In contrast, the more inclusive NSMC, formed by local government, might not have performed well on above two parameters for it institutional shortage on budgets and staffs, but the problem-solving orientation rendered itself a more active body facilitating coordination among sectors and sustaining local autonomy. This article thus concludes that the government, instead of treating citizens' participation as administrative red tape, should sincerely consider it a window of diverse opinions. Owing to both local offcials' higher incentives in dealing with local political stakes and their advantage exercising institutional flexibility through local connections, local governments seem to have higher potential to boost citizens' participation to the level of ”cooperation” and ”autonomy”. Therefore, how to strengthen institutional supports of local governments may be the key for future nuclear governance in terms of earning public trust.起始頁-結束頁：1-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系10篇名：制度韌性與台灣半總統制下的災後重建：以九二一地震、莫拉克風災為例並列篇名：Institutional Resilience and Post-Disaster Reconstruction of Semi-presidentialism in Taiwan: A Study of the 921 Earthquake and Typhoon Morakot作者：張峻豪(Chun-Hao Chang)關鍵字：半總統制;制度韌性;災後重建;九二一地震;莫拉克風災;semi-presidential system;institutional resilience;post-disaster reconstruction;921 Earthquake;Typhoon Morakot期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以制度韌性為理論基礎，選擇台灣近年重要的災害議題：九二一地震、莫拉克風災，探討源於半總統制憲法所創造的政府運作系統，會如何展現災後重建的佈局、彈性與相應舉措。由於國內過往的災害研究多關注「府際關係」或「公私協力」的面向，亦即分析行政體系對災害衝擊之回應，對於憲政體制在其中的影響較少著墨，因此，本文加入災後重建的政府體制因素，認為地方政府與私部門皆必須同時面對「憲政兩軌」的特性，特別是總統權力之影響。這不但使災後重建工作會因「政治彈性」牽動「府際關係」和「公私協力」之間的「尺度移轉」。另外，總統身為救災體系的最高指揮者，其所關注政權正當性與災害責任的卸除，更可能因總統制軌道的運作近乎取代內閣制軌道，造成行政體系被簡化以及地方參與的被排除。英文摘要：This article uses institutional resilience theory to explain how Taiwan's semi-presidential system absorbs the impact of major governance challenges. The paper chooses major disasters that occurred in recent years in Taiwan: the 921 Earthquake and Typhoon Morakot, to discuss how a system of government operations created by a semi-presidential constitution is reflected in the arrangements, flexibility, and corresponding mechanisms of the governance process. Related to the authority of the central government and the oversight role of the president, observers have argued that in Taiwan's disaster governance process, the central government has continued to control local grassroots action. In addition, the governance network involving cooperation between the central and local governments has been regarded as ignorant of real local needs, because the policy planning and resource distribution rarely represent local interests. This research argues that outside of the legal system, the institutional framework of the semi -presidential system continues to have the ability to regulate and absorb disaster governance. This should be an important explanatory dimension for subsequent research on disaster governance.起始頁-結束頁：65-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：Transcript from the Symposium on the Crisis of Liberal Democracies作者：Philippe Schmitter;Terry Lynn Karl期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：76期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201806_(76).00012篇名：《管子》新國家理論的務實思維：權力集中並尊重社會本體並列篇名：The New Theory of State of Guanzi: The Social Ontology of Power Concentration作者：郭應哲(Ying-zhe Kuo)關鍵字：《管子》;國家;權力;社會本體;Guanzi;States;Power;Social Ontology期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：76期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文嘗試指出夏商周至春秋戰國國家結構的演變－即從有國家之雛型至後來的郡縣制，並說明國家的概念業從較鬆散的政治組織，轉<U+7232>極<U+7232>強大的集中合法公共權力穿透個人生活的新國家。而《管子》的政治主張「因」，有助於處理、回應個體與國家的緊張態勢。是故，本文先對國家結構的轉變進行說明，接續論及《管子》書的文本屬性、定位與內容陳述。之後，相參於過往對中國早期國家的歷史研究成果並站在「思想史」和「對話」的角度，對《管子》的國家理論作一呈明。同時本文發現，《管子》國家理論奠基於二本－社會與個體端本在民情人性之利害和統治者（君）端則本於「因順」、「因循」的「無<U+7232>之治」。最後，盼能藉本體論（Ontology）之概念與《管子》進行對話。英文摘要：This essay focuses on state transformation from the Three Dynasties Period to the period of Spring and Autumn and the Warring States. Namely, as the state had transitioned from its embryonic form to the Junxian (郡縣) system, its conceptualization varied from that of a loose organization to a powerful apparatus in which its centralized, legitimized and widespread power was able to interfere the private lives of its subjects. This essay argues that by looking at concepts originating from Yin (因), Guanzi (管子) had addressed the growing tension between the individual and the state. This paper first elaborates on the structural transformation of the state, then on the characteristics, the nature, and the content of the book. This paper demonstrates the state theory in Guanzi, which benefited from the extent findings of the Chinese early state in the field of history and from the perspectives of ”intellectual history” and ”dialogue”. There are two premises: one on the social or individual, the other on the ruler. The former focuses on the interests concerned in human nature, and the latter focuses on the concepts of Y<U+012B>nshun (因順), Y<U+012B>nxun (因循) and Wuwei zh<U+012B> zhi (無為之治). Finally, this paper illuminates the concept of ontology found in Guanzi.起始頁-結束頁：31-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201806_(76).00023篇名：臺灣司法獨立改革運動：對於司法體系人事運作的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Taiwan's Judicial Independence Reform on the Operations of Personnel in the Judicial System作者：陳鴻章(Hung-chang Chen);郭子靖(Tzu-ching Kuo);王金壽(Chin-shou Wang)關鍵字：司法獨立改革;人事審議委員會;委託代理人理論;司法行政;改革派法官;Judicial Independence Reform;Judicial Council;Principal Agency Theory;Judicial Administration;Reform-minded Judges期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：76期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣於1990年代初期由基層法官發起的司法獨立改革運動，獲得相當大的進展。本文的目的是瞭解這些改革運動對於司法人事的衝擊，並從委託代理人理論的角度出發，首先分析法院獨立改革對於既有的司法行政體系所造成的制度與結構性衝擊；接著建構相關指標來測量一、二審法院院長在1986∼2015年間的調動情況以及結構變化的樣貌；最後則是追蹤改革派法官的生涯發展。透過實證資料的分析，本文認<U+7232>在司法獨立改革的衝擊下，法院體系原有人事升遷的「升官圖」，已經全面性的鬆動。改革派法官除了沒有遭到迫害之外，更活躍於獨立改革後的司法行政體系。英文摘要：Judges in the district courts initiated the Judicial Independence Reform Movement in Taiwan in the early 1990s. This article discusses the impact that the Judicial Independence Reform Movement had on matters of judicial personnel from the perspective of principal-agency theory. We first analyze the institutional changes of the judicial administration system caused by the independence reform of the courts. Second, we construct indicators to evaluate the changes of the appointment of chief justices in district courts and high courts from 1986 to 2015. Last, we argue that the promotion mechanism in Taiwan's courts has radically changed due to the judicial independence reform. The reform-minded judges who initiated this movement were not punished by the existing judicial system. Also, we did not find that the regime shift had much impact on judicial appointments.起始頁-結束頁：61-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201806_(76).00034篇名：臺灣食安管理中的跨域治理：以2014年黑心油品事件為例並列篇名：Cross-Boundary Governance in Taiwan's Food Safety Management: A Case Study of the Adulterated Oil Incidents in 2014作者：鍾瑞萱(Jui-Hsuan Chung);王宏文(Hongwung Wang);蔡逸敬(Yi-Ching Tsai)關鍵字：跨域治理;府際關係;黑心油事件;Cross-Boundary Governance;Intergovernmental Relationships;Adulterated Oil Incidents期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：76期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣食品安全事件不斷，特別是2014年的黑心油品事件，政府處理失當，相關新聞報導連續3個月以上，導致民眾對政府及食安信心大跌，政府也進行大幅改革，顯示政府在食品安全管理上的缺失及不足。因食品安全管理牽涉中央與地方及多部會間的互動與協調，故本文從跨域治理的角度切入，來檢視此一事件發生的原因及整個處理過程的全貌。在發生原因方面，研究結果顯示因過去政府資源不足，油品管理的權責不清，使得政策產生模糊地帶與缺漏，讓不肖廠商有機可趁；在處理過程方面，並非政府相關單位未積極處理，而是過去所累積的缺失一次爆發，各政府單位間的資訊不夠流通，導致政府處理狀況不佳。因此，本研究建議應釐清行政部門間的權責劃分、促進各單位之間資訊的流通，並強化行政和檢察單位之間的合作關係，始能有利於食品安全政策之執行與落實。英文摘要：Many food safety incidents have occured in Taiwan lately. The adulterated oil incidents in 2014 are unusual because the government handled the incidents poorly, and news related to these incidents lasted for more than three months. As a result, the public's confidence in the government and in food safety dropped, and the government had to reform the food safety management system. Because food safety management involves various departments and requires cooperation between the central and local governments, this paper aims to provide a more complete picture of the causes of the events, and an analysis of governmental activities from the perspective of cross-boundary governance. The results of this study show that the incidents erupted because the boundaries and responsibilities of the governments involved were not clear, maybe due to a lack of resources, and the deviating oil processors took advantage of these deficiencies. The governments conducted many activities to deal with these incidents. However, the accumulation of past shortcomings and a lack of information circulating between different governmental units, led to the poor handling of the events. Therefore, this study suggests that the boundaries and responsibilities of the executive departments should be clarified, the circulation of information between various governmental units should be promoted, and cooperation between the executive and judicial departments should be strengthened in order to improve food safety management.起始頁-結束頁：103-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201806_(76).00045篇名：為民而戰的游擊隊政府？初探臺灣文官異議行為與動機並列篇名：Fighting for the People with Guerrilla Government? A Preliminary Study of Public Administrators' Behavior and Motivation for Dissent in Taiwan作者：黃建勳(Chien-hsun Huang)關鍵字：官僚;游擊隊政府;異議;行政倫理;Bureaucracy;Guerrilla Government;Dissent;Ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：76期出版年：2018中文摘要：「游擊隊政府」（guerrilla government）是O'Leary（2006）形容在政府體系中一群對於上級有所不滿與反抗的異議官僚。目前「游擊隊政府」研究文獻主要以個案分析<U+7232>主，甚少進行量化研究。同時，公共行政理論認<U+7232>文官應該秉持公益而勇於表達不同意見，但是規範性理論仍需要經驗資料的支持。故本文利用2008年臺灣政府文官調<U+67FB>資料庫，選擇消極服從與對外透露資訊代表「游擊隊政府」具體行<U+7232>，並檢驗公益動機的影響關係。統計結果發現，當文官的工作目標以公益目的<U+7232>主時，有較高機會選擇消極服從，以回應上級指示不符公共利益；不過，公益動機與對外透露資訊間沒有統計上顯著性。本文目的不僅希望增進「游擊隊政府」的經驗性瞭解外，也提供循證性分析結果支持學界與實務界期待文官作<U+7232>人民受託者的規範性論述。英文摘要：What drives public servants to become guerrillas? This study aims at examining the resistant behavior of dissenting bureaucrats as implied by O'Leary's ”guerrilla government”, and their motivation for pursuing public interests. This study uses survey data from the TGBS (Taiwan Government Bureaucrat Survey) in 2008 to focus on two types of resistant behavior: passive obedience and leaking information to stakeholders. The analyses show that there is a greater chance for public administrators to obey orders passively when their work goals are public interest-oriented, but that there is no significant relationship between leaking information and public interest-oriented goals/sector choices. These empirical results provide a quantitative contribution to the guerrilla government literature which has mostly relied on case studies, and give evidence-based support for the role of public orientation and trusteeship argued by normative theories in the public administration literature. Research limitations and suggestions for future research will also be identified.起始頁-結束頁：159-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201806_(76).00056篇名：政黨結社自由與言論自由之再探並列篇名：Revisiting the Freedom of Association and Freedom of Speech of Political Parties作者：宮文祥(Wen-hsiang Kung)關鍵字：正義;多元民主;政黨;結社自由;言論自由;Justice;Pluralist Democracy;Political Parties;the Freedom of Association;the Freedom of Speech期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：75期出版年：2018中文摘要：正義，其實是一個多義的概念，因此在界定上勢必應當小心謹慎尤其當政府嘗試透過立法的手段，欲將主觀上所認定的正義予以實踐，就會很容易淪於主觀恣意的操作。尤其在自由與民主的社會下，絕對的自由固然形成失序，但光譜的另外一端自然就是獨裁與專制。甚至，面對時下對於民主、法治與正義的主張似乎成了一個時興的口號時，因此有著第一波、第二波、第三波民主之強調；也有著形式法治國與實質法治國之界分，更不用說還有著對於何謂正義的爭辯。凡此種種便成了享有話語權的人士所能左右與支配的對象，因此，相對於採取防衛性民主之概念而建構出我國對於政黨結社與政黨言論自由基本規範，進而產生可能有之爭議，對於多元民主的應有認識，即應當作<U+7232>比較參考的重要基礎，因<U+7232>，面對前述對於各該抽象概念之認識與解釋，均容有被操作的空間。誠如在法治國原則「實質」與否之爭論上，與其主觀式地否認我國尚非係屬民主法治國家，反倒應當檢視我們對於自由<U+771E>諦的應有認識<U+7232>何，如此方能重新確認我們所要追求的結社自由與言論自由之保障<U+7232>何，而不是在整個憲政體制的運作下，使得政黨結社自由與言論自由之應有的保障、乃至於應有的限制，淪於個案判斷上的不確定，造成所謂的「實質法治國原則」會隨著政黨輪替而有不同的內涵，如此反倒折喪了憲法對於基本權保障的應有尊嚴失卻了法律對於正義實踐應有的內涵，更埋藏了憲政運作因著政黨輪替而存在著不可預見的危機。英文摘要：Justice is a contested concept; therefore, we should be cautious when trying to define the true meaning of it. This is especially true when the ruling party, or the leader of the government, aims to utilize (or manipulate) the idea of justice, even trying to include it in the meaning of democracy and rule of law, which is based on his/her own understanding turning it into practical law via the the legislative under his/her control. This would be a threat to our modern democratic society. Nowadays, so-called ”transitional justice,” ”substantive constitutional state,” and ”defensive democracy,” which are supposed to be complicated ideas, seem to have become only fashion slogans. Moreover, the one with the authority to have the final say will be in charge of defining these ideas and their meanings. Therefore, we should have a clear understanding of the meaning of ”Pluralist Democracy” in order to also have a better understanding of the rule of law and to avoid constraints on the freedom of association and speech for political parties, except in cases where a clear idea of defensive democracy has been adopted when constructing a fundamental legal structure. The more we understand the rule of law, the better it will be for our democracy. Since the ruling party could easily manipulate the idea of ”transitional justice”, and the so-called principle of a ”substantive constitutional state”, the protections for the rights of association and speech for political parties could be put at risk in our modern democratic society. In sum, instead of emphasizing the fashion slogans and the principles that have uncertain meanings, we need to fulfill the fundamental values of the freedom of association and speech for political parties, based on the rule of law, not the rule of men.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201803_(75).00017篇名：國家與政治動員：俄羅斯工會與青年組織的案例探討並列篇名：The State and Its Political Mobilisation: Studies on Russian Trade Unions and Youth Organisation作者：康世昊(Shih-hao Kang)關鍵字：普京;威權主義;社會夥伴關係;FNPR工會;NASHI青年組織;Putin;Authoritarianism;Social partnership;FNPR;NASHI期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：75期出版年：2018中文摘要：俄國政治研究多指出普京總統的治理使得俄羅斯從1991年蘇聯解體以來<U+5553>動的民主化倒退回威權統治的時代。以普京<U+7232>中心，以侍從關係型態<U+7232>主的政黨體系和其他行政控制，強化和維持既成的中央集權體制。相應於政權轉型，民間部門在近20年來也傾向由當權者收編與限縮的方向。俄羅斯政府利用掌控的資源與立法工具，包括操控社會團體立案合法性、直接的金錢資助，換取社會團體領導者的順從，俄羅斯民間團體得向權力黨靠攏，以換取穩固的組織存續。本文從俄羅斯勞工與青年這兩股社會運動的個案切入，分析運動代言者與國家資源的分配關係，其領導階層儘管試圖在俄羅斯政黨政治舞台上取得一席之地，實質上附屬於權力黨與國家。從社會團體、政黨與國家間互動關係亦關注到後共俄羅斯的兩任領導人皆立基於威權統合主義的實踐，但普京的強人形象與威權統合能力超越葉爾辛失敗的社會統合主義，成<U+7232>俄羅斯強權政治成功的實現者。本文近一步對照分析普京領導的「國家」如何有效抑制異議勢力與政治動員，成功攏絡與控制親政府組織成<U+7232>主要的控制變項。當俄國在普京主義發展下進入「鞏固的威權政體」，上述條件讓未來的俄羅斯領袖亟易效法延續。英文摘要：Many who study Russian politics worry that President Putin's rule has caused the democratization among the country's youth to 'derail',, while the regime has now come to prefer a model of managed democracy. As Putin is at the very core of centralised state power, the regime has employed patron-client relations to mobilise and control the current Russian political system. Accordingly, many parts of Russia's civil society have also encountered struggles within a narrowing space and have become vulnerable to resource distribution. With their brutal control of administrative resources and legal means, Russian political elites have successfully made social organisations become associated with the government, in order for the latter to survive under the authoritarian climate. This paper refers to studies on the relationship between the Russian state, trade unions and youth organisations. In particular, although the leadership of both FNPR (the state trade union) and NASHI (the pro-Putin youth organisation) certainly had great ambitions for leading their organisations towards an active influence on Russia's political stage, they essentially became affiliated with the party of power and Putin's state. What is also noteworthily is that the characteristics of Putin's political practices share a similar tendency towards an authoritarian model as Russia's social corporatism under Yeltsin. Putinism has demonstrated an effective approach to a workable authoritarian regime. Perhaps the lessons have provided Putin's successors with a grand vision to follow.起始頁-結束頁：43-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201803_(75).00028篇名：英國法制對政黨自治與運作之規範並列篇名：Political Party Autonomy under the Party Law in the United Kingdom作者：謝國廉(Kuo-lien Hsieh)關鍵字：政黨自治;政黨法;同意原則;政黨自主原則;公共責任原則;政治基金;Political Party Autonomy;Political Party Law;the Principle of Consent;the Principle of Party Autonomy;the Principle of Public Accountability;Political Funds期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：75期出版年：2018中文摘要：國家對於政黨在政策上採取鼓勵和支持發展的態度，法律上幾無任何規範，但國家亦可能於法律上就政黨的設立條件、組織、人事財務，甚至是選舉候選人的遴選程序，訂定詳細的規範且積極地加以適用。根據本文的分析，英國的法制原則上走在中間的道路上，採取的主要是政黨自主原則。之所以如此，係因無論站在哪一個極端的位置，皆會遭遇各種的不利益。就20年來的實際情況而言，2000年政黨法雖未將英國法院於司法實務上所建立的政黨自主原則，轉化<U+7232>法律條文，但亦未對此一原則加諸任何的限制，實際上可謂國會肯定了此一原則於英國政黨法制的效力。總體而言，2000年政黨法得以提升政黨於政治上的領導效能，強化政黨於內部財務上的管理和稽核成果，同時對於政黨的意識形態和黨內所強調的原則，仍採取尊重的態度。英文摘要：The state might sometimes take an encouraging and supportive stance relating to its policies towards political parties. In this regard, the state may have only a few legal rules governing their operation. Conversely, the state might sometimes choose to enact and enforce detailed legal rules regarding the conditions for establishing a party, as well as rules concerning party structure, financial management, appointment of party leaders, and even selection of election candidates. The analysis of this article indicates that the United Kingdom does not stand at either extreme. Rather, the UK has adopted the principle of party autonomy, as going with either extreme would presumably lead to numerous disadvantages. Although the UK Parliament did not incorporate the principle of party autonomy into political parties over the last 18 years, the Parliament did not set any limitation on the principles of the Elections and Referendums Act 2000 either. Generally, the 2000 Act has enhanced the effectiveness of the leadership of political parties by improving their management and internal auditing. Meanwhile, the 2000 Act shows respect for the ideologies and key principles emphasised by the parties.起始頁-結束頁：75-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201803_(75).00039篇名：憲政民主體制之政黨規制：國際準則與中華民國政黨法制比較並列篇名：Political Party Regulations in Constitutional Democracy: A Comparative Study Between International Standards and the ROC's Recent Regulations作者：陳淳文(Chwen-wen Chen)關鍵字：政黨法;不當黨產處理條例;結社自由;政黨自治;Party Law;Ill-gotten Party Assets Settlement Law;Free Association;Autonomy of Political Party期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：75期出版年：2018中文摘要：許多民主國家之憲法甚少關懷政黨問題，即使政黨已存在於政府與社會之間，並在代議體制之下扮演最重要的角色。不過自二戰以降將政黨入憲，並立法規制政黨的潮流已經逐漸發展起來。然而，制定政黨專法並非是民主體制良善運作所不可或缺的要素，從歐洲國家之經驗，特別是威尼斯委員會的研究發現:政黨專法不僅未必有助於民主，甚且，只有在政黨法制內容愈限縮節制的情況下，才能發揮其管制功能。此外，政黨法制必須參考國際準則，以免成<U+7232>執政黨壓迫在野黨的工具。基於國際標準，政黨立法不僅必須有憲法基礎，尊重法律保留，並且以尊重結社自由與政黨自治<U+7232>其核心。就此而言，我國的政黨法制，特別是新近制定的相關規範，顯然還有諸多有待改善之處。英文摘要：Many democratic constitutions rarely pay attention to the role of political parties, despite the fact that they are crucially situated between society and government. Positively understood, key actors in any democracy are founded on the principle of representation. The tendency for political party statutes to be compiled, by constitutions or laws, gradually increased since the Second World War. However, a specific law for political parties is not a requirement for functioning democracies. In fact, a report compiled by the Council of Europe's Venice Commission on different regulatory practices of OSCE states in the realm of political parties determined that such legislation is not necessary for the proper functioning of democracy, and may be most effective when its scope is quite minimal. Parliamentary laws regulating political parties are not tools in the hands of the ruling party in order to oppress opposition parties, and therefore should be developed in conformity with both international standards and relevant jurisprudence. Based on the international standards of legal regulation of political parties, this paper argues that the role and function of political parties in a democratic system should ideally be defined in the highest legal order of the state to ensure the stability and relative permanence of these provisions. Additionally, legal regulations that affect political parties should protect free association and the internal functions of political parties should generally be free from state interference. In comparison with these international guidelines, the ROC’s recent political party regulations should be reviewed and amended in many aspects.起始頁-結束頁：103-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201803_(75).000401篇名：威權體制內部的民主制度：中國大陸民<U+8846>體制內政治參與對其政治態度的影響並列篇名：Nominally Democratic Institutions in Authoritarian Regimes: The Impact of Political Participation on the Political Attitudes of Chinese People作者：周嘉辰(Chelsea C. Chou);謝銘元(Ming-yuan Hsieh)關鍵字：威權體制;名義上的民主機構;政治參與;中國大陸;Authoritarianism;Nominally Democratic Institutions;Political Participation;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：66期出版年：2018中文摘要：近年來，政治學界關於比較威權主義的分析取得了許多突破性的進展。在最近的研究中，許多學者將焦點置於威權體制內部具有民主形式的制度，包括政黨、立法機構與半競爭性的選舉等。相較於現有文獻，本文將焦點置於一般民眾的參與經驗，探究這些形式上民主制度的設立，是否會對個人對於威權體制的政治態度產生影響。基於「亞洲民主動態調查」第四波的中國大陸調查資料，本文利用「傾向分數匹配」的研究設計，探討威權體制內部的民主制度的作用。在中國大陸，體制內的政治參主要為村委會與居委會選舉，我們發現，當中國大陸民眾有這些投票經驗時，他們對現有政治體制有更為正面的看法。同時，研究結果也顯示，個人的參與效應在對中央政府的態度方面，比對地方政府更加深刻，反映出中國大陸基層投票制度的直接受益者為中央政府。我們的研究結果肯定這種名義上的民主制度對於鞏固威權體制的作用。英文摘要：Studies on authoritarianism have made a significant breakthrough since the late 2000s. In the recent development, many scholars focus on the role of nominally democratic institutions, including political parties, legislature, and semi-competitive elections. This paper examines the relationship between Chinese people's participation in state-authorized institutions and their attitudes toward the political regime and the performance of the government. Devising a matching design to study the Wave 4th China national survey of the Asian Barometer, this paper finds that when Chinese citizens have voted in the local election, they are more likely to have a positive view about the political system. In addition, this experience is more helpful in improving their evaluation about the central government's performance than the local government's. In other words, the Chinese central government is the direct beneficiary of its local nominally democratic institutions. Our study confirms that ordinary citizens' attitudes toward the authoritarian government are influenced by their participatory experiences in nominally democratic institutions.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201812_66.00012篇名：政治知識的來源：社經地位、傳統媒體使用與新媒體使用並列篇名：Sources of Political Knowledge: Socioeconomic Status, Media Use, and New Media Use作者：劉嘉薇(Jia-wei Liu)關鍵字：政治知識;知溝理論;社經地位;媒體使用;新媒體;Political Knowledge;Knowledge-Gap Theory;Socioeconomic Status;Media Use;New Media期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：66期出版年：2018中文摘要：政治知識意指民眾對於政治事實的認知，過去國內文獻對政治知識的來源多集中於社經地位和傳統媒體使用的討論，對於新媒體的興起，雖蔚為話題，但卻沒有系統性地討論新媒體使用與政治知識的關係，這便是本研究的目的。若新媒體使用對政治知識提升有影響，是全面的影響？還是僅對部分特質的民眾有影響？本研究發現，社經地位仍是造成政治知識鴻溝的原因，電視使用對政治知識提升有其正面影響，但報紙已無此作用。基於理論，本研究採用新的研究設計，將民眾分為不同教育程度進行研究，發現新媒體使用僅能提高教育程度高者的政治知識。雖然社群媒體的本質在社交，然對於公共事務產生的正向價值仍值得追求，特別是在社群媒體上因為知識是共享和共構的，減少了許多組織的成本，使用者可「自動自發」地分享和協作生產－「使用者產生內容」，然此過程中需投入對公共事務的表達和討論，並避免錯誤資訊的分享和生產，才能使網路使用者進而獲取正確的政治知識。英文摘要：Political knowledge means the public's understanding of political facts. In the past, the discussion of the sources of political knowledge in the domestic literature focused on the discussion of the use of social and economic status and traditional media. The rise of new media is a topic, but there is no systematic discussion of the relationship between the use of new media and political knowledge and that is the purpose of this study. If the use of new media has an impact on the increase of political knowledge, would it have an overall impact or would it affect only some public? Social status is still the cause of the political knowledge gap. Television use can enhance political knowledge, but newspaper cannot. Based on the theory (new media affect political knowledge only in higher-education people), this study adopts the new research design, we divide the people into different education levels (high/middle/low education), and finds that the use of new media can only improve the political knowledge of those who are highly educated. Compared with the influence of various media on the use of political knowledge, the majority of television have their positive significance. Although the essence of social media is social (communicate with others, not get knowledge), the positive value of public affairs is still worth pursuing, especially spending less time working in the organization for users to share and collaborate on generated content. However, it will require the expression and discussion of public affairs and avoid the sharing and production of false information in order to enable Internet users to get the correct political knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：29-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201812_66.00023篇名：總統和國會的權力平衡與憲政衝突：以總統國會制國家祕魯、俄羅斯、喬治亞和葡萄牙為例並列篇名：Balance of Power and Constitutional Conflict Between President and Parliament: Comparing Georgia, Peru, Portugal with Russia作者：蔡榮祥(Jung-hsiang Tsai)關鍵字：總統國會制;憲法權力;權力平衡;憲政衝突;President-Parliamentary Systems;Constitutional Powers;Balance of Power;Constitutional Conflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：66期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文的研究問題有二：一、為何特定的總統國會制國家之憲政運作，較容易促成總統和國會的權力對抗（或妥協讓步）？二、府會衝突或和解如何影響半總統制民主的運作？主要的研究發現為總統國會制國家在少數政府或共治政府時期最容易發生行政和立法機關的衝突。當行政和立法機關之間的衝突發生在強總統和強國會對立的模式中，很容易升高成政權危機或是出現憲政崩潰。因為強總統和強國會彼此之間的憲法權力對等或武器相當，特別是在不同黨派分別控制總統和國會時，很容易促成抗衡結果。當行政和立法的互動模式屬於強總統和次強國會的對應時，總統可以略勝國會一籌，推行自己屬意的政策，而當國會可以聚集足夠的多數時，總統還是會受到國會的阻撓，不能恣意行事。當總統擁有較少的憲政武器例如總統並無單邊的委任立法權以及國會擁有低門檻的反否決權時，屬於次強總統對上強國會的設想狀況。此時總統可能相對地較為弱勢，因為國會掌握了立法的最後決定權。當總統只擁有否決權以及國會需要高的門檻才能撤銷總統的否決時，則屬於次強總統和次強國會之間的互動模式。這種模式較可能出現均勢的結果，亦即任何一方無法凌駕對方，雙方必須尋求妥協和讓步。本文以秘魯、俄羅斯、喬治亞和葡萄牙(1976∼1982)四個總統國會制國家的運作經驗來說明四種不同的行政和立法的權力平衡與憲政衝突高低之間的關係。英文摘要：Why some president-parliamentary countries are much easier to facilitate power struggle between the president and parliament and why other president-parliament countries are more likely to encourage compromise or negotiation between the president and parliament are the major research questions of this paper. Four scenarios can be envisioned. First, in the scenario of strong president vs. strong parliament, it is more possible to entice regime crises and democratic breakdown. Second, in the scenario of strong president vs. moderate parliament, the president prevails over the parliament and can promote his preferred policies. However, when the parliament can muster enough votes to pass a bill or override the president's veto, the parliament can have a check on the enactment of presidential powers. Third, in the scenario of moderate president vs. strong parliament, the president does not have unilateral power such as decree power and the parliament has the final authority of legislation. Fourth, in the scenario of moderate president vs. moderate parliament, both branches hang in the balance. This paper illustrates the framework by analyzing the cases of Peru, Russia, Georgia, and Portugal (1976-1982).起始頁-結束頁：65-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201812_66.00034篇名：臺灣半總統制下總統決策機制的困境：一個比較視野的研究並列篇名：The Dilemma of President's Policy-Making Mechanism under the Taiwan's Semi-Presidential System: A Study in Comparative Perspective作者：陳宏銘(Hongming Chen)關鍵字：總統;決策機制;半總統制;行政院院長;內閣會議;President;Policy-Making Mechanism;Semi-Presidentialism;Premier;Cabinet Meeting期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：65期出版年：2018中文摘要：我國半總統制運作迄今已經歷四任不同黨派的民選總統，但多數皆需費力在憲政體制外建立決策機制，試圖整合政府各部門與執政黨之意見，以期能形成有效能的政府執政團隊。經由多年的實踐，可以很清楚看到我國總統權力行使的一項挑戰，即憲法上並無配置給總統正式的政策決定機關。對於此一狀況，既有半總統制研究文獻甚少探討。因此，本文嘗試探討此一問題。本文先從全球的視野出發，歸納37個半總統制國家憲法的設計，再進一步探討我國憲法下總統政策決定或諮詢機制之安排，並以四位民選總統執政時期之實務運作為例加以解析。最後，並略述我國憲政體制可能的因應方案。英文摘要：Since Taiwan has adopted semi-presidential system, there have been four directly elected presidents. But most of them needed to build decision-making mechanisms outside the constitutional system, trying to integrate government departments and the ruling party's views in order to form an effective government ruling team. After years of practices, it is clear that there is a challenge for our President to exercise his (or her) power to govern. That is, there is no viable constitutional organ of the President's formal policy decision authority. For this phenomenon, the existing semi-presidential research literatures rarely explored it. Based on the global perspective, this paper summarizes the experiences of 37 semi-presidential constitutional designs and further explores the arrangements for presidential policy decisions or consultation mechanisms under the constitution of the ROC, and analyzes the practical operation of the four presidents. Finally, this article reflects some challenges and suggestions for the constitutional design in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201806_65.00015篇名：選舉制度及時程對政黨體系與政府型態的影響：總統制與半總統制國家的跨國分析並列篇名：The Effect of Electoral System and Election Timing on Party System and Type of Government: A Preliminary Study of Presidential and Semi-Presidential Democracies around the World作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-chiao Su)關鍵字：選舉制度;選舉時程;政黨體系;總統制;半總統制;政府型態;Electoral System;Election Timing;Party System;Presidentialism;Semi-Presidentialism;Type of Government期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：65期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文試圖檢視在全世界具有總統直選與國會選舉的民主國家（即總統制與半總統制國家）中，國會選制、總統選制與選舉時程對於國會政黨體系與政府型態造成的綜合影響。一般認為，不同的國會選制會形塑不同的國會政黨體系，而不同的國會政黨體系與憲政體制相互組合則會形成不同的政府型態。不過，上述的傳統看法稍嫌簡略，因為在總統制與半總統制民主國家中，影響國會政黨體系的制度因素不僅是國會選制，總統選制與選舉時程也分別對國會政黨體系造成影響。而且，選舉時程不僅會影響國會政黨體系，也會直接影響政府型態。因此，本文認為在總統制與半總統制下，「國會選制」、「總統選制」、「選舉時程」、「國會政黨體系」、「政府型態」等變項的關係是：「國會選制」、「總統選制」、「選舉時程」等三個變項（自變項）共同塑造「國會政黨體系」（中介變項），而「國會政黨體系」與總統制與半總統制相互組合則形成不同的「政府型態」（依變項）。此外，「選舉時程」（自變項）也會直接影響「政府型態」（依變項）。總之，本文將以上述各變項構成的分析架構為基礎，探討選舉制度與選舉時程如何影響全世界總統制與半總統制民主國家的國會政黨體系與政府型態。希望透過本文的初探性研究，能夠對當代民主國家選舉制度與憲政體制的配套問題有更深入的理解。英文摘要：This paper tries to investigate the comprehensive impacts of parliamentary electoral systems, presidential electoral systems and election timings on the party systems and the types of government among the presidential and semi-presidential democracies all over the world. Generally speaking, different parliamentary electoral systems will shape different party systems in the parliament, and different combinations of the party system and constitutional system will form different types of government. However, the above traditional patterns are too simple. In the presidential and semi-presidential democracies, the factor that may affect the party system in the parliament is not merely the parliamentary electoral system, so may the presidential electoral system and election timing. Furthermore, the election timing will not only affect the party system in the parliament, but also directly influence the type of government. Therefore, this paper argues that, under presidential and semi-presidential systems, the relations among the variables, which are parliamentary electoral system, presidential electoral system, election timing, party system in the parliament and the type of government, are as follows. Parliamentary electoral system, presidential electoral system and election timing (independent variables) will jointly shape the party system in the parliament (intervening variable), while different types of government (dependent variable) will be formed when the party system in the parliament is collocated with presidential or semi-presidential systems. In addition, the election timing (independent variable) will also directly affect the types of government (dependent variable). In summary, based on the analytical framework composed of the above variables, this paper explores how the institutional factors shape the party systems and the types of government in the presidential and semi-presidential democracies around the world.起始頁-結束頁：37-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201806_65.00026篇名：政黨實力、政治制度以及半總統制下政黨投入總統大選的決定並列篇名：Party Size, Political Institutions, and Parties' Decisions to Enter Presidential Elections in Smi-Presidentialism作者：李鳳玉(Feng-yu Lee)關鍵字：總統選舉;選舉制度;同時選舉;半總統制;政黨大小;Presidential Election;Electoral System;Concurrent Election;Semi-Presidentialism;Party Size期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：65期出版年：2018中文摘要：在民主國家中，政黨是否參與總統大選，會影響到總統與國會大選的政黨體系，也會影響到選民是否能做出有效的投票決定，並進一步影響到政府體制與民主制度的運作，影響深遠不言而喻。本文希望透過對半總統制民主國家的比較分析，探討政黨大小、總統的選舉制度、同時選舉以及半總統制次類型如何影響政黨投入總統大選的機率。本文發現，絕對多數決制使政黨有更高的機率投入總統大選；同時選舉只對大黨參選機率的提升有影響；而半總統制次類型與政黨大小的效果則存在交互作用。在增加大黨與小黨參選機率的部分，半總統制次類型的影響不大，但半總統制次類型的效果會因政黨大小的不同，而有顯著的不同。相對的，在總理總統制之下，相對於小黨，大黨參選的機率較高；在總統議會制之下，大黨與小黨的參選機率則差不多；政黨大小的效果會因為半總統制次類型的不同，而有顯著的不同。英文摘要：In democracies, whether parties enter the presidential race affects presidential and legislative party systems, and influences whether voters can identify potential presidents and make an efficient choice. Presidential and legislative party systems determine greatly the nature of government in semi-presidential democracies. To explore the effects of party size, presidential electoral systems, concurrent elections, and semi-presidential subtypes on parties' decisions to enter the presidential race, the author analyzes an original data set of all semi-presidential democracies. She finds that majoritarian electoral systems increase the probability that parties will enter the presidential race, that concurrent elections increase the probability that only large parties will do so, and that the effects of semi-presidential subtypes and party size are conditioned by each other. While semi-presidential subtypes do not influence the probability that large and small parties will enter the presidential race, the empirical evidence suggests that the effects of semi-presidential systems are conditioned by party size. As to the effects of party size, in premier-presidential systems, large parties are more likely to enter the presidential race, while in presidential-parliamentary systems, all parties are similarly likely to do so. The empirical evidence also proves that the effects of party size are conditioned by semi-presidential subtypes.起始頁-結束頁：81-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201806_65.00037篇名：後社會主義的參與式自然資源保育和社群韌性－以中國大陸拉布海流域管理為例並列篇名：Post-Socialist Participatory Resource Conservation and Solidarity Resilience: A Case Study of Watershed Management in Lashihai, Mainland China作者：邵建民(Johnny Shaw);湯京平(Ching-Ping Tang);桑達卓瑪(Sanda Zhuoma)關鍵字：社群自治;社群韌性;治理綜效;連帶團體;雙向融入;Community Autonomy;Social Resilience;Governance Synergies;Solidary Group;Mutual Assimilation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：65期出版年：2018中文摘要：自然資源的保育因需要密集的勞力，且涉及極為多元的利益，故非常強調透過社會部門（包括資源取用者以及志願組織）的參與及實踐。而社會部門的運作則依賴）強大的網絡、有效的規範，以及人際之間的信任關係，來推動自我管理的集體行動。是什麼樣的條件與契機，讓中國大陸這樣一個受到國家強力箝制的社會，能夠發展出參與式的自然資源保育集體行動？本研究以雲南省拉市海的流域管理為例，探討村民如何在國際非營利組織的引導下，取得政府的協助，以自主管理解決拉市海魚源枯竭的問題，並揭示在後社會主義的威權政體下，市民社會重建並參與治理的可能。英文摘要：As the conservation of natural resources requires intensive labor force and even involves rather diverse interests, it highly emphasizes the participation of the social sectors, including resource users and voluntary organizations. The operation of the social sectors relies on strong networks, effective norms, and interpersonal trust-worthy relationships to sustain the collective actions of self-management. Under what conditions can such a strong state-clamped society of Chinese Mainland develop a participatory mode of natural resource conservation? This study takes the watershed management in Lashihai, Yunnan province as an example to discuss how the villagers had, with the assistance of international nonprofit organizations and the endorsement of governments, achieved a successful participatory watershed management. It also reveals the possibilities of the civil society's reconstruction and participation in governance under the post-socialist authoritarian rule.起始頁-結束頁：109-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201806_65.000401篇名：編者言作者：王子華期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷S期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會2篇名：國小學生在社會性科學議題教學中的認知與立場改變－以全球暖化議題為例並列篇名：The Change of Sixth Graders' Recognition and Position After Socio-Scientific Issues-Based Instruction-The Case of Global Warming作者：林采薇(Tsai-Wei Lin);靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin)關鍵字：全球暖化;社會性科學議題;國小學生;教學模組;環境教育;Global Warming;Socio-Scientific Issue;Primary Students;Instructional Module;Environmental Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究根據社會性科學議題（Socio-Scientific Issue, SSI）理論，針對國小六年學童（N=45）設計一個以保護北極熊為案例之全球暖化議題教學模組，從事11節課的教學。研究目的旨在探討SSI教學對於學生全球暖化認知及決策立場的改變情形。研究期間藉學生撰寫指定短文及讀寫單，蒐集質性資料。其中，讀寫單一方面作為導引學生在小組中從事讀寫及討論活動的鷹架，另方面則於其中嵌入蒐集研究資料的問題，作為教學前後比較學生對減緩全球暖化問題意見與立場是否改變的依據。此外，所指定撰寫之短文則是在教學之初與末了，令學生依據全球暖化的成因、影響與解決方案等鷹架撰寫。本研究經分析並比較前後兩次短文及讀寫單內容後發現：本議題教學有助於提升學生的全球暖化相關認知；在教學後，學生不再出現迷思概念；且學生所表達的看法轉趨於自我省思個人可以調適之作為；而透過就北極熊保護方案的討論與修訂過程，有助於學生從初始階段所顯現出意見的紛歧，發展至具有共識的立場。本文並對SSI在國小的教學應用提出建議。英文摘要：This study used an eleven-session global-warming module in a class of sixth graders (N = 45) for exploring if changes happened in students' cognition and choices in the controversial position. In the teaching period, reading-and-writing worksheets were used as the scaffold for students' learning; the open-ended questions were also purposely embedded in it for collecting the information. Moreover, each student was asked to write a short essay, which included causes, impacts, and solutions for global warming problem, at the beginning and the end of the study. The results showed that students' understanding of the global warming issue was improved; the misconception was not shown any more after SSI instruction. Students reflected on what they could adjust the life style for reducing global warming. And more, in the process of discussion and negotiation, students had followed the track developed by instructor for leading their thinking and the decision-making to achieve a consensus. At the end of the article, the implication for instruction was provided.起始頁-結束頁：283-303資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201812_26(4).00013篇名：機器人跨領域STEM主題式統整課程與任務導向式教學的設計及評鑑並列篇名：Evaluation and Design of Cross-Disciplinary Robotics STEM Curriculum Based on Thematic Integration and Task-Oriented Instruction作者：張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang);陳怡靜(Yiching Chen)關鍵字：主題統整;任務導向式教學;統整課程;跨領域STEM;機器人;Thematic Integration;Task-Oriented Instruction;Integrative Curriculum;Cross-Disciplinary STEM;Robot期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究以跨領域主題統整模式之網狀式方法，建構出帆船機器人跨領域STEM（Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics）統整課程之知識圖，並結合線串式方法來呈現各相關知識之間的連結關係。另運用重理解的課程設計模式發展出帆船機器人跨領域STEM統整課程。採立意取樣針對某高中一年級某班42位學生（男35人，女7人），由一位教師進行任務導向的教學。學生採分組合作學習方式，每2位1組，共21組。研究結果顯示，在七個領域的知識測驗成績皆有顯著的進步。技能表現方面，學生在程式設計的表現最佳，其次為帆船設計、機構組裝，且皆達顯著水準。學生對STEM的態度有顯著的提升。五個顯著提升的興趣依序為工程設計；程式設計；想繼續就讀工程、科學或科技相關科系；未來想從事工程或程式設計相關工作；機器人」。三個未顯著提升的興趣依序為「數學」、「科學」、及「未來是否想從事數學或科學的工作」。本研究發展的帆船機器人跨領域STEM統整課程及任務導向教學策略，可供後續發展相關主題統整課程與教學之參考。英文摘要：This study has constructed a knowledge map of cross-disciplinary integrative STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) curriculum on robotic sailboat by using the webbed approach in the Cross-Disciplinary Thematic Integration Model. The thread method was used to display the linking relationships among relevant concepts on the map. Moreover, the Understanding by Design Model (UbD) was used to develop cross-disciplinary integrative STEM curriculum with robotic sailboat. Purposive sampling approach was adopted to select 42 first-grade students (35 males and 7 females) from one class in a senior high school. An instructor undertook task-oriented instruction and students undertook task-oriented hands-on activity. There were totally 21 teams with 2 members in each team via cooperative learning. Research results showed that students made significant progress on 7 fields of the test. Regarding skill performance, students made the highest performance on programming design; followed by sailboat design, mechanism assembling and installing, and significant level were reached in all activities. Attitude toward STEM showed significant improvement. Five significantly enhanced interests were engineering design, programming design, intention to study engineering or technology, intention to work in engineering field, and robotics. Three insignificantly enhanced interests were mathematics, science, and intention to work in mathematics or science field. The cross-disciplinary integrative STEM curriculum on robotic sailboat and the task-oriented instructional strategy might be the references for future development in integrative course and instruction of relevant themes.起始頁-結束頁：305-331資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201812_26(4).00024篇名：中學階段氣候變遷議題教學之回顧：教什麼？如何教？並列篇名：A Review of Climate Change Issue Teaching in Secondary Education-What and How作者：游小旻(Hsiao-Min Yu);張文華(Wen-Hua Chang)關鍵字：中等教育;全球暖化;氣候變遷;Secondary Education;Global Warming;Climate Change期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：氣候變遷為一跨學科的當代社會性科學議題，由於它在時間與空間尺度上的抽象性與複雜性，使其適合作為發展學生科學素養的題材。近年來，已有愈來愈多的國家將氣候變遷或相關主題納入課程；臺灣的新版課程綱要更將氣候變遷之影響與調適訂為自然領域跨科概念的次主題之一。儘管此議題具有重要性與急迫性，但在教學實踐上卻仍缺乏清晰的指引。無論是普羅大眾抑或在校學生，甚至學校教師都可能對此議題相關內容存有迷思概念。而氣候變遷議題教學不應僅止於理解，更需要轉化為行動。由於覺察是產生行動的起點，本研究欲瞭解何種教學介入與課程脈絡能促使學生覺察氣候變遷，為此而搜尋美國教育部教育資源資訊中心所提供之國家級教育學書目資料庫（Education Resources Information Center 〔ERIC〕），分析49篇中學階段以氣候變遷為教學主題之實徵研究。本文呈現中學階段氣候變遷議題教學的研究趨勢，並由分析結果提出教學介入與課程脈絡的建議：採用諸如制定行動計畫、專題研究或實地考察等讓學生得以直接經驗氣候變遷的教學介入，有助於他們覺察氣候變遷；相較於以地區性或全球性氣候變遷為課程脈絡者，課程脈絡含有與學生關係較為密切的個人選擇，能同時提升學生對氣候變遷的認識與覺察。而如何將科學本質的培育納入氣候變遷教育的規劃，則是未來科學教育者可以再繼續努力的方向。英文摘要：Climate change is an interdisciplinary and socio-scientific contemporary issue. Due to the complexity, abstraction, and criticality of climate change, it is a good theme for science researchers to develop students' scientific literacy. Over the last few years, more and more countries have brought climate change or related topics into curriculum frameworks. In Taiwan, climate change is subsumed a subtopic of interdisciplinary concept in science curriculum framework. Although it is an important issue, there is still no clear teaching guideline. Laypeople, students, and teachers may hold misconception of this issue. However, teaching climate change should be not only about facts and understanding, but also about behavior. Because awareness is the first step of behavior, we want to clarify what kinds of instructions and contexts could promote awareness. For this purpose, we searched Education Resources Information Center (ERIC) database and reviewed 49 related researches on teaching climate change in secondary education. Here, we showed the research trends of teaching climate change in secondary education, and brought a suggestion of teaching strategies and contexts. We found, firstly, studies used direct experiences, such as carrying out action plan, project-based learning, participating in a field trip, as teaching approaches that could not only facilitate understanding about climate change but also enable students to aware of climate change. Furthermore, professional consulting, role-playing, and demonstration may promote comprehension as well as perception. Secondly, the association between selected contexts for learning climate change and student learning outcomes indicated that comparing to local or global contexts, using personal contexts, such as transportation, home energy and appliance, food, or personal purchases, may enhance both understanding and awareness. Finally, we suggest that science educators could pay more attention to cultivate students' adequate understanding of the nature of science in planning climate change education.起始頁-結束頁：333-352資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201812_26(4).00035篇名：猜猜新聞背後是什麼？整合科學與媒體的跨領域教學並列篇名：Can You Guess What is Behind the News? An Interdisciplinary Teaching That Integrated Science and Media作者：黃俊儒(Chun-Ju Huang)關鍵字：科學;科學新聞;媒體;跨領域教學;Science;Science News;Media;Interdisciplinary Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：科技社會的快速發展之下，出現了各種複雜的跨領域議題，作為有識的現代公民需要擁有更全面的素養及觀點，方能因應這個急遽變遷的社會。鑑此，本研究以科學新聞文本作為題材，同時結合科學與媒體的相關知識，針對複雜、多元、邊界不清楚的科技議題開發「猜猜背後是什麼」（Try to Guess Behind, TGB）跨領域教學模式，透過閱讀、猜測、總結、澄清等四個步驟，促進學生透過非形式推理的過程整合科學與媒體的知識。本研究以南部某國立大學的通識課程作為實踐場域，參與的人員包括兩個班級共88名學生（理工科系21名，非理工科系67名），並以科學觀點問卷、媒體觀點問卷及深度訪談作為研究工具。研究結果發現，經過TGB教學後學生對於科學理論依賴的觀點、媒體批判性及新聞判讀自信心等面向改變顯著；在科學新聞監控的品質上，則表現在對於專家及訊息來源、媒體過程及自我認知習慣的監控等三種面向。相關的研究成果對於未來大學跨領域教學及12年國教所推動的素養教育，具有參考的價值。英文摘要：Under the rapid development of the technological society, various complicated interdisciplinary issues have emerged. As a well-informed modern citizen, it is necessary to have more comprehensive literacy and opinions in order to respond to this rapidly changing society. Based on the concern, this study used science news texts as the subject matter, and combined the knowledge about science and media to develop the Try to Guess Behind (TGB) interdisciplinary teaching models for complex, diverse, and vague technological issues, including 4 steps of reading, guessing, summarizing, clarifying, through informal reasoning processes to integrate students' knowledge related to science and media. This study took the general education course of a national university in southern Taiwan as a practice field. The participants included 88 students from two classes (21 from the Department of Science and Engineering and 67 from departments other than Science and Engineering), the science perspective questionnaires, the media perspective questionnaires, and in-depth interviews were used as research tools. The results of the study showed that after the TGB teaching, students' views on theory-laden science, criticism of the media, and self-confidence on news interpretation significantly changed. In the quality of scientific news monitoring, it was expressed from the reflection toward the expert and the information sources in the media, media production process, and self-awareness to the media. Relevant research results have a practical value for future inter-disciplinary teaching in university level and the literacy-oriented education promoted by the 12-year compulsory education system.起始頁-結束頁：353-775資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201812_26(4).00046篇名：體感創客在跨領域教學中的創作表現與其創作過程所扮演的合作角色評估並列篇名：Assessing the Performance of Creative Works and Collaborative Roles Played by Motion-Sensing Makers in an Interdisciplinary Teaching Activity作者：潘文福(Wen-Fu Pan);謝金威(Jin-Wei Shieh)關鍵字：合作角色;創客;資訊系統成功模式;跨領域;體感;Collaborative Role;Maker;Information System Success Model;Interdisciplinary;Motion-Sensing期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷S期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究的目的在於設計與實施體感創客之跨領域教學，然後分析教學前後師生對創作表現的成效評價、評價的一致性，以及歸納創作過程中學生所扮演的合作角色。本研究採取行動研究法，將教學行動分成規劃、實踐、檢核等三個任務階段，最後歸納結論並提出修正行動，以作為未來規劃跨領域教學之參考。本研究參與對象有一所高職17名學生與4位跨域老師，實施時間為105學年度上學期10週20節課。研究工具有創作成效評估問卷、半結構討論大綱，分析方法為層級分析、等級相關、整體敏感度、次數歸納與卡方考驗。本研究所獲結論如下：一、全體師生對作品的評價結果高低依序為：預防近視、舞出音符、體感電風扇、氣功大師、電視遙控器；而品質評價依序為：互動性、應用性、功能性，作品的資訊品質（互動性）最受肯定；二、全體師生教學前後的評價並無顯著一致性（r= .600, p = .285），其中對品質的評價發現，服務品質屬於期望─確認理論之正失驗改變類型，可見師生對此品質的感受超乎教學前預期；而對作品的評價發現「預防近視」也屬於正失驗類型，亦即師生對該組作品之感受也超乎預期；三、參與學生願意主動扮演提出創意點子的合作角色，而不想扮演旁觀角色。最後，本研究亦提出一些建議供參考。英文摘要：This study aimed to plan and implement interdisciplinary teaching with motion-sensing makers, and to check the performance of makers' works. Then the evaluation consistencies before and after teaching were compared, and the cooperative roles in process were also analyzed. This study adopted an action research method. The teaching action was divided into planning, implementing, and checking tasks. Finally, the researcher proposed revision action served as references for planning interdisciplinary teaching. The participants were 17 students in a senior high school, and 4 interdisciplinary supervisors. The duration of activity was the first semester of the 105th academic year, total 20 lessons for 10 weeks. Research tools included the questionnaire for assessing performance and the semi-structured outline for discussion. The statistical methods were adopted including analytic hierarchy process, spearman's rank correlation and performance sensitivity. The discussion results were inducted with frequency percentage and chi-square test. The conclusions were as follows: (1) the works evaluated by all the teachers and students were ranked as follows: prevention of myopia, playing the piano by dancing, gesture fan-controller, qigong master, and TV remote controller. The evaluation rankings of creation quality were interactivity, applicability, and functionality. (2) There was no significant consistency in the evaluation before and after teaching (r = .600, p = .285). For all works' quality, this study found that service quality was the positively disconfirmed type based on Expectation-Confirmation Theory. That is, this quality was better than the expected applicability after teaching. For work performance, the ”prevention of myopia” was also the positively disconfirmed type. That is, this work was considered better than the expected performance. (3) During teaching process, students were willing actively to play the role of proposing creative ideas but didn't want to play the role of bystanders. Finally, the researcher proposed some suggestions for references.起始頁-結束頁：377-398資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201812/SP_26.00017篇名：以「設計導向學習」模式初探智齡設計課程並列篇名：Using ”Design-Based Learning” as Preliminary Foundation of Smart Aging Design Course作者：楊朝陽(Chao-Yang Yang);康仕仲(Shih-Chung Kang);陳彥甫(Yen-Fu Chen);林喬茵(Chiao-Yin Lin);王嫊淩(Eng Suk Leng);林怡萱(Yi-Hsuan Lin)關鍵字：以學習者為中心的學習;設計導向學習;專案導向學習;問題導向學習;跨領域教學;Learner-Centered Learning;Design-Based Learning;Project-Based Learning;Problem-Based Learning;Interdisciplinary Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷S期出版年：2018中文摘要：「以學習者為中心的學習」在受重視後，教學現場分別推行「問題導向學習」與「專案導向學習」的教學模式，藉此將學生的學習連結真實世界問題及培養解決問題能力。為了讓自主學習更為完整，基於設計思考的「設計導向學習」隨之興起。本研究以設計導向方式設計「智齡設計」一跨領域總整課程為案例，課程以美國史丹佛大學d.School的ME310課程課綱為基礎，在臺灣的大學教學現場開課，招募跨校跨不同領域之大三以上學生參與，同時邀請對高齡議題有興趣之臺灣企業參與課程並提出產業議題。研究方法採用參與式行動研究，歷經派遣團隊至史丹佛大學學習ME310課程，以相同模式於臺灣的大學開課二學年，其中不斷地修正完成適合臺灣學生之課程內容安排，期間課程針對相對應步驟會接觸到的議題給予教授課程，讓知識的驗證更有其臨場感。結果顯示透過設計導向學習方式，學生能夠認同釐清問題前同理階段的價值，團隊溝通的成長對學生來說也印象深刻。本研究為以高等教育教學現場的創新實務經驗及發現，對於其他課程來說將增進設計導向學習實施的機會，研究成果所建立之課程能夠提供適當教學結構，並提醒執行上的挑戰，支持未來「設計導向學習」之課程設計與執行。英文摘要：Since Learner-Centered Learning (LCL) has been seen as important pedagogy, Problem- Based Learning (PBL) and Project-Based Learning (PBL) have been a phenomenon of modern higher education. To complete the LCL, Design Thinking-structured Design-Based Learning (DBL) has then been introduced. Using DBL as the main structure, this research has developed interdisciplinary capstone course-Smart Aging Design. Based on ME310 course of d.School at Stanford University, we developed Smart Aging Design course adapted with Taiwanese course design regulation. The course recruited junior and senior college students from different departments and universities. Companies were invited to participate in the course and provide practical issue they are interested in. The course was designed for one year, i.e. two semesters to build students non-linearly experience in design thinking stages such as empathy, define, ideate, prototype and test. After participating ME310 course, this research has used Participatory Action Research method to repeat plan, action, observe and reflect Smart Aging Design course design. As the results of DBL, students recognized the value of empathy after finishing the products, the products were convincing to the companies in their marketing prospective, experience of team communication were also impressive. This research experienced and explored the chance implementing DBL in the future. The results provided appropriate DBL teaching structure and call attention to possible challenges support for teachers. DBL builds up teamwork competency, and successful DBL also requires top-down real-life issues provided by real companies in conjunction with bottom-up teachers and student's passions.起始頁-結束頁：399-418資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201812/SP_26.00028篇名：大學跨領域能力、課程參與和問題覺知關係之研究並列篇名：A Study of the Relationship Between Undergraduate Students' Interdisciplinary Competence, Interdisciplinary Curriculum Participation, and Social Problem Perceptions作者：李育諭(Yuh-Yuh Li);林季怡(Chi-I Lin)關鍵字：問題覺知;結構方程式模型;跨領域能力;跨領域課程;Problem Perception;Structural Equation Modelling (SEM);Interdisciplinarity;Interdisciplinary Curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷S期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文探討跨領域的學習及影響，特別專注於學生問題覺知的提升，主要目在發展學生跨領域能力之測量指標，以及檢視其與問題覺知與跨領域課程參與之關係。跨領域能力量表參考Lattuca, Knight與Bergom（2013）的研究改編，原量表以工程科系學生為對象設計，所以量表設計會以工程領域學生為參考脈絡，改編後量表經效化後，成為適合測量各領域背景學生（不只工程科系）跨領域能力的一般性的量表。本研究亦同時檢試測量學生跨領域課程參與及問題覺知等兩個量表，研究對象為大學生，採用問卷作為資料收集工具。量表先經130位學生預試，作為是否修訂依據，正式施測時，抽取選修大學通識教育課程6班學生進行調查，課程涵蓋科學、社會、文學等領域多元主題。調查時以班級為單位進行調查，最後獲得有效問卷合計400份。資料分析以結構方程式模型（Structural Equation Modelling, SEM）效化測量工具，並建立「跨領域課程參與─跨領域能力─問題覺知」間之關係模型。主要有以下幾點發現：一、改編之跨領域能力量表對臺灣學生有不錯之測量信效度；二、跨領域能力與跨領域課程參與有關；三、跨領域能力與問題覺知有關。研究發現跨領域教育對學生問題覺知的影響是間接的，其影響需透過跨領域能力的提升來產生。研究結果提供大學跨領域教學與研究之參考。英文摘要：The study, focusing on promoting students' perception of social problems, discussed interdisciplinary learning and its impacts. The major objectives of study included: first, to construct indicators of university students' interdisciplinary competence; second, to investigate the relationship between the participation of interdisciplinary curriculum and the development of students' perceptions of social problems. Lattuca, Knight and Bergom's (2013) interdisciplinary competence scale was employed which initially investigated participants of engineering major background. The research modified and validated Lattuca et al.'s scale to measure students' interdisciplinary competence of different academic disciplines. This study also tested two scales that measured students' participation in an interdisciplinary curriculum and their perceptions of social problems. The participants were university students; questionnaires were used to collect research data. The modified questionnaire was pilot tested by 130 university students. The formal test was conducted in 6 randomly chosen general education courses which covered multi-dimensional subjects including science, sociology, literature, and etc. Four hundred valid questionnaires were collected; the data were analyzed by Structural Equation Modelling (SEM) and the model of ”participating in an interdisciplinary curriculum-interdisciplinary competence-perceptions of social problems” was constructed. The major findings of this study were as follows, first, the interdisciplinary competence scale had high reliability and validity. Second, there was a positive relationship between students' interdisciplinary competence and interdisciplinary curriculum experience. Third, the competence was related to their perceptions of social problems. The findings of this study identified an indirect relation between interdisciplinary learning and students' perceptions of social problems: a learning that was able to make impact on the students' perceptions must be enhanced by the promotion of one's interdisciplinary competence. The findings of this study offered methodology for assessing university students' interdisciplinary competence and their learning outcome and a reference for planning educational goals regarding interdisciplinary learning.起始頁-結束頁：419-440資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201812/SP_26.00039篇名：以行動者網絡理論檢視高中教師跨學科領域課程設計之研究並列篇名：Study on High School Teacher's Interdisciplinary Curriculum Design Based on Actor-Network Theory作者：張堯卿(Yao-Ching Chang);梁慧雯(Hwey-Wen Liang)關鍵字：行動者網絡理論;高中教師;跨學科領域課程;課程設計;Actor-Network Theory;High School Teacher;Interdisciplinary Course;Course Design期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷S期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究透過個案研究方式，以一個臺北市高中在設計跨學科領域課程的經驗，利用行動者網絡理論（Actor-Network Theory, ANT）觀點來檢視個案教師社群與教師在做跨學科領域課程設計的歷程。從ANT分析的過程中，行動者會面臨許多發展課程的阻力，並在阻力中去尋找集體的共識，即ANT所說強制性的通道（Obligatory Point of Passage, OPP），進而突破阻力而邁向成功之路。本研究發現，在跨學科領域教師社群上的困難與解決之道有三個因素：一、社群成員願意一起面對困境，並尋找解決問題的OPP；二、社群領導人需具有課程概念、能力與經驗，能帶領成員找出跨學科領域共通的議題當成OPP，讓成員集體前進，達到成功；三、跨學科領域社群能建構出適當且安全的協作平台，做為教師協作的OPP。而在教師參與跨領域學科社群上也有三個因素：一、教師需跨越學科本位，重新面對課程；二、教師要勇於溝通與表達，傾聽不同學科的看法，進行對話與釐清；三、教師需改善自我心智，跨越學科邊界，達到自我超越的境界。以ANT的四個契機做觀點協助，確實可以幫助行動者看清所有行動者的網絡關係，並避免異議的發生與擴大，進而尋找到合適的解決之道，讓行動者網絡的成員都能邁向成功之路。英文摘要：This research adopted case study approach and the Actor-Network Theory (ANT) viewpoint to examine teacher's curriculum design in an interdisciplinary field. During the ANT analysis process, the actors will encounter much resistance to the development of the curriculum, and find a collective consensus from the resistance; that is called ”Obligatory Point of Passage (OPP)”, and then break through the resistance to the road to success. This study found three key factors which affected problems solving in interdisciplinary courses community: 1. members of the community are willing to face frustration and find the OPP; 2. the community leaders need to have the concept, ability and experience of the curriculum, and can lead members to find out the OPP that can achieve success, let the members move forward collectively; 3. interdisciplinary community can build an appropriate and secure collaboration platform as a teachers' collaboration OPP. Also three factors that teachers must have in the interdisciplinary courses community: 1. teachers need to cross the subject standard and face the curriculum again; 2. teachers should be brave in communication and expression, listen to the views of different disciplines, conduct dialogue and clarify; 3. teachers need to improve their own minds, cross discipline boundaries, and achieve self-transcendence. ANT's viewpoint can help actors to see the network relationships of all the actors and avoid the occurrence and expansion of objections, and then to find suitable solutions and allow the members of the actor network to take steps.起始頁-結束頁：441-460資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201812/SP_26.000410篇名：科學議題資訊圖像呈現對閱聽人閱讀經驗與閱讀理解之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Science Issue Infographics on Reading Experience and Comprehension作者：黃子芸(Zi-Yun Huang);黃惠萍(Huiping Huang)關鍵字：多媒體學習認知理論;科學議題;資訊圖像;閱讀理解;閱讀經驗;Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning;Science Issues;Infographics;Reading Comprehension;Reading Experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：資訊科技的進步與閱聽人生活型態的改變，使資訊的呈現不再限於單一型式，科學議題的訊息也不限於文字或圖像，可包含聲音和互動點擊，協助閱聽人瞭解議題或事件的脈絡。本研究將資訊圖像的呈現，分為靜態式、動態式與互動式三種型態，並採用準實驗法探討科學議題以不同的資訊圖像呈現時，對閱聽人閱讀經驗與閱讀理解的影響。本研究以基因改造作物為主題，設計四種型態的文本，含控制組的純文字及三組實驗組的資訊圖像，再比較四組受試者對文本的整體評價及對內容主題的瞭解。本研究招募大學以上學生計840位參與線上實驗。研究發現，靜態式和動態式資訊圖像予閱聽人較佳的閱讀經驗，但純文字和互動式資訊圖像較能提升其閱讀理解。這指出，當科學議題以視覺圖像或聲音影像呈現時，確實對閱聽人較具吸引力，但欲提高閱聽人對文本主題的理解，仍需借重文字及互動式介面的設計。本結果可應用於科學議題的資訊呈現，協助公眾瞭解科學知識。英文摘要：Along with the development of information technology and changes of people's lifestyle, science issue information is no longer confined to words and pictures, but containing sounds and interactive clicks to help the audience comprehend issues or events. To understand this phenomenon, this study conducted an online experiment to compare the impact of different types of information, including three infographic types which are static, dynamic and interactive, as well as text-only version, on the audience. This study adopted genetially modified crops (GMC) as the topic to design science issue texts. Subjects for the web-based experiment were universtiy students. In total, 840 students participated in the experiment. Results showed that those who read static and dynamic infographics had better reading experience than the others, but those who read text-only and interactive infographic had better reading comprehension than the others. Overall, the findings suggest that science issue infographics including pictures and voices are more appealing to the audience, but text-only and interactive infographic are still important for the audience to comprehend the content. Results from this study can be applied to the presentation of science issues to help promote public understanding of science.起始頁-結束頁：197-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201809_26(3).000111篇名：以故事情境策略營造美感體驗對不同學習成就國小學生學習成效之影響研究並列篇名：The Effectiveness of Science Learning in an Aesthetic Environment With a Story-Telling Strategy for Different Levels of Sixth Grade Achievers作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin);楊惟程(Wei-Cheng Yang)關鍵字：自然科學習動機;低成就生;思考智能;探究教學;情境興趣;Motivation of Science learning;Lower Achievers;Thinking Ability;Inquiry-Based Learning;Situated Interest期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究藉說故事營造美感體驗策略融入探究學習，探討其對不同學習成就學生思考智能、自然科學習動機及學習情境興趣與助益覺知的影響。本研究對象為一班六年級學生（N = 28），從事10週的教學。在教學中將具美學特色的故事融入「天氣的變化」與「大地的奧秘」2個單元。因每單元有3個次單元，故由教學者選擇能夠動手做的次單元發展故事，2個單元共發展4個故事。研究資料蒐集則使用思考知能工作單、自然科學習動機問卷，以及情境興趣問卷。所得資料除了呈現全班的結果外，並以學業成績分為低、中與高三等分之不同學習成就群予以檢視。研究發現全體學生的思考智能顯著提升；除高成就學生外，中與低成就學生亦顯著提升。至於低成就生雖在各次測驗中均顯著低於高、中成就生，惟差距已縮小。全體及高、中、低成就生的自然科學習動機未提升；且在三次測驗中，三組學生間無顯著差異。情境興趣問卷顯示不同學習成就學生的喜好與有幫助的項目，可供未來說故事策略融入探究教學促進不同成就學生學習的設計參考。英文摘要：This study adopted a story-telling strategy in a 6th-grader science class (N = 28) to create the environment of aesthetics for enhancing their thinking ability, motivation and situated interest to learn science. Besides, the performances of three subgroups, high, middle, and low achievers in this class, were also compared. The instruction lasted for 10 weeks with two learning topics: ”Change of Weather,” and ”Mystery of Land.” Within these topics, 4 stories were developed and taught to students. Research information was from questionnaires, and situated interest feedback worksheets. Findings included: students' thinking ability was enhanced significantly. Not only high achievers, but also middle and low achievers had the similar tendency. Although thinking-ability scores of low achievers were significantly lower than middle and high achievers, the discrepancies between them had been minimized. These three groups did not show significant change in motivation of science learning after this study. In terms of motivation of science learning, no significant improvement was found in whole-class basis and three subgroups. Feedback worksheet revealed students' preference of and benefits from the teaching designs. This study also discussed the implications of the story-telling strategy for enhancing science learning of elementary students.起始頁-結束頁：219-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201809_26(3).000212篇名：從系統功能語言觀點探討科學詞彙的歧義與解歧並列篇名：Exploring Lexical Ambiguity and Disambiguation of Science Terminologies From the Lens of Systemic Functional Linguistics作者：陳世文(Shih-Wen Chen);古智雄(Chih-Hsiung Ku);楊文金(Wen-Gin Yang)關鍵字：系統功能語言;科學文本;科學語言;科學閱讀;詞彙歧義與解歧;Systemic Functional Linguistics;Science Text;the Language of Science;Science Reading;Lexicon Ambiguity and Disambiguation期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨以系統功能語言的主述位結構觀點探討國中階段科學文本詞彙歧義類型、詞頻分布、解歧詞彙及解歧語境類別，以「氫」一詞為例，利用AntConc軟體檢索106學年度三個版本國中教科書中含「氫」的語句，由三位科教學者進行詞彙歧義及語境類型之分析。研究發現國中科學文本中「氫」含有「氫元素」、「氫氣」、「氫原子」、「氫的元素符號」四種意義，在八年級科學文本中出現次數最高，歧義類型最多，特別是在元素與化合物、氧化還原反應等單元中。此外，在科學文本中「氫」有九種的解歧詞彙，其構成六種解歧語境類型。多數解歧語境屬同句主位及同句述位，其次是前句主位及前句述位，後句主位及後句述位最少，顯示閱讀解歧上可先從相同小句之主位及述位解讀歧義，其次回溯至先前小句主位及述位尋找解歧線索，最後才是後面小句的主位及述位。最後根據研究結果提出文本編輯、科學閱讀及後續研究等方面之建議。英文摘要：This present study aimed to explore the lexical ambiguities and the disambiguation contexts via the example of ”Hydrogen” in secondary school science textbooks from the lens of Systemic Function Linguistics by the corpus-based analysis technique. Total seventy sentences including the lexicon ”hydrogen” were selected from the corpus of science textbooks by the software ”AntConc,” and then these sentences were semantically categorized into various meanings and contexts by three science education experts. The results showed that ”Hydrogen” in science textbooks could be referred to four ambiguities: ”hydrogen element,” ”hydrogen gases,” ”hydrogen atom,” and ”element symbol of hydrogen.” These ambiguities appear frequently in the science textbooks of eighth grade. Moreover, night types of disambiguated words could help readers distinguish the ambiguities of ”hydrogen.” They could be further characterized into six disambiguation contexts. Among these contexts, ST and SR appear most frequently, while FT and FR follow, then BT and BR are the least, which indicated that these contexts could provide disambiguating tracks for readers to understand the precise semantics of hydrogen through their sequences and structures. Finally, the suggestions of the lexicon ambiguity and disambiguation are provided to the textbook writing, science reading, and future research.起始頁-結束頁：241-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201809_26(3).000313篇名：運用寫作認知歷程策略提升大學生的科學主題寫作表現並列篇名：Using a Cognitive Process of Writing Strategy to Improve Undergraduate Students' Performance on Science Thematic Writing作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin)關鍵字：大學生;全球暖化;科學寫作;寫作認知歷程模式;Undergraduate Student;Global Warming;Scientific Writing;Cognitive Process of Writing Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究針對45位修習科學寫作課程之大學生，利用寫作認知歷程策略之計畫、轉譯與回顧過程，以國小高年級學童為閱讀對象，就全球暖化從事寫作。在寫作歷程中，首先由研究者進行寫作規準的介紹，並示範科普作品的解析；繼之請學生依據全球暖化主題訂定題目，並寫出計畫綱要；隨後撰寫文本。再之，依所撰寫之計畫及文本，安排小組進行多次的分享與討論，以協助每位學生從事檢查的歷程；最後由學生進行修訂與精緻作品的任務。本研究依據寫作認知歷程模式所發展之規準，評量學生所撰之初稿（版本一）與修訂後的版本二。結果顯示：學生在「想法內容」向度上，除「全球暖化影響之描述」在版本二的表現有顯著提升外，其餘各規準均無差異。在「表達性」與「組織性」向度中的各規準，其版本二得分皆顯著高於版本一。本研究指出寫作認知歷程策略之應用，有助於大學生的主題寫作。本文亦蒐集學生的回饋心得，與量化結果符應。本文另就未來科學寫作教學及研究，提出省思與建議。英文摘要：This research adopted a cognitive process of writing strategy-plan, transcript, retrospect, and revise to inquire undergraduate students' (N = 45) performance on science thematic writing by surveying their capability of generating comprehensible texts on global warming for upper graders at the elementary level. In the beginning of this course, the fundamentals of writing and its rubrics were introduced and then the students were asked to write a global warming text beginning with planning the guidelines. In the following classes, the small groups were formed for facilitating in-depth discussion and reexamining process. After learning knowledge and skills relevance to scientific writing, the text written beforehand was revised. The texts before (version 1) and after (version 2) revision were assessed by using a self-developed rubric based on cognitive process of writing model specific to global warming issue. The results revealed that all rubric items except ”impact of global warming” in the dimension of ideas and content were not significantly enhanced. All means of rubric items in the dimensions of organization and presentation in version 2 were significantly higher than version 1. It means that the cognitive process of writing had positive impacts on students' scientific writing performance. The follow-up survey and interview from students confirmed the quantitative results. Finally, this study provides suggestions for future science writing research and teaching.起始頁-結束頁：261-282資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201809_26(3).000414篇名：習醫造就：以「專業社會化」析論臨床環境對見習經驗之影響並列篇名：Learning Medicine: Illuminating How Clinical Workplaces Socialize Clerks to the Profession作者：黃淑玲(Sheila Shu-Ling Huang)關鍵字：工作環境學習;見習;專業社會化;質化;醫學人文;Workplace Learning;Clerkship;Professional Socialization;Qualitative;Medical Humanities期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究以「專業社會化」為研究視鏡，瞭解見習醫學生從課室學習走進臨床環境之經驗樣貌，旨在探討工作現場即學習環境造就習醫者之歷程。研究方法採質化導向的多階段設計，歷經兩年四階段，以國內、外臨床觀察紀錄、照像、44名半結構式深度訪談等取徑進行資料蒐集。研究發現：一、總體而言，工作環境給予見習生觀察和周邊參與式的實作機會；但面臨學習環境的轉變，見習生深受新學習模式、思考徑路、情緒適應的挑戰。二、見習階段即是建構專業認定的啟始，科別輪調課程提供機構式學習架構，專業互動是見習生獲得新知與演練技能的首要來源；因不能執行疾病治療，反而在醫病互動中更能純粹練習傾聽、同理、利他、耐心、陪伴、感同身受、接納等專業人文素養，成為體會專業人文精神之最佳時機，進而體悟全面的醫療專業。三、臨床主治醫「師」角色在於建構學習環境、示範醫療行為與決策，為醫病關係之楷模，從而影響見習生對醫者形象之建構。四、跨年級團隊學習、有功能的周邊參與、臨床主治醫師之帶領與教學規劃，以及醫病互動中演練專業人文素養，是臨床環境專業社會化，造就習醫者之要素。英文摘要：This study sheds light on clerks’ learning experiences of transitioning from classrooms to bedside through the lens of ”professional socialization” with the purpose of illuminating how workplaces as learning environments have impacts on learning medicine. This study was entirely qualitative-driven and employed a 4-staged multi-design for data collection in two years. Approaches for data collection included bedside observations in multiple teaching hospitals in southern Taiwan and in California, taking photos of the artifacts and the contextualized interactions, and recruiting 44 students during clerkship years for semi-structured interviews either in one-on-one or in focus group formats. Results show that: 1. globally, the real workplaces provided clerks with opportunities for observation and peripheral participation. However, with the change of learning environments, clerks were challenged by new learning formats, thinking process and the emotional adaptation. 2. Clerkship itself was the initial step toward professionalism and identity. Grand rounds as a systemic approach of institutional affordances orchestrated learning. It was professional interactions from which clerks gained medical knowledge and skills. Clerkship programs provided exclusive opportunities for exercising medical humanities in the full potential, such as listening, empathy, altruism, patience, companionship, compassion, accepting and alike through interactions with patients. Consequently, they experienced full-fledged medical professionalism. 3. Attending physicians were the socialization agents. They structured bedside learning environments, demonstrated the practice of medicine and decision-making, and doctor-patient interactions, which consequently modeled the way toward professionalism and facilitated students’ identity formation. 4. Learning among colleagues with distinct statuses, peripheral but functional participation, attending physicians’ bedside teaching and arrangements, and trying-on behaviors of medical humanities through interactions with patients, were the defining factors of professionally socializing clerks to the medicine in workplace learning.起始頁-結束頁：97-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201806_26(2).000115篇名：高中生細懸浮微粒防治行為意圖及相關因子之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Preventive Behavioral Intention and Its Related Factors of Fine Particulate Matters for Senior High Students作者：周維倫(Wei-Lun Chou);曾治乾(Chie-Chien Tseng);葉國樑(Gwo-Liang Yeh);黃禎貞(Jen-Jen Huang);石玲如(Lin-Ju Shi)關鍵字：防治行為意圖;防治態度;高中生;細懸浮微粒(PM_(2.5));環境敏感度;Preventive Behavioral Intention;Preventive Attitude;Senior High Students;Fine Particulate Matters;Environmental Sensitivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣細懸浮微粒（PM_(2.5)）濃度日益增加，而其對健康危害相當嚴重，因此相關的防治教育刻不容緩。故本研究調查高中生有關細懸浮微粒 （PM_(2.5)）的知識、PM_(2.5)防治態度、PM_(2.5)自我效能、環境敏感度，以及PM_(2.5)防治行為意圖，以期提供給未來研擬PM_(2.5)的防治教學模組及推廣的參考。研究工具採自填結構式問卷，針對臺灣北、中、南等區，共1,570位高中學生，進行調查，得有效問卷1,535（97.77%），經分析結果為：一、高中生的PM_(2.5)防治知識屬於中上程度的瞭解，環境敏感度為正向敏銳程度，PM_(2.5)防治態度為正向態度，PM_(2.5)防治自我效能方面，大部分都有正向把握，PM_(2.5)防治行為意圖偏正向。二、女生在PM_(2.5)知識、PM_(2.5)防治態度、PM_(2.5)防治自我效能，以及PM_(2.5)防治行為意圖，顯著高於男生。三、中部和南部學生在PM_(2.5)知識和環境敏感度，都顯著高於北部學生。四、有環境相關活動經驗的學生，在PM_(2.5)知識、PM_(2.5)防治態度、PM_(2.5)防治自我效能、環境敏感度，以及PM_(2.5)防治行為意圖，都顯著優於沒有經驗的學生；曾經接觸過PM_(2.5)訊息的學生在PM_(2.5)知識、PM_(2.5)防治態度及環境敏感度，皆顯著高於無接觸經驗的學生。五、學生PM_(2.5)防治自我效能、PM_(2.5)防治態度及環境敏感度，能顯著預測防治行為意圖，解釋力達65.7%，其中PM_(2.5)防治自我效能影響力最大。英文摘要：The concentration of fine particulate matters (PM_(2.5)) in Taiwan is increasing day by day, while its health hazards are quite serious. Therefore, the related prevention and control education is urgent. The purposes of this study were to investigate the knowledge, preventive attitude, self-efficacy, environmental sensitivity, and preventive behavioral intention on fine particulate matters, and to find out what material are needed for the teaching modules of preventing fine particulate matters (PM_(2.5)). Research tools adopted self-report structured questionnaire. A total of 1,570 senior high students from the senior high schools of the northern, central, and southern Taiwan participated in this study. 1,535 effective questionnaires were collected and the effective rate was 97.77%. The main results of the study were as following: 1. The knowledge, preventive attitude, self-efficacy, environmental sensitivity, and preventive behavioral intention on PM_(2.5) of the senior high school students were positive. 2. The knowledge, preventive attitude, self-efficacy, and preventive behavioral intention on PM_(2.5) of female students were significantly better than those of male students. 3. The knowledge and environmental sensitivity of PM_(2.5) for senior high school students from central & southern Taiwan were significantly better than those from northern Taiwan. 4. The knowledge, preventive attitude, self-efficacy, environmental sensitivity, and preventive behavioral intention of PM_(2.5) for senior high school students with the experiences of environmental activities were significantly better than those without the experiences. 5. The preventive attitude, self-efficacy, and environmental sensitivity could significantly explain 65.7% of the variance of the preventive behavioral intention on PM_(2.5) Self-efficacy could especially influence the preventive behavioral intention most.起始頁-結束頁：123-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201806_26(2).000216篇名：複雜系統下的醫學教育：由解構社會脈絡到共構醫學知識的問題導向學習課程並列篇名：Medical Education Under Complexity Theory: Designing a Problem-Based Learning Curriculum from Deconstructing the Social Context to Co-Construct with Medical Knowledge作者：洪佳慧(Chia-Hui Hung)關鍵字：行動者網絡理論;問題導向學習;鞋墊;複雜理論;醫療科技社會;Actor-Network Theory;Problem-Based Learning;Insoles;Complexity Theory;Science-Technology-Society期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：當代醫療已不再是醫者在上的主權模式，病患是完全參與者，並與醫療人員一起討論和控制自己的疾病，所以醫療人員在提供醫學處置之外，還必須瞭解病患所沉浸的社會脈絡，才能協助病患一起做出最佳的醫療決策。因此，本研究由複雜理論的視角，以醫療矯正鞋墊為課程主題，解構的鞋墊社會學脈絡與醫學專業知識為基礎，重建一個融入鞋墊科技醫療與社會思維的問題導向學習課程，期待能提升醫療照護專業學生發展以使用者為中心的臨床技術能力。研究方法為透過行動者網絡理論，與相關人員深度訪談，以瞭解鞋墊發展的脈絡。繼而由內容分析法形成鞋墊STS課程的重要構念，編撰臨床問題導向學習教案之文本，然後提供給學生進行6週的問題導向學習 (Problem-Based Learning, PBL)小組討論，並透過設計鞋墊衛教單，檢視學生學習成效。結果發現，由學生課後分享單解析，發現對於課程滿意度甚高。而對學生在PBL前、後所作的「鞋墊衛教單」作業中所含的知識結構分析之結果顯示，課程前所含醫學專業知識與產品資訊較多，但課程後則可發現突現出了比例甚高的使用者指引、安全注意事項與關心語等多元且分層的概念。因此，可推論以科技醫療與社會思維為基礎，解構社會脈絡而建構的問題導向學習課程，對於培育醫學專業發展更為全面而具推廣性。英文摘要：Patients have been the complete participants with health care professionals to discuss and control their diseases, and health professionals do not always have the authority in the doctor-patient relationship in modern medicine. Therefore, health professionals need to provide the interventions and still need to recognize the social context of the patients, and then cooperate with them to make a better medical decision. Thus, the aims of the study were from the perspective of complexity theory, taking the medical insole as the topic to deconstruct the social context and medical knowledge to be the basis, then reconstruct a problem-based learning (PBL) programs of insole with the aspects of science-technology-society to help the health professions students to develop the clinical competence of client-centered thinking. This study employed a mixed-methods research design as the research methodology. Firstly, we analyzed the actors and context of insoles through the actor-network theory. Secondly, the content analysis method was used to find out the core constructs to develop the PBL scenario. As the PBL scenario completed, 6 weeks PBL small group tutorials were brought to students, and students were asked to design the health educational sheets of insole before and after the PBL to present their learning achievements. The result showed that students were satisfied with the PBL programs. Then, after analyzing and comparing the health education sheets, more medical concepts were presented before PBL, however, more insole using instructions, safety precautions and concerned statement emerged, and the diversity of concepts was also found after PBL tutorials. Therefore, the study suggests that the PBL program developed from the science-technology-society to deconstruct the social context and reconstruct with the medical knowledge helped the students to enhance their clinical competencies and might be helpful to cultivate further health professionals.起始頁-結束頁：149-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201806_26(2).000317篇名：一個混成式案例教學模式應用於非正式科學師資培育之成效：由學習參與和學習感受觀點並列篇名：Effectiveness of Applying a Blended Case-Based Teaching Model to Informal Science Teacher Preparation: Perspectives of Learning Engagement and Learning Perception作者：洪嘉駿(Chia-Chun Hung);施昆易(Kun-Yi Shih);王淑卿(Shu-Ching Wang);董曜瑜(Yao-Yu Tung);王國華(Kuo-Hua Wang)關鍵字：奈米科技;教學知能;混成式案例教學;學習參與;學習感受;Nanotechnology;Pedagogical Knowledge;Blended Case-Based Teaching;Learning Engagement;Learning Perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在由學習參與及學習感受觀點，評估一個混成式案例教學模式應用於非正式科學師資培育之成效。本研究採用兼顧質和量的混合研究法，研究對象為某師資培育大學物理系與生物系修習教學實習，且有意願參加的17位師資生，以及3位具不同科學背景之奈米教學專精教師。混成式模式包含「觀摩教學案例」與「專精教師現身說法」兩部分。「觀摩教學案例」係為網路課程，提供由3位專精教師的4個奈米教學案例讓師資生觀摩；「專精教師現身說法」為實體課程，邀請這3位教師親臨教室與師資生面對面討論，分享奈米教學經驗。本研究利用非正式課程時間，共進行混合網路及實體之3回合循環。研究蒐集質與量的資料，研究工具包括量表、晤談、錄影、及Moodle網誌等。研究發現：一、混成式案例教學模式對師資生的學習參與，有正向的促進效益。但案例不同，參與程度有些差異。而影響師資生學習參與的因素，包括教學案例之難易度、師資生背景知識、專精教師特質、師生互動形式及時間等因素。二、師資生對本課程之學習環境感受是正向的，並覺得有助於其奈米教學的專業成長，其中以奈米學科內容知識和奈米教學策略和表徵知識較顯著，而奈米教學的評量知識比較無幫助。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to assess effectiveness of applying a blended case-based teaching model to informal teacher preparation on learning nanotechnology teaching from perspectives of learning engagement and learning perception. This study adopted a mixed-methods research approach with collection of both qualitative and quantitative data. Participants consisted of 17 volunteer preservice science teachers, who took teaching practice course, from Department of Physics and Department of Biology of a normal university, and 3 experienced science teachers who are familiar with nanotechnology teaching. The blended case-based teaching model included an online teaching cases observation course and face-to-face workshops. The online course consisted of four nano teaching cases conducted by these experienced science teachers. On the other hand, the three experienced teachers were invited to come face-to-face with the preservice teachers to share the nano teaching experience. The model took a total of 3 rounds with the blended curriculum during informal course time. Data collections included questionnaire survey, interview, videotaping, and web logs of the Moodle. The results indicated that the use of blended case-based teaching model had a positive effect on teachers' learning engagement. However, there were some differences in the degree of engagement by the teaching cases. Factors influencing preservice teachers’ learning engagement included the difficulty of teaching cases, the background knowledge of preservice teachers, the experienced teachers’ teaching style, the forms of classroom interaction, and the time. Furthermore, the preservice science teachers were satisfied with the blended learning environment, and perceived the model were helpful for their professional growth on nanotechnology teaching. Among them, the content knowledge of nanotechnology and knowledge of teaching strategies and representations were more significant, while the knowledge of assessment was less helpful.起始頁-結束頁：171-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201806_26(2).000418篇名：跨領域永續課程提升大學生整體性思考及衝突問題解決能力：以海洋永續教育為例並列篇名：Sustainability Interdisciplinary Education for Facilitating Undergraduate Students' Holistic Thinking and Conflict Resolution Competencies: A Study on Education for Ocean Sustainability作者：林季怡(Chi-I Lin);李育諭(Yuh-Yuh Li)關鍵字：永續教育;永續概念圖;海洋文學;跨領域課程;Education for Sustainability;Concept-Mapping for Sustainability;Marine Literature;Interdisciplinary Learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文主旨在思考如何培養大學生永續核心能力，研究目的在檢視跨領域課程設計對學生永續核心能力學習成效之影響，特別著重在整體性思考及衝突問題解決兩項核心能力指標。研究以海洋永續教育為例，參照跨領域永續教育模式(Sustainability Transdisciplinary Education Model, STEM)，以文學藝術做為知識統整平臺，設計跨領域海洋永續教育課程，統整社會及科學領域知識。研究工具採用概念圖測量學生整體性思考及衝突問題解決能力，研究對象為參與課程之54位大學生，參與研究學生須先受過訓練熟習概念圖之操作，學期初及學期末各進行一次概念圖測量。學生所繪概念圖採內容分析法進行編碼，參照預先擬定之編碼表進行，由兩位研究人員分別進行編碼，編碼結果進行信效度分析。研究發現：一、跨領域永續教育課程有助學生整體性思考能力提升；二、跨領域永續教育課程有助學生衝突問題解決能力提升。研究發現將可提供未來跨領域環境及永續教育課程設計參考。英文摘要：This paper investigated the cultivation of the key competencies concerning sustainability among undergraduate students. It assessed the impact of interdisciplinary learning for sustainability education, focusing its investigation on the two key sustainability competencies of holistic thinking and conflict resolution. This study examined an ocean sustainability course design based on the sustainability transdisciplinary education model (the sustainability STEM model) that utilizes literary and art works as a platform for promoting a network of socio- and scientific fields of knowledge. Fifty-four students participated in the study and their learning outcomes were assessed by concept mapping. Prior to the pre-test survey, a training session on concept mapping skills was organized and the data were collected at both the beginning and end of the course. The contents of the collected concept maps were then coded, utilizing a structured rubric to analyze the students' key sustainability competencies. The inter-rater reliability between two coders and validity of the coding result were examined. The findings indicated that, by the end of the course: 1. the students' holistic thinking improved significantly; and 2. the students' conflict resolution improved significantly. The results presented in this paper also offered pedagogical implications for adopting the sustainability STEM model to develop multidisciplinary environmental and sustainability curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201803_26(1).000119篇名：教師創意教學信念量表之發展並列篇名：Development of Teacher Creative Teaching Belief Scale作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：教學信念;量表編制;創意教學信念;Teaching Belief;Scale Development;Creative Teaching Belief期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：創意教師是教育成功的靈魂人物，若要更豐富教師創意教學的方法或行為，首要之務就在於增進教師對於創意教學的信念。然而國內外目前有關於創意教學信念的衡量工具相當缺乏，因此本研究希冀藉由創造力理論、創意教學理論以及教學信念理論，編製教師創意教學信念量表。本研究歷經14位專家的專家效度、220位師資培育實習生的探索性因素分析，以及281位正式國小教師的驗證性因素分析的建構效度檢驗及信度檢驗後，完成了量表的發展。本研究的教師創意教學信念量表共包含三個構面，分別是提升創意意向(9題)、創意認知與態度(10題)及創意教材與活動設計（7題）等三個構面，整份量表共26題，最後針對量表的使用及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：A creative teacher is the soul of success education. To enhance a teacher's creative teaching belief is the prior task to enrich the creative teaching method or behavior. Nonetheless, measurement tools of creative teaching belief are rather deficient domestically and internationally. This study therefore expected to develop the teacher creative teaching belief scale through the theories of creativity, creative teaching, and teaching belief. The scale was developed after the tests of construct validity and reliability with the expert validity of 14 experts, Exploratory Factor Analysis of 220 intern teachers, and Confirmatory Factor Analysis of 281 formal elementary school teachers. The teacher creative teaching belief scale contained three dimensions of creative intention promotion (9 questions), creative cognition and attitude (10 questions), and creative teaching materials and activity design (7 questions). It also conformed to the theoretical bases of cognition, affection, and psychomotor. Finally, suggestions were proposed aiming at the use of the scale and future studies.起始頁-結束頁：29-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201803_26(1).000220篇名：國小土石流模組教學之行動研究－學生立場選擇、所持理由與認識觀的改變並列篇名：Action Research on Mudslide-Module Instruction in Grade-Five Level-Students' Change in Decision Making, Reasoning, and Environmental Ethic Belief作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin);胡芳禎(Fan-Jen Hu)關鍵字：行動研究;社會性科學議題;非形式推理;爭議性議題;做決定;Action Research;Socio-Scientific Issues;Informal Reasoning;Controversial Scientific Issues;Decision Making期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究採取行動研究取向，由個案教師對臺中市某國小五年級一班學生34人，從事土石流教學；並探討學生對於山坡地保育與開發間所持立場抉擇與非形式推理。研究初始之第一行動循環，教師主張以土石流成因與影響等相關知識為重點從事教學，而後請學生表達第一次立場及理由。由於第一次選擇傾向於單一立場，於是在第二循環中乃再施以不同論點的文本閱讀，且由學生從事小組討論後，再請其表達第二次的立場與理由。繼之，在第三循環中設計並實施全班公聽會活動，使學生能充分溝通與分享意見後，陳述其第三次的立場與理由。本研究就三次立場及其理由變化進行分析，發現：學生針對山坡地開發議題，由一面倒傾向贊成不做開發的素樸立場，經不同論點的資訊介入後促使立場的轉換，並且激發出多樣的理由。透過公聽會活動分組及角色扮演，增加學生小組合作、分享報告與討論的機會。在研究全程中，並比較了全班學生對人類中心、生物中心與生態中心等環境倫理觀之變化。文末，就教學上的應用提出討論及建議。英文摘要：This study, adopting action research approach, mainly focused on an in-service primary teacher to teach ”mudslide” module in a grade-five class in central Taiwan. During the process, students' decision making, reasoning, and environmental ethical belief about the utilization of mountain or not were explored. The whole process consisted of three action research cycles. In the first cycle, the knowledge and naive information were introduced; then the students were asked to make their decisions with their justified reasons. In the second cycle, the students were given the counterpart information, and answered the questions as previously. Finally, a public hearing conference was held for students to present their information and opinions before the whole class. Then, the third decision and reasoning were made. The research data were analyzed based on statistics and qualitative ways. The findings included: in the beginning, almost all students advocated not to use mountain areas. After encountering with opposite opinions, a move toward the different end occurred and more reasons were aroused. The environmental ethic beliefs observed in the three cycles were compared. More than that, the discussion and implication were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：51-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201803_26(1).000301篇名：平等參與或特殊待遇？臺灣障礙者大學入學制度變遷之社會學分析並列篇名：Equal Participation or Special Treatment?- A Sociological Analysis of Disabled Students' Admissions to College in Taiwan作者：詹穆彥(Chan, Mu-yen);張睇(Chang, Heng-hao)關鍵字：高等教育;教育權;實質平等;障礙學生;融合平等;Students with disabilities;right to education;higher education;substantive equality;inclusive equality期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：平等是當代民主社會的核心價值，如何推動障礙者的平等權，是當代社會必須面對的挑戰。從1980年代開始，在障礙權利團體的反歧視與教育權倡議下，障礙學生的教育權逐漸由歧視、慈善與形式平等，走向實質平等。除一般考試之調整，亦有特殊管道如甄試及獨立招生來增加進入高等教育的機會。隨著過去20年高教的快速擴張，障礙學生進入大學的機會擴增，在學人數顯著增加。藉由不同的平等模式分析，本文檢視臺灣障礙學生大學升學政策的發展歷程與侷限。我們認為，身心障礙學生升學大專校院甄試的制度在大學入學困難、系所直接歧視障礙者且缺乏考試調整的時代，的確發揮提供身心障礙學生更多念大學的機會的功能。然而，並不是所有系所都開放特殊名額，且開放的名額是以障礙類別錄取。本文認為應該以平等的結果，即障礙學生是否得到高品質的教育且融入大學生活，重新檢視甄試制度的效果。最後，本文主張《聯合國障礙者人權公約》的人權模式及合理調整的設計能夠挑戰現行障礙學生進入大學政策的侷限，公約所主張的融合平等，在實質平等的基礎上，能更細緻地處理平等權議題。英文摘要：Equality is a core value in a democratic society. Promoting equality for people with disabilities is an inevitable challenge in contemporary society. Since the 1980s, disability right organizations in Taiwan have been advocating for nondiscrimination and rights for higher education. Models of educational rights for disabled students have gradually shifted from discrimination, charity, and formal equality to equal opportunities and substantive equality. Purpose: Due to the rapid expansion of higher education in the past two decades, college entrance channels have expanded and the number of disabled students has increased considerably. This article presents an analysis of the development of diverse college entrance channels for disabled students in Taiwan, the intrinsic limitations of these channels, and the related models of equality. In particular, Taiwan has a special college entrance examination for disabled students; for this examination, each department in a college has special quotas for students with selected types of disabilities. In the past, some colleges have discriminated between disabled students and other students and disallowed disabled students from applying for admission; moreover, appropriate disability-related adjustments were not available in general college examination. Therefore, this special examination system has opened up opportunities for disabled students to enter college. Method: This paper uses historical comparative method and collects historical documents including legislative records, newspaper archives, and newsletters from disability rights social movement organizations. Results/ Findings:In this paper, we present that the special college entrance examination is a result of the disability rights social movement mobilization against disability-based discrimination. However, we argue that a high number of disabled students in a college does not necessarily promise substantive equality for students with disabilities. The special college entrance examination is a segregated system that limits disabled students’ choices and also allows departments in colleges to select students on the basis of the type of disability and not their capabilities. The support extended to disabled students is insufficient, and disabled students are still facing substantial obstacles in the current system. We argue that to achieve substantive equality and inclusive equality, the education policy for disabled students should reevaluate the special entrance examination system and focus on the quality of education and inclusive college environment for students with disabilities. Because the government of Taiwan has domesticized the Convention on Rights for Persons with Disabilities, the reform of the current college education system should apply the human rights model and should not exclude students on the basis of their disabilities. In higher education, an accessible environment and teaching should be implemented, and individualized reasonable accommodation should be provided for students with disabilities in colleges. Conclusions/Implications: Finally, we argue that to ensure that the education policy supports the right to education for disabled students, the outcome of the special quota in the special entrance examination system should be evaluated and the equality of result and inclusive equality in colleges should be analyzed.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201811_43(3).00012篇名：輕度自閉症資優學生失敗經驗的情感調節及復原歷程之研究並列篇名：Emotional Adjustment and Recovery Process for Gifted Students with Mild Autism Spectrum Disorders and Failure Experiences作者：陳勇祥(Yung-Hsiang Chen)關鍵字：失敗;情感調節;復原歷程;資優;輕度自閉症;mild autism spectrum disorders;gifted;failure;emotional adjustment;recovery process期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究以三位已就讀大學之輕度自閉症資優學生為對象，採敘說分析取向，並從復原力觀點，探討其失敗經驗的調節與復原歷程，以了解個案之復原力如何啟動與其復原模式如何建構。研究設計以個別及團體訪談，探討個案經歷失敗經驗的歷程現象與復原過程。研究發現，個案經「感受期」至「行動期」而減輕失敗衝擊，促進自我認知，以釐清成敗關係，並移轉、沉澱、重建後，願意嘗試不同挑戰。其情感調節與復原策略，有助個案調節負向情感並喚起自我責任，同時也賦予事件的正向意義與重塑自我價值。研究結論為輕度自閉症者之人際互動特性可能影響復原歷程尋求協助之意願，且此歷程需內在自我覺察與外部支持同時啟動，並需重要他人之支持與同理。因此，本研究建議應調整個案關注之焦點，輔導其評估事件對自我之影響，再檢視環境與自我之關聯，以轉化對失敗事件的負向感受。此外，教師與家長亦應指導學生理解個人價值並未因失敗事件而消失，藉此學習不過度重視他人評價，以減輕個案常感遭受他人關注之壓力。同時，亦應教導後設認知策略，以強化行動前之自我規劃與監控能力。英文摘要：Purpose: The purpose of this study was to examine the process of emotional adjustment and recovery from failure experiences in gifted students with mild autism spectrum disorders (ASD) from the perspective of ability restoration in order to understand how the restoration of students' failure event is initiated and how recovery modes are developed. Methods: This study was based on a narrative analysis, and three gifted students with mild ASD from three universities were enrolled in the study. Individual and group interviews were conducted in this study; these interviews helped the researcher to deeply explore the experience of failure and understand what factors had affected their recovery modes. Results/Findings: The main findings were as follows: (1) The three gifted students with mild ASD experienced recovery periods, which reduced the impact of failure. In this process, students could clarify the relationship between success and failure. (2) These strategies of emotional regulation and recovery enabled them to regulate their negative emotions and evoke self-responsibility. (3) The interpersonal characteristics of individual interviewees might affect their willingness to seek assistance in the recovery process. (4) The three gifted students with mild ASD who experienced emotional regulation and recovery began becoming internally self-aware and began seeking external support. (5) In this recovery process, students could release their negative emotions, which also changed their awareness. (6) Students who experienced the recovery process could plan their actions to face different challenges. (7) These strategies and methods regulated the emotions pertaining to failure and reconstructed their sense of self-responsibility, which induced them to identify positive meanings and different values from the failure events. Moreover, these strategies enabled them to examine their relationship with the environment to transform their negative feelings about their failure events. Conclusion/Implications: (1) Interpersonal interaction might affect the willingness of gifted students with mild ASD to seek resources and assistance. (2) Students should focus on adjusting their attention to the effect of events and viewing the relationship between themselves and the environment. (3) Teachers and parents should guide students to eliminate their feelings of failure by identifying positive meanings from failure events. (4) Students should learn not to pay attention to the evaluation of others to reduce the pressure caused to oneself. (5) Teachers should teach metacognitive strategies to enhance self-planning and skill monitoring prior to actions.起始頁-結束頁：29-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201811_43(3).00023篇名：華語學齡前特定型語言障礙兒童的非詞複誦表現與臨床診斷之應用並列篇名：Nonword Repetition Performance in Mandarin- Speaking Preschool Children with Specific Language Impairment-A Study of Diagnostic Accuracy作者：陳昱君(Yuchun Chen);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu)關鍵字：非詞複誦作業;特定型語言障礙;詞彙理解;語音短期記憶;學前兒童;specific language impairment;nonword repetition task;preschool;phonological short-term memory;vocabulary comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的是發展一套適用於華語學前兒童的非詞複誦作業，探討華語學前一般發展兒童非詞複誦能力的發展，並檢驗此作業應用作為特定型語言障礙兒童早期臨床篩選指標的有效性。實驗一招募4至6歲的一般發展兒童，包含4歲組31名、5歲組29名以及6歲組30名兒童，蒐集其標準化智力和詞彙測驗以及非詞複誦的表現。作業包含二至六音節的非詞，以音節為單位計算出非詞複誦作業正確率指標。結果顯示，臺灣學前兒童的非詞複誦能力有隨著年齡成長而成熟的趨勢，尤其是在音節長度較長的非詞中更為明顯。不同的年齡組內均可發現明顯的音節長度效應，顯示本項作業可以測量到兒童的語音短期記憶容量。另外，華語學前兒童非詞複誦能力和詞彙理解能力之間有正向相關性，亦顯示本項作業具有良好的效度。實驗二比較華語學前特定型語言障礙兒童和一般發展兒童在本項作業的表現差異，以及檢視本項作業的臨床診斷正確性。共有26名SLI兒童以及29名一般發展兒童參與。結果發現顯著的組間差異，華語4至6歲SLI兒童的非詞複誦表現較一般發展兒童差，此差異顯現在不同音節長度上。利用區別分析所得的敏感性、特異性與概似比作為臨床診斷正確性的指標時也顯示，本研究所設計的非詞複誦作業的臨床診斷正確性達到研究建議的良好範圍之內。期望本項非詞複誦作業未來能夠發展為標準化測驗，以協助SLI兒童早期篩選的工作。英文摘要：Purposes: The aim of this study was two-fold. First, we developed a self-designed nonword repetition (NWR) task to evaluate the performance of NWR in 4-6-year-old Mandarin-speaking children with typical development. Second, we examined the performance of NWR in children with specific language impairment (SLI) and agematched typically developing (TD) children in order to explore the possibility of using NWR accuracy as a clinical marker for Mandarin-speaking preschool children with SLI. Methods: In Experiment 1, 90 TD preschool children (with 31 being aged 4 years, 29 being aged 5 years, and 30 being aged 6 years) were recruited. The children's performance on the standardized nonverbal IQ test, receptive vocabulary tests, and self-designed NWR task was assessed individually. The NWR task included 30 nonwords comprising low-frequency Chinese real words ranging from 2 to 6 syllables in length. The total number of correctly repeated syllables for each child was used to calculate the percentage of correctly repeated syllables that was considered as the NWR accuracy index. In Experiment 2, we compared the NWR abilities of 26 children with SLI who were aged between 4 and 6 years and 29 age-matched TD children. Children who scored 1 standard deviation below the means in two of the three standardized language tests were confirmed to have SLI. The sensitivity and specificity of the NWR task for discriminating between the two groups of children were analyzed using discriminant analysis. Additionally, positive and negative likelihood ratios were reported. Results/ Findings: In Experiment 1, Significant effects of syllable length were found across the three age groups: children' repetition accuracy decreased as the length of nonwords increased. This phenomenon supported the validity of the self-designed NWR task for assessing the capacity of phonological short-term memory in preschool-aged children. Moreover, the NWR accuracy increased with age, and the age-related change was more evident in nonwords with longer syllables. The NWR accuracy was highly correlated with children’s receptive vocabulary ability. Compared with the results from NWR studies conducted using other languages, our data provided supportive evidence for the clinical usage of the proposed Mandarin NWR task. In Experiment 2, the results obtained after partialling out the influence of nonverbal IQ revealed that compared with the TD children, the children with SLI performed more poorly on the NWR task consistently for the different syllable lengths. The overall diagnostic accuracy of the NWR task was 87%, suggesting that the proposed NWR task could adequately distinguish between Mandarin-speaking preschool children with and without SLI. Conclusions/Implications: In summary, our study provided evidence indicating the phonological short-term memory deficits in Mandarin-speaking children with SLI and the possibility of using the proposed NWR task in the early stages of SLI screening procedure. We expect to extend this self-designed NWR task to a standardized test and expand its applicability in future studies to improve the early identification of children with SLI.起始頁-結束頁：57-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201811_43(3).00034篇名：以華語可接受噪音量預測聽力損失成人之助聽器使用率並列篇名：Predicting the Frequency of Hearing-Aid Use by Using Unaided Mandarin Acceptable Noise Level Values作者：張宸瑋(Chen-Wei Chang);陳小娟(Hsiao-Chuan Chen)關鍵字：助聽器使用率;華語可接受噪音量;噪音處理技術;frequency of hearing-aid use;Mandarin acceptable noise level (M-ANL);noise reduction features (NRFs)期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：國外研究發現選配前量測個人的「可接受噪音量」（acceptable noise level, ANL），可預測未來助聽器配戴後的使用狀態。本研究目的是建構華語可接受噪音量（Mandarin ANL, M-ANL）與助聽器使用率之對應關係及其預測效力。研究工具為華語版ANL測驗及「助聽器使用現況調查問卷」，以個案有助聽需求時的使用率作為助聽器使用頻繁度的判斷標準。126位助聽器使用者參與本研究，依現有助聽器有無開啟噪音處理技術分成兩組（無功能組50人，有功能組76人）。研究結果如下：一、全體平均未助聽華語ANL值5.84 dB（SD = 4.42 dB，範圍-3 ∼ 18 dB）；二、未助聽華語ANL值和助聽器使用率有顯著的負相關（p ＜ .001），即華語ANL值愈小，助聽器使用率就愈高；三、助聽器高頻繁使用者平均未助聽華語ANL值在無功能組為4.33 dB（SD = 3.41），有功能組是4.85 dB（SD = 4.01）；四、未助聽華語ANL值≦ 5 dB，有85 % 以上機率成為助聽器高頻繁使用者，未助聽華語ANL值 ＞ 13 dB（無功能組）或未助聽華語ANL值 ＞ 17 dB（有功能組），易成為助聽器低頻繁使用者，無功能組整體預測正確率是86.0 %，有功能組為80.3 %。本研究最重要的成果是建構國內助聽器使用者之未助聽華語ANL值相關數據，也佐證助聽器內建訊號處理技術會改變華語ANL值。臨床應用建議選配前量測華語ANL測驗，適時提供聽覺輔具進階技術與諮商，提升助聽輔具購買後的配戴使用率。另須留意未助聽的華語ANL值僅能解釋聽損者未來助聽器使用率的少部分，仍有多數未知的影響因素需要進一步探討。英文摘要：Purpose: Studies have revealed that acceptable noise level can be used to predict the use of hearing aids even before the fitting of the aids. The aim of this study was to develop a corresponding relationship between Mandarin acceptable noise level (M-ANL) and the frequency of hearing-aid use as well as the predictive effectiveness of M-ANL test. The M-ANL test provides clinical professionals a tool to assess how often a particular hearing aid might be used in the future. The frequency of hearing-aid use is defined as the percentage of the hearing-aid use whenever it is required.Methods: The M-ANL test and a questionnaire pertaining to hearing-aid use were the tools used in this study. A total of 126 hearing-aid users participated in the experiment. The participants were categorized into two groups on the basis of whether the noise reduction features (NRFs) of their hearing aids were turned on or off. The group in which the NRFs were off (NRFoff group) comprised 50 participants, and the group in which the NRFs were on (NRF-on group) comprised 76 participants. Results/Findings: (1) The average of unaided M-ANL values for all participants was 5.84 dB (SD = 4.42, range = <U+2212>3 to +18 dB). (2) There was a significant negative correlation between unaided M-ANL values and the frequency of hearing-aid use (p ＜ .001). Specifically, the lower the unaided M-ANL values were, the higher the frequency of hearing-aid use became, and vice versa. (3) In the NRF-off group and NRF-on group, the average unaided M-ANL values of hearing-aid users who used the hearing aids frequently were 4.33 dB (SD = 3.41) and 4.85 dB (SD = 4.01), respectively. (4) Logistic regression curves revealed that if unaided M-ANL values were lower than 5 dB, then the probability of a hearing-aid user becoming a frequent user was more than 85%. Moreover, if unaided M-ANL values were greater than 13 dB in the NRF-off group and greater than 17 dB in the NRF-on group, then participants would become less frequent hearing-aid users (the odds of becoming a frequent user were less than 20%). Furthermore, unaided M-ANL values could accurately predict 86.0% (NRFoff group) and 80.3% (NRF-on group) of hearing-aid usage patterns.Conclusions/ Implications: One of the most crucial achievements of this study is the determination of ANL values in Mandarin-speaking hearing-aid users. This study also verified that fitting a high-order hearing aid with more signal processing technologies would alter M-ANL values and increase the use of hearing aids. Thus, it is recommended to conduct the M-ANL test before hearing aids are fitted. The results of this study provide insights in informational counseling regarding advanced hearing-aid technologies. This can in turn improve the frequency of hearing-aid use. In clinical application, the unaided M-ANL value is one of the factors for predicting hearing-aid use; there are many unknown factors that should be investigated.起始頁-結束頁：83-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201811_43(3).00045篇名：臺北市國小特殊教育教師實施應用行為分析之現況並列篇名：Current Dissemination of Applied Behavior Analysis in Taiwan: An Example of the Taipei City Elementary School Special Education Teachers作者：張淑芬(Shu-Feng Zheng);郭千瑜(Chien-Yu Kuo);王慧婷(Hui-Ting Wang);鳳華(Hua Feng)關鍵字：行為功能評量;特殊教育教師;應用行為分析;applied behavior analysis;functional behavior assessment;special education teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣於2013年發布並修正《特殊教育法施行細則》，明訂專業團隊須提供所需學生行為功能介入方案，為國內實施應用行為分析立下重要里程碑。本研究目的為探討特教老師對於應用行為分析的認知程度與使用頻率的現況。研究對象為臺北市國小階段特教老師，隨機系統性抽樣66所臺北市國民小學及兩間特殊學校發放問卷，共回收有效問卷298份。問卷基於正向行為支持與應用行為分析的七大向度而設計，共有30題，內含反向題八題；研究結果發現，國小特殊教育教師在應用行為分析的七大向度裡，較能掌握「技術性的」和「行為的」兩個概念向度；普遍掌握較弱的概念向度為「應用的」。國小特殊教育教師對應用行為分析認知程度與使用頻率的關係，可分為四類型，依序為33.9%的知行高顯型、28.9%的知易行難型、21.1%的知行低顯型、16.1%的知難行易型。逐步複迴歸分析結果發現，自陳會在教學上使用應用行為分析、應用行為分析認知程度愈高、為特殊教育研究所或40學分班畢業、任教於一般學校資源班或特殊教育學校，是國小特殊教育教師應用行為分析使用頻率較高的顯著預測因子。國小階段特殊教育教師對應用行為分析之行為功能評量與介入的認知程度及使用頻率均高者占三分之一，顯示仍有加強之空間。另本研究發現，實踐動機、認知程度、教育程度、任教學校的安置型態可預測行為功能評量與介入的使用頻率。雖然是臺北市區域取樣，但因目前臺灣尚未有相關研究發表，因此研究結果仍能在謹慎下作為特殊教育學界推動應用行為分析與正向行為支持之參考。英文摘要：The Taiwan Association for Behavior Analysis was established in 2007. There are three course series certified by the Behavior Analyst Certification Board in Taiwan. As of June 2018, 24 certified behavior analysts were located in Taiwan. Taiwan's ”Enforcement Rules of Special Education” were amended in 2013; since then, the special education professional team involved in the program has been required to provide functional behavior intervention plans to students with emotional behavior issues; this was an important milestone for the domestic implementation of applied behavior analysis (ABA). Purpose: Using elementary school special education teachers in Taipei as an example, this study explored the current dissemination of ABA among special education teachers in Taiwan. Our research questions examined the following: (1) cognizance of ABA; (2) the frequency of use of ABA; (3) the levels of cognizance and frequency of use of ABA, which we used to categorize teachers into groups exhibiting a high level of cognizance of ABA and high frequency of use, a high level of cognizance and low frequency of use, a low level of cognizance and high frequency of use, and a low level of cognizance and low frequency of use; (4) the variables that influence the level of cognizance and frequency of use of ABA; and (5) the variables that predicted frequency of use of ABA. Methods: Certified special education teachers at elementary schools in Taipei were eligible participants. A structured questionnaire of 30 questions (including eight duplicated reverse questions for reliability) was developed on the basis of positive behavior support and the seven dimensions of ABA. Questionnaires were distributed to a systematically randomized sample of 66 elementary schools and two special schools in Taipei; 298 valid set of responses were collected. Results/Findings: Most participants consistently provided correct answers to questionnaire items relating to the ”technological” and ”behavioral” dimensions but not to questions in the ”applied” dimension. Per the survey results, the participants were distributed into four types according to the level of cognizance and frequency of use of ABA: 33.9% exhibited a high level of cognizance and high frequency of use, 28.9% demonstrated a high level of cognizance and low frequency of use, 21.1% displayed a low level of cognizance and low frequency of use, and 16.1% had a low level of cognizance and high frequency of use. A stepwise multiple regression analysis indicated that the key predictors of high frequency of use of ABA in teaching were high frequency of use of ABA, high level of cognizance of ABA, attainment of a higher than college/university educational level or completion of 40 credits of graduate-level special education classes, and teaching in ordinary school resource classes or special education schools. This study additionally discovered that the motivation to use ABA, the level of cognizance of the practice, the level of educational attainment, and the type of school in which the participant worked predicted the frequency of use of ABA in functional behavior intervention planning. Conclusions/Implications: This study determined that one-third of special education teachers in elementary schools had a high level of cognizance and high frequency of use of ABA. This finding demonstrated the current dissemination of the practice and evidenced the need for improvement. The results also demonstrated that motivation to use the practice, a high level of cognizance of ABA, a high level of educational attainment, and the type of school in which a teacher works predict the likelihood of the use of behavior functional analysis and intervention. The proportional sampling method precludes generalizing the findings to the entirety of Taiwan, but no other similar study has been reported in Taiwan; thus, the results nevertheless serve as a useful reference for promoting the practice of ABA.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201807_43(2).00016篇名：發展遲緩兒幼兒園活動參與研究並列篇名：Participation of Children with Developmental Delay in Preschool Activities作者：謝中君(Jung-jiun Shie)關鍵字：活動參與;發展遲緩兒;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factory analysis;developmental delay;participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的有二：一、編製一份觀察者評量「幼兒園活動參與量表」，建立其信度及效度資料；二、探討發展遲緩兒在幼兒園活動中的參與情形。自編評量表為利用跨活動情境的設計來建立參與的共同因素，以四種幼兒園常見的活動情境（團體討論、繪畫、團體遊戲及自由遊戲活動）來編寫題目，各活動題目於進行探索性因素分析後，找出四個活動的共同因素，即專注、回應、合適行為及互動，再以共同因素的原始題目作為觀察變項，進行二階驗證性因素分析。結果顯示，專注、回應、合適行為之二階因素模式有良好適配度，自由遊戲之互動模式的適配度亦佳。共有153位正常發展幼兒及16位發展遲緩兒參與正式量表編製。本評量表與「文蘭適應行為量表」的同時效度亦合宜。本評量表具有合適的評分者一致性信度，參與研究的評分者均經過訓練，評分者一致性之同意度已達.8。利用自編「幼兒園活動參與量表」評量就讀臺北市22個融合班級30對3至6歲發展遲緩兒及其正常發展同儕的參與表現，結果發現發展遲緩兒在專注、回應表現及自由活動的互動表現均較同儕差，惟在合適行為表現上，發展遲緩兒在四個活動的表現與其同儕相近。此外，發展遲緩兒在繪畫、團體遊戲、自由遊戲的回應表現均比團體討論活動佳，但四個活動的專注或合適行為表現，彼此間沒有顯著差異。英文摘要：Purpose: This study was twofold. First, the study developed an assessment tool called the Preschool Activity Participation Scale (PAPS) to help professionals observe and evaluate children's participation in preschool activities; the reliability and validity of the PAPS were also established. Second, the study evaluated the performance of the participation of the children with and without developmental delay. Methods: The PAPS was designed to establish the shared constructs of participation within the most common contexts in preschool activities. The test items were designed for each of the following four preschool activities: circle time, drawing, games, and free play. The validation process was as follows. (1) Test items were designed according to the context of each activity and examined and revised separately through an exploratory factor analysis. (2) After the analysis, four shared constructs were identified, namely attention, response, adequate behavior, and interaction. (3) A second-order confirmatory factor analysis was utilized to examine the fitness of the three shared constructs, namely attention, response, and adequate behavior. The test items for the four activities in each shared construct were used as the observation variables and analyzed through a second-order confirmatory factor analysis. Results/Findings: The results indicated that the fitness of the following shared construct patterns was adequate: attention, response, and adequate behavior. The construct pattern of interaction tested through the confirmatory factory analysis was satisfactory. A total of 153 children with normal development and 16 with developmental delay (DD) participated in the process of the confirmatory factor analysis. (4) The concurrent validity of the PAPS was also examined through the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale (VABS). The results showed the concurrent validity between the PAPS and VABS to be adequate. Notably, the interrater reliability was 0.8. The participation of the 30 pairs of children with and without DD was assessed by the PAPS. Conclusions/Implications: The results indicated that children with DD had significantly lower scores than their peers on the construct of attention in the circle time, group games, and free play activities; on the construct of response in all four activities; and on the construct of interaction in the free play activity. Notably, the children from both groups demonstrated similar performance levels on the construct of adequate behavior. Additionally, children with DD performed better in the activities of drawing, games, and free play than in the activity of circle time in terms of the construct of response. Children with DD performed similarly on the constructs of attention and adequate behavior in all four activities.起始頁-結束頁：31-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201807_43(2).00027篇名：以眼動儀探討罹患自閉症類群障礙症之兒童對自然情境圖片中社會訊息之凝視型態：ASD自然情境圖片眼動研究並列篇名：Investigating Gaze Pattern of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder toward Social Information in Naturalistic Pictures with Eye Tracker作者：余勝皓(Sheng-Hao Yu);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);林慧麗(Hui-Li Lin)關鍵字：生態效度;自閉症類群障礙症;眼動儀;第一凝視點;學童;autism spectrum disorder;ecological validity;eye tracker;first fixation;school-aged children期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討自閉症類群障礙症（Autism Spectrum Disorder, ASD）患者幼年時期社會認知缺陷本質。針對部分研究結果支持ASD患者較少觀看人物眼睛，仍有爭議，例如：ASD患者於動／靜態刺激的表現尚未有清楚穩定的結果。此外，眾多研究將焦點放在ASD成人患者。本研究使用眼動儀探索ASD患童在靜態高生態效度的社會刺激圖片上之凝視型態，共招募25位自閉症類群障礙症ASD患童為實驗組，25位配對性別、年齡及智力的典型發展兒童為控制組。操弄變項為圖片人數（單人、雙人）及圖片類型（社交、非社交），依變項為注視時間及第一凝視點。以注視時間為依變項所發現的結果，除了與過去研究大致相符外（ASD患童在人物、頭部及眼睛區域之注視時間顯著低於典型發展組，於非人物區域及嘴巴區域顯著高於典型發展組），亦發現ASD患童的社會注意力缺陷或許不在於對社會訊息的凝視組型，而在於對社會訊息凝視偏好的程度。更重要的是，以第一凝視點為依變項所發現的結果顯示，第一凝視點是呈現出組間差異之敏感指標；第一凝視點分析結果顯示ASD患童在人物、頭部及眼睛區域的凝視優先性顯著低於典型發展組，而於嘴巴及頭部其他區域則高於典型發展組。本研究貢獻在於嘗試以較具外在效度、具自然情境脈絡的取向來探索ASD患者之凝視行為，並採用更敏感的眼動指標，即第一凝視點。同時，本研究以學齡兒童為受試者，故能探索更早期的凝視型態。再者，本研究同時考量實驗素材之人數與互動性，亦控制人物的臉部表情，故能有較細緻的結論。英文摘要：Purpose: The topic of social cognition is essential to exploring the nature of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Compared with typically developing participants, individuals with ASD tend to gaze at a human's mouth more than his/her eyes. However, this conclusion is controversial, especially when different processing mechanisms related to static and dynamic task materials are considered. Methods: To resolve this controversy, eye-tracking techniques were applied to investigate the gaze pattern of children with ASD, and a precise and sensitive indicator, namely the first fixation point, was drawn from the observed eye movements. Both fixation time and first fixation point were measured as the participants were viewing ecologically valid social information pictures. In total, 25 children with ASD (the experimental group, EG) and 25 typically developing children (the control group, CG) were recruited. The two groups were matched by gender, age, and IQ. Two within-participants independent variables were used, namely the number of people in the materials (one or two people) and the type of action the people exhibited (social or nonsocial); thus, there were four types of materials, and each comprised five pictures. Results/Findings: Most of the fixation time results are consistent with those in the literature. Specifically, the total fixation time of the EG was significantly shorter than that of the CG in the people, head and eyes areas and was significantly longer in the non-people and the mouth areas. Moreover, we found out that the deficit of social interaction of children with ASD might not be related to the pattern but to the intensity of their interest to those critical areas. Notably, our findings based on the first fixation points indicate that the gaze priority of the people, head, and eye areas of the EG was significantly lower than that of the CG, and also that the gaze priority of the mouth and the areas of the other parts of the head of the EG was significantly higher than that of the CG. These findings also suggest that the cause of the impairments in social attention of children with ASD may not be the overall gaze pattern but the intensity of preference toward social information areas. Our findings also support the first fixation point as a precise and sensitive indicator to detect the differences between the two groups. Conclusions/Implications: The main contributions of this study include (1) using ecologically valid materials to increase the degree of external validity, (2) measuring the first fixation point and proving it is a sensitive dependent variable, (3) recruiting children as participants to investigate their developmental pattern, and (4) controlling the number of people and their social interaction nature and facial expression in the materials. Accordingly, we conclude that the stable developmental differences of the gaze pattern can be reliably observed between the two groups of children.起始頁-結束頁：65-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201807_43(2).00038篇名：學前單純語音異常兒童與伴隨語言發展異常之語音異常兒童的語音錯誤表現並列篇名：Speech Sound Errors of Preschool Children with Speech Sound Disorders and Co-Occurring Language Problems作者：鄭宇翔(Yu-Hsiang Cheng);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu)關鍵字：子音正確率;構音／音韻異常;語言發展異常;語音異常;學前兒童;articulation/phonological disorders;language development disorders;percentage of consonants correct;preschool children;speech sound disorders期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討單純語音異常兒童與伴隨語言發展異常之語音異常兒童在語音錯誤類型和語音異常嚴重度之差異，並檢視語言能力和構音錯誤類型及語音異常嚴重度的相關性。研究對象為年齡58∼74個月大之20名單純語音異常兒童（Speech Sound Disorders, SSD）與16名伴隨語言發展異常之語音異常兒童（Speech Sound Disorders & Language Development Disorder, SSD+LDD）。本研究以一套涵蓋國語21 個子音之自編情境詞語測驗蒐集語音樣本，分析兩組兒童在構音錯誤類型、音韻歷程、語音異常嚴重度與錯誤子音之變異表現的差異。結果顯示，兩組兒童構音錯誤類型皆以替代類型為主，且SSD+LDD組的替代類型出現次數顯著多於SSD組。音韻歷程部分，兩組兒童在後置音化與塞音化的出現次數有顯著差異。兩組之語音異常嚴重度有顯著差異，SSD組的平均嚴重度為輕—中度；SSD+LDD組則為中—重度。兩組在錯誤子音的變異出現率上無顯著差異，而SSD+LDD組的錯誤子音變異程度顯著大於SSD組。檢驗語言能力和語音表現的關聯性，發現語言理解與子音正確率、替代次數、音韻歷程次數有顯著相關，口語表達與子音正確率、替代／歪曲次數、音韻歷程次數有顯著相關，其中以口語表達能力和語音表現的相關較高。研究結果支持，伴隨有語言發展異常的語音異常兒童與單純語音異常兒童的語音表現有差異，前者表現出較多的構音替代錯誤次數、較多的音韻歷程次數和種類以及較高的語音異常嚴重度，且個別兒童的語言能力與語音錯誤類型和嚴重度間均有關聯性。建議對語音異常兒童進行評估與療育時，亦應考慮其語言能力差異可能造成的影響。英文摘要：This study explored the early speech sound performance of Mandarin-speaking children with speech sound disorders (SSDs) and different language profiles. Purposes: This study had two main purposes. First, the types of articulation errors and severity of articulation difficulties in two groups of children, namely one involving children with SSDs (the SSD-only group) and one involving children with co-occurring language development disorders (the SSD+LDD group), were explored and compared. Second, the correlation between the language abilities and speech production of the two groups was further examined. Methods: Thirty-six preschool children with SSDs were selected as participants and classified into the SSD-only group (n = 20, average age = 66.15, SD = 5.575) and SSD+LDD group (n = 16, average age = 66.81, SD = 4.902). Standardized tests were used to examine the children's nonverbal IQ and language comprehension and production abilities. A self-invented test called the Mandarin Speech Production Test was used to collect and assess a child’s speech production abilities, including articulation error types, phonological processes, error sound variation, and SSD severity. A two-way mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) and one-way ANOVA were adopted to investigate any significant differences in the speech sound performance between the two groups. The correlations among language comprehension ability, language production ability, speech error types, and speech error severity were also examined. Results/Findings: The results demonstrated that substitution errors were the most frequent articulation error types in the two groups, and the SSD+LDD group exhibited a higher frequency of substitution errors. For the group comparison of phonological processes, the SSD+LDD group exhibited a significantly higher frequency than SSD group. Regarding the variation of the children's sound errors, the SSD+LDD group exhibited a greater degree of variation than the SSD group. For SSD severity, the average level was from mild to moderate in the SSD-only group and moderate to severe in the SSD+LDD group. The Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient was used to examine the correlation between language abilities and speech production abilities; the results showed that both were significantly correlated with their substitution errors, phonological processes, and SSD severity levels. Conclusions/Implications: The results support the literature that children with SSDs and language problems exhibit a greater level of severity in speech production than those with SSD only. The children in the SSD+LDD group were observed to produce much more substitution error types in their articulation than those in the SSD-only group. The major outcomes reveal that the differences in the children's language ability may influence the production of their speech sound errors and SSD severity. On the basis of these findings, to convey a complete speech and language treatment plan, clinicians should allocate greater attention to the language difficulties of children with SSDs.起始頁-結束頁：93-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201807_43(2).00049篇名：學前特教巡迴輔導教師專業能力指標建構及其權重研究並列篇名：Construction of Indicators of Professional Competence for Early Childhood Special Education Itinerant Teachers作者：賴妤璿(Yu-Hsuan Lai);孫良誠(Liang-Chen Sun)關鍵字：能力指標;層級分析法;模糊德菲法;學前特教巡迴教師;early childhood special education itinerant teachers;competence indicators;fuzzy Delphi method;analytic hierarchy process期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要目的在建構學前特教巡迴輔導教師專業能力指標，並分析指標權重。首先整理相關文獻歸納學前特教巡迴輔導教師應具備的專業能力內涵作為建構指標的基礎，再邀請七位學者專家檢視指標架構及內容的合宜性與完整性，並依據渠等建議編製成研究工具，提供19位學者專家以「模糊德菲法」 篩選出適切的專業能力指標，最後再以「層級分析法」求得專業能力指標的相對權重值。本研究結論包括：一、學前特教巡迴教師專業能力指標架構與內涵可分為四個層面、11個次層面、49個指標。二、學前特教巡迴教師專業能力指標的四個層面權重，由高至低，分別為專業倫理（30.4%）、溝通與支援（27.2%）、課程與教學（22.2%）、鑑定與評量（20.2%）。三、學前特教巡迴教師專業能力指標四個層面下，各次層面權重值最高者分別為：課程與教學層面的教學實務、溝通與支援層面的與其他教師合作、鑑定與評量層面的鑑定評量實務，以及專業倫理層面的專業責任。最後，根據研究結果提出以下建議：一、學前特教巡迴教師應兼顧四個專業層面的能力；二、運用本研究建構的指標檢核學前特教巡迴教師專業能力；三、系統性規劃特教巡迴教師職前訓練課程，以及在職訓練課程；四、建立各項指標的檢核重點，以提高指標的實用價值；五、運用結構方程模式進行指標的驗證性因素分析與信、效度考驗。英文摘要：Early childhood special education itinerant teachers are important resources for the special education of young children in Taiwan. These teachers are required to be highly professional in relevant areas. However, current training and cultivation programs do not meet teaching and counseling needs, failing to adequately familiarize these teachers with the practices of student guidance and counseling, teacher consultation, and special education projects. Therefore, the teachers' capabilities and their teaching and counseling practices are often questioned. Studies have shown that these teachers are themselves concerned about not being provided sufficient professional training. Purpose: This study was intended to resolve this concern by establishing indicators for assessing the professional competences of early childhood special education itinerant teachers in Taiwan. These indicators could serve as references for them to plan their professional development and attend related training courses. Methods: We first conducted a literature review to establish the initial framework of these indicators. The framework was then examined by 7 experts to ensure the indicators' relevance, and a formal questionnaire was accordingly developed. Using the fuzzy Delphi method, 19 experts identified suitable indicators, and the analytic hierarchy process was employed to determine the indicators' importance. Results/Findings: (1) The framework consisted of 4 dimensions, 11 sub-dimensions, and 49 indicators. (2) In order of their weights, the 4 dimensions were as follows: professional ethics (30.4%), communication and support (27.2%), curriculum and teaching (22.2%), and diagnosis and assessment (22.2%). (3) The subdimensions with the highest weights were ”professional responsibilities” (professional ethics), ”cooperating with other teachers” (communication and support), ”teaching practice” (curriculum and teaching), and ”diagnosis and assessment practice” (diagnosis and assessment). Conclusions/Implications: Based on the findings, the following five implications were identified: (1) Early childhood special education itinerant teachers should develop their competences in all four dimensions. (2) The indicators can be used to examine the professional competences of these teachers. (3) Preservice and on-the-job training courses for these teachers should be systematically developed. (4) The indicators should have clear standards of inspection to ensure their practicability. (5) In the future, a structural equation model can be used to perform confirmation factor analysis as well as reliability and validity tests.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201803_43(1).000110篇名：國小數學學習困難學童之心理數線表徵發展及其數線估計能力之研究並列篇名：Mental Number Line Representation and Number Line Estimation by Elementary Students with Mathematical Learning Difficulties作者：連文宏(Wen-Hung Lien);洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung)關鍵字：心理數線表徵;數字在數線位置估計作業;數線估計能力;數學學習困難;閱讀困難;number-to-position task;mental number line representation;number line estimation ability;mathematical learning difficulties;reading difficulties期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的在於探討國小數學學習困難學童之心理數線表徵發展及其數線估計能力表現，研究指出，「數字在數線位置估計作業」所探討的心理數線表徵發展與數線估計能力（以估計誤差量作為指標）是研究學童數感能力的方式之一，然本研究以電腦化方式進行施測，得以進一步分析數線估計速度表現，並以三種方式進行分析，團體、個別、嘗試次。所有國小二年級與四年級的受試者都經過兩次數學與閱讀測驗，結果均低於百分等級35以下所篩選為數學學習困難合併閱讀困難、單純數學學習困難、單純閱讀困難、以及正常發展等四組學童。研究結果指出，有數學學習困難之學童在國小二年級時，其心理數線表徵仍依賴模糊表徵（介於對數和線性表徵之間），然無數學學習困難之學童已依賴線性表徵；到了國小四年級，四組學童均已依賴線性表徵，顯示國小二年級數學學習困難學童之心理數線表徵有發展遲緩現象，但是到了國小四年級則能跟上同儕的發展。至於估計誤差量與估計速度之數線估計能力，在國小二年級與四年級有數學學習困難學童之表現均顯著低於無數學學習困難學童，顯示隨著年級發展，有數學學習困難學童之數線估計能力仍顯著低落，此能力似乎為其核心缺陷。據此，本研究針對數學學習困難學生的數感能力研究、診斷與教學提出具體的建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Mental representation of numbers is considered to possess not only quantitative but also spatial properties; therefore, researchers have designed various tasks to estimate it. Mental number line representation, derived from the Spatial- Numerical Association of Response Codes effect, compresses large numbers as logarithmic functions, according to Dehaene (1993). The linear function becomes dominant as children grow. Therefore, this study investigated the development of mental number line representation and number line estimation in elementary school students who have mathematical learning difficulties (MLD). These types of representation and estimation assessed with the “number-to-position” task have been recommended as indicators of number sense in the literature. Methods: A computerized number-toposition task was designed using the Visual Basic program, and performance and speed were recorded when participants indicated the positions of numbers in lines shown on the screen. Four groups of students in the second and fourth grades were screened. Standardized mathematical and reading tests were administered. A cut-off score of ＜35th percentile for 2 consecutive years was used as the screening criterion for classifying the students into one of the following four groups: MLD with reading difficulties (RD) (MLD-RD), only MLD (MLD-only), only RD (RD-only), and normal achievement (NA). All students were tested using the computerized number-to-position task, and the data were examined through group, individual, and trial-by-trial analyses.Results/Findings: According to performance in the group and individual analyses, the mental number line representation of second-grade students with MLD (with/without RD) depended on ambiguous representation (falling between the logarithm and linear representation), and that of the students without MLD depended on the linear representation. However, in all groups of fourth-grade students, the mental number line tended to depend on the linear representation. This result indicated the developmental delay in terms of mental number line representation in second-grade students with MLD. As they progressed to higher grades, the students with MLD caught up with their typically developing peers in terms of their development of mental number line representation, as proven by the results of the fourth-grade students with MLD. In terms of estimation error and speed, there were significant differences between the students with MLD (including the MLD-RD and MLD-only groups) and those without MLD (including RD-only and NA groups) in both grades. This result indicated that number line estimation ability is the core deficit in students with MLD. Conclusions/Implications: The mental number line representation deficit decreases with progression to higher grades. Students with MLD catch up with their peers without MLD by the fourth grade. However, they still differ in terms of errors and speed. Accordingly, the metal number line presentation is defined as students’ number sense and is recommended for the assessment of the development of number sense or for evaluating the effectiveness of intervention.起始頁-結束頁：29-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201803_43(1).000211篇名：學齡期注意力不足過動症－混合表現型兒童執行功能研究並列篇名：Executive Function in Elementary School Children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Combined Presentation作者：朱慶琳(Ching-Lin Chu);黃敏怡(Min-Yi Huang);葉啟斌(Chin-Bin Yeh);姜忠信(Chung-Hsin Chiang)關鍵字：注意力不足／過動症—混合表現;執行功能;學齡期;ADHD-combined presentation;elementary school children;executive function期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究欲了解學齡期注意力不足過動症—混合表現型（Attention-Deficit/ Hyperactivity Disorder-Combined Presentation, ADHD-C）兒童執行功能表現，並檢視執行功能作業表現作為區分ADHD-C及一般兒童之區辨效能。研究對象共60名兒童，為國小一年級至六年級學童，包括30名目前未服藥且無其他精神科共病的ADHD-C兒童，以及配對年齡、智商與性別之30名控制組兒童；另有兒童家長及教師。探討二組兒童於五項執行功能領域（含八細項）之能力差異，分別為抑制（抑制正進行反應及干擾控制）、工作記憶（語文及視覺空間工作記憶）、認知彈性、計畫、流暢度（語文及非語文流暢度）。兒童依序接受WISC-IV簡式版及執行功能作業，家長與教師填答注意力缺陷過動症中文版。進行輪廓分析及典型區辨分析，探討執行功能差異及作業的區辨效能。結果顯示，ADHD-C兒童的執行功能整體輪廓與控制組並無不同，但整體表現低於控制組，且以干擾控制能力、視覺空間工作記憶能力、認知彈性能力顯著較差，而計畫、流暢度能力亦有偏低現象。各項作業上，以敲與拍作業、空間記憶廣度分測驗及兒童數－色測驗等三項，可有效區辨二組兒童，區辨分析指出整體區辨正確率為78.3%。總結來說，學齡期ADHD-C兒童執行功能呈現全面性偏低的能力，尤其在抑制、視覺空間工作記憶及認知彈性上更為明顯。本文最後提出未來研究上的發展及在臨床及教育上的應用。英文摘要：Purpose: Children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) who have executive function (EF) deficit show inconsistency in patterns of EF impairments. Certain methodological limitations might contribute to these confounding factors, such as ADHD subtype, intelligence quotient (IQ), chronological age, psychiatric comorbidity, and medication. This study examined the EF patterns in elementary school children with ADHD-combined presentation (ADHD-C) and determined whether EF tasks could help in effectively distinguishing between children with ADHD-C and controls. Methods: Sixty children from several elementary schools, their parents, and their teachers were recruited. Thirty children with ADHD-C and 30 healthy controls who were matched for sex, age, and IQ were enrolled. All the children with ADHD-C who were recruited had either never taken ADHD medication or had discontinued the medication at least a year before the study. Children with other psychiatric comorbidities were also excluded. Each child was tested on five major EF domains comprising eight different subdomains, including inhibition (of an ongoing response and interference control), working memory (verbal and nonverbal), cognitive flexibility, planning, and fluency (verbal and nonverbal). All the children were examined using the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children–Fourth Edition short form followed by the eight EF tasks. Parents and teachers in each group were required to finish the Swanson, Nolan, and Pelham Version IV scale for ADHD. Profile analyses were conducted to explore the differences in EF between the two groups. Canonical discriminant function analysis was used to determine whether a set of tasks effectively predicted ADHD-C. Results/Findings: The profiles of eight EF tasks were similar between the ADHD-C and control groups. Moreover, the global EF was relatively low in the ADHD-C group. Further analyses indicated that children with ADHD-C had poorer interference control, nonverbal working memory, and cognitive flexibility, and slightly lower levels in planning and in verbal and nonverbal fluency. Scores on the three EF tasks, including the knock and tap task, spatial working memory task, and the children’s color trial test, had an overall correct discriminative rate of 78.3% for the two groups. Conclusions/Implications: After the confounding factors were excluded, the study revealed that EF impairment may exist in children with ADHD-C. Compared to that in controls, EF performance was globally lower for children with ADHD-C. Among the EF subdomains, interference control, nonverbal working memory, and cognitive flexibility presented more deficits than the other subdomains, providing information about the phenotype of ADHD-C and the association with their neuropsychopathology. The clinical and educational implications of these findings are discussed. Further research on this subject is warranted.起始頁-結束頁：53-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201803_43(1).000312篇名：高功能自閉症兒童情緒語調之理解與表達並列篇名：Perception and Production of Emotional Intonation in Children with High-Functioning Autism作者：游蟬蔓(Chan-Man Yu);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu)關鍵字：高功能自閉症;情緒語調;理解;表達;high-functioning autism;emotional intonation;comprehension;production期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：43卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的在於了解學齡自閉症兒童對於情緒語調的理解與表達能力。研究對象為21名來自大臺北地區、具有口語表達能力的7∼11歲自閉症兒童，以及21名年齡、智商、性別配對之對照組兒童。實驗材料為在對話情境中「難過」、「中性」、「生氣」與「快樂」四種基礎情緒類別的語句，透過錄音與編輯的程序，分別請受試者進行情緒語調的理解與表達作業。情緒語調理解作業是以電腦程式呈現語句，兩組兒童在聆聽後按鍵判斷目標語句的情緒類別，並由該程式記錄其正確率與反應時間；情緒語調表達作業是由兩組受試兒童在有情境畫面的提示下逐一說出含有不同情緒的目標語句，再由聽力正常之大學生擔任評分者，進行情緒語調的聽辨正確性與清晰程度的評分。本研究結果發現，國小自閉症組兒童在對話形式中的情緒語調理解正確率較一般發展組低，所需的理解反應時間也顯著較長，其中，自閉症組兒童對於判斷和理解他人口語中所呈現的「快樂」情緒語調的困難較為明顯。情緒語調表達的測試結果顯示，兩組兒童的情緒語調表達正確率並沒有顯著差異，但自閉症組兒童在表達「中性」和「快樂」情緒語調的清晰程度則顯著低於一般發展組兒童，且其情緒語調理解與表達能力之間有顯著的正向關聯性。整體而言，自閉症兒童在情緒語調理解和情緒表達的清晰程度上較同年齡兒童表現為弱。未來研究可以進一步探討兩組兒童在複雜情緒語調理解和表達能力的差異，並嘗試調整作業的形式和難度，以期能更敏銳地反映個別能力的差異。英文摘要：Purpose: This study aimed to examine the abilities of school-aged children with high-functioning autism (HFA) to perceive and produce emotional intonation. Methods: Twenty-one 7-11-year old Mandarin-speaking children with HFA and 21 age- and nonverbal intelligence quotient (IQ)-matched children with typical development (TD) living in Taipei and New Taipei City participated in this study. The following four categories of emotional intonation were included as the stimuli: ”sad,” ”angry,” ”happy,” and ”neutral.” For the perceptual task, utterances with emotional intonations were recorded by a professional announcer in advance and then presented to individuals through the computer with a loud speaker. During the subjective perceptual judgment tasks, individual children were asked to identify the emotional category of each target utterance (happy, sad, angry, or neutral). The sequence of emotional category of each stimulus was randomly assigned. Accuracy and reaction time for categorizing each utterance were measured using the computer software E-Prime 2.0. For the production task, individuals’ speech productions of target utterances with four emotional intonations were collected through elicited conversation settings. A group of naive adult listeners with typical hearing was also asked to identify the emotional category of each target utterance produced by the two groups of children to measure the accuracy. They were then asked to judge the clarity of each utterance accompanying the 4 categories of emotional intonations. Results/Findings: The results demonstrated that there were significant between-group differences in the perception and production of emotional intonation, including the accuracy rate and reaction time of identification and the clarity of emotional production. Specifically, children with HFA had the most difficulty in identifying the ”happy” emotion. With respect to the results of the emotional production tests, there were no significant between-group differences in the accuracy rate for the production of emotional intonation. However, children with HFA performed significantly poorly on the clarity of emotional production for ”neutral” and ”happy” emotions. Moreover, positive correlations were found between performance in perception and production of emotional intonation in children with HFA; however, no such correlation was found for the TD group. Conclusions/Implications: In summary, this study suggested that children with HFA had lower performance in perception and production of emotional intonation than age-matched controls. However, owing to the high level of difficulty in the production task, the challenges children with HFA face in producing emotional intonation should be further examined. Future studies could investigate the differences between the abilities to comprehend and produce emotional intonation by adjusting the task formats and difficulty levels.起始頁-結束頁：79-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201803_43(1).000401篇名：剌激變項對自閉症學童自傷行為之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Stimulation Variables to Intervene Self-Injurious Behavior of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders作者：王大延(Ta-Yen Wang);鄭劍虹(Jian-Hong Zheng);張倉凱(Tsang-Kai Chang);王識敦(Shih-Tui Wang)關鍵字：自閉症;自傷行為;固定時距;非後效增強;區別增強;autism spectrum disorders;differential reinforcement of other behavior;fixed-time;noncontingent;self-injurious behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：48期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討非後效增強與區別增強其他行為和高、低可能性偏好物等刺激變項，對自閉症者的自傷行為之影響。研究參與者取自臺北市三位國小自閉症學童，研究時間四個月，首先評估研究參與者偏好物，其次評估研究參與者行為功能分析，實驗研究的自變項為固定時距─非後效增強，與固定時距─區別增強其他行為，依變項為研究參與者的自傷行為，研究方法採用單一受試A-B-C-A-B-C倒返實驗設計，經介入後發現：固定時距─非後效增強三階段，三位研究參與者的自傷行為均一致性的降低，成效十分良好，顯示非後效增強對自傷行為之介入處理有明顯效果；偏好物具有功能性等值作用；固定時距─區別增強其他行為三階段時間的間隔每階段增加50%的延宕時間，具有消弱目標行為的作用，三位研究參與者顯示自傷行為已降低至20%以下；無論使用固定時距─非後效增強或固定時距─區別增強其他行為階段，三位研究參與者均明顯的出現偶發性增強、消弱、消弱激突、饜足及其他副作用情形。本研究提出介入自閉症者自傷行為之建議，供教師與研究人員參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to intervening in self-injurious behavior. Participants were 3 children with autism spectrum enrolling in the elementary of Taipei City. Results of functional analyses indicated that self-injurious behavior (SIB) was maintained by social- positive and automatically reinforcement. NCR and DRO procedures, individualized for each participant, were implemented in the single subject reversal experimental design with A-B-C-A-B-C type with decreases in three subjects' SIB. The results revealed that the fix interval of NCR and DRO significantly decreased objective behavior below 20%. The study showed that NCR and DRO produced recovery. Results indicated that NCR and DRO produced spontaneous negative side effects. These results suggested that dense NCR and DRO decreased SIB by altering its motivating operation but extinction burst occurred as NCR and DRO was thinned. Suggestions and implementations to the utilizing of positive intervention were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系2篇名：海峽兩岸特殊教育學系學生專業能力之研究並列篇名：A Study on Students' Professional Competence of Special Education Department in Taiwan Strait作者：杞昭安(Chao-An Chi)關鍵字：海峽兩岸特殊教育;特殊教育專業能力;cross-strait special education;professional competence of special education期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：48期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討海峽兩岸特殊教育學系學生專業能力現況，不同性別、不同年級、不同學校性質特殊教育學系學生專業能力，以及兩岸特殊教育學系學生專業能力比較。至於潛在目的是想讓特殊教育學系的學生自我檢核，了解在學中要學習的專業能力有哪些，以及目前自己還有哪些能力需要追求。研究對象為海峽兩岸各省市師範校院特殊教育學系學生，其中大陸地區17所師範校院殊教育學系學生871名，臺灣地區13所設有殊教育學系的學生338名，共1,209名。大陸地區以「問卷星」編輯問卷，臺灣地區以「Google表單」編輯問卷。結果歸納：（1）大陸地區特殊教育學系學生專業能力，男女生之間整體上並沒有顯著差異；（2）臺灣地區特殊教育學系學生專業能力，整體而言男生顯著的優於女生；（3）海峽兩岸特殊教育學系學生專業能力，隨年級增加而遞增。問卷本身確實可以合理反映學生自我覺知之專業成長；（4）大陸地區特殊教育學系學生專業能力，本科師範院校特殊教育學系學生顯著優於非本科師範院校特殊教育學系學生；（5）臺灣地區特殊教育學系學生專業能力，師範大學與非師範大學間沒顯顯著差異；（6）海峽兩岸特殊教育學系學生專業能力有顯著差異。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the current situation of students' professional competence in special education departments across the Taiwan Strait, and the professional competence of students of different genders, grades and schools, as well as the professional competence of special education department students. The potential goal is to allow students of special education departments to check themselves, to understand what professional competence they have to learn in school, and what abilities they need to pursue at present. The research object is the students of Special Education Department of Normal University in the two sides of Taiwan Strait, Among them, 17 normal university in mainland China have 871 students of education department, 13 of which have 338 students in the Department of Special Education, 1,209 in total. In mainland China, the questionnaire was edited by ”questionnaires” and the questionnaire was edited by ”Google form” in Taiwan. The results are summarized as follows: (1) There is no significant difference between male and female students in the professional competence of special education departments in mainland China. (2) The special education department students' professional competence in Taiwan area is significantly superior to girls in general. (3) The professional competence of the students in special education department is increasing with the grade. The questionnaire itself can reasonably reflect the professional growth of the students' self awareness. (4) The special education students in the mainland of China are superior to the students of the special education department in normal universities. (5) There are no significant differences between normal and non-normal universities in the special education department of Taiwan. (6) There are significant differences in the professional competence of students in special education departments across the Taiwan Strait.起始頁-結束頁：35-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系3篇名：影像提示對國中智能障礙學生餐點製備技能之學習成效並列篇名：The Effect of Video Prompting on Food Preparation Skills for Middle School Students with Intellectual Disabilities作者：曾文麗(Wen-Li Tzeng)關鍵字：影像提示;最少提示系統;餐點製備;video prompting;system of least prompts;food preparation期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：48期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討影像提示策略是否能提升國中智能障礙學生餐點製備技能的學習成效，研究方法採單一個案研究法平行之跨行為（清洗、備料、調味和蒸煮）多探測設計，以三位就讀集中式特教班之智能障礙學生為研究對象，教導如何使用電鍋進行餐點製備，其介入方式為影像提示，並結合最少提示系統（最少到最多的提示）進行實施。本研究蒐集研究對象於各行為階段之餐點製備技能的步驟操作正確率，進行圖示與目視分析。重要的研究發現如下：（1）影像提示能有效地提升國中智能障礙學生餐點製備技能，並能類化至其他相似之餐點的製備；（2）影像提示採工作分析結合連鎖訓練能增進餐點製備技能的學習效果。根據研究結果的進一步討論，運用影像提示教導餐點製備技能，宜以參與者觀點並聚焦手部操作進行拍攝。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine whether video prompting would improve food preparation skills of middle school students with intellectual disabilities. A single case research method with a parallel multiple probe across behaviors design was used to evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention. Three middle school students with intellectual disabilities participated in this study to learn how to use a rice cooker to prepare a dish. The intervention was video prompting combined with the system of least prompting. The number of correct food preparation steps were collected, and further interpreted by visual analysis. The results revealed several findings: (a) the accuracies of students' food preparation skills were increased after intervention of video prompting, and students were able to generalize the skills to a dish with similar cooking steps; (b) task analysis with chaining would enhance the effectiveness of video-prompting. Based on the findings, implications were further discussed, video clips filmed from a subjective point of view and focused on hand movements would bring out the best results of this visual prompt.起始頁-結束頁：53-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系4篇名：新北市國民中小學教育階段融合教育政策評估之研究並列篇名：The Policy Evaluation for Inclusive Education at the Compulsory Education Level in New Taipei City作者：黃彥融(Yan-Rong Huang);盧台華(Tai-Hwa Emily Lu);王麗雲(Li-Yun Wang)關鍵字：融合教育政策;融合教育政策評估指標;融合教育政策評估;國民中小學教育階段;policy for inclusive education;evaluation indicators for inclusive education;policy evaluation for inclusive education;compulsory education level期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：47期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解新北市國民中小學教育階段融合教育政策實行概況，針對其政策目標達成情況與政策工具使用狀況進行評估，並分析不同學校背景實行融合教育政策的差異。透過問卷調查法進行資料搜集，以研究者自編之「融合教育政策評估問卷」進行調查，問卷內容涵蓋了政策目標達成狀況評估與政策工具實施現況評估等兩部分。問卷內部分題目以官方數據資料作為說明，其餘部分則由353位學校成員（含學校行政主管、普通班導師、特教教師、普通生家長及特教生家長）進行填寫評估問卷。研究結果以描述性統計作為說明，並使用t考驗及單因子變異數分析(ANOVA)進行差異分析。結果發現如下：(1)新北市融合教育政策目標執行現況普遍達滿意的程度，在「提供均等的教育機會」此項指標最具滿意度；(2)新北市融合教育政策工具十分多元且有中等以上的肯定，在「建立專業團隊合作」此指標最具滿意度；(3)新北市融合教育政策目標會受教育階段、學校規模及填答者身份而產生差異；(4)新北市融合教育政策工具不因教育階段不同而產生差異。最後，依據研究結果提出對融合教育政策實施修正之建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to evaluate the policy of inclusive education for the compulsory education level and take New Taipei City as the case for policy evaluation. This study applied the indicators to examine inclusive education policy in New Taipei City and assess the policy with questionnaire. Questionnaires were conducted on three-hundred-fifty-three school personnel and students' parents. Some evaluative data was obtained through official statistics. The result was analyzed through t-test and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Findings were summarized as follows: (1) The performance of implementing the objectives of inclusive education policy in New Taipei City, generally speaking, is above the average. As the research questionnaires indicate, ”providing equal educational opportunity” indicators has the highest satisfaction. (2) In regard to the implementation of the instruments, schools utilize a variety of means, as ”inter-professional collaboration” indicators reaches the highest satisfaction. (3) The effectiveness of the objectives of inclusive education policy varies according to educational level and school scales. (4) The effectiveness of instruments of inclusive education policy shows no such difference. Based the conclusions on the research to give advice to educational administration authorities, schools, and future studies for reference in order to promote the inclusive education.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系5篇名：自我監控對情緒勞務與身心健康之調節效果－以南部地區特殊教育學校教師為例並列篇名：Moderating Effect of Self-Monitoring on Relationship between Emotional Labor and Physical-Mental Health: The Case of Special Education Teachers in Southern Taiwan作者：羅妙虹(Miao-Hong Luo);陳建志(Chien-Chih Chen);謝秉蓉(Ping-Jung Hsieh)關鍵字：自我監控;多群體分析;身心健康;情緒勞務;偏最小平方法;self-monitoring;multi-group analysis;physical-mental health;emotional labor;PLS (partial least squares)期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：47期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在檢驗情緒勞務與身心健康二者間的關係，更進一步探討自我監控在其間的調節效果。以南部地區特殊教育學校之教師為研究對象進行調查，共獲得324份有效問卷。以偏最小平方法結構方程模式進行統計分析。研究結果顯示：(1)整體而言，特殊教育學校教師情緒勞務不會對身心健康造成危害；(2)經多群體分析，自我監控在情緒勞務與身心健康子構面間具有部分調節效果，亦即當特殊教育學校教師自我監控情形愈高，越不會出現身心不健康之情形。最後，歸納研究發現，提出建議供相關單位參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to examine the relationship between emotional labor and physical-mental health and to analyze the moderating effect of self-monitoring. A total of 324 valid questionnaires were collected from teachers of special education school in southern Taiwan. Partial least squares (PLS) structural equation modeling was applied. One of the results showed that teachers' emotional labor didn't damage teachers' physical-mental health. It also proved that self-monitoring of emotional labor had a part moderating effect on physical-mental health; that is, teachers with higher self-monitoring, the less unhealthy physical-mental problem would happen. Finally, the results of the study could be used as a reference for the administration of education.起始頁-結束頁：33-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系6篇名：家長應用文字參照策略提升學前語言發展遲緩兒童的書本和文字概念之成效並列篇名：The Effectiveness of Parents Using Print Referencing to Promoteprint Awareness in Preschool Children with Language Delay作者：蘇楷涵(Kai-Han Su);王秋鈴(Chiu-Ling Wang)關鍵字：文字參照策略;學前語言發展遲緩兒童;書本和文字概念;print referencing;language-delayed preschoolers;print awareness期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：47期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討學齡前語言發展遲緩兒童家長學習文字參照策略(print referencing, PR)之成效，並探討該策略對語言發展遲緩兒童的書本和文字概念發展之影響。研究採用單一受試法跨受試多探試設計，以大臺北地區三對親子為研究對象。三位家長均接受四週的PR策略課程，每週在家與兒童共讀4次，每次10-20分鐘，並每週與研究者面談一次，以了解PR策略在家中的實施情形。研究結果以目視分析和C統計進行資料分析，輔以觀察與訪談家長等資料探究社會效度。綜合本研究結果發現：(1)家長學習PR策略後，對增加其使用該策略的頻率具有立即成效及維持成效；(2)語言發展遲緩兒童在接受家長以PR策略共讀後，其在「幼兒書本和文字概念評量中文版」(Preschool Word and Print Awareness Assessment- Chinese Version, PWPA-C)的表現較介入前進步，且兒童於共讀過程中針對書本和文字概念做出適切回應或主動討論的頻率均較介入前高。本研究根據研究結果進行討論，並提供PR策略之實務執行與後續研究之建議。英文摘要：The aims of the study were to investigate the effectiveness of the parents of language- delayed preschoolers who learning print referencing strategies (PR), and its impacts on the children's print awareness. The multiple probe design across subjects was implemented in this study. Three language-delayed preschoolers and their parents from Taipei area were participated in this study. The parents received a 4-week program for learning print referencing strategies, and met the researcher once per week to understand how they applied print referencing strategies with their children during shared reading at home. The parents were asked to share reading with their children at least four times per week, and 10-20 minutes per time. The data were analyzed by visual analysis, and C statistic. Direct observations and parent's interviews were implemented supplementary for exploring the social validity. The results of this study were summarized as follows: (1) After a brief learning, it has immediate effect for increasing parents' frequencies of using print-referencing strategies during shared-reading. (2) It also has maintenance effect for keeping parents' frequencies of using print-referencing strategies after intervention. (3) The children show improvement in PWPA-C since their parents used print referencing strategies during shared-reading. (4) The children also increase the frequencies of appropriately respond to and discuss about the print awareness since their parents applied print referencing strategies for shared-reading. In addition to discuss of results, this study also provides suggestions for clinical practice and further research.起始頁-結束頁：63-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系01篇名：DIF成因之初探：試題特徵與差異試題功能之關聯並列篇名：Investigating Sources of Differential Item Functioning: the Relationship Between Item Property and Differential Item Functioning作者：孫國瑋(Guo-Wei Sun);陳承德(Cheng-Te Chen);施慶麟(Ching-Lin Shih)關鍵字：DIF成因;差異試題功能;差異層面功能;線性邏輯斯測驗模式;隨機效果線性邏輯斯測驗模式;DIF source;Differential item functioning;Differential facet functioning;Linear logistic test model;Random effects linear logistic test model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：近年來，研究者對於差異試題功能（differential item functioning, DIF）議題的探討，已由「檢測」DIF轉變為「解釋」DIF。以往對於DIF試題的解釋，多有賴於專家質性審查的方式。然而，如果能有量化分析的證據輔助專家審查，可對DIF成因的判斷有所幫助。本研究透過分析DIF試題之特徵，找出試題特徵與DIF之關聯，作為後續專家審查時判斷DIF成因的參考。為此，本研究採用線性邏輯斯測驗模式（linear logistic test model, LLTM）及隨機效果線性邏輯斯測驗模式（random effects linear logistic test model, LLTM-R）針對測驗中各試題特徵進行所謂的差異層面功能（differential facet functioning, DFF）之檢測，藉以說明試題特徵與DIF之關聯。模擬研究結果顯示試題的DIF程度受到該試題特徵的DFF效果之影響。此外，測驗的Q矩陣密度較高時（例如60%），可能因型一誤差之膨脹而檢測出高比例的DIF試題；本研究另以實徵資料說明如何針對試題進行DFF分析，藉以找出與DIF有關的試題特徵，並作為後續試題修正之方向。根據結果，本研究建議採用LLTM-R進行DFF檢測，可有助於釐清試題特徵與DIF之關聯。英文摘要：Because assessment methods for differential item functioning (DIF) have been developed and thoroughly investigated, the focus in DIF research has shifted to explaining DIF phenomena. Experts in this field are recruited to tap possible sources of DIF. Quantitative analysis results help experts reviewing DIF to locate sources for DIF items. This study aimed to demonstrate the use of the differential facet functioning (DFF) procedure implemented using the linear logistic test model (LLTM) and random effects linear logistic test model (LLTM-R) to explain possible DIF sources. The efficiency of LLTM and LLTM-R in detecting DFF under various conditions was also evaluated. The simulation results indicated that the DIF effect was significantly influenced by the DFF effect of item properties. Moreover, as the design matrices had a high density (e.g., 60%), Type-I error rates of DIF assessment were seriously inflated. We also demonstrated the procedure of DFF analysis with an empirical data. The result showed that most DIF items were related to two item properties, which would be provided as possible DIF sources in the item-review meeting. Researchers should implement DFF assessment using LLTM-R to help explain DIF sources.起始頁-結束頁：167-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201812_50(2).00012篇名：家事分工性別化內隱與外顯測驗發展之初探研究並列篇名：Instrument Development and Validation of Implicit and Explicit Measures of Gender Stereotypes in the Division of Housework作者：藍玉玲(Yu-Ling Lan);林烘煜(Hung-Yu Lin)關鍵字：內隱測量;性別刻板印象;家務分工;Domestic labor;Gender stereotype;Iimplicit measure期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的有二：（1）發展「家務性別角色量表（Domestic Gender Role Scale, DGRS）」與「家務性別角色內隱聯結測驗（Domestic Gender Role Implicit Association Test, DGR IAT）」，測量台灣人家務分工的外顯與內隱性別刻板印象；及（2）檢驗DGRS與DGR IAT信、效度。本研究先招募92位Y世代台灣人參與預備性研究，完成DGRS初步發展與DGR IAT家務工作的詞彙選擇；再招募99位Y世代與50位嬰兒潮世代台灣人，共149位成為正式研究參與者以檢驗這兩個測驗的信、效度。刪題後之驗證性因素分析結果證實DGRS的因素結構與預期相符，包含男、女、中性家事三面向；因素結構與實際觀察資料適配度良好。除了嬰兒潮世代男性家事分量表信度係數略低於.70之外，DGRS三分量表的alpha值與組合信度皆高於.70，具有良好的信度。DGR IAT方面，僅在嬰兒潮世代先進行和諧版施測的信度係數高於.70，仍有部分改善空間；但其IAT效果已達顯著，證實DGR IAT適用於台灣人家務分工的內隱性別刻板印象測量。透過相關分析證實DGR IAT與DGRS之間，呈現低度相關，顯示兩者所測量的構念不盡相同，具有區別效度，且DGRS三個因素之間，呈現中度相關，證實DGRS之聚斂效度。以新發展測驗而言，研究結果初步證實DGRS 與DGR IAT具有構念效度、DGRS的信度良好，但DGR IAT的信度仍可進一步改善；後續研究可招募不同教育程度、婚姻狀況的台灣人參與研究，驗證其跨樣本的穩定性及應用性。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop and examine the psychometric properties of two new instruments-the Domestic Gender Role Scale (DGRS) and the Domestic Gender Role Implicit Association Test (DGR IAT)-in assessing Taiwanese people’s explicit and implicit gender stereotypes regarding domestic labor. In a pilot study, 92 Taiwanese adults were recruited to obtain a sample of genderized household chores for development of the initial DGRS and DGR IAT versions. In the main study, another 149 Taiwanese people were recruited on a voluntary basis to examine the psychometric properties of the DGRS and DGR IAT. Confirmatory factor analysis of this sample indicated that the DGRS was a three-factor model. Except for the DGRS subscale for male baby boomers, the Cronbach's alpha values and composite reliability coefficients of the three DGRS subscale scores were all above .7, indicating satisfactory reliability. The significant IAT effects of the DGR IAT indicated that it was a valid instrument for assessing implicit gender stereotypes regarding domestic labor. Its reliability coefficient was over .7 only when assessing Taiwanese baby boomers using the congruent association-first version of the DGR IAT. Moreover, the weak association between its IAT effects and the three DGRS subscale scores revealed the divergent validity of these two instruments, whereas the moderate correlation among the three DGRS subscale scores indicated its convergent validity. As newly developed instruments, the DGRS demonstrated suitable reliability and validity, whereas the DGR IAT had suitable validity but required further modifications to improve its reliability. This study provided only an initial validation of these two instruments, and further research should validate their psychometric properties using samples with diverse education levels and marital statuses.起始頁-結束頁：189-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201812_50(2).00023篇名：頓悟性問題解決規則教導與效果評估並列篇名：Exploring the Insight Problem-Solving Rules and Evaluating the Effectiveness of Teaching the Problem-Solving Rules作者：邱發忠(Fa-Chung Chiu);徐芝君(Chih-Chun Hsu);張雨霖(Yu-Lin Chang);林耀南(Yao-Nan Lin);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen)關鍵字：詞彙的多義性;頓悟性問題;擴散性思考;Divergent thinking;Lexical ambiguity;Insight problem期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：頓悟性問題解決訓練是創造教育和創新思考的核心議題之一，過去既有提升頓悟性問題解決方法的研究，多數並非基於頓悟性問題解題規則。而根據過去研究顯示頓悟問題與笑話具有共通性，故本研究藉由分析笑話的結構與規則進行頓悟問題解題規則的教導，並以實徵實驗檢驗之。研究一將101位參與者隨機分派至頓悟性問題解決訓練之實驗組與控制組，實驗組同時予以「詞彙的多義性」、「符合關鍵語句的例外狀況」、「符合關鍵語句的例外規則」等頓悟性問題解決規則之整合訓練後，完成三類頓悟性問題與擴散性思考測驗。結果顯示，實驗組在「詞彙的多義性」與「符合關鍵語句的例外規則」類之頓悟性問題解決上具有提升效果；而且，在整體的頓悟性問題解決表現上亦具有訓練效果。此外，實驗組訓練也顯示可以提升擴散性思考的表現。研究二為瞭解個別解題規則訓練對於不同類別頓悟性問題解題效果之差異，將200位大學生隨機分派至三種不同解題規則：「詞彙的多義性」、「符合關鍵語句的例外狀況」、「符合關鍵語句的例外規則」之實驗組及「控制」組的訓練，接下來完成如同研究一的三類頓悟性問題。結果顯示「詞彙的多義性」訓練對「詞彙的多義性」與整體頓悟性問題解決表現具有提升效果；然而，「符合關鍵語句的例外狀況」與「符合關鍵語句的例外規則」訓練則未呈現提升解題的訓練效果。本研究初步發現基於笑話結構的「詞彙的多義性」規則訓練之效果，據此建議實務方面可運用此規則來教導頓悟性問題解決。英文摘要：Insight problem-solving training is a core topic in creativity education and creative thinking. However, few studies on enhancing such skills have identified the norms of insight problem-solving. According to the literature, a commonality exists between insight problems and jokes. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate insight problem-solving rules and examine their effects on improving problem-solving skills and divergent thinking through analyzing the problem-solving characteristics and structures of jokes. In the first study phase, 101 participants were randomly assigned to either the insight problem-solving training group or the control group. The experimental group received training for ”homonyms,” ”exceptions to the rules for punch lines,” and ”alternatives for punch lines,” and completed tests on insight problem-solving skills and divergent thinking. The results indicated that the experimental group had significantly better performance in ”homonyms,” ”alternatives for punch lines,” and overall insight problem-solving than the control group. In the second study phase, differences in the effects of three types of insight problem-solving training were examined. A total of 200 college students were recruited and randomly assigned to four groups: ”homonyms,” ”exceptions to the rules for punch lines,” ”alternatives for punch lines,” and ”no training” (i.e., the control group). The results indicated that the ”homonyms” group performed significantly better for ”homonyms” and overall insight problem-solving than the other groups. However, training for ”exceptions to the rules for punch lines” and ”alternatives for punch lines” exhibited no significant effects insight problem-solving and provided preliminary findings for the effects of training of ”homonyms” derived from the structure of jokes. These findings could be applied in practice for future insight problem-solving skill training courses.起始頁-結束頁：219-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201812_50(2).00034篇名：國小單步驟加減法文字題解題檢核評量之編製發展與實測分析研究並列篇名：Development and Analysis of a Checking Assessment for Word Problem Solving in Primary School Learners作者：許家驊(Chia-Hua Hsu)關鍵字：文字題解題;單步驟文字題;學習評量;檢核;Checking;Learning assessment;Single-step word problem;Word problem-solving期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在透過成份及內容分析編製發展單步驟加減法文字題檢核評量，檢核能力成份可分成反思及錯誤偵測二向度，反思向度由檢查行動及檢核技巧方式分層面組成，錯誤偵測向度由偵測答案計算、運算程序、題目語意脈絡、數量訊息擷取錯誤、正確無誤分層面組成，單步驟加減法文字題學習內容則取自國小各版本低年級數學教科書。之後研究者使用成份及內容分析解析單步驟加減法文字題解題中涉及之檢核能力運作與題型語意基模，接著使用所有分析結果編製發展單步驟加減法文字題檢核評量。考量不同學校學習內容及經驗同質性，採合目標與叢集取樣抽取嘉義縣市二年級學生864人，搭配解題經驗前導誘發評量實施單步驟加減法文字題檢核評量後，再隨機分成兩群進行信效度交叉驗證分析。試探性及驗證性因素分析發現前述二向度各分層面因子結構，且因素萃取、抽取變異比及模式適配度良好，並具良好效標關聯效度（以學生課堂檢核表現教師評定分數為效標）。α係數及組合信度、不同向度單題、分層面及分向度極端組t考驗亦均良好。而不同解題表現學生之解題檢核（反思及錯誤偵測）實測表現具顯著差異。英文摘要：This study developed a Checking Assessment for Single-Step Word Problem-Solving for Addition and Subtraction (CA-SSWPS-AS) using componential and content analyses. The checking ability component was divided into two dimensions: reflection and error detection. The reflection dimension consisted of checking actions and checking skills, whereas error detection comprised errors in answer calculation, operational procedure, problem semantic context, and quantitative information catching, as well as a correct (no error) facet. The single-step word problems for addition and subtraction were derived from various mathematics textbooks for first and second graders in Taiwanese elementary schools. Componential and content analyses were used to examine the checking operations and semantic schema involved in single-step word problem-solving for addition and subtraction. The results were then used in development of the CA-SSWPS-AS. Considering the homogeneity of learning contents and experiences in different schools, 864 second graders from Chiayi City and Chiayi County in Taiwan were selected as participants through convenience and cluster sampling. All participants were tested using the CA-SSWPS-AS combined with experience preactivated tasks in single-step word problem-solving for addition and subtraction. The data were divided into two clusters for use in random cross-validation statistical analyses. Validity analysis using exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis produced a number of factor structures that matched the aforementioned two dimensions and their facets. The variance proportions of factor extraction and model fitness were positive, as was criteria-related validity (using students' scores assessed by teachers in classroom performance-checking as criteria). Reliability analysis demonstrated a positive α coefficient and composite reliability. Regarding item analysis, the critical ratio was strong, regardless of whether a single item, a subassessment, or the whole was analyzed. Finally, reflection and error detection performance varied significantly when checking individuals with different word problem-solving performances.起始頁-結束頁：243-266資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201812_50(2).00045篇名：焦慮依附風格個案在諮商初期的晤談感受、工作同盟與諮商滿意之關係研究並列篇名：Relationship between Session Impact, Working Alliance, and Counseling Satisfaction on Preoccupied Clients with Attachment Style in the Initial Counseling Stage作者：陳慶福(Ching-Fu Chen);王雅萱(Ya-Hsuan Wang)關鍵字：工作同盟;晤談感受;焦慮依附風格;偏最小平方法結構方程模式;諮商滿意;Counseling satisfaction;PLS-SEM;Preoccupied with attachment style;Session impact;Working alliance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討諮商初期個案的晤談感受、工作同盟與諮商滿意的關係。本研究以2014年10月至2016年7月間，至台灣13所大學的諮商輔導中心，以至少接受3次個別諮商的第3次諮商之焦慮依附風格大學生N = 87為對象。研究工具：第五版晤談評量問卷、工作同盟量表與諮商滿意量表。本研究以「偏最小平方法結構方程模式」（PLS-SEM）驗證研究假設之因果模式。研究發現：晤談感受對工作同盟有直接的影響，影響的效果值為.84（p ＜ .001）；工作同盟對諮商滿意也有直接影響，影響效果值為.56（p ＜ .001）。晤談感受可透過工作同盟間接影響諮商滿意，效果值為.47（p ＜ .001）；晤談感受對諮商滿意直接效果值為.31（p ＜ .01），晤談感受對諮商滿意的影響主要為間接關係，工作同盟可能為晤談感受與諮商滿意之中介變項。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate relationships between clients' perception of session impact, working alliance, and counseling satisfaction in the initial counseling stage. All of the clients in this study had a preoccupied attachment style. The data were collected through questionnaires, namely, the Session Evaluation Questionnaire Form 5 (SEQ-5) (Stiles, Gordon, & Lani, 2002), Working Alliance Inventory (WAI) (Horvath & Greenberg, 1989), and Counseling Satisfaction Inventory-Short Form (CSI-S) (Chen & Jian, 2011). A total of 87 clients from 13 Taiwanese universities were recruited through heterogeneous convenience sampling between October 2014 and July 2016. After their third individual counseling session, clients completed the SEQ-5, WAI, and CSI-S. In addition, partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) was used to test the hypothesized path model. The results of this study were as follows: 1) clients' session impact predicted working alliance (effect size: .84, p ＜ .001); 2) clients' working alliance predicted counseling satisfaction (effect size: .56, p ＜ .001); 3) clients' session impact predicted working alliance (effect size: .84, p ＜ .001); 4) clients' working alliance predicted counseling satisfaction (effect size: .56, p ＜ .001); 5) clients' session impact indirectly predicted counseling satisfaction through working alliance (effect size: .47, p ＜ .05); and 6) clients' session impact directly predicted counseling satisfaction (effect size: .31; p ＜ .01). These findings suggest that clients' working alliance is likely to mediate the relationship between session impact and counseling satisfaction.起始頁-結束頁：267-291資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201812_50(2).00056篇名：學業拖延與課業情緒之交互關係：課室目標結構的調節效果並列篇名：Interaction Relation between Academic Procrastination and Academic Emotions: Moderating Effect of Classroom Goal Structure作者：簡嘉菱(Chia-Ling Chien);程炳林(Bing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：課室目標結構;課業情緒;調節作用;學業拖延;Academic emotions;Academic procrastination;Classroom goal structure;Moderated effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究之目的在分析高中生的學業拖延與其課業情緒（希望、自豪、無聊、生氣）的交互關係，並檢驗學生知覺的課室目標結構對學業拖延與課業情緒之間關係的調節效果。為達研究目的，本研究採縱貫研究，抽取7所學校共680名高二學生（男生315人，女生365人）為研究樣本，進行兩波段的測量。本研究的發現如下：（1）學業拖延與課業情緒交互效果模式可用來解釋國內高中生的觀察資料，高中生的學業拖延與其課業情緒存在互為因果的關係；（2）學生知覺的課室目標結構可調節學業拖延與課業情緒的關係：課室精熟目標結構組的學生，其學業拖延對正向課業情緒的負向預測力會增強，課室表現目標結構組的學生，其學業拖延對正向課業情緒的負向預測力會減弱；課室精熟目標結構組的學生，其負向課業情緒對學業拖延的正向預測力會減弱，課室表現目標結構組的學生，其負向課業情緒對學業拖延的正向預測力會增強；課室精熟目標結構組的學生，其學業拖延對負向課業情緒的正向預測力會減弱，課室表現目標結構組的學生，其學業拖延對負向課業情緒的正向預測力會增強。本研究根據研究結果提出建議，提供高中教學輔導及未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The study attempted to analyze the interaction relation between academic procrastination and academic emotions (hope, pride, boredom, and anger) of senior high school students and examine the moderating effect of the classroom goal structure between academic procrastination and academic emotions. Therefore, data collected from a longitudinal study with second grade senior high school students (N = 680, 315boys and 365girls) from seven schools were used to examine these. The results of the present study were summarized as follows: (1) the academic procrastination and academic emotions interaction effect model constructed in this study can be used to well explain the empirically observed data throughout Taiwan. The data analyses showed that there had been interaction relation between academic procrastination and academic emotions. (2) The relations between students' academic procrastination and academic emotions were moderated by students' perception of classroom goal structure: students in the guoup of perception of classroom mastery goal structure, the negative prediction of academic procrastination on positive academic emotions would strengthen; students in the guoup of perception of classroom performance goal structure, the negative prediction of academic procrastination on positive academic emotions would weaken; students in the guoup of perception of classroom mastery goal structure, the positive prediction of negative academic emotions on academic procrastination would weaken; students in the guoup of perception of classroom performance goal structure, the positive prediction of negative academic emotions on academic procrastination would strengthen; students in the guoup of perception of classroom mastery goal structure, the positive prediction of academic procrastination on negative academic emotions would weaken; students in the guoup of perception of classroom performance goal structure, the positive prediction of academic procrastination on negative academic emotions would strengthen. Based on the findings of this study, we discussed the implications and proposed suggestions for senior high school teaching and future research.起始頁-結束頁：293-313資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201812_50(2).00067篇名：焦點解決短期治療訓練對國中專任輔導教師之成果研究並列篇名：The Effects of Solution-Focused Brief Therapy Training on the Full-Time School Counselors in Junior High Schools作者：許維素(Wei-Su Hsu);吳宛亭(Wan-Ting Wu)關鍵字：在職訓練;專任輔導教師;國中;焦點解決短期治療;諮商訓練;Counseling training;Full-time school counselors;In-service training;Junior high school;Solution-focused brief therapy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討對國中專任輔導教師（專輔）進行焦點解決短期訓練（SFBT）的立即成果與追蹤成果。本訓練為八日共48小時的方案，分為SFBT基本初階及專題進階兩部分。參與訓練者為55位北區專輔，於訓練結束及之後一個月，分組參加焦點團體訪談，並填寫瞭解課程滿意度的問卷。12場焦點團體訪談資料以開放式編碼進行，輔佐性的問卷資料則以描述統計分析之。研究結果分為三個部分呈現：（1）對訓練方案的回饋：整體滿意度很高，但對時間安排意見迥異，並期望增加內容與時數。（2）立即成果：專輔工作模式與效能的拓展，包括：SFBT轉變專輔工作思維與技巧，將SFBT應用於各項專輔任務拓展專業效能，以及專業認同與自我賦能大為提昇。（3）追蹤成果：持續發揮所學，顯著提昇輔導效能，包括：持續努力熟練SFBT，SFBT訓練強化發揮專輔角色任務的功能，專業勝任度的漸被認可，以及激發專業認同與工作熱忱。本研究討論發現，SFBT訓練的設計與成果之間會相互帶動，SFBT值得應用於專輔工作模式及其在職進修。最後，針對本研究訓練方案與研究限制，提出未來訓練與相關研究建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the the immediate and follow-up training effects of Solution-focused brief therapy (SFBT) training on full-time school counselors in junior high schools. The training program consisted of 48 hours of training over 8 days within two months. The first phase of the training focused on foundations of SFBT, including an introduction to SFBT's philosophy, the structure and repersentive techniques of an SFBT session. The second phase of the training focused on applying SFBT on specific challenging tasks of full-time school counselors (e,g,, crisis intervention, working with involuntary clients, peer support groups, case conferences, parental consultation, and in-class intervention). Fifty-five full-time school counselors from the junior high schools in northern Taiwan were recruited. All the particiapnts attended one focused group interview and completed the training program satisfaction sheets group by group right after and one month later of the training. The data of totally twelve focused group Interviews was analyzed with opening coding of qualitative analytical methods. Quantitative data was analyzed by using descriptive statistics. The results had three parts: (1) Feedback to the training program: Overall trainees' satisfaction was high, but trainees' opinions on schedule were very different from each other and most of them expected to increase content and hours of training; (2) the immediate training effects: The training has had expending the working modle and enhancing the role competency of these trainees as full-time school counselors; and (3) the follow-up training effects: After one-month continuously practicing, the trainees' working effecicy, enthusiasm, and role identity of full-time school counselors were highly enhanced. This study found the design of the training program fitting the in-service professional needs of full-time school counselors could creat positive impacts on the training effect. This study also supports that SFBT is beneficial to execute the full-time school counselors' working tasks. Finally, the limitations of this training program were discussed, and suggestions for related trainings and research in the future were provided.起始頁-結束頁：315-340資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201812_50(2).00078篇名：緣的特性及其對生涯發展的影響並列篇名：The Nature of Yuan and Its Influence on Career Development作者：李迪琛(Di-Chen Li);金樹人(Shuh-Ren Jin)關鍵字：生涯發展;敘事研究法;緣;Career Development;Narrative Research;Yuan期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討「緣」的特性、「緣」在生涯發展中的功能及其對生涯發展的影響。根據立意取樣邀請六位研究參與者，採用訪談法搜集生涯緣分故事，運用敘事研究法中的「類別－內容」分析法對所得資料進行分析。結果顯示：「緣」的特性可分為「緣即變易」、「緣牽一線」、與「緣來如此」等三大類共十一項特性。「緣」在生涯發展中的功能有「以緣補缺」、「創造轉變」、「維持穩定」、「警醒提示」、「引導成長」、與「整合經驗」等六項。緣對生涯發展的影響主要在「緣分故事促進生涯發展」、「善應機緣陶鑄自我成長」兩類。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the characteristics of Yuan, the role of Yuan and its influence on career development. Yuan(緣) refers to a potential relationships between people and people, people and things, people and universe as well. Comparable to the thought of karma in Buddhism, it can be interpreted as destiny, coincidence as conditioned by one's past in the Chinese folk religion. According to purposive sampling method, six participants were invited to tell their Yuan-related stories. Their stories were then analyzed using a category-content analysis in narrative research method. The results were as follows. 1. There are eleven characteristics of Yuan and they can be classified into three main categories, which can be entitled as ”Yuan as changing”, ”Yuan as connecting” and ”Yuan as matching”. ”Yuan as changing” indicates two characteristics of Yuan. First, Yuan as uncertainty, it cannot be controlled or predicted; Second, Yuan is very complex in its' nature, it always has a personal meaning for the research participant. ”Yuan as connecting” indicates six characteristics of Yuan. First, Yuan can make sense of the causal relationship between seemingly unrelated things in the participant's career path. Second, Yuan happens again and again, which helps the participant to adjust accordingly to the new environment and to stabilize their career development. Third, Yuan can guide participants via different events to become themselves. Fourth, Yuan can directly or indirectly promote the participant's career development. Fifth, Yuan can enlighten participants. Sixth, Yuan happens at the right time and always has a significant influence on the participant. ”Yuan as matching” indicates three characteristics of Yuan. First, Yuan presences by our side unexpectedly with those who has close relationship with us previously. Second, Yuan matches us with people in terms of inexplicable attraction and it has a unique inspiration to the individual. Third, people must first try their best in career, and allow Yuan to do the rest. 2. There has six functions of Yuan in the process of career development. First, it can help us fulfill ourselves as a whole; Second, it can offer opportunities when people are struggling with career frustration; Third, it can stabilize career development by offering a positive emotional experience in working practice; Fourth, it can play a reflexivity role when career adversity is encountered; Fifth, it allows people to be themselves by connecting people and thing in diverse career positions; and sixth, it can integrate experience by enabling adaptation to career change. 3. The Yuan has two main influences on career development, namely, on practical work and on personal growth.起始頁-結束頁：341-362資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201812_50(2).00089篇名：身體活動與老年大腦功能：功能性磁共振造影的研究回顧並列篇名：Physical Activity and the Aging Brain: A Review of Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Studies作者：陳豐慈(Feng-Tzu Chen);黃植懋(Chih-Mao Huang);王俊智(Chun-Chih Wang);張育愷(Yu-Kai Chang)關鍵字：身體活動;執行功能;認知老化;磁共振造影;Cognitive aging;Executive function;Magnetic reasoning imaging;Physical activity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本回顧之目的係以靜息態與作業相關功能性磁共振造影取向探討身體活動對老年大腦功能之影響，其中並以橫斷式與縱貫式研究取向，將身體活動分為心肺功能／有氧訓練、太極拳、阻力健身運動、協調訓練、身體活動量，及認知性身體活動等探討其在老化大腦功能之效益。靜息態功能性磁共振造影取向之結果發現，透過心肺適能與有氧訓練與增進老年人大腦功能間有其正向關聯；該正面效益亦發現在針對高齡者的太極拳運動上，然研究對於阻力健身運動之結果仍需更多研究進一步釐清。作業相關功能性磁共振造影取向之結果則發現，心肺適能與協調訓練皆對老年人大腦功能亦有正面影響。此外，高身體活動量對一般老年或高風險失智者之大腦功能皆有其效益。另外，透過認知性身體活動介入可對老年人之大腦處理效率有正面影響。整體而言，過去研究已為身體活動與老化大腦功能間之正向關聯提供科學實證基礎，本回顧結果可能提供台灣社會針對老年族群改善大腦功能之身體活動處方。英文摘要：In this article, we review recent findings of the effects of physical activities on the aging brain and cognitive functions, focusing on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) results, including resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (RS-fMRI) and task-based functional magnetic resonance imaging (TB-fMRI). Moreover, the present articles explored both cross-sectional studies and longitudinal studies that examined the brain function alterations induced by physical activity training, which included cardiovascular fitness/aerobic exercise training, Tai Chi training, resistance exercise/weight training, and coordination exercise training, using measured amounts of physical activity as assessment criteria, and taking into account cognitive-related physical activity responses. Results of these RS-fMRI studies showed that older adults that engaged in cardiovascular fitness and aerobic training showed evidence of increasing brain functions. Furthermore, these positive effects also extended to older adults engaging in Tai Chi training. Also, a few studies focused on resistance exercise training; however, the results of these investigations remain inconsistence and thus will require further confirmation in the future. Results of the TB-fMRI studies indicated that older adults with higher levels of cardiovascular fitness or those engaged in cardiovascular fitness training combined with coordination training, have gained beneficial effects regarding brain functions. Specifically, the positive effects of cardiovascular fitness could be found in both normal and pathological aging populations, including older adults with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Older adults with higher amounts of physical activity benefited in their brain functions more than older cognitively intact adults, or those with a high risk for dementia. Collectively, the results of previous studies established an experimental basis for assessing positive relationships between physical activities and brain functions, revealing that physical activity approaches might induce different improved brain functions. The consequence of these reviews provides physical activity prescriptions and exercise models relevant to improving brain functions for older populations in the society of Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：363-388資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201812_50(2).000910篇名：巔峰型教師的樣貌：圓滿幸福、知覺工作壓力、靈性幸福感及心理健康之關係並列篇名：What does the flourishing teacher look like? The Relationships between Flourishing, Perceived Work Stress, Spiritual Well-being and Mental Health作者：余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);陳玉樺(Yu-Hua Chen)關鍵字：主觀幸福感;知覺工作壓力;圓滿幸福;巔峰型教師;靈性幸福感;Flourishing;Perceived work stress;Spiritual well-being;Subjective well-being;The flourishing teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：傳統上，健康的概念被視為不僅是沒有心理疾病，而且必須是同時擁有心理健康的一種完整狀態。教師心理健康狀態，長期以來備受各界所熱衷探討的關鍵議題。本研究旨在了解巔峰型教師的樣貌，探究圓滿幸福、知覺工作壓力、靈性幸福感及心理健康之關係。本研究為橫斷性研究，採用問卷調查法，隨機抽樣兩批全國中小學教師，共獲得2,400名有效樣本進行調查。問卷內容包括主觀幸福感短版量表、圓滿幸福量表、靈性幸福感量表、臺灣憂鬱情緒量表。採用獨立樣本t檢定、驗證性因素分析、結構方程式模型等分析。研究發現：（1）大多數教師的心理疾病程度偏低，但仍有9.8%的中小學教師群，係屬於幽谷型的心理健康狀態類型；（2）「掙扎型」，共1人（0.1%）、「徬徨型」，共5人（0.2%）、「混亂型」，共54人（2.3%）、「奮戰型」，共50人（2.1%）、「大眾型」，共240人（10%）、「愁善型」，共316人（13.2%）、「顛峰型」，共520人（21.7%）、「滿足型」，共978人（40.8%）、「幽谷型」，共236人（9.8%）。（3）巔峰型教師比起幽谷型教師具有較佳的靈性幸福感、圓滿幸福、知覺較低的工作壓力負荷；（4）巔峰型教師的靈性幸福感在圓滿幸福與憂鬱間扮演調節的角色；（5）巔峰型教師的主觀幸福感在知覺工作壓力與憂鬱間扮演中介的角色。整體而言，巔峰型教師比其他類型教師，具有較好的心理健康狀態與特質。最後依據本研究的發現，提出未來研究的具體方向與相關限制。英文摘要：Traditionally, the concept of health was viewed as not sick or no-illness and the mental health was conceptualized as absence of mental illness. The main purpose of this study was to explore teachers' mental health. The purpose of this current study is to explore the teachers with the type of flourishing mental health. The relationships between flourishing, perceived work stress, spiritual well-being and mental health. This is a cross-sectional study, used the data randomly sampled from the elementary to senior-high-school teachers of whole Taiwan. A total random sample of 2,400 teachers were collected and analyzed. They were asked to fill up four scales anonymously: Subjective Well-Being-short form (SWB-SF), Spiritual Well-Being Scale (SPIRTWBS), Flourishing Scale (FS), and Taiwan Depression Scale (TDS). Data analysis included the t-test, CFA, and SEM. Results show that 1) Most teachers did not exhibit mental illness symptoms, however, 9.8% of the teachers were classified into the languishing mental health status; 2) There was 2.3% of teachers' (54) in a floundering state, 0.2% of teachers' (5) in a hovering state, 0.1% of teachers' (1) in a struggling state, 13.2% of teachers' (316) in sentimental state, 10% of teachers' (240) in popular state, 2.1% of teachers' (50) in a striving state, 9.8% of teachers' (236) in languishing state, 40.8% of teachers' (978) in a contented state, 21.7% of teachers' (520) in flourishing state; 3) The flourishing teachers have significantly higher scores on the whole spiritual well-being, flourishing, lower work stress than those of the languishing teachers; 4) ”Spiritual well-being” play moderating effect for ”flourishing” to ”depression”. 5) ”Subjective well-being” play mediation role for ”perceived work stress” to ”depression”. On the whole, the flourishing teachers have better mental health status and traits than other types of teachers. Finally, according to findings of this research, the researcher proposed the specific directions for future researches and restrictions.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201809_50(1).000111篇名：中學生考試壓力團體方案之成效並列篇名：Effectiveness of Group Counseling Sessions Aimed at Alleviating Examination Stress among Junior High School Students作者：趙子揚(Tzu-Yang Chao);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);郭蕙寧(Hui-Ning Kuo);張瑩瑩(Ying-Ying Chang)關鍵字：中學生;中學生考試壓力量表;考試壓力;混合研究;團體輔導;Adolescents;Examination stress;Examination Stress Scale;Group counseling session;Mixed method期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在建置中學生考試壓力團體輔導方案，並檢視此方案對於考試壓力較大之九年級學生有無效果，期望以此供未來國中端對於學生考試壓力輔導之參考。本研究屬於質量並行的平行混合研究設計，在研究程序上，先以「中學生考試壓力量表」測量臺北市某所公立國中九年級學生之考試壓力，再依測驗結果，召募考試壓力較大之學生25名，組成四個團體，各進行六次團體。本研究於團體結束後，再次進行中學生考試壓力量表之測量，檢驗參與團體的學生，考試壓力是否降低。同時，本研究也以學生訪談資料之質性分析，檢視參加團體對學生來說，有何助益。研究發現，進行六次之團體，對九年級學生來說，能夠顯著降低其考試壓力。從質性資料中也發現，成員參與團體後，其益處為「生理焦慮舒緩」、「情感支持抒發」、「認知信念轉變」及「日常行動落實」。本研究將以中學生考試壓力團體方案之成效，以及學校應用之模式進行討論，以提供學校心理學在理論上及實務上之建議。英文摘要：For adolescents, examination stress is a widespread and universal phenomenon, and how to alleviate Examination Stress is also an important issue. The purpose of this present study is two-fold: based on the Examination Stress Framework, to set up group counseling sessions to help junior high school students alleviate examination stress, and to inspect whether the group counseling sessions are effective for ninth-grade students who experiencing high levels of examination stress. The parallel mixed method research design was used in this present study, by conducting both quantitative and qualitative methods. In regard to the quantitative method, we used the single-group-pretest-posttest design. The Examination Stress Scale (ExamSS) was used to measure the level of examination stress of ninth graders at a public junior high school in Taipei. According to the results, we then recruited 25 students experiencing high examination stress, and divided these students into four counseling groups. Each group underwent six counseling group sessions, after which the ExamSS was re-administered in order to determine whether there had been any decline in levels of examination stress. In regard to the qualitative method, in the other hand, we also interviewed six students after the counseling group sessions, to conduct qualitative content analysis to explore the possible benefits of the group counseling sessions. The quantitative result indicates that there is a significant reduction in levels of examination stress after the six counseling sessions. The qualitative result also indicates that benefits of group counseling sessions may be classified into ”mitigation of physiological anxiety”, ”emotional release”, ”change of perspective”, and ”learning how to deal with stress and other problems”. On the basis of these results, the present study provides theory- and practice-based recommendations about the group counseling sessions for examination stress, hoping that educational policy can be used to provide counselling programs in schools where it is needed so as to effectively reduce examination stress among adolescents.起始頁-結束頁：31-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201809_50(1).000212篇名：國中青少年三波段自尊類型潛藏轉移對心理適應之研究並列篇名：Three-wave Longitudinal Study on Latent Transition of Self-esteem and Psychological Adjustment in Adolescence作者：王郁琮(Yu-Chung Lawrence Wang);李佳儒(Jia-Ru Li)關鍵字：青少年自尊類型;青少年心理健康;潛藏轉移分析;Latent adolescent self-esteem;Latent transition analysis;Psychological adjustment in adolescence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在利用新進發展之三步驟設定潛藏轉移分析（3-step Specification Latent Transition Analysis），探討青少年早期三波段異質性自尊類型成員的變動。研究變項包含：國中一至三年級自尊測量以及國一學業表現、朋友關係、母子關係和導師關係滿意度量表、國三憂鬱情緒與違常行為等。藉由區分國中一、二、三個年級的自尊類型，再串聯跨年級間自尊類型的轉移，同時檢核國一自尊類型與滿意度變項間的關聯性，以及國三自尊類型在憂鬱情緒與違常行為的差異。研究樣本共追蹤2685名國一學生三年。資料蒐集工具包括自尊量表、現況不滿意度、憂鬱情緒與違常行為檢核表。LTA分析結果發現，國一、二、三各年級自尊類型都持續呈現出低、中、高和矛盾四種類型。類型轉移樣態顯示出低自尊人數比例逐年下降；高自尊人數比例逐年上升；國二到國三的自尊轉移率小於國一到國二。國一滿意度等變項和對自己容貌的評價可顯著預測國一自尊類型的分類，而國三的低自尊組和矛盾自尊組在憂鬱症狀和偏差行為等結果變項之反應明顯不同於其他組別。顯示台灣青少年早期自尊樣態與西方社會有所差異，隨年級漸升青少年自尊出現正向轉移，國一到國二階段的移轉性顯著高於國二到國三階段。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to explore the role of self-esteem in the transition of adolescents among heterogeneous classes by using a three-wave survey conducted by the Taiwan Youth Project. A newly developed three-step specification latent transition analysis of Mplus7.3 was used for data analysis. The research variables were measures of self-esteem, scores on the dissatisfaction scale, depressive symptoms, and delinquent behaviors. A total of 2,685 junior high school students participated in the study, and self-report questionnaires were administered for three consecutive years. Latent profile analysis results revealed that the self-esteem of adolescents could be classified into four heterogeneous classes: low, middle, high, and contradictory classes. Latent transition analysis results also indicated that during the 3 years of the study, the transition of students from one class to another was more likely to be upward than downward. Furthermore, the ratio of movers from the seventh grade to the eighth grade was lower than that of movers from the eighth grade to the ninth grade. Auxiliary variables such as academic performance, peer relationship, closeness with homeroom teacher, and mother-child relationship exhibited a significant correlation with membership of the four self-esteem classes. Scores for distal outcomes such as depressive symptoms and delinquent behaviors were discovered to be significantly higher for low and contradictory self-esteem classes than their counterparts.起始頁-結束頁：53-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201809_50(1).000313篇名：感恩到幸福：從復原力探討感恩與心理健康之關係並列篇名：From Gratitude to Bliss: The Mediating Effect of Resilience on the Relationship between Gratitude and Mental Healt作者：吳相儀(Hsiang-Yi Wu);張聖翎(Sheng-Ling Chang);蕭舒謙(Shu-Chien Hsiao);簡晉龍(Chin-Lung Chien)關鍵字：心理健康;幸福感;復原力;感恩;壓力知覺;Gratitude;Mental health;Perceived stress;Resilience;Well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：正向心理學的研究顯示，在正向特質當中，感恩對於人的心理健康具有正向影響，但感恩在邁向心理健康之中介因子及路徑尚有待進一步完善。研究目的：本研究旨在以復原力為中介變項，強調感恩對於正、負向心理健康都具有積極作用的特性，分析感恩與心理健康之關係。研究方法：在心理健康方面，採用正負向指標，分別為「幸福感」與「壓力知覺」，以結構方程式模型（SEM）檢驗感恩、復原力與正負向心理健康之路徑。研究對象為馬來西亞北中南6間獨立中學209位教職員，採問卷調查法蒐集資料，測量變項包括感恩、復原力、心理健康（幸福感、壓力知覺），研究工具包含「大學生感恩量表」、「復原力量表」、「幸福感量表」以及「壓力知覺量表」。研究結果與結論：結果顯示假設之模型成立，（1）從感恩到幸福感之間，復原力具有顯著中介效果；（2）感恩到壓力知覺之間，復原力具顯著且高度的中介效果；（3）感恩可經由復原力，再到壓力知覺之緩解，間接帶來幸福感。此結果意涵可提供未來研究及實務參考運用之方向。英文摘要：Gratitude has been considered as an important trait in predicting people's mental health in the studies of positive psychology. However, the path between gratitude and mental health is still unclear and needs to be further examined. Purpose: The present study wanted to emphasize that gratitude can beneficially affect people's positive and negative mental status simultaneously. And it would like to know if resilience, as a potential mediator that has the same characteristic as gratitude, could fully explain the relationship between gratitude and mental health. Method: This study adopted both ”well-being” and ”perceived stress” which represented positive and negative indicators of mental health to investigate multiple routes among gratitude, resilience, and mental health. Survey data were collected from 209 staff of six Chinese independent high schools in Malaysia. It measured participants' gratitude, resilience, well-being, and perceived stress by using relevant survey tools. Results and Conclusion: The results from structural equation modeling analyses suggested that: 1) resilience could significantly mediate the relationship between gratitude and well-being; 2) resilience could significantly and highly mediate the relationship between gratitude and perceived stress; 3) gratitude could go through resilience and perceived stress to increase subjective well-being. Possible explanations and implications of results were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：83-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201809_50(1).000414篇名：視障學生行動觸控設備使用態度影響模式探究：以知覺有用性、知覺易用性為中介變項並列篇名：Study on Attitude toward Mobile Devices in Students with Visual Impairments: Perceived Usefulness and Perceived Ease of Use as Mediating Variables作者：李昕寧(Hsing-Ning Lee);鄭永福(Yung-Fu Cheng);張千惠(Chien-Huey Sophie Chang);吳榮根(Jung-Gen Wu)關鍵字：行動觸控設備;知覺有用性;知覺易用性;視障學生;態度;Mobile device;Perceived usefulness;Perceived ease of use;Students with visual impairments期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探究視覺障礙學生對行動觸控設備使用態度的影響模式，了解社會支持、擁有資源及使用能力對態度的認知、情感及行為意向三個成分之影響力，並探討知覺有用性、知覺易用性的中介效果。本研究以國中以上曾使用過行動觸控設備之視障學生144人為對象，採用項目分析及驗證性因素分析驗證各變項量表之品質及信、效度，再以結構方程模式進行資料分析與模式驗證。研究發現，社會支持對知覺有用性及知覺易用性均有正向影響力，進而影響對行動觸控設備的態度。擁有資源對知覺易用性有直接影響效果，並藉由使用能力對知覺易用性產生間接影響，再進一步影響使用態度。知覺易用性對於態度的認知、情感及行為意向三個面向均有正向影響力，而知覺有用性則僅對認知及行為意向有顯著影響，對情感面向之影響則未達顯著水準。依上述結果，本研究對如何促進視覺障礙學生行動觸控設備使用態度提出具體建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the effect of various factors on the attitude toward mobile device of students with visual impairments (VI) in Taiwan. This study also explored the mediating effect of perceived usefulness (PU) and perceived ease of use (PEOU) and verified the structural model of social support, resource possession, and abilities and attitudes regarding the use of mobile devices. We redesigned the attitude scale in accordance with the suggestions of other studies to comprise three sections: cognition, affect, and conation. We investigated 144 students with VI above junior high school who had ever used mobile devices. Reliability and validity were examined using item analysis and confirmatory factor analysis. The results revealed that social support had a positive effect on PU and PEOU and an indirect effect on attitude toward mobile devices, mediated by PU and PEOU. Possession of resources and knowledge had a positive effect on PEOU and an indirect effect on PEOU, mediated by abilities for mobile device use, and consequently exhibited a relationship with attitude. PEOU had a positive effect on cognition, affect, and conation. Nevertheless, PU exhibited a significant relationship only with cognition and conation. Therefore, the findings of this study provide some suggestions for improving the attitude of VI students toward mobile devices. First, the researchers suggest the perceived ease of use (PEOU) be considered primarily when developing mobile devices, digital tools or applications, in order to accommodate the needs of users with visual impairments and to motivate their acceptance of those digital equipments. Secondly, family members, teachers, relatives and friends can provide more social support to encourage frequent use of digital mobile devices in people with visual impairments. Finally, the researchers will strongly recommend the government to provide sufficient mobile devices with related trainings for applying these devices, which will definitely help promote their attitude toward mobile devices.起始頁-結束頁：107-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201809_50(1).000515篇名：論壇劇場－一個深化醫學倫理教學的新嘗試並列篇名：Forum Theater: Innovation for Enhancing Medical Ethics Teaching作者：李錦虹(Gin-Hong Lee);邱浩彰(Hou-Chang Chiu)關鍵字：角色扮演;論壇劇場;醫學教育;醫學倫理;Forum theatre;Medical education;Medical ethics;Role play期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究嘗試將『論壇劇場』應用於醫學院之生命倫理課程，透過質性研究探討執行之過程，並從不同角度評量其成效。研究對象：某大學醫學系二年級修習生命倫理課程的學生，共47名。研究工具：期末課程評量問卷、觀察者紀錄、課後檢討會議記錄、以及學生的反思札記。研究過程：研究團隊設計四個生命倫理故事作為案例，由四位戲劇專家及課程教師以論壇劇場之形式帶領課程之進行。每個故事進行2次課程（共計4小時），合計8次課程。於論壇劇場實施前、中、後三階段，分別蒐集量性與質性資料。研究結果：量性評量顯示，學生對此課程的喜歡與收穫程度，在期末有顯著的增加。質性評量對於執行過程的複雜現象、所遇到的困難、檢討與建議等提供主題式的描述，這些描述分別涵蓋學生與專家的觀點，可以成為後續課程改進之參考。英文摘要：Background: Student role-play is a commonly utilized practice in medical ethics education. Because of various limitations, the benefits of role-play have not been fully realized. An interactive forum theater exhibits a unique design that may compensate for the drawbacks of role-play and provide opportunities to achieve the goals of ethics education. This study explored the application of participatory forum theater in a bioethics course and evaluated its effectiveness from different perspectives. Methods: Forty-seven second-year medical students who had taken a compulsory bioethics course participated in this study. Four bioethics clinical vignettes were predesigned by the research team. The forum theater program was conducted by four drama experts and the course instructors; this program had a total duration of 8 weeks, with 2 weeks (4 hours) for each vignette. The quantitative measurements were the interpersonal reactivity index, an ethics knowledge questionnaire, and a final-term evaluation. The qualitative data were collected through in-class observation, after-class review meetings, and student reflection reports. Research data were collected at the beginning, middle, and end of this program. Results: Compared with the initial measurements, a significant increase was observed in student feelings of satisfaction and perceived benefits with regard to this program as well as ethical knowledge at the end of the course. Five items from IRI also demonstrated a significant difference. A qualitative analysis revealed the complex phenomenon of conducting this interactive theater, the difficulties encountered, and suggestions for future applications, both from the perspectives of faculty and students.起始頁-結束頁：131-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201809_50(1).000616篇名：大學生服務學習態度對關懷弱勢群體的影響關係：網路社會關懷連結的調節效果並列篇名：The Impact of Service-learning Attitudes on Caring Minority Groups for College Students: The Moderating Effect of Online Social Caring Connections作者：張義雄(I-Hsiung Chang);沈湘縈(Hsiang-Ying Shen);陳儒晰(Ru-Si Chen)關鍵字：大學生;調節效果;服務學習態度;網路社會關懷連結;關懷弱勢群體;Caring minority groups;College students;Moderating effect;Online social caring connections;Service-learning attitudes期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究關注大學生服務學習態度對關懷弱勢群體展現助人意向與不同社會群體公平對待看法，並探討網路社會關懷連結態度在此影響關係所表現的調節作用。研究者使用問卷調查探討大學生對服務學習與弱勢群體關懷態度的影響因素和調節作用，自編問卷涵蓋「服務學習態度」、「關懷弱勢群體」、「網路社會關懷連結」等潛在構面，運用偏最小平方法分析問卷資料並檢定調節變項的交互效果與統計顯著性。研究結果指出大學生運用網路科技關心弱勢群體，藉由網路社群集結學習夥伴進行社會服務的看法，調節其對服務學習活動的助人意向與弱勢群體之社會關懷實踐以改善弱勢群體不利地位之看法。具有低度網路社會關懷連結態度的大學生，認同服務學習活動的助人意向之實施目標與教學安排，有助於其關懷弱勢群體的不公不義處境，並尋思以社會公平的改善之道。英文摘要：This study focused on the college students' attitude toward service learning on the perceptions about minority caring and helping intentions, and explored the moderating effects of social caring minority groups on this relationship. This study examined the influencing factors and moderating effect of college students' attitudes toward service-learning and caring minority groups by survey. The questionnaire consisted of three factors, including service-learning attitudes, caring minority groups, and online social caring connections. The researchers employed partial least squares to analyze the sample data, and testing interaction effect and statistical significance with the moderating factor. The results indicated college students' perceptions about the online social caring interactions and community connections moderated their attitudes toward the relationship of service-learning practices and caring or improving the social situations of minority groups. The college students with the lower scores of online social caring connections had the positive preferences about practical objectives and instructions of service-learning activities, and helped their considerations about the unfair and unequal situations for minority groups to improve their disadvantaged status.起始頁-結束頁：147-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201809_50(1).000717篇名：兒童閱讀歷程的代名詞與因果推論發展研究：橫切與個別差異的分析並列篇名：A Developmental study of Elementary School Children's Pronominal and Causal Inference Abilities during Reading: Cross-sectional and Individual Difference Analysis作者：曾玉村(Yuh-Tsuen Tzeng);黃秋華(Chiu-Hua Huang);張菀芯(Wan-Shin Chang)關鍵字：因果推論;指稱代名詞推論;推論能力發展;Causality inference;Developmental pattern;Referential pronoun inference期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：兒童如何進行因果推論與指稱代名詞推論，是兒童讀者能否形成連貫性閱讀理解表徵的關鍵能力，因此，探討因果推論與指稱代名詞推論的發展組型，是理論研究引導教學實務之重要貢獻。本研究目的旨在探討不同指稱代名詞型態與文本因果關係對國小學童在推論句閱讀時間的影響，並進一步分析弱理解者與優理解者推論能力的差異。研究參與者分別為128、194、158位二、三、四年級學童，他們於電腦上自行按鍵控制語句的閱讀時間，閱讀的材料是由兩個句子構成的短文，短文的首句會提及兩位人物，第二句為推論句，描述首句當中的一位人物所處的狀態或從事的動作；短文前後句之間的指稱代名詞型態（零代詞與明示代詞）與因果關係強度（高、低因果關係）進行系統性變化，構成四種文本類型。研究設計為以年級、指稱代名詞型態、因果關係強度為自變項之三因子混合設計，主要依變項為推論句的閱讀時間。結果顯示，年級越高閱讀推論語句所需時間越短，整體而言，二、三、四年級學童具有相似的推論組型，三因子交互作用不顯著，兩兩變項之二因子交互作用達顯著。不論推論句為零代詞或明示代詞，學童閱讀高因果關係的推論句所花時間皆短於低因果關係句；當語句之間具有高因果關係時，學童閱讀零代詞推論句的時間短於明示代詞句，但是在低因果關係時，學童閱讀該兩種代詞型式的推論句時間並無差異。接著，經過篩選之後進一步分析三、四年級弱理解者與優理解者的推論能力差異情形。結果發現，三年級的優理解者進行閱讀推論的時間比弱理解者短，但四年級的優與弱理解者之間沒有差異，整體而言，三、四年級學童在語句間有高因果關係時的推論時間皆比低因果關係時更短，且零代詞推論的時間也短於明示代詞句。顯示文本中以零代詞指稱且句子間具有高因果關係時，對優、弱理解能力兒童皆有促進推論的效果。英文摘要：Referential and causal inferences are key abilities for the development of reading comprehension. It is hence important to delineate children's developmental patterns of these abilities to serve as indexes for predicting future reading comprehension achievement and providing diagnostic sources of comprehension difficulties. This study aims at examining the development and interactions of different forms of pronoun and causality during reading short texts for 2^(nd), 3^(rd), and 4^(th) grade students, and further comparing differences between good and poor comprehenders. The numbers of participants for each grade were 174, 249, and 219 respectively. Thirty-six short texts were constructed with each contained two sentences. The first sentence always mentioned two characters and the second sentence related to the first one by varying pronominal (zero versus overt pronoun) and causal relations (high versus low causality). An interrogative question appeared at the end of each text to probe readers' comprehension. Participants sit in front of a personal computer and read the texts in a self-paced manner by pressing designated keys. This study was a 3x2x2 mixed design with grade as a between-subject factor (2^(nd), 3^(rd), & 4^(th) grade) and pronoun forms (zero versus overt pronoun) and causality (high versus low causality) as within-subject factors. The main dependent variable was the reading time of second/inference sentences. The results indicate that three-way interaction is not significant. Two-way interactions among three factors are all significant. Overall, the developmental pattern shows that, older the readers, shorter the reading time for inference sentences. All grades show a similar pattern for processing inference sentences. The effect of causality is always significant with shorter reading time for high than low causality text for both zero and overt pronoun conditions. Further analysis reveals that, for high causal relation texts, inference sentence reading time for zero pronoun condition is significantly shorter than that of overt pronoun condition. However, for low causal relation texts, there is no inference sentence reading time difference between zero pronoun and overt pronoun conditions among students across all grades. After selecting poor versus good comprehenders from 3^(rd) and 4^(th) grade, we further analyze their differences in reading inference sentences. Third grade good comprehenders process inference sentences faster than poor comprehenders but there is no reading time difference between good versus poor comprehenders for the 4^(th) grade students. To conclude, both good and poor comprehenders take less time in reading the high than the low causality texts, and less time for zero pronoun than overt pronoun texts. This study has demonstrated that the high causal relation texts for zero pronoun conditions will improve children's resolution process, whether they have good or poor understanding of the text.起始頁-結束頁：513-535資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201806_49(4).000118篇名：兒童摘要的推論歷程並列篇名：The inference processes of summarization作者：連<U+5553>舜(Chi-Shun Lien);曾玉村(Yuh-tsuen Tzeng)關鍵字：推論;概括化推論;鉅觀結構;摘要;Generalization inference;Inference;Macrostructure;Summarization期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：摘要是形成文本表徵的重要基礎（Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978）。讀者若能形成理想的文章摘要，亦即將文章的內容形成「鉅觀結構」（Kintsch, 1998）。讀者依照三個「鉅觀規則」：刪除（deletion）、概括（generalization）和建構（construction）來形成文章的鉅觀結構（van Dijk,1980）。讀者在摘要的歷程中，必須進行文本局部及整體連貫性的推論，「刪除」規則需要讀者將文本與其背景知識整合，以推論文章訊息或概念的重要性，決定這些訊息是否應該保留在摘要中。「概括化」和「建構」兩個規則，需要將相似或相同位階的概念加以整合，以提取上位概念，進而建構出能涵蓋下位概念的「主題句」。本研究將探討摘要的推論歷程進行分析，深入探討讀者在形成摘要時，「刪除」、「概括」和「建構」推論所扮演的角色。研究一的目的是比較國小學童摘要「刪除」、「概括化」和「建構」三種推論能力的發展。我們將四至六年級國小學童依其識字、閱讀能力進行配對，並透過實驗材料的操弄，比較國小學童在摘要歷程中刪除、概括化和建構三種推論發展差異。結果發現「概括化」和「建構」能力是影響摘要表現的重要因素。研究二的目的是探討概括化能力的發展差異以及對學童摘要表現上的影響。分別測量四年級和六年級學童的概括化能力，進而分析概括化能力與閱讀理解對說明文摘要表現之影響。結果發現概括化推論能力有發展上的差異，概括化能力可以有效地預測四年級學童之摘要表現。英文摘要：The ability of summarization is an important indicator of textbase understanding. Readers who are able to write an ideal summary of text can build up the macrostructure of text and extract the literal meaning from the text (Kintsch, 1998). A lot of local and global inferences were needed for macrostructure. Readers employ the three macro-rules during reading: First, readers delete both redundant and trivial information from the text. In order to do so, readers read text elements sequentially and decide the importance for each element on inclusion or deletion by their background knowledge. After deletion procedure, readers generalize related or similar concepts/sentences and construct superoridinate terms as substitutes. In this paper, two studies were presented to show how these inferences affected the construction of summary. In the first study, the purpose was to investigate the development of there types of inferences during summarization (i.e., deletion, generalization and construction). Fifty-three fourth graders, 55 fifth graders and 56 sixth graders were recruited from an elementary school in Chia-Yi City. Three versions of experimental texts, which were created to examine deletion, generalization, and construction inference-making abilities respectively, were given to participants for writing 60-words summaries. There was a significant developmental difference between fourth and sixth graders on the performance of generalization. Then, we selected low-ability participants from the 6th grade level and matched their word-recognition and reading-comprehension scores with participants on 4th grade. The result showed that there was a reliable difference between the low-ability group and the comprehension-match group. In the second study, the purpose was to examine how generalization inference affected children's summarization. Sixty-five fourth graders and 53 sixth graders were recruited from an elementary school in Yunlin County. All participants were administered the Reading Comprehension growth Test, the generalization test, and the expository summarization assessment. The results showed that there was significant developmental difference on the performance of generalization inference. In addition, the generalization inference reliably predicted the performance of summarization for the fourth graders.起始頁-結束頁：537-556資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201806_49(4).000219篇名：閱讀理解成長測驗之編製研究並列篇名：The Development of Progress Monitoring Test of Reading Comprehension作者：蘇宜芬(Yi-Fen Su);洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung);陳柏熹(Po-Hsi Chen);陳心怡(Hsin-Yi Chen)關鍵字：成長曲線;能力值;國小學生;複本測驗;閱讀理解;Ability value;Elementary school students;Equivalent test;Growth curve;Reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要目的為編製適用於小學四、五、六年級學生的多複本閱讀理解測驗，提供一套可瞭解閱讀理解能力發展情形的工具，也可用於閱讀低成就學生的補救教學成效評估，作為介入反應之決定。題目型式為測量文章理解的題組。每套複本都有四個題組，每個題組都有一篇文章及10個閱讀理解題目。四個題組的文章分別是短記敘文、短說明文、長記敘文、長說明文。40道題目中有兩題是不計分的，主要用以確認受試者是否認真作答。每個題組中的題目所測量的閱讀理解成份為字彙觸接、字面理解、摘取大意、及推論理解。在信度考驗方面，四、五、六年級每個複本的Cronbach's α信度及折半信度多 .8以上。在效度方面，以「國民小學閱讀理解篩選測驗版本A」為效標，所測得的效標關聯效度介於 .59∼.75之間。本測驗除了提供百分等級常模外，也提供能力值轉換常模，以便於繪出學生的閱讀理解能力成長曲線及計算成長係數。本研究也對於教育應用上的建議與限制提供說明。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop a set of equivalent tests for reading comprehension progress monitoring for grades four to six. The reading comprehension equivalent tests can also be used as tools for evaluating instructional effects of remedial intervention. In this test, there were six alternate-forms for each grade. Four testlets were included in each alternate-form. Each testlet had one passage and ten test items. The four passages in one alternate-form included one short narrative, one short expository, one long narrative, and one long expository texts. There were 200-300 characters in short passages, and 400-500 characters in long passages. The test items were designed to measure lexical access, literal comprehension, summarization, and inferential comprehension. There were forty items in total in one alternate-form. Regarding reliability, the Cronbach's α coefficients and split-half coefficients of all alternate-forms were mostly above .80. Using ”Reading Comprehension Screening Test for Elementary School Students-Version A” as criterion, the criterion validity coefficient were .67 (p ＜ .001), .59 (p ＜ .001), .75 (p ＜ .001) for grades 4, 5, and 6 respectively. In addition, based on the data collected from six time-points in 2011 school year, the growth model analysis revealed that the reading comprehension abilities of the fourth, fifth, and sixth graders increased from the beginning to the end in one school year. In order for teachers to monitor students' progress, this test provided not only the norm of percentile rank, but also the norm of ability value (theta score). Using the ability values between two time-points, a growth coefficient could be calculated. Several suggestions and one limitation for educational application were provided.起始頁-結束頁：557-580資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201806_49(4).000320篇名：課文本位閱讀策略教學對國小學童閱讀表現與策略使用覺知情形之影響並列篇名：The effects of Textbook-based Approach to Reading Instruction on elementary graders' reading comprehension and awareness of using reading strategy作者：陳明蕾(Minglei Chen)關鍵字：閱讀策略;閱讀理解;課文本位閱讀策略教學;Reading comprehension;Reading strategy;Text-based approach to reading instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：以教科書做為閱讀教學的主要材料，是提升教師進行閱讀策略教學的有效路徑（Pearson, 2009）。本研究採用課文本位閱讀教學模式，以原有國語課程教學時間，檢視此一教學模式對國小學童閱讀表現、閱讀理解策略覺知情形與情意之影響。本研究以嘉義市2所國小共439位學生為研究對象，採2（實驗組與對照組）×3（三、四、五年級）不等組前後測設計進行兩學期的準實驗教學。結果顯示，本教學模式確能提昇四、五年級學生閱讀測驗表現，但對三年級學生的閱讀測驗表現無顯著效果。在閱讀策略使用覺知的自評表現，發現五年級實驗組學生在摘要、上下文脈絡、理解監控、與自我提問四個構面後測的自評分數高於對照組學生，其餘後測的組別效果則皆無顯著差異。在情意部份，發現三年級實驗組學生在閱讀自信心、學習方法後測的自評分數高於對照組學生，五年級實驗組學生學習方法後測的自評分數低於對照組，其餘後測的組別效果則皆無顯著差異。英文摘要：The current study designed a multiple reading strategies program for elementary students and examined its effect on the reading comprehension, the awareness of using reading strategie, and attitude. A 2 (treatment: experimental group and control group)x3(grades: 3rd: 4th: 5th) quasi-experimental pretest-posttest design was adopted. 439 participants were recruited from 16 classes. The results indicated that (a) 4th and 5th experimental graders' reading comprehension score higher than control group, but there was no difference for 3rd graders; (b) for the awareness of using reading strategies, 5th experimental graders' scores higher than control group on the summary, context, comprehension monitoring, and self-questioning, and no group effects were found for other posttest contrasts; (c) for the attitude, 3rd experimental graders' scores higher than control group on the reading confidence, learning method, and no group effects were found for other posttest contrasts.起始頁-結束頁：581-609資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201806_49(4).000401篇名：近50年來國民教育發展之探究：九年國民教育與十二年國民基本教育政策之分析並列篇名：Basic Education Development in the Past 50 Years: An Analysis of the 9-year Compulsory Education and the 12-year Basic Education Policy Implementation in Taiwan作者：吳清山(Ching-Shan Wu)關鍵字：九年國民教育;十二年國民基本教育;教育政策;9-year compulsory education;12-year basic education;educational policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:4期出版年：2018中文摘要：1968年實施的九年國民教育和2014年實施的十二年國民基本教育，可說是我國跨世紀最重要的教育工程，影響我國教育發展極為深遠。本文旨在探究近50年來國民教育之發展，並以九年國民教育和十二年國民基本教育政策為例，就其發展背景、法律依據、政策內涵、成效檢討等部分進行說明。首先，探究其發展背景，兩者都是基於社會發展、教育潮流和人才培育的背景而來，但九年國民教育政策之推動，有強人主導，雖規劃時間較短，但比十二年國民基本教育要來得順利；其次，就其法律依據來看，九年國民教育是以《九年國民教育實施條例》為依據，而十二年國民基本教育則以《國民教育法》和《高級中等教育法》為依據；第三，就其定位、目標、入學方式、課程及教學、經費及學費和師資分析其政策內涵；最後，就其實施成效進行檢討，其中以入學方式最受關注，而九年國民教育和十二年國民基本教育雖能有助於人才培育，但就減輕學生過度學習壓力的政策目標而言，效果實屬有限，此為十二年國民基本教育必須改進的重要課題。英文摘要：This paper explores the development of basic education in Taiwan during the past 50 years, focusing on the implementation of the 9-year compulsory education and the 12-year Basic Education. The former, being put into effect since 1968, includes six years for elementary education and three for junior high education. The latter, being carried out since 2014, include nine years for compulsory education and additional three for senior secondary education. Both were the most important educational policies in Taiwan across the century, and had extremely far-reaching impact on the development of education in Taiwan. The backgrounds, legal bases, policy contents, and effectiveness of both systems are reviewed in this paper.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820181264040012篇名：臺灣國民中學學校建築發展與革新並列篇名：The Development and Innovation of Junior High School Buildings after 1968 in Taiwan作者：湯志民(Chih-Min Tang)關鍵字：國民中學;發展與革新;發展時期;學校建築;development and innovation;development period;junior high school;school building期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:4期出版年：2018中文摘要：1968年臺灣實施九年國民教育，本文以1968至2018年為範疇，為國中學校建築發展進行歷史分期。本文採內容分析法，以描述性敘述和詮釋性分析，透過政策、法規、案例和成效的蒐集和整理，探究其發展、特色和影響因素。國中學校建築發展與革新概分為安全和標準化時期（1960<U+223C>1970年代）、創意和新建築時期（1980<U+223C>1990年代）、優質與複合化時期（2000<U+223C>2010年代）等三時期六階段。歷經50年的蛻變，從立基標準校舍、開始重視安全、創新造形萌芽、新具人文關懷、開創多元環境，到跨域複合經營，挹注不少創新觀念。期間，受美、英、日的發展，以及臺灣的社會脈絡、新政策和研究推展的影響，而有突破性的革新。未來，建置和經營也面臨跨領域之挑戰。英文摘要：Taiwan has implemented nine-year compulsory education since 1968. Employing content analysis, which combines descriptive narrative and interpretive analysis, this study investigates the development, characteristics and influencing factors of junior high school buildings in Taiwan from 1968 to 2018 through the collection and collation of policies, regulations, cases, and results. The development and innovation of Taiwanese junior high school buildings can be divided into three periods and six stages: safety and standardization (1960-1970s), creativity and new construction (1980-1990s), and quality and compounding (2000- 2010s). During the 50 years, the emphasis has been shifted from the standard school buildings to safety, new modeling, new humanistic care, multi-environment, to cross-domain compound management. Many innovative ideas, which have been injected into junior high school buildings in Taiwan, are influenced by the development of the counterparts in the United States, Britain and Japan. Taiwan's social context, new policies and research has also lead to groundbreaking innovation. In the future, construction and operation will also face cross-domain challenges.起始頁-結束頁：37-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820181264040023篇名：我國國民中學輔導工作50年的回顧與展望並列篇名：Retrospect and Perspective of School Guidance and Counseling in Junior High School in Taiwan作者：田秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Tien);盧鴻文(Hung-Wen Lu)關鍵字：九年國教;國中輔導工作;輔導教師;學校輔導與諮商;guidance teacher;guidance in junior high school;9-year compulsory education;school guidance and counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:4期出版年：2018中文摘要：我國國民中學輔導工作，發軔於1968年九年國民教育的實施。本文針對這50年來學校輔導工作的發展與變革做討論，以檢討過去，並展望未來。就歷史發展而言，輔導工作從觀念的萌芽與試驗、制度的建置與穩定，直到面對社會文化變遷的因應及轉型、相關法令的制定與實施，輔導與諮商工作至今在校園中已相當專業而紮實。就特殊性而言，這些年來，輔導工作一直環繞社會所發生的事件或教育改革相關議題，包括校園霸凌、家暴性侵、性別認同、毒品防治、考試壓力等。針對這些議題所形成的重要法令或規範，使教師能穩定國中學生的心理健康。因著社會問題的多元，輔導教師所需具備的多元能力，也持續在繼續教育或職前教育階段不斷充實。面對今日複雜的學生困難，須共同介入的輔導團隊以及需要互動的學生家庭或社區資源也相對增加，輔導教師更需朝生態觀以及系統性的處遇模式發展。英文摘要：The school guidance and counseling in Taiwanese junior high schools has commenced since the implementation of the 9-year compulsory education in 1968. Its development included three key stages: from guidance concept enlightenment and experiment, to counseling system establishment, and finally, to transference and legislation. Now it has been quite solid. Particularly speaking, it has been focusing on social issues and educational reform, such as internet cyber bullying, domestic violence and sexual harassment, gender identity, drug abuse, and academic stress, etc. The Student Guidance Act and related enforcement regulations were enacted to lead the counseling practice in school. Multifaceted capabilities are required for school counselors to help students solving the problems. Accordingly, they need to enrich themselves with professional knowledge through pre- and in-service education. Counseling team workers also need to cooperate to each other to deal with the complicated problems encountered by the students and their family members. As a result, ecological perspectives and systematic approaches for the future of school counseling work are in need.起始頁-結束頁：77-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820181264040044篇名：知之為不知，不知為知之，學習也：論不知本位教與學並列篇名：Knowing Is Unknowing and Unknown Is Known: Discussing Ignorance-based Teaching and Learning作者：曾正宜(Jeng-Yi Tzeng)關鍵字：不知認識論;不知本位教學;知識本位教學;ignorance epistemology;ignorance-based pedagogy;knowledge-based pedagogy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:4期出版年：2018中文摘要：孔子認為真知即是要明辨知與不知的差別，但資訊爆炸的時代裡，知與不知的界線日益模糊。從老子哲學中可知，知與不知之間原是彼此共生相成。就此觀之，目前主導課室教學的知識本位教學觀，以追求正統強效知識為目標，傾向固守既定主流求知方法，卻忽略了知與不知原是相互定義，從知中求不知能趨動知識擾動與翻新的面向。本文比較知識本位與不知本位教學模式的差異，探討以不知為始、為歷程以及為收尾的教與學，並介紹一個強調不知的教學範例，藉以說明未來教學不應僅止於問題解決之求知能力的培養，也應強調如何視知為不知及以不知為知之「求不知」的教學觀。英文摘要：Confucius argues that true knowing is to discern the difference between the known and the unknown, but the line becomes blurry in the time of information exploration. From Laozi's perspective, the known and the unknown are not only symbiotic but also mutually cultivating. Knowledge-based pedagogy, which dominates current school teaching, aims at pursuing orthodox powerful knowledge, and tends to reinforce extant mainstream disciplines. But, it overlooks the duality and mutuality of the known and the unknown, and thus fails to empower students to challenge and renovate knowledge by pursuing the unknown from the known. In this article, I compare the knowledge-based pedagogy with the ignorance-based pedagogy, discuss theories underpinning the beginning, the process, and the conclusion of ignorance-based teaching and learning, and introduce an exemplary curriculum that accentuates using ignorance to induce deep learning. These are to argue that future-oriented teaching should not only focus on problem-solving abilities, but also strive for ignorance-based teaching and learning that help learners to see the unknown in the known, and to identify the known by the unknown.起始頁-結束頁：107-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820181264040035篇名：教育政治歧見之處理：由A. Gutmann民主教育觀點反思高中課綱微調爭議與出路並列篇名：Resolving Political Disagreement: Reflecting on High School Curriculum Guideline Adjustment Policy from A. Gutmann's Democratic Education作者：王麗雲(Li-Yun Wang);賴彥全(Yen-Chywan Lai)關鍵字：A. Gutmann;公共思辨;民主教育;教育政治;課程決定;A. Gutmann;public deliberation;democratic education;politics of education;curriculum decision-making期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:3期出版年：2018中文摘要：2014年高中課綱微調爭議成為全國焦點，法律與歷史攻防鬧得沸沸揚揚，對於課程內容、課程決定的程序、課程決定的權威，都有對立與激烈的討論。本文跳脫法律與歷史爭議，由政治面出發，討論教育政治歧見的處理方式。教育內容常位於政治十字路口，如何在嚴重歧見中繼續教育下一代，實為重要議題。本文以A. Gutmann的民主教育理論為架構，在有意識社會再製的前提下，根據不壓迫與不歧視原則，分析課程綱要歧見的處理方式。由程序面、內容面、決定權威面，討論課程綱要的決定原則。而回到教育面，更重要的是培育學生進行公共思辨與公共參與的能力，以踐行民主社會。英文摘要：In 2014, High School Curriculum Guideline Adjustment has become a national controversial issue with furious legal and historical debates. The issues that have emerged include the content of curriculum, procedures for curriculum decision-making, and the authority of curriculum decision-making. Rather than focusing on the legal and historical dimensions of the debates, this paper focuses on the political dimension of curriculum decision using Amy Gutmann's Democratic Education Theory. Under the assumption of conscious social reproduction and following the rule of nondiscrimination and non-repression, this paper discusses how political disagreement about curriculum should be handled. Cultivating the ability of public deliberation and public participation is critical for a democratic society and should be included in education.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820180964030016篇名：論國際教育中愛國主義與世界主義的矛盾與出路並列篇名：On the Contradictions Between Patriotism and Cosmopolitanism and Their Resolutions Within International Education作者：黃文定(Wen-Ding Huang)關鍵字：K. A. Appiah;世界主義;多元認同;國際教育;愛國主義;K. A. Appiah;cosmopolitanism;multiple identities;international education;patriotism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在運用教育詮釋學方法，爬梳國際教育中世界主義與愛國主義之間的兩種矛盾，分析Appiah「有根的世界主義」（或稱「世界主義的愛國主義」）觀點及其對兩種矛盾的調和，並闡釋國際育面對矛盾的出路。Appiah世界主義觀點的兩項核心理念，是對人類尊嚴與自主性的普遍關懷與對差異的尊重。針對道德判斷觀點之普遍主義與社群主義的矛盾，Appiah承認普世價值的存在，但強調我們應接受不同地方對同一普世價值的不同詮釋與實踐方式的合理性，因此，教師應指導學生透過跨文化對話，理解不同在地脈絡的人對價值詮釋與實踐的多樣性。針對忠誠與認同對象之世界優先與國家優先的矛盾，Appiah指出我們應釐清「倫理」與「道德」兩種義務的區別，成為具多元忠誠與認同的世界公民，因此，教師應指導學生跳脫「國家－世界」二元對立，認識身分認同與義務之多樣性，自主地創造自我。英文摘要：The purposes of this article were to adopt the method of educational hermeneutics to examine the two contradictions between cosmopolitanism and patriotism within international education, to analyze Appiah's viewpoints of ”rooted cosmopolitanism” (or ”cosmopolitan patriotism”) and reconciliation of the two contradictions, and to elaborate the resolutions to the contradictions in international education. The two core ideas of Appiah's cosmopolitan viewpoints were universal concern for human dignity and autonomy and respect for difference. In terms of the contradiction between universalism and communitarianism in moral judgments, Appiah acknowledged the existence of universal values, but emphasized that we should accept the legitimacy of different interpretations and practical approaches of the same universal value in different places. Hence, teachers should guide students to understand the diversity of interpretations and practices of values through intercultural conversation with people from different contexts. Regarding the contradiction of primary loyalty and identity between the state and the world, Appiah indicated that one should make a distinction of obligations between ”ethics” and ”morality” and can be a world citizen with multiple loyalties and identities. Therefore, teachers should educate students to go beyond the dichotomy of ”nation-world” and understand the diversity of identities and obligations to create self autonomously.起始頁-結束頁：41-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820180964030027篇名：校長促進教師專業學習的槓桿：校長學習領導對教師課堂教學研究影響之中介模式分析並列篇名：The Leverage for Principals to Promote Teacher Professional Learning: Analyzing a Mediated-effects Model Regarding the Impact of Principal Leadership for Learning on Lesson Study作者：潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Wendy Pan);陳文彥(Wen-Yan Chen)關鍵字：校長學習領導;教師效能感;教師專業學習;教師學習領導;課堂教學研究;principal leadership for learning;teacher efficacy;teacher professional learning;teacher leadership for learning;lesson study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:3期出版年：2018中文摘要：在十二年國教新課綱即將啟動的脈絡下，了解校長如何促使教師進行課堂教學研究，以讓教師每年公開授課的規範，得以發揮其專業學習的實質功能，甚具重要性。基此背景，本研究採問卷調查法，以臺灣本島公立國中為母群，探討校長學習領導對教師專業學習之影響路徑。在以課堂教學研究作為教師專業學習之指標，以及教師學習領導與教師效能感作為中介變項下，運用結構方程模式進行中介模式分析。研究結果顯示，校長學習領導與教師學習領導、效能感和課堂教學研究在學校現場均有中上程度的表現；校長學習領導對於教師課堂教學研究的影響強度，不若教師學習領導與教師效能感來得大；校長學習領導對教師課堂教學研究的影響被部分中介，其影響力主要透過教師學習領導與教師效能感而發揮。此研究結果指陳了教師學習領導的實踐與教師效能感的提升，是校長帶動教師願意持續學習的重要槓桿。英文摘要：The 12-year basic education curriculum guideline is about to launch in 2019. When it takes effects, teachers are regulated to open classroom on a yearly basis. In the context, to assess how principals promote teacher professional learning becomes an important issue. This study, employing a survey design, examined the impact path of principal leadership for learning on teacher professional learning. The participants from public junior high schools in Taiwan were recruited as samples. Structure equation modeling was used to analyze the data with teacher leadership for learning and teacher efficacy as mediators. The findings indicated that teachers who have perceived the enactments of principal leadership for learning, teacher leadership for learning, teacher efficacy, and teachers’ participation in lesson study were all at a moderately high level. The direct effect of principal leadership for learning on teachers’ participation in lesson study was weaker than those of teacher leadership for learning and teacher efficacy. Moreover, the impact of principal leadership for learning on teachers’ participation in lesson study was partially mediated by teacher leadership for learning and teacher efficacy. Our findings suggest that teacher leadership for learning and teacher efficacy was the leverage points for principal to promote teacher learning.起始頁-結束頁：79-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820180964030038篇名：書評：從移動的時空看教育的脈絡：評2018年世界教育年鑑《不平均的教育時空：歷史社會學的概念、方法與實踐》並列篇名：Book Review: World Yearbook of Education 2018 Uneven Space-times of Education: Historical Sociologies of Concepts, Methods and Practices作者：黃瑄怡期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：123-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820180964030049篇名：以教育實現人格自由：教育學者瞿世英在近代中國教育史上的意義（1917-1949）並列篇名：Freedom of Personality through Education: The Role of Education Scholar Shih-Ying Qu in Modern Chinese Education History作者：劉蔚之(Wei-Chih Liou)關鍵字：哈佛大學教育學院;教育史;瞿世英（菊農）;HGSE (Harvard Graduate School of Education);history of education;Shih-Ying Qu (Shih-Ying Chu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:2期出版年：2018中文摘要：瞿世英（菊農）是二十世紀上半葉唯一取得哈佛教育學博士的中國學者。出國前參加五四運動的他並未主張放棄傳統文化，反而選擇就讀當時教育學發展相對落後的哈佛大學深研觀念論教育哲學，以掌握中國當時教育哲學發展過於偏重實用主義的關鍵問題。瞿世英返國後先參與中國哲學界之學術研究體制創設工作，稍後從事鄉村平民教育工作，是中華平民教育促進會總會工作最久的幹部，也是二戰後協助聯合國在各國推行基本教育計畫的靈魂人物。觀其一生，瞿世英從未偏離觀念論教育哲學均衡和諧的宇宙觀、人生觀與世界觀；以教育啟蒙鄉村農民，實現每一個人的人格自由，正是他人生與教育理想的實踐。本研究以瞿世英哈佛時期就讀檔案、著作文本等一手史料文獻，評估其歷史地位。目的在重建瞿氏歷史圖像，彰顯前輩教育學者歷史意義，找出今日進行知識學習與轉移的啟示，以益學界傳承與創發。英文摘要：Shih-Ying Qu was the only Chinese to obtain a doctoral degree in education from Graduate School of Education of Harvard University in the first half of the 20th century. This avid participant in the May Fourth Movement did not advocate abandoning traditional Chinese culture; his education at Harvard University, which was relatively behind in the field of education, actually held the key to the ensuing development of education philosophy in China. Upon his return to China, Qu first engaged himself to the institutionalization of Chinese academic research on philosophy and then dived into rural mass education, became the longest acting member of the Chinese National Association of Mass Education Movements, and was heart and soul to plans in basic education that the United Nations implemented in various countries after the war. Shih- Ying Qu never lost what he acquired through his Harvard education: a weltanschauung of balance and harmony in the cosmic, in life, and in the world. Farmers in rural areas were enlightened to actualize their individual freedom of personality, which was the realization of his ideals in life and education. This research assesses Shih-Ying Qu’s place in history based on first-hand historical artifacts such as personal files obtained from Harvard University Archives, his publications, and existing research. The depicted image and its historical meaning can shade light on the learning and transfer of external knowledge, which could benefit future education scholars.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201806640200110篇名：促進性別容納或再製男性主導？從女性觀點解析專案導向式學習在工程教育中的應用並列篇名：Promoting Gender-inclusion or Reproducing Male-dominance? From Female Perspectives on Project-based Learning in Engineering Study作者：洪瑞璇(Jui-Hsuan Hung);曾正宜(Jeng-Yi Tzeng)關鍵字：女性工程學習;性別容納式科學教育;專案導向式學習模式;female students in engineering study;gender-inclusive science education;project-based learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:2期出版年：2018中文摘要：許多工程教育研究認為專案導向式學習（project-based learning, PBL）可促進性別容納、改善性別區隔困境，但多為學理論述，缺少實徵資料佐證。本研究藉由解析女性在專案歷程中的觀點與學習經驗，探討PBL是否呼應性別容納精神，或實則再製男性主導文化。在一門大學工學院PBL課程中，透過小組專案歷程影片與文件報告資料的分析，以及與六名女學生的深入訪談，從女性視角來描繪PBL學習經驗。研究發現，女性學習者對PBL課程設計理念抱持正向態度，但充滿性別刻板期望的社會文化結構仍透過小組性別互動權力關係，鞏固並再製工程教育男性主導文化，而阻礙性別容納。本研究最後並提出有關工程教育PBL課程及後續研究之相關建議。英文摘要：Many engineering educators claimed that project-based learning (PBL) provides gender inclusive learning environment for learners, from which women can benefit especially in studying traditionally male-dominant subjects such as engineering. Unfortunately, most of these claims were not supported by empirical evidences. We examined such claims by delving into women's perspectives on a team-based PBL course offered for first-year undergraduate students by School of Engineering in a university in northwestern Taiwan. We thoroughly examined videos and reports from team activities, and conducted in-depth individual interviews with 6 female students. We found that female participants were positive about the PBL in general, but still felt the pressure of male-dominance in group interactions, which replicated gender bias from the social and cultural stereotypes. Suggestions were made for future design and implementation of PBL in engineering courses.起始頁-結束頁：43-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201806640200201篇名：領域特定詞彙知識的測量：三至八年級學生數學詞彙能力並列篇名：The Measurement of Domain-Specific Vocabulary Knowledge: The Mathematical Vocabulary Ability of Third to Eighth Grade Students作者：吳昭容(Chao-Jung Wu);曾建銘(Chien-Ming Cheng);鄭鈐華(Chien-Hua Cheng);陳柏熹(Po-Hsi Chen);吳宜玲(Yi-Ling Wu)關鍵字：詞彙知識;試題反應理論;數學符號;術語;vocabulary knowledge;item response theory;mathematical symbol;technical vocabulary期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：學生的詞彙知識是理解教師講解、課堂討論、課本內容，以及題目題意的基礎。測量數學詞彙知識的詞目常是研究者主觀選定、只在特定單元或年級，工具未經信效度考驗，欠缺常模，更沒有複本。本研究建立了一至九年級數學課程中會面對的數學詞彙列表，包括術語、一般用語，以及符號，共731個詞，採比率抽樣從A、B、C年段（分別是三四、五六、七八年級）學過的詞目抽取詞彙來命題。經修審題，再經小型、第一次、第二次預試，及正式施測，共計5,593名受測學生，以年段為潛在<U+5EFB>歸變項進行Rasch模式的試題參數估計。三年段各三個複本在三類詞彙與四種數學主題的比率、試題難度分布，與測驗訊息量大致相當。本測驗之內部一致性信度達可接受範圍，並與數學成就、數學文字題、數學運算能力達中度以上相關。本研究以同時估計法將三個年段的題本垂直等化，而各年段的三個複本也經過水平等化，且以正式施測的2,357名學生建立三至八年級的常模，提供不同版本及不同年段的數學詞彙能力成長變化情形，也指出數學詞彙的難詞。英文摘要：Students' vocabulary knowledge is a foundation for understanding lectures, classroom discussions, textbooks, and semantics of word problems. The lemmas that measure mathematical vocabulary knowledge usually are selected by researchers subjectively, limited only to specific units or grades, lacking in reliability/validity evidence, norm and parallel forms of measurement tools. This study aims to develop measurements of mathematical vocabulary that contains 731 words demonstrating in 1st through 9th graders' mathematic courses, including technical, general, and symbolic vocabularies. We selected vocabularies for the measurements with data of the acquired lemmas in A, B, and C levels (that is, 3rd<U+2212>4th, 5th<U+2212>6th, and 7th<U+2212>8th grades) by proportional sampling method. After modification of items, small-scale trial, first pilot-test, second pilot-test, and fi nal test were conducted, in which about 5,593 students participated. We adopted levels as latent regression variable and conducted parameter estimation of Rasch model. The three parallel forms of each level among the three kinds of vocabularies and four kinds of mathematical topics showed approximately equivalent proportion, distribution of difficulty, and item information. The internal consistency reliability of this measurements was acceptable. Besides, the relationships between these measurements and the abilities of mathematical achievements, mathematical word problem solving, and mathematical calculation all indicated moderate positive correlations. Generally speaking, this study adopted concurrent calibration to build vertical scales for the three levels, and to develop horizontal scales for the three parallel measurements of each level. The norm of 3rd through 8th grades has been established by 2,357 students in the final test. This study showed not only the growth of students' mathematical vocabulary ability in different levels and parallel forms, but the varying difficulty of mathematical vocabularies.起始頁-結束頁：1-3+5-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420181214040012篇名：國小導師輔導自我效能量表之因素結構研究並列篇名：The Factor Structure of Elementary School Homeroom Teachers' Self-Efficacy in Guidance Scale作者：黃文瑄(Wen-Hsuan Huang);蔡秀玲(Shiou-Ling Tsai);李俊儀(Chun-Yi Lee);杜淑芬(Su-Fen Tu)關鍵字：因素結構;國民小學;發展性輔導;輔導自我效能;導師;factor structure;elementary schools;primary prevention;self-efficacy in guidance;homeroom teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探索國小導師輔導自我效能量表之因素結構。研究採用叢集與配額取樣，取得桃園市296位導師之自願參與。研究工具採用自編之國小導師輔導自我效能問卷，研究程序係透過項目分析與探索性因素分析檢視題目與因素屬性，並進一步以驗證性因素分析驗證國小導師自我效能之因素結構。因素分析結果顯示導師輔導自我效能包括「師生關係」、「班級經營與正向管教」、「問題解決與衝突處理」、「辨識適應問題徵兆」、與「系統合作」等五項因素，42項題目之因素負荷量介於.64到.85之間，各分量表信度介於.87 ∼ .92之間，五因素相關介於.87到.97之間。五因素模式卡方值X^2/df = 2.361，各項適配度指標CFI = .900、IFI = .901、SRMR = .042、RMSEA = .068。不同性別、年齡、婚姻、服務年資、任教年段、與輔導背景的導師，其部分或整體輔導自我效能呈現顯著差異（P ＜ .05）。英文摘要：The aim of current study is to explore the factor structure of homeroom teachers' self-efficacy in guidance scale. The study adopted stratified clustering sampling process and included 296 homeroom teachers from Taoyuan City. A questionnaire was developed to study the homeroom teachers' self-efficacy in guidance. In pre-test, item analysis and exploratory factor analysis (EFA) were performed to investigate the item quality and factors construct. Then, CFA was further conducted to confirm the factor constructs of homeroom teachers' self-efficacy in guidance. The results of CFA produced five constructs that consisted of teacher-student relationship, class management and positive disciplinary, problem solving and conflict resolving, identifying signs of adjustment problems, and system collaboration. The factor loadings of 42 items ranged from .64 to .85, the correlations between five factors were from .87 to .97, and the Cronbach α's were from .87 to .92 for five factors. The CFA model fit index was X^2/df = 2.361, other fit indexes included CFI = .900, IFI = .901, SRMR=.042, RMSEA=.068. In addition, teachers' self-efficacy in guidance showed significant differences with regard to different gender, age, marriage status, years of service, grade of teaching, and background education in counseling (P＜.05).起始頁-結束頁：41-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420181214040023篇名：以讀寫合一課程提昇五年級偏鄉地區學生的寫作能力並列篇名：Raising the Writing Ability of Grade 5 Students from Schools in Rural Taiwan Using a Reading and Writing Bi-Focal Curriculum作者：陳淑麗(Shu-Li Chen);曾世杰(Shih-Jay Tzeng);林慧敏(Hui-Min Lin)關鍵字：偏鄉地區學生;讀寫合一課程;寫作能力;students from rural Taiwan;writing bi-focal curriculum;writing intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：閱讀和寫作是重要的語文能力，但許多弱勢低成就學生的讀寫能力嚴重落後。本研究以偏鄉地區5年級學生為對象，探究整合閱讀和寫作的讀寫合一課程是否能有效提升其寫作能力。本研究採準實驗設計，實驗組和對照組各有28位來自偏鄉地區學校的5年級學生，教學實驗執行一學年，利用每週5節的國語課進行，總共介入180節。實驗組採用研究者研發的讀寫合一課程，對照組採用原學校選用的國語教材與課程，所有參與學生都於第一學期初、第一學期末、第二學期末進行3次寫作能力評估。研究主要發現有三：一、實驗組學生的寫作進展整體比對照組佳，但總字數及平均句長沒有顯著差異。二、寫作能力中高階文意層次的提升，要一學年的介入才能看到成效；較低階的句子語法處理能力，一學期就可以看到成效。三、實驗組學生的寫作品質能逐漸脫離低分群的範疇，但對照組學生則未看到此趨勢。英文摘要：The researchers developed a reading and writing bifocal curriculum for grade 5 students from schools of rural Taiwan. The present study aims to examine the effects of the curriculum on students' writing outcomes. A quasi-experimental design was adopted. The experimental group and control group were both composed of 28 grade 5 students recruited from schools in a remote area in Taiwan. All students received the intervention 5 sessions per week for 2 semesters. The total number of intervention sessions was 180. The experimental group received the bi-focal curriculum while the control group received current reading programs from their schools. Writing measures were collected at the beginning of the first semester, the end of the first semester, and the end of second semester. There were 3 major findings. 1. After conducting the bifocal program for 2 semesters, the progress of writing in the experimental group was better than that in the control group. There was no significant difference between the total number of characters and the average sentence length. 2. The bifocal program brought about quick observable growth of low-level tasks such as sentence length and total number of characters, in merely one semester. However, it took 2 semesters in the present study, to raise high-level skills like meaning expression. 3. With the involvement of the experimental intervention, students gradually got away from the ”poor writer” group. The distribution of the outcome measures became more positively skewed. No such trend was observed in the control group.起始頁-結束頁：71-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420181214040034篇名：科技大學校務評鑑之運用及其影響因素並列篇名：The Uses and Their Influencing Factors of the Institutional Evaluation for University of Technology作者：曾淑惠(Shu-Hui Tseng);張仁傑(Jen-Chieh Chang)關鍵字：評鑑運用;影響評鑑運用的因素;校務評鑑;evaluation use;influence factors of evaluation use;institutional evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：校務評鑑在臺灣舉辦多年，而評鑑運用的議題近年才逐漸受到重視。本研究採問卷調查法探究科技大學教職員對評鑑運用的用途與影響因素的看法，以重要－表現分析法分析評鑑運用之用途的理想與實際運用的差異，並以結構方程模型驗證影響校務評鑑運用的因素與評鑑運用的用途間關係之假設模型。總計發放795份問卷，有效回收701份，有效回收率為88.17%，主要研究結論包括：一、評鑑運用的用途分為過程運用與成果運用兩構面；二、影響評鑑運用的因素則可分為評鑑實施、政策決策及評鑑人員三構面；三、評鑑運用的用途理想重要程度顯著高於實際符合程度；四、本研究所提出之科技大學校務評鑑運用影響因素與用途模式架構為一適配模型。英文摘要：The institutional evaluation has been held in Taiwan for many years, and the evaluation use has gradually gained attention in recent years. The main purpose of this study is to explore the views of the faculty and staff of a University of Technology on the use and influencing factors of evaluation. The questionnaire survey was conducted in this study. A total of 795 questionnaires were issued and 701 were effectively collected. The effective response rate was 88.17%. Firstly, performance analysis was used to analyze the difference between the ideal and the actual use of the school evaluation. Secondly, the structural equation model was used to verify the hypothetical model that influences the relationship between the use of evaluation and the evaluation use. The major findings are summarized as follows: (1) The evaluation use is divided into two aspects: the process use and the result use. Factors that influence the evaluation use can be divided into three aspects: evaluation implementation, policy decision-making and evaluators. (2) The importance degree of ideal evaluation use is significantly higher than the actual. (3) The factors that influences the evaluation use for university of science and technology and the usage model provided in this study is an adaptation model.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420180914030015篇名：臺灣原住民族高等教育政策分析並列篇名：A Study on Higher Education Policies for Indigenous Residents in Taiwan作者：黃家凱(Chia-Kai Huang)關鍵字：教育公平;原住民族;高等教育;教育政策分析;政策週期;education equity;indigenous residents;higher education;education policy analysis;policy cycle期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究之目的在於描繪臺灣原住民族高等教育政策執行的情形，以釐清政策實踐之結果及其影響。以Stephen J. Ball的「政策週期」作為研究分析架構，採文件分析法及次級資料分析進行。分析資料來源包括原住民族教育政策白皮書、教育部統計處及行政院原住民族委員會之統計調查資料。透過調查統計資料分析臺灣高等教育原住民族學生就學及就業狀況，以了解高等教育原住民學生就學狀況，及對其未來職涯發展的連結。研究結果顯示：一、高等教育大眾化的結果，雖提升原住民族學生進入高等教育的機會，惟仍存在數量及品質上的不公平現象；二、高等教育原住民學生人才結構呈現失衡現象，高階人才（如碩、博士）的培育缺乏積極性的支持；三、原住民學生與非原住民學生在科系選擇上有同質化現象，然而原住民學生在科系的選擇上與其自身文化背景脈絡缺乏連結，且缺乏學習志趣，導致原住民學生休學及退學比例高；四、高等教育原住民學生畢業後，在就業方面呈現出不同學歷文憑間低薪、低就情形，所從事之行業及職業特性亦以高替代性、低技術性工作為主。整體而言，原住民族高等教育人才培育政策目標與政策實踐結果呈現不一致現象。透過本研究初步描繪臺灣原住民族高等教育人才培育政策之圖像，進一步探究政策實踐是改善、惡化或創造了新的學習問題。英文摘要：This study aims at analyzing the influences of higher education policies on Taiwanese indigenous students. This study applies Stephen J. Ball's ”policy cycle” as framework and document analysis and secondary data analysis as analytical methods. Data is from the white paper on the educational policy for indigenous peoples, Department of Statistics of Ministry of Education and the survey conducted by the Council of Indigenous Peoples. The results show that: 1. Massification of Higher Education in Taiwan increases the number of indigenous students' enrolling in higher institutions. However, there is still unequal status on the quality and quantity between Han Chinese and indigenous students studying in higher education sector; 2. There is an imbalance structure of indigenous students studying in higher education and a lack of support to those reading for higher degrees including master or doctoral students; 3. A similar trend could be seen on the choice of their major between indigenous and non-indigenous students. However, indigenous students' majors are not related to their interests and cultural background. It results in a high drop-out rate for indigenous students; 4. Indigenous graduates tend to have lower salary and lower skill requirement jobs. Overall, the purpose and outcomes of Taiwanese indigenous higher education policies do not match with each other. Through the analyses of this study, the sketch of indigenous people's higher education status is presented.起始頁-結束頁：33-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420180914030026篇名：一所高中學校轉型之歷程研究：活動理論取徑並列篇名：Exploring a High School Transformation through the Lens of Activity Theory作者：簡菲莉(Feili Chien);陳佩英(Pei-Ying Chen)關鍵字：活動理論;展化學習;學校轉型;activity theory;expansive learning;school transformation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在深描一所社區高中學校轉型經驗，應用活動理論分析與詮釋組織轉型之歷程。個案學校藉由與大學合作，組成核心小組，運用變革實驗室和活動理論的資料驅動探索模式，回應學校轉型的變革挑戰。研究為期將近兩年，資料蒐集方法包含訪談、參與式觀察和文件分析。研究發現可從個案學校轉型的兩種動力來說明：一為教師社群擴增所激發的組織動能，二是促進學校轉型的展化學習循環；兩種動能機制促發學校系統的持續轉變。個案學校轉型歷程從單點課程的試作，到跨領域課程的設計與創新，再到「一生一課表」的提案，呈顯了組織變革的學習循環，以及「點－線－面」的學校地景變化。在此過程中，教師經由教學研究會和課發會的擴大參與，教師的角色不僅限於課堂內的教學事務，也擴及學校前景發展的探討與擘劃；另一方面，個案學校在現狀與未來之間的拉扯帶出學校變革的衝突與擾動，但也因此引發學校成員的深層對話，展開了水平式的聯繫與學校轉型的探索歷程。學校轉型的進程揭示了集體探究循環和共享決策的學校轉型路徑，經由集體行動所生成的集體智慧，提供了豐富的研究資料，可以捕捉學校系統多年轉型的動態變化，進而分析和梳理變革中的複雜因素之交織和相互影響之路徑。英文摘要：This study explored in length a high school transformation, using activity theory to analyze and interpret the entire changing process. School improvement takes itself as an ”object” of organizational change. With enactment of organizational capacity and engaging conversation, the school tackles on systemic learning and goes through an organizational change journey. In response to the challenges of educational reform, the high school collaborated with the university to take on the intervention study of activity theory and Change Laboratory. The intervention study lasted for almost two years, using methods including interview, participant observation, and documentary research. Findings of the study can be explained by the dynamic of the school transformation: organizational dynamic inspired by the expansion of teachers' group and the expansive learning cycle. Firstly, this process resulted in the practice of a particular curriculum, then the design and innovation of interdisciplinary curriculum, and finally a proposal of ”one student, one curriculum timetable” for school transformation. The transformation signified the changing school landscape from small parts to the whole school. Through the entire process, most of the school teachers engaged in school future search discussion and planning via instructional study meetings and school-based curriculum committees. Thus, the roles of teachers are not limited to the teaching affairs in the classroom, but the decision making of the school development. Although the teachers had to face with the disturbances derived from the gap between status quo and future vision which aimed for school transformation, the chasm stimulated teachers to open up deep dialogue, lateral conversation and the inquiry regarding school improvement. The cycle of school transformation uncovered the path of collective inquiry cycle and shared decision making. The collective agentic action of school members somewhat displayed the emergent of collective intelligence of the school. The process therefore provided the length and depth of understanding regarding the dynamics and interaction of varied forces within the process of school transformation.起始頁-結束頁：65-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420180914030037篇名：師資生教學表現評量的設計與實施經驗探究並列篇名：Teaching Performance Assessment for Preservice Teachers: System Design and Implementation Experiences作者：黃永和(Yung-Ho Huang);張新仁(Shin-Jen Chang)關鍵字：師資培育;師資生;教學表現評量;teacher education;preservice teacher;teaching performance assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究的目的旨在以觀察式評量方法為基礎，設計發展適合國內師資培育情境的師資生教學表現評量方案，並且測試實施此一方案，分析測試實施經驗，以作為進一步設計發展的參考。本研究結果提出一師資生教學表現評量機制，包括教學實作任務、評分規準、觀察記錄工具、評量人員基本條件，以及標準化評量實施程序等。本評量的實施經驗顯示：一、就重要性而言，本教學表現評量獲評量人員及參與師資生的肯定，且有助於師培機構了解師資生在各項教學能力的優劣表現情形；二、就教學表現評量的時機而言，在教學實習課程中辦理可以強化師培機構的績效責任，提供師資生更多教學實踐機會；三、理解評量之檢測指標與檢核重點內涵可能是影響評量成績的關鍵因素；四、未來可再針對評量人員評分的信效度，增加教學觀察前會談或說明，應用本教學評量規準於師培相關課程，以及研擬錄影評審等議題進一步研究。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to develop an observation-based assessment to assess the teaching performance of preservice teachers, and to examine and reflect on the experiences of implementing the new practice. This study helped to develop an assessment program that includes teaching performance tasks, scoring rubrics, observation tools, professional assessors, and standard procedures. The implementation results show that: (1) Preservice teachers and assessors perceived the assessment as a significant way for preparing high-quality teachers. (2) Data from the assessments can provide evidence of preservice-teacher strengths and needs that serve a useful purpose in improving the teacher preparation program. (3) Preservice teachers' understanding of assessment rubrics might be an important factor contributing to the teaching performance level. (4) Future research could explore the issues of how to improve the inter-rater reliability, conducting pre-observation interview, providing effective teaching training program in teacher education, and assessing teaching performance through videotape.起始頁-結束頁：101-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420180914030048篇名：從街友到導覽員：萬華經濟弱勢者培力課程實踐歷程的個案分析並列篇名：From Homeless to a Tour Guide: A Case Analysis of Training Course of Empowerment Process among the Economically Disadvantaged Groups of Taipei's Wanhua District作者：徐敏雄(Min-Hsiung Hsu)關鍵字：培力;經濟弱勢族群;街友;導覽員;empowerment;economically disadvantaged groups;homeless;tour guide期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要目的在了解導覽培力課程對經濟弱勢者可能的影響，為此，研究者採取個案研究方法，以半結構式訪談、反思日誌撰寫和活動攝影等方式蒐集資料，分析曾經參與本課程的講師、學伴和街友之參與經驗及其歷程。研究結果發現，導覽培力課程能嘗試透過導覽技巧示範、導覽活動的親身體驗、多元場所規則適應，以及「學員」和「導覽員」之新社會角色扮演，搭配師生和同儕間信任關係的支持，便可引發街友印象整飾動機，讓他們較具安全感的氛圍下，持續調整既有的言行儀態、展現不同於以往流浪生涯的生活風格，促使街友從學員逐漸朝向導覽員的角色目標邁進。英文摘要：To better understand the potential effects that tour guide training courses may have on the economically disadvantaged, this study has chosen to employ a case study method. Data have been collected using semi-structured interviews, reflexive journal writing and event photography. Together, these tools have been used to analyze the experiences of instructors, fellow students, and homeless who participated in the training course. The results of this study show that by using firsthand experience methods of instruction such as tour guide skill demonstrations and tour guide activities; developing adaptation strategies for different rules from locale to locale; the construction of new social relationships among differing spaces; the acting out and narration of new roles and community relationships in both ”learners” and ”tour guides”, all coupled with the support of a relationship of trust between instructors, learners, and peers, the tour guide training courses have the power to trigger changes in motivation and intent with regard to impression management among the homeless. Within this safer environment, there was a continued adjustment of existing behavior and speech, resulting in a departure from previous vagabond lifestyles, which, in turn, spurred the homeless to gradually evolve from the role of learners to that of tour guides.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420180614020019篇名：從能力本位到素養導向教育的演進、發展及反思並列篇名：Reflecting on the Perspective Transformation of Competency-Based Education作者：吳璧純(Pi-Chun Wu);詹志禹(Jason C. Chan)關鍵字：素養導向;能力本位教育;歷史發展;理論思潮;十二年國民基本教育課程;competency;competency-based education;historical development;theories;curriculum of 12-Year Basic Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：能力本位教育（今日稱為素養導向教育）起源於美國，因應二次大戰軍事訓練以及戰後科技與經濟競爭之需求，講求效率、精確、績效管理與品質控制，頗具行為主義色彩；1980年代之後與新自由主義結合，九○代之後全球化浪潮席捲，能力本位教育更強調競爭力、高標準和成效本位，並實施學習成效評量，延續到21世紀，由於高壓控制也導致許多教育人員鋌而走險。大約早在九○年代，能力本位教育就隨著全球化的腳步向全世界擴散，但歐陸國家不走英、美路線，轉向強調整合性的素養與終身學習，將素養視為個體在特定情境中的綜合性整體表現，包含知識、技能、程序、方法、態度、倫理與行動等，且是一個終身發展的動態歷程。經濟合作發展組織提出「素養的定義與選擇」架構，在哲學上也趨向整合觀點，逐漸形成新的取向。本文反省了傳統能力本位教育背後長遠的理論思潮與歷史背景，指出它的風險與困難，再整理晚近發展的趨勢，歸納出三個新的取向：整合與平衡取向、歷程與發展取向、行動與陶養取向，然後據以提出建議，包括新的學習者圖像、新的教學意涵、素養導向的教學模式、素養導向的評量策略以及學校本位課程的有機統整等策略。英文摘要：The competency-based education (CBE) originated from the United States, in response to the needs of training soldiers during World War II and of educating competitive younger generations after war. It pursued accuracy, efficiency, performance management, and quality control, with behaviorism behind. Because it connected with neo-liberalism after 1980s and went with the trend of globalization after 1990s, it became an educational movement which emphasized competition, high standards, and outcome-based evaluation. This trend continued to the 21st century and lead to misconducts of educators who suffered from the high-stake competency test. After 1990s, CBE has spread into the international community. The continental European countries met the pressure but did not conform to the American and English tradition. They turn to a holistic perspective about competency which comprehensively includes knowledge, skills, attitudes, ethics, and action. Under the new perspective, the learner is expected to perform in a specific situation with the integration of competencies and to be a life-long learner. The DeSeCo framework proposed by OECD has a similar view to the holistic perspective about competency. The current paper reflects on various philosophies and historical backgrounds behind the traditional CBE, points out their risks and difficulties, and sorts out some new trends that emphasize integrated and balanced perspectives of personhood, appreciate developmental process, and advocate the implications of action and bildung. Under those new approaches, the current paper proposes some suggestions for a new image of students, a new connotation of teaching, a new model for competency-based instruction, a new series of tips for evaluation, and a new expectation of organic integration of school-based curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：35-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201806140200210篇名：從編審歷程分析國小社會學習領域教科書文本知識之轉變並列篇名：Knowledge Transformation in the Process of Textbook Censorship for Elementary Social Studies作者：周祖誠(Tsu-Cheng Chou);劉美慧(Mei-Hui Liu)關鍵字：社會學習領域;教科書審查;知識轉變;多元文化觀;social studies;textbook censorship;knowledge transformation;multicultural perspective期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：教科書文本是經過協商之後的產品，在編審互動歷程中，有些知識被保留、修正或刪除，無論是何種結果，背後都潛藏教科書編者與審查者的意識型態與權力關係互動。本研究分析國小社會學習領域教科書文本轉變的歷程與結果，探討教科書在編審歷程中，知識觀點如何轉變？本研究採用內容分析的質性分析方法，檢視國小社會學習領域第二階段教科書的三個版本，每個版本含教科書的審查版與教科書審查意見表。本研究發現五個面向的文本知識轉變情形：從成人觀點回到學生經驗、從單一觀點到多元觀點、從有限的取材到多樣的實例、從低層次轉化到高層次的提問方式、減少政治正確與道德勸說的內容。最後，本文依據研究結論提出教科書編審歷程中應注意的問題。英文摘要：The content of textbooks is retained, amended, or deleted during the process of compilation and review. Textbooks are products of negotiation which reflect the interactions of ideologies and power relations between editors and reviewers. This study aims to analyze the knowledge transformation for elementary social studies textbooks in the process of textbook censorship. It applied qualitative content analysis to review three versions of elementary social studies textbooks. Each versions included drafted textbooks and review comments form. The findings revealed five aspects of knowledge transformations: (1) from text-centric to learner-centric logic, (2) from single perspective to multiple points of view, (3) from limited examples to diverse examples, and (4) from lower-level to higher-level questions, (5) reduction of political correctness and moral persuasion. Finally, this paper proposes several recommendations for textbook editors and reviewers.起始頁-結束頁：65-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201806140200301篇名：華人地區數學素養教育效率比較並列篇名：Educational Efficiency of Mathematical Literacy: A Comparison of Four Ethnically Chinese Regions作者：鄭永福(Yung-Fu Cheng);許瑛玿(Ying-Shao Hsu);李哲迪(Che-Di Lee)關鍵字：效率分解;教育效率;資料包絡分析;數學素養;國際學生能力評量計畫;data envelopment analysis;decomposition of efficiency;educational efficiency;mathematical literacy;PISA期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究利用國際學生能力評量計畫2012年資料比較臺灣（只包括人口數大於100萬的七個大城市）、上海、香港與新加坡等四個華人地區的數學素養教育效率，並從教育效率的角度探討這四個地區數學教育的公平性。資料包絡分析法及效率分解法之分析結果顯示，臺灣與上海的「綜合效率」（含地區、學校與個人教育效率）、「地區與學校效率」與「地區系統效率」都是最高。然而，歸因於個人之無效率以臺灣與上海最高，歸因於學校之無效率在四個地區無顯著差異，歸因於地區之無效率以香港最高。在四個地區教育公平性方面，在高與低綜合教育效率學生之間，個人、學校與地區三個層級的無效率存在差異。具體而言，在個人層級，臺灣的無效率差異最大、上海次之；在學校層級，新加坡的無效率差異最大、臺灣次之；在地區層級，僅上海存在差異。總結而言，臺灣雖是數學素養教育效率最佳的兩個地區之一，然而，歸因於個人之無效率仍有相對較高的數值，且個人與學校之無效率也存在高與低教育效率學生之間差異過大的問題。此結果顯示，臺灣在個人和學校層級的教育效率仍有改進的空間。英文摘要：This study uses data from the Programme for International Student Assessment 2012 to compare the educational efficiency of mathematical literacy and explore the educational equality of mathematics with educational efficiency across four ethnically Chinese regions, including Taiwan (containing seven cities with a population greater than 1 million), Shanghai, Hong Kong, and Singapore. Data envelopment analysis and decomposition of efficiency revealed that Taiwan and Shanghai have the highest overall efficiency (the total of the regional, school, and individual levels), regional plus school efficiency (the total of the regional and school levels), and regional system efficiency. However, Taiwan and Shanghai have the most inefficiency at the individual level, and Hong Kong has the most inefficiency at the regional level. At the school level, there was no significant difference in terms of inefficiency among the four regions. Regarding educational equality among the four regions, there were significant differences in educational inefficiency at the individual, school, and regional levels between students with high and low overall educational efficiency. Specifically, at the individual level, Taiwan had the largest inefficiency difference between students with high and low overall efficiency, followed by Shanghai. At the school level, Singapore had the largest inefficiency difference, followed by Taiwan. At the regional level, only Shanghai had a significant difference in inefficiency. In summary, although Taiwan is one of the top two of these four regions in terms of the educational efficiency of mathematical literacy, it has the most educational inefficiency at the individual level and higher inefficiency differences at the individual and school levels between students with high and low overall efficiency. This indicates that Taiwan can still improve its educational efficiency.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).00012篇名：素養導向之數學教材設計與發展並列篇名：Design and Development of Mathematical Literacy-Oriented Subject Materials作者：左台益(Tai-Yih Tso);李健恆(Kin Hang Lei)關鍵字：APOS理論;素養構成要素;教材設計;數學素養;APOS theory;components of literacy;design of subject materials;mathematical literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：為培養學生能適應快速變遷的社會及面對未來挑戰，教學設計必須考慮相關的知識、技能、思維、態度等學習要素。而數學常展現於日常的活動、科技的發展、社會及經濟現象的解讀等生活及各種研究中，因此，「數學素養」一詞成為國民基本教育課程中的重要理念。然而，許多文獻都在探討數學素養的意涵及其目標，卻很少說明培養數學素養的教材設計。本研究從彙整現有文獻中的數學素養意涵，從而提出「知」識、應「用」、「觀」點與「學」習是數學素養的構成要素，而教材設計可從現實問題轉譯為數學問題，利用數學結果詮譯情境意義的學習迴圈，並配合APOS理論之起源分解說明數學知識的認知發展，發展以數學「知」識為核心，發展具內含及外顯特質的「用」、「觀」、「學」之素養導向教材。在此架構中，素養教材設計不限於同時包含迴圈中的所有元素，且「知」、「用」、「觀」、「學」是教材設計之方法而非必須依循的發展順序，教材設計者應考量學習者的認知及數學概念的發展，設計配合知識的應用、對數學的觀感、終身學習的思維及技能為導向的數學教材。本研究提供設計實例以說明教材設計的可能方向，並由此提出未來相關研究建議。英文摘要：To help students' adapt in a rapidly changing society, subject materials should incorporate learning components that feature knowledge, skills, thinking, and attitudes. Mathematics is commonly used in daily life, and it is vital for technological development and explaining economic phenomena. The term ”mathematical literacy” is regarded as the main idea behind compulsory education in Taiwan. However, studies have often explored the objectives and implications of the mathematics curriculum rather than the design of subject materials for mathematical literacy. In this paper, based on a review of the literature, we propose that knowledge, application, disposition, and learning are the four components of mathematical literacy. Mathematical literacy-oriented subject materials can be designed based on a learning loop, which first translates real-life problems into mathematical problems and then uses the mathematical results to explain the context. This learning loop framework illustrates cognitive development of knowledge based on the genetic decomposition of APOS theory. The framework can be used to develop literacy-oriented mathematical subject materials with knowledge at the center, incorporating application, disposition, and learning and possessing implicit and explicit features. When designing teaching materials, some components can be excluded. The components of knowledge, application, disposition, and learning serve as the approach to teaching design rather than the sequence of cognitive development. The designers of subject materials should consider the development of both learners' cognition and understanding of mathematical concepts. Moreover, the skills of knowledge application, mathematical perspective, and lifelong learning should be included in subject materials. Herein, several examples of possible directions for the design of subject materials are proposed, alongside suggestions for further investigations.起始頁-結束頁：29-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).00023篇名：素養導向國教新課綱的師資培育：國立臺灣大學「探究式－素養導向的師資培育」理想芻議並列篇名：Teacher Preparation in Response to Competence-Based Curriculum Reform for K-12 Education: National Taiwan University's Proposal of Inquiry-Based and Competence-Based Teacher Education作者：符碧真(Bih-Jen Fwu)關鍵字：十二年國教;核心素養;師資培育;師資職前教育課程;教師專業素養;core competencies;K-12 education;pre-service teacher education courses;teacher education;teacher professional competence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：新課綱強調核心素養，是史上最大規模的課程改革，自108學年度起上路。為培育新課綱所需的師資，2017年公布的《師資培育法》規定教育部要訂定「教師專業素養指引」及「師資職前教育課程基準」。師資培育機構須根據這些規定，自行規劃課程，並自108學年度起實施，這對師資培育機構是很大的挑戰。本研究探討兩個問題：一、新課綱強調「核心素養」，新《師資培育法》強調教師「專業素養」，一時之間素養成為「顯學」，究竟何謂「素養」？有無同時適用於中、小學教育及教師專業的素養定義？素養為何如此重要？二、師資培育機構該如何規劃職前教育課程，以培育新課綱所需的師資？本研究指出素養包括「功能性素養」及橫跨各學科的「共通性能力」，藉由知識與真實情境的連結，可培養素養，並減少學生「學這要幹嘛」及「學這有何用」的疑問，以提升學習動機。此外，本研究根據學理，提出國立臺灣大學「探究式─素養導向的師資培育」理想芻議，希望拋磚引玉，引發學界對話，為108學年度新課綱及新師資培育課程同步實施做好準備。英文摘要：A large-scale curriculum reform for K-12 education that emphasizes the cultivation of core competencies will be launched in 2019. To prepare future teachers for this reform, teacher education institutions (TEIs) are required to restructure their curriculum by 2019 in accordance with the ”core competencies for teachers” and ”standards for pre-service teacher education” specified by the new Teacher Education Act. ”Core competencies” has become a jargon commonly used in discussions of K-12 and teacher education; however, its definition remains unclear. This paper investigated (1) whether a common definition of core competencies exists for both K-12 education and teacher education, and why core competencies have reached their current level of prominence; and (2) how TEIs have restructured their new curriculum to meet K-12 educational requirements. The results revealed that core competencies are defined as functional literacy and transversal competence, linking academic knowledge to real-life experience. Moreover, National Taiwan University proposed a restructuring of the teacher education curriculum based on theoretical reasoning of teacher education. It is believed that clarifying the definition of core competencies and the proposed plan may provoke discussions among educators in TEIs regarding implementing a curriculum reform in 2019 for both K-12 education and teacher education.起始頁-結束頁：59-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).00034篇名：以素養導向觀點探討中等學校藝術師資培育教材教法課程現況與實踐並列篇名：Discussion From a Competence-Oriented Perspective on the Status Quo and Practice of the Secondary School Teacher Training ”Arts Teaching Material and Methods” Curriculum作者：陳育祥(Yu-Hsiang Chen)關鍵字：十二年國民基本教育;素養導向;師資培育;藝術教材教法;12-year compulsory education;arts teaching material and methods;competence-oriented;teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：鑑於十二年國民基本教育課程綱要總綱核心素養理念，藝術領域課程綱要核心素養與學習重點也依循對應與發展，藝術師資培育階段面對十二年國民基本教育課程政策的典範轉移與實踐轉化，亦需以現存之情境脈絡、處境與課題進行思考。本研究除以文獻梳理探討中等教育階段藝術領域師資培育的學術發展趨勢，並蒐集藝術師資培育單位分科／領域教材教法課程大綱，透過課程大綱文件內容分析與教材教法授課教師個別訪談，將資料概念化與類目化交叉比對，以探討師資培育階段藝術分科／領域教材教法課程與實踐現況。研究結果指出，受到藝術師資生起點行為、課程時數與教師甄選實際考量因素，藝術教材教法課程之現況重視教案設計與教學能力、學習內容多元變異性高、課程綱要之理解與鑑賞教學內容缺乏、合科教學成效不佳等情形，面對未來十二年國民基本教育課程綱要施行，有待思考素養導向之實踐，本研究依據結果提出相關建議。英文摘要：Because the curriculum guidelines of 12-year compulsory education consider competency to be its core philosophy, the guidelines drafted for the arts curriculum thus include key learning points and the development of core competencies. However, in addition to these guidelines, changes to the practice and requirements of arts teacher training programs in accordance with this shift in policy require investigation. Through a literature review, this study offers a discussion of the trend of academic development in secondary school teacher training programs. In addition to collecting syllabi for ”fine arts/visual arts teaching materials and methods” from teacher training institutes, the researcher conducted individual interviews with instructors of these courses. Through interviews and an analysis of document contents, the data were conceptualized and categorized to cross-verify and investigate the status quo and practice of the ”teaching materials and methods” curriculum in teacher training programs. The research results indicated discrepancies in preservice teacher entry behavior, number of teaching hours, and anxiety related to participating in screening tests, and that these factors had the most significant effect on teaching competence and lesson plan design. Significant variance was observed among teacher responses to learning contents, including inadequate understanding of curriculum guidelines, insufficient appreciation for teaching arts, and ineffective interdisciplinary teaching. Therefore, how arts teaching materials and methods are practiced during the implementation of 12-year compulsory education curriculum guidelines requires further investigation. Suggestions are also provided in this study based on the research results.起始頁-結束頁：89-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).00045篇名：國中課室素養導向標準本位評量的設計與應用：以英語科閱讀為例並列篇名：Development and Implementation of a Standardized Junior High School Classroom Literacy Assessment: English Reading Comprehension as an Example作者：曾芬蘭(Fen-Lan Tseng);鍾長宏(Chang-Hung Chung);陳世玉(Shih-Yu Chen);張銘秋(Ming-Chiu Chang)關鍵字：素養導向;標準本位評量;學生學習成就評量標準;literacy-based;standardized classroom assessment;standards-based assessment of student achievement (SBASA)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：近年來愈來愈多先進國家持續推動以標準為本位的教育評量改革，我國自2014年起推動十二年國民基本教育，並同時實施以標準參照計分的國中教育會考作為國中畢業生學力監控機制。在高風險考試之外，本研究以英語科為例，聚焦於探討如何在國中課室設計素養導向標準本位評量工具，並透過實際參與標準本位評量試辦的學生與教師的經驗及意見，分析情境式素養導向的標準本位課室評量如何提振學生興趣，促進英語學習。研究結果如下：一、依據學生作答感受問卷調查結果，在使用經多次命修審與預試的評量作業的情境之下，近七成的學生認為較傳統選擇題或填充題更容易發揮、更具有挑戰性、也較活潑有趣；六成左右學生的作答意願較高、心情比較愉快，也認為比較容易得分；二、依據試辦教師的回饋可知，多樣化題型搭配標準參照評等及彈性的作答方式，可激發學生多元能力表現，並從評量的過程與結果，讓學生明瞭自身學習狀況，也可促進教師專業知能的成長；三、情境式試題設計可引導學生從評量中學習將所理解的訊息，應用於仿真的新情境以解決問題，藉此幫助學生體會英語閱讀的實用性與實質意義。若能在國中英語科的課室中，實施類似本研究所提出之素養導向標準本位課室的多元評量，可「善誘學生學習動機與熱情」，促進自發學習，增進英語學習成效，有利培養學生成為十二年國教核心素養所強調的「終身學習者」。英文摘要：The number of developed countries that have initiated standardized education reform has increased over the last two decades. At the same time that the ministry of education in Taiwan implemented the 12-year basic education policy, they announced regulations for implementing a standardized comprehensive assessment program to monitor the achievement of junior high school students. This study investigated the implementation of a standardized classroom literacy assessment for English classes in junior high schools as an alternative formative-assessment option. In this study, we developed a standardized seventh-grade English (L2) reading-literacy sample task and collected student work and feedback from participating teachers and students. The reading task was scenario-based and required that students search for missing pets. The study results are as follows: (1) Nearly 70% of the participating students agreed that the high-quality scenario-based reading task was more interesting, fulfilling, and challenging than traditional tests. (2) The use of a standardized approach for assessing English reading literacy can enhance the learning motivation of students because it not only grants students the freedom to respond diversely (e.g. to demonstrate understanding by drawing pictures or using Chinese, their first language), but also helps students to learn English more effectively through post-assessment feedback. (3) The scenario-based reading task is an assessment that is useful for learning because it encourages students to apply knowledge to real-life problems, clarifying for students the meaning and value of learning English. Therefore, if a standardized literacy assessment is implemented in Taiwan's junior high school English classrooms, then students can gain motivation not only for learning English but eventually for lifelong learning, which is the ultimate goal of Taiwan's 12-year basic education curriculum reform.起始頁-結束頁：119-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).00056篇名：當科學素養與閱讀素養相遇：高中學生科學新聞閱讀策略之實驗研究並列篇名：When Science Literacy and Reading Literacy Meet: Experimental Study of Science News Reading Strategy for High School Students作者：鄭可萱(Ke-Hsuan Zheng);李松濤(Sung-Tao Lee)關鍵字：科學素養;科學新聞;閱讀素養;reading literacy;science news;scientific literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究的目的在於以「科學新聞SPHERE提問模式」作為高中學生閱讀科學新聞的學習鷹架，藉由閱讀時的自我提問脈絡，在科學新聞文本中找到較為明確的架構與解讀的線索，並藉以判斷科學報導的目的、實驗設計、結果與證據間的邏輯性，以此提升高中學生對於科學新聞的判讀與理解。研究對象為臺灣中部某高中一年級兩班學生（實驗組32人，控制組38人）；研究工具為自行發展之「科學新聞提問學習單」及「科學新聞理解測驗」，研究資料蒐集期間為四個月。共變數分析結果顯示，隨著實驗組學生對於自我提問模式的熟悉，三次測驗的素養表現出現成長趨勢；此外，分析結果也發現，本研究設計的「科學新聞SPHERE提問模式」閱讀策略可提升實驗組學生的素養表現，包括科學素養中的「科學地解釋現象」及「科學地解釋數據與證據」等能力，以及閱讀素養中的「擷取與檢索」、「統整與解釋」、「省思與評鑑」等能力，但對於實驗設計題的學習幫助則不如預期。英文摘要：This study proposed a scaffold of a science news questioning model for high school students when they read science news. It is hoped a clear framework and clues for news reading can be facilitated by the self-questioning strategy to judge the purpose, experiment designing, and logical relations between results and evidence. Seventy students (experimental group: 32 and control group: 38) from a senior high school located in Central Taiwan participated in this study. A learning sheet of science news questioning and a comprehension test for science news were developed. The study duration was two months. The analysis of covariance results indicated that the students in the experimental group exhibited steady literacy performance improvement in three tests. Moreover, this self-questioning teaching model is helpful for their scientific literacy performances (i.e., for scientifically explaining the phenomenon and scientifically interpreting data and evidence collected) and reading literacy performances (i.e., accessing, retrieving, integrating, interpreting, reflecting on, and evaluating information). However, this model was not very helpful for designing scientific inquiries.起始頁-結束頁：157-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).00067篇名：108課綱第四學習階段國語文閱讀素養線上評量之建構並列篇名：Development and Validation of an Online Assessment Module for Mandarin Reading Literacy for Middle School Students of the 12-Year Basic Education Program作者：謝佩蓉(Pei-Jung Hsieh)關鍵字：中等教育;素養導向評量;線上測驗;閱讀理解;literacy-based assessment;online assessment;reading comprehension;secondary education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：儘管聽、說、讀、寫都是108學年度預定實施之國語文新課綱的重要元素，然由基本理念可窺知，閱讀能力是新課綱非常重要的關鍵。為發展符合新課綱第四學習階段閱讀素養所需線上評量，本研究目的為建立新課綱第四學習階段國語文素養導向評量發展模式並檢視其成效，從評量架構的建立、文本的挑選或撰寫原則、命題原則等三個方面探討，並分析素養導向試題心理計量特性以支持素養導向評量發展模式的有效性。援用三角檢證法，經由三場評量架構專家會議、20場命題工作坊，本研究取得三向度評量架構與16項評量指標，建構五項文本的挑選或撰寫原則，10項素養導向試題之命題原則，以及23篇文本之201題閱讀素養導向試題之效度證據。試題置於i-Assessment研究團隊所開發的線上平台進行預試。經三梯次預試，對象來自全臺灣58校1,685位國中七、八、九年級學生。以試題難度、鑑別度、Rasch模式之適配度呈現試題心理計量特性，分析軟體為R，Package為CTT和TAM。17篇文本（73.91%）試題之平均鑑別度指數達.30以上。選擇題平均通過率介於.45∼.74之間，難度分布廣；半數建構題為高層次評鑑與省思題，其鑑別度指數平均.37、平均通過率.24，屬高鑑別度、高難度試題，符合期待。試題具備良好心理計量特性，併同歷程中專家肯定的效度證據，共同支持素養導向評量發展模式的有效性。最後透過範例試題，提供教學現場作為命題實務參考。英文摘要：Reading is one of the key elements of the 12-year basic education curriculum guidelines for elementary schools, junior high schools, and general senior high schools: Language and Literature Category - Chinese Language and Literature. This study developed an online reading assessment module in line with the new curriculum guidelines. A literacy-based assessment module was established to construct an assessment framework, text selection or writing principles, item writing principles, and reading literacy-oriented items. The psychometric characteristics of the items were also investigated to support the validity of the module. The principles and items were validated through the triangulation method. By conducting assessment framework meetings and item writing workshops, a 3-dimensional assessment framework, 17 indicators, 5 text writing principles, and 10 item writing principles were obtained. The Online Assessment for Science Literacy platform was adopted for 23 testlets with 201 items for pilot test administration. The participants were 1,685 junior high school students from 58 schools in Taiwan. Item difficulty, discrimination, and infit mean square statistics were analyzed using the CTT and TAM packages in R. The average discrimination of 17 testlets (73.91%) was more than .30. The average p-value of multiple choice items ranged from .45 to .74. The average discrimination of half of the constructed response items was .37 and the average p-value was .24, which revealed high discrimination and high difficulty. The sample items were also provided as a reference for preparing assessment designs for schools in the future.起始頁-結束頁：193-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).00078篇名：臺灣公民科技素養、科學興趣及科學參與之探討並列篇名：Exploring Taiwan Citizens' Scientific Literacy, Interest in, and Engagement in Learning Science作者：王薪惠(Hsin-Hui Wang);林煥祥(Huann-Shyang Lin);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong)關鍵字：2015年臺灣公民科技素養調查;科學參與;科學興趣;2015 Taiwan citizens' scientific literacy survey;engagement in learning science;interest in learning science期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的在探討臺灣公民科技素養、科學興趣和科學參與之交互作用，並以分層隨機抽樣選取年滿18∼70歲公民共計1,831人為研究樣本，填答信度與效度良好之公民科技素養試題。為瞭解臺灣民眾科技素養及科學興趣狀況，首先以極端組群法將公民的科技素養及科學興趣依據分數高低區分為四類組：「高科技素養、高科學興趣組」、「高科技素養、低科學興趣組」、「低科技素養、高科學興趣組」及「低科技素養、低科學興趣組」。再以百分比同質性檢定比較不同性別、年齡層及學歷在這四組的分布差異，發現「高科技素養、高科學興趣組」男性公民比例顯著高於女性公民、年齡層較輕、具大學畢業以上學歷；而「低科技素養、低科學興趣組」則是女性公民比例顯著高於男性公民、年齡層較高、具中學以下學歷。接著以單因子變異數分析比較四類組公民在科學參與之差異，發現「高科技素養、高科學興趣組」公民的整體科學參與頻率最高；而「低科技素養、高科學興趣組」公民為「科技議題活動參與」涉入程度最高。這些結果顯示高科學興趣的公民對科學及科技議題的參與較為積極。因此本研究建議，提升未來公民科技素養當務之急宜先培養公民科學興趣，進一步鼓勵其科學參與，養成終身學習的習慣。英文摘要：This study explored Taiwan citizens' scientific literacy, interest in, and engagement in learning science. By using the stratified random sampling strategy, 1,831 citizens in the age group of 18-70 years were selected to respond to a questionnaire survey along with a paper-pencil test. For exploring the relationship between Taiwan citizens' scientific literacy and their interest in science, the participants were divided into four groups on the basis of their scores for scientific literacy and interest in science. According to the essential results, the high scientific literacy and high science interest (HH) group was mainly represented by males, young citizens, and citizens with higher educational degrees. Conversely, the low scientific literacy and low science interest (LL) group was dominated by females, elderly citizens, and citizens with only a secondary school diploma. Among the four groups, citizens in the HH and LH groups exhibited higher frequency of engagement in science activities. Finally, citizens with high science interest tended to be enthusiastic in learning science and technology. This study contributed a novel insight that the interest in learning science plays a critical role in promoting adults' engagement in learning science. Future studies are recommended for focusing on the citizens in the LH group to investigate how high engagement in learning science influences their scientific literacy.起始頁-結束頁：229-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).00089篇名：素養導向教師教育內涵建構及實踐之研究並列篇名：Construction and Practice of Competency-Based Teacher Education作者：吳清山(Ching-Shan Wu)關鍵字：素養導向教育;素養導向教師教育;教師教育;competency-based education;competency-based teacher education;teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：素養導向教育為當前中、小學教育改革重要課題之一，它改變傳統學校教育的課程、教學和評量為主的知識學習，朝向素養的學習架構，培養學生具備適應現在和未來社會所需的知識、能力和態度。教師教育因應這一波的素養導向教育改革，從職前教育到教師專業發展，邁向素養導向的教師教育，將成為驅動專業教師教育發展的一股轉化力量。本研究旨在探究素養導向教師教育的內涵和實踐，採用半結構式訪談法，分別就素養導向教師教育的價值、內涵建構、推動困難、實踐建議等方面進行資料蒐集。根據研究結果分析與討論，得到如下的結論：一、素養導向教師教育具有引導師資培育發展方向等價值；二、素養導向教師教育的內涵包括知識和技能、情意和態度、信念和價值三個向度且具有適切性；三、素養導向教師教育推動的困難，主要是來自於素養概念缺乏共識，師資培育機構因應不足等因素；四、素養導向教師教育的實踐策略，需要師資培育機構配合、中小學教師增能和教育行政機關的積極作為。英文摘要：Competency-based education is among the most crucial topics in primary and secondary education reform. It transforms the conventional framework of curriculum, instruction, and assessment into one in which students must demonstrate that they have learned the knowledge, skills, and attitudes required to adapt to contemporary and future society. In response to the competency-based education trend, a new teacher education policy is necessary for both preservice and in-service teachers. Therefore, competency-based teacher education may well be one of major transitional forces reshaping Taiwan's professional teacher-training programs. The present study investigated the connotation and practice of competency-based teacher education. Semistructured interviews were used to collect data on the value, connotation, possible construction, and potential difficulties of competency-based teacher education, and to elicit suggestions for its implementation. On the basis of analysis and discussion of the results, the following conclusions were drawn: (1) Competency-based teacher education guides the development of professional training programs; (2) Competency-based teacher education includes three dimensions: knowledge and skills, affection and attitude, and beliefs and values; (3) Difficulties in promoting competency-based teacher education derive principally from the lack of consensus on the concept of competencies and insufficient responses from teacher-training institutions; and (4) Practical strategies for competency-based teacher education require the cooperation of teacher-training institutions, improvement of primary and secondary school teachers' capacities, active planning, and implementation and evaluation by educational authorities.起始頁-結束頁：261-293資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).000910篇名：十二年國教國中階段自然科學領域素養導向評量試題之開發與初探並列篇名：Development of Assessments for Scientific Literacy Based on Curriculum Guidelines for 12-Year Basic Education in Science Domains作者：林蓓伶(Pei-Ling Lin);潘昌志(Chang-Chih Pan);蘇少祖(Shao-Zu Su);陳柏熹(Po-Hsi Chen)關鍵字：十二年國民基本教育;科學素養;科學素養導向試題;12-year basic education;assessment for scientific literacy;scientific literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：為承接十二年國教自然科學領域課程綱要素養導向精神，此研究目的為研發與初探具信、效度之自然科學領域素養導向評量試題。本研究歷程包含三大部分：一、梳理與歸納文獻中科學素養之意涵；二、細緻化編碼自然科學領域課程綱要中國民中學階段核心素養具體內涵，以自然科學領域課程綱要國民中學階段核心素養具體內涵為架構，建立科學素養導向題型命題參考架構；三、以自然科學領域課程綱要國民中學階段核心素養具體內涵編碼表及命題參考架構，研發自然科學素養導向題型，並根據科學素養導向試題命題參考架構，針對鑑別度欠佳之試題，進行後設分析，進而達到試題修正之功效。由結果分析得知，依此科學素養導向試題命題參考架構所命之試題，除能明確對應自然科學領域課程綱要中之國民中學階段核心素養具體內涵與學習重點，大致有良好之品質。對於品質待改進之試題，科學素養導向命題參考架構亦能提供明確之修改方向，協助命題者進一步檢視與修正。本研究所提出之科學素養導向命題參考架構，可供未來作為命題時梳理課程綱要內涵與學習重點之清晰分類架構，並確保試題所欲評量之能力與內容呼應課程綱要素養精神。同時，亦能作為後續試題修改分析之明確參考方向，用以整體系統性開發、修正並歸類各式評量工具，以期作為未來相關領域學者及教師發展評量工具與進行教學設計之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to analyse the curriculum guidelines in science domains within the 12-year basic education and to explore and develop a reliable and valid assessment model for scientific literacy. This study is conducted in three parts: First, the definitions of scientific literacy that are established in the literature are classified and examined. Second, a coding list is established by decoding the implications of the curriculum guidelines in the science domains, and this decoded result is supported by examining the definitions of scientific literacy from the literature. A unified assessment framework is established for drafting scientific literacy-oriented exam questions. Third, the coding list and assessment framework are used to develop scientific literacy-oriented exam questions, and based on this framework, a meta-analysis of unqualified exam questions is conducted to revise these exam questions. The aforementioned coding list and assessment framework are used to develop and test the scientific literacy-oriented exam questions. The results indicates that most of the scientific literacy-oriented exam questions developed in this study have good quality and follow the curriculum guidelines of the 12-year basic education in science domains. Regarding the unqualified exam questions, the assessment framework for scientific literacy developed in this study provides recommendations for revision, which can help draft and correct exam questions. In sum, the proposed assessment framework for scientific literacy can be used to further develop, modify, and classify various assessment tools and as a reference for future teachers and researchers.起始頁-結束頁：295-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201812_63(4).001001篇名：朗讀流暢性測驗標準文本之發展研究並列篇名：The Development of Oral Reading Fluency Passages作者：張郁雯(Yuwen Chang)關鍵字：文本語言特性;信度;效度;朗讀流暢性;linguistic characteristics of passage;oral reading fluency;reliability;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：31卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究的目的在發展朗讀流暢性之文本，並建立文本的信度與效度。以文獻探討建立徵求文本的規範，所得文本初篩後，再由專家審查共得40篇文本。以個別施測方式施測於國小二到四年級60名學生。利用中文學習補救教學資源網、中文文章適讀性線上分析系統和可讀性指標分析三個網站分析文本的語言特性。研究結果發現最能預測朗讀流暢性的文本特性為文本的相異詞數、正向連接詞數和負向連接詞數。經由多種指標從40篇文本中挑選出32個文本，做為二、三年級朗讀流暢性測驗之文本，其中兩個年級共用6個文本，每年級各有可用19個文本。二個年級朗讀流暢性測驗之複本信度均為.85。每次以三個文本施測求平均表現，則二、三年級的類化係數可達.94和.95。效度係數分別是.49（二年級）和.43（三年級）。測驗的信度與效度獲得初步的支持。英文摘要：This study aims to establish procedures for developing oral reading fluency (ORF) passages for second and third graders. The required characteristics of passages were specified and an open request for passages was announced. After experts' reviewing, 40 passages were collected. Sixty students ranging from second to fourth grade were administered 40 passages individually. Three websites were used to analyze the textual features of the passages: Chinese Learning Remedy Teaching Resources Network, Readability-Analyzing System for Chinese Articles, and Chinese Readability Index Explorer. The results indicate that the total number of different words, the number of positive conjunctions, and negative conjunctions are the most powerful predictors of oral reading fluency. Thirty-two passages were chosen based on multiple indicators. These passages were divided into two sets. Each set comprises 19 passages with six common passages for both grades. The alternate-form reliabilities for both grades are .85. The generalizability coefficients in second and third grade conditions were .94 and .95 respectively when three passages were used to estimate performance. The correlations between ORF and grade scores in Chinese are .49 and .43 respectively. The results provide evidence for supporting the preliminary reliability and validity of the test.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學2篇名：專業學習的建構：「設計本位學習」創新教學之行動探究並列篇名：Framing Professional Learning: An Action Research on Teachers' Pedagogical Empowerment of Design-based Learning for Innovative Teaching作者：陳偉仁(Wei-Ren Chen);黃楷茹(Kai-Ju Huang);吳青陵(Ching-Ling Wu);呂金燮(Chin-Hsieh Lu)關鍵字：在職教師;設計本位學習;專業學習;創新教學;Design-Based Learning;innovative teaching;in-service teacher;professional learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：31卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：在這個強調創新的紀元中，如何支持教師創新教學是重要但未被系統性探究的議題。本研究採合作式行動研究，以教師學習理論為基礎，透過參與式觀察、訪談、文件分析等方式，探究教學培力團隊如何設計出專業的學習方式，引動一所國小教師社群實踐「設計本位學習」（Design-Based Learning[DBL]）課程，培力團隊並從反思中嘗試建構出創新教學師資培力的可行方式。研究發現教學培力團隊以參與式學習為理念，提升教師的專業自主性，並透過體驗活動、課程案例原型分享等方式，導入DBL創新教學的語彙。國小教師社群從中嘗試解構習慣，重新定位教學者角色，師生共構出轉動教學的情境知能，並深刻體會到真實展演是重構專業成長的契機。教學培力團隊從反思中提出創新教學師資培力的方式，導引出未來行動探究的方向：以平行學習的理念為基礎，和教師共同探究以品賞與識讀學生學習表現為核心的專業學習之路。英文摘要：In this innovation era, offering support for teachers' innovative teaching has been an important but neglected issue. Based on teacher learning theory, the purpose of this study is to explore a teaching empowerment team's design of professional learning for elementary school teachers who learned Design-Based Learning[DBL]. The team attempted to empower teachers based on the reflections of the collaborative action research through participatory observation, interviews and document analysis. The findings indicated that the teaching empowerment team regarded participatory learning as a fundamental rationale to elicit teachers' professional autonomy. The team also guided teachers to make sense of the key elements of DBL by experiential activities and used a DBL exemplar curriculum as protocol. Consequently, the teacher community in an elementary school tried to deconstruct teaching habits and redefined their teaching roles. The teachers collaborated with students to develop contextual pedagogical competencies, and found that presenting learning outcomes in real context made professional growth possible. A teacher empowerment framework for innovative teaching and future studies was further proposed: through parallel learning for pedagogical transformation, the team and teachers might work together to develop a sustainable professional learning pathway based on the connoisseurship and evaluation of student learning performance.起始頁-結束頁：25-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學3篇名：高齡者進修碩士學位之幸福內涵探究並列篇名：Exploring the Well-being of Elderly People Studying for a Master's Degree作者：鄭曉楓(Hsiao-Feng Cheng)關鍵字：PERMA模式;正向心理學;幸福理論;高齡者;elderly people;PERMA model;positive psychology;well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：31卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究以幸福理論PERMA模式探討高齡者進修碩士學位過程中所經驗的幸福內涵。以個別深度訪談55歲以上之碩士研究生13位，其平均年齡為64歲。採個案研究「多重個案嵌入」設計，以「分析歸納法」進行資料分析。研究結果，正向情緒（P）：高齡者對新身分感到「珍惜」與「信心」；逐漸享受知的「喜悅」以及克服困難的「滿足」。全然投入（E）：高齡者與學術文本「同在」產生共鳴，「體驗」到時間的有限和流逝感；沉浸於問、思、答的教學「流動」，並與同儕「共創」集體智慧。正向關係（R）：高齡者在團體「歸屬」中經驗接納，感染年輕的朝氣「活力」；也成為家庭中夢想實踐的「楷模」，感受子女反哺之「回饋」。意義（M）：高齡者進修著重體現「自我效能」，逐步分享與利他；在增廣視野中孕育生涯的「整裝待發」。成就（A）：不斷超越自我而提升「電腦資訊」能力，在腦力活化中翻轉成為「學習的主體」。學習歷程中的幸福狀態分為三個階段：學習初之喜悅與信心期、學習中之投入與突破期，以及學習進階之興盛與建構期。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to understand the experience of elderly people by the PERMA model. Thirteen participants were graduate students from a university in northern Taiwan and each were invited to an in-depth interview once. Their average age was 64 years old. This study adopted a ”Multiple-case embedded design” of case study and analytic induction. For each component of the PERMA model, the results are as follows: ”Positive emotion (P)”: The elderly people cherished and were confident. They gradually enjoyed learning and overcame difficulties. ”Engagement (E)”: The elderly people re-experienced the sense of time, resonated with academic work, immersed in the flow of asking, thinking and responding, and had creative conversations with peers. ”Positive relationships (R)”: The elderly people felt they belonged from peers, became a model and got positive feedbacks in their family. ”Meaning (M)”: The elderly people improved their self-efficacy, tried to help others, and began to re-start their new career. ”Achievement (A)”: They made progress in using computers and became an active learner. There were three stages in the well-being state of the learning process: the early stage was joyful and confidence, the middle of stage was engagement and breakthrough, and the last stage was flourish and construction. Finally, limitations and suggestions were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：59-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學4篇名：教育行政作為效率控制或是公義解放？－R. Bates的批判理論對教育行政之啟示並列篇名：Educational Administration as a Technology of Control? - A Study on the Educational Implications of R. Bates Critical Theory作者：蘇鈺楠(Yu-Nan Su)關鍵字：批判理論;教育行政;教育行政典範;Critical Theory;educational administration;paradigm of educational administration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：31卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：R. Bates是當代重要的教育行政學家，但目前在臺灣的相關研究卻極為稀少，其獨特之處在於從社會學的觀點切入分析教育行政，並將批判理論與教育行政做結合，Bates認為教育行政的目的在於解放，要達成此目的，行政過程中便不能讓管理主義操弄，在各種知識學習與行政手段上都需要注意有無違背此價值。這個思維論述或許可給予現今的臺灣在教育行政上一個新的觀點，並增添國內教育行政學對理論運動論述之辯證反思。本研究先行反思教育行政控制的源頭，發現地方自治改革運動、教育職業專業化和效率膜拜會加劇：(1)教育再製不平等；(2)知識成了學校體制再製下的產物；(3)形成說教式的教育文化；(4)失去公眾確信與社會關懷等四項問題。研究者並分析了管理主義和批判理論有三個本質差異，以此導出教育行政民主化、多元文化與公義化的三個教育行政上之啟示，期望藉由新的論述引入，增添教育行政領域中不同的觀點。英文摘要：R. Bates is one of the most important educational administration scholars in modern time. However, there has been little research about Bates in Taiwan. The uniqueness of Bates's theory lies in the analysis of educational administration based on sociology, combining critical theory with educational administration practice. For Bates, the purpose of educational administration is liberation rather than control, which corresponds to the aim of needing to anti-control the administration process, bringing to the forefront the contrary of every means of learning knowledge and administration regulations. Based on this theory, a new direction of educational administration perspective may begin in Taiwan, with focus on reflecting what the significance of the theory movement is. This study begins with the reflection on the origin of administration control, revealing the municipal reform movement, occupational professionalization, and the cult of efficiency as a source, which leads to four major problems: (1) reinforcing social reproduction on education, (2) knowledge as a product of school reproduction, (3) producing a didactic pedagogy, and (4) lacking a fundamental commitment to the ideas of community and to the mutuality of social concerns. The researcher also analyzes the three differences of control theory and critical theory, and deduces the three implications of educational administration democratization, multiculturalism, and justice, with expectation to reach different perspectives in educational administration by means of a new voice.起始頁-結束頁：95-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學5篇名：偏遠地區國民教育法令規範與政策之憲法學觀點探究－輔參酌日本經驗並列篇名：On National Educational Legislation and Policies for Remote Area by Constitutional View-Reference on the System of Japan作者：宋峻杰(Chun-Chieh Sung)關鍵字：久任獎金;日本《偏遠地區教育振興法》（<U+3078><U+304D>地教育振興法）;立法不作為;國民教育;偏遠地區;bonus for long stay;Japan's Education Promotion Law for Remote Areas;legislative inaction;national education;remote areas期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：31卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：有鑑於2017年12月《偏遠地區學校教育發展條例》之公布施行，雖可謂是已然完善我國偏遠地區國民教育發展工作推行的法令與制度框架，但於學界討論中較少有自憲法學觀點描述國民教育制度於偏遠地區推動過程時所衍生課題。故本文自相關法令規範及政策發展、該條例之立法過程、鄰國日本之經驗等面向，從憲法學視角論述於研究進程中所發現的幾則問題。經過此等探究過程，得知於該條例制定公布以前，若是採取憲法學之「立法不作為」論的觀點，則立法機關因未善盡憲法義務保障就讀於偏遠地區學校學生的學習權與受教育權，而已然長時間形成違憲狀態。於該條例制定公布後，其第二十一條久任獎金制度化的問題經過合憲性之檢視，亦已衍生有違憲之虞的法律風險。最後於參酌日本經驗方面，則發現包含制定偏遠地區學校級別標準在內，該國確實有不少作為值得我國政府機關與學界進一步深入的探究。英文摘要：This article first discusses the development and trends in the regulations and policies related to national education in remote areas of Taiwan. As regards to the development of statutory regulations, the legislative process of the ”Act for Education Development of Schools in Remote Areas” promulgated in December of 2017 was analyzed and illustrated. Additionally, in light of the development of policy, an introduction of its history, recent moves and relevant opinions of the academic community are also elaborated. Second, on the basis of the foregoing, it is from the viewpoint of constitutional law that discusses several theoretical and legal issues before and after the implementation of the Act. Third, this article briefly scrutinizes the objective of implementing ”Act on Improvement of Education in Remote Areas (1954)” in Japan and its related policies. It is hoped that this study may offer some insights into either education policy or education finance on how teachers from schools in the remote area of Japan are ensured to retain their position for a long time according to their willingness.起始頁-結束頁：121-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學6篇名：理解媒體素養：以大學生的批判性消費素養認知為例並列篇名：Unpacking Media Literacy: Exploring Undergraduate Students' Understanding Towards Critical Consuming作者：江宜芷(Yi-Chih Chiang);林子斌(Tzu-Bin Lin);孫宇安(Yu-An Sun)關鍵字：大學生;批判性消費素養;媒體素養;媒體素養教育;critical consuming;media literacy;media literacy education;undergraduate students期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：31卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的是以多重個案研究法探討大學生對於媒體素養的認知，以及大學生在實際解讀媒體文本的過程之中，如何運用其分析、綜合與評價等批判性消費能力。本研究以就讀國立臺灣大學聯盟三所大學的35位大學生為研究對象，設計半結構式訪談大綱，搭配四篇案例閱讀以蒐集資料。研究發現，參與者對於媒體素養的理解侷限於閱聽人識讀媒體的層次，同時參與者並未將產製相關的知識與技能視為媒體素養的一部分；進一步探究參與者閱讀報導的歷程，研究者發現研究參與者質疑報導的表現源於對媒體的不信任，同時研究參與者的批判性消費能力尚待加強。緣此，研究者建議我國未來媒體素養教育的發展，須擴展學生對媒體素養理解的範疇，並在高等教育階段持續深化其運用能力。英文摘要：This study explores how undergraduate students understand media literacy (ML), and how their critical consuming abilities function during a news-reading process. The participants were 35 students from the NTU Triangle Alliance. Semi-structure interview and article reading for four cases were designed for data collection. The findings show that interviewees have limited understanding of ML, and they did not consider the knowledge and skills related to media production as part of ML. While questioning the credibility of Taiwanese media, their reaction to the articles was only based on the distrust of Taiwanese media, not on the function of their ML ability such as analysis, synthesis, or evaluation. Thus, the authors suggest that Taiwanese media literacy education should not just focus on offering knowledge of ML at a cognitive level, but enhance students' competence in media literacy in higher education.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學7篇名：諮商師透過諮詢與教師合作處理學生問題行為之行動研究並列篇名：Consultation and Cross-professional Collaboration to Resolve Students’ Problem Behaviors: An Action Research作者：杜淑芬(Su-Fen Tu)關鍵字：行動研究;教師諮詢;跨專業合作;諮商心理師;action research;counseling psychologist;cross-professional collaboration;teacher consultation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：31卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本行動研究探究一位諮商師運用諮詢與教師合作處理學生問題行為的歷程，並歸納教師諮詢歷程的重要因素。行動研究者同時是諮詢者，接受諮詢者為26歲的女性初任教師。本研究遵循「研究問題－行動方案－評鑑」的流程進行，行動方案包括四天訓練課程，十次課堂錄影與五次教師諮詢。本研究整理出五項重要的教師諮詢歷程因素，並初步概念化為「正向支持與人際回饋為核心的整合諮詢模式」。在本模式中，提供教師正向支持與人際回饋是諮詢的核心工作，其他歷程因素包括提問、探究與評估，理解個案心理與行為意義，協同發展支持學生的正向輔導策略，教師覺與悟。其次，研究也發現諮詢涉及兩個專業的合作，諮商師提供他者觀點，並尊重教師的主體性。處理學生問題行為須兼顧個別輔導、班級動力與師生關係，俾以發展適切的輔導策略。另增進教師自身的覺察與領悟有助於輔導行動的展開，以及聚焦於教師優勢的正向支持是教師成長的動力，有助於轉化為支持學生的經驗。最後，對於傳統師道文化下的華人教師在處理學生問題行為時所衍生的焦慮與挑戰，本研究也提供討論和建議。英文摘要：This action research explored the consultation process of a counseling psychologist who worked collaboratively with a teacher to resolve her difficulties with students' behavioral problems. The researcher served as a consultant, while the consultee was a 26-year-old female novice teacher. The research followed the ”question-action-evaluation” process, the action plan comprised of four days of training, ten classroom sessions and five teacher consultation session. The results showed that there were five major process factors and a ”positive support and interpersonal feedback centered teacher consultation model” was conceptualized. The model suggested that providing positive support and interpersonal feedback to the teacher was the key factor in consultation. Other factors included to explore and assess, to understand the meaning of client and system's behavior, to develop positive behavior support guidance strategies, and to obtain teacher's awareness and insight. Additional important findings were that consultation involved cross-professionals' collaboration during which consultant introduced ”others” perspective but respected teacher's subjectivity. Also, having considerations of individual, class dynamics and teacher-students' relationships was necessary for developing appropriate guidance strategies. Actions of changes were initiated when the teacher's self-awareness was enhanced. With a focus on teacher's strengths and positive supports during the consultation, the teacher grew and transferred the positive experience to the students. Finally, the current research provided discussion and suggestions about teachers' anxieties and challenges in resolving students' problem behaviors under traditional Chinese teachers' culture.起始頁-結束頁：39-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學8篇名：國民小學校長重建領導層面及能力指標建構之研究：複合多評準決策的應用並列篇名：The Construction of Dimensions and Competency Indicators of Elementary School Principals’ Turnaround Leadership: A Novel Hybrid MCDM Model作者：賴志峰(Chih-Feng Lai)關鍵字：校長領導;重建領導;複合多評準決策;hybrid MCDM;principal leadership;turnaround leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：31卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在建構國民小學校長重建領導層面及能力指標、影響關係與權重體系。本研究分為三個階段：在第一階段，依文獻探討研擬各層面及能力指標，邀請10位專家檢測專家效度，然後透過分層隨機抽樣，抽取515位國小校長進行問卷調查，回收371份有效問卷。運用SPSS、AMOS軟體，進行項目分析及驗證性因素分析，確認各層面及能力指標；在第二階段，邀請14位國小校長及學者專家，進行準則問卷調查，運用DEMATEL建立各層面與能力指標之因果結構關係圖；在第三階段，運用DANP建構各項能力指標之影響關係與權重體系。本研究發現：(1)國小校長重建領導包含四個層面及20項指標，具有信效度；(2)四個層面及指標之間存在依存關係，彼此相互影響；(3)四個層面依其重要性，分別為驅動結果、問題解決、個人效能以及影響結果。最後，依據研究結果，提出具體建議，以供教育決策、領導實踐及研究之參考。英文摘要：This study aims to construct the dimensions of elementary school principals' turnaround leadership and related competency indicators, the relationships of effects and weight system. It includes three stages. During the first stage, the dimensions and indicators of elementary school principals' turnaround leadership were developed based on literature review, and validated by ten experts. Then, stratified random sampling was conducted; 515 elementary school principals were invited to fill out the questionnaire, and among which 371 valid questionnaires were obtained. By using SPSS and AMOS, item analysis and Confirmatory Factor Analysis were conducted. During the second stage, 14 elementary school principals, scholars and experts were invited to fill out the expert questionnaire. By using DEMATEL, INRM of dimensions and indicators were created. During the third stage, by using DANP, the relationships of effects among indicators and weight system were established. The findings of this study indicated that: 1) there are four dimensions and 20 indicators of elementary school principals' turnaround leadership; 2) there is an interdependent relationship between the four dimensions and 20 indicators and they influence each other; 3) the four dimensions are driving results, problem solving, personal effectiveness, and influencing results in the order of importance. Finally, specific suggestions were offered for educational decision-making, leadership practice, and future research.起始頁-結束頁：71-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學9篇名：發展青少年以紀錄片形式參與社會教學模組之設計並列篇名：Develop Instructional Modules for Teenagers to Participate in the Society Through Documentaries作者：游政男(Cheng-Nan Yu);高台茜(Tai-Chien Kao)關鍵字：故事線;紀錄片;教學模組;概念構圖;concept mapping;documentary;instructional module;storyline期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：31卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的是以模組化的方法探討青少年紀錄片的教學設計，著眼於社會議題的聚焦、故事鋪陳的創意、與社會連結的確立，以因應學生走出教室，參與社會的教育趨勢。以設計研究法，透過教學模組迭代循環設計，解決學生的紀錄片指導問題。研究對象為52位青少年在2010至2016年的16個紀錄片題材發展。研究結果開發出三個教學設計，分別為「基礎流程模組」、「加入故事鋪陳模組」和「加入提案釐清模組」，可實際使用於青少年紀錄片製作之教學。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the teaching design of instructional modules for teenagers to make documentaries. To conform to the educational trends asking students to step outside the classrooms and participate in the society, the method of process flow diagram was applied to help students clarify social issues, invent creative stories for documentaries, and therefore establish connections with the society. The method of design research through multiple iterative processes was employed. The subjects were 52 teenagers who produced 16 documentaries from 2010 to 2016. Three instructional modules were constucted from this study. They were ”foundational process module”, ”joining storytelling module”, and ”adding viewpoint for clarification module” which could be used separately or simultaneously in teaching. These modules could be used as guidelines to help students form storylines for documentaries from their own viewpoints that could lead to social participation.起始頁-結束頁：113-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學01篇名：「望」子成龍會否淪為癡心「妄」想？－論香港家長與子女教育期望之異同對學業成績的影響並列篇名：Would Parents' ”Shooting for the Stars” End up ”Crying for the Moon”? Alignment of Parent-Child Educational Expectations and Adolescents' Academic Performance in Hong Kong作者：相楠(Nan XIANG);趙永佳(Stephen Wing-Kai CHIU)關鍵字：教育期望;社會資本;學業成就;educational expectation;social capital;academic achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：在傳統尚學文化及近年高等教育擴張的影響下，香港家長對子女教育普遍抱有很高的期望。然而，本地大學學額供給不足、親子對教育持有不同期望似乎都是阻礙家長實現「望」子成龍夢的不利因素。為了幫助香港家長實現「望」子成龍的熱望，本研究從家長視角出發，試圖回答以下問題：（1）面對緊張的學額供給，香港家長本就很高的學歷期望是否仍對子女的學業有積極影響？（2）若家長可以使子女與自己懷有相同水平的教育期望，家長的期望是否更易實現？為回答上述問題，我們借鑑了地位取得、社會認知和社會資本理論，針對研究問題提出三種假設。接<U+7740>，我們運用描述性統計方法和多元線性迴歸模型來分析本次研究所用「香港高中學生升學及就業志向研究」數據。數據分析結果最符合我們據社會資本理論提出的假設：家長教育期望與子女的學業成就呈正相關關係；而當我們控制了家長教育期望的影響時，一致的親子教育期望對子女的學業成績有額外的積極影響。英文摘要：Deeply influenced by the traditional Chinese culture that respects scholars and the rapid expansion of higher education in recent years, parents in Hong Kong generally hold high expectations for their children's education. In fact, however, both the shortage of local university places and the parent-child difference in educational expectations are likely to prevent parents from achieving their expectations. To help Hong Kong parents reach their goals, this study aims to answer the following two questions from the perspective of parents. First, facing the fierce competition for university places in Hong Kong, do parents' way-too-high educational expectations still have positive effects on children's academic performance? Second, if parents can align their children's educational expectations with their own, are their expectations more likely to be fulfilled? To answer these questions, we will propose three different hypotheses according to status attainment theory, social cognitive theory, and social capital theory. Then, we will use descriptive statistical methods and multiple linear regression models to analyze the data used in this study (i.e., Panel Study on the Career and Educational Orientations of the Senior High School Students in Hong Kong). The results of data analyses are largely in line with the hypothesis drawn from the social capital theory. Parents' educational expectations are positively related to their children's academic performance. When parents' educational expectations are conditioned, the alignment of parents' and children's expectations is likely to have an additional positive effect on academic achievement.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：在家靠父母，出外靠朋友？不同社經地位青少年的父母支持、同儕支持與心理健康之關係並列篇名：Relying on Parents and Friends: The Effects of Parental and Peer Support on the Mental Health of Adolescents With a High and Low Socioeconomic Status作者：江守峻(Shou-Chun CHIANG);陳婉真(Wan-Chen CHEN)關鍵字：社經地位;心理健康;青少年;父母支持;同儕支持;socioeconomic status;mental health;adolescent;parental support;peer support期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討不同社經地位青少年的父母支持和同儕支持對於心理健康之影響，比較在不同家庭社經地位下，父母和同儕是否具有同等重要性，還是會因為社經地位而有所差異。研究資料來自台灣青少年成長歷程研究（Taiwan Youth Project, TYP），研究對象為其中969名國一學生。資料分析包括結構方程模型與多群組分析。研究發現：（1）對於高社經地位青少年，父母支持對自尊有正向顯著效果、對憂鬱則有負向顯著效果，但同儕支持對自尊和憂鬱皆無顯著效果；（2）對於低社經地位青少年，父母支持、同儕支持對自尊皆有正向顯著效果、對憂鬱則皆有負向顯著效果；（3）相對於低社經地位青少年，高社經地位青少年的父母支持對自尊的正向效果、父母支持對憂鬱的負向效果顯著更高；同儕支持對自尊和憂鬱的效果則無顯著差異。總結來說，高社經地位青少年心理健康主要受父母親影響，且影響程度明顯高於低社經者；低社經地位青少年心理健康同時受父母親和同儕朋友影響。根據上述結果，本研究針對教育工作和未來研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study explored how parental and peer support influence the mental health of adolescents with a high and low socioeconomic status (SES). By comparing the SES of adolescents, we examined whether parents and peers have the same importance and whether their influence on mental health differs. Data were provided by the Taiwan Youth Project. The participants were 969 first-grade junior high school students, and the results revealed that: (a) For the adolescents with a high SES, parental support had a significant positive effect on self-esteem and a significant negative effect on depression. Furthermore, peer support had no significant effect on self-esteem and depression. (2) For the adolescents with a low SES, both parental and peer support had a significant positive effect on self-esteem and a significant negative effect on depression. (3) The parental support of the adolescents with a high SES had an increasing effect on self-esteem and depression, which was in contrast to the adolescents with a low SES. In conclusion, the mental health of the adolescents with a high SES was primarily affected by parents, whereas that of the adolescents with a low SES was affected by parents and peers. Based on the results, suggestions for education and future research were provided.起始頁-結束頁：21-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：Caring and Beyond ”Motherly” Caring in Primary Teaching: A Case Study of a Taiwanese Primary School並列篇名：小學教學的關懷不只是「母親般的」關懷：台灣小學個案研究作者：李曉蓉(Hsiao-Jung LI)關鍵字：caring;motherly work/roles;femininity;masculinity;teachers' gender;primary teaching;關懷;母親工作/角色;女性特質;男性特質;教師性別;小學教學期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：The article, based on an ethnographic analysis of the gendered link of caring in primary teaching with motherly work/roles, seeks to articulate the notion that caring in primary teaching may be complex. Data were collected from a case study conducted at a Taiwanese primary school between 2008 and 2009. The findings suggest that the importance of caring was acknowledged, but teachers' responses about caring varied. Although male teachers manifestly distanced themselves from caring, the evidence suggests that caring does not exclusively relate to gender. Three non-gender-specific values - personal attributes, an emphasis on professional skills, and the discourse of humanism - were proposed for explaining the complexity of the caring phenomenon in the primary-school context.英文摘要：本文藉由民族誌分析小學教學中關懷與母親工作／角色的性別關聯，探討小學教學中關懷的複雜意涵。以2008至2009年台灣某小學的個案研究為資料，本研究發現雖然教師都認同關懷在小學教學中的重要性，但是對於關懷的觀點卻有歧異，例如男教師清楚表示自己的工作和角色與關懷相距甚遠。研究顯示，關懷並非只與性別有關，因此本文提出三個非性別特定的價值－個人特質、重視專業技巧、人道主義論述－以詮釋關懷在小學教學情境中的複雜性。起始頁-結束頁：43-65資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：公民身分與意識初探：澳門小學《品德與公民》教科書分析並列篇名：An Exploration of Citizenship Identity and Civic Awareness: An Analysis of Moral and Civic Education Primary School Textbooks in Macao作者：黃素君(Sou-Kuan VONG);黃樂源(Lok-Un WONG);謝均才(Thomas Kwan-Choi TSE)關鍵字：公民身分;公民意識;澳門;教科書分析;citizenship identity;civic awareness;Macao;textbook analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在探究澳門小學《品德與公民》教科書中有關「公民身分」及「公民意識」的論述及內涵。透過文本分析發現：（1）個體及集體層次的公民身分意識成為教材中的顯性話語；（2）教科書相當重視公民品德之養成，強調個體的自我規訓及集體價值；（3）愛國教育與公民教育互相滲透，培養具有愛國意識的中國公民；（4）呈現出以尊重為主色調的世界公民養成。總體而言，教科書所呈現的公民身分強調國族認同，公民意識以責任為取向，本質上仍然是被動、帶有自我規訓的公民觀。本文建議課程設計須重視公平與批判思考的公民素養，以發揮培育良好公民的功能和使命。英文摘要：This article aims to explore the discourses of citizenship identity and civic awareness embedded in the series of Moral and Civic Education primary school textbooks in Macao. The study reveals that: (a) the personal and collective level of civic awareness is the dominant discourse in the textbooks; (b) the textbooks give an important weighting to the cultivation of the character of citizens as well as the importance of individual self-discipline and collective value; (c) patriotic education and civic education intertwine in order to cultivate a patriotic Chinese citizen; (d) ”respect” is the key concept in cultivating the global citizen in the textbooks. The citizenship presented in the textbooks emphasizes the formation of national identity, and a form of responsibility-driven civic awareness. In essence, the cultivation of citizenship identity and civic awareness still demonstrates a passive and self-disciplined view. This article suggests that curriculum design should emphasize on the cultivation of fairness and critical thinking in order to fulfill a comprehensive mission and function of citizenship education.起始頁-結束頁：67-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：台灣大專身心障礙學生對適應體育課程目標之觀感及其關聯因素並列篇名：College Students' Views of the Goals of Adapted Physical Education Courses in Taiwan作者：陳麗如(Li-Ju CHEN)關鍵字：結構方程模型;適應體育課程;體育特別班;體育課程目標;adapted physical education;physical education goal;special physical education course;structural equation modeling (SEM)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討台灣大專身心障礙學生對其所修習適應體育課程目標之觀感，包括對目標的期待、達成目標的感受及與此期待相關的因素。以隨機取樣全台灣北中南東共53所大專院校，而後向曾經修習適應體育課程的216位身心障礙學生，以自編問卷施測。結果以SPSS描述統計、單因子變異數分析及AMOS進行結構方程模型驗證後發現：（1）大專身心障礙學生對適應體育課程存有一定期待，修課經驗卻讓學生覺得教師所授的適應體育課程並不理想，認為期待目標達成的情形不佳；（2）融合體育班級的身心障礙學生比體育特別班的學生參與適應體育課程的狀況更佳；輕度障礙比中重度障礙學生對適應體育課程目標達成的情形較滿意；（3）學生對大專適應體育課程目標是否能有正向的期待與其所感受教師執行課程的情形有關聯，與學生個人狀況的關聯則較不明顯。英文摘要：This study explored the views of college students with disabilities of the goals of adapted physical education courses. A questionnaire was distributed to 216 students with disabilities from 53 colleges in Taiwan. Using descriptive statistics, ANOVA, and the structural equation modeling test, the study found that: (a) students with disabilities had high expectations for adapted physical education courses, and they indicated that the courses did not effectively meet their expectations; (b) students with mild disabilities were more satisfied than students with moderate and severe disabilities with the education goals reached; the students who enrolled in inclusive physical education classes experienced better conditions than those enrolled in segregated physical education classes to participate into the adapted physical education courses; (c) significant correlation was found between the courses offered and the students' expectations, but the students' personal conditions did not have correlation with their expectations. The study will contribute to improving adapted physical education for college students with disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：87-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：大學職員職場霸凌知覺與心理健康關係之研究－兼論情緒耗竭之中介效果與因應策略之調節效果並列篇名：Perceived Workplace Bullying and Mental Health Among University Employees: The Mediating Effect of Emotional Exhaustion and the Moderating Effect of Coping Strategies作者：張振傑(Chen-Chieh CHANG);彭彥群(Yen-Chun PENG);莊文隆(Wen-Long ZHUANG)關鍵字：職場霸凌;心理健康;因應策略;情緒耗竭;workplace bullying;mental health;coping strategy;emotional exhaustion期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：雖然早期研究發現職場霸凌會影響個體心理健康，但其形成機制與外在因素的探討卻不多見。本研究主要依據情感事件理論探討情緒耗竭在職場霸凌與心理健康的中介效果，同時分析因應策略在職場霸凌對情緒耗竭和情緒耗竭對心理健康的調節效果。本研究採用便利抽樣法，共有290位大學職員參與。研究結果發現職場霸凌顯著正向影響情緒耗竭，情緒耗竭顯著負向影響心理健康，情緒耗竭在職場霸凌與心理健康之間有中介效果，因應策略對情緒耗竭與心理健康有顯著調節效果。根據研究結果，本文提出相關實務管理意涵和未來研究建議。英文摘要：Although earlier research found that workplace bullying affects an individual's mental health, investigations of the mechanisms that produce these behaviors and their external factors have remained rare. Based on the affective events theory, we examined the mediating effect of mental exhaustion on the relationship between workplace bullying and mental health. We also analyzed the moderating effects of coping strategies on the relationship between workplace bullying and emotional exhaustion as well as on the relationship between emotional exhaustion and mental health. Convenience sampling was used in this study and 290 university employees participated. We found that workplace bullying significantly and positively correlated with emotional exhaustion, emotional exhaustion significantly and negatively correlated with mental health. We also found that emotional exhaustion had a mediating effect on the relationship between workplace bullying and mental health and coping strategies had a significant moderating effect on the relationship between emotional exhaustion and mental health. Based on these results, we discussed the implications for relevant management practices and provided suggestions for future study.起始頁-結束頁：109-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所7篇名：國小校長知識領導影響學校創新經營效能之關係－以資料導向決定為中介變項並列篇名：A Study on the Impact of Elementary School Principals' Knowledge Leadership on the Effectiveness of Innovation Management: Data-driven Decision Making as Mediating Variable作者：黃建翔(Chien-Hsiang HUANG);吳清山(Ching-Shan WU)關鍵字：知識領導;資料導向決定;學校創新經營;學校效能;knowledge leadership;data-driven decision making;school innovative management;school effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在了解當前國民小學校長知識領導、資料導向決定與學校創新經營效能的現況和關係。本研究採用問卷調查法，以台灣地區128所國小1,301位教師為樣本，運用積差相關和結構方程模式等進行統計分析。研究結果顯示：（1）校長知識領導、資料導向決定與學校創新經營效能的現況良好；（2）校長知識領導、資料導向決定與學校創新經營效能三者之間具有相關性，且三者關係模式適配度良好，具有顯著正向效果；（3）校長知識領導可透過整體資料導向決定的中介作用，間接正向影響學校創新經營效能，而對它有助益。透過本研究的發現和建議，提供相關教育機構參考，以提高學校創新經營效能。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the current situation and relationships of elementary school principals' knowledge leadership and data-driven decision making toward the effectiveness of innovative management in schools. A questionnaire survey was conducted. The samples were 1,301 teachers from 128 elementary schools in Taiwan. The study used product-moment correlation and structural equation modeling to carry out statistical analysis. Results showed that: (a) principals' knowledge leadership, data-driven decision making and the effectiveness of innovative management were in good condition; (b) correlations among principals' knowledge leadership, data-driven decision making and the effectiveness of innovative management were found, and the relationship model fit for the three factors was good, posing significant and positive effect; (c) by means of the mediating effect of overall data-driven decision making, principals' knowledge leadership showed indirect, positive impact on the effectiveness of innovative management and enhanced its performance. The results and suggestions of this study may serve as references for related educational institutions to improve the effectiveness of school innovation management.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所8篇名：以資源基礎觀點論述高等教育機構績效之研究－以社會資本為干擾變數並列篇名：The Effects of Resource-based Antecedents on the Performance of Higher Education Institutions: Examining the Moderating Effects of Social Capital作者：彭耀平(Michael Yao-Ping PENG);何希慧(Sophia Shi-Huei HO);彭彥群(Yen-Chun PENG)關鍵字：內部社會資本;外部社會資本;寬裕資源;機構績效;機構聲譽;internal social capital;external social capital;slack resource;institutional performance;institutional reputation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究根據資源基礎觀點建立理論模型，探討資源前置因素對機構績效的影響，如機構寬裕、機構聲譽與機構績效間的關係。另外，為了在靜態資源上加入動態應用的本質，研究者分析社會資本的干擾效果，如內部和外部社會資本可促進及增強機構寬裕和機構聲譽兩種資源的運作，進而提升學校在教學、研究和服務的表現成果。研究對象為台灣37所高等教育機構的專任教師，共獲926份有效問卷，以階層迴歸模式檢視變數間關係。實證結果發現：（1）機構寬裕和機構聲譽對機構績效有正向影響；（2）內部社會資本對機構寬裕、機構聲譽與機構績效間關係有正向干擾效果；（3）外部社會資本只對機構寬裕與機構績效間關係有正向干擾效果。最後，根據研究結果提出理論及實務意涵、建議和未來研究方向，供相關研究者參考。英文摘要：Based on the resource-based view, a theoretical model was established to explore the influence of resource antecedents on institutional performance, such as the relation between institutional slack, institutional reputation, and institutional performance. In order to add dynamic application to static resources, moderating effects of social capital were discussed in this article. For example, internal and external social capital might facilitate and strengthen the application of institutional slack and institutional reputation, which thereafter enhance institutional performance in teaching, research and service outcomes. Research objects were full-time faculty in 37 Taiwan higher education institutions and 926 valid questionnaires were collected. The relation between variables was inspected with stratum regression pattern. Results show that: (a) institutional slack and institutional reputation positively affect institutional performance; (b) internal social capital has positively significant influence on the relationship between institutional slack, reputation and performance; and (c) external social capital has positive moderating effect on the relationship between institutional slack and institutional performance. Finally, theoretical and managerial implications and suggestions as well as future studies were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：23-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所9篇名：台灣新住民與原漢族群學生教育抱負影響機制之研究並列篇名：The Influential Mechanism of Students' Educational Aspiration Among Hans, Aborigines, and New Immigrants in Taiwan作者：李承傑(Cheng-Chieh LI);董旭英(Yuk-Ying TUNG)關鍵字：原漢;家長教育期望;家庭內社會資本;新住民;學生教育抱負;Hans and aborigines;parental educational expectation;family social capital;new immigrants;students' educational aspiration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究從James S. Coleman家庭社會資本論出發，延伸威斯康辛模型研究，以偏最小平方法之結構方程模型，分析2012年屏東教育長期追蹤資料庫小學六年級學生及其家長資料，目的在探討影響學生教育抱負的因果機制，並探究原漢、陸配和外配不同族群背景在此一模型上的差異。研究結果發現，家庭社經地位愈高，學業成績愈好；父母教育期望愈高，家庭內社會資本愈雄厚，進而提高學生教育抱負。其次，控制學業成績、家長教育期望、導師教育期望和家庭內社會資本等變項，家庭社經地位對於學生教育抱負的影響消失，顯示本研究找出影響學生教育抱負的重要中介。在族群比較方面，由於家庭社經地位對學業成績有很大影響，所以族群間家庭社經地位的不同是造成族群間學業成績差異的重要原因，進而影響其子女教育抱負。英文摘要：Based on Coleman's family social capital theory, this study extended the study of Wisconsin model to explore the influential mechanism of students' educational aspiration and the differences among Hans, aborigines, and new immigrants. The study used partial least squares techniques to analyze the data from Pingtung Education Longitudinal Survey for the sixth graders in 2012. Results indicate that having higher family socioeconomic status (SES), students get better academic performance, perceive higher parental educational expectation, and own more family social capital, thus enhancing their educational aspiration. Second, after controlling academic performance, parental educational expectation, and family social capital, the effect of SES on students' educational aspiration becomes non-significant. Important mediators in this influential mechanism were found. In terms of the racial multi-group comparison, owing to the strong effect of SES on academic performance, the differences of SES on different races are the main causes that result in the gap of academic performance and then exert an influence on educational aspiration.起始頁-結束頁：51-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所10篇名：「家庭參與及商校協作」：培育學生面對挑戰的希望感並列篇名：Family Involvement and School-Business Partnership: Nurturing Students' Hope作者：何瑞珠(Esther Sui-Chu HO);李文浩(Antony Man-Ho LI);李仕傑(Thomas Sze-Kit LEE)關鍵字：家庭參與;商校協作;弱勢學生;正向心理學;希望感;parental involvement;school-business partnership;disadvantaged students;positive psychology;hope期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：中學生踏入高中階段前後，要面對不同挑戰，而香港學生面對的學習壓力嚴重，升學競爭尤為激烈。若學生缺乏面對挑戰的素質，容易失去解決問題的目標和動力，更甚的是對未來失去希望感（hope）。這對於缺乏社經資源和家庭支援的基層學生來說，尤其值得關注。香港目前透過家庭參與和「商校協作」模式，舉辦或資助不同活動，推動學生的個人發展。本研究於2015年收集了5,500多位曾參與香港一項「商校協作」計劃的中學生的問卷數據，並以多元迴歸模型分析方法，探討學生的個人及家庭背景因素（性別、出生地、家庭結構及社經地位）、父母的期望和參與，以及參與「商校協作」活動，對學生希望感發展的影響，研究發現父母的期望和參與以及學生參與商校協作，對中學生的希望感具顯著正面影響。本研究就身處弱勢階層的青少年透過參與各類「商校協作」活動，對個人面對未來的正面素質－希望感的影響作實證剖析，結果將對青少年政策如何拓展企業及社區的社會資源有具體啟示。英文摘要：When stepping into senior secondary years, Hong Kong students are faced with different challenges, especially academic stress and competition for higher education opportunities. Without the qualities necessary for coping with challenges, they may lose the goals and motivation for solving problems and even the hope for future. This is of particular concern to disadvantaged students who are lacking in socioeconomic resources and family support. Nowadays, activities for promoting students' personal development have been organized or supported by family involvement and school-business partnership in Hong Kong. This study aims to investigate the impact of student and family background factors (gender, place of birth, family structure and socioeconomic status), parental expectation and involvement, and participation in school-business partnership activities, on the development of students' hope. Data was collected from a questionnaire survey in 2015 taken part by over 5,500 secondary students, who were participants in a school-business partnership program, and was analyzed by multiple regression models. Results indicated that parental expectation and involvement, and participation in school-business partnership activities show significant positive effect on students' hope scale. By analyzing the effect of participation in school-business partnership activities by disadvantaged youths on their development of hope - a positive quality for forging the future, this study provides practical implications on how youth policy may tap into the resources provided by enterprises and the community.起始頁-結束頁：73-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所11篇名：”English-only or Nothing”: Practitioners' Perspective on the Policy and Implementation of CLIL in Higher Education並列篇名：高等教育中融合學科內容與語言學習教學法之政策與實行：以教師的觀點為例作者：孔繁偉(Fan-Wei KUNG)關鍵字：Content and Language Integrated Learning;higher education;language policy;學科內容與外語學習結合;高等教育;語言政策期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：With the inception of internationalism, Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) has been adopted in many classroom settings in higher education to enhance students' global competitiveness after graduation. However, research on CLIL has been primarily focused on learners, leaving teachers' reflection unexplored in the Asia-Pacific region. This inquiry thus attempts to bridge this gap by exploring practitioners' experience of teaching CLIL that underpins their critical praxis in Taiwan where CLIL has been adopted and promoted by the government in higher education. Qualitative data were collected and analyzed based on nine practitioners of such various disciplines as humanities, social sciences, engineering and commerce from nine different universities in northern, central and southern Taiwan where CLIL has prevailed. Through a phenomenology framework, several recurrent themes emerge from the data such as the unequivocal English elitism, limited creativity and spontaneity, lacking teacher preparation, and biased recruitment. The results also suggest that although these practitioners are optimistic about the implementation of CLIL as revealed in the extant literature, the practice of CLIL promoted by the government has resulted in several such potential issues as inequality and stress for them. Pedagogical implications are further discussed.英文摘要：隨<U+7740>全球國際化的趨勢，學科內容與外語學習相結合（Content and Language Integrated Learning, CLIL）的課程在高等教育中已逐漸受到重視，以期能增進學生畢業後的競爭力。然而，CLIL的研究至今仍以學生的學習效果為主，有關亞太地區教師教學的研究鮮為人知。因此，本研究探討台灣大專院校教師對於CLIL課程的教學方法和經驗。根據台灣教育部，CLIL課程已逐漸成為大專院校的授課趨勢。本質性研究利用現象歸納法（phenomenology）探討台灣北部、中部、南部大學堙A人文、社會科學、理工和商管領域的教師對於CLIL課程政策和實行的觀點。研究結果顯示出許多問題，包括不對等的語言教學政策、缺乏創造力與空間的課程、不完備的教師培育，以及不公平的教師招募要求。即使教師對CLIL課程保持樂觀態度，他們同時亦認為此政策與實行使他們感受到不公平和雙倍的壓力。本研究最後探討當中的教育意涵。起始頁-結束頁：93-115資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所12篇名：”It Encourages Me to Keep Talking”: Enhancing L2 WTC Behavior and Oral Proficiency Through a HOT Approach並列篇名：通過高等思考法促進學生外語溝通意願行為和口語能力作者：陳美惠(Mei-Hui CHEN)關鍵字：L2 WTC behavior;L2 speaking;higher-order thinking;外語溝通意願行為;外語口語;高等思考期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Much L2 willingness to communicate (WTC) research has mainly focused on factors influencing WTC, but researchers have rarely explored the type of learning tasks which fosters L2 WTC behavior. Based on a social constructivist perspective, a higher-order thinking (HOT) approach was designed to promote L2 WTC behavior and investigate its effects on L2 WTC behavior, the relationship between L2 WTC behavior and L2 speaking proficiency, and factors influencing L2 WTC behavior. A comparative case study design was used with participants from two freshman EFL classes. Data were collected through observation from pre-test, post-test, delayed post-test, and stimulated recall interviews. Results show that the HOT approach significantly improved students' L2 WTC behavior with a sustainable effect and that L2 WTC behavior was positively correlated with L2 speaking ability. Student interviews revealed a positive attitude toward the thinking approach and a perceived enhancement of L2 speaking and L2 WTC. Implications for L2 teaching that enhances L2 WTC behavior are discussed.英文摘要：大部分外語溝通意願的研究都<U+7740>重於發現影響溝通意願的因素，很少探索哪種學習狀況可以強化學生使用外語的溝通意願行為。基於社會建構主義觀點，本研究設計一套高等思考法來提升外語的溝通意願行為，並探查這思考法對外語溝通意願行為的影響、外語溝通意願行為和外語口語能力的相互關係，以及在此學習狀況下會影響學生溝通意願行為的因素。本研究使用比較型案例研究法，兩班大學一年級英文課學生參與研究，透過課堂觀察（包括前測、後側及延後測）和刺激回憶訪談收集資料。研究結果顯示，高等思考法能顯著提升學生的外語溝通意願行為，此結果並具有持續性；學生的外語溝通意願行為和外語口語能力有正向的顯著關係；學生對這高等思考法抱持積極態度，且感受到自己的外語口語能力有進步，溝通意願增加。最後，本文討論本研究所產生對促進外語溝通意願行為的外語教學意涵。起始頁-結束頁：117-142資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所13篇名：創意自我效能、組織創新氣候對國中教師創意教學表現影響之跨層次研究並列篇名：A Cross-level Research of Creative Self-efficacy, Organizational Innovation Climate and Creative Teaching Performance of Teachers in Taiwan's Junior High Schools作者：余舜基(Shun-Chi YU)關鍵字：創意自我效能;組織創新氣候;創意教學表現;國中;階層線性模式;creative self-efficacy;organizational innovation climate;creative teaching performance;junior high school;hierarchical linear model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國中教師創意自我效能對創意教學表現的影響，並以組織創新氣候為調節變項，以創意自我效能理論、組織創新氣候理論和創意教學表現為理論基礎建立研究模式。研究對象為台灣台中市的國中教師，並運用階層線性模式分析學校組織與國中教師層次間各變項的影響。研究結果發現，學校國中教師的創意自我效能會影響創意教學表現，而提升組織創新氣候有助於國中教師的創意自我效能；組織創新氣候在國中教師創意自我效能與創意教學表現之間產生部分調節效果。根據以上發現，本研究認為學校為了創意教學表現的發展，應重視組織創新氣候的營造，同時還要重新檢討教師的創意教學方式。英文摘要：This study in 2015 aimed to explore organizational innovation climate as a moderator between creative self-efficacy and creative teaching performance of teachers in Taiwan's junior high schools. The effective sample included 1,005 teachers. A cross-level research model of creative self-efficacy, organizational innovation climate and creative teaching performance of teachers in Taiwan's junior high schools was proposed and tested by using a hierarchical linear modeling approach. Results demonstrated that the creative self-efficacy of junior high school teachers affect creative teaching performance, and improving the organization innovation climate will facilitate creative self-efficacy of these teachers; organizational innovation climate has partial moderation effect on the relationship between creative self-efficacy and creative teaching performance of teachers in Taiwan's junior high schools. These findings suggest not only that it is important to consider creative teaching performance of teachers in Taiwan’s junior high schools but also that organizational innovation climate plays an essential role in this relationship. Based on research results, the author puts forward a number of relevant suggestions and implications of findings for educational authorities. Finally, the author provides some directions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：143-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所14篇名：「閱讀促進寫作」中文第二語言教學法研究－提升香港非華語學生實用文閱讀與寫作能力並列篇名：Improving Chinese Second Language Learners' Reading and Writing Performance Through RLLW Pedagogy: A Study on Non-Chinese Speaking Students in Hong Kong作者：邱佳琪(Cha-Kie HIEW)關鍵字：閱讀;寫作;實用文;中文第二語言教學;閱讀促進寫作;reading;writing;practical text;Chinese as second language;reading to learn, learning to write期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：閱讀與寫作都和文本有關，可通過文類教學聯結從閱讀到寫作的教學。實用文是教材與評估中的主要文類之一，本研究採用「閱讀促進寫作」文類教學法進行實用文的讀寫教學實踐。此教學法以系統功能語言學為基礎，形成從閱讀到寫作的完整教學設計，已證實在英文寫作教學領域有正面效果，但在中文教學及閱讀的應用仍處於發展階段。本研究進一步設計相應的閱讀理解評量表，以香港非華語學生為對象，通過前、後測及訪談等研究工具，收集量化及質性數據。研究結果顯示，「閱讀促進寫作」教學法能提升中文第二語言學習者的閱讀表現達5.9倍，寫作表現進步達1.4倍，且實驗班的讀寫進步幅度均顯著優於對照班，證明此教學法能大幅提升讀寫表現，可進一步推廣及融入於課程設計。英文摘要：Reading and writing are key components of literacy education, while genre pedagogy can be implemented to connect the teaching from reading to writing. Practical text is one of the main genre in teaching materials and assessment. Relevant pedagogy and research should be conducted to provide second language learners the knowledge about genre, context, and function of language about practical writing. Based on the theories of systemic functional linguistics, the ”reading to learn, learning to write” (RLLW) pedagogy has demonstrated positive effect of improving English learners' reading and writing competency. For further development of genre pedagogy in different languages, there is a need to investigate the effect and feasibility of applying RLLW in teaching languages other than English. This article reports on its effect on Chinese as second language education through mixed-method case study research. It proved that RLLW can improve non-Chinese speaking students' reading performance by 5.9 times and writing performance by 1.4 times higher than pre-test, while both significantly better than the control group. Research findings proved the positive effect of RLLW pedagogy and its potential to be implemented in curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：165-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：輔導教師與心理師的跨專業合作量表之編製研究：輔導教師的觀點並列篇名：The Development of Collaboration Situation and Expectation between School Counselor and School Psychologist Scale作者：陳婉真(Wan-Chen Chen);江守峻(Shou-Chu Chiang);邱郁涵(Yu-Han Chiu);彭秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Peng);洪雅鳳(Ya-Feng Hung)關鍵字：心理師;跨專業合作;輔導教師;interdisciplinary collaboration;psychologist;school counselor期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：輔導教師與心理師的跨專業合作是目前推展學校輔導工作之重要政策，係基於輔導工作困境萌發之需求，將心理師引入校園以期增加輔導工作的專業度。本研究旨在發展輔導教師與心理師的「合作現況量表」與「合作期待量表」，初步以量化方式，從輔導教師的觀點分析跨專業合作之成效。首先訪談12位輔導教師，進行內容分析，以做成編寫量表題目之依據；接著以138位國中輔導教師為預試對象，進行項目分析與探索性因素分析，決定以17題的正式量表，包含三個因素：合作支持、專業協助、學校融入；最後採用北、中、南、東四個地區分層叢集抽樣，以399位國中輔導教師（男性67人、女性332人）為正式研究樣本，進行信度與效度檢驗。信度分析結果顯示：「合作現況量表」與「合作期待量表」均具有良好的信度。驗證性因素分析結果顯示：兩量表皆具有良好的適配程度。在效標關聯效度部分，輔導教師的合作現況與工作滿意度呈現顯著的正相關，與角色壓力呈現顯著的負相關。另外，男性輔導教師知覺心理師的學校融入程度高於女性輔導教師，且輔導教師對於與心理師的各層面合作，均出現期待顯著高於現況之現象。整體而言，「合作現況量表」與「合作期待量表」之信效度皆獲得支持，且能初步窺探跨專業合作的現況與期待。英文摘要：The interdisciplinary collaboration between school counselors and school psychologists is the main policy in current school guidance work. Based on the need to overcome the predicaments in school guidance work, introducing school psychologists into campus is important for increasing the amount of manpower and the level of profession in school guidance. This paper is aim to develop ”Collaboration Situation and Expectation between School Counselor and School Psychologist Scale”, which can be separated into ”Collaboration Situation Scale, CSS” and ”Collaboration Expectation Scale, CES”. By using quantitative method, we analyzed the effectiveness of interdisciplinary collaboration from the perspective of the school counselors. Before the tests, we interviewed 12 junior- high-school counselors and then used content analysis in order to form the suitable scale items. Afterwards, a total of 138 junior-high-school counselors participated in the pretest study. By the method of item analysis and exploratory factor analysis, three dimensions, collaboration support, professional assistant, and school immerse, were identified in both CSS and CES. Two scales were both self-report five-point Likert-type scales and includes 17 items. In formal test, a total of 399 participants (67 male, 322 female) were included to examine the reliability and validity of the scales from the four areas in Taiwan (North, Middle, South, and East) by using proportional stratified sampling. In reliability, the internal consistency of CSS and CES was satisfactory. The result of confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) indicated the models of CSS and CES were acceptable. Also, in criterion-related validity, CSS was significantly and positively related to work satisfactory, but significantly and negatively related to role pressure. Besides, male school counselors perceived higher level of school immerse of the psychologists than females. Furthermore, three dimensions and overall scores in CES were significantly higher than CSS. In sum, the reliability and validity of CSS and CES are supported, and the scales could explore the interdisciplinary collaborative situation and expectation between school counselors and school psychologists.起始頁-結束頁：341-365資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：「新編青少年強項量表」之編製與驗證並列篇名：The Development and Confirmatory Factor Analysis of the ”New Inventory of Adolescents' Strengths”作者：吳相儀(Hsiang-Yi Wu);陳冠羽(Guan-Yu Chen);廖思涵(Sih-Han Liao);劉政宏(Cheng-Hong Liu);謝碧玲(Bi-Ling Shieh)關鍵字：正向心理學;青少年;強項;adolescent;character strength;positive psychology期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究之目的為發展「新編青少年強項量表」並進行信效度驗證。首先，經文獻探討歸納核心強項，據此擬出題目。預試以立意取樣抽取212名國中生，經項目分析、探索性因素以及信度分析形成正式量表。接著，以分層便利取樣，涵蓋全臺灣北、中、南、東區國中生共1,147人。信效度部分，總量表Cronbach's α係數為.97，各分量表介於.76∼.90，顯示具良好內部一致性。建構效度部分為2階11個因素，3個2階因素為：「自己」、「他人」、「事情」，11個因素為：「自我尊重」、「情緒自覺」、「樂觀」、「同理」、「寬恕」、「感恩」、「做人」、「愛」、「創造力」、「毅力」、「自我控制」，整體適配度在可接受範圍內；再以「生活滿意度」、「復原力」作效標，發現具良好的同時效度。此外，本研究發現，女生在「他人」強項高於男生，例如：「同理」、「感恩」、「做人」與「愛」；年級較高者在「事情」強項表現較佳，例如：「毅力」和「自我控制」。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop and construct validity of the ”New Inventory of Adolescents' Strengths (NIAS)”. The researchers used 212 participants by using purposive sampling in the pretest to conduct item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, and reliability analysis. Then, used another 1,147 participants by using stratified convenience sampling method to conduct confirmatory factor analysis and criterion-related validity. Results indicated that the inventory's construct validity and reliability are acceptable. The Cronbach's α was from .76 to .90. Three second-order factors (Self, Other, and Things) and 11 first factors (self-esteem, emotion self-awareness, optimism, empathy, forgiveness, gratitude, person-making, love, creativity, persistence, and self-control) were derived from the final 50-item. The study also employed ”the Satisfaction with Life Scale” and ”Inventory of Adolescent Resilience” as criterions. The results of criterion-related validity revealed good. In the background variables, it was shown that girls outperformed boys on ”Others”, like ”empathy”, ”gratitude”, ”person-making”, and ”love”; and elder students outperformed youngers on ”Things”, like ”persistence”, and ”self-control”.起始頁-結束頁：367-399資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：極端反應風格之多向度試題反應理論模式的發展與應用並列篇名：Multidimensional Item Response Theory Models for Extreme Response Style作者：黃宏宇(Hung-Yu Huang);孫慧芳(Huifang Sun)關鍵字：多向度測驗;貝氏估計;極端反應風格;試題反應理論;Bayesian estimation;extreme response style;item response theory;multidimensional tests期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：在社會科學的調查研究中，極端反應風格的存在經常會造成測驗品質的威脅。本研究旨在發展一組新的試題反應理論（item response theory, IRT）模式，適用於多向度測驗分析，並同時能納入極端反應風格的隨機效果。研究者擴展四種適用多元計分的多向度試題反應理論（multidimensional IRT, MIRT）模式，並透過模擬研究操弄多種不同情境，使用貝氏估計法檢驗模式參數的回復性。研究結果顯示：本研究所發展出的四個新模式具有良好的估計品質。在試題參數估計方面，隨著向度增加、樣本數增加與向度之間呈現高相關時，能提供良好的試題參數估計；在潛在特質與權重參數估計方面，其樣本數、題數與向度增加時，受試者參數估計有不錯的效果。此外，向度間的高相關也能提升各向度特質之估計。實徵研究分析顯示：有納入極端反應風格的模式具有較佳的模式適配度，忽略極端反應風格時會造成潛在特值估計的偏誤。最後，研究者提出若干建議供未來研究發展參考。英文摘要：This study aims to develop a new set of multidimensional item response theory (MIRT) models for extreme response style (ERS). Four polytomous MIRT models were extended to incorporate the ERS effect in the item response functions. We conducted a series of simulations to assess the efficiency of the proposed models in terms of parameter recovery using Bayesian estimation. The results showed that a large sample size, a great number of dimensions, and high correlation between dimensions were associated with satisfactory item parameter recovery and that the latent trait and ERS weight parameters could be estimated precisely when the large sample size, the long test length and a great number of dimensions were used. In addition, as in multidimensional IRT models, the correlation between latent traits can provide precise latent trait estimation. An empirical example was provided to demonstrate the applications of the proposed model to real data analysis and the consequences of ignoring the ERS effect on persons' parameter estimation were investigated. We closed this article by addressing several suggestions for future study.起始頁-結束頁：401-438資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：Accounting for Careless Responding in Survey Questionnaires with a Bogus Item and Response Time並列篇名：使用混合反應時間模型在加入虛題的問卷中以識別作答類型作者：林克謙(Ke-Chian Lin);蔡蓉青(Rung-Ching Tsai);呂翠珊(Tsui-Shan Lu)關鍵字：bogus item;careless responding;response time;未認真作答受試者;虛題;試題反應時間期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：A valid inference for a survey is always based on the efficient estimation, which is often threatened and distorted by careless responses. A bogus item is commonly used in the survey questionnaire to detect the careless respondents, who answer without reading the items. The response time is another usual method to identify the careless responses and its effect in enhancing item parameter estimation has been verified in the educational testing. To reap the benefits of both the bogus item and the response time, we propose a mixture response time model to analyze the survey questionnaire including a bogus item. The proposed inference procedure not only distinguishes the attentive and the careless respondents but also effectively discovers the third responding behavior, those who answer the bogus item correctly but indeed belong to the careless group. Simulation studies show that the standard errors of the item parameters decrease for the samples of sizes being 500 or greater, together with the response time. We illustrate our proposed method with an analysis of a large proportion of careless responding behavior (22%) in a real data set.英文摘要：研究人員在問卷蒐集後的資料分析中，未認真作答的受試者（意即可能不看題目就作答）之問卷會影響到參數估計的有效性，進而產生不正確的推論。問卷中設置虛題在許多研究中很普遍，往往可以有效地辨別未認真作答的受試者。而試題反應時間是另一個常見的工具，提供受試者的應試行為。本研究的目標是如何同時將試題反應時間和虛題設計結合而更有效地辨別出未認真作答的受試者，研究者提出混合反應時間模型，將反應時間放在模型中的潛在類別變項，而非一般傳統作法將反應時間視為控制變量。本研究不只將受試者分為認真及不認真作答，而是更有效地分出第三類受試者：答對虛題但事實上是屬於不認真作答的類別。最後，研究者以提出的模型來分析一筆實徵資料（答錯虛題的比例高達22%）。起始頁-結束頁：439-463資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：數理資優鑑定實作評量之試題研發<U+66C1>效度評估並列篇名：Conducting the Performance Assessment for Mathematically and Scientifically Giftedness Identification作者：潘裕豐(Yu-Fong Pan);吳清麟(Chinglin Wu)關鍵字：資優鑑定;實作評量;數理資優;gifted identification;mathematically and scientifically giftedness;performance assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在發展適用數理資優鑑定的實作評量，以提供有效篩選數理學術性向資賦優異學生之測量工具。研究者邀集數學與自然科學領域專家以及資優班現場教師共同編製數理領域實作評量，共11題。首先，以49位國中一年級學生進行預試，依各試題內部一致性之結果挑選出六道題目（數學科與自然科各三題）為正式試題。接著，以150名學術性向測驗百分等級97以上的國中一年級學生進行正式施測及信效度檢驗。結果發現，各試題內部一致性信度介於.46至.96，數學與自然分測驗分別為.77與.61，整體實作評量則為.77。數學科與自然科之相關係數為.40，顯示各科具有良好區別性。研究者採用受測者下一學年之學科成績為效標變項，分析結果指出：實作評量分數可顯著正向預測數學科（r = .29∼.40）與自然科成績（r = .20∼.25），表示本實作評量能有效預測受測者後續在數理科目之學業表現。本研究亦於文末針對測驗信效度以及未來相關應用提出討論與建議。英文摘要：The study is aimed to conduct the performance assessment for identifying the mathematically and scientifically giftedness (PAMSG). 11 items of performance assessment was developed by the experts and gifted class teachers in the mathematics and sciences field. 49 junior high students participated the pre-test of PAMSG. Six items was selected as formal test according to the higher internal-consistent coefficients. We recruited 150 junior high students whose score of scholastic aptitude test above 97 percentage rank join the formal test. As for the reliability, the coefficients of internal consistency for mathematical and scientific sub-test were .77 and .61, for integrated test was .77. The correlation coefficients between the two sub-tests was .40, indicating the internal discriminant validity. The score of PAMSG positively predicted the subsequent academic performance of the mathematics and sciences discipline. We have discussed the reliability and validity of the PAMSG, and provided the potential application.起始頁-結束頁：241-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：國小六年級學生「數學論證評量工具」之建構並列篇名：The Construction of Measuring Six-Graders' Mathematical Argumentation作者：林碧珍(Pi-Jen Lin);鄭俊彥(Chun-Yung Cheng);蔡寶桂(Bao-Quei Tsai)關鍵字：六年級;評量工具;數學論證;驗證性因素分析;assessment;confirmatory factor analysis;mathematical argumentation;sixthgrade期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：過去有關學生學習成效之評量，其評量內容著重在數學知識而忽視高層次思考層面。本研究旨在建構一個適用於國小學生數學論證之評量工具，建構包含發展與驗證試題的品質。此評量工具透過預試和正式施測兩階段發展完成，兩階段的研究樣本都採用立意抽樣，預試和正式施測階段各從三縣市抽取六年級學生各為456與599人。從理論觀點建構數學論證評量架構的四個向度：「提出猜想」、「效化猜想」、「一般化」及「證明」，以提升評量工具的內容效度和建構效度，並利用統計分析，以項目分析、驗證性因素分析與信度分析，考驗「數學論證評量工具」的信效度。分析結果得到該份試題的難度介於0.30至0.74之間，鑑別度介於0.25至0.69之間，15題的總量表信度係數為.61，效度為專家效度；四個向度「提出猜想」、「效化猜想」、「一般化」及「證明」對數學論證的預測係數分別為.91、.84、.96、.83，顯示本研究中四個一階的預測因素能有效預測二階的數學論證之構念效度。本研究研發的數學論證工具之特色是不僅能對數學論證的四個向度以操作型定義，而且能將高層次思考的數學論證之評量試題以選擇題形式命題，並以論證品質的不同等級為誘答項設計的考量。本研究可提供教師及研究者一個值得信賴的評量工具。英文摘要：In past, the assessment of student learning focused on mathematical knowledge instead of the high-order thinking. The study was to construct a measure of assessing six-graders' mathematical argumentation through pilot study and main study. The construction of the measure included two aspects: developing and testing. A total of 456 students and 599 students were purposely sampled from three counties for pilot study and main study, respectively. The validity and reliability of the measure to be constructed were based on both theoretical consideration and statistical analysis. From the theoretical consideration, the framework of the measure consisted of two dimensions: mathematical argumentation and mathematical content. Argumentation included four constructs: formulation, validation, generalization, and justification. From statistical analysis perspective, item analysis, reliability analysis, and confirmatory factor analysis were used to test the validity of the measure. The difficulty of the items ranged from 0.30 to 0.74 and the coefficiency of discrimination ranged from 0.25 to 0.69. The reliability coefficient of the total measure of 15 items was .61. We used the validity of expert. The coefficients of predicting the four factors of the mathematical argumentation including formulation, validation, generalization, and justification were .91, .84, .96, .83 respectively. The result indicates that the four first-order predictors had good prediction on the validity of the second-order argumentation. The measure developed in this study with multiple choice of the items to assess students' high-order thinking and mathematical argumentation with operational definition were the two features of the study. This study was able to provide a reliable instrument for teachers or researchers to measure students’ argumentation.起始頁-結束頁：257-289資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：Confirmatory Factor Analysis and Construct Validity of the Chinese Math Anxiety Rating Scale-Revised for Undergraduate Calculus Learners並列篇名：以驗證性因素分析探討大學微積分學習者數學焦慮量表之建構效度作者：吳智鴻(Chih-Hung Wu);林韋廷(Wei-Ting Lin);施淑娟(Shu-Chuan Shih)關鍵字：confirmative factor analysis;Mathematics Anxiety Rating Scale-Revised;measure invariance;undergraduate calculus learner;大學微積分學習者;修正版數學焦慮量表;測量恆等性;驗證性因素分析期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Math anxiety, a feeling of uncertainty, helplessness, and fear of mathematics, affects students' learning and performance. To understand the level of math anxiety of Taiwanese college students learning calculus, this study translated the original English version of Mathematics Anxiety Rating Scale-Revised (MARS-R) into Chinese and evaluated the translation, construct, and criterion-related validity with the Mathematics Self- Efficacy Scale. The modified Chinese MARS-R comprises 16 items, 11 in learning math anxiety and 5 in math evaluating anxiety subscales respectively. The modified MARS-R is robust and demonstrated a negative correlation with the Mathematics Self- Efficacy Scale. Our revised MARS-R is highly suitable for evaluating math anxiety in both female and male Chinese college students learning calculus.英文摘要：數學焦慮是對於數學感到不確定、無助與恐懼的情緒，會影響學生的學習成效。為了瞭解華人大學生微積分學習時的數學焦慮，本研究將英文版MARS-R翻譯為中文版，並檢驗其翻譯效度、建構效度、與「數學自我效能量表」的效標關聯效度，以及跨性別的測量恆等性。修正後的中文版MARS-R包含16題，其中11題為數學學習焦慮子量表、5題為數學測驗焦慮子量表。本量表具有良好的模式適配度，且在實證結果中顯示數學焦慮與數學自我效能為顯著負相關。本量表經過驗證，可作為學習微積分時數學焦慮之量測工具，並且具有跨性別的測量恆等性，無論男性或女性的大學學生均適用。起始頁-結束頁：291-313資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：臺灣國中生「數學知識信念量表」之編製並列篇名：The Development of the Epistemological Beliefs Scale-Mathematics for Taiwan Junior High School Students作者：賴英娟(Ying-Chuan Lai);巫博瀚(Po-Han Wu)關鍵字：知識信念;結構方程模式;複核效度;cross-validation;epistemological beliefs;structural equation modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究係以Hofer的知識信念為理論基礎，以發展臺灣國中生「數學知識信念量表」（Epistemological Beliefs Scale-Mathematics，以下簡稱EBS-M），其包含知識的確定、知識的結構及知識的辯護三個分量表，共計14題。本研究以北、中、南三個區域之國中生為研究對象，選取自10個縣市、30所學校、60個班級，有效樣本為1,723人。研究發現：（1）三個分量表的Cronbach's α係數介於.82∼.89之間、再測信度介於.60∼.69之間，顯示量表具有良好的內部一致性信度與穩定性；（2）三個一階因素具有良好的組成信度與平均變異抽取量；（3）本量表具有良好的建構效度、區辨效度、聚斂效度及效標關聯效度；（4）複核效度分析顯示，EBS-M具有良好的模式穩定性與效度延展性。英文摘要：Based on Hofer's epistemological beliefs theory, this study aims to develop the Epistemological Beliefs Scale-Mathematics (EBS-M) for Taiwan junior high school students. There are 14 items in this scale including three sub-scales, certainty of knowledge, structure of knowledge, and justification for knowing. A cluster sampling was used in the study, and the participants were 1,723 eighth grade students. They were recruited from 60 classes of 30 junior high schools in Taiwan. The results are as follows, (1) the range of Cronbach's α of three sub-scales is from .82 to .89, and the range of test-retest reliabilities is from .60 to .69; (2) the three factors shows good composite reliability and average variance extracted; (3) the results of data analysis show good construct validity, convergent validity, discriminant validity, and criterion-related validity; (4) the finding of cross-validation shows the scale has good stability and validity extension.起始頁-結束頁：315-339資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：自動化校長即席演講評分系統建置之初探並列篇名：A Prelimary Study for Automatic Scoring System in Oral Presentation作者：謝名娟(Ming-Chuan Hsieh);蔡明學(Ming-Hsueh Tsai);李祈均(Chi-Chun Lee)關鍵字：口語評量;自動化評分系統;機器學習;automatic scoring system;machine learning;oral evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：為了因應大型評量的需要，自動化的口語評量系統為目前評量發展的新趨勢。近年來，自動化評分系統已逐漸應用於教育測驗、課程教學、心理計量等領域，本研究擬透過行為特徵處理的方式（behavioral signal processing），來建置一套結合音訊、視訊之自動化口語評分系統。樣本為儲訓校長，演說內容為教學、校務等相關議題。本研究提出多模態計算架構，結合培訓計畫的音訊與視訊資料，並透過詞袋模型（bag of words）與費雪矢量編碼（Fisher-vector encoding），以建置自動即席演講評分系統。研究顯示，只要蒐集到的樣本在口語表現上的變異性夠大，即能有效促進機器學習的效果。此外，由本研究的實驗可看出，機器和真人的評分，甚至會高於真人評分者彼此間的相關性。然而，未來在增進系統的辨識率方面，可透過加入文本資料、處理音視訊錄製過程中的雜訊、蒐集更多演講樣本、評分者的評分等，來提高自動化系統的準確率。英文摘要：Automatic scoring system is the current trend for large scale assessment. Automatic scoring system has became a popular research tool in the field of educational assessment, curriculum teaching and psychological measurement. In this work, we employ behavioral signal processing (BSP)-based methodology to develop a computational framework that can automate the scoring process of pre-service school principals' oral presentations given at the yearly training program. Using the audio-video feature extraction approach with session-level representation techniques based on bag-of-word and Fisher-vector encoding, we can then characterize each pre-service school principal's multimodal behavior during an impromptu speech examination for automatic scoring. For the future study, we will include lexical content and annotation; collect more samples and raters which could potentially improve the accuracy of this system.起始頁-結束頁：125-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會10篇名：Yes/No Angoff標準設定結果之效度檢核：應用群聚分析分類法並列篇名：A Validity Study for Yes/No Angoff Standard Setting Method Using Cluster Analysis作者：曾芬蘭(Fen-Lan Tseng);邱佳民(Jia-Min Chiou);張銘秋(Ming-Chiu Chang)關鍵字：效度驗證;國中教育會考;最大期望值演算法;階層性群聚法;標準設定;Comprehensive Assessment Program for Junior High School Students;EM algorithm;hierarchical clustering analysis;standard setting;validation期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：為提供依據專家判斷的Yes/No Angoff標準設定方法一個客觀效度驗證方式，本研究隨機抽取2014年國中教育會考五考科各5,000筆考生資料，應用階層性群聚分析法，將考生分為待加強、基礎、精熟三群，計算出每一群考生答對題數的期望值、標準差，以及各分群的人數比例，作為後續最大期望值（EM）演算法機率模型當中的初始值，再進一步最佳化分群的結果，得到每科三群的切點分數，以此作為Yes/No Angoff專家判定的參考。此外，再利用考生的在校成績作為外在效標。研究發現，兩種方法在數學科的能力分類一致性最高，在自然科的一致性最低；透過群聚分析，除了國文科外，其他考科被分類在待加強的比例，皆比專家判定結果多；在校成績可作為標準參照計分方式外在效標驗證的參考。就教育決策的觀點而言，訂定切點分數的適當性會影響整體教育績效的評估，而群聚分析分類法在常用的以專家主觀意見為依據的標準設定法之外，增加了相對較客觀的切點分數的訊息，可提供給教育主管機關不同觀點的決策參考。英文摘要：Test validity is a property of the interpretation assigned to test scores. To provide an objective validating evidence for a standard-referenced assessment is especially important. In this study we gather validity evidences to support the interpretation of test results of the 2014 Comprehensive Assessment Program Junior High School Students in Taiwan. We utilized two methods in the cluster analysis, namely, the hierarchical clustering and expectation maximization (EM) algorithm, to explore the validity of one of the expert judgement technique- Yes/No Angoff standard setting method. The hierarchical clustering (HC) based on a minimum variance algorithm was first applied to segregate the examinees into three groups with respective abilities, namely, below basic, basic, and proficient. Under the assumption that each ability cluster is a Gaussian distribution and the overall distribution of each test subject data is a mixture of Gaussians (MoG), we initialized the unknown parameters, including the mean, variance and the proportion of each cluster of the MoG based on the HC results. Following the initialization of parameters, the EM algorithm was adopted to optimize the estimation of parameters, resulting in three clusters of ability groups. The results from the traditional Yes/No Angoff standard-setting procedure and the HC-EM cluster analysis were compared. To compare the grouping results of the two methods, we analyzed the examinees' school grades as external criteria to provide alternative evidence for checking the convergent validity of both methods. The study suggested that cluster analysis could be applied as a support tool to provide validating information in the process of standard setting for high-stakes achievement tests.起始頁-結束頁：151-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：德國大學的最後碉堡？－應用科學大學博士學位授予權之爭並列篇名：THE FINAL BASTION OF GERMAN UNIVERSITY? THE CONTROVERSY OVER THE RIGHT OF UNIVERSITIES OF APPLIED SCIENCES TO AWARD DOCTORAL DEGREES作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang);曾大千(Dah-Chian Tseng);黃志堅(Chih-Chien Huang)關鍵字：應用科學大學;德國大學;博士學位授予權;德國高等教育;universities of applied sciences;German universities;right to award doctoral degrees;German higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：研究目的　在傳統德國高等教育領域中，應用科學大學／大學的辦學特色分屬兩極之不同類型學校，前者教授的職責聚焦於應用導向之教學、培育高級應用型人才，而學術研究僅隸屬於後者教授的任務，並著重於學術型人才之培育。而後，二者的發展在某種程度上彼此趨近，原本分工明確的不同類型學校間之界限越來越模糊，但博士學位授予權依然由大學與部分學院所壟斷，應用科學大學僅能仰賴大學、透過「合作式博士生培育程序」授予博士學位；因此很多人將該權限視為大學防守應用科學大學逐步進逼的「最後碉堡」。未料2013年起，有些邦陸續提出擬賦予應用科學大學博士授予權，因而在德國社會頓成為熱門爭議話題。本文即探究此爭議的背景與相關論點，並提出問題解決之建議。研究設計／方法／取徑本文研究方法為文件分析法。研究發現或結論本文從學術性／非學術性、理論／應用導向研究、師資與工作條件、資源競爭等角度，檢視在博士授予權上，對大學／應用科學大學做區別對待並無正當理由。尤其隨著知識生產模式轉型的趨勢，應用科學大學具有博士授予權不僅符應學科發展的需要，也能滿足其碩士畢業生攻讀博士學位的需求。再者，擬賦予應用科學大學博士授予權的幾個邦，並非全面性賦予該類型學校博士授予權，而是僅有學術研究能力強的教授和專業領域具有該權限，因此相應地在高等教育資源的重新分配亦僅涉及此部分。研究原創性／價值性　本文提出，大學可以為應用科學大學教授擬定認可的具體標準，通過者可以平等地參與博士學位授予程序，但大學還是在制度上具有博士授予權，所以其仍能持續穩當地佔有其「最後碉堡」。這樣一來，不僅大學教授可以保質保量地參與應用科學大學之博士學位授予程序、提高自身的博士學位授予人數，並可以儘早結束博士授予權之相關爭議。英文摘要：Purpose Germany's traditional system of tertiary education consists of two very different types of institutions: Regular universities and universities of applied sciences (UAS). The former emphasizes academic education and research, and the latter focuses on training in specialized technical skills. Originally the difference was quite distinct, but over time these two types of schools have developed in such a way that it’s now often difficult to see the difference. Nonetheless, only universities and certain colleges (Hochschule) have the right to award doctorates; UASs can only offer doctoral degrees in cooperation with a regular university. Many see this monopoly on the conferral of doctoral degrees as the universities’ final bastion for stemming the advance of UASs into their territory. When in 2013 several German states, one after another, unexpectedly proposed to extend to UASs the right to independently award doctoral degrees, this set off a heated controversy throughout German society. In this paper I present the background of this controversy, discuss related issues, and offer a suggestion for resolving the problem. Design/methodology/approach This research was conducted using document analysis. Findings In this paper I compare German universities and UASs in terms of educational emphasis (academic/non-academic), research orientation (theoretical/applied), faculty (qualifications and duties), and resource competition. I conclude that the differences between these two types of tertiary schools are insignificant and that there is therefore no valid reason to allow universities to continue to monopolize the conferral of doctoral degrees. Especially with regards to the changing mode of knowledge production, allowing UASs to award doctorates tallies with the requirements of scientific development, and would also facilitate graduates of master’s degree programs to enter doctoral programs. Moreover, no states have proposed allowing all programs at all UASs to award doctorates, but rather only granting the right to existing programs which emphasize academic research in a particular discipline. Thus no redistribution of resources for higher education would be required. Originality/value I propose that universities set up a vetting process for approving qualified UAS faculty to act as faculty members of cooperative Ph.D. programs offered by universities, but that the actual conferral of the doctoral degree should still remain the exclusive right of the university. This way properly qualified UAS faculty can be brought into the Ph.D. conferral process, increasing the number of doctorates granted while allowing university professors to maintain a degree of quality control over the process, thereby bringing an early end to the controversy over the conferral of doctoral degrees.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2402.012篇名：成人教育組織經營績效之調查研究：CVIPP模型與指標的應用並列篇名：THE CONSTRUCTION AND APPLICATION OF CVIPP PERFORMANCE EVALUATION MODEL AMONG ADULT EDUCATIONAL ORGANISATIONS IN TAIWAN作者：胡夢鯨(Meng-Ching Hu);嚴嘉明(Chia-Ming Yen);施宇澤(Yu-Ze Shih)關鍵字：成人教育組織;經營績效;CVIPP模型;指標應用;adult educational organisations;performance;CVIPP Model;application of indicators期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：研究目的　本研究目的分述如下：一、應用成人教育組織績效評估指標模型，評估台灣地區成人教育組織的經營績效表現與問題；二、分析不同類型成人教育組織其指標合適程度的差異；三、分析影響台灣地區成人教育組織經營績效的因素；四、根據研究成果，提出對未來成人組織或機構經營的建議。研究設計／方法／取徑本研究主要是應用「成人教育組織績效評估CVIPP指標」的問卷，實地調查三類成人教育組織的單位主管及行政人員，針對機構績效進行評估，總計發出問卷2,992份，回收2,222份，回收率為74.26%，有效問卷為2,050份。研究發現或結論　本研究發現三類型組織在各構面指標的表現，除了「外部情境」層面較為類似外，其餘則顯著不同；而在各構面指標的影響力方面，八個構面均有其影響力，但以「組織課程運作管理」與「資源挹注管理」此兩構面的影響效果最大。然而，若欲滿足各構面的影響力，三類型組織在優先重視的指標上必須有不同的思維。研究原創性／價值性　放眼國內外成人教育及終身學習的發展，績效評估已是不可避免的趨勢。本研究針對不同類型成人教育組織，發展出一套整體性的成人教育組織績效評估工具，國內外相關文獻甚為少見，此為本研究的創新性。而這一套指標亦可用來實際評估成人及終身教育組織經營的績效及影響因素，此為本研究的價值性，顯示本研究不但有其研究上的創新性，也符合當前國內實際現況的需求。英文摘要：Purposes This study aims to look at the following aspects: First, the Model and Indicators of evaluation on the effectiveness of adult educational organizations are adopted and applied here to assess the performances and issues among adult educational organizations in Taiwan. Second, the differences among the three types of adult educational organizations are assessed and analysed in terms of suitability of indicators. Third, the reasons that play significant effects on the organizational management performance are also analysed. Last, further recommendations are made which were driven from the results of indicator and assessment in this study. Design/methodology/approach This study mainly adopts from a survey which is designed as the tool of ”CVIPP Performance Evaluation Model for Adult Educational Organisations”, both the chief and administrative staff from three different types of adult educational organizations were recruited to participate. In total, 2,992 copies of questionnaires were distributed out and 2,222 copies were returned. The response rate is 74.26％ and 2,050 copies of questionnaire are valid. Findings According to the results, the performance indicators from Context are similar from one another among the three types of organizations. However, there are differences in Vision, Input and Product and Process aspects. Statistical power was found among the eight items and the items of ”Programme planning and management” and ”Resource investment and management” were in particular. To meet the satisfaction of all items in terms of statistical power, three types of organisations showed each of them had various needs and priority settings. Originality/value Performance evaluation has become the trends among the studies of adult education and lifelong learning in the worldwide. Therefore, the innovation of this study is to develop a complex evaluation tool to assess the performance from different types of adult educational organizations. And this has been rarely researched from previous studies both in Taiwan and worldwide. The values of this study are those indicators, which were developed here, systematically assessed the organisational performance and influential factors affected on the various organizations. This study not only innovated intellectually but also met our current needs from the society.起始頁-結束頁：39-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2402.023篇名：大學質性評鑑的挑戰：系所與外部專家評鑑觀點的一致性分析並列篇名：CHALLENGES OF QUALITATIVE EVALUATION: DIFFERENT VIEWS OF REVIEWERS AND UNIVERSITY STAFF IN THE PROGRAM ACCREDITATION OF HIGHER EDUCATION作者：陳慧蓉(Karen Hui-Jung Chen)關鍵字：質性研究;外部專家;高等教育;系所評鑑;信實度;確實性;一致性;qualitative evaluation;peer reviewers;higher education;program accreditation;trustworthiness;credibility;consistency期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016中文摘要：研究目的　質性評鑑受到質性研究的理念影響，質性研究的信實度已從過去客觀中立事實的認定，轉而追求詮釋與推論的確實性與可靠性，亦即質性研究者能從被研究者的立場詮釋，使雙方意見具有一致性。我國系所評鑑採行認可制，由熟悉大學治理的專家進行質性品質的判斷，以確保高等教育品質。雖然系所評鑑運用了質性研究的理念，以資料的三角校正等方法設計評鑑流程，然而，質性評鑑的品質仍然受到各界關注。由於評鑑專家是在社會情境脈落之下進行評鑑，專家本身的社會文化及個人信念，有可能帶入評鑑過程中。為尊重受評系所的意見，我國評鑑設計了申復機制，系所可藉由申復讓專家重新考量。本研究的目的是探討系所自評與外部專家評鑑觀點之異同，從訪評意見、學校申復、及申復回覆的意見往返，探討學校與外部專家意見的一致性，了解大學質性評鑑的挑戰。研究設計／方法／取徑本研究運用內容分析法，分析2006至2010年第一週期系所評鑑1,156個班制的申復報告及其相關回覆。研究發現或結論　研究發現，系所申復報告主要說明大學提供資訊或質疑專家引用資訊的確實性（佔68.4％），次要是質疑評鑑結論與決定的公正性 （佔13.4％），第三是說明系所情境脈絡或質疑專家未考慮學校情境（佔12.0％）。而專家對於申復的回覆，主要說明評鑑報告的結論與決定的（佔48.4％），次要是說明資訊確實性的考量情形（佔31.0％），第三是詳細說明評鑑推論（佔12.7％）。交叉檢視申復及回覆的往返內容，結果顯示系所評鑑運用了增進質性研究信實性的方法設計評鑑流程，然而，專家在執行上仍然面臨了四項威脅：一、未能考慮 情境脈絡；二、檢視的是結果而非動態歷程；三、專家價值觀的涉入；四、評鑑歷程缺乏長期投入與互動。研究原創性／價值性　良好的大學質性評鑑，需要大學與專家具備相當的評鑑專業知能，才能從根本審視學校問題，促進學校改善。本研究以分析當前大學質性評鑑的執行情形及面臨的挑戰為例，提出增進質性評鑑品質的建議，以期作為改進評鑑機制及擬訂相關政策之參考。英文摘要：Purpose Qualitative research is a method of inquiry employed in the qualitative evaluation. The quality of qualitative research was shifted from emphasizing on reliability and validity based on neutral facts to trustworthiness of inferences based on the consensus of qualitative researchers and participants. Taiwanese higher education adopts accreditation approach for educational quality assurance. Having experts with deeply understanding of the field being evaluated, peer review is able to make fair judgment and comments in external evaluation to assure the higher education quality. Although the accreditation approach applies the conceptions of qualitative research methods, such as triangulation for data collection during an evaluation procedure, the quality of qualitative evaluation has been challenged. It has been noticed that reviewers often conducted evaluations in a situated context and inevitably brought their own socio-cultural history and beliefs into the evaluation process. In order to remedy this problem, an objection and appeal system has been developed in Taiwanese higher education evaluation. The institution being evaluated can file an objection if they considered that the evaluation result is inconsistent with the facts. This study aims to investigate the major issues emerging from the objection reports and the corresponding replies, as well as to examine the gap between the educational quality of peer reviewers and institutional staff based on the objection reports. It provides an exploration of challenges of qualitative evaluation of higher education. Design/methodology/approach Applying content analysis methods, this study analyzed the objection reports of 1,156 programs during the 1st cycle of the program accreditation from 2006 to 2010. Findings Results showed that the institutions being evaluated tried to alter the conclusion of the on-site-visit reports by questioning the credibility of on-site visit report and providing more evidence (68.4%), weakening the justification of the review (13.4%), and asking reviewers to consider university context (12.0%). However, reviewers often repeated the same conclusion of the evaluation in the replies (48.4%), illustrated their considerations for data incredibility and inconsistency (31.0%), and provided detailed explanation for the evaluation reasoning (12.7%). Cross analysis of the opinions between university staff and reviewers revealed that the reviewers applied similar strategies to reply the objections of institutional staff. Four threats to credibility and consistency exist: 1. The university context was not fully considered; 2. The on-site visit examined only the isolated phenomena but not dynamic processes; 3. The evaluation judgments could be influenced by personal values; 4. The conclusion was not drawn based on long- term observations and interactions. Originality/value To conduct best practice of qualitative evaluation of higher education, institutional staff and external reviewers are required to have appropriate evaluation knowledge and skills. Making reflections from the suggestions of evaluation reports, institution can find out its weakness for institutional development, and make improvements for better educational quality. Through the inquiry of this study, the challenges of qualitative evaluation can be better understood, enabling future improvement of the evaluation process and making better educational policy of higher education.起始頁-結束頁：75-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2402.034篇名：透過稜鏡探究Enid Zimmerman的著作光譜並列篇名：THROUGH THE PRISM-LOOKING INTO THE SPECTRUM OF WRITINGS BY ENID ZIMMERMAN作者：林仁傑(Jen-Chieh Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：111-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2402.045篇名：國民中小學校長永續領導指標及權重體系之建構並列篇名：THE INDICATORS AND WEIGHT SYSTEM OF SUSTAINABLE LEADERSHIP FOR PRINCIPALS IN ELEMENTARY AND JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS作者：黃建翔(Chien-Hsiang Huang);吳清山(Ching-Shan Wu)關鍵字：校長;永續領導;模糊德懷術;層次分析法;principal;sustainable leadership;Fuzzy Delphi Method;Analytic Hierarchy Process期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本研究旨在建構國民中小學校長永續領導指標，並確立國民中小學校長永續領導指標之權重體系。研究方法採取模糊德懷術與層次分析法進行探究。在指標發展上，首先透過分析國內外校長永續領導之相關研究，初步建構「國民中小學校長永續領導指標建構調查問卷」，再邀請20位教育專家學者與教育現場實務人員組成模糊德懷術與層次分析小組，以蒐集專家對於國民中小學校長永續領導指標之相關意見，進行指標的選取與賦予權重，據以建置完成「國民中小學校長永續領導指標」，其內涵架構包含五大層面－道德與永續取向、權責分享與合作、主動與專業學習、創新發展與傳承、資源運用與維護，共涵蓋十個項目、五十項指標細目。英文摘要：This study is to construct the Sustainable Leadership Indicators of principals in elementary and junior high schools, and thereby to confirm the weight system of these indicators. Fuzzy Delphi Method and Analytic Hierarchy Process were adopted as the main research methods. Initially, a framework of the questionnaire had been developed for the Sustainable Leadership Indicators of principals in elementary and junior high schools via global research analyses in Sustainable Leadership of principals. And then, the Fuzzy Delphi and Analytic Hierarchy Process Team, composed of twenty scholars in education fields and principals, was invited to offer opinions on these indicators of principals in elementary and junior high schools, as well as the selection and weighting, and accordingly construct the Sustainable Leadership Indicators of principals in elementary and junior high schools. The sustainable leadership indicators consist of five dimensions, orientation toward moral and sustainability, sharing and cooperation in duty, active and professional learning, innovation development and inheritance, and the utilization and maintenance of resources, which cover ten units and fifty elements.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2401.016篇名：孰優、孰弱？臺灣學生學習成就軌跡之異質性分析並列篇名：WHO'S SUPERIOR AND WHO’S INFERIOR? STUDY OF HETEROGENEITY OF STUDENTS' ACHIEVEMENT TRAJECTORIES IN TAIWAN作者：邱皓政(Haw-Jeng Chiou);林碧芳(Pi-Fang Lin)關鍵字：教育機會均等;弱勢族群;混合成長模式;馬太效應;臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;equality of educational opportunity;disadvantaged minority;growth mixture modeling;Matthew effects;Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：學習優弱勢族群的辨識是重要的學術課題，也是教育政策決策與支持體系規劃的主要依據，更需要實徵資料提供證據支持。本研究利用臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（Taiwan Education Panel Survey,TEPS）的貫時性資料，以潛在成長模式與混合成長模式估計學生學習成就軌跡，藉以辨識優弱勢異質族群，並探討相關影響因素。TEPS資料庫中2,806位學生的學習成就四波調查的潛在成長模式分析結果發現，臺灣中學階段學生的學習成就成長軌跡呈現非線性的遞增漸緩的成長曲線。混合成長模式分析則得到三個異質族群：正常成長族群呈現能力遞增的成長曲線，兩個相對弱勢的族群則呈現起點低落或成長有限的變動曲線。進一步分析發現，教育分流與區位因素是區辨異質族群的主要原因，而負向文化資本亦有顯著的預測力，由不同族群者的起點與成長型態呈現扇形擴展，顯示潛在分群下的異質群體軌跡差異呈現馬太效應（Matthew effects）。本研究除了對於異質族群的內涵意義與相關影響因素進行分析與解釋之外，並對本文的方法學意義與研究限制進行討論。英文摘要：Identifying superior and inferior groups of academic achievements is not only the major concern of academic researchers but also the foundation of policy-making and supplementary system design, all relying on the support of empirical evidences. In this study, data of 2,806 students selected from the Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS) in four consecutive time periods are adapted to identify the latent clusters of superiority and inferiority in the students' achievement. The heterogeneity of the achievement trajectories is identified by the growth mixture modeling. The results show that the nonlinear model has the best fit for the observed data. An analysis of the mixture modeling indicates three heterogeneous classes on the trajectories, of which the typical-growth class has a gradually improved achievement curve. On the other hand, the two relatively inferior groups have a lower starting level or a decreased trend at the later waves of achievement measures. Furthermore, the inferior classes are identified by the differential schooling sectors and the location conditions with high level of negative culture capital. In contrast, the typical-growth class is improving relatively smoothly in the different learning stages in both the public and the normal schools. The fan-shaped pattern of trajectories supports the phenomenon of the Matthew effects. In addition to illustrating the heterogeneous trajectory and its influential factors, this study discusses the implications and limitations of several methodological issues.起始頁-結束頁：33-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2401.027篇名：AN ACTION RESEARCH ON FOSTERING CRITICAL THINKING IN EFL WRITING THROUGH FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT AND FEEDBACK並列篇名：一個以形成性評量與回饋意見在英文寫作課實踐批判思考教學的行動研究作者：黃淑真(Shu-Chen Huang)關鍵字：形成性評量;評量回饋;批判思考;英語教學;英文寫作;formative assessment;assessment feedback;critical thinking;teaching English as a foreign language;English writing期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本行動研究報導一位大學英文教師在寫作教學的改進過程。最初的教學包含四次指定題目的寫作與修改練習，教師已疲於批改，但仍欠缺藉由寫作以訓練批判思考與獨立發聲的重要元素。為求改進，教師安排自選題作文，加入多階段多來源的形成性評量與回饋設計，示範進而導引學生在構思過程中相互評量與批判，並安排期末的成果發表儀式。過程中，任課教師不再是唯一的評量者與意見回饋來源，而是將文章的發展從訂定主題、大綱、細部論點、草稿、修改到校對分成六個階段，並在每個階段安排兩種不同人員提供回饋，如助教及同儕。這些回饋意見包含了批評與挑戰，協助寫作學習者在文章發展過程中改進。最終產出的小論文成品以批判思考力評量表檢驗，結果顯示，學生多能選擇切身議題、表達個人意見，且對批判思考的結構有所掌握，唯在批判思考的內容論證上仍有改進空間。英文摘要：This action research reports how a college English teacher improved her essay writing instruction. The original course design consisted of instruction and four rounds of drafting and revising under assigned topics. While the teacher had been busy enough giving individual feedback, an important element of cultivating critical thinking and giving learners a voice was absent from the course. To address the problem, the teacher required learners to write an additional essay on a topic they each chose, designed an assessment scheme with multi-stage and multi-source feedback, and celebrated the final products at the end of the semester. During the process, the teacher was no longer the only feedback provider. Instead, essay development was arranged into six stages including idea generation, general outline, detailed outline, drafting, editing and proofreading. For each stage, feedback came from two different sources, such as the teaching assistant and peers. The feedback consisted of questions and challenges and helped the author learners improve from one stage to the next. The resultant essays were examined against a critical thinking rubric. Analysis indicated that these essays demonstrated unique personal opinions and that the writers had control over the structure of critical thinking. But in terms of the soundness of reasoning, there was more room for improvement.起始頁-結束頁：81-105資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2401.038篇名：校務研究資料庫的建構與分析應用並列篇名：DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATION OF DATABASES FOR INSTITUTIONAL RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS作者：曾元顯(Yuen-Hsien Tseng)關鍵字：資料一致性;資料正規化;資料素養;資料倉儲;視覺化分析;data consistency;data normalization;data literacy;data warehouse;visualization analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016中文摘要：本文根據教育科學、圖書館學、資訊工程等領域的知識，結合多年來處理校內外資料庫的實務經驗，以及對近年技術產品的瞭解，闡述校務研究資料庫建置的較佳實施概念，並分析比較各種建置方案的適用時機與優缺點，最後以三項代表性的具體實例說明本文提及之實施概念的綜效。具體而言，本文介紹採、編、典、藏、用五項可持久運作的資料庫建構作業流程與注意事項，說明資料正規化與反正規化的用處，透過概念驗證作業提供與國內廠商互動的經驗，並以實際校務數據的分析案例，分享應用經驗。整體而言，資料蒐整作業（即：採、編、典、藏）仍是最費時、費力的流程，一旦完成，後續的分析運用便容易進行。目前的視覺化分析工具將越來越便利，讓各類型使用者得以更有效率的從大量資料中發現特殊樣態、形成假說，進而對資料做各種查詢與探索，以獲得具體事證支持決策。展望未來，除了視覺化工具越受依賴外，事件演進模擬技術，也將扮演重要角色，其可讓使用者事先知道各種因素變化後的最終結果，讓分析平台更具價值。英文摘要：This article elaborates on the possible best practice of developing databases for institutional research and analysis, based on the knowledge of Educational Science, Library Science, and Information Engineering, years of experience in developing educational databases, and a recent survey of related technology and products. Several developing options are compared to show their benefits and disadvantages under different conditions. Three representative analysis tasks are reported to verify and show the synergy of the mentioned ideas and experience. In particular, this article proposes a sustainable workflow: (1) data collection and aggregation, (2) cataloguing, (3) regulation, (4) archiving, and (5) usage, and describes their must-known caveats. The application situations of data normalization and de-normalization are described. Capability of domestic vendors of related products is briefly mentioned based on a proof-of-concept testing. And finally, real-world institutional analyses are conducted to share our experience. Overall, the first four processes in the above workflow are most time-consuming and costly. Once data have been well prepared, recent visualization analysis tools allow users to easily discover meaningful patterns and inspire hypotheses, and allow them to explore the database to find evidence to support their hypotheses and decisions. In the future, we expect that event evolution simulation techniques, which allow users to foresee the results given various input scenarios, could play an important role in educational data analysis, in addition to the maturing data visualization tools.起始頁-結束頁：107-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2401.049篇名：21世紀的教育與民主並列篇名：A BOOK REVIEW OF EDUCATION AND DEMOCRACY IN THE 21ST CENTURY作者：單文經(Wen-Jing Shan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：135-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2401.0501篇名：Exploring Students' Reading Strategies via an Online Reading System並列篇名：透過線上閱讀系統探索學生閱讀策略使用作者：葉惠菁(Hui-Chin Yeh);劉沛琳(Pei-Lin Liu);張福佳(Fu-Chia Chang)關鍵字：multiple reading strategies;reading comprehension;reading process;多重閱讀策略;閱讀理解;閱讀過程期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study investigated students' use of multiple reading strategies to facilitate their reading processes via an online reading system based on Mayer's (1996) Selecting-Organizing-Integrating model of the reading process. This system was designed to engage students in using keyword selection, main idea identification, and summary construction as reading comprehension strategies. This study explored the differences in strategy use among students with different proficiency levels when practicing the strategies of Selecting, Organizing, and Integrating and their perceptions of multiple reading strategies training in an on-line learning system. Sixty non-English major college students were divided into the more proficiency (MP) and less proficiency (LP) groups based on their Testing of English for International Communication (TOEIC) reading scores. Participants then received seven weeks of online English reading system instruction. Data collected included pre- and post-test TOEIC scores, action log, questionnaires, and semi-structured interviews. The results showed that the MP students were more actively engaged in the use of keyword selection, main idea identification, and summary construction than the LP students. Overall, students' perceptions of the multiple reading strategies training system were very positive. The action log showed that the MP students mainly identified the key words through add keywords, while the LP students rarely added keywords but relied on the keyword extractor. In terms of the use of the strategy of main idea identification, the major difference between these two groups was how frequently they reviewed collected keywords were reviewed through reference. The MP students reviewed the collected keywords to recall the meaning of the content, whereas the LP students often re-read the text to write the main ideas without referencing the collected keywords. In the strategy of summary construction, the MP students more actively engaged in using reference to review their collected keywords and identify main ideas before posting summaries than the LP students.英文摘要：本研究旨在透過研究者自建的線上閱讀系統，為學生提供多種閱讀策略以促進閱讀能力。研究者根據Mayer（1996）的「選擇」－「組織」－「整合」閱讀模型，開發了一個線上閱讀系統，其中使用多種閱讀策略，包括「關鍵詞選擇」、「主旨組織」和「摘要構建」。研究目的在探究學生在選擇、組織和整合的閱讀過程中，具有不同閱讀能力的學生，其閱讀策略使用有何區別以及學生對此線上學習系統看法為何。參與者為60位非英語專業之大學生，並根據他們的多益英語考試閱讀成績區分為高分組和低分組。參與者接受了7週的線上英文閱讀系統指導，所收集的資料包含多益的前後測、動作記錄、問卷及半結構式的訪談。結果顯示，高分組的學生比低分組的學生更積極地使用關鍵詞選擇、主旨組織和摘要構建策略。兩組學生對此線上閱讀系統的看法都給予正向肯定。根據登錄資料顯示，高分組在「選擇」閱讀過程中，主要是通過系統中「新增單字」的功能來查詢所學文章中的單字，而低分組學生則很少使用此功能，而是依賴另一「閱讀輔助小幫手」的功能；在「組織」的閱讀過程中，這兩組學生的主要區別是使用「參考」功能的次數。高分組學生較常審查蒐集的關鍵字以回憶相關內容的含意，低分組學生則是經常重新審視閱讀文本，而不使用參考功能中先前蒐集的關鍵字；在「整合」閱讀過程中，高分組學生更積極點擊「參考」功能，回顧他們蒐集的關鍵詞及主旨，並在發布摘要之前確定主要大綱，而低分組學生則無。起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20181010040012篇名：即時適性英語字彙遊戲學習系統教學之學習成效與學習動機分析並列篇名：Analysis for the Learning Effectiveness and Learning Motivation of Real-Time Adaptive English Vocabulary Game Learning System Teaching作者：張安緹(An-Ti Chang);陳鴻仁(Hong-Ren Chen)關鍵字：英語字彙;數位遊戲學習;適性化學習;學習動機;English vocabulary;digital game-based learning;adaptive learning;learning motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：愈來愈多的英語學習活動透過數位遊戲情境，幫助學習者進行更有效的英語學習。遊戲的競賽策略融入英語教學環境中，亦讓學生獲得學習動機的提升。顯然教學實務重視英語學習已刻不容緩，促進英語字彙學習之研究有其重要性。即時適性英語字彙遊戲學習系統教學，可運用影像感應互動技術進入英語字彙遊戲學習場域，學習者藉由即時適性遊戲內容的設計及難易度的改變，可激發學習動力，有效發揮遊戲系統在教學上之優勢。本研究採用準實驗研究法，探討國小六年級學童透過即時適性英語字彙遊戲學習系統教學，其學習成效影響與學習動機差異性。研究結果顯示：一、應用即時適性英語字彙遊戲學習教學之學習成效，顯著優於傳統英語口述字彙教學。二、不同學習能力之學習成效分析，高學習能力組的學童在即時適性英語字彙遊戲學習教學與傳統英語口述字彙教學並無顯著差異；而低學習能力組的學生則使用即時適性英語字彙遊戲學習教學顯著優於傳統英語口述字彙教學。三、在學習動機分析方面，使用即時適性英語字彙遊戲學習教學之學習動機，在注意、關聯、信心與滿足四個向度與傳統英語口述字彙教學相較，都有顯著學習動機提升之效果。英文摘要：More and more English learning activities help learners to learn English effectively through digital game situation. The integration of game competition strategy into English teaching environment can improve students' learning motivation. It is obvious that the emphasis on English learning admits of no delay in teaching practice and the research into promoting English vocabulary learning is of great importance. The real-time adaptive English vocabulary game learning system teaching can apply the image sensing interaction technology to enter English vocabulary game learning field and learners can stimulate the learning motivation and effectively give play to the advantage of game system in the teaching through the design of real-time adaptive game contents and change in difficulty level. This research adopted quasi-experimental design to explore the effect on the sixth grade students' learning effectiveness and the difference in learning motivation through real-time adaptive English vocabulary game learning system teaching. The research results show that: (1) The learning effectiveness by applying real-time adaptive English vocabulary game learning system teaching is significantly superior to that of traditional dictating English vocabulary teaching. (2) In terms of learning effectiveness analysis with different learning abilities, students in high learning ability group have no significant difference in real-time adaptive English vocabulary game learning system teaching and traditional oral English vocabulary teaching; but for students in low learning ability group, real-time adaptive English vocabulary game learning system teaching is significantly superior to traditional oral English vocabulary teaching. (3) In terms of analysis for learning motivation, compared with the traditional oral English vocabulary teaching, the learning motivation of real-time adaptive English vocabulary game learning teaching has been significantly improved in the 4 dimensions of attention, association, confidence and satisfaction.起始頁-結束頁：31-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20181010040023篇名：以科技接受模式分析頭部腧穴擬真訓練指壓儀認知態度並列篇名：Using the Technology Acceptance Model to Analyze Students' Cognitive Attitude Toward a Head Acupuncture Point Assisted Training Simulator作者：翁姿菁(Tzu-Ching Weng);廖年淼(Nyan-Myau Lyau)關鍵字：科技接受模式;腧穴;頭部腧穴擬真訓練指壓儀;technology acceptance model;acupuncture point;head acupuncture point assisted training simulator期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要目的係以科技接受模式分析學生使用「頭部腧穴擬真訓練指壓儀」（以下皆簡稱為「頭穴儀」）的認知態度，施測對象為初次選修經絡腧穴相關課程的美容保健科與護理科五專學生。將擬真度、系統品質、資訊品質、結果可說明性的設計特性作為外在變數，分析使用者對「頭穴儀」接受程度與有用性和易用性的認知程度；本研究回收201份有效問卷，學生對頭穴儀擬真度、系統品質、資訊品質與結果可說明性之設計特性具良好認知態度；本研究另以結構方程模式檢驗模式適配度，結果顯示模式配適度良好，說明「頭穴儀」應用於相關課程的教學對於認知有用性與認知易用性具正向影響，對於提升學生的學習態度與使用意願具有正面效果，進而帶來較高之學習滿意度。本研究也發現，系統品質對認知有用性具關鍵影響，而擬真度、資訊品質與結果可說明性對認知易用性有正向影響。本研究架構以學生為核心，透過實際教學歷程與實證方式，讓具有人機介面回饋的「頭穴儀」輔助學習功能獲得驗證與支持。英文摘要：This study aimed to analyze students' cognitive attitude toward a newly created head acupuncture point assisted training simulator. The participants were the junior college students who selected the curriculum for the first time, and design attributes such as fidelity, system quality, information quality, and result demostrability were used as determinants to analyze users' acceptance level, perceived usefulness, and perceived ease of use toward the simulator. A total of 201 valid questionnaires were collected, the results demonstrated that the students had good cognitions toward the design attributes; in addition, the model fit was found to be good by using structural equation modeling, indicating that the applying the training simulator in related curriculum instruction had positive influences on perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use, and brought positive effects toward learning attitude and willingness to use which could increase the learning satisfaction. Moreover, the results showed that system quality played a critical role on perceived usefulness, and fidelity, information quality and result demostrability had positive influences on perceived ease of use. Based upon teaching process with students and empirical basis, the head acupuncture point assisted training simulator with human-machine feedback interface was fully proved to be an effective tool for students in this study.起始頁-結束頁：59-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20181010040034篇名：高齡學習者使用智慧型手機上網行為影響因素與生活滿意度關係之探討並列篇名：Exploring the Relationship Between Factors Affecting Internet Behavior and Life Satisfaction of Older Adult Learners with Use of Smartphone作者：賴弘基(Horng-Ji Lai)關鍵字：上網行為;生活滿意度;高齡者;智慧型手機;Internet behavior;life satisfaction;older adults;smartphone期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：智慧型手機直覺化操作介面深受高齡者的喜愛，因此，高齡教育機構紛紛開設智慧型手機的訓練課程，希冀高齡者透過此一人性化的科技享受數位生活帶來的便利性。因此，有關高齡者使用智慧型手機上網的影響因素遂成為重要之研究議題。本研究的目的在發展一測量模型，探究高齡學習者使用智慧型手機上網行為的因素，以及這些因素對於其生活滿意度的影響。研究方法採問卷調查法，並使用偏最小平方法來驗證研究模型與所提出之研究假設。研究對象為臺灣中部地區樂齡學習中心所開設智慧型手機課程的學員，共計回收394份問卷。研究結果顯示，高齡學習者使用智慧型手機上網的自我效能會正向影響他們上網取得保健、理財訊息，以及社交連結的認知程度。而影響高齡學習者生活滿意度的關鍵因素為社交連結面向。高齡學習者上網取得保健訊息與理財訊息對於其生活滿意度則無顯著的預測力。根據研究結果，提出建議給予高齡教育機構在規劃智慧型手機與平板電腦課程的參考，以及後續研究可調查的方向。英文摘要：The intuitive design features and friendly interface of smartphone attract older adults. In Taiwan, many senior education institutes offer smartphone training courses for older adult learners who are interested in learning this innovative technology. It is expected that the training courses can help them to enjoy the benefits of using smartphone and increase their life satisfaction. Therefore, it is important to investigate the factors that influence older adults' behavior of using smartphone. The purpose of the research was to develop and test a research model that investigates the factors (self-efficacy, social connection, the need to seek health information, and the need to seek financial information) affecting older adult learners' Internet behavior and their life satisfaction with use of smartphone. Also, this research sought to identify the relationship between the proposed variables. Survey method was used to collect research data. A Structural Equation Modeling was performed using Partial Least Squares regression for data exploration and model estimation. The participants were 394 older adult learners from smartphone training courses in active aging learning centers located in central Taiwan. The research results revealed that self-efficacy significantly affected older adult learners' social connection, the need to seek health information, and the need to seek financial information. The construct of social connection yielded a positive influence in respondents' life satisfaction. The implications of these results for practice and future research are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：85-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20181010040045篇名：遊戲學習分析架構並列篇名：Developing an Analytic Framework for Understanding Game-Based Learning作者：詹明峰(Mingfong Jan);張鐵懷(Tieh-Huai Chang)關鍵字：分析架構;遊戲設計;遊戲學習;遊戲學習分析;analytic framework;game-based learning;game design;game-based learning analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：從2003年開始，遊戲學習逐步成為全球教育研究的重要研究主題與教育議題，華人地區在遊戲學習的研究蓬勃發展，研究與實務推行面都有豐碩的成果。於此同時，本研究也發現華人地區和西方的遊戲學習研究存在本質上的差異，發展出不同的研究取徑與觀點。為了更深入遊戲學習研究的本質，為遊戲學習研究定位，本研究提出「遊戲學習分析架構」。此架構由遊戲學習的三個研究趨勢、遊戲學習的四種學習目標設計及遊戲學習的三個概念轉變所組成，並嘗試釐清遊戲學習的「研究趨勢」、對「學習」的觀點與定義「遊戲學習」的想法這三個研究本質的問題。本研究主張「遊戲學習分析架構」可為多數的遊戲學習研究與教學實踐定位，幫助研究者在撰寫研究計畫時、研究中、或者設計開發教育遊戲與課程的過程，釐清核心的問題。研究團隊也運用此架構來分析「全球華人計算機教育應用大會」所發表的遊戲學習相關論文，展現「遊戲學習分析架構」的可行性。英文摘要：This conceptual paper presents a game-based learning (GBL) analytic framework and showcases a systematic review of GBL research published at the Global Chinese Conference on Computers in Education (GCCCE). The GBL analytic framework delineates (1) three research trends in game-based learning, (2) four learning objectives in game-based learning research and practices, and (3) three concepts of game-based learning. Researchers and practitioners can employ the GBL analytic framework to better clarify game-based learning research and design orientation. It can also be utilized as a systematic analytic tool for understanding research trends in game-based learning. We demonstrate how GBL analytic framework can be used for the latter with an example- a preliminary analysis of GBL research published in the Global Chinese Conference on Computers in Education (GCCCE) between 2012 and 2016. The paper contributes to the development of GBL research by providing an analytic tool that can be used to interrogate the concept and identity of GBL research.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180710030016篇名：探討相異認知風格學習者對於數位遊戲介面元素之偏好並列篇名：Exploring Different Cognitive Style Learners on the Digital Game Interface作者：莊宗嚴(Tsung-Yen Chuang);陶淑瑗(Shu-Yuan Tao);蘇漢斌(Han-Bin Su)關鍵字：悅趣化學習;遊戲介面;遊戲偏好;認知風格;數位遊戲;game-based learning;interface design;game preference;cognitive style;digital game期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：無論文明如何演進，社會從務農邁向數位經濟時代，遊戲始終扮演生活中休閒娛樂與抒壓的重要角色。而數位遊戲寓樂於教的效果，和認知風格被視為是學習過程影響偏好行為的重要因素，當導入數位遊戲於學習活動時，認知風格與提升學習成效彼此間之關聯，遂成為非常重要的研究議題。認知風格是個人處理思考、記憶、知覺與問題解決等外在訊息時，一種習慣性和持久性的傾向，這種傾向是否會影響遊戲者在遊玩過程中對於遊戲介面元素的偏好，進而影響其遊戲行為，應該是遊戲設計者需要考量的重要因素之一。本研究旨在探討相異認知風格的學習者，對於偏好的數位遊戲介面元素之關聯。以文獻分析法蒐集相關文獻後進行分析，再設計數位遊戲偏好問卷和遊戲介面偏好問卷讓研究對象填答，經由問卷資料蒐集和分析，以呈現設計數位學習遊戲的遊戲介面元素時，基於相異認知風格學習者應著重的特點。本研究以153位大學生為研究對象，透過藏圖測驗將受試者分為場獨立者和場依賴者；研究結果根據介面元素的四個向度，分別為擺放位置、幾何形狀、提示功能和線性與非線性學習等，討論相異認知風格學習者之偏好。本研究並據此提出遊戲設計介面元素之實務面及未來研究的建議。英文摘要：Edutainment has drawn attention to related e-learning research over the past few decades. Previous research has shown a strong relationship between digital gaming and cognitive styles. It is beneficial for leaners with different cognitive styles to select suitable genres of digital games in their learning. Researchers found that the learners with different cognitive styles also revealed significant differences in navigation and linear/ non-linear learning with varied computer system interfaces. However, studies are seldom discussed how learners with different cognitive style select favorite game interfaces and genres. Therefore, this study is to investigate how learners with different cognitive styles select elements of favorite game interfaces and game genres. One hundred and fifty-three college students with gameplay experience participated in this study. They were separated into two groups by a hidden figure test. Thirty-six of them were categorized as field-dependent, while the other thirty-six participants were field-independent. The participants answered two questionnaires with high validity and reliability. The results indicated significant differences between the field-dependent and the field-independent learners in terms of ”placement of interface elements,” ”geometric figures,” and ”tips” in interface navigation. Linear/non-linear learning also showed the same results. However, field-dependence and field-independence do not significantly correlate to game genres on preference differences. Additionally, this study found that the traits of ”buttons” would affect the field-dependent learners and the field-independent learners to hold significant preferences on gaming interfaces. According to the results of this study, it was beneficial for students with different cognitive styles to give suitable elements of gaming interfaces. It could also improve their learning achievement on game-based learning.起始頁-結束頁：21-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180710030027篇名：Scaffolding Game-Based Summits on Crisis Intervention with WebQuest for Military English Learning並列篇名：以網路主題探究與危機處理高峰會遊戲探討軍事英語學習成效作者：洪玉堂(Yu-Tang Hung);姚秀瑜(Hsiu-Yu Yao)關鍵字：WebQuest;military English;crisis intervention;concept maps;game-based summits;網路主題探究式學習法;軍事美語;危機處理;概念圖;遊戲式高峰會期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study aims at helping cadets learn military English in situation by using a WebQuest learning method to scaffold mock international summits on crisis intervention. The cadets perform a mission of editing a military English word bank by first visiting various websites to quest for military events and reviews relevant to crisis intervention, then sorting out military terms used in dealing with a crisis. Subsequently, they participate in game-based summits in military situations. They play the roles of delegates from different countries with a task to solve military conflicts and explain the international status they confront and the strategy or tactics they adopt to intervene the military conflicts and crises by using the military English in the self-made word bank. Before and after the teaching program, the cadets fill out learning motivation questionnaires with a view to understanding whether their motivation increases. Then, the cadets' concept and ability of crisis intervention are studied by both pre- and post- concept maps. Finally, from the delegate's English declaration in the summits, the cadets' English acquisition is analyzed. The research result shows that the game-based learning in situation significantly elevates the cadets' learning motivation, enhances their military English learning efficacy, enriches their military concepts, and advances their English ability.英文摘要：本研究利用網路主題探究式學習法支持危機處理跨國高峰會模擬遊戲，協助軍校學生於情境中進行軍事英語的演練。過程中，由學生在任務引導下，於網路上探索相關軍事評論與事件，整理出危機處理應用的軍事美語字庫。接著在課堂中進行遊戲導向之情境式軍事高峰會，扮演各國角色解決軍事衝突，使用字庫中英語字彙說明己國面臨當時的國際情勢與對軍事衝突與危機所採取的策略。教學前後進行學習動機量表前後測，並從英語概念圖前後測及高峰會之各國宣言分析學生的英語習得與危機處理之概念能力。研究結果發現，遊戲導向之情境式學習法有助於提升學習動機並豐富學生之英語學習成效，對於軍校生的軍事概念與英語能力的展現均有顯著助益。起始頁-結束頁：49-76資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180710030038篇名：性別對於科技融入立體書的歷史學習成效與心流之研究並列篇名：History Learning Achievement and Flow Experience on the Genders for Technology Integration into Pop-Up Book作者：黃淑賢(Shu-Hsien Huang);游子宜(Tzu-I Yu);施如齡(Ju-Ling Shin)關鍵字：心流經驗;立體書;數位遊戲;學習成效;flow experience;pop-up book;digital game-based learning;learning achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：搭配不同的學習方式，學習亦會產生不同的變化。若能結合多元的學習方式，讓學習變得多元，對學習者可能會觸發不同的效應。然而，遊戲式學習能提升學習成效、引發學習動機，但目前顯少有相關研究將數位遊戲結合立體書進行學習，因此，本研究以立體書、近場通訊及手持裝置建置桅杆之夢數位遊戲學習，學習者透過近場通訊連結立體書及數位遊戲之間的關聯性，搭配各關卡不同模式的遊戲型態，進行十七世紀荷西時期史地歷史知識的學習。為了解學習者在學習過程的成效及狀態，藉由測驗及心流經驗問卷，探討不同性別的學習者對於本研究之遊戲設計的看法，以及各關卡學習者心流狀態的變化。研究結果發現，透過桅杆之夢遊戲學習能有效提升學習成效，其中女生的學習成效優於男生；再者，男生的數位遊戲經驗比女生多，心流經驗可能會因學習者的先備經驗而影響當下的心流狀態，關卡的掌控程度是男生優於女生。在挑戰性的部分，也會因為男、女生的差異而產生不一樣的結果，而此結果亦可當作未來設計遊戲的參考依據之一。英文摘要：Difference learning mode made a big difference in the learning process. If difference can be combined into multi learning environment, the learner would trigger difference effectiveness. In recent year, few researches implemented pop-up book in learning environment. So, in this study implemented pop-up book, near-field communication (NFC), hand-on device into digital game-based learning system. The system is used to learning history and geography in the seventeenth century age of discovery with the difference game mode in each stage. To ensure the status of learning process, flow experience questionnaire was used to understand the learners thinking and flow experience change in difference stage. Otherwise, under the same condition, flow experience was one of discuss issues in gender difference. In the result, the system can improve learning achievement. Especially, learning achievement of the female is significantly better than the male. Then, flow experience would be affected on difference prior experience. According to digital game-based learning experience, male was more than female. Then, the male also better than female on gun control and the stage control level, too. The situation between genders, different also arises on advantage aspect. Finally, the result of this study can be used on digital game-based learning environment design in future.起始頁-結束頁：77-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180710030049篇名：探討數位自我探索遊戲中青少年情緒調節歷程發展分析並列篇名：Exploring the Development of Teenagers' Emotion Regulation in the Digital Self-Discovery Game作者：許于仁(Yu-Jen Hsu);溫郁韻(Yu-Yun Wen);楊美娟(Mei-Chuan Yang);黃國禎(Gwo-Jen Hwang)關鍵字：自我價值探索;情緒調節歷程;數位遊戲式學習;數位遊戲諮商;self-value exploration;emotional regulation process;digital game-based learning;digital game-based counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要是透過情緒九立方腳本架構獨立開發一款角色扮演遊戲─Young Zone，藉由故事結構程序與方法進行遊戲中的情緒腳本創作。遊戲中除以一連串情境抉擇、任務解決及正向寶物蒐集讓個體在遊戲中展現內隱自我價值觀外，更設計情緒歷程系統，個體可一方面進行遊戲，一方面記錄其情緒感受，更可在遊戲結束後反思其遊戲過程中的情緒發展與調節變化。本研究公開招募64位大學生參與實驗，在實驗前一天填寫青少年情緒篩選量表、情緒調節量表、數位諮商成效問卷及滿意度問卷作為前測。正式實驗當天玩家須裝戴生理訊號手錶並閱讀散文以蒐集情緒基模後再進行實驗，結束後接受研究者焦點訪談並填寫後測。研究結果發現，在心率變異與情緒歷程圖間，心率變異可分為三個區間，各區間之心率變異現象亦反映至其情緒歷程圖；其次，研究對象在實驗後，其自我認同、勇氣、同理心、價值觀與情緒調節等諮商議題皆有顯著成效；最後，認為Young Zone的設計是有趣的且具有學習性，從中可獲得「抉擇」、「同理」等的價值觀，認為抉擇時需考量是利他還是利己，以及自身的能力是否足夠，而情緒歷程系統也能帶來反思與分析自身情緒的變化。英文摘要：This research aims to develop an RPG digital counseling game, Young Zone, based on the architecture of ”9 m^3 emotion.” It creates the emotional script via the structural process of the story. In the game, a series of situational choices, task solving, and treasure collection enable individuals to show their internal self-value. Moreover, an emotional history system is designed to record players' emotions when they are playing the game; they can further reflect on changes in their emotional development and regulation after the game. This research invited 64 college students to play Young Zone. They were asked to fill in the Teenager Emotional Screening Scale, the Mood Adjustment Scale, the Digital Consultation Effectiveness Questionnaire, and the Young Zone Satisfaction Questionnaire as a pre-test a day before they played the game. They needed to wear watches showing physiological signals, and to read an article to allow the completion of a basic model of emotion before they played Young Zone on the day of the experiment. After they played the game, they needed to participate in an interview with researchers and answer questions on a post-test. The research results show a relationship between heart rate variability and the emotion history chart. Moreover, a significant effect of Young Zone on self-identification, courage, empathy, values, and mood adjustments was obtained. Players think that this game is interesting and a good learning resource. By playing the game, they learn that they need to consider altruism versus selfishness, and their own ability when they are making choices. The emotional history system further allows them to reflect on themselves and analyze the changes in their own emotions.起始頁-結束頁：103-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201807100300510篇名：Concordancing-Enhanced Instruction for Proper Collocations in Writing並列篇名：透過語料檢索以強化大專生英文寫作搭配詞之運用能力作者：劉顯親(Hsien-Chin Liou);周秉郁(Bing-Yu Chou)關鍵字：collocation;concordancer;data-driven learning (DDL);English writing;搭配詞;語料庫檢索;資料為本學習法;英文寫作期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Recently, more corpus tools with monolingual or multilingual data have been developed as digital learning and natural language processing technologies advance. Pedagogy which harnesses the power of concordance programs, or data-driven learning (DDL), promises to encourage collocation learning. Recent vocabulary researchers emphasize that English learners need not only more words but also more phrasal knowledge such as collocations (words combined due to habitual use) to upgrade their proficiency. The current study investigated the application of integrating a Chinese- English concordance program, TANGO, with lookups of adjective-noun and verb-noun collocations into English writing instruction and examined its impact of such invention on college students in Taiwan. The target collocations were chosen from previous studies on L1-Chinese learners' misuse and relevant literature on collocation lists. With the single-group pre-/posttest design, the participants were given a collocation test and a paragraph writing task before the concordancing-enhanced instruction was given to increase their awareness and consolidate productive knowledge of including the target collocations in their writing. Such DDL was found to improve L2 students' writing performance and test scores through guidance of authentic usage in concordance. The positive effects were maintained two weeks after the treatment. While similar benefits that prior research has found on using DDL for L2 writing may explain our results, we found interlingual and intralingual factors as well as learners' prior collocation performance to exert varying influence on learners' distinct collocation performance. Based on their pretest performance, the low scorers made more progress. Verb-noun combinations and non-L1 influenced collocations showed more improvement in the posttest, unlike findings in prior research. Limitations, implications, and future research are discussed. We argue that the study contributes useful findings to our existing knowledge to researchers and teachers by confirming the effectiveness of integrating concordancers for learning English collocations and using them in writing. We also suggest that future research examine differential effects of collocation types (the role of Chinese-English difference and the intralingual factor of the English collocation system itself) on learner improvement.英文摘要：近年來，隨著資訊工程之自然語言處理技術的進步，多項不同語言之單語乃至雙語或多語語料庫檢索系統已被開發，也能在網路上隨時供學習者檢索以促進外語學習成效。同時，外語單字學習研究也由單一字詞教學朝多字單元方向發展（如搭配詞），因為要能提升外語程度確實需要超越逐字學習階段，語料庫檢索恰能結合數位學習及多字單元學習兩者之利基。本研究探討應用網路「中英雙語語料庫檢索」對大學生學習英文搭配詞中「形容詞－名詞以及動詞－名詞」組合，並運用於寫作上的學習成效。針對前人以中文為母語學習者之英文作文分析結果，本研究選擇64個搭配詞，採用「前測－實驗－後測－延遲後測」設計，以16位修讀大二寫作課程之學生為研究對象。前測後，經過5週使用語料庫TANGO檢索系統教學，並施予引導訓練。教學後立即給予後測，以及2週後的延遲後測。研究發現，學生使用搭配詞的表現在後測及寫作方面和前測相較均有顯著的進步，尤其在低分組最為明顯；同時在延遲後測並無忘失退步。不受中文母語影響之搭配詞，以及動－名之搭配詞顯示進步較多。本研究肯定前人研究中所發現的語料檢索之優點，但建議英語搭配詞及學習者本身因素（如母語或自身搭配詞程度），都值得未來深入探討。起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201804100200101篇名：施政表現、種族因素與市長滿意度：以卡崔娜颶風前後之紐奧良市為例並列篇名：Governance Performance, Racial Factor, and the Mayor's Approval Rating: The Case of New Orleans before and after Hurricane Katrina作者：王宏忠(Hung-chung Wang);劉兆隆(Chao-lung Liu)關鍵字：種族模式;施政表現模式;支持度;卡崔娜颶風;Racial Model;Performance Model;Approval Rating;Hurricane Katrina期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：民眾對於行政首長的評價，無論是在地方層級或是中央層級，長久以來是美國政治學者關注的焦點之一。部分學者指稱民眾對其日常生活品質的認知對行政首長的支持度有著關鍵性的影響；然而，亦有學者指出族群因素同樣扮演著舉足輕重的角色，特別是在地方行政首長的支持度上。本文以美國南方城市紐奧良為研究對象，並以種族因素以及施政表現兩種模式為理論基礎，探討紐奧良市民對非裔市長Ray Nagin在2005年卡崔娜颶風前後支持度之變遷。藉由分析紐奧良大學調查研究中心所提供之2004、2006以及2007年「生活品質研究」民調資料，本研究發現施政表現固然影響民眾對Nagin市長支持度，然而，種族變數亦展現出不亞於施政表現之影響力，Nagin市長的種族支持對象在風災前後的劇烈轉變，顯示種族因素是影響紐奧良居民對其市長支持度的關鍵因素。英文摘要：U.S. political scientists have long been attracted to the issue of how citizens evaluate their chief executive, both in central and local governments. Some scholars claim that people's perception of the quality of their life makes a huge impact on their approval of the chief executive while researchers of other schools indicate the racial factor is the one playing the most important role in it. This research compares a racial model to a performance model in explaining the approval of the mayor of New Orleans before and after Hurricane Katrina, analyzing the dynamics of job approval of the black mayor, Ray Nagin. By analyzing the 2004, 2006 and 2007 Quality of Life study survey data offered by the Survey Research Center, University of New Orleans, we concluded the findings suggest that the mayoral approval rating is affected by both the factor of race and governance performance. However, the racial model makes an even greater impact on the case of Mayor Nagin than performance model does. The dramatic change of Mayor Nagin's racial support base before and after Hurricane Katrina demonstrates that race is a crucial factor in influencing New Orleans residences' approval of their mayor.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201811_25(2).00012篇名：情緒政治與2016年總統選舉並列篇名：Political Emotions and the 2016 Presidential Election in Taiwan作者：陳陸輝(Lu-huei Chen)關鍵字：情緒;總統選舉;臺灣;emotions;presidential election;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究分析情緒如何影響選民的投票選擇，我們運用2016年總統選舉後執行的「臺灣選舉與民主化調查」(Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study, TEDS)資料，檢視民眾對於三位主要候選人的政治情緒，對於他們投票行為的影響。過去的研究指出，一些像是希望或驕傲的正面情緒，以及諸如憂慮或恐懼的負面情緒，對民眾意見或態度的形成具有重要影響。在2016年的總統選舉中，並無現任總統參選的情況下，民眾在展望未來、回推當下之後，定將仔細思索應該如何選擇他們未來的總統。從21世紀開始，有關情緒政治的相關研究愈來愈多，本研究從臺灣民眾對於2016年選舉中三位主要政黨候選人的政治情緒出發，說明因為對於民進黨提名人蔡英文女士的正面情緒多而負面情緒少，是她得以贏得大選的重要因素。而民眾對國民黨提名人朱立倫先生則是在三位候選人中具有最多負面情緒者，也因此讓他不受民眾青睞。本研究指出，未來在考慮解釋臺灣民眾在總統選舉的投票傾向時，也應該將政治情緒的角度納入。英文摘要：This study will examine how emotions might affect people's choice of vote. I will employ the 2016 Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study (TEDS 2016) to see how voters' emotions toward major presidential candidates affect their vote choices. Previous research argues that some positive emotions, such as hope and pride, and some negative emotions, such as anxiety and fear, might play critical roles in shaping citizens' opinions. For an open-seat presidential election, looking forward and reasoning back, voters employ hopeful and fearful emotions to make their voting decisions. As expected, voters with a fearful feeling toward Tsai Ing-wen are less likely to support her. We also find that those who are angry with Chu Li-luan tend not to vote for him. Emotions shed some light on our understanding of voting behavior in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：31-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201811_25(2).00023篇名：選舉競爭與資訊對投票率的影響：以2005-2014年台灣直轄市與縣市議員選舉為例並列篇名：The Effects of Electoral Competition and Information on Voter Turnout: The Case of the Local Council Election in Taiwan, 2005-2014作者：陳宏哲(Hung-che Chen);蔡宗漢(Tsung-han Tsai)關鍵字：選舉競爭;選舉資訊;投票率;直轄市/縣市議員選舉;多層次Beta迴歸模型;electoral competition;electoral information;voter turnout;local councilor elections;multilevel beta regression model期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文主要在探究選舉制度對於投票率的影響，與傳統文獻不同的是，本文不是從選舉制度的不同特徵進行討論，而是從選舉制度影響投票率的機制著手。本文採取理性選擇理論的觀點，認為選舉競爭程度對於投票率的影響取決於選民掌握的選舉資訊，並且主張同黨候選人與現任者參選有助於選民獲取選舉資訊，進而影響選舉競爭提升投票率的程度。本文以2005-2014年的台灣直轄市與縣市議員選舉為分析案例，資料性質屬於縱橫資料，分析單位是選區－年。因為該地方選舉採用複數選區單記非讓渡投票制(Single Non-Transferable Vote with Multi-Member District Systems, SNTV-MMD)，所以相當適合檢驗本文的研究假設。本文採用多層次Beta迴歸模型分析前述資料，分析結果顯示當議員選區中的同黨候選人參選程度或現任者參選比例較高的情況下，若選舉競爭程度愈強，則投票率會愈高。本文也針對這些研究發現提出其政治意涵。英文摘要：This article examines the effects of electoral competition on voter turnout conditional on the number of co-partisan candidates and incumbent reelection rates. Utilizing the advantages of SNTV-MMD systems such as the variations in the number of co-partisan candidates and incumbent reelection rates across districts, we conduct a data analysis of 486 districts of local councilors in Taiwan from 2005 to 2014, which are time-series cross-sectional data. We analyze the data by employing multilevel beta regression models and the results show that, when the number of co-partisan candidates or incumbent reelection rates are relatively high, strong electoral competition significantly fosters voter turnout. The results have important implications for the effects of SNTV-MMD systems on voter turnout.起始頁-結束頁：55-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201811_25(2).00034篇名：Testing Partisan Effects on Economic Perceptions: A Panel Design Approach並列篇名：政黨偏好是否左右經濟評估？定群追蹤之因果效應分析作者：黃紀(Chi Huang)關鍵字：partisan effects;economic perceptions;economic voting;counterfactual model of causal inference;fixed effects panel analysis;政黨偏差效應;經濟評估;經濟投票;反事實因果推論模型;固定效應定群分析期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：25卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：The economic voting model has been established as a paradigm for studying electoral accountability based on past economic performances and future prospects. However, objective economic conditions may be a valence issue, and subjective evaluations of the national economy may still be positional. Recent ”revisionist” commentators argue that economic voting is ”endogenous” in the sense that partisanship strongly affects, if not distorts, voters' perceptions of macroeconomic performance. Different responses have been elicited to this ”partisan bias” claim, but few directly address the causal effect of partisanship on economic perceptions. This study examined two competing theories of economic voting through investigating the partisan effects on sociotropic economic perceptions. By designing a narrow-window panel telephone survey conducted before and after the January 2016 presidential election in Taiwan, I constructed a two-way fixed effects (FE) model to test the existence of partisan bias. The estimates provided robust evidence of partisan effects on retrospective and prospective economic assessments. In other words, government party supporters evaluated both past and future economic performance favorably during the pre-election period but became pessimistic after their preferred party lost the election. By contrast, opposition party supporters discredited past economic performances during the government party's rule and expressed optimistic expectations regarding future economic performances after their preferred party won the election. However, the theoretical and methodological conclusions reached in this study extend beyond the single case of Taiwan's 2016 presidential election.英文摘要：古典經濟投票模型認為選民會回溯及展望經濟之榮枯，對執政者課責。但即使舉國對經濟莫不喜榮厭枯，個別選民對客觀經濟的主觀評估，卻仍可能因其原先政治立場而異。近年經濟投票之修正論者就質疑經濟投票有「內因性」(endogenous)，亦即選民對總體經濟的認知其實受其政黨偏好左右，與客觀經濟有差距，產生政黨偏差(partisan bias)。此說已引發許多論辯，但文獻卻鮮少單刀直入，直接檢定政黨偏好對經濟評估之因果效應。本文旨在彌補此一缺憾。本文先就古典派與修正派這兩個針鋒相對的理論，各推導出其預期之經驗意涵：若古典派「無政黨偏差說」為真，則選民對整體經濟的評估，應不會受政黨輪替選舉結果的影響，亦即選前、選後的經濟評估應該大致穩定；反之，若修正派「有政黨偏差說」為真，則選民對整體經濟的評估，應會受政黨輪替選舉結果的影響而前後翻盤。為了檢測這兩種經驗預期，作者針對選前普遍預期會產生政黨輪替的2016年總統大選，設計了選前、選後時間貼近的兩波定群追蹤(panel)電訪，然後以二維固定效果(two-way fixed effects)模型進行定群資料分析，檢定同一群選民之整體經濟評估是否會因自己偏好的政黨勝選或落敗而改變。分析結果與修正論之預期相符，不論是回溯或前瞻之整體經濟評估，都受到政黨偏好的顯著影響。換言之，原國民黨支持者，在2016大選前對過去及未來整體經濟多表肯定，但選後卻因國民黨敗選，對未來經濟走勢改為悲觀。反之，原民進黨的支持者，在選前對過去及未來整體經濟多表負面評價，但選後卻因民進黨勝選，對過去評價更為負面、而對未來經濟則大幅看好。此一研究發現的意涵深遠，應不僅限於台灣2016年大選的個案。起始頁-結束頁：89-115資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201811_25(2).00045篇名：選舉制度與憲政體制的制度組合：半總統制民主國家的跨國分析並列篇名：The Combination of Electoral System and Constitutional System: A Cross-Country Study of Semi-Presidential Democracies作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-chiao Su);王業立(Yeh-lih Wang)關鍵字：國會選舉制度;總統選舉制度;半總統制;總理總統制;總統議會制;parliamentary electoral system;presidential electoral system;semi-presidentialism;premier presidentialism;president parliamentarism期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以「國會選舉制度」、「國會政黨體系」、「憲政體制（半總統制）」、「政府型態」等變項所構成的分析架構為基礎，探討全世界民主國家在不同半總統制次類型（總理總統制與總統議會制）與各種主要國會選舉制度（單一選區相對多數制、比例代表制、聯立制、並立制）組合下的憲政運作差異。本文發現：在半總統制的兩種次類型中，總理總統制無論是與哪一種國會選舉制度組合，其憲政運作整體而言會比總統議會制與各種國會選舉制度的組合來得順暢。此一發現，可以為學界中關於「總理總統制優於總統議會制」的一般觀點提供另一項支持的立論基礎。再者，就總統議會制而言，這種半總統制次類型與單一選區相對多數制（或並立制）組合下的憲政運作，有時會比其與比例代表制（或聯立制）組合下的憲政運作顯得更為順暢，但有時卻又顯得更為窒礙難行。這種現象顯示了總統議會制下的選制選擇容易陷入難以取捨的兩難困境。此外，本文也對全世界半總統制民主國家採行總統選舉制度的整體趨勢進行觀察，指出兩項一般常見的直覺觀點：一是以為總統選舉制度類型與總統憲法權力大小存在著關聯性，二是以為相對多數制的總統選舉制度相較於兩輪決選制，傾向選出民意基礎較薄弱的總統，這兩項與實際經驗並不相符的一般直覺觀點實有必要破除。英文摘要：With an analytical framework comprised of variables such as parliamentary electoral system, political party system in the parliament, constitutional system (semi-presidentialism) and government type, this paper explores the differences among the constitutional operations from different combinations of the semi-presidentialism subtype (premier presidentialism and president parliamentarism) and the parliamentary electoral system (plurality with single-member-district system, proportional representation system, mixed-member proportional system and mixed-member majoritarian system) in the democracies all over the world. As far as semi-presidentialism is concerned, it is found that the overall constitutional operation under premier presidentialism, no matter which parliamentary electoral system is adopted, goes better than that under president parliamentarism. This finding can be another supportive reference for the perspective which believes premier presidentialism is better than president parliamentarism. Furthermore, the constitutional operation under the combination of president parliamentarism and plurality with a single-member-district system (or mixed-member majoritarian system) is sometimes proceeds more smoothly than that under the combination of president parliamentarism and proportional representation system (or mixed-member proportional system), but sometimes it does not, and even becomes more obstructed. This shows the dilemma of how to choose a suitable parliamentary electoral system under president parliamentarism. Besides, this paper also observes the overall tendency of semi-presidential democracies' choices for the presidential electoral system, and points out two common misconceptions. The first is the belief that whether the president has great constitutional powers or not is related to the presidential electoral system, and the second is the belief that the president elected via a plurality system has less democratic legitimacy than the president elected via a majority system. These two perspectives do not correspond to actual experiences, and should be clarified.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201805_25(1).00016篇名：問卷調查題型設計的效應檢證：以「政治知識」測量的隨機實驗為例並列篇名：Effects of Survey Questionnaire Design: A Random Experiment in Measuring Political Knowledge as an Example作者：林美榕(Mei-rong Lin);莊文忠(Wen-jong Juang)關鍵字：政治知識;問卷題目;實驗設計;測量效度;民意調查;political knowledge;survey questionnaire;experiment design;measurement validity;opinion poll期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：問卷調查係為了探詢受訪者對特定議題之意見、態度或行為，不但受訪者本身所擁有的相關訊息多寡可能影響其回答意願，題目與選項的設計型態也會左右受訪者的回答模式。有鑑於實務上大多數的問卷調查常囿於調查成本與問卷長度的考量，無法針對同一概念採取多元的題型設計，以確認受訪者在不同題型設計下的回答模式。因此，本研究乃採取實驗設計方式，以台灣選舉與民主化調查(TEDS)的政治知識測量題組為例，依據：（1）「開放VS.封閉」的題型設計，（2）是否提供「無反應」選項，設計成四種不同版本的問卷題目。以大學生為施測對象，採取「後測控制組設計」(posttest-only control-group design)，將不同問卷版本依實驗設計原理，隨機發放給學生填答，共計回收1,110份有效問卷。本研究結果有幾個發現：（1）題型和無反應選項的設計的確會影響到受訪者的回答模式，封閉型的題目設計有助於增加受訪者的答對比例，同樣也會產生高於開放型題目的答錯率；（2）開放型的題目設計，因無選項可供參考，也會降低受訪者的回答意願，因而有較高的無反應比例；（3）藉由題型和無反應選項的組合設計，可以較為精確地估計Mondak(1999)所建構之受訪者類型，但各類型的比例組合會因政治知識測量題目的難易而產生較大的變動。英文摘要：A survey is designed to explore the participants' opinions, attitudes and actions towards certain topics. The amount of information possessed by participants is not the only factor that influences their willingness to participate; question types and options design also influence participants' responses. In reality, given cost constraints and questionnaire length, it is not feasible to provide a multiple survey design for a single concept, or to verify participants' response mode under different survey designs. This study used an experimental design to measure political knowledge from Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study (TEDS) as an example, based on (1) an ”open-ended vs. close-ended” question design; (2) whether it provides ”non-response” as an option, to design four different types of surveys. The study uses a posttest-only control group design with university students as participants. We randomly released the questionnaires to participants and had 1,110 valid questionnaires. The study found that question type and non-response design affects the participant response mode; a close-ended questionnaire design does increase the correct response ratio from participants, but it also produces a higher proportion of incorrect answers than an open-ended questionnaire. An openended questionnaire design does not have options as reference, and so it could lower the willingness of participants to take part in the survey, and it therefore resulted in a higher non-response ratio. From the composite design of question type and non-response option, we were able to precisely estimate types of participants as in Mondak (1999), but the combinations of different types of participants vary significantly as results from the level of difficulties in a questionnaire designed to measure political knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：37-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201805_25(1).00027篇名：台灣民<U+8846>的制衡觀與分裂投票：GSEM方法之應用並列篇名：Cognitive Madisonianism and Split-Ticket Voting in Taiwan: A Generalized Structural Equation Modeling Approach作者：林啟耀(Kah-yew Lim)關鍵字：制衡觀;分裂投票;內生性;推廣之結構方程式模型;政黨偏好;cognitive madisonianism;split-ticket voting;endogeneity;GSEM;party preference期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：制衡觀之所以重要，不僅因為制衡觀是民主社會的重要價值，也是解釋分裂投票的重要因素。2016年總統與立委選舉合併進行，隨著小黨林立、候選人參選爆炸，媒體認為這次是中央層級選舉分裂投票最激烈的一次。在討論制衡觀與分裂投票的關係時，不能忽略政黨偏好同時影響這兩個變數所帶來的內生性問題。因此，本研究藉由TEDS2016的定群追蹤資料，重新分類民眾的制衡觀，並應用推廣之結構方程式模型（GSEM）方法應對內生性問題，驗證制衡觀與分裂投票的關係。分析結果顯示，民眾的制衡觀的確顯著受到本身政黨偏好所影響，民進黨偏好者在過去比較支持制衡，但隨著民進黨執政，他們轉而不支持制衡；國民黨偏好者則剛好相反，在過去不支持制衡，但是隨國民黨敗選，他們轉而支持制衡。在投票決定方面，制衡觀雖然顯著影響民眾採一致投票或分裂投票，但是有較高機率採取民進黨一致投票的卻是轉向不支持制衡觀與穩定支持制衡觀的民眾，而這兩群民眾都是民進黨偏好者為主的族群。這意味著民眾制衡觀對投票行為的影響，反映出來的仍是他們本身的政黨偏好。上述結果顯示以制衡觀解釋分裂投票行為的確存在內生性問題，凸顯GSEM方法的必要性。本研究認為未來研究在驗證制衡觀與分裂投票之間的關係時，仍需注意政黨偏好所產生的影響。英文摘要：Cognitive madisoniansim is crucial in political situations. It is not only an important value of democratic societies, but also a factor in explaining split-ticket voting. With the increase of minor parties and candidates, the media believe that Taiwan's 2016 general elections have shown the most fierce split-ticket voting. It is worth mentioning that we shall not ignore the issue of endogeneity caused by partisanship when discussing the relationship between cognitive madisoniansim and split-ticket voting. Based on the panel data of TEDS2016, this study aims to recategorize the cognitive madisoniansim of the respondents and resolve the issue of endogeneity by applying a generalized structural equation model (GSEM). By doing so, we aim to examine the relationship between cognitive madisoniansim and splitticket voting. The findings show that the public's cognitive madisoniansim was indeed affected by party preference. DPP supporters have tended to support cognitive madisoniansim in the past. However, they stopped supporting it once the DDP took over the government. The KMT showed the opposite situation. They had been against cognitive madisoniansim in the past. When they began losing elections, they started to support it. Regarding voting decisions, cognitive madsoniansim has positive effects on people's decisions about straight-ticket voting or split-ticket voting. Nevertheless, most voters who cast straight-ticket voting for the DPP are those who stopped supporting or constantly supported cognitive madisoniansim. These two groups of voters both prefer the DDP. This result indicates that the effect of voters' cognitive madisoniansim on their voting behaviors still reflects their party preference. The above-mentioned issues present the endogeneity issue derived by explaining the split-ticket voting behaviors by cognitive madisoniansim and the inevitability of GSEM methods. We suggest that researchers not ignore the effect of party preference as they examine the relationship between cognitive madisoniansim and split-ticket voting.起始頁-結束頁：75-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201805_25(1).00038篇名：Electoral Competition, Incumbency, News Coverage, and Prediction Market Price: A Preliminary Study of Campaign Contributions and Spending in Taiwan's 2016 Legislative Elections並列篇名：選舉差距、現任者優勢、新聞報導以及預測市場價格：探討台灣2016立委選舉的捐款與支出作者：蔡佳泓(Chia-hung Tsai)關鍵字：news coverage;prediction market price;contribution;spending;legislative election;新聞報導;預測市場價格;捐款;支出;立委選舉期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：25卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：In a political campaign, candidates attempt to mobilize voters by using contributions from individuals, corporations, and political parties. It is an accepted fact of democracy that campaigns should attempt to outdo one another in both the amount they collect in contributions and what they spend on campaigns. Previous research has explored the incumbent advantage in campaign finance, but many interesting factors remain. For instance, is fund-raising aided by factors such as the closeness of an election or a candidate's tenure in the Legislative Yuan? In this study, we explain campaign contributions using data from prediction markets and television news reports to account for variations in campaign spending. Our results suggest that incumbent advantage does indeed affect contributions and that DPP candidates outperformed other candidates in campaign finance. We also find that previous electoral margins and television news coverage contribute significantly to campaign donations, and that election betting has an impact on spending. These findings suggest that a political party's general campaign can influence the election race of an individual candidate, and that contributors tend to bet on likely winners, deepening the influence of the electoral system on competing political parties.英文摘要：在競選過程中，候選人運用從個人、政黨、企業所募得的資金，試圖動員選民，這已經是民主的常態。過去的研究已經探討現任者在選舉花費的優勢，但是仍有許多因素仍待探討。例如，選舉的差距變大會減少候選人募到的經費嗎？候選人在立法院的年資會有助於募款嗎？本研究使用預測市場以及電視新聞的資料，解釋候選人申報的政治獻金以及選舉支出，結果顯示現任者優勢的確存在，而且民進黨候選人的收入與支出高於國民黨與其他候選人。本研究也發現，四年前的選舉結果以及候選人所屬政黨的總統候選人出現在電視新聞的時間，顯著影響候選人的募款，此次選舉中預測市場的價格則顯著影響候選人的支出。歸納這些發現可以得出政黨的選舉方式將會影響個別候選人的競選過程，而捐款可能集中在勝選機會大的候選人，而這可能擴大選舉制度對於政黨競爭的影響。起始頁-結束頁：117-147資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201805_25(1).000401篇名：靈性與安身立命：從四大存有問題建構貫串靈性與生涯的本土化理論並列篇名：Spirituality and Living with One's Spirit: From Four Big Questions of Human Existence to Construct Indigenous Theories for Spirituality and Career作者：夏允中(Yung-Jong Shiah);劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang);孫頌賢(Sung-Hsien Sun)關鍵字：本土諮商心理學;生涯;自性覺醒;儒釋道;靈性;Career;Confucianism/Buddhism/Taoism;indigenous counseling psychology;self-enlightenment;spirituality期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：51期出版年：2018中文摘要：針對四大存有問題：我是誰？我的人生處境是什麼？我為什麼會受苦？我如何得到救贖與解救？本文綜合先前研究和本期論文發現：(1)靈性成長導引離苦：不論有無宗教信仰或信奉哪種宗教，靈性學習或在諮商中探討靈性議題，均有助於超越困頓、獲得靈性成長；(2)宗教給出世界觀和生涯觀：西方一神文化形成了個人主義的世界觀，華人的儒釋道文化強調自性的覺醒，形成了重視個人修煉及人境和諧的世界觀，本期論文研發的果報信念量表，可用以評量佛教與道教的累世因果觀念，期望後續研究可揭開另類身心健康與生活調適之道；(3)人在世間活出靈性：生命信念、生活目標之選擇(立命)，是一再重複的螺旋狀的視框轉移歷程，如何籌備本事以便在生活世界中實際活出所選角色劇本(安身)，則可透過有效的培訓模式加以輔助。綜合上述評析，本文建議：(1)在既有的靈性與諮商論述和實徵研究基礎上，進一步發展出理論；(2)開啟更多的「生涯」與「靈性」之關連與對話，以期建立貫串靈性與生涯的理論，讓兩個領域相互補足，開展出更有助全人發展的助人專業；(3)透過華人文化儒釋道智慧的自性覺醒模式之研發，建構含攝華人文化的、貫串靈性與生涯的本土化理論，藉由中西會通後的創新思惟發展出嶄新與現代化的華人本土諮商心理學，並持續與西方學術界交流與對話。英文摘要：No matter where you live and what cultures you belong to. You may encountered four big questions of human existence. Where do I come from? Why I am in this life situation? Why do I suffer? How do I find salvation? The current issue focuses on spirituality and career along with six accepted papers to echo for these four big questions of human existence. We combined previous research and the six accepted papers to provide the conclusion as follows: (1) The spiritual growth leads to overcome the pain. No matter what religions you belong to or not. Spiritual learning and exploring spiritual issues during counseling would help to overcome suffering and gain spiritual growth. (2) The religions provide worldviews and career views. The western monotheism stresses on the connection or close to the God leading to the individualistic worldview. The cultures of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism aim at the cultivating self-enlightenment process to transform the self or one's spirit to the good, nonself and authentic self. The self-enlightenment process leads to self-cultivation and the harmony worldview. There are emerging counseling studies and models to utilize the ideas of Buddhism. For example, the mindfulness originated from the Buddhism have been supported its benefits by many empirical studies. The study of the Karma Belief Scale development in our current issue could be used to assess the karma belief among the Buddhist and Taoism believers, with an aim to reveal another possible perspective to enhance mental and body health, and life adjustment. (3) We live in spiritual ways. One needs to make his or her career choice, select spiritual beliefs to apply them in the life world and understand one's life situation to live with one's spirit. Choosing to live with one's spirit between life beliefs and goals is a repeated spiral and transforming process. Obtaining necessary abilities to live one's own script in the life word could be enhanced by certain training models. Accordingly, we provide following suggestion for future research. (1) Based on the current spiritual and counseling empirical studies, we could develop related theories. (2) To open more dialogues and connection between career and spirituality could develop related theories linking spirituality to career. Then spirituality and career could be complementary to develop a helping professionalism with a more holistic development. (3) That the development of self-enlightenment models derived from the wisdom of Chinese cultures of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism is the core to construct indigenous theories for spirituality and career. The wisdom of Chinese cultures of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism could be the sources for the cultural consciousness program of Taiwan counseling professionalism. During the developing process of indigenous counseling and indigenous counseling psychology, it is worth to combine Modern western counseling theories and our cultural heritage with local living experiences. The article urges that we could draw on the Professor Kwan-Kuo Hwang's multiple philosophical paradigms to analyze Chinese cultures of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism as the basis to construct indigenous theories for spirituality and career. Accordingly, the indigenous theories for spirituality and career employing the Chinese cultures will be transformed to microworlds of scientific knowledge. Two analyzed examples of self-enlightenment models based on the Chinese cultures are presented. Specifically, the Buddhist self-enlightenment model suggests that we apply the self-cultivation principle by obeying certain precepts, practicing compassion, and absorbing wisdom. The aim of all this is to see through and overcome the delusion of the self, transforming self to nonself. The nonself state is authentic and durable happiness. Finally, we are calling for Chinese scholars to cultivate themselves towards to self-enlightenment then to comfort the others and construct new and modern Chinese indigenous counseling psychology based on merging our cultural roots and the western scientific knowledge, along with ongoing communications and dialogues with the Western academic societies.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620180400510012篇名：當靈性與心理諮商相遇－案主的經驗並列篇名：When Spirituality Meets Counseling: The Clients' Experiences作者：陳秉華(Ping-Hwa Chen);范嵐欣(Lan-Hsin Fan);朱美娟(Mei-Chuan Chu)關鍵字：案主的經驗;融入宗教/靈性的諮商;Clients' experiences;spiritually integrated counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：51期出版年：2018中文摘要：台灣是一個有高宗教人口且宗教多元的社會，因此諮商中很有可能會遇到有宗教/靈性背景的案主。過去文獻支持案主的宗教/靈性背景會影響他們對在諮商中討論靈性議題以及接受靈性介入的期待(尤其是對宗教/靈性投入的案主)，而案主的問題也會與背後的宗教/靈性觀相互交織，因此宗教/靈性議題在諮商中是需要被重視的。本研究旨在探討案主對接受融入靈性的諮商的經驗，包括案主對接受融入靈性諮商的期待、態度、在諮商中提出的宗教或靈性話題、接受融入靈性的諮商介入處理、經驗到的諮商結果等。本研究10位研究參與者都有接受融入宗教/靈性諮商的經驗，且有多樣性的宗教/靈性背景；10人中1位為男性，9位為女性。研究者透過半結構個別訪談收集資料，以主題分析方法分析資料。研究結果發現七個主題，分別為：有宗教/靈性背景的案主都對接受融入宗教/靈性的諮商有動機與期待，但也有顧慮；在諮商中出現多樣化的宗教/靈性議題；諮商師對宗教/靈性議題的探討與介入是多元的；宗教/靈性話題在諮商中能否展開與持續受到案主與諮商師雙方的影響；接受融入宗教/靈性的諮商為案主帶來自我與宗教/靈性上的成長與轉變；大多數案主對接受融入宗教/靈性之諮商持正向態度；以及案主認為實施融入宗教/靈性之諮商須有倫理。本研究的討論與建議於本文末提出。英文摘要：Recent large scale surveys of religions in Taiwan showed over 80% of the surveyed subjects identified themselves with religious beliefs, 85% of the subjects agreed religion can help people find inner peace and happiness, and ease the pains and discomforts. 2014 American Pew Research Center's Religious and Public Life Program reported Taiwan ranked second on the Global Religious Diversity Index. All the data indicated Taiwan has a high population in religion and is a multi-religious society. Western counseling researches and literatures showed that clients with religious/spiritual backgrounds brought problems into the counseling embedding their religious/spiritual perspectives and copings towards their problems. Counselors need to inquire and understand how these clients viewed their problems spiritually so that they could integrate religious/spiritual interventions into counseling to serve religious/spiritual clients more effectively. However, such research is rare in Taiwan, there is a need to conduct researches to call Taiwanese' counselors attentions to the topic. The purpose of the present study was to explore the experiences of clients who had received counseling incorporating religion/spirituality. The research questions included to explore the clients' expectations and attitudes towards receiving spiritually integrated counseling, the religious/spiritual issues raised and the religious/spiritual interventions received in the counseling sessions, and the reported counseling outcomes. Ten research participants with different religious/spiritual backgrounds and having experiences of receiving spiritually integrated counseling were recruited and participated in the study. Among them, three ware Christians, three were Buddhists, two identified themselves with having multiple religion/spiritual backgrounds, and two identified themselves with no specific region/spiritual backgrounds. Among the ten, one was male and nine were females. Semi-structured individual interviews were conducted for data collection. Interviewed questions included the religious/spiritual identities the interviewees were holding, the spiritually integrated counseling experiences received, the expectations towards the counselors' religious/spiritual backgrounds and the counselors' integrated counseling approaches, the religious/spiritual issues raised in the counseling sessions, the counselors' responses and the religious/spiritual interventions used in the counseling, and the resulting counseling outcomes. Thematic analysis was employed for data analysis. Seven themes were identified as the research finding. These seven themes were: clients with religious/spiritual backgrounds had motives, expectations, and concerns of receiving spiritually incorporated counseling, multiple religious/spiritual and psychological issues were intertwined and presented in the counseling sessions, clients received various religious/spiritual interventions from the counselors in the counseling sessions, facilitating and hindering factors which influenced the clients and /or the counselors to initiate and continue the religious/spiritual topics were identified, spiritually integrated counseling resulted in clients' spiritual and psychological growth, most clients showed positive attitudes of receiving spiritually integrated counseling, and clients claimed the ethical principles of practicing the spiritually integrated counseling. The discussions were focused on five points: 1. It is important to explore the specific expectations and concerns of clients with religious/spiritual backgrounds. Clients hold specific expectations on counselors' religious/spiritual backgrounds, integrating religious/spiritual interventions in counseling, and counselors' openness towards their personal religious/spiritual experiences. 2. Highly religious/spiritual devoted clients expect counselors to help them understand their encountered personal or interpersonal problems with both psychological and religious/spiritual perspectives. 3 Taiwan is a multi-religious society, and clients may come from various religious/spiritual backgrounds. Counselors can better serve clients with religious/spiritual needs if they are equipped with various religious/spiritual traditions and interventions. 4 Both common and religious/spiritual specific factors identified which facilitate and hinder the initiation and continuation of the religious/spiritual topics between the interaction of counselors and clients. Common facilitating factors relate to the trusting and supporting relationship the counselors created, and clients' readiness to change, openness to self-disclosure. Common hindering factors relate to clients' high anxiety of disclosing self, counselors' passivity, lack of direction, structure and counseling plans. Specific facilitating factors relate to counselors' acceptance of clients' religious beliefs, counselors' competencies in facilitating religious/spiritual conversations, and clients' recognition of the religious/spiritual interventions used. Specific hindering factors relate to clients' un-comprehension to the religious/spiritual interventions used, counselors are unable to provide religious/spiritual interventions clients needed, and counselors avoid religious/spiritual topics. 5. Religious/spiritual clients' counseling experiences and outcomes are positive when counselors integrate spirituality into counseling. However, counselors should not impetuously impose religious/spiritual interventions to those clients without religious/spiritual interests or backgrounds. Two suggestions were proposed in the end. Firstly, the result highlights the necessity of integrating religion/spirituality into counselors' practices. Thus, students and counselors need to acquire the competencies of practicing spiritually integrated counseling through counselor education courses, supervisions, and continuing education. Secondly, future researches on counselors' attitudes and perceived competencies of practicing spiritually integrated counseling, the positive and negative experiences of clients' receiving spiritually integrated counseling, and the effectiveness of practicing spiritually integrated counseling interventions are all needed for enhancing the knowledge of this new area of spiritually integrated counseling.起始頁-結束頁：27-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620180400510023篇名：正念在臺灣學校的影響：系統性回顧及後設分析並列篇名：The Impact of Mindfulness in School at Taiwan: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis作者：陳景花(Jing-Hua Chen);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)關鍵字：正念;後設分析;臺灣;Meta-analysis;mindfulness;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：51期出版年：2018中文摘要：正念在學校的發展與影響，有愈來愈普及化的趨勢。本研究以系統性的文獻回顧及後設分析，統整1991年至2016年的學位論文和期刊論文，希望釐清正念在臺灣學校的影響。本研究共分析26篇研究論文，樣本數2279人，實驗組1029人，控制組1250人，年齡層從幼稚園至大學高等教育之學生。研究結果如下：1.整體效果量分析：正念整體效果量達中度以上正向效果。2.其他變項分析：(1)年齡層次：正念效果不因年齡層次而有差異。(2)正念介入時程：正念的介入時程以1∼8週效果最佳。(3)正念效果類別：正念在壓力管理的效果最佳，其次是認知表現、情緒智力及人際技巧。整體而言，正念在學校產生的效果是正向的，然而，樣本的差異性、正念實施和練習的多樣性、各種不同的測驗工具、以及資料驗證的差異化，皆有許多異質性存在。因此，正念的測量極具挑戰性。最後，本研究針對研究結果，期待能發展適合教育領域的正念相關課程及後續研究，並對在教育上的涵意提供具體的建議。英文摘要：In recent years, researches on mindfulness in Europe and the United States have been booming. Mindfulness is generally used in a variety of fields, such as medicine, psychotherapy, health care, business and education. Mindfulness in schools is also becoming more and more popular. Mindfulness, perceived in a particular way, is purposeful awareness in the present moment and being nonjudgmental. Research shows that mindfulness can not only reduce anxiety and depression, but also promote concentration, emotional management and human relationships. Mindfulness promotes happiness and self-compassion. Mindfulness has its effects in cognitive performance, interpersonal skills, emotional intelligence and stress management. The aim of this paper is tantamount to understand the impact of mindfulness in the school at Taiwan. The systematic review and meta-analysis used data from thesis, dissertations, and peer review journals from 1991 to 2016 as inputs in understanding the impact of mindfulness in the school at Taiwan. Twenty-six studies were identified. In total, 2279 students were instructed in mindfulness, with 1250 serving as control group and 1029 as treated group, ranging from kindergartens to colleges. A meta-analysis is applied as the research method in order to understand the differences between the experimental group and the control group and to examine the overall effect and heterogeneity. According to the results of heterogeneity test, the effect model was selected and the moderators were concerned, such as the age of participants, the duration of mindfulness intervention and the category of mindfulness effect. This study utilized CMA (Comprehensive Meta-Analysis) statistical analysis software for meta-analysis. CMA proposed publication error verification. The study of failed-safe N = 11.38905 (p = .000), reaching a significant level of .001, indicating no publication bias. The results revealed that overall effect sizes were medium and positive. Among groups for domains were stress management, cognitive performance, emotional intelligence and interpersonal skills, which effect sizes were all positive. The mindfulness intervention time within 1-8 weeks was the best, and the effect of mindfulness was no significant differences in ages. Overall, the benefits of mindfulness in schools were positive. Finally, according to the research findings, practical suggestions for educational policy-making and researches were proposed. In educational practice, school authorities can systematically arrange various mindfulness training courses based on the needs of students and faculty members, including: (1) mindfulness and empowering courses for teachers, (2) academic achievement mindfulness courses, (3) emotion management mindfulness courses, (4) mindfulness-based stress reduction courses, (5) mindfulness general elective courses. In research limitations and future research, according to the conclusions of this study, the effect of mindfulness training has its effect in cognitive performance, stress management, emotional management and interpersonal skills. However, the diversity of study samples, vary in implementation and training, and a wide range of instruments and differentiated examination of data were difficult to be identified, too. There was great heterogeneity. Many studies were underpowered, and measuring effects of mindfulness in this setting was challenging. Based on this study, mindfulness training implemented in each research paper has its own different approach. Therefore, if future studies can explore the effects of mindfulness produced by different mindfulness training, so that participants can join in different mindfulness training according to their needs. Furthermore, for the prediction of the effects of mindfulness, there should be more precise theoretical basis for understanding and explaining the psychological mechanism of mindfulness, such as when and why the impacts of mindfulness happen. Through this study, it may also enrich the theory of psychology, and, in addition, the development of mindfulness measurement tools, so that it can lead to a more correct measurement of the mindfulness. According to different purposes of mindfulness to seek the appropriate mindfulness scale, the research will come to a better result.起始頁-結束頁：67-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620180400510034篇名：從懷疑到信任：中高齡宗教信仰者的靈性學習歷程並列篇名：From Suspicion to Trust: the Middle-aged and Older Adult Religious Believers' Spiritual Learning Process作者：葉俊廷(Chun-Ting Yeh);李雅慧(Ya-Hui Lee)關鍵字：成人學習;宗教信仰;經驗學習;靈性學習;Adult learning;experiential learning;religion;spiritual learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：51期出版年：2018中文摘要：靈性健康是達到成功老化的要素之一，個體要體驗靈性健康的狀態，需要透過生命經驗的整合，涵蓋過去到未來的成長過程，但目前對於個體如何達到靈性健康的學習歷程之相關研究較為缺乏，因此，本研究的目的是探討中高齡者投入宗教信仰的靈性學習歷程。以現象學的方法，深入描述與分析受訪者的靈性學習經驗。本研究採用半結構式訪談，總共訪談6位中高齡者，包含3位男性、3位女性，受訪者的年齡介於49∼67歲，平均年齡是58.2歲。他們的宗教類型包含：1位基督徒、1位天主教徒、3位佛教徒，以及1位回教徒。研究結果顯示：受訪者靈性學習的經驗歷程歸納為四個階段，分別為嘗試接觸期，是指受訪者接觸宗教信仰的初期階段；疑惑衝突期，是指學習過程產生的心理疑惑及衝突；學習反思期，是指對宗教與靈性有較具體的學習與反思行為；以及靈性體驗期，是受訪者從宗教信仰感受到靈性學習意義的階段。在靈性學習歷程中，受訪者能感受內心的平靜、具備克服困境與心靈沐浴的<U+5185>在力量、對生命的體悟，以及能夠為生活改變、貢獻影響與充實當下的生命意義與價值，這些靈性健康能促進成功老化。英文摘要：In previous studies and literature on both spiritual learning and experiential learning, we found that individual learning is a learning process utilizing past and prior experiences on future practices, namely, from the past to the future. Both literature and previous research paid much attention on individual learning in terms of how learners interact and gain experiences from the external world, self-life experiences, and reflections. From the study of spiritual issues, spiritual health is one of the factors of successful aging, as well as the positive significance of religion and spirituality, but it is difficult to fully understand the entire experience process of personal spiritual learning. However, the theory of experiential learning can be very helpful to further explore the spiritual learning process since the theory of experiential learning emphasizes the goal consciousness, action, reflection, feeling and experience of learning process. These concepts have already contributed to the current research to further explore the evolution process of personal spiritual value from a very simple perspective to a more advanced scope. For instance, we learned that individuals need to achieve the spiritual health status through the integration of life experience, covering the past to the future growing process. Having a lack of related research on how individuals succeed spiritual health, the current research aimed to investigate the middle-aged and older adults' spiritual learning process. In order to explore and analysis participants' spiritual learning experiences, we adopted phenomenology approach and conducted semi-structured interviews with 6 middle-aged and older adults. These participants were 3 males and 3 females, the ages ranged from 49~67 and average age 58.2 years. The participants were 1 Christian, 1 Catholic, 1 Muslim, and 3 Buddhists, respectively. The results of the study were summarized as followings: The participants' spiritual learning experiences could be divided into four phases, including initial contact, doubt and conflict, learning reflections, and experienced spiritual meaning. The first phase explained and referred to the reason why middle-aged and older adults first contact certain religions and the inner feelings of participating in religious beliefs. The second phase illustrated how adults' inner doubts and conflicts aroused from their learning processes which mainly involved ignorance of the truth of religious explanations, suspicion and misunderstanding of religious doctrines, conflicts with family members due to religious problems, or interruption of religious activities. The third phase referred to a more specific study and reflection on religion and spirituality, including the guidance of the elegant, the study of a group, the combination of experience, fixed time and step-by-step learning, and further reflection on personal work, sin, interpersonal and failure experience. The fourth phase referred to the participants' sense of spiritual learning from their religious beliefs. The first two phases were the spiritual learning that took place in the early stages. The first two phases can be discovered in their spiritual learning processes at a very initial stage. In the study, we found that participants are commonly curious about religion or resolve their questions after encountering negative experiences. All these can facilitate their demands of perusing a higher level of spirituality. Furthermore, there were continuous flow between the last two phases of spiritual learning. As participants felt spiritual through continuous learning, they continued to devote themselves to religious activities and learning and experienced the value of spirituality again from the reflection of self, life, and negative experiences. Spiritual learning experiences mainly occurred in the phase of learning reflections and experienced spiritual meaning as these two phases were usually for participants who have more time to further study and engage the study of religious spirituality after they retired from their work. By doing so, they learned and understood the meaning of religious spirituality from their young to old life experiences. In the spiritual learning process, the participants were affected by the inner peace, possessed the inner strength to overcome the dilemma and the spiritual bath, understood the meanings of life, and took actions to change the life, to contribute, as well as to make efforts for next life. These benefits from spiritual learning helped the participants lead a healthy and active life.起始頁-結束頁：105-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620180400510045篇名：敘事諮商歷程與敘事結構特徵中生活目標改變之詮釋分析並列篇名：Hermeneutics Analysis of Life Goals Change within Narrative Therapy Process and Narrative Structure Feature作者：黃素菲(Su-Fei Huang)關鍵字：生活目標;敘事結構;敘事諮商;詮釋分析;Hermeneutic analysis;life goal;narrative counseling;narrative structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：51期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究的分析文本是研究參與者經過25次敘事諮商的逐字稿，採取現象學取向的方法，根據Van Kamm的七個步驟進行逐字稿文本分析。共獲得六個研究結果：一、描繪使她活成「沒有自己」的那個世界的特徵。二、經由鬆動主流故事，看到隱藏的故事線，以「離」開被建構的生活目標。三、釐清共寫與重構故事的歷程。四、探討經由敘事視框轉變如何浮現出主體性的生活目標。五、整理出生活目標在敘事結構中的改變特徵，包括：1.被建構的敘事：受制狀態的敘事結構特徵；2.解構的敘事，鬆動狀態的敘事結構特徵；3.重構的敘事，重寫狀態的敘事結構特徵；4.生活目標是在「前置經驗」與「接續選項」組成螺旋狀的敘說循環過程中生成。六、提出敘事結構特徵與敘事視框轉變的心智循環空間模型。其中研究目的一：了解社會文化脈絡如何形塑生活目標，由研究結果一、二回答；研究目的二：探討以生活目標為主訴的諮商工作其敘事視框的轉變，由研究結果三、四回答；研究目的三：探討生活目標在敘事諮商歷程中的敘事結構之改變特徵，由研究結果五回答；研究目的四：釐清敘事文本詮釋與知識生產，由研究結果六回答。最後，根據研究結果提出研究與應用的建議。英文摘要：The life goal in everyday life can be used both as an alleged word or a subjective word. If life goal use as an alleged word, it is a communication tool for people to refer their relationship with social life. People in social activities use it as a tool function. If life goals use as a subjective word, life goal has left from social life field and enter into the subjective context or episodic memory field, life goal become a description of the person's life world. Life goal turned to be a subjective meaning space. Life goal is treated within personal meaning context in which it is as a manifested. According to the research title, purpose and research methods, literature review lists to discuss four themes: First, life goals as alleged word; Second, life goals as the subjective word; Third, the nature of the narrative psychotherapy; Fourth, narrative therapy work map and narrative structure. The text for research is based on 25 counseling sessions within 18 months by narrative psychotherapy method. In this research try to integrate therapy process and experience by case study, and systematically explore life goal change and narrative elements in therapy process. There are four research purposes: First, is to understand how the social and cultural context shapes life goals. Second, is explored life goal setting as chief complaint in therapy, how are the narrative perspective changed. Third, to clarify the life goals change in narrative therapy process how is the narrative structure emerged. Fourth, is to engage text interpretation and how the knowledge be produced. Phenomenological approach was applied as analyze method which is according to Moustakas' modified van Kaam method for analysis (Moustakas, 1994). This hermeneutic analysis method includes seven steps: 1. description of experience: listing and preliminary grouping, 2. horizonalization: reduction and elimination, 3. meaning units: clustering and thematizing the invariant constituents, 4. thematizing: final identification of the invariant constituents and themes by application, 5. individual textual description: construct for each co-researcher an individual textual description, 6. individual structural descriptionconstruct: construct for each co-researcher an individual structural description, and 7. textural-structural description: construct for research participant a textural-structural description of the meanings and essences of the experience. Six findings will be addressed below. First, depicting the characteristics of the world that made her live ”without herself”. Second, by de-construct the dominate stories to reveal alternative stories and ”away from” constructed life goal. Third, clarify co-authoring and stories reconstruction process. Fourth, to explore how narrative frames transform that would emerge subjectivity life-goal. Fifth, sorting out the change features of life goal in narrative structure, which include: 1. Be-constructed narrative: the restricted narrative structure features; 2. De-constructive narrative: the release narrative structure feature; 3. Re-constructive narrative: the rewriting narrative structure feature; 4. Life goal is generate within ”previous experience” and ”continued options” which consist a narrative spiral. Sixth, proposed the mental circulation space model and the transform features of narrative structure. The first research purpose is to understand how social and cultural context shape life goals which could be answer by first & second results. The second research purpose is to exploring narrative frame transform that was based on narrative counseling by life goal as chief complain which could be answer by third & fourth results. The third research purpose is to explore narrative structure features changing in narrative counseling for life goals which could be answer by fifth result. The Fourth research purpose is to clarify narrative text analysis and knowledge production which could be answer by sixth results. The contribution of this study is found that the narrative structure of narrative therapy contain with three elements: 1. Beconstructed Narrative Structure- restricted state. The first narrative element is the cons tructed narrative structure. Stories about life goal in restricted narrative structure state mainly cluster of stories related with the problem stories. 2. Deconstruction Narrative Structure-release state. The second narrative element is the deconstruction narrative structure. Stories about life goal in releasing narrative structure state mainly cluster of stories related with conflict stories. 3. Reconstruction Narrative Structure-Rewriting state. The third narrative element is the reconstructed narrative. Stories about life goal in rewriting narrative structure state mainly cluster of stories related with the reconciliation stories. Finally, suggestions are offered and limitations of the study are explained.起始頁-結束頁：143-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620180400510056篇名：大學生果報信念量表的建構與發展之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Construction and Development of Karma Belief Scale for Undergraduate in Taiwan作者：蔡明昌(Ming-Chang Tsai)關鍵字：大學生;生命教育;果報信念;果報信念量表;學校輔導;Karma belief;karma belief scale;life education;school counselling;undergraduate期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：51期出版年：2018中文摘要：果報信念是國人在進行倫理抉擇與面對生命困境時的重要思考模式之一，對於生命教育與學校輔導工作具有重要的意義。然而，迄今為止尚未發展出適合文化與國情的研究工具，也未對國人果報信念進行較深入且系統性的瞭解。基於此，本研究的主要目的，係建構大學生果報信念的主要內涵，並發展出一套適用於國內大學生的果報信念測量工具，並進行大學生果報信念調查，以了解當前大學生的果報信念概況。研究者採用文獻探討、實地訪談及問卷調查等三種研究方法，以大學生為研究對象，透過傳統文化果報觀點的探討、相關實徵研究的歸納、以及針對大學生的實地訪談，建構出大學生果報信念的主要內涵，據以編擬量表初稿。在透過專家審核、預試等程序進行題目的修正與刪減之後，形成共28題之正式量表，並以分層多階段抽樣法進行抽樣，抽取1158位大學生進行調查。研究結果發現本研究所發展的大學生果報信念量表具有良好的信、效度；我國大學生對於果報信念中的現世報應、死後報應、子孫承負及創造命運的說法傾向相信；而對於功過相抵、宗教救贖及接受命運的說法，則傾向不相信；此外，亦發現國內大學生的果報信念具有性別和宗教上的差異。最後，研究者並進一步根據研究結果，就果報信念在教育與輔導上的應用與意涵進行討論並做成結論。英文摘要：Karma belief is the critical view point of Taiwanese in the situation of ethical decision and suffering. For life education and school counselling, karma belief has the important implications. However, there is neither measurement of karma belief that base on the culture, nor systematic examination in karma belief of Taiwanese. Base on above, the main purpose of this present study was to construct the contents of karma belief, develop a measurement of karma belief for college students in Taiwan, investigate the karma belief of native undergraduate, and understand the profile of karma belief of undergraduate in Taiwan. In order to reach the purpose, the researcher used the methods of literature discussion, interview and survey, constructed the contents of karma belief by the examination of traditional culture and interview, selected undergraduate to be the empirical research subjects. The formal Karma Belief Scale (KBS) consists of 28 items, and divided into seven dimensions. Subjects were sampled by the way of stratified multi-stage sampling. A sample of 1158 college students was recruited to finish the Karma Belief Scale. In order to examine the reliability of Karma Belief Scale, the way of test-retest reliability and Cronbach's alpha reliability were used. The Exploratory factor analysis and Confirmatory factor analysis was calculated to check the validity of Karma Belief Scale. The result of this study showed the reliability and validity of Karma Belief Scale was generally well. The undergraduate in Taiwan to tend to believe the beliefs of 'retribution in this life', 'afterlife retribution', 'retribution in descendant' and 'create destiny'. However, the undergraduate in Taiwan have the tendency of rejecting the beliefs of 'offset of good and evil', 'religious redemption' and 'accept destiny'. The relationship between religious faith and karma belief was significant. The students who without any religious faith had the less beliefs in all dimension of Karma Belief Scale. The Christian students had lower score in the dimension of 'retribution in descendant', 'offset of good and evil', 'accept destiny' and 'create destiny' than the students who had the religious faith of Buddhism, Taoism, I-Kuan Tao and Folk belief. The difference of karma belief between male and female undergraduate in Taiwan was significant. The female undergraduate had higher acceptation in the dimension of 'retribution in this life', 'afterlife retribution', 'retribution in descendant' and 'create destiny' than male undergraduate. The male had lower acceptation in the dimension of 'offset of good and evil', 'religious redemption'. Finally, this present study discussed how to apply the result of this study to life education and school counseling. The karma belief has both advantages and disadvantages in the practice of life education and school counseling. In life education, the karma belief could be used to be the one of criteria in situation of ethical decision and in answer the question of 'Why should become a moral person?' However, belief of karma may let students looking forward the external remuneration then could not to be autonomous, and lack the moral courage to criticize the violation. In school counseling, when people encounter the impermanence of life, they need a reasonable attribution instead of relief of suffering. So the karma belief could be the comfort when student in suffering, but the disadvantage of karma belief may just like the Karl Manx's ridicule to religion, is the opium of the people, could let them hold the negative view of fatalism, don't want work hard to deal with difficult, even the difficult is not really serious.起始頁-結束頁：181-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620180400510067篇名：初任國民中小學專任輔導教師職前培訓方案的參與經驗與需求評估之初探研究並列篇名：The Perspectives of Novice School Counselors in Taiwan Elementary and Secondary Schools for Pre-service Training Programs作者：宋宥賢(Yu-Hsien Sung);李佩珊(Pei-San Lee);張聖杰(Sheng-Chieh Chang)關鍵字：專任輔導教師;需求評估;滿意度;職前培訓;Needs assessment;novice school counselors;pre-service training programs;satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：51期出版年：2018中文摘要：《學生輔導法》規定2015年起全國中小學初任輔導人員需完成40小時職前基礎培訓課程。為此，本研究邀請113位參與2015年培訓主要參與者－國中小初任專輔教師，參與問卷調查(共100位)與訪談(共13位)，並以Kirkpatrick與Kirkpatrick (2006)四層次教育訓練評估模式(Four Level Evaluation Model)中的反應層次內容(reaction)為依據，初探其對此培訓的滿意狀況、相關參與經驗與期待等。量化結果顯示：初任專輔教師對整體培訓略屬滿意，然對部分培訓面向仍感不足，如培訓時程安排、培訓對輔導資源運用、對輔導策略研擬之幫助等。對此，質性結果進一步補充專輔教師略感滿意之原因，即整體培訓有助其職前預備，並提升專業認同及專業形象建構。此外，質性結果亦顯示，據專輔教師觀點，培訓待改進處尚包含(一)政策執行層面：培訓未分流、必選修課程規劃未落實、未事先瞭解參與者背景與課程需求；(二)課程主題層面：未完整依學校輔導所需規劃整體課程；(三)課程設計層面：部份課程偏重基礎概念講述，忽略實務層面之重要性、部份課程設計較不符學校輔導工作脈絡。綜此，本研究綜整專輔教師對培訓之相關期待，並據以擬定實務與未來研究建議；並進一步提出雙軌式訓練理念，以優化現有課程架構。英文摘要：After Taiwan's Ministry of Education enacted ”Student Guidance and Counseling Act” in 2014, thousands of novice school counselors are recruited to provide counseling services in elementary schools and secondary schools. Based on this act, school authorities must also arrange at least 40 hours pre-service basic professional training programs for novice school counselors to enhance their professional counseling capacity and even to help them realize the job descriptions of school guidance work in advance. However, there are no any empirical studies regarding this pre-service basic professional training programs until now. Some studies indicate that if the effectiveness and quality of professional training programs want to be improved, the perspectives and opinions of the participants for the professional training programs need to be explored. Therefore, to explore the effectiveness of the training programs and to provide constructive suggestions for the further training programs, this study recruits the main participants of the training programs - 113 novice school counselors to participate in the quantitative survey and the qualitative interview. The purpose of this study is to explore satisfactions, needs, and participating experiences of these novice school counselors for the training programs based on the reaction level of Four Level Evaluation Model (Kirkpatrick & Kirkpatrick, 2006). The data is collected by self-report questionnaire and semi-structured interview, and then these collected data is analyzed by Rasch PCM Model, good-of-fit test, and constant analysis. The results indicate that these novice school counselors feel dissatisfied with some aspects of the training programs which do not meet their needs. For instances, they feel dissatisfied with the time planning of the training programs, topics of courses among the training programs, teaching methods of courses among the training programs, and so on. As a result, their expectation for this training programs are as below. First, they expect that these courses among the training programs should be divided into compulsory courses and elective courses according to different positions of participants, and this categorization not only can assist the novice school counselors to establish their common professional capability but also assist them to establish the professional capability according to their different positions. Second, they expect that the organizer needs to survey the participants' training needy and then plans the training programs. Third, they think that the best period to hold the training program is summer vacation. Fourth, they think that, in order to enhance the effectiveness of the training program, the organizer needs to adopt some appropriate teaching methods for these novice school counselors, such as case method, practical discussion, and so on. Fifth, they expect that the organizer should establish evaluation mechanism to evaluate the effectiveness of the courses among the training program. Although the above-mentioned expectations are deserved consideration, overall, these novice school counselors still agree with the values of the training programs. For instances, they agree that the training programs can assist them to understand the work contents of school counseling, to clarify their role definition, and to prepare well basic professional skills for school counseling, thereby enhancing their professional identification and building their professional images. In addition, this study also proposes the two-track training and blended learning models for promoting novice school counselors' qualities and abilities. Most importantly, this study reorganizes the course structures of the training programs. Based on the results of this study, it is expected that the effectiveness and appropriateness of the training programs can be improved to support the development of professional capability of novice school counselors.起始頁-結束頁：217-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186201804005100701篇名：兩岸洽簽「臺灣不獨大陸不武」協議理論與民意基礎研究－一項臺灣民眾的民意調查分析並列篇名：Survey Research of Taiwanese Attitudes Regarding a Cross-Strait ”No Independence, No Use of Force” Interim Agreement作者：溫賈舒(Josh Wenger);陳政一(Cheng-i Chen);陳明通(Ming-tong Chen)關鍵字：政治談判;中程協議;「臺灣不獨大陸不武」協議;politial negotiation;interim agreement;”no independence, no war” agreement期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：由於蔡英文政府上台後，拒絕接受所謂的「九二共識」，北京因此中斷與臺北的對話，並導致兩岸關係陷入僵局。民意支持兩岸政治談判來到前所未有的高峰，但是支持談判結果達成兩岸統一者少之又少，更多希望北京能承認臺灣的主權地位，雙方建立外交關係。這兩種結果在現階段，甚至在可預見的未來都沒有可能。因此一項不涉及兩岸終局政治安排的中程協議，即「臺灣不獨大陸不武」協議，即成為本論文的研究主題，希望可以藉此一協議的洽簽緩解兩岸的「安全困境」，防止敵意螺旋上升，以維持台海現狀穩定。本論文更運用「談判前置期理論」中的「時機成熟理論」，探討洽簽此一協議的可能性。認為當兩岸都認知到目前的僵局，是一種「相互傷害的僵局」，必須「尋找出路」時，兩岸談判「臺灣不獨大陸不武」協議即變成一種可能的選項。另外本論文亦認識到兩岸政治談判是一種「雙層賽局」，依照Putnam（1988）的理論中，民意是國內（即第二層）的行動者，攸關政治談判的成功與否。因此運用蔡英文政府上任前後三次全國性民意調查資料，瞭解臺灣民眾支持兩岸洽簽「臺灣不獨大陸不武」協議的情形，並進一步分析其原因。透過「二元勝算對數模型」（binary logit model），選擇包括性別、年齡、籍貫、教育程度、收看媒體屬性、政黨認同、國族認同、國家認同，和統獨抉擇等個體層次變項，檢驗這些變數對支持或反對此一協議的解釋力。研究結果顯示，臺灣民眾顯著地支持兩岸簽署「臺灣不獨大陸不武」中程協議，不管是馬政府後期或蔡政府初期，都獲得半數以上的臺灣民眾支持，呈現穩定地趨勢；特別是蔡政府執政後，更顯著地增加到六成。並認為簽署這樣的協議可以帶來包括降低兩岸緊張關係等諸多好處，但仍然無法消除兩岸的軍備競賽、降低臺灣依賴美國的安全保證。同時亦有受訪者不贊成洽簽這項協議，特別是年輕受訪者、大專以上教育程度者，以及支持臺灣獨立、政黨取向屬「泛綠」陣營者，這些族群的意見都會為這項談判帶來新的變數，但也可能成為談判的籌碼。英文摘要：Since Tsai Ing-wen assumed the presidency in Taiwan and Beijing cut off cross- Strait dialogue due to Tsai's refusal to accept the so-called ”92 consensus,” public support in Taiwan for political negotiation has risen to unprecedently high levels. At the same time, the number of Taiwanese who could accept unification, Beijing's desired outcome for political negotiation, is very low. This study uses three national public opinion surveys regarding cross-Strait political negotiation conducted before and after the Tsai administration took office to analyze Taiwanese attitudes toward a possible compromise interim negotiation agreement in which Taipei would renounce independence in return for Beijing's renunciation of force while deferring Taiwan's final political status to future negotiation. Binary logit model analysis is used to examine the effect of individual-level variables on support for a ”no independence, no war” agreement, including gender, age, provincial origin, education level, media source preference, political party identification, national and ethnic identity, and unification/independence preference The first section of the paper reviews the literature on cross-Strait political negotiation, compares various potential negotiation formulas, and looks at past surveys of Taiwanese public opinion toward an interim or peace agreement. Using insights from pre-negotiation theory, this section examines the likelihood that political negotiation will take place, why ”no independence, no war” is the formula most likely to bring the two sides to the table, and why public opinion could play a critical role in the process of negotiation of an interim cross-Strait agreement. The second section compares the three surveys with respect to aggregate levels of public support for a ”no independence, no war” pact and to public expectations about the effects such an agreement would have on Taiwan's national sovereignty, national security, international space and economic development. The third section outlines the design of the binary logit model and discusses the choice of individual-level variables that will be tested for their impact on public support for an interim deal. The final section discusses the finding of the statistical analysis and their implications. The study shows that there is stable majority support among the Taiwanese public for Taipei to conclude a ”no independence, no war” agreement with Beijing, and that support for this agreement has risen since Tsai Ing-wen took office. There is optimism among the public that such an agreement could reduce tension between the two sides, but skepticism about its capacity to eliminate arms racing and reliance on military support from the United States. Negotiation of this type of agreement would face stronger resistance from younger, more educated citizens and those whose personal and political identity is linked to support for Taiwan independence. The opinions of these groups would create uncertainty about ratification of a ”no independence, no use of force” agreement but could also be a source of bargaining leverage for Taipei.起始頁-結束頁：75-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：誰來監督國會？公督盟推動立法院和地方議會透明化之經驗並列篇名：Who Will Supervise the Congress? The Experiences of CCW's Promotion of the Transparency of the Legislative Yuan and Local Councils作者：黃秀端(Shiow-duan Hawang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：127-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：書評：The Ordinary Virtues: Moral Order in a Divided World〔平凡的美德－分歧世界的道德秩序〕by Michael Ignatieff〔葉禮廷〕並列篇名：A review of The Ordinary Virtues: Moral Order in a Divided World by Michael Ignatieff作者：葉明叡(Ming-Jui Yeh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：135-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：世界民主大事紀2018年4-6月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: April-June 2018期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：143-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：參與之後？大陸配偶之政治行動與認同並列篇名：After Participation? Mainland Spouses' Political Actions and Identity in Taiwan作者：楊婉瑩(Wan-ying Yang);張雅雯(Ya-wen Chang)關鍵字：大陸配偶;政治化集體認同;政治參與;政治認同;Mainland spouses;politicized collective identity;political participation;political identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討，陸配來臺在政治社會敵意及傳統性別體制包夾下，經歷認同的困惑與失落，在採取發聲行動試圖改變之後，如何地影響其集體認同，而她們和臺灣這個政治社群的關係又產生何種轉化。本研究採取Simon與Klandermans（2001）「政治化的集體認同」觀點認為，行動與認同有著雙向互動的關係，權力鬥爭以及政治參與的過程，正是認同發展與重建的關鍵。透過田野研究我們觀察到，當陸配試圖改變其處境時，在這過程中，她們理解到臺灣這個政治體系的運作規則，內化社群價值，採取體系所接受的相對應的政治行動，強化了自己作為這個政治社群成員的能動性。而她們的行動是否得到體系的支持回應，不但影響她們對這個政治社群的認同的發展，也持續影響往後他們的政治參與方式。再者，陸配對臺灣的認同與行動的選擇，有著不同的連結與發展路徑，在訪談個案中，我們既看到Hirschman（1970）所指出的積極的「發聲」與「退出」的兩種回應，也提出另一種消極「疏離」的可能回應。這些不同的認同情感與行動連結的樣態，顯示陸配的政治認同是在行動的過程中被具體化，更是異質多樣的政治化的過程。英文摘要：Facing Taiwan's sociopolitical hostility and gender patriarchy, Mainland spouses have experienced the sense of confusion and the loss of identity. How do they react to this trapped situations? Do their voicing actions change their status and political identity? And what has changed in their relationship with Taiwan as a political community? Our study adopts Simon and Klandermans' (2001) concept of ”Politicalized Collective Identity” which argues that action and identity have a two-way interaction: the process of power struggle and political participation are the keys to individuals' identity development and reconstruction. From in-depth interviews and field research, we found that as mainland spouses try to change their situation, they encounter the regulations of political systems, internalize the norms of the political community, and take corresponding political actions approved by the system. Consequently, Mainland spouses strengthen their political agency as members of the system. Simultaneously, the political system's support for their actions not only affects their identity with the political community but also continues to influence their political participation in the future. Furthermore, there are diverse linkages and paths between Mainland spouses' identity with Taiwan and their choices of actions. From the interviewees, we not only find the active types of political action-”voice” and ”exit”, the ideal types coined by Hirshman, but also discover the more passive type of ”alienation”. The different patterns linking their attachment feelings and political actions reveal that the political identity of mainland spouses is formed and reified in the process of political action, which is in itself a process of diverse and heterogeneous politicization.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：政治學相關科系大學生參與太陽花學運的追蹤分析並列篇名：A Longitudinal Study of Political Science Majors' Participation in the Sunflower Student Movement作者：陳光輝(Kuang-hui Chen)關鍵字：太陽花學運;政治學教育;政治社會化;追蹤分析;Sunflower Student Movement;political science education;political socialization;longitudinal study期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文針對2011年入學的政治學相關科系大學生進行追蹤分析。該年度的政治學相關科系大學生在2011年至2015年之間參與了三波的問卷填答。我們以該筆資料檢視政治系學生在大學時期政治態度的變動狀況、對於太陽花學運的態度與參與狀況以及參加太陽花學運的可能影響。整體而言，超過七成的政治系學生支持太陽花學運，也有超過三成五的政治系學生參與了這個抗議事件。男性與公立大學的政治系學生傾向支持與參與太陽花學運。此外，政治系學生的台灣人/中國認同、政黨支持、對中國的態度等幾項政治態度影響了他們對於太陽花學運的態度。相對地，在是否參與太陽花學運部分，除了政黨支持，其餘的政治態度並無顯著的影響。取而代之的是地理位置遠近與否以及政治資訊的多寡影響了政治系學生是否參與太陽花學運。最後，參加太陽花學運與對民主制度的評價、台灣人認同、政黨支持以及對於政治事務的關注等政治態度與行為有所關連。這顯示政治系學生的政治傾向在參與太陽花學運過程中受到了這個抗議事件的影響。英文摘要：This study focuses on a cohort of undergraduate students majoring in political science. A three-wave longitudinal data collected between 2011 and 2015 are analyzed to examine the political science students' political attitudes during college years, their participation in the Sunflower Student Movement, and the possible impacts of participating in this protest. There were more than 70% of political science students supporting this movement and more than 35% of them taking part in this protest. It is found that students who were male and studied in the public universities were more likely to support and participate in this protest. In addition, whether the political science majors would support this protest depended on their Taiwanese / Chinese identity, partisanship, and impression of China. However, with the exception of partisanship, the above political attitudes lost their significant effects on whether the political science majors would participate in the protest. It turns out that campus location and the amount of political information received from colleagues were the significant factors contributing to the political science majors' participation in the protest. In addition, the significant relationship between participation in the Sunflower Student Movement and the students' attitudes toward democracy, Taiwanese / Chinese identity, partisanship, and attentiveness to political affairs indicates the possibility that this protest has left an imprint on this cohort of students.起始頁-結束頁：51-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：影響台灣民眾支持社會福利的因素－明確二分集合的分析並列篇名：Why Do Taiwanese Support Social Welfare? A Crisp-Set Analysis作者：陳怡如(Yi-ju Chen)關鍵字：社會福利態度;明確二分集合;必要條件;充分條件;多元因果關係;welfare attitudes;crisp-set;necessary condition;sufficient condition;multiple conjunctural causation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文使用「2014台灣社會公平正義滿意度」調查資料，同時以迴歸分析與集合分析兩種方法檢視台灣民眾的社會福利態度是否受到以下四類因素的影響：（一）體制評價：包括民主制度正當性與台灣民主滿意度；（二）個人規範性信念：包括規範性道德經濟與社會平等；（三）階級：包括自我認定的階級、職業和收入；（四）人口學變項：包括具有啟蒙民眾規範性觀念功能的教育程度，以及具有自利意涵的年齡、性別和縣市富裕程度。線性迴歸模型顯示，整體模型與個別變數的解釋力都偏低。然而，集合分析的結果卻顯示，「支持民主制度」與「支持社會平等」是「支持社會福利」不可或缺的必要條件。在充分條件方面，因為多元因果關係，總共有21條因果路徑。在各因果路徑中，「支持民主體制」、「支持道德經濟」、「支持社會平等」等價值觀是觸發支持社會福利的重要條件。單純自利考量不足以讓一般民眾支持社會福利，自利考量仍然必須與價值觀結合才會形成支持社會福利的態度。簡言之，台灣民眾支持社會福利的態度，是在支持民主的前提下，規範性觀念與自利考量結合的結果。英文摘要：This research uses ”The 2014 Survey on Social Justice in Taiwan” to examine the factors causing welfare attitudes in Taiwan. Both linear regression and crisp-set analysis are performed to analyze four categories of factors. (a) Regime Evaluation: legitimacy of democracy and satisfaction with democracy in Taiwan; (b) Normative Values: moral economy and social equality; (c) Class: self-identified class, jobs, and income; (d) demographic characteristics: education, age, gender, and area. The result of regression shows that neither the model nor the individual variables can explain Taiwanese welfare attitudes. However, the solutions of crisp-set demonstrate the contrary. ”Supporting Democracy” and ”Supporting Social Equality” are necessary conditions for ”Supporting Social Welfare”. Regarding sufficient conditions, twentyone causal paths leading to ”Supporting Social Welfare” are identified. ”Supporting Democracy”, ”Moral Economy”, and ”Supporting Social Equality” are especially crucial to intrigue ”Supporting Social Welfare” within these causal paths. Self-interest cannot cause welfare attitudes independent of other factors. Instead, the preference to social welfare are shaped by the interaction between self-interest and normative values. In a nutshell, Taiwanese support social welfare as a result of the interaction between self-interested and normative considerations in a legitimate democratic regime.起始頁-結束頁：101-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：#MeToo之後？性別權力的濫權與課責並列篇名：After #MeToo? The Abuse of Power and Gender Accountability作者：黃長玲(Chang-ling Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：147-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：書評：The Space Between Us: Social Geography and Politics〔我們之間－社會地理感與政治〕by Ryan D. Enos〔萊恩．伊諾斯〕並列篇名：Books Reviews: A review of The Space Between Us: Social Geography and Politics by Ryan D. Enos作者：王宏恩(Austin Horng-en Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：157-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：比利時地區性政黨的興衰發展及其對法蘭德斯分離運動的影響並列篇名：The Development of Regionalist Parties (VB, N-VA) and Its Impact on the Flemish Separatist Movement in Belgium作者：劉華宗(Hua-Tsung Liu)關鍵字：法蘭德斯運動;分離運動;法蘭德斯集團黨;新法蘭德斯聯盟;比利時;Flemish Movement;separatist movement;Vlaams Blok (Flemish Block, VB);Nieuw-Vlaamse Alliantie (New Flemish Alliance, N-VA);Belgium期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：比利時協和式民主制度，向來被譽為有能力以和平方式解決國內紛爭。但過去近十年來，比利時持續性政治僵局引起人們的懷疑，比利時聯邦制國家還走得下去嗎？比利時的地區性政黨（VB、N-VA），於1990年代及21世紀選舉中有亮麗的表現。他們以法蘭德斯地區利益為優先的訴求，導致法蘭德斯有走向分離主義及國家朝邦聯化方向發展的可能，對比利時政治體制影響可謂有重大。地區性政黨有很深的傳統「法蘭德斯運動」基礎，這是從1830年比利時獨立以來，就一直在追求法蘭德斯更大的自主權。本文將探討地區性政黨如何崛起，在過去歷年選舉的表現狀況；並且分析地區性政黨的意識型態、發展過程、興衰原因，以及對法蘭德斯分離運動的影響。英文摘要：Belgian consociational democracy is often praised for its ability to deal peacefully with the country's internal divisions. In the past decade political stalemates have raised doubts over whether Belgium will continue. Regionalist parties (VB, N-VA) were very successful in Belgium in the 1990s and continue to be successful in the 21th century. Their impact on the political system is important, since their regionalist agenda has led to a Flemish separatist movement and to a reform of the state toward a confederal logic. Regionalist parties have their roots in the ”Flemish Movement”, a collective term for a plurality of people and organizations that have pushed for greater Flemish autonomy since Belgium achieved independence in 1830. In this article we describe the spectacular electoral rise of the regionalist parties and the subsequent search for an electoral niche in a party system. This paper also presents an analysis of regionalist parties, their ideology, development, success and decline, and impact on the Flemish separatist movement.起始頁-結束頁：127-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：從櫥窗到花車：菲律賓政黨體系轉變之剖析並列篇名：From Showcase to Bandwagon: Exploration into the Transition of the Party Systems in the Philippines作者：翁俊桔(Chun-Chieh Weng);呂炳寬(Bing-Kuan Lu)關鍵字：後馬可仕時期;政黨體系;民主轉型;總統花車模式;歷史制度主義;post-Marcos era;party system;Democratic transformation;Presidential Bandwagon;historical institutionalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：36卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：政黨政治在菲律賓已經存續超過一個世紀，其不僅是菲國人民參與政治的主要管道，而且也是該國民主發展的關鍵機制。這套機制雖然在「馬可仕時期」曾經被迫停擺，但是在「人民力量革命」的衝撞下，政黨又再度恢復其功能。不過，「民主轉型」（後馬可仕時期）後的菲律賓，似乎不再是過去兩黨輪替的政黨體系型態，取而代之的是多黨林立的現象；該情形並不符合憲政學理的常軌。對此，相關學者認為1987年憲法的頒行似乎是最重要的關鍵，惟該部憲法到底是如何導致菲國的政黨體系轉變呢？雖然沒有取得定論，但是他們卻一致發現「恩從關係」的現象始終充斥其間。基於此，本文除了援引日本學者粕谷祐子（Yuko Kasuya）教授的「總統花車模式」作為印證的基礎外，也嘗試從歷史制度主義的觀點，進一步探討菲國的總統選舉與政黨體系轉變的邏輯關係。英文摘要：Party politics of the Philippines is known to have been in existence for more than one century. Not only is it the main channel for people to participate in politics, but it is the key mechanism for safeguarding democratic development as well. Although the democratic politics in the Philippines was once suspended during the ”Marcos period”, the function of party politics had been restored after the ”people's power revolution”. However, during post-Marcos era, the party system in the Philippines was transferred from a bipartisan rotation pattern to a multi-party pattern. It was true that such a situation did not conform to [the] constitutional theory in the usual way. With regard to the multi-party political practice, some professional scholars believe that the Constitution promulgated in 1987 should be the crucial factor, though there is still no definite answer to the question of how the Constitution resulted in the transformation of the party system. Despite all the arguments, these scholars consistently found that the ”patron-client relationship” was present through all political circumstances that followed. In view of this, this article cites the idea of [a] ”Presidential Bandwagon” by Japanese scholar Kasuya Yuko as the basis of further study and aims at exploring the logical relationship between the presidential election and the transformation of the party system in the Philippines from the perspective of historical institutionalism.起始頁-結束頁：179-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：以科學新聞融入教學提升中學生自我效能及論證能力之探討並列篇名：Promoting Secondary School Students' Science Self-Efficacy and Argumentation Ability with Science News Instruction作者：潘怡如(Yi-Ju Pan);陳雅君(Ya-Chun Chen);林煥祥(Huann-Shyang Lin)關鍵字：科學自我效能;科學新聞;論證能力;Self-Efficacy;Science News;Argumentation Ability期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討透過「科學新聞教學活動」後，學生在論證能力及科學自我效能提升之情形，以及論證能力與科學自我效能之關係。研究工具包括「論證能力測驗」、「科學新聞論證活動學習單」和「科學自我效能量表」。研究對象為屏東縣某公立高中的兩個自然組班級，一個班級為實驗組(N = 29)，實施科學新聞融入教學，另一個班級為對照組(N =29)。研究結果發現：一、實驗組學生在論證能力後測表現顯著優於對照組(F = 49.93, p ＜.001)，並在科學自我效能的後測表現也顯著優於對照組(F = 45.77, p ＜ .001)。二、實驗組學生論證能力成長趨勢由較低層次逐漸發展為較高層次。三、實驗組學生論證能力前後測變化量與科學自我效能前後測變化量具有中度顯著正相關(r = .46, p ＜ .01)英文摘要：This quasi-experimental study was designed to explore the efficacy of using science news to promote the development of secondary students' argumentation ability and science self-efficacy and investigate the relationship of the two dependent variables. A pre-posttest design was employed to invite one class of 11th grades (N = 29) as the experimental group with 16 lessons argumentation instruction, while another class (N = 29) with the similar backgrounds using traditional instruction served as the comparison group. The instruments of science argumentation ability test, science news argumentation activity worksheet and science self-efficacy questionnaire along with follow-up interviews were used to assess the two group students' performance. Research findings revealed that the experimental group students outperformed those in comparison group in science argumentation ability (F = 49.93, p ＜ .001) and science self-efficacy (F = 45.77, p ＜ .001).The level of experimental group students' argumentation ability have developed gradually from lower level to higher level overtime. In addition, significant correlation existed between the experimental group students' pre-posttest variation scores in the science argumentation ability test and the survey of science self-efficacy questionnaire.起始頁-結束頁：71-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201803_26(1).000401篇名：遲語兒幼兒期至學齡前期的語言發展型態：兩年縱貫研究並列篇名：Late-talking Children's Language Development Pattern in the Early Childhood: A Longitudinal Study for Two Years作者：呂信慧(Hsin-Hui Lu);曹峰銘(Feng-Ming Tsao)關鍵字：語言成長曲線;語言晚熟;語言發展;遲語兒;Language development;Late-bloomer;Language growth curve;Late-talker期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：遲語兒在兩歲時的表達性語言能力落後一般兒童，而先前研究顯示遲語兒日後語言發展迥異，即出現語言障礙，抑或僅是語言晚熟。但是，這兩群遲語兒從二到四歲的語言發展型態有哪些差異？本研究目的探究這兩類遲語兒在這期間的語言發展型態。本研究追蹤遲語兒（n = 35）及對照兒童（n = 34）二到四歲的語言表現，總共蒐集三波資料（兩歲、三歲及四歲），遲語兒在四歲時按語言能力區分成語言「障礙組」（n = 12）與「晚熟組」（n = 20）。結果發現：（1）三組兒童在二到四歲的語言發展類型互異，而且在控制母親教育程度、語言療育和幼兒教育之後，他們在此期間的語言發展曲線亦仍各不同（2）在此期間接受語言療育與幼兒教育期間較長的遲語兒，和對照兒童的語言落差呈現隨年齡增加而遞減的趨勢。總結來說，雖然四歲才能確診遲語兒為語言障礙或僅是語言晚熟，但這兩類遲語兒自兩歲開始已展現迥異的語言發展型態。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine the language development of late-talkers with language-impairment and late-bloomer from toddlerhood to the preschooler stage. A total of 35 LTs and 34 typically-developing toddlers (TD) provided 3 waves of data at annual intervals beginning at age 2. The LTs were distinguished as those with language disorder (LD, n = 12) and the late bloomers (LB, n = 20) based on their language abilities at age 4. The three groups of children were compared with their language abilities at each time point, and also their language development trajectories from age 2 to age 4. This study had two major findings. First of all, ANOVA analyses the cross-sectional data and HLM analysis the longitudinal data showed that the TDs had better language performance than the LBs, while both groups outperformed the LDs. These findings have verified the proposal of Language Endowment Spectrum. Secondly, the language levels of LT children with LD and LB will improve with early language intervention and kindergarten education. To sum up, the children with LT or LB already show different language development patterns from toddlerhood to the preschooler hood.起始頁-結束頁：611-636資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201806_49(4).00052篇名：臺灣國民小學國語課本生字於心理語言學特性之研究並列篇名：Psycholinguistic Properties of Chinese Characters in Primary School Corpora of Taiwan作者：李孟峰(Meng-Feng Li);蘇宜芬(Yi-Fen Su)關鍵字：視覺複雜性;語音一致性;語音規則性;語義透明度;Phonetic consistency;Phonetic regularity;Semantic transparency;Visual complexity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究將國民小學一至六年級的國語科教材，包括南一、康軒及翰林三種版本所列之生字作心理語言學特性上的分析，包括字元種類、空間結構、視覺複雜性、聲旁語音規則性及一致性、聲旁和部首家族數、部首語義透明度，以及獨立性和附著性部件等，並依過去實徵研究的結果檢視國小國語科課本生字編排的適切性。整體而言，臺灣教育部審定的國小國語課本，相較於大陸及香港的國小國語科教材，雖然呈現簡化字與正體字彼此間的特殊性，但生字編排方式仍屬適切。本研究建立臺灣地區國小國語科教材的生字特性資料庫，這些生字特性的分析可供教師發展補救教學教材之參考，也可做為未來研究者選取實驗材料之依據。近年來，無論是中文書寫系統或是拼音文字系統皆有許多學者指出，認字能力的發展確實有助於閱讀理解能力的進步，可見認字能力是閱讀理解歷程中非常重要的一環。不過，中文字與拼音文字之間於字元本身的結構、特性及使用方面皆有很大的不同，本研究亦試圖回顧過去相關之中文字形音義方面的文獻，試著以統計角度的觀點引導未來研究之可能路徑。英文摘要：This study aims at analyzing the properties of the listed vocabularies which are included in three versions of current mandarin textbooks, Nan-Yi, Kang-Syuan and Han-Lin, for students in grade one to grade six. The psycholinguistic characteristics of vocabularies, including types of characters, spatial structure, visual complexity, phonetic regularity, phonetic consistency, semantic transparency, independent and bound components, as well as phonetic and semantic radical families, are carefully analyzed. In general, the elementary level mandarin textbooks validated by the Taiwanese Ministry of Education may display differences between the simplified and traditional characters, when compared to those used in China or Hong Kong. This study established a psycholinguistic property database of Chinese character for mandarin corpora used in Taiwanese elementary schools. This database can be a reference for both the mandarin textbook publishers and the instructors for developing remedial instruction materials. It is also a useful resource for future researchers to select experimental materials. To give examples, we suggested to investigate whether the Chinese character within the word will automatically activate the network of neighborhood words sharing the character, and took a further investigation about whether the neighborhood words will affect the identification of the target Chinese characters, and whether the process of characters within the word has been involved in Chinese word recognition. Furthermore, Some educctional implications of this study are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：637-662資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201806_49(4).00063篇名：母親與十四個月大幼兒共讀繪本手指圖文之語句功能並列篇名：Frequency and function of pointing during mothers and 14-month-old children shared book reading作者：李菁芸(Ching-Yun Lee);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：幼兒;母親;指向動作;親子共讀;Child;Joint book reading;Mothers;Pointing期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的在探討親子共讀時，母親與十四個月大幼兒指向動作使用的情形，以瞭解母親與十四個月大幼兒手指圖案或文字的次數頻率和語句功能，以及母親與幼兒使用手指圖文的關係。45對母親與十四個月大幼兒在家共讀彼此熟悉的繪本，全程錄音錄影，研究結果顯示：1.母親、十四個月大幼兒手指圖案的次數頻率均高於文字；2.母親指著繪本圖案或文字時，其所伴隨的語句功能最多為「強調或傳達相同語義訊息」，其次則為「增加更完整、清楚的語義訊息」及「引導注意」、「無法辨識」；3.十四個月大幼兒已出現大量手指圖文的指向動作，但尚未發展出清晰可辨的口語詞彙；4.母親與十四個月大幼兒共讀時，母親手指圖文的次數與幼兒手指圖文的次數呈現正相關。文末並對未來相關研究及親子共讀方式提出建議與討論。英文摘要：This study examines use of pointing during mother-child shared book reading in order to uncover the frequency and function of pointing to pictures and to text in mothers and 14- month-old children. Forty five mother-child dyads were videotaped in their homes when children were 14 months old. Results indicate that: 1. mothers and children pointed to pictures more frequently than text; 2. emphasizing or conveying the same messages, increasing complete and clear messages and directing 14-month-old children attention were the three main functions of maternal pointing; 3. the 14-month-old children pointed a lot but the function of their pointing was not clear; 4. positive correlations were found between frequency of pointing used by mothers and those used by children. Findings are discussed and suggestions for future studies were also provided.起始頁-結束頁：663-682資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201806_49(4).00074篇名：Children's Problems With Inference Making: Causes and Consequences並列篇名：兒童的推論問題：原因與後果作者：珍•奧克西爾(Jane Oakhill);凱特•肯恩(Kate Cain)關鍵字：Comprehension difficulties;Inference abilities;Vocabulary depth;理解困難;推論能力;詞彙深度期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Understanding a text requires not only understanding the individual words and sentences, but also requires the construction of an integrated model of the text as a whole: a Mental Model (Johnson-Laird, 1983) or Situation Model (Kintsch, 1998). In the first part of this paper, we differentiate between the types of inference that occur as a reader understands a text: necessary inferences (at both the local and global level) and 'merely elaborative' inferences, which might embellish the reader's understanding, but which are not essential to it. We then go on to discuss the problems of children who have a Specific Comprehension Difficulty (i.e. they are able to read words at an age-appropriate level but, nevertheless, have a poor understanding of the text overall). We describe the particular difficulties that such children have in answering inferential questions about a text, and outline the evidence that such difficulties are causally related to comprehension skill. We then discuss the reciprocal relation between vocabulary skills and inference making. Inference skills have a clear role in helping readers to derive the meanings of unknown words from text through the use of contextual cues and, conversely, deep vocabulary knowledge (what is known about words), and rapid access to that knowledge, can support inference making.英文摘要：理解篇章不僅僅只要讀懂個別的字詞和語句，並且也要能建構一個有關通篇文章的統整模式，稱之為心智模式或者情境模式。在本文的第一部分，我們區分幾種讀者理解文章時會出現的推論：一種是必要性推論（包括局部與整體層次的推論），另一種是可以豐富讀者的理解，但是並非必需的“單純精緻化”推論。然後我們接著討論有特定理解困難的兒童問題（界定為他們識字能力達到該有的年齡水準，但是對於篇章的理解能力偏弱）。我們描述這類兒童在回答根據文章進行推論性問題的困難點，並且呈現證據說明這類的困難和理解技能具有因果關係，我們更進一步討論詞彙能力和推論技能的雙向關係。推論技能對於有助於讀者運用的文章脈絡線索推敲出不熟悉字詞的意義；反之，如果讀者具有深度的詞彙知識（即對詞彙所知的一切）與快速提取詞彙的能力，也有助於進行推論。起始頁-結束頁：683-699資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201806_49(4).00085篇名：Knowledge-Based Inference Making for Reading Comprehension: What to Teach and What Not並列篇名：促成閱讀理解的知識性推論：教與不教什麼？作者：卡爾斯登．艾爾博(Carsten Elbro)關鍵字：Graphic organizer;Inference instruction;Knowledge-based inference;知識性推論;推論教學;圖表組織期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：It is easy to see that texts do not tell the whole story. Rather, they can be seen as detailed instructions to readers about which background knowledge they should activate and combine into a coherent mental model. There fore, readers will have to add knowledge and link information from the text with relevant background knowledge. In many cases, the text does not exhibit any explicit signal that something is missing, and the reader has to make an inference to maintain the global coherence of the text. It has been shown that students with poor comprehension sometimes fail to make such knowledge-demanding inferences because they fail to activate the relevant knowledge. In a first study, 11-year-old students were taught to activate relevant background knowledge by means of graphic organisers: some boxes had to be filled with information from the text, while others were to be filled with information from the reader's background knowledge. The teaching turned out to be highly effective not only for inference making in reading, but also for reading comprehension in general. Two limitations are discussed. First, teaching to activate background knowledge is probably much more important for comprehension of expository texts than for typical narrative texts. This is so because comprehension of expository texts depends much more on background knowledge that is abstract, not first hand experience and thus not immediately available. Second, an over-reliance on background knowledge may stand in the way for learning something new that is in conflict with prior knowledge or beliefs. The paper ends with a call for replication studies. It is further suggested that the teaching of knowledge activation for inference making may be integrated into the teaching of common text structures such as cause-consequence, compare-contrast, and problem-solution.英文摘要：一般普遍認為文本本身並無法充分代表故事應有的內涵，他們反而可以被視為是引導讀者觸發與結合背景知識以形成連貫性心智模式的指導語。因此，讀者有必要加入自己的背景知識，並且與文本訊息連結，才有閱讀理解。然而，文本往往不會清楚顯示出到底缺少什麼訊息，所以讀者就必須進行該有的推論，以維持文章的連貫性。研究指出，理解能力弱的學生可能因為他們無法觸發相關的背景知識以進行應有的推論。在本研究當中，我們教導11歲學生透過利用圖表組織觸發相關的背景知識：有些圖表需要填入文本訊息，有些則必須填入讀者的背景知識。結果發現，這樣的教學不僅有助於學生的推論能力，也能提升他們整體的閱讀理解。本文提出兩個該研究的限制：首先，教導如何觸發背景知識可能對於閱讀說明文比閱讀敘述文重要，因為讀懂說明文較需依賴抽象的背景知識，而非具體有感的切身經驗；其次，過度依賴背景知識可能會妨礙學生學習與本身先備知識或信念矛盾的新知。本文最後呼籲複製此類的研究，並且主張激發背景知識的教學應該與「原因－結果」、「比較－對照」與「問題－解決」等常見之文章結構的教學整合。起始頁-結束頁：701-713資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201806_49(4).00096篇名：情緒表達的性別差異：跨情境的分析並列篇名：Gender Differences in Emotional Expressions: A Cross-Situational Analysis作者：江文慈(Wen-Tzu Chiang)關鍵字：人際情境;性別差異;情緒表達;Emotional expression;Gender differences;Interpersonal context期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究在探討情緒表達的性別差異是否受到情境因素的影響。研究方法採問卷調查法，研究工具乃自編的「多重情境情緒表達量表」，研究對象是台灣地區的大學生，有效問卷605份（男生305名，女生300名）。研究結果如下：（一）正向情緒（快樂、喜愛、尊敬、感謝）的表達在四個情境都是女生多於男生，呈跨情境的一致。（二）悲傷、害怕、內疚等三種內化型負向情緒的表達，對普通關係者無性別差異，害怕與內疚的表達在親近私下和親近公開的情境是女生多於男生，而悲傷表達只有在親近私下的情境是女生多於男生；至於羞恥表達，面對普通關係者是男生多於女生，對關係親近者則無性別差異。（三）外化型負向情緒（生氣、厭惡、輕視和嫉妒）和自豪、驕傲等情緒，對普通關係者在私下和公開場合都是男生多於女生，對親近關係者，則有所不同。整體而言，情緒表達的性別差異視不同情緒在不同情境有所變化。英文摘要：This study utilizes a contextual perspective to exam whether gender differences in emotional expressions are stable across interpersonal contexts. A questionnaire survey was adopted in this study, and a total of 605 university students (305 males and 300 females) participated. The results were as follows: (1) Females reported expressing positive emotions such as happiness, love, gratitude, and respect more frequently than males across four situations. (2) Females reported expressing fear and guilty more frequently than males when with a familiar person in public or private, but no significant gender difference was found in situations with an unfamiliar person. Females expressed more sadness than males only in private with a familiar person. Moreover, males reported more shame expressions than females when interacting with an unfamiliar person. (3) Males reported expressing more anger, disgust, contempt, jealousy, pride, and hubris to an unfamiliar person in public or private than females, whereas females expressed more anger and disgust to familiar persons than males. As noted above, the findings indicated that gender differences in emotional expressions vary by emotions and interpersonal contexts.起始頁-結束頁：345-366資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201803_49(3).00017篇名：希望取向個別諮商對藥癮者目標建構與未來生活適應之探究並列篇名：Hope-Based Individual Counseling for Drug Addicts to Improve Goal Construction and Life Adaptation作者：鄭曉楓(Hsiao-Feng Cheng);吳永杉(Yung-Shan Wu)關鍵字：希望取向諮商;希望理論;敘事研究;藥癮者;Drug addictions;Hope-based individual counseling;Hope theory;Narrative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在了解希望取向個別諮商運用於即將出獄的藥癮者之歷程與內涵。研究參與者為5位北區某獄所一年內將出獄之男性毒品受刑人，分別進行每週一次約40分鐘，每人6-8次不等之希望取向個別諮商。總體共得34份個別諮商文本，採敘事研究法之「類別－內容」分析資料。研究結果發現：（一）主動思考的歷程與內涵，1.營建嶄新空間而成為優先作者：從對家庭的虧欠意識到彌補的責任；2.放慢速度在空隙中整合斷裂：從年華逝去和尊嚴不再到創造價值成就。（二）路徑思考的歷程與內涵，1.想像未來生活而盤整補充：開展社會興趣的預防內控路徑；2.停滯之困境與阻礙：聚焦自我阻斷和倚靠家中經濟的封閉路徑。（三）希望目標意識與未來生活適應，1.翻轉角色位置而彰顯主體：從計畫趕不上變化到勾勒生涯規劃的雛型；2.不帶判斷的允許得以貼近真實：突破戒毒與人際連結的兩難困境。（四）希望三要素之相互作用，1.述說希望目標的歷程能強化主動思考；2.確認所欲之希望目標能帶動路徑思考；3.內控取向的路徑能提升主動思考。最後，根據研究結果進行討論與並建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to examine individual counseling with a hope-based approach applied to drug addicts. Participants were 5 male drug addicts who would be released from the prison in northern Taiwan within one year. Each of them received 6-8 sessions of weekly individual counseling. There were a total 34 transcripts of individual counseling. Data were examined using categorical-content analysis of narrative research. The findings were: 1) Agency thinking - (a) building a new space and becoming a priority author: gaining a sense of owing the family to make up for the responsibility; (b) slowing down to integrate the cracks: from the passing of time and loss of dignity to creating valuable achievements. 2) Pathways thinking - (a) imagining the future of life and supplement: developing social interests to create paths of prevention; (b) being stagnant by obstacles: self-blocking and dependence on family. 3) Goal setting and life adaptation - (a) role reversal and focusing on subjectivity: from unpredictability to outlining of career; (b) non-judgmental acceptance leading to genuineness: breaking the dilemma between rejecting drugs and interpersonal relationships. 4) Interaction of three components - (a) describing goal process could strengthen agency thinking; (b) confirming real goal could drive pathways thinking; (c) pathways of internal control could improve agency thinking. Finally, results were discussed and suggestions were offered.起始頁-結束頁：367-390資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201803_49(3).00028篇名：經濟弱勢學生目標設定、認知負荷與學習意志力之研究：以台北市與新北市國小為例並列篇名：A Study of Financially Disadvantaged Students' Goal Setting, Cognitive Load, and Volition in Learning: Cases from Elementary Schools in Taipei City and New Taipei City作者：黃儒傑(Ju-Chieh Huang)關鍵字：目標設定;經濟弱勢學生;認知負荷;學習意志力;Cognitive load;Economically disadvantaged students;Goal setting;Volition in learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究實施問卷調查，以瞭解經濟弱勢學生在目標設定、認知負荷與學習意志力的現況及其與非經濟弱勢者的差異，並探討目標設定與認知負荷對學習意志力的關係。本研究依各區分層取樣，回收問卷經濟弱勢學生208 份及非經濟弱勢學生1965 份。研究發現一些重要結論，首先，經濟弱勢學生在目標接受與目標承諾層面，呈現較低的目標設定。其次，經濟弱勢學生在心智負荷與時間負荷層面，具有較高的認知負荷。第三，經濟弱勢學生在意識注意控制與內隱注意控制層面，顯現較低的學習意志力。最後，目標設定與認知負荷，對學習意志力具顯著影響，且目標設定還會經由認知負荷間接影響學習意志力。英文摘要：This study used questionnaires to analyze the differences of goal setting, cognitive load, and volition in learning between financially disadvantaged students and non- financially disadvantaged students. The goal was to investigate the relationships among goal setting, cognitive load, and volition in learning. 208 questionnaires from financially disadvantaged students and 1965 questionnaires from non-financially disadvantaged students were collected. Several important results were found. First, financially disadvantaged students showed lower goal setting than non-financially disadvantaged students. Second, financially disadvantaged students showed significantly higher mental load and time load than non-financially disadvantaged students. Third, financially disadvantaged students' volition in learning was significantly lower than non-financially disadvantaged students. Finally, students' goal setting and cognitive load had significant effect on their volition in learning.起始頁-結束頁：391-411資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201803_49(3).00039篇名：中學生快樂與學業能力之關係的縱貫性研究並列篇名：Longitudinal correlational research of happiness and academic competence among Taiwanese high school students作者：許崇憲(Chong-shiann, Hsu)關鍵字：交叉延宕相關;快樂;臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫;潛在成長模型;學業能力;Academic competence;Cross-lagged correlations;Happiness;Taiwan Education Panel Survey;Latent growth modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究採用臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫的調查資料，探討中學生整體快樂及學校快樂的潛在成長模型與彼此之間的關係，並檢驗這兩種快樂與學業能力的關係。潛在成長模型及交叉延宕相關分析結果顯示，台灣中學生的整體快樂及學校快樂程度皆隨著年級而下降，但是兩者的初始水準愈高，下降幅度則較慢。其次，交叉延宕相關分析顯示整體快樂及學校快樂可相互預測。第三，學業能力初始水準愈高，成長速度愈快。第四，學校快樂初始水準與學業能力初始水準為顯著正相關，但學校快樂初始水準愈高，學業能力成長速度較慢。第五，學校快樂下降速度較快，學業能力成長速度也較快。最後，國一時的學校快樂正向預測國三學業能力，後者正向預測高二學校快樂。意味著在相同教育階段內，學業快樂正面影響之後的學業能力；在教育階段轉換之間，學業能力正面影響學校快樂。根據本文發現，學生快樂是心理學解釋與經濟學解釋交互作用下的結果。最後討論未來研究方向及可能的實務做法。英文摘要：This research presented latent growth models of general happiness and school happiness among Taiwanese high school students. The relationships of these two types of happiness and academic competence were also examined. Seven hypotheses were made based on the economic and psychological explanations of happiness, the academic emotion theory, the broad-and-build theory, and the theory of eudaimonic well-being. The data from the Taiwan Educational Panel Survey were analyzed, and latent growth modeling and cross-lagged correlation were conducted. First, it was found that high school students showed decreasing general happiness and school happiness as grade level increased. However, there were slower declines for those with higher initial levels of general happiness. Second, the cross-lagged correlations showed that general happiness and school happiness significantly predicted each other. These findings implied that the economic explanation would better explain the origin of happiness than the psychological explanation. Third, the relationship between general happiness and academic competence was not significant. Fourth, the higher the initial level of school happiness, the slower the academic competence grew. The growth slope of academic competence was correlated positively with the growth slope of school happiness. But the growth slope of school happiness was negatire. Students with faster growth of academic competence would experience faster decline of school happiness. It implied that academic competency might grow at the cost of decreasing school happiness. These findings did not support the prediction from the academic emotion theory, broad-and-build theory, or theory of eudaimonic well-being. However, the theories of academic emotion and eudaimonic well-being were supported by results from the cross-lagged correlations. It showed that school happiness in Grade 7 positively predicted academic competency in Grade 9, which in turn predicted school happiness in Grade 11. It suggested that in the same educational stage, school happiness affected academic competence; while transitioning between two educational stages, academic competency affected the following school happiness. Further research and practical implications were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：413-435資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201803_49(3).000410篇名：青少年目的感經驗之探究並列篇名：The Experience of Adolescents' Sense of Purpose作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang)關鍵字：目的感;志向;青少年;Adolescent;Ambition;Sense of purpose期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的在探討青少年的目的感經驗，包括其內涵、發展與影響因素，以及相關因素間之差異情形。參與者為152位國中生，其中62位男生、90位女生，年齡介於13至16歲間，平均為14.16歲（SD = 0.97）。透過研究者設計的青少年目的感結構式訪談大綱，對參與者進行一次、約40分鐘訪談，所得之訪談內容，以質性內容分析方法，歸納未來志向、生活重心、理想生活以及理想社會等四個目的感之內涵與相關經驗，包括內涵、理由、何時發展、行動投入等相關經驗，以及其人際資源與支持情形。另外也計算相關類別之次數分配，探討相關因素之差異情形。研究結果為約有一半參與者產生具體志向，選擇志向依據個人興趣特質或專長、外在期待建議或條件、助人利他及存在意義。生活重心內涵為學業升學、父母家人、同學朋友、興趣娛樂。理想生活內涵為實踐理想職涯、擁有外在經濟條件、平安平凡的生活價值，及建立家庭與父母同住。理想社會內涵為朝向正向社會和諧、環境生態保育、教育文化運動以及多元公平正義。此外，年齡與部份目的感的形成時間與行動有顯著差異。根據結果進行討論，並提出建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore adolescents' sense of purpose, including its content, development, affecting factors, and differences among the various contents of their experiences. The participants were 152 junior high school students, 62 boys and 90 girls, between the ages of 13 and 16 (M = 14.16, SD = 0.97). The study designed a structured interview guide for adolescents' sense of purpose and conducted a 40 -mintute interview with each participant. Qualitative content analysis was conducted to analyze verbatim transcription of interview data and induced four contents and relevant experiences of their sense of purpose. The contents of sense of purpose were ambitions for future, life focuses, an ideal life, and an idea l society. The relevant experience was related to contents, reasons, the timing to establish the sense of purpose, engaging and involving, and support from interpersonal sources. We calculated the frequencies of relevant categories and explored the variances between these categories. The results showed that 50% of participants had developed concrete ambitions. Ambitions for future were selected based on participants' interest and personality characteristics or specialties, external expectations, suggestions or conditions, altruism, and life meaning. Life focuses were related to furthering academic pursuits, parents and family, classmates and friend, interests, and recreations. An ideal life was related to an ideal career, a decent life, a safe and ordinary life, and having a family to live with their parents. An ideal society was perceived as a positive and harmonious society including environmental and ecological conservation, educational and cultural development, and multidimensional justice. There was a significant difference between the age and the time to establish a sense of purpose as well as actions taken. A discussion was provided with suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：437-459資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201803_49(3).000511篇名：從角色默契消失到敵意湧現的惡化歷程：認定伴侶不貞的男性親密殺人心理探究並列篇名：The Deterioration Process Resulting from the Loss of Role Understanding to the Emergence of Hostility: Intimate Partner Homicide Caused by Accusations of Infidelity作者：邱獻輝(Hsien-Huei Chiou)關鍵字：文化考量;不貞;殺妻;華人關係主義;Chinese Relationalism;Cultural Consideration;Infidelity;Intimate Partner Homicide期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：不貞是親密殺人的重要前導事件，國外雖已累積不少研究，但多數缺乏文化考量；國內雖已開啟殺害不貞伴侶之心理探究、且融入華人文化的考量，但皆為單一受訪者的敘事探究；故國內外文獻皆有闕漏。為了周延建構台灣此類殺害伴侶者的心理機制，本研究從華人關係主義的角度切入，邀請十位認定伴侶不貞的男性親密殺人者進行深度訪談，並審閱其判決書、社工紀錄、犯罪紀錄，再以共識質性研究法分析文本。研究結果彙整出一個特徵範疇與四個歷程範疇，前者為「思維：關係主義的男性貞節信念」，後者包括「遠因：角色默契消逝的伴侶衝突」、「近因：信任崩解後的敵意湧現」、「爆發：親密暴行質變、憤恨殺害伴侶」、「回首：後悔」。此歷程結果有兩個可能的意涵：其一，從關係主義的觀點來審視，受訪者親密殺人歷程似是一個「從角色默契消失到敵意湧現的惡化歷程」；其二，認定伴侶不貞後出現的信任崩解／敵意湧現，可能是受訪者從相對輕微的親密暴力、惡化變質成殺害伴侶的促發因子之一－但此推測未曾見於先前文獻，後續研究可進一步探討。英文摘要：Accusing one's partner of infidelity is one of the major causes stated by offenders when intimate partner homicide occurs. Much research has been undertaken concerning this issue among western research literature, but most of them lacked cultural considerations with respect to the psychological process of homicide. In Taiwan, researchers who investigated this topic with Chinese cultural consideration undertook only narrative research based on a single participant, which only presented the specific experience from an individual's perspective and thus generalization is limited. Therefore, there is a gap within the literature on this this topic area. This study is based on Chinese Relationalism perspectives and is designed to comprehensively construct the psychological mechanism behind this type of homicide. Participants of this study consisted of ten male prisoners who accused their partners of infidelity and were convicted of homicide. Consensual qualitative research (CQR) was applied to analyze interview scripts, along with consulting written verdicts, criminal records, and records maintained by social workers. The results revealed one characteristics category and four process categories. The former was ”Personal thoughts: Male thinking related to fidelity based on Chinese Relationalism”. The later includes (a) Fundamental reasons: couple conflicts along with the loss of role understanding; (b); Proximate reasons: the emergence of hostility after losing trust; (c) Explosion: the worsening of intimate partner violence and accumulated rage leading to intimate homicide. (d) Looking back: regret. There were several implications from these results. Firstly, based on Chinese Relationalism, the interviewees’ homicide process seemed to be ”a deterioration process resulting from the loss of role understanding to the emergence of hostility.” Secondly, based on the results, it could be hypothesized that ”during the process of intimate partner homicide, the loss of trust and the emergence of hostility caused by partner infidelity might be an important reason for the worsening of intimate partner violence.” However, no research literature has discussed the role of the trust/hostile related to the intimate partner homicide caused by accusation of infidelity; thus, this would be an important area for future research to explore.起始頁-結束頁：461-486資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201803_49(3).000612篇名：常用漢字部件的位置規則性與位置自由度與其他文字特性相關之分析–以中文部件組字與形構資料庫為基礎並列篇名：A Corpus-based Analysis of Radical Position and the Degree of Freedom of Permissible Positions and Examination of the Influential Radical Properties作者：曾千芝(Chien-Chih Tseng);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);張瓅勻(Li-Yun Chang);胡中凡(Jon-Fan Hu);陳修元(Shiou-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：位置規則性;部件;組字知識;漢字;識字教學;Chinese character;Character learning and instruction;Othography;Position-based regularity of radicals;Radicals期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：49卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：漢字是由部件在二維的方形空間中排列而成。部件不但只會出現在特定幾種位置上（其可能出現位置的數目即為位置自由度），並與某一特定位置有不同的關聯程度（其機率即位置規則性），例如部件「<U+624C>」只出現在左側（如：換揮損搗撿擄等），而掌握這些組字規則的知識是識字教學的重要環節。雖然如此，鮮少有研究檢視常用正體漢字部件出現在特定位置的機率，以及部件特性與位置規則性之間的關聯。本研究採用陳學志、張瓅勻、邱郁秀、宋曜廷、張國恩（2011）11種漢字結構，以及中研院的「五大字集部件表」的其中438個部件，對「常用國字標準字體表」（甲表）的4,808漢字進行編碼。結果顯示：（1）平均每個部件只會出現在所有22種位置中的2.66種；（2）所有部件的平均位置規則性為75.5%，且有140個（33%）部件只出現在一個特定位置；（3）當部件屬於非常用字時，位置規則性越高。整體研究結果支持漢字部件的位置規律性，文末並討論此結果在識字教學上的意涵與可能的應用方式。英文摘要：Chinese characters are composed of radicals appearing in non-linear spatial configurations. Although the visual complexity of Chinese orthography has been widely recognized, the probability that a radical appears in a permissible position within a configuration is yet to be investigated. This understanding of what patterns of radicals are spatially arranged would be crucial for mastering Chinese orthographic knowledge. The present study aims to analyze the positions of 438 radicals extracted from 4,808 most frequently used Chinese characters according to 22 permissible positions. The results reveal three main findings. First, on average, each radical has 2.66 permissible positions. Second, 33% of the 438 radicals exhibit extremely high position-based regularity (i.e., they only appear in one particular position). Third, only the factor ”non-character” could predict high position-based regularity. Overall, the findings spell out the statistical regularities underlying the composition of radicals and their arranged positions within different configurations. Supporting examples and the implications of these regularities for learning and teaching Chinese characters are offered and discussed.起始頁-結束頁：487-511資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201803_49(3).000701篇名：美國華盛頓州國小階段跨國移民學生之學習安置和語言支援制度並列篇名：A Study of the Academic Placement and Language Support Policy for Immigrant Students in an Elementary Public School of Washington State, U.S.A.作者：洪麗卿(Li-Ching Hung);劉美慧(Meihui Liu)關鍵字：多元文化;移民學生;語言支援系統;學業安置;multicultural education;immigrants;linguistic support;academic placement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在探究美國華盛頓州國小階段跨國移民學生之學習安置和語言支援制度，以及政策從州層次至學校層級轉化之實施情形。本文以華盛頓州為研究場域，進行九個月的田野研究，並以西雅圖學區一所具移民族群多樣性之K-5公立小學為個案學校，藉由參與觀察、深入訪談和文件分析等方法來蒐集資料。研究發現有四：一、華盛頓州跨國移民學生之學習安置和語言支援制度趨於雙文化教育取向與針對特殊及異文化者取向。二、移民學生學習輔導注重全人需求的整體性安置。三、強調友善的語言無障礙環境可促進移民家庭參與教育活動。四、學校績效責任制產生對教育公平性實踐的質疑。最後，根據臺灣特殊脈絡提出未來擬定跨國轉銜學生學習安置制度之參考建議。英文摘要：This study aims at exploring the implementation of the academic placement and language support policy for immigrant students in an elementary public school in Washington State, U.S.A. The study investigated an ethnographic case study of one K-5 elementary public school with a high degree of ethnic diversity among its students for 9 months. Multiple methods of data collection including participant observation, data analysis, and interviews were applied. The findings of this study are as follows: (1) Most of the English Language Development Programs for immigrant students in Washington State emphasized bicultural education approach and education for the exceptional and culturally different. (2) The implementation of immigrants' academic intervention policies emphasized the integrity placement to meet students' holistic needs. (3) Friendly interpretation services were provided to support the immigrant families participating in educational activities. (4) Accountability had an equity problem. At the end, the paper provides three suggestions according to Taiwan's context.起始頁-結束頁：85-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820180664020032篇名：運用芝加哥藝術教育夥伴模式進行音樂融入兒童英語學習之課程設計與實施：以增進新住民兒童之學習為焦點並列篇名：The Curriculum Design and Implementation of Music Infused into Children's English Learning Project Based on the CAPE Model: Focus on Enhancing the Learning of New-Immigrant Students作者：鄭月秀(Yueh-Hsiu Cheng);吳筱萍(Hsiao-Ping Wu)關鍵字：CAPE;芝加哥藝術教育夥伴模式;新住民學童;藝術融入課程;CAPE model;Chicago Arts Partnership in Education;newimmigrant students;arts infused curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究以行動研究法將音樂融入雲林縣G國小六年級假日補救班之英語科教學，針對三名新住民學童及三名一般學童進行八週的行動教學研究，透過課程計畫、行動、觀察及反思的過程，完成芝加哥藝術教育夥伴模式進行音樂融入兒童英語學習的課程設計，以增進新住民兒童之學習成效。根據教學行動研究結果發現，藝術融入課程有助於刺激新住民學童的學習能力，而音樂融入英語學習的教學實踐具有提升學童學習語言能力的良好成效。雖然藝術融入課程的功效非短期可見，但確實有效提升了教師與學生的多元能力，而藝術形式及學科課程的選擇與學生學習的程度表現則環環相扣。教學團隊從課程規劃的開始，便要進行多方的溝通、大量的探究及專業的交流才能發揮教學成效的最佳化，形成良好的教學循環。英文摘要：This study adopted an action research method to draw on a music-infused English curriculum in a 6th- grade holiday remedial class in G elementary school in Yunlin County. The study investigated the implementation of arts-infused curriculum for 8 weeks for 3 new-immigrant students and 3 native students, through the process of plan, action, observation, and reflection to achieve the curriculum design and implementation of music-infused curriculum into children's English learning project based on the CAPE Model to enhance the learning outcomes of new-immigrant Students. The results of this action research study indicated that the course design of arts-infused curriculum stimulated the learning ability of new-immigrant students. The curriculum design of music-infused English learning improved learning outcomes. The effect of arts infused curriculum was not a short-term outcome, but with effective enhancement of teachers and students' diverse abilities. The selection of art form and subject course are intertwined with the degree of student learning outcomes. Multi-party communication, numerous inquiry and professional exchanges could optimize the effectiveness of teaching. Hence, the arts-infused curriculum could effectively form a good teaching cycle.起始頁-結束頁：125-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820180664020043篇名：重新發現教科「書」的歷程：從物質文化看教科書的潛在課程並列篇名：The Trajectory of Rediscovering the Text-BOOK: Approaching the Hidden Curriculum of the Textbook from a Material Culturist Perspective作者：彭秉權(Ping-Chuan Peng)關鍵字：物質文化;青少年（次）文化;教科書;潛在課程;material culture;youth (sub-) culture;textbook;hidden curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:1期出版年：2018中文摘要：2005年筆者在北部某大學講授「潛在課程」，一份期末報告敘說了學生在成長過程中對教科書的愛恨情仇，這些大家熟悉的情感與經驗揭露了既有教科書研究方法的不足，促使筆者重新思考這本「書」的存在，不只是個傳統科技的文字載具，也是青少年日常生活裡不可或缺的物件。之後10年，筆者嘗試從物質文化的角度重新檢視這本書對學習與社會化的影響。本文以倒敘的方式先分享筆者尋找物質之理論意涵的歷程，放眼教育社會學的批判傳統，從古典理論，到繼起的文化研究、後現代、後結構，乃至近期的後人文思想，儘管處理物質的方式殊異，但皆無損其重要性。之後再引用部分理論來敘說、反芻當年的情事，完成延宕多年的回應。本文希望能為教育研究者與工作者開啟物質文化取向在教科書、潛在課程與青少年次文化，乃至學習、教育科技、政策及課程與教學等領域的應用。英文摘要：The author has taught a course on hidden curriculum at a university in the northern Taiwan in 2005. A term project on students' normal but forgotten affection to textbooks unwittingly revealed the limit of the critical approaches in textbook studies. New theories were desperately needed. The author, therefore, has begun reconsidering the existence of the ”book” as more than a vehicle of words made by outdated printing technology, but also an everyday necessity for students' social practice and learning. After years of searching, the author was convinced that material cultural studies are helpful in exploring the effect of the book for researchers and educators interested in studying textbook, hidden curriculum, and youth cultures, and issues of learning, educational technologies and policy, as well as curriculum and pedagogy. This article is a flashback. It begins with the author’s exploration of a long lost yet problematic- matter- in sociological theories of education from the critical classic to the posties. Although the concern of matter varies with theoretical approach, its significance is hardly disputable. A few theoretical tools are thereby employed to answer the decadelong belated classroom comment.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820180364010014篇名：邁向倫理為主的經濟思維：P. Ulrich「統整的經濟倫理學」及其教育蘊義並列篇名：Towards an Ethically-based Economic Thinking: A Study on P. Ulrich's ”Integrative Economic Ethics” and Its Implications for Education作者：劉子菁(Tzu-Chin Liu)關鍵字：P. Ulrich;全人教育;社會—經濟理性;統整的經濟倫理學;經濟人;P. Ulrich;holistic education;socio-economic rationality;integrative economic ethics;economic man期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:1期出版年：2018中文摘要：新自由主義的市場化理念與競爭機制引發許多爭議，但現代經濟學背後的運作邏輯恐怕才是問題的主要根源。本研究旨在探討P. Ulrich的核心思維，以釐清當前教育中的經濟迷思，使教育遠離經濟主義。「統整的經濟倫理學」的核心內涵包括：第一，「統整」取徑是一種以「經濟倫理」為導向的思維，使經濟為生命服務。第二，以「社會—經濟理性」做為經濟活動的規範基礎，其中，倫理理性優先於「純」經濟理性。第三，不同於「矯正」與「規範」取徑的科學化路線，「統整」取徑整全地包含憲法、制度與行動層次。最後，本文提出「統整」 取徑有助於釐清經濟與教育的關係，破除當前教育裡的「市場偶像」，使教育免於淪為經濟的附庸，而造成全人教育的消失。此外，「統整」取徑支持教育以倫理價值為優先，透過理性的溝通與對話，省思生活世界中經濟課題的倫理意涵。英文摘要：The ideas of marketization and competition mechanism of contemporary neoliberalism have caused plenty of controversies. However, instead of neoliberalism, the logics behind modern economics is probably the root of the problems. This study aims to analyze Peter Ulrich's thought for clarifying the economic myth in education, i.e. guiding education to be distant from economism. The central contents of Ulrich's ”integrative economic ethics” are as below. Firstly, the ”integrative” approach is an economic-ethical thinking, aiming at the service of life. It leads a market society toward civilization from economic ideology. Secondly, ”socio-economic rationality” is the normative foundation of economic activities in which ethical rationality is prior to ”pure” economic rationality. Thirdly, different from the scientific route emphasized by ”corrective” and ”normative” approaches, the ”integrative” approach holistically encompasses constitution, system and action level. In conclusion, the ”integrative” approach contributes to clarify the relationship between economy and education. It sheds light to break ”idol of the market place” in education. Education is no longer an economic instrument by which the idea of holistic education is eliminated. In this way, education can help individuals establish ultimate goals based on the ethical value through rational communication and dialogue, cultivating students in reflecting ethical meaning within economic issues.起始頁-結束頁：33-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820180364010025篇名：班級脈絡與性別角色態度：友誼網絡位置的影響並列篇名：Class Contexts and Gender-Role Attitudes: The Effects of Friendship Network Position作者：楊天盾(Tien-Tun Yang);熊瑞梅(Ray-May Hsung);盧科位(Ke-Wei Lu)關鍵字：友誼網絡;性別角色態度;班級脈絡;friendship networks;gender-role attitudes;class contexts期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究從社會脈絡的觀點，探討不同性別組成的班級脈絡對青少年性別角色 態度的影響，同時透過友誼網絡中不同的結構位置，展現脈絡所型塑的社會規範力量對性別角色態度的社會影響過程。本研究使用中研院「臺灣青少年成長歷程研究」的調查資料做為研究對象。結果發現，混合性別的班級（mixed-gender class）中，男生在混合班中的性別角色態度比單一性別男生班更傳統；女生在混合班中的性別角色態度比單一性別女生班更傳統。在混合性別的社會脈絡中，學生的行為與態度似乎更加符合一般傳統性別角色態度的期待。同時，友誼網絡位置的影響，不論是個體在班級中受歡迎的程度（indegree centrality）或結構受限的程度（constraint），當個體性別角色態度愈符合所屬的班級脈絡所展現的性別角色態度規範，個體就愈受歡迎，並且愈有自信去接觸班級中其他具異質性的小群體。英文摘要：The study explores the development of adolescents' gender-role attitudes, concerning how the attitudes are influenced by different gender compositions in the classes, and how they are influenced by the normative force formed by friendship network position. The study uses the data from Taiwan Youth project (TYP) of Academia Sinica. The result shows that the boys in mixed-gender classes are more traditional than those in all-boys classes, and girls in mixed-gender classes are more traditional than those in all-girls classes. In mixed-gender contexts, the students' behaviors and attitudes and their cross-gender interaction seem to be more in line with the traditional gender-role expectation. Finally, the effects of friendship network position include indegree centrality and constraint scores. We found if individual gender-role attitude is more in line with the gender-role attitude performed by the class contexts, the individual is more popular and is more confident in connecting other small heterogeneous groups in their classes.起始頁-結束頁：63-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820180364010036篇名：高等教育補助與學費制度的多樣性－評The Political Economy of Higher Education Finance: The Politics of Tuition Fees and Subsides in OECD Countries, 1945-2015並列篇名：Book Review: Varieties of Tuition Fees and Subsidies-Remarks on The Political Economy of Higher Education Finance作者：林凱衡(Kai-Heng Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：64:1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：99-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201803640100401篇名：以巨量資料探勘氣候變遷主題詞彙網絡應用於教與學之探究並列篇名：The Applications of Lexicon Network of Climate Change Themes to Teaching and Learning through Data Mining作者：彭致翎(Chih-Ling Peng);吳鑑城(Jian-Cheng Wu);劉君毅(Chun-Yi Liu)關鍵字：巨量資料;資料探勘;詞彙網絡;教學創新;中等教育課程;big data;data mining;lexicon network;instructional innovation;secondary curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：在巨量資料的社會，教科書已不易滿足學習所需，藉助科技擷取生活脈絡中有意義的資訊融入教學，應為教學創新可行之途徑。本研究採資料探勘技術，以大量的新聞語料就氣候變遷主題詞彙進行篩檢，配合詞彙資料庫比對、專家檢核、教師問卷等，萃取氣候變遷關鍵詞彙群，並透過視覺化詞彙網絡圖呈現，併同學生紙筆測驗及師生訪談、蒐集回饋資訊等方式，探究教與學應用之可行性。本研究發現，採自巨量資料之詞彙網絡特點包含：一、巨量實徵：詞彙資料來源客觀，視覺化圖像有助明瞭；二、探索關鍵：藉由詞彙之關聯，窺知詞彙代表意涵；三、跨域學習：跨越領域學科，推敲詞彙共現形成之知識概貌；四、統整詮釋：突破單科限制，促進統整詮釋思維方式；五、批判反思：提供機會線索，反思新聞背後隱含意義。本研究嘗試跨越文本框架，以詞彙探勘及應用探究，構作貼近現實世界複雜知識表徵之補充教材，深化詞彙理解在學習之意義，期能為教師於從事跨領域跨科主題教學，或涉獵新興議題、時事結合、處於變化中事物時，開創更適切之輔助資源。英文摘要：In a society with an enormous amount of data, textbooks can hardly meet the needs of learning. Integrating the meaningful information acquired in the life context by using science and technology into teaching should be a feasible approach to instructional innovation. This study extracts keywords for climate change by using the technique of data mining to screen a news corpus based on climate change topics, along with comparing the corpus, expert checks, and teacher questionnaires. The study presents visual vocabulary network, using tests, interviews with teachers and students and collection of feedback information to explore its potential applications on teaching and learning. The results show that the lexicon network could be applied into several aspects of the empirical applications of data mining, the visualization of knowledge hybrid representation, the crosscutting instruction and learning, integral interpretation, and reflection. Finally, this study suggests that the technique of data-mining of the corpus could be an applicable research methodology to effectively integrate various knowledge systems of corpora, and the visualization of lexicon network could be an integral knowledge hybrid representation of facilitating instruction and learning of reading comprehension. This study attempts to cross the boundary between different textual frameworks to deepen the significance of vocabulary comprehension in learning, through vocabulary mining and its application and the construction of supplementary materials that are close to the representation of complex knowledge in the real world. This study can facilitate teachers to engage with cross-domain and cross-curricular thematic teaching, integrate emerging issues and current events into teaching, or create more appropriate supporting resources in the midst of change.起始頁-結束頁：93-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420180614020042篇名：我國大學學生評鑑教師教學指標之研究：概念構圖法的調整應用並列篇名：Construction of Indicators of Teaching Evaluation by University Students in Taiwan: The Adaptive Applications of Concept Mapping作者：羅恩冕(En-Mien Luo);郭昭佑(Chao-Yu Guo)關鍵字：學生評鑑教師教學;高等教育評鑑;概念構圖;student evaluation of teaching;higher education evaluation;concept mapping期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：學生評鑑教師教學（student evaluation of teaching, SET）今日被國內外大學廣泛使用於形成性評鑑及總結性評鑑，對於教師評鑑及大學績效管理都扮演著重要的角色，儘管在學生評鑑教師教學的實施及結果運用上仍在發展中，然而考量以學生為中心的教學評鑑，來自學生的意見具有一定價值。因此本研究目的在於建立符合大學教師教學評鑑關係人利益的評鑑指標，並透過概念構圖的方式將指標具體化以便指標提升教學效能之應用。本研究蒐集並分析來自國外教學優良的大學及機構使用的學生評鑑教師教學18份量表，使用概念構圖方法整合利害關係人的意見，建構適用於本國的學生評鑑教師教學指標。研究結果顯示，所建立的43項我國大學學生評鑑教師教學指標，可區分為三主要構面「課程規劃」、「教學 與互動」及「評量與回饋」，其中可再細分為8個次構面「課程適切性」、「課程內容」、「課程進程規劃」、「教材教法」、「學習活動引導」、「師生互動」、「學習回饋」及「作業與評量」。此指標及構面提供了學生評鑑教師教學的準則、教師提升教學效能的依循以及高等教育教學中決策與執行的依據。英文摘要：Student evaluations of teaching (SET) are widely used in formative evaluations and summative evaluations in universities in Taiwan and around the world. It plays an important role in teacher evaluation and performance management of university. Although the implementation and application of SET are still under development, opinions from students are valuable as teaching evaluation is student-centered. This study aims to construct indicators that meet the benefit of stockholders of teaching evaluation through concept mapping method in order to improve teaching effectiveness. 18 SET questionnaires from overseas universities with excellent teaching were analyzed and further combined with the opinions of stockholders to construct applicable indicators of SET. The results show that constructed 43 SET indicators of Taiwanese universities can be distributed in 3 dimensions, including ”planning and implement of curriculum”, ”teaching and interaction” and ”assessment and feedback”. These 3 dimensions can be divided into 8 sub-dimensions, which include ”appropriate curriculum”, ”contain of curriculum”, ”planning of curriculum process”, ”teaching materials and methods”, ”introduction and learning activities”, ”interaction between students and teacher”, ”feedback from learning” and ”assignment and assessment”. These indicators and dimensions provide a protocol of SET, reference for promoting teaching efficiency and evidence for policy making and execution of higher education teaching.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420180314010013篇名：Generating New Paths for Teacher Professional Development (TPD) through MOOCs並列篇名：透過磨課師為教師專業發展創造新途徑作者：黃振豊(Chen-Li Huang)關鍵字：teacher professional development;MOOCs;online courses;online learning;pedagogical innovation;教師專業發展;磨課師;線上課程;線上學習;教學革新期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：The study investigates the feasibility and means for facilitating teacher professional development (TPD) by massive open online courses (MOOCs). Through a literature review, limitations in conventional TPD approaches due to time, location, capacity, and budget issues were discovered. By exploring recent publications on information and communication technologies (ICT) in online learning and pedagogical innovation, this study has recognized that MOOCS are a feasible path for TPD since MOOCs are free and open for all with few limitations of time, location, and participation. The research has found several means for TPD through MOOCs, such as improving teacher's pedagogical literacy, professional subject knowledge, and professional subject teaching competency by MOOCs. Further, this study provides a critical reflection on the advantages and limitations of TPD through MOOCs and proposes some remedies for these limitations. Finally, the author infers some implications for TPD: using the advantages of MOOCs to facilitate TPD, providing teachers with support measures, facilitating the innovation of MOOCs, and encouraging teachers to be active learners in MOOCs.英文摘要：本研究探討大規模開放性線上課程（磨課師）促進教師專業發展的可行性與方法。藉由文獻分析發現，因於時間、空間、容量與預算限制，傳統教師專業發展存有局限性。透過探索資訊與通訊科技在線上學習與教學革新的研究發現，磨課師可為教師專業發展之合宜途徑，因為磨課師免費開放給大眾，少有時間、空間、參與的限制。研究找出透過磨課進行教師專業發展的方法：諸如藉由磨課師提升教師之教育專業素養、專業學科知識、以及專業學科教學能力。此外，研究對經由磨課師進行教師專業發展之優缺點提出批判性反思，再對缺點提供修補之道。最後，研究者推論對教師專業發展數項啟示：利用磨課師的優點來促進教師專業發展、提供教師配套措施、支助磨課師的革新、以及鼓勵教師成為磨課師的主動學習者。起始頁-結束頁：35-71資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420180314010024篇名：一所國中教師社群實踐課程領導的行動研究：閱讀好胃口並列篇名：An Action Research on Curriculum Leadership Practiced by a Junior High School Teacher Community: Cultivating Interest in Reading作者：洪郁婷(Yu-Ting Hung)關鍵字：行動研究;教師專業學習社群;課程領導;action research;curriculum leadership;professional learning community期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究談一個國中國文教師專業學習社群在7年的發展歷程中，如何從培養學生的閱讀好胃口出發，再經由文學圈的理論指引，實踐課程領導；並藉由這個故事，探究教師社群適合的運作模式以及發展主題。由於本篇研究者即為該社群領導人，故本文採行動研究，深入研究者任教之新北市S國中某教師社群；藉由文件分析及深度訪談，探究社群於課程領導的實踐軌跡。研究發現，此社群以理解學生的需求為課程領導主軸，成員彼此關係融洽、勇於面對困境，並以理論作為實踐的依據。研究結論有三，冀能作為國中教師專業發展的參考：一、課程領導為社群與師生、學校脈絡互相理解的動態過程；二、教師社群的運作須採輪流領導，並持續實踐與反思；三、社群的發展主題須先確立課程與教學理論基礎，再進行技術操作。英文摘要：This research investigates how a professional learning community (PLC) of junior high school teachers practices curriculum leadership by cultivating interest in reading among students, and by employing literary circles theory during a seven years' development course. This research also explores the suitable modes of operation as well as development themes for teachers' communities. Since the author is the leader of this community, this study is an action research. The author joined the PLC while teaching at a junior high school in New Taipei City, and investigated the trajectory of the curriculum leadership through literature analyses and intensive interviews of the PLC members .The study found that this community practiced course leadership according to the needs of the students. The members of this community had good relationships with each other, faced the challenges of curriculum development confidently and practiced curriculum leadership by using leadership theories. Three main conclusions can be drawn from this study, and hopefully these can serve as references for policy implementation for professional development of junior high school teachers: 1. Curriculum leadership is a dynamic process of the development of mutual understanding between communities, teachers, students, and the school. 2. The PLC operated under rotational leadership, practicing and reflecting continuously upon curriculum leadership. 3. The development themes for the PLC included the establishment of curriculum and pedagogy theories and then their practical implementation.起始頁-結束頁：73-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420180314010035篇名：技職大學生心理資本與心理幸福感之相關研究並列篇名：The Relationship between Psychological Capital and Psychological Well-being of Technological and Vocational University Students作者：鄭博真(Bor-Jen Jeng);鄭詩怡(Shih-Yi Jeng)關鍵字：心理幸福感;心理資本;技職大學生;psychological capital;psychological well-being;technological and vocational university students期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：14卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討技職大學生心理資本與心理幸福感的現況及相關性。本研究採用調查研究法，以南臺灣科技大學705名學生為研究對象。研究者使用「技職大學生心理資本量表」及「技職大專生心理幸福感量表」蒐集實證資料，接著以相依樣本變異數分析、積差相關分析及結構方程模式進行統計處理。研究結果發現：技職大學生具有中高度的心理資本及心理幸福感。心理資本與心理幸福感具有顯著的高度正相關，顯示技職大學生的心理資本越強，其心理幸福感越高。根據研究結果，本研究建議增強技職大學生的希望及自我效能，並提升其整體心理資本。未來可探討心理資本與學業成就的關聯，發展心理資本介入方案探討其對心理幸福感的影響。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to explore the statues and correlation between psychological capital (PsyCap) and psychological well-being of university students. The survey method was adopted for this study. 705 students from three private technological universities in Southern Taiwan participated in this study. The scales of PsyCap and psychological well-being of university students were used to collect empirical data. Then, data were analyzed by dependent samples analysis of variance, Pearson product-moment correlation and structural equation model. The finding show that the science and technological university students' PsyCap and psychological well-being were at the middle-high level. PsyCap and psychological well-being had a signifi cant, highly positive correlation, indicating that the stronger the PsyCap of university students, the higher their psychological well-being. Based on the findings, this study proposes to enhance science and technological university students' self-efficacy and hope subdimensions of PsyCap. In the future, the relationship between PsyCap and academic achievement, the impact of PsyCap intervention programs on psychological well-being can be explored.起始頁-結束頁：103-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201803140100401篇名：發展「性騷擾防治旁觀者介入課程」及實施成效研究並列篇名：Effects of a Bystander Intervention Curriculum for Preventing Sexual Harassment作者：李佩珊(Pei-Shan Lee);陳香廷(Hsiang-Ting Chen);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong)關鍵字：性別平等教育;性別偏見;性騷擾防治;高中生;旁觀者介入;bystander intervention;gender education;gender prejudice;senior high school students;sexual harassment prevention期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的在發展與效化「性別偏見態度量表」和「性騷擾防治概念量表」兩種評估工具，並探討「性騷擾防治旁觀者介入課程」對於降低學生性別偏見及提高性騷擾防治概念的成效。本研究先以立意取樣選取125位高中生填答預試量表，經信度與效度考驗及項目分析後，發展出29題「性別偏見態度量表」和16題「性騷擾防治概念量表」，皆具良好的信度與效度。再以便利取樣選取同所高中75位學生，分為實驗組和對照組，兩組學生在教學介入之前後分別填答兩份量表。實驗組進行合計18小時的性騷擾防治旁觀者介入課程，對照組進行一般性別平等教育課程。在課程實施結束後徵募研究對象同意，個別訪談8位實驗組學生，以進一步蒐集質性資料。本研究以共變數分析、獨立樣本t檢驗進行量化分析，以內容主題歸納方法進行質性分析，結果顯示性騷擾防治旁觀者介入課程對於降低高中生性別偏見及提高性騷擾防治概念具有顯著成效，而訪談分析內容顯示本課程能引發研究對象有旁觀者介入五步驟之反應。本研究提出課程設計、教學實施、未來應用於性霸凌或約會暴力防治等建議，期能更深入探討旁觀者介入教育之實施，並建議未來可針對不同變項、研究工具、成功經驗、網路應用等進行研究。英文摘要：Reports of sexual harassment continue to grow worldwide; therefore, the social and educational reasons for such incidents must be explored. This study proposed a sexual harassment prevention bystander intervention (SHBPI) course, the effects of which were determined using two research instruments: a gender prejudice scale (GPS) and a sexual harassment prevention perception scale (SHPPS). A total of 125 students were purposively recruited from a representative senior high school in Kaohsiung City, Taiwan to determine the reliability and validity of the two instruments. Then, 41 senior high school students from the same school were randomly selected as an experimental group (EG) to join a 6-unit 18-hour SHPBI program, while another 34 students were randomly selected as a comparison group (CG). All participants completed the 29-item GPS and 16-item SHPPS at the beginning and end of the intervention to assess their gender bias and perceptions regarding sexual harassment prevention. In addition, 8 students were selected from the EG to be interviewed following the posttest. The findings indicated that the SHPBI program effectively reduced students' gender biases and improved their perceptions regarding sexual harassment prevention. The EG students' total scores on the GPS were significantly lower than their CG counterparts. In addition, EG students' total means on the SHPPS were significantly higher than their CG counterparts. Interview analysis revealed that the course taught participants about the 5 steps of bystander reaction. Suggestions regarding curriculum design, teaching implementation, and bullying or dating violence prevention are provided, and the implementation of bystander intervention education is discussed. Future research should examine different variables, research tools, experiences, and internet interactions.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201809_63(3).00012篇名：以世界咖啡館討論模式提升大專學生公民參與態度及教學成效之研究並列篇名：Teaching Effectiveness of Adopting the World Cafe Model to Promote College Students' Civic Participation作者：周維萱(Wei-Hsuan Chou)關鍵字：公民參與態度;世界咖啡館;通識教育;civic participation;general education;World Cafe期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大學生接受公民參與態度培育的課程與教學後，其公民參與態度成長之效益。本研究採混合研究法，量性研究採準實驗設計，質性研究以扎根理論進行編碼與分析。實驗組接受世界咖啡館討論模式教學，對照組接受一般教學。研究工具為公民參與態度量表及過程評量。研究發現，世界咖啡館討論模式教學施作後，在學習成效上，實驗組與對照組沒有顯著差異，顯示成績不會變差，但整體公民參與態度及關心時事態度顯著提升，而公共事務態度、社會關懷態度亦達臨界顯著。顯然，大專學生的公民參與態度可經由適當課程及教學方法獲得改善。研究者歸納研究結論，並提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study examines course performance after citizenship education was integrated into the World Cafe model. Two classes of 26 students were recruited, with one as an experimental group and the other as a control group. The groups were analyzed using qualitative analysis supplemented by a quantitative method. The results revealed that the designed World Cafe teaching program contributed to improving students’ citizen participation attitudes and their attitudes toward current affairs. Suggestions are also provided for teaching practices and future studies.起始頁-結束頁：37-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201809_63(3).00023篇名：聲音光束對特殊需求幼兒溝通與動作發展之影響並列篇名：Effects of Soundbeams on Development of Communication and Physical Movements in Young Children With Special Needs作者：李玲玉(Liza Lee);何函儒(Han-Ju Ho)關鍵字：音樂育療;特殊幼兒;動作;溝通;聲音光束;communication;music educational therapy (MET);physical movements;soundbeam;young children with special needs期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討聲音光束對特殊需求幼兒溝通與動作發展之影響。研究對象為32位領有身心障礙手冊之幼兒，年齡介於40∼63個月之間。研究設計音樂育療中介入聲音光束。活動進行為期16週，每週一次，每次40分鐘。研究結果發現：一、音樂育療能增進特殊需求幼兒溝通與動作能力，顯示參與者有正向的成效，且活動兩個月後穩定保留進步成果；二、音樂育療不僅能促進特殊需求幼兒溝通與動作能力，且可進一步瞭解特殊需求幼兒操弄聲音光束「觸動模式」。英文摘要：This study primarily examined the influence of soundbeams on communication and physical movement development in young children with special needs. In total, 32 children aged 40-63 months and current holders of disability certificates participated. In the research design, soundbeam instruments were included in the music educational therapy (MET). The study duration was 16 weeks, with one 40-minute MET session per week. The results are as follows: (1) MET had positive results in the children. Their communication and movements had considerably improved after 2 months. (2) MET accelerated the development of communication and physical movements in the children; furthermore, information regarding the needs of young children manipulating the soundbeams in the trigger mode was obtained.起始頁-結束頁：69-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201809_63(3).00034篇名：劍的雙面刃－國中數學科不同成就學生學習組型差異之分析並列篇名：Double-Edged Sword: Different Learning Behavior Patterns for Junior High School Mathematics作者：陳嘉成(Chia-Cheng Chen);陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);洪兆祥(Chao-Hsiang Hung);薛人華(Jen-Hua Hsueh)關鍵字：考試焦慮;低成就;能力知覺;高成就;學習組型;learning behavior pattern;overachievement;perceived competence;test anxiety;underachievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：有些學生在資賦上很好，但學習表現卻不如預期，稱之為低成就學生；有些學生在資賦上低於平均數，但表現卻高於其能力水準，稱之為高成就學生。此兩類型學生剛好是能力與努力差異化的表徵。本研究目的係嘗試透過不同智力／成就組型的分析，來瞭解影響數學學習的相關心理機制，並嘗試探討數學教師能準確辨識低成就學生的比率與相關因素。本研究以3,530位國中學生為受試樣本，探討數學科低智商高成就與高智商低成就學生的學習行為構型。經由分析結果顯示：一、「低智商高成就」者占5.6%、「低智商低成就」者占4.1%、「高智商高成就」者占9.5%、「高智商低成就」者占10.2%；二、「數學能力知覺」與「自我設限」的學習組型可作為區分「低智商高成就」與「高智商低成就」的學生。最後，根據研究結果提出建議，以供教師及未來研究參考。英文摘要：Some skilled students are deemed underachievers, even though they demonstrate adequate academic performances, because they fail to meet certain expectations. By contrast, some gifted students achieving below-average scores, but having performance capabilities exceeding their skill level, are labeled overachievers. These two categories representing student ability and effort have differences. This study investigated the profiles of underachievers and overachievers in junior high school mathematics by comparing variation patterns to build the foundation for future remedial education. Students from one junior high school were analyzed; the conclusions were as follows: (1) Of 3,530 participating students, 199 (5.6%), 143 (4.1%), 337 (9.5%), and 360 (10.2%) were low intelligence quotient (IQ) - overachievers, low IQ - underachievers, high IQ - overachievers, and high IQ - underachievers, respectively. (2) Perceived math competence and self-debilitating strategies were observed in high IQ - underachievers and low IQ - overachievers. (3) Finally, suggestions for teaching practices and future studies were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：105-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201809_63(3).00045篇名：共變推理遊戲：遊戲自我效能與後設認知影響遊戲中的焦慮、興趣及表現之研究並列篇名：Game Performance in Covariation Reasoning: The Correlates Between Gameplay Self-Efficacy, and Metacognition Reflected Gameplay Anxiety and Gameplay Interest作者：洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);詹瓊華(Chiung-Hua Chan)關鍵字：共變推理;後設認知;遊戲自我效能;遊戲焦慮;遊戲興趣;covariation reasoning;gameplay anxiety;gameplay interest;gameplay self-efficacy;metacognition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：在日常生活中碰到問題時，常是顧此失彼，造成問題解決不能一步到位而徒花心力，為了解決這種思考不周延的現象，本研究應用一款「NG麵包遊戲」來檢測影響學生的遊戲焦慮、遊戲興趣、遊戲自我效能與後設認知間在共變推理遊戲中之相關。本研究以立意取樣方式，選取138位高一學生，每週進行20分鐘的NG麵包遊戲，連續實施六週，作為學習過程的一部分，學生必須完成線上問卷調查，包含遊戲實驗前的後設認知與遊戲自我效能等相關問卷，以及每次遊戲實驗後的遊戲焦慮、遊戲興趣等相關問卷調查，藉此以瞭解各變項間之相關。所得119份有效資料以SPSS 22與AMOS 21結構方程式進行資料分析與考驗，以瞭解高中學生情感因素間的相關性。本研究運用共變推理遊戲，以驗證各變項間之相關，研究結果顯示，後設認知、遊戲自我效能、遊戲興趣與遊戲焦慮皆呈現顯著負相關，遊戲自我效能與遊戲興趣呈現顯著正相關。結果證實，在特定的任務中提高玩家的遊戲自我效能，可減少遊戲焦慮進而支持玩家在競爭環境中的遊戲興趣。最終冀望本研究結果能提供教育工作者使用數位遊戲來訓練學生之可能性，以增強共變推理的能力。英文摘要：For studying cause-effect relationships, a monoapproach is preferred. However, to account for the complex nature of reality, practicing covariation thinking is necessary. For exploring how cognitive-affective factors play a crucial role in the ability to practice covariation reasoning, this study collected data from senior high school students aged 16-17 years and 138 students were invited to practice that game 20 minutes for 6 times. As part of their studying process, the students were required to complete online questionnaires. The questionnaire related to metacognition and gameplay self-efficacy were delivered before this experiment, questionnaires related to gameplay anxiety and gameplay interest were given after each trial of game playing. Path analysis of data from 119 effective responses was performed using SPSS (version 22) and structural equation modeling-AMOS (version 21). The results demonstrated that gameplay self-efficacy, gameplay interest, and metacognition in learning “NG Bread” was negatively correlated to gameplay anxiety, but gameplay self-efficacy was positively related to gameplay interest. Furthermore, the result indicated that enhancing gameplay self-efficacy in a specific task may reduce players’ anxiety and encourage interest in playing the game in a competitive setting. The implication of this study may encourage educators to use this digital game for improving covariation reasoning of their students.起始頁-結束頁：131-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201809_63(3).000501篇名：Mokken量尺分析的實務運用：以「英語閱讀能力測驗」與「英語口說情緒反應量表」為例並列篇名：Mokken Scale Analysis for Educational and Psychological Testing: Two Applications作者：洪素蘋(Su-Pin Hung);許清芳(Ching-Fan Sheu);李炯方(Joseph Lavallee)關鍵字：Mokken量尺分析;非參數試題反應理論;單調同質模型;雙重單調同質模型;double homogeneity model;Mokken scale analysis;monotone homogeneity model;nonparametric item response theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Mokken量尺分析之目的在建立符合非參數單調同質模型或雙重單調同質模型的單一潛在量尺，其程序包含篩選試題的規準與逐一檢核試題符合模型假定的方法。本研究旨在應用此非參數試題反應理論，分別對2,270位大一新生的「英語閱讀能力測驗」與168位國中學生的「英語口說情緒反應量表」進行分析。結果在10題二元計分的閱讀能力測驗分析發現，共有5題符合雙重單調模型假設；在20題多元計分的口說情緒反應題目檢驗發現，僅有2題違背單調同質性模型。兩份資料的題目反應都符應單一潛在構念向度的假定。本研究針對Mokken量尺分析的步驟與方法、分析軟體取得、分析程式語法、視覺化診斷、題目反應與非參數模型間適配情況進行討論、提供資料詮釋，以及實務應用上的建議。英文摘要：Mokken scale analysis is a scaling procedure for constructing unidimensional test items. It offers an item selection algorithm to partition a set of items into Mokken scales. It further provides methods to check the assumptions of two nonparametric item response theory (NIRT) models: the monotone homogeneity model (MHM) and the double homogeneity model (DHM). The present study aims to demonstrate applications of NIRT with empirical data. Scalability of data from part of a reading proficiency test for first-year university students (n = 2,270) and from an affective reactions to speaking questionnaire for high school students (n = 168) were examined to illustrate Mokken scale analysis with dichotomous and polytomous items, respectively. It was found that five items on the ten-item reading proficiency test were scalable according to the DHM. On the anxiety questionnaire, only two of twenty items were found to violate the unidimensionality assumption. Our paper also demonstrates use of the open source software program R for unidimensionality and reliability analyses and for graphical diagnostics with the MHM and DHM. We conclude with comments on the process of interpreting results as well as on the practical implications of NIRT modeling for educational and psychological testing.起始頁-結束頁：181-215資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：九種古典測驗理論信度指標精確性之研究並列篇名：A Comparison of Precision of Nine Reliability Estimates Based on Classical Test Theory作者：蔡佩圜(Pei-Huan Tsai);<U+51C3>柏原(Bor-yaun Twu);吳裕益(Yuh-Yih Wu)關鍵字：最大信度估計下限;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;the greatest lower bound reliability期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究採用因素結構已知的驗證性因素分析模式來產生模擬資料，探討測驗因素數目、題數、樣本數三個自變項，對ρ_(g1b)、λ_1、λ_2、λ_3(α)、λ_4、λ_5、ω_h、ω_t等九種信度估計方法的偏誤、絕對偏誤、誤差均方根三個依變項之影響，藉以評估不同信度估計指標之精確性。研究結果顯示：(1)傳統最常使用的信度估計值λ_3(α)僅適合用來分析單向度測驗，若為多因素測驗，則會明顯低估信度真值；(2) λ_4及ω_t無論在何種情境其信度估計誤差均極微，建議盡可能採用這兩種信度估計值，當測驗資料之因素結構很明確時，最適合以ω_t來估計整體之信度，若因素結構不明確時，最適合以λ_4來估計整體之信度；(3)除非是分析母群資料，否則ρ_(g1b)有高估信度真值的現象，不適合稱之為最大信度下限；(4)ω_h與ω_t之比值是g因素解釋率占所有共同因素（包括g與所有f）總解釋率之比率，建議以ω_h與ω_t之比值作為評估測驗是否接近單向度的指標。本研究之分析結果可提供給測驗使用人員依不同測驗情境選擇較適切之信度估計指標。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is mainly to analyze the accuracy of different reliability index by employing ρ_(g1b)、λ_1、λ_2、λ_3(α)、λ_4、λ_5、ω_h、ω_t as the major arguments. Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) is utilized for simulating data in this experiment, basically relying on independent variables (the number of test factors, the number of test items, the number of sample sizes) and dependent variable (bias, absolute mean bias, root mean squared error). The statistical results and analyses are described as following: (1) λ_3(α), the most commonly and traditionally used, only suitable for the analysis of one-dimension test, reliability index value will be significantly underestimated if multi-factor test takes place. (2) ω_t、λ_4 display best values of reliability estimation with extreme little error, it is recommended that these two can be used as much as possible. When the structure of factor of the test data is very clear, ω_t is the most suitable role to estimate the overall reliability. On the other hand, if it is not clear, thenλ_4 is the appropriate candidate to do the work. (3) Unless it is for analyzing the parent group data, then ρ_(g1b) shows a high estimated value of reliability which is not proper to name it as the greatest lower bound reliability. (4) The ratio of ω_h to ω_t is the ratio of the explanatory rate of g factor to the total explanatory rate of all common factors (including g and all f). It is recommended that it can be used as an indicator of whether the undergoing test is close to one dimension. The results of this study can provide testing persons with more appropriate estimates of reliability indicators according to different test scenarios.起始頁-結束頁：217-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：「外籍生在臺文化涵化量表」的信效度衡鑑與潛在剖面分析並列篇名：Validation Assessment and Latent Profile Analysis on the Acculturation Scale for Foreign Students' in Taiwan作者：王暄博(Hsuan-Po Wang);林振興(Zhen-Xing Lin);蔡雅薰(Ya-Hsun Tsai);洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong)關鍵字：文化涵化量表;涵化;潛在剖面分析;潛在類別模式;acculturation;acculturation scale;latent class modeling;latent profile analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：隨著全球化趨勢，文化涵化的議題逐漸受到重視。涵化是描述群體在接觸不同文化時，行為改變的現象，因此涵化是一種新的文化重組。研究者為了了解文化涵化對於社會衝擊的重要性，加上臺灣過去鮮少針對外籍生文化涵化的情形進行探究，且未有適合的檢測工具測量外籍生文化涵化之程度。因此，本研究以外籍生為研究樣本，參考Nguyen與von Eye（2002）以及Stephenson（2000）提出的ASVA與SMAS，發展「外籍生在臺文化涵化量表」，並運用潛在剖面分析，探討涵化各因素的潛在結構。研究結果顯示本量表具備良好的信效度，能夠準確測量外籍生在臺灣的涵化程度，且透過驗證性因素分析考驗因素結構適切性，獲得穩定的因素結構。本研究進行外籍生文化涵化的調查研究，以了解外籍生在新環境的融合情況，以及是否出現涵化的現象，因此本量表能作為相關研究人員、華語教師，以及外籍生的評量工具。此外，本研究以潛在剖面分析檢測量表潛在結構，並分成三種主要不同的涵化特徵組型，在測量方法學上具有高度實用價值。英文摘要：With the trend of globalization, the issue of the acculturation scale has been highly valued. Acculturation describes the phenomenon of behavior modification when contacting with other groups. Therefore, acculturation is a new way of culture regrouping. Researcher realized the significance of the culture acculturation to the social impact. However, over the past few years, there is little investigation on the condition of foreign students' acculturation in Taiwan, not to mention developing a suitable evaluation tool to measure the acculturation degree on foreign students. Adopting the foreign students as a sample, the study adapts the ASVA and SMAS from Nguyen and von Eye (2002) and Stephenson's (2000) researches to develop the acculturation scale for foreign students in Taiwan and applies the latent profile analysis (LPA) to explore the latent structure of each factor in acculturation. The result shows that the measure possesses a good reliability and validity, which enable to evaluate precisely the foreign students' acculturation degree in Taiwan. Testing the relevance through confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), the study obtained a stable structure in factor structures. The study investigates the degree of the acculturation to find out the integration condition to the new environment of the foreign students and to analyze whether acculturation phenomenon exists. Therefore, the scale may act as the evaluation tool for related researchers, Mandarin teachers, and foreign students in Taiwan. Moreover, developing the scale in coordination with LPA in this study to evaluate the latent structure analysis further, as well as categorizing three main different featured modules has high practical value in measurement methodology.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：「中文版執行功能指標」（大學生版與國中生版）的編製與其信效度報告並列篇名：The Development and Validation of Chinese Executive Function Index-for College Students (CEFI-C) and for Junior High School Students (CEFI-J)作者：游勝翔(Sheng-Hsiang Yu);林緯倫(Wei-Lun Lin)關鍵字：大學生;自陳式量表;國中生;執行功能;憂鬱;衝動性;college students;depression;executive function;impulsivity;junior high school students;self-rated inventory期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：執行功能的測量方式主要包括認知作業與行為量表兩大取向。行為量表評估個體日常生活的執行功能表現，具有良好的生態效度。然而，目前我國之執行功能行為量表多針對臨床病患設計，而適用於一般族群的執行功能自陳式量表仍相當缺乏。是故，本研究旨在編製適合一般大學生與國中生使用之中文版執行功能行為量表，即中文版執行功能指標：大學生版與國中生版。程序方面，大學生版先以188名大學生樣本進行預試分析與探索性因素分析，正式施測階段以564名大學生樣本進行驗證性因素分析，檢驗因素結構的穩定性與建構效度，最後再以另外183名大學生樣本進行效度考驗。國中生版方面，先以276名國中生樣本進行探索性因素分析與信度檢驗，再以另外231名國中生樣本進行驗證性因素分析與效度考驗。研究結果顯示，「中文版執行功能指標」（大學生版與國中生版）可分為「策略行動」、「組織規劃」及「衝動控制」等三因素，並重複驗證了執行功能與衝動性、憂鬱症狀、情緒調控的關係，具有良好的信、效度。整體而言，「中文版執行功能指標」之心理計量特性良好，施測簡便，適用對象不限於臨床或亞臨床個案，可用於評估我國一般大學生與國中生之執行功能程度，具有實務應用價值。本研究藉由比對研究結果與其他相關量表之因素結構差異，對執行功能之構念內涵進行探討。最後，亦討論本工具之應用範圍以及研究限制。英文摘要：There are two approaches to measuring the Executive Functions (EFs): one is by using neuropsychological tests and the other is by adopting behavioral rating scales. Behavioral inventories that evaluate one's executive function in daily life have good ecological validity. However, available behavioral inventories to assess EFs are mostly for clinical patients in Taiwan. Self-rated inventories to assess normal healthy individuals are still needed. Thus, the aim of the present study is to develop Chinese EFs inventories for college students and for junior high school students, namely, Chinese Executive Function Index for College Students (CEFI-C) and Chinese Executive Function Index for Junior High School Students (CEFI-J), respectively. In terms of CEFI-C, a pretest sample that consists of 188 college students was used to examine the factor structure through Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA). To examine the validity and stability of the factor structure, a sample set including 564 college students was used to conduct Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA). Finally, another sample set including 183 college students was used to examine the validity of CEFI-C. In terms of CEFI-J, a sample that consists of 276 junior high school students was used to examine the factor structure by EFA. Another sample set including 231 junior high school students was used to conduct CFA and to examine the validity of CEFI-J. The results of this study show that CEFIs (CEFI-C and CEFI-J) both have good reliabilities and validities. Three factors of CEFIs are extracted through factor analysis: strategic action, organizational planning and impulse control. Besides, the relationships among EFs, impulsivity, depression, and emotion regulatory strategies are also replicated in the present study. In sum, CEFIs are easy to be administrated and have good psychometric properties. CEFIs are useful in assessing EFs in normal healthy college and junior high school students rather than in clinical or sub-clinical ones. The concept structure of EFs is discussed by comparing the results of this study with the findings of other studies. The possible implications and limitation of this study are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：29-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：「國民小學校長績效責任領導量表」之發展並列篇名：Development of Scale of Elementary School Principals' Accountability Leadership作者：張文權(Wen-Chuan Chang);范熾文(Chih-Wen Fun)關鍵字：校長;量表發展;績效責任領導;accountability leadership;principal;scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要目的在發展「國民小學校長績效責任領導量表」。研究者首先參酌相關文獻，並統整訪談學者、校長及教師意見據以編製量表，再以焦點座談討論修正。問卷施測對象包括全國國小教師，在預試方面共獲得388份有效問卷，進行項目分析、探索性因素分析及信度分析。探索性因素分析的結果共萃取出三個因素：承擔責任、公平開放、回應互動；總量表的Cronbach's係數為.957，分量表介於.928至.939之間。正式樣本共獲得1,236份有效問卷，將其隨機分為二組，分別進行驗證性因素分析及複核效化分析。驗證性因素分析發現，量表模式有合理的適配及良好的聚斂效度、區別效度及外在效度，且量表模式的二階單因素具有合理的組合信度與平均變異抽取量，可見具有良好的信度與效度。最後，經由複核校化分析顯示，量表模式具有跨樣本的穩定性。英文摘要：This study aims to develop ”Scale of Elementary School Principals' Accountability Leadership”. First, based on related literatures, we reorganize the interview with the scholars, principals and teachers to develop the scale and modify it by Focus Group. The subjects of questionnaire include elementary school teachers in Taiwan. In pretest, we obtain 388 valid questionnaires for item analysis explorative factor analysis and reliability analysis. Upon the result of explorative factor analysis, we acquire 3 factors: accountability, fair and open, response & interaction; Cronbach's of total scale is .957 and sub-scale is between .928 and .939. As to formal samples, we obtain 1,236 valid questionnaires which are randomly divided into 2 groups for Confirmatory Factor Analysis and cross-validation analysis. Confirmatory Factor Analysis demonstrates that the scale is based on the fit, and goodness of convergent validity, discriminant validity and external validity. Besides, second-order factor of the scale is upon reasonable component validity and Average Variance Extracted. Hence, reliability and validity are positive. Finally, according to cross-validation analysis, the scale is stable with cross-samples.起始頁-結束頁：69-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「零至六歲嬰幼兒語言發展家長問卷」之編製並列篇名：Inventory of Language Development for 0-6 Years Old Children: A Parental Questionnaire作者：劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu);陳柏熹(Po-Hsi Chen);黃秀琦(Shou-Chi Huang);陳雅雯(Ya-Wen Chen);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：前語言期溝通;語言表達;語言理解;語言發展;讀寫萌發;comprehension;emergent literacy;expression;language development;prelimguistic communication期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究之目的在編製適用於評估零至六歲嬰幼兒語言能力發展的家長問卷，以了解嬰幼兒語言的發展和變化。問卷包括0∼2歲和2∼6歲兩個版本：0∼2歲版問卷評估的能力涵蓋前語言期溝通、語言理解、語言表達和讀寫萌發之能力；2∼6歲版問卷則涵蓋語言理解、語言表達和讀寫萌發之能力。本問卷研發歷程包括初試、預試和正式研究三個階段。正式施測的研究對象為新北市463名0∼6歲幼兒，蒐集家長填寫的問卷資料，並採用「嬰幼兒綜合發展測驗」評估158名幼兒的語言發展。研究結果發現，本問卷的內部一致性信度均大於0.9，再測信度結果均大於0.8，顯示本問卷具有相當良好的內部一致性與再測穩定度。此外，驗證性因素分析（因素負荷量大於0.5，整體模式符合度大致良好）、效標關聯效度（相關係數0.61∼0.82）檢驗和區辨分析結果得知，本問卷具有相當良好的建構效度、同時效度和區辨效度。結果顯示以家長問卷的方式，能對學前幼兒的語言發展狀況提供正確且可信賴之評估結果。英文摘要：This study aims to develop Inventory of Language Development for 0-6 Years Old Children (ILD), a parental report that can be used to assess the growth and change of language proficiency in children aged between 0 and 6 years old. Two versions of inventories were developed: a 0-2 years old version and a 2-6 years old version. The 0-2 years old inventory covers questions about pre-linguistic communication, language comprehension, language expression and emergent literacy, whereas the 2-6 years old inventory covers questions about language comprehension, language expression and emergent literacy. The procedure of developing the questionnaire includes three stages: preliminary test, pilot test, and formal study. In the formal study, 463 children aged from 0-6 were recruited from New Taipei City. The children's parents were asked to fill out the questionnaires and 158 children's language abilities were assessed using the Comprehensive Developmental Inventory for Infants and Toddlers. Results showed that the internal consistency reliability and retest reliability of the questionnaires were larger than 0.9 and 0.8 respectively, showing that the questionnaires had fairly good internal reliability and were quite stable in measuring children’s language development. In addition, the confirmatory factor analysis (factor loading ＞ 0.5), the correlation validity test (r = 0.61-0.82) and the discriminant analysis all indicated that the inventory had fairly good construct validity, criterion-related validity and discriminant validity. These results suggest that ILD provides correct and reliable assessment of language proficiency in children aged from 0-6 years old.起始頁-結束頁：95-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：LEARNING FROM U.S. RESEARCH ON THE IMPACT OF FINANCIAL AID ON COLLEGE STUDENT OUTCOMES TO ADVANCE INSTITUTIONAL RESEARCH IN TAIWAN並列篇名：從美國校務研究的角色探究台灣財務援助政策對大學生學習成效之影響作者：林靜慧(Ching-Hui Lin);Victor M. H. Borden關鍵字：financial aid;institutional research;college enrollment;postsecondary education;財務援助政策;校務研究;大學招生;高等教育期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：Purpose Given higher education's long history of escalating fees and complex bursaries, scholars in the U.S. have produced a considerable body of sophisticated, theory-guided research regarding the impact of financial aid on student college choice and academic success. This research reflects a mix of broad academic interests as well as specific institutional considerations. In this paper, we review several trends evident in this literature as a way of demonstrating how higher education research and institutional research can work together to produce new insights into the policies, practices, and student behaviors that promote societal and institutional objectives. Design/methodology/approach The paper synthesizes the more representative and rigorous research on financial aid programs in relation to student success from an institutional research perspective. Studies included in this paper were conducted in the U.S. and Taiwan. Findings The present study critically reviews financial aid studies in institutional research and casts light, more generally, on how institutional research can assist Taiwanese higher education institutions in achieving their core mission objectives. Findings suggest that financial aid serves as a mediator for student success, emphasizing the importance of transforming IR into action for evidence-based decision making. Originality/value While this study provides a beginning, it underscores the need for further institutional research into the relationship between student aid and student success in Taiwan. The issue of educational disparities remains a major concern in higher education policy circles. Basing institutional policies on empirical research provides a necessary basis for policy-making and institutional practices in relation to student success in higher education.英文摘要：研究目的美國高等教育長期以來面臨學雜費不斷調漲及複雜的獎助學金政策，許多學者投注心力於此類財務援助如何影響大學生選校偏好及其學習成效相關研究上。此類型研究顯示出學術研究對於此類議題的研究興趣偏好，及其受到高教機構端的重視。本篇藉由檢視文獻中的明顯趨勢，顯示出高等教育研究與校務研究的結合，在政策、實務及學生行為上能提供新的視野，以提升大學校務專業管理，達成社會及大學目標。研究設計／方法／取徑本篇採用文獻分析方式，以校務研究的觀點，綜論評析美國和臺灣財務援助政策與學生學習成效之關係。研究發現或結論本篇文章係聚焦於分析校務研究中財務援助的研究，整體性地闡明校務研究如何協助臺灣高等教育機構達成其核心目標。研究結果顯示，財務援助在大學生學習表現上扮演重要的中介影響變項，並強調校務研究轉為實際行動後，對於實證導向的決策之重要性。研究原創性／價值性本文章雖然是個開端，其闡述臺灣在助學金政策、學生學習成效上有推動校務研究之需求。高等教育政策中，資源分配不均向來是主要的關注議題；植基於實徵研究的校務研究，在高等教育學習成效方面，可做為教育決策及校務執行之基石。起始頁-結束頁：9-31資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2404.012篇名：地方教育行政機關校務評鑑運用之研究並列篇名：SCHOOL EVALUATION USE AMONG LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES作者：鄭淑惠(Shu-Huei Cheng)關鍵字：評鑑運用;校務評鑑;教育評鑑;地方教育行政機關;evaluation use;school evaluation;educational evaluation;local educational agencies期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：研究目的本研究旨在探討地方教育行政機關的校務評鑑運用情形，以及影響評鑑運用的因素。研究設計／方法／取徑本研究採取質性取徑，以半結構式訪談法蒐集資料，選取持續實施中小學校務評鑑且有評鑑運用意圖的縣市。受訪者為地方教育行政機關之校務評鑑主辦及業務相關單位代表，共訪談三縣市23 位行政人員。研究發現或結論針對地方教育行政機關的校務評鑑運用，首先，在結果性運用方面，包括：瞭解學校辦學情形、協助學校改善辦學品質、輔助行政決定，以及政策說服。其次，在過程性運用方面，包括：增進對學校辦學及意見的瞭解、促進專業學習，以及引導學校發展。第三，影響校務評鑑之結果性運用的因素，包括：追蹤輔導制度的設置、評鑑人員的可信度、評鑑報告的溝通、評鑑報告的回應性、對評鑑結果運用的態度，以及組織權責與資源。最後，影響校務評鑑之過程性運用的因素，則包括：評鑑參與機制，以及對評鑑參與的態度。研究原創性／價值評鑑運用是評鑑專業化不可忽略的部分，也是國內教育評鑑研究較少探討的議題，透過本實徵性研究，能加深對行政機關評鑑運用的瞭解，並提供評鑑實務與研究的建議。英文摘要：Purpose This study aims to explore school evaluation use among local educational agencies and the factors affecting it. Design/methodology/approach A qualitative approach was adopted with semi-structured interviews. The interviewees were recruited from three agencies that had continually performed elementary and junior high school evaluations, with an intention to use the evaluations. In total, the interviewees included 23 administrators whose responsibilities were related to evaluation processes and reports within the agency. Findings First, school evaluation findings were used by local educational agencies to understand school development, assist in school improvement, assist in decision making, and convince external agencies to support a particular position. Second, regarding process use, school evaluations were used by local educational agencies to understand school development and opinions about schools, enhance professional learning, and direct school improvement. Third, the factors affecting the use of evaluation findings included follow-up assistance, evaluator credibility, communication of evaluation reports, responsiveness of evaluation reports, attitude toward the use of evaluation findings, and authority and resources. Finally, the factors affecting process use comprised the mechanism of evaluation involvement and attitude toward evaluation involvement. Originality/value Evaluation use is an indispensable part of professional evaluation. Research on evaluation use has seldom been conducted in Taiwan. This study provides empirical evidence that assists in an understanding of evaluation use and provides suggestions for evaluation practice and research.起始頁-結束頁：33-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2404.023篇名：PROGRAM EVALUATION POLICY, PRACTICE, AND THE USE OF RESULTS作者：Robert Boruch;Jessica L. Chao;Selene S. Lee關鍵字：evaluation policy and practice;use of evidence;randomized controlled trials;quasi-experiments;meta-analysis;education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：This scholarly commentary addresses the basic questions that underlie program evaluation policy and practice in education, as well as the conditions that must be met for the evaluation evidence to be used. The evaluation questions concern evidence on the nature and severity of problems, the programs deployed to address the issues, the programs' relative effects and cost-effectiveness, and the accumulation of evidence. The basic conditions for the use of evidence include potential users' awareness of the evidence, their understanding of it, as well as their capacity and incentives for its use. Examples are drawn from studies conducted in the United States and other countries, focusing on evaluation methods that address the questions above.起始頁-結束頁：71-90資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2404.034篇名：REFLECTIONS ON A HALF CENTURY IN PROGRAM EVALUATION作者：James W. Altschuld關鍵字：evaluation history;evaluation training;training issues;trends期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：A retrospective trip through 50 years from graduate school to work in evaluation is the foundation of this article. It affords a way of looking at how the training of evaluators and what they do in conducting evaluations have changed, how personal experiences shaped perceptions about a field, and developments that transformed evaluation into the field that it is now. The author's graduate program is examined for its strengths, the guidance it provided him with, weaknesses, and what was missing and needed. His long-term involvement in many projects reflects both the evolution of evaluation practice and knowledge growth. A historical view is valuable for understanding the progress that has been made and, at the same time and surprisingly, shows that issues encountered many years ago are in ways and to a degree still pertinent and remain with us. This is especially true in regard to the teaching of a new generation that will carry evaluation forward. The past is indeed a backdrop for the future and the seeds of current concerns were evident a long time ago. Conclusions drawn from the five decades lead to what we might see as evaluation moves fully into the 21st century. The ultimate goal is to have evaluators individually and as a collective always question who we are and the premises that underlie our actions.起始頁-結束頁：91-107資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2404.045篇名：EFFECTS OF ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL STATUS ON MATHEMATICS PERFORMANCE: A MULTILEVEL MEDIATION ANALYSIS OF MOTIVATIONAL BELIEFS AND PRIOR CONTENT KNOWLEDGE ACTIVATION並列篇名：經濟、社會和文化地位對數學表現的影響：動機信念和先驗內容知識的激活之多層次中介效應分析作者：楊文佳(Man-Kai Ieong);張國祥(Kwok-Cheung Cheung);薛寶嫦(Pou-Seong Sit);蘇啟禎(Kaycheng Soh);麥瑞琪(Soi-Kei Mak)關鍵字：Self-regulated learning;Mathematics performance;ESCS;Multilevel mediation analysis;PISA;自我調適學習;數學表現;ESCS;多層次中介分析;PISA期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：Purpose This study seeks to verify if the multilevel mechanisms of self-regulated learning (SRL) processes are consistent with the analyzed data and test whether the mechanisms are mediating the effects of economic, social and cultural status (ESCS) on mathematics performance. Design/methodology/approach This study draws its data from Macao-China's Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2012 study. Macao-China conducted the census of 45 schools and across those schools more than 98% of 15-year-old Macao-China students have participated in this study. Based on social cognitive theories, two aspects of SRL (motivational beliefs and prior content knowledge activation) are examined by using Hierarchical Linear Modeling. Findings At the student level of data analysis, the three SRL variables: Mathematics self-efficacy, mathematics intrinsic motivation, and familiarity with mathematical concepts are the mediating variables. Across school to student level where peer effects arise from school ESCS composition, mathematics self-efficacy is able to mediate the between-level effect of school ESCS composition on student mathematics performance. Originality/value The significance of this study is that ESCS-performance gap in mathematics amongst students can be narrowed down by introducing student's regulation of motivation and cognition into the school's mathematics curriculum. The promotion of the educational quality can be done in tandem with the improvement of educational equity for ESCS-disadvantaged students.英文摘要：研究目的本研究旨在驗證自我調適學習（SRL）的多層次機制是否與分析數據所反映的影響模式相一致，並檢驗此機制是否能中介經濟、社會和文化地位（ESCS）對數學表現的影響。研究設計／方法／取徑本研究採用澳門學生能力國際評估計劃（PISA）2012 的數據進行分析，澳門全部45 所中學及超過98% 的15 歲學生參加了此次測試。此外，本研究根據社會認知理論建構分析模型，並採用層階線性模式對SRL 的兩個層面（即動機信念及先驗內容知識的激活）進行分析。研究發現或結論學生層次的數據分析結果顯示，SRL 中介變量有三，分別是數學自我效能感、數學內在動機和數學概念熟悉度。考慮到學校ESCS引起的同儕效應，跨學校至學生層次的分析方面，本研究發現數學自我效能感可中介學校ESCS 對學生數學表現的校間影響。研究原創性／價值性本研究的意義在於，針對學校數學課程引入並實現學生動機和認知方面的自我調適，學生之間因ESCS 的差異所造成的數學表現差距可被收窄；因此教育工作者在提升教育質量的同時，也能為ESCS方面處於劣勢的學生改善教育公平狀況。起始頁-結束頁：109-144資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2404.056篇名：P. J. Palmer「教學的勇氣」之理念及其在教與學的蘊義並列篇名：P. J. PALMER'S THEORY OF ”COURAGE TO TEACH” AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING AND LEARNING作者：徐敏雄(Min-Hsiung Hsu)關鍵字：帕爾默;教學的勇氣;教與學;恐懼的文化;Palmer;courage to teach;teaching and learning;culture of fear期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷4期出版年：2016中文摘要：研究目的探討P. J. Palmer「教學的勇氣」之理念及其對教與學行動的啟示。研究設計／方法／取徑本研究採取哲學詮釋學的研究取徑。研究發現或結論教學恐懼的主要起於教師無法認識真我，並忽略師生價值觀與生活方式差異的事實。為降低遇到差異的恐懼，師生們多以理性化的教與學策略控制各自主觀情緒，並在公共領域中刻意拉開彼此的安全距離，結果卻造成各種疏離關係。為改善這種現象，Palmer 建議教師努力從「愛的知識論」出發，並以「開放心」打破度自我保護的恐懼，勇敢地面對自己、社會、自然和宇宙間的弔詭性及恐懼感，才可能刺激彼此反思既有價值、知識、經驗侷限，讓每個人的理性、情感和靈性都納入「偉大事物」的知識與倫理關係。研究原創性／價值本文為完整探討Palmer「教學的勇氣」之理念及其延伸之教與學恐懼與勇氣的理論性研究，對教師面對差異經驗的教學行動，培養「心的習性」、擴展有機人際連結與更寬闊的知識版圖具重要參考價值。英文摘要：Purpose The purpose of this paper is to explore P.J. Palmer's theory of ”courage to teach” as well as the implication for teaching and learning. Design/methodology/approach Methods of philosophical hermeneutic are employed to investigate important works of Palmer. Findings According to Palmer, fear of teaching is caused by the fact that instructors are not able to know their true self. Another significant cause lies in the ignoring of different personal values and lifestyles between students and teachers. To reduce the fears related to these differences, students and teachers alike make use of rationalized teaching and learning strategies to control their subjective feelings. In this way, students and teachers seek ways to increase safe distances between them, but end up resulting in alienation. In order to improve this situation, Palmer suggests that teachers work to keep the epistemology of love as their starting point. He also suggests that teachers open their own hearts to vanquish those fears, which cause us to excessively protect ourselves as well as to face with courage the paradox and fear existing between ourselves, society, nature and the universe. Only in this way will students and teachers provoke each other into reflecting the limitations of their own personal values, knowledge and experience, allowing each individual's reason, emotions, and spirituality to be brought into the relationship between the knowledge and ethics of great things. Originality/value This study holistically explores Palmer's theory of ”courage to teach” as well as his extended notion of fear and courage within both teaching and learning. The results showed higher reference values for instructors and learners to cultivate their habits of the heart, to expand their organic interpersonal connections and to broaden the boundaries of their knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：145-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2404.067篇名：學齡前嬰幼兒之社會情緒能力－與嬰幼兒語言能力及父母教養之關聯並列篇名：PRESCHOOLERS' SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL COMPETENCE IN RELATION TO THEIR LANGUAGE ABILITY AND CAREGIVERS' PARENTING BEHAVIORS作者：程景琳(Ching-Ling Cheng);涂妙如(Miao-Ju Tu);陳虹仰(Hung-Yang Chen);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：學齡前嬰幼兒;社會能力;情緒能力;語言能力;父母教養行為;preschoolers;social competence;emotional competence;language ability;parenting behaviors期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：研究目的本研究旨在探討學齡前嬰幼兒之語言能力及父母教養方式分別與學齡前嬰幼兒之社會及情緒能力的關聯，並進一步了解不同教養方式在學齡前嬰幼兒之語言能力與其社會情緒能力之關聯間，是否具有調節效果。研究設計／方法／取徑研究參與者為235位學齡前嬰幼兒（男孩122名、女孩113名），平均月齡為18.99個月（標準差為10.83）；由學齡前嬰幼兒之主要照顧者（89.4%為親生母親、10.6%為親生父親）填答相關量表。研究發現或結論本研究發現，學齡前嬰幼兒之語言能力、父母之回應教養皆與學齡前嬰幼兒之社會及情緒能力呈現正相關。此外，在特定情況下（即年幼子女有明顯不當、逾矩或反抗行為），父母之責罰教養與學齡前嬰幼兒之社會及情緒能力呈現正相關；同時，父母責罰教養亦在學齡前嬰幼兒之語言能力與其社會情緒能力之關聯間，具有調節作用；亦即，對於語言能力相對較差的學齡前嬰幼兒而言，當父母針對其不當行為採取責罰方式進行管教之傾向較高時，其社會情緒能力相對較佳。研究原創性／價值性具負向特性（如：行為責罰）之父母教養方式的功能與影響，需在考量孩子的發展階段及發展特性上，加以深入探討。英文摘要：Purpose This study aims to explore how the preschoolers' language ability and caregivers' parenting behaviors relate to preschoolers' social and emotional competence, as well as to examine whether caregivers' parenting behaviors play a moderating role in the link between preschoolers' language ability and their social and emotional competence. Design/methodology/approach The participants were 235 preschoolers (122 boys and 113 girls) with an average age of 18.99 months (SD = 10.83). All data were reported by the caregivers (89.4% were by biological mothers and 10.6% by biological fathers). Findings The results showed that preschoolers' language ability, responsive parenting were positively associated with preschoolers' social and emotional competence. In addition, under certain conditions (i.e., when young children have improper or rebellious behaviors), punitive parenting was positively related to preschoolers' social and emotional competence. Furthermore, this style of punitive parenting played a moderating role in the association between preschoolers' language ability and their social and emotional competence. That is, preschoolers with poorer language ability had better social and emotional competence when their caregivers utilize punitive discipline to deal with their inappropriate behaviors. Originality/value Study on the functions and influences of parenting with negative features (e.g., behavioral punishment) needs to take into account of children's developmental stage and developmental characteristics.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2403.018篇名：臺灣中小學教師工作滿意度之研究－與其他職業做比較並列篇名：A STUDY OF JOB SATISFACTION OF ELEMENTARY/SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS IN TAIWAN -nCOMPARISON WITH OTHER OCCUPATIONS作者：林慧敏(Hui-Min Lin);黃毅志(Yih-Jyh Hwang)關鍵字：職業;中小學教師;工作滿意度;臺灣社會變遷基本調查;occupations;elementary/secondary school teachers;job satisfaction;The Primary Survey of Social Changes in Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：研究目的運用2005年「臺灣社會變遷基本調查」（五期一次）問卷二「工作與生活」（n = 2147）資料，對不同職業比較工作滿意度，探討臺灣中小學教師的工作滿意度高低，並探究造成臺灣中小學教師工作滿意度與其他職業差異的因果機制。研究設計／方法／取徑以迴歸方式進行工作滿意度的路徑分析，檢證相關假設，並試圖找出造成中小學教師工作滿意度高低的路徑。研究發現或結論臺灣中小學教師的工作滿意度最高，除了與主管人員沒有顯著差異外，顯著高於其他所有職業：原因是中小學教師的現任機構年資偏高外，中小學教師最感到工作有意義、現工作有價值，有較高的工作前景評估、工作場所人際關係，較認為男女性擔任主管公平性、較低的裁員機會，這都有助於提高工作滿意度。研究原創性／價值過去工作滿意度的研究，大多以單一職業（如教師、護理人員、基層警員......）為對象，少見同時對不同職業探討工作滿意度的研究。本研究將職業分成十類（中小學教師、主管人員、一般專業、半專業、事務工作、服務售貨、農林漁牧、技術、半技術、非技術工），以在臺灣很特別的中小學教師為對照組，與其他職業做比較，探討臺灣中小學教師的工作滿意度。研究發現，臺灣中小學教師的工作滿意度最高，只是與主管人員差異不顯著，這可能原因是中小學教師樣本不夠大（n = 67）。本研究除了採用過去對工作滿意度有影響的中介變項外，還將工作場所的「裁員機會」及「男女性擔任主管公平性」變項加入研究一起探討，研究中也證實中小學教師因較認為男女性擔任主管公平性與有較低的裁員機會，使得工作滿意度較高，這也提高了中小學教師對工作滿意度的解釋。英文摘要：Purpose This study used statistical data (n = 2147) from Questionnaire 2 ”Jobs & Lives” of ”The Primary Survey of Social Changes in Taiwan” (Occasion One, Period Five, 2005) to compare the job satisfaction of various occupations, in order to investigate the job satisfaction of elementary/secondary school teachers in Taiwan, and to probe into the mechanism leading to the differences in job satisfaction among elementary/secondary school teachers and other occupations. Design/methodology/approach This study performed regression/path analysis on job satisfaction, tested relevant hypotheses, and looked to find those paths affecting the job satisfaction of elementary/secondary school teachers. Findings The job satisfaction of elementary/secondary school teachers in Taiwan was the highest. While their job satisfaction was not significantly different from that of managers, their job satisfaction was significantly higher than that of all the other occupations. The reason was that the seniority of elementary/secondary school teachers at current schools was relatively higher. In addition, elementary/secondary school teachers perceived the highest meaning and value from work, and their evaluation of job prospects was higher. In terms of interpersonal relationships at the workplace, they believed that there was a fair chance for males/females to become department heads and a lower layoff rate. All of the above are beneficial to the improvement of job satisfaction. Originality/value Previous studies on job satisfaction mainly enrolled single occupation workers (e.g. teachers, nursing personnel, and grassroots police officers) as the subjects, with a lack of studies investigating the job satisfaction of various occupations. This study divided occupations into ten categories (elementary/secondary school teachers, managers, general professionals, semi-professionals, affairs personnel, service and sales personnel, agriculture, forestry, fishery, and animal husbandry, workers, skilled, semi-skilled, and non-skilled workers) and used elementary/secondary school teachers, who make up a rather unique occupation in Taiwan, as the control group so as to compare them with other occupations and investigate their job satisfaction. This study found that the job satisfaction of elementary/secondary school teachers in Taiwan was the highest. However, it was not significantly different from that of managers. The reason might be that the sample size of elementary/secondary school teachers was not large enough (n = 67). In addition to using intervening variables that affect job satisfaction in the past, this study also included ”layoff rate” and ”a fair chance for males/females to become department heads” in the investigation. This study also verified that elementary/secondary school teachers believed in a fair chance for either gender to act as department heads, as well as a lower layoff rate. This offered an explanation for the higher job satisfaction of elementary/secondary school teachers.起始頁-結束頁：29-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2403.029篇名：跨越教室的力量：教師學習領導之領導實踐分析並列篇名：THE POWER BEYOND CLASSROOMS: LEADERSHIP PRACTICE OF TEACHER LEADERSHIP FOR LEARNING作者：陳文彥(Wen-Yan Chen)關鍵字：學習領導;以學習為中心的領導;教師領導;教師學習領導;領導實踐;leadership for learning;learning-centered leadership;teacher leadership;teacher leadership for learning;leadership practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016中文摘要：研究目的本研究旨在探索三所學校中教師學習領導之實踐經驗，以瞭解教師如何發揮跨越教室的力量，促進學生學習。研究目的為瞭解個案學校中誰是進行學習領導的主要教師領導者，以及分析這些教師進行學習領導時，所立基的領導信念與展現之領導行為。研究設計／方法／取徑本研究採質性取向的多重個案研究，依聲譽規準選擇對促進學生學習已獲肯定的教師領導者與教師社群為研究對象。資料蒐集方法以質性訪談為主，另輔以文件分析，三校總計訪談25人。研究發現或結論本研究之結論有四：（一）個案學校進行學習領導的教師，身分別具多元性，扮演顯著角色者有三類；（二）個案學校教師進行學習領導的領導觀，是希冀擴散對教與學的理念，且能堅持對學生有利的事；在學習觀部分，則能肯認教師是學生學習的重要引導者，自身亦是主動的學習者，並採取學習者中心的教學觀；（三）個案學校教師學習領導之領導行為，主要展現於催化學習願景建立、帶動教師專業學習、促進學習方案開展，以及營造支持性文化與結構等四面向，其下又各有細部作法；（四）由學習領導視角分析教師領導實踐，應關注教師之領導觀與學習觀，以理解教師領導看似相近的行為背後，所蘊含之細膩意涵。研究原創性／價值國內尚無教師如何踐行學習領導之質性研究，且本研究結合信念面與行為面進行分析，據以連結領導觀、學習觀與領導實踐，是以往教師領導甚少論及之面向。研究結果除有助擴展學習領導與教師領導之研究視角，亦可作為教師學習領導實務推動之重要參考。英文摘要：Purpose The study aimed to explore the practice of teacher leadership for learning in three schools and to understand how teachers exercised influence beyond classrooms to facilitate student learning. The purposes were to indicate the teachers who played major roles in leading learning and to analyze the beliefs and behaviors of their leadership practice. Design/methodology/approach The study used qualitative multiple case study as the approach. With reputational criteria, teacher leaders and award-winning professional learning communities in three schools were selected. Twenty-five interviews and important documents were conducted and collected for analysis. Findings 1. Teachers who play important roles in leading learning can be categorized into three types. 2. The conceptions of leadership held by learning-centered teacher leaders are to diffuse their ideas of teaching and learning and to insist on students' benefits. As to the conceptions of learning, these teacher leaders appreciate learner-centered perspectives, recognize their vital roles in facilitating learning, and are active learners themselves. 3. Learning-centered leadership behaviors displayed by case school teacher leaders focus on facilitating the building of learning vision, promoting teachers' professional learning, broadening and deepening the development of learning programs, and nurturing supportive culture and structure for learning. 4. The analysis of teacher leadership for learning should connect leadership behaviors with teachers' beliefs of leadership and learning to comprehend different meanings of similar teacher leadership behaviors. Originality/value There are no qualitative studies on teachers' leadership practice of leadership for learning in Taiwan. Furthermore, the study connects teacher leaders' conceptions of leadership and learning with leadership behaviors, which was scarcely done in the past. The analysis and findings not only broaden the knowledge of teacher leadership and leadership for learning studies but also propose important suggestions for facilitating teacher leadership for learning.起始頁-結束頁：65-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2403.0310篇名：高等教育社會學的研究與脈絡並列篇名：SOCIOLOGY OF HIGHER EDUCATION: CONTRIBUTIONS AND THEIR CONTEXTS作者：謝卓君(Chuo-Chun Hsieh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：24卷3期出版年：2016起始頁-結束頁：99-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2016.2403.0401篇名：數位心智圖導入數位說故事對學童5C能力之學習成效分析並列篇名：Learning Effectiveness of Digital Mind Mapping Into Digital Storytelling for Elementary School Students' 5C Competencies作者：馬于婷(Yu-Ting Ma);黃淑賢(Shu-Hsien Huang);施如齡(Ju-Ling Shih)關鍵字：5C能力;逐格動畫;數位心智圖;數位說故事;5C competencies;stop-motion animation;digital mind mapping;digital storytelling期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討數位心智圖導入數位說故事對國小中、高年級學生5C能力之學習成效的影響。實驗對象為臺南市某國小四到六年級共203位學生。在課程實施前，每位學生先進行5C能力前測，再使用平板電腦進行各年級分組學習，最後進行後測；同時透過評量表對學生作品進行評量，以獲得量化及質性資料，並進行分析。研究結果發現，課程獲得大部分學生的喜愛，數位科技的輔助也確實能提升學生的5C能力。四到六年級學生都能將課程所學繪製成數位心智圖；大部分五年級學生都能以圖片編排為完整的數位說故事，而六年級更能將使用紙偶配合動作，循故事發展串連成順暢的逐格動畫，並為動畫搭配音樂和音效。學生於課程學得愈好，其5C能力則愈好；在數位心智圖、數位說故事及逐格動畫的作品成果亦愈好。英文摘要：In this study investigates the influence on students' 5C competencies from digital mind mapping into digital storytelling and stop-motion animation on mobile devices. Two hundred and three students from fourth to sixth grade in an elementary school in Tainan were chosen as the subjects of the experiment. Before the courses implemented, a pretest on 5C competencies was conducted on them. After they studied in groups on panel computers, a post-test was then conducted along with course. In the meanwhile, student's works were evaluated by an evaluation form with a view to obtaining qualitative and quantitative data for further analysis. The result found that courses were highly acceptable among most students and indeed enhanced 5C competencies. Students from fourth to sixth grade were able to create digital mind mapping at different topics, while most of fifth-grade students could put together pictures and recording, producing a very complete digital storytelling. Many six-grade students, if not most, produced a very smooth series of stop-motion animation with music and sound effect to display every move of paper puppets along with storyline. Therefore, the better students have performed from those courses, the higher their 5C competencies, the even better performances they showed from digital mind mapping, digital storytelling and stop-motion animation.起始頁-結束頁：31-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180410020022篇名：運用網路同儕互評促進護理溝通技巧並列篇名：Using Web-Based Peer Assessment for Promoting Nursing Communication Skills作者：賴錦緣(Chin-Yuan Lai);陳勝美(Sheng-Mei Chen)關鍵字：同儕互評;溝通技巧;網路學習;護理教育;peer assessment;communication skills;web-based learning;nursing education期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討網路同儕互評方式促進護生學習護理溝通的效果。研究採準實驗設計，參與者為某護專四年級修習「精神科護理學」課程的兩班學生，其中一班49人為實驗組，運用網路同儕互評學習溝通技巧；另一班52人為控制組，以傳統紙筆同儕互評方式進行學習。研究實施採前後測控制組設計（pretest-posttest control group design），兩班學生的溝通技能表現評估係根據學生團體討論的影片進行專家評分，並以問卷了解兩組學生在學習溝通時自我調節學習歷程之差異。研究結果發現：一、實驗組的後測溝通技能表現顯著高於控制組；二、實驗組與控制組的同儕互評分數與專家評分在前、後測皆未達顯著相關，顯示網路同儕互評環境未能有效提升護生的評估技能，往後系統可加入促進學生對溝通評量指標認知的機制；三、實驗組於學習過程中，較常使用不同的學習策略來改善溝通學習，曾經覺得沮喪而想放棄學習的比例亦較低。建議未來之護理溝通教學訓練可使用網路同儕互評方式，以減輕教師負擔，並促進學習效果。英文摘要：This study explored the effects of web-based peer assessment on promoting nursing students' communication skills. A quasi-experimental research design was conducted to investigate the effects. The participants were two classes of fourth-year students who were enrolled in a ”psychiatric nursing” course in a nursing college. One class with 49 students served as the experimental group, and used web-based peer assessment to learn nursing communication skills. The other class with 52 students served as the control group, and used traditionally paper-and-pencil method. We used pretest-posttest control group design and collected two classes of students' group discussion videos rated by the experts to compare their performance of nursing communication skills. A questionnaire was conducted to understand the differences of their self-regulated process while learning communication. The results demonstrated that the performance of communication skills of experimental group in posttest was higher than that of control group. However, the peer assessment scores of experimental group and control group were not significantly correlated with the experts' scores in pretest and posttest, indicating the online peer assessment did not effectively improve students' assessment skills of communication. Future systems should be considered to promote students' awareness of communication rubric. Furthermore, while learning communication, the students in the experimental group used different strategies more often to improve their learning than the control group. In the experimental group, the proportion of students who felt depressed and wanted to give up their learning was lower than the control group. It is suggested that the future nursing communication training could use network peer-evaluation approach to reduce the burden on teachers, and to promote learning.起始頁-結束頁：59-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180410020033篇名：應用機器人為自閉症孩童學習夥伴之研究並列篇名：Exploring the Use of Robots as Learning Companions for Children with Autism作者：董芳武(Fang-Wu Tung);銀子奇(Tzu-Chi Yin)關鍵字：自閉症;兒童;社會互動;社會輔助機器人;學習;autism;child;social interaction;socially assistive robotics;learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究擬探討機器人在提升自閉症兒童於社會互動學習的成效，同時比較不同擬人程度的機器人對互動與學習的影響。本研究規劃三個互動內容作為實驗情境，並製作中度和低度擬人機器人原型為實驗工具，受試者為五位高功能自閉症兒童，受試者以一對一的方式分別與兩個機器人進行三次互動實驗，記錄與觀察兒童與機器人的互動情形，包括學習任務完成度與社會互動行為。研究結果顯示，自閉症兒童願意與機器人互動，隨著與機器人接觸次數的增加，兒童對機器人會表現出更為社會性的互動行為；在任務學習方面，兩個機器人結合實體與圖卡教具都可順利進行教學活動，兒童多能完成學習任務。然而，在誘導自閉症兒童模仿機器人的肢體動作上，中度擬人機器人的四肢有更好的活動性，能有效地吸引兒童的注意力並提升他們模仿動作的意願；在社會互動方面，中度擬人機器人呈現較豐富的社會線索更能引發兒童的社會回應，社會線索可豐富機器人的社會性，有助於兒童在互動中練習社交行為與輪流對話。本研究顯示機器人可作為自閉症兒童學習的教學夥伴，可提供相關業者設計出具有成效且製作合理的社會輔助機器人。英文摘要：This study explored whether the use of humanoid robots can engage children with autism in learning and develop their social skills, and examined the effects of anthropomorphic appearances and behaviors on children's learning performance. We developed three learning scenarios for robots to interact with austic children, and created a low-anthropomorphic and a middle-anthropomorphic robots as experimental tools. Five autisic children were recruited to participate in this study. They one-on-one interacted with the two robots respectively in the three sessions. The collected data included particpnats' completion of required tasks and social interactions with the robots. The results of this study revealed that participants were willing to interact with the two robots. They would display more social behaviors after multiple interactions with the robots. The both robots could engage participants in learning activities with instruction materials such as toys or picture cards. The difference between the two robots was observed in the physical exercise task. The middle-anthropomorphic robot, having better movement in arms and legs, could receive the participants' attention and enhance their motivation to do physical exercise. As for the social interaction, the middle-anthropomorphic robot exhibiting more social cues was more effective in evoking the particpants' social responses. Social cues can be employed to enhance a robot's sociability, helping engage children in practicing social behaviors and turn-taking with a robot. The study suggests the potential of the use of robots as educational companions for children with autism. The findings of this study provide references for manufacturers to develop social robots for children with autism at reasonable cost.起始頁-結束頁：87-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180410020044篇名：Design and Implementation of Cooperative Project Planning E-Training System Based on a Collaborative Computer-Aided Learning Mechanism並列篇名：運用協作式電腦輔助學習機制於可合作式專案企劃訓練系統之設計與實現作者：李承修(Cheng-Hsiu Li);徐偉智(Wei-Chih Hsu)關鍵字：computer aided learning;cooperative project planning;e-training;project process management;teamwork;電腦輔助學習;合作式專案企劃;數位訓練;專案流程管理;團隊合作期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Project planning is the critical cause which affects the project result. The project manager must to possess the essential ability of project planning skill. Hence, the study aims to improve the cooperative project planning abilities of project manager by using a proposed e-training instruction with a cooperative project planning e-training system based on a collaborative computer-aided learning (CCAL) mechanism, and then a collaborative project planning model and suitable e-training course were developed for collaborative project planning, and a web-based computer-supported collaborative platform called the Project Planning Ability Training System (PPATS), was implemented to support the execution of collaborative training program for project planning. A cooperative project planning simulation was used as a teaching experiment. The experimental results proved that when learners used the proposed e-training instruction to study, they exhibited superior learning performances levels and cognition abilities. Learners improved their project planning abilities in collaborative situations, irrespective of their initial cognition or implementation abilities, and the learning effects were superior to those produced using traditional instruction.英文摘要：專案企劃是影響專案成功與否的關鍵因素，因此，專案企劃能力是專案管理人員必備的專業能力之一。本研究的主要目的在於提供一種新的訓練機制，讓專案管理人員能藉此提升協同合作專案企劃的能力。為了達成研究目的，本研究提出一套協作式電腦輔助學習機制，發展出可合作式專案企劃模式與適用於此模式的數位訓練課程，並實現支援其運作的雲端訓練平臺，稱之為可合作式專案企劃訓練系統。本研究將現實中進行協同合作專案企劃時的模擬情境運用於教學實驗中，讓實驗情境能更加真實。根據實驗結果可得知，當學習者使用此套訓練系統透過協作式電腦輔助學習機制進行學習時，能比傳統教學表現出更佳的學習成效，無論是在專案企劃的認知能力或實作能力皆有顯著提升。起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180110010015篇名：Using LSA-Based Tools to Enhance Students' Chinese Reading Ability並列篇名：應用潛在語意分析增強學生的閱讀能力作者：郭伯臣(Bor-Che Kuo);廖晨惠(Chen-Huei Liao);張正杰(Chun-Jey Chang)關鍵字：adaptive reading recommendation;latent semantic analysis (LSA);reading;reading ability;適性化推薦閱讀;潛在語意分析;閱讀;閱讀能力期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：The features of tablet personal computer are high portability, support for multi-finger touch input, lower price, and multi communication interface. In this research, latent semantic analysis (LSA) and tablet personal computer (TPC) were applied to enhance students' reading ability. Instructors applied LSA-based tools which expand students' vocabulary learning material and generated recommendation story books. LSA-based Chinese vocabulary learning system and reading comprehension courses are applied with TPCs at school. After an online diagnostic test, the system generated expanded vocabularies and recommended story books according to students' test result. Students learned the expanded vocabularies and read recommendation story books on their TPC. After 9 weeks of experiment, a Chinese reading comprehension test, a learning achievement test were conducted to measure the variation. Finally, 4 out of 7 abilities in the reading comprehension test were improved.英文摘要：本研究建立線上中文閱讀診斷與適性圖書推薦系統。系統內建204本電子書，每本書均有中文閱讀診斷測驗，共計5,456題。藉由診斷測驗評估學生的閱讀狀況，系統能依據診斷測驗結果，結合潛在語意分析，產生建議閱讀圖書清單供學生進行閱讀。本研究以準實驗研究法設計實驗流程，4年級兩個班為實驗組，兩個班為控制組，共有100位學生參與。實驗組閱讀線上中文閱讀診斷與適性圖書推薦系統產生的建議閱讀圖書清單，控制組依自己的喜好挑選圖書閱讀。經過一學期的實驗後，發現實驗組學生的中文閱讀理解測驗總分、語意能力、語法能力、比較分析，以及推論能力與控制組相比具有顯著性差異，顯示線上中文閱讀診斷與適性圖書推薦系統成效良好。起始頁-結束頁：31-55資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180110010026篇名：The Study of Constructing a Capability Maturity Model for Digital Teaching for Elementary and Junior High School Teachers並列篇名：建構中小學教師數位教學能力成熟度模式之研究作者：陳殷哲(Yin-Che Chen)關鍵字：analytic hierarch process;digital teaching capability maturity model;fuzzy Delphi method;層級分析法;數位教學能力成熟度模式;模糊德菲法期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study incorporated the fuzzy Delphi method and analytic hierarch process to construct the indices and frameworks of a digital teaching capability maturity model (D-TCMM). The D-TCMM was based on capability levels and maturity levels (MLs), and aimed to ensure consistency among teachers in their teaching material quality and stability in the learning structures of various course units. Overall, the model can improve the professional competencies of teachers creating teaching materials. According to the data analysis results, the weights of the MLs were .29 for initial, .26 for managed, .08 for defined, .20 for predictable, and .17 for optimizing. At the initial level, the weights of the process areas (PAs) were .46 for the application of digital teaching media, .28 for the concepts and implementation of digital teaching, and .25 for the concepts and application of technology. At the managed level, the weights of the PAs were .41 for the design concepts of teaching processes and materials, .29 for integrating digital information in a teaching environment, and .29 for digital teaching activity management. At the defined level, the PA weights were .43 for learning environment and experience, .38 for teaching and learning in digital courses, and .19 for standardizing digital teaching capabilities. At the predictable level, the PA weights were .38 for student learning evaluation, .32 for the sophistication of professional practices, and .30 for implementation and evaluation of teaching method. Finally, the weights of the PAs at the optimizing level were .56 for the applicability of digital technology and teaching, .26 for the potentials of digital technology, and .18 for the paradigms of digital teaching capabilities. According to the implications of each ML and PA, specific implementation goals were subsequently proposed for future teaching practices.英文摘要：本研究目的在於運用模糊德菲法與層級分析法，建構數位教學能力成熟度模式指標向度項目與架構。數位教學能力成熟度模式係以能力度及成熟度為基礎，以確保不同教學者教材品質的一致性及不同單元學習架構的穩定性，將有助於提升教學者製作數位教材的專業職能。依據資料分析顯示，數位教學能力成熟度模式權重值為：初始化（.29）、管理（.26）、定義（.08）、可預測（.20）、優化（.17）。在初始化下之準則權重值為：數位教學的媒體應用（.46）、數位教學概念與實施類型（.28）、科技的操作與觀念（.25）；在管理下之準則權重值為：教學與教材設計概念（.41）、數位資訊融入教學環境之經營（.29）、數位教學活動之管理（.29）；在定義下之準則權重值為：學習環境與經驗（.43）、數位課程的教與學（.38）、數位教學能力標準化（.19）；在可預測下之準則權重值為：學生成效評估（.38）、專業實務精進（.32）、教學實施與評估（.30）；在優化下之準則權重值為：數位科技與教學之應用性（.56）、數位教學能力之典範（.26）、數位科技前瞻性（.18）。最後，研究者依據各層級及其流程領域之內涵，提出具體之對應實施目標，以供未來實務教學之應用。起始頁-結束頁：57-94資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20180110010037篇名：結合多媒體與概念圖教材設計對認知學習效果之研究：以認知負荷為中介變項並列篇名：Effect of Digital Materials with Combining Multimedia and Concept Maps on Cognitive Learning: A Mediating Effect of Cognitive Load作者：田麗珠(Li-Chu Tien);邱垂昌(Chei-Chang Chiou);廖錦文(Chin-Wen Liao)關鍵字：中介效果;多媒體;概念圖;認知負荷;學業成就;mediating effect;multimedia;concept map;cognitive load;learning achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：10卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探究教師使用結合多媒體與概念圖教材進行教學對學生認知學習之影響，並進一步探討認知負荷是否具有中介效果。教學實驗採用準實驗設計，研究對象為中部某大學商學院一年級兩班學生共計114人。資料分析方法採用單因子共變異數分析、Sobel的z檢定及路徑分析。實證結果如下：一、教師使用結合多媒體與概念圖教材進行教學，有助於降低學生認知負荷與提高學生學業成就；二、認知負荷對教師使用結合多媒體與概念圖教材進行教學對學業成就之影響具有中介效果。由本研究獲得的實證結果，建議授課教師可使用結合多媒體與概念圖教材進行教學，以降低學生在學習過程中的認知負荷，並能提高學生的學業成就。英文摘要：This study has two purposes: First, investigating the effect of teachers teaching using materials with combing multimedia and concept maps on students' cognitive learnig. Second, examining whether cognitive load has a mediating effect on the relationship between teachers teaching using materials with combing multimedia and concept maps and students' cognitive achievement. A quasi-experimental design is used and the participants have total 114 from two freshmen classes at the business college of a university in mid Taiwan. Data analysis methods include a one-way analysis of covariance, a Sobel's z test and a path analysis. The empirical results as follows: 1. Teachers teaching using materials with combining multimedia and concept maps have a positive effect on reducing students' cognitive load and improving their learning achievement. 2. Cognitive load mediates the effect of teachers teaching using materials with combing multimedia and concept maps on students' cognitive achievement. Based on the empirical results obtained from this study, we suggest that instructors can use the materials of combination of multimedia and concept map to teach, which can reduce the cognitive load of students in the learning process and hence can improve their academic achievement.起始頁-結束頁：95-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201801100100401篇名：世界民主大事紀2018年1-3月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: January-March 2018期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：163-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：科技人權－全民電子通訊監察與個人資料保護並列篇名：Electronic Communication Surveillance on Entire Population and Personal Data Protection作者：翁逸泓(Wesley Yi-hung Weng)關鍵字：個人資料保護;隱私權;GDPR;巨量資料;數位人權;通訊監察;歐洲聯盟法院;Data Protection;the Right to Privacy;GDPR;Big Data;Digital Human Rights;Electronic Surveillance;CJEU期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文研究對象為歐盟法院（CJEU）大法庭於2016年12月做成，對瑞典與英國關於其以全民作為通訊監察對象法案之Tele2 Sverige AB and Watson判決，以此判決作為研究的起點，本文之研究目的為分析理解關於以現代資料科技作為手段，透過全民電子通訊監察之方式所追求之國家安全，與個人資料保護權利之間之競合，並嘗試建立衡平之模式。在該判決中，歐盟法院認為在合於憲法民主國原則下的民主社會中，以法律規範一網打盡式的全民電子通訊監控，無論如何都是對於隱私權、個人資料保護權利以及言論自由權利等嚴重之侵害。就關於個人資料保護與其他基本權利保障衡平之問題言，隱私權與個資保護權利在基本權利保障事項中，並不是一個絕對權，在個案中基於權利衡平之操作，必然地對於其他同為基本權利之事項會有不同程度之退讓餘地。歐盟法院對此要求國家機關必須有清楚且準確之規則規範國家機關在何種實體要件與正當法律程序要件，且該等規則須基於客觀證據標準而非虛無縹緲的主觀臆測公共利益之考量下，方得以留存與接近使用該等後設資料。本文對此進一步認為即便管制焦點由個資蒐集階段退縮至利用階段，仍應堅持目的性原則之核心內涵。再者，歐盟法院該判決亦認為人格圖像之剖析對個人言，與真實之通訊內容一樣受到個資保護諸權利之保障，此際以科學評價作為唯一之評價方式，並自動化由機器根據該等評價作成決定而欠缺自然人之介入，將導致整體社會之發展可能欠缺保障人格自由發展之考量。英文摘要：This essay examines a series of judgements of the Court of Justice of European Union (CJEU), in particular the case of Tele2 Sverige AB and Watson, regarding the litigation derived from laws on surveillance in member states of the European Unions. On the basis of the judgements, this essay aims to comprehend and analyse state electronic surveillance on entire population, e.g., the surveillance on web browsing history and all the other sorts of metadata, without proper privacy and personal data protection safeguards via modern data technologies. In the mentioned judgements the CJEU confirms that, under the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and EU data protection law, such blanket retention of personal confidential data, including traffic data and so on, is unlawful and mass surveillance programmes are only allowed if they are targeted, e.g., fighting against serious crime, and not implemented on a general and indiscriminate basis. Furthermore, without appropriate safeguards, this essay argues that profiling and automated decision-making technologies can pose significant risks for data subjects' fundamental rights and freedoms.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：民進黨地方侍從體制與台灣基層民主轉型－台南經驗的啟示並列篇名：Local Clientelism of Democratic Progressive Party and The Transition of Taiwan's Grass-Root Democracy: Lessons from Tainan Experience作者：丁仁方(Jen-fang Arthur Ting);趙卿惠(Ching-hui Chao);李依霖(Yi-lin Li)關鍵字：新興民主;侍從體制;特殊利益;基層民主;侍從式政策;個案研究;young democracy;clientelism;particular interest;grass-root democracy;clientelist policy;case study期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：西方學者近年對新興民主國家轉型經驗的研究，發現傳統侍從體制並未隨著民主化的過程而消失，反而出現各種變異或更加鞏固；包括官僚系統的獨立性、政黨及國家體制整合特殊利益的方式、政黨的選舉策略與競爭等，都可能影響侍從體制特殊利益的表達空間。本文檢視民進黨在台南（縣）市執政二十多年幾位首長透過執政資源籠絡支持者及吸納選民的經驗，據以推斷台灣基層民主轉型的發展型態及其可能潛在的問題。約略言之，台南（縣）市先後有不同民進黨籍首長執政超過二十年，跟支持者及基層選民逐漸發展出更細緻的侍從連結方式，從台南縣陳唐山開始透過執政資源爭取國民黨傳統派系並建立恩庇關係，之後不同縣市首長除透過執政資源吸納政治支持之外，更透過一些侍從式政策穩定與選民的連結，因此才使得民進黨在台南（縣）市的支持基礎越來越穩固。本文透過個案研究的方式，檢視台灣地方侍從體制轉型經驗，並就其中可能的問題提出反省。英文摘要：In recent years, Western scholars who study the experience of the transition of young democratic countries have found that the traditional clientelism has not disappeared during the process of democratization, but rather it has changed form or even consolidated in some young democratic countries. The independence of the bureaucracies, the way political parties and the state system integrating special interests, and the party election strategy or competition among parties all may affect the articulation of the special interest within clientelism. This article examines the incumbent experience of several heads of the DPP in more than 20-year reign of the Tainan city (county) through the public resources to draw on supporters and attract voters, and then to infer the development patterns and potential problems of Taiwan's grassroots democratic transition. Roughly speaking, Tainan city (county) has different DPP heads in reign for more than 20 years, and they had gradually developed more delicate clientelistic linkages with supporters and grassroots voters, from Tainan County magistrate Chen Tangshan starting to coopt Kuomintang traditional factions through the ruling resources and then building clientelist relationship, later on different heads of counties and cities absorbing political support through the ruling resources, but also through a number of clientelist policies to stabilize the linkage with the voters, so that the DPP electorate in Tainan city(county) is becoming more and more stable. This paper examines the experiences of Taiwan's local clientelist transformation through a case study, and makes some generalizations about the possible problems occurred within the process.起始頁-結束頁：45-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：客語共同體的想像－比利時經驗之借鏡並列篇名：Imaging Hakka Language Community: Learning from Belgium's Experience作者：王保鍵(Pao-chien Wang)關鍵字：客家基本法;語言共同體;比利時語族自治體;臺灣客家;Hakka Basic Act;language community;communities in Belgium;Taiwan Hakka期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：為建構更具效能的客語復振機制，政府於2018年1月31日修正《客家基本法》，於客家文化重點發展區（客庄）實施客語為地方通行語及教學語言。本文檢視「客家基本法修正草案」之各階段修法歷程，發現客家委員會原構思「客家文化自治團體」，退縮為依《地方制度法》第24條之1成立之「客家文化區域合作組織」。經檢視修法爭點後，發現：客家委員會及內政部等相關部會仍以行政區域為中心思考文化自治，致難跳脫現行《地方制度法》規範架構。為提供國內政策分析之參考，本文運用公共政策理論及分析相關文獻，以比利時為制度參照個案，探討比利時語族自治體及區域自治體之運作。本文並以比利時為借鏡，以「族群自治」理念，提出我國「客語共同體」設計之芻議。英文摘要：In order to set up a more effective mechanism for revitalizing the Hakka language, the Legislative Yuan passed the amendment of Hakka Basic Act on December 29th, 2017. The revised version of Act institutes Hakka language as the local and teaching language in those ”major Hakka cultural areas” (Hakka villages). After examine the revision process of Hakka Basic Act, this paper finds that the revised Act follows the ”Local Government Act” and established ”Hakka cultural regional cooperation organizations” instead of adopting the idea of ”Hakka cultural self-ruling body” advocated by Hakka Affairs Council. This result from both of Ministry of Interior and Hakka Affairs Council tend to build the cultural self-ruling mechanism under the framework of administrative regions, which is according to the article 24-1 of ”Local Government Act”. For providing references to domestic policy analysis, this paper, which employs the institution of Belgium as a case study, explores the autonomous area of language family and regional self-ruling body in Belgium by the approach of public policy theory and literature review. Moreover, this paper tried to propose a designation of ”Hakka language community”, which is based on the experience of ethnic self-ruling body in Belgium.起始頁-結束頁：79-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：公民如何能知？－iVoter的民主實作經驗檢視並列篇名：How can citizens be informed? Examining the Democratic Practices of iVoter作者：廖達琪(Da-chi Liao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：「民主」在今日正遭受廿世紀中葉以降的最大頓挫，美國《外交事務》（Foreign Affairs）4月號甚且提問「民主正死亡中嗎？」（Is Democracy Dying?），姑不論中國崛起或全球化推倒疆界，導致移工、難民等跨界流動，所引起的歐美右派保守之民粹主義勢力興起等外生因素對自由民主體制的衝擊；就民主本身的實踐而言，離「理想」的範式甚遠，則是不爭的事實。什麼是理想的範式呢？公民能「知」而後投票選「政治代表」或「政策」，應是古典民主理論所期待的根本出發點，此一理想雖經歷經驗民主論的「悖論」，但又為今日審議民主論者所重視及推動。但「公民能知」如何做？能做到什麼程度？有什麼效果？可能面對的問題是什麼？台灣審議民主的推動者，尤其是社會學界頗做了一些，大體較聚焦地方性與居民切身利害較有關之公共議題的審議；而本文欲分享的經驗，則較從政治學選舉的視角，來說明檢視「iVoter」這一網路平台，推動公民能知的緣起、做法、效益、問題檢視及未來期許。本文作者自2010年起，由蔣經國國際學術交流基金會支持，與歐洲大學研究院（European University Institute）政治系教授Alexander H. Trechsel合作，開發了iVoter網站http://ivoter.tw/，主要是提供選民於國會選前各候選人的議題立場資訊，方式是以問卷先請候選人、政黨（2016年才有）填答問卷，結果經分析整理（如圖一）；再開放邀請選民參與，在iVoter網站上填答同樣的問卷；但在頁面呈現上，特別就議題本身及相關的正反意見做說明，提供更多資訊給選民參考（如圖二），以進行和自己立場相近的委員或政黨配對（如圖三、圖四，及圖五），希望協助選民在投票前多一份與自己理念核對過的相關資訊為參考；所以iVoter這樣的設計，在英文文獻中，被稱為「投票諮詢應用平台」（Voting Advice Applications, VAA）；而我們稱iVoter的意義也有Informed, Intellegent and Internet選民之寓含，也就是強調「能知」的部分。起始頁-結束頁：121-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：書評：Taiwan's China Dilemma: Contested Identities and Multiple Interests in Taiwan's Cross-strait Economic Policy〔台灣的中國兩難－台灣的兩岸經濟政策當中的認同與利益爭辯〕by Syaru Shirley Lin〔林夏如〕並列篇名：Books Review: A review of Taiwan's China Dilemma: Contested Identities and Multiple Interests in Taiwan's Cross-strait Economic Policy by Syaru Shirley Lin作者：陳方隅(Fang-Yu Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：129-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：書評：National Security Secrecy: Comparative Effects on Democracy and the Rule of Law〔國家安全機密－民主與法治的比較效應〕by Sudha Setty〔蘇哈•賽迪〕並列篇名：Books Review: A review of National Security Secrecy: Comparative Effects on Democracy and the Rule of Law by Sudha Setty作者：林昕璇(Hsin-Hsuan Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：137-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：世界民主大世紀：2017年10-12月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: October-December 2017期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：145-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：我國高齡教育基本權的憲法基礎探究：終身學習權保障觀點並列篇名：Study of the Constitutional Foundations of the Right to Senior Education in Taiwan: A Lifelong-Learning-Right Perspective作者：王等元(Deng-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：在地老化;高齡社會;高齡教育;教育基本權;終身學習權;aging in place;aged society;basic right to education;right to lifelong learning;senior education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：個別基本權利功能及其憲法保障基礎的探究是基本權利理論研究的重要問題；故本研究從終身學習權保障觀點出發，並以教育憲法釋義學方法，試圖探究我國新興高齡教育基本權功能及其憲法保障基礎。本研究發現，為因應臺灣高齡社會發展趨勢，高齡教育基本權利應屬國民教育基本權與大學學術自由以外的新興教育基本權利，其憲法保障的基礎為我國立國精神之憲法基本原則、憲法第22 條「概括基本權利」，以及基本國策相關規定；其次，我國高齡教育基本權應具有防禦權功能、客觀價值秩序功能、制度性保障功能，以及組織與程序功能；最後，就其基本權功能而言，除防禦權功能外，其餘應屬基本權客觀法規範功能，旨在課予國家積極提供高齡學習機會之作為義務，以協助人民實現其高齡教育基本權利。英文摘要：Discussions of individual basic rights and their constitutional protection are fundamental to research into basic rights theory. This paper aims at explicating the functions of the basic right to senior education and its constitutional rationale through interpretative epistemology of the Constitution from a lifelong-learning-right perspective. The research findings are as follows: (1) In global aging societies, the basic right to senior education is a relatively new right to education, and its constitutional rationale can be derived from articles 11 and 22 of the Constitution. (2) The functions of the basic right to senior education are the defensive function, objective values function, institutional protection function, and organizational and procedural function. (3) Except for the first function, the others are new basic-right functions, which impose the state obligations to help the older adults benefit from the right to senior education. On the basis of these findings, some suggestions for policy decision-makers and future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).00012篇名：學習者分析—探討年齡、性別與閱讀力對高齡髖部骨折患者術後恢復的關係並列篇名：Learner Analysis: Influence of Age, Gender, and Reading Ability on Postoperative Recovery Following Hip Fracture Among Older Adults作者：張丞淯(Cheng-Yu Chang);許曉霈(Hsiao-Pei Hsu);梁惠玉(Hui-Yu Liang);林冠宏(Kuan-Hung Lin);陳淑芬(Shu-Fen Chen)關鍵字：衛教指導;學習者分析;髖部骨折;health education;hip fracture;learner analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討因髖部骨折接受手術之70歲以上高齡者，在年齡、性別與閱讀力不同的特質下，其術後恢復相關的因子是否會不同。在北部某區域教學醫院，邀請因髖部骨折接受手術之70歲以上高齡者為對象，共收案150 位，以老人活動量表與步態及平衡評估量表評估術後恢復，主要結果包括：一、年齡分組：80 歲以上的高齡者，其居家環境安全評估得分愈高，術後恢復佳；未滿80 歲的高齡者，則無發現顯著的相關因子；二、性別分組：女生組的高齡者，居家環境安全評估得分愈高，術後恢復佳；男生組的高齡者，則未發現顯著的相關因子；三、閱讀力分組：識字組的高齡者，自我照顧瞭解程度愈好，術後恢復佳；不識字組的高齡者，則未發現顯著的相關因子。透過學習者分析，發現學習者特質的不同，與術後恢復的相關因子有所不同，本研究結果可作為設計術後衛教指導之參考。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the differences between the characteristics of older adults (including age, gender, and reading ability) and to determine the differences between factors associated with recovery after hip fracture surgery. Adults aged 70 years and older who received surgery because of hip fractures at a teaching hospital in northern Taiwan were invited to participate in this study. A total of 150 patients were enrolled in this study, and postoperative recovery was evaluated using the Elderly Mobility Scale and Performance-oriented Mobility Assessment Scale. The main results were classified according to age group. In patients aged 80 years and older, the higher the home safety evaluation score, the better was the postoperative recovery. No relevant factors were found patients aged younger than 80 years. For female patients, the higher the home safety evaluation score, the better was the postoperative recovery. By contrast, no relevant factors were found for male patients. Literate older adults had a better understanding of self-care and postoperative recovery, whereas no relevant factors were found among illiterate older patients. The relevant factors for postoperative recovery differ due to the differences between the characteristics of the learners. The results of this study can be used as a reference for designing effective health education for postoperative recovery.起始頁-結束頁：25-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).00023篇名：藝術治療團體運用於失智長者之效果研究並列篇名：Effect of Group Art Therapy on Older Individuals With Dementia作者：黃傳永(Chuan-Yung Huang);郭淑惠(Shu-Hui Kuo)關鍵字：失智症;長期照護;高齡化社會;藝術治療團體;aging society;dementia;group art therapy;long-term care期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討藝術治療團體運用於失智長者之效果，採取質性研究的發現取向進行分析，透過團體後個別訪談蒐集資料。結果顯示：在失智長者參與藝術治療團體之實質幫助與影響有：期待參與團體、提升出門動機、引發長者好奇、增進其身體活動、增進與人互動、促進口語表達、學習正向自我肯定與鼓勵別人、提升專注力、生活有重心、增進正向豐富的情緒經驗、家屬感受放鬆、對長者有新的看見與情感連結。藝術治療介入方案對失智長者之成效因子則包括：促發長者創造力並提升成就感、運用多重感官、提升長者其感官知覺、創作賦能與維護長者自我價值感、投入創作進入心流、忘記病痛不適、提升長者活動量促進手眼協調。最後，依據研究結果進行討論，並因應未來高齡化社會，在失智人口不斷提升的情況下提供政府相關機構，以及未來研究之規劃與參考。英文摘要：This study explored the effect of group art therapy on older individuals with dementia. A discovery-oriented qualitative study was used for data collection. Individual interviews were conducted after the completion of group art therapy. Findings indicated that group art therapy provided practical help and influences, including anticipation of participating at the group, increased motivation to leave the house, aroused curiosity, enhanced body movement, enhanced interactions with others, strengthened verbal responses, boosted self-recognition and encouragement, improved concentration, a focus for life, strengthened positive emotional experiences, relaxation, and new thoughts about older individuals and the connections between them. The effects of group art therapy included improved creativity and sense of accomplishment, usage of different senses, enhanced sensations, creative empowerment, maintenance of self-fulfillment, dedication to art enabling participants to forget suffering and pain, improved activity, and improved hand-eye coordination. The findings of this study are discussed, and suggestions are provided for the government and related institutions to cope with an aging society and an increasing population of individuals with dementia.起始頁-結束頁：45-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).00034篇名：中小學教師老化教育培訓方案實施成效之實驗研究並列篇名：Effects of Aging Education Training on Elementary and Secondary Teachers Toward Aging作者：黃錦山(Chin-Shan Huang)關鍵字：老化知識;老化教育;老化教學行為;老化態度;年齡歧視;ageism;aging education;attitudes toward aging;knowledge of aging;teaching behavior intention toward aging期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：近年來高齡人口數逐年增多，但現代老人的地位卻因工商業社會的發展而逐年下降，致使年齡歧視現象充斥於社會之中。如何能夠消弭年齡歧視的蔓延，有賴於中小學教師具有老化教育的相關培訓。因此，本研究旨於規劃18小時的「教師老化教育培訓方案」是否能有效地改善中小學教師的老化知識、態度與教學行為意向？本研究採取「不等組前後測設計」，有效樣本實驗組33人、控制組51人。主要研究發現有：一、實驗組教師在接受「老化教育培訓方案」後，其老化知識、態度與教學行為意向上的得分，顯著較其培訓前佳；二、控制組教師在未接受「老化教育培訓方案」的情況下，其老化知識、態度與教學行為意向上的前後測得分，無顯著差異；三、實驗組教師在接受「老化教育培訓方案」後，其老化知識、態度與教學行為意向上的得分，顯著較控制組教師佳。英文摘要：The aging population is gradually increasing because people are living longer. Older people are often portrayed as insignificant, unhealthy, sad, and dependent in contemporary cultures and values. Therefore, it is pertinent to improve the knowledge, attitudes, and behavioral intentions toward aging and older people held by elementary and secondary teachers. The researcher designed an 18-hour Aging Education Training (AET) program to test whether it influenced the knowledge, attitudes, and behavioral intentions of the participants. Overall, 33 teachers were in an experimental group and 51 teachers were in a control group. The results revealed that the teachers who joined the AET program had improved knowledge, attitudes, and behavioral intentions toward aging people after the training program. Conversely, there was no significant difference in the knowledge, attitudes, and teaching behavior toward aging people in the teachers who did not join the AET program. Overall, the teachers who joined the AET program had significantly greater knowledge, attitudes, and teaching behavior toward aging people compared with the teachers who did not join the AET program.起始頁-結束頁：73-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).00045篇名：高齡代言人對高齡者評估廣告之影響並列篇名：Effects of Elderly Endorsers on Older Adults' Advertising Evaluation作者：林鴻洲(Hung-Chou Lin);蔡嘉怡(Chia-Yi Tsai)關鍵字：知名度;性別;高齡代言人;國籍;健康促進;elderly endorser;health promotion;nationality;popularity;sex期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究欲探討高齡者代言功能性與享樂性產品的廣告效果，並進一步加入代言人性別、知名度、國籍為調節變項。本研究歸納出四個研究目的：一、探討高齡代言人與產品配適對廣告效果之影響；二、探討高齡代言人性別是否會影響廣告效果；三、探討高齡代言人知名度是否會影響廣告效果；四、探討高齡代言人國籍是否會影響廣告效果。本研究採用實驗法，施測人數共420人。研究結果顯示：一、高齡代言人代言功能性產品的廣告效果會優於享樂性產品；二、無論在功能性產品或是享樂性產品的代言中，高齡代言人的性別不具有調節效果；三、高齡代言人知名度對於廣告代言具有調節效果，以享樂性產品而言，知名度高的代言人廣告效果會優於知名度低的代言人；反之，以功能性產品而言，知名度低的代言人廣告效果會優於知名度高的代言人；四、高齡代言人的國籍對於代言的廣告具有調節效果，以功能性產品而言，國外高齡代言人優於國內高齡代言人的廣告效果；以享樂性產品而言，國內高齡代言人優於國外高齡代言人的廣告效果。最後，本研究根據資料分析結果，提出實務上的建議，供企業規劃行銷策略或政府相關部門規劃高齡者健康促進活動時參考。英文摘要：This study examined the advertising effectiveness of hedonic and utilitarian products endorsed by elderly endorsers. Sex, popularity, and nationality of the elderly endorsers were incorporated to examine their moderating effects. Four experiments were conducted in which 420 participants filled out questionnaires about advertising effectiveness. The results indicated the following: (1) Utilitarian products had superior advertising effectiveness than hedonic products endorsed by elderly endorsers. (2) The sex of the elderly endorsers had no moderating effect. (3) The popularity of the elderly endorsers had a moderating effect-the advertising effectiveness of a high-popularity elderly endorser was considerably higher than low-popularity elderly endorsers for hedonic products. By contrast, the advertising effectiveness of a low-popularity elderly endorser was considerably higher than high-popularity elderly endorsers for utilitarian products. (4) The nationality of the elderly endorsers had a moderating effect-the advertising effectiveness of domestic elderly endorsers was considerably higher than that of foreign elderly endorsers for hedonic products. The advertising effectiveness of foreign elderly endorsers was considerably higher than that of domestic elderly endorsers for utilitarian products. On the basis of these findings, suggestions for health promotion and marketing strategies are offered.起始頁-結束頁：99-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).00056篇名：臺北市高齡學習者健康促進、人際互動及生活滿意之研究並列篇名：Health Improvement, Interpersonal Relationships, and Life Satisfaction Among Elderly Learners in Taipei作者：陳淑敏(Amy Shumin Chen);張澄清(Cheng-Ching Chang);吳志富(Chih-Fu Wu)關鍵字：人際互動;生活滿意;高齡學習;健康促進;學習型態與類別;elderly learners;health improvement;interpersonal interaction;learning topics and style;life satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣自1993 年起已成為人口老化國家，協助高齡者體認健康之重要性及從事學習活動與社會活動，是積極面對人口老化的重要方針。鑑此，本研究以調查法探究臺北市高齡學習者偏好之學習類別與學習型態，並據此將高齡學習者分為「積極」、「保守」、「知性取向」及「人際取向」四類，其中以人際取向學習者居多、保守學習者最少。分析結果顯示，年齡、教育程度、居住地區及婚姻狀況與學習者類型呈顯著關聯性，其中，未滿60歲、國中以下教育程度之分組積極學習者的比例較少；70∼74 歲、研究所以上學歷積極學習者比例較高。信義區積極學習者比例較高、松山區則以保守學習者較多。喪偶者呈現較傾向於積極學習者與人際取向學習者。整體而言，積極學習者不論在健康促進行為、人際互動趨向及生活滿意度，皆優於保守與人際取向學習者。基於本研究之發現，建議高齡學習相關資源、方案、規劃、活動和課程，應多方考量學習者的個別特性及地區差異，以增強保守學習者持續參與學習的動機和提升低社經地區民眾的整體參與為積極面對高齡社會之策略。英文摘要：Taiwan has been an aging society since 1993. Elderly people should be encouraged to recognize the importance of their health, plan their finances early, and participate in learning and social activities, because these are important strategies for actively facing the aging process. This study explored the preferred categories and styles of learning among elderly people in Taipei. The results showed that elderly people could be divided into four types according to their learning interests: active, conservative, intellectually oriented, and interpersonally oriented. Most elderly learners were interpersonally oriented, and fewest of them were conservative learners. The findings indicated that learners' age, educational level, residential area, and marital status were significantly related to their learning type. Fewer active learners were found among those who were less than 60 years old or who had not completed senior high school. Those who were 70 to 74 years old or who had master's degrees were more active learners. Active learners were more frequently found among elderly people living in Xinyi District, whereas in Songshan District there were more conservative learners. Widowers were more likely to be active and interpersonally oriented learners. Moreover, active learners showed a higher degree of health improvement behavior, interpersonal interaction, and life satisfaction than conservative and interpersonally oriented learners. The authors suggest that differences in learners’ characteristics and location should be kept in mind when planning resources, programs, and activities for elderly people. Moreover, as goals for an aging society, it is necessary to increase the motivation of the category of the conservative groups to engage in learning activities and to promote learning participations for those elder learners with lower social and economic status.起始頁-結束頁：127-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).00067篇名：Effects of Fall Prevention Programs for Older Adults on Fall-Related Injuries: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis並列篇名：預防計畫對於老人跌倒相關傷害之成效：統合分析作者：黃素妃(Su-Fei Huang);楊婷婷(Ting-Ting Yang);陳雪芬(Shueh-Fen Chen);呂莉婷(Li-Ting Lu);廖容瑜(Jung-Yu Liao)關鍵字：accidental falls;fall prevention;injury;meta-analysis;older adults;老人;統合分析;跌倒預防;意外跌倒;傷害期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study aimed to evaluate the effects of fall prevention programs on fall-related injuries, and the characteristics of these programs. The Cochrane Library, Medline, PubMed, PsycARTICLES, PsycINFO, ERIC, AgeLine, CINAHL, Psychology and Behavioral Sciences Collection databases were searched for randomized clinical trials on fall-related injuries among older adults from 1996 to 2016. A meta-analysis was performed to calculate the combined effects of fall prevention programs on fall-related injuries. A total of 33 research papers were included in the meta-analysis (68,736 participants). The meta-analysis found that fall prevention programs had a significant effect in preventing fall-related injuries (OR=0.86, 95% CI: 0.75-0.97), but a borderline-significant effect in preventing fractures (OR=0.80, 95% CI: 0.63-1.03). The fall prevention programs had a significant effect on fall-related injuries when both male and female participants were included in the study sample, interventions involved healthcare professionals, more than 20% of the patient population had a history of falling, interventions occurred in the community setting, and multiple interventions were used. Thus, fall prevention programs had a small but significant effect in preventing fall-related injuries but only a borderline effect in preventing fractures. When planning fall prevention programs, future policy makers and clinical workers should consider the different characteristics of older adults to propose appropriate intervention programs.英文摘要：本研究目的為評估預防計畫對老人跌倒相關傷害之成效，從Cochrane Library、Medline、PubMed、PsycARTICLES、PsycINFO、ERIC、AgeLine、CINAHL、Psychology、Behavioral Sciences Collection databases等，蒐集所有相關的臨床隨機試驗研究，文獻年代範圍從1996年至2016 年間，並應用探索性統合分析，計算老人跌倒預防計畫之效果量。共計33 篇期刊論文納入分析（68,736 人），探索性統合分析結果顯示，跌倒預防計畫對因跌倒所造成的傷害具顯著效果（OR＝0.86, 95% CI：0.75-0.97），但是對於骨折的預防效果則介於邊緣性顯著差異（OR＝0.80, 95% CI：0.63-1.03）。此外，跌倒預防計畫若是不分男女、介入內容包含健康照護專家、當參與者超過20%具跌倒經驗、社區為介入場域、包含多元介入等，本研究發現預防計畫對於預防跌倒相關傷害具有小卻顯著的效果，因此，未來規劃跌倒預防計畫時，政策制定者及臨床工作者應考量不同特性的老人，並提出合適的介入計畫。起始頁-結束頁：163-186資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).00078篇名：Models of Transformative Learning Among Family Caregivers of People With Dementia: Positive Experience Approaches並列篇名：失智症家庭照顧者轉化學習模式：邁向正向經驗作者：嚴嘉明(Chia-Ming Yen)關鍵字：family caregivers of people with dementia;positive caregiving experiences;transformative learning;失智症家庭照顧者;正向照顧經驗;轉化學習期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：In contrast to the general assumptions that people with dementia are a physical, psychological, and financial burden, recent studies have demonstrated that family caregivers can benefit and experience personal growth when caring for a family member with dementia. This study investigates the transformation of family caregivers when caring for a family member with dementia. This study first examined the negative experiences of family caregivers of people with dementia and then explored the triggers that helped change their experiences from negative to positive during caregiving. In-depth interviews were conducted with 18 participants. The participants were recruited from two local care associations and one medical centre in central and southern Taiwan. Each interview was audio-recorded and data were transcribed verbatim. A thematic analysis was performed to analyze the themes and subthemes related to the triggers. The findings revealed that optimistic characteristics, mutuality, spirituality, and coping abilities and skills are important triggers for developing a positive caregiving experience model. This study is intended to help family caregivers, who may often feel pessimistic, to have positive daily caregiving experiences. Moreover, the study provides government long-term care policymakers, scholars, and healthcare professionals and practitioners with a more comprehensive understanding of the caregiving challenges and needs of family caregivers.英文摘要：近年來有愈來愈多的研究顯示，失智症家庭照顧者從照顧歷程中也能獲得正向意義與個人成長，雖然多數的研究表示照顧者仍飽受體力、心理與財務的困擾。本研究探討失智症家庭照顧者如何及以什麼樣的模式可由負向轉為正向的照顧經驗。本研究首先探討失智症家庭照顧者的負向經驗，再進一步探索有助於失智症家庭照顧者由負向轉為正向經驗的重要驅動力。本研究以深度訪談的方式，共計訪談18位失智症家庭照顧者，受訪者分別招募自中部及南部的兩個照顧者協會與一個醫學中心。訪談過程全程錄音，並繕打成逐字稿。本研究採用主題分析法，根據深度訪談中與重要驅動力有關的主題與次要主題內容加以分析。本研究發現，「樂觀的個性」、「互動關係」、「靈性」及「因應能力及技巧」均為失智症家庭照顧者轉化成正向經驗模式重要的驅動力因素。為數甚多的失智症家庭照顧者經常感受負面經驗，透過本研究的發現，希望能提供失智症家庭照顧者找到正向照顧經驗的方法與模式。本研究結果亦提供政府長期照顧政策決策者、學者、醫療從業人員及實務工作者，因應失智症家庭照顧面對的挑戰與需求時能有更深入的認識與瞭解。起始頁-結束頁：187-218資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).00089篇名：課程實施在推廣中的意涵與革新體現：課程史觀點並列篇名：Curriculum Implementation Implies the Meanings of the Dissemination and Innovation: The Viewpoint of Curriculum History作者：侯一欣(Yi-Hsin Hou);高新建(Shin-Jiann Gau)關鍵字：課程史;課程革新;課程推廣;課程實施;curriculum dissemination;curriculum history;curriculum implementation;curriculum innovation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究以歷史回顧的文獻分析技術就過程、觀點爬梳相關名詞釋義，並整合課程革新實施模式的探討，從中瞭解課程革新實施的相關詞義生成與脈絡演變，作為國內課程實施的學術和實務參考之借鏡。本研究的主要發現臚列如下：一、起源於美國1960年代推廣課程革新的失敗，「課程實施」的術語乃從「課程推廣」做概念衍伸。又因Fullan實施階段的劃分並不嚴謹，「課程實施」若附屬於「課程推廣」的子過程，則實施、擴散和制度化或可望做進一步的理論整合。二、課程革新實施的觀點從忠實轉變為調適取向，目標與結構逐漸消融，外來革新結合在地文化深耕，乃能導致後續的人際擴散與制度化。三、課程革新實施的模式主要為「自上而下」及「由下而上」兩種類型，各種模式的發展有其脈絡背景及假定基礎。英文摘要：The aim of this study was to analyze previous literature on academics for integrating the model and process of innovative curriculum implementation (ICI). The findings yielded the following conclusions: (1) The academic term ICI was derived on the basis of curriculum dissemination and related factors and originated from a failure in curriculum innovation in the United States during the 1960s. The academic error committed by Fullan caused the integration of diffusion and institutionalism as a combined theory. (2) The concept of ICI was revised from fidelity to mutual adaptation. Moreover, the concept does not emphasize the goal and structure of ICI but combines innovation with culture to enable interpersonal diffusion and institutionalization. (3) The model of ICI differs from the top-down and bottom-up approaches, all of which were developed on the basis of assumptions.起始頁-結束頁：219-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).000910篇名：科技大學教師對職能融入教學政策之接受態度研究—以「產業職能基準系統」為中介環境並列篇名：Constructing an Educational Policy Acceptance Model to Explore Attitudes Toward Policy Implementation: Using an Industrial Competency Standards System in Science and Technology Universities作者：洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);張瑞娥(Jui-O Chang)關鍵字：科技接受模式;教育政策接受模式;期望價值理論;整合性接受模式;職能基準;acceptance model of educational policy;competency standards;expectancy-value theory;technology acceptance model;unified acceptance model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：基於以往教育政策效益的研究，多聚焦於該領域專家的觀點，而不是從利害關係人的角度進行評估。因此，本研究目的在於建立以科技大學教師觀點之職能基準融入教學政策的接受模式。運用相關接受模式的理論主張為基礎，建構包括教師信念、政策理解性、政策執行性、政策價值性和政策接受態度等五個變項的模式，依序編製問卷、蒐集257份有效樣本，運用結構方程模式進行分析。研究發現：一、所建構模式適配度良好、各變項之信度與效度俱佳，可以解釋科技大學教師對職能政策的接受態度；二、本模式驗證相關接受模式的理論和成分的主張，其中構成期望成分之「政策的理解性」、「政策的執行性」，正向影響價值成分之「政策的價值性」，進而決定科技大學教師對職能政策的接受態度；三、模式中「教師的信念」對於「政策的理解性」和「政策的執行性」，具正相關；「政策的理解性」和「政策的執行性」對於「政策的價值性」，也同具正相關；而「政策的理解性」對「政策的執行性」，並無相關；四、以「教師的信念」為模式的外部變項，可提升模式的解釋力；而「政策的價值性」是模式的重要中介變項。上述的研究發現可供政策決策及執行單位參考；另本模式未來亦可擴大運用至其他對象或政策，具理論和實務的應用性。英文摘要：Studies related to the effectiveness of policy making have been focused on the concerns of domain experts, not stakeholders. The purpose of this study was to construct an acceptance model of educational policy to explore competency standards integration, and technical-vocational education and teaching. Based on the perspectives of professors from science and technology universities, this study examined the correlations among teaching progressive beliefs, perceived ease of policy understanding and application, perceived value to students, and attitudes toward policy implementation. Quantitative data from 257 participants were collected for confirmatory factor analysis using structural equation modeling. The results revealed that teaching progressive beliefs was positively related to perceived ease of policy understanding and application to teaching settings; perceived ease of policy understanding and application were positively associated with value to students; and value to students was positively correlated with attitude toward policy implementation. In addition, teaching progressive beliefs positively predicted the implementation attitude that was mediated by the perceived value of policies; however, perceived ease of policy understanding and application were essential in explaining the expectancy-value research model. This study suggested that formalization of the policy acceptance model can be applied to explore other policies related to education and policy making for understanding stakeholders' attitudes toward the implementation of new policies.起始頁-結束頁：251-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201806_63(2).001001篇名：《師大學報》與《教育科學研究期刊》60年之內容分析並列篇名：Research Content Analysis for a Period of 60 Years for the Journal of National Taiwan Normal University and Journal of Research in Education Sciences作者：黃詩媛(Shih-Yuan Huang);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);劉子鍵(Tzu-Chien Liu);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang);蔡孟寧(Meng-Ning Tsai)關鍵字：內容分析;師大學報;教育科學研究期刊;content analysis;Journal of National Taiwan Normal University;Journal of Research in Education Sciences期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究採用內容分析法，針對《師大學報》與《教育科學研究期刊》自1956年至2017年間之發展歷史與所收錄論文進行分析，透過研究內容的分類及統計，瞭解學刊在近60年間之領域發展軌跡及未來研究趨勢。本研究共彙整收錄於學刊之1,345篇論文，並依研究目的分類為七個向度進行資料探究，分別為：期刊收錄內容、研究對象、研究主題、研究性質、研究方法、作者貢獻程度、引用文獻分析。研究結果如下：一、學刊自分冊後出版篇數有明顯增加，平均作者量也逐年增長，顯示國內人文教育領域之研究數量增加，且近期作者多採用合作模式共同進行研究。二、研究對象以人類樣本最多，其後依序是語文樣本、數測樣本、其他樣本；而在人類樣本中的研究群體以教師最多，其他年紀樣本的比例也逐年增加，表示學刊收錄論文的研究對象朝多樣性發展。三、研究主題早期以科學教育、歷史與哲學為主，但相關論文逐年遞減，近期隨著期刊分冊後，《師大學報》改以語言與文學為研究主軸，《教育科學研究期刊》則以學習與教學為主，此類研究主題的發表篇數皆逐年攀升，分別顯示兩類學刊各自的研究主題趨勢，如《師大學報》研究重心逐漸轉移至「語文」，而《教育科學研究期刊》的研究主軸為「教」與「學」。四、研究性質以實徵性研究為主軸，其次為論述性研究，而非研究論文之比例最少。五、研究方法是量化研究與質化研究各占半數，量化研究以實驗研究法及調查研究法為主；質化研究則以文獻研究法為多數；混合研究法的使用於近30年開始增加。六、引用文獻分析中，參考文獻以英文文獻為主，引用類型則以書籍與期刊為主。近年來，隨著科技進步，電子資源的引用明顯增加，書籍的引用則是逐年下降。七、針對國內教育類八本學刊在2015年影響係數之比對分析，《教育科學研究期刊》在影響係數中的數據居於首位，且影響係數有逐年增加的趨勢，具有高度影響力，係教育學門專業領域良好且優質的學術期刊。本研究根據系統性資料整理與回顧性探討內容進行討論，提供未來相關領域發展之參考及建議。英文摘要：The present study examined and analyzed the articles and studies published in the Journal of National Taiwan Normal University and Journal of Research in Education Sciences during the 60-year period from 1956 to 2017. A total of 1,345 published studies were analyzed and classified into seven categories-article contents, participants, research topics, research types, research methods, contributions of authors, and citation analysis. The findings of this study are as follows: (1) The volume, publications, and numbers of authors of the journals have been increased. (2) The highest number of studies were conducted on human samples, followed by language samples, mathematical test samples, and other samples. (3) Early research topics were concentrated on science education, history, and philosophy. However, during the past 60 years, articles on these topics declined year by year. The Journal of National Taiwan Normal University mainly included studies on language and literature and the Journal of Research in Education Sciences mainly included studies on learning and teaching. (4) The highest number of studies employed empirical designs, followed by discourse studies. Non-research articles were the fewest. (5) The majority of studies followed quantitative or qualitative research designs. Quantitative research was mainly based on experimental methods and survey research; qualitative research was mainly based on literature research methods; mixed-methods research has been increased in the past 30 years. (6) Citation references were primarily to English studies with the majority of the citation to books and journals. In recent years, the citation to electronic resources has been increased and the citation to books has declined year by year. (7) A comparative analysis of 2015 impact factors in eight major education journals was conducted. The Journal of Research in Education Sciences was ranked first for its impact factor. In this paper, previous research results and presents suggestions for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2018.63(1).012篇名：探討高雄市青少年自覺健康、身體意象及幸福感之關係並列篇名：Relationships Between the Self-Perceptions of Health Awareness, Body Image, and Well-Being Among Adolescents in Kaohsiung作者：吳枚瑛(Mei-Ying Wu);陳香廷(Hsiang-Ting Chen);魯盈讌(Ying-Yen Lu);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong)關鍵字：自覺健康;身體意象;幸福感;青少年;結構方程式;adolescents;body image;health awareness;SEM;well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本橫斷調查研究目的在探討青少年於自覺健康、身體意象與幸福感的差異性及中介效果。本研究以分層叢集抽樣方式選取高雄市國中、高中及大學一年級共計1,129位學生為研究對象，以三種自編量表蒐集青少年自覺健康、身體意象與幸福感的現況。首先，以探索性及驗證性因素分析及內部一致性信度檢驗量表之信度與效度，再以描述性統計、獨立性t檢定、單因子變異數分析，比較不同背景的青少年在自覺健康、身體意象及幸福感的差異情形，最後，使用結構方程模式檢驗青少年自覺健康、身體意象、幸福感間相關性與預測力。本研究發現，七年級學生的自覺健康與身體意象總分顯著高於高一及大一學生，男學生自覺健康與身體意象總分顯著高於女學生，而女學生的幸福感顯著高於男學生，青少年的身體意象對於自覺健康及幸福感具有顯著完全中介效果。本研究建議融入健康教育理論與實務於各級學校和各學科領域課程與教學及各類型活動中，以引導青少年樹立正確身體意象觀念及提升幸福感。英文摘要：This survey investigated the relationships between the health awareness, body image, and well-being of Taiwanese adolescents. The mediation effects of students' health awareness on the relationship between their body image and well-being were explored. A total of 1,129 adolescents were selected through stratified random sampling from seven junior high schools (seventh-grade students), six senior high schools (tenth-grade students), and five universities in Kaohsiung (freshmen). Three well-structured scales-health awareness, body image, and well-being scales-were conducted to measure adolescents' health awareness, body image, and well-being. Subsequently, data from the measurements were compared by conducting individual t-tests, one-way analyses of variance, and structural equation modeling. The results revealed that the seventh-grade students possessed significantly higher scores on the health awareness and body image parameters compared with the tenth-grade students and freshmen. The adolescent boys possessed significantly higher total scores on the health awareness and body image parameters compared with the adolescent girls. The well-being total score of the adolescent girls was significantly higher than that of the adolescent boys. In addition, this study provides evidence to support the fact that adolescents' body image is a mediating factor between health awareness and well-being. This study adds empirical evidence and provides insights into how grade and gender differences can be integrated in planning and implementing effective pedagogical strategies for increasing adolescent' health awareness, body image, and well-being in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：33-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2018.63(1).023篇名：教師轉換型領導與學生就業力發展之研究：以社會認知生涯理論論述之並列篇名：Impact of Professors' Transformational Leadership on University Students' Employability Development According to Social Cognitive Career Theory作者：彭耀平(Yao-Ping Peng);陳榮政(Robin Jung-Cheng Chen);何希慧(Sophia Shi-Huei Ho)關鍵字：自我效能;社會認知生涯理論;問題導向學習;學生就業力;轉換型領導;problem-based learning;self-efficacy;social cognitive career theory;student employability;transformational leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：我國高等教育政策發展與人才培育成效近年廣受社會關注與業界挑戰，尤其是畢業生就業條件未能跟上快速變遷的職場環境與雇主要求，致使大學教育與產業人才需求間，存在亟需解決的缺口。本研究以社會認知生涯理論為基礎，問卷為調查工具，採立意抽樣方式，選取12所學校大學生為樣本，共獲619份有效問卷，以分析教師轉換型領導、學生自我效能和問題導向學習對大學生就業力發展的直接影響，並進一步瞭解自我效能與問題導向學習在教師轉換型領導對學生就業力間的中介效果。透過結構方程模式分析顯示，教師轉換型領導、問題導向學習和自我效能對學生就業力具有正向顯著影響，且問題導向學習與自我效能在轉換型領導與就業力間扮演重要的中介角色。最後，根據研究結果提出具體建議及未來研究方向，作為大學及其教師在課程與教學規劃之參考。英文摘要：In Taiwan, higher education policies and manpower training have failed to meet the requirements of the rapidly changing society and employer expectations. This causes a substantial gap between university education and employment. On the basis of social cognitive career theory, this study aims to explore the relationships between transformational leadership, self-efficacy, problem-based learning, and student employability in higher education institutions (HEIs). In this study, 619 undergraduates from 12 Taiwanese HEIs were analyzed using structural equation modeling. The results revealed significant positive influences of transformational leadership, self-efficacy, and problem-based learning on student employability. Moreover, problem-based learning and self-efficacy are key mediators between transformational leadership and student employability. On the basis of the findings, specific suggestions and managerial implications for HEIs concerning curriculum and instruction planning and areas for future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：69-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2018.63(1).034篇名：國中普通班身心障礙學生親子互動、自我概念與學校適應之關係研究並列篇名：Relationships Between the Parent-Child Interaction, Self-Concept, and School Adjustment of Junior High School Students With Disabilities作者：黃瓊儀(Chiung-Yi Huang);游錦雲(Ching-Yun Yu);吳怡慧(I-Hwey Wu)關鍵字：自我概念;特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫;學校適應;親子互動;parent-child interaction;school adjustment;self-concept;SNELS期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討國中普通班七年級身心障礙學生親子互動及自我概念對多面向學校適應（師生關係、同儕關係、活動參與、學校氣氛、學業成就、合宜行為）之影響。本研究使用特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫所蒐集的1,482位身心障礙學生資料，透過結構方程模式來檢定親子互動對自我概念與學校適應的直接效果、自我概念對學校適應的直接效果，以及探討親子互動透過自我概念影響學校適應之間接效果。研究結果顯示：親子互動對自我概念、師生關係、活動參與、學校氣氛、學業成就、合宜行為均有正向顯著影響，但親子互動對同儕關係之影響未達顯著；自我概念對師生關係、同儕關係、活動參與及學校氣氛有正向顯著影響，但自我概念對學業成就、合宜行為之影響未達顯著；親子互動透過自我概念對師生關係、同儕關係、活動參與、學校氣氛有正向顯著的間接效果。最後針對研究結果，提出相關討論與建議。英文摘要：This study explored the relationships between the parent-child interaction, self-concept, and school adjustment of junior high school students with disabilities. A sample of 1,482 junior high school students with disabilities were selected from the surveys of the Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study (SNELS). On the basis of empirical and theoretical research, a causal model of the parent-child interaction, self-concept, and multiple dimensions of school adjustment of junior high school students with disabilities (teacher-student relationship, peer relationship, activity participation, school climate, academic achievement, and appropriate behavior) was formed and validated using structural equation modeling. The mediation effect of the self-concept variable was evaluated. The findings demonstrated that parent-child interaction had no significant effect on peer relationship but had positive and significant effects on self-concept, teacher-student relationship, activity participation, school climate, academic achievement, and appropriate behavior. Self-concept had positive effects on the teacher-student relationship, peer relationship, activity participation, and school climate but did not have positive effects on academic achievement or appropriate behaviors. Moreover, self-concept played a mediation role between the parent-child interaction and several dimensions of school adjustment. Parent-child interaction indirectly influenced the teacher-student relationship, peer relationship, activity participation, and school climate through self-concept. This study also proposed some relevant suggestions on the basis of the findings.起始頁-結束頁：103-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2018.63(1).045篇名：現象學取向的磨課師教學經驗隱含之意義並列篇名：Denotations Pertaining to Teaching Experiences of Massive Open Online Courses on the Basis of the Phenomenological Perspective作者：汪耀華(Yao-Hua Wang);張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang)關鍵字：教學經驗;現象學;經驗意義;磨課師;experiential connotation;MOOCs;phenomenology;teaching experiences期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討磨課師（MOOCs）教學經驗隱含之意義。以現象學的深度訪談與資料分析步驟，從受訪教師內隱的心理體驗歷程，歸納屬於人們共通性現象的經驗之意義，可分五大項陳述：傳達以學生為中心的訊息、編導故事情境的教學影片、增加多元學習經驗比小知識重要、放下名利得失心、創新教學的熱情與執行力。綜合上述描述，發現MOOCs授課教師具備五項教學經驗的意義：一、轉化專業實務經驗：將實務歷練注入教材製作，不同於學校課程所教授的內容與型態，讓學生感知有用及興趣。二、善用多媒體建構教材：教師構思教學劇本架構，編導影片或動畫，與生活面連結讓學生易於理解，引導學生想像空間預見未來。三、增加多元學習經驗：引用多元資源教學，安排實務專家參與課程，擴增學生視野及知識。四、精進數位教學知能：放下個人名利心，體驗MOOCs教學，獲得磨練及反思。五、做中學的精神：懷抱創新教學的熱情，勇於嘗試執行。最後，從反思MOOCs授課教師教學經驗的意義，得到啟示並提出建議。英文摘要：This study analyzes the denotations pertaining to instructors' teaching experiences of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). By conducting a detailed phenomenological interview and data analysis, the study provides the denotations pertaining to common human phenomena through intrinsic psychological processes experienced by the instructors. The denotations were described on the basis of five perspectives-Delivering a learner-centered message, editing a teaching video with a story scenario, valuing the diversity of the learning experience over the acquisition of basic knowledge, setting aside fame and profit during teaching, and displaying the power of enthusiastic innovative teaching. On the basis of the five aforementioned descriptions, five denotations of teaching experiences were identified. (1) Transfer of professional practical experiences: This category involves preparing teaching materials on the basis of practical experiences. Such materials differ from the contents of traditional courses and enable students to find the topic useful and interesting. (2) Preparing optimal multimedia teaching materials: This category involves teaching by utilizing the framework provided in the teaching materials and editing videos or animations by linking the topics with situations encountered in daily life. This enables students to comprehend the materials easily and face the future responsibly. (3) Diversified learning experiences: This category involves teaching with diverse resources, including experts, to broaden students' horizons. (4) Advancing the digital teaching ability: This category involves setting aside the individual fame and profit during teaching and teaching MOOCs to provide appropriate training and obtain suitable feedback. (5) Spirit of learning by experiences: This category involves cherishing the enthusiasm of innovative teaching and taking up novel challenges when teaching. Finally, implications and recommendations are proposed by analyzing the denotations pertaining to instructors' experiences of teaching MOOCs.起始頁-結束頁：141-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2018.63(1).056篇名：科學能力的建構反應評量之發展與信效度分析：以自然科光學為例並列篇名：Developing and Validating a Constructed-Response Assessment of Scientific Abilities: A Case of the Optics Unit作者：林小慧(Hsiao-Hui Lin);林世華(Sieh-Hwa Lin);吳心楷(Hsin-Kai Wu)關鍵字：多面向Rasch測量模式;建構反應評量;評分者一致性;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;constructed-response assessment;many-facet Rasch measurement;rater consistency期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：由於建構反應試題較選擇題更適於評估學生的高階認知能力，本研究目的係在發展科學能力的建構反應評量，建立評分規準，並分析信度與效度。全評量包含「科學知識的記憶與瞭解」、「科學程序的應用與分析」、「科學邏輯的論證與表達」，以及「問題解決的評估與創造」四個分評量，共計32題。分析結果顯示，評分者內之Cronbach's α與評分者間之Kendall ω和諧係數值均大於.90，表示評分者內與評分者間的一致性良好。再者，評分者嚴苛度之多面向Rasch測量模式之卡方考驗未達顯著水準，表示評分者間的嚴苛度未有差異存在，infit與outfit MNSQ介於1 ± 0.5，顯示無論嚴格或寬鬆的評分者，均能有效區分高、低能力的學生。另RSM與PCM模式比較的卡方考驗達顯著水準，將所估計的Deviance進行BIC轉換，結果發現RSM較為適配，顯示評分者間有相同的評分閾值。此外，全評量之Cronbach's α在.85以上，顯示具有不錯的信度。驗證性因素分析結果顯示，「科學知識的記憶與瞭解」、「科學程序的應用與分析」、「科學邏輯的論證與表達」，以及「問題解決的評估與創造」所檢測四個一階潛在因素，可被二階因素之「科學能力」解釋的變異量分別為.92、.56、.46、.46，實徵資料尚且支持「科學能力的建構反應評量」的理論構念模式，係為一項精確測量科學能力的工具。英文摘要：This study aimed to develop and validate a constructed-response assessment of scientific abilities and an accompanying rubric. The assessment included 32 open-ended test items that were categorized into four subscales-Remembering and understanding scientific knowledge, application and analysis of scientific procedures, argumentation and expression of scientific logic, and evaluation and innovation during problem solving. The analysis revealed the following results: First, the Cronbach's α values were higher than .90, indicating high intrarater consistency. Second, Kendall's coefficient of concordance was higher than .90 and its p value was less than .001, denoting a consistent scoring pattern between raters. In addition, many-facet Rasch measurement (MFRM) analysis revealed no significant difference in rater severity, whereas a comparison of the rating scale model (RSM) and partial credit model (PCM) indicated that each rater had a unique rating scale structure. The infit and outfit mean squares of the MFRM were 1 ± 0.5, which suggested that both severe and lenient raters could effectively distinguish high and low-ability students. The Deviance values estimated by the RSM and PCM were converted to Bayesian information criterion values, and the RSM was viewed to fit the empirical data appropriately compared with the PCM. Therefore, the severity thresholds of the raters were the same. Third, Cronbach's α coefficients of the four subassessments and the full assessment were higher than .85, indicating that the constructed-response assessment of scientific abilities (CRASA) provided a high internal-consistency reliability. Finally, confirmatory factor analysis revealed acceptable goodness-of-fit for the CRASA. These results suggested that the CRASA is a useful tool for accurately measuring scientific abilities.起始頁-結束頁：173-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2018.63(1).067篇名：大學藝術與設計專業課程融入社會實踐之探究－以地方文化加值設計為例並列篇名：Integrating Social Practice Into the Specialty Program of Art and Design in Universities: An Example of a Value-Added Concept for the Local Culture作者：廖敦如(Tun-Ju Liao)關鍵字：大學藝術與設計教育;地方文化;社會實踐;問題解決導向;實務導向研究;local culture;practice-led research;problem-based learning;social practice;university art and design education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣近年來有關藝術與設計實務導向的相關理論研究已開始萌芽，藝術課程的實務性應建基於「實踐性」，有實踐性才能產生實務的意義；再者，具有實踐性的行動課程，關心的面向應在於是否能以廣闊的視野來論述社會和文化意義。站在藝術教育的立場，教學者有責任將抽象的理論概念，轉變為實踐的行動，讓學生直接面對真實世界的問題，此過程才能產出知識改變的力量。另者，科技部近年亦重視大學的社會責任，期許高等教育能針對臺灣的重要社會議題，提出具人文關懷與學術創新的行動方案。因此，本研究採用為期1年半的行動研究，學生以分組實作的方式，探索各鄉鎮的農業產業文化，以及面臨的問題與困境。據此，本研究的目的為：一、應用「實務導向」的課程理念創造大學生對在地文化的關懷；二、以「社會實踐」的理念規劃地方文化為主軸的藝術設計課程。本研究結果為：一、以實務導向、地方文化為課程理念，可以激發學生「人文探索」、「科技應用」、「社會創新」、「族群關懷」等能力，具有整合性人才培育的效益；二、以社會實踐為課程發展模式，應重視「問題規劃」、「學習社群」、「教學者」、「學習者」等四個層面的設計。英文摘要：Studies on theories related to practice-led art and design have been conducted for several years in Taiwan. The practice of an art program should be based on practicality. Furthermore, a practical program must have social and cultural significance with a broad vision to become a topic of conversation. Therefore, teachers of art education are responsible for turning abstract theoretical concepts into practical actions for students to overcome the problems faced in real-world learning. The process of learning may yield the power of affecting change through knowledge. Moreover, the Taiwanese ministries of education and technology have recently emphasized the social responsibility of universities and expected that higher education students can propose social programs for various human concerns and perform academic innovation to solve crucial social issues in Taiwan. Consequently, an 18-month social activity study was conducted. Students were grouped to explore the agricultural culture and the problems encountered in the towns of Yunlin County. The purposes of this study were: (1) To identify college students' concerns toward local culture by applying practice-led program ideas and (2) To plan an art design curriculum on the basis of the local culture with a primary focus on social practice. The following results were obtained: (1) Programs based on practice and local culture develop students' abilities related to cultural discovery, technological application, social innovation, and group care. (2) Programs based on social practice should stress planning, the learning community, and teachers and learners.起始頁-結束頁：207-245資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2018.63(1).078篇名：補救教學中個別化教學對學生學習成效之影響分析並列篇名：Impact of Individualized Instruction on the Learning Outcomes of Low-Achieving Students Who Received Remedial Instruction作者：余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);李昭鋆(Chao-Yun Li)關鍵字：中介效果;個別化教學;結構方程式模型;補救教學;學習成效;individualized instruction;learning outcomes;mediation effect;remedial instruction;structural equation modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：63卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究運用結構方程式模型中的中介模型，探索個別化教學透過自我歸因、學習動機等因素，對補救教學學習成效之影響關係的探討；樣本乃抽取臺灣地區國中、國小參與補救教學的學生共2,168人。本研究先進行個別化教學對學習成效直接影響效果的檢測，發現其標準化迴歸係數為.86，達顯著。進一步分析則發現，部分中介模型優於完全中介模型。故本研究歸納得出的結論為：個別化教學能夠直接影響補救教學學生的學習成效，且個別化教學亦可透過自我歸因、學習動機等因素，間接影響補救教學學生的學習成效。根據上述結果，本研究提出結論與對教育當局的建議。英文摘要：The study was commissioned under the contract of the K-12 Education Administration. In this study, 2,168 students in Taiwan who joined the remedial instruction program were randomly selected. A mediation model was applied to analyze the procedure by which individualized teaching influences the learning outcomes of remedial instruction through self-attribution and learning motivation. The analysis results suggested that the direct effect of individualized teaching on the learning outcome was .86. Furthermore, the partial mediation model was more acceptable than the complete mediation model. The results obtained from the partial mediation model are provided as follows: Individualized teaching affected the learning outcomes of low-achieving students who received remedial instruction directly and indirectly through self-attribution and learning motivation. Finally, on the basis of the results, conclusions were drawn, and several policy-making suggestions were proposed for educational authorities in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：247-271資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.2018.63(1).0801篇名：因人而異的知識分享：對自己人偏私的調節效果並列篇名：It Depends on Who and Whom, Knowledge Sharing in Workgroup: The Moderating Effect of Favoring Ingroups作者：姜定宇(Ding-Yu Jiang);葛玉璇(Yuhsuan Gur)關鍵字：差序式領導;知識分享;知識隱藏;華人組織管理;自己人與外人;differential leadership;knowledge sharing;knowledge hiding;management in Chinese context;ingroups and outgroups期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：團體內的知識分享可以區分成一般性知識分享與隱匿性知識分享兩類，而團體內不同的次團體，可能會影響團體內的知識分享。在華人企業組織中的團體—主管自己人部屬與外人部屬，是最為突顯的二個次團體。本研究從內團體偏私與團體認同的觀點，探討成員次團體身分與接受其他成員一般性與隱匿性知識分享之間的關聯性，同時檢視偏私自己人的調節效果。本研究蒐集台灣企業組織中64套工作團體問卷，主要結果為：（1）知覺自己人程度愈高，受到自己人部屬分享一般性與隱匿性知識的程度愈高；（2）知覺自己人程度與隱匿性知識分享之間的關聯性，會隨著偏私自己人的程度愈高時，關聯性愈強。最後探討本研究的貢獻與限制，並說明未來研究方向以及實務意涵。英文摘要：Knowledge sharing could be distinguished into general knowledge and concealed knowledge in investing the phenomena of knowledge sharing among workgroup members and various subgroups in workgroup could have influence on knowledge sharing process. In the Chinese organization context, supervisors' ingroup subordinates (ingroups) and outgroup subordinates (outgroups) should be the two most important subgroups in workgroups. Sixty-four group survey questionnaire were collected from various Taiwanese business groups. The results showed that (1) perceived ingroup status positively correlated with received general and concealed knowledge sharing from other ingroup members; and (2) differential leadership moderated the relationship between perceived ingoup status and received concealed knowledge sharing from other ingroup members and the positive relationship will be stronger when the extent of favoring ingroups is high in contrast to low. Limitations and contributions were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201812_18(2).00012篇名：知識分享行為之研究：從計畫性行為理論的觀點及其延伸並列篇名：A Study on Knowledge Sharing: From the Theory of Planned Behavior Model and Its Extension作者：沈慶龍(Ching-Lung Shen);盧沛宜(Pei-Yi Lu)關鍵字：計畫性行為理論;動機理論;知識分享意圖;知識分享行為;theory of planned behavior;motivation theory;knowledge sharing intension;knowledge sharing behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：知識成為組織最重要的資產，並成為競爭優勢的基礎。知識管理的相關議題，已廣受學術界與實務界的重視。其中，知識分享更是知識管理的關鍵，瞭解哪些因素促進了或妨礙了組織成員間的知識分享行為，成為值得加以探討的議題。本研究從計畫性行為理論的觀點，納入動機與社會行為理論，建構一分解式計畫行為的整合性研究架構，期對組織內知識分享的行為，有一更深入與廣泛的洞察。本研究針對新竹、台中及台南科學園區內之高科技產業，透過配額抽樣法，回收有效問卷246份，並透過結構方程模式之統計方法，進行資料分析與研究假設之驗證。研究結論顯示，本研究架構除了獲取良好的假設驗證外，並對組織成員知識分享行為上，提供一相對完整及有效的解釋力。英文摘要：Knowledge has become the most important asset and the foundation of a firm's competitive advantage. The knowledge management therefore has gained the researcher's and practitioners' increasing attention and interest. However, knowledge sharing is the core and basis of knowledge management, and also is treated as the toughest task for knowledge management. Understanding the factors which will enhance or inhibit the knowledge sharing behavior among organizational members is an important subject that is worth to be explored. The aim of this study is to employ the theory of planned behavior (TPB), decomposed TPB and also the theory of extrinsic motivation and social-psychological forces, and try to develop an integrative research framework to explore and assess the factors that influence encouragement of knowledge sharing intention and behavior in the organization. The samples of this study were drawn from the high-tech industries from Hsingchu, Taichung, and Tainan Science Parks, based on the method of quota sampling. We collected 246 valid data. The structural equation modeling (SEM) was used as the statistical analysis method to test the hypotheses and examine the structural model. The research conclusions indicate that all the research hypotheses have been supported, and offered a knowledge sharing behavior among the organizational members.起始頁-結束頁：31-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201812_18(2).00023篇名：道德領導與員工建言行為：情感信任與團隊成員關係衝突知覺的中介角色研究並列篇名：Ethical Leadership and Employee Voice Behavior: The Mediating Roles of Affect-Based Trust and Team Member's Perception of Relationship Conflict作者：陳懷傑(Huai-Jie Chen);李弘暉(Hung-Hui Li);郭建志(Chien-Chih Kuo);程晟(Sheng Cheng)關鍵字：道德領導;情感信任;團隊成員關係衝突知覺;員工建言行為;ethical leadership;affect-based trust;team member's perception of relationship conflict;employee voice behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究立基社會交換的理論觀點，探討道德領導與員工建言行為間的關係，並檢驗情感信任與團隊成員關係衝突知覺這兩個中介機制，用來說明道德領導對員工建言行為的心理作用歷程。研究者蒐集35個企業73個團隊526份員工資料，研究結果發現道德領導對員工建言行為具有正向的作用效果，而情感信任與團隊成員關係衝突知覺在道德領導與建言行為間則扮演著中介的角色，顯示道德領導可經由部屬情感信任的提升與團隊成員關係衝突知覺的降低來激發部屬的建言行為。最後，本研究依據結果進行未來研究與管理意涵之討論。英文摘要：Drawing on the social exchange theory, this research examined the relationship between ethical leadership and employee voice behavior, and tested the mediating roles of affect-based trust and team member's perception of relationship conflict. The data collected from 526 employees from 73 teams in 35 companies in Taiwan. The results showed that ethical leadership has a positive effect on employee voice behavior, while affect-based trust and team member's perception of relationship conflict play the mediating roles between the relationship of ethical leadership and employee voice behavior. This indicates that ethical leadership can stimulate subordinates' voice behaviors through the promotion of affect-based trust and the prevention of perceived relationship conflicts. The contributions to both ethical leadership and employee voice behavior literature are discussed and the limitations of the current study and the directions for future research are provided.起始頁-結束頁：69-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201812_18(2).00034篇名：真誠領導與服務導向組織公民行為之關係：結構方程模式分析並列篇名：The Relationship of Authentic Leadership and Service-Oriented Organizational Citizenship Behaviors: A Structural Equation Model作者：邱雅暖(Ya-Nuan Chiou);張婉菁(Wan-Jing April Chang)關鍵字：真誠領導;服務導向組織公民行為;心理資本;服務氣候;authentic leadership;service-oriented organizational citizenship behavior;psychological capital;service climate期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究從正向心理學及正向組織行為學的角度，以國立大學圖書館館員為研究對象，將研究重心放在人員的心理層面，目的在驗證真誠領導與服務導向組織公民行為的關係，並探討心理資本與服務氣候的中介效果。經過兩階段的問卷調查，共發送870份問卷，回收來自28所圖書館，510份有效問卷。運用結構方程模式分析結果指出主管的真誠領導、組織的服務氣候以及館員的心理資本，分別對服務導向組織公民行為均有顯著的正向影響。館員的心理資本與圖書館組織的服務氣候並完全中介真誠領導對服務導向組織公民行為的影響。英文摘要：This study focuses on the psychological aspects of the university librarians from the perspective of positive organizational behavior. The purpose of the study is to examine empirically between authentic leadership and the service-oriented organizational citizenship behavior. This study also investigates the mediating effect of personal psychological capital and organizational service climate. Through conducting two stages questionnaire survey, this study totally distributed 870 questionnaires to the university librarians and got 510 paired returned questionnaires from 28 university libraries. With structural equation model (SEM) analysis, the results demonstrated that authentic leadership, psychological capital, and service climate all have positive effects on the service-oriented organizational citizenship behavior. In addition, the relationship between authentic leadership and service-oriented organizational citizenship behavior is fully mediated by psychological capital and organizational service climate.起始頁-結束頁：99-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201812_18(2).00045篇名：管理裁量權對主管薪酬水準之影響：以任務及組織特性為調節變項並列篇名：The Effects of Managerial Discretion on Managers' Pay Level: Task and Organizational Characteristics as Moderating Variables作者：諸承明(Chen-Ming Chu);余佩蓉(Pei-Jung Yu);余坤東(Kung-Don Ye);胡秀華(Hsiu-Hua Hu)關鍵字：管理裁量權;薪酬水準;任務多樣性;組織正式化;managerial discretion;pay level;task variety;formalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：薪酬議題在企業營運中扮演著重要角色，並有許多研究針對主管薪酬水準進行探討。影響主管薪酬的因素甚多，以往研究焦點集中在策略及環境層面，但近來已有研究關注管理裁量權對其之影響。當裁量權愈大時，管理者對組織產出具較大的影響力，反映在薪酬上，其薪酬水準可能會隨之增加。本研究的實證分析顯示：（1）職位權力對本薪、職務性加給、技能性加給、績效性獎金未有顯著影響；（2）個人權力對本薪、職務性加給、技能性加給具有正向顯著影響，但對績效性獎金的影響則不顯著；（3）任務多樣性對於個人權力與職務性加給、技能性加給間之關係具有顯著的調節效應；（4）組織正式化對於職位權力與技能性加給、績效性獎金間之關係亦具有顯著的調節效應。英文摘要：Pay management is a major consideration in business operation. Research on managers' pay level has a long history. Although much of this work has focused on the effects of strategic and environmental factors, recent work has begun to move beyond established frameworks to suggest managerial discretion that may influence the pay level setting. The amount of pay is expected to be higher the greater the level of discretion. This study conducts a survey and has summarized the following four conclusions: (1) There are no significant effects of position power on salary, job-based allowance, skill-based allowance, and variable performance reward; (2) the personal power of managers is positively related to the salary, job-based allowance, and skill-based allowance, but there is no significant relation of personal power on variable performance reward; (3) the moderating effects of task variety on the relations between personal power and job-based and skill-based allowance are significant; and (4) the moderating effects of formalization on the relations between position power and skill-based allowance and variable performance reward are significant.起始頁-結束頁：131-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201812_18(2).00056篇名：自由創新專案與組織創意氛圍：組織寬裕觀點並列篇名：The Free Innovation Initiative and the Organizational Creative Climate: The Organizational Slack Perspective作者：張元杰(Yuan-Chieh Chang);紀慧如(Hui-Ru Chi);羅達賢(Ta-Hsien Lo);周瑞貞(Jui-Chen Chou);陳<U+5B11>亭(Yi-Ting Chen)關鍵字：自由創新;創意氛圍;組織寬裕;free innovation;creative climate;organizational slack期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：組織寬裕營造組織創意氛圍與創新氣候，對組織與人才發展至為重要。然而，過去少有以組織寬裕觀點探討組織創意氛圍之運作機制。本文回顧組織寬裕與組織創意氛圍文獻，建構組織創意氛圍六構面，含（1）願景與使命、（2）自主性、（3）同儕支持、（4）挑戰性和趣味性、（5）激勵制度與（6）資源，以著重前瞻研發創新之i法人研究機構具寬裕情境，其推動「10%自由創新計畫」為研究個案。文末發現i機構可：（1）透過具體的願景和使命導引組織轉型、（2）資源寬裕支持創意持續、（3）促進計畫參與者自我效能與（4）擴大尚未加入該計畫員工參與，藉此增強組織創意氛圍。結論為組織寬裕之自由創新計畫提升組織創意氛圍。最後，對組織營造創意環境與欲採用自由創新計畫提出具體管理意涵。英文摘要：Organizational slack builds a creative and innovative climate for organizations and employees. Thus the issue of organizational slack is very important for organizational development. However, there are few studies emphasizing organizational creative climate based on a perspective of organizational slack. Based on the literature review of organizational slack and organizational creative climate, the study develops six dimensions of organizational creative climate. The six dimensions consists of (1) vision and mission, (2) autonomy, (3) challenge and playfulness, (4) peer support, (5) incentive system, and (6) resources. Especially the issue is more important for research institutes with slack resources addressed on the shift toward advanced research and development. This paper adopts ”10% free innovation initiavtive” in i research institute as the case study. The paper finds that free innovation initiavtive could enhance organizational creative climate with the share vision and mission, sustained supportive resoureces, self-efficacy of participants, and enlargement of non applicants. Finally, some managerial implications are provided to organizations that might be interested in adopting free innovation initiative in the future.起始頁-結束頁：169-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201812_18(2).00067篇名：The Relationship between Teams' Specific Status Cues, Transactive Memory System, and Teams' Outcomes: A Moderated Mediation Model of Teams' Psychological Safety Climate並列篇名：團隊特定專業線索、團隊交融記憶系統與團隊效能：團隊安全感氛圍的調節中介模型作者：黃瓊億(Chiung-Yi Huang)關鍵字：teams' specific status cues;team transactive memory systems;teams' psychological safety climate;team performance;team creativity;團隊專業特定線索;團隊交融記憶系統;團隊心理安全感氛圍;團隊績效;團隊創造力期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Teamwork and coordination of expertise among team members with different backgrounds are increasingly recognized as important for team effectiveness. To establish the ecological validity and generality of transactive memory system (TMS) research findings, this study sampled 769 members and 120 team leaders of 120 teams from a variety of organizational settings in Taiwan and examined the relationship between teams' specific status cues, TMS, team performance, and team creativity. Results showed that teams' specific status cues are positively related to TMS, and TMS positively predicts team performance and team creativity, whereas TMS also as a mediating role. Further, teams' psychological safety climate as a moderator in the relationship between teams' specific status cues and TMS. Finally, teams' psychological safety climate has moderated the indirect relationship between teams' specific status cues, TMS, and teams' outcomes. This research has further contribution to TMS theory and status characteristic theory in teams.英文摘要：團隊運作與成員不同背景的專業間合作逐漸被視為是影響團隊效能的重要因素。團隊如同個體，可以進行認知分工，依賴彼此的記憶儲存訊息，此為團隊交融記憶系統。本研究收集769位有效團隊成員及120位團隊領導者樣本，探討團隊特定專業線索、團隊交融記憶系統與團隊效能的關係。研究結果顯示團隊特定專業線索正向預測團隊交融記憶系統，且團隊交融記憶系統會中介團隊特定專業線索與團隊績效與團隊創造力間的關係。此外，團隊心理安全感氛圍會調節團隊特定專業線索與團隊交融記憶系統關係之外，團隊心理安全感氛圍亦調節團隊特定專業線索、團隊交融記憶系統與團隊效能的間接關係。研究結果對團隊交融記憶系統及地位特徵線索理論進一步提出一些理論研究貢獻。起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201806_18(1).00018篇名：揮之不去：以反芻思考認知的觀點連結不當督導與部屬長期負向情感狀態並列篇名：I Just Cannot Get It Out of My Mind: A Cognitive Rumination Perspective on the Relationship between Abusive Supervision and Subordinates' Long-Term Negative Affective States作者：梁欣光(Shin-Guang Liang);陳彥君(Yen-Chun Chen)關鍵字：不當督導;核心自我評價特質;反芻思考認知;長期負向情感狀態;abusive supervision;core self-evaluations traits;cognitive rumination;long-term negative affective states期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究根據反芻思考認知理論的觀點，將主管的不當督導行為建構為員工在職場上追求任務執行或與主管社會互動過程中的受挫經驗，藉以探討不當督導透過反芻思考認知對員工長期負向情感狀態的影響。此外，本研究還探究部屬核心自我評價特質對於上述中介機制的調節效果。本研究透過不同時間點（間隔一個月）的問卷調查方式，蒐集194份全職員工的樣本。透過階層迴歸分析與條件式間接效果分析，本研究發現反芻思考認知會中介不當督導與部屬長期負向情感狀態之間的關係。此外，本研究還證實部屬的核心自我評價特質會調節不當督導透過反芻思考認知，進而對部屬長期負向情感狀態產生影響的中介效果。最後，針對研究結果，本研究提出相關研究意涵。英文摘要：Drawing on cognitive theories of rumination, this study conceptualized abusive supervision as failed experience regarding employees' pursuit of task and social goals at work and examined the mediating role of cognitive rumination on the relationship between abusive supervision and subordinates' long-term negative affective states. In addition, we also explored the moderating role of subordinates' core self-evaluations traits on the indirect effect of abusive supervision on subordinates' long-term negative affective states via cognitive rumination. The data was collected from 24 companies of different industries in Taiwan, consisted of 194 matched data. We used hierarchical regression analysis and conditional indirect analysis to test our hypotheses. Results showed that cognitive rumination mediated the relationship between abusive supervision and subordinates' long-term negative affective states. Further, conditional indirect analyses demonstrated that subordinates' core self-evaluations traits moderated the strength of the indirect effect of abusive supervision on subordinates' long-term negative affective states via cognitive rumination. Accordingly, based on our findings, theoretical and practical implications, limitations and future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：35-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201806_18(1).00029篇名：不當督導與強迫性組織公民行為之關係：心理安全感與組織政治知覺所扮演的角色並列篇名：Abusive Supervision and Compulsory Citizenship Behavior: The Roles of Psychological Safety and Perception of Organizational Politics作者：劉娜婷(Na-Ting Liu);蔡秉毅(Peng-Yi Chua);陳淑貞(Shu-Chen Chen);王政文(Zheng-Wen Wang)關鍵字：不當督導;心理安全感;強迫性組織公民行為;組織政治知覺;abusive supervision;psychological safety;compulsory citizenship behavior;perception of organizational politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在探討不當督導、心理安全感、組織政治知覺與強迫性組織公民行為（compulsory citizenship behavior, CCB）之關係。首先，本研究試圖將不當督導與CCB進行連結；其次，探討心理安全感在不當督導與CCB間扮演的中介機制；最後，檢驗組織政治知覺在心理安全感與CCB之間和在中介歷程中的調節效果。本研究以台灣地區全職員工為調查對象，採用兩階段調查方式總計收回280份有效問卷，建立調節式中介模型來進行假設檢驗。結果支持本研究所有的假設：不當督導與CCB呈顯著正向關係；心理安全感在不當督導與CCB之間具中介效果；組織政治知覺在心理安全感與CCB之間扮演調節角色；組織政治知覺亦強化了不當督導透過心理安全感對CCB的中介效果。最後，針對研究結果，本研究提出管理意涵與後續研究建議。英文摘要：This study examined the effects of abusive supervision, psychological safety and perception of organizational politics on compulsory citizenship behavior (CCB). First, we examined the relationship between abusive supervision and CCB. Second, we investigated psychological safety as a mediator of the relationship between abusive supervision and CCB. In addition, perception of organizational politics was tested as a moderator of psychological safety- CCB relationship. Two-wave data were collected from 280 full-time employees in Taiwan from different organizations in different industries. We developed a moderated mediation model to test our hypotheses. Results indicated that abusive supervision was positively related to CCB. Psychological safety mediated the relationship between abusive supervision and CCB. For the moderating effect, the higher of perception of organizational politics, the stronger the influence of psychological safety on CCB. Furthermore, perception of organizational politics moderated the strength of the mediated relationship between abusive supervision and CCB via psychological safety, such that the mediated relationship is stronger under high perception of organizational politics. Some academic and managerial implications were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：57-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201806_18(1).000310篇名：上司信任部屬的前因及對領導行為之影響：上司信任傾向的調節角色並列篇名：Antecedents and Leadership Behavioral Consequences of Trusting in Subordinates: The Moderating Role of Supervisors' Trust Propensity作者：陳嵩(Song Chen);林伶瑾(Lin-Chin Lin);楊素卿(Su-Qing Yang)關鍵字：員工歸類模式;信任傾向;認知型信任;情感型信任;家長式領導;subordinate categorization model;trust propensity;cognition-based trust;affect-based trust;paternalistic leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：在組織垂直人際信任上，瞭解上司信任部屬的前因及影響，是相當值得研究的議題。本研究主 要探討部屬值得信任特點與上司信任傾向對上司信任部屬的影響、上司信任部屬對上司威權（包括尚嚴及專權）與仁慈（包括工作及生活照顧）領導行為的影響，及上司信任傾向的調節影響。253組主管、部屬配對問卷資料分析結果顯示：（1）部屬的管理輔佐行為、與上司的私人關係、上司信任 傾向皆會正向影響上司的情感型信任，部屬的能力及謹守分際行為會正向影響上司的認知型信任；（2）上司的信任傾向會負向影響「部屬能力（及謹守分際行為）—上司認知型信任」的關聯；（3）上司對部屬的情感型信任會負向影響其專權領導行為、正向影響其工作照顧及生活照顧領導行為，但認知型信任則無任何顯著直接影響。最後，本研究依據實證結果分別提出學術意涵、管理意涵及後續研究建議。英文摘要：In the interpersonal relationship of organizational hierarchy, it would be a valuable research subject to understand the antecedents of supervisors trusting subordinates and in turn influence on supervisors' leadership behavior. In this research, we derive the influences of subordinates' trustworthy characteristics and supervisors' trust propensity on supervisors' cognition-based and affect-based trust in their subordinates. Second, we explore the effects of supervisors' trust in subordinates on their leadership behaviors of authoritarianism (including Shang-Yan and Juan-Chiuan) and benevolence (including life-oriented and work-oriented cares). Lastly, we explore the moderating effects of supervisors' trust propensity on the relationships between subordinates' characteristics and supervisors' trust in subordinates. Two hundred and fifty-three supervisor-subordinate dyads from enterprises in Taiwan were sampled as subjects. The analytic results showed: (1) The subordinates' assisting in managerial activities, personal relationship with supervisors and supervisors' trust propensity positively influenced supervisors' affect-based trust in subordinates, subordinates' capability and adhering to hierarchy behaviors positively influenced the supervisors' cognition-based trust in subordinates. (2) Supervisors' trust propensity negatively influenced the relationships of the subordinates' capability and adhering to hierarchy to supervisors' cognition-based trust in subordinates. (3) Supervisors' affect-based trust in subordinates negatively influenced their leadership behavior of Juan- Chiuan, and positively influenced their leadership behavior of life-oriented and work-oriented cares, but cognition-based trust in subordinates has no any direct influence. Finally, the theoretical and managerial implications were drawn based on the study findings, and recommendations for future researchers were made.起始頁-結束頁：85-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201806_18(1).000411篇名：組織贊助性人才管理措施與職涯成功關聯性之研究：領導潛能跨層次中介效果並列篇名：The Relationship between the Organization Sponsored Talent Management Practices and Career Success: An Examination of Cross-Level Mediating Effects of Leadership Potentials作者：廖良文(Liang-Wen Liao);林文政(Wen-Jen Lin);盧建中(Chien-Chung Lu)關鍵字：人才管理;領導潛能;職涯成功;階層線性模式;talent management;leadership potential;career successful;hierarchical linear modeling (HLM)期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：近年來探討職涯成功的組織及個體層級預測變數，為學術界及實務界高度關注之焦點，本研究同時採用贊助性以及競爭性向上移動之系統來探討職涯成功的決定因素。根據36家公司主管與部屬配對問卷的研究結果指出，贊助性人才管理措施與職涯滿足、晉升力、領導潛能有正向的關聯性；研究同時發現，領導潛能於贊助性人才管理措施及職涯滿足、晉升力間具有完全中介效果。本研究是少數以實證方式探討人才管理、領導潛能及職涯成功議題之研究，研究發現對實務界與學術界都有重要的意涵。英文摘要：Examining organizational- and individual-level predictors of career success has been highly concerned by academics and practitioners in recent years. In this study, we use both systems of contest mobility and sponsored mobility to examine the determinants of career success. Results based on data from 36 companies’ supervisor-subordinate dyads indicated that sponsored-mobility talent management system was positively related to career satisfaction, promotability, and leadership potential. Results also showed that the effect of sponsored-mobility talent management system on career satisfaction and promotability was fully mediated by leadership potential. This study is one of few research using empirical methods to examine the topics of talent management, leadership potential, and career success. These findings have important implications both for practitioners and academics.起始頁-結束頁：129-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201806_18(1).000512篇名：重返校園好累？探討職學衝突對在職進修者之影響並列篇名：Is It Tough to Go Back to School? Exploring the Effects of Work-To-School Conflict on Working Students作者：汪美伶(Mei-Ling Wang);李俊賢(Chun-Hsien Lee);李明棋(Ming-Qi Li)關鍵字：職學衝突;學習倦怠;工作倦怠;資源保存理論;外溢理論;work-to-school conflict;school burnout;job burnout;conversation of resource theory;spillover theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：18卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究整合資源保存理論與外溢理論，探討在職進修者所經驗的職學衝突是否透過學習倦怠、工作倦怠的中介機制，間接影響工作滿意。針對就讀碩士在職學位的全職工作者，採用自陳式問卷調查，於碩士課程第二學年間的兩個時間點，獲得264位在職進修者的職學衝突、學習倦怠以及工作倦怠、工作滿意等資料，利用結構方程模式進行分析。研究結果發現職學衝突與其學習倦怠之間，具有正向關聯；學習倦怠亦透過工作倦怠，間接負向影響工作滿意；藉由學習倦怠對工作倦怠的外溢效果為中介機制，職學衝突對工作滿意間接產生負向影響。此外，本研究結果亦發現職學衝突與工作倦怠間有顯著正向關聯，知覺主管支持於職學衝突與工作倦怠間有調節效果，能緩解職學衝突所導致的負面結果。針對研究結果，本研究提出理論意涵與後續研究建議。英文摘要：Integrating conversation of resource theory with spillover theory, this current research explores whether work-to-school conflict indirectly decreases job satisfaction via the mediation of school burnout and job burnout. Data were obtained from 264 working graduate students at multiple time points over the second academic year. Then, we analyzed the gathered data by utilizing structural equation modeling. Results showed that work-to-school conflict was found positively associated with school burnout. School burnout had indirect effect on job satisfaction via the mediating effect of job burnout. Furthermore, on the basis of spillover effect, school burnout and job burnout mediated the negative relationship between work-to-school conflict and job satisfaction. In addition, work-to-school conflict was found to be positively associated with job burnout, and perceived supervisor support moderated the relationship between work-to-school conflict and job burnout; that is, perceived supervisor support buffered the negative indirect effects resulting from work-to-school conflict. Based on the findings, theoretical implications and suggestions for further research were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：155-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201806_18(1).000601篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：陳端容期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：57期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press2篇名：以大型抽樣調查評估戶籍人口與常住人口之可能差異並列篇名：Inconsistency Between Estimates of Both Registered and de Jure Population: Evidence From a Large-Scale Sample Survey作者：廖培珊(Pei-Shan Liao);蕭錦炎(Chin-Yen Hsiao);楊雅惠(Ya-Hui Yang)關鍵字：戶籍人口;常住人口;抽樣調查;人口推估;registered population;de jure population;sample survey;population estimation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：57期出版年：2018中文摘要：我國人口資料的蒐集是採用戶籍登記制度為主，定期發佈各級人口資料，此外亦固定進行每十年一次的戶口及住宅普查（簡稱戶口普查），另輔以各式的抽樣調查來符合特定需求。然而，戶口普查的對象主要為常住人口，往往與戶籍人口有一定程度的差異；戶籍資料未隨著人口流動及時更新，因而有著涵蓋率與準確性的問題，常造成「人籍不一致」的情形。另方面，常住人口具有反映人口分佈現狀的特性，但卻經常缺乏具時效性的客觀數據可比對。當利用大型調查資料來估算人口分佈時，經常因為戶籍人口與常住人口的差異，而使得推估出的數值有所差異。本研究利用「105年度全國客家人口暨語言基礎資料調查研究」的六萬五千多筆電話訪談資料，進行臺灣地區的常住人口推估，並比較不同地區層級（縣市、鄉鎮市區）所推估的人口分佈狀況與戶籍人口的差異。此外，我們也進一步檢視戶籍人口與常住人口的推估結果，在各地區層級所呈現的人口結構，同時也以資料所推估出的客家人口為例，討論其政策與調查實務上的意涵，以做為未來執行大型抽樣調查與常住人口推估之參考；然而在缺乏及時更新與較細層級之常住人口進行資料檢視的條件下，以調查資料推估母體的作法仍須謹慎為之。英文摘要：Population statistics in Taiwan are derived from the husehold registration system and released regularly. The household registration, however, suffers from coverage errors because of incomplete or inaccurate information, residential mobility, and updating delays. The inconsistency between registered and actual, current residential addresses is an important issue in population statistics. On the other hand, census and large-scale sample surveys are conducted to estimate the de jure population as a whole or for certain demographic groups. De jure population has the advantage of reflecting the most up-to-date population distribution, while residential mobility also leads to the lack of a gold standard. Using more than 65 thousand cases from the 2016 National Hakka Population and Language Survey (NHPLS), this study aims to estimate the registered and de jure populations at the county or city and borough or township levels. The inconsistency between the two population estimates is reported. As the purpose of the 2016 NHPLS is to estimate the distribution of Hakka population in Taiwan, results using registered and current residential address are reported to illustrate the inconsistency. Researchers need to be aware of the limitation when using survey results to estimate population when a gold standard is lacking. Based on our findings, implications for policy making and survey practices are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201812_57.00013篇名：Obesity, Public Attitude Toward Government-Funded Obesity Prevention, and Psychological Distress: A Cross-Level Interaction Analysis of 26 Countries並列篇名：肥胖、公<U+8846>支持政府肥胖防治與個人心理困擾的關係：26個國家的跨層次分析作者：陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen);譚家惠(Elise Chia-Hui Tan)關鍵字：obesity;psychological distress;obesity prevention;international comparison;肥胖;心理困擾;肥胖防治;國際比較期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：57期出版年：2018中文摘要：Obesity has become a major health issue in industrialized and developing countries. Obese people are stigmatized for social and health reasons. This study examined obesity, public attitudes toward government-funded obesity prevention, and psychological distress in 26 countries. The following three issues were examined: (1) whether obese people experienced more psychological distress, and whether the association is stronger in countries where public attitude favoring government-funded obesity prevention; (2) whether perceived social status moderated the negative association between obesity and psychological distress; and (3) whether there was a gender-specific association between obesity and psychological distress, as well as whether women experience more psychological distress than men in countries where public attitude was toward favoring government-funded obesity prevention. The data were obtained from the health module of the 2011 International Social Survey Program. A total of 23,811 adults aged 18 to 64 years in 26 countries across Europe and Asia were included in the study. Multilevel analyses were conducted. The results revealed that obese people in countries where public attitude was toward favoring government-funded obesity prevention exhibited an elevated risk of psychological distress, yet when stratifying by gender, the effect was only significant in women. Perceived high social status moderated the negative effects of obesity on psychological distress, and the modification was significant only for obese women. Future research should explore the consequences, expected and unexpected, of obesity reduction campaigns and policies for preventing obesity in different countries.英文摘要：在已開發國家中，肥胖已成為重要的健康與社會議題。本研究探討歐、亞洲等26個國家中的肥胖者是否有較多心理困擾？而此心理困擾是否因該國民眾支持政府肥胖防治的程度愈高而加劇？同時，本研究也探討肥胖與心理困擾的關係是否因男女而有不同？本研究資料來自2011年國際社會調查計畫（2011 International Social Survey Program），共23,811位18－64歲的成人。運用個人及國家的二階層統計分析模型進行資料分析。研究結果顯示，超過半數以上國家，肥胖者經歷較多的心理困擾，且當一個國家民眾愈支持政府進行肥胖防治，該國的肥胖者心理困擾就愈高。進一步的性別分層分析指出，女性肥胖者的情緒困擾會因國家民眾支持政府肥胖防治的程度愈強而增強。最後也發現，肥胖者自覺社會地位愈高，愈能緩和其受到的心理困擾。此一研究指出民眾強烈支持政府進行肥胖防治，可能會造成社會對肥胖者更強的敵視，且可能增加肥胖「醫療化」程度，這些未預期的結果可能使肥胖者的心理困擾，更加雪上加霜。未來應進一步探討不同國家的肥胖防治政策可能對肥胖者產生不可預期的負面效應。起始頁-結束頁：41-77資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201812_57.00024篇名：歐洲超級多樣性（Super-Diversity）之理論概念與研究啟示並列篇名：The Theoretical Concept of Super-Diversity and Research Implications作者：林顯明(Hsien-Ming Lin)關鍵字：超級多樣性;同化理論;整合理論;比利時臺灣移民;少數為多數城市;super-diversity;assimilation theories;cultural integration theories;Belgian Taiwanese immigrant;minority-majority cities期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：57期出版年：2018中文摘要：超級多樣性可謂是近十年來歐洲社會科學與移民研究領域中最重要的理論概念之一。根據超級多樣性理論概念提出者Steven Vertovec的定義，所謂的超級多樣性意旨為：隨著大量國際移民與非本地出生人口移入的情況下，所造成不同地區人口組成與結構之改變，以及奠基於此人口結構與特徵改變下所產生的各種挑戰與新興之公共、社會相關研究議題。另外，截至2018年為止，已有超過300多篇的英文期刊論文運用此一概念進行國際遷徙、移民研究與城市人口議題等相關領域的探討。然而，面對此一理論概念在歐洲和英文學術發表的快速發展；相對下，中文期刊方面針對此一理論概念的系統性梳理與討論則較為缺乏，另外，到目前為止，針對超級多樣性理論概念所進行的探討在臺灣則尚未可見。為了補足上述研究之不足，研究者欲透過此一研究紀要，系統性地梳理超級多樣性之理論概念並探討其所開展的相關研究議題。研究者亦會進一步地針對歐洲超級多樣性社會發展可能對於當前社會科學和移民研究領域之相關理論和研究方法所產生的啟示與挑戰進行系統性的梳理與討論。研究者期待透過本文之研究紀要，提供中文讀者對於此一理論概念的認識，亦提供未來相關研究參考之基礎。英文摘要：Super-diversity is one of the most vital theoretical concepts in the European social science disciplines and migration studies literature in the past decade. According to the definition by concept initiator Steven Vertovec, super-diversity refers to the new challenges and research implications since the massive flow of international migrant populations to European countries and cities. So far, there are more than 300 English journal article publications utilizing the super-diversity concept to conduct social science and migration-related research. However, there are no Chinese-language journal articles systematically conducting such research and discussing this new research theory concept. In order to fill the research gap, the present study discusses this new theoretical concept and the research implications. In this regard, the study focuses on the discussions of the challenges and implications of the super-diversity concept for the theories of assimilation and cultural integration in the social science and migration studies literature. Moreover, the author also discusses the challenges of the super-diversity concept with regard to research design and clarification of methodological issues.起始頁-結束頁：79-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201812_57.00035篇名：我國人口政策與少子化因應策略省思之二：零至二歲嬰幼兒照顧配套整備並列篇名：Health and Welfare Policy Forum on Population Policy in Taiwan: Rethinking the Childcare Welfare Policy Towards Children Under 2 Years of Age作者：陳再晉(Tzay-Jinn Chen);陳冠文(Kuan-Wen Chen);鐘珮純(Pei-Chun Chung);林廷育(Ting-Yu Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：57期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：125-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201812_57.00046篇名：主編的話作者：陳端容期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：56期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press7篇名：臺灣日治時期的家庭結構與分家現象－新竹四個街庄的分析並列篇名：Household Structure and Its Division in Colonial Taiwan-Analysis of Four Settlements in Xinzhu作者：李俊豪(Chun-Hao Li);楊文山(Wen-Shan Yang);莊英章(Ying-Chang Chuang)關鍵字：日治時期;家庭結構;分家;Taiwan under Japanese Rule;family structure;family division期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：56期出版年：2018中文摘要：家庭是傳統漢人社會的重要基礎社會單位，家庭結構則是漢人社會的核心研究課題之一。粗略而言，漢人家庭可分為核心、主幹，與聯合家庭（或稱擴展家庭）三種基本型態。姑且不論其對錯，由父母及其未婚與已婚子女，與已婚子女之妻兒所組成的聯合家庭常被認為是漢人社會的主要家庭型態。而「分家」常使得家庭型態由某一類型 轉換成另一種型態較小、人數較少的類型。本研究以「臺灣日治時期戶口調查簿資料庫（1906-1945）」資料做為實證研究基礎，研究者企圖探討哪些家庭成員（特別是男子）會步入分家的過程？分家時，家戶又是處在何種狀態？具體而言，研究者採用量化研究方法，探討個人性因素與家庭人口結構特徵對於個人分家發生風險的影響效果。無論是以簡單的分家發生率或是複雜的歷史事件分析方法研究者均發現，家戶男性個人的出生序與其婚姻狀態，以及家戶內家庭結構（例如：已婚兄弟所占之比例，與父母的存歿與居住狀態）明顯影響其分家行為發生的可能性。然而，本研究的發現與二十世紀後半葉的研究結果略有不同，而這些差異主要根源於社會結構的轉變；分家行為伴隨社會結構的轉型而改變發生的時間點、形式與步驟。英文摘要：The family is the fundamental unit of social organization in traditional Han Chinese society. Family structure therefore is a core topic in Sinology. General speaking, there are three family types: conjugal, stem, and extended forms. The extended form consisting of a couple, their married and unmarried sons and daughters, and the third-generation offspring has traditionally been thought of as the ideal type of family. A family starts with a conjugal unit, and further develops into a stem and/or an extended form. Family division is a process that usually transforms a family into a smaller type with fewer family members. In the present study, the researchers are particularly interested in learning who divided themselves from their original families and created their own, and who did not. Data are drawn from the ”Taiwan Historical Household Registers Database, 1906-1945 (THHRD).” Because Taiwan generally is a patriarchal and patrilineal society, we particularly investigate the likelihood of family division of male actors. Specifically, the research focuses on the factors at the individual level and those representing family structure, and explores their effects on the likelihood of family division. Based on two data analysis approaches, including the prevalence of family division by individual and family structure characteristics, and the event history analysis approach, we find that, first, personal demographic characteristics such as birth order and marital status matter. Second, the proportion of married male siblings within a family and the presence of parents are also associated with the likelihood of family division. However, our findings are slightly different from the research in the second half of the 20th century. Our explanation for the disparity is because of the change of social and economic structure which affects the timing and the process of family division.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201806_56.00018篇名：臺灣樂齡學習需求人口與樂齡學習中心資源配置差異分析：應用空間群聚與地理可近性方法評估並列篇名：A Study on Resource Allocation Comparing the Elderly Population in Need of Learning Centers and Elderly Learning Centers in Taiwan: Evaluating by Spatial Clustering and Geographic Accessibility作者：蔡明璋(Ming-Chang Tsai);曾明性(Ming-Hseng Tseng);吳慧卿(Hui-Ching Wu)關鍵字：活躍老化;樂齡學習人口;樂齡學習中心;空間群聚;地理可近性;active aging;elderly learning population;elderly learning center;spatial clustering;geographic accessibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：56期出版年：2018中文摘要：提升高齡者生活品質，除醫療照護，學習提高心智靈活，聯結社會網絡，有助活躍老化目標，因此，樂齡資源地理可近性是影響學習與社會參與的重要因素之一。為瞭解樂齡學習需求人口分佈與樂齡學習中心資源分佈供需配置妥適性，本文以臺灣本島為分析範圍，2009年及2017年樂齡學習中心為資源提供點，各村里55歲以上非失能人口為需求人口，運用空間群聚、線性相關、三階段地理可近性分析進行探討。研究發現樂齡學習需求人口疏密度與樂齡學習中心數量空間配置妥適性有待改善。首先，從空間群聚及相關分析發現，2017年資源供需線性相關性低於2009年，顯示縣市資源供給量雖增加，卻未與需求人口空間疏密趨勢相符。其次，三階段地理可近性分析發現，資源擁有率最低（臺北市、桃園市、新北市、嘉義市、新竹市），資源取得最短距離平均值最大（臺東縣、南投縣、花蓮縣、嘉義縣、宜蘭縣）存在縣市差異，顯示「一鄉鎮一中心」政策未將同縣市各村里需求人口取得資源距離差異納入評估。本文基於資料來源均能由政府開放資料取得，分析方法簡易、不須繁複路網分析等兩大考量，提出一套快速簡捷特性，針對社區資源（村里層級）地理可近性初步政策評估分析法，研究成果期能提供樂齡學習資源政策規劃參酌。英文摘要：Improving the elderly's motivation to learn will help achieve the goals of ”healthy aging” and ”active aging.” Improving the quality of life of the elderly requires not only medical care but also increased opportunities for social participation through social activities aiming to improve mental flexibility, and linking social support networks, thereby enhancing mental health. Therefore, the geographic accessibility of learning resources is one of the most important factors influencing the elderly's ability to participate socially. In this study, methods of spatial clustering analysis and linear correlation were applied, and a new three-step method for assessing geographic accessibility was proposed. All data were derived from the Taiwanese government's open data of 2009 and 2017. The data on resource supply points were based on the number of elderly learning centers. The amount of the population in need of elderly learning centers was calculated from the non-disabled population aged 55 years or older in 2017. Results of this study showed an inconsistency between the density of the population in need of learning centers and the geographical distribution of elderly learning centers. Firstly, according to spatial clustering analysis and linear correlation, the correlation coefficient was lower in 2017 than in 2009. Secondly, the lowest resource ownership rates of elderly learning centers were in the larger cities (Taipei City, Taoyuan City, New Taipei City, Chiayi City, and Hsinchu City). The largest average values of the nearest distances to services were in the countryside (Taitung County, Nantou County, Hualien County, Chiayi County, and Yilan County). These results showed that policies should be redesigned based on different counties' situations. This study was based on open governmental data and proposed an easy assessment method with no need for complicated network analysis. Our methodology and results illustrate possibilities for elderly learning policy planning and implementation to reduce elderly learning centers' resourceallocation inequality and enhance the geographic accessibility of elderly learning.起始頁-結束頁：35-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201806_56.00029篇名：高齡家庭與高齡照顧者的特性：2010年人口與住宅普查資料的應用並列篇名：The Characteristics and Formation of Elderly Families and Elderly Caregivers: Application of 2010 Population and Household Census Data作者：劉千嘉(Chien-Chia Liu)關鍵字：失能長者;高齡家庭;高齡照顧者;人口普查;disabled elderly;elderly family;elderly caregiver;census期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：56期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣於2018年進入高齡社會，照顧者高齡化的現象越趨普遍，但高齡家庭中失能者與照顧者的人口特質，及高齡家庭之型態目前仍未見系統性討論。本文運用2010年人口與住宅普查資料進行加值分析，以戶內親屬關係與失能程度，檢視高齡家庭內潛在的照顧者與被照顧者狀態，以揭露高齡家戶所面臨的照顧情境。研究發現如下：（一）高齡家戶約占全臺老人家戶之四成三，高齡獨居者的照護需求較其他類型家戶低，且多有子女住在附近以便照顧；（二）約一成二的高齡夫妻家戶有照護需求，以妻子照顧丈夫為多，而夫妻皆失能的家戶，其子女居住地點會較無失能或一方失能的家戶為近；（三）四成七的高齡親子家戶有照顧需求，以子代照顧失能親代為主；（四）當高齡親子家戶中的照顧者無力再負擔照顧時，僅一成三的家戶有接替的照顧人選。本研究為初探性研究，旨在評估高齡家戶中潛在的照顧型態與需求，期能提升高齡者生活福祉，做為地方政府規劃長期照顧服務時之參考。英文摘要：Taiwan became an aged society in 2018, and the phenomenon of aging of caregivers has also become more common. However, the demographic attributes of family members, disabled family members, caregivers in elderly families, and the characteristics of elderly families have not been systematically discussed yet. Based on the 2010 population and household census data, this paper focuses on the elderly, and depicts their potential living situations by examining the state of individual disabilities and family kinship within households. The research findings are as follows: (1) Elderly people in elderly families account for about 47.5% of the total elderly population. Compared to other types of elderly families, elderly persons in single families are generally much healthier and have lower degrees of disability; (2) The predominant form of care is the wife taking care of her husband; this demonstrates the phenomenon of feminization of caregiving in husband-and-wife families; (3) The greater the parent-child family size is, the less care burden the family endures. Therefore, the care burden is the heaviest in one-parent-one-child families; and moreover, (4) Elderly parent- child families also contain oldest-old parent to take care of the youngold children and may indicate higher care demand in the future. This is an exploratory study aiming to assess the risk states of caregivers among elderly families. The findings hopefully can enhance the well-being of elderly people and assist the government in allocating local long-term care.起始頁-結束頁：81-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201806_56.000310篇名：衛生福利政策專題討論「我國人口政策與少子化因應策略之省思－移民政策的推動與再省思」學術活動紀實作者：陳再晉;鐘珮純;陳冠文;林廷育期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：56期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：121-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201806_56.000411篇名：「跨國婚姻的組成差異與生育影響：南韓與臺灣經驗」演講紀實作者：呂采穎期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：56期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：133-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201806_56.000512篇名：Book reviews: I'm Migrant: New Perspectives in the Studies of Oversea Chinese並列篇名：書評：《移動之民：海外華人研究的新視野》作者：鄭得興(James Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：56期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：141-143資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201806_56.000601篇名：編輯報告並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：陳昭如期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：43期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室2篇名：從告白到對話：《我和我的T媽媽》和《日常對話》的倫理轉向並列篇名：From Confession to Dialogue: The Ethical Transformation in The Priestess Walks Alone and Small Talk作者：林書怡(Sophie Shu-Yi Lin)關鍵字：紀錄片倫理;第一人稱紀錄片;同志紀錄片;關係性;告白;酷兒親屬關係;documentary ethics;first-person documentary;queer documentary;relationship;confession;queer kinship期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：43期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文探討同志家庭中的家人關係再現，從黃惠偵紀錄片中再現的母女關係探究影片呈現的倫理意涵。藉由Levinas式的倫理評論，本文檢視紀錄片如何提問人／我關係，以及關係產生的方式與效應，將黃的兩部紀錄片《我和我的T媽媽》（2016）及《日常對話》（2016）置於台灣同志紀錄片歷史，來分析比較兩部影片使用不同的第一人稱告白形式、敘事結構、對話內容及反思性的電影語言，得以發現兩片觀點的變化所蘊涵的認識論轉變。本文主張這兩部影片雖然都呈現導演觀點，卻各自賦予母女關係不同的詮釋，顯示對母女關係的認識差異：短片《我和我的T媽媽》用封閉式的敘事結構與告白形式，以母女和解描繪親情的總體性存在，對母女關係的認識失於導演的自我中心主義；長片《日常對話》則鬆動敘事結構，觀點趨向於肯認朝向他者（other-oriented）的關係性存有。兩片由此產生導演自我認識與建構主體的不同企圖與途徑。本文進一步發現，先前同志運動紀錄片作為一種「抗爭的場域」，討論議題環繞同志形象的「可見性」，而黃的兩部影片則著重討論家人間的「關係性」，紀錄片成為拍攝者與被拍攝者心靈「相遇的場域」。兩部影片的觀點改變映照Levinas對關係性存有的強調，擁抱一種持續對話與關懷、互為主體的他者倫理。英文摘要：This paper explores ethical issues raised by two documentary films: The Priestess Walks Alone (2016) and Small Talk (2016), both made by director Hui-chen Huang. In a comparison of the two films, I analyze how each deploys a first-person confessional mode, narrative structure, mother-daughter dialogue, and reflective film language to generate different perspectives on and different interpretations of the central mother-daughter relationship. By situating the two films within the historical context of Taiwanese gay-themed documentary films, this paper scrutinizes the changing effect of 'first-person autobiography' films. It also compares the ethical issues portrayed in Huang's two films with those raised in previous Taiwanese gay-themed documentary films. This paper uses a form of ethical critique inspired by Levinas to interrogate the significance of the Self-Other relationship represented by the films. The paper finds that while both of these films represent Huang's perspectives through new ways of organizing reality, they each interpret mother-daughter relationship differently. This paper argues that Huang's films propose a new direction for gay-themed films: documentary is no longer a 'site of resistance' but a 'site of encounter,' where documentary filmmaking is used to construct and negotiate relationships. Although Huang's films are not always successful, they aim to rewrite the mother-daughter relationship in the process of filmmaking. Switching from the short film to the long version, the point of view of each film changes from an outward-projecting ego-centricism to an other-oriented relational perspective, thus creating different relationships between self and other. From confession to dialogue, from visibility to relationality, the change in viewpoints suggests an ethical transformation in Taiwan queer documentary filmmaking history, an understanding of self which embraces a face-to-face, ever-interactive, ever-constructing intersubjectivity.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201812_(43).013篇名：「恢復自信美體」：美學經營主義下的母性主體與懷孕生產並列篇名：Recovering a Self-Confident Body: Pregnancy and Childbirth under Aesthetic Entrepreneurship作者：何梅俐(Amelie Keyser-Verreault)關鍵字：育嬰雜誌;新自由主義;人為資本;美學經營主義;自信心;maternity magazine;neoliberalism;human capital;aesthetic entrepreneurship;self confidence期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：43期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究分析主流婦幼雜誌中的美貌論述，檢視它們如何呈現及建構孕產婦關於外表的經營，並藉由文本內容分析以詮釋「產後恢復」背後的深刻意義。本文以「新自由主義」觀點下的「美感勞動」作為分析焦點，並以「美學經營主義」的新觀念作為美貌研究的新方向，試圖超越以「結構」或「主體能動性」為主的傳統研究取向。研究發現，雜誌論述將「經營美貌」視為孕產婦的關注及責任，追求外表成為孕產期間各種重要決定的考量因素，如月子及餵母乳，顯示女性作為「美學經營者」已成為「母性主體」的定義之一。本文也試圖從「身體」及「心理」兩方面檢視論述的運作，觀察性別權力如何透過美貌論述而維繫不平等的支配關係：關於前者，筆者發現孕期的身體變化幾乎皆被負面地呈現，愛美的女性需要透過大量且特定的美學勞動來找回「美體」；關於後者，「美貌」、「自信心」、「自我認同」被設定為等同的關係，產後恢復變成是「重回找回自信」。英文摘要：This article analyzes the discourse concerning the quest for beauty in Taiwan's two most popular maternity magazines, Mommy and Baby and Mother and Baby. We show that this discourse focuses on 'recovering the body as it was before pregnancy' and we believe that a theoretical approach using the concept of aesthetic entrepreneurship is helpful in analyzing this phenomenon. This theoretical framework allows us to shed a new light on feminist beauty studies rather than discussing the problem in terms of structure or agency. The beauty quest discourse can be understood as a 'care for beauty,' and this depicts recovering the body shape of a young woman as something new mothers are now, more than ever, responsible for. It seems that the beauty quest is incrementally influencing the choices women make while pregnant. We argue that the care for beauty implies a reinterpretation of the customary postpartum month of recuperation (yuezi) and breastfeeding, amongst others. Finally, this paper analyzes the care for beauty on two levels: the body and the psychological dimension. All the body changes that come with pregnancy are seen as negative; therefore, women need to do a significant amount of aesthetic labor in order to get back in shape. On the psychological level, the discourse in these maternity magazines implies an equivalence among beauty, self-confidence and identity. In this logic, getting back in shape also means getting back women's self-confidence.起始頁-結束頁：37-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201812_(43).024篇名：從閨房、書齋，走進歷史：吳藻《喬影》的空間隱喻、物質象徵與行為意義並列篇名：From the Boudoir and Study into History: Spatial Metaphors, Material Symbols and Significant Actions in Wu Zao's Qiao Ying (The Disguised Image)作者：高禎臨(Chen-Lin Kao)關鍵字：吳藻;喬影;吳爾芙;自己的房間;女性書寫;Wu Zao;Qiao Ying;Virginia Woolf;A Room of One's Own;women's writing期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：43期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文借用英國作家吳爾芙《自己的房間》的空間隱喻、對於女性創作文學一事的思索，以及該作既抒情且辯證的文字特色作為參照對象，藉以分析清代女性劇作家吳藻在《喬影》一劇裡以「書齋」作為女性自我重新詮釋的空間場域，並透過象徵性物質與特定儀式行為的安排設計，建構出一個私密的女性抒情世界，進而傳達女性創作者挑戰男性文學歷史的慾望。《喬影》藉著戲劇裡的角色扮演與獨白話語，以及抒情與敘事文法的並用，展現出極富女性色彩的思考與書寫，亦呼應了作者細緻的個人情感與流動的性別意識；同時也在這些跨越既定疆界的文字裡，吳藻親身示範了女性作家從男性文學脈絡出走，建立自身文學風格的可能性。英文摘要：Adopting the spatial metaphors found in Virginia Woolf's A Room of One's Own, and taking as a point of reference the lyrical and dialectic characteristics found therein, in this paper I discuss how the study is used as a metaphorical space for expressive potential in the drama Qiao Ying (The Disguised Image) written by Wu Zao, a female playwright of the Qing dynasty. I also examine how she uses symbolic objects and particular actions to construct a woman's private world of emotion and to challenge the male hegemony of Chinese literary history. Through the use of drama, emotional expression, and narrative, Qiao Ying displays the richness of feminine reflective thought, as well as Wu Zao's inner sentiments and detailed views on gender. Moreover, by transcending fixed literary boundaries, she personally demonstrates how a female writer can find her own voice in a male-dominated field.起始頁-結束頁：89-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201812_(43).035篇名：評《同志文學史：台灣的發明》：帝國、酷兒時間、置疑同志主體並列篇名：Review A Queer Invention in Taiwan: A History of Tongzhi Literature: Empire, Queer Temporality, and Destabilizing Tongzhi Subjectivity作者：劉文(Wen Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：43期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：127-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201812_(43).046篇名：編輯報告並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：吳嘉苓期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：42期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室7篇名：再思自我再現做為培力的方法：以花蓮新移民女性紀錄影像工作坊為例並列篇名：Self-Representation as a Form of Empowerment: A Documentary-making Workshop for Female Marriage Immigrants in Hualien, Taiwan作者：王君琦(Chun-Chi Wang)關鍵字：自我再現;影像培力;倫理;新移民女性;能力取向;self-representation;documentary-making as empowerment;ethics;female marriage immigrants;capability approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：42期出版年：2018中文摘要：1980年代中期以降，台灣出現了大規模的跨國婚姻移民現象。因婚姻來台定居的新移民女性，往往被主流媒體視為社會問題而承受了汙名和偏見，除了以新移民女性為題材的社會議題紀錄片企圖扭轉之外，也有許多讓新移民女性拿起攝影機的影像培力工作坊出現。本文指出，讓新移民女性拿起攝影機再現其社群的作品，在觀點上不必然會挑戰或批判主流意識形態，故不應以此做為影像培力的目的和宗旨。本文以筆者所參與的花蓮新移民女性影像工作坊為例指出，專長培力者必須慎思影像培力的倫理課題，才能在過程中拋下專業權威主義，讓新移民女性在處理自我再現時擁有選擇權與能動性。影像培力的意義在於讓參與的新移民女性發展與發揮一直以來被生活現實與社會期待壓縮的感知、想像、見解、情感等能力，同時在參與者之間形成情感與生活的支持系統。而在作品完成後，可以藉由影像作品的高文化位階取得發言權，更直接地參與有關新移民女性的論述。英文摘要：Since the mid-1980s, there has been a trend towards transnational marriage of Taiwanese men with women from Mainland China and Southeast Asian countries. These female marriage immigrants, however, have long been stigmatized and stereotyped in the mainstream media. There have been a small number of social documentaries made by Taiwanese filmmakers that provide counter-stereotypical representations of the female marriage immigrants. In addition to that, handing control of the camera over to the women themselves has been considered another solution to counter mainstream bias. In light of this, there have been quite a few documentary-making workshops in both the public and private sectors offered to these women. This article begins with an examination of several social documentaries on female marriage immigrants, to argue that self-representation does not guarantee opposition to the mainstream ideal of assimilation or Taiwanization. Any attempt to indoctrinate the participating female marriage immigrants to produce anti-mainstream content, despite the good intentions of the workshops' operators, can be a violation of ethical boundaries. In this paper I reflect upon my own experience as a facilitator in a documentary-making workshop that aims to empower female marriage immigrants in Hualien. I argue that the significance of this form of empowerment is two-fold: first, it allows female marriage immigrants to develop and display certain capabilities that have long been suppressed and undervalued. Second, creating a self-representation in the form of a documentary film allows the women to gain cultural capital with which to negotiate the social and cultural discourses in their families and in the society around them.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201806_(42).018篇名：耽美批判：台灣當代肚皮舞現象的陰性情境並列篇名：Towards A Florid Critique: An Interpretation of the Contemporary Belly-dance Phenomenon in Taiwan作者：鄭芳婷(Fan-Ting Cheng)關鍵字：肚皮舞;耽美批判;陰性;台灣;酷兒;belly-dance;florid critique;femininity;Taiwan;queer期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：42期出版年：2018中文摘要：台灣表演藝術界的肚皮舞風潮，自千禧年迄今不墜，不僅持續發展多元在地風格，更從性別與文化角度，深度影響參與者的認同形構。本文援引陰性情慾、後殖民理論與身體美學論述，並結合相關表演單位之田野分析，將台灣當代肚皮舞現象視作一種操演性劇場實踐，從中提出「耽美批判」概念：表演主體藉由追求超溢性美感，以生產酷兒抵抗能動，擾亂社會建構與正典銘刻。第一部分自吳若羚現象討論起，耙梳陰性情慾的研究系譜，闡述肚皮舞劇場中早已僭越父權認識論之批判能動；第二部分結合「編舞術」與「自我東方主義」概念，詳析伊薩部落與呼吸之間等實驗團體所發展出來的異質混種戰術。本文最後提出肚皮舞劇場相關表演文化研究之力有未逮處，並提示未來可能的探問方向。英文摘要：Since its inception in 2000, belly-dance fever in Taiwan has never died out. Instead, it has continued to influence diverse local aesthetics and stimulate cultural industry, while also deeply shaping the identity of its participants. Seeing contemporary belly-dance activity as a performative theater practice, this paper employs gender, postcolonial, and corporeal theories together with analysis of specific examples to propose the framework of ”florid critique”, in which a performing subject fashions queer resistance through transgressive theatricality. The term florid appropriated in this paper refers to a scenario of hyper-performativity enacted with critical purpose. The first section starts with the phenomenon of Wu Ruo-Ling, articulating a genealogy of feminine sexuality in order to reveal an agency that troubles the patriarchic epistemology. The second section combines the theory of choreography with the concept of self- Orientalism, investigating the heterogeneous, hybrid tactics launched by Essa Dance Troup and Nefes Dance Workshop. The paper finally points toward four necessary, yet unstudied, issues that present possibilities for future research.起始頁-結束頁：39-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201806_(42).029篇名：養育「無污染」的孩子：有機食品論述、風險管理與母職實作並列篇名：Raising ”Unpolluted Children”: The Discourse on Organic Food, Risk Management and the Practices of Mothering作者：梁莉芳(Li-Fang Liang)關鍵字：有機食物;風險管理;母職;性別;階級;食物工作;organic food;risk management;mothering;gender;social class;foodwork期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：42期出版年：2018中文摘要：「密集母職」是當代社會母職實作的重要特徵，除了主張媽媽是孩子最佳的照顧者外，更強調必須投入大量的時間、心力，甚至金錢，專注於育兒。在新自由主義脈絡下，社會認為獨立的個人要為自己的身心福祉和成敗負責。對於不被視為獨立人的孩子，則由母親為他們擔負趨吉避凶、管理風險的責任。本文探究，在近年來有機論述盛行的影響下，「食物工作」如何成為重要的母職實作場域，並再製性別與階級的不平等。藉由訪談中產階級母親，本文呈現有機論述、風險管理的概念及密集母職的意識形態，影響與形塑她們為孩子準備食物的日常實作。首先，透過有機食物的選擇、購買與烹調，她們進行孩子日常生活的風險管理，降低孩子被「污染」的機率；其次，食物準備成為她們實踐母職與建立認同的重要場域；接著，藉由有機飲食，這群媽媽展現個人對於守護環境與孩子未來的責任，但同時強化新自由主義對個人理性的強調。一方面，因為經濟、文化與社會資本，這群中產階級媽媽擁有較大選擇與決定的自由；另一方面，她們的母職實作仍受到傳統性別體制影響，追求有機食物與風險概念更強化日常育兒分工的性別不平等。英文摘要：Intensive mothering is the most important characteristic of contemporary motherhood. In this framework it is argued that mothers are the best care-givers for their children, and they need to invest a huge amount of time, energy, and even money in raising children. Influenced by the ideology of neo-liberalism, the society considers that individuals need to be responsible for their own well-being, health, and success or failure. Since children are regarded as uncompleted human beings, their mothers are in charge of managing their risks and preventing them from falling into danger. This article investigates how, influenced by the discourse of organic food, ”foodwork” has become an important field for mothering, and how gender and class inequalities are reproduced through foodwork. Relying upon interviews with middle-class mothers, this article illustrates how the discourse of organic food, risk management and the ideology of intensive mothering shapes their daily practices of foodwork for their children. First, through selecting, consuming and cooking organic food, the mothers manage the risks their children confront in everyday life, and prevent their children from being ”polluted”. Second, foodwork has become important for practicing motherhood and builds upon the identity of ”mother”. Third, these mothers seek to fulfill their responsibilities in protecting both the general environment and their children's future. At the same time, they reinforce the emphasis on personal rationality in the neoliberal context. Because of their social class capital, on one hand, these mothers are more capable in making decisions. On the other hand, their practices of mothering are still affected by the traditional gender system. Their involvement in foodwork reinforces gender inequality in the labor division of child care.起始頁-結束頁：73-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201806_(42).0310篇名：評《上海拉拉：中國都市女同志社群與政治》並列篇名：Book Review: Shanghai Lalas: Female Tongzhi Communities and Politics in Urban China作者：伍維婷(Weiting Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：42期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：127-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201806_(42).0401篇名：何謂台灣的「主體性／subjectivity」？一個在亞洲「之間」的方法論的實踐並列篇名：What Is Zhu-ti-xing/Subjectivity in Taiwan? An Exercise of Inter-Asia Methodology作者：張馨文(Hsing-Wen CHANG)關鍵字：主體性;後殖民理論;翻譯;亞洲作為方法;在亞洲「之間」的方法論;文化霸權;subjectivity;postcolonial theory;translation;Asia as Method;Inter-Asia Methodology;hegemony期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：111期出版年：2018中文摘要：「主體性」是台灣當代政治實踐的關鍵詞，這個概念在1990年代跨越學科領域且在民間流行起來，堪稱重要的社會與政治現象。雖然是從subjectivity翻譯而來，subjectivity在西方是關於構成性的哲學問題的概念，本身並沒有如同「主體性」一詞在台灣那樣被人們當成所欲求的政治價值。本文的目的有二，一是提出探討「何謂主體性？」的研究方法。本文的「方法論」是印度後殖民女性主義學者寧蒂珠（Tejaswini Niranjana）所提出的「在亞洲『之間』的方法論」（Inter-Asia Methodology）。依照此方法論中「對概念『使勁』」（“pressing” the concept）的原則，發展適用於台灣的後殖民研究方法－將「譯者之言」視為「他者」，並且將翻譯的意義落差視為概念政治化之所在－我稱之為「控白概念」研究法。第二，運用「控白概念」研究方法，分析1990年代的主體性現象。我以1992年至1996年間《中外文學》一系列關於台灣與主體性的辯論為分析的對象，示範「主體性／subjectivity」如何在這個具權威性的學術場域中的運作。本文以翻譯的政治與菁英的交鋒作為切入點來回答「何謂主體性？」的問題，將主體性的概念視為菁英譯者階級的發明，意義混淆不明並非「民間」「誤用」的結果，而是與譯者的慾望有關。英文摘要：Zhu-ti-xing is a fundamental political concept in contemporary Taiwan. The concept has become popular since the 1990s, to the extent that it can be seen as a significant social and political phenomenon. Zhu-ti-xing is the Chinese translation of the concept of subjectivity. However, as a philosophical concept for questioning the constitution of the subject, the concept of subjectivity in the West does not function as a desirable political value as Zhu-ti-xing does in Taiwan. The aims of this paper are as follows: Firstly, it aims at developing a research method to work on the question ”what is Zhu-ti-xing?” I follow the so-called ”Inter-Asia methodology” brought forth by Indian postcolonial feminist scholar Tejaswini Niranjana, particularly her idea of ”'pressing' the concept,” and develop a research method called ”kong-bai concept.” The method of ”kong-bai concept” is a postcolonial research method that treats the language of the translator as ”the Other” and sees the unbridgeable gap between the translation and the translated to be the locus where the concept is politicalized. Second, I use the method of ”kong-bai concept” to analyze the debates on Taiwan and Zhu-ti-xing from 1992 to 1996 in the leading literary and cultural studies journal Chung-Wai Literary Monthly. Through analyzing the debates, I demonstrate the function of the kong-bai concept of ”Zhu-ti-xing/subjectivity.” This paper argues that Zhu-ti-xing/ subjectivity is formed in the antagonism among the elite-translators. The equivocity of its meaning is not due to the misappropriation of common people but rather the desire of the elites.起始頁-結束頁：7-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：「捍衛民主」的悖論：試論台灣「超越藍綠」的政治文明化情感並列篇名：The Paradox of the Defense of Democracy: The Political Emotion of ”Beyond 'Blue' and 'Green'” in Taiwan作者：鄭<U+4E98>良(Keng-Liang CHENG)關鍵字：太陽花運動;超越藍綠;捍衛民主;中國因素;情感政治;政治文明化;The Sunflower Movement;Beyond ”Blue” and ”Green”;defense of democracy;China Factor;the politics of emotion;political civilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：111期出版年：2018中文摘要：「國民黨不倒，台灣不會好！」這個朗朗上口的口號表達了社會對國民黨執政的不滿。2014年太陽花運動浮現的這股不滿力量，使國民黨在2014年的地方選舉與2016年的總統與立法委員選舉「倒了」，同時讓民進黨完全執政。但關鍵問題是：雖然運動帶來了政治版圖的改變，但是從TPP、土地與環境問題到2018年1月《勞基法》修惡版通過立法並於同年3月正式實施，因著不滿力量而得以取代國民黨的民進黨仍向資方靠攏，重演著「克勞塞維茲的魔咒」。本文試圖重探太陽花運動的情感政治來理解此問題。本文從脈絡化2014年太陽花運動如何訴諸「超越藍綠」的「捍衛民主」與反「中國因素」的政治想像作為情感動員，分析這樣的政治想像是如何建構起來？形塑了什麼運動的主體想像？產生什麼作用與限制？本文試圖論證，「超越藍綠」是一種政治文明化焦慮，源於對藍綠政治對立的不滿與2006年陳水扁貪腐帶來的民主化挫敗感。到了2008年國民黨重新執政後，這股文明化的挫敗與焦慮將問題外部化為「中國因素」他者的威脅，建構了運動「捍衛民主」的政治想像。「超越藍綠」代表的政治文明化焦慮，不僅未能揚棄「藍綠對立」的政治結構，也使「捍衛民主」走向了民主的悖論，並遮蔽了台灣在全球資本主義下所面對的問題。英文摘要：As the popular saying expresses, ”Taiwan won't be better until the KMT is overthrown,” the Sunflower Movement with its ”anti-China Factor” cause gave rise to major political changes in Taiwan. In elections in 2014 and 2016 after the Sunflower movement, the KMT government stepped down, and the DPP became the majority both in the local and the central government. However, in controversies such as TPP, the amendment of the Labor Standards Act, environmental protection, land justice issues, etc., the DPP regime still prioritizes capitalists' interests. The phenomenon may be described as the ”Clausewitzian enchantment”. Although the effect of the Sunflower Movement led to the political change, the concern of economic equality, that is supposedly the main issue in this anti-free trade movement, also gave way to the political aspiration for the defense of democracy against the ”China Factor”, and the problems of capitalism was displaced with the problems of Taiwan as a democratic subject in relation to China. How to understand such displacement? What conjuncture gives rise to this political culture and what kind of emotion lies in the call for the defense of democracy? What political subject does the defense of democracy constitute? This paper contextualizes the political emotion in the movement's call for ”the defense of democracy” and its political aspiration for going ”beyond the party line” (i.e. ”beyond 'Blue' and 'Green'”). This paper points out that the defense of democracy ”beyond 'Blue' and 'Green'” emerged in 2004, particularly since the CHEN Shui Bian's corruption in 2006. It represents an emotion of discontent with and an aspiration for political civilization in relation to Taiwanese political identity vis-a-vis China. Such an aspiration for political civilization has aroused popular anxiety for political changes and displaced economic inequalities with the anti-China sentiment after 2008. Eventually the ”defense of democracy” has become its own paradox.起始頁-結束頁：59-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：雨傘運動後的流感隱喻及其來源並列篇名：Influenza as Metaphor after the Umbrella Movement and Its Origin作者：董顯亮(Xianliang DONG)關鍵字：疾病隱喻;流行性感冒;沙士;本質化;中港區隔;illness as metaphor;influenza;Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome;essentialization;China-Hong Kong segregation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：111期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以2014年雨傘運動之後的流感隱喻作為研究主體，同時涉及與之相關的沙士隱喻，希望藉著疾病隱喻的話題來展現當下香港社會政治環境之矛盾，以及描繪出現時中港之間緊張的關係是如何被鞏固的。在梳理了過往研究與疾病隱喻的理論界限之後，本文提出如何批判地運用醫學知識與歷史素材的研究方法，進而指出在除去隱喻的普遍特徵後，香港雨傘運動後的流感隱喻的特殊之處在於兩點：單一使用「中港矛盾」作為主要內容；與沙士有密切聯繫。接著，本文先是對流感隱喻中時常回顧的沙士隱喻的構建過程作出描述，然後提出流感隱喻既承續了沙士隱喻，自身又有所轉變。本文認為流感隱喻較少吸收歷時事件，而是輕易將「中心／邊緣」與「患病／健康」兩組意象複合，同時以「排他」與「區隔」作為唯一的治療手段。最後，本文將流感隱喻置於「本土主義」思潮的歷史中考量，認為流感隱喻加深了人們對於中港矛盾的刻板印象，它構建了內地人一種「患病」的本質，賦予「中港區隔」以合理性，但此方案潛藏著前所未有的暴力，它最終可能演變為對於個體的強制審判與懲罰。英文摘要：This article examines the metaphor of influenza after the Umbrella Movement in Hong Kong in 2014. With reference to the metaphor of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), this article draws on the metaphor to discuss the political predicament of Hong Kong, as well as the intensely conflicting China-Hong Kong relationship in contemporary time. By recapitulating the theories on illness as metaphor, this article will offer a critical study of both the pathological knowledge and historical materials to analyze influenza as metaphor in contemporary Hong Kong. The second part of this article will not only delineate the common characteristics of the metaphor of influenza, but also shed light on the specificities of such metaphor in the context of Hong Kong in two ways: (1) the metaphor of influenza is particularly deployed to account for the ”China-Hong Kong conflict”; (2) such metaphor is inseparably linked to the metaphor of SARS. For the remaining parts, the article will explicate the discursive process of the metaphor of SARS that has been often referred to the metaphor of influenza. It argues that the metaphor of influenza can be understood as an ”inheritance” of the metaphor of SARS, with modification and appropriation. Rather than referencing to the diachrony, the metaphor of influenza usually aligns the binary opposition of ”center/periphery” with the one of ”illness/health”, while it has frequently used ”exclusion” and ”segmentation” as the remedy for such dilemma. Finally, this article looks into how the metaphor of influenza has developed in the context of ”local consciousness”. It concludes that the metaphor reiterates stereotypes of the China-Hong Kong conflict through essentializing the ”illness” of mainland Chinese, thereby legitimizing the China-Hong Kong segregation. The legitimacy of such segregation implies the potential violence against the mainland Chinese and may become a coercive trial and punishment for individuals.起始頁-結束頁：109-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：揚棄同性戀、返開新男色並列篇名：Forget Homosexuality, Revisit Nanse作者：甯應斌(NING Yin-bin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：111期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：165-229資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：粉飾與同性戀民族主義之後：以夷制夷下的知識生產並列篇名：Pinkwashing, Homonationalism and the Politics of Colored People Knowledge-Production作者：卡維波(NING Yin-bin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：111期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：231-248資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：性之帝國：訪談馬薩德並列篇名：The Empire of Sexuality: An Interview with Joseph Massad作者：F. B. Ewanje-Epee;S. Magliani-Belkacem;張竣昱(Jun-yu ZHANG);何春蕤(Josephine Chuen-juei HO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：111期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：249-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：馬薩德：非西方世界的性／別另類可能性並列篇名：Joseph Massad: Alternative to Sexuality in the Non-Western World作者：李雪(Xue LI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：111期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：261-273資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：回首我們的知識道路：台社同仁北京2018座談會並列篇名：Reflecting on Our Winding Path of Inquiry: Talks in Beijing 2018期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：111期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：275-356資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：「脆弱」的照顧：中國養老院中的身體、情感與倫理困境並列篇名：The Vulnerability of Eldercare: Bodies, Affects, and Ethical Dilemmas in China's Nursing Homes作者：吳心越(Xinyue WU)關鍵字：養老院;照顧工作;骯髒工作;性別;市場化改革;城鄉區隔;nursing home;care work;dirty work;gender;market reform;rural-urban divide期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究通過對中國江蘇省某地兩家養老院的田野調查，考察了護理員們的日常工作情境。養老院中的老年人照顧工作，在以經濟發展與健康生機為主導價值的當代中國社會中，被視為「骯髒工作」，而當前主要依賴一群在社會轉型中處於底層的中老年女性，即「阿姨」。我通過呈現「骯髒工作」中具體的身體、情感經驗和一系列倫理衝突，指出照顧工作本身同時蘊含著「照顧」、「褫奪」、「傷害」的脆弱性質。通過考察護理員們的勞動生涯，本研究揭示了中國的市場化改革、城鄉區隔、性別政治等諸種結構性因素的交織影響，它們也共同形塑了這些「阿姨」的自我認同與照顧實作。英文摘要：Based on ethnographic research in two nursing homes in Jiangsu Province, this paper describes the work situations of the care workers. Reflecting upon the concept of ”dirty work,” I argue that in contemporary China, where economic development and vitality become the dominant social values, the declined and disabled elders in nursing homes are generally regarded as dirty and contaminated, thus stuck in a paradoxical condition: they are being cared but in a zone of social abandonment. The current elderly care work mainly relies on a group of middle-aged and elderly women which are called ”anties”, who have been confined to the bottom during the social transformation. The precarious conditions of those underclass care workers must be understood in the context of China's socialist market reform, rural-urban divide and gender politics, which shape their identities and care practices, and vice versa. Furthermore, the affective, bodily experiences, and the ethical dilemmas in care practices reveal the vulnerability of eldercare, which may lead to deprivation, even violence.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：災難中的原住民族社會工作：以莫拉克颱風災後原鄉族人的異地安置經驗為例並列篇名：Indigenous Social Work in Disaster: A Study of Indigenous Peoples' Experiences of Emergency Relocation after Typhoon Morakot作者：林津如(Chin-ju LIN)關鍵字：莫拉克颱風;建制民族誌;原住民族社會工作;災難社會工作;文化能力;文化安全;Typhoon Morakot;institutional ethnography;social work for indigenous people;disaster social work;cultural competence;cultural safety期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018中文摘要：為何官方眼中理想的災難安置政策卻造成原住民族人痛苦的經驗？從莫拉克颱風災後原鄉族人被異地安置的經驗，如何學習原住民族社會工作的精神與方法？和原住民族一起工作應具備何種文化能力？本文以「消除各種形式之種族歧視」及「爭取原住民族集體文化權」為指標，以建制民族誌為研究方法，探索災後異地安置現場實作如何和族人真實需求產生斷裂，以「文化安全」為核心價值，借鏡思考如何培育災難中社會工作者的文化能力。研究發現顯示，許多災難現場的歧視觀點看似平凡，卻因背後的意識形態符碼挾帶著國家機器、社福體制、宗教團體之管理主義與殖民主義等結構性的不平等，形成制度性的歧視；安置過程中族人文化認同與需求被否認與貶抑，缺乏文化安全的對待。安置政策與論述將原鄉族人污名化為「受災的弱者」、「福利的依賴者」、「宗教的他者」、「野蠻的他者」、「環境的破壞者」、「不健康的他者」、「順從的敬拜者」及「都市的他者」。若從原住民族集體文化權來思考，族人需要（一）部落集體自治自決的權利、（二）部落選擇留在原鄉居住及臨時中繼安置的權利、（三）國家政策在執行前應取得部落諮詢同意的權利。為避免再製族人成為災難中的他者、社會工作的客體、文化自治權被社會福利所取代的現象，本文倡議以反種族歧視及尊重原住民族集體文化權利為基礎的原住民族社會工作，並以文化安全的角度來省思社工員所應具備的文化能力之內涵。英文摘要：Why has the disaster relocation policy, ideal in the official eyes, become the worst experience for the indigenous people? By looking into indigenous people's experiences of emergency relocation after Typhoon Morakot, this article asks what are the spirit and method of indigenous social work? What kinds of cultural competences are needed when working with the indigenous people? This paper adopts institutional ethnography as the research method to investigate the break between indigenous people's real needs and social work practices at the post-disaster relocation site. The research finds that the workers in the relocation site constructed the welfare needs of the indigenous people with their managerial thinking and Buddhist culture. Indigenous people were treated by cultural unsafe practices. During the process, they were stigmatized as ”vulnerable victims”, ”welfare dependents”, ”the religious other”, ”the barbarous other”, ”environmental destroyers”, ”the unhealthy other”, ”obedient worshipers”, and ”urban wonders”. They became victims of racial discrimination and the object of social work. To counter racial discrimination, the paper argues that on the base of indigenous collective cultural rights, indigenous peoples (a) would need time and space to achieve collective autonomy of self-governing and self-determination, (b) should have the right to choose to stay in the traditional territory and temporary emergence relocation after disaster, and (c) should have the right to be consulted by any state policies taking place. The research finds that the state replaced cultural autonomy with social welfare after Typhoon Morakot. Moreover, the social welfare system placed indigenous people as the object of social work in the relocation policy. This paper advocates that elements of cultural competences should be based on cultural safety, anti-racial discrimination and respect for the collective cultural right of the indigenous people.起始頁-結束頁：37-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：重返「媒體亂象」：一個社會共識的再析辨並列篇名：A Rediscovery of the ”Media Disorder”: Reassessing a Social Consensus作者：魏玓(Ti WEI)關鍵字：批判論述分析;媒體批評;媒體亂象;社會共識;critical discourse analysis;media criticism;media disorder;social consensus期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018中文摘要：一種概稱為「媒體亂象」的傳播問題，是過去二十年來台灣社會的「共識」之一。這個共識也影響了整個社會對本地媒體問題的認識，以及對問題的解答和改善之道。本文將「媒體亂象」視為一個特定時間與空間脈絡下的社會論述，企圖透過適當的歷史回顧研究，後設地釐清「媒體亂象」相關論述的內涵及其意義，更準確地理解台灣「媒體亂象」的「問題」本質究竟是什麼，以作為嘗試重新認識、進而解決台灣媒體問題的基礎之一。本文發現，「媒體亂象」作為一種論述，其實是戴著某種「理想媒體」理念的眼鏡而建構出來的，並形成了一種缺乏辯論的「俗見宇域」，需要透過建立具競爭性的意見場域，方能釐清共識背後的實相，進而尋求突破的解決之道。英文摘要：A problem of the media generally called ”media disorder” has been a ”consensus” of Taiwanese society over the past two decades. This consensus has not only directed the entire society how to understand the local media issues, but also led to the solution to the problem and the ways of reform. The article considers the ”media disorder” as a social discourse constructed in a specific historical and spatial context. It aims to explore the significance and implication of the discourse of ”media disorder” by an appropriate historical review and to understand the issues more accurately. Only the discourse of ”media disorder” being thoroughly reexamined then the central problem of Taiwan's media could be resolved. The article finds that the ”media disorder” was actually constructed by the conceptual glasses of ”ideal media” manufactured by the Western societies and the discourse of ”media disorder” has formed a kind of ”doxa” around the local society without questions and debates. It needs to create a competitive field of opinion to make changes possible. By clarifying the realities behind the social consensus can we seek a breakthrough solution.起始頁-結束頁：91-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：從排灣部落到台北街頭：馬列雅弗斯．莫那能訪談並列篇名：From a Tribe of Paiwan to Streets of Taipei: Interview with Malieyafusi Monaneng作者：陳光興;林麗雲;陳素香;蘇淑芬;陳瑩恩;劉雅芳;郭佳期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：125-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：書評：在失憶中與歷史和解並列篇名：Book Reviews: To Reconcile with History in Post-traumatic Amnesia作者：李海霞(Haixia LI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：153-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：另類實踐：批判性的社會行動－編按並列篇名：The Alternative Praxis of Critical Social Activism-Editorial Introduction期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：169-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：我不是人，更不是個東西並列篇名：I Am Neither Human Nor a Thing作者：周平(Ping CHOU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：173-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：戒嚴體制下的台灣土地正義運動：以南鐵東移案為例並列篇名：Taiwan Land Justice Movement under Martial Law System: A Case Study of Tainan Underground Railway Moving East作者：陳致曉(Chih-Hsiao CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：189-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：工運「政治化」的歷史回顧、現況與展望：為何需要「政治化」？何謂「政治化」？如何可能？－專題導言並列篇名：The History, Present, and Future of the ”Politicization” of the Labor Movement: Why ”Politicization,” What Is It, and How?- Editorial Introduction作者：鄭<U+4E98>良(Keng-Liang CHENG);陳柏謙(Po-Chien CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：241-248資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：整隊再出發：一份關於「政治化」的筆記並列篇名：Rally and Restart: A Note on ”Politicization”作者：張宗坤(Zackary Zong-Kun CHANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：249-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：當前工運面對「政治化」無可迴避的問題並列篇名：Unavoidable Questions about Politicization that the Current Labor Movement Needs to Ask作者：林佳瑋(Chia-Wei LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：257-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：左翼組黨：我的工運政治化主張並列篇名：Organizing the Left Party: My Opinion on the Politicization of the Labor Movement作者：黃德北(Te-Pei HUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：110期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：261-267資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：王甫昌期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：36期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201812_(36).012篇名：「能K能玩」：明星高中的社團活動、升學實作與青少年文化並列篇名：”Study Well, Play Well”: Extracurricular Club Activities, Educational Practices, and Youth Culture in Taiwan's Elite High Schools作者：王啟仲(Chi-chung Wang)關鍵字：教育改革;地位競爭;社團;青少年（次）文化;生涯;educational reform;status competition;extra-curricular club;youth culture;career期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：36期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文藉明星高中青少年文化與教育經驗之間的關係，勾勒當代台灣升學體制運作的核心邏輯。研究發現明星高中興盛的社團活動關聯到1980年代末隨民主化、教改帶來的政策改變，及隨後在校園所興起的追求「能K能玩」的文化氛圍。在此轉型過程中，以往容易與「問題學生」畫上等號的次文化活動，逐漸在「菁英學生」的世界中取得正當性。學生競逐秀異地位的關鍵，也從過去的「讀好書考好試」轉變為「玩好也考好」。社團活動和考試升學在教育功能上有相互依賴、影響的關係：追求「休閒成就」的集體文化需求與升學制度交錯，使學生在社團參與也呈現填鴨學習模式，再製升學競爭邏輯；社團優異表現也強化學生對既有教育體制的認同。表面上明星高中學生有更多自由追求休閒成就，但研究發現，此種校園生活模式讓「休閒」與「課業」都在更壓縮的過程中進行。明星高中社團活動其實是由學業考試所延伸出的地位競爭場域，發揮讓學生順應以填鴨考試、競爭為核心的升學體制的社會功能。英文摘要：This article explores the relationship between Taiwanese academically elite students' culture and their schooling experience. The main purpose of this study is to reveal the core logic of the exam-oriented educational system's operation in contemporary Taiwan. In so doing, I first demonstrate that the thriving extracurricular club activities in publicly funded elite high schools are part of a wider subcultural milieu and are characterized by the collective pursuit of ”dual excellence in both study and play,” which has been shaped by educational policy changes implemented since the late 1980s. Some particular subcultures --earlier associated with problematic, low-achieving youth groups --were gradually legitimized among academically elite youth during this transformation process. Exam success is no longer sufficient for high-school students to secure distinction within their peer group: Excellence in leisure activities is also pursued in this post-martial- law era. My findings suggest that students' extracurricular club activities and academic pursuits exist in a symbiotic relationship. The collectively shared cultural need to pursue leisure accomplishments intersects with educational institutions, as students adapt strategies characterized by rote learning to their club activities. First- and second-year students' outstanding achievement in extracurricular club activities leads to them being willing to dedicate themselves to intensive rote academic learning in their third year, as they prepare for university entry exams, thus contributing to the reproduction of the logic of educational competition. Students from elite public high schools seem to have more leeway and time to pursue leisure accomplishments. I argue, however, that both their leisure and academic activities proceed in a compressed manner. The thriving extracurricular club activity in public elite high schools is an arena extended from academic examinations for accommodating status competition, which functions to support students' compliance with an examination-oriented educational regime marked by rote learning and intensive competition.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201812_(36).023篇名：定位差異：以糖尿病衛教佈署為例並列篇名：Situating Differences: The Case of Health Education Deployments for Diabetes作者：林文源(Wen-yuan Lin)關鍵字：糖尿病;衛教;醫療化;醫療治理;實作體制分析;認識佈署;Diabetes;health education;medicalization;bio-power;analysis of regime of practice;epistemic deployment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：36期出版年：2018中文摘要：要如何思考醫療擴張中的實作差異？定位這些實作差異的認識方式有何重要性？社會學參與其中，能學習到什麼並發揮什麼作用？本文以糖尿病衛教探索這些問題。台灣拓展糖尿病照護體制已逾二十年，在整體政策推動下，實作面卻有相當落差。本文汲取諸多探討差異的洞見：多元衛教經驗研究、醫療化與生命權力理論的差異轉向，與互動論及科技與社會研究的實作取徑，並由以實作體制分析描繪糖尿病衛教實作的啟蒙、成效、教練、團隊與健康佈署模式。本文分析其各自關注點、機制與效果，並釐清認識在地差異的認識佈署對促成不同佈署的意涵。藉此，本文指出體制分析與認識佈署概念如何定位各種差異，包括臨床認識實務、衛教文獻的脈絡化觀點，以及社會學研究的理論化前景與理論取徑。英文摘要：How should researchers think about the differences in practices of medical expansion? What is the importance of the knowing practices for situating these differences? Being part of the practices, what can sociology learn and what difference can sociology make in these practices? This paper explores such issues in the case of diabetes health education. In Taiwan, while the nationwide Diabetes Shared Care Network was launched more than 20 years ago, its local performances and practices vary. Drawing on insights into differences from health education studies; the ”turn to differences” in medicalization and bio-power theories; and interactionism and Science, Technology, and Society (STS), this paper uses regime of practice analysis to specify the deployments of enlightenment, efficacy, coaching, team, and health-oriented modes of health education. It particularly highlights the epistemic deployment for analyzing matters of concern, apparatuses, and effects of the deployments. This paper concludes by elaborating how the concept of epistemic deployment and regime of practice analysis help to specify the differences in messy clinical work, the contexts of health education, and the agenda for social theory.起始頁-結束頁：47-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201812_(36).034篇名：台灣民眾轉至成人發展歷程之類型與變遷並列篇名：Patterns and Changes of Transition to Adulthood in Taiwan作者：翁康容(Kang-jung Weng);謝雨生(Yeu-sheng Hsieh)關鍵字：轉至成人;生命歷程;生命事件持續期與順序;年齡規範;多軌道序列分析;transition to adulthood;life course;life event duration and order;age norm;multichannel sequence analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：36期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討台灣民眾轉至成人歷程（transition to adulthood），嘗試回答1935－1984年出生世代轉至成人歷程呈現哪些類型、內涵、人口特徵及變遷。資料取自1996年「台灣社會變遷基本調查第三期第二次東亞比較調查」與2005年「東亞社會階層與社會流動研究」，總樣本數7,248筆。本研究採用處理多重生命事件動態歷程的多軌道序列分析法。研究發現台灣轉至成人歷程出現明顯世代變遷，持續期增長、生命事件順序彈性增加、起步時間從早鳥到晚發的變化、第一生命事件從完成學業到更多人為開始工作。發生型中婚育定錨作用消失，使「早起步慢完成、晚起步快完成」型態轉變為「早起步快完成、晚起步慢完成」。性別與家庭社會階層持續影響不同世代的轉至成人歷程。高家庭社會階層男性有較長且彈性的轉至成人歷程，供其編寫適合自我的路徑，較高的生命事件未發生率意味著必須反思「無法完成生命事件者為失敗者」的刻板印象。低家庭社會階層女性持續期短且採行規範性路徑，必須承受生命事件快速發生的衝擊，且無法跳脫傳統框架。英文摘要：This study explores the transition to adulthood in the cohort period spanning from 1935 to 1984 in Taiwan by adopting the life course approach, in an effort to identify typical transition to adulthood types, their features, relationships to demographics, and cohort variations. Combining two surveys, the Taiwan Social Change Survey, 1996 and the Social Stratification and Social Mobility in Three Eastern Asian Countries, 2005, we employ Multichannel Sequence Analysis to analyze 7,248 respondents’ life event data. We identified different kinds of transition to adulthood types in each birth cohort period. We found apparent cohort changes during the transition to adulthood, including longer duration and more diversity in the order of life events. The outset time of transition to adulthood changed from early to late, and the first event changed from finishing school to more starting work. The ”anchoring effect” of first marriage identified in the early cohort weakened, leading to a change from ”early start and late completion, late start and early completion” to ”early start and early completion, late start and late completion” among the types having high completion rates. Sex and family socioeconomic status continue to have significant effects on the transition to adulthood, and the advantaged/disadvantaged demographic features tend to overlap in certain types. The advantaged groups, namely males with high family socioeconomic status, have longer duration and more flexibility in the transition to adulthood. Their higher rates of not completing life events demands more reflection on the legitimacy of stereotyping those who do not finish life events on time as failures. The most disadvantaged group, females with low family socioeconomic status, shows opposite characteristics to those of the overall trend. Having the shortest duration and the normative path in the transition to adulthood demands that people in this type make the most effort to adjust to the impacts of frequently changing life events.起始頁-結束頁：111-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201812_(36).045篇名：「慈善」與「權利」之間－身心障礙者車船半價優待的爭取過程（1950－1980）並列篇名：Between Charity and Rights: How Disabled People Fought for Their Transportation Discounts in Taiwan between 1950 and 1980作者：邱大昕(Tasing Chiu)關鍵字：社會福利史;法律社會學;身心障礙研究;盲人史;welfare history;sociology of law;disability studies;history of blindness期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：36期出版年：2018中文摘要：1980年代末的解嚴和隨後風起雲湧的社會運動，經常被視為台灣社會福利制度從「慈善」發展成「權利」的轉捩點。然而早在1950年代，身心障礙團體已開始不斷向行政部門爭取福利資源，現今身心障礙者權利保障法中的許多福利措施，便是身心障礙團體長期爭取而來的結果。「身心障礙者車船半價優待」是台灣施行最久的福利政策之一，本文將重現與分析該政策之制訂與修正的過程，期盼能更深入瞭解福利制度的轉變過程。英文摘要：The 1980s are seen as an important era in the transition of welfare for the disabled from traditional philanthropy to civil rights. Many welfare policies and programs for the disabled created after the 1980s, howvever, did not suddenly emerge out of nowhere. Prior to this time, many groups of people with disabilities had fought continuously for the establishment of a more comprehensive social welfare system. Exploring the process by which laws and legal reforms were made concerning transportation discounts in Taiwan between 1950 and 1980, this essay helps us understand more clearly how the welfare system moved from charity to rights during this period.起始頁-結束頁：167-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201812_(36).056篇名：書評：評《中國抗爭性公共領域》並列篇名：Book Review of The Contentious Public Sphere: Law, Media and Authoritarian Rule in China作者：陳志柔(Chih-jou Jay Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：36期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：189-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201812_(36).067篇名：書評：揚起台灣教養研究的號角：評Raising Global Families: Parenting, Immigration, and Class in Taiwan and the US並列篇名：Developing Parenting Studies in Taiwan: Book Review of Raising Global Families: Parenting, Immigration, and Class in Taiwan and the US作者：石易平(Yi-ping Shih)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：36期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：195-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201812_(36).078篇名：書評：評《台灣社會福利運動與政策效應》並列篇名：Book Review of Social Welfare Movements and Policy Impacts in Taiwan: 2000-2018作者：何明修(Ming-sho Ho)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：36期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：203-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201812_(36).089篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note Research Article作者：王甫昌期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：35期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201806_(35).0110篇名：鑲嵌性的時間經驗：社群媒介於日常的時間實作分析並列篇名：Embedded Temporal Experience: An Analysis of the Temporal Structure of Social Media Usage in Daily Life作者：余貞誼(Chen-yi Yu)關鍵字：社群媒介;時間經驗;生活紀錄;例行性;social media;temporal experience;lifelogging;routine期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：35期出版年：2018中文摘要：當社群媒介挾帶跨越時間界限的物質基礎而來，一種新的時間觀／時間經驗也被預言將會誕生。本篇文章以手機app和電腦瀏覽器來蒐集人們使用社群媒介的時間資料，將時間性切分為時間長度、節奏、時間點、週期和例外性這五個向度，來探究其所浮現的時間經驗之樣貌。研究發現，社群媒介在日常生活所促成的是一種鑲嵌式的時間經驗。這意味著，即使社群媒介具有跨越時間界線的物質潛力，但它們座落在日常生活時間結構的方式，仍是鑲嵌在特定情境脈絡中，與各種社會關係、文化期待、技術支援和生活儀式等因素相互協商，形成一種具有個人理解和意義詮釋的存在。提出如此的鑲嵌性，能讓我們看見社群媒介的使用時間經驗並不只是站在物質基礎上的被動採用，而是立基於個人化情境脈絡的主動納入過程，人們會運用各種管理、選擇、控制、和協商時間性的策略，來開展出社群媒介進駐於生活中的獨特秩序感和存在意義。英文摘要：The material affordances of social media can transcend the boundaries of time, which may lead to new temporal experiences. This study uses a mobile phone app and a web browser (Chrome) to collect temporal data of users' social media usage and divides temporality into five dimensions, including duration, tempo, temporal location, cycles, and exception, to construct the temporal structure of social media uses in daily life. The results show that usage of social media in daily life contributes to an embedded temporal experience. This means that even if social media have thematerial affordance to transcend the boundaries of time, the way they are located in the temporal structure of daily life is embedded in a specific context and becomes personally meaningful by negotiating with social relations, cultural expectations, technical support, and life rituals. Proposing the embeddedness of social media, we can see that the usage of social media is not only passively adopted on a material basis, but it is also actively incorporated based on individual contexts. People embody various forms of agency, including crafts of management, selection, control, and negotiation, to develop a unique order and meanings of social media's existence in daily life.起始頁-結束頁：1-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201806_(35).0211篇名：追求教學卓越？台灣高教的表現管理建制研究並列篇名：Pursuing Teaching Excellence or Fallacy? Institutional Ethnography of Performance Management in Higher Education Reform in Taiwan作者：林昱瑄(Yu-hsuan Lin)關鍵字：建制民族誌;教學卓越計畫;關鍵表現指標;新管理主義;大學治理;institutional ethnography;Teaching Excellence Project (TEP);key performance indicator (KPI);new managerialism;university governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：35期出版年：2018中文摘要：1990年代中期以後，台灣的高等教育治理受到新管理主義影響，開始大量採用關鍵表現指標（KPI）管理大學的品質改進計畫，期待透過表現管理建制引導大學有效能地運用公共經費、提升高教品質。然而，來自大學內部的回應卻與政策論述之間有許多矛盾、斷裂之處。因此，本研究希望瞭解這種新型態的管理技術如何運作？如何改變人們的工作過程？及其實質產生的效應為何？本研究採建制民族誌，研究田野為台灣一所獲得教學卓越計畫補助的私立大學。透過對該所大學行政管理階層、職員、師生的深度訪談、教卓相關文本分析等方法進行資料蒐集。本文追溯身處同一套建制中不同位置工作者的文本實作，描繪他們如何受統治文本框限，生產不同的協作型態。研究發現透過KPI治理衍生許多非預期後果，包括主體採取去專業性的自我異化協作、人們重新建構一套新的價值論述以達成自我說服、工作者內化與市場相關的工作倫理、大學產生社會關係的變化與勞動型態的轉變。文末分析表現管理建制的主體規訓技術，並對建制民族誌方法論進行反思。英文摘要：Since the mid-1990s, the governance of higher education in Taiwan has been influenced by new managerialism, and hence started to make extensive use of key performance indicators (KPIs) to evaluate the effectiveness of educational programs. By means of performance management, the government expects that universities can be guided to use public funds effectively and enhance the quality of education. However, there are many contradictions and disjunctures between the responses from universities and the intention of the policy. Therefore, the purpose of the present study is to reveal 1) how this new form of managerial technique has been implemented, 2) how it changes people's working processes/practices, and 3) what effects it has. The research adopts institutional ethnography (IE) to investigate a private university that has been awarded Teaching Excellence Project (TEP). Data gathering techniques include interviews with administrative managers, staff, teachers, and students at the university and the collection of relevant documents, which are submitted to text analyses. This close examination of ”how things actually happen” traces the actual practices of university workers at various levels under this governance policy reform and the changes it brings. The results show that KPI mandates have activated a ruling apparatus of de-professionalism. The workers are further driven to develop market-orientated work ethics. This, in turn, transforms the social relations between and/or within the administration and pedagogical developments, alongside the labor processes/practices. In a critical dialogue with IE, the study concludes with methodological reflections on and breakthroughs in applying IE.起始頁-結束頁：59-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201806_(35).0312篇名：當社區營造遇到參與式預算：兩個社區的比較研究並列篇名：When Community Building Meets Participatory Budgeting: A Comparison between Two Communities作者：林祐聖(Yu-sheng Lin);陳東升(Dung-sheng Chen)關鍵字：公民社團;進階社造;參與式預算;政治文化;civic association;deliberative community building;participatory budgeting;political culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：35期出版年：2018中文摘要：公民社團對於民主的建立與運作相當重要，公民社團的活躍程度經常被視為評判民主運作的標準。本文以文化部在公所層級推動的參與式預算為例，檢視公民社團與民主實踐的關係。透過比較模範與起步兩個社區的參與式預算運作，本文認為，社區的政治文化影響民眾對於民主的想像，進而造成兩個社區的民主實踐的差異。在本文的研究案例中，社造「強」的社區，容易讓社區成員將參與式預算視為爭取資源的管道，注重參與式預算產出的方案是否能配合菁英對於社區的規劃，而在社造「弱」的社區中，社區成員在參與式預算有更多的發聲與決定的機會。本文指出，社區會形成何種政治文化與它們受到社造行政管理程序的影響程度、社區英雄的存在與否，以及社區資源的豐富程度而定。本文建議，未來可以把研究對象由社區發展協會擴充到其他的公民社團，檢視其他類型的公民社團的文化與民主實作的關係，也可以對於社區做長時間的觀察，瞭解民主實作對於既有社團文化的改變。英文摘要：Civic associations are regarded as a foundation of democracy. In this article, we examine the relationship between civic associations and democracy by observing the operation of participatory budgeting (PB) in the project of community building. Participatory budgeting is a model of civic participation, where by engaging in community deliberations, ordinary people can decide how the budget will be allotted. Theoretically, a veteran community should have better PB performance than a rookie community, because the former is used to engaging with democratic processes. We found, however, that the veteran community demonstrated a more centralized political culture than the rookie community did. Consequently, the process and outcome of PB in the veteran community reflected the will of local elites. In contrast, the rookie community was more open to community members who owned more authority to decide the budget. We argue that the reasons behind this difference are the constraints of the rules and procedures of community building, the emergence of the community hero, and the resources that a community has. We suggest that future studies can focus on the influence of different political cultures in various civic associations on democratic practices and how democratic practices shape the political cultures of civic associations.起始頁-結束頁：109-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201806_(35).0413篇名：評《未竟的奇蹟：轉型中的台灣經濟與社會》並列篇名：Book Review of Unfinished Miracle: Taiwan's Economy and Society in Transition作者：吳明機(Ming-ji Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：35期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：151-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201806_(35).0514篇名：評Bit by Bit: Social Research in the Digital Age並列篇名：Book Review of Bit by Bit: Social Research in the Digital Age作者：洪晨碩(Chen-shuo Hong)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：35期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：163-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201806_(35).0601篇名：影響臺灣青年人口居住型態之價值觀因素並列篇名：The Impact of Personal Values on Housing Status of Taiwanese Young Adults作者：張詠菡(Yung-Han Chang)關鍵字：青年居住;家庭價值觀;自我文化;居住型態;youth housing;family value;self-culture;housing status期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣的青年居住困境近年常是大眾媒體熱烈議論的話題，然而大多將焦點放在買不起房的經濟因素上，少有研究深入探究青年人買房或租屋背後的想法與價值觀。此研究嘗試將家庭價值觀及自我文化納入討論，並同時採用量化及質性分析，嘗試拆解在結構及環境因素下，價值觀如何影響臺灣18至40歲青年的居住型態。研究結果發現，在控制各項其他因素下，價值觀仍能顯著影響青年的居住型態，在深度訪談分析中更可清晰看出青年在面對居住選擇時，即便因結構限制而選擇有限，但仍因家庭價值觀、自我文化、購屋期待之差異而做出不同的選擇。英文摘要：The housing dilemma faced by Taiwanese young adults has been widely discussed in the mass media in recent years. As most discussions have focused on the difficulties of entering homeownership among young adults caused by the economic pressure, there is a lack of research examining young adults' personal values regarding buying or renting houses. This study aims to take personal values, including family values and self-culture, into account. By adopting quantitative and qualitative analyses, this study investigates how personal values affect the housing status of Taiwanese young adults aged 18-40 within a given structural context. The research findings show that after controlling for other variables, personal values still have significant effects on young adults' housing status. Furthermore, the analysis of in-depth interviews indicates that when facing housing options, young adults tend to choose differently according to their family values, self-culture, and housing aspirations, even though they are limited by structural factors.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會2篇名：影響台灣保險業不動產投資行為因素的分析並列篇名：The Determinants of Real Estate Investment for the Insurance Industry in Taiwan作者：王健安(Chien-An Wang);彭金隆(Jin-Lung Peng)關鍵字：保險業;不動產投資;制度性因素;集團聯屬關係;insurance company;real estate investment;institutional factors;affiliated group期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究使用36家保險公司在2007年1月<U+223C>2016年3月的資料，分析影響其投資於不動產的因素。實證結果發現：(1)在制度性因素方面，保險公司如隸屬之集團同時經營建築業者，或經營權為地產公司主導者，其不動產投資比重的成長率會顯著高於同業。當保險公司的風險性資本適足率越低，負債／資產的財務槓桿程度越高時，則會減少不動產的持有。(2)在總體因素方面，低利率與利差與不動產投資為反向關係；租金或房價水準越高時，則會增加不動產的持有。(3)在個體因素方面，資產規模越大、獲利程度越好，以及設立年份越久者，越傾向持有更多的不動產投資。英文摘要：Using 36 insurance firms and quarterly data from 2007Q1 to 2016Q3, this paper investigates the determinants of real estate investment for the insurance industry in Taiwan. There are three main findings. First, the affiliated group between the insurance and construction business is shown to be highly related to the ratio of real estate investment. The regulation ratio of risk-based capital (RBC) and the leverage (proxied by debt/assets) are negative in relation to the real estate investment. Second, the level of spread and interest rate also exhibit a negative relationship with the growth ratio of real estate investment. However, the level of rent and housing price are both positively related to the growth ratio of real estate investment. Finally, the insurance firms that are larger in terms of assets, have better performance (proxied by ROA and ROE), and have been in operation longer tend to increase the ratio of real estate buying.起始頁-結束頁：39-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會3篇名：住宅增值參與證券之定價模型並列篇名：Pricing Model for Home Appreciation Participation Notes作者：楊屯山(Jerry T. Yang);蔡錦堂(Jing-Tang Tsay);林哲群(Che-Chun Lin)關鍵字：住宅增值參與證券(HAPNs);定價模型;分享增值抵押貸款(SAMs);道德風險;不動產市場;Home Appreciation Participation Notes (HAPNs);pricing models;Shared Appreciation Mortgages (SAMs);moral hazard;real estate market期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文為“住宅增值參與證券”設計更具彈性且符合實務之定價模型及推導出“均衡屋主持分率”，以順暢投資者與購屋者各取所需之交易平台。本文應是首先將“房產持有期間”設為隨機變數，並按實際房屋售價的落點，設計投資者“階段式分配”房價漲跌盈虧的機制，置入於HAPNs定價模型的文章。如此可排除既有之類似商品“分享增值抵押貸款”(Shared Appreciation Mortgages)所導致“投資不足”及“道德風險”的問題。本文並針對投資者分配盈虧比率及無風險利率等關鍵參數，對於HAPNs價值與“均衡屋主持分率”的影響，進行比較靜態分析。模擬結果將有助於HAPNs市場化的持續發展。英文摘要：We propose a pricing model for Home Appreciation Participation Notes (HAPNs) to efficiently promote the HAPNs transaction platform. In addition to housing prices and interest rates, our paper may be the first to consider the ”house-holding period” as a stochastic process in pricing HAPNs. Another feature of our model is the design of the stratified sharing scheme for HAPNs investors to share the cash flows after house owners sell the houses, thereby mitigating the concerns with underinvestment and moral hazard embedded in Shared Appreciation Mortgages (SAMs). We simulate the impact of key parameters or determinants on the value of ex-ante HAPNs to investors and house owners' ”optimal sharing percentages”. Our simulation results can shed light on the implementation of securitization in the real estate market and the future development of the HAPNs market in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：61-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會4篇名：探討住宅權屬對高齡者主觀社會地位與自評健康條件之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Housing Tenure on the Subjective Social Status and Self-Rated Health Status of the Elderly作者：陳靜怡(Ching-Yi Chen)關鍵字：住宅權屬;主觀社會地位;異質性;雙變量;housing tenure;subjective social status;heterogeneity;bivariate期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在探討高齡者主觀社會地位與自評健康條件之相互影響關係，及住宅權屬對兩變數之影響。爾後，分析高齡者之社經因素對兩應變數所產生之異質影響。結果顯示：(1)主觀社會地位與自評健康條件具有顯著的正向相互增強效果。(2)住宅權屬為租賃者，高齡者之主觀社會地位評價低的機率較高。(3)參與社團活動且擔任幹部之高齡者，自評社會地位與健康條件高的機率較高。(4)所得、性別與認知功能顯著地解釋高齡者主觀社會地位與自評健康條件之異質差異。本文提供了高齡社會進一步瞭解高齡者自我評價之參考依據。英文摘要：This study discusses the interaction between the subjective social status (SSS) and the self-rated health status (SRHS) of the elderly, further analyzing the effects of housing tenure on these variables. The heterogeneity is considered within the context of a bivariate model of SSS and SRHS. The results indicate that (1) SSS and SRHS significantly reinforce each other; (2) renters think of themselves as having lower social status; (3) elderly individuals who actively participate in club activities and serve as leaders consider themselves to have higher SSS and SRHS; and (4) income, gender, and cognitive function significantly explain the heterogeneous differences between SSS and SRHS. This study provides a reference basis for the self-evaluation of the elderly in an aged society.起始頁-結束頁：85-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會5篇名：從行為經濟學看台灣不動產市場：羅伯特．席勒教授來台演講之省思與啟示並列篇名：Examining the Taiwanese Real Estate Market from Behavioral Economics: Reflections and Implications from Professor Robert J. Shiller's Speech in Taiwan作者：朱芳妮(Fang-Ni Chu);陳明吉(Ming-Chi Chen)關鍵字：不動產市場;非理性繁榮;行為經濟學;real estate market;irrational exuberance;behavioral economics期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：台灣不動產市場發展已難單從傳統經濟學假設人類理性思考來出發解釋。去年(2017)受邀來台主講亞洲及世界華人不動產學會聯合學術研討會的2013年諾貝爾經濟學獎的羅伯特．席勒(Robert J. Shiller)教授，以對資產訂價研究的卓越貢獻而得獎，對於歐美及亞洲主要國家的長期不動產市場趨勢有深入的分析，他對於不動產市場研究的貢獻不僅是提出Case-Shiller房價指數及週期調整本益比(Shiller's CAPE Ratio)供市場投資者衡量美國住宅價值變動情形及評估權益證券投資風險，其過去數本經典著作的核心論述，更可從行為經濟學觀點解釋在基本面因素以外，不動產市場是如何受到擁有資訊者的操弄、消費者對價格的預期以及人類基於本能所採取的行動之影響。本文從席勒教授近期與不動產市場相關的著作與論述，探討台灣不動產市場近年榮景下的隱憂與課題，期能從中獲得啟示。英文摘要：The development of Taiwan's real estate market has been difficult to explain from the assumption of human rational thinking in traditional economics. Professor Robert J. Shiller, who received the 2013 Nobel Prize in Economics for his outstanding contributions to the asset pricing research, conducted an in-depth analysis of long-term housing market trends in major countries in Europe, Asia, and the United States. His contribution to the housing market researches is not only to present the Case-Shiller Housing Price Index and the Shiller Cyclically Adjusted Price-to-Earnings Ratio (CAPE Ratio) for market investors to measure the changes in the value of housing in the United States and to evaluate the risks of equity investments, but also explain how the housing market is influenced by the manipulation of participants who hold the information, the consumer's price expectation, and the action taken by human beings based on their instincts beyond the fundamentals from the perspectives of behavioral economics. This paper discusses the issues and concerns of the real estate market in Taiwan in recent years from Professor Shiller's recent books and articles. We hope to obtain implications from these discussions.起始頁-結束頁：111-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會6篇名：薛立敏教授訪談紀錄並列篇名：Interview with Professor Li-Min Hsueh作者：薛立敏(Li-Min Hsueh);楊智元(Chih-Yuan Yang);孫偉智(Wei-Zhi Sun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：129-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會7篇名：林益厚前署長訪談紀錄並列篇名：Interview with Former Director General Yi-Hou Lin作者：林益厚(Yi-Hou Lin);楊智元(Chih-Yuan Yang);孫偉智(Wei-Zhi Sun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：133-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會8篇名：Does Population Aging Affect Real Housing Prices? Evidence from Eight Asian Economies並列篇名：人口老化是否影響房價？亞洲八國分析作者：盧秋玲(Chiuling Lu);沈仰斌(Yang-Pin Shen);施正倫(Cheng-Lun Shih)關鍵字：housing prices;population aging;old dependency ratio;Asian economies;房價;人口老化;撫養比例;亞洲經濟體期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：We examine the effect of an aging population on housing prices in eight Asian economies. Given that most Asian economies are younger than advanced economies, we expected their demography to have a comparatively small negative effect on real housing prices. Our findings, however, show that the negative effect is large. On average, total population and population aging will cause real housing price returns to decrease by approximately 134 basis points per annum until 2035, compared to 80 basis points in advanced economies until 2050, as estimated by Takats (2012). The results further show that in regions with greater economic freedom, such as Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea, the downward influence will be less than that in regions with less economic freedom.英文摘要：我們檢視了八個亞洲經濟體中人口老化對房價的影響。鑑於大多數亞洲經濟體都比已開發國家經濟體年輕，我們預計他們的人口老化對實際房價的負面影響應該相對較小。然而，我們的研究結果顯示負面影響幅度卻很大。根據Takats(2012)的估算，已開發國家人口老化將導致實際房屋價格在2035年之前每年下降約80個基本點，但是平均而言，亞洲經濟體的下降幅度卻高達每年134個基本點。另外，我們結果進一步發現，在經濟自由度較大的地區，如香港、新加坡、台灣和南韓，其下跌幅度將遠低於樣本中的其他地區。起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會9篇名：總體經濟對房地產景氣循環不對稱影響之研究－中國大陸之實證分析並列篇名：A Study on the Asymmetric Impact of Macroeconomic Factors on the Real Estate Cycles of Mainland China作者：林祖嘉(Chu-Chia Lin);游士儀(Shih-Yi You)關鍵字：中國大陸房地產;景氣循環;馬可夫轉換模型;real estate market of China;business cycle;Markov switching model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：房地產景氣波動是一動態的過程，如何在有效的樣本資料下，準確地認定中國大陸房地產景氣循環轉折點，並正確估計總體經濟變數對房地產景氣波動的影響，將有助於提供相關住宅政策建議。本研究使用中國大陸2004年1月至2015年7月的總體經濟資料，透過馬可夫轉換模型，重新對中國大陸房地產景氣循環進行估算，並且探討在不同房地產景氣的階段，總體經濟變數對房市是否存在非對稱的效果。實證結果顯示，中國大陸2004年至2015年以來，房地產擴張期的時間大於衰退期的時間，且總體經濟變數在房地產不同景氣下，確實對房地產市場有非對稱的影響效果。英文摘要：The dynamic nature of the real estate market of China has posed specific challenges to researchers. It would be helpful to make policy suggestions by investigating the turning point in the real estate market cycle as well as the impacts of some fundamental economic factors. The main purpose of this study is to investigate the cycle of China's real estate market by adopting the Markov switching model. Our empirical results show that, during the period from 2004:01 to 2015:07, the average duration of the real estate market's expansion in China is longer than that of the contraction. In addition, our analysis confirms the significance of the asymmetric relationship between the real estate market and fundamental economic factors in China.起始頁-結束頁：23-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會10篇名：以房養老市場投資需求因素之研究－新均衡理論與模糊分析階層程序法之應用並列篇名：A Study on the Investment Demand Factors in the Housing Endowment Market - An Application of New Equilibrium Theory and the Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchical Process作者：吳明哲(Ming-Che Wu)關鍵字：以房養老;逆向抵押貸款;新均衡理論;模糊分析階層程序法;housing endowment;reverse mortgage;new equilibrium theory;fuzzy analytic hierarchical process期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：為因應年長者之經濟安全需求，以房養老(housing endowment)之相關商品成為台灣矚目的討論議題。本研究乃應用Ibbotson et al.(1984)所發表之資本市場新均衡理論(new equilibrium theory, NET)做為建立以房養老市場潛在需求因素之理論基礎，並利用模糊分析階層程序法(fuzzy analytic hierarchical process, FAHP)評估潛在需求因素之準則及國內四種不同方案之需求意願之排序。本文研究發現有其韌性，因無論是以三角模糊數或常態模糊數，其結果皆以「逆向抵押」之投資意願排序最高。英文摘要：To manage the economic security needs of elderly people, the housing endowment is becoming a key issue in Taiwan. This study explores the determinants of the potential demand for investing in the housing endowment market on a basis of the new equilibrium theory proposed by Ibbotson et al. (1984). It evaluates and ranks the factors that influence the potential demand for housing endowments and four different programs using the fuzzy analytic hierarchical process. Our results show that it is robust in the sense that investment in reverse mortgages ranks as the first priority regardless of whether triangular fuzzy numbers or Gaussian fuzzy numbers are utilized.起始頁-結束頁：47-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會11篇名：以賣方議價能力衡量台灣房市熱度並列篇名：An Estimate of the Heat of the Taiwan Housing Market Based on Measuring Sellers' Bargaining Power作者：楊智元(Chih-Yuan Yang)關鍵字：房市熱度;議價能力;開價;成交價;搜尋模型;heat;housing market;bargaining power;search model;housing price期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：與過往文獻常直接以成交量衡量房市熱度不同，本文考慮未成交之潛在交易者，透過搜尋模型評估賣方接受買方議價的機率，並以台灣2001至2015年的資料估算賣方議價能力，據此衡量賣方認知的房市景況。實證結果顯示，儘管2015年房市交易量萎縮，全台與六大都會區賣方認知的房市景況依然呈現熱絡，屋主仍不輕易接受買方出價，市場上可能存在許多有意願交易但無法在價格上達到成交共識的買賣雙方。此外，賣方考慮買方議價的機率與建案銷售比率呈現正向相關，特別是中南部的都會區。本文衡量賣方觀點的市場熱度，可為不動產市場提供另一角度的觀察。英文摘要：The 'heat' of the real estate market has recently been a major preoccupation in the academic literature (Novy-Marx, 2009). While past studies have often directly used trading volume as a measure of the heat of the housing market, such a practice may ignore potential buyers and sellers because of real estate transactions being characterized by asymmetric information and significant heterogeneity. This paper employs a search model from the viewpoint of the sellers, and then estimates the sellers’ bargaining power that accounts for their optimal bidding strategy. Our empirical results show that the heat of the real estate market and future housing prices are positively correlated. In addition, the sales ratio for new housing is positively correlated with the willingness of sellers to accept counter-offers. This paper may provide another measure of housing market conditions.起始頁-結束頁：79-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會12篇名：聚焦本土、傳承交流、積極參與∼張金鶚教授訪談紀錄並列篇名：Interview with Professor Chin-Oh Chang作者：張金鶚;楊智元(Chih-Yuan Yang);劉昱辰(Yu-Chen Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：105-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會13篇名：跨域研究、觀念推動、房市改革∼林祖嘉教授訪談紀錄並列篇名：Interview with Professor Chu-Chia Lin作者：林祖嘉;楊智元(Chih-Yuan Yang);劉昱辰(Yu-Chen Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：27卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：109-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會01篇名：公共政策對中產階級的影響：臺灣、韓國與日本並列篇名：The Effect of Public Policies on the Middle Class in Taiwan, South Korea, and Japan作者：洪明皇(Ming-Hwang Hong);劉豐佾(Feng-Yi Y. Liu)關鍵字：中產階級;公共移轉;私人移轉;所得稅;middle class;public transfer;private transfer;income tax期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：公共轉移與所得稅制是國家藉以縮減貧富差距或擴大中產階級的主要政策工具，而公共政策未發揮應有效果的國家，可能較仰賴私人移轉的重分配效果。文獻上尚未有同時比較上述政策對臺灣、韓國與日本中產階級影響的研究，本研究使用2005-2013年的盧森堡家戶所得資料庫，比較2000年中期公共移轉、私人移轉及所得稅對三個國家中產階級的影響，此外也分析臺灣與韓國的跨時變化。主要研究發現包括：一、所得階層別的家庭組成分析顯示，臺灣與韓國下層階級的老人單人家戶與老人夫妻兩人家戶佔率明顯高於中層與上層階級；日本由於公共年金制度相對成熟，所以這個現象較不明顯。二、日本的公共移轉擴大中產階級與減少下層階級的力量大於臺灣與韓國，相對的臺灣與韓國的私人移轉擴大中產階級與減少下層階級的力量大於日本。此外，臺灣與韓國2012-2013年公共移轉的所得重分配效果有減弱的現象。三、臺灣與韓國的所得稅制失功能，所得稅與社會保險費擴大中產階級的作用不及公共移轉。臺灣2013年的所得稅與社會保險費竟反而使中產階級減少，且使下層階級增加。英文摘要：Public transfers and income tax systems are primary policies and tools of the country to reduce economic inequality and to expand the middle class. However, in some countries where public policies fail to exercise effect, private transfers for income redistribution become more effective. Previous study less compared the effect of the public policies on the middle class among Taiwan, South Korea, and Japan. Hence, this paper used the Luxembourg household income database from 2005 to 2013 to analyze the effects of public transfers, private transfers, and income tax on the middle class among Taiwan, South Korea, and Japan in the 2000s. Additionally, this paper compared the time variant difference between Taiwan and Korea as well. The research results were: 1. Analysis of the family composition of the different social classes (categorized according to their income) showed that in Taiwan and South Korea, the proportion of older adults living alone (one person) or older couples living together (two people) in the lower class was significantly higher than those in the middle and upper classes. In Japan, because of the presence of the public annuity system, this phenomenon was less pronounced. 2. In Japan, the effect of public transfers on increasing the middle class and decreasing the lower class was greater than that in Taiwan and South Korea. By contrast, the effect of private transfers on expanding the middle class and diminishing the lower class was greater in Taiwan and South Korea than in Japan. In addition, the income redistribution effect of public transfers in Taiwan and South Korea decreased in 2012-2013. 3. In Taiwan and South Korea, the income tax systems were relatively ineffective: the effects of income tax and social insurance charges expanding to the middle class were less than those of public transfers. In 2013, income tax and social insurance charges actually decreased and increased the populations of the middle and lower classes in Taiwan, respectively.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201812_22(2).00012篇名：與姐妹志工一起工作：新住民家庭服務中心支持性志願服務初探並列篇名：Working Together with ”Jiemei” Volunteers: Exploring the Supportive Volunteering for Immigrant Wives in Service Centers for New Immigrant Families作者：王翊涵(Yi-Han Wang)關鍵字：新住民女性志工;支持性志願服務;新住民家庭服務中心;immigrant-wife volunteer;supportive volunteering;service center for new immigrant family期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：相關文獻指出移民在接待社會的志願服務參與可以產生正向效益，接待社會亦受惠移民志工的貢獻，然身處弱勢使移民不易參與及維持在志工活動中，此召喚出「支持性志願服務」的重要。臺灣學界尚未關注如何支持新住民女性參與志願服務的議題，本文以10間新住民家庭服務中心為研究場域，深度訪談12位督導或社工辦理新住民女性志工的經驗，試圖彙整出具有支持性志願服務的作為。研究發現基金的補助規定是驅使中心辦理新住民女性志工的主因，然在辦理過程中逐漸體認參與志願服務對新住民女性具有重要意義，進而對此業務產生認同，鑲嵌著選擇、多元、互惠、肯認、多樣性、文化敏感度、培力、支持、肯定、即時等特徵的支持性志願服務措施因此逐漸發展形塑。具體作法包括以多樣管道和善用原鄉社群網絡進行招募；舉辦始業式；規劃多種培訓課程；協助參與志工教育訓練；培訓時間與志工服務保持彈性；志工運用時重視新住民女性的能力與原生文化；即時或定期提供教育性和支持性的督導；以及適時獎勵。本文最後依據研究結果提出具體建議，期能催化支持性政策與措施的發展，暢通新住民女性參與志願服務的管道與機會。英文摘要：It was recognized that immigrants made extraordinary contributions to the host society by undertaking volunteering activities whereby immigrants also improved their well-beings. However a variety of factors might prevent immigrants from volunteering which called for the development of ”supportive volunteering”. Studies to date on the issue of immigrant wives in Taiwan had paid no attention to the support of their volunteering participation. Based on the interview data collected from 12 workers in 10 Service Centers for New Immigrant Families (SCNIFs), this article first found that SCNIFs gradually recognized the importance of involving immigrant wives as volunteers although most centers were provoked into doing this by the state's policy. It was further found that SCNIFs could spontaneously and incrementally developed supportive volunteering measures, including using diverse approaches to recruit, particularly making good use of immigrant wives' networks; having an orientation to make formal introduction; giving diverse training; making voluntary sector flexible; appreciating immigrant-wife volunteers' abilities and native culture; providing available and approachable support and supervision; and encouraging and rewarding immigrant-wife volunteers' contribution. This article finally putted forward recommendations of how future policies and programs could be formulated in order to support immigrant wives' involvement in volunteering and successfully retain them.起始頁-結束頁：49-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201812_22(2).00023篇名：「客工」？臺灣小型長期照顧機構外籍看護工之照顧勞動並列篇名：”Guest Workers”? A Study of Foreign Care Workers' Labor Experiences in Small Taiwanese Long Term Care Facilities作者：王潔媛(Chieh-Yuan Wang);楊培珊(Peishan Yang)關鍵字：長期照顧機構;外籍看護工;跨國照顧勞動;long term care facilities;foreign care workers;transnational care labor期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在探討臺灣小型長照機構外籍看護工之照顧勞動，是如何鑲嵌在長期照顧機構的組織層級，並解析本籍與外籍看護工在勞動角色之專業分工與互動性。本研究採質性研究法，運用田野觀察法及深度訪談法進行資料蒐集及詮釋；研究對象採立意取樣，主體為北部之兩家小型長照機構，共訪談外籍看護工小組長三人、外籍看護工19人、機構負責人、社工人員、護理人員、及本籍照服員等。研究發現外籍看護工已經成為小型長期照顧機構的「主力」，而非來幫一手的「客」工；另一方面，呈現出族群性地、長期地在台居留，而不只是短期作客的「客」工。研究建議：（1）應重視外籍看護工勞動的主體性，減少對外籍看護工的刻板印象與歧視，願意接觸及理解外籍看護工的母國文化，以及她們在台的社會網絡與活動；（2）我國政府應擬定積極的策略，俾能保有在國際移工市場的競爭力，預防外籍勞工缺工窘境，以利建構長期照顧永續的勞動力及提升臺灣機構式長期照顧服務之品質。英文摘要：This article aims to explore how the labor experiences of foreign care workers (FCWs) were embedded in the organizational structure of the contemporary Taiwanese small sized long term care facilities, and how they interacted with other members in the institutional settings. This research applied qualitative methods, using field observations and in-depth interviews to collect data, and then using thematic analysis to do data analysis. Purposeful sampling was applied. Field observation was done mainly in two small sized private facilities. Interviewees included 19 foreign care workers, managers, social workers, nurses, and local care workers. The research results indicated that FCWs have long become the dominant labor force in Taiwanese long term care facilities. Finally, this research suggested that (1) FCWs' individuality and culture should be respected and their social networks in Taiwan should be understood; (2) the government ought to formulate progressive strategies and labor policies in order to enhance the competitiveness of Taiwan in international care labor market.起始頁-結束頁：95-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201812_22(2).00034篇名：「親密關係經濟暴力量表」之發展並列篇名：Development of the Intimate Partner Economic Violence (IPEV) scale作者：王珮玲(Pei-Ling Wang);顏玉如(Yu-Ju Yen)關鍵字：親密關係暴力;經濟暴力;測量工具建構;脅迫控制;受暴婦女;intimate partner violence;economic violence;measurement development;coercive control;abused women期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：親密關係經濟暴力是施暴者控制伴侶的重要方法之一，對被害人身心帶來嚴重的負面影響；但由於經濟暴力內涵隱晦不明，不易辨識與察覺，長期被各界所忽略，而學術社群亦缺乏相關探討。本研究旨在瞭解親密關係暴力被害人遭遇經濟暴力的經驗，並試圖建構親密關係經濟暴力的測量工具。本研究以曾遭受親密關係暴力之婦女為對象，採問卷調查方式蒐集相關資料，樣本為來自11個縣市、共379位親密關係暴力女性被害人。透過文獻檢視與專家訪談初步形成的量表內容，以探索性因素分析，最後形成20題的「親密關係經濟暴力量表」（IPEV），且將經濟暴力行為歸類為四個類型：經濟剝奪、經濟控制、阻止工作、以及財務獨斷，此四因素可解釋整體變異量之65.92%，而有關量表之內部一致性與建構效度檢驗亦表現良好。本研究為我國第一份針對親密關係經濟暴力議題所進行的量化調查研究，對於了解親密關係經濟暴力現象提供重要的實證資料，提出之測量工具可作為相關研究的測量參考，並提供實務工作者運用。英文摘要：Economic violence is part of the pattern of behaviors used by batterers to maintain power and to control over their partners. Intimate partner economic violence brings a variety of negative impacts on victims. However, the issue of economic violence has been ignored for a long time. Limited measures and studies are available to accurately understand the prevalence of economic abuse in the lives of survivors in Taiwan. This study describes the development of the Intimate Partner Economic Violence Scale (IPEV), which was designed to fill the research gap. Surveys were conducted with 379 survivors of domestic abuse, each of whom responded to measures of economic, physical, and psychological abuse as well as economic autonomy. Results show that the reliability and validity of the scale of IPEV were adequate. The IPEV contains 4 factors: economic exploitation, economic control, employment sabotage, and financial arbitrariness. These four factors explain 65.92% variance. This study is an important first step toward understanding the extent and impact of economic violence experienced by survivors in Taiwan. The IPEV is the first scale to measure the intimate partner economic violence which could be benefits for victims and advocates to clarify the violent situations and as the base for service assessments.起始頁-結束頁：135-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201812_22(2).00045篇名：臺灣社會團體工作者專業知能之養成歷程並列篇名：The Development of Professional Knowledge and Competencies of Practitioners in the Field of Social Group Work in Taiwan作者：林佩瑾(Pei-Chin Lin);古允文(Yeun-Wen Ku)關鍵字：社會團體工作;專業養成;師徒制;social group work;professional cultivation;mentorship期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究為探索性研究，從社會工作者學習、轉化與整合歷程與脈絡來探索臺灣社會團體工作的專業發展與養成。本研究深入訪談15位社工年資在五年以上且具有社會團體工作實務經驗之研究參與者，並進行文本詮釋與理解。研究結果發現，臺灣社會團體工作專業養成是漸進式的學習歷程，開始於大學教育，真正的學習則是在實務場域，從自己經驗團體、觀察團體、協同領導及擔任領導者，甚至經歷重要關鍵事件，當突破這些關卡之後，則更能靈活運用團體工作。因此，本研究提出建議：發展「經驗學習」及「行動中心」的教育與訓練取向、培養實務師資及發展師徒制訓練模式。本研究不僅關注社會團體工作發展中的失落，也關注轉變中的問題，最重要的是期盼本研究能夠燃起實務工作者投入社會團體工作之熱情，建構團體工作的專業認同，進而深化臺灣團體工作的專業發展。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the professional development and cultivation of social group work in Taiwan from the perspective of social workers, based on their learning, transformation and integration context. The data are collected from in-depth interviewing with 15 social workers who have more than five years working experience in social work as well as practical experience in leading groups. Data is interpreted by using hermeneutic circle to discover the meanings and to achieve understandings. The findings of the research present that the professional cultivation processes of practitioners in social group work are beginning with higher education, going through by participating in groups, observing groups, as a co-leader of groups and as a leader of groups, in order to move from novices to expert practitioners. When key critical events are experienced, the practitioners could be more flexible on adopting social group work. Accordingly, the research recommendations include: (1) to develop an educational and training approach based on ”experience learning” and ”practical-based”, (2) to cultivate practitioners to be mentors to coach students and novices, and (3) to form a mentorship of practicing social group work. This study not only concerns with the ”lost” in the field of social group work, but also focus on the transition in the field. Most of all, this study would awaken spiritual heritage and construct professional identity of practitioners, as well as deepen the professional field of social group work.起始頁-結束頁：181-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201812_22(2).00056篇名：德國、奧地利與日本長照政策形成的政治過程分析並列篇名：Comparison of Political Analysis on the Formation of Long-term Care Policies in Germany, Austria and Japan作者：周怡君(Yi-Chun Chou);林倖如(Hsing-Ju Lin);黃全慶(Chuan-Ching Hwang);林谷燕(Ku-Yen Lin)關鍵字：長照政策;政治分析;政黨;利益團體;政治制度;interest groups;long-term-care;policy analysis;parties;political institutions期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文從政黨與利益團體的傳統政治理論觀點、強調福利縮減的新政治觀點，以及重視政治制度結構的政治制度觀點，探討德國、奧地利和日本三個國家的長照制度與福利體制的關係，並比較分析其長照政策形成之政治因素。研究結果得出德奧日三國的長照制度在財源籌措、給付類型以及保障人口上皆有差異，德國與日本長照制度大致延續其傳統福利體制特徵，奧地利長照制度則與其傳統福利體制有極大差異。而造成三國長照制度結果與其傳統福利特徵關係差異之政治過程與政治因素的解釋，則是由政黨和利益團體特徵化的傳統政治理論，對三國的長照政策形成具有最佳詮釋力，政治制度理論次之，而強調福利縮減的新政治論點則較不具詮釋力。英文摘要：This paper explores the long-term care systems and welfare regimes in Germany, Austria and Japan. It also compares their political process of long-term care policies. The three approaches of the political theories concern different factors such as political parties, interest groups, welfare reduction and political institutions and are used to analyze the political process of LTC policies in these three countries. The results show that the long-term care systems of these three countries have different finances, benefit and coverage population. The long-term care systems in Germany and Japan have continued their traditional welfare regimes and the long- term care systems in Austria greatly differ from its traditional welfare regime. In addition, the classical political perspective that is characterized by political parties and interest groups have the best interpretation for the formation of the long-term care policies in these three countries, followed by the best political institutional perspective; however, the new political argument emphasizing welfare reduction is less interpretive.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201806_22(1).00017篇名：臺灣企業實施托育設施與措施之影響因素：比較資本主義的觀點並列篇名：Determinants of the Introduction of Childcare Measures in Taiwanese Firms: A Perspective of Comparative Capitalism作者：陳盈方(Ying-Fang Chen);葉崇揚(Chung-Yang Yeh);蔡培元(Pei-Yuen Tsai);呂建德(Jen-Der Lu)關鍵字：福利資本主義;就業導向家庭政策;托育照顧;性別化比較資本主義;welfare capitalism;employment-oriented family policy;childcare;gendering the varieties of capitalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以比較資本主義觀點為理論基礎，並且嘗試性別化過去所忽略的比較資本主義觀點，藉此分析臺灣企業實施就業導向家庭政策的誘因結構和偏好。本文分析臺灣2013年「僱用管理性別平等概況調查」資料庫，發現臺灣企業實施托育設施與措施的誘因結構，受到企業規模、風險程度（女性員工比例）、技術類型（產業部門）、企業組織（公、私部門企業）所影響。而此一研究發現也隱含著對傳統探討社會政策觀點與權力資源理論的批判，亦即企業不見得會反對社會政策的開展，而是會因為其規模（財務能力）、風險程度、所依賴的技術類型以及公私部門的分化而有所差異。英文摘要：This study aimed to analyze the preferences and incentives of firms on employment-oriented family policy by gendering the Varieties of Capitalism. We analyzed the 2013 ”Survey on Gender Equality of Employment” data, and found that firm size, the percentage of female workers, skill profiles and sectors were significant in explaining firms' preferences on employment-oriented family policy. These findings demonstrated that, in contrast to the power resource theory, employers would not necessarily resist social policy development. Rather, firms' social policy preferences were determined by firm size, risk, skill profiles and sectors.起始頁-結束頁：49-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201806_22(1).00028篇名：處罰父母、拯救小孩？臺灣強制性親職教育輔導的結果評估：以兒虐再通報率為指標並列篇名：Punishing Parents and Saving Children? The Outcome Evaluation of Mandated Parenting Education Programs in Taiwan: With the Reporting Rate of Child Abuse Incidents as the Indicator作者：沈瓊桃(April Chiung-Tao Shen)關鍵字：強制性親職教育輔導;兒童虐待;通報;成效評估;mandated parenting education;child abuse;mandated reporting;outcome evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在檢視全臺各縣市實施強制性親職教育輔導的成效，使用的成效指標為兒虐事件的再通報率；測量工具為全臺20個縣市負責強制性親職教育輔導業務的承辦人員所填寫的問卷。結果顯示2012年各縣市完成強制性親職教育輔導時數結案者共有166案，其中在半年之後又再次被通報兒虐事件的個案數有13案，故全臺兒虐再通報率為7.8%。若以縣市為分析單位，七成五的縣市的個案在完成強制性親職教育輔導時數後，並沒有再被通報兒虐案件。此外半數以上的方案負責人表達該縣市執行強制性親職教育輔導方案的優勢包括網絡合作順暢、課程多元、和專業知能充足。另有四成以上的縣市表達個案出席率低、資源限制、人力資源不足等困境。本研究的結論是大多數縣市的親職教育輔導成效佳，兒虐再通報率低，但有少數縣市的輔導成效不彰。本文建議強制性親職教育輔導的成效評估指標應包括是否能預防兒虐事件的再次發生。此外強制性親職教育輔導的焦點不能只限縮在父母個人的親職能力，相關的配套措施、資源連結和服務的可近性與多元化是未來需要努力的方向。英文摘要：This study aims to carry out an outcome evaluation of the mandated parenting education programs in Taiwan. The indicator of the outcome evaluation is whether there are new reported child abuse incidents after the clients have completed the mandated parenting education programs. This study invited social workers who were in charge of implementing the mandated parenting education programs in each city and county to fill out a questionnaire and to calculate the number of child abuse reports. The research findings show that there were 166 cases that had completed the mandated parenting education programs in 2012. Among them, 13 cases reported child abuse incidents again in 2013. Therefore, the reporting rate of child abuse incidents is 7.8%. From the city or county perspective, 75% of the cities or counties in Taiwan did not have new reports of child abuse incidents among clients who had completed the mandated education program. Half of the research participants indicated that the advantages of their mandated parenting programs included a working-well network, diversified courses, and professional knowledge and skills. On the other hand, more than 40% of the research participants expressed that the disadvantages of their programs were low attendance rate, limited resources and insufficient manpower. The mandated parenting education programs in most cities and counties were effective and the reporting rate of child abuse incidents was low. However, the programs in few cities and counties were not effective. The outcome evaluation of the program effectiveness should include reporting rate of child abuse incidents. Moreover, the mandated parenting education programs cannot just focus on parenting skills. Future work needs to improve other supporting measures, resources connections, and the accessibility and diversity of the services.起始頁-結束頁：97-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201806_22(1).000301篇名：典型或非典型工作？臺灣男性和已婚女生就業型態的決策模式及因素分析並列篇名：To Be a Typical or an Atypical Worker? Decision Modes and Determinants of Employment Patterns for Male and Married Female Laborers in Taiwan作者：魯慧中(Lu, Huei-Chung)關鍵字：非典型就業;就業選擇;多項式羅吉特模型;巢式羅吉特模型;Atypical Employment;Employment Choice;Multinomial Logit Model;Nested Logit Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：54卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文從就業型態的決策模式出發，進而瞭解影響個人就業型態的決定因素。將就業選擇的過程設定為「兩階段決策」及「序列決策」兩種模式，我們使用2009年和2013年「人力運用調查」資料，並以「多項式羅吉特模型」和「巢式羅吉特模型」進行估計。我們的估計結果顯示，臺灣男性傾向「序列決策」模式，而已婚女性勞動者則傾向「兩階段決策」模式。年齡較長、已婚男性、教育程度較高者，從事全日典型工作的機率較高；年紀較輕者從事全日非典型工作的機會較高；然而從事部分時間工作的機率與年齡之間則無具體的單調性關係，且男性和已婚女性存在差異性。家人失業數的增加會減少男性選擇部分時間工作的機率，但卻會鼓勵已婚婦女投入勞動市場從事兼差性質的工作。此外，戶內人口組成與經濟景氣狀況對於男性和已婚婦女的就業型態選擇亦會產生不同的影響。英文摘要：This paper explores the decision modes of employment and presents the possible factors. Classifying the decision modes into ”two-stage decision” and ”sequential decision” and using the data of ”Manpower Utilization Survey” in 2009 and 2013, we apply a multinomial logit model and two nested logit models for the estimation. Our empirical results show that men tend to adopt the mode of ”sequential decision” and married women tend to adopt the mode of ”two-stage decision”. Furthermore, an older person, a married man, and a higher educated person have a greater possibility of choosing a full-time typical job. A younger person tends to choose a full-time atypical job, however, the probability of choosing a part-time job has no monotonic correlation with age. An increase in the number of family members decreases the possibility of choosing a part-time job for men, but encourages married women to participate in the secondary labor market (i.e. a part-time job). Finally, the composition of families and the business cycle have distinct impacts on the decision of employment patterns between males and married females.起始頁-結束頁：119-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系2篇名：經理人持股對公司價值的影響：過度自信的角色並列篇名：The Impact of Managerial Ownership on Firm Value: The Role of Overconfidence作者：劉永欽(Liu, Yong-Chin);陳香如(Hsiang-Ju Chen);陳聖雯(Sheng-Wen Chen)關鍵字：經理人持股;過度自信;利益一致假說;職位防衛假說;公司治理;Managerial Ownership;Overconfidence;Convergence of Interests Hypothesis;Entrenchment Hypothesis;Corporate Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：54卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文檢視經理人過度自信是否改變經理人持股對公司價值的影響，以Tobin's Q衡量公司價值，1997年至2014年台灣上市櫃公司年資料的迴歸分析發現，經理人持股對公司價值之影響在經理人無過度自信時呈U型；若不考慮持股率平方項則為正斜率線形；若經理人過度自信，則為倒U型或無顯著關係。使用四種過度自信指標、考慮經理人持股及過度自信之內生性後，此結果仍然不變。再者，經理人持股低時，有無過度自信並未使公司價值顯著不同，乃因過度自信對已相對低的價值衝擊有限。故證據支持經理人與股東利益一致與過度自信假說，不符合職位防衛假說。本文也發現經理人過度自信導致其高持股亦無助提升公司價值與不當投資有關，因為高持股和過度自信時，投資對現金敏感性相對較高。英文摘要：This article examines whether managerial overconfidence alters the impact of managerial ownership on firm value. With a sample encompassing annual data of Taiwan's listed and OTC companies for the period 1997-2014 and using Tobin's Q as firm value, the results from regression analyses indicate that under the situation of no overconfidence by managers, the effect of managerial ownership on firm value follows a U-shaped pattern, but there is a positive-slope linearity if squared ownership is not considered. However, if managers are overconfident, then ownership value exhibits either an inverse U-shaped curve or an insignificant relationship. The results are unchanged even after iterations with four indicators for managerial overconfidence and by considering the endogeneity of both ownership and overconfidence. Moreover, when managers have low ownership, their overconfidence does not make a significant difference in firm value, because it has limited harm on any relatively low value. Therefore, the hypothesis of convergence of interests for managers and shareholders and the overconfidence hypothesis both hold, but the entrenchment hypothesis does not. This article also uncovers one reason, related to improper investments, for why managers with high ownership and overconfidence fail to raise firm values due to the relatively high sensitivity of cash flows to investments.起始頁-結束頁：191-242資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系3篇名：臺灣之進出口與臺灣接單海外生產對製造業表現的影響－地區別貿易效果之比較並列篇名：The Effects of Trade and Overseas Production of Taiwan's Export Orders on the Performance of Taiwan's Manufacturing Industries: A Comparison between Trade with Different Regions作者：蔡易如(Tsai, I-Ju)關鍵字：貿易;臺灣接單海外生產;要素移動性;就業;場所數;實質薪資;Trade;Overseas Production of Export Orders;Factor Mobility;Employment;Number of Establishments;Real Wages期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：54卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究利用2006年及2011年行政院主計總處工商普查與海關進出口統計資料，分析臺灣對中國大陸與香港、對中國大陸與香港以外的地區（簡稱其他地區）進出口、以及臺灣接單海外生產對製造業表現的影響。實證結果顯示，出口至中國大陸與香港年成長率每增加1%，就業年成長率增加0.07%，但其對場所數與平均實質薪資則無顯著影響。出口至其他地區年成長率每增加1%，就業年成長率增加0.14%。以絕對量而言，在2006年至2011年間，出口至中國大陸與香港每年可帶動4,801個就業人數的增加，出口至其他地區則為9,951人，合計可解釋89%就業人數年增量。再者，出口至其他地區年成長率每增加1%，場所數之年成長率提高0.13%；此出口每年帶動368個場所數增加，占實際總增量的41%。臺灣出口至中國大陸與香港相對於出口至其他地區之就業與場所數創造效果較小，顯示與貿易對手之間的要素移動性高低會影響貿易帶動效果的大小。在進口部分，則不論自何地進口，對就業、場所數與平均實質薪資之影響均不顯著。臺灣接單海外生產之當期效果顯示，其年成長率每增加1%，平均實質薪資之年成長率微幅增加0.012%。臺灣接單海外生產之長期累積效果則為，以中國為生產基地的臺灣接單海外生產金額相對於該產業出口值比率上升時，該產業在臺灣場所數相對減少，不利創新。英文摘要：This paper uses Taiwan's Industry, Commerce and Service Censuses of 2006 and 2011 and trade statistics to analyze the impact of cross-strait trade, its trade with regions other than mainland China and Hong Kong (other regions hereinafter), and overseas production of Taiwan's export orders (OPEO) on the performance of the country's four-digit manufacturing industries. The empirical findings are that a one percentage point increase in exports to China (including mainland China and Hong Kong) and other regions raises employment across industries by 0.07 and 0.14 percentage points, respectively. The estimate suggests annual employment increases of 4,801 and 9,951 workers stemming from the growth in exports to China and other regions over the period 2006-2011, respectively, accounting for 89% of the actual annual total increment in employment. Furthermore, a one percentage point increase in exports to other regions results in a 0.13 percentage point rise in the number of establishment units. The growth in exports to other regions prompts an increase in the number of establishment units by 368, accounting for 41% of actual annual incremental growth. However, Taiwan's exports to China have no significant effect on the increases in the number of establishment units and Taiwan's imports from China incur no significant changes in employment, the number of establishments and real wages in Taiwan. The larger creation in Taiwan's employment and establishments brought about by exports to other regions than that to China suggests that the relative importance of trade-induced effects are subject to factor mobility between trade partners. Additionally, although a one percentage point increase in OPEO leads to a slight 0.012 percentage points increase annually in average real wages during the same period, the long-run accumulated effect of overseas production is negative, i.e., an increased ratio of overseas production in mainland China to an industry's exports results in a decrease in the number of establishments in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：243-286資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系4篇名：總體審慎政策工具與臺灣房價的關係－特定目標信用工具與房市相關租稅工具的影響並列篇名：On Macroprudential Policies and Housing Prices in Taiwan: The Effects of Targeted Credit Policies and Housing-Related Tax Policies作者：陳柏如(Chen, Po-Ju)關鍵字：貸款負擔率;貸款成數;房市相關租稅政策;房價;追蹤資料共整合關係;Debt-to-Income Ratio;Loan-to-Value Ratio;Housing-Related Tax Policies;House Prices;Panel Cointegration期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：54卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文研究臺灣主管機關為管理房價而採用之總體審慎工具，包括房市相關租稅政策（即開徵特種貨物及勞務稅和調整房屋稅課徵內容）；以及特定目標信用政策（包括提高房貸風險權數、訂定貸款成數上限與貸款負擔率上限），對臺灣房價表現有何影響。本文研究發現房市相關租稅工具中，提高房屋稅稅率對臺灣實質房價有負面影響，然奢侈稅的施行影響卻不顯著。而特定目標信用工具中，貸款成數及貸款負擔率皆與臺灣實質房價間有顯著正向相關性；但提高房貸風險權數則未對房價造成顯著影響。本文研究發現不同政策工具調控臺灣房價的效果不盡相同，則主管機關在調控房價時若能考量工具效果的差異配套使用，整體效果當可更貼近央行穩定金融的政策目標。英文摘要：This paper reveals how macroprudential policies, including housing-related tax policies and targeted credit policies, affect housing prices in Taiwan. Policies intended to limit the growth of housing credit are categorized as ”targeted credit policies,” which include the imposition of a maximum DTI ratio and a maximum LTV ratio and increasing risk weights for mortgages, while the tax policies to influence the cost of purchasing or possessing a house are categorized as ”housing-related tax policies,” such as stamp duties and property tax. The results of this paper show that raising the property tax rate has a significant negative effect on housing prices, whereas the imposition of a stamp fee and increasing the risk weights for mortgages do not impact housing prices in Taiwan. Moreover, tightening targeted credit policies, including lowering the maximum LTV and DTI ratios, can cause housing prices in Taiwan to fall. The results provide evidence for differences in the effects of macroprudential policies in Taiwan and suggest that a combination of policies can promote resilience in financial market.起始頁-結束頁：287-330資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系5篇名：Solving Stray-Animal Problems by Economic Policies並列篇名：解決流浪動物問題的經濟政策作者：劉曦敏(Liu, Shi-Miin);陳孝琪(Hsiao-Chi Chen)關鍵字：Stray Animals;Externality;Tax;Subsidy;Perfect Competition;Imperfect Competition;流浪動物;外部性;稅;補貼;完全競爭;不完全競爭期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：54卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This paper investigates optimal economic policies, that deal with stray animals. We construct a two-stage game to characterize the interactions among the regulator, pet shops, and consumers. In particular, we employ a simple Hotelling (1929) model to endogenize the behaviors of dog/cat purchasers and adopters and show that the regulator may tax or subsidize pet-animal buyers if it aims to maximize social welfare in an imperfectly competitive pet-animal market. On the other hand, taxing pet-animal buyers is the regulator's best choice in a perfectly competitive pet-animal market. These results hold under both linear and quadratic breeding-cost and strays' environmental-damage functions. By contrast, when the regulator is targeting to minimize the number of stray animals, taxing dog/cat buyers is the best choice. This outcome holds whether the pet-animal market is perfectly or imperfectly competitive and whether the breeding-cost and strays' environmental-damage functions are linear or quadratic.英文摘要：本文嘗試探討處理流浪動物的最適經濟政策。我們建構了一個兩階段的賽局，用以刻劃主管機關、寵物店和消費者之間的互動。尤其，一個簡單的Hotelling模型可用來將購買與領養寵物者的行為內生化。我們的結果顯示，當社會福利的極大化是目標且寵物市場為不完全競爭時，主管機關可以對寵物的購買者課稅或進行補貼。另一方面，當寵物市場為完全競爭時，主管機關應該對購買寵物者課稅。相對地，當流浪動物數目的極小化是目標時，對寵物的購買者課稅是主管機關的最佳選擇。無論寵物的飼養成本和流浪動物造成的環境代價是線性的或二次式的函數型態，也無論寵物市場為完全或不完全競爭，這個結果都成立。起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系6篇名：政府貪腐、非意欲產出與國家生產效率－空間分量迴歸模型之應用並列篇名：Corruption, Undesirable Output, and Efficiency: The Application of Spatial Quantile Regression作者：林俊宏(Lin, Chun-Hung);林河山(Ho-Shan Lin)關鍵字：政府貪腐;非意欲產出;國家生產效率;空間分量迴歸;Corruption;Undesirable Output;Efficiency;Spatial Quantile Regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：54卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文使用兩種資料包絡分析(data envelopment analysis, DEA)方法來估計國家生產效率，一為不考慮非意欲產出的生產效率，另一為考慮二氧化碳的排放量做為非意欲產出計算所得出之生產效率。我們比較兩種生產效率，發現歐洲國家近年來對環境所投入之人力、物力已見成效，此與以往相關之文獻結果不同。本研究進一步採用空間分量迴歸模型來分析影響國家生產效率的因素，本模型可同時解決資料具空間相關性及異質性的問題，在分析時可避免偏誤的問題，結果證實此模型之適用性優於傳統迴歸模型。由模型推估結果發現，若以不計非意欲產出之生產效率做為應變數時，我們發現低生產效率國家有顯著空間相關性，高生產效率國家則無；貪腐程度則對高生產效率的國家影響較大，外人直接投資對低效率國家之影響較為顯著，貿易量則可能對高生產效率的國家有負向的影響。若以考量非意欲產出之生產效率來看，發現空間相關性仍存在，惟效率最低的國家將無法透過周邊國家的技術外溢獲得益處；而貪腐程度對高生產效率國家之負向影響將遠大於低效率的國家，此乃因為高效率國家之貪腐程度越高將使得二氧化碳排放增加。此外，最低生產效率的國家將不再經由外人直接投資獲益。最後，我們發現提高貿易量反而可能引發低效率國家之生產效率降低。英文摘要：This article uses two types of the DEA (data envelopment analysis) method to estimate the production efficiency of countries: one does not consider undesirable output, and the other one considers carbon dioxide as an undesirable output. By comparing the results from these two types of efficiency estimation, we find that the efforts by European countries in recent years have paid off, which is different from results in the past literature. This study employs a spatial quantile regression model to analyze the factors affecting the efficiency of national production. The model solves the problem of data exhibiting spatial correlation and heterogeneity and therefore avoids biased estimations. We show that the degree of corruption affecting high production efficiency countries is more significant, that foreign direct investment has a significant effect for less efficient countries, and that trade might have a negative impact for highly productive countries. By considering undesirable output, when spatial correlation does exist, the least efficient countries do not get the benefits through technology spillover from adjacent countries. The extent of corruption influences highly productive countries more negatively than inefficient countries, because the high degree of corruption in higher productive countries allows for an increase in carbon dioxide emissions. In addition, the least productive countries no longer benefit from foreign direct investment. Finally, we note that an increase in trade likely leads to lower production efficiency in less efficient countries.起始頁-結束頁：29-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系7篇名：租稅協定、資訊交通條款與跨國公司的海外營運活動並列篇名：Tax Treaty, Exchange-of-Information Clauses, and Overseas Activities of Multinational Corporations作者：陳香梅(Chen, Shinemay);黃庭欣(Ting-Hsin Huang)關鍵字：租稅協定;資訊交換;直接投資;漁獵協定;跨國公司;Tax Treaty;Exchange of Tax Information;Foreign Direct Investment;Treaty Shopping;Multinational Company期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：54卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：簽署租稅協定有助於增加對外投資的主張在實證文獻上並未得到一致的論斷。會有如此不一致的結果，文獻大都會歸因於租稅協定內容涵蓋了減輕重複課稅及防杜逃稅與避稅兩個同時存在但又互相衝突的目的。本文以2000年至2013年臺灣上市公司在79個國家所設立之6,960家海外關係企業的財務資料，首度探討租稅協定的資訊交換條款對臺灣上市公司海外子公司營運活動的影響。透過固定效果模型進行估計，結果顯示較嚴格的資訊交換規範就是降低海外營運活動的重要因素之一。英文摘要：Tax authorities often emphasize the role of tax treaties in promoting foreign investment through double taxation relief. This paper adds to the literature by examining the impact of tax treaty and exchange-of-information clauses in foreign affiliate activity (measured by affiliate sales) of Taiwanese listed companies. Using 2000-2013 financial data of 6,960 subsidiaries located in 79 countries, we find that the foreign affiliate activity in countries that have tax treaties with Taiwan decreases. Higher standards of exchange of information for tax purposes play a vital role for this negative and significant result.起始頁-結束頁：73-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系01篇名：Embracing Diversity in Nursing Research Methods作者：Cheryl Chia-Hui CHEN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷6期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：375-375資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003042篇名：Efficacy of an Ergonomic Ankle Support Aid for Squatting Position in Improving Pushing Skills and Birth Outcomes During the Second Stage of Labor: A Randomized Controlled Trial作者：Yu-Ching LIN;Meei-Ling GAU;Ghi-Hwei KAO;Hung-Chang LEE關鍵字：squatting with ankle support;squatting;second stage of labor;pushing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The physical positions that are adopted by women during childbirth significantly impact their childbirth outcomes and experiences. Literature studies have associated using a squatting position with reduced childbirth pain and increased comfort and pushing efficiency. However, the major disadvantage of the squatting position is that women may lack the muscular fitness and stamina necessary to sustain this position for a long period. Purpose: The aim of this study was to compare the pushing experiences and birth outcomes of three different pushing positions during the second stage of labor. Methods: A randomized controlled trial was conducted at a regional teaching hospital in northern Taiwan. Data were collected from 168 primiparous women during the 38th to 42nd gestational weeks. None of the participants received epidural analgesia during labor, and all were free of pregnancy and labor-related complications. During labor, after full cervical dilation and when the fetal head had descended to at least the +1 station and had turned to the occiput anterior position, the experimental group was asked to push in the squatting position while using the ergonomically designed ankle support. For purposes of comparison, Comparison Group A was asked to push in the squatting position without the use of the support, and Comparison Group B was asked to push in a standard semirecumbent position. All of the participants completed a demographic and obstetrics data sheet, the short-form McGill Pain Questionnaire, and the Labor Pushing Experience scale within 4 hours postpartum. Results: In terms of delivery time, the duration between the start of pushing to crowning for the experimental group (squatting with ankle supports) averaged 25.79 minutes less (F = 6.02, p G .05) than the time for Comparison Group B (semirecumbent). The duration between the start of pushing to infant birth averaged 25.21 minutes less for the experimental group than for Comparison Group B (F = 6.14, p G .05). Moreover, the experimental group had a lower average visual analog scale pain score (5.05 T 3.22) than Comparison Group B (F = 42.67, p G .001), and the average McGill pain score for the experimental group was lower than both comparison groups (F = 18.12, p G .001). The participants in the group that delivered from a squatting position with ankle support had better labor pushing experiences than the comparison groups (F = 14.69, p G .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: In comparison with both unsupported squatting and semirecumbent pushing, squatting with the aid of ergonomically designed ankle supports reduced pushing times, ameliorated labor pain, and improved the pushing experience. Thus, this intervention may reduce the caring needs of women during the second stage of labor. This intervention may be introduced in midwifery education programs and in clinical practice as a method to improve the care of women during the second stage of labor.起始頁-結束頁：376-384資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002623篇名：Testing the Psychometric Properties of the Postpartum Sleep Quality Scale in Turkish Women作者：Ilkay BOZ;Nida SELVI關鍵字：psychometric properties;postpartum women;Turkish Postpartum Sleep Quality Scale期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Postpartum sleeplessness has been observed to be an important health problem in Turkey. However, no scale is currently available to evaluate quality of sleep in Turkish postpartum women. Purpose: The aim of this study was to test the validity and reliability of the Turkish Postpartum Sleep Quality Scale (T-PSQS). Methods: The sample of this methodological study surveyed 100 women during their first 2 postpartum weeks. Data were obtained using a personal characteristics form and the PSQS. The PSQS is a 5-point scale ranging from 0 to 4. The validity of the PSQS was tested using content validity index and confirmatory and exploratory factor analyses, and the reliability of the scale was tested using Cronbach's alpha. Results: The opinions of eight experts were canvassed to test the validity of the T-PSQS. The content validity index showed that the scale had high validity (.92). The factor analysis that was conducted to test the construct validity of the scale indicated that the scale was composed of three factors with eigenvalues over 1.00 and that the total Cronbach's alpha coefficient was .88. The Cronbach's alpha for the subscales ”Infant night care-related daytime dysfunction,” ”Physical symptoms-related sleep inefficiency,” and ”Sleep quality or sleep” were .82, .86, and .80, respectively. Conclusions: Content validity, construct validity, and reliability analyses of the T-PSQS revealed that the scale may be used to measure postpartum sleeplessness levels and sleep quality in Turkish women.起始頁-結束頁：385-392資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002534篇名：An Outpatient Heart Failure Clinic Reduces 30-Day Readmission and Mortality Rates for Discharged Patients: Process and Preliminary Outcomes作者：Kristin Danielle KOSER;Lisa S. BALL;Jennifer K. HOMA;Vinay MEHTA關鍵字：heart failure;outpatient clinic;readmission;inpatient mortality;palliative care期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The first outpatient heart failure clinic (HFC) in Western New York was developed within a large private cardiology practice with the objective of reducing 30-day all-cause rehospitalization and inpatient mortality. Purpose: The aim of this study was to analyze the process and patient outcomes of this independent outpatient HFC. The specific aims were to (a) describe the outpatient care strategies employed and (b) determine whether the HFC reduced 30-day all-cause rehospitalizations and inpatient mortality by comparing HFC data with census data. Methods: This study used a retrospective chart analysis of 415 adults who had been enrolled in the target HFC after hospitalization for HF. Data were summarized using frequency comparisons and descriptive statistics. One-sample chi-square tests were conducted to test the observed values in the study sample against census data. Results: Patients in the HFC were less likely to experience a readmission to hospital within 30 days of discharge (69% reduction within the study period, p G .001). Patients were seen acutely after discharge, had multiple medication adjustments, and received ongoing telephonic follow-up. The HFC had statistically lower inpatient mortality rates (1.2%vs. 11.6% national average, p G .001), likely a result of the HFC care regimen and referrals for palliative care (17%). Conclusions: The results of this analysis highlight the importance of developing an outpatient HFC in collaboration with hospitals that is aimed at reducing 30-day all-cause readmissions and inpatient mortality, with referral to palliative care when indicated.起始頁-結束頁：393-398資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002605篇名：Validity and Reliability of the Korean Version of the Dialysis Symptom Index for Hemodialysis Patients作者：Mi-Kyoung CHO;Young KIM;Hye Yeung SHIM關鍵字：kidney failure;chronic;renal dialysis;quality of life;symptom assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Hemodialysis patients experience physical and psychosocial symptoms caused by comorbid illnesses, treatment-related side effects, lifestyle alteration, and the psychosocial impacts of living with end-stage renal disease. The Dialysis Symptom Index (DSI) is the most frequently used instrument to assess symptoms of chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal disease in patients. Purpose: The aims of this study were to develop the Korean version of the DSI, to verify the reliability and validity of the developed tool, and to use the tool to evaluate the symptoms of hemodialysis patients in Korea. Methods: A methodological study was performed on 230 hemodialysis patients from three hospitals who agreed to participate in the study from October 1 to 30, 2015. The Symptom Checklist- 90-Revised was used to verify the convergent validity, whereas the total score of Kidney Disease Quality of Life Questionnaire- Short Form, Version 1.3, was used to verify the divergent validity. Data were analyzed using descriptive analysis, Cronbach's alpha, confirmatory factor analysis, and Pearson's correlation analysis. Results: The internal consistency reliability of the Korean DSI assessed by Cronbach's alpha was .90. The Korean DSI showed a high positive correlation coefficient of .80with symptom severity using the Symptom Checklist-90-Revised, which confirmed the convergent validity. Finally, the correlation coefficient with the quality of life of the participants using the Kidney Disease Quality of Life Questionnaire-Short Form, Version 1.3, was -.68, which confirmed the divergent validity. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study developed the Korean version of the DSI and verified its validity and reliability. The Korean version of the DSI showed good properties and may be used to assess the symptoms of hemodialysis patients. Nurses may use this self-report tool to better understand and help relieve the prevalence and severity of symptoms in hemodialysis patients in Korea.起始頁-結束頁：399-410資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002676篇名：Significant Effect of Acupressure in Elevating Blood Stem Cell Factor During Chemotherapy in Patients With Gynecologic Cancer作者：Ya-Wen SHIH;Shun-Fa YANG;Ming-Hsien CHIEN;Ching-Wen CHANG;Vincent H. S. CHANG;Hsiu-Ting TSAI關鍵字：acupressure;hematopoietic regulation;gynecologic cancer;myelosuppression期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Chemotherapy is used mainly to treat and control the progression of gynecological cancer. Bone marrow suppression, one of the adverse side effects of chemotherapy, may decrease immune function, increasing the risk of serious, fatal infections. Purpose: The aims of this study were to evaluate the effectiveness of noninvasive acupressure in preventing and diminishing chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression in patients with gynecologic cancer and to determine whether this effect is associated with the regulation of the expressions of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and stem cell factor (SCF). Methods: In total, 28 women with gynecological cancer were randomly assigned either to the experimental group (n = 10) or to the control group (n = 18). The experimental group received acupressure of 5-minute duration to the Hegu (LI4), Quchi (LI11), Xuehai (SP10), Sanyinjiao (SP6), Taixi (K3), Zusanli (ST36), Taichong (LR3), and Baihui (GV20) points, respectively, three times per day for 6 weeks. The control group did not receive the acupressure intervention. The blood count, including white blood cells, platelets, and hemoglobin, and serum levels for SCF and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor were assessed before (pretest) and 6 weeks after (posttest) the participants' first course of chemotherapy. Results: At posttest, blood hemoglobin had significantly decreased from(mean T SD) 11.6 T 2.2 to 10.8 T1.6 mg/dl (p = .03) in the control group. However, no significant pretestYposttest difference in hemoglobin concentration (11.4 T 1.0 vs. 10.9 T 1.1 mg/dl) was detected in the experimental group. Levels of SCF increased significantly between pretest and posttest in both the control group (from 1196.10 T 293.17 to 1325.05 T 253.77 ng/ml; p = .01) and the acupressure group (from 1046.78 T 469.52 to 1387.06 T 310.00 ng/ml; p = .007). In addition, a borderline difference (p = .05) in mean pretest-posttest SCF increase was found between the acupressure group (340.28 T 255.46 ng/ml) and the control group (128.94 T 250.64 ng/ml). Finally, a significant time-dependent interactive effect was found between acupressure and the increased blood level of SCF at posttest (” = 211.34, p = .02). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings support that acupressure on specific acupoints increases blood SCF levels significantly, which may help protect chemotherapy patients from experiencing reduced hemoglobin levels and may relieve chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression in patients with gynecologic cancer. This noninvasive approach is suggested for practical implementation in patients undergoing a course of chemotherapy.起始頁-結束頁：411-419資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002577篇名：Knowledge of the Warning Signs of Foot Ulcer Deterioration Among Patients With Diabetes作者：Yen-Fan CHIN;Jiun-Ting YEH;Hsing-Yi YU;Li-Chueh WENG關鍵字：diabetic foot;foot ulcer;knowledge;scale;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Seeking treatment in a timely manner may prevent lower limb amputation subsequent to diabetic foot ulcers. Knowledge regarding the warning signs is one important factor that is related to the timely treatment seeking of patients with diabetic foot ulcers. However, there is no previous research on which aspects of such knowledge that patients with diabetes are lacking. Purpose: The aims of this study were to test the psychometric properties of a questionnaire that was designed to assess the knowledge of the warning signs of diabetic foot ulcer deterioration and to determine the knowledge of these warning signs among patients with a history of diabetic foot ulcers. Methods: A cross-sectional study design was used. Patients with a history of diabetic foot ulcers were recruited using convenience sampling (N = 385). Data were analyzed using Spearman's rank correlation and the Mann-Whitney U test. Results: The questionnaire showed good known-group validity, satisfied internal consistency (Kuder-Richardson Formula 20 = .82), and exhibited acceptable 2-week test-retest reliability (Spearman's rho coefficient = .75). More than 30% of the participants were unaware of the warning signs of peripheral vascular insufficiency and severe infection. Of the participants, 75.8% felt that the time to seek medical treatment of diabetic foot ulcers was when they experienced wound deterioration. Those who held this opinion had significantly less knowledge regarding the warning signs of diabetic foot ulcer deterioration than did those who had not. Other factors that were significantly associated with less knowledge included being older, having less education, not having an existing foot ulcer, having no foot ulcer treatment history, and never having received education regarding foot ulcers. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The questionnaire showed adequate validity and reliability and thus may be used by healthcare practitioners and researchers to assess the knowledge of at-risk patients regarding the warning signs of diabetic foot ulcer deterioration. Patient education regarding the importance of timely treatment seeking and warning signs should be promoted.起始頁-結束頁：420-426資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002588篇名：The Benefits of Continuous Leisure Participation in Relocation Adjustment Among Residents of Long-Term Care Facilities作者：Li-Jung LIN;Hsin-Yen YEN關鍵字：aging;continuity theory;elderly;leisure activity;mental health期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The rising population of older adults is transforming Taiwan society. Although many long-term care facilities now operate for older adults, the transition from the home environment to long-term facilities may cause multiple issues, including relocation stress syndrome, for new residents. Autonomy is a critical element of the human experience. Leisure, as an expression of autonomy, has been shown to enhance self-image and promote feelings of competence and mastery. Purpose: The aim of this study was to assess the relationship between participation in leisure activities and adjustment to residential care using the continuity theory. Methods: One hundred sixty-three qualified individuals from 11 long-term care institutions were recruited and completed the questionnaire. The sampling criteria for the study were age (55+ years), appropriate cognitive skills, and residency (less than 5 years). Interviews conducted by trained interviewers were used to collect data. Measured outcomes included leisure participation; physical, psychological, and social adjustments; and background information. Cluster analysis, descriptive analysis, multivariate analysis of variance, and least significant difference test were used in analysis. Results: Type of admission (voluntary/mandated) and type of leisure participation significantly affected the level of relocation adjustment success. Four leisure behavior categories were identified, including reduced participation, expanded participation, active participation, and continuing participation. The participants in the active and continuing participation categories had significantly higher psychological adjustment than their peers in the reduced participation category. Moreover, the continuing participation category had a significantly better level of social adjustment than their expanded participation category peers. Continuous and active participation categories had a beneficial outcome in relocation adjustment. Conclusions: The findings support that, in general, residents of long-term care facilities who participate continuously in leisure activities adjust better psychologically and socially to their new life in these facilities than individuals in the other participation categories. As continuity of participation in leisure activities is important for successful aging, institutions should facilitate the continuing leisure behavior of new residents.起始頁-結束頁：427-437資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002639篇名：Trends in Urodynamic Procedures, Surgical Procedures, and Overall Health Resource Utilization in the Adult Taiwanese Population With Urinary Incontinence: A Secondary Data Analysis作者：Lan-Fang HSU;Ling-Yin CHANG;Yuan-Mei LIAO;Shauh-Der YEH;Pei-Shan TSAI關鍵字：urinary incontinence;urodynamic procedures;surgical procedures;healthcare utilization;National Health Insurance Research Database期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The prevalence and incidence of the main risk factors for urinary incontinence (UI) have both increased over time. In addition, official statistics indicate that Taiwan is on course to evolve from an aging society into an aged society within the next decade. However, most of the studies in the literature that address the natural history of UI target Western and other non-Asian populations. Taiwan lacks knowledge of the natural history of UI. Purpose: The aims of this research were to study the trends in the use of urodynamic and surgical procedures for various subtypes of UI and to investigate the relationship between UI and healthcare resource utilization. Methods: The data on 1 million, randomly selected people who were enrolled in the Taiwan National Health Insurance program between 2000 and 2008 were extracted from the Longitudinal Health Insurance Database. The population and all procedures were identified based on the International Classification of Disease, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification codes. Annual incidence of UI was calculated on an annual basis, and trend analysis was performed using logistic regression models. The association between UI and healthcare utilization was examined using generalized linear models in a gamma distribution with a log link function. Results: Overall, the trend in the annual incidence for all types of UI increased significantly (p ＜ .01). Significantly increasing trends in the use of urodynamic procedures over time were observed for mixed and other types of UI (p ＜ .01). In addition, a significantly increasing trend was observed in the annual rates of surgical procedures that were received by patients with urge or stress UI (p ＜ .05). Patients with UI showed significantly higher healthcare resource utilization, including number of ambulatory visits, number of hospitalizations, average ambulatory care expenditures, and average days of hospitalization, than those without UI. However, limited information is available on the conservative treatment of UI in the database. Conclusions: UI symptoms may lead to increased healthcare resource utilization in patients with UI.起始頁-結束頁：438-445資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000025410篇名：Aging, Women, Poverty, and Health作者：Bih-Ching SHU期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：307-307資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000028811篇名：Correlations Among Self-Rated Health, Chronic Disease, and Healthcare Utilization in Widowed Older Adults in Taiwan作者：Shu-Hsi HO關鍵字：self-rated health;multinomial logistic regression;widowers;widows期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Taiwan has a rapidly aging population. It is well known that older adults usually have worse health than younger adults, with widowed older adults at a particularly high risk of poor health. Widowed older adults experience the effects of bereavement, which affects their health. Therefore, health topics related to widowed older adults deserve special attention. Purpose: The aim of this study was to discuss self-rated health for chronic diseases and healthcare utilization among widowed older adults. Methods: A cross-section of data was used to analyze self-rated health-related issues. Data were adopted from the National Health Interview Survey in Taiwan, with the data on adults aged 65 years and over extracted and included in the assessment. Multinomial logistic regression models were used to investigate the relationships between healthcare utilization and self-rated health and chronic disease variables. Results: The main empirical results show worse self-rated health status among widowed older adults in comparison with their nonwidowed peers and worse health status for widowers than widows. Next, age was negatively correlated with health rating, whereas a positive correlation with health was found for education. In addition, chronic diseases, particularly stroke, were found to be a significant predictive factor related to poor health status. Similar results were observed for healthcare utilization, apart from traditional Chinese medicine. Older adults who habitually purchased and used traditional Chinese medicine were shown to enjoy relatively better health statuses. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: These findings identified that chronic diseases and healthcare utilization correlated strongly with self-rated health for widowed older adults. Therefore, self-rated health may be used as a screening tool by the National Health Insurance System in Taiwan, and the results may be referenced by public health officials who are responsible for developing welfare strategies to promote healthy aging among the widowed in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：308-315資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000024812篇名：Social Support and Health-Related Quality of Life Among Elderly Individuals Living Alone in South Korea: A Cross-Sectional Study作者：Jiyun KIM;Jong-Eun LEE關鍵字：elderly;living alone;quality of life;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is an important component of healthy aging. Elderly individuals living alone with health risks have rapidly increased in South Korea. Inadequate social support has been associated with poor HRQoL in elderly individuals who are currently living alone. Although studies of HRQoL in elderly subjects who live alone have been conducted, studies of the relationships between social support and HRQoL have rarely targeted the elderly individuals living alone. Purpose: The aim of this study was to identify the factors that are related to HRQoL among the elderly individuals living alone in South Korea. Methods: A cross-sectional study design was used. Five hundred seventeen elderly individuals who were living alone in community dwellings and aged 65 years or older were included. The structured questionnaires included the 12-item Short-Form Health Survey,Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support, demographic characteristics, health status, and behavior factors. A descriptive analysis and hierarchical multivariate logistic regression were conducted to examine significant correlations between the variables. Results: The mean score of the Physical Component Summary was 43.00 (T 4.82), and the mean score of the Mental Component Summary (MCS) was 45.94 (T 7.21). After controlling for demographic characteristics, health status, and behavior factors, support from significant others was negatively associated with the Physical Component Summary scores, whereas support from significant others, family, and friends was positively associated with the MCS scores. Conclusions: Social support emerged as an important factor in the HRQoL domains of the MCS of the participants. Future interventions should focus more on implementing effective social support strategies to improve HRQoL in elderly individuals who live alone.起始頁-結束頁：316-323資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000024113篇名：Effect of a Delayed Start to Oral Feeding on Feeding Performance and Physiological Responses in Preterm Infants: A Randomized Clinical Trial作者：Yu-Wen WANG;Hsiao-Ying HUNG;Chyi-Her LIN;Chi-Jane WANG;Yuh-Jyh LIN;Ying-Ju CHANG關鍵字：bottle feeding;cardiorespiratory response;feeding performance;preterm infant;transition time期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The efficient and safe oral feeding of preterm infants, an essential criterion for hospital discharge, is affected by neurodevelopmental maturation. However, the timing of initiating oral feeding and its relation to maturation, feeding performance, and physiological responses are unclear. Purpose: The aim of this study was to determine the effect of a 1-week delay in the initiation of oral feeding on feeding performance, transition time, weight gain, and cardiorespiratory responses in preterm infants. Methods: In this randomized controlled trial, 40 infants with a gestational age at birth of less than 32 weeks were recruited. The control group (n = 18) began oral feeding when the infants were physiologically stable, whereas the experimental group (n = 22) began oral feeding 1 week later. Infant feeding performance, heart rate, and oxygen saturation were measured before, during, and after feeding on the first day of oral feeding and 3 days later. Daily weight gain was calculated by measuring body weight every morning, and transition time was calculated by counting the number of days from the initiation of oral feeding to the termination of tube feeding. Results: There were no significant differences between the two groups in terms of feeding performance, weight gain, or postmenstrual age at the completion of full oral feeding. The transition time was significantly shorter in the experimental group than in the control group. More infants in the control group experienced episodes of oxygen desaturation during feeding than in the experimental group. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: For infants with a postmenstrual age of greater than 32 weeks who are ready to initiate oral feeding, postponing oral bottle feeding for 1 week may be considered as an intervention to reduce physiological distress.起始頁-結束頁：324-331資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000024314篇名：Factors Influencing Postpartum Fatigue in Vaginal-Birth Women: Testing a Path Model作者：Ching-Hsing HSIEH;Chien-Lan CHEN;Tan-Ju HAN;Pei-Ju LIN;Hui-Chun CHIU關鍵字：vaginal birth;perineal pain;the second stage of labor;postpartum fatigue期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Postpartum fatigue is a very common complaint among postpartum women. Although current evidence indicates that several factors (e.g., parity, epidural analgesia, perineal trauma, perineal pain, and longer second stage of labor) are associated with postpartum, not enough is known about the relationships among these physical factors simultaneously and how they contribute to the development of postpartum fatigue. Increased awareness of the complex relationships among these factors will help nurses assess, prevent, and alleviate postpartum fatigue. Purpose: The aims of this study were to test a model of factors that influence postpartum fatigue and to estimate the direct and indirect effects of these factors on postpartum fatigue in vaginal-birth women. Methods: The hypothesized model of the factors that influence postpartum fatigue after vaginal birth was developed based on previous studies. This study used a cross-sectional correlational design and convenience sampling. The Visual Analog Scale for Pain was used to measure postpartum perineal pain, and the Postpartum Fatigue Scale was used to assess postpartum fatigue via a structured, self-report questionnaire. Data analysis included descriptive statistics, Pearson's correlation coefficients, and path analysis. Results: This study evaluated 326 healthy postpartum women within the first day after vaginal birth. Participants ranged from 20 to 43 years old, and 50.9%were primiparous. The model of the factors influencing postpartum fatigue after vaginal birth showed a good fit with the empirical data. Parity and the use of epidural analgesia predicted the duration of the second stage of labor, and the degree of perineal trauma predicted perineal pain. Participants who had experienced longer durations of the second stage of labor and more perineal pain reported higher levels of early postpartum fatigue. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: It is suggested that maternal nurses should better understand postpartum fatigue, take precautions to decrease perineal pain, and pay more attention to the longer duration of the second stage of labor to minimize postpartum fatigue, increase patient comfort, and improve the quality of perinatal care.起始頁-結束頁：332-339資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000024915篇名：Psychometric Evaluation of the Chinese Respiratory Distress Observation Scale on Critically Ill Patients With Cardiopulmonary Diseases作者：Ya-Hsiang CHAN;Hua-Shan WU;Chih-Ching YEN;Margaret L. CAMPBELL關鍵字：critically ill patients;cardiopulmonary diseases;respiratory distress;reliability;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Respiratory distress is a common and distressing experience that strikes most critically ill patients with cardiopulmonary diseases. Now, most dyspnea assessment tools rely on patient's self-report. Only one instrument, the Respiratory Distress Observation Scale (RDOS), is valid for assessing respiratory distress when the patient cannot provide a dyspnea self-report. Purpose: The aims of this study were to develop the Chinese version of RDOS through two-way translation and examine its reliability and validity. Methods: The first step was the translation and back-translation to establish the Chinese RDOS and examine the semantic equivalence between the back-translation version and the original one. The second step was the psychometric testing of the Chinese RDOS including internal reliability, interrater reliability, concurrent validity, convergent validity, and content and construct validity. Results: The Chinese RDOS was reported with an internal consistency (Cronbach's α value) of .73, an interobserver reliability of .97, and a content validity index of .97. In the conscious critically ill patients, significant correlations were found between the Chinese RDOS and Spielberger State Anxiety Inventory scores or Dyspnea Vertical Visual Analog Scale scores (r = .69 and r = .76, respectively; p G .001). In the unconscious critically ill patients, there was a significantly positive correlation between the Chinese RDOS scores and fraction of inspiration O_2 (r = .26, p G .05) and a significantly negative correlation between the Chinese RDOS scores and saturation peripheral oxygen (SpO_2; r = -.42, p = .001). In addition, it also could effectively identify the dyspnea differences between the first and last days in the intensive care units (p G .001). Conclusions: The Chinese RDOS showed good reliability and validity in conscious critically ill patients. The assessment with the Chinese RDOS could be completed within a short period no matter whether the assessor has nursing background in respiratory care or not. It could help the professionals systematically manage and track the change of respiratory distress in patients.起始頁-結束頁：340-347資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000025016篇名：Lifestyle in Visually Impaired or Blind Massage Therapists: A Preliminary Study作者：Shu-Ling HUNG;Mei-Fang CHEN;Yu-Hua LIN;Chia-Chan KAO;Ya-Wen CHANG;Hui-Shan CHAN關鍵字：visually impaired or blind;massage therapist;lifestyle.期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Lifestyle is among the most important factors affecting individual health status. Limited access to health information may limit the ability of people with visual impairment or blindness to practice healthy lifestyles. However, no studies have investigated how lifestyle practices affect health specifically in visually impaired and blind populations. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the lifestyle behaviors of visually impaired and blind massage therapists (VIBMTs) in Taiwan. Methods: This exploratory study used a purposive sampling technique to recruit 50 VIBMTs who were employed at massage stations in southern Taiwan. All of the participants completed the Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile II (HPLP-II) and a survey of demographic characteristics. Descriptive and inferential statistical tests, including the Mann－Whitney U test and the Kruskal－Wallis H test, were used. Statistical significance was defined as p G .05 in two-tailed tests. Results: Fifty participants completed both the HPLP-II and the demographic survey. The mean subscale score for the HPLP-II was 2.52 T 0.37. The lowest scores were on the physical activity (2.09 T 0.67) and nutrition (2.35 T 0.39) subscales, and the highest scores were on the spiritual growth (2.89 T 0.56) and interpersonal relations (2.79 T 0.46) subscales. Scores on the stress management and physical activity subscales were significantly higher in men than in women (p G .05). In addition, mean HPLP-II scores were significantly higher in VIBMTs who exercised regularly compared with those who did not (p G .05). Compared with nonsmokers, current smokers had significantly higher scores on the stress management subscale (p G .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The low physical activity scores in this population may be improved by developing physical activity programs for the home and workplace and by establishing community recreational and exercise facilities for visually impaired populations. The low scores for nutrition may be improved by establishing nutrition education programs that are designed specifically for VIBMTs to increase their consumption of fresh produce and other healthy foods and by requiring food manufacturers to use labels that may be easily read or understood by visually impaired populations.起始頁-結束頁：348-355資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000024217篇名：Attitude of Nursing Students Toward Scientific Research: A Cross-Sectional Study in Turkey作者：Seher UNVER;Remziye SEMERCI;Zeynep K<U+0131>z<U+0131>lc<U+0131>kOZKAN;Ilker AVCIBASI關鍵字：attitude;nursing;students;scientific research;education期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Nursing, a social applied science, is a dynamic profession. Professional nurses must be curious, investigative, and open to learning as well as practice critical and analytic thinking to sustain their professionalism. Purpose: The aim of this study was to determine the attitudes of nursing students toward scientific research. Methods: A descriptive and cross-sectional study design was used. This study was conducted at a nursing department of a university in Turkey. A sample of 375 nursing students participated. Data were collected using the ”Personal Information Form” and ”Attitude Scale towards Scientific Studies.” Standard descriptive statistical methods, correlation, Mann－Whitney U, Kruskal－Wallis, and post hoc Bonferroni were used in data analysis. Results: Nearly all (90.1%) of the participants were female, and 33.9% were sophomore (second-year) students. Junior (third-year) students held the most positive attitudes toward research, as compared with the participants in other academic years. Participants who had participated in scientific activities held more positive attitudes toward research than those who had not. Participants who had prior experience doing scientific research showed more positive attitudes toward research and researchers than those without this experience. Being older, having scientific research experience, following the continuous broadcasts related to nursing, and participating in scientific activities all significantly influenced attitude toward research (p G .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Although nursing students who participated in this study exhibited generally positive attitudes toward scientific research, they had relatively little experience participating in scientific activities. Therefore, to foster a positive scientific research culture among undergraduate students, grants should be provided that encourage wider participation in scientific activities and offer opportunities for undergraduate students to do scientific research.起始頁-結束頁：356-361資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000024418篇名：Relationship Between Maternal Characteristics and Postpartum Hemorrhage: A Meta-Analysis Study作者：Aysegul DURMAZ;Nuran KOMURCU關鍵字：meta-analysis;PPH;risk factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) is a leading cause of maternal death in low-income countries and the primary cause of approximately one of every four maternal deaths worldwide. Purpose: The aim of this study was to determine the antenatal risk factors of PPH and its effects. Methods: The literature from nine databases was reviewed, and studies published between 2000 and 2012 were analyzed using terms such as ”postpartum hemorrhage,” ”prevention of postpartum hemorrhage,” and ”management of postpartum hemorrhage.” The full text of 1,061 articles was reviewed, and 29 studies were selected according to the inclusion criteria. Studies that determined bias using the funnel plot test were excluded, and 20 studies were included in the meta-analysis. The data were analyzed using Microsoft Office Excel 2010 and comprehensive meta-analysis. Results: The meta-analysis included five studies and 1,286,752 women for maternal age, six studies and 607,822 women for body mass index, and six studies and 1,118,490 women for parity. The results of the analysis showed that body mass index Q 25.00 kg/m^2 (OR = 1.43, 95% CI [1.40, 1.47]), primiparity of mothers (OR = 1.37, 95% CI [1.35, 1.40]), and hypertensive disorder in mothers (OR = 1.52, 95% CI [1.43, 1.61]) are risk factors for the development of PPH. No rela-tionship was found between maternal age Q 35 years and PPH (OR = 1.02, 95% CI [0.99, 1.04]). Conclusions: Midwives, obstetric nurses, and obstetricians should carefully evaluate mothers for the risk factors of PPH during the antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum periods. Moreover, at-risk pregnant women should give birth in a unit with emergency initiative options. Future studies should examine relevant personal characteristics of mothers, as familiarity with the risk factors facilitates the management and treatment of PPH. Finally, meta-analyses should review more studies to detect risk factors more comprehensively.起始頁-結束頁：362-372資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000024519篇名：Letter to the Editor and Author Response of Assessment of a Health Promotion Model on Obese Turkish Children. The Journal of Nursing Research, 25(6), 436-446作者：Andrew W BROWN;David B ALLISON期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷5期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：373-374資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會20篇名：Translating Research Findings Into Practice: The Importance of Updating Knowledge作者：Mei-Ling YEH期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：227-227資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000028201篇名：The Challenges of Manpower in Long-Term Care: Intergenerational Learning Approach From Ageism to Caregiving作者：Li-Chan LIN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：228-230資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002812篇名：End-of-Life Care Discussion for Residents With Dementia in Long-Term Care Facilities作者：Hsiu-Li HUANG;Li-Chueh WENG;Wen-Yu HU;Yea-Ing Lotus SHYU;Wen-Pin YU;Kang-Hua CHEN關鍵字：long-term care facility;dementia;advance directives;end-of-life care;healthcare professionals期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Healthcare professionals play an important role in end-of-life care decisions. Although the factors affecting end-of-life care in long-term care facilities have been well studied in Western contexts, few studies have examined factors affecting end-of-life care discussions for residents with dementia among multidisciplinary professionals in Asian or Taiwanese contexts. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the factors related to the end-of-life care discussions of registered nurses, social workers, and physicians with residents with dementia and their families. Methods: This is a cross-sectional and correlational study. A stratified random sampling was conducted, and self-administered questionnaires were mailed to physicians, registered nurses, and social workers who work in long-term care facilities with accreditation ranks Q Grade A in Taiwan. Results: Questionnaires were returned by 478 participants (response rate = 94.1%). Fewer than 10% of the participants reported often discussing end-of-life care with residents with dementia and their families. Physicians were significantly more likely to discuss life-sustaining treatment than nurses and social workers. The frequency of professionals discussing advance directives and life-sustaining treatment for residents with dementia was predicted by higher confidence in end-of-life care skills and greater perceived facility support. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Most professionals did not frequently discuss end-of-life care with residents with dementia and their caregivers. Discussions of end-of-life care in long-term care facilities should be promoted by enhancing the confidence of these professionals in providing end-of-life care and creating a supportive environment for end-of-life discussions and care.起始頁-結束頁：231-241資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002403篇名：Perceptions of Diabetes Self-Care Management Among Older Singaporeans With Type 2 Diabetes: A Qualitative Study作者：Cherry Chay Lee TAN;Karis Kin Fong CHENG;Chee Fang SUM;Jasmine Sew Hong SHEW;Eleanor HOLYDARD;Wenru WANG關鍵字：perceptions;older adults;diabetes;self-care;Singapore期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Given the global shift in aging populations and the associated increasing prevalence of diabetes, it is critical to explore new approaches in diabetic self-care management. In Singapore, what has been overlooked to date is an in-depth, contextually based examination of the needs, expectations, and barriers faced in self-care management by older adults with Type 2 diabetes. Purpose: This study aimed to explore the experiences of older Singaporeans with Type 2 diabetes in diabetes self-care management to understand their perceived needs, expectations, and barriers associated with their diabetes self-care management. Methods: A descriptive qualitative approach using focus group discussions was adopted. Purposive sampling was used to recruit older adults with Type 2 diabetes from Singapore's three main ethnic groups, namely, Chinese, Malay, and Indian, through the diabetes centers of two hospitals. Four focus groups, including two groups of Chinese, one group of Malays, and one group of Indians, were conducted. Thematic analysis was used to analyze the data set for emerging themes that relate to the experiences of participants with diabetes self-care management. Results: The four major themes related to the experiences of participants with diabetes self-care management that emerged were as follows: (a) ”Diabetes is genetic, destined, and not serious; complication, let it come”; (b) ”Diabetes self-care is difficult”; (c) ”I don't know diabetes”; and (d) ”Doctor and nurses are important facilitators of self-care management.” Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Findings have important implications in Singapore as well as in other Asian countries where populations are also aging and diabetes prevalence is increasing. The findings provide new culturally focused insights for clinical patient education within the Southeast Asian context to improve diabetes self-care management of older adults.起始頁-結束頁：242-249資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002264篇名：Learning Needs of Hospitalized Patients With Heart Failure in Singapore: A Descriptive Correlational Study作者：Shu-Fen ONG;Pamela Pei-Mei FOONG;Juanna Shen-Hwei SEAH;Lavanya ELANGOVAN Wenru WANG關鍵字：heart failure;patient education;health education;Singapore期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Understanding the learning needs of patients with heart failure (HF) is important in reducing the incidence of HF-related hospital readmissions. Sociocultural differences are known to influence patient learning needs. However, most HF learning needs studies have been conducted on Western populations. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the learning needs of hospitalized patients with HF in Singapore. Methods: A cross-sectional, descriptive correlational design was adopted using a questionnaire survey that included the Heart Failure Learning Needs Inventory and sociodemographic and clinical datasheets. A convenience sample of 97 patients with HF was recruited from an acute hospital in Singapore. Results: Findings revealed that education topics relating to signs and symptoms, risk factors, general HF information, and medications were perceived by participants as the most important. Contrastingly, education topics relating to diet, activity, and psychological factors were poorly valued. The only significant demographic factor that was correlated to the patients’ learning needs was monthly household income, which correlated to education on HF risk factors and general HF information. Conclusions: This study supports the necessity of carefully prioritizing patient education topics in line with patient learning needs. Furthermore, education should be culturally sensitive and take into account the unique values, needs, and situations of patients.起始頁-結束頁：250-259資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002395篇名：Palliative Nursing for Cancer Patients as an Abstract Concept: A Hermeneutic Study作者：Leili BORIMNEJAD;Marjan MARDANI-HAMOOLEH;Naimeh SEYEDFATEMI;Mamak TAHMASEBI關鍵字：cancer;hermeneutic phenomenology;nurse;palliative care;patient期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Understanding the outcomes of palliative care (PC) that is provided to patients with cancer is necessary. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the lived experiences of Iranian nurses with regard to PC outcomes in cancer patients. Methods: This hermeneutic study interviewed 14 nurses to understand their lived experiences with regard to PC outcomes in cancer patients. A seven-stage process of data analysis was employed. Results: One constitutive pattern ”palliative nursing for cancer patients is an abstractive concept” and the two associated themes of ”providing excellent PC” and ”PC as an alarm” were identified. Providing excellent PC had two subthemes: being a unique nurse and experiencing the humanistic approach to caring. PC as an alarm also had two subthemes: caring-related concerns and challenging issues caused by caring. Conclusions: The findings provide a deeper understanding of the nursing experience with regard to PC outcomes in cancer patients.起始頁-結束頁：260-265資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002326篇名：Effects of a Psychoeducational Intervention in Patients With Breast Cancer Undergoing Chemotherapy作者：Pei-Hua WU;Shang-Wen CHEN;Wen-Tsung HUANG;Shu-Chan CHANG;Mei-Chi HSU關鍵字：psychoeducational intervention;breast cancer;self-efficacy;resilience;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Compelling evidence has yet to be published regarding the positive effect of psychoeducational interventions (PEIs) on psychological distress in patients with breast cancer. The impact of PEIs on self-efficacy, resilience, and quality of life is also unclear. Purpose: The aim of this study was to assess the effects of a PEI on anxiety, depression, disease-specific care knowledge, self-efficacy, resilience and quality of life in patients with breast cancer during and after chemotherapy. The intervention was administered before and during five rounds of chemotherapy treatment. Methods: A randomized controlled trial was conducted. Patients with breast cancer (N = 40) were randomly assigned to either the experimental or control group. The experimental group participated in PEI, a brief and highly structured program consisting of two parts: (a) an educational manual that addressed depression, anxiety, disease-specific care knowledge, self-efficacy, and resilience and (b) a self-assessment of learning. The control group received only traditional pamphlet education. Data were collected at four time points: before the first chemotherapy session (T1), during the third chemotherapy session (T2), during the fifth chemotherapy session (T3), and at 2 weeks after the final chemotherapy session (T4). Results: Anxiety, depression, resilience, and quality of life in the experimental group showed significant differences at T4. Significant differences became apparent at T2 for knowledge and at T3 for self-efficacy. The effects of knowledge, resilience, and quality of life remained significant when group and time interactions were included in the model, showing a positive relationship between PEI and the variables of knowledge, resilience, and quality of life. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Face-to-face PEI for patients with breast cancer is potentially effective in improving knowledge, resilience, and quality of life during and after chemotherapy. In the current study, PEI significantly improved disease care techniques, reduced chemotherapy-related discomfort, and improved quality of life for participants in the experimental group.起始頁-結束頁：266-279資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002527篇名：Neuropathic Pain Experiences of Spinal Cord Injury Patients作者：Chin-Ching LI;Hung-Ru LIN;Ming-Dar TSAI;Shiow-Luan TSAY關鍵字：neuropathic pain;pain experience;spinal cord injury期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Neuropathic pain (NP) is a common, severe problemthat affects spinal cord injury (SCI) patients. Only SCI patients truly understand the impact and extent of this type of pain. Purpose: The aim of this study was to understand the NP experienced by SCI patients and the influence of this type of pain on their daily life. Method: A qualitative design was used. An interview guide including a semistructured questionnaire and in-depth interviews was conducted with SCI patients with NP in a neurorehabilitation department at a medical center in northern Taiwan. The data were collected using a purposive sampling method. Content analysis was performed on the interview data, which were obtained from 13 SCI patients with NP. Results: Three themes and eight subthemes were identified that described the NP experience of the participants and the influence of NP on their daily life. The three themes included elusive pain (changing and individual pain sensations, erratically haunting threat, and phantom limb sensations), complicated feelings about pain (converting depression into an active attitude toward life, having feelings of anticipation and anxiety about future pain relief, and facing and experiencing pain), and renewed hope (bravely fighting pain and seeking pain relief methods). Conclusions: This study revealed three important themes of NP experienced by SCI patients, including elusive pain, complicated feelings about pain, and renewed hope. Nurses should understand the nature of NP, provide a thorough pain assessment, and design a proper pain management plan to care effectively for patients with NP.起始頁-結束頁：280-287資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002278篇名：A Multidisciplinary Program Reduces Over 24 Hours of Physical Restraint in Neurological Intensive Care Unit作者：Yu-Li LIN;Cheng-Chih LIAO;Wen-Pin YU;Tsung-Lan CHU;Lun-Hui HO關鍵字：multidisciplinary collaboration;intensive care unit;neurological care;patient safety;physical restraint期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Physical restraint (PR) has to be performed in a well-organized, structured, and careful manner. The safety and effectiveness of the PR procedure in clinical practice are crucial to patient care. Purposes: The aim of this study was to examine the effect in neurological intensive care units of a multidisciplinary PR reduction program on the overall incidence rate of PR, the monthly rate of PR, and the monthly rate of PR of more than and less than 24 hours, respectively, after controlling for associated factors. Methods: A before-and-after study design was conducted in three neurological intensive care units (total of 45 beds) of a medical center in northern Taiwan. A multidisciplinary PR reduction program was implemented, with four phases of data collection. Data on the number and duration of PR were extracted from a database. In the first preintervention phase, data on the rate (number or frequency) and duration of PR were collected for 12 months before program implementation. The next three data collection phases were 1 month (introduction), 3 months (intermediate), and 6 months (maintenance) after program implementation. The chi-square test, one-way analysis of variance with Scheffe’s post hoc tests, and logistic regression method were used for data analysis. Results: The results showed that PR was used 72.8 mean times per month before program implementation. After implementation, the mean times per month fell to 40 after the first postimplementation month (introduction), 53.3 after 3 months (intermediate), and 36.2 after 6 months (maintenance). Implementation of the PR reduction program resulted in a decreased incidence rate of PR from 6.1% to 3.2% (event/total patient day) and a decrease in the percentage of patients who were restrained for more than 24 hours from 69.6% to 34.1%. The results of the logistic regression model showed that PR of more than 24 hours was significantly less in the postintervention phases: introduction phase (odds ratio [OR] = 0.31), intermediate phase (OR = 0.16), and maintenance phase (OR = 0.18). Moreover, PR of more than 24 hours was significantly higher in patients with endotracheal intubation (OR = 1.51) and nasogastric intubation (OR = 2.16) and with Glasgow Coma Scale scores of 6Y8 (OR = 2.36), 9Y12 (OR = 2.40), and 13Y15 (OR = 2.15). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results support that a multidisciplinary collaborative program has the potential to decrease the incidence of PR in neurological intensive care units. A standardized protocol and policies are essential for healthcare professionals to effectively use PR as well as to effectively improve the quality of care that is provided to intensive care patients.起始頁-結束頁：288-296資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002519篇名：The Experiences of Fathers Whose Spouses Are Hospitalized for Pregnancy Termination Due to Fetal Chromosome Abnormality in Taiwan作者：Jui-Chiung SUN;Wenmay REI;Min-Yu CHANG;Shuh-Jen SHEU關鍵字：experience;chromosomal abnormality;termination of pregnancy;phenomenology期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Hospitals, where most births and terminations of pregnancy take place in modern society, tend to focus on addressing the perinatal loss experiences of mothers rather than fathers. Healthcare providers often overlook the loss experiences of fathers when pregnancy has been terminated because of chromosome abnormality. Little literature exists on the perceptions of these losses from the point of view of fathers in Taiwan. Purpose: The aims of this study were to explore and reveal the essence and structure of the experiences of Taiwanese fathers whose spouses are hospitalized for pregnancy termination due to fetal chromosome abnormality. Methods: A descriptive phenomenological approach was applied to collect data. In-depth interviews using individualized, semistructured, open-ended questions were conducted with 20 fathers whose spouses were hospitalized for termination of pregnancy due to fetal chromosomal abnormalities. Data were analyzed according to Giorgi's methods. Results: The participants described their experiences as distressing and involving painful decisions. Four themes emerged: (a) ”a dismayed father: the unexpected process of terminating pregnancy,” (b) ”a hidden source of grief: neglected care,” (c) ”a stressful decision: difficulty handling the deceased offspring,” and (d) ”a regretful father: inadequate treatment of the baby's remains.” Conclusions: Health professionals must better understand the experiences of fathers, learn to be sensitive and empathetic, and keep communication lines open to create and maintain a more compassionate and caring environment. Health professionals should provide the opportunity for fathers to discuss the decisions that they face, treat the deceased infant with dignity, and acknowledge the grief of both parents as qualitatively equal. Both mother and father should receive appropriate care while the mother is in the hospital for a pregnancy termination.起始頁-結束頁：297-305資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000024610篇名：Message From the Editor作者：Pei-Shan Tsai期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：151-151資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000027011篇名：Comparing the Effects of Simulation-Based and Traditional Teaching Methods on the Critical Thinking Abilities and Self-Confidence of Nursing Students作者：Mashael Hasan ALAMRANI;Kamila Ahmad ALAMMAR;Sarah Saad ALQAHTANI;Olfat A. SALEM關鍵字：simulation;electrocardiogram;self-confidence;critical thinking期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Critical thinking and self-confidence are imperative to success in clinical practice. Educators should use teaching strategies that will help students enhance their critical thinking and self-confidence in complex content such as electrocardiogram interpretation. Therefore, teaching electrocardiogram interpretation to students is important for nurse educators. Purpose: This study compares the effect of simulation-based and traditional teaching methods on the critical thinking and self-confidence of students during electrocardiogram interpretation sessions. Methods: Thirty undergraduate nursing students volunteered to participate in this study. The participants were divided into intervention and control groups, which were taught respectively using the simulation-based and traditional teaching programs. All of the participants were asked to complete the study instrument pretest and posttest to measure their critical thinking and self-confidence. Results: Improvement was observed in the control and experimental groups with respect to critical thinking and self-confidence, as evidenced by the results of the paired samples t test and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test (p ＜ .05). However, the independent t test and Mann-Whitney U test indicate that the difference between the two groups was not significant (p ＞ .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study evaluated an innovative simulation-based teaching method for nurses. No significant differences in outcomes were identified between the simulator-based and traditional teaching methods, indicating that well-implemented educational programs that use either teaching method effectively promote critical thinking and self-confidence in nursing students. Nurse educators are encouraged to design educational plans with clear objectives to improve the critical thinking and self-confidence of their students. Future research should compare the effects of several teaching sessions using each method in a larger sample.起始頁-結束頁：152-157資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000023112篇名：An Evolutionary Route for the Moral Development of Nursing Students: A Constructivist Grounded Theory作者：Hadi RANJBAR;Soodabeh JOOLAEE;Abouali VEDADHIR;Abbass ABBASSZADEH;Colleen BERNSTEIN關鍵字：students;nursing;moral development;education;ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Developing moral competency is a main aim of educational systems, especially in healthcare-related disciplines. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the moral development process in nursing students. Methods: This study used a constructivist grounded theory. Twenty-five semistructured, face-to-face interview with 22 participants were conducted to gather the data. The participants were nursing students and educators attending three nursing schools in Tehran. Results: Moral development evolves within nursing students following a stepwise progression. Within each step or phase, students experience specific changes with regard to both their practical skills and their moral capabilities and competencies. Three main steps were identified: moral transition, moral reconstruction, and moral internalization. Techno-scientific competence, biomedical competence, and nursing competence are developed in each step, respectively. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Moral competency in nursing students develops along with their competency as nursing practitioners. To facilitate progress through each phase, it needs to be ensured that the learning experiences that students are exposed to during each consecutive year of study facilitate as much as possible the development of moral competence.起始頁-結束頁：158-167資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000022413篇名：Development Trajectories and Predictors of the Role Commitment of Nursing Preceptors作者：Wei-Fang WANG;Chich-Hsiu HUNG;Chung-Yi LI關鍵字：nursing preceptor;commitment;trajectory期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The commitment of nursing preceptors to their role is an important driving force that supports their clinical teaching and affects teaching quality. Role commitment undergoes dynamic development and thus changes over time. Existing studies have utilized only cross-sectional study designs and have not analyzed the changes in commitment trajectories with related factors. Purpose: This study aimed to investigate the development trajectories of the commitment of preceptors and to examine the predictors between the trajectories of role commitment among nursing preceptors. Methods: A single-group, repeated-measures design was adopted, and 59 participants completed the Commitment to the Preceptor Role Scale and the Preceptor's Perception of Support Scale. The latent class growth analysis method was used to estimate the trajectory class patterns. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test, a nonparametric method, was used to compare the differences in demographic characteristics between the trajectories of commitment among nursing preceptors. Predictors were examined using binary logistic regression analysis. Results: The two-class model was the best-fitting model to describe the trajectories of nursing preceptor commitment. The two classes in this model were ”low commitment,” which accounted for 90.3% of all the participants, and ”high commitment,” which accounted for 9.7%. A significant difference was found between the two classes in terms of motivation for being a preceptor (p = .048). Neither demographic characteristics nor organizational support had a predictive effect on the trajectories of commitment development. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study found a low level of role commitment among new preceptors. Moreover, internal motivation was found to be a significant factor affecting the trajectories of this commitment. Therefore, institutions should foster an appropriate environment to enhance the role identity of preceptors as well as cultivate and stimulate their commitment to this role.起始頁-結束頁：168-176資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000022214篇名：Development and Validation of a Fertility Intention Scale in Breast Cancer Survivors作者：Chin-Ching LI;Sheng-Miauh HUANG;Jerry Cheng-Yen LAI;Yvonne HSIUNG;Yi-Heng CHEN;Ching-Fang LEE關鍵字：female;breast cancer;pregnancy;fertility intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Evidence indicates that breast cancer survivors with reproductive concerns have a poorer quality of life than survivors without fertility concerns. There is a lack of reliable and valid assessments of fertility intention among breast cancer survivors. Purpose: The aim of this study was to develop and validate the Fertility Intention Scale (FIS) that is sensitive to the fertility intention of women with breast cancer. Methods: A literature review and a qualitative study were conducted to generate the items in the scale. Content validity was evaluated by 15 experts, and face validity was assessed by 10 patients with cancer. Factor analysis was used to assess construct validity, and criterion validity was evaluated using two percentile items of fertility willingness. We developed and examined the validity and reliability of the FIS using a sample of 178 patients with breast cancer who had completed chemotherapy. Results: The Cronbach's alpha calculated for the FIS (15 items) was .88. The factor analysis performed for the construct validity of the scale identified four factors that accounted for approximately 68.72% of the total variance. These four factors were pregnancy risk, disease control, social support, and happiness. There was a significant correlation between the total FIS and the level of desiring fertility preservation or pregnancy. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The FIS has acceptable reliability, content validity, and construct validity. This scale is appropriate for use in research and clinical practice settings to evaluate the risk-benefit perceptions of pregnancy in patients with breast cancer.起始頁-結束頁：177-184資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000022315篇名：Factor Structure of the Quality of Life Scale for Mental Disorders in Patients With Schizophrenia作者：En-Chi CHIU;Shu-Chun LEE關鍵字：validity;health-related quality of life;schizophrenia期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The Quality of Life for Mental Disorders (QOLMD) scale was designed to measure health-related quality of life (HRQOL) in patients with mental illness, especially schizophrenia. The QOLMD contains 45 items, which are divided into eight domains. However, the factor structure of the QOLMD has not been evaluated, which restricts the interpretations of the results of this scale. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the factor structures (i.e., unidimensionality, eight-factor structure, and second-order model) of the QOLMD in patients with schizophrenia. Methods: Two hundred thirty-eight outpatients with schizophrenia participated. We first conducted confirmatory factor analysis to evaluate the unidimensionality of each domain. After the unidimensionality of the eight individual domains was supported, we examined the eight-factor structure and second-order model. Results: The results of unidimensionality showed sufficient model fit in all of the domains with the exception of the autonomy domain. A good model fit was confirmed for the autonomy domain after deleting two of the original items. The eight-factor structure for the 43-item QOLMD showed an acceptable model fit, although the second-order model showed poor model fit. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Our results supported the unidimensionality and eight-factor structure of the 43-item QOLMD. The sum score for each of the domains may be used to reflect its domain-specific function. We recommend using the 43-item QOLMD to capture the multiple domains of HRQOL. However, the second-order model showed an unsatisfactory model fit. Furthermore, caution is advised when interpreting overall HRQOL using the total score for the eight domains.起始頁-結束頁：185-190資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000023616篇名：Psychometric Properties of the Chinese Version of the Occupational Fatigue Exhaustion/Recovery Scale: A Test in a Nursing Population作者：Jin-Bo FANG;Chun-Fen ZHOU;Jing HUANG;Chang-Jian QIU關鍵字：fatigue;Chinese;nurse;psychometric properties;instrument期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The Occupational Fatigue Exhaustion/Recovery Scale (OFER) was designed to assess occupational fatigue in nurses. Although the original English version of this instrument has shown high degrees of reliability and validity, a Chinese version of this scale has yet to be verified. Purpose: The aim of this study was to evaluate the psychometric properties of the OFER in a population of Chinese nurses. Methods: The scale was translated using translation and back-translation. The validities and reliabilities were evaluated on 923 qualified participants using content validity index, concurrent validity, factorial validity, internal consistency reliability, and test-retest reliability. Results: The content validity index for the OFER was .92. The correlation coefficients between the scores of the OFER subscales and the criteria in this study (varying from -.498 to .705) verified that the OFER has acceptable concurrent validity. Principal component analysis and confirmatory factor analysis revealed that three factors correspond to the structure of the original instrument and that recovery mediates the relationship between acute and chronic fatigue. The Cronbach's alpha for the chronic fatigue, acute fatigue, and intershift recovery subscales were .83, .85, and .86, respectively. Test-retest reliabilities with correlation coefficients from .61 to .78 were found in the three subscales. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: OFER is a reliable and valid instrument for assessing work-related fatigue in Chinese nurses. However, further improvement of the acute fatigue subscale is recommended. The OFER has the potential to elicit information that is useful for assessing fatigue in nurses in China. Furthermore, as it differentiates between acute and chronic fatigue, OFER may be an effective tool for guiding the development and implementation of various, related intervention measures.起始頁-結束頁：191-198資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000024717篇名：Information Reception and Expectations Among Hospitalized Elderly Patients in Taiwan: A Pilot Study作者：Kai-Li CHEN;Chia-Ming CHANG;Ching-Huey CHEN;Mei-Chih HUANG關鍵字：medical information;medical information expectations;hospitalized elders期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Communicating with patients, especially geriatric patients, is a challenge for medical professionals. Medical message receiving and expectations among hospitalized elderly patients have not been studied. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore medical message receiving and expectations concerning medical information among hospitalized elderly patients in Taiwan. Methods: A descriptive study design was used. Convenience sampling was applied, and the research was conducted in a geriatric ward in a medical center in southern Taiwan. Patients were recruited who were 65 years or older and capable of verbal communication. Data were collected using a self-developed semistructured questionnaire. For each participant, data were collected in one regular ward round. The messages of the physician were recorded. During the first and fourth hours after the ward round, the researcher collected the medical messages that were conveyed by the physician in the ward round and that could be repeated by the patients. Open-ended questions were used to collect data about patient expectations of medical messages during the first hour after the ward round. Quantitative data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, and qualitative data were analyzed using content analysis. Results: Thirty patients participated in this study. All of the participants remembered the visit of the physician. Seventeen participants (56.6%), however, could not repeat the messages, and the total message repetition rate was 17.8% at the first hour after the ward round. By the fourth hour, the message repetition rate fell to 8.9%. Furthermore, three participants (10%) reported messages incorrectly. Participants reported the importance and necessity of physicians conveying medical messages. ”Desire to know the reasons for discomfort” and ”discharge date” were the messages most expected by the participants. Conclusions: This study suggests that most hospitalized elderly patients cannot repeat medical messages that are conveyed by their physicians. Written materials and the involvement of principal caregivers in the medical informing process may be necessary. Besides, before providing medical information, medical professionals should be cognizant of the key concerns of their patients.起始頁-結束頁：199-206資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000022818篇名：Relationship Between Lifestyles That Promote Health and Quality of Life in Patients With Chronic Schizophrenia: A Cross-Sectional Study作者：Shih-Pi LIN;Chieh-Yu LIU;Chiu-Yueh YANG關鍵字：canonical correlation;lifestyles that promote health;quality of life;schizophrenia期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Over the last few decades, an increasing number of studies have examined quality of life in patients with chronic schizophrenia. However, little research has addressed the relationship between lifestyles that promote health and quality of life issues in these patients. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the relationships between lifestyles that promote health and quality of life in patients with chronic schizophrenia. Methods: A cross-sectional study design was used. The study was conducted at 10 hospital-based psychiatric rehabilitation units in northern Taiwan. In total, 357 participants completed the World Health Organization Quality of Life-YBREF and the Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile. This study examined the relationships among the six domains of the Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile and the four domains of the Quality of Life-YBREF using canonical correlation analysis. Data collection occurred between April 2013 and April 2014. Results: The results of the canonical correlation analysis showed that the Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile domains of nutrition, health responsibility, self-actualization, interpersonal support, exercise, and stress management were significantly related to the Quality of Life-YBREF results, specifically in the physical, psychological, and social relationships and environment domains. Two canonical correlations were identified (the canonical correlation coefficients were .622 and .317), which showed that 38.6% of the variance in lifestyles that promote health and quality of life was shared. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this study may be useful to practitioners who are responsible for lifestyles that promote health and quality of life issues in patients with chronic schizophrenia.起始頁-結束頁：207-215資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000023519篇名：A Preliminary Study of the Effects of a Multitheory-Driven Intervention in Adults With Prediabetes Mellitus作者：Fu-Mian TSAI;Chiu-Chu LIN;Huey-Shyan LIN;Yi LIU關鍵字：lifestyle change;theory driven;prediabetes期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Prediabetes mellitus (pre-DM) is an important predictive indicator of Type 2 diabetes. A person with pre-DM is eight times more likely to develop diabetes than a person without pre-DM. Prior research suggests that proactive interventions may delay the progression of this disease and reduce the rate of disease development. Purpose: The purposes of this preliminary study were to develop a multitheory-driven lifestyle intervention protocol for adults with pre-DM and to evaluate its feasibility and impacts on knowledge regarding pre-DM, dietary behaviors, and physical activity (primary outcomes) as well as to describe the disease progression indicators (secondary outcomes). Methods: A single-group, longitudinal study design was used. Thirty-nine participants were included in the analysis. A generalized estimating equation model was used to determine the trends in changes in the outcomes. All of the participants underwent testing at baseline (T_0) and at 3 (T_1), 6 (T_2), and 12 (T_3) months after the 4-week lifestyle intervention. Results: There were significantly increasing trends for each study parameter (Pre-DM Knowledge Assessment Form-12, p ＜ .01; Dietary Behavior Scale, p ＜ .01) and significantly positive changes in body weight (p ＜ .01), body mass index (p ＜ .01), fasting glucose level (p ＜ .01), and glycated hemoglobin level (p ＜ .01) over the 12-month study period. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study supports the feasibility of the developed multitheory-driven lifestyle intervention protocol and suggests that its application may improve the effectiveness of diabetes prevention programs in clinical settings. Further randomized controlled trials are needed.起始頁-結束頁：216-225資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000022520篇名：MESSAGE FROM THE EDITOR作者：Yea-Ing Lotus Shyu期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：71-71資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000026401篇名：The Development and Psychometric Testing on Psychiatric Nurses of a Nurse Case Management Competence Scale in Taiwan作者：Shing-Chia Chen;Shih-Kai Lee;Jiin-Ru Rong;Chien-Chang Wu;Wen-I Liu關鍵字：case management;competence assessment instrument;reliability and validity;psychiatric nurses期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Case management is a complex process involving multiple activities. It is vital that nurses are competent in all related tasks for case management. A competence scale is a valuable tool for assessing task-related competency. Purpose: The aims of this study were to examine the reliability and validity of an assessment scale for nurse case management competence and to use this scale to assess the current competency of nurses. Methods: A nurse case management competence scale was developed in three stages: (a) selection of assessment items according to standards of practice for case management and literature review, (b) determination of content validity using the Delphi technique with a panel of experts, and (c) psychometric testing of the developed competence scale using a cross-sectional design. Convenience sampling was used to recruit psychiatric nurses at seven psychiatric centers in Taiwan to complete the scale anonymously. An exploratory factor analysis was performed to analyze construct validity. Discriminant validity, internal consistency, and 2-week test-retest reliability were also examined. Results: Two hundred eighty-five psychiatric nurses completed an assessment scale comprising 18 items (originally 25 items). The content validity index reached 0.96 after the Delphi technique was applied twice in the expert panel. Seventy-eight percent of the total variance was explained by two dimension factors: coordination facilitation competence and direct care competence. Participants who had undertaken case management courses had superior case management ability compared with those who had not, indicating that the scale possesses excellent discriminant validity. Cronbach's α and the test-retest results showed excellent reliability. Of the two competence factors, direct care competence (3.03) was better than coordination facilitation competence (2.81). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: There is a dearth of studies investigating the development and psychometric testing of case management competence scales. The results of this study provide evidence to support the reliability and validity of the developed case management competence scale among Taiwanese psychiatric nurses. It is a reliable and valid assessment instrument that may help identify educational needs and improve the case management competencies of nurses.起始頁-結束頁：72-79資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002302篇名：The Medical Futility Experience of Nurses in Caring for Critically Ill Patients作者：Ming-Yi Hsu;Shu-Fen Su;Lien-Ying Chiang;Sou-Jen Shih;Yu-Chen Chen關鍵字：critically ill patients;critical care nursing;medical futility期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Medical futility is a key bioethical concern. In Taiwan, policymakers tend to provide care standards and evaluation guidelines for critically ill and terminal patients whose treatment is medically futile. However, the current status of medical futility for critically ill patients is inadequate, and no consensus currently exists on the definition of medical futility. Purpose: The aim of this study was to understand the medical futility experiences of intensive care nurses. Methods: This qualitative research adopted a phenomenological perspective and was conducted in a medical center and a regional hospital in Central Taiwan. Eight nurses with at least 1 year of nursing tenure who were serving in the intensive care unit were recruited. Purposive and snowball sampling methods were used to conduct one-on-one in-depth interviews. Each of the tape-recorded interviews was transcribed before data analysis. Results: The research results found four themes, including (a) definitions of medical futility and types of patients, (b) considerations of medical futility, (c) the occurrence of medical futility, and (d) nurses' responses to medical futility. The participants indicated that medical futility refers to the point at which the continued provision of treatment does not evidently ease the disease condition of a patient or improve his or her quality of life or when life-sustaining treatment is provided to patients to facilitate the process of death. Conclusions: This study revealed that the major challenge in clinical cases of medical futility is for physicians, nurses, and patients to communicate effectively together during times of rapid and unanticipated change in patient condition. Thus, events of medical futility may be preventable. Past cases of medical futility involving critically ill patients may serve as references for guiding clinical care, education, and related policy formulation.起始頁-結束頁：80-87資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002213篇名：Effects of Team-Based Learning on the Core Competencies of Nursing Students: A Quasi-Experimental Study作者：Kyung Eun Lee關鍵字：team-based learning;competency;nursing education期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: An important goal of nursing education is helping students achieve core competencies efficiently. One proposed way of improving nursing education is team-based learning (TBL). Purpose: The aim of this study was to assess the comparative effectiveness of TBL and lecture-style classes in terms of teaching core competencies in nursing education, which include clinical competence skills, problem-solving ability, communication competencies, critical thinking ability, and self-leadership. Methods: This quasi-experimental study enrolled 183 students as participants, with 95 and 88 in the experimental and control groups, respectively. These two groups attended 6 hours (2 hours weekly for 3 weeks) of TBL and lecture-style classes, respectively. Differences in core competencies between the two groups were compared before and after the intervention. Results: The experimental group achieved significantly higher scores for clinical competence skills, communication competence, critical thinking ability, and self-leadership at posttest than at pretest, whereas the control group achieved significantly higher scores for clinical competence skills and critical thinking ability at posttest than at pretest. After the intervention, the experimental group had significantly better clinical competence skills, communication competence, and self-leadership than the control group. Conclusion: TBL is an effective approach method to teaching core competencies in nursing education.起始頁-結束頁：88-96資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002594篇名：Effect of Family-Based Education on the Quality of Life of Persons With Type 2 Diabetes: A Randomized Clinical Trial作者：Hossein Ebrahimi;Zahra Ashrafi;Daryadokht Masroor Rudsari;Zohreh Parsayekta;Hamid Haghani關鍵字：family;quality of life;type 2 diabetes;education;family members期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Diabetes, a disease with increasing prevalence, requires comprehensive support from family members to ensure that sufferers are able to perform daily activities. The chronic nature of diabetes and its potential side effects impose high financial costs on patients and families, reduce their quality of life (QOL), and change the lifestyle of both patients and their families. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of a family-based training program on QOL in persons with Type 2 diabetes. Methods: A randomized clinical trial was used to assess the effects of an educational program on QOL both before and after 12 weeks of training for the experimental group (40 patients and families) and of standard care for the control group (40 patients) at an endocrinology clinic in a hospital in Iran. A demographic and social questionnaire and the QOL questionnaire for patients with Type 2 diabetes were used for data collection. The study groups were selected using block randomization sampling, and results were analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistics. Results: Both the experimental and control groups were homogeneous in terms of demographic characteristics and QOL before the intervention. The results of the mean score of patient QOL after the 12-week training program showed a significant difference between the scores for the two groups of patients in the physical, mental, social, economic, disease, and treatment dimensions. Moreover, the total score and QOL of the experimental group improved significantly after the patients' families had attended the training program. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Educating the families of patients was shown in this study to improve the QOL of the patient. The design of educational programs for nursing students must emphasize the role of the family in the care of chronic patients.起始頁-結束頁：97-103資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002125篇名：Adolescent Perceptions of Peer Responses to Diabetes Self-Management: A Qualitative Study作者：Pei-Yun Yang;Meei-Fang Lou;Angela Shin-Yu Lien;Bih-Shya Gau關鍵字：adolescent;peers;diabetes;self-care;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is more prevalent in adolescents than in adults, and the self-management of insulin-dependent diabetes is complex. T1D requires injections of insulin, self-management of blood testing, regular physical activity, and diet monitoring, which are challenging for growing and developing adolescents. Adolescents are often more concerned with how they are perceived by their peers than how they perceive themselves. Positive peer responses influence the self-care management of adolescents with T1D in school settings. By contrast, negative peer responses and avoidance behaviors threaten to negatively affect the health outcomes of adolescents with T1D. Evidence indicates that peer influence is crucial to the successful self-management of diabetes in adolescents. However, very few studies have investigated the effect of peer influence on adolescents with T1D. Purpose: This article describes how adolescents with T1D perceive the responses of their peers to their diabetes self-management in school settings. Methods: Ten 12- to 17-year-old adolescents with diabetes were recruited from a pediatric endocrinology clinic at a university hospital in Taiwan. Audio-recorded interview data were transcribed verbatim and reviewed for accuracy. A thematic analysis approach was used to analyze the narrative content of semistructured interviews with participants. The rigor of the data collection and analysis was emphasized. Results: Analysis of peer responses to the diabetes care practices of the participants revealed six themes: knowledge seeking, curiosity, enthusiasm, empathy, fearfulness, and isolation and bullying. Subthemes were categorized to illustrate how adolescents with T1D balance the challenge of diabetes self-care regimens and normal peer interactions. They were coping with the requirements of their T1D regimen and hoping to determine the perceptions of their peers toward this regimen and themselves. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Understanding the perception of peer identity for adolescents with T1D provides information for diabetes education and assists school nurses to facilitate successful T1D management in adolescents.起始頁-結束頁：104-111資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002346篇名：Intention to Receive Breast Cancer Screening and Related Factors of Influence Among Vietnamese Women in Transnational Marriages作者：Fang-Hsin Lee關鍵字：breast cancer screening;breast cancer;health belief model期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Breast cancer is a major global health issue. Receiving regular breast cancer screenings aids in the early detection and treatment of breast cancer. Numerous factors influence whether a Vietnamese woman receives breast cancer screening. Purpose: The aims of this study were to understand current rates of breast cancer screening and explore the factors that influence intention to undergo breast cancer screening among Vietnamese women in transnational marriages. Methods: This was a cross-sectional, community-based study. Data were collected via snowball sampling. We enrolled 250 women aged 18 years and over from September to December 2015. Results: The percentage of participants who had received a breast self-examination, breast palpation, or breast ultrasound within the past year were 25.6%, 9.6%, and 21.2%, respectively. Moreover, only 6.8% of participants had received a mammography within the past 2 years. Participants with strong perceptions of breast cancer being a serious illness, who had fewer barriers to obtaining a breast cancer screening, or who had been advised by healthcare personnel to undergo screenings were more likely to report an intention to receive periodic breast self-examinations during the subsequent 1-year period. Participants who had lived in Taiwan for a longer period, had higher levels of perceived susceptibility to breast cancer, had prior experience with breast diseases, or had fewer barriers to obtaining a breast cancer screening were more likely to report an intention to receive a breast ultrasound during the subsequent 1-year period. Finally, participants who were older, perceived greater benefits from receiving breast cancer screening, and had not entered menopause were more likely to report an intention to receive a mammography during the following 2 years. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Medical care personnel should promote breast cancer screening among Vietnamese women in transnational marriages. The results may be useful in promoting greater awareness among medical care personnel of breast cancer issues and efficacy in performing breast cancer screening for Vietnamese women in transnational marriages and provide references for the establishment of breast cancer prevention and control policies.起始頁-結束頁：112-122資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002107篇名：Influence of Ankle Active Dorsiflexion Movement Guided by Inspiration on the Venous Return From the Lower Limbs: A Prospective Study作者：Hongying Pi;Hong'an Ku;Ting Zhao;Jie Wang;Yicheng Fu關鍵字：ankle active movement;deep vein thrombosis;hemodynamics;prevention期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Active ankle movement is recommended intervention for preventing deep vein thrombosis effectively and easily by promoting venous return from the lower limbs. The active ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion movement guided by deep breathing is considered the most effective method, although outstanding problems remain, including low patient compliance and difficult motion essentials. Purpose: The aims of this study were to compare the influence of different ankle active movements on venous return from the lower limbs and to suggest the optimal movement for preventing deep venous thrombosis in the lower limbs. Methods: A self-controlled study on 130 subjects was undertaken. The femoral venous hemodynamics of the left femoral vein and changes in pulse oxygen saturation and heart rate were compared among the three states of quiescent, active ankle 30° dorsiflexion movement, and active ankle 30° dorsiflexion with active plantar 45° flexion movement. The immediate master rates of the two ankle movements were examined before the study. Results: The femoral venous hemodynamics of the left femoral vein were significantly higher in both movement states compared with the quiescent state. Moreover, no significant difference was found among the three states in terms of pulse oxygen saturation and heart rate. The immediate master rate was significantly higher in the active ankle 30° dorsiflexion movement than in the active ankle 30° dorsiflexion and active plantar 45° flexion movement. Therefore, active ankle 30° dorsiflexion movement guided by inspiration was found in this study to increase femoral venous hemodynamics, which heightened the immediate master rate but had no obvious influence on pulse oxygen saturation and heart rate. Conclusions: Active ankle 30° dorsiflexion movement guided by inspiration effectively promotes venous return from the lower limbs and is a better method to prevent deep vein thrombosis of the lower limbs.起始頁-結束頁：123-129資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002148篇名：The Nursing Performance Instrument: Exploratory and Confirmatory Factor Analyses in Registered Nurses作者：Knar Sagherian;Linsey M. Steege;Jeanne Geiger-Brown;Donna Harrington關鍵字：nursing performance instrument (NPI);measures;validity;factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The optimal performance of nurses in healthcare settings plays a critical role in care quality and patient safety. Despite this importance, few measures are provided in the literature that evaluate nursing performance as an independent construct from competencies. The nine-item Nursing Performance Instrument (NPI) was developed to fill this gap. Purpose: The aim of this study was to examine and confirm the underlying factor structure of the NPI in registered nurses. Method: The design was cross-sectional, using secondary data collected between February 2008 and April 2009 for the ”Fatigue in Nursing Survey” (N = 797). The sample was predominantly dayshift female nurses working in acute care settings. Using Mplus software, exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses were applied to the NPI data, which were divided into two equal subsamples. Multiple fit indices were used to evaluate the fit of the alternative models. Results: The three-factor model was determined to fit the data adequately. The factors that were labeled as ”physical/ mental decrements,” ”consistent practice,” and ”behavioral change” were moderately to strongly intercorrelated, indicating good convergent validity. The reliability coefficients for the subscales were acceptable. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The NPI consists of three latent constructs. This instrument has the potential to be used as a self-monitoring instrument that addresses nurses' perceptions of performance while providing patient care.起始頁-結束頁：130-137資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002159篇名：A Systematic Review of Reminiscence Therapy for Older Adults in Taiwan作者：Hsin-Yen Yen;Li-Jung Lin關鍵字：life review program;dementia;gerontology;psychiatry;mental health期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Population aging is an increasing phenomenon in many countries around the world. It has been estimated that more than one quarter of all older adults experience a mental or neurological disorder or disease such as dementia, depression, anxiety, and substance abuse. Reminiscence is a popular treatment for enhancing well-being in older adults. Previous studies have shown that reminiscence therapy improves the cognitive functions, behaviors, and other psychosocial outcomes in older adult patients. The themes and materials that are used in reminiscence treatments for the older adults in Taiwan differ from those used in other countries because of Taiwan's unique historical background and culture. Purpose: The main purpose of the current study was to review systematically the application and outcomes of reminiscence therapy in Taiwan. Method: The terms ”reminiscence”, ”dementia”, ”Alzheimer's disease,” and ”Taiwan” were used in an Integrated Resources Search that was conducted at National Taiwan Normal University. Sixteen articles were systematically reviewed using a synthesis of two matrices of experimental designs and intervention designs. Result: Reminiscence group sizes ranged between 7 and 12 participants, session frequencies were all once a week for periods lasting between 4 and 16 weeks, and session durations ranged from 30 minutes to 2 hours. The memories of the participants were stimulated using materials dating from their youth such as Taiwanese folk songs, toys, photos, radio programs, newspapers, and food and drinks. In terms of research methodology, most of the studies that were reviewed used quasi-experimental designs without random assignment or control group due to sample size. A minority of the reviewed studies applied the randomized controlled treatment method. Only a few of the studies evaluated indicators in pretest, posttest, and follow-up periods. The results of these studies identified several benefits of reminiscence therapy in Taiwanese older adults, including improvements in cognitive function, anxiety, depressive symptoms, self-esteem, life satisfaction, and personal interaction. Conclusions: Reminiscence is a good noninvasive treatment for the prevention and treatment of mental diseases in Taiwanese older adults. Furthermore, reminiscence promotes mental health in older adults. Finally, this study provides recommendations for further study and clinical application of reminiscence therapy in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：138-150資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000023310篇名：MESSAGE FROM THE EDITOR作者：Li-Yin Chien期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-1資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000026111篇名：The Effects of White Noise on Agitated Behaviors, Mental Status, and Activities of Daily Living in Older Adults With Dementia作者：Li-Wei Lin;Shu-Chuan Weng;Hua-Shan Wu;Lu-Jen Tsai;Ya-Ling Lin;Shu-Hui Yeh關鍵字：dementia;white noise;agitated behavior;mental status;activities of daily living期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The aging of society is a global trend, and care of older adults with dementia is an urgent challenge. As dementia progresses, patients exhibit negative emotions, memory disorders, sleep disorders, and agitated behavior. Agitated behavior is one of the most difficult problems for family caregivers and healthcare providers to handle when caring for older adults with dementia. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the effectiveness of white noise in improving agitated behavior, mental status, and activities of daily living in older adults with dementia. Methods: An experimental research design was used to study elderly participants two times (pretest and posttest). Six dementia care centers in central and southern Taiwan were targeted to recruit participants. There were 63 participants: 28 were in the experimental group, and 35 were in the comparison group. Experimental group participants received 20 minutes of white noise consisting of ocean, rain, wind, and running water sounds between 4 and 5 P.M. daily over a period of 4 weeks. The comparison group received routine care. Questionnaires were completed, and observations of agitated behaviors were collected before and after the intervention. Results: Agitated behavior in the experimental group improved significantly between pretest and posttest. Furthermore, posttest scores on the Mini-Mental Status Examination and Barthel Index were slightly better for this group than at pretest. However, the experimental group registered no significant difference in mental status or activities of daily living at posttest. For the comparison group, agitated behavior was unchanged between pretest and posttest. Conclusions: The results of this study support white noise as a simple, convenient, and noninvasive intervention that improves agitated behavior in older adults with dementia. These results may provide a reference for related healthcare providers, educators, and administrators who care for older adults with dementia.起始頁-結束頁：2-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000021112篇名：Effects of Auricular Acupressure on Sleep Quality, Anxiety, and Depressed Mood in RN-BSN Students With Sleep Disturbance作者：Ke-Hsin Chueh;Chia-Chuan Chang;Mei-Ling Yeh關鍵字：RN-BSN students;sleep quality;anxiety;depression;auricular acupressure期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Students in 2-year registered nurse to Bachelor of Science in nursing (RN-BSN) programs usually work full-time and study part-time. Sleep disturbance, anxiety, and depression are known to be common health problems among these students. Prior research has described the effectiveness of auricular acupressure (AA) in reducing sleep disturbance and improving mood. Purpose: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of using a 4-week AA program that adheres to a magnetic pellet on the shenmen acupoint on sleep quality, anxiousness, and depressed moods in nursing students with sleep disturbance. Methods: This study used a one-group, quasi-experimental design with repeated measures. Eligible students were recruited from an RN-BSN program offered by a university in northern Taiwan, and all were currently experiencing sleep disturbance. A 4-week AA intervention that applied a magnetic pellet on the shenmen acupoint was used. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Beck Anxiety Inventory, and Beck Depression Inventory-II were used to measure sleep quality and mood outcomes each week during the 4-week intervention. Improvements in sleep quality, anxiety, and depressed moods were analyzed using the generalized estimating equation. Results: Thirty-six participants with a mean age of 32 years were enrolled as participants. After adjusting for confounding factors, continuous and significant improvements in sleep quality, anxiety, and depressed mood (p G .05) were observed throughout the intervention, with 4-week improvements in sleep quality, anxiety, and depressed mood averaging 26.7%, 43.5%, and 25%, respectively. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study showed the efficacy of using a 4-week AA that applies a magnetic pellet on the shenmen acupoint in terms of improving sleep quality, anxiousness, and depressed mood in RN-BSN students experiencing sleep disturbances. Especially, the emotional mood of participants improved significantly as early as the first week. The 4-week AA for reducing sleep disturbance, and improving students' anxiety, and depressed moods may be applied on primary healthcare.起始頁-結束頁：10-17資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000020913篇名：Moral Distress Model Reconstructed Using Grounded Theory作者：Hsun-Kuei Ko;Chi-Chun Chin;Min-Tao Hsu關鍵字：moral distress;grounded theory;model;ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: The problems of nurse burnout and manpower shortage relate to moral distress. Thus, having a good understanding of moral distress is critical to developing strategies that effectively improve the clinical ethical climate and improve nursing retention in Taiwan. Purpose: The aim of this study was to reconstruct the model of moral distress using the grounded theory. Methods: Twenty-five staff nurses at work units who attend to the needs of adult, pediatric, acute, and critical disease or end-of-life-care patients were recruited as participants using theoretical sampling from three teaching hospitals in Taiwan. Data were collected using intensive, 2- to 3-hour interviews with each participant. Audio recordings of the interviews were made and then converted into transcripts. The data were analyzed using the grounded theory. Results: In the clinical setting, the perspective that nurses take toward clinical moral events reflects their moral values, which trigger moral cognition, provocation, and appraisal. The moral barriers that form when moral events that occur in clinical settings contradict personal moral values may later develop into moral distress. In handling moral barriers in the clinical environment, nurses make moral judgments and determine what is morally correct. Influenced by moral efficacy, the consequence may either be a moral action or an expression of personal emotion. Wasting National Health Insurance resources and Chinese culture are key sources of moral distress for nurses in Taiwan. The role of self-confidence in promoting moral efficacy and the role of heterodox skills in promoting moral actions represent findings that are unique to this study. Conclusions: The moral distress model was used in this study to facilitate the development of future nursing theories. On the basis of our findings, we suggested that nursing students be encouraged to use case studies to establish proper moral values, improve moral cognition and judgment capabilities, and promote moral actions to better handle the regular pressures of moral distress in future clinical or workplace settings. Moreover, a better understanding of moral distress may help retain staff nurses.起始頁-結束頁：18-26資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000018914篇名：Reliability and Validity of the Turkish Version of the Job Performance Scale Instrument作者：Arzu Kader Harmanci Seren;Rujnan Tuna;Feride Eskin Bacaksiz關鍵字：contextual performance;job performance;nurses;reliability and validity;task performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Objective measurement of the job performance of nursing staff using valid and reliable instruments is important in the evaluation of healthcare quality. A current, valid, and reliable instrument that specifically measures the performance of nurses is required for this purpose. Purpose: The aim of this study was to determine the validity and reliability of the Turkish version of the Job Performance Instrument. Methods: This study used a methodological design and a sample of 240 nurses working at different units in four hospitals in Istanbul, Turkey. A descriptive data form, the Job Performance Scale, and the Employee Performance Scale were used to collect data. Data were analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics Version 21.0 and LISREL Version 8.51. Results: On the basis of the data analysis, the instrument was revised. Some items were deleted, and subscales were combined. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The Turkish version of the Job Performance Instrument was determined to be valid and reliable to measure the performance of nurses. The instrument is suitable for evaluating current nursing roles.起始頁-結束頁：27-35資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000021315篇名：Look Who Is Talking Now: Eliciting the Concept of Fatherhood Among Filipino Fathers Using Metaphor Analysis作者：Neil Jupiter E. Villamor;Allan B. de Guzman;Evangeline T. Matienzo關鍵字：doodles;fatherhood;Filipino fathers;metaphors;qualitative期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Although the increased interest in investigating the dynamics of fatherhood in developed nations has been documented in the literature, its collective meaning and implications in nursing remain largely unknown in the context of East Asia, especially in developing countries such as the Philippines. Purpose: Capitalizing on the unique power of metaphors to improve the understanding of complex and abstract ideas and to shape healthcare practices, this qualitative semiotic investigation intended to define the essence of fatherhood from the perspective of Filipino fathers. Methods: This study focused on a group of 28 first-time and 22 second-time fathers who were recruited from the largest maternal and newborn tertiary government hospital in the Philippines. To capture the richness and thickness of fatherhood as a subjective human reality, doodling and elicitation interviews were employed to promote data triangulation. Furthermore, semiosis was used as the data analytic framework to better understand the ontology and epistemology of the elicited metaphors. In addition, a member-checking procedure was employed to validate the themes that emerged from the inductive approach. Results: This study provides a conceptualization of ”The House of Fatherhood,” which illustrates the uniqueness of the experience of fatherhood as identity defining, maturity enabling, and duality affirming. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The pillars of fatherhood that were identified in this article provide a valuable framework for Filipino healthcare providers and program administrators in the field of maternal and child nursing to identify scaffolding measures and other support mechanisms to address the needs and concerns of Filipino fathers and their journey to fatherhood in a more effective and holistic way.起始頁-結束頁：36-43資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000020116篇名：Factors Affecting the Ability of People With Diabetes to Avoid Hypoglycemia作者：Fei-Ling Wu;En-Chang Wu;Yue-Cune Chang;Wen-Yu Hu;Jyuhn-Huarng Juang;Mei Chang Yeh關鍵字：problem solving;negative mood;diabetes;hypoglycemia期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Hypoglycemia is recognized as a limiting factor in diabetes management. Fear of experiencing hypoglycemia may lead to lower quality of life, impaired glycemic control, and emotional distress, all of which impair the ability of patients to self-manage their diabetes effectively. Problem solving is central to diabetes self-management and may help patients achieve effective self-care of their disease. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the ability of people with diabetes to avoid hypoglycemia and to explore associated factors. Methods: A cross-sectional, descriptive design was used for the study. Data were collected using a demographic and disease characteristics datasheet, the Hypoglycemic Problem Solving Scale, and the Disease-Associated Negative Mood Scale. Results: Three hundred thirteen participants were recruited, with a mean age of 55.49 years. The average item score for the questions on hypoglycemic problem-solving ability was 2.43 (SD = 0.75). In comparing Hypoglycemic Problem Solving Scale subscales, participants scored highest on the problem orientation subscales and lowest on the problem-solving skills subscales. Multiple regression analysis revealed that being younger and unmarried and having a higher level of education, a diagnosis of Type 1 diabetes, and a lower negative mood score were each significantly associated with greater problem-solving ability as regards hypoglycemic events. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: We suggest that patients with diabetes, especially those who are older or with lower levels of education, receive disease-related psychological interventions and that healthcare professionals teach problem-solving abilities in conjunction with hypoglycemia management.起始頁-結束頁：44-51資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000019817篇名：Factors Associated With Peer Victimization Among Adolescents in Taiwan作者：Hui-Wen Huang;Jyu-Lin Chen;Ruey-Hsia Wang關鍵字：victimization;adolescents;risk factors;protective factors;bullying;peer influence期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Adolescents who have experienced peer victimization face a higher risk of negative health outcomes. However, little is known about the factors that are associated with peer victimization among adolescents in Taiwan. Purpose: The aim of this study was to examine the factors related to peer victimization among Taiwanese adolescents. Methods: A cross-sectional design was employed. Three hundred seventy-seven adolescents aged 13-16 years from seven middle schools in southern Taiwan were recruited as participants. Validated, self-reported questionnaires were used to gather data on demographic characteristics, resilience, peer relationship, parental monitoring, school connectedness, social support, and peer victimization. Logistic regression analysis was used to examine the factors that were related to peer victimization. Results: About 17% (n = 64) of the participants experienced peer victimization during the previous 1-year period. Logistic regression analysis indicated that parental monitoring of daily life, school connectedness, and peer support were significant predictors of a reduced risk of peer victimization. The final model explained 23.1% of the total variance in less peer victimization and predicted 80.1% of peer victimization. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: School connectedness and peer support were identified as important factors facilitating the avoidance of peer victimization among adolescents in Taiwan. Healthcare providers and school personnel should consider school-based programs to improve school connectedness and to build an atmosphere of peer support to reduce peer victimization. Educating parents to monitor their adolescents' daily activities is also encouraged in concert with these school-based programs.起始頁-結束頁：52-59資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000019518篇名：Identification, Associated Factors, and Prognosis of Symptom Clusters in Taiwanese Patients With Heart Failure作者：Tsuey-Yuan Huang;Debra K. Moser;Shiow-Li Hwang關鍵字：heart failure;symptom cluster;hospitalization;mortality期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Patients with heart failure (HF) have multiple distressing symptoms that are associated with poor outcomes. These symptoms do not occur in isolation from each other but likely occur as discrete clusters that may prove helpful to clinicians trying to counsel patients about symptom monitoring and management. Defining common symptom clusters and determining the associations between symptom clusters and outcomes may improve patient management. Purpose: The aim of this study was to define symptom clusters and their association with event-free survival in terms of cardiac hospitalization and all-cause mortality in patients with HF. Methods: Patients were recruited from outpatient HF clinics. Physical symptoms (dyspnea, fatigue, edema, sleeplessness, anorexia, and poor memory) were measured using the modified Pulmonary Function Status and Dyspnea Questionnaire and the Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire. A two-stage cluster analysis was conducted to identify subgroups of patients based on the self-perceived severity of the six symptoms. The Kaplan-Meier survival curve and log-rank test were used to assess whether symptom clusters were associated with event-free survival through a 12-month follow-up. Results: Two hundred fifty-eight patients (mean age = 61.2 ± 12.3 years, 75% male, 41% New York Heart Association class III/IV) participated. Three symptom clusters were identified based on the severity of symptoms. These clusters were called the nonsevere symptom cluster (all symptoms were rated with low severity), the typical severity symptom cluster (high level of severity for dyspnea and fatigue, low level of severity for edema, and moderate level of severity for all other symptoms), and the atypical severity symptom cluster (low level of severity for dyspnea and fatigue, high level of severity for edema, and moderate level of severity for all other symptoms). Symptom clusters were associated with event-free survival (p ＜ .001). A post hoc comparison showed that the prognosis was better in the nonsevere symptom cluster than both the typical symptom (p ＜ .001) and nontypical symptom (p ＜ .001) clusters and that the prognoses for the latter two clusters did not differ significantly. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Symptom clusters play an important role in the prognoses of patients with HF. Both patients and healthcare providers may use the information that is provided by this study to improve the surveillance and management of related symptoms.起始頁-結束頁：60-67資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000019919篇名：Involving People Who Self-Harm in Research Design作者：Sandra Walker關鍵字：service user;self-harm;involvement;engagement;mental health research期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Background: Involving service users in mental health research is expected in the United Kingdom. Purpose: This report outlines the process of exploring a proposed research project with a group of service users. The proposed research project is part of a doctoral pathway that was designed to explore the experiences in a general hospital of people who were admitted with self-harm in terms of their contact with mental health services. Methods: A consultation event was held where the researcher outlined the proposed format of the project and the expected aims and outcomes. The group members were asked to consider the validity of the question being asked and to consider questions they felt needed to be asked as part of the process. Results: The research question was amended in light of the consultation, and the process influenced the research methodology. Some interesting and unexpected linguistic points were noted during the consultation. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Although the process was time consuming in terms of setup, it was immeasurably valuable in adding real-world value to the project and ensuring that the research outcomes would be more likely to be meaningful to both service users and professionals alike.起始頁-結束頁：68-70資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000020801篇名：The VOC and the Geopolitics of Southern Formosa: The Case of Lonckjouw並列篇名：荷蘭東印度公司與南臺灣的地緣政治：以瑯嶠人為例作者：康培德(Peter Kang)關鍵字：Lonckjouw;Dutch East India Company (VOC);history of Taiwan (Formosa);history of Formosan Austronesians;Pimaba;瑯嶠;荷蘭束印度公司;臺灣史;臺灣原住民族史;卑南覓期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：This paper discusses how the political and commercial activities of the Dutch East India Company affected the territorial powers of Lonckjouw in southern Formosa. The contemporary Dutch portrayed the Lonckjouw people as the most stratified society in Formosa. Their leaders ruled over more than 16 villages and acted as lord of all his subjects. This paper explores how the development of the Dutch commercial and political interests in southern Formosa simultaneously enhanced and impeded the territorial expansion and political consolidation of the Lonckjouw people. The leadership of the Lonckjouw people once declined, and even tentatively split, after the Dutch moved their alliance to the Pimaba to the north of Lonckjouw. By analyzing the contemporary political geography and interactions between the Lonckjouw people and the Dutch, the paper shows how the Lonckjouw leaders responded to the Dutch in an effort to maintain their dominance, while facing the Dutch presence from southwestern Formosa.英文摘要：本論文討論荷蘭東印度公司在臺灣的政商活動如何影響南臺灣瑯嶠地方的地域勢力。荷蘭人筆下的瑯嶠，是當時臺灣最具社會階層化，擁有明顯社會政治階序的人群。瑯嶠統治者轄領十六社，為屬民視同君主。論文探討荷蘭人在臺灣南部的政商利益發展，如何強化或阻擋瑯嶠集團的領地擴張與權力鞏固。荷蘭人轉向與瑯嶠人不同祖源的卑南人結盟，並擊敗瑯嶠人後，瑯嶠集團一度面臨分裂與弱化。藉由分析當時的政治地理以及瑯嶠人與荷蘭東印度公司雙方的互動，論文試著呈現瑯嶠政治菁英面臨來自臺灣西南部的荷蘭人時，如何回應其帶來的壓力以維持其統治。起始頁-結束頁：485-504資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心2篇名：財產權的限制與補償：新理論分析框架並列篇名：The Limitation and Compensation of Property Rights: A New Theoretical Framework作者：張永健(Yun-chien Chang)關鍵字：騎樓;公共設施保留地;特徵迴歸模型;財產權;隱然非金錢補債;大法官釋字第564號解釋;至為輕微;pedestrian arcade;reserved land for public facilities;hedonic regression model;property rights;implicit in-kind compensation;Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 564;de minimis期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：「財產權重大限制」是指財產權雖然沒有被徵收，但受到超過「至為輕微」的管制。臺灣的「財產權重大限制」理論，主要有兩大缺失：第一，缺乏夠具體的判斷標準;第二，沒有現實可操作的補償計算方式。本文以大法官釋字第564號解釋理由書，以侵害是否「至為輕微」作為區分特別犧牲和社會義務的判斷標準。本文並進一步主張，使用特徵迴歸模型與實價登錄數據，計算系爭不動產在管制前後的市場行情。市價差異可以用來判斷侵害是否至為微小而須給予補償；也可以作為補償數額的估價方式。英文摘要：Current theories and constitutional interpretations on regulatory takings in Taiwan only vaguely distinguish regulations and regulatory takings, in addition to failing to advance any operable method to compute the amount of compensation. This article expands the de minimis standard raised in Constitutional Court Interpretation No. 564 and argues that constitutional law scholars should develop theories regarding which kind of implicit, in-kind compensation can be used to offset the regulated parties' losses. This article explains how hedonic regression models and the big data on real estate transactions enable regulators and courts to calculate the market value of the real properties in question before and after a regulation. The difference in computed market value can be used to decide whether the limitation of property rights is de minimis-if not, the value gap should be compensated.起始頁-結束頁：505-535資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心3篇名：男男按摩的身體工作：親密關係的劃界與跨界並列篇名：The Bodywork of Erotic Gay Massage: ”Crafted Intimacy” and ”Unscripted Care” in Male-for-Male Sexual Commerce作者：陳伯偉(Bo-wei Chen);王宏仁(Hong-zen Wang)關鍵字：男男情慾按摩;身體工作;感知的身體;親密劃界／跨界;邊緣的身體;affective embodiment;bodywork;erotic gay massage;intimacy;socially vulnerable bodies期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文探討男男情慾按摩中的兩個面向：男師如何透過身體工作，滿足客人的需求，在此過程中，親密關係如何被感知與「體現」。透過深度訪談34位男同志按摩師的勞動經驗，本文發現：在身體工作的面向，男師會透過按摩技藝，營造與邊緣身體的性親密關係，也劃出與消費者之間的界線；在跨進親密關係的面向，則因勞動過程中與客人身體親密「感觸」所產生的情感連結，讓男男按摩成為其體的關愛實作。透過分析身體工作與親密關係的勞動過程，讓我們看到男男按摩中所涉及的身體／情感互動，體現男同志性消費文化中的親密「劃界」與「跨界」。英文摘要：Drawing upon in-depth interviews with 34 male-for-male masseurs, this article explores two prominent service features of erotic gay massage: crafted intimacy and unscripted care. Whereas the former refers to the 'boyfriend experience' built up through tactile encounters, the latter regards erotic services as caring practices for the socially vulnerable, adding a moral dimension to the cultural significance of gay massage. This article suggests that the bodywork of gay massage provides a clear window into the neglected interactions of body and affections in male-for-male sexual labor where corporeal and emotional boundaries can be both maintained and crossed. It reveals the bodily inflexibility of normative gay desire, indicating how its contours are redefined by commodified same-sex intimacies. This article concludes that corporeal and affective dimensions are inseparable in understanding gay massage. Further research can benefit from more attention to somatic affection in the interplay between bodywork and intimacy in gay sexual commerce.起始頁-結束頁：537-569資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心4篇名：郭店《老子》思想管窺並列篇名：A Preliminary Study of the Political Thought in Guodian Laozi作者：張其賢(Chishen Chang)關鍵字：郭店老子;樸;無名;無為;自然;Guodian Laozi;pu;wuming;wuwei;ziran期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文將郭店《老子》視為一開放性的文本，以先秦所有文獻，作為詮釋其中重要思想用語義涵之根據。郭店甲「絕聖棄智」章中的「樸」，個人將之釋為「作為特定政策結果之民情單純」。郭店《老子》中的「無名」，釋為「取實去名」，無為」之「為」釋為「立名、重名」；「無為」解為「勿以名為務，取實而去名」；「無不為」解為「使實自為」；「自然」釋為「有實無名」。郭店《老子》呈現出的政治思想，可總結為：「抑制思想言論，重農抑工商，去除名／貌／飾／謀，使民情返回重實去名、使實自為的狀態。「無為」的精髓並非尊重放任一切現狀，而是復樸。英文摘要：This article aims to propose a new way of studying the ideas and political thought contained in Guodian Laozi. This new way consists of presenting other relevant texts and ideas of the pre-Qin period as annotative materials for interpreting the connotations of certain key concepts in the target text. Using such a method, I argue that pu might be understood as the simplicity resulting from a policy which promotes agriculture and discourages luxurious crafts and commerce, wuming as ”retaining the substance and discarding nominal form”, wuwei as ”refraining from pursuing nominalism”, and ziran as ”abiding by the substance of beings”.起始頁-結束頁：571-609資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心5篇名：牟宗三與海德格論康德：以「有限性」作擂臺並列篇名：”Finitude” as the Arena: Mou and Heidegger on Kant作者：楊德立(Yeung Tak-Iap)關鍵字：牟宗三;海德格;康德;有限性;無限性;道德的形上學;此在形上學;Mou Zongsan;Heidegger;Kant;finitude;infinitude;moral metaphysics;metaphysics of Dasein期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在釐清牟宗三與海德格詮釋對康德「有限性」概念之詮釋，借此建立三者的溝通基礎。牟跟海一樣，認為康德對存有論的論述並不完備，需要補充；海德格認為康德哲學應下開「基礎存有論」發展「此在形上學」。牟宗三則認為，應該發展「道德的形上學」；牟重視現象與物自身的區分，因其關乎認知與道德、感性與超感性領域之分際，並認為道德之超越性是人「可無限」的關鍵；海德格則意圖改變感性、知性的優次地位，強調感性、處境和時間性，否定人之無限性。基於以上異同，本文進一步申述兩者對康德哲學的改造與後續發展，設想他們之間的批評和回應，並評論兩者在何種意義下，更能承先啟後。英文摘要：This paper aims at laying the foundation of a discourse between Mou and Heidegger's philosophy through their interpretations of Kant's concept of finitude. Mou tried wholeheartedly to internalize Kantian philosophy in the interest of establishing the new Chinese philosophy which takes the moral subject as the foundation of the system. The key to success lies in the interpretative works of arguing the transcendental character of man with the following premise: man is finite but can be infinite; Heidegger, as a phenomenologist, claims that the concept of finitude is the fundamental spirit and implicit premise of the whole Kantian philosophy. He upholds the priority of sensibility and concludes that human finitude has to be delimited by the situation in terms of time, by which he rejects the infinitude of human existence. By the juxtaposition of their interpretations, we can see how they interpret the concept of finitude, and how they try to internalize and go beyond Kantian philosophy.起始頁-結束頁：611-638資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心6篇名：原則、情境與道德規範性並列篇名：Principles, Situations, and the Normativity of Morality作者：許漢(Hahn Hsu)關鍵字：道德個別主義;道德原則主義;原則;道德意義;道德義務;情境敏感性;道德一致性;moral particularism;moral principlism;principle;moral sense;moral obligation;contextual sensivity;moral consistency期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：當代道德個別主義者Jonathan Dancy主張，道德實踐不依賴道德原則，原則也不存在。他認為，同一類行為之每一行為個例的道德意義都不一樣。依據個別主義，如果有原則，必定有例外，原則之間也必有衝突。這篇論文提出一個原則主義的論述。這個原則主義反對個別主義且認為，道德需要原則。這個原則主義基於對原則的概念理解而論說，原則具有一組形上特性與功能可以化解個別主義的批評，而且，原則主義的道德觀可以說明道德的一致性以及道德對於情境的敏感性。英文摘要：Contemporary moral particularists like Jonathan Dancy argue that the possibility of morality does not depend on moral principles. He maintains that principles do not exist. According to particularism, if there were any moral principle, there would have to be exceptions to it; if there were plurality of principles, they would necessarily tend to come into conflict. This paper attempts a defense of the need for and existence of moral principles. Such a defense is a form of principlism which will be argued for and explained by this paper. This defense begins with a conceptual understanding of principle which gives rise to some metaphysical features and functions of principles. In virtue of these features and functions, the proposed principlism is able to meet the particularist criticisms. More importantly, this principlist view of morality is able to give an account of moral consistency and the contextual sensitivity of morality.起始頁-結束頁：313-347資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心7篇名：年金自由化？－日本企業年金體系的制度變遷並列篇名：Pension Liberalisation? Institutional Change of the Japanese Corporate Pension System作者：葉崇揚(Chung-yang Yeh)關鍵字：自由化;雙元化;企業年金;日本;比較資本主義;liberalisation;dualisation;corporate pension;Japan;comparative capitalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：日本於2001年引進確定給付和確定提撥企業年金法，這是否代表日本企業年金體系呈現自由化的轉變呢？本文以比較資本主義觀點為基礎，指出日本面臨經濟自由化與困境時，行動者受制於日本二重構造體系而採取雙元化策略：一方面，維持一定比例的核心勞動者，讓他們享有DB制企業年金，作為日本企業在全球市場的比較競爭優勢；另一方面，提高非典型勞工的比例，以增加彈性化和降低企業生產成本，則是依賴DC制企業年金和公共福利。因此，日本企業年金體系是逐漸呈現雙元化的趨勢，而非自由化。英文摘要：Japan introduced the Defined-Benefit Corporate Pension Act and Defined-Contribution Corporate Pension Act in 2001. Did this liberalise Japan's corporate pension system? This article based on the Comparative Capitalism Perspective endeavours to show that Japan adapted the dualist strategy due to its institutional legacies in the face of economic liberalisation and difficulties. On the one hand, a portion of core workers are maintained for comparative institutional advantages in the global market, and DB corporate pensions are provided for core workers. On the other hand, the number of non-regular workers is increasing to increase flexibility and reduce labour cost, and they usually rely on DC Corporate pensions and public welfare. Therefore, the transformation of the Japanese corporate pension system is dualisation rather than liberalisation.起始頁-結束頁：349-393資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心8篇名：頻譜拍賣制度之理論回顧、政策經驗與模擬研究並列篇名：Theoretical Review, Policy Experience and Simulation Study of Spectrum Auction System作者：樊沁萍(Chinn-ping Fan);陳人傑(Jen-chieh Chen)關鍵字：頻譜拍賣;多回合上升標拍賣;組合價格鐘拍賣;綜效;spectrum auction;simultaneous multi-round auction;combinatorial clock auction;synergy effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文比較國際電信頻譜釋照最常用的兩種拍賣制度：SMRA（simultaneous multi-round auction）與CCA（combinatorial clock auction）。從學術分析與政策經驗看來，這兩種拍賣制度各有優劣。SMRA簡單易懂，但無法投組合標，故可能降低效率。CCA之組合標設計可改善此缺點，但操作複雜，由電腦算出之拍賣結果難以用直觀解釋，成交價格不真備穩定性也違反單一價格法則。本文以模擬方法研究綜效係數與SMRA效率之關係，建構多種評價架構之全綜效與部分綜效模型，就不同綜效係數值各進行五千組隨機評價之模擬分析。模擬結果顯示當綜效係數不超過0.20時，SMRA制度之效率比不會大幅降低，仍然是適當的拍賣制度。英文摘要：This paper compares two spectrum auction systems: SMRA (simultaneous multi-round auction) and CCA (combinatorial clock auction). Besides theoretical studies, we also discuss the relative merits of these two systems demonstrated by policy experiences of various countries. SMRA is considered efficient except when there exists a high degree of positive synergy factors. CCA allows bidders to bid on any package that suits their needs. However, the calculation of VNC (Vickrey nearest core) price seems like a black hole for bidders, and also violates the law of one price. We conduct a simulation to study the relationship between synergy factors and efficiency level. Our simulation covers six valuation structures, and two synergy structures, each with 101 factor levels and 5000 groups of random values. The simulation results show that for synergy factors below 0.20, SMRA can achieve a relatively satisfactory efficiency level, and hence, it is still a satisfactory auction system.起始頁-結束頁：395-434資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心9篇名：中國大中型鋼鐵企業表現差異及其決定因素並列篇名：Factors Determining Differences in Performance between the Large and Medium Chinese Steel Enterprises作者：張嘉麟(Chia-lin Chang);瞿宛文(Wan-wen Chu)關鍵字：國企改革;企業表現;中國產業;鋼鐵產業;SOE reform;enterprise performance;Chinese industry;steel industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：中國在經歷90年代國企改革之後，國企在一些包括鋼鐵業的重工業仍占有主導性的地位，本文欲探究這些國企維持其領導性地位之原因，因此探討主導中國鋼鐵業發展的大中型企業之間的表現差異，及導致差異的來源和因素。結果發現，雖然中國鋼鐵國企普遍承擔較多社會責任，財務負擔較高，以致獲利能力較私企低，然而大型國企因有較高的規模經濟生產優勢，並容易受到中央政府的支持，使其擁有較中型國企和其他大中型私企高的生產效率；中型國企則因較無規模優勢，又有沉重的財務負擔，因此企業表現排名居末；而改制企業的企業表現已能接近於私企。英文摘要：After China pushed through a massive reform of the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the late I990s, some SOEs still dominate heavy industries, including the steel industry. To study the reasons why these SOEs have been able to maintain their leading position, we investigate the difference in the performance of the large and medium steel enterprises in terms of ownership and scale, and analyze the causes of the difference in performance. Our results reveal that although some leading state-owned steel enterprises in China have higher financial burdens, probably due to their greater social responsibilities, they still have higher productivity because of their greater advantage of economies of scale, and they are more likely to be supported by the central government. The medium-sized SOEs perform worst because they don't have the advantage of economies of scale and have higher financial burdens. In addition, the privatized enterprises perform like the private ones.起始頁-結束頁：435-483資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心10篇名：地方派系的資源配置策略：以嘉義縣社區營造資源為例的個案研究並列篇名：Resource Allocation Strategy of Local Factions: A Case Study of Community Development Resources in Chiayi County作者：王宏文(Hongwung Wang);柯昀伶(Yun-Ling Ko);孫寧(Ning Sun)關鍵字：分配政治;補助;地方派系;distributive politics;grant;local faction期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：分配政治文獻中常探討政治人物會將資源優先分配給誰，其實證研究的結果並不一致，可能影響因素如下：大選與黨內初選制度、資源的分配流程、選區人口特性，及政治人物的特性等。本文探討嘉義縣社區營造資源的分配，量化研究結果顯示在此資源的分配上，陳縣長的影響力較大，立委們的影響力較小；陳縣長、張花冠立委及立委落選人陳適庸的地盤獲得補助的機率較高。這顯示並不是所有的支持者與游離者都是相同的，擁有在地資訊的現任者會考慮肉桶收買的成本、風險與效益，而會優先分配給一些真有某些特性的小團體或地方派系。英文摘要：Previous studies of distributive politics have focused on which types of voters are favored in the allocation of resources. Variations across these empirical studies can be attributed to factors such as the voting system and candidate selection rules, the type of and allocation procedures for resources, the nature of the district's population, and the characteristics of politicians. This paper studies the grant allocation of the Townscape Renaissance Project in Chiayi County. The results show that the influence of Magistrate Ming-Wen Chen outweighed that of legislators. In addition, the villages which were the core-constituencies of Magistrate Chen, of the Legislator Hua-Kuan Chang, and of the legislative election loser Shi-Yong Chen, had higher probabilities to receive the grants. This implies that not all support voters and swing voters are the same. The politician who has local information considers the cost, risk and benefit of pork-barrel buying, and allocates in favor of some groups or local factions with certain characteristics.起始頁-結束頁：163-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心11篇名：霍布斯的政治理論可以運用在國際關係規範理論嗎？為一種「修正主義式」的途徑辯護並列篇名：Can Hobbes's Political Theory Be Applied to Normative International Theory? In Defense of a ”Revisionist” Approach作者：林炫向(Hsuan-Hsiang Lin);凌振庭(Cheng-Ting Ling)關鍵字：霍布斯;國際關係;現實主義;道德規範;自然法;Hobbes;international relations;realism;morality;the law of nature期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：根據國際關係現實主義的傳統詮釋，一般認為國際關係是處在霍布斯所謂的自然狀態中；而根據霍布斯，此一狀態又是戰爭狀態，因此正義或道德規範不適用於國際政治。然而，在政治思想界近年來已經有一些「修正主義式」的詮釋認為，霍布斯的理論其實蘊含不少規範思想，特別是他關於自然法的探討與說明。這種替代的詮釋雖然在政治思想界已經廣為人知，在國際關係學界則還未受到足夠的重視。本文的目的是要藉助國際關係學的理論來為這種替代的新詮釋辯護，以使霍布斯的政治理論可以成為思考國際規範問題的一種理論資源。英文摘要：According to the realist orthodoxy, international relations are situated in the Hobbesian state of nature, which according to Hobbes is a state of war, and is thus devoid of justice or morality. In recent years, however, there has emerged among political theorists a new trend of revisionist interpretations which contend that Hobbes's political thought, if explored more thoroughly, is loaded with morality, especially in his exposition of the law of nature, and thus Hobbes's law of nature could be deemed a foundation of morality. This alternative interpretation is already well known in the study of political thought, but it is still not well accepted by the mainstream in the study of international relations (IR). The purpose of this paper is to defend this approach by drawing on theories in IR, so that it can become a resource for the theorizing of normative theory in IR.起始頁-結束頁：207-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心12篇名：法學方法與基本權解釋方法導論並列篇名：Reflections on the Legal Methodology and the Interpretation of Basic Rights: An Introductory Overview作者：李建良(Chien-liang Lee)關鍵字：法學方法;基本權利;憲法解釋;比較法學;自由權;平等權;Legal methodology;basic rights;constitutional interpretation;comparative law;right to liberty;right to equality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：法學作為一種學科或學術，時受到欠缺方法及不具客觀性的質疑，尤其涉及人民基本權利之憲法解釋，經常遭逢流於主觀恣意或政治考量的批判。緣此，本文以基本權解釋為探討核心，嘗試從法學方法的基本觀念與運作要素出發，一則分析法學方法之一般性特徵，另則聚焦於憲法基本權的解釋方法，檢視現行司法解釋下之基本權構造體系，並反思基本權釋義學及對其實務的影響。最後，分別針對自由權與平等權的憲法規範構造，提出憲法解釋（違憲審查）之基本法學方法，以供學術討論與實務運作之參考。英文摘要：The study of law, as an academic discipline, can sometimes be questioned for lacking methodology or objectivity, especially concerning the constitutional interpretation of the basic rights of people where these basic rights are subject to the criticisms of subjective or political considerations. Thus, this paper explores the interpretation of basic rights, and attempts to use the fundamental conceptual and operational factors of jurisprudence as its starting point. First, it analyzes the general characteristics of jurisprudence, and second, it focuses on the constitutional interpretation of basic rights, and examines the interpretation of basic rights and the impact of this interpretation on their practice. Last, it presents the basic legal methodology of the constitutional interpretation (constitutional review) of constitutional liberty and equality separately, to provide references for both academic discussion and practical application.起始頁-結束頁：237-277資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心13篇名：The End of a Commercial Era: From the English Junk Affair to the Vietnamese Maritime Embargo in 1693作者：Hoang Anh Tuan關鍵字：Tonkin/Vietnam;East Asia;early modem period;maritime trade;English East India Company期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：According to the English records, on Christmas Day 1693, the King of Tonkin issued an edict forbidding Vietnamese people from leaving the country on board foreign ships. Subsequent developments depicted the Vietnamese Court's strict regulation, ending an era of relatively liberal maritime trade and travel. Surprisingly, the Vietnamese Court's maritime embargo was not recorded anywhere in the Vietnamese chronicles. Using new data retrieved from the English archives, this article highlights the ”English Junk Affair” in 1693 which subsequently led to the Vietnamese Court's imposition of a maritime embargo, practically ending the commercial era of Tonkin. It also places the English misfortune in the context of local socio-economic changes as well as the transformation of the regional maritime commerce which largely contributed to the English withdrawal from northern Vietnam during the late seventeenth century.起始頁-結束頁：279-302資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心14篇名：檢驗「好公民」的認知轉變：比較脈絡下的臺灣公民並列篇名：Testing the ”Good Citizens” Theory: Taiwanese Citizens in a Comparative Context作者：黃信豪(Hsin-hao Huang)關鍵字：公民規範認知;公民精神;政治學習;世代交替;citizenship norms;citizenship;political learning;alternation of generation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究以Dalton的「好公民」研究<U+7232>參照，從比較視野勾勒近年來大眾公民規範認知演變與樣態；其次，也以臺灣<U+7232>個案解析個人如何獲取這項認知。透過ISSP兩年度調查資料的分析，本文發現公民規範認知應被區分<U+7232>公民職責、自主參與以及社群責任等三方面內涵。其次，穩定民主國家、新興民主國家的認知儘管有所差異，但演變趨勢卻相當一致。當考慮個人年齡因素，跨國比較分析與臺灣實證分析的結果皆符合個人政治學習解釋的預期。本文除了從比較視野拓展Dalton的研究，針對臺灣的發現也意涵我國民主公民教育與公民精神的深化仍有相當大的改善空間。英文摘要：With the consideration of Dalton's ”good citizens” theory, this study compares people's normative beliefs about citizenship cross-nationally, and investigates individuals' acquisition of citizenship norms by the case of Taiwan. By analyzing two waves of survey data of ISSP, we confirm that beliefs about citizenship norms can be divided into three aspects: civic responsibility, autonomous participation, and community duty. Also, respondents' citizenship norms in old democracies are different from those in new democracies, but patterns in the two country groups change in the same direction. Taking individuals' age into account, both our cross-national comparison and empirical analysis on Taiwanese respondents support the explanation of individuals' political learning. This study not only extends Dalton's research to a comparative context, but also implies that there is still much room for improvement in democratic civic education and the deepening of citizenship norms of Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心15篇名：托克維爾論異己民族與文明的判準並列篇名：Tocqueville on ”Others” and the Qualifications of Civilization作者：許家豪(Chiahao Hsu)關鍵字：托克維爾;文明;平等;殖民主義;反奴<U+96B7>制度;Alexis de Tocqueville;civilization;equality;colonialism;abolition of slavery期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文論證在托克維爾的思想中，社會條件的平等雖然是民主政體的必要條件，但卻預設一定的文明發展高度。托克維爾認<U+7232>從野蠻到文明有固定的判準，而文明發達國家有義務幫助落後的民族向文明的進程邁進，因而他支持殖民制度與反對奴隸制度的理由是一致的。殖民是必要的，因<U+7232>它可以「幫助」那些過去從未經歷過文明生活的野蠻民族去體會更進步的生活方式，而奴隸制度是不可欲的，因<U+7232>它阻礙了人性之中自發朝向更高度文明進步的自然趨力。從托克維爾對於異己民族與文明判準的觀點，我們可以發現他的民主理論中對於參與民主社會成員資格的認定。英文摘要：This article analyzes Tocqueville's discussions of cultural ”others” to illustrate Tocqueville's view on the qualifications of ”civilization”. I begin by arguing that Tocqueville's famous assertion on the ”equality of social conditions” in America is a societal status that was unique to America at his time, and presumes a highly ”civilized” standard in which those who are not ”civilized” are not qualified to be fully equal. Tocqueville believes those more civilized nations or peoples have the duty to ”elevate” those who fall behind on the path towards civilizational progress, and when ”necessity” requires, can even justify the use of force. I argue that Tocqueville's assumption of civilizational progress can explain Tocqueville's seemingly contradictory positions in supporting the colonization project in Algeria while fighting against slavery in French colonies. The essay concludes that it is crucial to include Tocqueville's assumption of civilization when considering the full scope of his theory of democracy.起始頁-結束頁：41-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心16篇名：Putchock of India and Radix China: Herbal Exchange around Maritime Asia via the VOC during the 17th and 18th Centuries並列篇名：印度木香與土伏苓：17至18世紀荷蘭東印度公司的亞洲海域香藥貿易作者：鄭維中(Weichung Cheng)關鍵字：putchock;radix China;Dutch East India Company;country trade;herb exchange;木香;土伏苓;荷蘭東印度公司;港腳貿易;香藥貿易期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Putchock (Saussurea costus) has long been grown in the vicinity of Kashmir. It is known by the Chinese as a cure for diarrhea-related symptoms. Radix China (Smilax china) is a herb grown in the hinterland of China which cures symptoms of skin ulceration. The radix China was carried from China to India, while the putchock was carried the other way around. They were carried by official traders belonging to Vietnam, Siam, Ryukyu, Java and so forth. Along with the expansion of European intervention in trans-oceanic trade from the 16th century onward, European chartered companies gradually replaced the Southeast Asian tributary traders and became the main carriers of these trades. In this article, the author collects incomplete quantitative data surviving in the archives of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) on those two herbs in China and India, in order to illustrate the concrete situation of this trans-Asian herbal exchange.英文摘要：木香產於喀什米爾高原一帶，長年被中國人作<U+7232>治療腹瀉的藥物使用。土伏苓則是中國內陸生產的藥草，對於皮膚潰爛症狀具有療效。土伏苓從中國出口到印度，而木香則是由印度出口到中國。這些香藥也由越南、暹羅、琉球、爪哇等地經營海上貿易的商人來輸運。十六世紀起，當歐洲人進入東亞海域，各特許公司開始取代這些仰賴中華帝國朝貢制度的區域貿易交換活動，甚至成<U+7232>主要的載運者。本文藉由荷蘭東印度公司檔案中所遺留的貿易數量記載，檢視在中國與印度之間兩種香藥的交換歷史，以呈現泛亞香藥貿易的實態。起始頁-結束頁：75-117資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心17篇名：臺灣民間宗教儀式實踐中的「品味動員」：陣頭、品味社群與宗教治理並列篇名：”Taste Mobilization” in the Ritual of Taiwanese Folk Religion: Parade Troupes, Taste-Community and Religious Government作者：齊偉先(Wei-hsian Chi)關鍵字：遶境;陣頭;宗教場域;宗教品味;身體技藝;territorial circumvention;parade troupes;religious field;religious taste;bodily technique期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：30卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：許多研究分別從不同的角度探索臺灣漢人民間信仰場域的變化，但尚未有研究從品味的角度切入來探討民間信仰場域的變遷。本文嘗試帶入品味面向的討論，凸顯這個取徑在宗教社會學研究可能帶來的貢獻。本研究從民間信仰場域中具代表性的遶境活動著手，分別從論述面及組織面分析了品味元素的影響。研究發現，與遶境陣頭相關的品味結構是結合廟宇信仰論述與陣頭技藝論述的關鍵要素。另外透過遶境活動中的品味動員，派生出三類不同的自發性組織化群集，這些新的管道創造了參與者發展出個人信仰的可能，展現出現代民間宗教場域中宗教治理的多元面貌。英文摘要：While existing research on religion has documented the interplay between modernization and folk religion in Taiwan well, the notion of taste appears to be analytically absent from the current literature. In this paper, I illustrate how taste serves as an insightful framework for approaching sociology of religion. I begin with the ritual activity of territorial circumvention, and show new forms of religious grouping resulting from it. I further examine how taste takes place in activities of territorial circumventions, with a particular focus on its discursive and institutional dimensions. Specifically, my analysis demonstrates how the taste structure organizes different discourses of the religious field. From an institutional perspective, I show three types of religious grouping based on the taste mobilization. Such religious groupings invite people of different social statuses to take part in the religious field. The emerging religious phenomena discussed here shed light on the multiple dimensions of modern religious government.起始頁-結束頁：119-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心01篇名：「例外之地」與「臨時之所」－編輯室的話並列篇名：Editorial: Exceptional Spaces, Temporary Locales作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：4-9資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).00012篇名：緬甸克倫難民的文化實踐與民族主義運動並列篇名：Cultural Praxis and Nationalist Movement of Myanmar Karen Refugees作者：趙中麒(Chung-Chi CHAO)關鍵字：難民;民族主義運動;流離失所的社會性文化;社會記憶;同時性;Refugees;Nationalist movement;Displaced societal culture;Social memory;Simultaneity期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018中文摘要：文化是一個民族被感知、被認識，並能持續存在的要素，也是民族主義人士得以驅動成員投入民族運動的關鍵。難民因為流離於家園，成為文化上失根的浮萍。文化是文化社群成員習得人我關係、倫理、認同等世界觀的來源。難民的認同或許會因為流離失所狀態而改變，但不會消失。難民的文化，會在難民營被重建。在泰緬邊境克倫難民營，由於泰國政府的難民和邊境管理政策、國際援助組織援助行動，加上難民營內教會、各個難民組織的文化活動，在難民營內建立屬於克倫民族流離失所的社會性文化，並且在此社會性文化之中，由於某種同時性，讓所有難民都被包覆其中，承襲民族主義的集體記憶。這種社會性文化，讓克倫難民不再是無文化的失根者，也成為克倫難民民族主義運動仍舊持續的重要原因。英文摘要：Members of national community inherit the cosmology of the community by practicing their culture. Homelands of refugees are the places wherein their cultures take root. Because of being forced to take shelter in neighboring countries, refugees are perceived as people severing their ties with their cultures and loose the cosmology. However, in the Karen refugee camps at the Thai- Burma border, thanks to Thai authorities' border and refugee management policies, as well as international humanitarian assistance, the Karen refugees rebuild their culture in refugee camps. The rebuilt culture is called displaced societal culture. Within the societal culture, a simultaneity emerges and all members in refugee camps can thus inherit their collective memory. The existence of the societal culture is the reason why a nation can be objectively perceived and recognized, as well as the critical factor that nationalists can make use to mobilize ordinary people's nationalist consciousness. The Karen organizations also use the rebuilt culture to reshape, strength and/or incite ordinary people's nationalist consciousness.起始頁-結束頁：11-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).00023篇名：在市場中實踐「西藏意識」：印度、尼泊爾流亡藏人的難民經濟並列篇名：Practicing ”Tibetanness” in the Market Place: Refugee Economy of Exiled Tibetans in India and Nepal作者：潘美玲(Mei-Lin PAN)關鍵字：流亡藏人;難民經濟;西藏意識;西藏志業;宗教倫理;Exiled Tibetan;Refugee economy;”Tibetanness”;Tibetan cause;Religious ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018中文摘要：在全球化的跨國移工或經濟移民的現象中，本文探討的是非自願移民的難民群體的生存策略與經濟運作機制。主要針對流亡藏人社群，因為其難民的狀態，同時擔負著維繫西藏的文化使命，而發展出來的「西藏意識」（Tibetanness），從政治認同的面向拓展到市場上的經濟實踐，從而影響其生存策略與經濟活動的實踐。透過流亡藏人在印度的冬季毛衣貿易業，以及在尼泊爾發展的西藏地毯產業，以多點民族誌與比較分析策略，檢視流亡藏人如何在這兩個產業市場當中實踐其「西藏意識」，從而構成西藏難民的經濟特色。這種西藏特色有助於市場差異化策略的進行，但也構成了產業發展的限制。印證了博蘭尼所指出市場鑲嵌在社會之中的運作，尤其流亡藏人社會的發展要務，在於為西藏的家園尋求正義，並以維持認同與文化傳統為優先，因此經濟的目的在於維生，是完成西藏志業的工具，從而對於資本主義式的財富積累和壟斷式的擴張，產生了節制的力量，維繫了藏人在流亡處境下族群團結的基礎。英文摘要：This paper discusses exiled Tibetans as involuntary migrants, and their survival strategies and economic mechanism. Exiled Tibetans developed ”Tibetanness” because they are refugees with responsibility to preserve Tibetan culture and tradition. ”Tibetanness” has been derived from political identity, shaping exiled Tibetan's survival strategies and economic practice. Winter sweater-selling business in India and Tibetan carpet industry in Nepal are two cases to demonstrate how exiled Tibetans exercise their ”Tibetanness” in the refugee economy. To make a living is the major purpose of refugee economy and it also serves the Tibetan cause: to seek justice for Tibetans and to preserve identity and language. This study is based on multi-sited ethnography and comparative methods on exiled Tibetans in India and Nepal to understand the commonality and difference of ”Tibetanness.” The result has confirmed Karl Polany's theory that market is embedded in society. Exiled Tibetans have found their way to limit the development of capitalistic accumulation of wealth and competition, and to re-enforce their national solidarity.起始頁-結束頁：59-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).00034篇名：「越」界臺茶：臺越茶貿易中的移動、劃界與本土爭辯並列篇名：Mobility, Bordering, and the Contested Localness of the Tea Trade between Taiwan and Vietnam作者：洪伯邑(Po-Yi HUNG);練聿修(Yu-Hsiu LIEN)關鍵字：邊界;移動;物質性;組裝;越南茶;臺灣茶;Border;Mobility;Materiality;Assemblage;Vietnamese tea;Taiwanese tea期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文結合邊界（border）與移動（mobility）的理論取徑，從茶作為物在臺灣、越南之間的農技轉移與跨境貿易中，重新思索臺灣茶與越南茶之間貌似對立卻又互依的關係，並藉此再思考食物農業產銷中的本土所謂何物。越南茶與臺灣茶之間的關聯，隱含臺灣的南向政策、農技轉移，臺灣茶進出口市場的消長、食安議題、食農體系全球化與本土農業保衛戰等多層意義；同時越南林同（Lam Dong）省地區跨境農技移轉的茶葉地景，其生成與轉變背後有著臺灣、中國兩岸政治經濟動態過程下的臺越關係。臺灣茶的品種、製茶技術、產業經營者往越南跨境移動，當臺灣國內開始強化本土茶的意涵，從而形塑與包括越南茶在內的境外茶的對立時，邊界與移動的力道的確並存於臺灣茶與越南茶兼具互斥與互依的複雜關係中。要解讀境外越南茶與本土臺灣茶之間的互斥和互依，研究者必須參與到茶生產消費的日常生活中，從中獲取詮釋邊界與移動如何互為表裡的資料。茶的物質性牽起非線性的人與非人的組裝，讓越南茶鬆動臺灣茶的本土劃界，移動進入臺灣的通路，形成本土與境外，邊界與移動互為表裡的實作過程。英文摘要：Taking tea trade between Vietnam and Taiwan as an example, this essay aims to reconsider the re-localization of agro-food production and consumption through understanding the politics of (de)bordering and (im)mobilization in local food system (LFS). Starting from the early 1990s, a group of Taiwanese entrepreneurs and tea merchants started their tea plantations and production in Vietnam, especially in the Province of Lam Dong. Instead of using the tea trees that originally grew in Vietnam, these Taiwanese entrepreneurs and tea merchants transplanted tea trees of improved varieties from Taiwan. Additionally, they also brought along the whole ”package” of processing techniques. In other words, they believed they also produced Taiwanese tea, whereas the production location was in Vietnam instead. In Taiwan, the ”local” production of tea has declined due to a variety of reasons. Nevertheless, the market demand of tea has increased mainly because of the increasing consumption of bottled teas, handmade tea drinks at chain stores, and the tea for touristic souvenirs. As a result, strong demand for imported tea, mainly from Vietnam, has increased to meet the growing consumption. However, the emerging ethos of LFS in Taiwan has created a discourse of local authenticity in agriculture, including tea production. In consequence, the decreasing local tea production in Taiwan has been labeled as the only authentic tea product of Taiwan. In accordance, many people regard Vietnamese tea, including those produced by Taiwanese tea entrepreneurs in Lam Dong, as a threat tarnishing the authenticity of local tea in Taiwan. Based on the empirical data collected in both Taiwan and Vietnam, we argue that the local food movement has been a circulation assemblage with an interface between border work and material mobility. From that, we problematize the emerging pursuit of a purified and essentialized local food, Taiwanese tea in particular.起始頁-結束頁：87-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).00045篇名：馬來西亞「後茅草行動」的華社變遷：以「動地吟」詩人群體為個案討論並列篇名：The Transition of Malaysian Chinese Society in ”Post-Operasi Lalang” Era: A Case Study on the ”Dong Di Yin” Poetic Group作者：曾維龍(Wen-Loong CHOU)關鍵字：馬來西亞;華人社會;馬華文學;茅草行動;「動地吟」詩人;Malaysia;Chinese society;Malaysian Chinese literature;Operasi Lalang;Dong Di Yin期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文主要探討「後茅草行動」時期所出現的一批詩人群體，他們的形成以及實踐的困境。筆者以1987年至1998年之間「後茅草行動」時期為範疇，嘗試說明「後茅草行動」和馬華文學之間存在的聯繫。這一批詩人群體，主要由游川和傅承得號召聚集。通過參與「動地吟」現代詩朗誦的演出，他們積極以詩歌創作介入社會，反映當下。這一詩歌活動，橫跨越二十餘年的時間，幾乎每隔十年即呈現一系列的演出。按傅承得統計，在1987年至2012年之間在「動地吟」演繹的本土作品即有331篇，另有馬來文及巫譯作品6篇、國外作品23篇，共計360首詩。參與的詩人多達100人。這一現象產生了大量的創作文本，成為馬華文學研究的重要課題。本文闡述詩歌文本背後所可能存在的「支配／反支配」、「壓抑／反壓抑」、想像力等結構性問題，從側面反映「後茅草行動」時期馬來西亞華人社會族群本位的態度。英文摘要：This paper discusses the emergence, formation, and practice of a group of poets that appeared during the ”Post-Operasi Lalang” period. This article elaborates on the relationship between the ”Post-Operasi Lalang” and the Ma-hua (Chinese Malaysian) literature in the period between 1987 and 1998. During this period, You Chuan (游川) and Poh Seng Titt (傅承得) have gathered a group of poets. By participating in the performances of ”Dong Di Yin” (動地吟), they actively participated in the society through writing poetry that reflects the present. Spanning more than twenty years, this activity has presented series of performances almost every decade. According to Poh's statistics, there were 331 local works performed in the period from 1987 to 2012. Furthermore, there were 6 Malay works translated from Malay and 23 works from Western texts, reaching a total of 360 poems. There were more than 100 poets involved. This phenomenon has become an important topic in the study of Ma-hua literature. In a large amount of texts, the poets explored the structural problems such as ”domination/anti-domination”, ”repression/ anti-repression” and imagination, particularly reflecting the Chinese society in Malaysia during the ”Post-Operasi Lalang” period.起始頁-結束頁：127-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).00056篇名：在萬家墨面的時代：「動地吟」的文學行動並列篇名：The Time of the Poor: ”Earth-Shaking Recitation” as Literary Activism作者：張錦忠(Kim Tong TEE)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：154-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).00067篇名：馴化水，也要馴化人：臺北市自來水生飲計畫的面子工程與技術展演並列篇名：Domesticating Water, Domesticating Persons: The Face-saving Project and Technological Performance of Tap-water Drinking Programs in Taipei作者：王志弘(Chih-Hung WANG);黃若慈(Jo-Tzu HUANG)關鍵字：現代性;基礎設施;淨化;信賴;Modernity;Infrastructure;Purification;Trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文探討臺北市自來水生飲計畫如何於落後焦慮脈絡中，形成彰顯城市進步的面子工程與技術展演。生飲涉及兩種技術場域：技術專家主導且黑箱化的幕後工程與技術實作，以及鑲嵌於都市政治的面子工程與技術展演。1960年代，臺北自來水事業處宣稱自來水已達生飲標準，但混濁水質遭市民質疑，官方則以家戶端配水管不符標準回應。1980年代，生飲計畫再次啟動，以學校及觀光飯店等彰顯國家門面場所為主。該計畫著重汰換使用端管線設備，通過用戶端輔導工作以塑造進步飲水主體，並將生飲更名「安全用水」，但市民依然缺乏信心。自來水系統大幅升級後的1990年代晚期，市府於公共場所設置「直飲台」，並以數據化水質監測展現可靠形象，但民眾基於衛生和口味習慣，仍普遍裝設過濾裝置。作者主張，生飲計畫的曲折顯示馴化人與馴化水必須同時進展，而水也可能於馴化後再度野化，體現了文明淨化的焦慮與信賴的物質面向。英文摘要：This paper explores the tap-water drinking programs of the Taipei City and argues that they acted as face-saving project in a ”latecomer anxiety” atmosphere and need technological performances to ensure trust from citizens. In the 1960s, the Taipei Water Department claimed that the tap-water in Taipei already reached potable water standards, but the turbidity of water was not convincing. In responding to the public’s questioning, the Department maintained that the water was turbid because the end-users had installed inadequate pipes. In the 1980s, the government again initiated the project, and made those sites featuring the face of the nation as their targets, such as schools and tourist hotels. At this stage the government highlighted the needs of replacing pipes directly linked to the end-users, and through counseling programs it aimed to cultivate the citizens as advanced drinking subjects. Tap-water drinking was also renamed as ”secure drinking” given this context. Despite all the efforts, citizens still lacked confidence in the quality of the water. During the late-1990s, when the piped water system had been greatly improved, the government began setting up ”purifier water supply machines” in public places. It also tried to demonstrate the reliability of the water by publicizing the water quality statistics. Yet given the public’s concerns with hygiene and personal tastes, people still use filter device before drinking tap-water. The authors argue that the case of tap-water drinking programs suggests that domestication of humans and water have to be carried out simultaneously; especially when water tends to become wild again even after domestication, the material aspect constituting the anxiety and reliability during the course of civilizing purification is made obvious.起始頁-結束頁：159-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).00078篇名：導言：在共同世界的邊緣探問生命政治：阿吉耶的城市人類學與難民營研究並列篇名：Introduction: Inquiring about the Bio-Politics from the Edge of the Common World: Michel Agier's Anthropology of City and Camp Study作者：陳瑞樺(Jui-Hua CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：196-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).00089篇名：生命權力以其敏感形式來檢驗：當代異質空間民族誌計畫的簡要導論並列篇名：Le biopouvoir a l'epreuve de ses formes sensibles. Breve introduction a un projet d'ethnographies des heterotopies contemporaines作者：阿吉耶(Michel AGIER);陳瑞樺(Jui-Hua CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：212-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).000910篇名：製作不受歡迎者並列篇名：La fabrique des indesirables作者：阿吉耶(Michel AGIER);陳瑞樺(Jui-Hua CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：226-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).001011篇名：阿吉耶著作目錄並列篇名：Bibliography of Agier作者：曾嘉琦(Chia-Chi TSENG);陳瑞樺(Jui-Hua CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：232-235資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).001112篇名：書評：評阿吉耶的《邊界：邁向世界主義境況的人類學》並列篇名：Book Review: A Review on Michel Agier's Borderlands: Towards an Anthropology of the Cosmopolitan Condition作者：洪世謙(Shih-Chian HUNG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：236-243資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).001213篇名：書評：紀念包曼：一位永遠的異鄉人評論家並列篇名：Book Review: In Memory of Zygmunt Bauman: A Life of an ever Stranger-Critic作者：朱元鴻(Yuan-Horng CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：244-257資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).001314篇名：影評：旁觀他人痛苦的影像倫理：《海上焰火》與生命蒙太奇並列篇名：Film Review: Visual Ethics of Regarding the Pains of the Other: The Montage of Life in Fire at Sea作者：柯能源(Neng-Yuan KO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：27期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：258-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201812_(27).001415篇名：思辨中國性－編輯室的話並列篇名：Editorial: Scrutinizing Chineseness作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：4-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).000116篇名：「體」現中國？：1950-1960年代威權統治下的臺灣民族舞蹈與創作能動性並列篇名：Dancing China ? : Exploring Artistic Creativity in the Nationalistic Dance under an Authoritarian Regime in Taiwan during the 1950s and 1960s作者：徐瑋瑩(Wei-Ying HSU)關鍵字：文化霸權;民族舞蹈;芭蕾;被發明的傳統;威權體制;Authoritarian regime;Ballet;Cultural hegemony;Invented tradition;Nationalistic dance期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣現代形式的舞蹈藝術萌發於日本殖民現代化的社會過程，然而，奠定今日舞蹈藝術學院化與形成舞蹈藝術場域的重要歷史轉折期，是在高舉反攻大陸的1950年代。在國民黨反共復國總動員的目標下，政治無可避免插手或管制藝文創作，舞蹈作為藝文之一環也無法逃脫政策的約束。當時，藝文政策鼓勵創作具戰鬥性的反共抗俄作品，與能象徵國民黨統治中國正當性的民族舞蹈。因此，臺灣舞蹈史的書寫對此一時期的舞蹈現象多以政治箝制、牽制舞蹈藝術的觀點總結。本文將此作為提問起點，重回史料觀察1950-1960年代的民族舞蹈與藝文政策之關係。相較於學者們著重由上而下指出政治箝制、牽制舞蹈，本文則由下而上觀察與理解當時舞蹈人如何在回應藝術政策的創作策略上施展能動性，以此豐富民族舞蹈如何可能的想像。同時，進一步理解缺乏反共經驗與中國舞知識技術的臺籍舞蹈名家如何配合民族舞蹈政策創作民族舞蹈。本文以貼近舞蹈家創作與表演的經驗為研究基礎，思考政治與舞蹈間迂迴的互動與辯證關係，彰顯即便在威權體制下，舞蹈作為特殊的藝術類屬，還是有其藝術思維與技術操作上的自我運作方式是政治難以強迫轉變的。舞蹈家在創作過程所開創的美學形式更是形塑民族舞蹈風格的骨架，決定民族舞蹈如何被體現與想像的關鍵。英文摘要：Dance as a modern art form in Taiwan originated from the period of Japanese colonization, however, the cold war period of 1950s-1960s was a stage of transformation that institutionalized dance and formed the basis of the dance field as we know today. During this time, anti-communism and recovering Mainland China was the goal of the Nationalistic Government Kuomintang（KMT 國民黨）, hence cultural policies were formulated to achieve the goal and so was the policy of dance. The Chinese Nationalistic dance created in Taiwan so called minzu dance（民族舞蹈）was the product promoted by KMT and its aim was to legitimatize the authority of KMT based on cultural nationalism. Scholars who studied minzu dance emphasized its political demands and considered that the dance policy limited the creativity of choreographers. This research turns this assumption into a question. Instead of talking about how the creativity of choreographers were restricted by the dance policy, I analyze documents and literature to see how choreographers created minzu dance that was an invented tradition, and special attention is paid to Taiwanese choreographers who grew up during Japanese colonization and had little experience of Mainland China. By revealing how choreographers created minzu dance in terms of their mentalities, the techniques, the strategies, I argue that minzu dance was the product of the negotiations between dancers and politicians. However, it was the creativity and techniques in dance making rather than the policy seeking to shape it that determined how minzu dance was presented and perceived.起始頁-結束頁：9-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).000217篇名：離散的邊界：離散論述、土腔電影與《初戀紅豆冰》並列篇名：The Frontiers of the Diaspora: Diaspora Discourse, Accented Cinema and Ice Kacang Puppy Love作者：許維賢(Wai-Siam HEE)關鍵字：離散華人;本土化;反離散;《初戀紅豆冰》;土腔電影;土腔風格;去疆界化;Diasporic Chinese;Localization;Against diaspora;Ice Kacang Puppy Love;Accented cinema;Accented style;Deterritorialization期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文揭示馬華的離散論述不盡然是反本土化的書寫。作者回顧和檢視馬來西亞土著霸權的源起和發展，以揭示它如何既構成了馬來西亞華人離散的邊界，亦建構了以黃錦樹為代表的在台馬華離散論述。這套離散論述把馬華的本土化論述排除在外，並傾向於把本土化與土著特權的原鄉迷思進行理論的連鎖。本文反思馬華本土化的困境與其正當性，從離散論述探討作為土腔電影的《初戀紅豆冰》的土腔風格和地方感性認同。此片在初始公映階段不被馬來西亞國家電影發展機構承認為大馬國產電影，後來導演阿牛在台灣綜藝節目向馬來西亞政府「嗆聲」批評，再經過朝野政黨力爭後，終於被承認為國產電影，免除繳交娛樂稅。阿牛既紮根大馬本土，亦跨界到台灣和其他華人世界，借助離散或反離散的位置向馬來西亞政府嗆聲，從而得到承認，整個事件即是去疆界化和再疆界化的旅程，說明了離散和本土化在馬華的共存共榮。《初戀紅豆冰》對華巫關係的描述框架不停留在族群的規範框架，它創造性地轉換成對中國化論述和父權制度的批判。此片也借助馬華的土腔風格和本土音樂創作，建構大馬的地方感性認同，讓流動的本土性也能轉化成離散影像中的土腔口音，隨時可以攜帶出境和入境，造就了離散的去疆界化。英文摘要：This article demonstrates that Malaysian Chinese diaspora discourse is not completely anti-localization. It retraces and examines the origins and development of Malaysian Bumiputera privileges in order to demonstrate that not only does this constitute the frontier of the Malaysian Chinese diaspora, but also constructs a Taiwan-resident Malaysian Chinese diaspora discourse, emblematized by author and critic Ng Kim Chew. This diaspora discourse excludes Malaysian Chinese localization discourse, and tends to create a theoretical link between localization and the ”original homeland” myth of Bumiputera privileges. This article reflects on the difficulties and legitimacy of Malaysian Chinese localization, employing Sinophone theory to explore the ”accented style” and the identity of local sensibility evident in the accented cinema Ice Kacang Puppy Love. When first screened, this film was not regarded by state film body FINAS as a domestic Malaysian film. Only after director Ah Niu took the Malaysian government to task over this on a Taiwanese arts show did opposition and governing parties unite to protest this, eventually winning the film recognition as a domestic production exempt from the entertainment tax. Ah Niu is firmly rooted in Malaysian soil, but also steps into Taiwan and other Chinese societies. His use of a diaspora or against diaspora position to criticize the Malaysian government and gain recognition is a process of deterritorialization and reterritorialization, illustrating the way in which diaspora and localization co-exist and thrive in Malaysian Chinese society. Ice Kacang Puppy Love’s descriptive framework for Chinese-Malay relations is not confined to standard ethnic templates, but creatively morphs into a criticism of Sinification discourse and the patriarchy. It also uses a Malaysian Chinese ”accented style” and local music composition to create an identity of local sensibility, enabling fluid local-ness to transform into a local accent within a diaspora film: it can be brought across frontiers at will, resulting in the deterritorialization of the diaspora.起始頁-結束頁：59-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).000318篇名：以「部落」之名：籌設原住民族部落學校的脈絡和論辯並列篇名：In the Name of ”Tribe” : The Context and Debate on the Establishment of Indigenous Tribal Schools作者：林文蘭(Wen-Lan LIN)關鍵字：原住民族部落學校;原住民族;主體性;教育實踐;文化復振;Indigenous tribal schools;Indigenous peoples;Subjectivity;Pedagogical practice;Cultural revitalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018中文摘要：從1990年代起，原住民族社群透過發展「體制內」的教育方案，或採行「體制外」的教學模式，積極從事文化復振以尋回族群主體性。整體而論，最顯著的特點是從教育體系內的「差異化」邁向「主體化」，其中以原住民族部落學校的發展最具有代表性，它挑戰了既有的教育管制和學習框架。本文以部落學校的籌設當作分析案例，採取政策和教育文本分析、媒體論述分析、參與觀察和訪談等多元研究方法，闡述部落學校如何以「部落」之名進行教育實踐和文化復振？梳理出原住民族教育體制從被殖民和同化，逐漸朝向爭取自主的過程。原住民族委員會於2012年提出部落學校設立計畫，自2013年創設第一所部落學校為「排灣族大武山部落學校」，規劃在十年內開辦30所。部落學校是以部落為主體的教育型態，更是原住民族文化權的實踐場域。然而，在籌辦過程中引發許多論辯：第一，部落和政府之間的關係亟待釐清，究竟是資源依賴或在地自主、是政策執行或部落民主。第二，籌辦過程並未優先扶植亟需文化保護的少數族群，是否會導致不同族群產生競爭、分化和對立，甚至成為強勢族群爭奪資源的戰場。第三，部落學校基於何種「族群」想像被建構，在教育實踐過程中如何重構傳統文化。第四，跨地域的整編分殊化的「部落」，如何顧及多元異質的部落主體性，而全稱式的學校命名和異中求同的教育實踐，如何體現出不同部落的文化差異性。綜論之，本文分析部落學校在生成脈絡、發展圖像和運作機制的相關論辯，描繪出奠基在文化主體性的理念所籌設的部落學校，如何打造出差異化的學習路徑、如何成為實踐教育民主的場域、如何變成觸發文化競逐的戰場，從中勾勒出原住民族邁向教育主體性的契機。英文摘要：Starting from the 1990s, indigenous communities have actively engaged in cultural revitalization to reclaim indigenous subjectivity through either education developments within the system or development models outside of the system. A key feature was to go from having differences (discrimination) received by indigenous students within the education system to the indigenous peoples establishing independence (autonomy and subjectivity) in their own education from the restrictions of the education system. This article examines how the educational practices and cultural revitalization of indigenous tribal schools: (1) reveal the profoundness of ”rediscovering indigenous tribes”, and (2) demonstrate the indigenous peoples’ tendency toward manufacturing tribal culture and reclaiming tribal subjectivity. Through a multi-perspective approach that analyzes government policies, education texts, media discourse, video analysis, participant observation and in-depth interviews, this article maps the development of indigenous tribal education from its colonization and assimilation to the fight for autonomy and self-determination. The Council of Indigenous Peoples therefore proposed the ”Indigenous Tribal Schools Establishment Plan” in 2012 to plan for the establishment of thirty indigenous tribal schools within the following ten years. Although indigenous tribal schools are a new form of tribal education, they are even more so a form of establishment of the indigenous peoples’ cultural rights. However, the process of establishing these schools has also brought up many issues for consideration: (1) There should be reflections on the relationship between the indigenous peoples and the government in terms of whether the indigenous peoples are resource-dependent on or resource-independent from the government, as well as whether the indigenous peoples should follow the government policies in all aspects or retain some tribal autonomy. (2) The establishment of the indigenous tribal schools resulted in competition, fractures and oppositions between different regional tribes. Because priority wasn’t made in regards to the cultural preservation of the minority tribes in the policies, the establishment of indigenous tribal schools resulted in majority tribes seizing larger shares of resources than minority tribes. Consequently, there is doubt raised on the fair distribution of resources across tribes. (3) There should be a review on the imagination of ”ethnicity” that is used as the basis in the establishment of indigenous tribal schools, and the cultural elements that are either revived or made from the educational practices of these schools. (4) ”Tribe”, when used in a trans-regional sense, integrates different local tribes but overlooks the individual elements and differences of each tribe’s subjectivity. Employing the term ”tribe” to group the indigenous people together and streamlining tribal differences into one homogenous system in the indigenous tribal schools’ educational practices rob the different tribes of their cultural distinctions and limit the locality and regional uniqueness of each of their existing cultures. This article presents the emerging context behind the establishment and the progress of indigenous tribal schools, analyzes their development and mechanism, seeks to understand how they have come to be a reflection of tribal democracy being established or cultural conflict at work, and outlines ways that the indigenous peoples can advance towards tribal self-determination and preserving their subjectivity.起始頁-結束頁：97-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).000419篇名：放逐於自身之外：亂倫創傷主體的心靈地景並列篇名：Inner Exile: The Psychic Landscape of Incest Trauma作者：彭仁郁(Jen-Yu PENG)關鍵字：亂倫創傷;心靈地景;內在放逐;臨床田野;心靈真實;Incest trauma;Psychic landscape;Clinical fieldwork;Inner exile;Psychic reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018中文摘要：亂倫性侵創傷在主流精神醫學和臨床心理學的實證論述框架中，經常被簡化為創傷後壓力症候群(PTSD)。然而，已有許多醫學人類學和臨床實務研究指出，忽視主體歷史脈絡和殊異性的標準化診斷，往往造成令心理創傷被精神疾病遮蔽的弔詭。然而，不可見的心理創傷如何被看見？精神分析對於心靈真實(psychic reality)的重視有助於超越精神病理學的限制，透過揭露主體無意識欲望的夢和自由聯想，以象徵隱喻的方式貼近創傷真實。只不過，自幼長期受創的後果之一即為夢的缺乏和聯想的不自由。基於長年針對亂倫創傷主體進行的「臨床田野」研究，本文嘗試提出「心靈地景」(psychic landscape)概念，作為窺見亂倫心理創傷樣貌的媒介。對亂倫創傷主體而言，作為自我認同基礎的「家」，經常由迫害－情感依附等衝突對立面構成。後果是倖存者裂解的自我被驅逐至一個無外在可逃離、無時無刻被監控的「內在放逐」(inner exile)狀態。此種無法言說的恐怖，外顯為令人不解、而易被精神病理化的症狀。本文將以一個與亂倫創傷主體遭逢的田野日誌為例，說明精神分析式的聆聽如何協助創傷主體揭露自身創傷與欲望混織的心靈地景，而此地景又如何可能在研究者與研究對象間的傳移(transference)關係中轉化。英文摘要：Contemporary psychiatry and clinical psycholog y generally frame the incest trauma within the positivist discourse of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). This categorization goes hand in hand with a tendency to pathologize and medicate psychotrauma. However, the standardized diagnostic reasoning may render the trauma invisible to the professional eye. In practice, due to the ineffability of incest trauma, victims are often subjected to different diagnoses of mental illness (schizophrenia, borderline personality disorder, antisocial personality disorders, etc.). For how can psychological trauma be seen or conceived? From a psychoanalytical perspective, and based on ”clinical fieldwork” (Peng 2014a) on incest trauma over a decade, the author advances the notion of the ”psychic landscape” to illustrate the power of imagery metaphors as a means to access to the subject's inner experience. For many incest survivors, ”home”, the presupposed fundamental space for constructing self-identity, is constituted of ambivalent representations that often combine one element with its very opposite: for instance, persecution-attachment, betrayal-demand for loyalty. The consequence is that the survivor's self is forced into a state of ”inner exile”, in which the split self is permanently monitored and there is no ”outside” to flee to; i.e., the subject is deprived of authority over her/his own psychic territory. The extreme terror of inner exile can manifest itself in puzzling symptoms, such as inexplicable fear, global anxiety, somatization, dissociation, lying, repeated victimization, etc. Taking a Taiwanese incest survivor's case as an example, this paper describes the transferential process through which the traumatic psychic landscape emerges. By doing so, the author reiterates the need to go beyond the pathologizing tendency in contemporary psychiatry and bring the psychic reality, or subjective truth, back into focus when approaching psychotrauma.起始頁-結束頁：171-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).000520篇名：影像發聲法的應用初探：以「棄物展」為例並列篇名：Exploring the Application of Photovoice Methodology: A Case Study of the Homeless Belonging Exhibition作者：鄭怡雯(Yi-Wen CHENG)關鍵字：影像發聲法;遊民;攝影;參與式研究;培力;Photovoice;Homeless;Photography;Participatory research;Empowerment期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文首先從整理「影像發聲法」提出的理論脈絡和原型著手，該方法在1990年代由美國學者Caroline Wang和Mary Ann Burris正式提出，她們定義影像發聲法是一種以攝影作為媒介的參與式研究方法，該方法讓研究對象拿起相機有意識地拍攝自己的生活，進而在團體討論中透過照片呈現的視覺影像，來跟團體成員分享與討論他們如何感知自身在社區所面臨的問題，並從對話中發展出解決的方案，進一步促成改變的可能。透過此培力的過程，影像發聲將研究對象轉化成主動的參與者，而此方法過去十年間在國際間視覺社會學領域裡，也日益受到關注。在前述基礎上，筆者再以2015年與「當代漂泊協會」合作、策劃以遊民家當為主題的「棄物展」為分析個案，探討「影像發聲法」的在地應用與實踐經驗，並從中歸結出該方法的優點、侷限和面臨的挑戰。英文摘要：In this article, the theoretical contexts and prototype of photovoice methodology would be summarized at first. As a qualitative method used for participatory research, photovoice was formally proposed by Caroline Wang and Mary Ann Burris in the 1990s. They defined photovoice as an empowering process that combines photography with grassroots social action. Participants are asked to express their points of view by photographing scenes that highlight research themes, and these photographs are collaboratively interpreted through group discussions and then narratives can be used to promote dialogue to mobilize and help change-makers. This method transforms the research object into the active participant, which has drawn more and more attention in the field of visual sociology during the past decade. Following the summary, this article takes ”the Exhibition of Homeless People's Discarded Belongings ”as the case study, which I curated and worked with Working Poor Unite (a NGO for the homeless people) in 2015, to elaborate and discuss how to apply photovoice in Taiwan's context. Based on this experience, the advantages, limitation and challenges of photovoice application would be analyzed and concluded in the end.起始頁-結束頁：227-259資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).000601篇名：無可理喻的檔案：論「靈遊書」與「靈異影像」的檔案法並列篇名：Archives of the Incomprehensible: Archival Methods of Ghost Story Books and Supernatural Photos作者：梁廷毓(Ting-Yu LIANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：260-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).00072篇名：【書評論壇】冷戰對於港臺的身分政治影響並列篇名：Book Review Forum: The Influences of the Cold War on the Identity Politics作者：陳欣欣(Angelina CHIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：280-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).00083篇名：【書評論壇】「忘記中國性」，然後呢？在分斷體制內的思考並列篇名：Book Review Forum: ”Forget Chineseness,” and Then ? Thinking within the Division System作者：劉世鼎(Shih-Diing LIU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：286-297資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).00094篇名：【書評論壇】實用主義的認同：體制／文化與地緣政治並列篇名：Book Review Forum:Pragmatic Identification: Institution/ Culture and Geopolitics作者：王智明(Chih-Ming WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：298-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).00105篇名：評論：唱自已的歌，聽自已的聲音：評許維賢《華語電影在後馬來西亞：土腔風格、華夷風與作者論》並列篇名：Commentary: Song and Voice of Myself: A Review on Hee Wai-Siam’s Post-Malaysian Chinese-Language Film: Accented Style, Sinophone and Auteur Theory作者：熊婷惠(Ting-Hui HSIUNG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：308-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).00116篇名：評論：反戈一擊：記亞際文化研究社群<U+66C1>亞際文化研究讀本出版並列篇名：Commentary: Turn Back to Hit: On the Publication of the Inter-Asia Cultural Studies Reader in Chinese and Its Research Community作者：羅小茗(Xiaoming LUO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：26期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：316-327資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201807_(26).001201篇名：從治癒到照護－論加護病房病患的善終作者：張厚台(Hou-Tai Chang);陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：599-601資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).PF032篇名：低價值醫療之探討並列篇名：A review of low-value care作者：吳潔人(Chieh-Jen Wu);吳怡玟(Yi-Wen Wu);郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo)關鍵字：低價值醫療;醫療品質;以病人為中心;成本效益;low-value care;quality of care;patient-centered;cost effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：全球的衛生醫療保健支出逐年上漲，各國開始針對「無效率照護」、「過度使用醫療資源」等議題進行討論，因此「低價值醫療」（Low-value care）一詞逐漸備受重視。低價值醫療可能導致醫療費用上升、病人身體與心理傷害、壓縮高價值的醫療服務資源供給，更甚者可能造成醫源性傷害（Iatrogenic harm）的發生，因此若減少低價值醫療的利用，能減少不必要的治療與後續相關醫療費用支出。本研究整理低價值醫療議題的發展脈絡，接著釐清造成低價值醫療在「臨床人員」、「病患」以及「醫療體系」三個不同面向的因素，同時探討低價值醫療對於病患及醫院端的影響，最後整理出近年來各國低價值醫療利用現況、政策介入與改善情形，進一步探討台灣未來針對低價值醫療可以改善的方向與目標。英文摘要：The rising cost of health care has raised concerns about the provision of ”ineffective care,” ”inefficient care,” and ”unwanted care” in many countries. ”Low-value care” has received attention because it can increase the cost of health care, cause physical and mental harm to patients, including iatrogenic harm, and reduce the availability of high-value health care services. Efforts to reduce the prevalence of low-value care can, therefore, reduce the incidence of unnecessary treatments and their accompanying costs. This paper reviews the contexts in which low-value care occurs and investigates the manner in which clinicians, patients, and health care systems contribute to the prevalence of low-value care. This paper also discusses the effect of low-value care on patients and health care providers. Finally, we summarize the current status of policies and interventions aimed to curb the provision of low-value care in several countries to illuminate potential targets for policy interventions and solutions to reduce the provision of low-value care in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：602-613資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).1070883篇名：評論：低價值醫療之探討作者：李亞欣(Ya-Hsin Li)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：614-614資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).107088014篇名：台灣一般護理之家評鑑：十年回顧與展望並列篇名：Review and outlook of Taiwan nursing homes accreditation作者：梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang)關鍵字：一般護理之家;評鑑;nursing home;accreditation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：面對人口老化及家庭照顧支持功能的式微，一般護理之家扮演了重要的長照服務角色，且其照護品質日益受到重視。台灣一般護理之家評鑑始自2009年，為回應各界對一般護理之家評鑑制度的批評與建言，2017年衛生福利部配合國家政策推動評鑑改革，以回歸住民安全與照護照顧品質的精神，簡化一般護理之家評鑑基準及作業。迄今，一般護理之家評鑑實施屆滿十年，展望未來，本文透過檢視台灣一般護理之家評鑑發展歷程，並提出建言，作為後續評鑑制度修訂參考。英文摘要：Faced with an aging population and decline in family support functions, nursing homes are an increasingly essential component of long-term care in Taiwan. Furthermore, the demand for high-quality nursing home care is on the rise. Taiwan launched a nursing home accreditation program in 2009. Subsequently, in 2017, in response to criticism and suggestions from the public, the Ministry of Health and Welfare sought to reform the accreditation system for nursing homes by streamlining the system and standards in accordance with resident safety and care quality. At the time of this review, approximately one decade had passed since the implementation of the aforementioned nursing home accreditation program. This paper reviews the process of nursing home accreditation and provides recommendations for future reform.起始頁-結束頁：615-625資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).1070845篇名：長期追蹤研究台灣幼童飲食攝取與生長速度並列篇名：Dietary intake and growth rates of young children in Taiwan: a longitudinal study作者：陳韻伶(Yun-Ling Chen);徐桂婷(Kuei-Ting Hsu);盧立卿(Li-Ching Lyu)關鍵字：幼童;生長速度;飲食攝取;young children;growth rate;dietary intake期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究觀察台灣北中南地區幼童2至6歲期間的飲食變化、生長速度，並探討其食物類別及營養素攝取量與生長速度之相關性。方法：結合台灣北中南區2至6歲幼童長期追蹤之每年兩日24小時飲食回憶及體位等資料，分析2∼6歲期間食物類別及營養素攝取量對於生長速度的影響。結果：台灣北中南區幼童飲食及生長速度並無地區差異，而3、4歲為幼童飲食變化的轉變點，熱量及多種營養素（蛋白質、脂質、醣類）來源逐漸以一般家庭飲食為主。分析食物類別（food groups）攝取與生長速度相關性，發現2∼6歲期間植物油類（vegetable oils）攝取量與體重增加量（r=0.32, p＜0.05）及體重z分數增加量（r=0.27, p＜0.05）呈顯著正相關，肉類及水果類攝取量與身高增加量（r_肉=0.23, r_果=0.25, p＜0.05）及身高z分數增加量（r_肉=0.23, r_果=0.25, p＜0.05）呈顯著正相關。營養素（nutrients）分析則發現植物性脂質（plant fat）攝取量與體重增加量呈顯著正相關（r=0.22, p＜0.05），熱量（r=0.23, p＜0.05）、維生素B_6（r=0.24, p＜0.05）、膽鹼（r=0.25, p＜0.05）、鉀（r=0.22, p＜0.05）攝取量與身高增加量呈顯著正相關。結論：高營養密度食物可提供充足的微量營養素，有助於幼童身高之生長，而過多油脂攝取則會使體重增加。英文摘要：Objectives: To examine the dietary transition and growth rates of children aged 2 to 6 years from northern, central, and southern Taiwan and thereby determine the relationships between food groups, nutrient intake, and growth rate. Methods: This cohort study recruited participants from various areas of Taiwan. Food groups and nutrient intake data of children aged 2 to 6 years were analyzed through 2-day 24-hour dietary recall. Anthropometric data were converted to age-and sex-specific Z-scores to calculate growth rates. Results: No differences were observed in the dietary intakes and growth rates of young children from northern, central, and southern Taiwan. The turning point in the children's dietary patterns appeared at ages 3-4 years, because their energy and the majority of nutrients gradually began to be received from a normal diet. Analysis of food groups revealed that vegetable oils were significantly and positively correlated with weight gain (r = 0.32, p ＜ 0.05) and weight-for-age Z-score gain (r = 0.27, p ＜ 0.05); furthermore, meat and fruit intake were significantly and positively correlated with height gain (r_(meat) = 0.23, r_(fruit) = 0.25, p ＜ 0.05) and height-for-age Z-score (HAZ) gain (r_(meat) = 0.23, r_(fruit) = 0.25, p ＜ 0.05). In addition, weight gain was significantly and positively correlated with the intake of plant fat (r = 0.22, p ＜ 0.05); height gain was significantly and positively correlated with the intake of energy (r = 0.23, p ＜ 0.05), vitamin B_6 (r = 0.24, p ＜ 0.05), choline (r = 0.25, p ＜ 0.05), and potassium (r = 0.22, p ＜ 0.05); however, only energy (r = 0.22, p ＜ 0.05) and choline (r = 0.22, p ＜ 0.05) had the same trends as HAZ gain. Conclusions: High nutrient-dense foods could provide young children with sufficient micronutrients to help with height growth, whereas excessive fat and oil intakes may cause weight gain.起始頁-結束頁：626-637資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).1070906篇名：護理之家實施安寧療護服務措施之研究並列篇名：Service measures of hospice care in nursing homes in Taiwan作者：龍紀萱(Chi-Hsuan Lung);李依臻(I-Jhen Lee)關鍵字：護理之家;安寧療護;服務措施;nursing home;hospice care;care measures期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：目前國內護理之家面對疾病末期與瀕死階段住民提供之相關服務，尚有待進一步探討。本研究目的企圖建構護理之家安寧療護之服務措施，以供相關單位、機構與實務專業人員參考。方法：依地理區域於全國舉辦四場次焦點團體會議，參加對象為立案且經衛生福利部評鑑為甲等（含）以上護理之家的實務工作者，共計34人參與。結果：建構護理之家安寧療護服務措施包含三個面向與十二個措施：（一）解決人力資源不足：建立機構內的照護團隊、完善的教育訓練、機構間之跨團隊合作、提升對安寧的認知；（二）建立良好制度：解決死診開立問題、簽署DNR措施、結合相關政策、設立安寧療護專區；（三）面對死亡的藝術：安寧接案考量、促進有效溝通、全人照護面向、往生後事與悲傷輔導。結論：應先了解推行安寧療護服務措施面臨的困境，再者評估現有的資源，從人力資源與制度建立進行改善。最後，建議從政策面、機構面與人員面解決所面臨的困境，以利安寧療護實施於護理之家。英文摘要：Objectives: In Taiwan, the services currently available for terminally ill nursing home residents require further discussion. This study established service measures of hospice care in nursing homes for the reference of related units, facilities, and practicing professionals. Methods: Four focus group meetings were convened in Taiwan according to geographic location. Thirty-four practicing professionals from registered nursing homes with accreditation of A or higher by the Ministry of Health and Welfare attended the meetings. Results: The establishment of service measures of hospice care in nursing homes comprised 3 aspects, with a total of 12 measures: (1) resolving labor shortages (establishing caregiving teams within the facility, providing comprehensive education and training, and promoting interfacility teamwork and hospice care knowledge), (2) establishing an appropriate system (resolving problems concerning the issuing of death certificates and DNR promotion, incorporating related policies, and establishing designated areas for hospice care), and (3) confronting death (considering hospice admission, facilitating effective communication, implementing holistic health care, assisting in funeral affairs, and providing grief counseling). Conclusions: To facilitate the implementation of service measures for hospice care in nursing homes, the procedure should be started by considering the difficulties associated with implementation, followed by the evaluation of current resources, improvement of the system and human resources situation, and finally, addressing of the dilemma faced by the relevant policymakers, organizations, and personnel.起始頁-結束頁：638-650資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).1070937篇名：醫院策略與急性心肌梗塞照護品質之關係並列篇名：Association of hospital strategies with quality of care for acute myocardial infarction作者：廖思詠(Szu-Yung Liao);游宗憲(Tsung-Hsien Yu);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：急性心肌梗塞;醫院策略;照護品質;acute myocardial infarction;hospital strategies;quality of care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：台灣醫院近年持續改善急性心肌梗塞（acute myocardial infarction, AMI）的照護品質，不過未有研究探討那些醫院策略與AMI照護品質有關，本研究目的係探討醫院策略與AMI照護品質的相關性。方法：本研究為橫斷性研究，以收治全台灣大部分AMI住院病人之96家醫院，以郵寄問卷方式進行普查，測量醫院2015年至2016年醫院策略實施的情況，問卷回收率為73.96%，再與中央健康保險署全民健康保險AMI照護品質資訊公開之照護品質指標資料合併，採用複線性迴歸模式，在控制醫院特性與病人特性後，探討醫院策略與AMI照護品質（血脂低密度脂蛋白檢查、阿斯匹靈、腺嘌呤二磷酸接受體拮抗劑、乙型阻斷劑及血管收縮素轉化<U+9176>抑制劑或血管收縮素接受體阻斷劑使用率）之相關性。結果：醫院所推行的三項策略與較高AMI藥品治療使用率有關。結論：隨時（含假日及夜間）有心臟專科醫師於醫院輪值處置病人、監測出院病人7或14日回診之百分比、臨床人員與緊急醫療救護人員定期開會與較佳的AMI照護品質有關。英文摘要：Objectives: In recent years in Taiwan, hospitals have continuously improved quality of care for acute myocardial infarction (AMI). However, no study has examined which hospital strategies are associated with quality of care for AMI. This study investigated the association of hospital strategies with quality of care for AMI. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted in hospitals in which most patients with AMI throughout Taiwan are admitted. A structured questionnaire was developed and mailed to 96 hospitals to examine the implementation of hospital strategies between 2015 and 2016. The response rate was 73.96%. The data of quality measures for AMI care were obtained from the report titled ”Public Reporting for Quality of Care for AMI,” which is provided by the National Health Insurance Administration. Multivariate linear regression models were used to examine the association of the implementation of hospital strategies with AMI quality of care measures (rate of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol testing and rates of aspirin, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor/angiotensin receptor blocker, adenosine diphosphate receptor inhibitor, and beta-blocker use). Results: Three hospital strategies were found to be associated with high rates of AMI medication use. Conclusions: Having cardiologists always on site, monitoring percentages of 7- or 14-day outpatient follow-up, and holding regular meetings between hospital clinicians and emergency medical service providers are associated with better quality of care for AMI.起始頁-結束頁：651-663資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).1070568篇名：失智症與非失智症長者之照顧者醫療服務利用之比較並列篇名：Comparison of healthcare utilization between caregivers of dementia and nondementia older adults作者：詹書媛(Su-Yuan Chan);游曉微(Hsiao-Wei Yu);楊銘欽(Ming-Ching Yang);李玉春(Yue-Chune Lee);陳雅美(Ya-Mei Chen)關鍵字：失智症照顧者;醫療服務利用;長期照顧十年計畫;健保資料庫;dementia caregivers;healthcare utilization;Ten-year Long Term Care Project (TLTCP);Taiwan National Health Insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：比較台灣長期照顧十年計畫使用者中，失智症與非失智症照顧者醫療服務利用與費用。方法：本研究串聯照顧服務管理資訊平台與衛生福利資料科學中心資料庫，分析2008至2013年間，10,771位長照十年計畫使用者的照顧者，透過多變項羅吉斯迴歸與多變項線性迴歸，比較失智症與非失智症照顧者，在初次核定長照服務後一年內的門診、急診、住院利用與費用。結果：整體而言，失智症與非失智症照顧者在門診、急診、住院與整體醫療利用與費用皆未達統計顯著差異。然而，當被照顧者輕度失能時，失智症較非失智症照顧者每次急診費用高20.6%（p ＜ 0.01）、累積急診費用高31.9%（p ＜ 0.01）；被照顧者重度失能時，失智症較非失智症照顧者的住院使用次數多0.22次（p ＜ 0.05）。結論：失智症與非失智症照顧者的短期醫療利用無明顯差異，但失智症照顧者，特別是輕度失智症照顧者，可能更忽略自身健康、拖延就醫，最終尋求急性醫療資源協助。建議政策提供更多喘息服務，給予失智症照顧者時間滿足初級醫療服務需求。英文摘要：Objectives: To compare the healthcare utilization and expenditures between the caregivers of elderly adults with or without dementia who were in Ten-year Long Term Care Project (TLTCP) in Taiwan. Methods: Data were extracted from the population-based datasets of the Long-Term Care Service Management System and the National Health Insurance in Taiwan. 10,771 individuals who were the caregivers of elderly adults aged <U+2265>65 years in the TLTCP during 2008-2013 were included. Multiple logistic regression and multiple linear regression were used to compare the 1-year healthcare utilization and expenditures between the caregivers of elderly adults with or without dementia, including outpatients, emergency departments (EDs), and hospitalizations, after their care recipients being first time prescribed with LTC services. Results: In general, no significant differences were observed between the two groups. However, caregivers who cared for patients with dementia with mild disabilities had significantly 20.6% higher per ED fees (p ＜ 0.01) and 31.9% higher ED fees (p ＜ 0.01). Caregivers who cared for patients with dementia with severe disabilities had significantly 0.22 higher hospitalization visits (p ＜ 0.05). Conclusions: In general, there is no difference in the use of healthcare services between the caregivers of elderly adults with or without dementia. Nevertheless, dementia caregivers, especially those caring for patients with mild dementia, are more likely to neglect their own health and hence tend to use more acute care healthcare resources. These results suggest policymakers to provide additional respite care services to allow caregivers time to seek for primary healthcare resources.起始頁-結束頁：664-675資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).1070749篇名：高齡者低握力評估的切點分析：台灣南部複合式健檢的實證分析並列篇名：Comparisons of cutoff points of poor grip strength for elderly people in southern Taiwan作者：秦秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Chin);林裕珍(Yu-Chen Lin);蕭玉芬(Yu-Fen Hsiao);莊華盈(Hua-Ying Chuang);李瑋(Wei Lee)關鍵字：切點;肌力強度不足;低握力;衰弱症;虛弱;cut-off point;low muscle strength;poor grip strength;frailty syndrome;weakness期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究以台灣南部某農業縣2017年複合式健檢高齡民眾的握力檢測資料進行分析，透過低握力評估切點分析，了解受試者虛弱的情形。方法：受試者為男性999人（73.69±6.39歲）、女性1,212人（72.76±6.04歲）。以電子握力測試儀進行施測；以SPSS 20.0統計軟體進行分析。結果：男女受試者百分位數20的握力值與AWGS的評估切點相近；以受試者性別和BMI進行調整的分析，男性低握力比例為5.79%-71.43%，女性為9.55%-63.64%。FNIHSP評估切點的分析，男性低握力比例為10.88%-47.76%，女性為4.69%-31.37%。AWGS評估切點的分析則顯示男性低握力比例為10.88%-47.76%，女性為12.24%-45.10%。結論：三種切點的低握力評估結果，男女的低握力比普遍隨著年齡增加而遞增。其中，FNIHSP評估切點的分析，三個年齡層男性低握力比例大約都是女性的1.5倍，可見FNIHSP的評估切點並不適用於國內高齡者。以男女BMI調整的評估切點分析，不僅低握力比與國內男女高齡者的衰弱盛行率研究相近，也反映不同身體質量對個體衰弱的影響。至於AWGS所設定的女性評估切點對我國女性高齡而言，相對較高，建議進一步依年齡進行調整。此外，本次男性參與者握力相對較低，受試者間差異較大；因此，呼籲男性高齡者的衰弱情形需要更多的關注。英文摘要：Objectives: The objectives of this study were to compare the cutoff points of poor grip strength defined by Fried, EWGSOP, FNIHSP, and IWGS by subjecting community-dwelling elderly people in Southern Taiwan to a comprehensive physical examination. Methods: Participants comprised 999 men (age: 73.69±6.39 years) and 1,212 women (age: 72.76±6.04 years). Handgrip strength was measured using digital dynamometers (TKK 5101). Results: The 20th percentile of both men and women concurred with AWGS criteria. According to the Fried frailty criteria by adjustment for BMI, the prevalence of poor grip strength ranged from 5.79% to 71.43% among men and from 9.55% to 63.64% among women. According to FNIHSP criteria, the prevalence of poor grip strength ranged from 10.88% to 47.76% among men and from 4.69% to 31.37% among women. According to IWGS criteria, the prevalence of poor grip strength ranged from 10.88% to 47.76% among men and from 12.24% to 45.10% among women. Conclusions: The prevalence of poor grip strength increased with age in both sexes. According to the FNIHSP criteria, the prevalence of poor grip strength of older men was almost 1.5 times that of women, indicating the unsuitability of the cutoff points for Asians older than 65 years. The prevalence of poor grip strength based on Fried frailty criteria by adjustment for BMI not only corresponded with that from previous research on frailty in Taiwan but also revealed the effect of BMI on aging. Based on the AWGS criteria, the cutoff point of poor grip strength for older women was higher than those in other local studies in Taiwan. Therefore, this study suggests that the age factor be considered in the cutoff point of the AWGS. Moreover, attention should be paid to the weaker performance and greater individual differences in grip strength among the male participants.起始頁-結束頁：676-685資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).10706110篇名：細懸浮微粒（PM_(2.5)）自2006年到2016年在台灣的時空趨勢並列篇名：Spatiotemporal trend of fine particulate matter 2.5 μm in Taiwan from 2006-2016作者：鄭永鴻(Yung-Hung Cheng);吳佩儒(Pei-Ju Wu);鄭意儒(I-Ju Cheng);莫之欣(Chih-Hsin Mou);藍郁青(Yu-Ching Lan);謝顯堂(Dennis P. H. Hsieh);蔡善璞(Shan-Pou Tsai);陳昭文(Chao-Wen Chen);溫啟邦(Chi-Pang Wen);宋鴻樟(Fung-Chang Sung)關鍵字：細懸浮微粒;歷年趨勢;工業站;一般站;PM_(2.5);annual trend;industrial station;non-industrial station期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷6期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：空氣污染在最近再受到重視，尤其是細懸浮微粒（PM_(2.5)）及其發生源格外引起關切。本研究利用行政院環境保護署自2006年到2016年的監測資料比較工業測站和非工業測站歷年的PM_(2.5)變化趨勢。方法：我們自行政院環境保護署網站下載歷年各空品測站之逐小時監測資料，選擇有工業測站的苗栗、彰化、雲林和高雄地區，計算各類型測站PM_(2.5)的平均濃度，觀察每三年的變化，和繪成編年趨勢，比較工業測站和非工業測站測定值的差別，我們也分別繪製2016年各地各測站合計的月平均測值，觀察季節變化。結果：這四個地區，各測站的PM_(2.5)平均值均逐年下降（p≦0.001）。測定最大值最小值的差異大，可達100倍。在苗栗地區，頭份工業測站的監測數值由29.6 mg/m^3下降到18.2 mg/m^3，和非工業測站的數值相當。雲林和彰化工業測站的平均值則比非工業測站平均值較低。高雄地區有12個測站，工業測站的平均PM_(2.5)較其他類型測站平均值在前幾年較高，到2016年則下降較速，稍低於所有非工業測站的平均值。分析2016年四地區逐月平均值顯示，各地的PM_(2.5)夏季月份平均值遠低於冬、春月份的平均值。結論：各空品測站的PM_(2.5)逐年下降，工業區的PM_(2.5)排放未必高於交通排放或一般測站的測定值，下降幅度相當，期盼持續下降達到15 μg/m^3的標準或以下。英文摘要：Objectives: Air pollution has recently received renewed attention, particularly on the fine particulate matter of 2.5 μm (PM_(2.5)) and on sources that generate the pollutant. This study used the air pollution data monitored by the Environmental Protection Administration (EPA) of Executive Yuan to calculate the temporal trends of PM_(2.5) monitored from 2006-2016 and to compare levels between industry stations and non-industry stations. Methods: We obtained the EPA data and selected MiaoLi, Changhua, Yunlin and Kaohsiung areas to calculate mean PM_(2.5) levels over three 3-year and one 2-year time spans from 2006-2016, and plotted annual mean values for the same period. The temporal trends were compared between industry stations and non-industry stations for each area. Monthly means of all stations in each area in 2016 were also reported to observe the seasonal variations for the 4 areas. Results: The temporal trends of mean PM_(2.5) levels declined among all types of monitoring station with the maximum level could be up to 100-fold higher than the minimum level. At an industrial monitoring station of the MiaoLi area, the mean PM_(2.5) declined from 29.6 mg/m^3 in 2006 to 18.2 mg/m^3 in 2016, which were approximately similar to the corresponding mean levels estimated at two non-industry stations. The mean levels monitored at industrial stations were lower than that at non-industry stations in Changhua and Yunlin areas. Among 12 monitoring stations in the Kaohsiung area, the annual mean PM_(2.5) levels were greater at the industrial station than the respective means at 11 non-industrial stations, but declined rapidly to a slightly lower level in 2016. Monthly mean levels in 2016 showed that the PM_(2.5) levels were lower in summer months than in spring and winter months in all 4 areas. Conclusions: The PM_(2.5) levels were in declining trend in all areas in Taiwan. The effective mitigation of PM_(2.5) in industrial areas is comparable to that in non-industrial areas. We can probably expect to see it will soon reduce to the standard of 15 μg/m^3 or lower.起始頁-結束頁：686-695資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201812_37(6).10710111篇名：減糖之意涵與關鍵策略並列篇名：Challenge and strategy for sugar reduction作者：潘文涵(Wen-Harn Pan);葉乃華(Nai-Hua Yeh);洪淑怡(Shu-Yi Hung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：475-480資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).PF0212篇名：台灣公共衛生教育之發展與挑戰並列篇名：Development and challenge of public health education in Taiwan作者：陳為堅(WEI J. CHEN);黎伊帆(YI-FAN LI);連盈如(YIN-JU LIEN);張純琦(CHUN-CHI CHANG);江東亮(TUNG-LIANG CHIANG)關鍵字：公共衛生教育;公共衛生人力;教育評鑑;公共衛生師法;個人認證;public health education;public health manpower;education accreditation;Public Health Specialist Act;personal certificate期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：台灣的公共衛生（以下簡稱公衛）教育與國家整體的公衛發展有密切的關係。本文旨在整理並回顧台灣公衛教育的發展與演進，作為進一步改革台灣公衛教育的參考。我們先依歷史資料及教育部1998至2015年之統計資料，將台灣公衛教育的發展歷史分成四個時期：草創期（1939到1970年），茁壯期（1971到1990年），擴充期（1991到2007年），及重整期（2007年之後），詳細回顧有關公衛系所之設立、教師結構、與學生人數等實證資料。其次，我們探討這些結果與趨勢所顯示的議題與挑戰，包括核心課程、能力測驗、系所評鑑、及人力需求。最後，我們提出對於未來的一些展望，像是建立專業組織以進行機構評鑑、通過公衛師法以推動專業認證、以及開發新興公衛人力巿場。英文摘要：Public health education in Taiwan has been parallel with the nation's public health development, reflecting the health demands in the society. This study aimed to empirically review the evolution of public health education in Taiwan, and discuss the future direction of education reform in public health. First, after reviewing the historical documents and the statistical databases created by the Ministry of Education from 1998 to 2015, we divided the nation's development of public health education into four stages: founding stage (1993-1970), thriving stage (1971-1990), rapid-expansion stage (1991-2007), and reorganization stage (after 2007). We then reviewed the trend of the establishment of public health-related departments or institutions, the composition of faculty, and the number of enrolled students in the higher education. Second, we discussed critical issues revealed by these empirical data, including core courses, competence examination, the evaluation of departments/institutions, and job markets. Lastly, we suggested some directions for future reforms, such as establishing professional organization to conduct accreditation for departments/institutions, advocating Public Health Specialist Act to certify professionals, and fostering emerging human resources market for public health professionals.起始頁-結束頁：481-498資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).10703113篇名：醫院整合醫學照護制度（Hospitalist）對住院照護品質的影響，台灣文獻綜論並列篇名：Effects of hospitalist systems on the quality of inpatient care in Taiwan: a literature review作者：汪秀玲(HSIU-LING WANG);洪純隆(SHEN-LONG HOWNG)關鍵字：醫院整合醫療主治醫師;品質衡量;住院天數;死亡率;病人滿意;hospitalist;quality measure;length of stay;mortality;patient satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：因應高齡多重慢性病及急診擁塞，台灣於2015年試行醫院整合醫學制度（Hospitalist，簡稱HP），已有部分醫院參與。儘管先前國際研究HP表現逾20年，但關於HP能否改善照護品質仍有分歧，本文藉由文獻回顧的綜合發現，探討台灣HP模式對住院照護品質之影響。作者搜尋PubMed資料庫、華藝線上圖書館以及衛福部HP計畫成果發表會議研究摘要，發表或陳現台灣HP效率、臨床結果之初級資料被納入，排除概念性文章，23份文獻中17份符合準則納入分析，並根據Donadedian品質三面向（結構－過程－臨床結果）衡量，摘錄品質資料以評估HP之表現。結果顯示台灣HP病房平均醫師人力為7人、病床46床，HP排值模式為二班（85.71%）或三班（14.29%），醫師以內科專科領域為主（65.71%）。與傳統病房模式比較，47項品質衡量中31項呈現HP表現較佳（65.96%）、16項HP表現較差（34.04%）。整體而言，HP模式能降低轉入加護病房率（50%）、醫糾件數（100%），但病人滿意度降低（66.67%）；HP模式能縮短住院天數（50%）、醫療費用降低（100%）、急診待床比率降低（50%）；HP模式能降低14天/30天再住院率（87.50%）、48小時重返急診（100%），但死亡率提高（71.43%）。整體而言，相較於傳統住院照護，HP是有效率的提供者（住院日數、醫療費用減少），HP的臨床品質與傳統模式相當（再入院率降低），然而，死亡率、病人滿意度尚待改善。多數文獻沒有校正干擾因素可能影響研究結果的外部效度。英文摘要：Coping with aging, multiple chronic diseases, and hospital emergency congestion, Taiwan implemented a trial program of hospitalist (HP) care provision in some hospitals in 2015. Although more than two decades of international research has examined the performance of HP models, disagreement remains regarding whether HP improves inpatient care quality. This literature review summarizes findings from comparative evaluations to explore the effects of HP models on care quality in Taiwan. We searched PubMed databases, Airiti Library, and Ministry of Health and Welfare national conference reports published or presenting primary data on efficiency and clinical outcomes in Taiwan’s HP systems. A total of 23 articles were identified; conceptual articles were excluded. The remaining 17 articles meeting the inclusion criteria were reviewed. According to Donabedian’s three-concept measures of structure, processes, and outcome, comparative evaluations of quality between HP systems and attending physicians were analyzed. Of publications reviewed, average manpower was seven physicians per 46 beds in HP wards. HP duty scheduling was either three shifts (57.14%) or two shifts (42.86%). Internal medicine was the most common specialty (65.71%). HP models outperformed the traditional ward model in 31 of the 47 quality measures (65.96%); however, 16 evaluations revealed worse performance (34.04%). The reviewed articles demonstrated that HP care reduces admissions to intensive care units (50%), medical malpractice (100%), patient satisfaction (66.67%), average length of stay (50%), medical expenditures (100%), bed waiting times (50%), postdischarge 14-day and 30-day readmission rates (87.5%), and 48-hour returns to the emergency department (100%); however, mortality was higher (71.43%). In summary, Taiwan HP wards are more efficient providers of inpatient care than traditional wards are based on reductions in total medical expenditures and length of stay. The clinical quality of HP wards is comparable to that provided by traditional wards; however, patient satisfaction and mortality are not uniformly improved. Failure of some of the reviewed studies to adjust for confounders may affect the external validity of our results.起始頁-結束頁：499-513資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).10614014篇名：應用空間資訊技術探討環境綠蔽度與雙相情緒障礙症之空間關聯－以台北都會區為例並列篇名：Association between surrounding greenness and bipolar disorder using spatial informatics: a study in Taipei作者：陳映融(YINQ-RONG CHERN);洪語晨(YU-CHEN HUNG);潘文驥(WEN-CHI PAN);龍世俊(SHIH-CHUN CANDICE LUNG);吳治達(CHIH-DA WU)關鍵字：環境綠蔽度;雙相情緒障礙症;心理健康;常態化差異植生指標;空間資訊技術;surrounding greenness;bipolar disorder;mental health;Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI);spatial informatics期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究整合地理資訊系統、遙感探測技術以及統計模型，以探討環境綠蔽度與雙相情緒障礙症之關聯。方法：本研究經由健保資料庫承保抽樣歸人檔以獲取2003年至2012年台北都會區（含台北市及新北市）各鄉鎮雙相情緒障礙症之季發生率資訊；並透過MODIS之全球常態化差異植生指標（Normalized Difference Vegetation Index, NDVI）資料庫，以量化環境綠蔽度；最後使用廣義加乘混合模型，在校正社會經濟、人口學、環境、共病症等可取得之風險因子與時空自相關情況下，探討環境綠蔽程度與雙相情緒障礙症發生率之關聯性。結果：研究結果發現，NDVI與雙相情緒障礙症發生率之關聯達到統計上之極顯著水準（p＜0.01），係數值為-0.51（95%CI: -0.68, -0.48），取自然對數後得相對風險值為0.60（95%CI: 0.51, 0.71），代表當鄉鎮之NDVI每上升一個四分位距（IQR=0.33）時，雙相情緒障礙症之發生率會降至原來的0.60倍。結論：由此可知，環境綠蔽度的增加與雙相情緒障礙症發生率的減緩具有正向的關聯性。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated the association between surrounding greenness and bipolar disorder in the Taipei metropolitan area (Taipei City and New Taipei City) using a geographic information system and remote sensing technologies. Methods: The seasonal incidence of bipolar disorder from 2003 to 2012 for each township in the Taipei metropolitan area was calculated based on medical records extracted from the Longitudinal Health Insurance Database 2000. Surrounding greenness information was collected as the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) provided by NASA's Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer. The generalized additive mixed model was applied to examine the relationship between surrounding greenness and bipolar incidence after adjusting for socioeconomic status, demographic characteristics, environmental factors, and comorbidity. Results: Accounting for potential confounding variables, we found a statistically significant negative relationship between NDVI and bipolar incidence (regression coefficient: -0.51; 95% confidence interval [CI]: -0.68, -0.48; p＜0.01). The adjusted relative risk for bipolar incidence was 0.60 (95% CI: 0.51-0.71) per interquartile range increment (0.33) on NDVI. Conclusions: Surrounding greenness is statistically associated with bipolar incidence in the Taipei metropolitan area.起始頁-結束頁：514-526資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).10704715篇名：核酸擴增試驗應用於捐血者病毒檢驗之成本效益分析並列篇名：Analysis of cost saving from nucleic acid amplification testing of all blood donations for viral infection in Taiwan作者：許鈴宜(LING-I HSU);程仁偉(JEN-WEI CHEN);林東燦(DONG-TSAMN LIN);魏昇堂(SHENG-TANG WEI);侯勝茂(SHENG-MOU HOU)關鍵字：核酸放大試驗;NAT yield case;輸血感染（TTI）;成本;nucleic acid amplification test (NAT);NAT yield case;transfusion-transmitted infection (TTI);cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：台灣於2013年全面施行捐血者核酸放大試驗（Nucleic acid Amplification Test, NAT）來篩檢愛滋病毒（HIV），C型肝炎病毒（HCV）及B型肝炎病毒（HBV）。本研究以NAT實施四年所避免之輸血感染數來評估常規免疫酵素法加測NAT之後，相對於只用免疫酵素法檢測可節約之成本。方法：我們以免疫酵素法檢驗血清標記陰性而NAT檢驗陽性（NAT yield case）個案數、可製成血品數、輸血族群未曾感染比例及病毒傳染力來估計可避免輸血感染數（transfusion-transmitted infection, TTI）。雖然捐血加測NAT增加血液供應成本，但加測NAT可節省支出包含TTI之醫療照護成本、道義救濟成本、訴訟成本及HIV帶原捐血者二次傳播醫療成本。我們比較兩者之間的差異來進行成本效益分析。結果：2013-2016年共檢測7,001,347人次，NAT yield case為HIV 6人，HCV 52人及HBV 1,927人。NAT檢驗及人事成本共738,534,700元。TTI估計值為HIV 16.7例、HCV 115.6例、HBV 55.2例，以及HBV潛隱性個案持續捐血至65歲造成TTI 1,032.2例，合計可避免之TTIs共1,219.7例。可節省之醫療照護成本259,075,635元，道義救濟金642,000,000元，法律訴訟97,800,000元，捐血者二次傳播醫療成本28,448,352元，合計1,027,323,987元。結論：2013-2016台灣捐供血系統全面加測NAT實際檢驗支出7.4億元，預估可避免約1,220例TTIs，預估可節省支出10.3億元。以輸血感染事件而言，自全面篩檢至今（2018年3月）未曾發生HIV TTI，篩檢成效明確。英文摘要：Objectives: Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAT) of all blood donations for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), and hepatitis B virus (HBV) has been performed in Taiwan since 2013. We analyzed the benefits of universal NAT by estimating the number of prevented transfusion-transmitted infections (TTIs) and calculating the saved cost of medical expenditures, relief payments, litigation costs, and medical care for secondary HIV transmission. Methods: We determined the number of NAT yield cases (seronegative NAT-reactive donors) during the study period of 2013–2016. The number of prevented TTIs was estimated based on the number of NAT yield cases after considering the number of blood components produced per donation, recipient susceptibility, and viral infectivity. Results: Among 7,001,347 donations, we identified 6 HIV, 52 HCV, and 1927 HBV seronegative NAT-reactive donors. The expected number of prevented TTIs was 16.7 for HIV, 115.6 for HCV, and 55.2 for HBV. After further considering donations contributed from donors with occult HBV infection, an additional 1032.2 cases of TTIs were prevented. An estimated 1219.7 cases of TTIs were prevented. The cost of NAT during the 4 years was NT$740 million. The estimated savings from medical expenditures, relief payments, litigation costs, and secondary transmissions of HIV from NAT yield cases were respectively NT$259 million; NT$642 million; NT$98 million; and NT$28 million. The savings attributed to NAT screening totaled NT$1,027 million. Conclusions: Universal NAT improves the safety of blood donation. The total cost of NAT in Taiwan was NT$740 million over 4 years. An estimated 1,220 TTIs were prevented, and approximately NT$1,027 million was saved. NAT screening of donor blood is conclusively cost effective.起始頁-結束頁：527-538資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).10702416篇名：Exploring the home services utilization and its influencing factors for case closures in Taiwan long-term care system並列篇名：台灣長照體系居家服務利用與結案原因之影響因子探討作者：劉立凡(LI-FAN LIU);陳佳楨(JIA-JEN CHEN);李懿珍(YI-CHAN LEE);劉建志(CHIEN-CHIH LIU)關鍵字：home services;utilization;case closure;unmet need;long-term care;居家服務;使用率;結案原因;未滿足需求;長期照護服務期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Objectives: In order to develop person-centered service delivery in the community, it is important to understand the causal relationships among older adults' personal factors, service utilizations, and the ability to reside in the community from a longitudinal perspective. This study aimed to examine the profile of home services utilization and the reasons for case closures in two years, as well as the related influencing factors, among home service recipients in southern Taiwan. Methods: We analyzed the long-term care dataset of one southern metropolitan area from 2011- 2015, and the records of 9,889 persons aged 50 and over who received home services with an initial need assessment (T0). The Cox Regression Analyses were used to examine the potential risk factors for leaving the services. Results: The high rates of case closures included death (20%) and drop-out (41%), mainly due to the need to search for caregiving resources within family networks. In terms of the influencing factors for leaving the services, those who with non-low household incomes, informal caregiving burden and moderate cognitive impairments were more likely to drop out. Conclusions: This study provides empirical evidence of the high dropout rate and the importance of further investigations to explore the service gap in this context, especially the need to give more attention to those service users who then drop out of the system.英文摘要：目標：居家服務於長期照護中相當普遍，而發展以人為本的社區式服務，必須透過縱向資料的累積來了解高齡者之個人特性、服務使用與留住社區之能力。本研究目的在檢視南部某都市的居家服務利用情形、結案原因以及相關影響因素。方法：以南部某都市照顧管理資訊系統（LTC-CM）資料庫2011年至2015年為止曾核定使用居家服務之身心障礙者及老人現況資料進行分析，第一次需求評估中（T0）共有9,889名個案接受服務。Cox回歸分析應用於檢視服務利用兩年內結案原因分析，來找出潛在影響因子。結果：研究期間結案的比例偏高，其中死亡佔20%，離開服務佔41%（主因為個案之家庭網絡尋求其他照顧資源）。扣除死亡後結案的影響因子為一般戶、照顧者負荷較大、中度智力缺損者較易結案。結論：本研究結果實證居家服務的高結案率，建議除服務提供外，應重視個案的服務利用狀況與結案原因，建議未來進一步探討不續用服務者其產生服務缺口的原因。起始頁-結束頁：539-553資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).10703817篇名：少子女化對產科醫師執業空間變遷及產婦就醫可近性之影響並列篇名：Impacts of low birth rates on the geographical distribution of obstetricians and accessibility of obstetrics resources for parturient women作者：林民浩(MIN-HAU LIN);郭年真(RAYMOND N. KUO);江東亮(TUNG-LIANG CHIANG)關鍵字：少子女化;產科;醫療資源;就醫距離;空間分析;low birth rate;obstetrics;health care resources;travel distance;spatial analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：少子女化帶來人口結構變遷，使國家發展面臨種種挑戰，健康照護產業無法自免於外，特別是與生育直接相關的產科醫師。本研究使用具代表性實證資料，分析少子女化情境下，產科市場與產科醫師執業空間的變遷，並檢視此番變遷對產婦生產就醫之影響。方法：以全民健康保險研究資料庫全國住院醫療費用清單明細檔及2005年承保抽樣歸人檔，首先分析2005-2009年間，生產件數與產科醫師服務量趨勢，再以空間分析技術，檢視研究期間產科醫師執業空間變遷與產婦就醫可近性的變化。最後透過引力模式，剖析就醫可近性與可用性於產婦就醫選擇的權衡。結果：研究期間全國生產件數減少6.7%、產科醫師減少了5.4%，全國產科醫師平均接生件數僅減少1.6%，前述指標在低都市化地區減幅大於高都市化地區。除退出市場，部分醫師選擇轉換執業地，尤其更傾向轉往區域負荷量離差高的地區執業。而醫師執業空間之變遷，使低都市化地區產婦需移動更遠距離生產就醫，也使其選擇生產地時，可近性的考量會優先於產科服務可用性。結論：少子女化將使低都市化地區產科市場先受衝擊，產科醫師則退出市場或轉換執業地以因應市場改變，進而可能造成產婦就醫可近性惡化並使其就醫選擇受限，特別是低都市化地區、就醫可近性原先即相對較差的群體。英文摘要：Objectives: Low birth rates can have substantial social impacts and comprise a challenge for the health care sector, especially obstetrics. To understand their influence on obstetrics services, this study aimed to quantify the impacts of low birth rates on the geographical distribution of obstetricians and the accessibility of obstetrics services for parturient women by using representative empirical data. Methods: Using Nationwide Health Insurance Database, we observed trends in childbirth and the mean number of deliveries per obstetrician from 2005 to 2009. Theoretical frameworks and spatial analysis were employed to analyze the changes in the geographical distribution of obstetricians and the accessibility of obstetrics services for parturient women. Finally, we used a gravity model to analyze the parturient women’s trade-off of between the accessibility and availability of obstetrics services. Results: During the study period, childbirth decreased by 6.7%, and the number of obstetricians decreased by 5.4%. Meanwhile, the mean number of deliveries per obstetrician decreased by 1.6%. The changes in the aforementioned indicators were worse in rural areas than in urban areas. Some obstetricians withdrew from the market, some changed their practice location, especially to areas with a higher carrying capacity. Consequently, parturient women who lived in areas with a low urbanization level had to travel longer distances to obtain obstetrics services; thus, they preferred to obtain services in areas with better accessibility rather than better availability. Conclusions: This study demonstrated that low birth rates can lead to the geographical redistribution of obstetricians, which worsen accessibility for parturient women, particularly those living in rural areas.起始頁-結束頁：554-564資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).10705818篇名：評論：少子女化對產科醫師執業空間變遷及產婦就醫可近性之影響並列篇名：Commentary: impacts of low birth rates on the geographical distribution of obstetricians and accessibility of obstetrics resources for parturient women作者：洪錦墩(Chin-Tun Hung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：565-565資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).1070580119篇名：檢驗自然資源依賴與肺結核之相關性，2000-2016年並列篇名：Association between natural resource dependence and tuberculosis, 2000-2016作者：張文揚(WEN-YANG CHANG)關鍵字：肺結核;發生率;死亡率;自然資源;時間序列橫斷面固定效果模型;tuberculosis;incidence rate;death rate;natural resources;time-series crosssectional model with fixed effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：肺結核對世界而言是重大的健康威脅，但是世界各國在千禧年以來防治肺結核的成效表現不一，其中還有退步者。在解釋國家公共衛生議題的成效差異時，近年來被提出的一個解釋，就是國家對自然資源的依賴程度，但是學者對自然資源產生的效果並沒有共識，對肺結核的討論也付之闕如。本研究期望藉由探討自然資源依賴程度與肺結核防治成效之間的關係，補足這部分的研究缺口。方法：本文以時間序列橫斷面方法中的固定效果模型，檢驗2000-2016年之間97至135個不等的國家或政治實體的肺結核與自然資源依賴程度的相關性，並控制人均GDP、政府效率、15-49歲的人口中HIV發生率、0-14歲的人口佔總人口的百分比、5歲以下兒童死亡率（每千例活產兒）、人口密度、都市化程度以及經常性醫療保健支出占GDP比重（%）等幾個解釋變數。結果：在2000-2016年之間，國家對自然資源的依賴程度愈高，肺結核的發生率以及死亡率就愈高，兩者的統計結果均至少達到0.01的顯著水準。結論：根據研究發現，要降低自然資源與肺結核之間的相關性，依賴自然資源程度較高的國家，可能可以藉由：(1)轉型經濟減少對自然資源的依賴；(2)以及（或是）強化對自然資源收益的管理；(3)改善礦區的工作與衛生狀況，來降低肺結核發生率或死亡率。英文摘要：Objectives: Tuberculosis (TB) is a major threat to global public health. However, since 2000, the effectiveness of TB control and prevention has varied considerably across countries; the performance has even deteriorated in some countries. To examine differences in public health performance among countries, researchers can determine the degree to which they rely on natural resources. However, scholars have not reached a consensus regarding whether reliance on natural resources is beneficial. In addition, discussions on the link between TB and natural resources are limited. This study filled this gap by exploring the association between natural resource dependence and TB. Methods: This study applied the time-series cross-sectional model with fixed effects to examine the effects of natural resource dependence on TB between 2000 and 2016 in 97–135 countries or political entities. This study controlled for gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, government efficiency, population density, urbanization, incidence of the human immunodeficiency virus among the uninfected population aged 15-49 years, population aged 0-14 years (% total), mortality rate for the population aged under 5 years, and current health expenditure as a percentage of GDP. Results: During the period of 2000-2016, a state's natural dependence level was positively associated with a higher incidence and death rate of TB. Both results reached statistical significance at at least the 0.01 level. Conclusions: On the basis of research findings, the researcher suggests that to more effectively control and prevent TB, countries and political entities that rely on natural resources should (1) diversify their economies to reduce natural resource dependence, (2) strengthen natural resource management, and (3) improve the working and sanitary conditions of mining locations.起始頁-結束頁：566-581資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).10704520篇名：Development and validation of the nutrition literacy measure for Taiwanese college students並列篇名：台灣大學生營業素養測量工具之發展與驗證作者：廖梨伶(LI-LING LIAO);賴苡汝(I-JU LAI);施淑芳(SHU-FANG SHIH);張麗春(LI-CHUN CHANG)關鍵字：nutrition literacy;college students;measure;eating behavior;validation;營養素養;大學生;測量工具;飲食行為;信效度驗證期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷5期出版年：2018中文摘要：Objectives: To develop a nutrition literacy measure for Taiwanese college students and evaluate its reliability and validity. Methods: A cross-sectional study using convenience sampling was adopted to evaluate the measure and six universities in Taiwan were included. A total of 1,269 students were recruited and 1,264 valid questionnaires were returned. The ratio of men to women was 0.87. Most students were sophomore (38.1%) and junior (26.1%). The nutrition literacy measure was formulated based on the Dietary Guidelines for Taiwanese and the Daily Food Guides and consisted of 8 self-rated items and 32 scenario-based test items. Cronbach’s α coefficient was used to evaluate the internal consistency reliability, while a confirmatory factor analysis was conducted to validate the measure. Results: Cronbach’s α for the self-rated scale and the scenario-based test was 0.85 and 0.81, respectively. The measure showed a good model fit in 2 parts and the difficulty parameters of the scenario-based test ranged from -3.22 to 0.11 in the item response theory analysis (acceptable range= -4 to 2). Furthermore, scores for 2 parts of the measure were both positively correlated with the healthy-eating behavior scale (r = .417, p ＜ .001 and r = .125, p ＜ .001, respectively). Conclusions: The devised instrument was a valid and reliable measure for assessing nutrition literacy among Taiwanese college students. Specifically, it could be used by practitioners for needs assessment before the implementation of a nutrition education program.英文摘要：目標：發展適用於台灣大學生之營養素養測量工具，並進行信效度驗證。方法：本研究採用便利取樣的方式，由國內六所大學中選取1,269位學生參與此橫斷面研究，評價研究素養測量工具之信效度。本研究回收1,264份有效問卷，男女比例為0.87，大部分學生為大二（38.1%）和大三（26.1%）。營養素養測量工具的發展乃根據台灣之每日飲食指南和國民飲食指標，包括自陳式量表（8題）和情境式測驗量表（32題），以Cronbach's α係數來驗證測量工具的內部一致性信度，效度考驗則採用驗證性因素分析。結果：自陳式量表和情境式測驗量表之Cronbach's α係數分別為0.85和0.81，營養素養測量工具兩部分量表都達到良好模式適配度指標，而情境式測驗量表以項目反應理論分析困難度參數介於-3.22和0.11（可接受範圍介於-4~2）之間。此外，營養素養測量工具兩部分量表都與健康飲食行為呈正相關（r=.417, p＜.001 和r=.125, p＜.001）。結論：本研究所發展之台灣大學生營養素養測量工具為一個具有信效度之測量工具，可應用在營養教育介入計畫執行前之需求評估。起始頁-結束頁：582-597資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201810_37(5).10705401篇名：「呷甜甜老康健？呷甜甜呷百二？」作者：陳怡君期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：351-351資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).PF012篇名：被忽略的熱帶疾病對非洲人群健康之衝擊與治療藥物取得之困境作者：范家<U+5803>期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：352-359資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).1060603篇名：混合研究法：創新整合程序作者：MICHAEL D FETTERS;SU-I HOU期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：360-365資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).1070334篇名：新一代品質報告卡設計思維－病人觀點的客製化需求資訊並列篇名：New generation of quality report card design considerations - patient view of the tailored need for information作者：陳宗泰(TSUNG-TAI CHEN);陳凱倫(KAI-REN CHEN);邱銘心(MING-HSIN PHOEBE CHIU)關鍵字：品質報告卡;病人觀點;公開資訊;客製化;quality report card;patient view;disclosed information;tailoring期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：美國雖然在1987年開始實施第一個品質報告卡，但是因為成效不彰，2010年即開始改革及宣示公開民眾真正需要且容易了解的資訊。反觀國內，報告卡雖已實施10年左右，但公布的資訊仍以專業的技術品質資訊為主，這類型的資訊雖然也很重要，但不完全是民眾就醫選擇主要參考的資訊，因此，本文提出品質報告卡成功之鏈，第一步即是要客製化病人需求的資訊，本文從報告卡成功設計的架構出發，然後詳細描述客製化病人需求資訊的重要性，以及萃取病人需求資訊的一些考量，期望能給主管機關應用參考，以及引發相關學者進一步的研究。英文摘要：Although the U.S. implemented the first quality report card in 1987, due to its ineffectiveness in 2010 the country began to reform and declare that disclosed information should be truly needed and easily understood by citizens. In contrast, quality report card system has been in effective for around 10 years in Taiwan, but the disclosure of information primarily focuses on professional and objective information. While this type of information is also important, it may not completely match the main reference information for choosing health care facilities. Hence, our article proposes a chain of successful report card design in which the first step is to tailor patients' need for information. We start from the framework of successful design and then in greater detail describe the importance of tailoring patients’ needed information along with some considerations of eliciting the information from the patients. We believe this format provides some pragmatic implications for authorities and can help scholars further advance related research.起始頁-結束頁：366-374資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).1070115篇名：Walk Score^R之相關文獻回顧：身體活動、步行行為及慢性疾病風險並列篇名：A literature review of Walk Score^R: physical activity, walking behavior and risk of chronic diseases作者：賴鼎富(TING-FU LAI);廖邕(YUNG LIAO);薛名淳(MING-CHUN HSUEH);林倩宇(CHIEN-YU LIN)關鍵字：Walk Score;宜走性環境;身體活動;步行行為;慢性疾病;Walk Score;walkability;physical activity;walk behavior;chronic disease期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：世界衛生組織指出身體活動量不足為全球第四位的死亡危險因子，而宜走性環境為促進身體活動、步行行為；減少肥胖、慢性疾病風險的重要決定因子之一。Walk Score^R網站為公開且能快速測量宜走性環境的新興工具，本文將系統性回顧2007年後與Walk Score^R網站及身體活動、步行行為、慢性疾病風險有關的發表研究。本文使用PubMed與華藝線上資料庫搜尋2007至2017年間，以中、英文發表的探討Walk Score^R網站與身體健康相關之文獻，經系統性地篩選後，一共納入28篇符合標準之文獻。現有研究多為橫斷性設計，且集中於加拿大與美國。我們根據健康結果將其歸納成「身體活動/步行行為」、「身體質量指數」、與「慢性疾病/醫療費用」三大範疇。納入回顧的文獻顯示，Walk Score分數與身體活動/步行行為呈正相關，但與慢性疾病的風險呈負相關。建議未來研究採用大數據，以確保研究結果的可靠性；並採取縱貫性設計，建立因果關係之推論，作為由環境層面的介入，有利提升民眾參與身體活動的重要參考。英文摘要：According to the World Health Organization, physical inactivity is the fourth most prevalent risk factor for mortality. Studies indicate that environmental walkability is one of the main determinants of physical activity, walking behavior, obesity, and chronic diseases/medical expenditure exposure. The Walk Score^R website, established in 2007, is a public, easy to navigate, and novel measurement of the amenity of a particular urban environment to walking. The aim of this study was to systematically review the literature from 2007-2017 investigating the association of Walk Score^R with several health-related outcomes. The study systematically reviewed literature on the association of Walk Score^R with health-related outcomes, primarily through PubMed and Airiti Library (2007-2017). Twenty-eight articles met the criteria and were included in this study. The majority of studies was cross-sectional and most were from the US and Canada. We generalized the findings into three broad categories: physical activity/walking behavior, body mass index, and chronic diseases/medical expenditure. Most studies reported that Walk Score^R was positively associated with physical activity and walking behavior, but negatively associated with obesity, some chronic diseases (i.e., cardiovascular disease and cancer), and medical expenditure. Future research needs to use large sample sizes and longitudinal design to understanding the causal mechanism between external measures such as Walk Score^R and health-related outcomes and provide encouragement to the public to engage in more physical activity.起始頁-結束頁：375-393資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).1070236篇名：運用計劃行為理論比較有無子女者之懷孕意圖－以台灣北部某區域醫院之女性護理人員為例並列篇名：A comparison of pregnancy intentions between women with and without children using the Theory of Planned Behavior: a sample of female nurses from a regional hospital in northern Taiwan作者：張曉涵(HSIAO-HAN CHANG);黃俊豪(JIUN-HAU HUANG);羅筱榕(HSIAO-JUNG LO)關鍵字：計劃行為理論;懷孕意圖;有無子女;女性護理人員;台灣;Theory of Planned Behavior;pregnancy intention;women with and without children;female nurses;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：運用計劃行為理論之構念（行為態度、主觀規範及自覺行為控制），以台灣北部女性護理人員為例，比較分析有無子女者之懷孕意圖及相關因素。方法：針對北部某區域醫院、20-40歲、非懷孕中之女性護理人員進行網路匿名問卷調查（N=624），使用多變項羅吉斯迴歸進行分析。結果：無子女者，其對懷孕之正面、負面「行為結果評價」態度（AOR=20.43、2.35）、「主觀規範」（AOR=2.93、13.78）以及有利情境下之「自覺行為控制」（AOR=4.95），與其懷孕意圖具顯著關聯。反觀有子女者，其對懷孕之正面「行為結果評價」態度（AOR=23.87、40.50）、「主觀規範」（AOR=7.32）、有利情境（AOR=0.16、0.12）及阻礙情境（AOR=0.19）下之「自覺行為控制」，與其懷孕意圖具顯著關聯。結論：計劃行為理論之五類因素，於有無子女者，對其懷孕意圖之影響程度與方向不同。若欲提升懷孕意圖，針對無子女者，應提升其懷孕之正向態度、加強其重要他人之支持程度，並提供生育有利因素；對有子女者，則應強調懷孕生育之正面結果、加強其非長輩重要他人之支持程度，及改善阻礙因素。英文摘要：Objectives: This study compared pregnancy intention and associated factors between women with and without children, using the constructs of the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB): Attitude toward the Behavior, Subjective Norm, and Perceived Behavioral Control, in a sample of female nurses. Methods: Anonymous online survey data were collected from 20-40-year-old non-pregnant nurses working in a regional hospital in northern Taiwan (N=624). Multivariate logistic regression analyses were conducted. Results: Among childless nurses, their attitudinal evaluations of positive and negative behavioral outcomes (AOR=20.43 and 2.35, respectively), subjective norms (AOR=2.93-13.78), and perceived behavioral control under facilitating conditions (AOR=4.95) were significantly associated with their pregnancy intention. By contrast, among nurses who were already mothers, their attitudinal evaluations of positive behavioral outcomes (AOR=23.87–40.50), subjective norms (AOR=7.32), and perceived behavioral control under facilitating (AOR=0.16–0.12) and constraining (AOR=0.19) conditions were significantly related to their pregnancy intention. Conclusions: Pregnancy intention among childless nurses and those who were already mothers was differentially associated with the five TPB-based factors, both in terms of strength and direction of effect. To increase childless nurses' pregnancy intention, efforts should be made to foster their positive attitudes toward pregnancy, increase their perceived support from significant others, and provide facilitating conditions conducive to pregnancy. By contrast, for nurses who are already mothers, such initiatives should focus on emphasizing the positive outcomes of pregnancy, enhancing their perceived support from significant peers, and reducing the constraining conditions for pregnancy.起始頁-結束頁：394-406資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).1061087篇名：大學生食品素養自陳量表之建構及其與飲料行為之關係並列篇名：Development and validation of a food literacy self-report inventory and investigation of the relationships between food literacy and dietary behavior among college students作者：羅藝方(YI-FANG LUO);楊淑晴(SHU-CHING YANG);江佳勳(CHIA-HSUN CHIANG);盧家湄(CHIA-MEI LU)關鍵字：食品素養;飲食行為;大學生;food literacy;dietary behavior;college student期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在建構食品素養自陳量表，並進一步探討大學生食品素養與飲食行為之關係。方法：採取分層取樣的方式，資料蒐集時間自2017年5月至6月，正式樣本共394位大學生。結果：經預試（n=202）分析，食品素養自陳量表可區分為「互動性」、「功能性」及「批判性」三構面，各構面Cronbach's α介於.76至.87，全量表信度為.89，可解釋總變異量為66.08%。再以正式樣本（n=394）進行驗證性因素分析，量表個別項目的信度介於.40至.66；因素負荷量介於.63至.81（p＜.001）；潛在變項的組合信度為.80至.86之間；平均變異抽取量為.50至.61之間。模式的各項指標顯示本研究的適配度佳。結論：本研究所建構之食品素養自陳量表具有不錯的信效度。大學生自認為具有中等程度以上的食品素養能力，且有較好的消費者健康和飲食控制行為，但均衡飲食的習慣較差，相對的，偏差飲食行為則較高。此外，大學生的批判性食品素養比功能性和互動性食品素養更能正向預測其飲食行為。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to construct a food literacy self-report inventory and to investigate the relationships between food literacy and dietary behaviors among college students in Taiwan. Methods: A nationally representative sample of 394 college students was surveyed using stratified sampling from May to June 2017. Results: In a pilot study (n = 202), items were loaded on the following 3 dimensions in exploratory factor analysis: functional, interactive, and critical food literacy. The Cronbach's α was between .76 and .87, and that of the overall scale was .89 with a total variance of 66.08%. In the formal study (n = 394), we used structural equation modeling to examine the measurement model. The reliability of the individual food literacy scale items ranged from .40 to .66. Moreover, standardized factor loading ranged from .63 to .81 (p ＜ .001), composite reliability from .80 to .86, and the average variance extracted for each dimension from .50 to .61. The indicators revealed that the measurement model had a good fit. Conclusions: The food literacy self-report inventory developed in this study is a reliable and valid measure. The status of food literacy and dietary behavior showed that the college students had at least a medium level of food literacy, and although they had good consumer health and diet control behavior, they had a poor balanced diet and deviant behavior. Additionally, compared with functional and interactive food literacy, critical food literacy positively predicted dietary behavior.起始頁-結束頁：407-419資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).1070298篇名：台北兒童與母親飲料及糕餅點心中游離糖攝取研究並列篇名：Consumption of free sugar from beverages, snacks, and desserts for children and their mothers in Taipei作者：盧立卿(Li-Ching Lyu);呂雅婷(Ya-Ting Lu);徐桂婷(Kuei-Ting Hsu);游家佳(Chia-Chia Yu)關鍵字：游離糖;飲料;糕餅點心;兒童;世代研究;free sugar;beverages;snacks and desserts;children;cohort study期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究澄清各種糖的計算方式，並探討母親與兒童飲料及糕餅點心游離糖（freesugar）的攝取狀況及相關性。方法：本次研究參考食品標示及文獻建立游離糖資料庫，並使用24小時飲食回憶法，評估來自世代研究中57對6歲及40對9歲的兒童及其母親游離糖攝取量。游離糖分成純果汁本身的糖及添加至飲料及食物中的糖，為果汁糖、飲料糖與糕餅點心糖的總和。結果：兒童游離糖平均攝取量及佔總熱量百分比，六歲為22.5±14.8g（6.4±4.3%），九歲為31.6±20.1g（8.0±4.6%），主要來自茶飲料及麵包類，九歲兒童飲料糖與游離糖的攝取量顯著高於六歲兒童（p＜0.05）。分析也發現兒童六歲時與母親攝取飲料糖（r_s=0.28, p＜0.05）跟果汁糖（r_s=0.38, p＜0.01）有顯著相關，但九歲並無顯著相關。結論：本次研究提供了台灣國人游離糖攝取量、食物來源與親子間食物攝取相關性的初步資料。發現兒童六歲時與母親飲食攝取有顯著相關，兒童六歲至九歲游離糖攝取隨年齡增加，雖皆符合國際建議（佔總熱量10%以下），但仍有進步空間。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to clarify methods of calculation method of sugars, to estimate the intake, and to compare the intake of free sugar from beverages, snacks, and desserts between children and their mothers. Methods: Data from a prospective cohort included 57 and 40 mother-child pairs when children were at 6 and 9 years old, respectively. Consumption of free sugar was assessed using 24-hour recall. Free sugar was defined as processed and natural sugar in sweets and fruit juices; it was the sum of the sugars in juices, drinks, and snacks, and desserts. Quantification of free sugar was based on content listings on packaged foods and on information provided by several references. Results: The average daily intake of free sugar by 6-year-old children was 22.5±14.8g (6.4±4.3% of daily energy intake), and by 9-yearold children was 31.6±20.1g (8.0±4.6% of daily energy intake). ”Tea drinks” and ”breads” were the greatest sources of free sugar consumed. The consumption of free sugar and sugar in drinks was significantly higher at age 9 than at age 6 (p＜0.05). The intake of sugar from drinks (r_s =0.28, p＜0.05) and juices (r_s =0.38, p＜0.01) was significantly correlated between children and their mothers, when the children were 6 years of age, but not significantly correlated at age 9. Conclusions: These findings provide preliminary data on consumption of free sugar, the main food resources, and correlations between children and their mothers. Free sugar consumption increased from age 6 to 9 years, and there was strong correlation of sugar consumption between mothers and their 6-year-old children. Although the sugar consumption reported met WHO recommendations (less than 10% of daily energy intake), it still has room for improvement.起始頁-結束頁：420-434資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).1061349篇名：健康資訊傳播對民眾空氣汙染風險認知的影響並列篇名：The impact of health information dissemination on public awareness of air pollution risk作者：鄧詠竹(Yung-Chu Teng);曾子容(Tzu-Jung Tseng);詹大千(Ta-Chien Chan)關鍵字：空氣汙染;風險認知;資訊傳播;健康資訊;air pollution;risk awareness;information dissemination;health information期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：室外空氣汙染物被證明會導致健康危害，如何透過健康資訊傳播有效提升民眾的風險認知非常重要。本研究探討民眾空氣污染的風險認知程度、對政府解決能力的信心，是否與資訊的傳播方式、資訊來源的信賴度、或本身的健康狀態等因素有關係。方法：資料使用2016年科技部傳播調查資料庫第一期第五次的調查結果，以邏輯斯迴歸進行統計分析，主要探討哪些個人因素、資訊傳播方式、資訊的信任程度、地區差異等會與民眾對空氣汙染的風險認知有關。結果：58.1%受訪者覺得空汙很可能影響自己的健康，而對於政府改善空汙狀況的信心很低（36.7%）。民眾居住地區、教育程度、個人健康狀態或快樂程度、資訊蒐集的管道、資訊的信賴程度等都對於空氣污染的風險認知或政府處理空汙能力的信心上產生顯著的影響。結論：針對不同地區、特定族群提升電視與網路所提供健康訊息的信賴感及提升對政府處理空污問題的信心，並加強男性、單身、中老年族群對於空污的風險認知。英文摘要：Objectives: Outdoor air pollution has been proved hazardous to health. It is notably important to elevate civil awareness and thorough dissemination of health information. This study tried to elucidate the associations between public awareness of air pollution, confidence in government strategies for dealing with air pollution, obtainment of air pollution information from different channels, trust in the information source, and personal health status. Methods: The data were obtained from the fifth survey of the first phase of the Taiwan Communication Survey, funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology, 2016. Personal factors, information dissemination approaches, trust in the information source, and spatial differences were explored with logistic regression to understand respondents’ perception of outdoor air pollution risks and related health behavior. Results: 58.1% of respondentss thought air pollution may affect their own health. About 1/3 (36.7%) of people lacked confidence in strategies for improving air pollution led by the government. Residence, education, personal health status or happiness, information channel, and trust in the information source had significant association with risk awareness and confidence in government air-pollution measures. Conclusions: Our results suggested the importance of enhancing the reliability of health information provided from TV and internet and boosting confidence in government actions to combat air pollution. Finally, awareness of the risk of air pollution can be improved for specific population segments including males, singles and the elderly population.起始頁-結束頁：435-452資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).10700910篇名：家庭接納對成年期同性戀及雙性戀者身心健康之影響並列篇名：The effect of family acceptance on the physical and mental health of lesbian, gay and bisexual adults作者：楊喬羽(Chiao-Yu Yang);沈瓊桃(April Chiung-Tao Shen)關鍵字：家庭接納;同性戀;雙性戀;健康;family acceptance;lesbian/gay;bisexual;health期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討家庭接納對同性戀及雙性戀者生理及心理健康之影響。方法：透過問卷調查法蒐集620份有效樣本，包括300份同性戀樣本、125份雙性戀樣本及195份異性戀樣本資料。本研究以多變項變異數分析檢驗研究對象自評的生理健康、心理困擾及自殺意念是否因性傾向而存在差異，並以廣義線性模型分析家庭接納對個體生理健康、心理困擾及自殺意念的影響是否因性傾向而有不同。結果：統計分析結果顯示同性戀及雙性戀者之心理困擾及自殺意念均顯著高於異性戀者。不論性傾向為何，家庭接納和身心健康以及自殺意念皆有顯著的相關。此外，家人的接納對同性戀及雙性戀者心理困擾的影響程度顯著高於家庭接納對異性戀者心理困擾的影響。結論：相關機構應針對同性戀及雙性戀者之心理健康需求提供服務，並致力於促進家人對同性戀及雙性戀者之接納，以提升同性戀及雙性戀者之心理健康。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated the effects of family acceptance on the physical and mental health of LGB adults. Methods: Valid questionnaires were collected from 620 research participants, including 300 lesbians and gays, 125 bisexuals and 195 heterosexuals. The data were analyzed by MANOVA to examine the differences in the self-rated physical health, mental health and suicide ideation among lesbians and gays, bisexuals and heterosexuals. The data were also analyzed by a generalized linear model to examine the difference in the effects of family acceptance on the physical health, mental health and suicide ideation among lesbians and gays, bisexuals and heterosexuals. Results: LGB adults scored significantly higher than heterosexuals did on the scales on mental health symptoms and suicide ideation. Family acceptance was significantly correlated with physical health, mental health, and suicide ideation, regardless of the participants' sexual orientation. Family acceptance had a more significantly effect on LGB's mental health than on that of the heterosexual participants. Conclusions: Related agencies should develop specific mental health services for LGB adults and make efforts to increase family members' acceptance of LGB adults in order to promote their mental health.起始頁-結束頁：453-463資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).10611511篇名：The relationship among work stress, emotional intelligence, and emotional exhaustion: an empirical study on Taiwanese dietitians並列篇名：探究工作壓力、情緒智慧和情緒耗盡之相關性：台灣營養師之實證研究作者：賴苡汝(I-Ju Lai);廖梨伶(Li-Ling Liao);李貞慧(Chen-Hui Lee);李佩珊(Pei-Shan Li)關鍵字：dietitian;emotional exhaustion;emotional intelligence;work stress;營養師;情緒耗盡;情緒智慧;工作壓力期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Objectives: The purposes of this study were to understand the work stress, emotional intelligence, and emotional exhaustion status of Taiwanese dietitians, and to determine the predictors of emotional exhaustion. Methods: A total of 320 practising dietitians voluntarily participated in the online questionnaire survey. The self-administered, structured survey consisted of the Occupational Stress Indicator-2, the Emotional Intelligence Scale, the Maslach Burnout Inventory - Chinese, and questions seeking general information. Descriptive statistics, one-way ANOVA, and hierarchical regression were performed for the analyses. Results: This study found that workload was the main source of work stress among dietitians and they were at moderate levels of burnout. The 5 subscales of emotional intelligence were all higher than the middle point of the measurement scale. Those who worked in hospitals had significantly higher levels of work stress and emotional exhaustion. The final model explained 46.2% of the variance in emotional exhaustion. Work place, work stress, and emotional intelligence were significant predictors of emotional exhaustion. Conclusions: Emotional exhaustion is a noteworthy issue among Taiwanese dietitians, especially for those working in hospitals. The study’s findings suggest a significant association between emotional intelligence and emotional exhaustion; thus, enhancement of emotional intelligence may need to be at the core of future interventions.英文摘要：目標：本研究旨在瞭解台灣營養師工作壓力、情緒智慧和情緒耗盡之現況，並找出情緒耗盡之預測因子。方法：全國共有320名執業中營養師志願透過線上問卷調查的方式參與本研究，研究工具包括職業壓力指標第二版、情緒智慧量表和職業倦怠量表中文版及個人資料問卷，資料分析方法為描述性統計、單因子變異數分析和多元階層迴歸分析法。結果：工作負荷大為營養師最主要的壓力來源，情緒智慧各面向表現皆高於平均值，情緒耗盡表現則為中度職業倦怠; 在醫院工作的營養師工作壓力較大、情緒耗盡情況較為嚴重。階層迴歸模式顯示所有變項可以解釋營養師情緒耗盡46.2%的總變異量，工作地點、工作壓力和情緒智慧都是情緒耗盡之顯著預測因子。結論：台灣營養師之情緒耗盡情況是一個值得重視的問題，尤其是在醫院工作的營養師問題更為嚴重。本研究發現情緒智慧是情緒耗盡的顯著預測因子，提升營養師的情緒智慧或許是未來改善情緒耗盡的重要策略。起始頁-結束頁：464-474資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201808_37(4).10702512篇名：農業工作者的職業傷病與職災補償制度並列篇名：Occupational injuries and diseases in agricultural sector and worker’ compensation for agricultural workers作者：陳宗延(Chun-Yen Chen);鄭雅文(Yawen Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：237-243資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).10702713篇名：兒童固定就醫場所與醫療利用並列篇名：Regular sources of care and children’s health care utilization作者：黎伊帆(YI-FAN LI);江東亮(TUNG-LIANG CHIANG)關鍵字：兒童;固定就醫場所;門診;急診;住院;children;regular sources of care;ambulatory care;emergency services;hospitalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：探討兒童的固定就醫場所對門診、急診，以及住院利用的影響。方法：資料來自台灣出生世代調查研究，共有18,845名兒童同時完成6個月至66個月共4次調查，完訪率為88.7%。自變項為兒童在6個月至36個月時分別以診所、醫院為固定就醫場所，以及沒有固定就醫場所3組，依變項為兒童66個月時的醫療利用。結果：63.5%的兒童有固定就醫場所，其中44.7%為診所、18.8%為醫院。父母親教育程度較低、母親為非本國籍、家庭月收入多在3萬元以下的兒童，其沒有固定就醫場所的百分比較高。控制社會人口學特性及健康狀況，以診所為固定就醫場所者門診利用較高，然而，以醫院為固定就醫場所（急診OR=1.6；住院OR=1.8）與沒有固定就醫場所（急診OR=1.2；住院OR=1.4）其急診及住院情形顯著高於以診所為固定就醫場所者。結論：以診所為固定就醫場所的兒童，其急診、住院利用率顯著低於以醫院為固定就醫場所、或是沒有固定就醫場所的兒童，建議政府宜推出鼓勵相關財務誘因與診所品質資訊透明化的政策，以鼓勵家長選擇診所為固定就醫場所。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to determine the relationship between children's regular sources of care (RSOC) and health care utilization including ambulatory care (AC), emergency services (ES), and hospitalization (HOSP) care in Taiwan. Methods: Data came from the Taiwan Birth Cohort Study. A total of 18,845 children were included. Their parents completed four waves of interview surveys between 6 and 66 months of age, with a response rate of 88.7%. The independent variable was children's RSOC including RSOC in clinics, RSOC in hospitals, and no RSC when the children were 6 to 36-months old, and the dependent variable was medical utilization when the children were 66-months old. Results: A total of 63.5% of the children had a RSOC including 44.7% in clinics and 18.8% in hospitals. Children were less likely to have a RSOC with parents' of lower education, foreign-born mothers, and a household monthly income less than 30,000 NTD dollars. After controlling for children's gender, maternal nationality, socioeconomic characteristics, and health status, children with RSOC in hospital was significantly associated with higher likelihood of ES and HOSP (ES, OR=1.6; HOSP, OR=1.8) as were those who did not have a RSC (ES, OR=1.2; HOSP, OR=1.4), compared with those who did not have a RSOC. Conclusions: Children with RSOC in clinics was significantly associated with lower likelihood of ES and HOSP. This suggests that the government implemented financial incentive and transparency of quality in clinics policies for encouraging parents to use clinics as the RSOC.起始頁-結束頁：244-253資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).10610214篇名：新進住院醫師對電子病歷的看法－以科技持續理論探討並列篇名：Perspectives on electronic medical records among new residents -applying Technology Continuance Theory作者：莊秋華(CHIOU-HWA CHUANG);郭律成(LU-CHENG KUO);楊銘欽(MING-CHIN YANG)關鍵字：電子病歷;醫療資訊系統;科技持續理論;知覺有用性;知覺易用性;electronic medical records (EMR);health information systems;Technology Continuance Theory (TCT);perceived usefulness;perceived ease of use期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究欲瞭解台灣某醫學中心新進住院醫師在擔任實習醫師時使用電子病歷後，對電子病歷的認知、態度、持續使用意向，以加強對實習醫師和新進醫師在電子病歷上的教育和臨床訓練。方法：本研究以科技持續理論（Technology Continuance Theory, TCT）為基礎設計結構式問卷，調查某醫學中心2017年新進住院醫師對電子病歷之認知、態度、滿意度及持續使用之意向，使用複迴歸分析驗證變項間的相關性。結果：本研究共發出292份問卷，回收276份（回收率94%）。填答者中，男性占65%，平均24.3歲，265位（96.0%）在擔任實習醫師時曾使用過電子病歷。複迴歸分析結果顯示，和受訪醫師是否會持續使用電子病歷有關的因素包括知覺有用性（p＜0.0001）、滿意度（p＜0.01）、病歷書寫表現（p＜0.0001）、書寫表現（p=0.01）。結論：新進住院醫師使用電子病歷和病歷書寫表現及學習表現具有正相關，且新進住院醫師對電子病歷之滿意度、態度及表現都和醫師持續使用電子病歷的意向呈現正相關。英文摘要：Objectives: This research aimed to understand the cognition, attitude, and intention for continued use of electronic medical records (EMRs) among new residents following EMR use in their intern year at one medical center in Taiwan. As such, the goal of this study was to improve education and clinical training among interns and new residents who use EMRs. Methods: A structured questionnaire was constructed based on Technology Continuance Theory (TCT), which was used to investigate the cognition, attitude, satisfaction, and intention for continued use among physicians-in-training at a medical center in 2017. Regression analysis was used to analyze the relationships among variables. Results: A total of 292 sets of questionnaires were distributed, of which 276 were collected for a response rate of 94%. Males represented 65% of all respondents, with an average age of 24.3 years. Two hundred sixty-five residents (96%) stated that they used EMRs during their intern year. Regression analysis showed that the factors which affected intention to continue using EMRs among physicians are as follows: perceived usefulness (p＜0.0001); satisfaction (p＜0.01); medical records writing performance (p＜0.0001); and learning performance (p=0.01). Conclusions: Using EMR was positively associated with medical record writing and overall learning performance among new physicians. In addition, resident satisfaction, performance, and attitude towards EMR were positively associated with an intention to continue using EMRs.起始頁-結束頁：254-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).10701515篇名：台灣基層診所病人複雜度與提供服務項目之探討並列篇名：Patient complexity and services provided by primary care clinics in Taiwan作者：林奕穎(YI-YING LIN);郭年真(RAYMOND N. KUO)關鍵字：西醫基層診所;病人複雜度;基層醫療服務項目;家庭醫師;都市化程度;primary care clinic;patient complexity;primary care service;family physician;urbanization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：經由分析台灣基層診所之病人複雜度，以及可提供文獻常見之基層醫療服務項目之比例，來探討台灣現況之下有多少基層診所可承擔家庭醫師的功能。方法：本研究以2009年至2013年全民健康保險資料庫之一百萬人承保抽樣歸人檔為資料，經由分析基層診所申報之診斷、檢查、年齡分布、藥物和特定診療項目，根據數量、變異性和多樣性變化等構面，進行「病人複雜度」之計算。此外，本研究參考文獻使用之基層照護品質指標，從中歸納出十一項常見之基層醫療服務項目，探討不同科別基層診所提供服務項目之差異。結果：台灣家醫科基層診所的病人複雜度最高，其次是兒科、內科。基層診所提供各項服務之比例，以2013年為例：空腹血脂36.45%，醣化血色素30.80%，微量白蛋白尿25.53%，眼睛檢查8.69%，成人健檢35.26%，流感疫苗有21.53%，子宮頸抹片檢查為8.31%，糞便潛血檢查為14.88%，而戒菸門診為7.46%。癌症篩檢項目中，結腸直腸鏡佔1.32%，乳癌篩檢佔0.17%。僅有不到一成的診所同時能提供流感疫苗等五項診所常見之服務項目，且高達四成的診所未能提供五項中任一項的服務。此外，本研究也發現，病人複雜度和提供服務項目之比例與都市化程度普遍成反比。結論：整體而言，台灣基層家醫科、內科和小兒科診所最接近家庭醫師的角色，但現況之下以達成的比例來說，能夠提供五項以上基層醫療服務項目的診所未達一成，相較於國外的基層診所常提供的服務項目上，仍有很大的進步空間。英文摘要：Objectives: The primary care system is responsible for the management and coordination of patient care. This study will explore how many primary care clinics are able to take on the functions of family physicians. This will be accomplished through exploring the patient complexity and the services provided by primary care clinics in Taiwan. Methods: In this study, we calculated patient complexity using different dimensions, including quantity, variability, and diversity. We assessed patient complexity in terms of diagnoses, exams, age distributions, medications, specific diagnosis and treatments provided by primary care clinics. In addition, we referenced the quality care indicators used in other countries and then summed up eleven primary care services indicators. Through linear regression and logistic regression, we examined the relationships between division, urbanization and patient complexity and services provided by primary care clinics. We also took into account the relationship between physicians' specialty, demographic characteristics, and primary care services. Results: Patient complexity is the highest for family medicine providers, followed by internal medicine and pediatrics clinics. In 2013, the results suggest that the eleven primary care services that primary care clinics can provide are: fasting blood lipids 36.45%, glycosylated hemoglobin 30.80%, microalbuminuria 25.53%, eye examination 8.69%, health examination 35.26%, influenza vaccine 21.53%, pap smears 8.31%, fecal occult blood test 18.7%, and smoking cessation clinic 7.46%. In cancer screening services, colorectal cancer screening are only 1.32%, and breast cancer screening only 0.17%. Fewer than 10% of primary care clinics provide the five most common services, and nearly 40% of those clinics did not provide any of the above services. In general, the degree of urbanization in the clinics is inversely proportional to the patient complexity and the ratio of clinics providing primary care services. Conclusions: Overall, family medicine, internal medicine and pediatrics clinics in Taiwan are able to take on the functions of primary care providers, but fewer than 10% of the primary care clinics provide top 5 primary care services. Ideally, primary care services could be spread more evenly between providers. Any effort to improve the referral system should be aimed at strengthening the clinics that aren't currently able to meet primary care service needs. This is particularly true of primary care clinics in highly urbanized areas.起始頁-結束頁：265-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).10608116篇名：丹麥孕產照護：助產師和產科醫師共同照護模式並列篇名：Maternity care practice in Denmark: a model of collaboration between midwives and obstetricians作者：施麗雯(LI-WEN SHIH)關鍵字：丹麥;孕產照護;助產師;產科醫師;共同照護;Denmark;maternity care;midwife;obstetrician;model of collaboration期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：助產師和產科醫生共同照護是目前許多先進國家採用的孕產照護模式。本文介紹施行該模式的北歐國家丹麥醫院裡，助產師與產科醫師專業分工的實作，並分析這套模式的優勢和其運作邏輯。方法：本文採用文獻分析，針對丹麥的全國統計資料庫、和相關文獻、報章媒體等整理和分析丹麥的孕產照護制度發展，並在丹麥進行田野調查，透過訪談（產科醫師、助產師和剛生產的懷孕女性）、參訪、診間的參與式觀察等，了解助產師和產科醫生分工下的照護實作以及挑戰。結果：丹麥孕產照護的專業分工來自國家制度化的保障，不但讓助產師和產科醫生能夠各司其職，亦能因應不同孕婦的健康需求給予照護。面對助產人力不足、居家產率上升等挑戰時，仍能從孕婦、助產師和產科醫師等多元角度去思考對策提出改善策略。結論：這些經驗有助於台灣相關政府單位未來想推動要學習這套孕產照護模式政策時作為參考。英文摘要：Objectives: The shared care model between obstetricians and midwives is one of the most adopted maternity care models in advanced industrial countries. This article attempts to introduce the Danish maternity care system, which practices this model, to enrich our understanding of the practice in which a collaboration between obstetricians and midwives is practiced, and also to learn the advantages and logic of care embedded in its practice. Methods: To understand Danish maternity care practice, this article is based on data from the Danish media, the national database (Statistics Denmark), related articles and books, field work with interviews of obstetricians, midwives, and pregnant couples from 2014-2017, and participant observations in 7 hospitals in Denmark. Results: Danish law, which ensures a division of labor between obstetricians and midwives that enables midwifery and obstetric professionals to work following a model of collaboration that provides care according to a woman's need. The logic of the Danish maternity care means that when the system is facing challenges from a rising home birth rate and shortage of midwives, Danish society listens to different perspectives from obstetric and midwifery professionals and also to women's need when generating strategies to overcome those challenges. Conclusions: This model serves as a good example to the Taiwanese government and society, and it is therefore of value to learn the core value and care practice policy in this maternity care model.起始頁-結束頁：280-294資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).10700517篇名：高齡者口腔衛生教育介入效果之研究—以社區及長照機構長者為例並列篇名：Effect of oral health education for the elderly in the community and long-term care institutions作者：陳少卿(SHAO-CHING CHEN);胡益進(YIH-JIN HU);張瑞珊(RUI-SHAN ZHANG);嚴明芳(MING-FANG YEN);張進順(JIN-SHUN ZHANG)關鍵字：口腔衛生教育;牙菌斑;健口操;咀嚼力;老年人;oral health education;dental plaque;oral function training;chewing function;elderly期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：探討高齡口腔衛生教育介入對於社區及長照機構長者的進食、口腔衛生狀況、咀嚼力與口腔機能之影響調查。方法：以類實驗研究法立意取樣收集台北市社區與長照機構65歲以上長者232位，以非對等控制組設計，將社區126位與長照機構106位，區分為社區實驗組68位、社區對照組58位、長照機構實驗組53位與長照機構對照組53位，實驗組皆採12週健口操訓練與4次口腔衛教課程介入，對照組則無，經由牙醫師進行口腔檢測及訪員結構式問卷調查，分析介入前後成效。結果：機構長者在吞嚥、機能發音、鼓起雙頰及咀嚼力的表現上明顯較社區長者差。在介入成效上，高齡者對口腔狀況自評、舌苔、牙菌斑牙面比例、吞嚥秒數、咀嚼力，實驗組結果較對照組佳。合併社區及機構實驗組在舌苔及牙菌斑牙面比例有顯著後測改善。整體及機構實驗組在吞嚥秒數有改善，咀嚼力則發現整體及機構對照組後測較前測差，但實驗組沒有差異。結論：高齡者口腔衛生教育介入對長者舌苔、牙菌斑與口腔機能有改善或維持。建議社區及長照機構應持續鼓勵長者進行口腔健康促進活動，並協調口腔保健資源及其護理人員，規劃不同生理功能老年人的教育模式。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the influence of oral health education intervention on eating, oral health, chewing, and oral function of elderly in community and long-term care institutions. Methods: A quasi-experimental study involving a non-equivalent control group design was conducted in the community and long-term care institutions in Taipei City. Two hundred thirty-two elderly ＞ 65 years of age were recruited; 126 were community residents (experimental group [n=68] and control group [n=58]) and 106 were from long-term care institutions (experimental group [n=53] and control group [n=53]). The intervention for the experimental group included 12 weeks of oral training and 4 oral hygiene courses; no intervention was provided to the control group. Dentists and oral hygienists collected a survey before and after the intervention, and a questionnaire on oral function and oral hygiene was administered. Results: The elderly in the institutional group was significantly worse than the community group with respect to swallowing, pronunciation, motor activity of the cheeks, and chewing function. The entire experimental group had significant improvement in self-evaluation of oral health, tongue coating, dental plaque, swallowing time, and chewing function compared to the control group. With respect to dental plaque check and tongue coating, the entire experimental group exhibited statistically significant improvement. The entire and institutional experimental groups had improved swallowing function. The entire and institutional control group had worse chewing function, but no difference was observed in the experimental group. Conclusions: Oral health education promotes improved tongue coating, dental plaque, and oral function in the elderly. Based on the current study, it is recommended that community and long-term care institutions should continue to carry out oral health promotion, coordinate oral health care resources, and plan the education mode of different physiologic functions for the elderly.起始頁-結束頁：295-308資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).10700318篇名：台灣成年族群飲酒型態與事故傷害、酒駕之關係探討並列篇名：Drinking patterns in relation to injuries and drunk driving among community-dwelling adults in Taiwan作者：楊涵纖(HAN-SIAN YANG);鄭凱元(KAI-YUAN CHENG);張新儀(HSING-YI CHANG);陳娟瑜(CHUAN-YU CHEN)關鍵字：狂飲;飲酒頻率;傷害;酒駕;binge drinking;drinking frequency;injuries;drunk driving期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：瞭解台灣成年族群中飲酒型態與自陳過去一年事故傷害、因酒後駕車而遭警察開單或逮捕之相關性。方法：本研究為一橫斷性研究。資料來源為台灣2013年國民健康訪問調查（National Health Interview Survey, NHIS），並以青壯年（18-39歲，n=7,251）及中年（40-64歲，n=8,003）兩族群為研究對象。飲酒型態的評估指標包含狂飲行為及飲酒頻率。統計採調查統計分析，按年齡分層，並以邏輯式迴歸探討飲酒型態和過去一年事故傷害（含跌倒、燒燙傷、其他事故傷害）及酒後駕車之關係。結果：青壯年族群有較高的事故傷害盛行率（如跌倒：12.9%），然中年族群有酒駕經驗者較多（3.8%）。相較於飲酒頻率，狂飲與事故傷害的相關性較強，且狂飲相關事故傷害風險在青壯年較為顯著（如狂飲者跌到勝算比1.75）。狂飲且日飲之青壯年其酒駕盛行率達22.6%；相較於非狂飲且非日飲者，其酒駕校正後勝算比為11.5（95%信賴區間：4.94-26.91）。結論：本研究發現狂飲與事故傷害（如跌倒）的風險增加有關，且此相關性於青壯年族群尤為顯著。本研究推論受限於橫斷性設計限制，未來可考慮由追蹤性研究或監測資料進一步確認並探討相關機制。酒害防治策略發展建議納入低頻過量飲酒之傷害，並將年輕族群視為酒駕重要介入對象。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aimed to determine the association linking drinking patterns with self-reported past-year injuries and drunk driving among community-dwelling adults in Taiwan. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study utilizing the dataset from the 2013 Taiwan National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). The analytic sample comprised young adults (18-39 years of age; n=7,251) and older adults (40-64 years of age; n=8,003). Complex survey analyses in the logit function were performed to estimate the odds ratio [OR] of injuries (i.e., past-year falls, burns, and other injuries) and drunk driving in relation to binge drinking and drinking frequency. Results: Young adults had a higher prevalence of injuries (4%~13%), whereas a higher prevalence of drunk driving existed in older adults (3.8%). In contrast to drinking frequency, binge drinking was associated with higher odds of injuries; this association was more prominent in young adults. Greater than 1 in 5 young adults with binge and daily drinking reported drunk driving (22.6%); the adjusted OR for drunk driving was estimated 11.5 (95% CI= 4.94-26.91). Conclusions: Our analyses revealed a slightly increased risk of injuries associated with binge drinking, which was more prominent in young adults. The causal inference was limited because of the cross-sectional study design. Further evidence derived from longitudinal or surveillance data is needed to validate the connection and explore possible pathways. Alcohol harm reduction strategies may address moderate drinking-related injuries and drunk driving intervention should focus on young drinkers as a priority target.起始頁-結束頁：309-321資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).10700819篇名：評論：把酒問青天並列篇名：Commentary: a drinking question to the heaven作者：林茂榮(Mau-Roung Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：322-322資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).1070080120篇名：作者回覆：把酒問青天並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary: a drinking question to the heaven作者：楊涵纖(Han-Sian Yang,);鄭凱元(Kai-Yuan Cheng);張新儀(Hsing-Yi Chang);陳娟瑜(Chuan-Yu Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：323-323資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).1070080201篇名：以系統性文獻回顧與整合分析探討瑜珈對更年期相關症狀之成效並列篇名：Effectiveness of yoga for improving menopause-related symptoms: a systematic review and meta-analysis作者：黃惠美(HUI-MEI HUANG);林小玲(SHIR-LING LIN);廖媛美(YUAN-MEI LIAO);戴秀好(SHIU-HAO TAI);明金蓮(JIN-LAIN MING)關鍵字：瑜珈;更年期相關症狀;yoga;menopause-related symptoms期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：更年期相關症狀對於婦女的生活常造成相當程度困擾，瑜珈是常被用於處理更年期相關症狀之輔助方式之一，但其成效未獲確定。方法：此系統性文獻回顧與整合分析探討瑜珈對於改善更年期相關症狀之成效，於PubMed、MEDLINE、CINAHL、Cochrane Library及華藝線上圖書館等電子資料庫設定關鍵字搜尋2018年2月以前出版之中、英文文獻，依據納入及排除條件，排除不符合此研究主題之文獻後共納入11篇文獻，依考科藍隨機對照試驗誤差風險評估（The Cochrane risk of bias tool for randomized clinical trials）之評析標準進行文獻研究品質評價，並使用牛津大學之實證醫學證據等級表（Oxford centre for Evidence-based Medicine）評定證據等級。整合分析（Meta-Analysis）部分乃使用Review Manager軟體（RevMan）5.3版本。結果：整合分析結果顯示：瑜珈改善整體更年期症狀之效果量SMD為-0.96（95% CI:-1.60, -0.32, p=0.003; 異質性I^2=86%），改善憂鬱之效果量SMD為-0.23（95% CI:-0.42, -0.03, p=0.02; 異質性I^2=0%），改善睡眠障礙之效果量SMD為-0.21 （95% CI:-0.41, -0.02, p=0.03; 異質性I^2=0%），改善血管舒縮症狀之效果量SMD為-0.23（95% CI:-0.41, -0.05, p=0.01; 異質性I^2=0%）；但瑜珈對於改善壓力感受未呈現顯著成效。結論：此系統性文獻回顧與整合分析支持瑜珈可改善整體更年期相關症狀、憂鬱、睡眠障礙與血管舒縮症狀，針對此特殊族群提出練習瑜珈之相關建議將受限於納入研究之內外在信度的影響，仍需執行更多嚴謹研究以豐富現存文獻。英文摘要：Objectives: Menopause-related symptoms often cause considerable distress to women. Yoga is widely employed as a complementary method for managing menopause-related symptoms, but its effectiveness must still be determined. Methods: This systematic review and meta-analysis examined the effectiveness of yoga for improving menopause-related symptoms. Using identified keywords, a systematic literature search for relevant English and Chinese language studies published before February 2018 was conducted in the following electronic databases: PubMed, MEDLINE, CINAHL, the Cochrane Library, and the Airiti Library. Results of the literature search were screened using proposed inclusion and exclusion criteria. Eleven articles were included for systematic review after removing some articles on irrelevant topics. Study quality was assessed based on the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool for Randomized Controlled Trials, and ranking of evidence was based on the Oxford 2011 Levels of Evidence. Meta-analysis was conducted using Review Manager version 5.3. Results: Meta-analysis results indicated that practicing yoga resulted in an improvement in overall menopause-related symptoms [standardized mean difference (SMD): -0.96, 95% confidence interval (95% CI): -1.60, -0.32, p = 0.003; heterogeneity I^2 = 86%], depression (SMD: -0.23, 95% CI: -0.42, -0.03, p = 0.02; I^2 = 0%), sleep disorders (SMD: -0.21, 95% CI: -0.41, -0.02, p = 0.03; I^2 = 0%), and vasomotor symptoms (SMD: -0.23, 95% CI: -0.41, -0.05, p = 0.01; I^2 = 0%). However, practicing yoga did not result in a significant reduction in the perception of stress. Conclusions: The results of this systematic review and meta-analysis support that yoga may improve overall menopause-related symptoms, depression, sleep disorders, and vasomotor symptoms. Recommendations related to practicing yoga for this specific population may be attenuated by influences associated with the internal and external validities of the included studies. Conducting additional rigorous studies is necessary to enrich the currently available information.起始頁-結束頁：324-339資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).1070102篇名：Factors associated with future illicit drug recidivating for young adult students who misuse drugs: a population-based cohort study from Taiwan並列篇名：年輕成人學生藥物濫用再逮捕相關警示因素：一個來自台灣的全人口世代研究作者：劉<U+701E>鎂(CHIN-MEI LIU);李子奇(CHARLES TZU-CHI LEE)關鍵字：illicit drug use;cohort study;young adult;criminal record;藥物濫用;世代研究;年輕成人;犯罪紀錄期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Objectives: Although data have discovered risk factors of illicit drug use, there was still rare study discussing this issue based on the following criminal record. The aim of this study was to investigate the factors associated with the following illicit drug criminal record in young adult drug misuse student. Methods: This was a population-based cohort study. The index date was set as the first register date of illicit drug use from Ministry of Education. Included Students aged 18- 24 years old with a positive test result of illicit drugs between January 1, 2013 and December 31, 2013. Illicit drug criminal record after index date from National Police Agency criminal system served as outcome. Cox regression model used to assess the association between factors and illicit drug criminal record by hazard-ratio. Subjects were follow-up until relapse of drug misuse, death, migration or June 30, 2015. Results: Of the 860 illicit drug use students, 61 (7.09%) with the following drug criminal record of schedule I and II drugs. There were 214 (24.88%) with the following drug criminal record of schedule III and IV drugs. Factors associated with schedule I and II drugs were main caregiver and prior drug misuse criminal record. Factors associated with schedule III and IV drugs were main caregiver, prior withdraw from school record, learning problem and prior drug misuse criminal record. Conclusions: Drug misuse recidivating for young adult students associated with prior drug misuse criminal record, non-parent caregiver, learning problem and prior withdraw from school record.英文摘要：目標：藥物濫用者之再犯率高，但少有研究使用犯罪紀錄探討再犯相關警示因素，本研究目的在探討年輕成人學生藥物濫用再逮捕的相關警示因素。方法：本研究為全人口世代研究。研究起始日為第一次通報藥物濫用的日期。研究對象為102年教育部通報藥物濫用個案（年齡18-24歲），以研究起始日後之一、二級毒品或三、四級毒品為再逮捕指標，探討與個人、家庭背景因素之相關性。採用Cox迴歸分析，計算各因素的「危險比」，追蹤個案從研究起始日至被警方逮捕、死亡、移民或2015年6月30日。結果：共860位藥物濫用學生中有61（7.09%）位在研究起始日後有一、二級毒品移送紀錄；214（24.88%）位有三、四級毒品裁罰紀錄。一、二級毒品移送高風險族群：非父母監護人、成案前有一、二級毒品刑案移送紀錄等背景因素。三、四級毒品裁罰紀錄高風險族群：監護人非母親、中輟、學習意願低落、成案前曾有三、四級裁罰紀錄等。結論：年輕成人藥物濫用學生再逮捕相關警示因素：曾有毒品犯案紀錄、非父母監護人、中輟與學習意願低落。起始頁-結束頁：340-350資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201806_37(3).1061243篇名：台灣地區道路密度、長期細懸浮微粒暴露與發生高血壓之研究並列篇名：Roadway density, PM_(2.5), and hypertension: a retrospective cohort study in Taiwan作者：邱聖崴(Sheng-Wei Chi);吳治達(Chih-Da Wu);張奕彩(Yi-Tsai Chang);潘文驥(Wen-Chi Pan)關鍵字：道路密度;細懸浮微粒;高血壓;因果中介變項模型;roadway density;PM_(2.5);hypertension;casual mediation model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：檢視台灣地區道路密度與發生高血壓之相關性，及利用因果中介變項分析了解細懸浮微粒、交通噪音在關係中之角色。方法：研究利用全民健康保險2000年百萬承保抽樣歸人檔（Longitudinal Health Insurance Database [LHID] 2000）之世代追蹤研究資料，以確認2003年至2012年間罹患高血壓者的新病例。暴露資料則以交通部運輸研究所之路網數值圖2006第1.3版，透過地理資訊系統計算研究對象就醫鄉鎮之道路密度而細懸浮微粒資料取自2006至2012年空氣品質監測網之每小時PM_(2.5)自動監測資料，並以克力金模型推估至研究對象就醫地點所在之鄉鎮，做為受試者之長期暴露數值。最後再以Cox比例風險模型估計道路密度與發生高血壓之危險比及利用因果中介變項量化交通汙染所產生之細懸浮微粒所造成之高血壓效應（例：間接效應[Natural Indirect Effect, NIE]）。結果：研究對象所就醫之鄉鎮如有較高之縣道道路密度時（<U+2265> 125.3 m/km^2），則其對之高血壓風險約略增加17%（危險比[Hazards Ratio, HR]=1.17, 95%信賴區間：1.14-1.19），而較高之鄉道道路密度（<U+2265> 473.2 m/km^2）也發現相同的趨勢（危險比[Hazard Ratio, HR]=1.09, 95%信賴區間：1.07-1.10）。結論：本研究發現研究對象就醫鄉鎮之道路密度與發生高血壓有正向的相關性，此相關可能為細懸浮微粒所造成。英文摘要：Objectives: To assess the association between roadway density and the incidence of hypertension and to evaluate the role of fine particulate matter (PM_(2.5)) on that association by using mediation analyses Methods: We included participants' health information retrieved from the Longitudinal Health Insurance Database 2000. We retrieved roadway density (e.g. county road) from the Institute of Transportation's Digital Road Network Map 2006. Participants' long-term exposure to traffic-related pollution was based on the roadway density of the township in which they resided. We applied Cox proportional hazards models to assess the association between the incidence of hypertension and road density. Casual mediation models were utilized to estimate the mediation effect of PM_(2.5) on the roadway density-hypertension association. Results: During a median follow-up time of 11.01 years, 108,733 cases of hypertension were identified. After we controlled for potential confounders, participants who resided in townships with a higher density of county roads (<U+2265> 139 m/m^2) had a 17% higher risk for hypertension when compared to the reference group (Hazard Ratio [HR]=1.17; 95% Confidence Intervals [CIs]: 1.14-1.19), and similar results were also found for country roads (HR=1.09, 95% CIs: 1.07-1.10). Results were not materially different when we included only participants who lived in a metropolitan area (e.g. Taipei city). Furthermore, PM_(2.5) imposed a statistically significant mediating effect on the incidence of roadway density-associated hypertension for county roadway exposure (HR=1.01, 95% CIs: 1.00-1.02) and country roadway exposure (HR=1.001, 95% CIs: 1.00-1.02). Conclusions: This study provided evidence that roadway density was positively associated with the risk of hypertension in an Asian population. We also found that PM_(2.5) served as a mediator for this association.起始頁-結束頁：125-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201804_37(2).1060884篇名：頭頸癌病人放射治療毒性反應預測因素之研究並列篇名：Predictors of radiation therapy toxicity in patients with head and neck cancer作者：馬震中(Chen-Chung Ma);葉世安(Shyh-An Yeh);郭光明(Kuang-Ming Kuo);林佩蓉(Pei-Jung Lin)關鍵字：放射治療;頭頸癌;放射治療毒性反應;radiation therapy;head and neck cancer;radiation therapy toxicity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：放射治療產生之毒性反應，反映著治療品質之好壞，進而影響病人後續生活品質。本研究目的為探討頭頸癌病人放射治療毒性反應之預測因素。方法：採回溯性研究設計，以病歷回顧方式收集資料，個案來源為台灣南部某區域醫院2013年1月1日至2015年12月31日，共606名頭頸癌病人納入研究；本研究經人體試驗倫理委員會通過後執行。資料進行敘述性性統計、卡方檢定及多元羅吉斯回歸分析，找出影響放射治療口腔及皮膚治療毒性反應之預測因素。結果：男性546人（90.1%），女性60人（9.9%），平均年齡54.0歲，經多元羅吉斯迴歸分析結果以治療次數、治療固定方式為頭頸癌放射治療皮膚呈現輕微或嚴重反應之預測因素；年齡、身體質量指數為口腔呈現輕微反應之預測因素，癌症部位則為口腔呈現輕微或嚴重反應之預測因素。結論：結果發現改變治療固定方式即能減少皮膚輕微或嚴重反應，由此可供臨床醫師擬定治療計畫時之參考運用，其他預測因素則可促進醫療照護人員對毒性反應之瞭解並提高治療期間對病人毒性反應之關注，能即時給予適當醫療照護處置，以降低毒性反應程度並藉此提升病人的放射治療品質。英文摘要：Objectives: Toxicity from radiation therapy is a reflection of the quality of treatment, and will influence the quality of life of patients. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of demographic, disease and radiotherapy factors on the toxicity of radiation therapy for patients with head and neck cancer. Methods: This was a retrospective study with secondary data analysis. A total of 606 head and neck cancer patients were enrolled in this study from January 1, 2013 to December 31, 2015 in a regional hospital in Southern Taiwan. This study was approved by the institutional review board of E-DA hospital. Descriptive statistics and logistic regression analysis were used to analyze the factors associated with radiation therapy toxicity of the mouth and skin. Results: The results of multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that treatment fraction and immobilization techniques had a significant influence on the side effects on the skin to a mild or severe degree, age and body weight index had a significant influence on the side effects on the mouth to a mild degree, and tumor site had a significant influence on the side effects on the mouth to a mild or severe degree. Conclusions: Immobilization technique is a controllable factor in that changing the selection of immobilization technique can reduce the effects on the skin. This may provide valuable information for radiology physicians when they design a patient's treatment plan. The results may also help medical care staff understand radiation side effects, provide immediate medical services, and improve the quality of radiation therapy.起始頁-結束頁：137-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201804_37(2).1061175篇名：應用SERVQUAL量表探索台灣中南部偏遠地區長期照護服務使用者與家屬對長照據點滿意度與相關因素並列篇名：Exploring user satisfaction with factors related to long-term care service stations in remote areas of Taiwan using SERVQUAL作者：李懿珍(Yi-Chan Lee);劉立凡(Li-Fan Liu)關鍵字：長期照顧服務;據點偏遠地區;服務缺口模式;據點功能;衛生所;long-term care service stations;remote area;PZB model;function of the stations;health station期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：由「服務品質模式」（PZB model）缺口五角度切入，檢視偏遠地區及資源不足區長照服務據點之滿意度及相關因素。方法：本研究發展的SERVQUAL問卷內容效度與信度良好。以方便抽樣於各偏遠長照據點訪問6-10名服務使用者，共完成23個據點有效樣本206份。結果：受訪者有六成來過據點，使用者多為女性、失能程度較低。約六成的據點成立不到3年，照顧管理個案量高。服務品質滿意度得分以保證性最高、有形性最低，總平均分數為4.37分。受訪者認為據點的功能以直接服務顯著高於整合平台與衛教。不同失能程度在可靠性、反應性、關懷性與滿意度總分有顯著差異，而事後檢定發現無失能者在可靠性、滿意度總分顯著高於輕度失能者。衛生所（30.4%）承接的據點滿意度較高，在有形性、關懷性與滿意度總分有顯著差異。回歸結果顯示，了解據點功能及由衛生所承接的據點對使用者及家屬滿意度有正向且顯著影響。結論：本研究結果建議強化使用者及家屬對據點功能之了解以及未來由衛生所承接的政策考量。英文摘要：Objectives: To examine user satisfaction and factors influencing the function of long-term care service stations in remote areas of Taiwan. Methods: In a PZB model, 6-10 users were recruited by convenience from each long-term care service station to complete the SERVQUAL questionnaire. A total of 206 user questionnaires from 23 long-term care service stations were collected. Results: Sixty percent of the respondents had been to the service stations, and most users were female or with a mild disability. Nearly 60% of the service stations had been set up for fewer than three years, and a large caseload was managed by each care manager. From the respondents' perspective, the highest satisfaction was in the assurance domain, and the lowest in tangibles. The mean score was 4.37. More users perceived the function of service stations as providing direct service rather than functioning as integration platforms or health education facilities. There were significant differences in the accessible, reliable, and empathy domains and total scores for satisfaction at different levels of disability. Scores in the accessible domain and total scores for non-disabled users were significantly higher than those of those with a mild disability. There was also higher user satisfaction in the tangibles and empathy domains and total score if their health station (30.4%) provided services. Finally, regression analysis showed that there were positive significant effects on the respondents' satisfaction with clear recognition of the function of long-term care service stations and the services they provided. Conclusions: This study suggested that in order to promote user satisfaction, it would be useful to deliver a clear message about service station features and the services they provided.起始頁-結束頁：148-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201804_37(2).1060916篇名：評論：應用SERVQUAL量表探索台灣中南部偏遠地區長期照護服務使用者與家屬對長照據點之滿意度與相關因素並列篇名：Commentary: exploring user satisfaction with factors related tp long-term care service stations in remote areas of Taiwan using SERVQUAL作者：李怡娟(I-Chuan Li)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：165-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201804_37(2).106091017篇名：民眾對全民健保給付合理論責機制之態度調查並列篇名：Employing accountability for reasonableness in Taiwan's National Health Insurance: exploration of public opinions作者：吳全峰(Chuan-Feng Wu);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：合理論責機制;全民健康保險;給付決策流程;分配正義;accountability for reasonableness (A4R);National Health Insurance (NHI);treatment/drug reimbursement decision-making process;distributive justice期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：合理論責機制（accountability for reasonableness, A4R）為健康照護分配正義評估提供完整連貫之理論架構，本研究目的便係瞭解民眾（作為重要利害關係人）對於將A4R要件納入全民健保給付決策機制之態度與認知，並探討可歸因性之相關因素。方法：研究對象為20歲以上全國民眾，採隨機抽樣並輔以電話訪問，樣本數為1,140位，以多項式邏輯斯迴歸探討可歸因性與民眾特性、公開性、參與性及可修正性之關聯性。結果：多數受訪者認為可歸因性、公開性、參與性與可修正性為健保給付決策機制之重要要素，但僅少數受訪者認識相關機制。就健保給付決定因素分析，重視藥物/醫療服務價格勝於治療效果者，與年齡、教育程度、收入、醫療利用、公開性及參與性有關；重視疾病負擔勝於治療效果者，與年齡、收入、慢性病及參與性有關。結論：民眾普遍認為健保給付決策機制納入A4R要件有其重要性，但認知與態度存在差距；且可歸因性與民眾特性、公開性、參與性有關。英文摘要：Objectives: Accountability for reasonableness (A4R) provides a coherent theoretical framework to evaluate healthcare distributive justice as part of healthcare policy. This study aimed to analyze people’s knowledge about and attitudes toward employing A4R (including relevance of decisions, transparency, involvement of stakeholders, and revisability) in the National Health Insurance (NHI) treatment/drug reimbursement decision-making process, and to explore factors associated with the relevance of such decisions. Methods: A total of 1,140 adults aged 20 and over were randomly sampled from a nationwide population and interviewed by telephone. Multinomial logistic regression was used to examine the associations of individual characteristics, transparency, involvement of stakeholders, and revisability with the relevance of decisions. Results: Most respondents regarded A4R as essential to the NHI reimbursement decision-making process, but only few recognized how A4R was implemented. Additionally, with regard to considerations about setting healthcare priorities - (medical efficacy, disease burden, treatment/drug price), respondents' concerns about price were associated with age, education, income, medical utilization, and their subjective perspectives about transparency and the involvement of stakeholders. Their concerns about disease burden were associated with age, income, chronic disease status, and subjective perspective about the involvement of stakeholders. Conclusions: Even though most people agree on employing A4R to support fair priority-setting in NHI's reimbursement decision-making, a gap exists between their attitudes and knowledge. Additionally, public attitudes about the relevance of decisions are associated with socio-economic characteristics and concerns about transparency and the involvement of stakeholders.起始頁-結束頁：166-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201804_37(2).1061328篇名：The effects of the enablers incentive package on the quality of life among tuberculosis patients receiving DOTS in the Gambia並列篇名：促成獎勵措施對於甘比亞接受都治治療的肺結核病人生活品質影響之研究作者：謝朗明(Lamin M. Ceesay);黃嵩立(Song-Lih Huang);楊振昌(Chen-Chang Yang);顏璧梅(Pi-Mei Nancy Yen)關鍵字：Gambia;health-related quality of life;incentives;tuberculosis;甘比亞;健康相關生活品質;誘因;肺結核期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this research was to explore the quality of life among tuberculosis patients in the Gambia and assess the effects of the enablers package on it. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted among patients receiving anti-TB treatment for at least two weeks in the Gambia. Health-related quality of life was assessed using the WHOQOL-BREF questionnaire through face-to-face interview. The mean overall and domain-specific scores of the WHOQOL-BREF were compared for recipients and non-recipients of the enablers package. Multiple linear regression analyses were employed to identify predictors of a better quality of life. Results: Receipt of the enablers package had a positive association with the overall quality of life (p＜0.0001) and all domain-specific quality of life scores except that of the social domain. Multiple linear regression analyses revealed that the receipt of incentives, female gender, and urban residence had positive significant impacts on the overall quality of life. Conclusions: The results of this study mark the beginning of the understanding of quality of life studies in the Gambia, especially among TB patients. Further research is warranted to explore the needs of TB patients in order to improve their quality of life.英文摘要：目標：本研究目的在探討甘比亞肺結核病患的生活品質及就醫時是否接受促成獎勵措施（enablers package）對於病人健康相關生活品質的影響。方法：本研究利用橫斷式研究，以至少接受兩週以上肺結核治療的肺結核病人為研究對象。利用世界衛生組織健康相關生活品質滿意度問卷進行面對面訪談，以瞭解其健康相關生活品質之狀況，並比較接受及未接受促成獎勵措施的兩組病人的整體及不同範疇的健康相關生活品質平均分數之差異。最後以複線性迴歸模式分析探討可能與較佳的生活品質有關的預測因子。結果：有接受促成獎勵措施者較無接受相關措施者有顯著較高的整體健康相關生活品質（p＜0.001）；且與生理、心理與環境等範疇之健康相關生活品質也都有顯著的正相關。在複線性迴歸模式分析中，有接受治療的誘因（促成獎勵措施）、女性及居住在城市者有顯著較高的整理健康相關生活品質。結論：本研究結果為首次瞭解甘比亞肺結核病人的健康相關生活品質。未來需要更進一步的研究以瞭解肺結核病人的需求，並提升該族群的生活品質。起始頁-結束頁：182-195資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201804_37(2).1061279篇名：學校結盟藥師推動正確用藥教育提升用藥知識、效能與行為之成效評價並列篇名：Evaluating the effects of school-pharmacist partnerships to improve medication knowledge, efficacy and behavior作者：李俊賢(Chun-Hsien Lee);張鳳琴(Fong-Ching Chang);紀雪雲(Hsueh-Yun Chi);黃莉蓉(Li-Jung Huang)關鍵字：學校;藥師;結盟;正確用藥教育;評價;school;pharmacist;partnership;correct medication education;evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究目的為評價台灣推廣學校結盟藥師執行正確用藥教育對學生正確用藥知識、效能及行為之影響。方法：以102年及105年度全台灣地區國小高年級、國中、高中職學生為母群體，採等比機率抽樣。研究工具為自填結構式網路調查問卷，102年受訪學生共計8,635人，105年受訪學生共計6,226人。以廣義估計方程式（GEE）分析台灣推廣學校結盟藥師執行正確用藥教育對學生正確用藥知識、效能及行為的影響。結果：學生表示學校有辦理過正確用藥教育相關活動的比率從102年73%增加至105年的79%。多變項結果顯示，在控制學制與學生的性別後，102年至105年推廣學校結盟藥師執行正確用藥教育後，對學生的正確用藥知識、正確用藥效能及行為有顯著正面影響。此外，學校有辦理正確用藥教學活動學生的正確用藥知識、效能及行為也顯著較高。結論：台灣推廣學校結盟藥師推動正確用藥教育可以顯著提升學生正確用藥知識、效能及行為，建議持續推動學校與藥師結盟推動正確用藥教育以增進學生正確用藥素養。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of promoting and implementing a school-pharmacist partnership correct medication education program to improve students' medication knowledge, efficacy, and behavior in Taiwan. Methods: A probability proportionate to size sampling method was used to select the study population. A total of 8,635 students in 2013 and 6,226 students in 2016 completed the self-administered online questionnaire. Generalized Estimating Equation (GEE) analysis was used to examine the effects of a school-pharmacist partnership correct medication education program to improve students' medication knowledge, efficacy and behavior. Results: The proportion of students who reported that their schools had implemented correct medication educational intervention increased from 73% in 2013 to 79% in 2016. The GEE analysis results showed that, after controlling for school level and gender, the promotion and implementation of a school-pharmacist partnership correct medication education program from 2013 to 2016 had a positive impact on improving students' medication knowledge, efficacy, and behavior. In addition, schools implementing a correct medication educational intervention also showed positive effects in increased student medication knowledge, self-efficacy, and behavior. Conclusions: The promotion and implementation of a school-pharmacist partnership correct medication education program had positive effects on enhancing students' knowledge, efficacy and behavior. We recommend continued implementation of school-pharmacist partnerships to enhance students' medication literacy.起始頁-結束頁：196-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201804_37(2).10613510篇名：K他命膀胱炎患者中止物質濫用歷程之探究並列篇名：The desistance process of substance abuse in people with ketamine cystitis作者：齊沛瑜(Pei-Yu Chi);王炯珵(Chung-Cheng Wang);陳心怡(Hsin-Yi Chen);唐宜楨(I-Chen Tang);童伊<U+5EF8>(Yi-Ti Tung)關鍵字：K他命膀胱炎;物質濫用;中止;ketamine cystitis;substance abuse;desistance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：近來毒品濫用與施用者年輕化的問題甚為嚴重，初次接觸毒品常以K他命為主。本研究目的為探究K他命膀胱炎患者中止濫用K他命的經驗，瞭解K他命膀胱炎患者其中止K他命濫用的歷程與影響因素。方法：本研究採質性研究設計，以立意取樣方式，對9位K他命膀胱炎患者進行面對面深度訪談，並將訪談資料轉成逐字稿進行內容分析。結果：將中止K他命濫用歷程分為：K他命濫用成型、掙扎階段、初步中止、穩定中止或失敗等四階段。促進中止K他命濫用因素有健康信念與自我覺察、家庭支持與正向人際關係、宗教信仰寄託、偏差友伴網絡瓦解、司法矯治介入。結論：建議重視醫療人員在K他命戒治中的積極性角色、毒品濫用中止需跨單位的協調與合作、輔導戒治宜從脈絡檢視物質濫用者的需求、建立保護性通報機制、透過醫療系統的治療輔導替代行政裁罰以中止K他命濫用的問題。英文摘要：Objectives: Drug abuse is more common among young people than it is in other age groups. For some, their initial exposure to drugs is ketamine. The purpose of this study was to investigate the experiences of people with ketamine cystitis who had desistance ketamine abuse. Methods: The study adopted a qualitative research design, and conducted in-depth interviews with nine patients with ketamine cystitis. The interview data were converted into transcripts for content analysis. Results: The desistance process of ketamine abuse was divided into four stages: The start of Ketamine abuse, struggling to stop, initial desistance, and stable desistance or failure. The causes of trigger desistance Ketamine abuse were health concerns and self-awareness, family support and positive interpersonal relationships, religious beliefs, and collapse of the supply network. Conclusions: It is recommend that medical professionals become involved in programs to end ketamine addiction and coordinate and cooperate in interdisciplinary team work with drug abusers. Treatment should assess the context of drug abuse and establish a secure notification mechanism. Medical treatment could substitute for administrative sanctions for ketamine addition, and an emphasis on preventing ketamine abuse could reduce the abuse of more harmful drugs.起始頁-結束頁：206-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201804_37(2).10610311篇名：母親接受子宮頸抹片篩檢及女兒接種HPV疫苗之相關因素分析－以桃園市育有12-17歲青少女之母親為例並列篇名：Factors associated with mothers' health behaviors with regard to receiving Pad-smear screening for themselves and human papillomavirus vaccination for their adolescent daughters in Taoyuan City: a health belief model approach作者：蔡炯青(Chiung-Ching Tsai);林國甯(Kuo-Ning Lin);陳效君(Hsiao-Chun Chen)關鍵字：子宮頸癌;HPV疫苗;子宮頸抹片篩檢;健康信念;cervical cancer;HPV vaccine;Pad-smear screening;health belief期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在以健康信念模式探討母親讓女兒接種HPV疫苗、自己接受子抹篩檢之相關因素，以及兩項健康行為之間的關係。方法：透過NIIS系統選取桃園市12-17歲女學生之家戶資料，依分層隨機抽樣並以女學生之母親為對象進行電話調查，最後以羅吉斯複迴歸檢視影響其健康行為之相關因素。結果：職業、地區都市化程度、對HPV疫苗有效性認知是影響女兒接種HPV疫苗的顯著因子；母親接受子抹篩檢的顯著影響因子則有年齡、職業、醫療院所之行動線索、以及對子抹篩檢的障礙性認知。女兒接種HPV疫苗與母親接受子抹篩檢這兩項健康行為呈正相關，並且女兒接種HPV疫苗可以顯著影響母親後續接受子抹篩檢的意願與行為。結論：加強母親對HPV疫苗之有效性認知、降低母親對子抹篩檢之障礙性認知，乃是促使母親採取子宮頸癌預防行為之重要關鍵。而推動青少女免費HPV疫苗政策非僅可達一級預防效果，也可促進母親接受子抹篩檢的意願與行為，對於推動子宮頸癌之二級防治亦有實質助益。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to explore factors influencing mothers' health behaviors with regard to Pad-smear screening for themselves and human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination for their adolescent daughters. Methods: Based on data from the National Immunization Information System (NIIS), we selected families with daughters aged 12-17 in Taoyuan City and interviewed the mothers. We adapted the stratified random sampling method, and a computer assisted telephone interview was conducted in October 2016. We used chisquare tests, point-biserial correlations, and multiple regression models to analyze the 1,031 valid samples. Results: After multiple logistic regression analysis, we found that the statistically significant factors influencing HPV vaccination of teenage girls were: mothers' occupation, living area, and perceived effectiveness of the HPV vaccine. We also found that mothers' cues to action, perceived barriers to Pad-smear, and particularly, the daughters' HPV vaccination, could significantly predict mothers' later use of Pad-smear screening. Conclusions: The policy of HPV vaccination for adolescent girls could not only achieve the primary prevention of HPV, but could also improve the secondary prevention of cervical cancer. Base on this win-win policy, we suggest that health sectors should provide more comprehensive information for the public about the HPV vaccine in order to improve mothers' perceived benefits, and therefore to increase the rate of HPV vaccine of adolescent girls. Furthermore, the most significant predictor, a convenient and friendly environment for women to receive Pad-smear screening, should be taken into account in order to reduce the perceived barriers to Pad-smear screening.起始頁-結束頁：220-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201804_37(2).10612312篇名：誤用彈性安全下的健康衝擊：以勞動基準法再修為例作者：劉曦宸;陳宗延;李宸;林子涵;陳秉暉;陳保中期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10613913篇名：建置公私協力的傳染病防治戰備物資體系－從全球CEPI聯盟與美國的BARDA談起作者：蔡奉真;郭旭崧期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：8-11資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10611214篇名：利用文字探勘建立醫學主題詞與基因名稱之關聯性並列篇名：Associations between medical subject headings and gene names based on text-mining in PubMed作者：林宜歆(Yi-Hsin Lin);林嶔(Chin Lin);葉釋仁(Shih-Jen Yeh);蘇遂龍(Sui-Lung Su)關鍵字：文字探勘;醫學主題詞;基因名稱;常一起出現在摘要中的相關性;text-mining;medical subject headings (MeSH);gene names;often appearing in abstracts期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：近年來生物醫學文獻發表量日益增加，有必要借助電腦自動化整理大量文獻並提供有用的資訊。目前自動化整理生物資訊之著名相關網站如Coremine、STRING、DisGeNet等，但都看不到字詞間的間接相關性。本研究欲探討PubMed收錄之非結構化摘要中，醫學主題詞（MeSH）與基因名稱間不同年代使用次數的高低情形與各詞彙間的相關強度。方法：本篇研究所採取的研究設計為text-mining design，研究樣本為2016年7月8日檢索PubMed並下載共26,295,751篇文獻。分別利用美國國立醫學圖書館與國際人類基因組組織命名委員會，編製的醫學主題詞與基因的正式名稱，檢索同義字後建立27,883個醫學主題詞的字庫與39,903個人類基因的字庫；文字比對擷取各摘要中包含的醫學主題詞與基因名稱，以年為單位計算各詞彙於摘要中出現次數，並使用word2vec分析詞彙間的相關強度。結果：本研究建立互動式網站，提供查詢醫學主題詞與基因名稱在各年代摘要中出現次數與頻率，以及最常一起出現在摘要中的相關字詞（https://yihsin.shinyapps.io/meshgeneterm_relation/）。本研究發現在2012年開始有很多文章在摘要中提到China，次數排名於2016年擠進前8名，象徵中國在學術界的崛起；Health從排行第7到第3名，也許表示越來越重視健康的議題。舉退化性關節炎為例，與退化性關節炎最常一起出現在摘要中有截肢手術、髕骨、膝關節與癱瘓等，同時也看的到這些字間的間接相關。結論：利用本研究建立的網站，瞭解各醫學主題詞與基因名稱在摘要中不同年代使用次數與頻率，以及最常與哪些字一起出現的相關強度，讓研究者在探索新領域時能快速有概括性的了解，取得建議研究的方向，以利往後跨領域之科學研究。英文摘要：Objectives: In recent years, the biomedical literature has expanded by leaps and bounds. Based on studies available in the databases, it is difficult for users to sort through the massive literature and organize sets of qualitative data. At present, there are well-known websites such as Coremine, STRING, and DisGeNet; however, one can inquire only about words directly related to the search words without any indirectly relevant suggestions. Thus, there is a real need to address the issue. In this study, we investigated the number of uses in each year and the relationship between medical subject headings (MeSH) and gene names in the non-structured abstracts in PubMed. Methods: The study used a text-mining design. The study samples were the 26,295,751 articles in PubMed on July 8, 2016. Using the MeSH from the American National Library of Medicine in the MeSHBrowser, we identified 27,883 words to establish the MeSH dictionary. Genes were officially named by the Human Genome Organization Nomenclature Committee. A search of NCBI Gene yielded a dictionary of 39,903 human genes. The medical subject headings and gene names included in the abstracts were then extracted and calculated by year. We used word2vec to analyze the associations between the MeSH and gene names. Results: We built an interactive website which provides information about the number of uses in different years and the relevant words that most often appeared together with MeSH and gene names in the abstract (https://yihsin.shinyapps.io/meshgeneterm_relation/. For example, words which appeared most often together with Osteoarthritis were Osteotomy, Nails, Patella, Knee joint, Physical examination and Paralysis. There are also indirectly relevant suggestions. Conclusions: The website developed in this study provides the number of uses in different years of MeSH and gene names, and what words were most associated with them; this indicates that these words were often mentioned and discussed together in medical publications. We can also see the indirect correlations between them so that researchers exploring new areas can quickly have a general understanding of the field.起始頁-結束頁：12-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10608615篇名：石綿暴露工作者的職業健檢：職業醫學專科醫師的觀點並列篇名：Occupational health examination of asbestos-exposed workers: viewpoints of occupational health physicians作者：蕭汎如(Fan-Ju Hsiao);陳宗延(Chung-Yen Chen);李俊賢(Lukas Jyuhn-Hsiarn Lee);鄭雅文(Yawen Cheng)關鍵字：石綿;職業病;職業醫學專科醫師;職業健檢;asbestos;occupational diseases;occupational health physicians;occupational health examination期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：職業健檢機制的制度缺失之一，為特殊健檢的對象僅限在職者，因而難以早期偵測潛伏期漫長的職業病。有鑑於職業醫學專科醫師（職醫）在職業健檢制度中扮演重要角色，本研究以石綿相關疾病為例，探討職醫對於石綿作業工作者離職後健檢機制必要性、可行性與影響的觀點。方法：研究者在2017年1月至8月間個別訪談15位職醫，訪談主題為：(1)對於目前石綿作業特殊健檢機制的看法，(2)對於建立職業石綿暴露工作者離職後追蹤檢查機制的看法。結果：受訪者都同意現有的職業健檢制度無法對職業石綿相關疾病發揮提早偵測的功能，因此有必要改善。然而，受訪者對於建立石綿職後健檢機制持有疑義，可歸納為以下五個面向：(1)界定石綿暴露工作者的困難，(2)確認石綿暴露的困難，(3)缺乏合適的篩檢工具與專業判讀人員，(4)缺乏明確的財源機制與配套措施，(5)可能引發道德危害疑慮。結論：受訪的職醫皆同意政府應針對石綿暴露工作者建立職後健檢機制，並同意其他可能導致職業病罹病風險的職業危害也應比照，然而在執行層面上之制度設計與配套措施，仍需就上述問題作進一步研商。英文摘要：Objectives: One of the many shortcomings of the current occupational health examination (OHE) system in Taiwan is that only on-the-job workers are eligible to participate, making it difficult for the early detection of workers who develop occupational diseases with long disease latencies. We used occupational asbestos-related diseases (OARDs) as an example to explore the opinions of occupational health physicians (OHPs), who play important roles in the OHE system, regarding the necessity, feasibility, and potential impact of post-exposure OHEs involving asbestos-exposed workers. Methods: Fifteen OHPs were interviewed individually during the period from January to August 2017, with questions on the following two themes: (1) opinions about the current OHE system for asbestos-exposed workers; and (2) opinions on the establishment of post-exposure OHEs for asbestos-exposed workers. Results: All of the interviewees agreed that the current OHE system fails to detect OARDs, thus reforms are needed; however, the interviewees had concerns regarding the establishment of a post-exposure OHE system, which were summarized in the following 5 dimensions: (1) problems of identifying asbestos-exposed workers; (2) difficulties in verifying asbestos exposure; (3) uncertainty in choosing a suitable screening tool and in ensuring qualified personnel; (4) lack of financial resources and administrative support; and (5) problems of moral hazards. Conclusions: All of the interviewed OHPs agreed that the establishment of a post-exposure OHE system is needed, not just for asbestos-exposed workers, but for workers exposed to other types of hazardous substances with long disease latencies. To design the system and its implementation procedures, more discussions are needed, especially with respect to the aforementioned issues.起始頁-結束頁：24-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10610016篇名：發展台灣工作者職場內外心理壓力強度評估表之質性訪談初步驗證並列篇名：Verification of a pilot qualitative interview about the development of an intensity scale of psychological stress induced by life events inside and outside of the workplace for Taiwanese workers作者：葉婉榆(Wan-Yu Yeh);胡佩怡(Pei-Yi Hu)關鍵字：工作壓力;精神疾病;職業疾病;認定基準;壓力生活事件;work stress;mental illness;occupational disease;reference guide on identification;stressful life events期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：我國勞動部（時為勞委會）曾參考日本職業精神疾病認定制度，於2009年發布「工作相關心理壓力事件引起精神疾病認定參考指引」，其中羅列多項職場內外生活壓力事件，本研究將這些事件項目發展為心理壓力強度評估量表，並運用質性訪談蒐集量表內容對於台灣職場脈絡的適用性評估，以及工作者填答壓力強度分數的影響因素。方法：2010~11年間徵得36位來自製造業、服務業、營造業與公共行政業的正職、約聘、派遣工作者參與量表試填與訪談，透過半結構式大綱深入瞭解受訪者填答問卷的難易程度，以及生活壓力事件發生情境和壓力強度評分的考量因素。結果：個人對於生活事件的壓力強度評估經常需要對照對於他人類似經驗的觀察，並隨著發生時間遠近、事件嚴重度的認知、所扮演的社會角色、有無支援體系、個人價值觀等原因而對生活事件的壓力強度判斷產生個別差異，另組織人手不足以及高難度的業績目標對於台灣職場而言可能是值得納入評估表的壓力來源，而收入減少事件雖然在參考指引中被歸類為職場外事件，但工作者的收入減少和職場內的薪資條件亦有相關。結論：在政策面，本研究針對壓力評估表的後續修訂提供實證依據，另對於企業在員工壓力管理與協助方案的規劃，也提供議題設定優先順序的參考。英文摘要：Objectives: Taiwan’s Ministry of Labor (formerly the Council of Labor Affairs) has referred to the Japanese occupational mental illness system issued a 2009 document, entitled ”Evaluation guidelines for psychiatric diseases induced by work-related mental stress”, which lists a number of stressful life events inside and outside of the workplace. In this study, these events were established as a psychological stress intensity assessment scale, and qualitative interviews were used to evaluate the applicability of the content of the measurement scale for the Taiwanese workplace, as well as to determine the factors influencing worker stress intensity. Methods: In this study, we recruited 36 regular, contract-based and dispatched workers from the manufacturing, service, construction and public administration industries to participate in the scale test and in-depth interview in 2010~11. A semi-structured outline was employed to determine the difficulty the respondents had in filling out the questionnaire, and to examine the context in which the participants’ stressful life events occurred as well as to consider factors in the rating mechanism as part of the process of completing the stress intensity evaluation scale. Results: Individual assessment of the intensity of stressful life events was often affected by the observation of other people's experiences, and, over time, the perceived severity of the events, the social role, social support system, and personal values about stressful life events produced individual differences. Understaffing and unrealistic performance goals were potential sources of stress for Taiwanese workers and are worth including in evaluation guidelines. Additionally, while income reduction was classified as a non-work event, the workers' income reduction were often highly correlated with salary conditions in the workplace. Conclusions: In terms of policy implications, this study provides an empirical basis for revision of the stress assessment table in the evaluation guidelines, and also provides a reference for priorities in the planning of Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs) as well as in the improvement of training techniques to cope with stress.起始頁-結束頁：34-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10607717篇名：乳癌及大腸癌篩檢不平等評估－反轉公平假說之檢視並列篇名：Assessing inequalities in breast and colorectal cancer screening-testing the inverse equity hypothesis作者：李佳綺(Chiach i Bonnie Lee);李妙純(Miaw-Chwen Lee)關鍵字：癌症篩檢;Erreygers校正集中指數;相對不平等指數;反轉公平假說;cancer screening;Erreygers corrected concentration index;relative inequality index;inverse equity hypothesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究探討乳癌及大腸癌篩檢利用之收入不平等，以及不平等與篩檢率之關係。方法：本研究資料取自2001、2005、2009、2013年國民健康訪問調查，估計45或50歲至69歲乳癌及大腸癌篩檢之與均等家戶收入關連之Erreygers集中指數（ECI）、相對不平等指數（RII）及影響不平等因素解析。結果：乳房攝影及糞便潛血篩檢率自2001年之9.2%及10.1%分別上升至2013年之46.1%及41.3%；並呈現收入愈高篩檢率愈高的現象。2001年最高收入群體之乳房攝影使用率比最低收入群體多達近一倍（RII=0.984），但到2013年下降為多5.7%（RII=0.057）。最高收入群體之糞便潛血檢查率比最低收入群體多40-60%（RII=0.377~0.634）。除了2013年乳房攝影外，兩項篩檢之使用亦都集中於高收入群體（乳房攝影ECI=0.060~0.150；糞便潛血檢查ECI=0.036~0.104）。免費政策實施前（2001、2005及2009年）收入都是影響篩檢不平等的重要因素，但免費政策實施後（2013年）教育程度為最重要因素。結論：與「反轉公平假說」一致，當篩檢率上升時，不同收入群體篩檢率差異愈小。提升篩檢率可縮減篩檢之社會不平等，有助於緩和健康不平等。英文摘要：Objectives: This study analyzed income-related inequalities in breast and colorectal cancer screening in Taiwan and the relationship between inequality and screening rate. Methods: We used data from the 2001, 2005, 2009, and 2013 National Health Interview Surveys. The Erreygers concentration indices (ECI) and relative inequality indices (RII) were calculated and ECIs were decomposed. Results: In 2001, 9.2% of participants reported undergoing mammography and 10.1% reported having a fecal occult blood test (FOBT) within the previous year. Those screening rates within the previous two years increased by 46.1% and 41.3% respectively in 2013 and showed income gradients. In 2001, mammography use by the highest-income group was nearly double that of the lowest-income group (RII=0.984), while that difference in 2013 fell by 5.7% (RII=0.057). Compared with the lowest-income group, the highest income group received 40- 60% more screening for FOBT (RII=0.377 to 0.634). Except for mammography in 2013, both mammography and FOBT were concentrated in the higher income group (ECI=0.06-0.15 for mammography; ECI=0.036-0.104 for FOBT). Before the national cancer screening programs in 2001, 2005 and 2009, income was the most important contributor to inequalities in the screening rate, while education accounted for the greatest contribution in 2013. Conclusions: Consistent with the ”inverse equity hypothesis,” income-related inequalities in cancer screening decreased with higher screening rates. Therefore, an increased screening rate facilitates the reduction in inequality in cancer screening and addresses health inequalities.起始頁-結束頁：50-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10605918篇名：罹患肺結核的移工在台灣醫療照顧制度中的治療經驗與賦權並列篇名：The treatment experience and empowerment of migrant workers with tuberculosis in Taiwan’s medical care system作者：黃郁惠(Yu-Hui Huang);齊偉先(Wei-Hsian Chi)關鍵字：肺結核病;移工;檢疫;健康不平等;醫療照護中的賦權;tuberculosis;migrant workers;quarantine;health inequality;empowerment in medical care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：本研究分析台灣罹患肺結核病之移工的醫療照護過程，探究移工這個弱勢社群，是否在獲得醫療照護資源的機會上面臨許多阻礙。研究中說明台灣還存在著這類問題，並試圖提出改善的建議。方法：本研究採質性研究法，採立意取樣的方式，針對九名罹患肺結核的個案及一名資深結核病個管師進行深度訪談，結合訪談及參與觀察的田野資料，進行質性研究方法的分析。結果：分析發現關鍵影響結核病移工獲得照護資源的重要因子，主要有四，分別是現行相關政策所產生的限制、文化及溝通的障礙、仲介及雇主缺乏正確的健康觀念、醫療人員的權宜措施。結論：本研究具體建議(1)政府相關單位應強化醫療人員的多元文化照護能力；(2)醫院應擴大參與面，善用醫療體系之外的資源改善移工的健康問題；(3)政府應加強跨部門的溝通，創造外籍移工獲得較佳治療的機會。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated the medical treatment of migrant workers with tuberculosis. The aim was to determine if this vulnerable group still had barriers in accessing medical care resources. Methods: Adopting a qualitative research design, this study used purposive sampling to conduct in-depth interviews with nine migrant workers infected with tuberculosis and one tuberculosis case manager. Data collected from these interviews and participant observation were analyzed qualitatively. Results: Four factors were found to influence the migrant workers’ access to medical resources: constraints of current related policies, cultural and communicative barriers, job mediators’ and employers’ lack of medical knowledge, and the tactics of medical personnel. Conclusions: This study recommended that (1) related government departments propose projects to empower medical personnel and improve their cultural competence; (2) hospitals cooperate with civil organizations to provide different resources to solve the health problem of migrant workers; (3) the government reinforce cross-departmental communication to create a better medical treatment environment for migrant workers.起始頁-結束頁：63-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10606519篇名：合併精神疾病對癌症延遲診斷與治療之相關性並列篇名：Associations of psychiatric disorders with delay in diagnosis and treatment of cancer作者：陳一凡(Yi-Fan Chen);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu)關鍵字：精神疾病;癌症;延遲診斷;延遲治療;psychiatric disorders;cancer;delayed cancer diagnosis;delayed cancer treatment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：國外研究顯示癌症患者合併精神疾病較容易經歷延遲診斷或治療，台灣是否也存在這樣的情形？本研究欲探討癌症病患是否會因合併精神疾病，致癌症延遲診斷或治療。方法：採回溯性世代研究，以2011年確診為肺、肝、結直腸、乳癌、口腔及子宮頸癌新發個案有治療者為對象，利用全民健保門、住診及癌症登記檔進行分析；以傾向分數配對精神疾病與非精神疾病組；另將精神疾病細分為焦慮、老年期診斷、物質濫用、嚴重精神疾患與其他精神疾患。以癌症期別第三期以上定義為延遲診斷，診斷到開始治療<U+2265>4週為延遲治療；控制變項包括病患、疾病與醫院特質，採條件式邏輯斯迴歸進行分析。結果：癌症治療患者延遲診斷率，合併精神疾病者為48.2%、非精神疾病者為44.3%，兩者無統計上顯著差異（AOR=0.97, 95%CI=0.84-1.11）；合併精神疾病者延遲治療率為58.7%、非精神疾病者為59.7%，亦無統計上顯著差異（AOR=0.94, 95%CI=0.83-1.06）；不同類型精神病分層分析，亦未達統計上顯著差異。結論：整體而言，癌症治療患者合併精神疾病無較高延遲診斷與治療風險；然如何減少延遲診斷與治療國內仍有努力的空間。英文摘要：Objectives: Evidence suggests that cancer patients with psychiatric disorders may be more likely to experience a delay in cancer diagnosis and treatment. The association between psychiatric disorders and delayed diagnosis and treatment in patients with cancer has not been studied well in Taiwan. The aim of this study was to determine if pre-existing psychiatric disorders led to delayed diagnosis and treatment among patients with cancer. Methods: A population-based retrospective cohort study was conducted with the use of the Taiwan National Health Insurance database and the Taiwan Cancer Registry. The study subjects were patients who were newly diagnosed and received treatment for lung, liver, colorectal, breast, oral or cervical cancer before 2011. Propensity scores were used to divide the study subjects into two groups with and without psychiatric disorders. Psychiatric disorders were further subdivided into five categories: anxiety disorders, dementia and other organic psychoses, substance abuse and dependence disorders, severe mental disorders, and other mental health disorders. Stage III or IV cancer was identified as a delayed diagnosis, and a period from definite diagnosis to the start of treatment greater than four weeks was identified as delayed treatment. Conditional logistic regression was used for analysis after controlling for demographic, hospital and disease characteristics. Results: Among patients treated for cancer, the rate of delayed diagnosis for people with psychiatric disorders was 48.2%, and for people without psychiatric disorders, it was 44.3%. The risk of delayed diagnosis was not significantly significant between groups (AOR=0.97, 95%CI=0.84-1.11). Moreover, the rate of delayed treatment for people with psychiatric disorders was 58.7%; for people without psychiatric disorders, it was 59.7%. The risk of delayed treatment was not significantly different between the groups (AOR=0.94, 95%CI=0.83-1.06). Conclusions: We still need to make an effort to reduce the delay in diagnosis and treatment of cancer in psychiatric patients.起始頁-結束頁：77-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10608320篇名：早期太極拳運動對慢性阻塞性肺疾住院病患之運動耐力、焦慮憂鬱及生活品質的長期成效並列篇名：Long-term effects of early Tai Chi on exercise tolerance, anxiety, depression, and quality of life in hospitalized patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease作者：沈雪珍(Hsueh-Chen Shen);郭素娥(Su-Er Guo);張家豪(Chia-Hao Chang);楊聰明(Tsung-Ming Yang);蔡昆道(Kuen-Daw Tsai)關鍵字：早期運動;慢性阻塞性肺疾病;太極拳;運動耐力;生物標誌物;早期運動;慢性阻塞性肺疾病;太極拳;運動耐力;生物標誌物期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：早期運動有助於慢性阻塞性肺疾病急性發作（Acute Exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, AECOPD）的住院病患快速回復，但未有研究探討早期太極拳運動的長期成效，故本研究旨在檢測AECOPD住院病患接受早期太極拳運動訓練在運動耐力、焦慮憂鬱、生活品質與生物標誌物的長期成效。方法：本研究採類實驗設計，立意取樣自雲嘉三間醫院，共31人參與此研究（實驗組，n=17及常規照護的對照組，n=14）。收集6次資料，分別是介入前、出院日、出院後1週、1、3及6個月。運用廣義估計方程式分析太極拳運動成效。結果：實驗組比對照組在出院後1週（p=0.008）及第6個月（p=0.012）有較佳的運動耐力表現；實驗組比對照組在出院後第3個月生活品質明顯改善（p=0.040）；實驗組與對照組相比，實驗組在出院後第3個月第六型介白質（Interleukin-6, IL-6）和C-反應蛋白（C-reactive protein, CRP）的改善幅度，分別減少15.67（pg/ml）（p=0.017）與17.46（ug/ml）（p=0.013），獲得顯著成效。然而在焦慮憂鬱、YKL-40和LCN2的分析上，兩組未達顯著差異。結論：住院期間介入早期太極拳運動可增進病患之運動耐力、生活品質及降低發炎反應且安全可行。此研究結果可供臨床醫護人員做為日後推動住院COPD病患早期運動的實證基礎。英文摘要：Objectives: Early sustained exercise can help patients with an acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD) to quickly return to a steady state; however, to the best of our knowledge, no previous studies have examined the long-term effects of early Tai- Chi or Tai Chi as a bridge between early exercise during hospitalization and exercise at home. The aim of this study was to examine the effects of early Tai Chi on exercise tolerance, anxiety, depression, health-related quality of life and biomarkers in hospitalized patients with AECOPD. Methods: A quasi-experimental study was conducted. A purposive sampling of 31 patients with AECOPD (experimental group n=17 and control group n=14) was selected from hospitals in the Yunlin-Chiayi area. Data were collected during pre-intervention, at discharge, and one week, one month, three months or six months after discharge. Generalized estimating equations were used to examine the effects of the Tai Chi training intervention. Results: The experimental group had better exercise tolerance than did the control group one week after discharge (p=0.008) and six months after discharge (p=0.012). The experimental group had a better quality of life than the control group three months after discharge (p=0.040). The experimental group had decreased biomarker levels (Interleukin-6, p=0.017 and C-reactive protein, p=0.013) more than the control group three months after hospitalization. Anxiety, depression, and other biomarkers (YKL-40 and LCN2) failed to find statistical significance. Conclusions: Early Tai Chi helped promote early exercise in patients with AECOPD.起始頁-結束頁：91-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10612201篇名：評論：早期太極拳運動對慢性阻塞性肺疾住院病患之運動耐力、焦慮憂鬱及生活品質的長期成效作者：蔡美文期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：109-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).106122012篇名：日本的勞災保險制度：對台灣職災保險改革的啟示並列篇名：Industrial accident compensation insurance in Japan: implications for workers’ compensation reform in Taiwan作者：陳宗延(Chung-Yen Chen);蕭汎如(Fan-Ju Hsiao);黃怡翎(Yi-Ling Huang);鄭雅文(Yawen Cheng)關鍵字：勞動者災害補償保險法;職災補償制度;職業傷病;Industrial Accident Compensation Insurance Act;workers' compensation;occupational injuries and diseases期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：目標：台灣職災補償法規範散亂繁複，造成職災勞工的補償權益無法確保、雇主責任無法落實。鑑於台灣與日本國情文化接近，本研究旨在深入探討日本勞災保險制度，作為台灣制度改革借鏡。方法：本研究蒐集並回顧日本勞災保險相關文獻，包含中文或日文的論文、專書、政府官方資料等，並依據下列架構分析、比對資料：(1)制度沿革、(2)法源與行政組織、(3)納保人口、(4)財源與保費、(5)給付內容、(6)認定機制。結果：日本勞災保險依據《勞動者災害補償保險法》，由中央勞動基準局及地方勞動基準監督署主管，涵蓋全體受僱勞工，由雇主全額支付保費，給付內容包含職災勞工及家屬所需各層面。職業傷病認定過程由勞動檢查官主導。結論：參考日本勞災保險經驗，台灣職災補償制度應整合並制定專法、擴大保險涵蓋範圍、精算合理費率、提昇給付內容，同時亦應簡化職業傷病申請與認定流程，由勞檢單位積極介入協助，以確保職災勞工的補償權益。英文摘要：Objectives: Workers' compensation in Taiwan is complicated, and it is regulated by various laws; this results in inadequately guaranteed workers' rights to compensation and easy escape from employers' responsibilities. Considering the cultural and socioeconomic similarities between Taiwan and Japan, we examined the institutional arrangements and recognition procedures of the Industrial Accident Compensation Insurance (IACI) of Japan to suggest directions for institutional reform in Taiwan. Methods: The literature about IACI in both Japanese and Chinese including journal articles, books, and official publications was reviewed. Data were analyzed and compared in terms of: (1) institutional evolution, (2) legal basis and administrative organizations, (3) insured population, (4) premiums and financing, (5) benefits, and (6) mechanisms for recognition. Results: IACI in Japan was established on the basis of the IACI Act, and is supervised by the Labor Standards Bureau and prefectural Labor Standards Inspection Offices. All employed workers are covered, and premiums are fully paid by employers. Various types of benefits are provided to the injured workers and their families. The recognition process of occupational injuries and diseases is handled by labor inspection officers. Conclusions: Learning from the experience of IACI in Japan, we believe that a new law is needed to integrate the workers' compensation systems in Taiwan. Coverage should be expanded, the insurance rates should be adjusted reasonably, and benefits should be increased. In addition, the compensation procedures and recognition mechanisms should be simplified and actively assisted by labor inspectors in order to guarantee workers' compensation rights.起始頁-結束頁：110-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201802_37(1).10612101篇名：「以人為中心的東南亞政治研究」專號導言並列篇名：Special Issue: People-Centered Perspectives in Southeast Asian Politics-Introduction作者：蕭新煌(Hsin-Huang Michael Hsiao);楊昊(Alan Hao Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：政治轉型必須以人民為導向並列篇名：Political Transformation Must be People-oriented作者：卡席特．皮隆(Kasit Piromya);楊昊(Alan Hao Yang)關鍵字：政治轉型;東南亞;民主發展;以人為中心;變革;Political Transformation;Southeast Asia;Democratic Development;People-Centered;Change期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：任何社會變革都應該「以人民為導向」。在東南亞，源遠流長的歷史見證了轉型、改革與革命的同時發生。易言之，整個東南亞早已歷經多元的社會變革。有些變革持續存在，並且已經達到目的；而也有一些變革已經停滯，並且形成了某種現狀。臺灣可以藉著自身在民主環境裡的成功政治轉型，贏得東南亞國家的友誼。人民都渴望與熱愛自由，而這正是臺灣向外挺進、走入世界的起點。臺灣應該能區別並選擇哪一些東南亞國家具有民主特性、或者正朝民主轉型，進而與這些國家共享臺灣的成功經驗與最佳範例。臺灣早已歷經參與式與全觀性的社會轉型，人民早已是核心，同時也是國家主權的擁有者與主權權利、利益與報酬的最終接受者。就此，臺灣更應該勇於與其他國家分享現有的難得成就。英文摘要：Any societal change should be people-oriented. In the region of Southeast Asia, history has witnessed the occurrences of transformation, reform and revolution. In other words, there have been a variety of societal changes. Some changes continue and reach objectives. Some remain static and settle into a status-quo. Taiwan can win friends in Southeast Asia with its version of successful political transformation in a democratic setting. People in general want, and love, freedom. That is the starting point for Taiwan to go out into the world. Taiwan went through societal transformation that was participatory and holistic. The people are the center; the owner of national sovereignty as well as the final recipients of sovereign rights, benefits and rewards. Taiwan should not be shy to share with others its achievements.起始頁-結束頁：19-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：轉型正義的實踐與影響：東帝汶經驗檢視並列篇名：Unintended Balance, Unrealized Accountability: Transitional Justice in Timor-Leste作者：顏永銘(Yung-Ming Yen)關鍵字：重大罪刑特別法庭;接納、真相、與和解委員會;印尼—東帝汶真相與和解委員會;平衡論;跨國倡議網路;Special Panels for Serious Crimes (SPSC);Commission for Reception, Truth, and Reconciliation;Commission of Truth and Friendship;Balance Approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：亞太地區的轉型正義個案中，東帝汶具有相當特出之地位，1999年獨立公投動亂後10年間，重要的轉型正義機制在不同行為者推動下展開運作。本文對於東帝汶追求轉型正義的實踐經驗進行系統性的分析整理，並討論其對於東帝汶社會所帶來之影響。本文發現東帝汶重罪特別法庭在制度設計與運作上皆未能符合初衷，另一方面，先後出現的兩個真相委員會固然也受到政治因素牽制，但其運作不經意間形成互補效應，在真相釐清的目標上達成一定效果。在制度的影響上，東帝汶的制度實踐與宏觀的規範性目標間並無明確的經驗證據支持，然此等政治工程的影響，或許須更細緻的由民間社會群體的行動與實踐中加以觀察。英文摘要：Among the societies that had pursued transitional justice enterprise, Timor-Leste was unique for diverse measures taken within the first decade since the 1999 crisis. This study intends to review the major institutional mechanisms adopted in Timor-Leste to respond the human rights abuses and assess their impacts. It is found that despite the pragmatic concern of diplomacy, the restorative justice (embodied in two truth commissions) contributed to the revelation of the truth. In contrast, the operation of the Special Panels for Serious Crimes was mitigated by insufficient support externally and internally. The record of the court showcases the typical predicament facing hybrid courts. In terms of broad impacts, there is limited evidence to support the positive effects brought by the mechanisms operated in Timor-Leste. Nevertheless, new actors and campaigns have been inspired by the legacies, and this society-oriented approach deserves further attention in the future.起始頁-結束頁：33-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：聯合國「關切之人」與東南亞「人的安全」：以泰緬周遭之難民為例並列篇名：”Persons of Concern” to UNHCR and Human Security in Southeast Asia: A Study on Refugees around the Thailand-Burma Border作者：蔡育岱(Yu-Tai Ts'ai);李思(Szu-Hsien Lee)關鍵字：聯合國難民署;關切之人;國際難民;人類安全;泰緬邊境;UNHCR;Persons of Concern;International Refugees;Human Security;Thailand-Burma Border期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：既使進入21世紀，世界難民問題依然嚴重。敘利亞內戰開始於2011年，截至2016年底造成了約1,200萬難民，當敘利亞衝突仍然方興未艾之時，據「聯合國難民署」估計，約19萬緬甸的羅興亞人，正漂流在泰國、菲律賓和馬來西亞海域，同時約有40萬克倫族人因受政治迫害，居住在泰緬邊境受聯合國與泰國政府保護。在國際法相關難民問題上，根據1951年「關於難民地位公約」和1967年「關於難民地位的議定書」定義，敘利亞難民、緬甸羅興亞人、克倫族人等無庸置疑可被歸類為國際難民，並予以庇護安置。而在人類安全研究中，國際社會所「關切之人」（Persons of Concern）是用來描述「聯合國難民署」所要保護與援助需求的遭難者總稱。「聯合國難民署」將其分類為一般的難民（公約定義）、境內難民、無國籍者、尋求庇護者與歸國難民等。爰本文主要目的先行從「聯合國難民署」定義下的「關切之人」概念分析，涉及東南亞「關切之人」部分，再循「以民為本」（people centered）的人類安全途徑詮釋國際難民議題與東南亞「人的安全」，進而以東南亞泰緬周遭之難民為個案探討，引導出東南亞的國際難民問題正挑戰「東協模式」，考驗著東協的團結；最後藉由東南亞難民問題，能有更深一層的認識與了解東南亞「人的安全」。英文摘要：Even in the 21st century, the world refugee problem has remained acute. The Syrian civil war that began in 2011 created some 12 million international refugees by late 2016. As the conflict in Syria has continued to unfold, the UNHCR estimates that more than 190,000 people, mostly Rohingya, left on flimsy boats to countries such as Thailand, the Philippines, and Malaysia. Meanwhile, 400,000 Karen people are homeless and protected around the Thailand-Burma border by UN and government of Thailand. The Syrian refugees, Rohingya people, and Karen people fulfilled the requirements to be categorized as a refugee, based on the meaning of refugee in the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugee and the 1967 Protocol. Hence, the main purpose of this article is to evaluate the definition of ”Persons of Concern and its relevance with Southeast Asia. Besides, the aim of the present research is to provide a thorough analysis of the issues of international refugees and Human Security in Southeast Asia underthe ”people-centered” approach.起始頁-結束頁：71-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：東協共同體成立後整合成效之初探：以糧食安全的治理為例並列篇名：Assessing the Integration Achievement after the Creation of ASEAN Community: The Case Study of Food Security Governance作者：譚偉恩(Wei-En Tan)關鍵字：東協經濟共同體;東南亞國家協會;區域整合;糧食危機;糧食安全;ASEAN Economic Community;ASEAN;Regional Integration;Food Crisis;Food Security期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：「共同體」內的每個成員應在特定事務上有相當程度共享的理解和趨同之政策。2003年，東南亞國家協會在「峇里第二協約」（Bali Concord II）的架構下，確立構築「共同體」的目標，包括安全、經濟、社會文化等三大面向。2009年，「共同體路徑圖」（Roadmap for an ASEAN Community）又再次對東協整合的目標進行確認。2015年，東協經濟共同體（the ASEAN Economic Community, AEC）正式成立，代表東協國家在經濟整合上的新里程碑。然而，由於東協會員國間的政治與經濟差異過大，難以在所謂的共同事務上凝聚共享的集體認知或調和彼此之政策。本文藉由治理糧食安全的個案，指出共同體成立之後的東協會員國仍傾向自助或消極的不合作；毋寧，在糧食安全的治理這方面，個案的研究結果顯示東協只是一個形式上已「合」，但實質上未「整」的區域組織。英文摘要：The members of one community may share their ideas about some specific issues and have policy convergence to a certain extent. In 2003, the member states of ASEAN endorsed the Bali Concord II, which established a vision for the goal of integration through three pillars on security, economic, and social-culture. In 2009, the Roadmap for an ASEAN Community was issued, which reaffirms the commitment to accelerating the establishment of regional community. The formal establishment of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) in 2015, as part of the ASEAN Community, marks an important milestone. However, because political disparities and economic development gaps between member states remain stark, it has been difficult to establish a shared common identity and to harmonize members' policies regarding the common affairs of ASEAN. Based on the case study of governing food security, this paper demonstrates that member states still prefer a self-help approach or unappreciative participation. In other words, ASEAN just established a formally integrated community instead of a community with substantial union.起始頁-結束頁：99-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：他者化的受難？菲律賓海燕風災的新聞論述分析並列篇名：Othering Their Suffering: Taiwanese News Discourses Analysis of Philippine Typhoon Haiyan作者：張春炎(Chun-Yen Chang)關鍵字：東南亞;中介的遠端受難;他者化;媒體再現;想像的臺菲關係;Southeast Asia;Mediated Distant Suffering;Othering;Media Representation;the Imagined Relationship of Taiwan and Philippines期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的在於探討，新聞論述如何建構受難國成為負面的他者。本文以2013年在菲律賓釀成慘重災情的海燕風災為個案，透過論述分析的取徑，研究討論臺灣電視新聞對此災難的報導內容，以說明受難的菲律賓如何被建構為負面的他者。進一步，本研究提出研究論點是，臺灣有關菲律賓的一系列災難新聞報導，不僅是再現了臺灣對菲律賓的負面看法，這也反映出這兩個亞洲鄰國有著既存的社會與文化差異。而這項差異透過新聞論述不斷建構和自然化「進步的我們」與「落後的他們」。國際媒體難以成為容納異己、拉進兩社會文化關係的建構機制，反而是扮演一個他者化菲律賓的建構機制，使得臺灣社會以「次帝國的眼光」看待菲律賓。然而正是這樣的眼光，使臺灣在世界體系中面對核心國家的壓迫和他者化，喪失建立自我反思和建構主體性的批判思考力，進而也弱化了擺脫劣勢地位的機會。因此本文最後建議，應該建立「以人為本的視野」的臺灣國際新聞報導的視野，以減少臺灣社會「他者化東南亞（人）」的問題，同時增進自己「反被他者化」的能力。英文摘要：The main aim of this study is to explore how Taiwanese news discourses construct Philippines as a negative others? By investigating Taiwanese news of Haiyan Typhoon struck the Philippines, this research finds that media representation of Philippines' suffering were a process of othering of Philippines constructs them negative Stereotype and located them in inferior position naturally. Furthermore, news discourses of Philippine suffering as an othering process not only located Philippines in an inferior position but also made Taiwan losing agency to against the othering from core countries. In the conclusion, this study made a suggestion that Taiwanese news should built a people-centered reporting approach to avoid othering Southeast Asian society. It will help Taiwan to establish more friendly imagined relations with neighboring countries in Southeast Asia. In the same time, it will improve Taiwanese' abilities to resist discrimination from others.起始頁-結束頁：145-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：爭辯中的東南亞與中國關係：國際關係理論的模擬與應用並列篇名：Debating Southeast Asia-China Relations: Simulation and Application of International Relations Theories作者：陳宗巖(Ian Tsung-Yen Chen)關鍵字：國際關係理論;中國;東南亞;東協;International Relations Theories;China;Southeast Asia;ASEAN期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：對於國際關係學界來說，「理論」被視為是用來解釋歷史、分析現勢、預測未來的重要知識工具。當前學界對於東南亞國家與中國的關係有許多不同的詮釋，但卻少有一套完整的說明來檢視理論工具與經驗事實之間的關係。有鑑於此，本文將以國際關係理論中的不同研究傳統作為立論基礎，試圖呈現由中國與東南亞關係所構成的可能區域場境。同時，本文將進一步據此分析構成東南亞與東亞區域和平與穩定發展的涉入國可能作法與策略。根據各種理論的爬梳後，本文認為，區域穩定的條件至少有五個：第一，美國需要提升對東南亞戰略部署承諾；第二，中國需減緩進攻性武器的發展與應用；第三，東南亞與中國經貿投資關係需改善並走向雙贏；第四，區域各國需要加速民主政治發展；第五，東協區域組織須能成為更有效的區域組織以協調歧異。反之，區域將難以走向和平與穩定。英文摘要：In the academia of international relations, theories are important intellectual tools useful for examining history, analyzing current events and predicting the upcoming future. Although there are quite a few different theoretical interpretations of Southeast Asia-China relations, few of them offers a comprehensive picture that connects divergent theories with empirical evidence. This paper seeks to address this problem by presenting possible regional scenarios of Southeast Asia-China relations based on divergent approaches of international relations theories, as well as analyzing potential directions and strategies beneficial to regional peace and stability. Accordingly, this paper locates five conditions for regional stability: (1) the U.S. needs to increase commitment to strategic deployment in Southeast Asia; (2) China has to slow down the development and application of offensive military facilities; (3) trade and investment relationships between Southeast Asia and China need to be improved and adjusted to a win-win structure; (4) accelerating national democratic development in the region is needed; (5) ASEAN should be a more capable and effective regional organization for resolving disputes. Otherwise, it will be difficult for the region to attain peace and stability.起始頁-結束頁：195-237資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：「歷史意識與歷史教育」專號導言並列篇名：Special Issue: Historical Consciousness and Historical Education Introduction作者：湯志傑(Chih-Chieh Tang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：臺灣大眾文化中呈現的歷史認識：以漫畫為中心（1945-1990）並列篇名：Historical Understandings in Taiwanese Popular Culture: A Focus on Comic Books (1945-1990)作者：李衣雲(I-Yun Lee)關鍵字：臺灣漫畫;日本漫畫;臺灣史;想像的中國;歷史認識的參考架構;Taiwanese Comic Books;Japanese Manga;Taiwan History;Imaginary China;Taiwanese Historical Understandings期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：歷史是一種凝聚共同體的語彙敘事，而歷史認識則是個人與集團如何認識過去、對過去採取什麼意向的思考架構。1945年後，國民黨政府以強大的歷史教育體系，使中國史觀成為一般人的歷史認識參考架構，在戒嚴體制下封閉的臺灣社會，亦沒有足以檢視這個不證自明的「中國＝歷史＝我群過去」的知識貯槽。雖然以中國古代為背景的古裝漫畫或歷史漫畫，不強調考據，呈現出的是一個符應官方史觀的「想像的中國」，但這些漫畫的內容仍能為空虛的歷史架構添入感性與意義。1966年漫畫審查制落實實施後，臺灣漫畫日漸衰微，興起的日本漫畫等帶進了異質的內容，給予臺灣人多元的訊息，豐富了知識與符號的貯槽。但直到1990年代後，隨著民主化運動的推動，中國史觀的一元統制力弱化，日本漫畫帶來的資訊開始充實了原本空虛的歷史相關意義貯槽，但臺灣本土漫畫的去時空性特徵仍然可見。長期以來去生活感覺的歷史認識，直到2000年代中期以後，才開始逐漸呈現出身體性，歷史的認識慢慢呈現出多樣的可能。英文摘要：History is a form of discursive narrative for the assembling of communities, and historical understanding is the cognitive structure for how individuals and groups understand the past as well as the intentions they have toward it. Since 1945, the Kuomintang government had enforced a powerful history education system which made an ”China=history=our past” equation. The historical period comic books based on ancient China presented an ”imaginary China”. Until the 1990s, as political movements pushed for democratic reforms, the monocentric control of China-centered view of history dwindled, and the information brought by Japanese manga started to enrich the once hollow base of historical meanings; however, the decontextualized characteristic of local Taiwanese comic books was still visible. The historical understanding devoid of life and feelings for long only began to exhibit a sense of embodiment until the middle of the 2000s.起始頁-結束頁：7-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：從《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要總綱》看高中歷史教學的契機與挑戰並列篇名：Examining the Opportunities and Challenges of the History Teaching in High Schools in the Scope of the General Program of Curriculum Guidelines of Twelve-Year Compulsory Education作者：莊德仁(Te-Jen Chuang)關鍵字：十二年國教;核心素養;歷史教學;閱讀素養;歷史意識;Twelve-Year Compulsory Education;Core Competency;History Teaching;Reading Literacy;Historical Consciousness期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：十二年國教即將實施，其所主張的素養導向、跨學科的問題導向、教師須自行設計實作探索式的課程教材、教師需組織共備社群、教師須公開授課議課、教師須有多元評量的能力，這些都將對高中教學現場產生衝擊。尤其是教師須擁有解構課綱自編教材的能力，對高中教師更是最直接的挑戰。十二年國教開放更多教學時數，可以讓教師自行設計教材授課。若要設計培養學生核心素養的歷史課程，教師應該要給與學生適當的文本，提出核心的問題，並安排循序漸進地有利思考判斷的學習活動，讓學生從小組討論的合作上，經由探索與實作中，發現與提出適當的推論，且發表系統性的見解。加上現今有優秀的中學歷史實作教材，可作學習典範，這些都是有利十二年國教推行的契機。加上新歷史課綱，融入歷史意識概念，讓歷史教學能順暢地連結過去、現在與未來，此為此次教改的重要突破。然也可預期教師將面臨須改變以往獨自備課的習慣、教師要有編寫歷史閱讀素養教材的課程設計能力，以及歷史科在跨學科架構下，可能淪為資料庫的窘境等三大新挑戰。英文摘要：Many new reforms proposed by the Twelve-Year Compulsory Education will have a great impact on real teaching context in senior high schools. Under the structure of Twelve-Year Compulsory Education, more teaching hours are available, which enables teachers to design their own teaching materials. Along with existing practical history teaching materials in secondary schools as models, the features above are the strengths beneficial to the implementation of Twelve-Year Compulsory Education. New history curriculum outline into the concept of historical consciousness, so that history teaching can be smooth to link the past, now and the future, this is an important breakthrough in teaching reform.Still, three main challenges are expected, including that teachers are required to get rid of the habit of working alone, that teachers should be equipped with the ability to design teaching materials with history reading competency, and that history subject might become a database under the structure of interdisciplinary framework.起始頁-結束頁：75-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：文本、文本閱讀與歷史教學：兼論溫伯格的閱讀理論並列篇名：Text, Text Reading and History Teaching and Focus on the Literacy Theory of Sam Wineburg作者：林慈淑(Tzu-Shu Lin)關鍵字：文本;文本閱讀;歷史教學;溫伯格;Text;Text Reading;History Teaching;Sam Wineburg期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：近年來受到「語言學轉向」思潮的影響，歷史教育同樣也興起一股主張培養學生閱讀文本的風氣。其中，美國史丹佛大學的溫伯格（Sam Wineburg）所提倡的閱讀理論備受矚目。本文擬以探究文本閱讀與歷史教學的關係為主軸，並分別處理三個重點：首先，回溯20世紀以來「語言學轉向」思潮下所蘊藉出的「文本」意義以及詮釋資料的新模式。其次，本文將分析溫伯格歷史教育觀點，呈現他的閱讀思考與當代文本概念的關連性。最後，筆者將探究溫伯格提出的兩個文本閱讀策略：「追查史源」（sourcing）、「脈絡化」（contextualization）在歷史教學上的可行性，並反思文本閱讀在歷史教育上的重要性。英文摘要：Currently developing students' literacy tends to be an important issue of history teaching. From this viewpoint, influenced partly by the tide of ”linguistic Turn” since 1960s, students need to foster literacy through reading like a historian. One of the well-known researchers is Sam Wineburg, the director of Stanford History Education Group and the author of Reading Like a Historian: Reading like a historian: Teaching Literacy in Middle and High School History Classrooms. For revealing the relationship between literacy or text reading and history teaching, this article deals with three points. Firstly, it explores the new concept of text and the new mode of interpretation by the context of linguistic turn. Secondly, it will analyze Sam Wineburg's literacy theory and his view of historical education. The third, it tries to investigate the suitability for teaching sourcing and contextualization these two strategies which Wineburg have invented for reading historical texts.起始頁-結束頁：127-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社12篇名：論余琛歷史意識理論兼論臺灣反課綱微調運動之批判精神並列篇名：Jorn Rusen's Theory of Historical Consciousness in Taiwan: The High School Students' Curriculum Movement as a Practice of Critical Historical Consciousness作者：洪銘國(Ming-Kuo Hung)關鍵字：批判種族理論;高中生反課綱微調運動;歷史意識;Critical Race Theory;Taiwanese High School Students' Curriculum Movement;Historical Consciousness期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在重新詮釋余琛（Jorn Rusen）四型歷史意識理論，透過比對余琛英文著作和胡昌智先生中文譯介間的差異，來闡釋不同歷史意識對權威解讀的不同，並透過批判型歷史意識來解釋臺中一中蘋果樹公社師生參與反課綱微調運動的批判精神和教育意義。透過探討余琛四型歷史意識理論如何在臺譯介產生落差，論證過往學術在威權體制的傳統包袱中，表現出余琛所提傳統型歷史意識之擁護權威傾向，難以理解批判精神的正面意義，而余琛所提培養歷史意識的歷史教育，應接納多元共存的歷史論戰，批判型歷史意識質疑權威的理念和做法，能帶出不同於主流歷史詮釋的相反論述，有其社會和教育價值，本文申論臺中一中許全義老師「學生有感」之教學理念，並其帶領學生參與反課綱微調運動之舉，為批判型歷史意識之教育實踐。若以批判種族理論詮釋，反主流之經驗論述是研究批判之聲的重要來源，亦為培養演化型歷史意識不可或缺之相反論述，當代臺灣社會如欲達到余琛四型歷史意識中最高評價之演化型歷史意識，應培養對弱勢者歷史論述予以包容接納的道德素養，以此為根基促成更多對話，而生成不斷更新的歷史意識。英文摘要：This article discusses the difference of Jorn Rusen's theory of Historical Consciousness between his English writings and Hu Ch'ang-Chih's Chinese translation. The main difference between Rusen's and Hu's interpretation of Historical Consciousness is the attitude on authority. This article argues that the participants in the Taiwanese High School Students' Curriculum Movement in summer 2015 performed critical historical consciousness to challenge political manipulation over the educational system in a positive way. Hsu Chuan-Yi, an active role in the movement as a teacher of student leaders, expressed his educational philosophy as implementing critical historical consciousness. A critical narrative of the movement will benefit Taiwanese society to develop genetic historical consciousness. From the perspective of critical race theory, the movement also reflected racial/ ethnic awareness. The historical narrative of the movement's participants was based on Hoklos' experiences to fight against Mainlanders' historical narrative formalized by the political power. It should also be an example for Taiwanese to learn to hear minorities' voices.起始頁-結束頁：189-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社13篇名：法國歷史教育的歷史與晚近發展：兼論記憶法律所引起的爭議並列篇名：The History and Recent Development of French History Education: Institutionalization, Reforms, and Controversy over Memory Laws作者：戴麗娟(Li-Chuan Tai)關鍵字：法國;歷史教育;歷史記憶;記憶法律;歷史公共化;France;History Education;Historical Memories;Memory Laws;Public Uses of History期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以法國的中小學歷史教育為主題，在第一部分擇要地回顧其建制化的過程，第二部分聚焦於二戰後其所經歷的重要改革，包括課綱的改革、教學法的改革，和課程架構上的改革。第三部分則針對1990年代迄今，圍繞著歷史記憶等議題所引發的討論，尤其是針對國會陸續通過的「記憶法律」所引起的社會效應，以及對教育現場的衝擊。文末開放性的結尾希望促進思考：在歷史公共化的前景下，中小學校的歷史教育該如何重新定位的問題。英文摘要：This article focuses on historical education in primary and secondary schools in France. The first part reviews the process of its institutionalization and the influence of key events and actors. The second part assesses the important changes implemented after World War II, including curricular, pedagogical, and structural reforms. The third part deals with the discussions related to historical memories since the 1990s, especially the 'memory laws' passed by the French Parliament and their impacts on society and school education. In light of the increasing prominence of historical issues in public society, the article concludes by openly asking how primary and secondary schools' history education can be repositioned in this context.起始頁-結束頁：231-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社14篇名：長時段的回歸與公眾歷史：近來臺灣出版市場的「全球史熱」並列篇名：The Return of Longue Duree and Public History: the ”Global History Fever” of Publishing Market in Taiwan作者：蔣竹山(Chu-Shan Chiang)關鍵字：公眾史學;全球史;歷史書寫;歷史意識;Public History;Global History;Historical Writing;Historical Consciousness期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：近來臺灣的公眾歷史書寫市場有三種特色，臺灣熱、中國想像與全球史視野，其中又以全球史的著作既反映當代歷史學的研究趨勢；又能兼具有傳達給民眾世界觀與歷史意識的公眾史學功用。大衛．阿米蒂奇「長時段的回歸」的論點，似乎揭露了一個新的史學時代的到來，暗示大歷史與全球史更符合當前的世界公＼民的需求。作為一位世界公民，我們必須跳脫傳統的民族國家史觀，將自身的歷史放在世界史的脈絡下來看待。雖然這樣的趨勢在臺灣的學院裡尚未形成風潮，但卻已在民間的史學出版上，看出這類歷史書寫的時代特性。從《槍砲、病菌與鋼鐵》到《西方憑什麼》及《人類大歷史》的長銷，在在都說明了全球史書寫與公眾歷史的密切關連。英文摘要：Recently, Taiwan's writing market of public history has three characteristics: Taiwan fever, Chinese imagination and global history. Among them, the works of global history reflect the research trends of contemporary history, and can also convey the world view and historical consciousness of the people. Public history function. The argument of David Armitage's the term ”longue duree” seems to reveal the arrival of a new era of historiography, suggesting that big history and global history are more in line with the needs of current world citizens. As a world citizen, we must break away from the traditional national history of the nation and look at our own history in the context of world history. Although such a trend has not yet formed a wave in Taiwan's colleges, it has already seen the characteristics of this era of historical writing in the publishing market. The long-term sales of ”Guns, Germs and Steel” to ”Why the West Rules-For Now” and ”Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind” all illustrate the close relationship between global history writing and public history.起始頁-結束頁：271-303資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社15篇名：「香港文學再追跡」專號導言並列篇名：Special Issue: In (Re)Search of Hong Kong Literature Introduction作者：樊善標(Sin-Piu Fan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社16篇名：「遺忘」與「反遺忘」：香港文學遺忘史的幾個側面並列篇名：Forgotten and Anti-forgotten: a Side View on the History of Hong Kong Literature of Forgotten作者：陳智德(Chi-Tak Chan)關鍵字：馬博良（馬朗）;《文藝新潮》;香港文學;遺忘;Ronald Mar;New Tides of Literature and Arts;Hong Kong Literature;Forgotten期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：鄭樹森在〈遺忘的歷史，歷史的遺忘－－五、六十年代的香港文學〉一文與《香港新文學年表（一九五○－一九六九年）》一書中與黃繼持、盧瑋鑾的〈三人談〉中，自覺地提出他們整理史料的限制，嘗試理清歷史與遺忘的本質。本論文由鄭樹森附帶著無力感的「遺忘論述」出發，透過馬博良在《文藝新潮》停刊後數年離開香港，一度消失於文壇再於1976年復出，以及梁秉鈞1962年間的「馬朗發現事件」，探討「遺忘」與「反遺忘」的矛盾或複雜性；此外，「遺忘」這現象如何被意識到、被標示出，以至被論述到，而其附帶著無力感、哀懷、嘆喟，又如何呼應文學史的發展，以至參與了文學性的塑造。英文摘要：This paper examines discourse of the forgotten by focusing on two issues of literary history, namely, Ronald Mar's leaving Hong Kong, his disappearance from the literary world a few years after the suspension of the periodical ”New Tides of Literature and Arts”, and his return to the literary world in 1976; and Leung Ping-kwan's ”discovery of Ronald Mar” in 1962, in conjunction with the reflection on historical compilation of Hong Kong literature by William Tay. To extend the meaning of discourse on the forgotten, this paper also discusses how the issue on the forgotten had been realized, indicated and discussed in the history of Hong Kong literature, and how the sense of powerlessness, sorrow and regret has responded to the development of the literary history and participated in the shaping of the literariness.起始頁-結束頁：7-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社17篇名：1980年代香港文學場域的跨界連結：以《八方》、《香港文學》為例並列篇名：Border-Crossing in Hong Kong Literature in the 1980s: A Case Study of Ba-Fang Literary Journal and Hong Kong Literature作者：陳筱筠(Siao-Yun Chen)關鍵字：1980年代;香港文學場域;跨界連結;境遇性;以地方為本;1980s;Literary Field of Hong Kong;Border-Crossing;Situatedness;Place-Based期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：香港文學在其建構過程與思索自身定位時，不必然只有專注於香港本地文學的發展，或者透過與中國的對話才得以產生，而是有更多路徑的思考，其中一條重要的路徑便是與臺灣和東南亞的文藝連結。這篇論文嘗試以《八方》和《香港文學》這兩份香港文藝雜誌為例，探討1980年代香港除了提供一個匯聚文化中國的場域之外，在香港文學的建構過程中它也同時揭露了境遇性的重要性，以及這些跨界連結如何為香港文學帶來更多發展的可能性與對話空間。當時香港在與其他地區的華文文學進行連結的過程時，我們雖然仍會看到追求中國文化的尋根想像，但同時我們也能發現許多論述中所呈現的，反而是把自己由追本溯源的「產物」，轉換成以地方為本的「生產者」。英文摘要：The construction of Hong Kong literature was not necessarily through focusing on the development of local literature or dialogues with China. The Hong Kong literature was also shaped by forming various lines of thought, such as connections with Taiwan and Southeast Asia. By focusing on Ba-Fang Literary Journal and Hong Kong Literature, this study reveals that 1980s Hong Kong was an active hub of cultural China, demonstrated the importance of situatedness, and witnessed how border crossings contributed to the development of Hong Kong literature as well as its interaction with literature from other cultures. At the time, although Hong Kong literature sought its roots in Chinese culture when connecting with Chinese-language literature in other regions, many directions of relevant discourse transformed the ”products” of this root-seeking into place-based ”producers.”起始頁-結束頁：35-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社18篇名：城市漫遊者及「我－們」的「本土」：重讀西西《我城》並列篇名：The Flaneur/ Flaneuse and the Multiple ”I”s of the ”Local” in Xi Xi's I City作者：謝曉虹(Hiu-Hung Tse, Dorothy)關鍵字：西西;《我城》;本土;漫遊者;Xi Xi;I City;the Local;Flaneur/ Flaneuse期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：寫於70年代中期，西西的《我城》已經成為香港文學的經典。然而，對於《我城》的研究歷時既久，論述的焦點多年來亦經歷了不少變化，尤其在九七前後，論者明顯的由語言、結構等美學問題轉向對「本土」議題的關注。本文延續有關的思考，卻希望提出「集體認同」以外的方向，來理解《我城》所想像的「本土」。具體來說，「我城」裡的「我」，經常被理解為集體的「我們」，而小說裡所描述的樂觀情緒，則「反映」了70年代港英政府的政策改變及社會民情。本文認為，《我城》著力於瓦解一種延綿不斷的歷史想像，充分意識到「地方」的臨時性。在創造性地理解「本土」以外，更處處暗示「本土」具有流動變化的可能性。本文認為，《我城》這種取向不單見諸它對70年代社會運動，以及難民問題兩項時事的回應，同時也見諸小說所聚焦的，「孤獨」的都市漫遊者，他們的獨行形象從某方面來說，暗示了他們對資本主義城市的疏離，也意味著他們對家庭及民族國家等等集體意識形態的拒絕。借用南希（Jean-Luc Nancy）對於「共通體」（community）的哲學思考，集體的「我們」或可理解為獨一複數（singularly plural）的「我－們」。《我城》的漫遊者通過日常生活的實踐，而非集體的認同，來投入到「本土」的創造。英文摘要：Since its publication in the mid-1970s, Xi Xi's novel I City has become a classic of Hong Kong literature. The scholarly focus on the novel has altered over the years; since 1997, there has been an especially marked shift away from aesthetic concerns, such as language and structure, and towards a discussion of the ”local.” This article continues that discussion, but proposes interpretations of the local that go beyond notions of collective identity. The ”I” in I City is often understood as a collective ”we,” and the optimistic tone and vision of the novel are generally regarded as reflections of the social conditions and political reforms experienced under the British Hong Kong Government of the 1970s. This paper argues, in contrast, that I City hints at the concept of a fluid and ever-changing ”local” by deconstructing a linear and continuous historical imagination. This is evident not only in the novel's representation of the social movements and refugee problem of the 1970s, but also in the image of the flaneur/ flaneuse, which implies their detachment from the capitalist city in which they live, as well as their rejection of the ideology of the family and nation-state. Given Jean-Luc Nancy's notion of community, the collective ”we” may be understood as ”singularly plural.” I also argue that the flaneur/ flaneuse participate in the creation of the ”local” through their everyday practice instead of submitting themselves to a collective identity.起始頁-結束頁：73-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社19篇名：本土與中國文化關係的重寫：以也斯《剪紙》、《煩惱娃娃的旅程》與《記憶的城市．虛構的城市》為討論中心並列篇名：Rewriting the Relationship Between the Local and Chinese Culture: A Discussion Focusing on Ya Si's Paper-Cut; The Journey of the Worry Dolls; and Cities of Memory, Cities of Fabrication作者：趙曉彤(Hiu-Tung Chiu)關鍵字：重寫;本土與中國文化關係;文化身分;Rewriting;Relationship between Local and Chinese Culture;Cultural Identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：也斯是香港重要的作家、文化評論家。過去，研究者已提出也斯獨特的跨文化視野，但較少考慮這種視野如何為他的文學創作所生產。也斯先後於1977及1983年發表名作《剪紙》和《煩惱娃娃的旅程》。兩個作品原為報紙上的連載小說，在重寫後再度出版，後者更名為《記憶的城市．虛構的城市》。在也斯寫作各個版本期間，中國和香港的政治關係時張時弛，本土與中國文化反覆碰擊、磨合。本文通過比較上述作品的不同版本，揭示出版機制、個人及時空條件如何相互作用，促成各個版本的生產。本文亦會提出這些作品回應1970年代以降香港本地、國家與世界現代化進程的方式。論文將從歷時的角度，追<U+8E2A>也斯對本土與中國文化關係看法的持續變化，發展他的跨文化省思之歷程。英文摘要：Ya Si (1949-2013) is an important writer and cultural critic of Hong Kong. His unique intercultural perspective has been well presented, but the development of such a perspective within his works is often overlooked. Ya Si wrote his famous Paper-Cut and The Journey of Worry Dolls in 1977 and 1981 respectively. Both were originally novel series in newspapers and were rewritten and republished, while the latter one is renamed as Cities of Memory, Cities of Fabrication. During the revision, the political relationship of China and Hong Kong keep falling into tension or relaxation, while the local and Chinese cultures struck and fused together. By comparing different versions, this paper reveals how they act as coordinated outcomes of publishing mechanisms, personal and historical conditions, and how they responded to the local, national and world modernization since the late 1970s. It further traces Ya Si's renewal of views on the relationship between the local and Chinese culture, and the development of his intercultural perspective.起始頁-結束頁：115-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社20篇名：臺灣短工補償制度的分析：平衡社會保護與經濟功能的實踐難題並列篇名：An Analysis of Short-Time Compensation Institution in Taiwan: Practical Dilemma of Balancing Social Protection and Economic Function作者：李健鴻(Chien-Hung Lee)關鍵字：短工補償制度;縮短工時;技能保護;就業保險制度;解僱保護制度;Short-Time Compensation Institution;Short-Time;Skill Protection;Employment Insurance Institution;Dismissal Protection Institution期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文分析臺灣建構形成短工補償制度的影響因素，以及衍生的制度運作後果。研究發現，政府宣稱基於「降低道德風險」與「減少財務負擔」的因素，因此設計了「高標準的就業保險失業率作為啟動門檻」與「緊縮資格條件」制度，不僅限縮了短工補償制度的社會保障範圍，而且導致短工補償制度難以啟動實施。而這種獨特的制度設計方式，衍生的制度運作後果是：在「短工補償制度難以啟動實施」、「解僱保護制度功能有限」、「失業給付制度要求雇主負擔義務少」等三項制度共同構成的制度環境下，促使雇主偏向選擇解僱勞工，即使有部分雇主選擇實施縮短工時措施，但是往往迫使勞工處於一種「勞資協商不對等」的處境，只能被迫同意雇主實施的縮短工時措施，同時在短工補償制度難以啟動的情況下，導致雇主無法申請薪資補助，縮減工時勞工無法獲得薪資補助，因而難以達到平衡實踐社會保護與經濟功能的政策目標，成為當前臺灣短工補償制度在實踐上所面臨的主要難題。建議刪除以「就業保險失業率」作為啟動門檻的規定，改採取「企業提出因經濟景氣衰退而訂單縮減與獲利明顯減少之證明」作為企業可以實施縮短工時措施的基本認定標準，再以「同一企業組織縮減工時勞工人數的下限達到20%以上」作為啟動門檻。英文摘要：This article aims to analyze the influence factors of short-time compensation institution and analyze the institutional outcome in Taiwan. The main finding is that short-time compensation were designed follows the ”high criteria employment insurance unemployment rate as start threshold” and ”tighten eligibility criteria”, bringing forth short-time compensation not only limit the scope of social protection but also cannot start to implemented. The institutional outcome is that employer preference dismissed workers in the context of ”short-time compensation cannot start to implemented” link to ”employer's low obligations were required by the unemployment benefit institution” and ”limited function of employment protection institution”, even some employer choose to implemented short-time measure, but workers cannot receive short-time allowance because the ”high criteria start threshold”. The suggestions as follow: delete the employment insurance unemployment rate as start threshold, adopt the ”proofs of company profit loss due to economic depression” as the criteria that employer implemented the short-time measure.起始頁-結束頁：179-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：怎麼看？當代藝術場域的被觀看策略與範式並列篇名：The Strategies of 'Being Watched' in the Field of Contemporary Art作者：陳逸淳(Yi-Chun Chen)關鍵字：社會媒介;被觀看;象徵革命;Social Media;Being Watched;Symbolic Revolution期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：從藝術社會學的觀點出發，我們已經可以確定，一個物件之所以能從物件成為藝術作品，除了創作者本身的靈光和技術之外，還需要一連串的價值賦予的社會過程，也就是在不同的社會層次上漸次獲得承認的過程。在這個過程中，「如何被觀看」扮演了一個決定性的角色。事實上，「如何被觀看」這個問題，在歷史上的不同時代，創作者尋求的被觀看的策略也不盡相同。在古典時期，創作者的身分為工匠，其創作與其說是要尋求觀眾，不如說是要尋求長期的買主，其所尋求的被觀看的策略，並不具當代的公共性可言。當代意義的「被觀看」，亦即被非特定、無可預期的觀眾看到，之所以開始有意義，是在藝術場域開始自主化之後才出現的。在當代藝術之後，藝術場域由於評判標準的缺席，「新」（nouveaute）開始成為最重要的判准。於是，作品該如何被看到、如何被觀看，有了過去不曾出現的新的模式。包括偶然、反社會、無神論、遠程客觀性（teleobjectivite）等等。在當代藝術場域裡頭，層出不窮的被觀看策略，除了反映出了所謂的後現代性，也反映出了當代藝術對於尋求象徵革命的焦慮。英文摘要：From the point of view of the sociology of art, the social process of valorization is the most important element which makes an article out of nothing and become awell-recognized artwork. In this social process of recognition, ”How to be watched”, as a strategy in the field of art, plays a decisive role. The strategy of the creators of artworks, who are always seeking the recognition of people, differs from time to time. In the classical age, the creators of crafts were identified as 'artisans', who seek their private long-term buyers, and the audience of art crafts were not 'the public'. The contemporary meaning of ”being watched”, that is non-specific, general audience, was not meaningful before the creation of salon. For the contemporary art, since the criteria of watching artwork is absent, ”the new” became the most important judgment prospective. The strategy of 'how to be watched' changes in our day, with an whole new model which did not occurred in the past. In the field of contemporary art, endless strategy of 'being watched' reflects the post-modernity.起始頁-結束頁：235-261資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：從文化復興到文化重塑：戰後臺灣高級中學「中國文化史」書寫的轉折與蛻變並列篇名：From Cultural Renaissance to Cultural Reconstruction: Transition and Transformation of the Textbooks Writing of ”History of Chinese Culture” for Junior High Schools in Postwar Taiwan作者：劉龍心(Long-Hsin Liu)關鍵字：中國文化史;教科書;復興中華文化;歷史思維;書寫策略;Chinese Cultural History;Textbook;Chinese Cultural Renaissance;Historical Thinking;Writing Strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：教科書的出現是中國近代史上極具劃時代意義的大事，教科書中所傳遞的知識與訊息，大體勾勒了每一世代的人最基本的知識結構。1965年啟用至2007年停用的《中國文化史》教科書，不但形塑臺灣青少年的歷史文化觀念，教科書的內容亦折射了不同世代臺灣社會認知和理解「文化」的歷程。本文主要討論各個不同版本的高中《中國文化史》教科書的書寫策略，尤其側重知識結構與知識轉型的變化，及學術與教育之間的互饋關係，從中觀察在臺灣使用了四十多年的《中國文化史》，如何從復興傳統中華文化走向解嚴之後以根植臺灣、重塑文化認同為目標的過程。英文摘要：The emergence of textbook is an epochal event in modern China. The information conveyed in textbook map out the knowledge structure of every generation. The Chinese Cultural History textbook, first issued in 1965 and ceased publication in 2007, not only shaped the concept of culture and history of Taiwanese teenagers, but also reflected identity within different generations. In this article I compare various versions of Chinese Cultural History, analyze their strategy of compilation and writing; and interpret the interaction between textbook content, political ideology, and national education policy. I especially highlight the interaction between writing strategies of textbooks and transformation of knowledge structure, underscore the academic research trend and its feedback toward popular education. We may find, at last, that this textbook miniature the changing idea of ”culture” from Chinese Cultural Renaissance before the lift of Marshal Law to reshaping cultural identity which rooted in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：「從神聖言說至經典詮釋」專號導言並列篇名：Introduction作者：陸敬忠(Jing-Jong Luh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：75-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：精神與辯證法：宗教改革之古典歐陸哲學效應歷史並列篇名：Spirit and Dialectics: The Effective History of Reformation to Classical European Continental Philosophy作者：陸敬忠(Jing-Jong Luh)關鍵字：宗教改革;歐陸哲學;精神;辯證法;詮釋學;Mysticism;Reformation;European Continental Philosophy;Spirit;Dialectics期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：在宗教改革500年紀念之際，本文將以宏大敘事的進路先從更世界觀而言，從西方文化史以及哲學思想史的雙重脈絡下揭示此從艾克哈特至宗教改革所生發的德意志精神文化運動及其發展脈絡之核心所在：一種從存有至精神之神哲學典範轉移，或者更從哲思基本預設而言，從玄元（<U+1F00>ρχ<U+03AE>）系統性（systematic）哲思轉向整體體系性（holisitc-systemic）哲思，接著再提示其所生成感應的兩條獨特的德意志神哲學思路脈絡亦即辯證法與詮釋學來呈現宗教改革對歐陸哲學之效應歷史，本文以論述辯證法為主體，亦即將古典德意志哲學之中心思路的生成發展，顯示成從精神典範之生成特殊地發展成主體論哲思以及其思路之形構亦即辯證法之化成。而一方面在從德意志精神運動至古典德意志哲學之思想史進程中，源自日耳曼密諦神思的上帝—人—宇宙之為三元一系（trinitical）的內在性三一體系底精神結構實通貫而轉化地為其世界觀架構，另一方面該運動則從精神典範特殊化為主體論哲思並終以辯證法為其表現方式。如是，在開放性結論中會開示從宗教改革典範轉移所開啟的另一條歐陸神哲思路：詮釋學。英文摘要：In the course of the quingentenary of the Reformation, this article will take the path of grand narration from the perspective of the world view to present the effective history of the Reformation to the European continental philosophy, that is, under the dual context of the Western cultural history and the history of philosophy it shall reveal at first this e process from Eckhart to the Reformation as the genesis of the cultural movement of the German spirit and the core of its development context: a paradigm shift of theological and philosophical thinking from being to spirit, or concerning the basic presupposition of philosophy, from the systematic philosophy of <U+1F00>ρχ<U+03AE> to the holistic-systemic philosophy. It will indicate the two unique German theological and philosophical thinking, i.e. dialectics and hermeneutics as clues. Dialectics as the main theme of this paper shall be displayed, that is, the genesis and development of the central way of thinking of classical German philosophy will be demonstrated as specialization of the spirit-paradigm into the philosophy of subjectivity and the construction of its way of thinking in formation of the dialectics. In the intellectual-historical progress from the movement of German spirit to the classical German philosophy, the trialectical system of God, human and world as spiritual structure originating from the immanent trinity of German mysticism plays the continuing but also transforming framework of world view.起始頁-結束頁：83-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：懺悔的隱喻與勾勒形構：呂格爾詮釋學之宗教向度研究並列篇名：On the Metaphor and Figuring of Confessions: the Religious Dimension in Paul Ricoeur's Hermeneutics作者：黃筱慧(Cristal Huang)關鍵字：呂格爾;懺悔;模擬;勾勒形構;隱喻;Ricoeur;Confession;Mimesis;Figure;Metaphor期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以呂格爾之哲學方法為主軸，透過其解析之奧斯定哲學的時間概念導出懺悔概念，藉此整合出呂格爾的三重模擬論，並以其中的勾勒形構之概念，探討時間概念如何在懺悔的整體活動中表現具關鍵意義的隱喻。本文以此探討懺悔與勾勒形構的動作之關係，希望透過呂格爾哲學的思想，研究天主教之宗教儀式中，語言與吾人如何可透過哲學轉化而掌握自身與神聖者的關係。懺悔的整體活動是本文設定的主要對象，透過呂格爾關於隱喻與勾勒形構的思維，本文希望可以為當代宗教研究提出新的視角。英文摘要：The paper focuses on Paul Ricoeur's philosophy. Through his analysis on Augustine's concept of time, Ricoeur introduces the concept of confession, in order to integrate his own idea on the threefold mimesis. Ricoeur develops the total activity of confession in order to develop how to use the idea of time to present that, the confessional metaphor is the main core of the meaning. The paper wants to discuss the relation between confession and the figuring. We wish to apply Ricoeur's thought on the Catholic religious ceremony, language and our attitude on how to use philosophy to be a transformation. Through philosophy, we may obtain certain relation between self and the Sacred. Through Ricoeur's discussion, the paper wishes to provide contemporary philosophy as religious dimension, to settle the total activity of confession as main object, through metaphor and figure, we provide this religious dimension. We wish to provide the new perspective from Ricoeur's idea as one new angle for the research.起始頁-結束頁：125-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：論儒家選擇以道德語言形態表達其思想之可能理據：兼論牟宗三對科學知識的反思並列篇名：On the Reasons for Confucianism to Express Its Thoughts with the ”Language Features of Moral Types”: An Analysis from the Reflection of ”Scientific Knowledge” by Mr. Mou Zongsan作者：黃信二(Hsin-Er Huang)關鍵字：儒家與科學;天;牟宗三;道德語言;儒學方法論;Confucianism and Science;Tian;Moral Language;Confucian Methodology期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：牟宗三先生對科學知識的反省架構，是以「智」的中、西屬性差異為論述核心的，他認為儒家論「智」是「仁智合一」型態，而科學知識的「智」則與「仁」無關，它是「純粹的知性」，是「知性主體」，是能與物為二的。本文分析的步驟與目標主要有三：一是透過對「智知」與「識知」的理解，分析牟先生對科學的反思。其次，對牟先生的反思加以回應，回應的方式是向歷史溯源，針對儒家的第一觀念的「天」的字型之形成，從儒學之源流、從人對自然的表達型態的分析，或言從超越儒學與科學前的歷史縱深（即本文所論「天」觀念形成的歷史），透過「文明的表達工具」之高度，回到儒家與科學兩範疇形成前的歷史中，從其同源的人性背景設法指出儒學與科學形成差異的原因，以增加兩者於當代對話之可能性。其三，透過對儒家第一觀念「天」的「文字的字形」之形成因，指出儒家形成道德語言之表達形態的可能理據。英文摘要：Mr. Mou Zongsan's method of reflection on scientific knowledge is based on the ”intelligence” of ”the difference between Eastern and Western attributes”. He believes that Confucianism discusses ”intellectuality(Zhi)” as the ”type of unity of benevolence and intelligence”, while the ”intellectuality” of scientific knowledge is unrelated with ”benevolence” because it is a ”pure knowledge”. The scientific way of thinking, their method will separate the thinker himself from the object which he observing. The article will through the formation of the ”hieroglyphic character of Tian” of Confucian first concept, go back to the time before ”the appearance of Confucianism and science”. Also, through the way of thinking how was ”the first core concept of Chinese philosophy” created, we will point out why the expression system of Confucian presenting the ”language features of moral types”.起始頁-結束頁：155-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：論《淮南子》的因循之道並列篇名：The Philosophical Implications of the ”Yin-Xun” in the Huai-Nan-Zi作者：林明照(Ming-Chao Lin)關鍵字：淮南子;因循;治身;治國;政治;Huai-Nan-Zi;Yin-Xun (Following);Self-Cultivation;Ruling a Country;Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：因循之道為先秦道家或黃老道家在治道層面的核心關注，《淮南子》作為先秦以來黃老思想的集大成之作，對於因循之道更有著深入的闡論。本文嘗試探討《淮南子》因循之道的相關意涵，首先將對於先秦道家因循之說的基本意義作出討論，接著將指出，《淮南子》的因循之道，至少包含三方面的意義：一是憑藉事物特質及既有條件以發揮最大政治效能，前者尤其指向臣民的情性好惡；後者則包含時間、空間以及人才等條件，尤以人才條件為重要；二是未來時間性及變化向度下的核心統治原則，展現為因應時機及變化而作出靈活調整、應變的要求。這一層的因循觀，同時含蘊著應變與常則之間的關係。三是「保其精神、偃其智故」的養生、修身要求，以及與前述二種政治作為間的關聯。英文摘要：The concept of ”yin-xun” (following, 因循) is a great concern in the employment of Dao for the pre-Qin Daoists, and therefore there is an abundant description about it in Huai-Nan-Zi, as we know, which is an important collection of pre-Qin Daoism. The article tries first to discuss the possible explanations of ”yin-xun” in Huai-Nan-Zi, and then we can find that there are at least three dimensions of it to discuss. First, ”yin-xun” means to get the greatest political efficiency by making good use of the characteristics and conditions; the former especially points to the official and the ruled people's temperament and their likes and dislikes. The latter includes the situations of time, space, talent, etc, and the talent is particularly very important. Second, ”yin-xun” is the main principle of ruling in the condition of future and tide, so the ruler has to adjust and react to the situations with good flexibility. At last, the third aspect is about one's cultivation of ”keep (ing) the nature and put (ting) away the wisdom,” which is much related to the political behaviors we mentioned above.起始頁-結束頁：191-221資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：《大智度論》對智顗之禪學詮釋的影響並列篇名：The Influence of Mah<U+0101>prajn<U+0101>p<U+0101>ramitopade<U+015B>a on Zhiyi's Interpretation of Chan作者：嚴瑋泓(Wei-Hung Yen)關鍵字：《大智度論》;智顗;天台;禪觀;Mah<U+0101>prajn<U+0101>p<U+0101>ramitopade<U+015B>a;Zhiyi;Tien-tai;Contemplation期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以智顗禪學詮釋中引述《大智度論》的脈絡作為研究線索，探究《大智度論》對智顗的禪學詮釋的影響與哲學義蘊。根據本文結論，《大智度論》對智顗禪學詮釋的影響可從以下三點窺知：1.智顗早期自《大智度論》中擇取早期、部派佛教乃至於初期大乘佛學的禪觀理論，並有系統的建構其禪學詮釋的次第。2.智顗在天台隱棲時期禪學詮釋的觀心法門，上溯於《大智度論》的體系禪學，下開天台三大部時期後的圓頓止觀。據此，《大智度論》對智顗之體系禪學、觀心法門乃至於圓頓止觀都有或隱或顯的影響。3.智顗中後期思想的代表性著作，雖然不如早期有系統的擇取《大智度論》的理論與方法作為禪學詮釋的論據，甚至更重視其他的大乘經論，但若從智顗早期禪學詮釋中的內在要求看來，智顗中後期的禪學詮釋也不脫此種思想型態。就此而論，本文認為《大智度論》在智顗禪學詮釋中佔據著重要的地位。英文摘要：This paper delved into the influence of Mah<U+0101>prajn<U+0101>p<U+0101>ramitopade<U+015B>a (hereafter abbreviated as MPPU) on Zhiyi's interpretation of Chan as well as the philosophical implication within through the investigation of the citation of MPPU in his interpretation of Chan. This paper points out that the influence of MPPU on the Zhiyi's interpretation of Chan can be induced into three points: 1. The early stage whereby Zhiyi selectively adopted the theories of meditation of the Early, Abhidharmic and Early Mah<U+0101>y<U+0101>na Buddhism from MPPU, and then systematically constituted his interpretation of Chan. 2. The doctrine of the contemplation of mind (kuan-hsin) from Zhiyi's interpretation of Chan, which can be traced back to MPPU, and from that he developed the Perfect Sudden Teaching (Yuan-Tun-Chih-Kuan). As regards, MPPU did influenced the Chan interpretation, the doctrine of the contemplation of the mind and even the Perfect Sudden Teachings of Zhiyi 3. Although the works of the middle and late stages of Zhiyi did not adopted from MPPU as the ground of his interpretation of Chan, and also even more valued on other Mah<U+0101>y<U+0101>na texts. But if consider the model shown as the early stage, the middle and late stages of Zhiyi's interpretation has never been divorced from this kind of pattern. Accordingly, MPPU did play an important role in Zhiyi's Chan interpretation.起始頁-結束頁：223-257資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：越儒黎貴惇的感應思想及其三教交涉並列篇名：Le Quy <U+0110>on's Thought of Sympathy and the Concerned Integration of Three Teachings作者：林維杰(Wei-Chieh Lin)關鍵字：理氣;感應;同質感應;異質感應;li and qi;Sympathy;Homogeneous Sympathy;Heterogeneous Sympathy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文處理越南儒者黎貴惇的感應思想，嘗試提出感應的四種模式呈現儒釋道三家的交涉情形，這些模式分別是（同質的）同理相感與同氣相感，以及（異質的）理氣相感與異氣感應。「同理相感」是天理與人心之間的感通，「理氣相感」則包含人心與鬼神，以及精神與軀體之間的互動感知，「異氣相感」指的是陰陽五行的相生相勝及沖和與否。「同氣相感」不僅指「天地之氣」與「人之氣」的相接感應，也包含鬼神仙佛與凡人之間的懲戒與果報，甚至指向祭祀墓葬時先祖與後輩之間的血氣感應。形上學的理氣論在貴惇手中逐漸轉為氣學。對他而言，氣化流行貫穿宇宙，也是各種感應現象的主要模式。英文摘要：This article will to deal with Vietnamese Confucian scholar Le Quy <U+0110>on's thought of sympathy in order to give a picture of the concerned integration of Confucianism, Daoism and Buddhism. According to Le, the presentation of sympathy can be divided into four different forms, namely ”the homogeneous activity of sympathy” between presentations of same li and of same qi, and ”the heterogeneous activity of sympathy” between liqi and between different qi. The first homogeneous form of sympathy is a communication of Dao and heart/mind. The second homogeneous form, to which Le pay the most attention, contains not only the mutual sympathy between cosmic qi and human qi, but also the punishment and retribution of human world from Gods and Buddha, even that the skeleton of ancestors can put descendants under their protection. The third activity, which is seen as heterogeneous, contains the sympathy between heart/mind and ghost/ god, and between spirit and body. The fourth heterogeneous form means the mutual promotion and restraint between Ying and Yang or among the five elements. Le amends Zhu Xi's metaphysics about relationship of li-qi and views qi as the guiding and dominant role of our cosmos.起始頁-結束頁：259-286資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：解消所有矛盾的「絕對者」：庫撒努思在《論博學的無知》的上帝觀並列篇名：”The Absolute” Eliminating all Contradictions: Cusanus's View of God in Of Learned Ignorance作者：孫雲平(Yun-Ping Sun)關鍵字：庫撒努思;差異與比較;絕對者;一切對立的同一;神祕主義;Cusanus;Difference and Comparison;the Absolute;Coincidence of Opposites;Mysticism期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：56卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：庫撒努思（Cusanus; Nicolaus von Kues）在《論博學的無知》（De docta ignorantis, 1440）透過對人類理性之限制探討有關「上帝」的觀念。其對於「上帝」最核心的說法主要在該書中卷一。庫撒努思以上帝作為「絕對者」，作為「絕對者」的上帝是沒有任何事物可與之相提並論的。庫撒努思從認識論的角度來說明知識是基於相互比較異同而產生的，可比較性則來自具體之數量或性質的差異。然而這些差異、對立和矛盾在「絕對者」之內都將化為烏有，因為「絕對者」將解消所有的衝突矛盾。一方面，上帝作為「絕對者」不可能以具體事物的模式被比較，但在另一方面，上帝作為「絕對者」根本是超越人類的認知範圍。上帝內所有的對立都被取消，不僅是數量與性質的界定，甚至連「存在」與「不存在」的差異對上帝都不成立。庫撒努思的陳述超越了邏輯、且無法以邏輯分析；此種徹底的無分別性顯示上帝的難以解釋。本文嘗試論述庫撒努思此超越邏輯與理性思維的上帝觀。英文摘要：Cusanus (Nicholas of Cusa, 1401-1464) investigates the idea of ”God” through the boundary of human reason in Of Learned Ignorance (De docta ignorantis, 1440). The most central statements concerning ”God” lie in the Volume 1 of the book. Cusanus regards God as ”the Absolute” with whom there is nothing can be compared. Cusanus takes an epistemological approach to explicate that knowledge results from comparison between the same and the different, and that comparability comes from concrete differences in quantity or quality. Yet these differences, opposites, and contradictions will disappear in ”the Absolute”, for ”the Absolute” will remove all conflicts and contradictions. On the one hand, as ”the Absolute” God cannot be compared with in the way of concrete entities. On the other hand, God is beyond our ken. All opposites within God will be eliminated; not only the determination of quantity or quality, but even the contrary between existence and non-existence cannot hold. Cusanus's accounts exceed logics and cannot be analyzed by logics; such total indistinguishability manifests the incomprehensibility of God. This essay tries to expound Cusanus's view of God that is beyond logical and reasonable thinking.起始頁-結束頁：287-323資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：Market Competition and Price Clustering: Evidence from the ETF Market並列篇名：市場競爭與價格群聚：ETF市場之分析作者：徐淑芳(Shufang Hsu);鍾惠民(Huimin Chung);陳煒朋(Wei-Peng Chen)關鍵字：Exchange traded funds (ETFs);price clustering;liquidity;multimarket trading;ETFs;價格群聚;流動性;多重市場交易期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：We explore the impact of UTP implementation on ETF price clustering. The empirical results show a discernible reduction in price clustering on the overall market, attributable to improvements in the liquidity of order flow. After UTP trading commenced on the NYSE, large traders can more easily split their orders into smaller sizes and move to the optimal trading venue. These findings show feasible explanations for the relative competitive advantage associated with executing large orders once the NYSE entry reduced negotiation risks due to increasing competition among market makers, public availability of price information, and the alleviation of price risk.英文摘要：本文探討NYSE因UTP制度開始交易ETF後，對ETF價格群聚的影響。實證結果發現，多重市場交易有助提升市場流動性，並降低價格群聚，且對大單尤其明顯。推論此結果可歸因於多重市場交易使投資人拆單更容易，增加造市者之間的競爭，提升資訊透明度，降低價格風險，因此有助於減少協商議價過程的風險，而此對大單的影響特別重要。起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201812_26(4).00012篇名：Should Overconfident Managers Engage in Corporate Social Responsibility Activities? Evidence from the Accounting Performance of the Banking Industry並列篇名：過度自信管理者應從事企業社會責任活動嗎？來自銀行業會計績效的證據作者：陳曉蓉(Hsiao-Jung Chen)關鍵字：Over-confidence;corporate social responsibility;bank performance;過度自信;企業社會責任;銀行績效期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：This paper examines the impacts of banks that engage in corporate social responsibility (CSR) activities on the relationship between managerial overconfidence and bank performance. The sample consists of 136 financial institutions in 23 countries over the period of 2006-2012. Empirical results show that when this study controls for bank-specific factors, country-specific factors, and time effects, managerial overconfidence significantly raises banks' return on equity. Similarly, engaging in CSR activities is beneficial in improving banks' accounting performance. However, when banks are managed by overconfident chief executive officers (CEOs) or chief financial officers (CFOs), engaging in CSR activities harms the banks' accounting performance.英文摘要：本文在控制銀行特性、國家特性及時間效果下，利用最小平方法調查銀行重視企業社會責任（corporate social responsibility （CSR））對於管理者過度自信與銀行績效間關係之影響。結果發現，銀行管理者越傾向過度自信或銀行從事企業社會責任活動，分別可顯著提升其會計績效，但過度自信管理者所掌管的銀行若從事CSR活動，反而使該銀行會計績效顯著惡化。起始頁-結束頁：45-99資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201812_26(4).00023篇名：Economic States, Downside Risk, and Momentum in the Taiwan Stock Market並列篇名：經濟狀態、下方風險與動能策略：臺灣實證作者：楊念慈(Nien-Tzu Yang);柯冠成(Kuan-Cheng Ko);李享泰(Hsiang-Tai Lee);林楷哲(Kai-Zhe Lin)關鍵字：Macroeconomic risk;momentum;economic states;expected market risk premium;downside risk;總體經濟風險;動能策略;經濟狀態;預期市場風險溢酬;下方風險期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：Motivated by the procyclical nature of momentum, we empirically explore the relation between variations in macroeconomic conditions and momentum profits in the Taiwan stock market. Using expected market risk premium (EMRP) to identify macroeconomic conditions, we document significant losses for momentum in extremely bad economic states when EMRP is remarkably high. Only in extremely good economic states when EMRP is remarkably low, however, momentum can generate reliable profitability in this market. Further analyses indicate that the relation between EMRP and momentum profits is robust to the out-of-sample estimation of EMRP and several time-varying predictors of momentum.英文摘要：本文以預期市場風險溢酬衡量總體經濟環境，發現預期市場風險溢酬與動能報酬存在顯著負向之關係。在經濟狀態低迷時，因預期市場風險溢酬大幅提高，此時動能策略將帶來顯著之損失；在經濟狀態高漲時，因預期市場風險溢酬異常偏低，動能策略可提供顯著為正之報酬。實證結果在樣本外估計與考量許多動能預測因子下仍具有穩健性。起始頁-結束頁：101-130資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201812_26(4).00034篇名：Long-Run Risk, Monetary Policy, and Bond Risk Premium並列篇名：長期風險、貨幣政策與債券風險溢價作者：趙世偉(Shih-Wei Chao)關鍵字：Long-run risk;bond risk premium;inflation target;monetary policy shock;長期風險;債券風險溢價;通貨膨脹目標;貨幣政策衝擊期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：The paper evaluates whether a long-run risk model with endogenous inflation accounts for the U.S. term structure and bond risk premium across three distinctive historical periods. In addition to the fit of the average yield curve, the model generates positive bond risk premium that increases in maturity for all periods and reasonably describes the evolutions of term premium over time with some quantitative discrepancies. Since the model tightly links bond risk premium to long-short yields difference, the main challenge is to rationalize large (small) bond risk premium with small (large) slope of the yield curve.英文摘要：本研究探討引入貨幣政策與內生性通貨膨脹的長期風險模型是否可以解釋不同歷史期間的利率期限結構與債券風險溢價。分析顯示此模型可合理模擬不同期間殖利率曲線的水準、斜率與債券風險溢價的走勢，但由於模型中較高的債券風險溢價必然伴隨較大的長短期利差，因此較難解釋歷史上部分期間兩者不一致的現象。起始頁-結束頁：131-153資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201812_26(4).00045篇名：Volatility Spreads and Patent Announcement Returns並列篇名：波動度差與公司專利宣告報酬作者：林姿瑩(Zih-Ying Lin);黃冠瑛(Guan-Ying Huang);謝佩芳(Pei-Fang Hsieh)關鍵字：Call-put implied volatility spread;stock returns;patent announcement;買賣權隱含波動度差;股票報酬;專利宣告期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：Prior studies investigating the stock market have documented that the day when a firm is granted a patent contains information that affects the market. This study examines the roles of informed traders who reveal information in the options market by examining the informational content of options trading on patent announcement returns. The empirical results show that call-put implied volatility spreads contain information about a firm being granted a patent and positively significantly predict two-day patent announcement returns. The degree of announcement return predictability is also stronger when the volatility spread is measured under high option liquidity.英文摘要：文獻發現，公司專利權宣告日隱含影響股票市場之資訊。本文探討個股選擇權市場交易隱含有專利宣告後報酬之資訊。實證分析發現，買賣權隱含波動度差可預測公司取得專利宣告後兩天之報酬，而且當選擇權流動性越高時，波動度差對於公司宣告後報酬預測越準確。起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201809_26(3).00016篇名：Corporate Social Network and Bank Loan Contract並列篇名：企業社會網絡與銀行貸款契約作者：劉志良(Chih-Liang Liu);邱敬貿(Junmao Chiu);王鈺仁(Yu-Jen Wang)關鍵字：Corporate governance;social network;bank loan;公司治理;社會網絡;銀行貸款期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study highlights the role that external social networks play in a bank loan contract. Using data on Taiwan-listed companies, we find that the social networks of CEO, CFO, and board members help reduce (increase) bank loan spread and liquid collateral requirement (loan size), particularly pronounced for the network to financial institutions. However, the network-loan relation is non-linear with a U-shape effect, suggesting that an over-connected network leads to higher (lower) loan spread and greater collateral requirement (loan size). These facts help resolve controversy of whether a social network is beneficial or detrimental to the firm.英文摘要：本研究探討外部社會網絡與銀行貸款的關係。以臺灣上市櫃公司為樣本，我們發現企業執行長、財務長與董事會成員的社會網絡有助降低（提高）貸款利差與抵押品要求（貸款規模），尤其是與銀行連結的網絡關係。然而，網絡與貸款是U型的非線性效果，顯示過度對外連結的網絡反而導致較高（較低）的利差與抵押品要求（貸款規模）。起始頁-結束頁：27-89資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201809_26(3).00027篇名：Analytical Approximations for American Options: The Binary Power Option Approach並列篇名：美式選擇權之解析近似：二元乘冪選擇權法作者：江彌修(Mi-Hsiu Chiang);傅信豪(Hsin-Hao Fu);黃以達(Yi-Ta Huang);駱建陵(Chien-Ling Lo);石百達(Pai-Ta Shih)關鍵字：American option;binary power option;early exercise premium;美式選擇權;二元乘冪選擇權;提早履約溢酬期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study proposes an innovative approach to value American options. Using a portfolio of binary power options to replicate the early exercise premium, we modify Medvedev and Scaillet (2010) to derive an analytical approximation of American option values under the Black-Scholes framework. Compared with Medvedev and Scaillet (2010), our approach provides a much simpler functional form of the early exercise premium that can be easily extended to high-order series expansions. The numerical results show that the pricing performance of our method is closely comparable to that of Medvedev and Scaillet (2010) and superior to that of Barone-Adesi and Whaley (1987).英文摘要：本研究提出一創新方法評價美式選擇權。利用二元乘冪選擇權之投資組合複製提早履約溢酬，本文在Black-Scholes架構下修改Medvedev and Scaillet (2010)方法，導出美式選擇權價格之解析近似。相較於Medvedev and Scaillet (2010)，本研究提供更為簡易之函數型式，並易於應用至高階級數。結果發現，本文方法堪比Medvedev and Scaillet (2010)所呈現之結果，並優於Barone-Adesi and Whaley (1987)。起始頁-結束頁：91-116資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201809_26(3).00038篇名：Information Content of Continuous and Jump Decomposition of Variances並列篇名：連續及躍動變異部份之訊息內涵作者：曾祺峰(Chi-Feng Tzeng);蔡子<U+6667>(Jeffrey Tzuhao Tsai)關鍵字：Volatility prediction;model free implied volatility;realized variance;conditional jump intensity;波動度預測;無模型隱含波動度;已實現變異值;條件式躍動頻率期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：The GARCH models and heterogeneous autoregressive (HAR) model are used to evaluate the information about the continuous/jump compositions of variances. The continuous/jump components of the implied variance are extracted from FTSE 100 data. We compare the performance of the GARCH models in terms of sample fit and out-of-sample performance measures. Our results suggest that both the realized variance and model-free implied volatility are important information resources in variance forecasting. Using the HAR model, we find that the realized measurements contain incremental information relative to implied variances. Implied volatilities are improved as the GB2 distribution fitting is applied.英文摘要：本文利用GARCH模型與HAR模型檢定連續/躍動部份變異之訊息內涵。從FTSE 100資料中取出連續/躍動隱含變異值，並以樣本內配適及樣本外預測力比較GARCH模型。在模型中已實現變異值及無模型隱含波動度皆是重要訊息來源。運用HAR模型，本文發現已實現變異值相對於隱含變異具有增額訊息；透過GB2分配配適能改進隱含波動之訊息內涵。起始頁-結束頁：117-139資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201809_26(3).00049篇名：Have the Determinants of Implicit Guarantee and Intervention Changed during the Financial Crisis of 2008?並列篇名：隱性保證與干預之決定在金融危機期間是否改變？作者：黃玉麗(Yu-Li Huang);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：Implicit guarantee;implicit intervention;issuer rating;individual rating;global financial crisis;隱性保證;隱性干預;發行人評等;個別評等;全球金融危機期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：This paper investigates whether the determinants of implicit guarantee and intervention change during the financial crisis of 2008? It finds the following results. First, the harm of intervention is more severe for banks with better financial strength, but it is mitigated in countries with better sovereign ratings. Second, strong banks receive more support in the crisis than in the non-crisis period, and countries with strong sovereign ratings provide fewer guarantees during the crisis period. Third, the effects of implicit intervention do not change after the financial crisis. Finally, country-specific factors can explain the determinants of implicit intervention.英文摘要：本文探討政府隱性保證與干預的決定在金融危機期間是否改變。發現，第一，政府干預造成的傷害對財務表現佳的銀行影響更嚴重，而主權評等較佳的國家可以減少干預的風險。其次，財務佳的銀行在金融危機期間收到更多隱性保證，而主權評等佳的國家提供較少隱性保證。第三，銀行獲得較高隱性干預的機率可以由國家特定變數解釋。起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201806_26(2).000110篇名：Institutional Informed Trading and Stock Price Behavior並列篇名：機構法人資訊交易與股價行為作者：朱榕屏(Lon-Ping Zu);楊智元(Chih-Yuan Yang)關鍵字：Informed trading;institutions;multiple transactions;market anomalies;資訊交易;機構法人;多期交易;市場異象期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：We assume that the aim of informed institutions is to maximize the joint profits of multiple investing sessions. The model shows that when the aggregate informed trades are relatively large, institutions would reach agreement in private, delaying the use of the information. Such delaying action is quite different from prior studies adopting rational expectations models, which mainly infer that institutions obtain and use information immediately, and the action can explain some market anomalies.英文摘要：本文模型設定法人決策行為並非僅關注當下的利得，而是考量未來多期交易的利潤總合。結果顯示當資訊交易總量較大時，機構法人將私下協議共同延後使用資訊。此一結果與過往文獻認為機構法人在取得資訊後會立即使用的結論迥然不同。機構法人共同延後使用資訊的行為可解釋部分市場異象。起始頁-結束頁：39-91資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201806_26(2).000211篇名：The Effect of Legal Environment on the Association between Credit Risk and Earnings Quality: Evidence from China並列篇名：基於法制環境論信用風險與盈餘品質之關聯性－來自中國之證據作者：吳幸蓁(Shing-Jen Wu);沈大白(Da-Bai Shen);莊婷婷(Ting-Ting Chuang)*關鍵字：Earnings quality;credit risk;legal environment;provincial business environment index;盈餘品質;信用風險;法制環境;省份企業經營環境指數期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：The study examines the association between credit risk and earnings quality as well as the mediating role of legal environment on foregoing relationship by using a sample of Chinese A-share listed companies. The empirical results indicate that the higher credit risk, the lower earnings quality of financial reporting. Besides, firms that are situated in the provinces with a sounder legal environment exhibit higher earnings quality. Finally, this study also finds that the sound legal systems could restrain the potential earnings manipulation behaviors of high credit risk firms, thereby improving the quality of reported earnings.英文摘要：本文以中國大陸A股上市公司為研究對象，探討信用風險與盈餘品質之關係，並考量省級法制環境於其間所扮演的角色。實證結果顯示，信用風險越高的公司，其所報導之盈餘品質越差。此外，公司若處於法制環境越為完善的省份，其盈餘品質亦越高。最後，省份層級的法制環境越佳，則越能有效抑制高信用風險公司的潛在盈餘管理行為。起始頁-結束頁：93-137資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201806_26(2).000312篇名：Do Intraday Large Price Changes Matter for Trading Index Futures? Evidence from China Futures Markets並列篇名：日內大幅價格變化對交易指數期貨重要嗎？中國期貨市場的證據作者：戴敏育(Min-Yuh Day);黃寶玉(Paoyu Huang);倪衍森(Yensen Ni);陳育欣(Yuhsin Chen)關鍵字：Index futures;day trading;investment strategy;large price changes;指數期貨;日內交易;投資策略;大幅價格變動期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：By employing intraday tick data due to big data concerns, we examine whether investors profit by day trading China Stock Index 300 Futures (C300F) as the C300F index rises (falls) over considerable points in a minute defined as intraday large price change. We argue that the intraday large price change might induce investors to trade the C300F. Results reveal that investors are likely to make profits by taking short positions on the C300F right after the occurrence of the intraday large price change, except when the C300F falls from extremely high points like 20 points in a minute.英文摘要：本研究採取具有大數據性質的日內資料為樣本，來探討一分鐘滬深300期貨指數漲跌相當幅度時介入，是否有獲利的可能性。此乃基於當滬深300期貨指數大幅變動似能引發投資者介入。實證結果顯示除滬深300期貨指數一分鐘大跌20點外，投資人似可在滬深300期貨指數大幅變動時放空而有獲利的契機。起始頁-結束頁：139-174資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201806_26(2).000413篇名：IPO Lockup Expiration and Institutional Investors Trading並列篇名：IPO閉鎖解除日與機構投資人交易作者：黃柏凱(Po-Kai Huang);張邦茹(Pang-Ru Chang);姜堯民(Yao-Min Chiang)關鍵字：Lockup expiration;institutional investors;閉鎖解除日;機構投資人期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：We test the true unlock effect based on these withdrawal dates of lockup shares for 380 IPO firms from 2005 to 2014 in Taiwan, unlike previous studies which find no significant market returns based on regulation date. We find significantly negative abnormal returns around the first withdrawal date. We further show that institutional investors significantly react to these withdrawal events by selling shares and buying back shares before prices moved up. This action is especially more significant for mutual funds than for foreign institutional investors and dealers.英文摘要：本研究探討2005年至2014年380家臺灣IPO公司首次閉鎖解除日之股價反應，以及首次閉鎖解除日之機構投資人交易情形。我們發現在首次閉鎖解除日時，具有顯著為負之異常報酬率；而機構投資人在首次閉鎖解除日事件中，顯著賣超及在價格上漲之前顯著買超，相較於外資和自營商，投信之此種交易行為較顯著。起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201803_26(1).000114篇名：Loss Aversion in Real Estate Transactions並列篇名：不動產交易之損失趨避作者：趙慶祥(Ching-Hsiang Chao);張傳章(Chuang-Chang Chang);葉錦徽(Jin-Huei Yeh)關鍵字：Loss aversion;investor experience;quantile regression;real estate markets;損失趨避;投資者經驗;分量迴歸;不動產市場期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This research examines loss aversion within the real estate market by evaluating evidence and a priori arguments on the effects of investor sentiment on willingness-to-accept among homeowners. Based upon a unique data set providing the complete histories of transactions in the real estate market, our findings reveal that the loss aversion phenomenon prevails regardless of homeowners' gender. Interestingly, young investors, and non-owner occupied investors faced with lower-priced cases exhibit higher levels of loss aversion. By sketching the whole conditional distribution via quantile regression, this study provides new evidence suggesting difference on cognitive biases across investors' residential region, gender, and age.英文摘要：本研究驗證不動產市場中，屋主之售屋決策是否存在損失趨避行為與其所造成之影響。我們發現，損失趨避現象普遍存在於各「性別」。有趣的是，在銷售低價位房屋時，年輕與非自住投資者較容易受損失趨避影響。透過分量迴歸，本研究提供新證據，發現不動產投資者在不同住宅區域、性別和年齡間存在不同程度之認知偏差。起始頁-結束頁：25-58資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201803_26(1).000215篇名：Stock Traders' Order Aggressiveness and Investment Performance on the Taiwan Stock Exchange並列篇名：臺灣股市交易者之下單積極度與投資績效作者：林霖(Lin Lin);洪碧霞(Pi-Hsia Hung);林宗岳(Chung-Yueh Lin)關鍵字：Investor types;microstructure;order size;order submission;trading behavior;投資人類別;市場微結構;委託單規模;委託單提交;交易行為期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This paper examines the relationship between order aggressiveness and investment performance across investor classes on the Taiwan Stock Exchange. We combine intraday order-level data, transaction-level data, and display information to construct the daily volume-weighted order aggressiveness and investment performance for identified investor types. Empirical results find that professional institutions are more aggressive than individuals and other institutions, and institutional investors generally perform better than individuals. Evidence also suggests that mutual funds are the most active among all types of investors and out-perform the rest. Finally, these results are robust when we check for stock volatility, tick sizes, and market conditions.英文摘要：本文探討臺灣股票市場中各類交易者之下單積極度與投資績效之關係。實證結果發現，專業機構投資人較散戶及其他法人更積極，機構投資人投資績效表現優於散戶。共同基金為下單積極度最高的交易者，其投資績效明顯優於其他類別交易者。此外，考慮股票波動度、價格升降級距及牛熊市效果時，亦符合上述實證結果。起始頁-結束頁：59-96資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201803_26(1).000316篇名：Stock Market Reaction to the Resignation of Compensation Committee Members: Evidence from Taiwan並列篇名：薪酬委員會委員辭職之市場反應：以臺灣為例作者：潘虹華(Hunghua Pan);廖懿屏(Yi-Ping Liao)關鍵字：Corporate governance;compensation committee;resignation;公司治理;薪酬委員會;辭職期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：26卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study investigates market reactions to the resignation of compensation committee members. First, we find a significantly negative market reaction when independent directors resign. Second, when members resign for a busy reason, the market appears to consider the resignation as a signal of poor performance or weak corporate governance and thus responds negatively. Third, the resignation of members with academic background or practice experiences causes an unfavorable market reaction. Our main contribution is being the first study to document that resignation of compensation committee members provides crucial information about compensation committee performance from the market participants' perspective.英文摘要：本文旨在調查薪酬委員會委員辭職之市場反應，並分別以委員之身份、專業背景、及辭職原因進行分析。結果顯示，當薪酬委員會之委員具獨立董事身份、或以忙碌為由辭職、或該委員具學術或實務背景時，市場反應為顯著負向。簡言之，資本市場以上述面向評估薪酬委員會之效能，故主管機關應參酌之。起始頁-結束頁：97-118資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201803_26(1).000401篇名：以數量分析方法探討台灣薪資停滯成因並列篇名：A QUANTITATIVE EXPLORATION OF THE CAUSES OF TAIWAN'S WAGE STAGNATION作者：盧姝璇(Shu-Shiuan Lu)關鍵字：新古典;勞動市場;薪資;台灣;Neoclassical;Labor market;Wages;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：在2000-2012年間，台灣的薪資呈現停滯的狀態，是過去六十多年來未見的現象。讓人費解的是，這段期間平均勞動生產力的成長率仍維持在2.5％以上，但實質薪資幾乎沒有成長。為此，本篇論文採用簡單的數學計算和新古典學派衡量景氣循環成因的方法即景氣循環拆解方程式（business cycle accounting），來探討為何平均勞動生產力與實質薪資的成長率差異顯著，並進一步了解薪資的成長率在這段期間較過去二十年低的原因。結果顯示，成長率約80％的差異是因為平均勞動生產力和實質薪資在計算時採用不同的平減指數。另外，2000-2012年間薪資的成長率較1980-2000年間低有兩個原因：（1）2000年初起總要素生產力的成長趨緩以及2000年中葉起資本市場存在均衡下既有耗損的擴大，造成邊際勞動生產力的成長率下降；（2）工資高於邊際勞動生產力的溢額變小，因而使薪資給付的成長趨緩。這些因素導致我們所觀察到的薪資停滯。英文摘要：Wage stagnation between 2000-2012 is unprecedented in Taiwan's development in the past 60 years. This phenomenon is puzzling, as the growth rate of average labor productivity remains above 2.5%, while there is almost no growth in real wages. In this paper, a simple arithmetic computation and a neoclassical measuring approach - business cycle wedge methodology - are adopted to explore the possible causes of such a growth difference in average labor productivity and real wages. Moreover, we address why wages grow much more slowly than in the previous twenty years. It turns out that the use of different deflators for deflating average labor productivity (i.e., real gross domestic product per worker) and real wages accounts for about 80% of the gap. Furthermore, there are two reasons for why the wages during 2000-2012 grew more slowly than the preceding period, i.e., 1980-2000: (1) the fall in total factor productivity in the early 2000s and then the increasing capital market friction caused the growth rate of the marginal product of labor to fall; (2) the fall of the markup of wages paid over the marginal product of labor caused the slow growth in wages paid. All the above factors lead to the observed wage stagnation.起始頁-結束頁：519-553資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：貿易開放對經濟成長的影響－整合分析之應用並列篇名：TRADE OPENNESS AND ECONOMIC GROWTH: A META-ANALYSIS作者：林馨怡(Hsin-Yi Lin);王靖筑(Ching-Chu Wang)關鍵字：貿易開放;經濟成長;整合分析;Trade openness;Economic growth;Meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文使用整合分析（meta-analysis）方法探討貿易開放對經濟成長之影響，以分析現有文獻對此議題的爭論。我們納入所有與主題相關文獻，整合分析後發現，一國貿易開放顯著地有助於經濟成長，但貿易開放效果會依資料類型、文章是否已發表、文章使用何種貿易開放指標、以及研究對象有所不同。以非洲國家為樣本的文獻指出，貿易開放對經濟成長的重要性遠高於其他國家樣本，亦即，窮困落後國家的貿易開放政策對其國家經濟成長扮演重要角色。此外，此議題之樣本文獻具有異質性與出版偏誤問題，經由整合迴歸分析後，我們發現文章使用的貿易開放指標、資料型態、國家數目、或樣本數不同皆可能是造成樣本文獻變異來源，而非洲國家或開發中國家的貿易開放效果可能被過度放大。英文摘要：This paper uses a meta-analysis to investigate the relationship between trade openness and economic growth. Our results reveal that there is a significant genuine effect of openness on growth. This effect depends on the type of data, openness indicators, and countries of the articles used. For example, the impact of openness on growth is higher in the African countries, which implies that the trade policy is far more important in poor countries. We also find evidence of problems of heterogeneity and publication bias in the literature. The resulting meta-regression results show that the studies considered are different with respect to the openness indicator used, the type of data, the number of countries, and the sample of countries. The openness effects in African and other developing countries may be over magnified.起始頁-結束頁：555-596資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：貿易自由化與所得不均度間之非單調關係並列篇名：THE NON-MONOTONIC RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRADE LIBERALIZATION AND INCOME INEQUALITY作者：徐則謙(Tsechien Hsu)關鍵字：國際貿易;所得不均度;異質生產者;借貸市場摩擦;產業內貿易;International trade;Income inequality;Heterogeneous producers;Frictions in the borrowing and lending market;Intra-industry trade期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：二十世紀末，不少實證研究發現世界各國所得不均度上升的模式異於Heckscher-Ohlin模型之預測，因而認為貿易並非主因。然而最近不少研究，特別是基於異質生產者的模型，重新發現兩者間的關係具有理論基礎，並在實證上得到佐證。本文結合借貸市場的摩擦、個體資本稟賦的差異及需求彈性的內生性，內生地創造出所得不均度與貿易自由化的非單調（non-monotonic）關係。同樣立基於異質生產者的架構，雖然部分模型預測之關係為單調，然仍有部分模型呈現非單調的特徵，即使產生的機制與本文不同。英文摘要：At the end of the twentieth century, many economists believe that trade is not the main reason causing income inequality within countries, because several empirical studies have found that the pattern of the rise in inequality does not coincide with the prediction of the Heckscher-Ohlin model. However, many recent studies, especially those based on firm heterogeneity, rediscover the theoretical basis and empirical evidence to support the relationship between the two. Based on the friction in the borrowing market, the difference between the capital endowment and the endogeneity of the demand elasticity, this paper generates the non-monotonic relationship between the inequality and trade liberalization. Based on firm heterogeneity, some studies predict the existence of a monotonic relationship, but others show a non-monotonic feature, although the mechanism is different from this paper.起始頁-結束頁：597-636資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：Market Concentration and Licensing Royalty in an Asymmetric Oligopoly並列篇名：異質寡占下之市場集中度與單位授權金作者：許淑<U+5A96>(Su-Ying Hsu);羅竹平(Chu-Ping Lo)關鍵字：Market concentration;Licensing royalty;Asymmetric firms;Non-linear demand;RAND;市場集中度;單位授權金;非對稱廠商;非線性需求;RAND原則期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：This paper studies the interaction of market concentration and licensing royalty for an innovator following RAND terms under an asymmetric oligopoly in which the technology transfer takes place from the innovator to firms having asymmetric cost. Taking cost variance as a proxy to evaluate market concentration, this paper shows that the nexus of market concentration and licensing royalty is highly sensitive to the curvature of market demand. When market demand is concave (convex) to the origin, the nexus of market concentration and royalty rate is positive (negative), whereas in the case of linear demand the royalty is independent of market concentration. As a result, market concentration and market demand crucially affect the licensing royalty.英文摘要：本文以一個非對稱的寡占模型來探討市場集中度與單位授權金的關係，在模型中，技術母廠遵循RAND原則以單位授權金及固定權利金的組合授權給在市場競爭的廠商。以成本變異作為市場集中度的代理變數下，本文研究表明當市場需求為線性時，單位授權金與市場集中度是獨立的；但是，當市場需求為凹向原點時，市場集中度與單位授權金呈現正向關係，即當市場集中度愈高時，單位授權金也會提升，但是此一正向關係在市場需求為凸向原點時會轉變成負向關係。因此，消費市場的需求情形對於單位授權金與市場集中度兩者之間的關係具有關鍵性影響。起始頁-結束頁：637-670資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：信用交易、意見分歧與股票報酬並列篇名：MARGIN TRADING, DIFFERENCES OF OPINION, AND STOCK RETURNS作者：丁碧慧(Pi-Hui Ting);呂振揚(Chen-Yang Lu);周賓凰(Pin-Huang Chou)關鍵字：信用交易;意見分歧;股票報酬;賣空餘額;投資人基礎;Margin trading;Divergence of opinion;Stock returns;Short interest;Investor base期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文擴充Miller（1977）的意見紛歧理論觀點，證明在存在投資人異質下，融資餘額與融券餘額分別導致正向與反向的定價差距，因而對後續報酬有負向與正向的影響。與融券賣空不同的是，以機構投資人為主的借券賣出餘額具有資訊內涵與價格修正二種效果；由於二效果的相對大小不確定，因而借券賣出與後續報酬的關係也不確定。我們以台灣證券交易所所有上市公司為樣本，發現高融資餘額與高借券賣出餘額都會造成後續股票報酬下修；高融券餘額則與後續股票報酬有正向相關。英文摘要：We extend Miller's (1977) divergence-of-opinion theory to the case where heterogeneous investors engage in margin trading due to their differences in sentiment. Specifically, we show that long purchasing and short selling activities due to individual investors, contribute to positive and negative mispricing respectively, thereby having negative and positive effects on subsequent stock returns. By contrast, short selling activities due to institutional investors have two opposite effects on mispricing: an information effect, which predicts a negative effect on subsequent stock returns and a price correction effect, which predicts a positive effect; the net effect will be negative if the former dominates the latter. Based on a monthly sample period for all stocks listed on the Taiwan Stock Exchange for 2006-2015, we find strong empirical evidence supporting our theoretical argument.起始頁-結束頁：323-366資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：以分量迴歸評估台灣央行的利率反應函數並列篇名：ESTIMATING INTEREST RATE REACTION FUNCTIONS OF TAIWAN'S CENTRAL BANK USING QUANTILE REGRESSIONS作者：周國偉(Kuo-Wei Chou);曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur)關鍵字：利率反應函數;Taylor原則;逆分量迴歸;即時資料;不對稱政策反應;Interest Rate Reaction Function;Taylor Principle;Inverse Quantile Regression;Real-Time Data;Asymmetric Policy Reaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以分量迴歸分析台灣央行在整個利率條件分配下的政策反應參數。本文選取通膨預測及產出預測的即時資料，並以逆分量迴歸處理匯率變數的內生性問題。本文發現不同條件分量下的政策反應係數與條件平均估計存在差異，特別是央行利率訂定在高分量，會相較於低分量時採較平滑之利率調整。此外，央行對當前產出缺口近似反衰退偏好，但對未來產出缺口之態度為反景氣循環。而央行對當前景氣之反衰退偏好，不但可能是造成不對稱利率慣性調整之原因，或也導致央行對美元匯率有更多樣且條件性的干預。本文結果突顯出台灣央行之利率政策相當彈性，確實也不易由實證之非線性或門檻模型所能清晰呈現。英文摘要：This study uses quantile regression to analyze the policy reaction parameters over the whole conditional distribution of the interest rate of Taiwan's central bank. Real-time data of inflation forecasts and the output forecast are used, and the inverse quantile regressions are applied to deal with endogeneity of exchange rate variables. We find the policy reaction parameters systematically deviate from the estimates of the conditional mean over the conditional interest rate distribution. In particular, the interest rate smoothing parameter will be higher in the upper part than in the lower part of the conditional distribution of the interest rate. Furthermore, the central bank prefers an anti-recession policy for the current output gap and an anticyclical policy for future output gaps. The central bank's anti-recession preference for the current output gap not only may cause asymmetric interest rate inertia, but also leads to diverse and conditional interventions on the nominal exchange rate. The results of this study highlight the fact that the interest rate policy of Taiwan's central bank is very flexible, and not easily demonstrated by the empirical non-linear or threshold model.起始頁-結束頁：367-428資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：A Performance Evaluation of Constant Proportion Portfolio Insurance: An Application of the Economic Index of Riskiness並列篇名：固定比例資產組合保險的績效評估－風險經濟指標的應用作者：呂瑞秋(Richard Lu);熊令瑜(Ling-Yu Hsiung)關鍵字：Constant proportion portfolio insurance;Economic index of riskiness;Economic performance measurement;固定比例資產組合保險;風險經濟指標;經濟績效指標期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：The investment performance of constant proportion portfolio insurance (CPPI) strategies is evaluated by using the economic performance measure (EPM). This performance measure generalizes the Sharpe measure by replacing the standard deviation with the economic index of riskiness proposed by Aumann and Serrano (2008). For the performance evaluation, the return distributions are generated by Monte Carlo simulations. The results show that whether the CPPI strategies can outperform a buy-and-hold (BH) strategy depends on the level of the multiplier, the performance measure, and the market scenario. The multiplier is the most important factor that determines whether CPPI can outperform BH. When the multiplier is no more than two, CPPI almost always outperforms BH under the normal return and volatility market. However, if the multiplier is five, which is a commonly used value in applications, CPPI is outperformed by BH under all market scenarios studied. Furthermore, EPM-based evaluations of CPPI are often favorable under more upward and less volatile markets.英文摘要：本研究利用蒙地卡羅模擬並運用經濟績效指標來評估固定比例資產組合保險策略的投資表現。此經濟績效指標以Aumann and Serrano（2008）中的風險經濟指標取代夏普比例中的風險指標－標準差，可視為一般化的夏普比例。研究結果顯示，固定比例資產組合保險策略是否能優於買進持有策略視乘數、績效指標與市場情境的影響，其中乘數是最重要的因子。在一般正常的市場情境下，若乘數不高於二，經濟績效指標顯示固定比例資產組合保險策略優於買進持有策略。然而，若乘數等於常用的五，則固定比例資產組合保險策略都劣於買進持有策略。此外，使用經濟績效指標或在市場具有上升趨勢且波動小的情況下，都較能顯示固定比例資產組合保險策略優於買進持有策略。起始頁-結束頁：429-462資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：狄斯奈樂園的訂價方式－兼論部分搭售並列篇名：DISNEYLAND PRICING: AN ANALYSIS OF PARTIAL BUNDLING作者：廖郁萍(Yu-Ping Liao)關鍵字：遊樂園;兩部分訂價;搭售;Amusement park;Two-part tariff;Bundling期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：在本文所建立的模型裡，有一個擁有兩個遊樂設施，1和2，的遊樂園。遊樂園要在下列五種訂價方式中，選取一個來採用：（一）不收入園費，但玩遊樂設施1和2都要收費；（二）只收取入園費；（三）兩部分訂價法：先收取入園費，對於繳了入園費者，不論玩遊樂設施1還是玩遊樂設施2都要另外收費；（四）欲進入遊樂園者要買一票簿；票簿裡有一張入園票和一張玩遊樂設施1的票。遊客若要玩遊樂設施2，需另支付費用；（五）欲進入遊樂園者要買一票簿；票簿裡有一張入園票和一張可用來玩遊樂設施1或遊樂設施2的票。遊客用完了票簿裡的票後，若想玩另一遊樂設施，需另支付費用。分析結果顯示：遊樂園有意願採用的是訂價方式（二）或（和）訂價方式（五）。這樣的結果可以解釋狄斯奈樂園自開幕至今所採用的訂價方式，也可以解釋一些採會員制、販售課程（例如健身、舞蹈、瑜珈課程）的商家的收費方式。英文摘要：This paper presents a model in which an amusement park with rides 1 and 2 chooses among different five pricing schemes: (1) a price per ride; (2) a pure entry fee; (3) two-part tariff-a combination of an entry fee and a price per ride; (4) a price for a ticket book of two tickets, one for park entry and one for ride 1, plus a price per ride on ride 2; and (5) a price for a ticket book of two tickets, one for park entry and one for either ride, plus a price per ride on either ride. It concludes that the amusement park chooses to adopt scheme (2) and/or scheme (5). This result can explain Disneyland's pricing since its opening in 1955. It can also explain the pricing scheme(s) adopted by many firms that sell courses and lessons (e.g. fitness, dance, and yoga) on a membership basis.起始頁-結束頁：463-517資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：典型和非典型全日工作的工資差異--雙變數就業選擇之實證分析並列篇名：WAGE DIFFERENTIAL BETWEEN PERMANENT AND TEMPORARY CONTRACTS OF FULL-TIME JOBS: AN EMPLOYMENT DECISIONS作者：魯慧中(Huei-chung Lu);陳明賢(Mingshen Chen)關鍵字：非典型就業;永久契約;臨時契約;工資差異;Oaxaca-Blinder拆解法;Atypical employment;Permanent contract;Temporary contract;Wage differential;Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本實證研究考慮兩個面向的就業決策：工時（全日/部分工時）與契約形式（永久/臨時契約，我們採用Heckman兩階段估計法，同時考慮勞動者對工時及契約形式的選擇，分析全日工作下永久和臨時契約的工資率是否存在顯著的差異性，進而探討導致此工<U+8D44>差異的來源。若依性別區分，我們利用Oaxaca-Blinder拆解法發現，導致女性樣本工資差異的主要來源在於個人特質（如：工作經驗，教育程度及年齡）和工作屬性（如：公司規模或行業別）；然而，造成男性樣本工資差異的主要來源則是報酬結構（歧視）；這個結果意謂著男性勞動者在臨時契約下被歧視的程度比女性高。最後，我們從特定解釋變數觀察，發現教育程度和工作經驗是導致不同契約之間工資差異的最重要來源。英文摘要：This empirical study considers two decisions of employment: the working hours (i.e. full-time/part-time) and the pattern of contracts (i.e. permanent/fixed-term). Using Heckman’s two-stage estimation and simultaneously considering the decisions of working hours and the pattern of contracts, we analyze the wage differential between permanent and temporary contracts of the full-time employment and further explore the sources of wage differential. By gender, we employ the Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition technique and find that the wage differential for female workers is caused mostly by endowments including individual characteristics (such as experience, years of schooling and age) and job characteristics (such as firm size or occupation). However, that for male workers mostly results from the discrimination that comes with the unorthodox nature of temporary contracts. That is, male workers are subject to more discrimination than female workers under temporary contracts. Finally we find that years of schooling and work experience are the major factors that contribute to the wage differential between permanent and temporary contracts.起始頁-結束頁：133-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：台灣公營事業民營化對受僱員工薪資與就業之影響--長期追蹤資料分析並列篇名：WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF PRIVATION IN TAIWAN: A LONGITUDINAL DATA ANALYSIS作者：林柏翰(Bo-Han Lin);黃芳玫(Fung-Mey Huang)關鍵字：民營化;薪資;就業;追蹤資料;Privatization;Wage;Employment;Panel data期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：過去公營事業民營化之研究，多著重於民營化後經營績效改善及個案分析之面向，然而，在民營化過程中，因組織架構之改變可能影響其受僱員工之切身權益。<U+FFFD><U+FFFD><U+FFFD><U+FFFD>過往國外文獻對於民營化對受僱員工之影響未有定見，而台灣在此一領域之研究闕如。本文透過1994至2010年由行政院主計總處之「受僱員工動向調查」與「受僱員工薪資調查」串聯資料。運用廠商固定效果及個別廠商不同之成長趨勢效果等長期追蹤資料計量方法，分析台灣公營事業民營化對其受僱員工薪資，就業之影響。研究發現，台灣公營事業民營化對受僱員工之影響具有產業之差異性，其影響效果只有短期效果而無長期效果。在製造業，民營化對於其員工人均時薪存在顯著之負向影響，此減薪效果發生在民營化後的當年至第三年，民營化對製造業在職員工之就業（其離職人數）並沒有顯著影響。在金融業，民營化不影響員工人均時薪，然而，在短期內有裁員現象，在較早民營化之金融企業中，裁員現象發生在民營化後之第四年，而較晚民營化之金融企業裁員現象發生在民營化當年。英文摘要：The privatization of a public enterprise may involve a sequence of restructuring to improve the productivity and efficiency of the enterprises. The privatization may confront issues arising due to layoffs and wage cuts for incumbent employees. This study merges data sets of the ”Employee's Movement Survey and the ”Employee's Earnings Survey from 1994 to 2010 to analyze the wage and employment effects of privatization in Taiwan. The results show that the effects of privatization on employees' benefits are short-run and have substantial inter-industry differences. The employees of privatized enterprises in the manufacturing sector experienced a substantially negative impact on hourly wages. The restructuring of state-owned enterprises in the financial sector, however, saw privatization accompanied by short-run layoffs. These short-run layoffs appear in the fourth year and first year after privatization for earlier and later privatized state-owned companies, respectively. These findings may provide policy implications for current state-owned enterprises which are under consideration for future privatization.起始頁-結束頁：185-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：同儕性別組成對大學科系選擇之影響並列篇名：THE INFLUENCE OF PEER GENDER COMPOSITION ON CHOICE OF COLLEGE MAJOR作者：郭祐誠(Yu-Chen Kuo)關鍵字：科系選擇;職業隔離;同儕效果;同儕性別組成;Choice of college major;Occupational segregation;peer gender compostion期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：台灣如同其他歐美國家，以教育程度當作衡量性別教育成就差距早已消失，但性別職業隔離現象還是清楚呈現，女性在理工領域的人數明顯較男性少，而這也普遍被視為男女間持續存在工資差距的重要因素。由於大學時期的主修與未來的職業選擇息息相關，因此本計畫的目標在利用「台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫後<U+7EE9>調查」（簡稱TEPS-B）連結「台灣教育長期追蹤資料庫」（簡稱TEPS），探索國中時期同儕的性別組成對於未來上大學科系選擇之可能影響。實證結果發現國中班級的性別組成對於未來性別主流科系選擇的影響，主要發生在男性，且存在非線性的關聯。當班級中女性比例為絕對少數時，此時女性比例的增加會提高男性將來選擇性別主流科系的可能性，亦即傾向選理工科系。但當女性超過一定比例為相對多數時，此時會降低男性將來選擇性別主流科系的機率，也就是傾向選人文社會科系。至於性別組成對女性之影響則與男性有所差異，實證結果顯示女性之科系選擇與學習環境的性別組成之間無顯著關聯。由於絕大多數國中班級性別比例之組成不大可能由學生或其家長所影響或加以選擇，此一結果顯示班級性別之組成的確有可能影響學生之性別意識及學習行為，進而影響學生將來科系之選擇。此一發現或許可以解釋為何台灣近年來男性大學生，選擇理工科系的比例逐年降低，部分有可能導因於國中時期班級，性別分佈漸趨平均所致。英文摘要：Empirical evidence indicates that gender-based difference in ability can only partly explain differences in educational or occupational choices. The concern of gender segregation in occupation or education has never lessened as scientists seek to address the underrepresentation of women in science technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers Authors of previous studies suspect that students growing in a learning environment with more mixed-gender setup are more likely to choose gender-stereotyped majors This paper will analyze the effects of per gender-composition on choice of college major using data from the Taiwan Education Penal Survey (TEPS) and Taiwan Education Pane Survey and Beyond (TEPS B). Results showed that pear gander-composition in junior high school has significant and nonlinear impact on male choice of college major Male students who attended a junior high school class with a very low proportion of female classmates tended to select ”prevalently male” college majors as the proportion of females increased in their junior high school classes it is worth nothing that males become less likely to choose prevalently male” college majors once the female sex ratio reaches a certain level. These effects of peer gender-composition however, are not observed in the female cohort These results may partly explain the declining percentage of male college students who choose natural sciences as their college major over the last decade These findings should also improve the understanding of educational decision-making processes in Taiwan and be relevant to national educational policy decisions.起始頁-結束頁：225-261資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：經濟成長、薪資停滯?初探台灣實質薪資與勞動生產力成長脫鉤之成因並列篇名：DECOUPLING OF WAGE GROWTH AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN TAIWAN: AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION作者：林依伶(Yi-Ling Lin);楊子霆(Tzu-Ting Yang)關鍵字：薪資;勞動生產力;貿易條件;Wage;Labr productivity;Terms of trade期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：過去15年來，台灣的勞動生產力（每單位勞動的實質產出）持續成長，但實質薪資卻出現停滯。過去文獻多半將此一現象歸咎於我國勞動報酬份額持續下滑，亦即這是經濟成長果實「分配不均」所致。本文利用經濟模型與統計資料，將實質薪資與勞動生產力的成長差異拆解為三項因素的變動趨勢：（1）勞動報酬份額;（2）薪資佔勞動報酬之比率;（3）產出對消費之相對價格（GDP平減指數對消費者物價指數之比值）。與過去看法不同，實證結果顯示在2002-2014年間，絕大部分（87％）的每工時實質薪資與勞動生產力的成長差異，是來自於我國產出價格相對消費價格的下滑，而非勞動報酬份額的變化。進一步分析產出對消費之相對價格下跌的原因，並與南韓資料比較，我們發現台灣的實質薪資與勞動生產力之成長脫鉤現象可能與台灣貿易條件惡化有關。英文摘要：One of the most puzzling facts about Taiwan's economy in the past 15 years is that the growth of the real wage rate has fallen far behind the growth of labor productivity (real GDP par hour worked). Many previous studies have suggested this phenomenon could be due to the decline in the share of lobar compensation. We examine this issue empirically by decomposing the growth gap between the real wage rate and labor productivity into the growth of three components: share of labor compensation, wage to labor compensation ratio and the relative price of output to consumption (i.e. the ratio of the GDP deflator to CPI). In contrast to the traditional view, we find that the change in the relative price of output to consumption contributes the most to the wage-productivity growth gap. The decline in the relative price of output to consumption can explain 87 % of the annual growth gap between the real wage rate and labor productivity during 2002-2014. Furthermore, by decomposing the change in the relative price of output to consumption and analyzing data from South Korea, we hind that the decoupling of wage growth and productivity growth actually reflects the deteriorating toms of trade.起始頁-結束頁：263-322資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：Land Rent Pattern with Commuting Mode並列篇名：具通勤運具之地租型態作者：蔡智發(Jyh-Fa Tsai);蕭潤君(Jun-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：Land rent pattern;Commuting mode;Externalities;Congestion;Accidents;Emission;地租型態;通勤運具;外部性;擁擠;事故;廢氣排放期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study shows that the residential land use pattern of Alonso (1964) and Muth (1969) can be obtained by choosing a commuting mode instead of the typical classification of land use directly. Differing from the related studies in the literature setting different wage rates or income levels for households, our study shows that every household with the same income still generates the varying bid rent function analytically. Comparing the commuting modes of mass transit, motorcycles, and cars, it is shown that commuting by car with a high fixed cost and a low marginal cost will be advantageous with a longer commuting distance. In contrast, commuting by mass transit with a low fixed cost and a high marginal cost will be advantageous to those traveling a shorter commuting distance. This model is then applied to the case of the Taipei metropolitan area. Two policies on the costs of commuting modes, including fuel taxes on motorcycles and cars and fares on mass transit are analyzed. The externalities of traffic congestion, accidents, and emission are introduced in the analysis.英文摘要：本研究顯示Alonso(1964)與Muth(1969)的住宅土地使用型態可經由選擇通勤運具的分析獲得，而不需對土地使用直接分類。不同於文獻上的相關研究對住<U+6237>設定不同的工資率或所得水準，本研究提出即使住<U+6237>均有相同的所得水準，仍然可以得到不同地租的分析解。比較各種通勤運具，研究顯示使用高固定成本與低邊際成本的運具（汽車）通勤時，對長程的通勤較為有利。相對而言，使用低固定成本與高邊際成本的運具（大眾運輸）通勤時，對短程的通勤較為有利。此外，本模型應用至台北都會區，並探討兩種有關通勤成本的政策，一為對私人運具的燃料稅，另一為大眾運輸的票價，其中分析過程亦考慮交通擁擠、事故與排放廢氣等外部性的影響。起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：疊代模型中的最適智慧財產權保護並列篇名：THE OPTIMAL DEGREE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS PROTECTION IN AN OVERLAPPING-GENERATIONS MODEL作者：金志婷(Chi-Ting Chin)關鍵字：社會福利;疊代模型;保護智慧財產權;研究與發展;Social welfare;Overlapping generations;Intellectual property rights (IPRs);Research and development (R&D)期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Kwan and Lai (2003)在代表性個人的總體架構下，探討最適的智慧財產權保護。本文利用疊代模型分析最適的智慧財產權保護，我們發現：增強智慧財產權的保護相當於將年輕人的財富移轉一部分給年長者，因此，增加對智慧財產權的保護將擴大跨代間的財富差異並壓低整體社會的福利，導致疊代模型中最適的智慧財產權保護低於代表性個人模型。Kwan and Lai (2003)在代表性個人的總體架構下，忽略智慧財產保護對跨代財富差異的影響，高估了最適的智慧財產保護。英文摘要：Kwan and Lai (2003) obtain the optimal degree of intellectual property rights protection (IPRP) in a representative-agent model. This paper analyzes the welfare effect of intellectual property rights protection in an overlapping-generations model. It is shown that a rise in IPRP implies that the wealth is transferred from the younger to the older generations; thus it expands the wealth gap among various generations and reduces the social welfare. The optimal degree of IPRP in the overlapping-generations model is lower than that in the representative-agent model. Kwan and Lai (2003) ignore the intergenerational wealth gap effect of IPRP and overestimate the optimal degree of IPRP.起始頁-結束頁：33-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：理性住宅需求者效用極大化之最適房價並列篇名：OPTIMAL HOUSING PRICE TO MAXIMIZE THE UTILITY OF RATIONAL HOUSING BUYERS作者：洪志興(Chih-Hsing Hung);鐘戊典(Wu-Tien Chung)關鍵字：最適房價;風險規避;遺贈動機;Optimal housing price;Risk aversion;Bequest motives期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：在房地產景氣循環中，大家都普遍認為房價早已偏離正常價格，非一般受薪階級可以負荷的，但影響房地產價格的因素眾多，且房地產又兼具消費功能及投資動機，合適房價要如何界定，本研究認為是最適房價。本研究以理性住宅需求者效用極大化的模型為基礎，在取得影響理性住宅需求者之最適房價的幾個重要參數後，將參數量化並把模型以相對數值模擬。我們的模型摸擬結果是對數房價成長率、住宅消費偏好、實質報酬率、風險規避係數對最適房價的影響為正向，貸款價值比(LTV)及遺贈動機(bequest motives)的影響為負向，而房貸利率則在低利率時影響為負向，在高利率時影響為正向。最適房價隨著住宅消費偏好或實質報酬率提高導致住宅消費增加，或因實質房價成長及風險規避的提高驅動住宅投資增加而上升。英文摘要：When housing prices deviate from normal prices during a housing boom, salaried workers cannot afford the higher prices. However, housing prices are affected by many factors, and housing has both a consumption function and investment motives. This paper argues that an appropriate house price can be best defined by the optimal housing price. Based on a model of the maximal utility of a rational consumer, this study takes several important parameters that affect the optimal housing price of a rational buyer, quantifies the parameters, and simulates the model with relative values. The results of the model indicate the positive impact in terms of the real growth rate of housing prices, the housing consumption preference, the real rate of return, and the risk aversion coefficient on the optimal housing price. Thus, the loan value ratio (LTV) and the bequest motives all show negative impact. However, the impacts of mortgage rates at lower rates are negative, while those at higher interest rates are positive. The optimal price increases with housing consumption preferences or the real rate of return on investment, resulting in an increase in housing consumption, or an increase in housing investment due to increased real estate prices and risk aversion.起始頁-結束頁：69-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所16篇名：利益團體、民營化與關稅政策並列篇名：INTEREST GROUPS, PRIVATIZATION AND TARIFF POLICY作者：彭朋義(Peng-Yi Peng);顏志達(Chih-Ta Yen);吳朝欽(Tsaur-Chin Wu)關鍵字：利益團體;民營化;關稅;Interest groups;Privatization;Tariff期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文考量經濟體系存在的政治失靈現象，將利益團體對政府提供政治獻金並進行遊<U+8AAC>的行為，導入政府決定民營化與關稅政策架構中，檢視在此設定下的最適釋股比例與關稅政策，以及對社會福利水準的影響。文中發現：存在利益團體的遊<U+8AAC>行為時，會使得政府制訂較高的釋股比例、較低的關稅稅率(甚或補貼)政策；其次，相較於不存在利益團體遊<U+8AAC>行為而言，存在利益團體對本國政府提供政治獻金進行遊<U+8AAC>行為，反而會讓本國社會福利水準提高，並對兩國社會福利水準有著柏拉圖改善(Pareto improvement)效果；其三，本文延伸探討兩國簽訂與未簽訂自由貿易協定的情況，指出兩國總和福利水準的高低，取決於利益團體的遊<U+8AAC>效率；最後，就Wang and Chiou (2015)所認為民營化與關稅政策的等價性性質，在本文的分析架構下，則有著相異的論點。英文摘要：This paper incorporates the political contribution and lobbying activities of interest groups into governments' decisions on privatization and tariff polices. Under this condition of government failure, we re-examine the optimal privatization and tariff policy, as well as their impact on social welfare. First, it is found that the optimal level of privatization will be higher and tariff will be lower (or even subsidy in some cases) whenever lobbying exists. Second, the domestic welfare will be higher under political contribution than that without, and produces Pareto improvement for both countries. Moreover, to extend the situation of trading countries with or without a Free Trade Agreement, we find that the changing direction of aggregate welfare depends on the efficiency of lobbying. Finally, the equivalence between privatization and tariff policies of Wang and Chiou (2015) will not hold under our framework.起始頁-結束頁：99-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：處理效果文獻回顧並列篇名：Treatment Effect Models: A Brief Review作者：許育進(Yu-Chin Hsu);賴宗志(Tsung-Chih Lai)關鍵字：Rubin因果模型;處理效果;傾向分數;機率倒數加權;rubin causal model;treatment effect;propensity score;inverse probability weighting期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：處理效果文獻在過去30年間有不少新的理論發展，這篇文章將回顧在Rubin因果模型中，當條件獨立假設成立時，如何以機率倒數加權法得到平均處理效果之認定及估計結果。我們也將說明在此假設不成立的內生性架構之下，該如何利用工具變數來對局部平均處理效果進行機率倒數加權之認定與估計。最後，我們介紹一個對條件獨立假設的統計檢定，並總結近年來處理效果文獻的發展，以及提出幾個未來可能的研究方向。英文摘要：Over the last three decades, much progress has been made in the treatment effect literature. In this article, we review the identification and estimation results of average treatment effects based on inverse probability weighting under the unconfoundedness assumption. We also discuss similar identification and estimation results of local average treatment effects when treatment assignment is endogenous but a binary instrumental variable is available. We then introduce a test for the unconfoundedness assumption and summarize some recent developments in the treatment effect literature. Finally, we point out some future research directions.起始頁-結束頁：501-521資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201812_46(4).00012篇名：以遺產稅資料分析我國財富分配不均與財富之組成並列篇名：An Estate Tax Data Analysis of Wealth Inequality and Wealth Composition in Taiwan作者：伍大開(Da-Kai Wu);陳國樑(Joe Chen)關鍵字：財富分配不均;財富組成;遺產稅;wealth inequality;wealth composition;estate tax期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文藉由2001年至2015年遺產稅申報資料，分析台灣財富分配不均及財富組成情形。研究結果發現財富分配不均程度近年來之逐漸增加，與金融資產愈趨集中於富人相關；此外，財富集中的分配不均情形，不僅發生在貧富之間，單就富人族群，也可觀察到財富集中化的現象。在財富組成部分則可觀察到，相較於不動產與其他非金融資產，國人漸趨偏好金融資產，其原因可能在於，遺產稅有效稅率下降，減少持有不動產以規避租稅的誘因。雖然金融資產占財富總額比例增加，但土地仍為國人主要持有財產。本文另外以迴歸模型探討遺產稅有效稅率與財富組成的關係，其結果顯示，遺產稅有效稅率對於土地占財富總額比例為顯著正相關，對於存款與投資占財富總額比例則為顯著負相關，代表個體面對較高的租稅負擔，傾向利用稅制之下土地評價低估的方式獲取租稅利益。稅制不但扭曲個人對於資產種類的選擇，也影響個體資產配置的決策。英文摘要：Based on estate tax returns from 2001 to 2015 and using the estate multiplier method to blow up the sample of decedents to represent the number of the living, this paper analyzes wealth inequality and wealth composition in Taiwan. The results suggest that the degree of wealth inequality has gradually increased in recent years, in accordance with the observation that financial assets became more concentrated. In addition, the concentration of wealth and the resulting inequality is not only between the rich and the poor; it also happens within the rich group. At the same time, the results suggest a tendency to hold more financial assets as opposed to real estate and other non-financial assets. One of the possible explanations is that the decreasing effective tax rate of the estate tax reduces incentives to hold real estates for tax benefits. Despite the increase in the proportion of financial assets, land is still the major choice of property holding as measured by the ratio of wealth. The second part of the study uses regression analyses to explore the relationship between the effective tax rate (of the estate tax) and the composition of wealth. Results show that the effective estate tax rate is positively correlated with the ratio of land to total wealth, and negatively correlated with the ratio of deposits and investment. These results show that when facing a higher tax burden, individuals tend to take advantage of the undervaluing of land in the current tax system to obtain tax benefits. This adds to existing evidence that taxes distorts individuals' choice of asset types, and affects individuals' decisions on asset allocation.起始頁-結束頁：523-567資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201812_46(4).00023篇名：2001年高中職和五專多元入學方案與入學後學校滿意度、學業壓力及在校表現之關係並列篇名：The Multichannel Entrance Program for High School and Junior College in 2001 and Subsequent Academic Pressure, Performance in School, and Satisfaction with School作者：劉家樺(Chia-Hua Liu)關鍵字：多元入學方案;學校滿意度;學業壓力;在校表現;multi-channel entrance program;satisfaction with school;academic pressure;performance in school期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文使用「台灣青少年調查」，檢視2001年高中職和五專多元入學方案之三種入學管道決定因素、多元入學方案與學校滿意度和學業壓力的關係及不同管道入學生在學校滿意度、學業壓力和在校表現的差異。實證結果顯示，國中綜合表現與甄選或申請入學管道呈現相關性。該方案的實施與學校滿意度的提升有關，但與學業壓力無關。不同管道入學生的學校滿意度和在校表現存在差異。甄選和申請入學生學校滿意度高於登記分發入學生。甄選入學生在校學業和非學業表現比登記分發入學生突出；申請和登記分發入學生學業表現沒有差異，非學業表現則各有所長。英文摘要：The paper uses the Taiwan Youth Project to examine determinants of three entrance channels of the multichannel entrance program for high school and junior college, as well as correlations between the entrance channel and subsequent satisfaction with school and academic pressure. Results indicate that students' academic records during junior high school are correlated with admissions through screening and application channels. Although students' satisfaction with school is increased, their academic pressure is not alleviated after the program. Students entering schools via different channels differ in satisfaction with school and performance in school. Compared to the examination channel, students entering schools via screening and application channels are more satisfied with school and the former also perform better. Students entering schools via the entrance examination and application channels do not differ in academic performance but have different comparative strengths in non-academic performance.起始頁-結束頁：569-618資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201812_46(4).00034篇名：產業外產品創新授權及福利分析並列篇名：Quality Competition, Outsider Patentee Licensing, and Welfare作者：郭平欣(Ping-Sing Kuo);曹古駒(Ku-Chu Tsao);邱靖珈(Jing-Jia Chiou);林燕淑(Yan-Shu Lin)關鍵字：業外授權;產品品質創新;垂直差異;社會福利;outsider patentee;vertical differentiation;licensing;negotiation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文利用循序談判賽局探討在品質異質的雙占價格競爭中，業外品質技術擁有者的授權行為。本文得到：（1）如果新技術屬於利潤極大化的業外廠商，則當授權前的品質競爭不激烈，新技術授權給高品質廠商並收取策略授權金；當授權前的品質競爭激烈，但是新技術提高品質有限，以傳統授權金移轉技術給高品質廠商；當授權前的品質競爭激烈，但是新技術可以大幅提升品質，以傳統授權金移轉技術給低品質廠商為最有利。（2）如果新技術屬於政府，政府會希望將新技術移轉給低品質廠商；當新技術與高品質差異不大時，需補貼低品質廠商使用新技術。英文摘要：We analyze the optimal licensing strategy of an outside patent holder of a superior quality technology for a Bertrand duopoly with different product quality in a finite stage sequential bargaining game. Two types of fixed-fees are considered, a strategic one and the conventional one. If the new technology is owned by a revenue maximizing outsider, it is shown that the optimal licensing strategy is transferring the patent (1) to the original high quality firm with a strategic fixed fee when the quality difference between the duopoly is large enough, (2) to the original high quality firm with a conventional fixed fee when the quality difference is small and the new technology helps little, and (3) to the original low quality firm with a conventional fixed fee, otherwise. If the new technology is owned by a social welfare maximizing government agency, it is shown that transferring technology to the low quality firm is optimal and a subsidy is required in case the new quality is improved very little.起始頁-結束頁：619-644資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201812_46(4).00045篇名：RMB Revaluation and China's Trade: Does the RMB Have a Limited Effect on China's Surplus?並列篇名：人民幣升值與中國的貿易：是否人民幣對中國貿易餘額影響效果有限？作者：彭喜樞(Shi-Shu Peng);劉名寰(Ming-Huan Liou);楊浩彥(Hao-Yen Yang);楊志海(Chih-Hai Yang)關鍵字：exchange rate elasticity;trade surplus;dynamic panel GMM;匯率彈性;貿易餘額;動態一般化動差模型期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study examines the influence of the RMB fluctuations on trade in primary, intermediate, and final goods between China and its 49 major trading partners over the period 1992-2009. The empirical result shows that the sensitivity of trade to the exchange rate varies substantially for different commodities. Overall, China's exports are less sensitive to the exchange rate than imports. Counterintuitively, we find that RMB appreciation reduces China's intermediate goods imports. A possible reason is that the appreciation harms its final goods exports in the assembly sector, thus indirectly lowering the demand for the required intermediate goods imports. This finding, along with the finding that final goods exports, the major source of the trade surplus, are not sensitive to exchange rate changes, are probably the main reasons why RMB appreciation has a limited effect on restraining China's rising surplus.英文摘要：本文探討人民幣匯率波動對中國的初級財貨，中間財與最終財貿易的影響。利用中國在1992年至2009年間與49個主要貿易對手國的貿易資料進行研究，實證結果發現不同財貨的貿易對於匯率變動的敏感度具顯著差異。整體而言，中國出口的匯率敏感度較進口為低。本文發現人民升值反而降低了中間財的進口，可能導因於人民幣升值降低最終財的組裝產品出口，間接使得所需進口的中間財減少。由於最終財出口為中國貿易餘額的最大來源，但其對於匯率變動的敏感度較低，致使人民幣升值對於抑制中國貿易餘額攀升的效果相當有限。起始頁-結束頁：333-362資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201809_46(3).00016篇名：外匯干預下的利差交易策略：台幣匯率基本面變數的經濟價值並列篇名：Carry Trade Strategy in the Presence of Central Bank Interventions: The Economic Value of Fundamentals作者：藍青玉(Ching-Yu Lan);葉柏宏(Bo-Hong Yeh);郭炳伸(Biing-Shen Kuo)關鍵字：利差交易;外匯干預;利率平價說;風險溢酬;carry trade;exchange rate intervention;interest rate parity;risk premium期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以新台幣對美元、歐元與日元三種貨幣之利差交易，實證檢驗以新台幣進行利差交易獲利之可能。相較於傳統利差交易僅以兩國利率之相對大小決定操作部位，我們將匯率基本面變數所隱含的訊息納入利差交易策略，探究其改善利差交易操作績效之可能。同時考量台灣管理式的浮動匯率制度之獨特性，我們也將央行干預匯率市場之替代變數納入模型，檢視進一步提高利差交易績效之可行性。相較於過去以樣本外預測均方誤之大小評估匯率預測模型之優劣，本文透過利差交易獲利績效之提昇與否，賦予匯率基本面變數以及央行干預因素的納入決策之經濟價值。我們發現經濟基本面變數及央行干預之考量，其績效之貢獻在傳統利差交易所實現之績效大幅下降的金融海嘯後時期，益加凸顯。同時該利差交易之報酬，與市場大盤超額報酬的連動性不高，而無法為投資人承擔系統性風險之風險溢酬所解釋。英文摘要：The profitability performance of some NTD carry trade strategies against major international currencies subject to intervention are investigated. Of particular concern in this paper is whether the profitability of the strategies taking into account information on fundamentals and/or intervention is better than that of the naive strategy considering interest differentials alone. The paper establishes significant evidence in support of this idea. The evidence presented is remarkable for the time series sample's post global financial crisis of 2008. Moreover, the returns to the strategies can not be attributed to the existence of risk premia, as the excess returns of either the S&P 500 or TAIEX, proxies for systematic risks, and found to lack power to explain the profit differentials.起始頁-結束頁：363-399資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201809_46(3).00027篇名：考慮樣本選擇下分析兩性勞工薪資低付問題：關聯結構隨機邊界法之應用並列篇名：Analyzing Gender Wage Underpayment with Sample Selection: A Copula-based Stochastic Frontier Approach作者：黃台心(Tai-Hsin Huang);劉洪禎(Hung-Chen Liu);胡聚男(Chu-Nan Hu)關鍵字：樣本選擇;薪資低付;組合誤差項;關聯結構法;隨機邊界關聯結構模型;薪資效率;sample selection;wage underpayment;composed errors;copula methods;stochastic frontier copula model;wage efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：勞動市場若存在樣本選擇(sample selection)問題，本研究嘗試建構聯立迴歸模型，同時包含隨機工資與工時兩條邊界方程式，可探討男女兩性勞工薪資低付程度課題。因存在組合誤差項，必須使用關聯結構法推導出聯合機率密度函數，進而建構隨機邊界關聯結構模型。整理民國94、96、98、100與102等五年的台灣「人力運用調查」資料，進行迴歸分析。發現考慮樣本選擇的平均薪資效率遠低於未考慮樣本選擇者，與以往文獻有相當差異，可能原因為以往文獻探討薪資效率時，未同時考慮樣本選擇問題，將無工作者樣本完全排除，導致迴歸分析結果僅適用於有工作者。英文摘要：This paper compiles the ”Manpower Utilization Survey” data, to study the issue of wage underpayment. Assuming sample selection, we apply copula methods to derive the joint probability density function for composed errors in the equations of wage and hours of work. The likelihood function can take both workers, who have observed wages, and non-workers, who have no observed wages, into account. Non-workers are usually excluded by previous researchers, studying similar issues, since they overlook the role of sample selection. The empirical results show that the trend of wage efficiency in the categories of working identity and working area are almost the same in each gender, whether correcting for the sample selection problem or not. However, in the remaining 4 categories, the sample selection bias appears to play an important role on the determination of wage efficiency. With the correction of the samples election bias, most of the findings differ from the past literature that considers only workers with wages and salary.起始頁-結束頁：401-450資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201809_46(3).00038篇名：購屋決策之定錨偏誤－分量觀點並列篇名：Anchoring Bias in House Purchasing Decisions: A Quantile Regression Perspective作者：張傳章(Chuang-Chang Chang);趙慶祥(Ching-Hsiang Chao);葉錦徽(Jin-Huei Yeh)關鍵字：不動產;定錨偏誤;購屋者;分量迴歸;real estate;anchoring bias;homebuyer;quantile regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文旨在驗證不動產市場中，購屋決策是否存在定錨行為與其對房價所造成的影響。受惠於首度取得台灣不動產市場中完整的實際交易資料，因此我們得以深入探究交易市場中的參與者對於房價是否有定錨之行為偏誤。透過分量迴歸，深入分析購屋者對於高總價和低總價房屋類型的認知偏誤差異，以及不動產屬性對願付價格的影響。我們發現不分性別，定錨偏誤普遍存在於購屋決策中；然而，較富有經驗的購屋者在購屋時則可免於陷入定錨危機中。此外，在比較不同的購屋者型態後，發現男性購屋者在購買高價位的房屋時較容易受定錨偏誤影響；有趣的是，高價位的房屋在系統性風險升高之下亦存在較高的定錨偏誤。總括來說，定錨行為在面對不確定性的購屋決策中有相當重要的影響。英文摘要：This study examines the existence and influence of anchoring bias, evaluating a priori arguments and evidence from the real estate market indicating the effect of investor sentiment on house purchasing decisions. Based upon a unique dataset which provides the complete histories of transactions, housing characteristics and investor attributes in the real estate market, we investigate whether the market participants are likely to fall into the anchoring trap. The quantile regression allows us to show the difference between high-priced and low-priced dwelling units on investor's cognitive biases. We find that anchoring is a common phenomenon, regardless of gender; however, sophisticated homebuyers are less susceptible to the anchoring bias. Male homebuyers faced with higher-priced real estate exhibit higher levels of anchoring, and homebuyers faced with higher systemic uncertainty exhibit higher levels of anchoring also when faced with high-priced real estate. In conclusion, anchoring bias due to heuristic thinking plays an important role in the face of uncertainty in real estate purchasing decisions.起始頁-結束頁：451-500資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201809_46(3).00049篇名：Quality Licensing in a Vertically Differentiated Oligopoly並列篇名：垂直異質寡占市場之品質授權作者：許至乙(Chih-Yi Hsu);張瑞雲(Ray-Yun Chang);彭正浩(Cheng-Hau Peng)關鍵字：technology licensing;vertical product differentiation;oligopolistic competition;social welfare;技術授權;垂直品質差異;寡占競爭;社會福利期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：This paper investigates the optimal licensing contract for product innovation in a vertically differentiated oligopoly in which a high-quality firm competes with other low-quality firms. We find that the high-quality firm will never license its technology to all the low-quality firms if there are more than two low-quality firms, which is a result that has never been documented in the literature. We also show that fixed-fee licensing is more profitable for the licensor, if the technology gap is small, which is a result opposite to that in the cost-reducing licensing literature. We further show that under certain circumstances, fixed-fee licensing is less socially desirable than royalty licensing. Finally, if the licensor firm adopts a two-part tariff contract, then the optimal contract may consist of a pure royalty, a positive royalty and a positive fixed fee, or a pure fixed fee, varying with the technology gap between the two types of firms. These results hold even if the licensees are subject to capacity constraints and cannot raise their quality to the leucl of then of the licensor via licensing.英文摘要：本文建構一垂直產品差異性的寡佔模型，探討擁有品質創新的高品質廠商面對多家低品質廠商競爭下之最適授權契約。研究結果顯示，當市場上存在兩家以上的低品質廠商時，高品質廠商僅會將其品質創新授權給部分的低品質廠商。當產品品質差異較小（大）時，固定權利金授權下高品質廠商的總利潤將會高（低）於單位權利金授權。此外，我們也發現固定權利金授權下的社會福利水準有可能低於單位權利金授權下的水準。這些結果與文獻中成本下降之最適授權契約相比，有很大的不同。如果授權廠商採兩部訂價法之授權契約，依產品品質差異的程度大小，其最適授權契約可能<U+7232>純粹單位權利金、正的單位權利金加上正的固定權利金或純粹固定權利金。值得一提的是，即使在被授權廠商受限於吸收能力而無法將其產品品質提升至授權之品質水準，以上這些結果仍然成立。起始頁-結束頁：181-224資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201806_46(2).000110篇名：十七世紀荷日貿易中台灣所扮演的角色並列篇名：The Role Taiwan Played in the Seventeenth Century Dutch-Japanese Trade作者：古慧雯(Hui-wen Koo)關鍵字：荷蘭時代的台灣;絲;鹿皮;糖;Taiwan in the Dutch colonial era;silk;deerskins;sugar期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：日本商館利潤是十七世紀荷蘭東印度公司融通亞洲貿易最重要的資金來源，利用荷蘭檔案館之原始資料，我們整理出荷蘭東印度公司在日本商館的商品利潤。生絲是當時最重要的商品，在1641年之前，荷蘭人販售的生絲主要是在台灣買到的中國絲，這說明了早期台灣做為轉口港之重要性。除了轉口貿易之外，台灣本身亦出口鹿皮、糖等商品；不過重要性遠不及早期的絲。荷蘭人與鄭芝龍交惡後失去了中國絲的貨源，台灣的商業地位因此不免大減。這部分說明了何以在投降鄭氏家族之後,荷蘭人未積極地策劃重占台灣。英文摘要：The Dutch East India Company relied heavily on the profits at her Japan Factory to finance her intra-Asia trade in the seventeenth century. We use the primary sources to compile profits of various commodities sold in Japan, and identify raw silk as the most profitable. Since before 1641, the Company obtained Chinese silk from Taiwan, Taiwan's importance as an entrepot cannot be over-emphasized. Taiwan also provided local products like deerskins and sugar to Japan's market, but their importance cannot be compared with that of raw silk. After breaking off with Iquan, the Dutch lost their sources of Chinese silk, and this diminished Taiwan's once important role as an entrepot. This partially explains why the Dutch never seriously planned to return to Taiwan after the surrender to the Koxinga's family.起始頁-結束頁：209-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201806_46(2).000211篇名：最適即期匯率目標區與物價目標區的決定－即期匯率與股價雙預期經濟變數的考量並列篇名：The Determination of the Optimal Spot Exchange Rates and Price Target Zones Band - A Consideration of Dual Expectations of the Spot Foreign Exchange Rate and Stock Price作者：廖培賢(Peir-Shyan Liaw)關鍵字：目標區;蜜月效果;貨幣需求的股利彈性;即期匯率預期變動效果;股價預期變動效果;target zone;honeymoon effect;the stock dividend elasticity of money demand;the effect of spot foreign exchange rate expectation shift;the effect of stock price expectation shift期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文目的是結合Eaton and Turnovsky (1982), Eaton and Turnovsky (1984)與Blanchard (1981)，建構一個可以詮釋即期外匯市場、遠期外匯市場與股票市場互動關係的開放總體經濟模型。本文分析一旦貨幣當局同時宣佈實施「即期匯率目標區」與「物價目標區」政策,各種資產市場的干擾是否對相關總體經濟變數具有安定效果,以及如何選擇最適「即期匯率目標區」與「物價目標區」區間。本文的結論顯示：(A) (i)「貨幣需求的股利彈性」大於抑或小於1, (ii)「即期匯率預期變動效果」與「股價預期變動效果」的相對大小這兩項因子在決定對相關總體經濟變數具有安定的效果上扮演了舉足輕重的角色；(B) (i)「貨幣當局相對較為重視即期匯率抑或本國物價的波動」，(ii)「即期匯率預期變動效果」與「股價預期變動效果」的相對大小這兩項因素在判定最適「即期匯率目標區」與「物價目標區」區間的決定上也占了關鍵樞紐的角色。英文摘要：This paper constructs a stochastic open macroeconomic model based on Eaton and Turnovsky (1982) and Eaton and Turnovsky (1984), and the Blanchard (1981) stock price dynamic adjustment model. We examine what will be the effect of alternative asset market exogenous disturbances on the possible honeymoon effect of relevant macroeconomic variables if the monetary authority synchronously executes a spot exchange rate and price target zone policy? Additionally, we analyze how the monetary authority chooses the optimal spot exchange rate and price target zone band? The major findings are: (1) the stock dividend elasticity of money demand and the size of the effect of a spot foreign exchange rate expectation shift relative to the effect of a stock price expectation shift are the two key factors determining the relevant macroeconomic variables exhibiting the honeymoon effect, (2) (a) the relative importance the monetary authority attaches to the fluctuations in the spot foreign exchange rate and the domestic price output level, (b) the relative size of the effect of a spot foreign exchange rate expectation shift and the effect of a stock price expectation shift are the two key factors to determine how the monetary authority chooses the optimal spot exchange rate and price target zone band.起始頁-結束頁：235-295資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201806_46(2).000312篇名：台灣央行外匯市場干預對臺美匯率之影響－媒體資料之應用並列篇名：The Impact of the Foreign Exchange Intervention of the CBC on the USD-NTD Exchange Rate - An Examination Using Press Reports作者：柯秀欣(Hsiu-Hsin Ko)關鍵字：央行干預;逆風干預政策;匯率波動;central bank intervention;leaning against the wind intervention;exchange rate volatility期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究之主要目的為透過媒體資料以了解台灣中央銀行在外匯市場的偏好行為，進而分析其外匯市場干預行為對每日美元兌新台幣匯率的影響。實證結果指出在2000/01/04-2012/12/28的樣本期間內，當新台幣升值時央行進場執行逆風干預的頻率顯著地比貶值時高，也就是說相對於阻貶而言，台灣央行有偏好阻升的現象。然而，探究央行干預對匯率變化的影響後，本文發現央行偏好的阻升干預對匯率變化的影響非常有限，反而是阻貶對匯率變化有顯著的影響，且阻貶干預對匯率變化影響明顯比阻升大。另一方面，台灣央行宣稱其干預的目的是為了減少匯率波動，本文研究結果發現央行逆風干預對匯率變化的波動無顯著的影響，因此台灣央行的外匯市場干預是否可以有效地減少匯率波動仍有待進一步的評估。英文摘要：In this study, we use press reports to construct a proxy variable of the foreign exchange intervention of the Central Bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan) (hereafter, the CBC) and analyze the CBC's preference for foreign exchange interventions. The statistical results show that the CBC adopts the 'leaning-against-the-wind' policy and intervenes in the foreign exchange rate market more often when the New Taiwanese dollar (NTD) appreciates than when the NTD depreciates. Nevertheless, the empirical result shows that the against-NTD-depreciation interventions leads to significant changes in the exchange rate, but not the against-NTD-appreciation interventions. Moreover, the effect on the exchange rate change of the against-NTD-depreciation interventions is larger than the against-NTD-appreciation interventions, which implies that the CBC's intervention policy has asymmetric effects on the exchange rate change. Lastly, we find that the CBC's foreign exchange interventions have no significant effect on the volatility of exchange rate change.起始頁-結束頁：297-332資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201806_46(2).000413篇名：Energy and Carbon Embodied in the Exports of Taiwan: An Input-Output Structural Decomposition Analysis並列篇名：台灣出口品之能源及碳隱含量：投入產出結構分解分析作者：林師模(Shih-Mo Lin);張雅棠(Ya-Tang Chang);林晉勗(Jin-Xu Lin)關鍵字：embodied carbon;input-output;structural decomposition analysis;carbon tax;碳隱含量;投入產出;結構分解分析;能源稅期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This paper computes the energy and carbon intensities of the Taiwanese economy in 1996, 2001 and 2006 to figure out the changes in energy and carbon embodied in products and exports and the contributing factors. We use structural decomposition analysis to find the relative contribution of five factors causing the changes in the energy and carbon embodied in exports. From 1996 to 2001, the changes in the direct energy efficiency, the structure of intermediate inputs and the structure of exports were the most important factors contributing to the changes of energy and carbon embodied in Taiwan's exports. Between 2001 and 2006, the structure of exports has been the most important factor causing the changes. This paper also explores whether energy policy could have effectively reduced the energy and carbon embodied in Taiwan’s exports. Our results show imposing a carbon tax on using fossil fuels would have decreased the carbon embodied in exports only moderately from 1996 to 2001. However, the carbon embodied in exports would have decreased significantly from 2001 to 2006 after taxation, implying that a carbon tax would have been a more effective policy in the latter period.英文摘要：本文估算台灣1996、2001及2006年出口品的能源及碳隱含量，以衡量能源及碳隱含量的變化情形及其影響因素。文中利用結構分解分析將出口品能源及碳隱含量變化的影響因子區分為五個因子，結果發現在1996至2001年間，能源使用效率、中間財的投入結構，以及出口結構的變化是造成台灣出口品能源及碳隱含量變化的主要因素;而在2001至2006年間則是以出口結構的變化為主要影響因子。此外，本文也同時評估台灣能源政策對減少出口品之能源及碳隱含量的有效性，研究結果顯示，在1996年至2001年間，若對化石能源課徵碳稅僅能微幅降低出口品之能源及碳隱含量，但在2001年至2006年間卻能使出口品之能源及碳隱含量明顯的減少，亦即在2001年至2006年間碳稅政策較前一段期間來得更有效。起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201803_46(1).000114篇名：誰是台大學生？（2001-2014）－多元入學的影響並列篇名：Who are NTU Students? (2001-2014)- the Effects of the Multi-Channel Admission Program作者：駱明慶(Ming-Ching Luoh)關鍵字：台大學生;多元入學;性別差異;高中畢業學校;城鄉差異;NTU Students;multi-channel admission;gender differences;senior high school graduated;urban/rural discrepency期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：接續駱明慶(2002)對1954-2000年台大學生組成的分析，本文使用2001-2014年台大學生的學籍資料，分析多元入學對於學生來源分布的影響。結果發現，透過對個別高中推薦學生名額的限制，「繁星計畫」和「繁星推薦」使得台大學生在高中畢業學校與學生居住縣市的集中度，以及學生居住地平均所得均下降，學生高中畢業學校的總數則明顯增加。雖然相較於「考試分發」，「個人申請」在高中畢業學校的集中度和居住地的平均所得均較高，但考量制度上先「個人申請」、後「考試分發」的時序安排，「個人申請」結果不滿意者才會再參加「考試分發」，我們無法得到「申請入學」對明星高中和高所得家庭學生較為有利的結論。此外，「個人申請」比例的逐年增加，以及「個人申請」相較於「考試分發」錄取的女性比例較低，可能導致了整體女性比例的下降，但「繁星計畫」和「繁星推薦」則有提高錄取學生女性比例的效果。英文摘要：Continuing the analyses of Luoh (2002), this paper uses student records from 2001 to 2014 to investigate the effects of the multi-channel admission program on the composition of NTU students. First, by limiting the number of students from each senior high school recommended to NTU, the Stars Project reduces the concentration of students from elite high schools, diversifies the locality and reduces the average township income where students reside. The Stars Project also effectively increases the total number of senior high schools from which NTU students graduated. Although we find that ”admission via application” has a higher proportion of students who graduated from elite high schools, and has higher average township income, due to the time sequence of ”admission via application” and ”admission via the joint college assigned-subject examination,” we still can not conclude that ”admission via application” is more advantageous for students with better socioeconomic family backgrounds. In addition, the increasing proportion of ”admission via application” in the multi-channel admission program, along with the fact that a smaller proportion of female student are admitted via application, may have contributed to the overall slight decrease in the proportion of females admitted to NTU. In contrast, the Stars Project increases the proportion of females admitted.起始頁-結束頁：47-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201803_46(1).000215篇名：生產性政府支出與經濟成長關係的再探討：個人所得稅與營利事業所得稅融通政策之比較並列篇名：Revisiting Government Spending in A Simple Model of Endogenous Growth: Individual Income Tax vs. Corporate Income Tax作者：王韋能(Wei-Neng Wang);謝智源(Jhy-Yuan Shieh);陳智華(Jhy-Hwa Chen)關鍵字：生產性政府支出,經濟成長, 所得稅政策;社會福利;productivity government expenditure;economic growth;taxation policies;social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文比較營利事業所得稅與個人所得稅融通生產性政府支出的總體經濟效果，我們發現當政府以營利事業所得稅作為融通工具時，最適政府規模(政府支出占GDP的比率)等於生產性政府支出的產出彈性，而且此水準的政府規模同時也能讓經濟社會的福利水準達到極大，這個發現與Barro (1990)的論點一致。但是，倘若政府以個人所得稅做為融通工具時，最適政府規模除了必須考量生產性政府支出的產出彈性外，營利事業所得稅率也會影響最適政府規模。而且，在個人所得稅融通的情境下，經濟成長極大的目標和社會福利極大的目標未必會一致，這個結論明顯不同於Barro (1990)的發現。英文摘要：In this paper, we analyze the effect of business income tax financing and individual income tax financing on the productive government expenditure. We find that, under the business income tax financing scheme, the growth rate optimality condition for the productive government expenditure is the ratio of government spending to GDP equal to the production elasticity of public spending. In addition, maximizing the economic growth rate is equivalent to maximizing social welfare. On the other hand, under the individual income tax financing scheme, the optimal government expenditure not only depends on the government spending level and production elasticity of public spending, but also depends on the income tax rate. Moreover, maximizing economic growth is not equivalent to maximizing social welfare under the individual income tax financing scheme.起始頁-結束頁：97-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201803_46(1).000316篇名：產業專精之查核是否能減緩企業之財稅差異？並列篇名：Does Auditor Industry Specialization Matter to Book-tax Differences?作者：廖益興(Yi-Hsing Liao);高儷華(Li-Hua Kao);單騰笙(Teng-Sheng Sang)關鍵字：產業專家會計師;財稅差異;盈餘品質;傾向分數配對法;auditor's industry expertise;book-tax differences;earnings quality;propensity score matching method期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：46卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究旨在從審計品質所扮演的資訊與公司治理角色，及從改善盈餘品質之監督效果執行分析，希冀瞭解產業專家會計師是否可直接或間接抑制受查客戶財稅差異的幅度？研究結果顯示，經由Heckman兩階段估計法控制財稅差異樣本自我選擇偏誤，及工具變數之兩階段最小平方法控制產業專家變數內生性後，產業專精程度與財稅差異幅度呈顯著負相關。進一步透過兩階段估計法觀察產業專家會計師是否經由提升盈餘品質而降低財稅差異之間接效果時，亦發現產業專家會計師所查核的客戶其裁決性應計數較小，且因其具備較佳的盈餘品質得以降低財稅差異的幅度。上述結論即使改以傾向分數配對法控制產業專家變數內生性時，審計品質的效果仍然維持相當的穩定。英文摘要：This study aims to examine whether the auditor’s industry expertise reduces book-tax differences (hereafter BTD) directly through its information and governance roles and indirectly through its effect in enhancing earnings quality. To alleviate the concern regarding the self-selection bias caused by the non-random sample of BTD and the potential endogeneity issue related to auditor choice, we adopt the Heckman two-stage procedure and the twostage least squares with instrumental variables approach to deal with these issues. Empirical results show that smaller absolute BTD are associated with higher auditor industry expertise. Moreover, using two stage estimation methods to investigate the indirect effect of auditor industry expertise on BTD through earnings quality, we find that discretionary accruals is smaller for clients of auditor industry specialists than for clients of auditor industry non-specialists and that lower discretionary accruals in turn reduces the magnitude of BTD. Even when we substitute the propensity score matching method for the two stage least squares approach to correct for endogeneity bias, the results remain qualitatively similar.起始頁-結束頁：125-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201803_46(1).000401篇名：外部創意尋求企業合作的歷程與挑戰－獨立發明人觀點取向的個案研究並列篇名：The Processes and Challenges while Eternal Ideas seeking Business Cooperation - A Case Study of the Perspective of an Independent Inventor作者：李國瑋(Kuo-Wei Lee)關鍵字：創意;專利;獨立發明人;個案研究;Ideas;patent;independent inventor;case study期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：據經濟部統計，台灣專利商品化機率僅千分之三。唯創意（乃至衍生之專利）未能商品化，不代表該些創意即毫無商業價值。一項藉由67位專利獨立發明人訪查的研究指出，獨立發明人雖認同透過企業合作為創意發明商品化的最佳管道，但如何尋得企業合作卻是其所面臨的困難議題。本研究旨在以獨立發明人觀點為取向，藉由個案研究法，針對外部創意尋求企業合作「實務歷程」進行具體探討與論述。本研究成果揭露獨立發明人尋求企業過程中具體情境脈絡與發展轉折，包括專業經理人互動與談判歷程、非內部發明潛在影響乃至各企業部門關切重點之差異。最後，本研究在結論針對該歷程之困難與因應策略進行探討與彙整，以提供獨立發明人尋求企業合作若干參酌與指引。英文摘要：According to statistics released by the Ministry of Economic Affairs, the commercialization rate of patents in Taiwan is merely 0.3%. The fact that creative ideas (even the derived patents) have not been commercialized does not necessarily mean that these creative ideas are of no commercial value. According to an investigation into 67 independent inventors of patents, these inventors encounter difficulty in how to seek corporate cooperation, although they agree that corporate cooperation is the best way to commercialize creative inventions. From the perspective of an independent inventor and with a case study, this study aims to elucidate the ”practical development” of seeking corporate cooperation for external creativity. The results of this study show the detailed situational structure and the turning points in the process where independent inventors seek corporate cooperation, including the interaction and negotiation of professional managers, the potential influence of non-internal inventions, and even the difference in focus among corporate sectors. This study concludes by presenting a systematic discussion and summary of the difficulties in the development and the countermeasures of the process, so as to provide some reference and guidance for independent inventors when targeting corporate cooperation.起始頁-結束頁：125-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201812_20(2).00012篇名：具交易匿名性之電子商務協定設計－以第三方支付為例並列篇名：An Electronic Commerce Scheme for Anonymity Transactions - A Case of Third Party Payment作者：蘇品長(Pin-Chang Su);陳明心(Ming-Hsin Chen)關鍵字：電子商務;第三方支付;匿名性;盲簽章;E-commerce;third-party payment;anonymity;blind signature期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究之目的為提出一個新的電子商務協定，讓消費者於線上交易數位商品，透過第三方支付模式，除能保障買賣雙方交易的公平性，也能保有顧客匿名性。此新協定以橢圓曲線密碼學為基礎，並導入自我認證及盲簽章機制來強化交易的安全性，避免製發憑證的過程中會有偽冒用戶身分的安全弱點，同時也可以降低公鑰儲存、計算與管理的成本與風險。本研究的具體貢獻為：（1）能以較短金鑰長度達到相同之安全強度；（2）採自我認證機制，簡化認證流程；（3）達機密性、完整性、鑑別性、不可否認性、匿名性及公平性等電子商務安全要求。英文摘要：This study proposes a new e-commerce protocol, and the new protocol is designed for trading digital goods through a third-party payment model. It not only ensures fair exchange, but also retains customer anonymity. This study adopts the elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) to strengthen the security of the online transaction process. In particular, self-authentication and blind signature schemes are incorporated into the proposed scheme to avoid the counterfeiting of user identity during the certificate issuing process, and also to reduce the cost and risk of public key storage, computation and management. Through the rigorous analysis, the proposed solution has three main advantages: (1) achieving the same security strength by using a shorter key; (2) simplifying the certification process by a self-authentication scheme; (3) fulfilling the basic information security requirements including confidentiality, integrity, authenticity, non-repudiation, customer anonymity and fairness.起始頁-結束頁：165-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201812_20(2).00023篇名：社會連結強度、產品知覺風險與沉浸感對消費者行為意圖之影響─以Facebook 塗鴉牆推薦訊息為例並列篇名：The Study of Tie Strength, Perceived Diagnosticity and Flow to Consumer Behavior Intention － The Case of Facebook作者：吳倫睿(Luen-Ruei Wu);李小梅(Shan-Me Li)關鍵字：連結強度;知覺風險;訊息診斷性;購買意圖;推薦意圖;Tie strength;perceived risk;perceived diagnosticity;purchase intention;referral intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究探討社群網站情境下，消費者決策制定過程之影響因素。採用實驗法，以「Facebook 開店應用程式」為例，針對連結強度（強／弱）、知覺風險（高／低）分為四組進行實驗操弄。結果顯示連結強度對於消費者訊息診斷性具有顯著差異；知覺風險之高低對於連結強度與訊息診斷性間具有干擾效果；訊息診斷性對於消費者行為意圖具有正向影響；沉浸感對於訊息診斷性與購買意圖之間具有正向調節效果。實務建議在社群環境中，企業應重視強連結對於消費者決策的重要性，以及適合推廣低風險產品，同時考量自家商品是否適用於社群網站，進而採用相關應用程式功能。英文摘要：This study analyzes factors that influence customers' decision making process in the context of social networking websites. With the use of ”Facebook Store App” as an example, experimental method is adopted to allow manipulation of four groups divided by tie strength (strong/weak) and perceived risk (high/low). The results show that significant difference exists between tie strength and perceived diagnosticity; the level of perceived risk has interference effect on tie strength and perceived diagnosticity; perceived diagnosticity positively influences customers' behavior intention; flow has positive moderating effect on perceived diagnosticity and purchase intention. The study suggests that in the context of social networking sites, businesses should value the importance of strong ties on customers' decisions. Low perceived risk products are more suitable to be sold.起始頁-結束頁：189-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201812_20(2).00034篇名：嚴肅遊戲（Serious Game）平台與學習風格配適對學習成效影響之研究並列篇名：The Effect of Serious Game Platform and Learning Style Fit on Learning Effectiveness作者：連俊瑋(Jiunn-Woei Lian);許和莉(Ho-Li Hsu);許惠媚(Hui-Mei Hsu)關鍵字：嚴肅遊戲;學習風格;學習平台;學習成效;智慧型手機;Serious game;learning style;learning platform;learning effectiveness;smart phone期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：過去研究，對於嚴肅遊戲成效的探討，存在不同見解，可能原因是未考量學習者個人特質差異。因此，本文主要的觀點為，嚴肅遊戲的成效，會受到學習者學習風格與學習平台配適與否影響。本研究採實驗法，針對不同「學習風格」受測者，搭配不同「學習平台（個人電腦、智慧型手機）」，瞭解兩者配適與否對學習成效的影響。179位受測者參與研究，結果指出：學習風格搭配適合的學習平台，會對學習成績產生顯著影響。其中，同化型與收斂型受測者，使用個人電腦網頁遊戲的學習成績顯著較高；在知覺有用性部分，則未達顯著差異。然而，不論那一種學習風格與平台，受測者均認為嚴肅遊戲能夠有效提升學習表現。此外，性別差異也存在調節效果。英文摘要：Previous studies have different findings toward the effectiveness of serious game. This study suggests that individual characteristics difference may be one of the major reasons. Among personal characteristics, individual learning style serves as a key determinant. Therefore, the purpose of this study attempts to understand the effect of learning style and learning platform fit on the effectiveness of serious game. Experimental method is employed. Four learning styles, two learning platforms (PC and smartphone), and two learning effectiveness (exams, and perceived usefulness) variables were employed. Totally, 179 participants in our experiment. The results indicate that different learning effectiveness was caused by different learning styles with difference learning platforms. Assimilation and convergence participants have better testing grade when using PC online serious game. However, the perceived usefulness have no significant difference. This study also finds that regardless of which platform users' perceived usefulness of serious game is relatively high. In other words, all participants perceive that both platforms can improve their learning performance. Finally, the moderating effect of gender difference also exists in the result.起始頁-結束頁：217-248資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201812_20(2).00045篇名：Creating Social Networking Environment for Workers through a Means-End Chain Model並列篇名：以方法目的鏈模式建構公司社群網絡環境作者：汪美香(Mei-Hsiang Wang);楊棠堯(Tarng-Yao Yang);魏志誠(Chih-Cheng Wei)關鍵字：Means-end chain;social networking sites;hierarchical value map;implications matrix;task performance;方法目的鏈;社群網路;價值階梯圖;涵意矩陣;工作績效期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：Social networking sites (SNSs) are available at workplace and have created an environment for workers to share information and socialize with others. The study aims at revealing the links among the functionality of SNS attributes, hierarchical value map (HVM) and task performance, by using means-end chain (MEC) approach. In order to examine the links between the internal company SNS attributes and consequences, as well as the values of each which the employees regard as important. Data was gathered for a MEC analysis by interviewing 30 employees in a company. Laddering interviews identify employees' perceptions of six attributes, nine consequences, and six values associated with the internal company SNS adoption. The results show that the functionalities of online learning, questions and responses, and knowledge sharing are useful for knowledge collaboration and task performance. Finally, we also analyze other items linked to attributes layer, consequences layer and values layer to provide insights for constructing effective mechanisms in working contexts.英文摘要：社群網路已為組織員工打造出一種不同於以往的工作環境。本研究利用方法目的鏈模式，分析受訪者使用公司內部社群網站於工作之狀況。透過階梯法針對某科技公司30位員工進行深度訪談，瞭解其所認定社群網站的核心價值。接著，以內容分析法進行資料編碼與分析工作，最後彙整出價值階梯圖，包括六個屬性、九個結果及六個價值。可見，公司內部社群網站功能屬性，除了利於工作者間之知識協調外，對於工作績效的提升亦有相當助益。最後，本研究亦分析其他在屬性層、結果層與價值層的鏈結涵意，希望能提供實務界建構公司內部社群網絡環境之參考。起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201806_20(1).00016篇名：顧客消費體驗預期形成之心理模式－環境心理學觀點並列篇名：Formulizing the Mental Model for Customer's Expectation of Consuming Experience: a Prospective of Environmental Psychology作者：林淑瓊(Shu-Chiung Lin);陳煇煌(Huei-Huang Chen);林衛國(Wei-Kuo Lin);李品萱(Pin-Hsuan Lee)關鍵字：虛實整合;環境心理學;S-S'O'R'-R;心理模式;顧客消費體驗預期;Virtual/physical integration;environmental psychology;S-S'O'R'-R, mental model;customer's expectation of consuming experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：顧客在線上或線下購物的想法有沒有不同？這對據以從事虛實整合的規劃很重要。從環境心理學的觀點，「環境刺激─行為個體─趨避回應」（S-O-R）模型似乎適宜用以探索此議題。經回顧相關研究發現，對於其中「行為個體」的衡量變數通常是後設認知及情感反應，心理模式仍然是遮蔽的。本研究首先將「S-O-R」延伸為「S-S'O'R'-R」概念，以「S'O'R'」代表心理模式。然後針對消費者行為，將心理模式擴充為「顧客消費體驗預期」觀念架構。此外，本研究以服飾類採購為例進行實徵試驗，透過網路與紙本共收回828份有效問卷，並以PLS及SPSS分析，結果顯示顧客在實體/虛擬環境下之消費體驗預期有顯著差異。本研究結果有助於實體及虛擬商店業界管理行銷策略，並裨益後續學術研究參考。英文摘要：Is there any difference in customer's mind between online and offline purchase, or not? It is critical for the virtual/physical integration planning accordingly. From the perspective of environmental psychology, it seems that the ”S-O-R” (stimulus - organism - response) model is suitable for exploring such issue. After reviewed related research, the middle ”O” was usually measured by meta-cognition and reflective affection variables, still keep the mental model masked. This study firstly extends ”S-O-R” to ”S-S'O'R'-R” in which ”S'O'R'” as a mental model. Then, for the purpose of interpreting consumer behavior, expands the mental model (S'O'R) into a conceptual framework of customer's expectation of consuming experience. In addition, this study illustrates an empirical pilot research investigated in dress purchasing. A total of the 828 valid responses are collected from web and paper questionnaire for analysis by partial least squares (PLS) & SPSS. The result manifests that customers formulize their expectations of consuming experience are significantly different between physical and virtual environments. The result of this study can assist both online and offline store industry to manage their marketing strategy and also be useful for future academic research.起始頁-結束頁：33-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201806_20(1).00027篇名：產品生命週期管理系統開發與實證：以汽車零組件製造商之協同設計為例並列篇名：Product Lifecycle Management System Development and Applications: Evidences from the Collaborative Product Design of a Motor Vehicle Parts Manufacturer作者：張碩毅(She-I Chang);阮金聲(Jin-Sheng Roan);張麗敏(Li-Min Chang);李幸蓉(Hsing-Jung Li);侯惠娟(Hui-Chuan Hou)關鍵字：產品生命週期管理;協同產品設計;行動研究;汽車零組件製造業;質性研究;Product lifecycle management;collaborative product design;action research;motor vehicle parts manufacturing;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：運用產品生命週期e化方式來解決模組化產品設計的協同運作，是現今汽車零組件產業強化產業競爭力的重要策略。本研究結合質性研究策略及行動研究法，探討汽車零組件製造商如何透過產品生命週期系統之建置，來解決與供應商之間的產品協同設計問題。研究結果發現在相同的研發能量情境下，提供一個整合性的資訊化平台，讓供應商可適時的涉入產品設計與生產、建立有效的溝通環境、提供回報執行進度之訊息傳遞、以及預防問題發生的自動警訊等機制，不但可使產品開發與設計的時程縮短約30%，更可創造委外加工廠商與個案公司在研發設計與製造的產業優勢。本研究之過程與成果，可提供給其他汽車零組件業者或相關產業，作為供應商涉入資訊系統發展之參考。英文摘要：Applying the product lifecycle management (PLM) system in collaborative design of the modular products has been an important strategy to strengthen the industrial chain and increase the competitiveness of the motor vehicle parts manufacturing industry. This study combined qualitative research and action research to investigate how the motor vehicle parts manufacturers collaborate with suppliers for products design by implementing a PLM system. The research outcome shows that a company can shorten product development and design period by 30 percent and also create advantages for both the outsourcing factory and its clients in the area of product research and design if the following requirements can be reached under the same research and development conditions: providing an integrated information platform for suppliers to design and manufacture, creating an efficient negotiation system and communication environment, creating a smooth progress reporting channel for outsourcing service suppliers, and offering an automatic alarm system to prevent the occurrence of problems. All the process details and outcomes of this research can be referenced by the motor vehicle parts manufacturing and associated industries for having a better collaboration with their suppliers through the use of an information system.起始頁-結束頁：65-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201806_20(1).00038篇名：在資料串流的環境下探勘高效益項目集並列篇名：Mining High Utility Itemsets in a Data Stream作者：顏秀珍(Show-Jane Yen);李御璽(Yue-Shi Lee)關鍵字：資料探勘;高效益項目集;資料串流;交易資料庫;Data mining;high utility itemset;data stream;transaction database期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：探勘高效益項目集同時考慮每筆交易中各項目被購買的數量以及項目集可能帶給公司的利潤，以求出最有價值的商品組合。然而，交易資料會隨時間不斷改變。當資料新增或刪除時，高效益項目集也會有所改變。目前在資料串流的環境下探勘高效益項目集的演算法都需要花費很多時間再次掃描原始資料庫並搜尋候選高效益項目集，才能重新找出所有的高效益項目集，沒有利用到之前已找出的高效益項目集。因此，本篇論文提出一個在資料串流的環境下有效率的探勘高效益項目集的演算法。當資料新增或刪除時，我們的演算法不需要再掃描資料庫，也不需要搜尋候選高效益項目集，就可直接找出所有的高效益項目集。實驗結果也顯示我們的方法比之前的演算法更有效率。英文摘要：Mining high utility itemsets considers the purchased quantities and the profits of the itemsets in the transactions, which can find the profible products. In addition, the transactions will be continuouslly changed over time. When the transactions are added or deleted, the original high utility itemsets will be changed. The previous proposed algorithms for mining high utility itemsets over data streams need to rescan the original database and search for the candidate high utility itemsets without using the previous high utility itemsets. Therefore, in this paper, we propose an algorithm for efficiently mining high utility itemsets in data streams, when the transaction are added or removed, our algorithms do not need to re-scan the transaction database and search for candidate high utility itemsets. Experimental results also show that our algorithm outperforms the previous approaches.起始頁-結束頁：99-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201806_20(1).000401篇名：保險科技是否威脅傳統保險業？－網路風險分散平台之比較分析並列篇名：Threat of InsurTech to Conventional Insurance Industry: Comparative Analysis of Online Risk-Transferring Platforms作者：彭金隆(Jin Lung Peng);黃以達(Yi Ta Huang);李世偉(Shih Wei Li);黃文慧(Wen Hui Huang)關鍵字：金融科技;保險科技;網路風險分散平台;去中心化;FinTech;InsurTech;Network Platforms of Risk Transfer;Decentralization期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究以消費者期望效用角度，藉由經濟模型比較網路風險分散平台與傳統保險經營模式。研究發現在人數規模夠大時，網路風險分散平台功能類似收取極低附加費用的保險公司，且其消費者期望效用會隨人數規模遞增，當人數超過臨界規模量時，網路風險分散平台之消費者期望效用將比傳統保險機制高。此外，網路風險分散平台將道德風險的成本藉由每人分攤的方式，會比傳統保險公司將審核道德風險的成本轉嫁至附加保費上來得更有效率。但當市場的風險發生率差異很大時，網路風險分散平台則比較難推廣成功。總之，網路風險分散平台以科技技術創造低成本、低進入門檻與無地域限制的相對優勢，未來有可能對傳統保險經營帶來衝擊。英文摘要：Based on consumer's expectation utility, this research compares online risk-transferring platforms and the conventional insurance mechanisms using economic models. The research findings indicate that when the scale is suitably large, the function of online risk-transferring platforms is similar to that of insurance companies with low loadings. Moreover, consumers' expectation utility increases with the number of users. When the number of users is higher than the critical number of users, the utility of online risk-transferring platforms is greater than that of the conventional insurance mechanisms. In addition, it is more efficient for each user to share the cost of moral hazards on online platforms than it is to add the cost of loading in conventional insurance companies. However, the promotion of online platforms is subject to failure when risk probability differs substantially among individual users. In light of online platforms' comparative advantages of low cost, low entry barriers, and relatively few limitations, these platforms may incur devastating effects on the conventional insurance industry.起始頁-結束頁：1-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201810_37(4).CNI0012篇名：試論金融監理科技的分析框架與發展圖像並列篇名：A Tentative Analytical Framework and Developing Roadmap for SupTech作者：臧正運(Cheng-Yun Tsang)關鍵字：監理科技;法遵科技;金融科技;金融科技監理;SupTech;RegTech;FinTech;FinTech Regulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：監理科技的發展與運用可以有效提升金融監理的效率及效能，並有助管理金融科技發展所伴隨的風險。然而，當前監理科技的討論分歧，相關文獻仍屬有限，產官學界欠缺共同對話的基礎，而不利於市場的發展與監理體制的調適。有鑑於此，本文乃從監理機關的角度出發，探討金融監理科技的興起背景及發展趨勢，勾勒出金融科技時代下的科技監理新範式，並在此脈絡下，提出可供後進研究者深入並細膩探討此議題縱深之監理科技分析框架，並試圖勾勒出監理科技的可能發展圖像。英文摘要：The development and use of SupTech have great potential to increase the efficiency and efficacy of financial supervision and can help manage risks that accompany with the development of FinTech. Nevertheless, the current discussion on SupTech remains divergent, and the literature remains limited. The lack of a common ground for conversation and debate among regulators, academics and industry members has postponed the market development and the possible transition of the regulatory regime. To fill this gap, this paper aims to provide an analytical framework and developing roadmap for SupTech. It begins with an analysis of the rise of SupTech and its developing trends and then portrays a new paradigm of technology-enabled financial regulation. The analytical framework and developing roadmap are then proposed to assist the regulators and other stakeholders in assessing their current stage of SupTech development and then identifying possible paths to the next level of development.起始頁-結束頁：19-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201810_37(4).CNI0193篇名：巨量資料交易之法律風險與管理意涵－以個人資料再識別化為中心並列篇名：Legal Risks and Management Implications of Big Data Transactions - Focusing on the Reidentification of Personal Data作者：宋皇志(Huang-Chih Sung)關鍵字：巨量資料交易;去識別化;再識別化;法律風險;管理意涵;Big Data Transaction;De-Identification;Re-Identification;Legal Risk;Management Implications期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以個人資料再識別化為中心，探討巨量資料交易之法律風險與管理意涵。本文對我國各級法院關於個人資料去識別化之判決進行全面的實證研究，發現我國司法判決仍誤以為刪除部分直接識別標誌即可去識別化，毫無再識別風險之概念。在「學生資料案」中，大學意識到個人資料去識別化後具有再識別之風險，然很可惜法院認為此點無再加論述之必要，錯失一次審理再識別風險的絕佳機會。在「健保資料案」中，最高行政法院將審理重點擺在應由資料提供者抑或資料接收者進行去識別化程序之問題，否決原告所提驗證再識別化風險之聲請。本文淺見認為，運用已掌握幾位特定人之部分資料來驗證是否能辨識出該特定人，進而獲取該特定人之全部資訊，是相當好的再識別風險之驗證方法，最高行政法院於判決中全盤否定原告所提證據方法，恐有值得商榷之處。對於降低再識別風險之可能機制，本文認為對於大多數研究而言，著實沒有追求資料絕對精準之必要，概括處理應是平衡個人資料隱私保護與資料可用性最理想之去識別化方法。資料提供者為確保去識別化是否能完全斬除或至少大幅降低再識別風險，進而降低侵權風險，在交易前應對去識別化之效果進行驗證。巨量資料去識別化是否確實之驗證，應該挑選個人已知的幾筆資料，確認是否由這幾筆資料即可識別出特定人。英文摘要：This paper focuses on the re-identification of personal data and discusses the legal risks and management implications of big data transactions. A comprehensive empirical study of the Taiwanese courts' decisions regarding the de-identification of personal data is conducted. The findings indicate that the Taiwanese courts are unaware of the risk of re-identification. In the Student Information case, the university recognized that de-identified personal data poses a re-identification risk. However, the court stated that further elaboration on this concern was unnecessary, thereby missing a critical opportunity to pass a judgment that would address re-identification risk. In the Health Insurance case, the Supreme Administrative Court focused on procedural concerns regarding whether the de-identification process should be performed by the data provider or the recipient, and denied the plaintiff's argument about re-identification risk. This paper proposes that a validation measure for determining whether specific individuals may be identifiable based on partial personal data and whether this process makes the whole of their personal data obtainable would be suitable for use in assessments of re-identification risk. In light of the proposed method, the Supreme Administrative Court's complete negation of the evidentiary method proposed by the plaintiff is debatable. Regarding a possible mechanism to reduce the re-identification risk, this paper argues that for most research, absolute precision is not required, and that the ideal approach for de-identification is the ”generalization treatment,” which can balance the protection of personal data privacy and data usability. In this approach, the data provider must validate the efficacy of de-identification before transactions to ensure that the de-identification process has completely eradicated or substantially reduced the re-identification risk, thereby reducing the infringement risk. To validate whether the de-identification of big data is reliable, several datasets belonging to known individuals must be examined to confirm whether the individuals may identified from the datasets.起始頁-結束頁：37-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201810_37(4).CNI0374篇名：試論虛擬貨幣之監理與法律定位－以日本法為中心並列篇名：The Regulation and the Legal Status Regarding Virtual Currencies-Focus on Japanese Law作者：蔡英欣(Ying-Hsin Tsai)關鍵字：虛擬貨幣;比特幣;金融科技監理;日本支付服務法;Virtual Currencies;Bitcoin;Regulation of FinTech;Japanese Payment Service Act期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文目的係針對虛擬貨幣之監理與私法定位，以日本法之發展為借鏡，對我國法制設計提出淺見。日本在2016年修正支付服務法，將虛擬貨幣交換業者納入規範，並針對反洗錢、反資恐議題配合修法，而在規範方式上採低度監管，重視業者組成之自律組織所扮演之監督功能，顯示日本政府鼓勵金融科技創新之態度。而由於日本東京地方法院在2015年一則民事判決中，不認為比特幣為民法上所稱之物，引起日本法界對虛擬貨幣法律定位之探討，此等議論均可作為同是大陸法系之我國借鏡。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to examine Japanese legal regulations regarding virtual currency businesses and the characterization of virtual currencies' legal status and to thereby promote Taiwan's design of laws in similar fields. In 2016, the newly-revised Japanese Payment Services Act was enforced for the regulation of virtual currency businesses for the first time. In addition, the Japanese government followed the practices of AML/CFT to revise the Act on Prevention of Transfer of Criminal Proceeds. However, despite these new laws, the Japanese model of regulating virtual currency businesses appears to be insufficient. Moreover, the Japanese system encourages various virtual currency businesses to monitor themselves through self-organization. The Japanese government seems to have adopted a model that promotes the acceleration of financial technology. Regarding the legal status of virtual currencies, the Tokyo District Court ruled in 2015 that Bitcoin, a virtual currency, is not regulated by the Civil Code and that, therefore, no individual can claim ownership over it. As a result of this seemingly innovative concept, many Japanese elite legal scholars have begun to discuss the topic, and they have produced numerous worthwhile contributions to the literature. In sum, our findings indicate that the Taiwanese research efforts on critical, new concerns related to FinTech can benefit from the relevant Japanese research.起始頁-結束頁：53-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201810_37(4).CNI0535篇名：「工業4.0」下製造業之轉型政策並列篇名：Restructuring the Manufacturing Industry during the Industry 4.0 Transition作者：郭楚其(Chu-Chi Kuo);徐作聖(Joseph Z. Shyu)關鍵字：工業4.0;政策分析模式;產業轉型升級;產業創新需求要素;Industry 4.0;Policy Analysis Model;Industry Revitalization;Industrial Innovation Resources期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：工業4.0技術的擴散改變了主要產業的結構，成為產業轉型升級和發展的核心主題。德國政府的「工業4.0」計畫(The Industrie 4.0 Working Group 2013)，基於物理資訊系統和物聯網全面部署。美國「先進製造夥伴計畫」(President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 2011)、「中國製造2025」(National Manufacturing Strategy Advisory Committee 2015)、臺灣「生產力4.0」（行政院科技辦公室2015）也相繼被提出。本研究以政策分析模式為基礎，建構工業4.0下製造業之轉型競爭策略，以工業4.0下製造業之轉型政策目標與製造業產業領先條件為研究之區隔變數，分析德國、美國、中國及臺灣在工業4.0下製造業之轉型政策目標定位，並根據工業4.0下製造業產業創新需求要素及製造業專家的意見調查，整理分析歸納出工業4.0下製造業的關鍵成功要素及各國目前發展工業4.0下製造業的創新策略，協助政府在發展工業4.0下製造業之政策參考。初步結果顯示，德國政策以經濟發展、科技發展及社會發展為主軸，工業4.0下製造業領先條件為國家層級、產業層級及企業層級；美國政策以經濟發展與科技發展為主，而工業4.0下製造業產業領先條件為產業層級及企業層級；中國政策重點在政治發展、經濟發展、科技發展及社會發展為主，工業4.0下製造業領先條件則重視於國家層級；臺灣政策以經濟發展與科技發展為主，而產業領先條件則為國家層級、產業層級及企業層級。英文摘要：The proliferation of Industry 4.0 technology has changed the structure of major industries and has become the core tenet of industrial revitalization and improvement. Based on the comprehensive deployment of physical information systems and the Internet of Things, the German government's Industry 4.0 program employs a computerized, digitalized, and intelligence-optimized business operations model. Elsewhere, the Advanced Manufacturing Partner program of the United States, Made in China 2025, and Taiwan Productivity 4.0 are leading-edge manufacturing programs. Based on a policy analysis model, this study constructed a competitive strategy for the manufacturing industry to implement during the Industry 4.0 transition, and analyzed the revitalization policy objectives of the manufacturing industries of Germany, the United States, China, and Taiwan in light of the revitalization policy objectives of the manufacturing industry and locus of industrial leadership. Based on the survey of Industrial Innovation Resources under the Industry 4.0 transition and the views of manufacturing experts, this paper examines and summarizes the key success factors of the manufacturing industry and a country's manufacturing innovation strategy during the Industry 4.0 transition. These key success factors could serve as a reference to aid governments in the development of revitalization policies for the manufacturing industry. The preliminary results indicated that economic, technological, and social development are policy mainstays in Germany with the locus of industrial leadership at the national, industrial, and enterprise levels during the Industry 4.0 transition. Meanwhile, policy in the United States is centered on economic and technological development, and the locus of industrial leadership is at the industry and enterprise levels. China's policy focuses on political, economic, technological, and social development, and the locus of industrial leadership is at the national level. Finally, Taiwan bases its policy on economic and technological development, and the locus of industrial leadership is at the national, industrial, and enterprise levels.起始頁-結束頁：1-13資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201807_37(3).CNI0016篇名：「工業3.5」之先進智慧製造系統架構：半導體智慧製造為例並列篇名：Industry 3.5 Framework of an Advanced Intelligent Manufacturing System: Case Studies from Semiconductor Intelligent Manufacturing作者：簡禎富(Chen-Fu Chien);王宏鍇(Hung-Kai Wang);傅文翰(Wen-Han Fu)關鍵字：工業3.5;先進智慧製造系統;大數據分析;數位決策;智慧工廠;Industry 3.5;Advanced Intelligent Manufacturing System;Big Data Analytics;Digital Decision-Making;Intelligent Fab期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究提出「工業3.5」作為工業3.0和工業4.0之間的混合策略，整合物聯網、大數據分析、資源調度與最佳化等技術，發展先進智慧製造系統架構，並以半導體製造實際問題為例，發展模組化的解決方案，以檢驗研究效度。事實上，工業4.0仍在演化中，本研究提出之工業3.5架構已有智慧製造的實踐案例，可以作為其他產業發展並實現先進智慧製造的藍圖和參考依據，先在既有基礎上，發展智慧製造所需的大數據分析和最佳化彈性決策能力，才能在未來工業4.0基礎更成熟時發揮更大效益。英文摘要：This paper proposes that Industry 3.5 is a hybrid strategy that enables intelligent manufacturing with use of the big data analytics and digital decision-making processes of Industry 4.0 and the existing manufacturing system of Industry 3.0. The proposed strategic framework integrates leading technologies such as the Internet of Things, big data analytics, resource allocation, and optimization to develop an advanced intelligent manufacturing system framework. To determine the feasibility and validity of the proposed Industry 3.5 framework, this study reviewed a number of empirical studies concerning semiconductor manufacturing. The results indicated that the proposed Industry 3.5 is viable and can be used as an effective roadmap and reference to empower the migration of various industries to Industry 4.0 through adoption of advanced intelligent manufacturing, big data analytics, flexible decision-making, and optimization.起始頁-結束頁：15-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201807_37(3).CNI0157篇名：工業4.0下的創新設計迷思並列篇名：Myths Surrounding Innovation Design in the Industry 4.0 Era作者：吳啟華(Chi-Hua Wu);陸定邦(Ding-Bang Luh)關鍵字：工業4.0;創新設計;創新理論;Industry 4.0;Innovative Design;Innovation Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：第四次工業革命引發不同的想像，但對消費者價值變遷仍未有定論。本研究深入資訊科技普及導致的個體化現象，分析生產方式限制降低促成的消費模式主動化和消費者瞬時化，探討邁入工業4.0環境時顯露的創新迷思，體現在「大」數據和物「聯」網的相關思維。進入工業4.0時代，資訊是重要的生產要素，也是創新的關鍵。湍流的資訊促使企業轉向個體化的市場觀點，持續估計消費者期待，在創新的同時累積對市場的隱性知識，用以調整估計，形成正向循環。從創新流程最佳化，轉移到串流化、超主動化，以維持資源配置的彈性。基於消費者期望的願景領導式創新將益發重要，考驗企業的歸因能力，要求管理者謹慎檢視自身的觀點，追求未來的、消費者經驗為核心的創新。英文摘要：We have entered the era of Industry 4.0. To compete in this new era, companies must employ new computer technologies to more quickly and effectively deliver value to consumers; however, such employment can cause elevate consumer expectations, which in turn can generate volatile markets, the pace of which might be too quick for companies to keep up with. This situation demands the development of a new perspective on innovation. This study examined false perceptions or ”myths” concerning innovation that occur if beliefs concerning Industry 3.0 are applied to Industry 4.0. Tracing back to industrial revolutions and markets exhibiting various characteristics, we identified the following two major myths. (1) Big data fosters innovation; however, too much information can paralyze a company's decision- making. (2) Incorporating information technology into objects generates more consumer value and higher resource efficiency. Possible remedying principles are discussed in this paper, namely (1) developing ”streaming” instead of ”project-based” innovation processes, and (2) recognizing the importance of vision-dominant innovations.起始頁-結束頁：35-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201807_37(3).CNI0358篇名：運用ADDIE建構工業4.0產業自動化控制人才職能導向課程並列篇名：The Study of Developing Industrial Automation and Control Competence-Based Program by Applying ADDIE Model作者：謝明德(Min-Der Hsieh);趙義隆(Yi-Long Jaw)關鍵字：ADDIE;職能;智慧自動化;職能導向課程;澳洲資歷架構;ADDIE;Competence;Automation Intelligence;Competence-Based Program;Australian Qualifications Framework期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：過去文獻已廣泛運用ADDIE模式作為確認訓練需求、發展訓練課程教材、執行課程與評估成效等系統化方法。再者，面對先進國家如德國工業4.0與美國AMP先進製造等政策方案，現有文獻較少對產業自動化職能模型建構進行探討。因此，本研究以澳洲資歷架構，探討工業4.0所需產業自動化控制職能導向課程。研究結果：(1)驗證產業自動化與控制領域對於產業轉型升級存在人才缺口。(2)透過焦點群體座談，發現三項工作任務：控制元件基礎工作任務、自動化整合系統建置進階工作任務、馬達驅動器應用進階工作任務。(3)發展適合產業自動化控制職能導向課程之時數合計共86小時。最後，本研究建議政府與產業運用本研究結果，轉換成工作說明書、績效考核以及教育訓練課程規劃等。英文摘要：Most related studies support the premise that the ADDIE model provides a systematic approach for determining training needs, designing and developing training programs and materials, implementing training programs, and evaluating the effectiveness of training. However, no studies have paid adequate attention to industrial automation and control competence-based programs, especially in light of the challenges posed by Germany's Industry 4.0 and Advanced Manufacturing Partnerships in the United States. This study explored the aforementioned competency gap in the literature and constructed an industrial automation and control competence-based program by using the ADDIE model with reference to the Australian Qualifications Framework. The results demonstrated that (1) using manpower supply and demand information can help to identify the talent gap in the industrial automation and control field; (2) three key basic tasks are controlling components, automating integrated systems to perform advanced tasks, and advancing applications by using motor-driven tasks; and (3) a total of 86 hours is required for industry automation and a control competence-based program to be implemented. This research contributes a valid instrument to assist governmental and industrial sectors in developing training strategies (e.g., job descriptions, performance appraisals, training programs).起始頁-結束頁：53-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201807_37(3).CNI0539篇名：中國人壽：投資重分類並列篇名：China Life Insurance Co., Ltd.: Investment Reclassification作者：劉啟群(Chi-Chun Liu);林純央(Chun-Yang Lin);林思成(Szu-cheng Lin)關鍵字：中國人壽;投資重分類;財務報表分析;公司治理;金融監理;China Life Insurance Co.;Ltd.;Investment Reclassification;Financial Statement Analysis;Corporate Governance;Financial Supervision期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本個案是真實事件的圖書館個案，藉由本個案讓學生學習使用公開資訊分析企業財務報表及財務實質，並延伸至對企業利害關係人的影響。中國人壽以2012年12月31日為基準日，將帳上持有至到期日投資全數轉列備供出售投資。雖然會計處理完全符合公報規範，卻引起主管機關高度重視。究其原因，乃因重分類的會計處理透過對財務實質的影響造成代理問題嚴重化。本個案分析重分類對財務實質之影響，係提出重分類後可能的投資決策，帶入數字計算重分類當期及之後各期淨利、綜合損益與淨值的影響數，計算是否對財務實質有利。本個案讓學生了解重分類後，無論以何種利害關係人的角度，皆不應僅看當期表現，而要將對未來的影響一併列入考慮，才能作出最佳決策。英文摘要：In this library case study we aim for students to analyze the financial statements of a firm and its financial condition by using public information and to understand stakeholders’ decisions. China Life Insurance Co., Ltd. reclassified all of its held-to-maturity investments to available- for-sale at the end of 2012. The reclassification did not violate accounting regulations, but concerns were still raised by the regulator. According to our analysis, the agency problem was exacerbated by the reclassification. In this case study, the impact of reclassification on financial conditions is analyzed by proposing several investment decisions after reclassification. Net income, comprehensive income, and net worth are calculated for every year in the investment period, and the benefits of reclassification for the firm are evaluated. Through the analyses, students can learn from this case that, in addition to current financial performance, future outcomes should be considered by stakeholders when making investment decisions.起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201804_37(2).CNI00110篇名：革命性的門診調配作業改造－以怡仁醫院為例並列篇名：The Revolution of Hospital Outpatient Pharmacy Fill Prescription Operation Procedure Reform: Yeezen General Hospital作者：吳乃<U+7FA3>(Nai-Chun Wu);鄭志強(Chin-Chiang Cheng);王豫萱(Yu-Hsuan Wang);黃瓊億(Chiung-Yi Huang)關鍵字：人因工程;有限空間佈局規劃;處方頻率;黃金取帶;工作流程規劃;Human Factor;Layout Planning;Demand Frequencies;Golden Zone Storage;Workflow Planning期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：國內醫院在門診尖峰時刻，藥局候藥區病患經常門庭若市，而調配區藥師忙碌不已。由於藥局藥品種類眾多，但調劑台的擺放空間卻有限，藥師在調配時必須頻繁地走動，不時的彎腰或蹲下拿藥，此情況對於藥師工作時的生理與心理均造成負荷。本個案主要探討如何運用人因工程概念，跨領域的採用「調劑台及周邊有限空間佈局規劃」、「藥盒規格化」、「處方頻率結合黃金取帶設計藥品儲位」、「促進學習的藥品儲位標示法」及「彈匣式補藥」等作為，協助學生了解如何改造醫院門診藥局調配作業的整體動線規劃，讓藥師進行調配時，走動、彎腰及蹲下的動作能明顯減少，並降低工作壓力及調配疏失，有效提升調配速度。本個案情境不僅讓學生了解藥局的特殊管理模式，思考如何規劃及改造作業流程，進而應用至零售通路與物流倉儲產業。此外，本個案的執行成本低，但效能持續性強，亦能讓想解決相同問題的醫院容易學習與複製。英文摘要：During peak times, hospitals in Taiwan typically have many people waiting for drugs despite pharmacists hard work in the dispensing station. The main problem is that dispensary space is limited, but there are numerous types of drugs. Therefore, pharmacists in the dispensing station must frequently walk, bend down, and squat to retrieve drugs. This increases the risks of physical and psychological health problems among pharmacists. In this case study, we consider the human factor and cross-field practices, namely ”layout planning of the limited surroundings of dispensary space,” ”drug box standardization,” ”prescription demand frequencies combined with golden zone storage and storage location assignment,” ”storage markers to foster the learning of the location of drugs,” and ”magazine-style medicine replenishment.” These practices are revolutionary for the workflow planning in hospital outpatient pharmacy dispensing. This case study aims to train students in methods to reduce walking, bending, and squatting among pharmacists in a dispensing station. The benefits of the reforms are lower workplace pressure and dispensing negligence and faster dispensing speed. Students are expected to extend the practices of this case study to retailing, warehousing, and the logistics industry. Furthermore, the costs associated with these reforms are low, results are effective, and practices are easy for other hospitals to learn from and replicate.起始頁-結束頁：23-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201804_37(2).CNI02311篇名：寶成集團在反全球化和自動化的浪潮下之策略方案選擇並列篇名：Pou Chen Group's Strategic Approaches Facing the Waves of Anti-Globalization and Automation作者：李鐘培(Jong Peir Li);黃思明(Syming Hwang)關鍵字：反全球化;自動化;隨需製造;資源基礎理論/資源基礎觀點;Anti-Globalization;Automation;Manufacture-on-Demand;Resource-Based Theory/Resource-Based View期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：寶成集團是全球運動鞋製造的龍頭，即使面對通貨膨脹及品牌廠商不斷地壓縮銷售價格，仍能屹立不搖。主要原因是持續地降低製造成本、垂直整合原材料的供應鏈，以及徹底實行全球化。但這種運動鞋製造的競爭優勢，遭遇了新的衝擊。第一個衝擊是品牌商要求自動化要加速。兩大客戶：耐吉及愛迪達，都不約而同地自行投入了自動化的發展，來因應電子商務的趨勢，以及越來越高的客製化需求。第二個衝擊是寶成的全球化受到了挑戰。2016年美國總統大選之後，美國立刻退出TPP(The Trans-Pacific Partnership)跨太平洋夥伴關係，為反全球化開了第一槍。寶成必須要重新審視到美國設廠的可行性。學生從本個案中，可學習如何找到企業的核心能力，根據所面對的衝擊，產生並分析不同的方案，替寶成規劃整體的策略藍圖。英文摘要：Pou Chen Group is a leading original equipment manufacturer of sports shoes that has been highly successful despite inflation and its partner brands constantly cutting sales prices. In addition to internationalization, its success can primarily be attributed to its ability to continually lower its production costs and vertically integrate its supply chain. However, these attributes currently face several new challenges. First, its brand partners have made demands for accelerated automation. Both of its major partners, Nike and Adidas, have initiated efforts for automation in response to e-commerce and increasing demands for custom-made products. Second, challenges have been made to internationalization. The United States withdrew from the Trans-Pacific Partnership soon after the 2016 presidential election, firing the first shot for antiglobalization. Pou Chen Group must reexamine the feasibility of establishing a plant in the United States. During the proposed course, students are expected to learn to identify a corporation’s core competencies through a case study, which will serve as a basis for devising various options for solving the challenges it faces. Subsequently, the students will analyze the strengths and weaknesses of these options and develop a future strategy for Pou Chen Group.起始頁-結束頁：45-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201804_37(2).CNI04512篇名：LimitStyle里米斯科技：群眾外包設計平台的創新並列篇名：LimitStyle: Innovation in Crowdsourcing Design Platform作者：陳宏欣(Terry Chen);管郁君(Eugenia Y. Huang)關鍵字：群眾募資;群眾外包;創業;電子商務;Crowdfunding;Crowdsourcing;Startup;E-Commerce期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：本個案描述里米斯科技創業團隊從設計產業的困境看到機會，建置Limitstyle群眾外包設計平台，許多設計師獲得國際<U+596C>項，但自行創業時卻因不熟悉製程，無法掌握量產的時間及成本、後續通路銷售等，里米斯採用群眾群眾外包設計平台將關鍵活動串連，大幅提升獲獎設計產品成功商業化的機率。設計師透過此平台提案，提案上架後進行票選、預估銷售量，如通過票選協調工廠生產，提供專業的製程規劃，將全球設計產業平均製程12至18個月縮短至約4個月，產品設計與製造流程經由群眾智慧不斷修正，凸顯其深具潛力的市場。此創新模式幫助里米斯年營收從900萬新台幣迅速成長至2015年的4,500萬，進而吸引創投讓資本額擴大，有更多資源後規畫成長策略，2016年初里米斯面臨策略抉擇點，分別在不同產品、不同市場中進行思考。本個案描述新創公司面臨典型的挑戰，個案本文分為A、B兩段，A段為個案公司面臨的成長抉擇內容，討論後可發下B段，針對真實情境中實際做出的成長決策進行討論。英文摘要：This case gives a description of how the design team of LimitStyle seized opportunities from difficulties and created the LimitStyle crowdsourcing design platform. Many designers have won international awards, but when they set up their own businesses, they are not familiar with the process and cannot master the time, costs of mass production, or follow-up channel sales. LimitStyle employed the crowdsourcing design platform to connect key activities; thereby, substantially increasing their chance of the successful commercialization of award-winning design products. Designers put forward their proposals through this platform, and after the proposals are submitted, votes on these proposals will be cast and the sales estimated. If the vote is secured, negotiation with factories will be conducted regarding production. Professional process plans will be provided, and the average process of the global design industry is shortened from 12 to 18 months to approximately 4 months. Product design and manufacturing processes are constantly being modified by crowd wisdom, which suggests that the platform has great market potential. This innovative model contributed to the rapid growth in the operating revenues of LimitStyle from NTD 9 million to NTD 45million in 2015. As a result, LimitStyle attracted venture capital investment to expand its capital, and developed growth strategies after obtaining more resources. At the beginning of 2016, LimitStyle was confronted with a strategic choice, and contemplated different products and different markets. This case describes the typical challenges faced by startups, and is divided into two parts, namely, Part A and Party B. Part A is the growth choice faced by the case company. After discussions, Part B can be released for discussions about growth decisions in real scenarios.起始頁-結束頁：61-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201804_37(2).CNI06113篇名：成長駭客的煉金術－良興電子的虛實整合並列篇名：The Alchemy of a Growth Hacker - Integration of Online and Offline by Liang Shing Electronics作者：林耀欽(Yao-Chin Lin);陳俊良(Chun-Liang Chen)關鍵字：跨通路經營;成長策略;虛實整合;顧客關係管理;電子商務;零售業管理;Cross-Channel Operation;Growth Strategy;Online and Offline Channel Integration;Customer Relationship Management;E-Commerce;Retail Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：由於網路購物環境日趨完善與成熟，無論在銷售介面、商品品質、安全金流及快速到貨等服務不斷強化，已嚴重威脅到實體通路業者的經營。因應電子商務的快速發展，良興電子自2005年起便投入網路購物，數位浪潮促使其對於消費者需求、存貨控管、數據管理、跨通路的行銷操作模式等重新思考，並於其中尋求創新的契機。良興電子從實體經營跨足虛實整合的轉型過程中，一路上都在面對決策者的兩難與挑戰。但在總經理整合線上與線下的資源後，透過跨通路經營提升服務與體驗，以精準的數據分析、低廉的成本、可控的風險來達成虛實通路客戶的成長、會員活躍度的提升、與整體營業額成長等營運目標，成為3C產品實體零售企業經營轉型的典範。英文摘要：The continual enhancement of sales interfaces, product quality, safe payment options, express delivery, and other related services resulting from increasingly sophisticated and mature online shopping environments is seriously threatening the operation of brick-and-mortar channels. In anticipation of this rapid growth in e-commerce, Liang Shing Electronics established its online shopping operation in 2005. The digital tide encouraged Liang Shing Electronics to reevaluate and identify new opportunities based on customer needs, inventory management, data management, and cross channel sales strategies. The transformation of Liang Shing Electronics from a brick and mortar operation to one with both online and offline sales channel operations was challenging for company decision makers. However, after integrating online and offline resources under the leadership of the general manager, cross-channel operations enhanced service and customer experience. Accurate data analysis, in addition to low cost and risk management strategies, was applied, which enabled the achievement of operational targets, customer growth in both online and offline sales channels, and increased member activity and overall sales growth. This resulted in the company becoming a role model for consumer electronics retailers that are seeking to transform themselves.起始頁-結束頁：75-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201804_37(2).CNI07514篇名：貨幣面額價值與升級意願並列篇名：Currency Face Values and Upgrade Intentions作者：劉信賢(Hsin-Hsien Liu);周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou)關鍵字：貨幣面額價值;升級意願;沉沒成本;時間延遲;貨幣轉換經驗;Currency Face Value;Upgrade Intention;Sunk Cost;Temporal Delay;Currency Conversion Experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：在許多耐久財產品產業中，產品銷售取決於吸引新的使用者，或是說服既有使用者進行產品升級，有鑑於越來越多消費者會於國外市場買入耐久財產品，本研究旨在探討當初購買產品之外國貨幣面額價值，如何影響消費者未來的升級意願，並檢視可能的干擾變數。三個實驗的結果指出：當消費者原有的耐久財產品是以乘數(相較於分數)貨幣面額價值購入時，消費者會有較高的知覺沉沒成本，以及較低的升級意願，且知覺沉沒成本中介了貨幣面額價值對升級意願的影響；不過，上述貨幣面額價值效果僅發生於距離原耐久財產品之購買時間短、消費者知道正確的貨幣匯率、以及消費者缺乏貨幣轉換經驗的情境下。本研究結果對於相關理論發展和行銷實務皆有其重要意涵。英文摘要：In many industries, sales depend on attracting new users and convincing existing users to upgrade to newer models. Consumers are also increasingly able to purchase these products in foreign markets. This research explores how the face value of the foreign currency used to pay for a product influences future upgrade intentions, and it examines the effects of possible moderators. The results of three experiments are evidence that consumers express lower upgrade intentions when they perceive higher sunk costs in the original purchase. This occurs when the foreign currency face value of the owned product is a multiple rather than a fraction of the consumer's home currency. However, the currency face value effect occurs only when the temporal delay is short, consumers know the correct exchange rate, and consumers lack currency conversion experience. These findings have significant implications for both theory development and marketing practice.起始頁-結束頁：1-14資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201801_37(1).CNI00115篇名：求偶思維對自我複雜度、共品牌契合度與雌雄同體共品牌評價之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Mating Mind-Sets on Self-Complexity, Co-Brand Fit, and Androgynous Co-Brand Evaluation作者：蔡進發(Chin-Fa Tsai)關鍵字：求偶思維;自我複雜度;共品牌契合度;雌雄同體共品牌評價;Mating Mind-Sets;Self-Complexity;Co-Brand Fit;Androgynous Co-Brand Evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文將求偶思維的觀念應用在雌雄同體共品牌的研究上，試圖檢驗求偶思維、自我複雜度、共品牌契合度與雌雄同體共品牌評價之間的關係，並檢驗性別對雌雄同體共品牌評價的影響，是否會受到求偶思維所干擾。本研究採用實驗設計方式，將募集的290位受測者隨機分派到求偶思維情境與非求偶思維情境，進行實驗、蒐集資料並驗證假說。結果顯示：(1)求偶思維、自我複雜度與共品牌契合度會正向影響雌雄同體共品牌評價，(2)求偶思維會正向影響自我複雜 度與共品牌契合度，(3)性別對雌雄同體共品牌評價的影響會受到求偶思維所干擾。英文摘要：This study applies the concept of mating mind-sets to the field of androgynous co-brand and attempts to examine the relationships among mating mind-sets, self-complexity, co-brand fit, and androgynous co-brand evaluation. Besides, this study also attempts to examine whether mating mind-sets moderates the effect of gender on androgynous co-brand evaluation. This study adopts experimental design to collect data and to examine proposed hypotheses. 290 recruited subjects are randomly distributed to any one of both mating mind-sets and non-mating mind-sets situation. This result shows that (1) Mating mind-sets, self-complexity, and co-brand fit positively influence androgynous co-brand evaluation. (2) Mating mind-sets positively influence both self-complexity and co-brand fit, respectively. (3) Mating mind-sets moderates the effect of gender on androgynous co-brand evaluation.起始頁-結束頁：15-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201801_37(1).CNI01516篇名：臺灣版診斷關聯群制度接受意圖關鍵影響因素探討並列篇名：Key Factors Influencing Intention to Accept ”Taiwan Diagnosis-Related Groups”作者：邱光輝(Kuang-Hui Chiu);林孟樺(Meng-Hua Lin)關鍵字：臺灣版診斷關聯群制度;健康保險制度;醫院管理;計畫行為理論;行為意圖;Taiwan Diagnosis-Related Groups (Tw-DRGs);Health Insurance;Hospital Management;Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB);Behavioral Intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本研究目的為探討臺灣版診斷關聯群制度Taiwan Diagnosis-Related Groups, Tw-DRGs實施後，影響利害關係人接受Tw-DRGs的主要因素。經文獻回顧顯示利害關係人受到的主要衝擊為住院天數限制，本研究方法以臺北市某區域醫院之骨科進行質性訪談該科不同疾病類別的病患，收集可能影響接受意圖的原因，再用量化分析來驗證變數間的關係。本研究以計畫行為理論為基礎來推導假說，研究結果顯示利害關係人的安全感及所感受到的服務品質為影響對行為的態度之主要變數，而正向影響一般民眾對於Tw-DRGs之住院天數限制接受意圖的因素則為對Tw-DRGs之住院日控制的態度、醫護人員或者利害關係人身邊的重要他人對Tw-DRGs之住院天數限制的看法或者接受程度、面臨到住院天數限制情況時是否有足夠資源或能力去應付。醫院體系應試圖提升利害關係人正面感受，期許研究結果可提供為現今Tw-DRGs之住院天數規範下醫院體系的因應策略參考，期望使健保政策改革更適用於我國醫療體系。英文摘要：This study investigates the key factors that affect stakeholders' intention to accept Taiwan Diagnosis-Related Groups (Tw-DRGs). The literature shows that the factor most strongly influence the acceptance of Tw-DRGs is the length of hospital stay policy. Participants in the qualitative interview included patients in the orthopedic department of a Taipei regional hospital and their companions during their hospital stay. Factors that affect the intention to accept the length of hospital stay were explored in this study, and the relationships among them were verified using quantitative analysis. This study uses the theory of planned behavior to develop the hypotheses. The research results show that the sense of security and perceived service quality of the stakeholders are the main factors influencing attitude and behavior. The results also show that both have a positive influence on the intention to accept the limited length of hospital stay of Tw-DRGs. Other factors that may affect the intention to accept are the following: (1) attitude toward control of the length of hospital stay; (2) perception of the limited length of stay by patients' relatives or companions in the hospital; and (3) financial capacity to cope with the extended hospital stay once the length of stay has been reached. The hospital system should improve the attitudes of stakeholders' regarding policies on Tw-DRGs. This study can help hospitals understand how to encourage patients to accept Tw-DRG policies on the length of hospital stays. This study can deliver some positive advices to make policy in Tw-DRGs more applicable to Taiwan's medical policy system. Furthermore, the results can guide decision-makers in effectively reforming Taiwan health insurance policy.起始頁-結束頁：35-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201801_37(1).CNI03517篇名：前推電視商務之新商業發展模式：東森購物為例並列篇名：Estimating Forward Business Development Model of TV-Commerce: Case Study of ET Mall作者：黃寶祚(Bao-Tzuoh Huang);陳麗貞(Lee-Chen Chen)關鍵字：無店鋪電視商務;投產關聯分析;產業鏈共生;Non-Store TV Commerce;Input-Output Interdependence;Industrial Chain Symbiosis期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：37卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：數位時代的特色之一，為新興商業模式持續衍生與不斷竄出。2003年SARS事件爆發與帶來的有店購物不安情境，讓以在宅視覺行銷搶攻消費市場的電視購物，業績瞬間數倍翻出與爆表；此階段的電視購物業績一度超越網購，在當時曾展現出火車頭產業的架勢。當時此新創的無店經營模式，何以會在後續成長過程呈現出乏力走勢？其「長尾」不顯著的生命週期演進，值得深入探討。本研究以當時電視商務第一品牌─東森購物的型錄商品，為資料蒐集對象，應用投入產出關聯表為量化分析工具。由本文實證發現黃金成長階段的東森，曾經為主導型的優勢品牌，然而其商務鏈結構卻出現了問題，即此時期的東森展現富後勤優勢的後向影響度，卻發生前向鏈結失衡之感應度問題。市場之挑戰就是機會，本文最後運用跨界共生之新媒體鏈關聯佈局，前推此新興零售業之平衡發展模式，期能突破當前東森營運之混沌生命週期。英文摘要：The new business model has been motivated and created steadily in response to emerging digital times. After SARS events, the out-shoppers under TV commerce's convergence had ever been exploded, in association with the uneasy contingencies in physical shopping connectivity. Under the continuous mobile communication techniques, this original TV commerce which had ever made good prospects in long-tail business has been confronted with more challenge and strong competitive pressure. In this article, we investigate the ET Mall's robust golden age, stimulated by the non-store TV commerce in conjunction with its initiative and innovative retailing, and help identify some important cause for the subsequent declining. We apply an evaluative inter-industry interdependence matrix to calculate its less forward and more backward linkages during its golden-age period, respectively. Our findings are intended to build a new symbiotic-balanced chain for the media retailer sensitively measured by the relevant forward-linkage revaluation, and to help fight for and faced with high shake-out as well as its chaos life span.起始頁-結束頁：55-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201801_37(1).CNI05501篇名：導言：但開風氣作者：余舜德期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所2篇名：疾病與文化：李亦園先生對臺灣醫學人類學發展的貢獻並列篇名：Illness and Culture: Yih-yuan Li's Contribution to the Development of Medical Anthropology in Taiwan作者：張珣(Hsun Chang)關鍵字：李亦園;醫學人類學;民俗醫療;儀式醫療;多元醫療體系;Yih-yuan Li;medical anthropology;folk healing;ritual healing;plural medical system期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：李亦園先生（1931－2017）在戰後台灣人類學發展的過程中佔有非常重要的領導角色。李亦園不但延續人類學研究異文化的學科宗旨，調查台灣原住民文化，前往馬來西亞<U+8534>坡調查海外華人社區，也針對台灣漢人日趨複雜的各個面向的社會文化變遷進行研究，並提出針貶時事的倡議。本文針對李亦園對於醫療文化行為的一貫關懷，從原住民傳統醫療是其文化宇宙觀的一部份，到華人的養生飲食與「致中和」宇宙觀的提出，均體現了人類學宗旨所強調的健康與醫療行為是鑲嵌在整體文化行為當中，二者密不可分。尤其，李亦園的醫學人類學研究方法採取病人與在地醫療者的主位（emic）立場，而與西方醫療的客位（etic）立場得以對話並互補，說明了台灣以及非西方社會多元醫療體系形成的文化背景。透過大量閱讀爬梳台灣醫學人類學者的著作，以及回顧李亦園1960年至2000年的相關作品，本研究發現從事台灣醫學人類學研究的人類學家，或親炙，或師承於李亦園在不同時期，在不同教學單位的薰習與交流。本文擇其要者，諸如Arthur Kleinman與許木柱等人，加以陳述。印證李亦園但開風氣之先，扶植了台灣醫學人類學的幼苗，並發展出多項研究議題。英文摘要：Yih-yuan Li (1931-2017) played a leading role in the development of cultural anthropology generally and in medical anthropology specifically in post-war Taiwan. As a Han Chinese anthropologist, with the aim of cross cultural comparison, Prof. Li investigated Austronesian aborigines in Taiwan and the Chinese community in Muar, Malaysia in the 1960s. In his published monographs of these investigations, ritual healing and folk healing were carefully described in terms of how they formed an important part of the local cultural system. He proposed that primitive etiology was a crucial part of local cosmology as well. Li turned to Han Chinese religious studies in 1970 and continued to study the ritual healing of danggi (shamans) in the countryside of Taiwan. Li was interested in the psychosocial function of dang-gi and traditional Chinese dietetics and dedicated himself to elucidating the complimentary relationship between modern Western medicine and traditional Chinese medicine, thus explaining the plural medical system in contemporary Taiwan. This paper reviews Li's publications from 1960 to 2000, and explores the medical concern revealed in Li's religious writings. With the friendship between Li and Arthur Kleinman since 1970, Li's researches on ritual healing were not only categorized as medical anthropology but also officially started medical anthropology studies in Taiwan. This paper also finds that most of the medical anthropologists in Taiwan today are students of Li or his followers, showing that Li was a pioneer in the field of medical anthropology in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：7-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所3篇名：縱橫古今論傳說：李亦園院士的「神話與傳說」研究之回顧並列篇名：Studying Legend from Past to Present: Review of Academician Yih-Yuan Li's Research on ”Myth and Legend”作者：劉子愷(Tzu-kai Liu)關鍵字：神話與傳說;口傳文化;價值體系;跨文化比較研究;跨學科研究;myth and legend;oral culture;value system;cross-cultural comparative study;interdisciplinary study期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：神話（myth）與傳說（legend）可視為口傳文化、宗教信仰和儀式的一部分，也往往是社會記憶與族群歷史的一環。本文對李亦園院士在不同學術時期的神話與傳說研究進行回顧，目的是瞭解他將神話與傳說看成是超自然信仰的學術思想脈絡，以及所採用的跨學科理論架構和研究方法。本文從1950年代李亦園院士參與台灣南島民族的民族學田野調查的脈絡談起，討論他在神話和傳說研究上所強調的跨文化比較的觀點；也討論他於1960年代發展出結合心理學和人類學的跨學科角度，研究神話和傳說的價值體系，以及1980－1990年代漢人社會的「傳說和儀式」的結構人類學研究，並挑選他在每一時期的代表著作進行文本分析。筆者認為李亦園院士所強調的跨文化比較和跨學科合作是他在神話和傳說研究領域的重要學術思想，1960年代中期開拓出台灣學界的心理學與人類學的行為科學整合討論的研究風氣，神話和傳說研究可說是李亦園院士運用心理學的理論概念進行人類學研究之開端。他的傳說研究的對象從1950－1960年所關注的臺灣南島民族逐漸轉變為1980－1990年所關注的漢人社會，這也正是臺灣人類學在研究課題上的轉變過程，從南島民族研究延伸到漢人社會、海外華人社會的研究課題，也具體展現他在不同時期對跨文化比較、跨學科合作、社會變遷議題的看法。本文透過「神話／傳說做為族群歷史和社會記憶」、「神話／傳說成為價值體系」、「神話／傳說成為人類心靈的結構原則」三個不同學術時期的回顧與討論，揭示神話／傳說縱橫古今連結過去意涵與當代意涵，並從宗教信仰面向擴及世俗面向，透過李亦園院士的研究也顯示出人類學口傳文化的研究取向之轉變。這樣的轉變是面對政治、社會和文化變遷中的傳說文化所發展出的研究方法和理論架構，以及他帶給臺灣人類學界的一些重要啟發。英文摘要：Myth and legend-a kind of oral culture-are not only considered part of religious beliefs and rituals but are also connected to social memory and ethnic history. This article reviews Academician Yih-Yuan Li's studies of myth and legend in different academic periods from the 1950s to the 1990s. The objective of the article is to underscore the ways in which Li developed interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks and research methods to analyze the versatile contexts of myth and legend as supernatural beliefs. This article begins with the review of his ethnographic fieldwork in Taiwan's Austronesian groups, and discusses his cross-cultural comparative perspectives in this research. It also examines his interdisciplinary approach in the 1960s to study the value systems of myth and legend by taking views and concepts from the disciplines of both psychology and anthropology, as well as his application of structural anthropological theory in the study of ”legend and ritual” in the 1980- 90s. Through selecting Li's representative works and doing close textual analyses of them, this article suggests that cross-cultural comparative study and interdisciplinary perspectives were important academic thoughts demonstrated explicitly in Li's work. His research on myth and legend, I further argue, was the initial step in his academic career where he adopted psychological theories in doing anthropological research. In the trajectory of his career, the subjects of his research shifted from Taiwan's Austronesian peoples to Han societies. More broadly, such change exemplifies the transformations of the research topics in the discipline of Anthropology in Taiwan over time, starting from Austronesian study to Han study to the study of overseas Chinese societies. Within this background, this article specifically reviews and discusses three different stages of Li's research: ”Myth/legend as ethnic history and social memory,” ”Myth/legend as value system,” and ”Myth/legend as structural rule of the human mind.” What is shown in his research is the connection of meanings of the past and the present as well as the intersection of the sacred and the secular. Also, his research shows the changes in anthropological approaches to the study of oral culture, as well as the methods and theoretical frameworks he used under the political, social and cultural transformations of oral culture. Tracing the academic contexts within which Li developed his thoughts and methods, this article shows some of the important ways in which his work inspired Taiwan Anthropology.起始頁-結束頁：47-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所4篇名：返復、延遲與區隔：福建惠東「不住家」婚後雙居、交換與社會再生產並列篇名：Return, Delay, and Boundary Making: Exchange, Social Reproduction, and the Practice of Duolocal Post-Marital Residence among Rural Societies in East Hui'an, Fujian作者：簡美玲(Mei-ling Chien)關鍵字：交換;婚姻;婚後雙居;社會再生產;福建惠安;中國東南;Exchange;Marriage;Duolocal Post-Marital Residence;Social Reproduction;East Hui'an;Fujian;Southeast China期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：婚後雙居意指，婚後的婦女生育子嗣前，多住在原生家庭。對人類社會，這是相對少見的婚後居習俗。但直到二十世紀晚期，婚後雙居仍可見於中國西南和東南的部分族群社會。環繞婚後雙居習俗，1990年代初，福建惠安東部人類學研究開始之際，李亦園老師就積極投入。李老師出生成長於泉州，惠東研究或亦可算是一趟遊子返鄉的心靈之旅。做為老師的學生，在這篇文章，我以受到老師學術啟蒙，初初開展婚後雙居研究的惠東民族誌田野描述與分析為主。本文指出1990年代晚期惠東人的婚儀，涉及縱向的父系氏族傳承和橫向的姻親聯通兩種社會關係。這雙重社會關係的維繫和延續，正是社會再生產的關鍵所在。本文記錄並闡述環繞婚儀相關行為細節，包含「小重行」、「大重行」，有如以社會劇碼的搬演，創造與想像不住家婦女在通婚村落重復往返的現象。誠然本文前提是社會再生產的必須和必然性。然而，惠東不住家的婚後雙居現象，也還涉及社會體系如何形成，是區與他區的分野。其存在因素，變與不變的關鍵。本文雖未涉及前述議題，但蔣炳釗（1989）與李亦園老師（1997），都已提出討論。本文主要闡述惠東親屬、婚姻與性別的獨特意義。由較細微的村落民族誌路徑，探索新娘處於娘家和夫家之間的身份界定、轉變與歸屬，如何通過交換儀式，建構社會整體之特性與價值。這也是本文承先啟後，在惠東研究，已完成與有所突破處。英文摘要：The practice of duolocal post-marital residence means that a married woman will stay with her natal family until her first child is born. Such a custom is relatively unusual for human societies, but it was common among minority peoples in Southwest China and in some rural areas in Southeast China until the late twentieth century. In the early 1990s, there was a research team which aimed to explore this custom in eastern Hui'an. My mentor, Professor Li Yih-yuan was one of the pioneer scholars who was deeply engaged in this research. Inspired by their academic commitment, I started my ethnographic journey on study the anthropology of kinship, marriage and duolocal post-marital residence two decades ago, and have continued till now. This paper is the result of my field work study in rural Hui'an in the summer of 1997. From the description and interpretation of the cultural contents of gift exchange and ritual practice during the wedding ceremony, this paper proposes that there are two layers of social relations: one is the patrilineal relations and the other is the affinal relations. The people maintain and continue these two sets of relations for the value of social reproduction. In this paper, I focus on providing ethnographic data about the details of the gift exchange, wedding ceremony and the ritual practices which present the ethos of duolocal post-marital residence through the cultural foci of ”return”, ”delay” and ”boundary making.”起始頁-結束頁：95-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所5篇名：「清香風味」作為研究主題：李亦園院士致力督促之身體感的研究取徑並列篇名：The Taste of ”Fresh and Fragrant” as Research Topic: The Shentigan approach encouraged by Academician Li, Yih-Yuan作者：余舜德(Shuenn-Der Yu)關鍵字：身體感;清香;高山茶;茶文化;台灣;shentigan;social life of taste;high-mountain tea;tea culture;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：身體感之研究取徑承襲自李院士主持之氣的研究計畫（中研院主題計畫「文化、氣與傳統醫學科技綜合研究」），本文探討之台茶的「清香風味」亦為一身體感的項目（category），以之為研究主題，追溯其生命史，以呈現相關之文化、社會與歷史過程，乃李院士督促筆者與民族所「身體經驗研究群」戮力發展之身體感的研究取徑。筆者謹以李院士生前最後參與之身體感的整合型計畫的研究成果，感念李老師的鼓勵與支持。台灣戰後茶產業與消費文化出現一項重要的轉變──「清香」口味的出現與風行，與而後造成之台茶部分發酵茶全面之清香化的趨勢。台灣早期茶葉製作基本上承襲福建安溪與武夷的傳統，注重重發酵與烘焙的熟香口味，這個傳統的口味與製作方式在1980年代出現極大的變化，輕發酵、低度（或不）烘焙的清香風味開始流行，台灣各式部分發酵茶都受影響，台灣幾樣名茶，包括文山包種、白毫烏龍、凍頂烏龍、高山烏龍及鐵觀音等都出現清香化的趨勢，並於90年代末期影響中國及香港的消費趨勢與製茶工藝，使得歷史悠久之安溪鐵觀音也出現清香化的現象。本論文探索台灣茶清香風味的社會生命史，追溯台灣茶風味的歷史所展現之豐富的政治、社會與文化的過程，尤其將從此品嚐項目的出現及內涵的轉變入手，一方面討論歷史的行動者（茶農、茶改場專家、茶商、茶人及消費者）與茶這項物之間密切的互動如何導致此項目的成形；另一方面深入瞭解「清香」風味的形成，如何轉而成為影響台灣茶產業之政治經濟及茶葉製作科技發展的動力。英文摘要：The emergence of qingxiang (fresh and fragrant) high-mountain tea in the early 1980s marked an important transformation in Taiwan's tea industry and consumptive culture, resulting in a ”qingxiang trend” influencing Taiwanese and even Chinese partly-fermented tea manufacturing and consumption. Taiwan's tea manufacturing style was inherited from Anxi and Wuyi, in Fujian. This style stressed heavy fermentation and a refined baking process to produce a special roasted flavor. This tradition, in terms of both tasting and manufacturing, significantly changed in the 1980s as the qingxiang flavor marked by light fermentation and non-roasting became popular. This new trend has since affected various Taiwan teas, including Baozhong, Oriental Beauty, Dongding oolong, and Tieguanyin, and eventually influenced Anxi's time-honored Tieguanyin manufacturing tradition in the late 1990s. By exploring the social life of Taiwan's qingxiang taste, this article aims to reveal the rich political, social and cultural processes involved in the emergence of this newly created taste category to discuss on the one had how interactions between historical actors, including tea farmers, experts, merchants, and consumer, and object (tea in this case) have been brought into its materialization, and on the other hand, how the formation of qingxiang taste has become a driving force affecting the political economy and technological development of Taiwan's tea industry. This ”social life of taste” approach originated from the Thematic Research Project titled ”Culture, Qi and Traditional Medicine” organized by academician Yih-Yuan Li in 1997. This paper is to memorialize his long-time contribution to the Institute of Ethnology and to Taiwanese anthropology as a whole.起始頁-結束頁：123-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所6篇名：飲食文化展示與設計：道地與後現代風土主義並列篇名：Exhibiting Food Culture and Identity: Authenticity and Vernacular Postmodernism作者：林怡潔(Yi-Chieh Jessica Lin)關鍵字：飲食文化;道地;綠色觀光;策展;凝視博物館;food culture;authenticity;green tourism;curation;gaze, museum期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：在「風土化後現代主義」、全球化及綠色政治等風潮帶動下，近年各地興起一股以認識各種食物生產過程為目的之「綠色觀光」消費活動，臺灣由公共博物館以飲食文化為主題之策展數量開始增加，民間食品企業也爭相設立展示設施，並命名為飲食博物館，這種新型態的綠色觀光模式，有來自政府政策鼓勵觀光工廠設立之因素，亦有因環境教育法實施後認證設施數量增加等原因，加以民眾對於飲食相關知識需求增加。而不同的策展資本來源，也使得臺灣當代不同飲食文化策展的展示內容、互動策略等，呈現非常多元分歧的狀態。本文以此現象為觀察起點出發，回顧飲食文化策展與道地相關的文獻，以說明、評判飲食文化策展，在何種脈絡下，可以促進地方認同與社會價值，以及其研究限制。並透過案例說明，臺灣的飲食文化策展者，未來應可與人類學界多方進行交流，有助於運用人類學知識於日常生活，最後則對於當代臺灣的飲食文化策展，如何形塑參訪者對於「道地」意義實踐，提出筆者之建議。英文摘要：Against the backdrop of globalization, the development of vernacular post-modernism, and green politics, a new green tourism trend, which entails the observation of the process of food production, has burgeoned all over the world. In recent years, public museums or food producers in Taiwan have also set up exhibitions on local food in increasing numbers and became a new model of green tourism, due to government policy and apparent increase in interest in food knowledge among the general public. A diversity of exhibition designs and interactive strategies have been installed with different sources of capital. This paper presents viewpoints related to curating food culture and authenticity through related research by five scholars: Jeff Pratt, Sally Everett, Cara Aitchison, Rebecca Sims, and Sarah Lyon. Although they do ethnographic work in different places, they have all discussed the influences of presenting food as authentic on producers and on community development, which deserves attention and review. This paper is divided into three parts. The first part explains the theoretical contexts in which food and museums come to be a focus in the current study of green tourism. Then, I introduce related issues raised by the above five scholars. Lastly, through case studies, I discuss the implications and recommendations for future curators on food topics in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：159-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所7篇名：Book Reviews: Politics in Color and Concrete: Socialist Materialities and the Middle Class in Hungary作者：張正衡期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：180-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所8篇名：Book Reviews: Religion in Japanese Daily Life作者：黃約伯期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：185-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所9篇名：影評：《二姨丈的TATALA》並列篇名：Film Reviews: My Uncle's TATALA作者：莎瓏．伊斯哈罕布德期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：192-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所10篇名：影評：《不得不上路》並列篇名：Film Reviews: Path of Destiny作者：思嘎亞．曦谷(SkayaSiku)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：198-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所11篇名：認同不停轉換，類別不能不分：社群網站、跨國文化政治、與「T婆／不分」女同志認同型塑並列篇名：Compelling Categories, Shifting Identities: Social Media, Transnational Cultural Politics, and ”T/Po/Bufen” Lesbian Identity Formation作者：胡郁盈(Yu-Ying Hu)關鍵字：社群網站;跨國文化政治;T婆／不分;女同志認同型構;酷兒人類學;social media;transnational cultural politics;T/Po/bufen;lesbian identity formation;queer anthropology期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：「本文由酷兒人類學（queer anthropolog y）與跨國性向研究（transnational sexuality）理論視角出發，探討在台灣當代由社群網站與跨國文化政治作為主要物質與文化基礎的女同志社群中，「女同志」主體透過日益多元的性別少數認同範疇（identity category）來分類、理解、並命名自我非常規性別認同與情慾實踐的認同軌跡。本文首先回顧在台灣現代女同志運動中產生的「T婆／不分」文化階序，並提出「範疇政治」（politics of categorization）概念，指出在台灣解嚴之後國家民主化與現代化的過程中，西方與在地性別情慾知識交會，其所產生的文化權力關係如何影響相關認同 範疇邊界的重新劃定，並導致主體排除與涵納機制的重構。本文聚焦研究者從「圈外」到「圈內」的民族誌參與觀察，指出當社群網站成為台灣年輕女同志的首要社交媒介時，「T婆」反而成為主導女同志自我認同與社群互動的認同範疇；然而，「T婆／不分」範疇政治所承載的意識形態論爭與認同邊界重構，卻也同時使得年輕女同志在認同型塑過程中必須經歷繁複的自我辯證，並持續的對應、趨近以及偏離「T婆」、「不分」、「女同志」、「跨性別」、「雙性戀」等等多元認同範疇。藉此，本文描繪在台灣現代國家形構、進步同志運動、在地情慾文化與社群網站興起的交會中，非常規性別主體認同範疇如何彼此創造並交錯形成一個龐大繁雜的象徵系統，不僅使其象徵與指認非常規性／別主體的表意能力日益趨向開放、混雜、與溢出，而「女同志」主體企圖認知與定位自我性別與情慾實踐的努力也成為一個不停流動、混雜而且永遠不會完成的過程，在西方LGBT認同政治全球化的濫觴中，創造出台灣在地獨特的性／別少數主體認同模式。英文摘要：Enlightened by scholarship in queer anthropology and transnational sexuality, this article explores how younger generations of lesbians in contemporary Taiwan use the identity categories of ”T”, ”Po”, ”bufen”, ”nutongzhi”, ”transgender”, ”bisexual” etc. to conceptualize and categorize their genders and sexual desires under the condition of flourishing social media and transnational cultural politics. This article first reviews the cultural hierarchy between identity categories of ”T/Po” and ”bufen” developed in the modern Taiwanese lesbian movement. I proposes the concept of the ”politics of categorization” to elucidate how power relations between global and local knowledges of gender and sexuality effect a redefinition of the boundary of T/Po identity categories and lead to a realignment of the mechanisms of subject inclusion and exclusion in the context of the building of Taiwan's modern, democratic, and sovereign nationhood. Through my ethnographic research, I delineate how the identity categories of T/Po dominate lesbians' identity formation and social interaction when the Internet becomes the principle social space in contemporary lesbian communities. However, the contested ideologies and the realignment of categorical boundaries also lead younger generation of lesbians to continuously approach and deviate from the above-mentioned identity categories, undergoing a journey of complex self-interrogation in the attempt to form an identity. Through this analysis, this article demonstrates how the encounter between a highly westernized Taiwanese tongzhi movement and local sexual culture produces a massive and complicated symbolic system of identity categories defined by uncertainty and fluidity. The efforts made by young lesbians to identify and position themselves in a heteronormative world are thus turned into a unique but endlessly hybridizing and fluctuating process, further complicating the impact of globalizing LGBT identity politics.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所12篇名：追求美貌與變成母親：台灣女性的一個兩難－以高文憑的都會女性為例並列篇名：Quest for Beauty and Becoming a Mother: A Painful Paradox for Highly Educated, Urban Taiwanese Women作者：何梅俐(Amelie Keyser-Verreault)關鍵字：新自由主義;懷孕;性別角色;人身資本;美感標準;Neoliberalism;Pregnancy;Gender;Human capital;Beauty ideal期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：此篇論文試圖探討台灣主流的正妹美感標準（ideal of zhenmei beauty）如何多面向地影響女性的日常生活，並以高文憑的都會女性作為分析的對象。雖然台灣有著現代化的經濟，但在婚姻及因婚姻而來的家庭生活仍是十分重要，而一個符合正妹美感的外表大幅地影響她們在擇偶市場中的婚姻成敗，即使對有高文憑的職業女性也是如此，因此對外貌的追求深遠地影響了她們整個的生活。筆者以批判性的觀點下使用新自由主義（neoliberalism）來分析台灣女性對美的關注，並試圖強調，有關美或外貌在台灣的新自由主義脈絡下應被視為是女性「人為資本」（human capital）的重要構成因素，女性對外貌的經營在本文中被視為是一種「美學企業主義（aesthetic entrepreneurship）」。以此理論角度下，本文嘗試指出，因為「變成母親」而來的「身體」變化、「地位」變化及「可用資源」的變化（主要為金錢及時間）與主流的正妹美標準處於不相容的敵對狀態之中，因此對許多女性而言，「成為母親」與「美貌追求」是一個痛苦的矛盾。英文摘要：This paper explores the ramifications that the ideal of beauty has on the experience of becoming a mother among educated urban women. For many women in Taiwan, beauty significantly contributes to a successful marriage, and this quest for beauty influences their whole lives. Undeniably, Taiwan has a modern economy, but marriage and starting a family is still valued, even for highly educated professional women. I analyze women's preoccupation with beauty from a critical perspective on neoliberal ideology. I will argue that beauty can be understood as contributing to women's human capital and the preoccupation with beauty in terms of aesthetic entrepreneurship. From this theoretical perspective, I show that Motherhood's consequences for women's bodies and the lack of resources to invest in one's beauty, in term of money and time, are incompatible with Taiwanese beauty norms. Hence the painful paradox for many women in a society in which they are expected both to have children and to make themselves beautiful.起始頁-結束頁：51-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所13篇名：比較作為反身性實踐：民族音樂學比較研究的來時路與新取徑並列篇名：Comparison as Reflexive Practice: Old Paths and New Approaches to Comparative Studies in Ethnomusicology作者：許馨文(Hsin-Wen Hsu)關鍵字：民族音樂學;比較方法;反身性;臺灣客家音樂;芬蘭貝里曼尼音樂;Ethnomusicology;Comparative Methods;Reflexivity;Taiwan Hakka Music;Finnish Pelimanni Music期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文探討過去半世紀多以來民族音樂學的多元比較取徑，並且以筆者的研究經驗為例，提出「比較作為反身性實踐」的概念與實作策略。二次世界大戰過後，首先建制於北美的民族音樂學，受到人類學「文化相對論」典範的影響，不再延續19世紀末以降歐陸比較音樂學的傳統。大多數民族音樂學者認同音樂文化的研究，不能只是在檔案館或研究室裡進行資料分析與比對，而必須培養相關的音樂能力，並且對其所處脈絡進行長期的田野調查，藉此深入探究。儘管如此，這不表示民族音樂學者不再進行比較研究。筆者承續晚近民族誌研究者對於既有比較研究的批判與反思，主張有意義的比較－包括外顯比較－仍然是民族音樂學、人類學與相關文化分析領域知識生產的重要方法。筆者分析晚近英語世界與臺灣地區所出版之民族音樂學研究，指出至少有五種不同的比較取徑。筆者繼而以自身與其他民族誌研究者的比較經驗為依據，主張民族誌視野下的比較，與其說是指出事物之間異同所在的事實陳述，不如說是研究者透過反身性實踐，試圖創造不同脈絡之間連結方式的意義建構。在其中，研究者探索、銘刻自身所關注的可比較性，並且經歷視域變容的過程。文末筆者提出三種轉化比較為反身性實踐的策略，並且說明研究者如何能藉此重新理解比較個案與它們所共同牽涉到的研究主題，在知識建構的「建林」過程中，亦逐漸「見林」。英文摘要：This article explores the diverse modes of comparison in Ethnomusicology, and proposes the notion and strategies of ”comparison as reflexive practice,” based on the author's ethnographic and comparative study of the institutionalization of Finnish pelimanni and Taiwanese Hakka music. Deeply shaped by the cultural relativism of Anthropology, Ethnomusicology shifted the traditional paradigm of Comparative Musicology while being institutionalized as an academic discipline in postwar North America. Since then, most ethnomusicologists have recognized the importance of fieldwork for the study of music culture; they have emphasized that researchers cannot merely sit in the armchair comparing or contrasting archival data produced by other researchers, but have to learn to play the music they study and conduct ethnographic research to gain deeper understanding of the research subject. Nevertheless, this ”ethnographic turn” doesn't mean that ethnomusicologists stop doing comparison or denying the usefulness of comparison. I discuss recent criticism and reflection on existing comparative research in Ethnomusicology, Anthropology and other neighboring fields of cultural analysis. In addition, I analyze comparative studies in Ethnomusicology, arguing that at least five modes of comparison are prominent across these studies. Furthermore, based on my own research experience as well as other ethnographers' commentaries on comparison, I suggest comparison in the ethnographer's eye is not just about identifying similarities and differences between cases in comparison. In contrast, it entails a complicated process of theory construction through which a researcher creates meaningful ties across different contexts. I indicate comparison takes place in ethnographers' exploration and inscription, through which they construct comparabilities across contexts and the horizon of both the research subject and the cases in comparison transforms. In addition, I propose a series of strategies useful for turning comparison into reflexive practice, analyzing the ways by which they help unveil assumptions that have been taken for granted, recontextualize and connect cultural practices and social actions/interactions apart from each other, and facilitate researchers' efforts to ”see the forest for the trees” in the process of knowledge construction.起始頁-結束頁：113-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所14篇名：族群邊界與認同梯度：雲南省隴川縣老馬寨回族的飲食與族屬並列篇名：Ethnic Boundaries and the Identity Gradient: Diet And Ethnicity of the Hui Ethnic Group in Laoma Village, Longchuan County, Yunnan作者：桂榕(Rong Gui)關鍵字：邊疆回族;飲食;族屬;族群邊界;認同梯度;Hui ethnic group in the borderland;diet;ethnicity;ethnic boundary;identity gradient期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：老馬寨回族作為邊疆多民族區域共同體中的一員，是「一對多」回族社區類型的代表，它既具有中國回族內部的同質性，也具有較突出的民族邊緣性和特殊性；這種邊緣性和特殊性，集中體現為邊疆回族與當地多民族基於生存交互性而產生的族群邊界的可穿透性與民族認同的梯度化。筆者以作為回族族屬象徵符號的飲食為切入點，從回族集體族屬的社會表達與個體族屬的梯度表現兩層面，來討論回族飲食與族屬之間的密切聯繫。建構主義為主的民族認同的包容性、生活實踐與「清真」觀念的普遍脫節，是老馬寨回族邊緣性的主要特徵。老馬寨回族認同梯度及民族邊緣性的形成，與其所居多民族邊疆特有的文化生態與國家邊疆體制密切相關，筆者從微觀、中觀、宏觀三個層面就其邊緣性成因進行分析總結。該個案對回族族屬、邊緣族群及邊疆民族關係相關研究可能的理論拓展與反思，主要有兩方面：一是在回族族屬研究方面，可能會帶給我們一些從邊緣反觀中心的思考；二是在理論分析工具與方法論方面，具有一定的創新性。英文摘要：Laoma village is part of the community of the borderland multiethnic region. It is representative of communities which consist of the Hui plus multiple other ethnic groups. It has the internal homogeneity of the Chinese Hui nationality, and as well as national marginality and particularity, which is manifest in the permeable ethnic boundaries and gradiated ethnic identities which are based in the interactions between the Hui and other local nationalities. Focusing on the diet of Hui village people, which plays a symbolic role of Hui ethnicity, the author discusses the close relationship between diet and ethnicity from both collective and individual perspectives. An important feature of Hui marginality is that ethnic identity is primarily based on constructivism and on the living practices which are commonly disjointed from the concept of Halal. The formation of the identity gradient among the Hui of Laoma village is closely related to the particular cultural ecology and the national frontier system of the multi-ethnic borderland in western Yunnan. The author analyzes the factors in this formation from the microscopic, middle view, and macroscopic perspectives. The possible theoretical contributions and reflections on Hui ethnicity, marginalized ethnic groups, and frontier ethnic relationships lie in two aspects: firstly, in terms of the study of Hui nationality this case provides some reflection on the center from the position of marginality; secondly, in terms of theoretical analysis toosl and methodology, this case study has a certain value.起始頁-結束頁：159-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所15篇名：Book Reviews: iGen: Why Today's Super-Connected Kids Are Growing Up Less Rebellious, More Tolerant, Less Happy - and Completely Unprepared for Adulthood作者：張仁和期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：218-222資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所01篇名：稅制調整與地下經濟—臺灣動態隨機一般均衡模型分析並列篇名：TAX REFORMAND THE UNDERGROUND ECONOMY IN TAIWAN: A DSGE APPROACH作者：傅敬堯(Ching-Yao Fu);林雪瑜(Hsieh-Yu Lin);楊淑珺(Shu-Chun S. Yang)關鍵字：地下經濟;查緝罰款;消費稅;稅改;動態隨機一般均衡模型;Underground economy;Tax evasion penalty;Consumption tax;Tax reform;DSGE model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：臺灣自2000年以來，政府稅收和其它收入占GDP的比大致呈現一下滑的趨勢，造成政府舉債的逐年增加。因此，如何增加稅收以健全財政為目前臺灣經濟所面臨的重要課題。本文建構一個包含地下財及合法財之兩部門動態隨機一般均衡（dynamic stochastic general equilibrium）模型，透過校準，分析兩種稅率的調整－提高查緝罰款率或提高消費稅率－對於稅收以及總體經濟的影響。結果顯示，兩種方法皆可以達到增加稅收的目的，但對兩部門的總體影響大不相同。以增加同樣的政府總稅收占總產出之比例而言，提升查緝罰款率對總產出負面效果較小，且能縮小地下財部門並擴大正常財部門的產出。提升消費稅率對於兩部門產出的效果則恰好相反。文中也發現兩部門間的勞動替代彈性對增稅之總產出效果有重要影響。當兩部門勞動替代彈性變大時，可減緩總產出面臨的負面衝擊。本文的另一貢獻是，提供一個結構總體模型，用以推估一經濟體之地下經濟的規模。英文摘要：The tax revenue-to-GDP ratio in Taiwan has gradually declined since 2000. Among various approaches to raising revenues, this paper compares increasing the tax evasion penalty rate on underground economic activity to increasing the consumption tax rate, using a two-sector DSGE model. It finds that both approaches can raise revenues but have very different sectoral effects: raising the tax evasion penalty shrinks the underground economy and increases the out- put of the formal sector, opposite to the effects of raising consumption taxes. Increasing the consumption tax rate has more negative effects on output than increasing the tax evasion penalty for a given revenue-to-output share raised on impact. The paper also finds that higher sectoral elasticity between labor of the two sectors produces less negative effects on total output. Finally, the calibration exercise, making use of tax revenue-to-output data, offers a structural method to assess the size of an underground economy.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：利潤移轉的租稅誘因及反誘因對海外關係企業布局的影響—以臺灣上市公司為例並列篇名：LOCATION CHOICE AND TAX INCENTIVES OF PROFIT SHIFTING: THE CASE OF TAIWAN'S MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS作者：陳香梅(Shinemay Chen);胡偉民(Wei-Min Hu)關鍵字：區位選擇;租稅協定;利潤移轉;漁獵協定;混合羅吉斯模型;Locational choice;Tax treaty;Profit shifting;Treaty shopping;Mixed logit期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：近年來，各國對外投資多採取多層級的複雜跨國股權控制結構；以臺灣為例，2015年臺灣上市公司的海外關係企業由臺灣母公司直接控制的僅占22.24%，高達77.76%的海外關係企業係由中介分支機構所持有。而此現象,多被各國租稅當局視為用以利潤移轉及稅基侵蝕的安排。本研究遂以2001年至2015年臺灣上市公司在79國新設的9,789家關係企業為樣本，利用mixed logit模型，探討利潤移轉租稅誘因及反誘因變數對跨國企業設立海外關係企業區位選擇的影響。本文不僅首度檢視地主國移轉訂價規範及資本弱化條款的實施是否影響臺灣上市公司新設關係企業的海外區位選擇；更在現有文獻之上，進一步探討租稅協定及漁獵租稅協定對跨國企業區位選擇的影響。最後，透過反事實分析，檢視臺灣上市公司在各國租稅政策的變化下，所進行的區位選擇替換。由均值或固定參數的估計結果顯示，移轉訂價規範、資本弱化規範及租稅協定的簽署都屬於利潤移轉的租稅反誘因，會降低臺灣上市公司在該區位新設關係企業的機率。相對的，免稅天堂或具有廣泛租稅協定網絡是跨國公司從事利潤移轉的租稅誘因，會增加臺灣上市公司新設關係企業的機率。此外，反事實分析模擬的結果發現，當「兩岸租稅協議」生效後，中國將會流失29.51個百分點的新設關係企業，新設關係企業的地點將轉向香港、日本、南韓、美國及印度等地。最後，模擬各國單邊降低稅率15%，發現美國2017年年底的租稅改革對臺灣上市公司選擇美國作為新設關係企業的區位之吸引力並不如中國、香港、及日本降稅的結果。英文摘要：Over the past few years, foreign investment in many countries has adopted multi-level, complex, multinational ownership control structures. In Taiwan in 2015, for example, only 22.24% of overseas subsidiaries of Taiwanese listed companies were controlled by Taiwan's parent companies, and up to 77.76% of overseas subsidiaries were held by intermediary affiliates. This phenomenon is often viewed by tax authorities in various countries as an arrangement for profit shifting which leads to tax base erosion. In this study, we adopt a mixed logit method, with the sample of 9,789 new subsidiaries of Taiwan's listed companies from 2001 to 2015, located in 79 countries, to explore the influence of tax incentives relevant to profit shifting on the overseas location choice of multinational corporations. This project is the first to examine whether the implementation of transfer pricing or capital thinning provisions of the host country can affect the location choice of Taiwan's subsidiaries, and it is also the first in the literature to explore the effect of bilateral tax treaties or treaty shopping on the location choice. Finally, through counterfactual analysis, we estimate the relative change in the probability of location choice due to relevant scenarios of tax policy changes in in various countries. Estimation results of the mean or fixed coefficients show that transfer pricing rules, capital thinning regulation and signature of a bilateral tax treaty with Taiwan are all disincentives for profit shifting, reducing the chances of Taiwanese listed companies establishing new subsidiaries in the country. In contrast, a tax haven or an extensive network of tax treaty agreements is a tax incentive for corporations to make profit transfers and increases the chances of establishing a new subsidiary. The results of counterfactual analysis predict that after the bilateral tax treaty with Taiwan comes into effect, China will lose 29.51 percentage points of all the newly established subsidiaries of Taiwan's multination corporations, mainly to Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea, the United States and India. Finally, by simulating a unilateral reduction of tax rates by 15%in each country, we find that the attraction of the tax reform in the United States towards the end of 2017 to Taiwan's listed companies in choosing the United States as a new subsidiary is disadvantageous to the same tax cuts implemented in China, Hong Kong and Japan.起始頁-結束頁：47-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：稅制與遺贈決策之實證分析並列篇名：AN EMPIRICAL STUDY ON ESTATE AND GIFT DECISIONS作者：李家銘(Chia-Ming Li);陳國樑(Joe Chen);黃勢璋(Shih-Chang Huang)關鍵字：遺產及贈與稅;稅制改革;生前贈與;死後遺贈;Estate and gift tax;Tax reform;Inter vivos gift;Bequest期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：為檢視遺產及贈與稅制對於個人財產移轉決策之影響，本研究藉由臺灣2001-2014年的遺產及贈與稅申報資料，針對個人贈與意願、分年贈與次數以及年贈與金額，透過Probit模型、統計檢定及差異中差異（difference-indifference;DID）等計量方法，探討2009年遺贈稅制改革如何改變個人生前贈與或死後遺贈之決策。研究結果發現，稅制改革明顯影響個人生前贈與決策：對於被繼承人淨財富高於遺產稅免稅額者，稅制改革提高其生前贈與意願、分年贈與情形及年贈與金額；尤其當被繼承人的淨財富愈高，贈與意願與年贈與金額增加之效果就愈趨明顯。英文摘要：In order to examine how the estate and tax system affects individuals' decisions on property transfers, this study uses Taiwanese estate and gift tax re- turns data from 2001 to 2014 to study individuals' willingness to make inter vivos property transfers, the number of annual gifts, and the amount of annual gifts. Results from the Probit regression, statistic test and difference-in-difference (DID) analysis suggest that the estate and gift tax reform in 2009 affects inter vivos property transfers siginificantly: in cases where decedents' net wealth is higher than the estate tax exemption, the tax reform increases individuals' willingness to make inter vivos property transfers, the number of annual gifts, and the amount of annual gifts; furthermore, the effect is increasing with respect to the level of net wealth.起始頁-結束頁：97-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：壹、2018年臺灣經濟情勢總展望之修正作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：147-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：151-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷1期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：178-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：美國和日本量化寬鬆貨幣政策對臺灣經濟衝擊－GVAR模型之分析並列篇名：IMPACT OF U.S. AND JAPAN QUANTITATIVE EASING POLICIES ON TAIWAN: A GVAR APPROACH作者：吳俊毅(Jyun-Yi Wu);黃裕烈(Yu-Lieh Huang)關鍵字：量化寬鬆政策;GVAR模型;衝擊反應函數;Quantitative easing;GVAR model;Impulse responses function期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：美國與日本量化寬鬆(quantitative easing，以下簡稱QE)貨幣政策不只影響單一國家，還會透過金融市場的傳遞，存在複雜的雙邊，或是多邊的影響效果，影響全球的經濟。有鑒於此，本文嘗試利用具有捕捉國際聯動特性的全球向量自我迴歸模型(global vector autoregressive model，以下簡稱GVAR)，考量全球29個國家的經濟數據，來分析美國與日本QE政策對臺灣經濟的衝擊與影響效果。透過GVAR模型，本文嘗試探討以下四種情境，分別是(1)僅美國施行QE政策退場；(2)僅日本施行QE政策退場；(3)美國與日本同時實行QE退場的情況；以及(4)美國施行QE退場但日本QE持續進行的情境。實證結果發現，在情境(1)下，短期之<U+5185>對臺灣GDP成長率有顯著的負面衝擊，但長期的影響效果並不顯著。此外，該政策也會使臺灣的股價指數受到顯著的負面衝擊，衝擊期間大約1季左右。在情境(2)，影響效果跟美國QE退場的影響情況大致相同，只是都不顯著。造成此結果的主因可能是日本QE的購債規模遠小於美國。在(3)的情境下，我們發現對臺灣GDP成長率以及股票市場都會有較大且較<U+7232>顯著的負面衝擊。在最後的情境(4)下，我們發現對臺灣GDP成長率沒有顯著的影響，但短期<U+5185>對臺灣通貨膨脹率卻會有顯著的負面效果。英文摘要：Several rounds of quantitative easing (hereafter QE) in the U.S. and Japan have increased the size of the central banks' balance sheets, which is not only to stimulate the U.S. and Japanese economies by encouraging banks to make loans, but also to affect the emerging economies via the market networks. In this study, the global vector autoregression (hereafter GVAR) model proposed by Pesaran et al. (2004) is applied to analyze how the QE policies of the U.S. and Japan affect Taiwan's economy. Four different circumstances are considered here: (1) the U.S. Federal Reserve tapered its QE policy, (2) the Bank of Japan reduces its economic boost and tapers its QE policy off, (3) both the U.S. Federal Reserve and Bank of Japan wind down their bond buying stimulus programs, and (4) the U.S. Federal Reserve tapers its QE policy but the Bank of Japan adopts a QE policy. Our results indicate that the performance of the GVAR model is encouraging in the sense that the effects of various QE shocks on core macro variables of interest are generally consistent with the predictions based on the standard macroeconomic theory. In case (1), the effect of the QE tapering by the U.S. Federal Reserve implies a decrease in the real output of Taiwan in the short run. It also has a negative impact on Taiwan's stock market. Similar results can also be found in case (2). However, the impacts of the QE tapering by the Bank of Japan are not statistically significant. In case (3), both the QE tapering in the U.S. Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan have a significant negative effect on the real GDP and stock price in Taiwan. Finally, the impact of case (4) is negative for Taiwan's inflation rate.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：政府擴大公共建設投資支出對我國總體經濟、財政及所得分配影響之動態一般均衡分析並列篇名：AN ECONOMY-WIDE ANALYSIS OF THE IMPACT OF INCREASING GOVERNMENT INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT ON MACRO-ECONOMY, FISCAL BALANCE AND INCOME DISTRIBUTION: A DYNAMIC COMPUTABLE GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH作者：劉瑞文(Ruey-Wan Liou);許聖民(Sheng Ming Hsu);林幸君(Hsing-Chun Lin);謝德衍(Te-Yen Hsieh);張靜貞(Ching-Cheng Chang);徐世勳(Shih-Hsun Hsu)關鍵字：公共投資;所得分配;動態可計算一般均衡模型;Public investment;Income distribution;Dynamic computable general equilibrium model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：我國政府投資占國內生產毛額比率由2005年的4.12%降至2015年的2.60%，而政府投資逐年下滑造成基礎建設無法支撐產業升級需要，使得經濟成長力道趨緩。本文針對政府擴大公共建設投資支出，分別輔以增加所得稅或提升間接稅作為政府投資財源，分析對國內經濟與產業影響。模擬結果顯示，若擴大政府投資，國內的非貿易競爭型產業將透過實質匯率下降之影響，以及民間投資與內需市場之帶動下而擴大產出，有利經濟成長與產業發展。若採用所得稅融通，能使國內所得分配不均改善；若採間接稅支付政府消費，則對財政餘絀能有正面效果。英文摘要：The ratio of the Taiwanese government's investment to GDP dropped from 4.12% in 2005 to 2.60% in 2015, and continued to fall afterwards. The diminishing investment in infrastructure was insufficient to support industrial needs and slowed economic growth. This paper examines the effects of an expansion in public construction investment expenditure. We assume two alternatives for financing such expenditures. The first is an increase in income tax, and the second is an increase in indirect taxes as the source for government investment. Simulation results show that increased government investment will have a more positive effect on GDP than increased government consumption. Additionally, government investment induces further private investment. Using income taxes to finance investment can reduce domestic income inequality. Indirect taxation, on the other hand, can have a positive effect on financial debt if used for government consumption. Due to domestic currency appreciation as well as investment-driven effects, domestic non-trade-based industries can experience improved industrial output, favorable economic growth, and industrial development.起始頁-結束頁：41-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：總體缺電成本估計－CGE模型之應用並列篇名：POWER OUTAGE COSTS ESTIMATION AT THE MACRO LEVEL: AN APPLICATION OF CGE MODEL作者：柏雲昌(Yunchang Jeffrey Bor);賴偉文(Weiwen Lai)關鍵字：總體缺電成本估計;可計算一般均衡模型;電力經濟;需求面管理;Macro outage cost;CGE model;Electricity economics;Demand side management期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：基於臺灣地區兩大政黨對「無核家園」政策之爭議逐漸縮小，再加上地區民眾對燃煤電廠排放的空氣汙染多所疑慮，可預見未來臺灣地區的電源開發工作將日益困難。此問題甚至引起外商和高科技電子產業的擔憂，認<U+7232>自2017年後可能面臨限電的危機，將嚴重影響生產成本。一般而言，因供電系統的備用容量數降低，進而會發生缺電機率。民生及產業在缺電時都會受影響及發生損失，即所謂的缺電成本。跟據本文研究結果顯示，以發電端缺電機率(LOLP)實績值做<U+7232>缺電成本政策模擬情境的下界，另以台灣電力公司需求面管理(DSM)實際契約作<U+7232>缺電成本政策模擬情境的上界，估計總生產部門缺電成本約<U+7232>新臺幣1.01元/度至4.01元/度(實質附加價值)。家計部門缺電成本乃從新臺幣0.09元/度至2.19元/度不等。缺電也將對實質GDP、就業率、消費、和進出口等總體經濟將產生負面的衝擊。英文摘要：Due to the recent, rapid development of a ”nuclear-free homeland” consensus, plus increasing air pollution from coal-fired power plants, maintaining the infrastructure of electricity supply is becoming more and more difficult in Taiwan. Foreign enterprises and local high-tech industries have expressed serious concerns about this issue. They have even projected that there will be power shortages after 2017, and the production costs due to uncertainty of power supply will increase dramatically. If power supply reliability decreases, it will heavily erode the spinning reserve of the power system and increase the probability of power shortages. Power users, including industrial users and residential users, will bear losses due to interruptions of electricity supply. The present study adopts a CGE model (EnFore-Green) to estimate power outage costs at the macro level in Taiwan. The average power outage costs are forecast to be about 1.01-4.01 NT$/kWh for the production sector, and 0.09-2.19 NT$/kWh for household sector. The interruptions to electricity supply will also cause negative impacts to all macro level variables, such as real GDP, employment, consumption, and imports and exports.起始頁-結束頁：79-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：壹、2018 年臺灣經濟情勢總展望作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：111-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：115-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：48卷2期出版年：2018起始頁-結束頁：143-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：A Study of Foreign Policy Analysis Framework in Germany's Energy Policy of the Post-Cold War Era並列篇名：德國在後冷戰時期能源政策的外交分析作者：斯特拉托斯．波利塔契斯(Stratos Pourzitakis);克利斯多夫．希利<U+6E29>斯基(Krzysztof Sliwinski);韋奇宏關鍵字：energy security;foreign policy;Nord Stream;Germany;Russia;能源安全;外交政策;北溪天然氣管道;德國;俄羅斯期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：This paper re-examines the Foreign Policy Analysis (FPA) with regards to the security of energy relations between Germany and Russia, understood as specific foreign policy actions-that is, ”products” of foreign policy decisions. It attempts to explain why Germany consistently sought better relations with Russia, partially with the aim of securing energy supplies. Drawing on Walter Carlsnaes's identified lack of integrative and dynamic models that convincingly include both types of variables-structures and actors in a dynamic fashion-this study offers a link between the FPA and energy policy. The paper focuses on the years from the 1990s through to the present, across various segments of the German government, and explores major values and objectives of German energy policy. German energy policy is intrinsic to German-Russian relations, and places particular emphasis on the Nord Stream 1 pipeline. Our research indicates that the linear sequence, as proposed by Carlsnaes himself (structure- disposition-intention-action), can be conducive in bringing about favourable conditions for further actions following the same path.英文摘要：本篇文章檢驗德國與俄羅斯之間的能源外交關係。德國之所以尋求改善與俄羅斯的關係，有一部分是為了確保能源供應無虞。本研究奠基於Walter Carlsnaes的理論架構，整合結構與行為者這兩個變數，以分析外交政策與能源政策之連結。本文聚焦在九<U+3007>年代至今，橫跨多個德國政府部門，探討德國能源政策的價值與目標。德國能源政策是德國與俄羅斯之間外交關係的實質，且著重在北溪天然氣管道一號線。我們的研究指出，Carlsnaes提出的「結構－屬性－意圖－行動」直線序列，可以為進一步的行動產生有利的條件。起始頁-結束頁：481-512資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201812_48(4).00012篇名：中美競逐影響力下的臺灣避險策略並列篇名：Taiwan's Hedging Strategy Under the Influence of US-China Competition and Cooperation作者：吳崇涵(Charles Chong-han Wu)關鍵字：外交政策;避險;美中臺關係;國際關係理論;中國大陸研究;foreign policy;hedging;the US-China-Taiwan relations;international relations theory;China studies期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：當東亞地區面對中國大陸的崛起，與美國的持續影響力時，決策者可以選擇使用避險策略，不在兩大強權之間選邊。自從歐巴馬政府時期的「重返亞太」(Pivot to Asia)，到川普2017年訪問亞洲時的「印度－太平洋」(Indo-Pacific)，充分顯示北京與華盛頓除了經濟上的對峙外，軍事上亦相互較勁。有鑑於此，臺灣蔡英文政府試圖採取「避險」政策。本文主要對避險(hedging)加以討論，並以馬英九與蔡英文時期的政策為例，探討避險的定義與應用。期盼藉由文獻回顧及實證分析，在避險政策上，討論臺灣如何謀求經濟利益與地區安全的雙重保障。英文摘要：In the case of East Asian strategies towards a rising China and the existing U.S. influences, unless the dominant powers insist, decision makers have enough space hedging without leaning to either side. The ”Pivot to Asia” policy by the previous Obama's administration and Trump's ”Indo-Pacific” policy in 2017 has shown that there is not only economic cooperation between Beijing and Washington, but the continuous military competitions also need our attention between these two great powers. Thus, Tsai Ing-wen's administration has adopted a more practical position that is best described as ”hedging” yields with more flexible options. This paper aims to show the comprehensive studies in decisions by Ma Ying-jeou and Tsai Ing-wen to adopt hedging strategies. The findings demonstrate that Taiwan has contiunuosly managed its policy by using hedge over the current regional affairs.起始頁-結束頁：513-547資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201812_48(4).00023篇名：假設性思考與解釋關係並列篇名：Counterfactual Reasoning and Explanatory Relations作者：鄧敦民(Duen-Min Deng)關鍵字：假設性思考;解釋關係;可能世界語意學;因果模型;前提語意學;counterfactual reasoning;explanatory relations;possible world semantics;causal models;premise semantics期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷4期出版年：2018中文摘要：「假設性思考」與「解釋關係」之間有著十分緊密的關聯。首先，大部分的哲學家都同意，「假設性思考」對於我們了解「解釋關係」有很大的幫助，因為解釋關係通常具有反事實條件句的蘊含，使得我們可以透過假設性思考來檢測「解釋關係」是否成立。另一方面，「解釋關係」對於我們了解假設性思考也扮演了很重要的角色，而這部分的關聯卻是文獻當中較少提及的。本文的目標便是要闡明這部分的關聯，特別針對在「反事實條件句」這種展現假設性思考的重要方式中，「解釋關係」所扮演的角色。本文將從「可能世界語意學」、「因果模型」以及「前提語意學」等主要理解反事實條件句的語意學架構著手，來檢視「解釋關係」在當中所扮演的角色。英文摘要：There is an intimate connection between ”counterfactual reasoning” and ”explanatory relations.” On the one hand, ”counterfactual reasoning” plays a crucial role in helping us establish certain explanatory relations, as it is widely acknowledged that explanatory relations have counterfactual implications, by which we may test whether a given explanatory relation holds. On the other hand, explanatory relations also play a crucial role in our counterfactual reasoning. This, however, is comparatively less discussed in the literature, and it is the aim of this paper to explicate it more clearly, with a special focus on the role of explanatory relations in our understanding of counterfactual conditionals. I shall examine the alleged connection through the main semantic frameworks for counterfactual conditionals, including the possible world semantics, causal models, and the premise semantics.起始頁-結束頁：549-590資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201812_48(4).00034篇名：Subjectivity Under Construction-Messianism and Masochism in ”Circe”並列篇名：建構中的主體：論〈瑟爾西〉中的彌賽亞主義與受虐狂作者：許靜瑛(Ching-Ying Hsu)關鍵字：J. Lacan;”Circe”;Sinthome;Messianism;Masochism;拉岡;〈瑟爾西〉;聖狀(Sinthome);彌賽亞主義;受虐狂期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：I read the problematic episode of ”Circe” as Joyce's experiment with a sinthomatic construction of subjectivity, contending that there is a constant process of unknotting and reknotting in the construction of textual subjectivity. I examine whether the sinthomatic construction of subjectivity, as it is evidenced in the fantasmatic episodes, truly invents new structural stratifications of subjectivity and alternative libidinal organizations. By way of Lacanian psychoanalysis and Zizek's theory, I argue that masochism in ‘‘Circe’’ is not necessarily ethical but can function as a preparatory step towards the true ethical act. Pseudomessianism and masochism are opposed to the true messianism manifested through neighbour love as a genuine ethical act. Enlightened by Lacan's complex theory of the psychoanalytic act and Badiou's idea of new neighbourhood, I try to capture the ethical impact of genuine messianism. Through works of love, a new neighbourhood, conceived as an open, generic set in the Badiouian sense, comes into being. Love as an ethical act is a life-altering, structure-transforming movement, reconfiguring the relationship between the subject and the Other, gesturing toward a new singular universal, a new formation of neighbourhood. Moreover, ”Circe” does not terminate with the indulgence of an idiosyncratic sinthome, but the moment when the sinthome is breached by the ethical act of neighbour love, which opens for the further renewal and reinvention of the sinthome and the intersubjective relationship.英文摘要：本文探討喬伊斯如何在〈瑟爾西〉中進行主體聖狀建構（sinthomatic construction）實驗，我主張〈瑟爾西〉呈現拉岡晚期拓墣學中所討論的主體不斷消解與重組的過程，進而檢視特定聖狀建構是否產生新的主體結構和驅力組織。透過拉岡與齊傑克的理論，本文主張虛偽彌賽亞主義和受虐狂都不具備倫理潛力，兩者皆與藉由鄰人之愛所展現的真實彌賽亞主義相對。受拉岡倫理作為理論和巴迪厄鄰人區域論述啟發，本文闡釋真實彌賽亞主義將帶來嶄新的獨特共相與新生的鄰人區域。〈瑟爾西〉終結於鄰人之愛所致的病徵突破，藉此重寫、再製聖狀，並開展嶄新的互為主體關係。起始頁-結束頁：333-386資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201809_48(3).00015篇名：The U.S. Securitization of the 1992 Consensus -Security Speech Acts and Threat Inflation, 2011-2012並列篇名：美國，安全化與九二共識：安全論述與誇大威脅，2011-2012作者：韋奇宏(Chi-hung Wei)關鍵字：The United States;securitization;the 1992 Consensus;speech acts;threat inflation;美國;安全化;九二共識;論述;誇大威脅期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：During 2011-2012, the ”1992 Consensus” was understood as relating to the cross-Strait security situation. Yet, I argue that the 1992 Consensus was not intrinsically a security problem but rather became one through U.S. acts of securitization. While the 1992 Consensus was originally seen as a political issue, the United States brought a security logic to bear on it by arguing that cross-Strait relations would likely become unstable should the 1992 Consensus be denied. As a result of the issue linkage or rhetorical framing, what once had been a political formula came to be understood in Taiwan as a security issue. I also argue that the U.S. securitization of the 1992 Consensus was a discursive practice that inflated Chinese threats to Taiwan. A comparative-historical analysis reveals that what causes cross-Strait tensions is Taipei's adoption of pro-independence policies that provoke China rather than Taipei's rejection of the 1992 Consensus.英文摘要：在2011-2012年之間，「九二共識」的普遍了解是一個兩岸安全的議題。然而，我的論點是，九二共識並不是一個天生的安全議題，而是經由美國「安全化」的論述做為而建構成為一個安全議題。在2000-2008年之間，九二共識是一個圍繞在「一個中國」定義上的政治議題。然而，2012年臺灣總統大選期間，美國賦予九二共識一個安全邏輯，其做法為聲稱一個沒有九二共識的兩岸關係會變成不穩定與緊張。經由美國的議題連結或者語言技巧，九二共識原本的政治意義消去，而成為一個安全議題。我同時主張，美國的安全化作為誇大中國對臺灣的威脅。歷史經驗顯示，兩岸關係緊張導致於臺灣的獨立舉動，而非臺灣拒絕九二共識。起始頁-結束頁：387-427資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201809_48(3).00026篇名：新啟蒙：對美國政治言說的認知與跨文化分析並列篇名：New Enlightenment-A Cognitive and Cross-Cultural Analysis of American Political Discourses作者：鄧育仁(Norman Y. Teng)關鍵字：深度故事;重新框束;新啟蒙;雷科夫;儒學;Deep Story;Reframing;New Enlightenment;George Lakoff;Confucianism期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷3期出版年：2018中文摘要：雷科夫由對美國政治言論的分析，提出新啟蒙的理念。他的分析展示了（1）政治觀念如何受家庭價值與理想的親子關係所框束、（2）框束的不同方式，以及（3）因框束不同而導致多種樣態的界定民眾所擁抱之價值與何者算是政治通念的認知模式。新啟蒙敦促民眾正視這種認知多樣性，並對政治言說作出相應的重新框束。通過一種批判性及跨文化的分析，本文論證何以按照雷科夫所描述的重新框束進行，反會弄巧成拙。本文提議宜調整重新框束的作法，並將之安置於一種更包容、鼓勵聆聽與有感理解的公民對話裡。英文摘要：Lakoff proposes an idea of New Enlightenment in his analysis of American political discourses, which reveals (1) how political ideas are framed in terms of family values and ideals of parent-child relationship, (2) different ways of the framing, and (3) the resultant diversity of cognitive models that define values people embrace and what counts as common sense in politics. New Enlightenment urges people to face squarely the cognitive diversity, and to reframe political discourses accordingly. Through a critical and cross-cultural analysis, I argue that reframing, as portrayed by Lakoff, is self-defeating, and propose that it should be modified and incorporated into a more inclusive civic dialogue that encourages listening and empathic understanding.起始頁-結束頁：429-480資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201809_48(3).00037篇名：Identifying Sustainability -The Measurement and Typology of Sustainable Agriculture in the United States並列篇名：識別永續性：美國永續農業的測量與類型作者：郭蕙如(Hui-Ju Kuo)關鍵字：environmental sustainability;economic sustainability;social sustainability;measurement;U.S. county agricultural statistics;環境永續性;經濟永續性;社會永續性;測量;美國郡縣農業統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：Sustainable agriculture seeks to create an economically viable, socially supportive, and environmentally sound farming system. However, there is limited empirical research on measuring agricultural sustainability, its components, and spatial distribution. Drawing data from the 2012 Census of Agriculture, a confirmatory factor analysis helps identify a three-factor structure of sustainable farming across counties in the United States: the environmental sustainability component refers to practices that reduce environmental degradation; the economic dimension highlights the efficiency of agricultural production; and the social component identifies practices which tend to promote economic viability and social support for communities. A cluster analysis on factor score indexes further indicates that the typology of sustainable agriculture includes: a majority of counties in the high environment & low economy and moderate intensity categories are widespread in this country; a low environment & high economy group is concentrated in the Northern Great Plains and in Iowa and Illinois; a few counties in the extremely low environment & extremely high economy cluster are located along the Lower Mississippi Valley, and dispersed throughout the Midwest, California, and Florida; and a small number of counties in the high social group are primarily concentrated in the New England, along the Pacific Coast, and around the Northern Great Lakes. In general, an agroecosystem framework that focuses on the interplay between social and ecological process of the agricultural system provides insights at the systems level and explicitly interprets the core attributes of sustainable agriculture, both in definition and measurement.英文摘要：永續農業尋求創造一種在經濟上可行、具有社會支持性，並且無害環境的農作系統，然而當前對於農業永續性的測量及其組成內容和空間分布的實證研究仍相當有限。藉由2012年農業普查資料，驗證性因素分析指出美國永續農業在郡縣層級的多元結構：「環境」的永續性是有關減低環境破壞的農作實踐，「經濟」的永續性彰顯農業生產的效率，「社會」永續性趨向於促進社區的社會支持和經濟活力。依據各郡因素分數之集群分析進一步發現，永續農業的類型包括：大多數屬於「高環境低經濟」及「中等強度」集群的郡縣廣布於全國各地、「低環境高經濟」集群集中於北美大平原北部和愛荷華州與伊利諾州、屬於「極低環境極高經濟」集群的幾個郡縣主要位於下密西西比河谷，並分散在中西部及加利福尼亞州和佛羅里達州、以及主要集中在新英格蘭、太平洋海岸、和大湖區周圍的「高社會」集群的少數郡縣。整體而論，「農業生態系統」之概念架構著重於社會和生態間的相互作用，不僅提供系統層面的洞察力，在定義上和測量上皆明確解釋了永續農業的核心內容。起始頁-結束頁：195-222資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201806_48(2).00018篇名：理性思辨與感官觸動的交織與衝突：托瑪斯．曼《魂斷威尼斯》中的命運之旅並列篇名：The Interweavement and Conflict of Rationality and Sensation—The Travel of Fate in Thomas Mann’s Death in Venice作者：林倩君(Chien-Chun Lin)關鍵字：歐洲文學;藝術觀;現代主義;文學中的哲思;唯美主義;European literature;view of art;modernism;philosophy in literature;aestheticism期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：該小說講述了主人公對長期壓抑的寫作生活感到倦怠之際萌發了出遊的慾望，在威尼斯與波蘭少年塔秋的邂逅，使他對生活的陶醉和對藝術的追求達到了忘我的境地，以至最終染疾而走向毀滅。威尼斯羅曼蒂克的外觀下，城市內卻瘟疫蔓延，映照出主人公充滿矛盾的人格特質。小說中曼表達了對尼采戴奧尼索斯精神的讚賞，並間接否定了叔本華壓抑生命意志的藝術哲學。然而，現實生活中的曼則是偏愛後者。如他所言，在生活中謳歌本能，不過是「一時的修正」。本論文就小說的寫作動機、敘事結構和人物塑造進行了分析與探討，以及對其所蘊涵的尼采和叔本華的美學思想進行了詮釋。英文摘要：The novella Death in Venice narrates the story of the writer von Aschenbach. He writes diligently for years without slackening his efforts. Just as his ascetic lifestyle is taking a toll on him, a chance encounter with a traveller suddenly inspires him anew. His encounter with a handsome young Pole, Tadzio, in Venice, brings his passion for life and his pursuit for perfect art to a condition of ecstasy. As a result, he totally ignores the prevalence of cholera, which consequently results in his illness and ruin. The vacancy of his emotional world coupled with his high position as an aristocrat forms an internal conflict within him that cannot be resolved. The description of Venice city life reflects his personality: despite the romantic scene in Venice, cholera is widespread in the streets. In Mann’s work, he expresses his appreciation of the spirit of Dionysus in The Birth of Tragedy, which was written by Friedrich Nietzsche. He also indirectly rejects Arthur Schopenhauer's philosophy of arts that represses life will. However, Mann favors the latter in his life, saying that praise of drives in life should be merely considered a ”temporary correction.” The research will analyse and probe into the motivation, narrative structure, and characterization of the writing. It will explain the internal conflict artists often experience, as well as the aesthetics of Nietzsche and Schopenhauer implied in the novel. It will also dig into possible relations between the author and the protagonist in terms of background and characteristics.起始頁-結束頁：223-266資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201806_48(2).00029篇名：美國聯邦憲法增修條文第4條搜索令狀原則的新發展：以Jones, Jardines & Grady案為例並列篇名：New Development Regarding Search Warrants under the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution -Jones, Jardines & Grady作者：張陳弘(Chen-Hung Chang)關鍵字：合理隱私期待標準;物理侵入原則;隱私權;美國聯邦憲法增修條文第4條;the reasonable expectation of privacy protection test;the physical trespass doctrine;the right to privacy;the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷2期出版年：2018中文摘要：美國聯邦最高法院在判斷什麼樣的政府行為會構成美國聯邦憲法增修條文第4條規定的搜索而需適用法院的令狀原則要求，在西元2012年Scalia大法官主筆的United States v. Jones案中，產生一個新的轉折發展：主張以隱私權為基礎的合理隱私期待標準與以財產權為基礎的物理侵入原則，兩者間並非「取代」，而係「併存」關係。此一「雙軌理論」主張，繼續在西元2013年之Florida v. Jardines案與西元2015年之Grady v. North Carolina案獲得援用，應值重視。此外，新興科技對於政府搜索行為認定的影響，美國法院出現了物理侵入原則至合理隱私期待標準，再到兩標準併立的轉變因應過程，亦值我國搜索法制發展援引借鏡。英文摘要：In regards to the requirement of a search warrant under the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, a new rule was declared by the U.S. Supreme Court in United States v. Jones in 2012, authored by Justice Scalia. Jones did not adopt the prior position that the reasonable expectation of privacy test should replace the physical trespass doctrine. In Jones, the Court ruled that both tests-a reasonable expectation of privacy (a principle based on the right to privacy), and physical invasion of private property (a principle based on the protection of private property)- should apply in the examination of the requirement of a search warrant. This two-tier theory in Jones was restated by the Court in 2013 in Florida v. Jardines and reaffirmed in 2015 in Grady v. North Carolina. This article introduces the evolvement of Fourth Amendment tests in the U.S. and the above most recent standard the Court has adopted in reviewing searches by the government. The alteration of privacy tests may have reflected the Court's positions in resolving different types of disputes arising from the government's use of innovative technologies in conducting searches. The above development of the U.S. Fourth Amendment tests may provide guidance on approaches to develop our own laws relating to searches conducted by the government.起始頁-結束頁：267-332資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201806_48(2).000310篇名：Exploring the Dynamics of Local Emergency Management Collaboration in the United States -What We Learned from Florida County and City Emergency Managers' Viewpoints並列篇名：探究美國地方災防協力動態：佛州地方災防主管觀點作者：張鎧如(Kaiju Chang)關鍵字：local emergency management;Florida county and city;vertical and horizontal collaborations;emergency manager;地方災害防救;佛羅里達州郡與市;垂直與水平協力;災防主管期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：This study uses a framework developed using the perspectives of internal and external organizational factors, and emergency management capacity to study the drivers of emergency management collaboration (i.e., vertical, horizontal-interlocal, and horizontal-intersectoral collaborations) at the local level. Qualitative data were collected by interviewing county and city emergency managers in Florida to understand practical collaborative activities in both vertical and horizontal contexts, explore county and city managers' rationales behind each type of collaboration, and examine the influences of selected drivers in the theoretical framework. The findings show that for local governments, seeking resources and training opportunities can explain a large proportion of why they seek vertical collaboration. However, in horizontal collaboration, local governments go beyond resource- seeking to also providing assistance to their governmental and non-governmental partners. Horizontal collaboration is more common and more popular than vertical collaboration. In sum, this study helps us gain a theoretical and practical understanding of local emergency management in the United States.英文摘要：本研究藉由文獻檢閱，從組織內部因素、組織外部因素，以及地方政府災防能量三個面向發展研究架構，探討促成美國地方政府從事垂直與水平災防協力的驅動因素；透過訪談美國佛羅里達州郡市地方災防辦公室主管，蒐集資料分析與釐清地方政府實務上，從事不同災防協力活動現況與其背後的理性動機，進行理論與實務的對話。研究發現，在美國的系絡下，尋求資源與訓練機會解釋了大部分地方政府從事垂直協力的動機；而地方政府從事水平協力不僅是為了尋求資源，亦提供了其他政府機關與非政府組織夥伴資源與協助。整體而言，相較於垂直型跨政府層級的災防協力，水平型的跨地方政府、跨部門災防協力更已被廣泛運用。起始頁-結束頁：1-71資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201803_48(1).000111篇名：美國在跨太平洋夥伴協定談判中對勞工權利條款之立場及對我國之影響並列篇名：U.S. Positions Promoting Worker Rights in the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement and Their Impact on Taiwan作者：焦興鎧(Cing-Kae Chiao)關鍵字：跨太平洋夥伴協定;自由貿易協定;勞動人權;國際勞工組織;國際勞動基準;Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreements (TPP);Free Trade Agreements (FTAs);worker rights;International Labor Organization (ILO);international labor standards期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：本文以跨太平洋夥伴協定之談判及簽訂為背景，說明美國與各國談判雙邊及區域自由貿易協定時，如何倡議勞動人權之各類努力，並指出我國應採取之因應作為。除序言及結語外，全文共分四大部分：第一部分說明此協定之演進過程及實質影響，並探討美國參與之動機，以及此協定對我國之重要性。第二部分闡敘美國如何在國際經貿活動中附加勞工權利條款之相關作為。第三部分則根據此協定第19章勞工專章之相關規定，以五項重要之基本勞動人權為主軸，分析美國所採取之立場。最後則針對它歷年來對我國違反這些重要勞動人權之質疑批判等，提出因應之道。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to use the negotiation and signing of the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP) to analyze United States government action in promoting worker rights through bilateral and regional free trade agreements. It also offers several proposals for Taiwan to reform its labor laws and practices seen as hurdles it must overcome to join the TPP. Aside from introductory and concluding remarks, the paper is divided into four sections. First, it briefly describes the historical background and motivations behind the TPP, and the importance of Taiwanese participation. Second, it discusses why and how the U.S. government has raised worker rights issues in international trade, investment and other related activities to safeguard domestic labor. Third, it analyzes the positions taken by the U.S. in promoting five fundamental worker rights contained in Chapter 19 of the TPP. Finally, the paper utilizes various critiques contained in the annual State Department issued Country Reports on Human Right Practices as a basis to propose several reform measures for Taiwan to initiate as required by the TPP. It concludes that these reforms not only improve labor rights domestically, but can Taiwan's labor laws and practices conform to international standards.起始頁-結束頁：73-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201803_48(1).000212篇名：從歐盟會員國憲政危機檢討哥本哈根政治標準執行上之缺失並列篇名：Member States' Constitutional Crises and Deficiencies in EU's Implementation of the Copenhagen Political Criteria作者：邵允鍾(Yung-Djong Shaw)關鍵字：哥本哈根標準;憲政危機;歐盟民主;歐盟法治;歐盟人權;Copenhagen Criteria;constitutional crisis;EU democracy;rule of law in the EU;EU human rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：48卷1期出版年：2018中文摘要：在歐盟與中東歐及巴爾幹國家的加盟談判過程中，哥本哈根標準審查機制促成了此些國家民主、法治、人權保障制度與經濟模式的歐洲化，惟近來部分中東歐國家爆發憲政危機，顯示現行審查機制事實上未能確保所有加盟國的憲政體制皆達到歐盟所要求的穩定性。藉由釐清歐盟價值秩序與會員國憲政秩序的交互影響關係、耙梳歐盟價值保障機制的沿革過程，以及分析匈、波兩國憲政危機之政經社因素，本文主張東擴過程中歐盟在時間壓力下對加盟談判操之過急，以及加盟談判未能強化加盟國之公民社會，是導致哥本哈根政治標準無法克竟其功的重要原因。英文摘要：Accession negotiations have contributed significantly to the Europeanization of democracy, the rule of law, human rights and economic models in Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkans. However, recent constitutional crises in Central and Eastern European countries demonstrate that the Copenhagen Criteria have failed to ensure that all candidate states have reached the required degree of stability in their constitutional systems before accession. Why did the EU fail to screen out those applicants that as yet lacked sufficiently strong democratic institutions, despite the great efforts made during the screening process? By clarifying the interaction between the EU value order and the constitutional orders of the Member States, revisiting the evolution of the EU value-protecting mechanism, and analyzing the socio-political and economic factors behind the constitutional crises in Hungary and Poland, this paper argues that the overhasty pace of the accession negotiations, and the fact that the current value-protecting mechanism was unable to sufficiently empower civil society in the candidate states, are important reasons for the weakness of the current mechanism.起始頁-結束頁：139-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201803_48(1).000301篇名：農業損失空間分析與政策涵義：以雲嘉南淹水潛勢地區為例並列篇名：Spatial Analysis of Agricultural Loss and Policy Review: A Case Study of Flood Potential Area in Yunlin, Chiayi, and Tainan Counties作者：陳雅惠(Ya-Hui Chen);王瓊芯(Chiung-Hsin Wang);李俊霖(Chun-Lin Lee);陳郁蕙(Yu-Hui Chen)關鍵字：潛在農業損失;農業普查;淹水潛勢;地理資訊系統;空間異質性;potential agriculture lost;agricultural survey;flood potential area;geographic information system;spatial heterogeneity期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：41期出版年：2018中文摘要：氣候變遷趨勢下的極端降雨事件對農業有深遠影響，而往往導致農業生產受到嚴重的損害。然而，不同降雨情境下回到農地單元的農業損失空間分布，及其空間分布存在有何種空間異質性，仍未被相關研究清楚指認。因此，本文以空間資料庫與地理資訊系統為基礎，整合農業普查原始資料、農地利用現況、降雨淹水潛勢等相關資訊，以台灣農業重要產區之雲林、嘉義及臺南為對象，探討在不同淹水潛勢的降雨情境下，當一次極端降雨事件發生時，潛在農損金額的空間分布及其空間異質性。研究結果顯示，降雨情境對各地區影響各異，而各類作物產生之經濟損失確實存在空間區位差異，因此需要擬訂不同的災害救助措施以因應各種農損情況，建議的措施包括：農業保險、各類作物生產專區或設施農業等。英文摘要：Since agricultural production is highly correlated with climate and environment conditions, it is anticipated that climate change will have significant impacts on agricultural development. Extreme rainfall is one of the most common phenomenon of climate change, and often results in damage to agriculture. However, spatially explicit assessment of potential damage to agricultural production is still absent, especially that based on units of agricultural land. Yunlin, Chiayi, and Tainan are the major agricultural production regions in Taiwan. Therefore, a geographic information system (GIS), agricultural census data, agricultural land-use survey data, potential flood maps, and other GIS maps are applied in this research to investigate the spatial distribution and spatial heterogeneity of potential damage due to extreme rainfall. Our findings indicate that potential damage resulting from severe rainfall differs by crop as well as production region. Therefore, disaster relief schemes need to be tailored to cope with the various damage circumstances. Applications of agricultural disaster insurance, special production zones for various crops, and strengthening agricultural facilities are suggested.起始頁-結束頁：7-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心2篇名：Constructing an Evaluation Model of Agricultural Tourism Production Value with a Fuzzy AHP Approach並列篇名：運用模糊層級分析法構建農業旅遊產值之評估模型作者：陳彥呈(Yen-Cheng Chen);李青松(Ching-Sung Lee)關鍵字：agricultural tourism production value;fuzzy analytic hierarchy process;agricultural products;core production value output;農業旅遊產值;模糊層級分析法;農業產品;核心產值指標期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：41期出版年：2018中文摘要：Agriculture in Taiwan has undergone transformation. The once production-based agriculture has now been supplemented or even replaced on many small farms by a service-based model. The managerial model of agricultural tourism is becoming more diversified, and the market of agricultural tourism is moving toward a mature market structure. With the emergence of agricultural tourism, the production value thus generated has become important. However, an explicit index and criteria for assessing the current value of agricultural tourism is needed. This study establishes such an index for statistical evaluation of the production value of the agricultural tourism industry, deploying the Delphi method and fuzzy analytic hierarchy process (FAHP). We establish three main criteria, including products, services, and expenditures. Overall, agricultural products remain an important statistical index of production value in agricultural tourism. The present study suggests that the concerned authorities in agricultural tourism apply agricultural products as the core production value output. This study will enable them to estimate and quantify the production value of agricultural tourism in Taiwan.英文摘要：國內農業旅遊乃由生產性的事業轉型為服務性的事業，在新興服務事業裡農業旅遊具有很大的發展空間，由於農業旅遊經營的型態與規模趨於多元，促使農業旅遊產業市場逐漸趨向一個成熟的市場結構；然而隨著農業旅遊的興起，其所創造的產值也相形重要，而評估農業旅遊的產值目前則較無明確的調查指標與標的，因此建立評估農業旅遊之產業產值統計模式是值得深入探討的。本研究透過專家德菲法與模糊層級分析等質量兼具的方法來建構農業旅遊產值指標。研究結果顯示，農業旅遊產值統計指標主要區分為農業產品、旅遊服務、娛樂消費等三大指標，在整體觀點方面，農業產品係為較重要的調查統計指標。因此本研究建議農業旅遊相關主管機關應以農業產品作為農業旅遊主要核心指標，以期能更精確作為農業經濟發展之標的。起始頁-結束頁：57-86資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心3篇名：多元民意調查方法的比較研究並列篇名：A Comparison Study of Multiple Survey Methods作者：曾憲立(Hsien-Lee Tseng);洪永泰(Yung-Tai Hung);朱斌妤(Pin-Yu Chu);黃東益(Tong-Yi Huang);謝翠娟(Tsui-Chuan Hsieh)關鍵字：住宅電話調查;手機訪問調查;網路調查;雙底冊調查之組合估計;telephone survey;mobile phone survey;Internet survey;a post-stratified weighting procedure期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：41期出版年：2018中文摘要：台灣各界多以住宅電話調查方式反映民意，但手機與各種網路通訊工具普及，只使用手機的人口越來越多，以住宅電話號碼為抽樣底冊的調查涵蓋率日益縮小，加上拒訪率上升、較難接觸到年輕族群的意見等影響，使得住宅電話調查的推論結果受到嚴峻考驗。本研究之目的，即是希望透過比較不同調查方法所蒐集之民意調查結果，了解不同調查方法在涵蓋率與可觸及調查對象的模式效應，以及如何有效反應以戶籍資料加權造成的誤差問題，為達上述目的，同時使用住宅電話、手機、網路等調查工具進行資料蒐集，以四年期調查資料，證實了不同的調查方法會導致不同的樣本結構，進而得到不同的調查結果。未來民意調查應考慮不同調查方法所涵蓋母體的範圍差異問題，結合不同調查方式以提高涵蓋率，否則隨著使用手機的民眾比例逐年上升，單以住宅電話調查結果做為民調依據的偏頗將越來越大，本研究並具體提出以戶籍資料為加權依據及組合估計的建議，供未來調查參考。英文摘要：Responsiveness is now a major concern of various normative and empirical theories of democracy. In response to citizens' need to have a more responsive and democratic civil administration, it is important for public policy makers to obtain public opinions during the policy making process. However, the rise of the Internet, various information and communication technologies (ICTs), and social media has brought fundamental changes in the way society works. Consequently, traditional public opinion surveys are facing tremendous challenges, such as low response rates and difficulty in reaching younger generations. This research collects data from landlines, cell phones, and internet surveys for four years to compare different survey methods. The results show that the telephone survey has better access to respondents who are older, the mobile phone survey has better access to male respondents, and the Internet survey has more access to respondents under 40 years old. In addition, the data have shown that the population that each survey method comes into contact with differs greatly from one method to another. For future policy-related surveys, a post-stratified weighting procedure is suggested to integrate samples from various survey methods, so that the samples contacted by the surveys conform more closely to the true populations.起始頁-結束頁：87-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心4篇名：以地址最末兩碼調整之戶中選樣表並列篇名：Using the Last Two Numbers of an Address for Objective Respondent Selection within a Household作者：謝淑惠(Shu-Hui Hsieh)關鍵字：門牌地址抽樣;戶籍抽樣;個人資料保護法;面訪調查;戶中選樣;address-based sampling;register-based sampling;Personal Information Protection Act;face-to-face survey;respondent selection within the household期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：41期出版年：2018中文摘要：台灣於2012年10月1日開始施行「個人資料保護法」（以下簡稱個資法）。為了符合個資法規定，政府機關對於個人資訊的維護與管理更加嚴格，導致戶籍資料僅能提供給政府機構申請，而不再提供學術研究單位做為抽樣清冊。因此，面訪調查將會以門牌地址抽樣的方式代替過去30年來慣用的戶籍抽樣，進而開啟應用戶中選樣於面訪調查之研究。戶中選樣方法首先由Leslie Kish提出，用於從中選住戶地址挑選一位受訪者。本文所提出之戶中選樣表係以門牌地址最末兩碼數字為隨機機制來控制戶中選樣程序，令每一位受訪者被選取的機率均不同。為了比較戶中選樣方法之樣本差異性，我們以電腦模擬方式說明樣本配適性。最後，以2016年科技部補助之門牌地址抽樣計畫預試調查，來說明我們所提出之戶中選樣表的執行成效與結論。英文摘要：The Personal Information Protection Act (PIP Act) became effective in Taiwan in October 2012. To comply with the stipulations of the PIP Act, the Ministry of the Interior started restricting the use of any personal information from the population register, even for academic research. Unsurprisingly, the large-scale face-to-face surveys with the newly designed address-based sampling (ABS) strategies, after 30 years of reliance on governmental register-based sampling, became less feasible and reliable. ABS often requires selection, in each household, of a single person or one respondent only as the designated (or target) respondent for the interview. Leslie Kish pioneered the random selection of members within a household. Since then, several approaches of selecting household members have been adopted in survey practices. A technique in which the interviewer used the last two digits of the address number to randomly select the designated respondent was designed in this study. To investigate the performance of the proposed method, we conducted a simulation to generate samples by using various sample selection methods. In addition, we used a pilot survey of ABS to explore the effectiveness of the proposed method.起始頁-結束頁：119-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心5篇名：性別化的青少年友誼網絡與性別角色態度：單一性別與混合性別的班級脈絡並列篇名：Gendered Adolescent Friendship Networks and Gender Role Attitudes: Social Contexts of Single-Gender and Mixed-Gender Classes作者：楊天盾(Tien-Tun Yang);熊瑞梅(Ray-May Hsung)關鍵字：性別化的友誼網絡;班級脈絡;性別角色態度;指數隨機圖模型;gendered friendship networks;social contexts of classes;gender role attitudes;Exponential Random Graph Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：40期出版年：2018中文摘要：青少年友誼發展的過程，性別一直扮演重要的角色。傳統社會對男女應表現出的行為與態度之不同期待，可能使得男女在個人社會網絡的組成、密度與規模因此產生差異。女生傾向產生非階層性與關係性相互依賴的友誼結構，男生則傾向集體性相互依賴、集體中心性與階層性的友誼結構。本研究從班級脈絡的角度，探討男女所產生性別化的網絡結構，如何在不同性別組成的班級中透過彼此的互動過程展現出來。本研究使用中央研究院「台灣青少年成長歷程研究」的調查資料做為研究對象。結果發現，單一性別的班級脈絡，男生班的網絡結構呈現集體中心性與階層性的特質，女生班則沒有。而混合性別的班級脈絡，由於班級性別隔離的現象明顯，因此，雖在指數隨機圖模型模型（ERGM）中沒有集體中心性與階層性的特質，但男生仍有較明顯的集中性趨勢。最後，結構對性別角色態度的影響，在單一性別的班級脈絡中，越位於集體中心性核心結構位置的個體有較傳統的性別角色態度。英文摘要：While adolescents are growing up, school is the place where they have the most contact with other students, and peer relationships between classmates at school are very important for adolescents. Gender always plays an important role for development of friendship among adolescents. Different behaviors and attitudes exhibited by males and females due to different traditional social expectations can result in different composition of individual social networks. Girls tend to build relationally interdependent friendship structures, and boys tend to build collectively interdependent, in-star and hierarchical friendship structures. This study explores gendered friendship networks to show the process of peer interaction in social contexts of single-gender and mixed-gender classes. At the same time, the network structure how to affect adolescent gender role attitudes. This study uses the data from the Taiwan Youth Project (TYP) of Academia Sinica. The result shows that in single-gender classes, the male network structure exhibits collectively central and hierarchical characteristics, but the female and mixed-gender network structures do not. In mixed-gender classes, the phenomenon of gender segregation is obvious, and males and females still tend to interact with same-gender members. Finally, in single-gender classes, individuals in core structure positions have more traditional gender role attitudes.起始頁-結束頁：7-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心6篇名：社區人際網絡與社區意識及參與關聯性之研究：不同營造經驗社區的比較並列篇名：The Study on the Correlation between Social Network, Sense of Community and Community Participation: Comparison of Different Communities' Experiences of Community Building作者：王光旭(Guang-Xu Wang);黃怡臻(Yi-Jhen Huang)關鍵字：社會網絡;社區參與;社區意識;社區總體營造;社會網絡分析;social network;community participation;sense of community;community building;social network analysis (SNA)期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：40期出版年：2018中文摘要：社區營造的理論表明，營造有助於重新建立人與人之間的連結，透過對社區意識的強化，達到居民參與社區公共事務，促成社區發展與民主深化的目的。然過去研究在方法上也反映兩點不足之處：其一，雖然多數研究肯定人際網絡對社區意識與社區參與有重要影響，但對社區內人際網絡的測量，大多還是以李克特量表的認知測量為主，反映的是對關係的想像，而非實際的關係；其二，社區研究的成果，大多從社區發展協會幹部的角度檢視，而非從社區居民的調查中呈現，因此多反映社區領導者對自身營造成果的評估或想像，而非代表居民實際的看法與狀況。基此，本研究透過社會網絡分析（social network analysis）的應用，以社區居民為調查對象，重新驗證前述命題。在研究設計上，本研究擇定規模相當的兩個都市型社區進行調查（有、無營造），並透過系統抽樣各抽取約300位居民進行面訪。本研究成果如下：第一，對目前社區研究中對人際關係或社會資本測量的方法進行補充，以社會網絡分析強化相關測量的信效度；第二，以更嚴謹的研究設計了解居民社會網絡與社區意識和社區參與的關聯性；第三，驗證社區營造經驗對強化居民間的社會網絡、社區意識與社區參與程度的效果，藉以系統性檢視社區營造政策成效。英文摘要：Community building not only has driven citizen participation recently but also has brought scholars of political science and public administration into the field of community research. It is important that community participation promote democratic society. Most previous studies have indicated that community building is good to re-establish interaction among inhabitants, and strengthen the sense of community. In addition, strong connections among residents can encourage residents to participate in public affairs, promote community development and deepen democracy. Nevertheless, there are two limitations of previous community network studies: first, the most widely used network measurement is through a perceptual approach to measuring ties, but the results cannot reveal actual relationships among residents in a community; second, most of the research results gather data from community development associations or chiefs of village rather than residents. Thus, this paper applies social network analysis (SNA) to explore relationships between residents to investigate the relationship between residents' social networks, sense of community and community participation. More than 300 residents were systematically sampled in two communities, one with more than ten years of experience in community building, and the other with none. This study contributes by using a more rigorous research design to demonstrate the relationship between social networks, sense of community and participation, and shows that applying social network analysis can supplement the measurement of interpersonal relationships or social capital to improve reliability and validity. The analytical results verify the positive moderating effect of community building experiences.起始頁-結束頁：63-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心7篇名：邁向世界風險社會？台灣民眾的社會資本、風險感知與風險因應行為並列篇名：Approaching a World Risk Society? Social Capital, Risk Perception and Risk Coping Behavior in Taiwan作者：林宗弘(Thung-Hong Lin);蕭新煌(Hsin-Huang Michael Hsiao);許耿銘(Keng-Ming Hsu)關鍵字：風險社會;風險感知;社會資本;食品安全;天災;risk society;risk perception;social capital;coping behavior;food security;natural disasters期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：40期出版年：2018中文摘要：風險社會是當代社會科學的重要議題，對於不同類型的風險，台灣各階層民眾如何認知與因應？本研究使用2013年「台灣社會變遷調查」風險社會組的問卷來分析上述議題。結果發現，不同的風險類型確實會影響台灣民眾的風險感知與風險因應行為：自雇者、體力勞動者與鄉鎮民眾較擔心氣候變遷，曾有天災受災經驗者亦較擔心核災。高教育程度、中壯年家庭與女性最擔心人為的食品安全風險；農民、非技術工人、低所得與低教育程度的弱勢族群更擔心颱風等天災風險，證明不同類之風險脆弱性群體影響其主觀風險感知，而天災與世界風險的脆弱群體有重疊。其次，風險感知確實會提高主觀評估的風險因應行為。第三，社會資本對風險感知影響不一致或不顯著，但社會資本越高者越可能採取風險因應行為，符合韌性研究的假設，顯示社會資本主要作用是因應風險而非感知風險。研究結果提醒政府、學界與公民社會，需要多元的風險溝通或風險治理方式來應對全球風險與天災人禍。英文摘要：How do vulnerability and social capital shape people's risk perception and risk coping behavior in a high-risk society such as Taiwan? We apply the Risk Society Wave of the Taiwan Social Change Survey (TSCS) 2013 to investigate these questions. Statistical findings show that different types of risk shape people's social vulnerability, risk perception, and coping behavior: (1) Taiwanese people do worry about the world risks such as nuclear power and climate change, and their risk perception is related to their climate disaster hazards and vulnerability. Higher risk perception and social capital improve people's coping behavior related to world risks. (2) In contrast, the more highly educated, middle aged, and females worry about human-made food insecurity risk more than others; higher risk perception and social capital improve people's coping behavior related to human-made risks. (3) However, low socio-economic status people worry about natural disaster risks such as typhoons and earthquakes more than others; higher risk perception and social capital improve these relatively vulnerable people's coping behavior in relation to natural disaster risks. The results show that different types of risks-world, human-made, and natural disaster risks-shape people's social vulnerability, perceptions of hazards and risks, and coping behavior, and suggest different risk communication and risk governance strategies for the three types of risks in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：127-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心8篇名：Adolescents' Environmental Attitudes and Behaviors: Analyzing the Opportunities and Constraints of Their Friendship Network Structure並列篇名：青少年的環境意識與行動：社會影響網絡的機會與限制作者：張志堯(Chih-Yao Chang)關鍵字：New Ecological Paradigm;social network analysis;friendship;network features;social influence;新生態典範;網絡分析;友誼關係;網絡特徵;社會影響期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：40期出版年：2018中文摘要：In this paper, I profile the attitude, belief, and behavior of adolescents with regard to environmental issues via a nationwide survey to illustrate the extent to which our younger generation practices environmentalism. The opportunities and constraints of their friendship networks on disseminating the New Ecological Paradigm (NEP) are further discussed. This discussion is based upon Simmel's sociation theory, the degree to which one's social interactions shape and reshape his/her values and actions, which results in opportunities and constraints for developing environmental education. The data collection is based on the nationwide in-school adolescent population in three age cohorts (first-year students of junior high school, high school, and college students, respectively) in 2015. The total sample size is 1,320, but the college respondens were too few to be included in the discussion here. By using social network analysis (SNA), I am able to place the following key network features of sociation: multi-dimensional friendship structures, eigenvector centrality, network constraint, network closeness, and susceptibility into the model. The findings show that adolescents had a low level of environmental engagement (only approximately five percent of our respondents displayed high environmental awareness, and even fewer had ever participated in environmental movements). Besides, the link between social and environmental engagement was of high network constraint and low eigenvector centrality, which indicates that environmental education in junior high must be highly peer-centered to spread. Moreover, popular high school students with higher levels of environmental engagement might have more influence among their peer networks, since they have stronger links to others and greater chances to help their peers become more sympathetic towards environmental problems.英文摘要：在本研究中，我以臺灣地區青少年抽樣調查的資料，剖析青少年對於環境議題的了解與參與環境保護運動的程度，並探討友誼網絡與新生態典範主義之間的關係。社會網絡的觀點乃是基於Georg Simmel的sociation理論，探討友誼網絡特性對青少年養成環境保護認知的影響。資料蒐集的方式是利用一項臺灣青少年生活現況調查計畫，於2015年抽樣調查當時國一新生、高一新生以及大學－新生共1,320名的資料，進行臺灣青少年環境意識與友誼網絡分析，但由於大學－新生樣本數不足，故在分析上，僅以國高中生的結果進行討論。友誼網絡分析部分，我著重於探討多重友誼關係以及中心性、連結限制性、臨近性和易感性等結構特徵。研究發現臺灣青少年普遍環境意識皆不高並缺乏環保行動力。國中生友誼網絡是扁平，訊息傳遞或資訊分享有較高的效率，故環境意識培養應以其內部社群影響力推動較適當。高中生則是有較高環境意識的一群人在同儕之間扮演功能性的友誼角色，有助於向同儕推廣環境教育的知識與實踐。起始頁-結束頁：167-210資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心9篇名：台灣半導體產業的公司治理跨坐網絡趨勢（2000-2015）：朝向小世界網絡特性並列篇名：Trend of Interlocking Networks of Corporate Governance in Taiwan's Semiconductor Industry (2000-2015): Toward Small World Network作者：林季誼(Chi-Yi Lin);熊瑞梅(Ray-May Hsung)關鍵字：公司治理;董監事跨坐網絡;大股東跨坐網絡;小世界網絡;半導體產業;corporate governance;interlocked networks of board directors;interlocked networks of large owners;small world networks;semiconductor industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：40期出版年：2018中文摘要：全球化資本流動與全球金融危機迫使各國公司治理的董事跨坐網絡產生結構斷裂重組，且這些網絡朝向小世界網絡的趨勢。本文引進小世界網絡的結構特質的相關指標，並應用在台灣半導體產業從2000-2015年的董監事與大股東跨坐網絡（亦稱為公司治理跨坐網絡）的趨勢分析。小世界網絡的結構特質是當網絡成員增加為大型網絡，網絡的最大成分的節點平均局部的網絡群聚群係數是增加的，且節點間的路徑距離縮短了。若真實網絡與隨機網絡的平均局部群聚係數的比值越大，且真實網絡和隨機網絡的平均最短距離的比值趨近於1到2之間，則此巨大且複雜的網絡具有小世界網絡的現象。台灣的半導體產業知識技術與資本的全球化快速增加，2000-2015年的跨董監事與跨大股東網絡變遷趨勢有朝向小世界網絡的現象。小世界網絡的特質也會隨著經濟成長和衰退而變化，關鍵的技術經理、創投、獨立董事專家學者及投資機構法人的網絡居間中心位置在網絡跨界重新連結上扮演重要橋樑者角色。英文摘要：Both the mobility of globalized capital and the global financial crisis have fractured the interlocking networks of board directors, producing structural breaks and causing connections to be rewired, and these networks are approaching a trend toward small world networks. This paper applies the related indexes of structural characteristics in small world networks in trend analyses of interlocking networks of board directors and large stock owners (also called interlocking networks of corporate governance) in Taiwan’s semiconductor industry from 2000 to 2015. The structural characteristics of small world networks are that the average local clustering coefficient for all points is increasing and the average path distance for all points to other points is shorter in the largest component of networks when the size of networks (i.e. number of members) becomes large. If the ratio of the average local clustering for actual networks over that for random networks is growing, and the ratio of the average shortest distance for actual networks over that for random networks is between 1 and 2, then the large and complex networks display the phenomenon of small world networks. The globalization of knowledge, technology and capital in Taiwan's semiconductor industry has increased rapidly, and there has been a trend toward the phenomenon of small world networks for the 2000-2015 interlocking networks of board directors and large owners in this industry. The small world phenomenon varies with economic growth and recession. The critical positions of betweenness for technological managers, venture capitalist, scholars for independent board directors, and institutional investors play important roles of brokerage.起始頁-結束頁：211-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心10篇名：Mokken Scale量表之應用：以長期變遷的語言學習和使用態度題組為例並列篇名：Application of Mokken Scale: An Example of Attitudes toward Language Learning and Use with Longitudinal Data作者：廖培珊(Pei-shan Liao);江振東(Jeng-Tung Chiang);林定香(Ting-Hsiang Lin)關鍵字：Mokken量表;葛特曼量表;項目反應理論;潛藏特質;語言學習;Mokken scale;Guttman scale;Item Response Theory;latent trait;language learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：39期出版年：2018中文摘要：調查問卷常使用計分量表來測度受訪者的潛藏特質，然而以常見的葛特曼量表為例，題目間難易程度之嚴格假定，缺乏隨機性的概念與測量誤差之考量等，使其應用受到限制。被視為項目反應理論之無母數模型的Mokken量表，具單一向度、局部獨立性、單調性等的特質，並考量回答類別的反應機率，因此可用以檢測含數個題目的題組是否可組成測量同一潛藏概念之量表。本研究介紹Mokken量表模型之基本假設與特性，並以「台灣社會變遷基本調查」2004年至2014年共三期的資料檔中有關語言學習及使用態度之題組為例，利用Mokken量表的條件特性來檢視量表組成，並將估算出之量表分數與個人背景和語言使用之變項進行分析。研究結果指出，以逐項條件檢驗的方式來看，包含三個題目的語言學習及使用態度題組整體而言符合Mokken量表之特性；邏輯斯迴歸分析則可看出個人背景及家中使用語言與潛藏態度的關係，均會因調查年度的不同而有差異，本研究並就Mokken量表模型的特性與應用分析結果提出討論。英文摘要：Cumulative scales have been widely used in questionnaires to measure respondents’ latent traits, such as personality or attitudes toward certain events. Different scaling models have been developed to reveal the disparity among respondents, in which Guttman-type scales are commonly used. However, their assumption of a unique combination of response patterns and lack of stochastic implications of the scalagram indices have limited their application to empirical studies. The Mokken scale, which can also be seen as a non-parametric item nonresponse model (NIRT), has been developed to relax the rigid assumptions of the Guttman scale while maintaining its requirements of uni-dimensionality, local independence, and monotonicity. In addition, the Mokken scale takes into account probabilities of responses to question items, which enable the examination of whether these items are measures of the same latent construct. This study describes the basic assumptions and characteristics of the Mokken scale, and demonstrates its application using empirical data. Question items which measure the latent attitudes about language learning and use from 2004-2014 Taiwan Social Change Survey (TSCS) are used as an example to examine the scalability of the items and the scale that consists of those items. Furthermore, logistic regression of the latent trait using Mokken scale scores on demographic characteristics and a variable associated with language used at home are performed. Our results indicate that the association between the examined variables and the latent trait varies depending on the survey year. Discussion on the conditions of the Mokken scale model and findings based on empirical data are provided.起始頁-結束頁：7-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心11篇名：分層隨機作答模式於敏感性特值比例之貝氏估計研究並列篇名：A Bayesian Estimation Study of the Sensitive Character Proportion in Stratified Randomized Response Model作者：王智立(Chih-Li Wang);陳泰達(Tai-Da Chen)關鍵字：敏感性問題;隨機作答模式;貝氏估計;分層隨機抽樣;共軛事前分配;sensitive question;Randomized Response Model;Bayesian Estimation;stratified sampling;conjugate prior distribution期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：39期出版年：2018中文摘要：許多研究者在估計母體具敏感性特質A的比例π時，受訪者常因不想承認具敏感性特質A，而拒絕合作或給予不真實的回答，使調查結果有所偏差。Stanley Warner提出隨機作答模式（randomized response model, RRM），這種模式能保護受訪者的隱私，亦可增加受訪者的合作性，故較願意提供誠實的答案。但Warner和之後的相關文獻都專注於最大概似法的應用，而忽視受訪者針對RRM所回答「是」的比例θ應限制於參數空間[1 <U+2212> P, P]之內(P為隨機器之設定機率)，因此造成π的估計值可能為負值或大於1。Robert Winkler與Leroy Franklin提出針對RRM使用範圍為[0, 1]的非共軛事前Beta分配的貝氏估計法。Shaul Bar-Lev等學者針對一些RRMs使用共軛事前Beta分配的貝氏估計法。本文將貝氏法應用於王智立與蔡宛容之RRM，和本文所提之兩階段RRM，兩個模式並採用Jong-Min Kim與William Warde分層RRM的觀念，再以適當的截切Beta分配當作共軛事前分配獲得比例π的貝氏估計量。結果顯示本文所提的貝氏估計量可改善最大概似法之估計結果不在參數空間內的缺點。此外，本文所提之兩階段RRM與其他模式進行比較有更好的估計效率。英文摘要：Many researchers are faced with the problem of estimating the sensitive characteristic proportion π of a human population that has a particular characteristic A. Often reluctant to admit to having this particular characteristic A, respondents may refuse to participate or provide untruthful answers, which causes bias in study results. Stanley Warner first proposed the Randomized Response Model (RRM), which protects the respondent's privacy while simultaneously increasing both their cooperation in the survey and their willingness to provide an honest answer. However, Warner's study and related subsequent literature all focus on the application of the maximum likelihood method and ignore the fact that the ratio θ of the respondents' ”yes” response in the model should be restricted within the parameter space [1 <U+2212> P, P], where P is the probability of the randomized device, resulting in the possibility of the estimated value of π being negative or greater than one. Robert Winkler and Leroy Franklin proposed a Bayesian approach for Warner's model using a non-conjugate prior Beta distribution for π over [0, 1]. Shaul Bar-Lev et al. (2003) presented a conjugate prior Beta distribution to some RRMs. The aim of this study is to apply the Bayesian approach to the RRM provided by Chih-li Wang and Wang-jung Tsai, coupled with a two-stage randomized response model, which uses the concept of stratified randomized response model proposed by Jong-Min Kim and William Warde and suitable truncated Beta distributions in a common conjugate prior structure to obtain the Bayes estimates for the proportion of a ”sensitive character A” in the population of interest. Final results reveal that the Bayesian estimator proposed by this study can improve the drawback of the absence of the maximum likelihood method results in the parameter space. In addition, results show that the RRM proposed by this study will have better estimation efficiency when compared to other models.起始頁-結束頁：43-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心12篇名：臺灣原住民的族群婚配類型：世代效果、代間傳承與族群差異並列篇名：Marriage Patterns of Indigenous Peoples in Taiwan: Cohort Effect, Generational Heritage and Ethnic Difference作者：劉千嘉(Chien-Chia Liu);章英華(Ying-Hwa Chang)關鍵字：族群內婚;跨族群婚;原漢通婚;原住民;ethnic intermarriage;intra-marriage;racial intermarriage;indigenous people期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：39期出版年：2018中文摘要：相較於1950年前的族群隔離狀態，1970年代後原住民族從原鄉外移，與本族以外的人相遇的機會增加，亦改變其婚姻形態。本文運用2007年「臺灣原住民社會變遷與政策評估調查研究」及2013年「族語保存現況調查研究」兩份計畫調查資料，描繪變遷中的原住民族婚配圖像，研究發現如下：（1）越晚近世代同族婚比例越低，跨族群婚與原漢通婚比例提高；（2）婚姻模式的代間傳承隨婚配類型而定：原漢通婚有代間傳承傾向，親代通婚子代越易通婚，但跨族群婚的代間傳承傾向不明顯；（3）特定族群與漢族距離小於其他族群：邵族、噶瑪蘭族、賽夏族對漢人的婚姻傾向性大於其他原住民族；（4）族群間的親近性各異：卡那卡那富族、拉阿魯哇族與布農族有高度親近性，噶瑪蘭族與阿美族有高度親近性。本文以合併的調查資料描繪臺灣原住民族群的婚配類型，以克服過往缺乏個別族群兩代通婚資料的限制，彰顯日趨多元的婚配傾向，同時關照個別族群的差異，並探討其可能的影響因素。英文摘要：Compared to the spatial segregation period before the 1950s, indigenous people have had migrated from tribal to metropolitan areas since 1970 and had more daily contact with Han Chinese and other ethnic group people; hence, the marriage pattern of indigenous people has changed. Based on Taiwan Indigenous People Survey data and the Language Endangerment in Formosan Languages Survey data, this paper portrays the dynamic marriage patterns of indigenous people. The main findings are as follows: (1) The younger birth cohort has a higher racial intermarriage rate and lower intra-marriage rate. (2) The generational inherited marriage pattern within family varies by intermarriage type: offspring’s preference for racial intermarriage is similar to their parents, but the ethnic intermarriage does not show a significant heritage pattern. (3) The marriage pattern of some ethnic groups involves more intermarriage with Han Chinese than with other ethnic groups such as Thao, Kavalan, and Saisiyat. (4) The intimacy among ethnic groups is different: Hla'alua, Kanakanavu, and Bunun are much closer to each other, as are Kavalan with Amis. This paper portrays marriage patterns among Taiwan indigenous people based on the merged data from the two surveys, which provide rare and valuable information on inter-ethnic marriage of different indigenous tribes. The paper presents the increasing plurality of patterns of inter-ethnic marriage, manifests the different tendency of each ethnic group, and reveals the factors facilitating inter-ethnic marriage.起始頁-結束頁：77-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心13篇名：命運或機會：我國外籍家庭看護工轉換雇主實證分析並列篇名：A Chance or A Risk? Empirical Studies on Foreign Care Workers’ Transfer of Employment作者：李有容(Yu-Jung Lee);鄭杏茹(Shing-Ju Cheng)關鍵字：外籍家庭看護工;轉換雇主;勞雇關係;面試與試作;古典機率;foreign care workers;transfer of employment;industrial relations;probation;classic probability期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：39期出版年：2018中文摘要：在台灣老年化人口逐漸增多、醫療技術進步的環境下，民眾對看護工的需求日益增加。囿於法規限制以及對便利性的追求，不論是聘任外籍看護工或者是與其解除契約常委託仲介代行，然仲介並無法解決雙方隔閡。性騷擾、許可外工作、語言文化不通、看護工偷懶講電話的抱怨層出不窮；在無法立即解除合約的條件下，看護工逃跑事件頻傳，勞雇關係出現不對等差距。儘管政府透過直接聘僱方式取代仲介，更宣布推動長照2.0來解決台灣老年社會的問題，然此政策演變主要是保障、解決台灣的雇主方，外籍家庭看護工能否透過各式「機會」改變自我「命運」？是本文關注焦點。文章從機率觀點描繪政策的各式出象，佐以26位四方身分的訪談，說明看護工與雇主間面臨的各式問題，包括了轉換雇主、面試、試作、許可外工作，甚至性騷擾等，期透過此勾勒未來聘任外籍看護工的政策方針。英文摘要：This paper discusses the possibility for foreign care workers to change employers in Taiwan. The classic theory of probability in statistics is adopted, and 26 interviews with care workers, employers, agencies, and government translators are conducted. Four concluding points are drawn for this research. First, 2008 was a turning point, when foreign care workers were given the opportunity to change employers for the first time in Taiwan. Secondly, the government should pay attention to those who switch between employers frequently during the time of their employment contracts. Thirdly, the human resource agencies specialised in importing overseas manpower often play under the table in order to avoid restrictions by government. Finally, classic probability shows that the launch of a probation mechanism will not alter the odds ratio between employees and employers. This paper therefore suggests that current policy should be changed to ensure that foreign care workers receive equal employment opportunity to transfer employers during the time of their employment contract. In fact, this change might also increase the willingness of foreign care takers to work in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：123-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心
