01篇名：以四旋翼UAS酬載熱感測器取像製作數值表面溫度模型並列篇名：Generation of Digital Surface Temperature Model from Images Collected by Thermal Sensor on Quadcopter UAS作者：邱式鴻(Shih-Hong Chio);謝耀震(Yao-Chen Hsieh)關鍵字：三焦張量;光束法平差;定位定向;無人機系統;熱像;Trifocal Tensor;Bundle Adjustment;Positioning and Orientation;Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS);Thermal Images期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：22卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：熱感測器能感測可見光感測器無法取得的訊息，因此若能透過熱感測器進行環境監測，便能得到一般可見光感測器無法獲取的資料。本研究以四旋翼UAS酬載熱感測器得到局部區域地面高解析度之熱像並製作數值表面溫度模型（Digital Surface Temperature Model, DSTM）供環境監測之用。而一般環境監測區，如火山地區，不易布設控制點，因此本研究除於UAS上酬載熱感測器之外，並搭載GNSS接收模組，探討GNSS觀測量輔助熱像定位定向之可行性，研究以國立政治大學旁的指南溪為實驗區，使用AI-RIDER YJ-1000-HC四旋翼UAS酬載FLIR Tau 640熱感測器以及Trimble BD970 GNSS接收模組，透過GNSS動態後處理資料，取得取像時對應的GNSS觀測量，再搭配少量地面控制點執行光束法平差輔助熱像定位定向，過程中透過三焦張量約制剔除自動匹配之誤匹配連結點。實驗結果顯示，所產製之數值表面模型（Digital Surface Model, DSM）於不易變動區，經現有資料檢核均在±1m之間，產製出地面解析度11 cm的DSM與正射熱像，且正射熱像平面精度為47 cm。雖然DSM和正射熱像精度無法符合一般常規的測量規範，但成果仍可證明熱像直接產製DSM以及正射熱像之可行性，最後生成數值表面溫度模型的成果可供後續環境監測研究使用。英文摘要：Thermal infrared camera can sense some important information that general optical digital cameras cannot do for the environment monitoring. In this study, the Quadcopter UAS for thermal image collection applied to environment monitoring was developed. FIIR Tau 640 thermal infrared sensor was used in this thermal image collection system. Additionally, Trimble BD970 GNSS OEM board was also carried on the Quadcopter UAS to collect dual-frequency GNSS observations for determining the flying trajectory by Post-processed kinematic (PPK) technique to support the positioning and orientating of collected thermal images by bundle adjustment. Meanwhile the trifocal tensor constraint was used to delete wrong matching tie images points before performing bundle adjustment for positioning and orientation of thermal images. The test area was located at Zhinan River nearby National CengChi University, Taipei, Taiwan. From the test, the differences between produced DSM and existing DSM data were ±1 m on stable ground surface. Both the resolution of produced DSM and thermal orthoimages were 11 cm and the accuracy of thermal orthoimages could reach 47 cm. The accuracy of thermal orthoimages might not comply with a normal surveying standard, but it proved the possibility of DSM and orthorectifed thermal images generated from thermal images directly. Additionally, the produced Digital Surface Temperature Model (DSTM) could be used for environment monitoring in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201905_22(1).00012篇名：臺灣濕地保育面臨之挑戰－以台南地區濕地劃設為例並列篇名：The Challenges of Wetland Conservation in Taiwan: A Case Study on Wetland Designation in Tainan作者：陳鵬升(Perng-Sheng Chen);齊士崢(Shyh-Jeng Chyi)關鍵字：民眾抗爭;利害關係人分析法;明智利用;重要濕地;衝突;Conflict;Public protests;Stakeholder analysis;Wetlands of importance;Wise use期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：22卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：濕地，是地球上各種生態系中生產力最高者之一。濕地範圍劃設係為維護濕地生物多樣性，促進濕地生態保育及明智利用。但自2015年濕地保育法施行以來，濕地劃設的範圍屢屢遭到當地民眾質疑及抗議，讓濕地保育工作受到極大的衝擊。為探究濕地劃設的衝突問題以提出解決建議，本研究以台南地區之曾文溪口、四草、七股鹽田及鹽水溪口等4處重要濕地為研究範圍，採用2016年公開說明會之民眾陳情意見，應用利害關係人分析法，研析主要操作權力的利害關係人及權力運作的過程，並透過衝突和互補性矩陣，分析關鍵利害關係人之間的衝突、互補或合作。再從明智利用角度，進一步針對民眾陳情內容加以歸類及分析。研究結果顯示，民眾陳抗的主要關鍵因素包括：濕地的認知、土地被日本強徵、擔心濕地劃設後權益受損及阻礙地方發展等問題。因此，對於濕地的定義及類型、允許明智利用之行為、土地使用項目及其他各項民眾合法的權益保障，皆須對民眾再加強說明及溝通。爭議的關鍵問題說明目前民眾參與機制是不足的，建議於保育利用計畫中，增加「社區參與平台計畫」，擴大當地民眾參與次數及層面，並適度採納當地民眾的意願。本研究成果可供未來與民眾再溝通、修正重要濕地保育利用計畫及審議之參考。英文摘要：Wetland is home to the most productive ecosystems on earth. Wetland designation aims to maintain biodiversity, facilitate wetland ecosystem conservation, and promote the wise use of relevant wetland resources. However, since the Wetland Conservation Act was promulgated in 2015, frequent protests from the public against wetland designation pose a great challenge to wetland conservation. In an effort to obtain a better understanding of the conflicts arising from wetland designation, and thereby proposing suggestions and solutions, this study will focus on four wetlands in Tainan: Zengwun Estuary Wetland, Sichcao Wetlands, Cigu Salt Pan Wetland, and Yanshuei Estuary Wetland. This research adopts the stakeholder analysis methodology to analyze the public opinions collected at the 2016 public meeting to grasp the whole picture of the stakeholders and the underlying power manipulation, and the Contradiction Matrix and Complementarity Matrix to analyze conflicts, complementarity and cooperation among key stakeholders. Moreover, in regard to the wise use of relevant wetland resources, this study also categorizes and analyzes the public opinions for further discussion. The analysis results reveal that the major factors accounting for the protests include: different awareness levels of the importance of wetland, historical traumas of arbitrary land expropriation under Japanese rule, and fear of infringement of the rights of the stakeholders, and hindrance to local development. In light of these concerns, improving the communication between government and the public is suggested in regard to the following: the definition and classification of wetlands, the criteria of wise resource use, land use projects, and protection of the rights for stakeholders. The key issue is lacking of public participation. It is suggested that adding ”The platform project of community involvement”, expanding frequency and level of public participation, and moderately adopting local people's opinion. The research results are expected to serve as a reference for further discussion with the public and the review and revision of the Wetland of Importance Conservation and Utilization Plan.起始頁-結束頁：29-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201905_22(1).00023篇名：鄉鎮市區層級災害耐韌力指標關聯性與權重之DANP分析以及空間聚集性分析之應用並列篇名：Relationship and Weights of Township Level Disaster Resilience Indicators and the Application of Spatial Clustering Analysis作者：林文苑(Wen-Yen Lin)關鍵字：災害耐韌力指標;決策實驗室分析基礎之網路層級分析法（DANP）;空間自相關技術;空間聚集分析;DANP (DEMATEL-based ANP);Disaster Resilience Indicators;Spatial Autocorrelation Techniques;Spatial Clustering Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：22卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：國內外的相關研究對於面對災害的態度已由抗災的觀點，轉為耐韌力的思維與災害共處的調適作為，而各領域對於耐韌力的議題也漸臻成熟且被廣泛地討論。本研究透過文獻回顧先行釐清關於耐韌力的定義與概念，並廣泛蒐集相關研究中所提出的各類指標作為基礎，以建立適用於本研究分析之災害耐韌力指標系統；之後進行專家問卷以及採用決策實驗室分析基礎之網路層級分析法，以DEMATEL法分析指標的因果關係結構，藉由檢視指標間影響程度，以及利用矩陣運算取得指標間的相互影響關係（interfering relationship）及影響強度，同時產生DEMATEL影響矩陣，再透過納入此一影響矩陣的ANP分析求得指標間的關聯與影響權重（influential weights）。使用DEMATEL影響矩陣的ANP分析之主要優點是可以避免一般計算常態化超矩陣（super matrix）時，必須建立在每一個群組之權重都是相等的假設，而忽略群組間不同效應的問題。針對耐韌力的評估，本研究提出四個評估項目：「社會背景」、「經濟基礎」、「環境條件」、「應變能量」，每個項目之下各列出三個評估指標，共計十二個指標，透過DEMATEL分析中心度與原因度，瞭解各指標與項目間的影響力與與關聯性；之後利用DEMATEL矩陣的轉化進行DANP分析，找出各指標的權重，並將之應用於各鄉鎮市區的耐韌力評估。評估的結果發現，耐韌力較高的地區多位於台灣西部的主要都會區，而耐韌力較低者多位於山區與偏遠地區；本研究並以空間自相關技術應用於災害耐韌力的空間分析，以確認其空間聚集情形。英文摘要：The recent research of disaster management indicates that the attitude of facing disasters is changing from ”resistance” point of view to ”resilience” and ”adapting” behaviors of living among the possible risks. The issues of ”resilience” are also getting matured and being discussed broadly among various disciplines. The definitions and concepts of resilience were clarified first by literature reviews, along with the collections of indicators from relating researches, in order to establish a disaster resilience indicator system that is feasible for this study. By collecting experts' opinions through questionnaires and adopting the analysis procedures of DANP (DEMATEL-based ANP) method, DEMATEL was used to investigate the interfering relationship among indicators, to find the central indicators to represent the effectiveness of factors, and to obtain the influence matrix. The ANP analysis was introduced the DEMATEL influence matrix to identify the connections of indicators and calculate the influential weights. The advantage of introducing the DEMATEL influence matrix is to avoid the equal-weight assumptions of clusters when normalizing the super matrix in ANP, thus it can take the effectiveness of clusters into account during the calculation. This study used 4 assessment items - ”social background”, ”economic basis”, ”environmental conditions”, and ”response capacity” - and 12 indicators to evaluate the resilience of local townships. By using DEMATEL method, the ”Prominence” and ”Relation” of items and indicators were identified for the relationship and effectiveness among them. The DEMATEL matrix was transformed for DANP analysis to find the indicator weights. By applying the results from DANP analysis, this study was able to examine the spatial distribution of townships' disaster resilience in Taiwan, and to verify the spatial clustering of disaster resilience through the application of spatial autocorrelation techniques.起始頁-結束頁：59-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201905_22(1).000301篇名：高教見聞錄並列篇名：The Sketchbook of Higher Education in Taiwan作者：陳政亮(Cheng-Liang CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：233-251資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：社會實踐的企圖和困境並列篇名：The Intention and Predicament of Social Practice作者：鄧湘漪(Hsiang-I TENG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：253-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：從歷史制度主義分析台灣集體勞動體制的再生產與變遷：以不當勞動行為裁決制度及雇主支配介入案件為例並列篇名：The Reproduction and the Transformation of the Collective Labor Regime in Taiwan from the Perspective of Historical Institutionalism: A Case Study of Employer Domination and Intervention in the Unfair Labor Practices作者：林倩如(Chien-ju LIN)關鍵字：歷史制度主義;路徑依賴理論;單一廠場工會制度;不當勞動行為裁決制度;集體勞動體制;historical institutionalism;path dependence theory;the single trade union;unfair labor practices;collective labor regimes期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019中文摘要：這篇論文主要從長時間的歷史角度分析單一廠場工會制度如何同時再生產與轉變。首先，這篇論文根據James Mahoney的制度再生產機制理論，分析單一廠場工會制度透過《工會法》的修法過程不斷地自我增強，並且成為工會組織中最重要、也是最基本的組織。再來，這篇論文根據Mahoney 和Kathleen Thelen制度變遷模型和制度具有權力分配的特性，分析國家在2011年新增不當勞動行為裁決機制後，企業工會與產業和職業工會在行使團結權和協商權是否受到相同的保障，並發現，人力資源部門的管理者仍可利用裁決委員會對工會成員可以透過跨階級合作而共同尋求員工最大利益的詮釋，以及《工會法》第14條對雇主概念的模糊定義，成功地建立另類工會。第三，這篇論文分析職業工會如何在不當勞動行為裁決制度之外，爭取與資方協商的權利。最後，這篇論文試圖對既有路徑依賴理論進行反思與補充。英文摘要：This article analyzes the reproduction and the transformation of Taiwan's single trade union from the path dependence in historical institutionalism analysis. First, based on James Mahoney's institutional reproduction theory, this article argues that the single trade union regime is reproduced through the amendments of the Labor Union Act and thus plays an important role in the labor organizations. Second, this article examines whether the corporate unions, industrial unions and professional unions are afforded the same protection regarding unfair labor practices, according to Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen's institutional change models and the institution as the distributional instruments. However, the human resource managers take advantage of the unfair labor practice committee on the cross-class cooperation between employees and managers and, moreover, the ambiguity on the Article 14 of the Labor Union Act to develop a new corporate union. Third, this paper examines how a professional union establishes collective bargaining power outside the unfair labor practice proceedings. Finally, based on these findings, this article tries to supplement and to revise the path dependence theory.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：誰是局內人？從傳統領域到政治領域，一種治理性的可能並列篇名：Who is the Insider? From Traditional Territory to Political Domain A Possibility of Governmentality作者：施聖文(Sheng-Wen SHIH)關鍵字：傳統領域;政治領域;治理性;歷史社會學;原住民運動;私有化;traditional territory;political domain;governmentality;historical sociology;aboriginal movements;privatization期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文主要是從現今傳統領域推動的困境中，回問歷史過程中是哪些因素造成今日的問題。分析發現，不同時期的各種運動抗爭架構出國家與原住民族之間的複雜關係，同時藉由各種治理技術達成一種實踐合理性。為了維持此一合理性，並合乎某種經濟的學說或計算，及行政系統的治理性格，佈置了政治領域的「局」。這個「局」把「傳統領域」讓渡到現代國家主權的架構中，也逐漸將原本保持抵抗的人納入局內。這個納入的過程就是將傳統領域逐漸轉成政治領域的過程，使得傳統領域的概念逐步成為一種政治領域的聲稱，呈現出一種現代國家治理性的可能。本文主要藉由歷史社會學的比較方法，比較1980年代「還我土地運動」中的土地論述，以及「傳統領域」從研究調查到立法劃設的過程。兩個運動訴求的歸還土地，無意間都與保留地私有化的「我」結合。在各種行政部門進行的增／劃編保留地作業中，傳統領域的意義呈現出一種「被發明的傳統」，並在經歷各種運動與抗爭之後，以一種定置的劃界模式不斷地位移。當「還我土地」到「傳統領域」的過程中聲稱維繫傳統之際，仍置入了現代土地私有的模式，偷渡了私有化的概念，並與其合流而合理化地說服自己。英文摘要：This paper mainly focuses on the predicament of the promotion of the ”traditional territory” recently, and inquires what are the factors that caused present problems in the historical processes. The analysis finds that the complex relationship between the state and the aborigines were constructed in every social movement in different periods. A variety of governance techniques were used to achieve a practical rationality. In order to maintain the rationality, it is required to conform to certain economic doctrines, calculations, and the governance character of the administrative system, and to set up a ”game” in the political domain. This ”game” also means that the ”traditional territory” has become a claim of the political rights in the framework of modern national sovereignty, and the people who originally maintained resistance have gradually been incorporated in the game. This process of incorporation has been transforming the traditional territory into a political domain, and making the concept of the traditional territory gradually become a political claim, and therefore the modern state governmentality can be realized. This paper compares the discourse of the ”traditional territory” with the Aboriginal Land Movement in the 1980s by applying the comparative method of historical sociology. The appeals of giving back the land in the two movements coincidentally both included an ”I”, which is the subject of the privatization of the reserve. In the administrative processes of re-investigating and re-mapping the ”traditional territory” by the concerned government departments, the meaning of the ”traditional territory” appears as an ”invented tradition”. Practices in various social movements of the aboriginal, with a fixed demarcation model of locating, has also moved to different positions and roles. When it is claimed to maintain the tradition in the Aboriginal Land Movement and the traditional territory, preservation of tradition is still embedded in the logic of the land privatization. The land privatization has displaced the meaning of tradition as the rationality of the traditional territory.起始頁-結束頁：49-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：「不男不女」：台灣「長髮」男性的治理及其性別政治，1960s－1970s並列篇名：”Neither Man nor Woman”: The Gender Politics of Long-haired Men in Taiwan, 1960s-1970s作者：王秀雲(Hsiu-yun WANG)關鍵字：長髮男性;不男不女;陽剛特質;1960-1970年代台灣;奇裝異服;gender politics;long-hair men;masculinities;Taiwan in the sixties and seventies;outlandishly dressed期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019中文摘要：1960－1970年代期間，台灣政府根據《違警罰法》大規模取締「長髮」男性（又稱「不男不女」），社會各界對於長髮與取締也議論紛紛。本文以機關檔案、公文、報章報導、雜誌書籍，及「長髮」男性的口述史訪談為材料，探討這段歷史的身體治理及其性別政治。本文有三個主要發現。其一，《違警罰法》與善良風俗論述（身體儀容的性別規範）的歷史皆可以追溯至20世紀初期的中國，可知「奇裝異服」的儀容治理有其歷史的延續性。但有別於民國初年的治理對象以婦女為主，1960、1970年代台灣則以男性為治理的主要對象，及較少數的女性迷你裙取締。其二，將1960年代台灣的治理與當時全球各地的治理比較，除善良風俗之外，台灣的反共、「西洋歪風」襲擊及復興中華文化的論述顯示出此身體治理的冷戰特色與地理政治。最後，長髮男性並無意圖成為「不男不女」，而是反抗制式化的身體規範，如此的自我表達與身體自主的維護是一種陽剛特質的展現。基於此段歷史的複雜性，本文主張不能僅以戒嚴體制來解釋此段歷史，並說明這類身體治理顯示了性別政治與國家文化政治的互相滲透。英文摘要：In the period between the late sixties and mid-seventies, the government of Taiwan undertook broad-scale action to police young men who were thought to have grown their hair too long. Situating such regulation of the masculine body in the context of Cold War gender politics, social transformation, and the history of Taiwan's particular hair rules, this paper examines the ways in which long-haired men were understood as a sign of the country's crisis articulated in terms of Western and communist corrupting influences. I argue that this history is gendered at various levels, including the appropriation and reinvention of the term ”bu nan bu nu” (neither man nor woman) to describe such a supposed foreign corruption of ”authentic” Chinese culture, and which implied that men were not supposed to distinguish themselves by adopting an unconventional hair style. Even though 'long-haired' men did not intend to adopt women's hair style, they did resist the rigidly imposed regulations of body appearance. It was through this resistance and the claiming of the freedom to one's own body expression that men worked against the limitations that were imposed upon them. The case of long-haired men was not merely an example of how the martial law system restricted freedom of expression; it was also a case in which the regulations of gendered body appearance intertwined with both the state and cultural politics.起始頁-結束頁：99-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：建制民族誌「為何」書寫？探索建制民族誌的系譜、方法特質與挑戰並列篇名：Revisiting Institutional Ethnography: Conceptual Roots/Routes, Methodological Characteristics and Analytical Challenges作者：齊偉先(Wei-hsian CHI)關鍵字：建制民族誌;支配關係;文本中介;斷裂;女性主義;institutional ethnography;ruling relations;textually mediated;disjuncture;feminism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文試圖從經驗研究操作的角度爬梳建制民族誌的特色，並說明建制民族誌的可能限制。首先，從理論系譜的角度切入，揭示建制民族誌在發展系譜上所傳承的內涵，說明它如何傳承及調整馬克思理論傳統、俗民方法學以及傅柯的論述理論。同時從研究對象設定及方法特質，說明建制民族誌這研究取徑的特色。接著本文從經驗研究的實際操作面切入，指出台灣相關經驗研究所透露出的建制民族誌的可能限制。具體指出在反抗議題和文化議題上，現有的建制民族誌研究並未能對此有所回應，藉此說明運用建制民族制所可能面臨的限制與挑戰。英文摘要：This article sets up to capture the analytical features of institutional ethnography (IE), while illustrating the potential conceptual limitations encountered. First, I begin with the theoretical tracing of IE and its conceptual roots/routes, including how IE works with and against Marxist tradition, ethnomethodology and Foucauldian discourse. Meanwhile, I characterize the methodology of IE by explaining how and what IE is implemented. Next, I culturally contextualize IE and its practices within the Taiwanese context and show the potential methodological challenges encountered. In particular, I argue that the notion of resistance and the concept of culture are under-theocratized in the analytical landscape of IE and needs to be better accommodated. This shows the methodological limitations and challenges while practicing institutional ethnography.起始頁-結束頁：147-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：《人文知識思想再出發》新書討論－編按並列篇名：A Discussion of Restart Knowledge and Thoughts in Humanities-Editorial Introduction作者：陳信行(Hsin-hsing CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：171-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：人文性與中國社會主義的理想：《人文知識思想再出發》讀後並列篇名：Humanites and the Socialist Ideals in China: Some Thoughts on Restart Knowledge and Thoughts in Humanities作者：黃琪椿(HUANG Chichun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：181-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：海峽封斷中的閱讀與互讀：思考「當代中國問題」的「台灣缺位」問題並列篇名：Reading and Mutual Reading across the Taiwan Strait amidst a Time of Stagnated Interaction: The ”Absence of Taiwan” as a Problem in the Debates on the ”Contemporary China Question”作者：張立本(CHANG Li-Pen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：197-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：在解放與再囚禁間：中國社會轉型與人文知識思想變遷的幾點印象／觀察並列篇名：Between Liberation and Captivity: Some Impressions on the Changes of Humanities Knowledge and Thoughts under China's Social Transition作者：黃文倩(Wen-Chien HUNAG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：219-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：在台灣，何以從他者之身再出發？並列篇名：How to Restart through the Body of the ”Others” in Taiwan?作者：朱凌毅(Ling-I CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：227-233資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：邁向歷史－社會－文化－心理的人文療癒並列篇名：Toward a Historical-Social-Cultural-Psychological Healing through Humanities作者：王東美(Dongmei WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：235-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：從藍綠意識形態到「跟著心走」：台灣研究的人文知識思想再出發並列篇名：From Partisan Ideologies to ”Follow the Heart”: Restart Knowledge and Thoughts in Taiwan Studies作者：姜亞築(CHIANG Ya-Chu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：261-276資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：從人出發，從社會出發，從深入彼此的苦惱出發：台灣研究場域需要的「人文知識思想再出發」並列篇名：Restart from Human and Society, and Deep Understanding of Each Other's Anxieties: The Field of Taiwan Studies Needs to ”Restart Knowledge and Thoughts in Humanities”作者：李娜(LI Na)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：277-296資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：往東向南：「中國傳播政治經濟學」芻議並列篇名：Looking to the East, Walking to the South: Grundrisse for the Chinese Political Economy of Communication作者：吳暢暢(Changchang WU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：112期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：297-317資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：從國際關係到內政的理論：論Carl Schmitt「政治性」概念的變動和Dolf Sternberger的評論並列篇名：Across International and Domestic Political Spheres: Carl Schmitt's Evolving Concept of ”the Political” and Dolf Sternberger's Critique作者：楊尚儒(Shang-Ju Yang)關鍵字：Schmitt;Sternberger;政治性;敵友區分;戰爭;和平;Schmitt;Sternberger;the political;friend-and-enemy distinction;war;peace期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文試圖指出Carl Schmitt的政治性概念之所以會以敵友區分作為判準，乃是因為此概念原為談論國際關係和戰爭問題所做，後來才轉而指涉到國內政治以解決威瑪共和的政治衝突。此外，本文也會談論Dolf Sternberger這位Schmitt在戰後最重要的一位評論者，他所做的評論。他不僅對Schmitt從戰爭來理解「政治性」的觀點有所批評，也試圖提出基於和平的概念以取而代之。最後，則將會對Sternberger的評論做出批判性的檢視。英文摘要：This study will illuminate why Carl Schmitt's concept of the political uses the friend-enemy distinction as its criterion. The concept of the political was developed in the context of international relations and war, but later evolved to address domestic affairs in response to the internal political conflicts in the Weimar Republic. This essay will also discuss the critique from Dolf Sternberger, one of the most important commentators on Schmitt after the war. Sternberger criticized Schmitt's concept of the political and proposed an opposing conception that is based on peace rather than war. Lastly, this essay will conclude with a critical evaluation of Sternberger's comment.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201903_(68).0012篇名：Kittler與書寫－打字機與電子閱讀器改變了什麼？並列篇名：Kittler and Writing-What Do Typewriter and E-Reader Change?作者：江淑琳(Shu-Lin Chiang)關鍵字：弗里德里西．基德勒;論述網絡;書寫;打字機;電子書;Friedrich Kittler;Discourse Networks;Writing;Typewriter;E-Reader期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文從人與科技之關係出發，透過文獻整理與二手資料，探討德國媒介思想家弗里德里西．基德勒（Friedrich Kittler）如何看待書寫與書寫科技。本文以其第二個學術階段為討論對象，爬梳打字機出現前後的書寫論述網路。除前言外，第二節概述基德勒的媒介立場以及對於書寫的討論；第三節整理基德勒作品中對於改變書寫的重要技術發明─打字機─的主要討論，尤其打字機與女性的關係；由於基德勒在討論書寫時，閱讀也同屬其分析之書寫論述網絡，因此第四節試著從書寫的消費角度，爬梳基德勒作品中對閱讀的看法，並整理當代若干學者對於目前盛行的電子閱讀器（例如kindle、ipad等平板裝置）如何影響／不影響人與閱讀的關係之各種論述，試圖與基德勒對話。最後一節為小結。英文摘要：This article aims to investigate how German media philosopher ”Friedrich Kittler” looks at the relationship between writing and writing technology. It is based on the inspiration from media theories, which deals with the relationship between human beings and technology. This article in particular focuses on the second stage of Kittler's academic life, discussing the writing discourse network before and after the advent of typewriters. Section two of this article provides an overview of Kittler's standpoint on media and his discussion of writing. Section three synthesises the discussion of how typewriters changed writing, as well as how they influenced the everyday life of women at that time. Section four tries to analyse whether and how e-readers (e.g. the Kindle, iPad, etc.) influence the relationship between human beings and reading in terms of Kittler's approach to writing. The final section concludes this research.起始頁-結束頁：57-106資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201903_(68).0023篇名：論法律與道德的關係：霍布斯之「自然法與實證法相互包含」論題（The Mutual-Containment-Thesis）並列篇名：The Relationship between Law and Morality: Thomas Hobbes on the Mutual-Containment Thesis作者：周家瑜(Chia-Yu Chou)關鍵字：霍布斯;哈特;自然法;法實證主義;道德;Hobbes;H.L.A. Hart;Laws of Nature;Legal Positivism;Morality期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：雖然霍布斯的政治思想以其國家學說著名，然而法律卻始終是他理論體系中的重要主題。我們應如何理解霍布斯的法理論，以及對霍布斯而言，（實證）法律與道德的關聯為何？便是這篇文章致力探討的主題。本文首先指出，在法實證主義者與自然法思想家這樣的二分法中，霍布斯的論述似乎踩在一個模稜兩可的位置，一方面霍布斯主張法律即為主權者命令，因此霍布斯式法理論與後來奧斯丁的命令論連結起來，也導致後來哈特的批判，但另一方面，霍布斯似乎又主張主權者命令應當受到自然法的規約與限制，因此似乎傾向自然法傳統，而本篇文章藉由霍布斯對自然法與實證法之間關係之探討要指出的是：這兩種理論與傳統均無法涵蓋霍布斯的法理論。英文摘要：This essay explores Hobbes's account of the mutual-containment thesis, which has been a puzzle for Hobbes scholars. Specifically, it investigates Hobbes's account of the relationship between positive and natural law, i.e., law and morality. While the core purpose of Hobbes's political thought appears to justify an absolute power, and hence Hobbes was often seen as a legal positivist (akin to John Austin's command theory), his account of laws of nature (supposed to impose restrictions upon political authority) has been gaining attention in recent years. Additionally, I argue that Hobbes's account of laws of nature is neither ”self-effacing”, as some have argued, nor a ”facade of absolutism”. While Hobbes's conception of laws of nature as equity does not impose limits upon sovereign power as traditional natural laws did, it has function through rulings of the subordinate Judge. I indicate that Hobbes's accounts of the role and importance of the Judge's interpretation, and how the law is verified by the subordinate Judge, show that his legal theory has been oversimplified by both the legal positivist and natural law interpretations. I conclude that neither of these contrasting theories is able to tell the whole story of Hobbes's legal theory.起始頁-結束頁：107-142資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201903_(68).00301篇名：一個另類的STS方法論並列篇名：An Alternative Methodology for STS作者：陳瑞麟(Chen, Ruey-Lin)關鍵字：STS方法論;科學爭議;社會爭議;對稱原則;STS methodology;scientific controversies;social controversies;principle of symmetry期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：28期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文發展一個另類的STS方法論，稱為「策略基礎的方法論」（strategy-based methodology），它主張STS研究應該因應不同的目標和情境，使用不同的研究策略，才能適當地處理科學、科技、與社會多樣而複雜的關係。本文特別著重在「爭議」這個課題。這種方法論之所以必要，理由在於「科學」、「科技」與「社會」這幾個關鍵詞，都代表巨大的範疇，也因此形成了「科學爭議」、「科技爭議」、「科學的社會爭議」和「科技的社會爭議」這些不同的樣態，本文指出源自「科學知識的社會學」的方法學原則無法配合這多樣爭議，進而論證區分科學與科技的內部和外部的必要性，並檢視「對稱原則」的問題。最後基於上述討論，提出幾個具體的策略和應用條件，建議一個針對「科技的社會爭議」提出倫理評價的方法論綱要。英文摘要：This paper aims to develop an alternative methodology for science and technology studies, called a ”strategy-based methodology.” STS research should respond to different goals and situations by using different strategies for exploring the diverse and complex interactions between sciences, technologies and societies. This paper focuses on the topic of ”controversies.” The main reason for developing this methodology is that controversies across ”science,” ”technology,” and ”society” present plural and complex modes. We should distinguish among scientific controversy, technological controversy and social controversy of science and technology, using different methodological strategies for different modes. However, the traditional methodological principles stemming from sociology of scientific knowledge fail to match the diversity of controversy modes. Examining the problem of the symmetry principle, I defend the necessity of a boundary between the internal and the external of science and technology. Following this line of reasoning, I suggest a number of research strategies and their conditions of application, proposing a methodological scheme of ethical evaluation based on the social controversy of a particular technology.起始頁-結束頁：9-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：日治時期台灣細菌學研究機構的發展史淺析－以士林支所及其細菌性製劑為中心的觀察並列篇名：On a Research Institutions of Bacteriology in Japan-Ruled Taiwan: A Case Study of the Shihlin Branch and Its Bacterial Products作者：沈佳姍(Chia-san Shen);劉士永(Michael Shi-Yung Liu)關鍵字：細菌性製劑;帝國大學;熱帶醫學研究所士林支所;臺灣總督府中央研究所衛生部;傳染病研究所;Bacterial preparations;Imperial University;Institute of Tropical Medicine, Shilin Branch;Department of Hygiene, Government Research Institute, Formosa;Government Institute for Infectious Diseases期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：28期出版年：2019中文摘要：1990年代起，物質文化研究在科學史方面提出許多精采的觀點。學者因而意識到醫療物質常會受到外部政治、社會、經濟等因素干擾，變的難以理解甚至反饋予使用或製造者的本身。本文是以擬從中央研究所衛生部士林支所改隸台北帝大熱帶醫學研究所的過程中，試探細菌性製劑與其製成組織變遷中的互動關係，希望藉此理解細菌性製劑如何成為影響台灣醫學機構發展的物質因素。本文始於1930年代日本對破傷風和白喉等特定製劑的需求，再循人物流動，論述台灣在細菌學和相關製劑技術的發展。儘管從專業人員流動與初期組織形成來看，中央研究所衛生部和台北帝大醫學部，在官制、職掌、人員方面漸與東大連結，證明台灣細菌性製劑發展具有受日本中心支配而提供服務的外地邊陲身分；但在個別事例如戰時對特定製劑的需求上，熱帶醫學研究所也因此特殊關係，取得異於日本其他帝大研究所且近似東大傳染病研究所的地位，突顯其反而因位處帝國邊陲，得以發展出與帝國醫學核心之獨特連結而超越其可能較次級的位階。英文摘要：Since the 1990s many brilliant studies in the history of science have presented material cultures are often interfered by political, socio-economic, and other external factors, configurating obstacles to illuminate the meanings of manufacture and even material itself. This paper aims to explore the process of establishing the Shilin Branch of the Government Research Institute, Department of Hygiene in Formosa and its transformation to the Shilin Branch of the Institute of Tropical Medicine of Taipei Imperial University along with the discussion on the interaction between bacterial products and its manufacturing organizations. The discussion starts at the demand for specific products such as tetanus and diphtheria in Japan in the 1930s, and traces the key figures who guided the development of manufacturing bacterial products in colonial Taiwan. By the flow of medical professionals and the initiation to build research institute of bacteriology, the Department of Hygiene in Japan immediately coordinated with the School of Medicine of the Taipei Imperial University which close to the Tokyo Imperial University. The seamless connection between the Department of Hygiene in Japan and the Taipei Imperial University implied that the bacterial manufacturing in Taiwan on a periphery location was supported by the medical center in Japan. However, with the demands for specific products increased due to the outbreak of WWII, the Institute of Tropical Medicine in Taiwan gained some special status and privileges in production, way beyond many imperial university institutes in other colonies, almost paralleled to the Government Institute for Infectious Diseases in Japan. With careful review, generally speaking, the authors attempt to illustrate how materials like bacterial products could symbolize the unique features of Japanese colonial medicine via the institutionalization of medical research and manufacturing in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：55-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：子午流注中醫預測模型的建構並列篇名：Building a TCM Predictive Model of ”Midnight-Midday Ebb Flow”作者：鄭宛鈞(Wan-Chun Cheng);楊仕哲(Su-Tso Yang)關鍵字：子午流注;中醫;五輸穴;漏刻;術數;midnight-midday ebb flow;traditional Chinese medicine;five transport points;water clock;divination期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：28期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文旨在探討建立子午流注法的醫家們究竟掌握哪些知識，以及他們如何獲得這些知識。使用這種針灸療法的醫家們，創建了哪些方式以預測經脈中的氣血狀態。子午流注模型在金元時期被創造、建構出來，而在明代更獲得了很好的發展。使用子午流注法的醫家們認為，當經脈中的氣血灌注在特定穴道的時候是最佳的治療時間。本文認為子午流注法是古人試圖理解天人相應下的氣血流注情形而產生的推導模型，其模型的創造是建立在三個相關連介面「理」、「物」、「數」之間的相互交錯下而產生的。「理」的部分是中國傳統的天人相應宇宙觀，醫家要選擇合適的時間和空間組合替患者治療，這樣的思維模式可能來自於中國的關聯性宇宙觀與擇吉信仰。「物」的使用，指的是漏刻、渾象和渾儀。改變了觀測器具的性能將提升對大自然的理解，這些器物表面上看來與醫學無涉，實際上是具有深刻意義的社會選擇。「數」則是指推測命理變化的術數技法，借用推命術的原理以術數的方式對天體運行做出層層推演，得出讓古代使用子午流注法的醫家集團們都認可的模型。但是當面對複雜且充滿許多「意外」的大自然／天，子午流注模型的運作法則竟能藉由術數運算而得出非常規律的推論，以致於許多後世的醫家認為未免有過於「理想化」之處。英文摘要：This essay analyzes how TCM doctors constructed and mastered ”Midnight-Midday Ebb Flow” knowledge within their acupuncture practice, as a means of predicting the condition of qi-blood in meridians. The Midnight-Midday Ebb Flow model was established in Jin and Yuan Dynasties and further developed in Ming Dynasty. Doctors who supported Midnight-Midday Ebb Flow believed that the optimal time to perform treatment is when meridian qi-blood flows through specific points (five transport points). We argue that ancient TCM practitioners modeled Midnight-Midday Ebb Flow of qi and blood on the correspondence between Heaven and human beings. The creation of the model was based on the convergence of three facets: ”principle,” ”equipment,” and ”divination.” ”Principle” refers to the traditional view of the correspondence between Heaven and human beings. The idea of doctors choosing suitable times and spaces to heal patients likely stems from this correlative view of the universe and auspicious beliefs. ”Equipment” means observational knowledge based on water clock, celestial globe, and armillary sphere. The upgrade of measuring equipment could increase their understanding of Nature. Even though the equipment appears to be unrelated to medicine, it actually contains meaningful social choices. ”Divination” means the fortune-telling numerology divination techniques used in Midnight-Midday Ebb Flow, from which the convergence of Eight Characters Numerology and traditional Chinese medicine is evident. By using the principles of numerology and methods of divination, rotation of Heaven was deduced and formulated using a model which was constructed by doctors of Midnight-Midday Ebb Flow in ancient days. Later, it was believed by some doctors that this idea was too idealistic. The complicated Nature/Heaven relationship is always full of ”surprises” which cannot be predicted by simple numbers and operations.起始頁-結束頁：89-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：書評：人工智慧、標準壟斷與同化危機：論《Cyber-Humans Our Future with Machines》並列篇名：Book Review: Artificial Intelligence, Monopoly of Standards and Threats of Assimilation作者：柯一嘉(Yi-Chia Ke)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：125-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：書評：鄭和艦隊在非洲所創下之波瀾壯闊史蹟暨影響：評《非洲踏尋鄭和路》並列篇名：Book Review: The Magnificent History and Legacy of Zheng He's Fleet in Africa: A Review of Feizhou Taxun Zheng He Lu作者：林紀璿(Chi-Hsuan Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：145-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：工程倫理的積極責任－回應〈台灣工程倫理回顧及科技與社會取徑〉並列篇名：Active Responsibilities in Engineering Ethics: Some Additional Thoughts to ”A Review of Engineering Ethics in Taiwan from the STS perspective”作者：張國暉(Kuo-Hui Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：153-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館7篇名：STS與工程倫理的差異及其他：回應張國暉並列篇名：The Difference between STS and Engineering Ethics, and Others: A Reply to Kuo-Hui Chang作者：戴東源(Dong-Yuan Tai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：161-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：兒女傷、父母痛：K他命成癮者父母的傷痛經驗與搶救行動並列篇名：Child Injury and Parental Pain: The Grief Experience and Rescue Actions of Parents of People with Ketamine Abuse Disorders作者：蔡佩真(Pei-Jen Tsai)關鍵字：物質濫用;藥癮家庭;父母;K他命;搶救;substance abuse;family with drug addicts;parents;Ketamine;rescue期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：39期出版年：2019中文摘要：K他命有獨特的危害性，藥癮者父母是隱身的毒品受害者，本文採用質性研究法，以十位K他命成癮者的父母為研究對象，透過家庭訪視、深度訪談、參與家屬團體以進入藥癮家庭的世界，試圖理解K他命成癮造成之影響以及藥癮者父母的搶救行動。受訪者其子女成癮時間平均為7.3年，父母的搶救行動是從子女的年少期持續到成年時期。研究發現K他命的成癮性、濫用性、社會危害性極其嚴重，藥癮子女生活逐漸變調，以毒為重。父母展開的救援行動包括斷源、協助戒癮、收拾殘局、風險管控，從早期忍辱負重與積極搶救，到後期親情耗竭卻不忍放手，父母的搶救行動隨著子女成年而有差別。K他命成癮者缺乏社區戒癮資源且學校資源中斷，父母多僅靠自身力量搶救子女，親子成為緊密相依的生命共同體，父母既是照顧者也是潛在案主。親情的耗竭需要被正視，在政策上與實務上需有相應的資源以協助父母面對危機並協助藥癮者脫困，研究成果盼提供藥癮處遇之參考。英文摘要：Ketamine poses unique risks, and the parents of individuals with drug abuse disorders are unrecognized victims of drug abuse. This study used qualitative research methods. Ten parents of individuals with ketamine addiction participated in family visits, in-depth interviews, and family group meetings to reveal the effects of drug addiction on families and the rescue actions of the parents of people with drug abuse disorders. The study revealed that the average duration at which addiction sustained was 7.3 years and that parental rescue actions spanned from childhood to adulthood. Ketamine addiction, abuse, and related social harm are serious problems that alter the life path of those who become addicted. Parents included in this study implemented many rescue actions, including source breakout, assisting their children in conquering their addiction, and risk management. These actions spanned from early active rescue until family exhaustion. The rescue actions of the parents also varied according to the age of their children. Individuals addicted to ketamine lack detoxification resources, and school routine assistance has been disrupted. Therefore, parents rely on their own strength to rescue their children from addiction. Parents and children develop close relationships throughout life: parents are both caregivers and potential clients. Parental exhaustion must be confronted; it is recommended that resources be dedicated in policy and practice to help parents face crises and assist their children in such cases of addiction. The research results can provide a reference for addiction treatment.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201906_(39).00012篇名：揭露文本的沉默性：以批判論述分析方法應用於「曹小妹事件調查報告」為例並列篇名：Making the Production of a Text Visible: Analyzing the Investigatory Report on ”The Tragic Death of Girl Tsao” to Explore the Methodology of Critical Discourse Analysis作者：鄭怡世(Yi-Shih Cheng)關鍵字：批判論述分析;方法論;社會工作研究;兒童保護;critical discourse analysis;methodology;social work research;child protection期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：39期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文分為三個部分來梳理批判論述分析的知識理路與方法論處置。首先，討論批判論述分析作為一個分析的概念，其如何思考及關注語言的社會性、論述與權力，以及論述與意識型態之間的關係。再者，釐清批判論述分析作為一個揭露文本中社會文化脈絡、權力、意識型態之間複雜連結的研究取徑，其在方法論上的幾個議題，包括為什麼文本中會蘊含著這樣複雜的連結、文本的選擇，以及如何進行文本的分析。最後，以分析監察院所公布的〈曹小妹母攜女燒炭自殺事件調查報告〉為示例，來討論如何運用此方法進行文本的分析，以達到此方法所欲獲致的目的。希望藉此可以讓臺灣的社工社群更深入地了解與掌握此方法，並用以進行社會工作研究及知識生產，擴充社會工作知識與行動的多元性。英文摘要：This p aper aims to examine the rationality and methodology of critical discourse analysis (CDA), in seeking to extend its theory and applications for social work research and practice. It is divided into three parts. The first part discusses CDA as an analytical concept founded on phenomenological linguistics claiming the sociality of language; post-structuralism declared speech as a power process, and critical theory asserted the ideology in language, pursuing to understand the relationship between language and social process. The second part examines CDA as a research orientation: how to use phenomenology, hermeneutics and post-structuralism to disclose the meaning-making network and the role of power in texts; how to choose text; and how to analyze the text. In the third part, the investigatory report on the ”The Tragic Death of Young Girl Tsao” from the Control Yuan is text used to carry out the steps of CDA analysis obtained above. It also demonstrates how the core-concern of CDA: ”how does language figure (this article is a child protection discourse) as an element in the social process (this article consolidates the child protection system in Taiwan)”. This paper aims at proposing an alternative perspective regarding knowledge production and research methodology for social work, and enhancing understanding of CDA with greater confidence.起始頁-結束頁：57-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201906_(39).00023篇名：原住民族幸福感之研究：對原住民族社會政策與社會工作的意涵並列篇名：An Empirical Study on Happiness of Indigenous People in Taiwan: Implications for Indigenous Social Policy and Social Work作者：莊俐昕(Li-Hsin Chuang);黃源協(Yuan-Shie Hwang)關鍵字：幸福感;福祉;生活滿意度;原住民族;happiness;well-being;life satisfaction;indigenous people期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：39期出版年：2019中文摘要：原住民族是不快樂或悲情的嗎？本研究旨在探討臺灣原住民族的幸福感樣貌及其影響因素，並據以提出促進原住民福祉的相關建議。幸福感量表係由六個面向所組成：心理福祉、身心健康、工作與生活平衡、生活水準、人身安全及良善治理。本研究以20歲以上之具有原住民身分者為研究對象，並採取叢集抽樣方法，以全國55個「原住民族家庭服務中心」為平臺，每個中心各邀請15位符合受訪資格者接受面訪調查，最後完成有效問卷790份。研究發現，原住民族的幸福感屬中上段的，特別是在「心理福祉」和「工作與生活平衡」面向上。影響幸福感的變項很多，其中，年齡、收支平衡狀況、居住時間與居住區域是最主要的影響變項。依據研究結果與討論，本研究從社會政策與社會工作的觀點，提出有助於促進原住民族幸福感與福祉的相關建議。英文摘要：Are indigenous people 'unhappy' or 'miserable' as supposed? This study aims to explore the profile of the happiness of the indigenous people in Taiwan, and its influencing factors, in particular their personal traits and family status. The 'happiness scale' is comprised of 6 domains: psychological well-being, physical and mental health, work-life balance, living standards, physical safety, and good governance. The case population is indigenous people aged over 20. 790 samples from 55 'indigenous family service centers' located on the Island (Taiwan) were successfully invited to participate in face-to-face interviews. The results show that indigenous happiness leans towards positive, in particular in the domains of 'psychological well-being' and 'work-life balance'. Many variables influencing happiness, among others, include: age, balance between income and expenditure, community living time, and residential area made the most significant contributions. According to the findings, some suggestions related to promoting indigenous life chance and well-being are proposed from the perspectives of social policy and social work.起始頁-結束頁：105-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201906_(39).00034篇名：跨國社福移工的訓練與在地經驗：社會融合觀點並列篇名：Migrant Social Welfare Workers' Training and Localization Experiences in Long-term Care Facilities: A Social Inclusion View作者：王潔媛(Chieh-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：長期照顧機構;外籍看護工;照顧品質;在職訓練;long-term care facilities;foreign care workers;care quality;on-the- job training期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：39期出版年：2019中文摘要：照顧人力不足為推展長照服務主要困境，政府開放外籍看護工進入老人照護體制。本文檢視外籍看護工參與訓練現況，以機構勞動情境為主軸，分析影響教育訓練執行因素。本文採用質性研究，以半結構式深度訪談及田野觀察蒐集資料，研究對象為北部四家長照機構，訪談對象為外籍看護工及負責人、護理師、社工員、照服員。研究結果顯示長照機構直接照顧工作之分派與執行完全仰賴外籍看護工，來臺前在母國職前訓練多無法銜接及適用，外籍看護工之聘僱及訓練管理皆仰賴機構治理，透過「重整重訓」以達獨立工作目標；機構之組織型態與差異影響人力培訓與執行成效。研究建議訓練教材之設計與評值需考量外籍看護工在文化及語意的差異，訓練內容需融合照顧情境，增加臨床應用性。未來宜透過公私協力，制定照顧技術指導之工作標準，透過合宜訓練之建置，發展及建構外籍看護工在臺社會融合之重要機制。英文摘要：The shortage of caregivers is a primary obstacle for promoting long-term care services in Taiwan. The Taiwanese government therefore opened up the foreign care workers (FCWs) association to enter the formal elderly care systems. The aim of this research was to analyze the current situation of FCWs participating in training, focusing on labor situations, and analyzing the factors affecting the implementation of education and training. This research applied qualitative methods, using field observations and in-depth interviews to collect data. Four long-term care facilities participated in this study. The subjects are foreign care workers and administrators, social workers and nursing staff. The study results revealed that the care work of long-term care facilities depends entirely on FCWs in Taiwan. Although the FCWs were trained before they came to Taiwan, their effectiveness was not as expected. Facilities need to pay attention to FCWs' recruitment training management and provide a comprehensive training program for them. Organizational differences affect the effectiveness of the implementation of on-the-job training. Finally, this research suggests that the design and evaluation of training materials need to consider the cultural and semantic differences of FCWs, as well as to evaluate the requirements of FCWs and the efficiency of training course. The standard operating procedures given to the FCWs need to be developed, along with government and private sectors cooperation. Establishing appropriate training has become an important mechanism for promoting the social inclusion needs of FCWs.起始頁-結束頁：153-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201906_(39).000401篇名：廣告媒體與消費者資訊結構對製造商均衡價格及廣告策略之影響並列篇名：Effects of Advertising Media and Consumers' Information Structure on Manufacturers' Equilibrium Pricing and Advertising Strategies作者：陳其美(Chyi-Mei Chen);周善瑜(Shan-Yu Chou);黃仕宗(Shih-Tsung Huang);曾慧玟(Huei-Wen Zeng)關鍵字：品牌告知廣告;資訊不對稱;定價策略;賽局理論;阻礙進入;informative advertising;information asymmetry;pricing strategies;game-theoretical model;entry deterrence期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討消費者資訊結構與廣告媒體特性對既存獨佔製造商與一潛在競爭者執行品牌告知型廣告之誘因的影響，並探討廣告策略如何影響兩製造商後續的訂價行為以及潛在競爭者的進場意願。考慮產品帶給消費者的毛效用夠高的情況下，本文主要研究結果如下：（1）除非既存製造商忠誠顧客人口極多，否則既存製造商透過大眾媒體執行品牌告知型廣告，皆有助於阻絕潛在競爭者的入場；（2）當既存製造商執行品牌告知型廣告無法阻絕潛在競爭者入場，且兩廠商間忠誠顧客比例相距不是太大時，如果廣告所用大眾媒體的接觸率越高，既存製造商執行廣告擴大產品知曉度將同時激化兩廠商間的價格競爭；（3）在上述情況下既存製造商可能放棄執行告知型廣告；（4）當既存製造商可以使用高效率的目標廣告媒體時，既存製造商執行告知型廣告可使兩廠商共同受惠。英文摘要：This paper intends to investigate how consumers' information structure and the nature of advertising media may affect an existing manufacturer and a potential entrant's incentives to perform informative advertising, and how these advertising decisions may affect these manufacturers' subsequent pricing behavior and thus the potential entrant's entry decision. With the assumption that consumer gross valuations are high, we obtained the following results. Firstly, except in the case where the incumbent manufacturer is endowed with a very large loyal base, the incumbent's informative advertising through mass media helps deter entry. Secondly, in a case where informative advertising fails to deter entry and that neither firm has a dominant loyal base, then the post-entry price competition crucially depends on the nature of the advertising medium used by the two firms. If they use a similar mass medium with high reach rate, then the informative advertising performed by the incumbent will intensify their price competition. Thirdly, when both firms use similar mass media to perform informative advertising, it is unlikely that the incumbent manufacturer conducts informative advertising in equilibrium. Finally, when the incumbent can use an efficient targeted medium, the incumbent's informative advertising tends to benefit both manufacturers.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201912_29(3).00012篇名：員工創造力研究之回顧與展望：臺灣與東亞的研究發現並列篇名：Research on Employee Creativity in Taiwan and East Asian Countries: Findings and Implications作者：莊璦嘉(Aichia Chuang);李均揚(Chun-Yang Lee);陳宇軒(Yu-Syuan Chen);嚴國晉(Kuo-Ching Yen)關鍵字：創造力;創新行為;個人創造力;團隊創造力;creativity;innovative behavior;individual creativity;team creativity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：創造力相關研究近年來已受到學者的廣泛關注，然而截至目前為止，多數研究係基於西方的理論或研究樣本，尚未充分考慮東亞地區的員工特色，以及這些特色如何影響其在創造力上的表現。本研究旨在回顧過去十五年間（2000-2015），國內外重要管理期刊之中，以臺灣和其他東亞國家為樣本之創造力實證研究，並討論上述研究結果與西方研究的相似或差異之處。回顧結果發現，雖然許多東亞研究採取源於西方的理論與研究構念，但近年來出現了東亞國家之本土取向研究。此外，在實證研究結果上，多數東西方研究結果一致，呈現了部分之文化普同性，但亦有少數研究呈現不同結果之現象。最後，在未來展望部分，本文基於東亞國家之本土文化觀點，提出未來研究方向建議。英文摘要：A lot of research about creativity and innovation has drawn much attention from scholars in recent years. However, the majority is based on Western theories or research samplings without considering the employees' characteristics from East Asian areas and how these characteristics may influence creative performance. This paper includes analysis on international management journals and empirical research (about creativity in Taiwan and other East Asian countries) from the past 15 years (2000-2015). It also discusses the similarities and differences of research findings between Eastern and Western studies. Although the results indicate that many East Asian studies used Western theories and research constructs, indigenous studies in East Asian countries have emerged in recent years. In addition, most East Asian research findings are consistent with Western ones, showing that the results are partly culture-general, while only few areas revealed inconsistent findings. Finally, in the 'Future Prospects' section, we provide suggestions for future research based on East Asian cultural perspectives.起始頁-結束頁：39-82資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201912_29(3).00023篇名：「勞資衝突」是必然，還是偶然？從結構化理論探討台灣企業勞資衝突之歷程研究並列篇名：Are Industrial Conflicts Inevitable or Fortuitous? -A Process Research on Industrial Conflicts in Taiwanese Enterprises from the Perspective of Structuration Theory作者：李怡慧(I-Hui Lee);吳建明(Chien-Ming Wu);林尚平(Shang-Ping Lin)關鍵字：勞資衝突;結構化理論;工會;勞工;歷程研究;industrial conflict;structuration theory;labor union;labor;process research期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：「勞資衝突」議題攸關台灣產業經濟發展，但檢視現有學術文獻，除了論文篇數不多，論文發展走向也有一些值得商榷之處。例如，研究主題偏重「勞資爭議事件」而少談「勞資衝突歷程」；研究對象以「企業與工會」為主，較少觸及「管理者與勞工」；研究觀點趨向從「資方結構層面」或「勞工行動面向」的單一角度論述等。這些情況，無形限縮對於此地「勞資衝突」問題的理解。為此，本研究就個案勞資衝突歷程，進行包括企業、工會、管理者、勞工等觀察。同時採取「結構化理論」作為分析架構，藉以探求更深層的勞資衝突發展內涵。本研究希望據此重新思考：「勞資衝突」是企業無法避免的宿命，還是人為行動介入所致。英文摘要：”Industrial Conflict” phenomenon has been common in practice in the business world. How to cope with this issue has become important in the development of Taiwanese industries and economy. For reasons stated above, the study explores cases of industrial conflict in Taiwanese enterprises. Moreover, in order to expand the limited existing sources from single viewpoints of the ”employer” structure or ”labor” action, this study also uses an interactive perspective with the support of structuration theory as the analytical framework to explore the comprehensive dispute process and main reasons of industrial conflicts. Finally, this study aims to disclose facts about the forming process of industrial conflicts and relevant influential factors, and whether these conflicts are the unavoidable fate for organizations or could have been an engineered consequence by interrelated actors.起始頁-結束頁：83-124資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201912_29(3).00034篇名：Does Efficient Social-Network Structure Benefit the Performance of Business Groups and Core Firms? The Underlying Mediation Mechanism for Small World Network Structure and Internationalization in Cross- Level Business Group Network並列篇名：有效率的網絡結構對組織的營業績效真的有幫助嗎？探討小世界網絡結構對集團企業以及核心母公司的績效影響作者：陳膺郁(Ying-Yu Chen)關鍵字：small-world network;business group;financial performance;internationalization performance;core firm;小世界網絡;集團企業;財務績效;國際化績效;核心母公司期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Small-world networks have received much theoretical attention from sociologists, business-management researchers, and others. In the present study, I examine both financial and internationalization performance under a small-world network structure of business groups. Using the perspective of network analysis, I set out to clarify the effects of small-world network structures on the financial performance of groups and their core firms. I also test the internationalization performance of groups and its mediating role between small-world networks and group financial performance. This study extends business-group research by examining the effects that group and cross-level nested dimensions can have on financial and internationalization performance. With longitudinal business-group data in Taiwan from the BGT directory spanning the years between 2009 and 2013, I present evidence that small-world networks have shaped dynamic financial outcomes. The result indicates that the relationship between small-world networks and the financial performance of groups is U-shaped. The evidence additionally indicates that an inverted U-shaped relationship characterizes the interactions between the small-world networks and the nested core firms of groups. However, small-world network structures do not affect the internationalization performance of groups.英文摘要：小世界網絡近幾年來在管理領域已受到諸多學者的關注，本研究主要探討在集團企業所形成的小世界網絡結構與其績效之相關性。該績效包含財務面的營業績效以及國際化績效。本研究採用過去較少用來探討集團企業的網絡觀點，所探討重點為小世界網絡結構對整體集團企業及其所屬核心母公司的財務績效所造成之影響；除此之外，集團企業的國際化績效，在過去集團企業研究領域也較少被觸及，本研究也嘗試探討小世界網絡結構對集團企業的國際化績效影響，以及國際化績效所扮演的中介角色。本研究透過集團層次以及跨層次（集團對公司層次）之研究情境，延伸過去集團企業這一脈的文獻研究。針對為期5年的集團企業資料之實證結果顯示：集團企業的小世界網絡結構與其財務績效呈U型的非線性相關；小世界網絡結構與其所隸屬的核心母公司之財務績效卻呈倒U型的非線性相關。值得一提的是，小世界網絡結構與集團的國際化績效並未呈現相關性，集團的國際化績效也未在小世界網絡及其財務績效之相關性帶來中介效果。起始頁-結束頁：125-166資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201912_29(3).00045篇名：線上企業創造鎖入效應之策略分析並列篇名：Online Business Strategy in Creating Lock-In Effect作者：劉子歆(Tzu-Hsin Liu);洪世章(Shih-Chang Hung);蕭詠璋(Yung-Chang Hsiao)關鍵字：鎖入效應;線上企業;隱喻分析;lock-in effect;online business;metaphor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：線上企業如何創造鎖入效應以維持長久的競爭優勢，乃是當前網際網路創新服務熱潮下一個非常重要的策略性議題。著眼於過去管理理論對線上企業如何創造鎖入效應之解釋尚缺乏一個整體性的探討。在分析基礎上，本研究透過質性研究之隱喻分析，立基於花與蜜蜂之間互動模式之探索，提出線上企業與顧客間鎖入效應的六種因素，包括（1）轉換成本、（2）網絡外部性、（3）品牌形象、（4）線上服務系統、（5）顧客認知價值、（6）核心資源。本研究並且藉由Facebook、YouTube、LINE等三個成功的線上企業如何創造顧客鎖入效應之分析，提出一個具體且循序的策略性架構，即「支援策略、吸引策略、成癮策略與擴散策略」。最後，據此提出相關的理論與實務建議。英文摘要：Understanding how to sustain a long-term competitive advantage for online businesses by leveraging a lock-in effects is an up-and-coming strategic issue in internet innovations. However, prior research on the lock-in effect of online businesses has lacked an integrated analysis. The lock-in effect on the Internet is now considered an effective strategy. For example, social media platforms such as Facebook, YouTube, or LINE have generated and accumulated many loyal online users. The lock-in situation has erected a high entry barrier for new and potential businesses. We propose the following question: how do online businesses use the lock-in effect to form a strategic model for value creation? To answer this question, this paper uses bees and flowers to propose six sources of the lock-in effect: cost switching, network externalities, brand image, online service system, buyers' value perceptions, and core resources. Consequently, this study finds that for the purpose of reproduction, flowers use a series of strategies to facilitate the lock-in effect of bees. Conversely, bees perform honey dance and information sharing to entice other bees to take nectar from specific flowers. The interaction between flowers and bees is similar to that of an online business and its customers. We thus establish an integrated and systemic strategic analytic framework of creating lock-in effect through supporting, attracting, addicting, and diffusing strategies. We also suggest that online businesses consider adopting the attracting-addicting-diffusing-supporting strategy to develop lock-in models for value creation. In addition, online businesses should repeatedly use these strategic actions during the development of the lock-in effect.起始頁-結束頁：167-192資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201912_29(3).00056篇名：The Mediating Effect of Glass Ceiling Beliefs in the Relationship between Women's Personality Traits and Their Subjective Career Success並列篇名：女性對玻璃天花板之看法在女性人格特質與其主觀事業成就關係中的中介效應作者：Saddam Khalid;Tomoki Sekiguchi關鍵字：Big Five personality traits;glass ceiling beliefs;subjective career success;五大人格特質;玻璃天花板觀點;主觀事業成就期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Nowadays, the number of women working in organizations is growing, and they play a vital role in organizational productivity. However, male dominance in the workplace is still strong, and the glass ceiling effect, or the artificial barriers that prevent female employees from reaching top-level management positions, exists in both developed and developing countries. In this article, we use the theory of optimism and pessimism and propose that women's personality traits are related to their glass ceiling beliefs and subjective career success. Specifically, we propose the model in which glass ceiling beliefs in the forms including denial, resilience, acceptance, and resignation mediate the relationship between women's Big Five personality traits and their subjective career success. Our model has both theoretical and practical implications regarding how women may achieve their career success in organizations by overcoming the possible glass ceiling effect.英文摘要：投入職場的女性人數日益增加，她們於組織生產力扮演重要的角色。然而，男性在職場中仍掌握強勢主導權，不論是已開發或開發中國家，依舊存在玻璃天花板效應及其他人為屏障，阻礙女性取得高階管理職位。本文以樂觀主義與悲觀主義推論，並提出以下假說：女性的人格特質和其對玻璃天花板的看法與其主觀事業成就具關聯性。我們所提出模型為：女性對玻璃天花板的看法可能屬下列四種：否認其存在、適應其存在並克服其所帶來的困難、接受其存在且不做抵抗、承認其存在並轉而追求職場以外的目標。這四種態度在模型中於女性人格特質與女性主觀事業成就具中介效果，並與這兩者互相影響、調和。本論文的模型對於女性係如何克服潛在的玻璃天花板效應以取得事業成就在理論及應用上皆具意涵。起始頁-結束頁：193-219資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201912_29(3).00067篇名：幸福了，然後呢？從情感與認知觀點解釋幸福感與工作績效之關係並列篇名：Happy Ever After? Explain the Relationship between Subjective Well-Being and Work Performance in the Affective and Cognitive Perspectives作者：黃櫻美(Yin-Mei Huang);蔡昀庭(Yun-Ting Tsai)關鍵字：幸福感;工作滿足;自我效能;助人行為;任務績效;subjective well-being;job satisfaction;self-efficacy;helping behavior;task performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究目的在探討幸福感與工作績效關係之中介歷程，以擴張－積聚理論為基礎，同時從情感與認知雙重歷程提出工作滿足與自我效能為中介變數。本研究更明確主張幸福感會透過工作滿足間接影響到助人行為，而透過自我效能間接影響到任務績效。本研究採用問卷調查法搜集資料，由主管與員工分別對工作績效與幸福感、自我效能及工作滿足進行評量，搜集155份主管與員工配對資料，共有155位員工與61位主管完成填答。本研究就預試與正式施測之結果，將幸福感區分為四個構面，分別為「快樂」、「生活滿意」、「生活意義」與「喜歡自己」。研究結果發現，幸福感中的快樂與生活滿意構面會透過工作滿足之中介效果，進而間接正向地影響助人行為。此外，幸福感中的快樂與生活意義構面則會透過自我效能之中介效果，進而間接地提升任務績效。英文摘要：This study focuses on the effects of subjective well-being (SWB), examining the mediating processes in the relationships of SWB and job performance. Referencing to the broaden-and-build theory (Fredrickson, 2001, 2003), this study proposes job satisfaction and self-efficacy as the affect-driven and cognition-driven mediators to explain why SWB impacts helping behavior and task performance. There are 155 employees and 61 supervisors, totaling 155 dyads, responding to the survey. Results indicate that SWB is a multi-dimensional construct, with dimensions such as happiness, life satisfaction, life meaning, and loving oneself. Results also showed that happiness and life satisfaction were positively correlated to job satisfaction and then indirectly enhance helping behaviors. Results further reveal that self-efficacy mediates the relationships among happiness, life meaning and task performance.起始頁-結束頁：221-254資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201912_29(3).00078篇名：退休基金自選投資制度之研究並列篇名：A Study of Member-Choice Management Platform for Pension Funds作者：童嬋娟(Chan-Chuan Tung);林盈課(Anchor Lin);李瑞珠(Grace Lee)關鍵字：退休金;自動加入機制;生命週期基金;行為經濟學;pension;automative enrollment;life-cycle fund;behavioral economics期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：為了提升我國新制勞退基金經營管理績效，本研究參考相關文獻與先進國家退休金制度的實施經驗，建議勞退新制開放自選平台方案：採單一帳戶具可攜式和連續性，簡化帳戶管理；採政府與民營共管架構，保有二年定期存款保證收益方案供勞工選擇；採自動加入機制，預先設定自提比率3%，每遇加薪超過1%時自動提高提撥比率0.5%直到上限，簡單方便；自提比率上限由現行6%調升至先進國家水準12%，鼓勵儲蓄，但超過6%部分無賦稅優惠；勞工可隨時自行申請調整提撥比率，保有彈性選擇；目標期限型基金為預設標的基金，降低無退休理財觀念或無暇投資理財勞工之投資困擾，該基金以生命週期投資理論建構，依據勞工距退休日期作風險評估與資產配置。Thaler and Benartzi（2004）運用行為經濟學的推力觀念，設計明天存更多（Save More Tomorrow; SMT）退休金方案，大幅提高雇員的自提參加意願與自提比率，值得台灣設計自選平台時參考。英文摘要：In order to strengthen the performance of Taiwan's New Labor Pension Fund, this study reviews the pension-related literature and investigates the reform experience in selected developed economies. We suggest a member-choice management platform with the following characteristics: one pension account only for every employee for management convenience, a management structure offering both private services and government services with a guarantee of two-year deposit returns, automotive enrollment with a default savings rate of 3% and automotive escalation linking saving increases to pay increases, raising the savings rate limit from 6% to 12% with no tax benefit for savings above 6%, and target date funds as the default funds by applying life-cyle investment theory to make asset allocation for employees with different retirement dates. Thaler and Benartzi (2004) apply the nudge concept in behavioral economics to design a pension management program, called Save More Tomorrow (SMT). Our suggestion is to take the SMT program as reference when we design Taiwan's member-choice management platform since SMT has significantly increased both pension enrollment rates and savings rates in developed economies.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201908_29(2).00019篇名：考量隨機利率下物價連動保證對退休金制度年金成本評價之分析並列篇名：Effect of Inflation on the Cost of Inflation-Linked Annuities Considering Stochastic Interest Rate and Inflation Rate Models作者：陳芬英(Fen-Ying Chen);楊曉文(Sharon S. Yang);黃泓智(Hong-Chih Huang)關鍵字：物價連動年金;利率風險;通貨膨脹風險;遠期利率模型;inflation-linked annuity;interest rate risk;inflation risk;forward interest rate model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：為保障退休金給付的實質購買力，提供具有物價連動的年金為常見的設計，然而該設計也會增加退休金制度之年金成本，在年金改革因應財務健全性中也是需了解的因素。本研究的主要目的將分析不同年金設計的成本比較，包括普通年金、與物價連動的年金、具上限型的物價連動年金及具下限型的物價連動年金，並導出一理論解模型，該模型為一般化模型，在特定的參數設定下，可以變成與通貨膨脹無關的年金模型、一般與物價連動的年金模型、上限型的物價連動年金模型、下限型的物價連動年金模型。數值結果得知當上限或下限的門檻值提高，年金的價格大多也隨之增加；波動度的敏感度大致比相關係數的敏感度高，本研究的架構可以提供台灣退休金制度及年金改成本分析的參考。英文摘要：To protect the real income from retirement pensions against the risk of inflation, developing an annuity model that can be linked to the inflation index is necessary. Although inflation-linked annuities increase the cost of retirement pensions for governments, the risk posed by inflation to retirement annuities must be understood. In this paper, an inflation-linked annuity with a cap and floor model is developed. The model is a general form that can be reduced to special forms such as ordinary annuities, inflation-linked annuities without barriers, inflation-linked annuities with a cap model, and inflation-linked annuities with a floor model. Interest rate risk and inflation risk are considered within the model. Furthermore, we derive a closed-form solution for the model. The valuation framework can benefit annuity providers to understand the cost of inflation-linked annuities. The empirical results indicate that the prices of the annuities with cap and floor generally increase when the cap values increase. In addition, the sensitivities of volatilities are larger than those of the correlation coefficients. The valuation framework can benefit annuity providers to understand the cost of inflation-linked annuities.起始頁-結束頁：29-59資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201908_29(2).000210篇名：國軍軍官晉任停年及服役年限之變革對軍官退休俸未來給付影響之估計模型並列篇名：An Estimation Model for Evaluating the Impact of Changing Officers' Minimum Time in Grade and Maximum Time in Service on Officers' Future Pension Payment作者：楊承亮(Cheng-Liang Yang)關鍵字：退休金;潛藏負債;政府財政負擔;人力規劃;穩定狀態生涯結構模型;pension;future payment of the officers' pension;government's financial burden;manpower planning;steady state career structure model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來軍人退撫基金財務收支逐漸失衡而有破產之虞，國防部遂有延長服役年限之規劃以改善此一情形。但服役年限應該延長多久？基金之財務是否因此而獲得改善？迄今尚缺乏一個用來設計人力政策同時可以評估其對軍官退休俸未來給付有何影響之模型。本研究參酌Alam（1985）的穩定狀態生涯結構模型，考慮各階級退損率，建構了一個MSSCSM模型。本研究根據此一模型結合各階級人力成本，建構了另外一個人力資源財力規劃模型，亦即軍官退休俸未來給付估計模型（EMMOFPP）。透過MSSCSM模型設計不同的晉任停年及服役年限政策，其所產生的結果輸入EMMOFPP模型，則可估計出這些人力政策對每年新退休軍官之退休俸未來給付所產生的影響。此外根據本研究的MSSCSM及EMMOFPP理論模型，我們亦可瞭解所設計的各階級的晉任停年、服役年限、編制數、留營策略等人力政策在財力限制下是否可行，以及要落實這些人力政策，需要多少財力來支援。同時亦可根據本研究的理論模型，設計不同的退休給付政策，了解這些政策會減少或增加多少軍官退休俸未來給付。本研究假設少校至上校的現役最大年限均延長4年，少將延長2年，少尉及上尉晉任停年各自延長1年。研究結果顯示，校官及少將服役年限的延長並配合尉官晉任停年的拉長，提高了大部分階級的晉升機會，例如少校晉升中校由52.8%提升為55.9%，中校晉升上校由46%提升為50.3%。但軍官退休俸未來給付並未因此而減少，反而增加了0.29%。英文摘要：To avoid failure of the current servicemen pension fund system, the Ministry of Defense intends to increase the service time required for retirement. However, how long should the service time be extended? Could this extended service time improve the financial situation of the pension fund system? Until now there has not been a model which can be used to evaluate the impact of this change on the future payment of the officers' pension. The current study refers to Alam's (1985) steady state career structure model, and considers the wastage rates of each grade to construct a Modified Steady State Career Structure Model (MSSCSM). Combining the MSSCSM with manpower costs of each grade, a human resource financial model, i.e. an Estimation Model for Military Officers Future Pension Payment (EMMOFPP), is established. By using the MSSCSM, we can evaluate policies with different time in grade for promotion, and service time for retirement. The policies' results are then inputted into the EMMOFPP to estimate the impact of these policies on the future pension payment for new retired officers every year. In addition, according to the theoretical models of this study, we can also understand whether the newly designed manpower policies that vary each grade's minimum time for promotion, maximum time for retirement, established numbers, and retention strategies are feasible under financial constraint and how much financial resource is needed to implement these manpower policies. Meanwhile, based on the current study's theoretical models, we can design different retirement payment policies to understand how future pension payment for officers may be affected. The current study proposes that the maximum service time of retirement for major to colonel should be extended 4 years, and 2 years for major general. Minimum time for promotion of second lieutenant and captain should be extended 1 year. The results indicate that the extensions of service time for retirement in Field Grades and Major General, and the extensions of time in grade for promotion in Company Grades will increase most ranks' promotion prospects. For example, the promotion prospect of major to lieutenant colonel increases from 52.8% to 55.9%, and of lieutenant colonel to colonel from 46% to 50.3%. However, the future payment of the officers' retirement pension has not been reduced. In contrast, it has been theorized to increase 0.29%.起始頁-結束頁：61-102資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201908_29(2).000311篇名：勞保年金給付方式的新思維並列篇名：The New Thought of Labor Insurance's Pension Benefits作者：陳芬苓(Fen-Ling Chen);張森林(San-Lin Chung)關鍵字：退休給付;投保薪資;退休金保險費率;替代率;retirement benefits;insurance salary;pension insurance premium;replacement rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：此次勞保年金改革的重點之一是在計算勞保退休給付時，延長投保薪資的採計期間，由現行60個月最高投保薪資平均逐步延長至15年最高投保薪資平均。因為不同時間點投保薪資的價值並不相同，如果只是將採計的投保薪資直接平均並不公平，而且也會導致退休者的年金給付降低。針對上述議題，本文提出調整公式，可以合理地將過去的投保薪資還原成開始請領年金時的投保薪資水準。本文建議的調整方式具有即時反映薪資水準變化、使退休基金的收入與支出正相關、具性別平等意識…等優點。其次，本文建議依照隨收隨付制的精神，來決定勞保基金的長期均衡費率和給付率。最後，本文也試算分析如何在兼顧財務平衡下，運用本文建議的給付公式來設定勞保年金的樓地板。英文摘要：Under the recent pension reform of the Labor Insurance Act in Taiwan, it is proposed by the Ministry of Labor that the old-age benefits be based on the worker's average salary over his/her highest 180 months of earnings rather than his/her highest 60 months of earnings. Extending the time length in the average salary scheme may substantially reduce retirement benefits if the insurance salary is not adjusted before taking the average. In this paper, we propose a reasonable adjustment formula for calculating the worker's average salary. Our formula has several advantages such as embedding a dynamic adjustment according to the latest national average monthly salary and improves gender equality. We discuss how to determine the long-run relationship between pension insurance premium and retirement benefits for a financially stable pension system. We also suggest how to apply the proposed benefits formula to set up a financially feasible retirement payment formula that embeds a minimum payment (Floor).起始頁-結束頁：103-137資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201908_29(2).000412篇名：臺灣年金制度改革的財務影響與世代不均問題並列篇名：Financial Effects and Intergenerational Inequity of Pension Reform in Taiwan作者：王儷玲(Jennifer L. Wang);黃泓智(Hong-Chih Huang);陳彥志(Yen-Chih Chen);鄭惠(Mark, Hui-Heng Cheng)關鍵字：年金改革;退休金;社會保險;pension reform;retirement;social insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣人口結構快速改變，加上社會保險與退休金制度不足額提撥的制度設計，使得臺灣的年金制度的永續性面臨極大挑戰，本研究從財務觀點探討年金改革對職業不公、世代不均、基金財務永續所造成的影響，並提出臺灣年金制度所面臨的重要問題與年金改革政策建議。研究結果發現，臺灣年金制度所造成的世代不均問題比職業不公更嚴重，解決世代不均問題與建立財務永續的年金制度才是政府未來年金改革最迫切的問題。而臺灣的民眾更必須了解自行準備退休金的重要性，才能彌補退休金不足的缺口，為自己建構更完整安全的退休保障。英文摘要：The pension system in Taiwan faces various challenges caused by the rapid aging of the population and severe underfunding of pension funds. This study examines three crucial aspects, including (i) inconsistent pension benefits between occupations, (ii) intergenerational inequity, and (iii) unsustainability of pension funding. These effects have significant financial effects on pension reform in Taiwan. The results show that the difference of money's worth ratios between generations is larger than that between occupations. The government should quickly implement pension-reforming policies to resolve the intergenerational inequity and establish a sustainable pension system. In addition, to enhance retirement income security, individuals should also be required to contribute more to their occupational pension schemes and increase their retirement savings.起始頁-結束頁：139-171資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201908_29(2).000513篇名：我國社會安全年金制度可攜性分析並列篇名：Portability of Social Security Pension in Taiwan作者：傅從喜(Tsung-Hsi Fu);施世駿(Shih-Jiunn Shi);林宏陽(Hung-Yang Lin)關鍵字：年金;年金改革;年金可攜性;老年經濟安全;pension;pension reform;pension portability;old age income security期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：我國的年金制度是典型的俾斯麥模式，依職業別辦理不同的方案，民眾在轉換職場時可能也需轉換不同的年金方案，如何提升年金制度的可攜性遂成為我國年金制度發展的重要課題。本文分析我國公共年金與職業年金現行有關可攜性的規定，並探討提升我國年金可攜性的具體策略。本研究發現，我國現行的各項公共年金方案不論在年金請領年資門檻、提前退保者的權益保障、轉換方案後的年資可攜性等規定，都有明顯的不同。而在職業年金部分，現行各項確定給付方案與確定提撥方案對於年金可攜性的處理方式亦大不相同。本研究提出以「權益保留」、「年資可攜」與「年金資產可攜」等方式，來提升我國年金制度的可攜性，進而提升民眾老年的生活保障。英文摘要：Taiwan's pension system is a typical Bismarck model, which means that it has different schemes for people in different occupational groups. Participants might be required to shift to a different pension scheme when they change jobs. Therefore, how to improve the portability of the system has become a critical topic. This paper discusses the concept and historical development of pension portability. In addition, it considers Taiwan as a case study to analyze how different public and occupational pension schemes manage portability. The results reveal substantial differences between current pension schemes in terms of vested regulations for early leavers and portability of service. In addition, defined-benefit and defined-contribution schemes employ different strategies for pension portability. This paper suggests that Taiwan's pension plans should use vesting rights, service portability, and assets portability to improve the overall portability of pensions. These measures can improve people's income security in later life.起始頁-結束頁：173-199資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201908_29(2).000614篇名：董事連結與企業避稅程度之關聯性並列篇名：The Relationship between Board Interlocks and Corporate Tax Avoidance作者：黃美祝(Mei-Juh Huang)關鍵字：董事連結;企業避稅;board interlocks;tax avoidance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：根據知識擴散理論，企業的網絡連結可使其學習到其他公司的經驗，且隱晦複雜的新知識透過連結所產生的擴散效益更高。有鑒於租稅規劃策略及經驗可經由企業的網絡連結，尤其是董事連結來分享予其他公司，因此本文沿續Brown and Drake（2014）之研究，實證結果顯示當企業與低稅負公司間存有董事連結時，其避稅行為亦會較高。此外，研究結果亦發現董事連結對企業避稅之影響尚取決於某些連結之特性，例如經由執行董事而產生董事連結、與連結之低稅負公司雇用同一個查核會計師、以及與連結的低稅負公司屬同一個家族企業等，皆可使連結後之知識擴散效果增強。本文結果不僅對文獻中關於網絡連結之應用上有所貢獻，實證結果亦可用於額外解釋各企業避稅行為間的差異。英文摘要：According to diffusion theory, network ties allow networked firms to learn vicariously from each other's experiences through the diffusion of new knowledge, and ties related to the transfer of tacit and complex knowledge, such as tax-planning strategies, are particularly beneficial. Since the knowledge of tax-planning strategies and experience in implementing tax-planning strategies can be shared among firms via their network ties, especially through board interlocks, following Brown and Drake (2014), this study evinces that a firm's tax avoidance behavior is related to its directorate ties to low-tax firms. Furthermore, this paper reveals that the influence of board interlocks on tax avoidance depends on certain characteristics of the firm's ties, such as ties formed by executive directors, ties to low-tax firms engaging the same auditor, and ties to the firm's low-tax family members. The empirical results of this study not only add evidence on network ties to the accounting literature but also can help explain part of the observed variation in corporate tax avoidance.起始頁-結束頁：201-231資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201908_29(2).000715篇名：The Illiquidity Premium: Further Evidence from Global and Asia-Pacific Markets作者：Yakov Amihud;Allaudeen Hameed;Wenjin Kang;Huiping Zhang關鍵字：illiquidity;illiquidity premium;international stock markets期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：We document the prevalence of illiquidity premium in the international equity markets, across 45 markets over the period from 1990 to 2015. The global average illiquidity premium is economically significant at 0.85% per month and it is 1.05% for the Asia- Pacific markets, after adjusting for exposure to global and regional return factors. We also find that investors demand a premium for stock illiquidity, after controlling for various firm characteristics that predict the cross-section of stock returns.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.2018.Speech16篇名：Post-Disaster Grain Supply Chain Management with Supplier Hoarding and Regime Intervention並列篇名：供應商囤貨行為及政權介入對於災後農產品供應鏈管理之影響作者：許鉅秉(Jiuh-Biing Sheu);郭欣慈(Hsin-Tsz Kuo)關鍵字：supplier hoarding intention;regime intervention;grain supply chain;供應商囤貨意圖;政權介入;農產品供應鏈期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study proposes a research model to address the causal relationships among regime intervention, supplier hoarding intention and its antecedents in a post-disaster grain supply chain. We argue that the regime intervention can moderate the relationship among supplier hoarding intention, supplier's belief of future earnings, and supplier's attitude towards risk reduction of disruption after a disaster. Using data acquired from questionnaires, this study applies structural equation modeling (SEM) to test the research model. Our findings show that regime intervention mitigates the positive effect of supplier belief in future earnings on supplier hoarding intention. Also, regime intervention increases the negative effect of supplier attitude towards risk reduction of disruption after a disaster on supplier hoarding intention. Finally, we discuss the findings and the practical implications for disruption of the grain supply chain.英文摘要：本研究提出一個關於供應商囤貨行為意圖的假設模型，探討災後農產品供應商囤貨意圖及其成因與政權介入三者之間的關係。我們認為政權介入時，能有效調節災後的囤貨意圖，可從供應商預期未來收益以及供應商災後傾向風險趨避的態度這兩個面向來予以分析。使用結構方程模型（SEM）實證結果發現，政權介入確實會降低供應商對於未來預期收入增加的預期心理。另一方面，供應商在面臨災後生意中斷風險時的態度，則可經由政權介入提供正向的協助。最後一章節，我們將會深入討論這些實證結果的意涵，並提供農產品供應鏈管理實務上應用的建議與未來可能的研究方向。起始頁-結束頁：25-49資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201904_29(1).000117篇名：Exploring Dual Business Model Choice of Brand and OEM Businesses並列篇名：探索品牌與代工雙元營運模式的選擇作者：郭重松(Chung-Song Kuo);李吉仁(Ji-Ren Lee)關鍵字：dual business model;capabilities-based view;OEM business;business model;雙元營運模式;能力基礎;代工業務;營運模式期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：This research undertakes a longitudinal, case-based research to explore how a less well-endowed product supplier chooses a dual business model, which simultaneously engages both own-brand and original equipment manufacturing (OEM) businesses, and its associated decision rationales. Based on in-depth study on multiple product line cases sampled from a single organizational context, we are able to propose two decision constructs: segment-making capabilities and product/service innovation potential, which various types of dual business models are intertwined with. In addition, we find that in the case of exploratory products, the product supplier adopts a model where the organizational learning effect is more pronounced, while in the case of exploitative products, balancing long and short-term outcomes is the primary motive for model choice. Overall, our research adds new insight to the existing paradoxical conversation of dual business models by offering a useful decision framework with a theoretical foundation and practical guidance.英文摘要：本論文以跨時個案研究方法，探討同一組織脈絡下的四個產品線，如何在資源有限的環境下，同時進行品牌與代工業務的雙元營運模式，並解析其決策判斷依據與決策動機。透過此一質性研究，我們提出兩個重要的決策構面：市場區隔的創造能力、以及產品或服務的創新潛力，並說明四種不同業務組合的雙元營運模式及其判準。此外，我們發現當產品技術屬於較創新者，產品供應商會基於組織學習為主要動機而採用雙元模式，而當產品漸趨多元應用與成熟時，供應商會以長短期收入平衡為其採用雙元模式的主要動機。整體而言，本研究期望能夠對看似矛盾的雙元營運模式，提出兼具理論基礎與實務意涵的決策模式。起始頁-結束頁：51-94資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201904_29(1).000218篇名：Choose Foreign R&D Partners From Right Pools: A Synthesis Framework並列篇名：海外研發夥伴之選擇：整合型架構作者：葉峻賓(Chun-Ping Yeh);蕭義棋(Yi-Chi Hsiao);趙義隆(Yi-Long Jaw)關鍵字：strategic motive;learning strategy;institutional voids;foreign R&D partner selection;stakeholders;策略動機;學習策略;體制缺陷;海外研發夥伴選擇;關係人期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：To complement the extant research of R&D partner selection that is fragmented, we develop the synthesis framework to provide a holistic view for the foreign R&D partner selection process. In this framework, we integrate the strategic motive, the learning strategy, the R&D partner selection, and the institutional contingency altogether and adopt the classification of stakeholders to suggest firms the pools of potential candidates in which they can effectively select their suitable R&D partners in the host countries. By examining the 2,423 outbound FDI cases of Taiwan from 2009 to 2012, we find that firms pursuing the technology acquisition will adopt the exploratory learning strategy and be more inclined to choose their R&D partners from their external stakeholders; but this inclination will be mitigated when the host countries are full of institutional voids. Nevertheless, firms pursuing the market expansion may not necessarily adopt the exploitative learning strategy as the prior research suggests but, instead, may undertake the exploratory learning and, furthermore, partner their external stakeholders when the host countries are full of institutional voids.英文摘要：由於現有關於選擇研發夥伴的研究較為片段，我們為此提出了一個整合型架構來為海外研發夥伴之選擇流程提供一個全方位的觀點。在這架構中，我們整合了策略動機、學習策略、研發夥伴之選擇、以及體制情境等要素，並採取了關係人的分類架構，建議企業在地主國應該從哪類的關係人當中有效地選擇合適的研發夥伴。透過檢視臺灣自2009到2012年間共2,423筆的海外直接投資案例中，我們發現，當企業去海外尋求新科技時，他們會採行探索型（Exploratory）的學習策略，並且傾向從外部關係人（External Stakeholders）當中找尋研發夥伴，但這樣的傾向會被地主國的體制缺陷（Institutional Voids）所弱化。然而，當企業去海外擴大其市場時，他們並不一定會像以前研究所說的去採行深化型（Exploitative）的學習策略，反而可能會採行探索型的學習策略，而且當地主國充斥著制度缺陷時，他們甚至可能從外部關係人當中找尋研發夥伴。起始頁-結束頁：95-128資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201904_29(1).000319篇名：廠商能力與治理模式對網絡與績效之干擾效果並列篇名：The Moderating Effects of Firm Capabilities and Governance Modes on the Network-Performance Relation作者：羅憶如(Yi-Ju Lo)關鍵字：外部網絡關係;廠商能力;治理模式;廠商績效;生技產業;external networks;firm capabilities;governance modes;firm performance;biopharmaceutical industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文探討廠商的外部網絡關係對其經營績效之影響，並進一步探討存在於兩者間的可能干擾效果。在資源依賴理論基礎上，本研究主張廠商能力在外部網絡與廠商績效之關係上具有負向干擾效果；另一方面，在交易成本理論基礎上，本研究主張具股權投資的治理模式在外部網絡與廠商績效之關係上具有正向干擾效果。本研究分析2002至2013年之台灣上市櫃生技廠商之縱橫資料，實證結果發現外部網絡關係對廠商績效存在正向影響效果；其中，當廠商擁有較多的外部研發合作或供應鏈網絡關係時，則其績效表現將會較好。另外，實證結果亦指出當廠商能力中的技術能力或產銷能力愈弱時，其分別所對應的研發合作網絡關係或供應鏈網絡關係對廠商績效的貢獻將更為顯著。同時，研究結果也指出具股權投資的治理模式正向干擾著外部網絡關係對廠商績效的影響性；亦即當廠商的具股權投資之合作關係佔外部網絡關係比重愈高時，則外部網絡關係對廠商績效的貢獻將更為顯著。英文摘要：This study examines how a firm's external networks affect its performance and the factors that can potentially moderate the effect of networks on performance. Drawing on the resource dependence theory, this study argues that firm capabilities could negatively moderate the relation between networks and performance. Drawing on the transaction cost theory, on the other hand, this study asserts that the equity-based governance modes could positively moderate the relation between networks and performance. Using the panel data of public biopharmaceutical companies in Taiwan from 2002 to 2013, this study shows that a firm's external networks positively affect its performance. Specifically, the firms achieve superior performance when they have richer external R&D or supply chain networks. In addition, this study shows that the weaker the firm's capabilities, the stronger the positive effect of external networks on firm performance. For instance, the weaker the technical capabilities, the stronger the positive effect of external R&D networks on firm performance; the weaker the manufacturing and marketing capabilities, the stronger the positive effect of external supply chain networks on firm performance. Meanwhile, the study also indicates that the equity-based governance modes positively moderate the relation between networks and performance. That is, the more equity-based external networks, the better the firm performance.起始頁-結束頁：129-170資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201904_29(1).000420篇名：建構商業智慧委外承包商評選指標之研究並列篇名：Construct Outsourcing Vendor Selection Criteria for Business Intelligence作者：張俊陽(Chun-Yang Chang);楊禎為(Jen-Way Yang);吳敏筑(Min-Chu Wu)關鍵字：商業智慧;委外承包商;評選指標;修正式德菲法;分析層級程序法;business intelligence;outsourcing vendor;selection criteria;modified Delphi method;analytic hierarchy process期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究目的在建構商業智慧委外承包商評選指標。本研究以資訊系統委外承包商相關文獻為基礎，針對過去研究的缺口再結合資源基礎理論、資源依賴理論、交易成本理論、代理成本理論、社會交換理論與服務科學觀點，發展出委外承包商的評選指標，並且透過商業智慧的功能與架構來修正，以建構出符合評選商業智慧委外承包商的評選指標。接著本研究透過修正式德菲法請13位專家進行評選指標的新增與篩選，再利用分析層級程序法建立權重值，以建構出商業智慧委外承包商之四構面35個評選指標。就學術界而言，本研究所發展之指標建構程序與評選指標可做為相關研究的基礎；就實務界而言，可做為企業評選商業智慧委外承包商，亦可提供承包商做為自我檢討之參考。英文摘要：This study developed reliable and valid criteria for evaluating business intelligence outsourcing vendors. Three critical steps comprised the research process. First, we determined possible criteria to outsource information system vendor selection. Second, we applied resource-based theory, resource dependence theory, transaction cost theory, agency cost theory, social exchange theory, and the service science perspective to strengthen the criteria. We then modified the criteria by using business intelligence theory. Finally, the selection criteria were examined by 13 experts through a modified Delphi method, and their opinions were applied to determine the weight of each criteria using the analytic hierarchy process. Our results provided four dimensions and 35 criteria, which can strengthen the vendor selection process to realize higher performance and greater satisfaction.起始頁-結束頁：171-200資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201904_29(1).000501篇名：e-GNSS定位作業規範適用性之探討並列篇名：Research on the Applicability of Operational Specification on e-GNSS Positioning作者：蔡明達(Ming-Da Tsai);王明志(Ming-Chih Wang);王柏文(Po-Wen Wang);李宜珊(Yi-Shan Li)關鍵字：電子化全球衛星導航定位系統;虛擬基準站即時動態定位技術;衛星定位幾何精度因子;E-Global Navigation Satellite System (e-GNSS);Virtual Base Station-Real Time Kinematic (VBS-RTK);Position Dilution Of Precision (PDOP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：22卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究主要探討電子化全球衛星導航定位系統（e-Global Navigation Satellite System, e-GNSS）定位系統應用於加密控制及圖根測量之作業規範中的適切性。其中包括：衛星定位幾何精度因子（Position-Dilution of Precision, PDOP）值之限制、觀測時間資料筆數、重複觀測之間隔時間等規定的適用性。以e-GNSS 6小時靜態觀測之成果，透過虛擬基準站即時動態定位技術（Virtual Base Station-Real Time Kinematic, VBS-RTK）動態後處理方式，產製單星系及多星系解算坐標成果，並將觀測資料分組，據以分析評估現行作業規範中有關外業觀測作業規定之適用性。其成果顯示e-GNSS定位系統已提升為多星系統之後，由於定位系統能力增強、可視衛星數大幅提升，使得平均PDOP值由2.7降為1.5，可大幅提升其定位精度及工作效率。此外，本研究以接收時間3分鐘（180筆）觀測資料以及重複觀測之間不間隔之作業方式與現行規定接收20分鐘（1,200筆）觀測資料及重複觀測間隔1小時以上之作業方式相較，其內部精度與外部精度相當，其解算成功之成果，仍能符合使用者之精度要求。英文摘要：This study mainly discusses the applicability of the e-Global Navigation Satellite System (e-GNSS) in the operational specifications of densified control and skeleton surveying. The applicability includes the value limits of the PDOP (Position Dilution of Precision), the data numbers of observations time, and the interval time between repeated observations. Based on the results of 6-hour static observation of e-GNSS, Virtual Base Station-Real Time Kinematic (VBS-RTK) dynamic post-processing method was used to produce coordinate results from single-GNSS and multi-GNSS solutions. The observations were grouped and analyzed in order to evaluate the applicability of the current operational specifications regarding the field observations. The results show that the average PDOP value reduced from 2.7 to 1.5 by upgrading the e-GNSS positioning system to a multi-satellite system, due to the enhanced positioning system capability and the significant increase in the number of visible satellites. The positioning accuracy and work efficiency have substantially improved. In addition, the results by the 3-minute period observations (180 epochs) with no interval between repeated observations were compared with the results by the current operational specification which is the 20-minute period observations (1200 epochs) with more than 1 hour repeated observation interval. The internal precisions are equivalent to the external precisions in all comparisons, and the results from the success solutions can still meet the user's accuracy requirements.起始頁-結束頁：111-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201911_22(2).00012篇名：原住民部落推展農村再生計畫的集體行動－以花蓮縣光復鄉阿美族南富社區為例並列篇名：Indigenous Collective Actions to Promote Rural Regeneration Programs: A Case of Nanfu Community of Amis in Guangfu Town, Hualien County作者：顏愛靜(Ai-Ching Yen);季美珍(Mei-Jen Chi)關鍵字：集體行動;農村再生;團體特徵;原住民部落;外部環境;Collective Action;Rural Regeneration;Group Characteristics;Indigenous Community;External Environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：22卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：源於人口外移、高齡化，公共服務水準低落，使得台灣農村陷入衰退的惡性循環。為紓解所困，政府乃於2010年8月4日立法實施農村再生條例，規定設立農村再生基金，以振興農村的整體發展。為實施農村再生政策，由上而下的整合策略和自下而上的推進策略皆是重要措施。根據培根課程規定，一旦動員農民完成四個階段課程（包括關懷班、進階班、核心班和再生班）的組織，則有資格提出農村再生計畫。位居台灣東部的花蓮縣光復鄉南富社區為阿美族部落，他們樂見所申請的四年期培根計劃業經政府核准，但是，能否動員整個社區以實現再生計畫的目標仍有存疑。本文提出一個分析框架以理解集體行動的作用，其係基於兩個面向：原住民社區的團體特徵和依賴外部政府及非政府組織支持的外部環境。計畫的實施取決於財政和非財政的支持，如對有機農業的驗證費用進行補貼，或培訓賦予農民或居民具有特定知識的能力。這項研究發現：1.南富社區的小眾，確能在領導階層帶領下，藉由農再的培訓、提案，達成制度正常運轉、成員稟賦互補、備具社會資本、凝聚共識與目標。2.雖源自財政與非財政支持對於社區自主有所助益，中介者居間協調有利於計畫形成與執行，然因各級政府間的權責分工不甚明確，從而滋生不少問題。由於農再制度設計不良，使南富社區於研提與執行農再計畫時，陷入困局：1.農再計畫與農村再生總體計畫定位不明橫生枝節；2.該社區研提計畫難以涵蓋太巴塱部落進行整體規劃；3.在地單一組織難以促成產業永續發展。本文以為，未來宜朝如下方向修正：1.建構農村再生計畫完善體系以利承上啟下；2.研議太巴塱部落農再整體規劃以展現綜效；3.強化在地組織與外在組織連結以利農業產銷；若能確實執行，或許農村富麗再生則指日可待。英文摘要：The ”Rural Regeneration Act” was passed by the government on 4 August, 2010, which was designed to revitalize the overall development of rural areas in Taiwan. The government was forced to actively solve the problems of rural decline, such as rural emigration, aging, lower education, lower average labor productivity, and overall low levels of public service. The purpose of this Act is to establish a Rural Regeneration Fund for hoping to take care of the farmers and fishermen in rural areas, and to make the rural community filling with ”vitality, health and happiness”. To implement Rural Regeneration Policy, besides top-down integrating strategies, the bottom-up promoting strategies are also considered as an important method. The Amis indigenous community in Eastern Taiwan was encouraged to apply Empowerment Program. According to the Rule of Regeneration Course, once organizations enabled their farmers finishing four stages of course (including beginner's course, advanced course, core course, and regeneration course), they are qualified to propose a Rural Regeneration Project. The indigenous community are very happy to see the passing of four-year-project by the Government. However, it is still a doubt of mobilizing whole community to participate in Regeneration Project. This paper proposed an analytical framework to understand the role of collective action based on the interaction of two dimensions: group characteristics of the indigenous community and external environment which is depended on external support by government and non-governmental organizations. The implementation of the project was conditioned by the financial and non-financial support, for example, subsidy to verification fees of organic farming or training and empowering farmers with specific knowledge. In this study we find that: 1. the small, well organized group of Nanfu community can, under the guidance of the leadership, attend the training program and propose the Rural Regeneration Plan, possess diverse endowments but homogeneity of identities among members, share the social capital, and build up consensus and goals. 2. The financial and non-financial support is beneficial to community autonomy, intermediary intermediation is conducive to the formation and implementation of the plan. However, the division of responsibilities between different levels of government is not clear, which results in some problems. Due to the poor institutional design of rural regeneration, the Nanfu community was trapped in the dilemma: 1. The orientation of Rural Regeneration Plan and the Comprehensive Rural Regeneration Plan is unclear; 2. The Rural Regeneration Plan does not consider the comprehensive planning of the Tafalong community; 3. It is difficult for a single organization in the local area to promote the sustainable development of the industries. Facing the above shortcomings, it might adopt the following steps to correct it: 1. to construct a perfect system for Rural Regeneration Planning to facilitate the development of the project; 2. to study the overall planning of the Tafalong community to demonstrate synergy; 3. to strengthen the link of local organization and external organization for facilitating agricultural production and marketing. If these strategies can be implemented, perhaps rural regeneration is just around the corner.起始頁-結束頁：135-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201911_22(2).00023篇名：一份大肚兩樣情：論大肚臺地東西傳統聚落與地形水文之關係並列篇名：Discussion on the Relationship between the Eastern and Western Traditional Settlements and Terrain Hydrology of Datu tableland作者：田應平(Ying-Ping Tien);陳瑩貞(Ying-Chen Chen)關鍵字：大肚臺地;水文學;地形學;聚落發展;Datu tableland;Hydrology;Settlement Development;Topography期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：22卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究利用大肚臺地聚落發展的文獻以及台灣堡圖，配合大肚臺地上傳統聚落的地形參數與水文特徵，解釋大肚臺地上地形、水文與聚落的關係。並以臺地東西兩側作為區分，透過歷史文獻以及地理實察歸納出不同取水類型的聚落。研究發現，不論臺地東西兩側，從清朝先民開始拓墾起，聚落的發展皆和水源有關。臺地東側分別有（1）臺地邊緣坑谷出泉與水井聚落；（2）臺地高處的埤塘型聚落；（3）臺地東緣南北向河圳聚落。而西側則發展出（1）臺地西側崖下出泉聚落；（2）臺地邊緣坑谷出泉與水井聚落；（3）臺地高處的埤塘型聚落；（4）臺地西緣南北兩側河圳聚落。整體而言，大肚臺地東西兩側雖然乾隆年間大量漢人移入後皆有先民由臺地底面湧泉帶往臺地頂面拓墾，但是西側坡陡取水較為不易地帶，開發較晚並發展成旱田聚落；西南側陡坡地帶因坡度較為陡峻，且坑谷溪流過於短促，流量依季節變化大，光緒年後直至日治初期無漢人拓墾。相對的東側因地勢平緩，加上東側的南北有筏子溪與大甲溪沿岸因可就近取河水成圳，故自乾隆年間至嘉慶時期持續向台中盆地拓墾，皆有發展灌溉稻作。英文摘要：In this study, the relationship among the terrain, the hydrology, and the settlement of Datu tableland is explained by using the historical documents, field investigation, and Taiwan Fort Figure. And it discovers that the development of Chinese traditional settlements is related to water sources. In this sense, the types of traditional settlements are divided into two parts. In the eastern side of the tableland, they can be summarized as: (1) the settlements along the rivers of the valleys in the edge of the tableland and the settlements of the wells; (2) the settlements of artificial ponds at the height of the tableland; (3) the settlements of irrigation channels from the north to south sides. In the west side of the tableland, they can be summarized as: (1) the settlement of the springs under the cliffs in the western side of the tableland; (2) the settlements along the rivers of the valleys in the edge of the tableland and the settlements of the wells; (3) the settlements of artificial ponds in the high place of the tableland; (4) the settlements of irrigation channels in the northwestern and the southwestern sides of the tableland. On the whole, although a large number of Chinese moved to the eastern and western sides of the Dadu tableland during the Qianlong period, all the ancestors moved from the areas of springs in the edges of the tableland to the top of the tableland. However, it is more difficult to get water in the areas of steep terrain in the western side. This thus delays the development of traditional settlements in these areas and makes the settlements dryland ones. On one hand, the slope in the southwestern side is steep, the rivers in the valleys are too short, and the flow varies greatly in different seasons. Thus, there was no Chinese settlement extension in the early days of Guangxu until the beginning of the Japanese occupation. On the other hand, the slope in the eastern side of the Dadu tableland is flat, and there are Fazi River and Dajia River from the northernern to the southern sides of the east side. These reasons made the irrigation channels built easily. From the Qianlong period to the Jiaqing period, the Chinese traditional settlements in the eastern side of the Dadu tableland had continued to develop paddy farms along the progress of irrigation channels and expand into the Taichung Basin.起始頁-結束頁：171-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.201911_22(2).000301篇名：經濟學的演繹法研究取徑：兼論提升應用能力之道並列篇名：Deductive Inference in Economics: Concurrent Discussion on Enhancing Its Applicability作者：林沁雄(Richard Chin-Hsiung Lin)關鍵字：方法論;典範;知識;理性選擇;理論負載;演繹推論;deductive inference;knowledge;methodology;paradigm;rational choice;theory-ladenness期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：69期出版年：2019中文摘要：經濟學經常應用數理模型來建立理論，本文稱此為演繹法研究取徑。當前本研究取徑凡分兩大流派，第一流派認為推論結果（即假說）是為理論，資料檢驗不具角色，第二流派則謂須要通過檢驗。本文旨在經由經濟哲學與方法論之角度，探討這兩大流派如何建立理論，並且擬定提升應用能力之對策。研究結果顯示，理性選擇能力所涉及的信念或思想，以及令這些成為可行所必須具備的前提條件非常重要，否則研究結果與被研究對象將不具相關性，難具應用功效。基此，兩大流派應盡力滿足這些條件，以避免缺乏基礎與文不對題的弊端。除這些考量外，本文亦提出兩項資料檢驗應注意事項以幫助第二流派提高證成與真實之條件，令理論更具應用的能力。英文摘要：Economists often use logical reasoning or mathematic models to establish theories or analyze certain issues; this is called the deductive inference approach by this article. Based on the need for empirical support, there are basically two branches in this approach: Branch I claims that the deductive result is a theory that does not need evidential support, while Branch II demands a confirmation or falsification from data. This paper sets forth to explore these two branches and, furthermore, to formulate the best responses to their drawbacks in order to strengthen the applicability of these theories. Research results show that rational choice is the basis of deduction that renders its underlying concepts and beliefs very essential. The conditions that presupposed these concepts and beliefs become the prerequisites of rational choice and deduction, because without them the inference loses its foundation and relevance, not to mention the applicability of the theory. These prerequisites are important to both Branches. In addition, we propose two remedies for the second branch for empirical testing with the aim of increasing the justification and truth conditions of a theory.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201906_(69).0012篇名：論布赫迪厄（Pierre Bourdieu）的「象徵暴力」概念並列篇名：On the ”Symbolic Violence” of Pierre Bourdieu作者：陳逸淳(Yi-Chun Chen);黃敏原(Min-Yuan Huang)關鍵字：象徵暴力;宰制;承認;無知;象徵工具;symbolic violence;domination;recognition;ignorance;symbolic instruments期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：69期出版年：2019中文摘要：在布赫迪厄（Pierre Bourdieu）的思想體系之中，「象徵暴力」（violence symbolique）這個概念在社會的再生產（reproduction）的過程之中扮演了一個關鍵性的角色。象徵暴力這個概念從創生、豐富化到成為一種政治鬥爭工具，反映了布赫迪厄自身的學術關懷的轉變。象徵暴力作為一種隱含的暴力，其運作乃內在於語言之中，並且透過語言來操作的；而該運作仰賴於兩個關鍵的機制：承認（reconnaissance）與無知（meconnaissance）。透過以上這兩個機制，象徵暴力便能夠將其力量強加於人們身上。本文的目的在於分析「象徵暴力」這個概念在布赫迪厄的思想體系中的意義的變遷，及其思想之繼受，特別是對馬克思、涂爾幹和韋伯的繼受。最後並探討象徵暴力概念在布赫迪厄的思想體系中的創新之處，以及如何抵抗象徵暴力。英文摘要：The concept ”symbolic violence” plays a key role in Pierre Bourdieu's sociological thinking, which is indispensable in the process of social reproduction. This concept was created by periods, from its creation, then enrichment, to becoming a tool of political struggle, reflecting the transformation of Bourdieu's academic concern. As symbolic violence is an implicit form of violence, its operation is in the usage of language, and also through it. Its operation relies on two key mechanisms: ”reconnaissance” (recognition) and ”meconnaissance” (ignorance). This research aims to analyze the change of this concept through Bourdieu's academic career, and also to explore its inheritance of Marx, Durkheim and Weber. The last part of this research tries to realize how to resist the symbolic violence in Bourdieu's sociological thinking.起始頁-結束頁：51-106資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201906_(69).0023篇名：安東尼．艾斯克姆與承諾服從爭論並列篇名：Anthony Ascham and the Engagement Controversy作者：賴芸儀(Yun-I Lai)關鍵字：艾斯克姆;承諾服從爭論;政治效忠;合法性;正當性;Anthony Ascham;Engagement Controversy;political allegiance;legality;legitimacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：69期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文試圖探討英格蘭共和國的政治寫手艾斯克姆（Anthony Ascham）如何將政治誓詞用來建構承諾服從爭論（Engagement Controversy），分析共和國建國初期的統治正當性與合法性論述。16世紀英格蘭宗教改革以來，歷任統治者都曾利用政治效忠宣誓強化統治正當性與合法性，而反對君主體制的共和政府也不例外。共和政府透過政治宣誓創造新的統治論述基礎時，透過艾斯克姆等人塑造的新統治論述。藉由檢視共和國建國初期的政治誓詞產生過程，有助於還原政治效忠語彙的變化脈絡，呈現16、17世紀英格蘭政治誓詞的發展歷程與轉折，以神意論為手段，本質為事實論的艾斯克姆之論述。英文摘要：This article examines the context of the secularization of the political allegiance oath between the English Reformation and the English Civil War and Anthony Ascham's works concerning the Engagement Controversy. This demonstrates the transformation of the ideal of political legality and legitimacy during the Interregnum. In 1649, the Commonwealth of England proclaimed herself a commonwealth and free state by the supreme authority of the nation, i.e., the representatives of the people in Parliament. Nevertheless, contemporaries questioned by what right could the new ruler, the House of Commons, transfer the supreme authority from the hands of the King and the House of Lords into its hands via a new political oath. This article shows that Ascham reshaped the discourses of political allegiance by adding contemporaries' works, such as those of Hugo Grotius. Ascham's political thought defines a new argument on the legitimacy of governing through the theory of conquest and natural law.起始頁-結束頁：107-172資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201906_(69).00301篇名：臺灣早期近視驗光配鏡市場的專業鬥爭並列篇名：Professional Competition in the Early Optical Market for Myopia Services in Taiwan作者：戴定皇(Tai, Ting-Huang)關鍵字：眼科醫師;眼鏡產業;視光教育;專業場域;專業內分化;ophthalmologists;optical industry;optometry education;professional fields;differentiation in the professions期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：29期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣號稱「近視王國」，1980年視力保健政策開跑後，眼科醫學會與鐘錶眼鏡商業公會曾短暫合作，投入眼鏡產業的專業培訓制度建構。本文通過各項期刊、報紙與政策檔案，分析1970至1990年代近視驗光配鏡場域的職權競逐、行業人口變動與位置分化，以便解釋這時期專業內與跨專業競逐的始末。本文發現眼科醫師在1970年代中期起，逐漸壟斷了近視流行病與政策建議的發言權，但眼科醫師人數不足以應付視力保健政策所需。眼鏡產業在1970年代與1980年代之交，不但湧入大量經濟與技術資本不一的新業者爭奪商機，也有連鎖經營的大公司吸引眼鏡師傅。部分老牌業者或者直接配合眼科醫師，或者通過鐘錶眼鏡公會建立光學方面的專業門檻，標榜自身的技術資本、確保從業人員的供應。因此眼科醫師與這批業者曾一度合作，共同投入視光專業培訓。但隨著眼科醫師本身的人數逐步增加，配合1980年代末的專業間爭議，這批業者與眼科醫學會的對立再度升高，延緩了視光專業教育的設立。英文摘要：The government began promoting vision health nationwide from the 1970s in Taiwan, the ”kingdom of myopia.” The new policy encouraged ophthalmologists to help advance the watch-and-optics industry. This article analyzes professional journals and archival records to examine how ophthalmologists and opticians contested the boundaries and roles within and between their respective professions from the 1970s to 1990s. Ophthalmologists monopolized the production of myopia-related knowledge in the role of policy consultant from the mid-1970s, but their limited number could not satisfy the needs of public health policy in Taiwan. By the late 1970s to early 1980s, junior opticians with small retail shops or street stalls and the large chain stores began flooding the eyewear market, threatening the professional status of both ophthalmologists and more experienced opticians. Some opticians cooperated closely with the Ophthalmological Society of Taiwan in training opticians, while others set up alternative professional training programs in their own corporations in order to establish their own bona fides and assure the supply of their technicians. In the 1980s and 1990s, the number of ophthalmologists escalated, which renewed professional disputes between the Ophthalmological Society of Taiwan and the Taiwan Watch-and-Optics Industry Association and impeded the development of the field of optometry.起始頁-結束頁：9-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：環評需要什麼樣的公民參與？廢棄物填海造島政策中環評公民共識會議的啟示並列篇名：Public Participation and the Effectiveness of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA): The Implications of Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) Consensus Meetings on Sea Reclamation by Solid Disposals作者：陳潁峰(Chen, Ying-Feng)關鍵字：環境影響評估;公民會議;審議式民主;公眾參與;廢棄物管理政策;EIA;citizens' meetings;deliberative democracy;public participation;waste management policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：29期出版年：2019中文摘要：目前我國的環評制度仰賴專家審議認可，因公民參與不足而頗受詬病，環保署近年來雖加入若干民主元素，但因程序流於形式，反而遲滯環評效能。本文探討了2012年我國環評史上首次由官方舉辦的「公民共識會議」及其後續影響，發現優質的公民討論讓政策得到更多公眾與政府部門檢核的機會，能以多元知識讓替代方案獲得重視，同時也為後續法制監督提出明確方向，最終使公務機關重拾政策理性而選擇在2014年撤回環評，改以官民合作產出的替代方案進行下一波的公民諮商程序。此案證明了：透過有系統而嚴謹的共識培力過程，公民觀點的引入能讓專家的科學理性與官方的行政理性回歸於社會理性的大框架之下，進而提昇環評的治理量能，引導公務體系跳脫窠臼，並為後續共同生產解決方案提供良好的動能。而本案亦顯示：環評的冗長失能並非肇因於擴大公眾參與，相反地，如果能有精緻的深入討論，優質的公民參與將反是環評突破僵局的助力。英文摘要：The Strategic Environmental Assessment and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA/SEA) system in Taiwan has long been plagued by a lack of public participation. Although the Taiwan EPA decided to incorporate some democratic elements, [in the past] the largely ritualistic procedures only caused more gridlock. This article explores the SEA process on ”Sea Reclamation by Solid Disposals” (SRSD) in 2012, when an unprecedented series of citizens' meetings were sponsored by the EPA. The EPA learned that high-quality civil discussion contributed to greater accountability in policy-making, diverse knowledge-sharing that increased awareness of alternatives, and improvements to the legal system that could positively impact future [environmental] monitoring. The EPA thus decided to conduct another series of public consultations based on a new policy of collaborative and deliberative efforts. This case suggests that, through a systematic and rigorous consensus-building process, the introduction of lay citizens' perspectives helped clarify the social conditions of policy implementation. Therefore, it could provide a model for communicating scientific rationales to the public, giving impetus to collaborative solutions, and promoting administrative efficiency by overcoming common policy-making hurdles. It also reveals that the cumbersomeness of the EIA process is not the result of participation by the public. On the contrary, such participation empowers citizens and holds the potential to break policy gridlock.起始頁-結束頁：65-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：傷害之後，法律如何動起來：臺灣油症公害的法律與社會研究（1979－1990）並列篇名：How the Law Was Mobilized after the Harm Was Done: A Social-Legal Study of Yu Cheng (1979-1990)作者：蘇上雅(Su, Shan-Ya)關鍵字：法律動員;威權體制;毒物侵權;油症;臺灣;Legal Mobilization;Authoritarian State;Toxic Tort;Oil Disease;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：29期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以1979年臺灣油症為個案，探討戒嚴體制下的毒物公害法律動員過程如何多元、運用法律之方式如何受行動者背景與威權體制影響，及行動主體如何影響既有法律機會結構。本文首先分析臺灣油症的紛爭發展歷程，指出戒嚴體制下國家在傷害命名、形塑咎責對象與主張上具有主導性。再者，本文分析油症爆發後的自救行動，指出陳情和請願，在援用法律資源、追究政府責任程度上非常不同；自救訴訟難以開啟，主因是近用法律的知識與經濟門檻。第三部分，本文分析消基會義務律師團協助開啟的油症訴訟，指出1980年代法院的因果關係認定標準，使原告訴訟請求策略性轉向精神賠償；當時民事訴訟法導出的「過失責任主義」影響訴訟勝敗；法律扶助制度闕如，衍伸出「即便勝訴也無法受償」的困境。本文最末將油症訴訟與近年公害指標裁判對照，指出法院如何因應科學在認定損害上的限制、法院與原告對毒物侵權賠償之認知差異，是自油症案延續之今，尚待解答的議題。英文摘要：In 1979, the Yu Cheng (literally, ”oil disease”) disaster occurred in Taiwan. It became one of the most disastrous polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) poisonings ever recorded worldwide. The incident marked only the beginning of the suffering experienced by the victims exposed to these toxic chemicals. This study analyzes how people mobilized the law in various ways to speak for the injured. The author first examines how Yu Cheng moved from an incident to a dispute in which the government was the key agent. This study then investigates the self-help actions of the victims, who tended to mobilize the law outside the courts. For example, they petitioned to sue the government based on the State Compensation Law, while their real intent was to negotiate for a decent medical allowance. Finally, analyzing the court actions taken, the author finds that, however successful the litigation was at first, the Civil Code and the principles the court adopted eventually distorted the content of their claims and diverted the outcome away from the plaintiffs' wishes. The study ends by discussing the transformation of toxic harm torts in Taiwan between the 1980s and 2000s by comparing this case with two industrial hazard cases: RCA and Dioxin pollution.起始頁-結束頁：119-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：書評：實存之物覆於人造之重：公地的管理悲劇　評Managed Annihilation: An Unnatural History of the Newfoundland Cod Collapse並列篇名：Book Review: What is given is wrecked under the pressure of all artefacts: the tragedy of managing the commons A review of Managed Annihilation: An Unnatural History of the Newfoundland Cod Collapse作者：錢克綱(Chien, Ko-Kang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：183-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：書評：馴化的公民與科學？評Radiation Brain Moms and Citizen Scientists the Gender Politics of Food Contamination after Fukushima並列篇名：Book Review: Disciplined Citizen and Science? Book Review on Radiation Brain Moms and Citizen Scientists the Gender Politics of Food Contamination after Fukushima作者：房思宏(Fang, Szu-Hung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：193-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：社工教育、意識型態、貧窮歸因對社工系學生貧窮態度之影響並列篇名：Factors associated with social work students' attitude toward poverty: social work education, ideology, and poverty attribution作者：劉威辰(Wei-Cheng Liu);鄭麗珍(Li-Chen Cheng)關鍵字：社會工作教育;意識型態;貧窮歸因;貧窮態度;路徑分析;social work education;ideology;poverty attribution;poverty attitude;path analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：40期出版年：2019中文摘要：培養社工專業認同與促進學生對弱勢人口的關懷，是社工教育的重要使命之一。然而在貧富差距逐漸擴大、低收入戶數上升的現代，關於社工教育的成果與學生對貧窮的態度研究仍為數不多。為瞭解社工教育的成效，本研究運用Zucker與Weiner（1993）的歸因理論模型，檢視社會工作教育，如何影響學生的意識型態、貧窮歸因以及對貧窮的態度。本研究採用調查研究法，獲得來自16間台灣大專院校社工系424位同學的有效回覆。研究工具經過因素分析確認問卷效度後，以SPSS進行多元迴歸，並運用AMOS進行路徑分析，以瞭解歸因理論模型中，各個變項之直接效果與間接效果。結果發現，擁有較佳學習成效、意識型態偏左、不認同貧窮是個人與文化歸因的學生，會有較正向的貧窮態度；同時在路徑分析中，也驗證了歸因理論模型的說法，貧窮歸因在意識型態與貧窮態度之間，確實具有中介效果。因此，社工教育除了應重視結構觀的思維、降低個人歸因，也須關注學生們的吸收狀況，以提升學生對貧窮人口的態度。英文摘要：A core tenet of social work education is to cultivate students' professional identity and ability to show concern for disadvantaged people. However, in the past, little research has focused on exploring the relationships between social work education and student attitudes toward the disadvantaged people in Taiwan. To be exact, based on the attribution theory model proposed by Zucker & Weiner (1993), this study tested path relationships among social work education, welfare ideology, poverty attribution, and attitudes toward poverty. Four hundred and twenty-four social work students from 16 different universities across Taiwan were recruited through a stratified random cluster sampling design. They were invited to give responses to a structured questionnaire. As expected, social work students who had higher learning competency on poverty issues, leaned toward left-wing ideology, had higher approval of structural poverty attribution, and had higher opposition to personal and cultural attributions were positively related to attitudes toward poverty. In path analysis, the attribution model which posits that students' poverty attribution has a mediating effect on the relationship between students' welfare ideology and their attitudes toward poverty was also confirmed. The results in this study indicate that students' learning competency on poverty issues plays an important role in cultivating students to be reflective and thoughtful in their poverty attribution and welfare ideology toward poor people. The competency was then indirectly was transformed to enhance their poverty attribution toward more structural explanations, eventually favorably changing their attitudes toward poverty. The implications about social work education to promote social work students' learning competency on poverty issues is included in this paper.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201912_(40).00012篇名：以合作賽局角度看待慈善機構與個案之間的配適問題並列篇名：A Mechanism Application to Match Charities Organizations and Donees Based on Cooperative Game Approaches作者：褚志鵬(Chih-Peng Chu);藍陳淯(Chen-Yu Lan)關鍵字：慈善機構與照顧個案;配對機制應用;延遲接受演算法;波士頓機制;charity organizations and donees;matching mechanism;deferred acceptance algorithm;Boston matching mechanism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：40期出版年：2019中文摘要：目前慈善機構與個案端間的資源分配研究較少，在實務上也常看到照顧個案資源分配不均，有些照顧個案接收到同質性的福利物資過多，或是更需關懷個案卻無資源協助之現象，本研究利用合作賽局機制「延遲接受演算法」設計一個配適平台，作為慈善機構與照顧個案之間的媒合，慈善機構間可因資訊互通及透明化，使資源更有效利用，進而合作擬訂關懷計畫。本研究模擬不同情境，結果顯示「延遲接受演算法」之整體成效優於現行的配對機制與「波士頓配對機制」。本研究機制亦可作為社會工作人員決策之參考，以達到慈善機構之價值。英文摘要：Few studies focus on the matching problem between charities organizations and donees. In the real world, there is an uneven distribution phenomenon among donees. Somet donee cases receive too much charity resources, while other cases with higher priority may receive no charities. This study applied a ”deferred acceptance algorithm” to design a matching platform for charity organizations and donees. This platform makes the charity distribution process both logical and transparent; therefore, the charity organizations will distribute their resources more efficiently. In the three scenarios designed in this study, all the results support the conclusion that the deferred acceptance algorithm has better performance than the current matching mechanism and Boston matching mechanism. This platform can also serve as a reference for social workers in order to achieve the desired value of charities.起始頁-結束頁：43-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201912_(40).00023篇名：部落族人對原住民族社會工作的期待：去殖民觀點的想像並列篇名：The Voice of Tribal Peoples in Indigenous Social Work: Imagination of a Decolonized Perspective作者：莊曉霞(Hiu-Ha Chong)關鍵字：原住民族社會工作;殖民;去殖民觀點;質性研究;Indigenous social work;colonization;decolonized perspective;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：40期出版年：2019中文摘要：當前社會工作強調歐美理論典範，排除和邊緣化原住民族知識與技術，令社會工作成為專業與文化殖民的場域，不只無助於解決問題，還創造了問題。本研究以個別深入訪談法訪問了14位部落族人，企圖瞭解族人對原住民族社會工作的想像。研究發現族人：（1）強調將族群殖民歷史脈絡與知識論整合至社會實務工作中，改變社會工作中的殖民活動；並透過福利和經濟產業活動促進部落改革和發展，取回控制權；（2）期待社會工作者是擁有血緣、地緣關係的在地人，認同原住民族和為族人所認同的助人者，或具備雙文化的助人者。族人的觀點提醒社會工作專業去殖民的重要性，需要我們思考以權利為保障、以族群文化為核心行動，及以血緣、地緣和／或認同原住民族的社會工作者為媒介的社會工作，本文最後據此提出對原住民族社會工作的意涵。英文摘要：Indigenous knowledge and skills are excluded and marginalized in the field of mainstream social work because of the emphasis on Eurocentric philosophical paradigms, with social work becoming a colonial cultural field and profession, creating problems for Indigenous peoples. Based on a decolonized research agenda, this research employed in-depth interviews to collect data from 14 tribal peoples and to understand their expectations of Indigenous social work. The findings suggested that the interviewees expected: (1) to change colonial activities by integrating Indigenous epistemologies and knowledge of colonial histories into social work practice, and to gain control by promoting self-determination and developing tribal welfare and economics; (2) social workers with blood relationships and geographical ties are to have bicultural trainings, while non-Indigenous helpers should be able to recognize and respect Indigenous cultures. The findings reminded us that ensuring human rights, placing culture at the heart of social work activities, and training social workers as agents of decolonization are of paramount importance towards the goal of decolonized Indigenous social work. The article ends with recommendations for the Indigenous social work profession.起始頁-結束頁：87-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201912_(40).00034篇名：社區組織參與老人預防照顧體系之社區治理分析並列篇名：Community Organizations Participating in Preventive Elderly Care System: An Analysis of the Community Governance Perspective作者：蕭文高(Wen-Kao Hsiao)關鍵字：社區組織;社區治理;照顧服務;community organizations;community governance;care services期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：40期出版年：2019中文摘要：為滿足民眾照顧需求，協助長者在地老化，政府逐步補助社區組織提供老人照顧服務，此不僅改變公私部門互動模式，亦影響社區之永續發展。因此，本研究目的在整理運用社區治理觀點，瞭解社區發展協會參與老人預防照顧面臨之挑戰，進而提出實務性建議。經彙整相關文獻後，本文分析社區組織在老人預防照顧體系之角色及組織特性，統整社區治理理論分析架構，歸納出長照2.0計畫建立照顧型社區目標面臨下列挑戰：（1）政府在政策量化績效與尊重社區自主性間產生社區主義價值抉擇兩難；（2）社區組織所獲支援不足，承擔過高照顧風險；（3）為確立服務品質與責信之管控機制，造成志工服務疏離感；（4）社區組織經歷政治力干擾、志工人力老化，以及服務排他性等失靈危機。基於前述發現，本研究建議公部門應提供社區組織足夠支持及影響評量訊息，改革績效管考機制，委託辦理專業督導計畫，並協調社區所需空間與服務支援，以增進計畫成效。英文摘要：In order to satisfy citizens' care needs and help older people to age in place, the government gradually subsidized community organizations to delivery care services for older adults. Within this system, there have been significant changes in the public-private sector interaction and effects on community-based sustainable development. Therefore, this study aimed to examine community governance perspectives, analyze challenges of community development associations participating in preventive elderly care, and outline some practical implications and suggestions. Through a literature review, this article discusses the roles and characteristics of community organizations in the preventive elderly care system and explores four challenges of Long Term Care Plan 2.0 (LTCP2) with the objective of building a caring community: (1) Government is facing the communitarian dilemma between seeking quantitative policy performance and respecting community autonomy; (2) Community organizations are bearing the risk in caregiving because of insufficient support; (3) Mechanisms of quality control and accountability increase volunteers' service alienation; (4) Failures of community organizations occur during political disturbance, aging volunteers, and community exclusion. Based on the research findings and for the purpose of enhancing the effectiveness of LTCP2, this paper suggests that the government should provide sufficient support and impact assessment information for community organizations, improve management mechanisms, contract out professional supervision program, and arrange space and service support for communities.起始頁-結束頁：131-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.201912_(40).000401篇名：Earnings Informativeness of Long-Lived Assets Impairment Recognized and Reversals並列篇名：長期資產減損認列與迴轉對盈餘資訊性之影響作者：陳慶隆(Ching-Lung Chen);陳名揚(Ming-Yang Chen)關鍵字：earnings informativeness;assets impairment;reversals;future earnings;盈餘資訊性;資產減損;迴轉;未來盈餘期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study examines how recognition of long-lived asset impairment influences the amount of current and future earnings that are embedded in current stock returns. Note that Taiwan accounting standards permit an impairment on a long-lived asset to be reversed if the asset's economic value recovers. We further examine whether firms with reversed asset impairment show significantly distinctive informativeness patterns of future earnings when compared with non-reversed firms. Based on unbalanced-panel data, empirical results conform with expectations, i.e., the informativeness of current (future) earnings decreases (increases) in firms with a large magnitude of recognized long-lived asset impairment. We also find that this increased informativeness of future earnings for firms with impairment is mitigated in the reversals subsample, which supports the managerial incentives hypothesis of impairment decisions. This study implements some diagnostic checks and demonstrates that our results are robust to various specifications.英文摘要：本研究檢測股票報酬率如何反應公司認列長期資產減損之當期及未來盈餘資訊（即長期資產減損認列之盈餘資訊性）；其次，因我國會計準則允許在減損資產價值回復後，認列減損迴轉利益，本文進而檢測認列減損迴轉利益公司相對於未認列減損迴轉利益者，其盈餘資訊性是否有顯著差異。以非平衡式追蹤資料進行實證，結果顯示：公司認列長期資產減損顯著降低（提高）當期（未來）盈餘資訊性。進一步檢測發現認列長期資產減損且在後續年度認列迴轉利益之公司，資產減損的認列對未來盈餘資訊性之影響並不明顯，此實證發現支持部分公司管理當局運用資產減損認列決策以影響未來報導盈餘之觀點。本研究進行若干敏感性測試，實證結果具相當穩固性。起始頁-結束頁：201-253資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201904_29(1).00062篇名：CEO Incentives and Bank Liquidity Management並列篇名：經理人誘因與銀行流動性管理作者：陳一如(I-Ju Chen);林暐智(Wei-Chih Lin)關鍵字：bank liquidity;CEO incentives;bank performance;銀行流動性;經理人誘因;銀行表現期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：29卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：We investigate the association between CEO incentives and liquidity policy of commercial banks in the United States from 1992 to 2012. Empirical analyses indicate that CEO incentives affected the liquidity holdings of commercial banks, but the effect was different for S&P 1,500 and non-S&P 1,500 banks. We found that S&P 1,500 banks with higher CEO equity ownership usually had lower proportions of loan commitments, were less involved in non-interest generating activities, but maintained higher levels of liquidity. Our study indicates that S&P 1,500 banks with different level of CEO incentives had different business policies, which affected bank liquidity holdings and bank performance, but this relation was not clear for non-S&P 1,500 banks. Our results complement current understanding of how different CEO incentives affect bank liquidity policy.英文摘要：本研究利用1992年到2012年美國商業銀行的資料，探討經理人誘因（CEO incentives）與銀行流動性管理的議題。實證分析顯示美國銀行經理人誘因會影響銀行的流動準備，但對S&P 1,500銀行與非S&P 1,500銀行的影響效果不同。CEO持股較高的S&P 1,500銀行，通常承做較低比例的承諾性放款和較多的傳統商業銀行業務，且維持較高的流動性。研究也發現，在S&P 1,500銀行中，不同CEO誘因的會影響銀行的放款決策，進而影響銀行的流動性與營收表現，但此關係在非S&P 1,500銀行中並不明顯。本研究結果有助於進一步瞭解銀行經理人誘因對銀行流動性的影響。起始頁-結束頁：255-322資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.201904_29(1).000701篇名：丸山真男政治學中的“政治”並列篇名："Politics" in Maruyama Masao's Political Science作者：孫歌(Ge Sun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：73期出版年：2009起始頁-結束頁：219-242資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社DOI：10.29816/TARQSS.200903.000801篇名：Nietzsche道德思想的當代意義：相對主義或多元主義？並列篇名：The Contemporary Significance of Nietzsche's Moral Philosophy: Relativism or Pluralism?作者：黃厚銘(Hou-Ming Huang)關鍵字：主人道德;奴隸道德;均質人;例外人;開放原始碼運動;master morality;slave morality;average man;exceptional man;open source movements期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：70期出版年：2019中文摘要：身為所謂後現代思想的鼻祖之一，Nietzsche的觀點論立場與超越善惡的主張，經常被批評為虛無的道德相對主義。但在另一方面，《超越善與惡》（Beyond Good and Evil）一書卻正是其筆下新哲人建立未來哲學的宣示，且其作法在形式上有如Plato的哲學家皇帝。究竟Nietzsche的道德哲學是否還有規範上的判準？以及，他的思想主張對於當代的我們可以有什麼樣的啟示？本文主張，Nietzsche的超克人理想與生命哲學要求每個人活出自己獨有的生命。這樣的道德哲學以一致性的道德規範來鼓勵差異，進而促成多元化的發展。一方面，多元主義是「熱愛命運」的必然結果。另一方面，有別於支撐科學理性的斷而再斷之形式邏輯，植基於Nietzsche道德哲學底層則是含混思考。正是Nietzsche道德思想別開生面的特點，與其當代意義之所在。英文摘要：Nietzsche, as the forerunner of so-called postmodern thought, is frequently criticized or interpreted as a relativist, especially about his conception of perspectivism and ”beyond good and evil”. However, as shown in the subtitle of the book Beyond Good and Evil, it is Nietzsche's prelude to the philosophy of the future. And in this book, Nietzsche advocated his politics of new philosophers. At least in the forms, this opinion is not so different from the philosopher kings of Plato, who is always criticized by Nietzsche. So the question is whether Nietzsche sets up a normative criterion, and what his thought can suggest to us. In this paper, I contend that Nietzsche's ideal of overman and his philosophy of life ask us to live our unique lives. His moral philosophy is to promote plurality with a singular standard of morality. The plurality is the outcome of ”amor fati”. And the logic of his thought is not only different from the logic of clearcutting duality which supports general modern, scientific reasoning, but also distinguished from Hegel's dialectics. This is the key feature of Nietzsche's moral philosophy and the way in which it can edify us.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201909_(70).0012篇名：對話之外：從巴赫汀晚年「外部性」的觀點新義看理解的（不）可能性並列篇名：Beyond Dialogue: Mikhail Bakhtin's Perspective of ”Outsideness” in his Later Years and its Significance for the (Im)possibility of Understanding作者：王孝勇(Hsiao-Yung Wang)關鍵字：反向民主觀;巴赫汀;外部性;理解;對話疏離論;reversed democratic model;Mikhail Bakhtin;outsideness;understanding;defamiliarization of dialogue期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：70期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在藉由Bakhtin晚年所述之「外部性」的觀點新義，探討理解的（不）可能性。首先，透過Bakhtin於1970年間所撰寫的四篇論著，本研究將推敲其中所揭示的「外部性」觀點，如何展現出不同於前期對話論的內涵。其次，順著Emerson對於Bakhtin在俄國學術語境持續發酵的討論和譯介，本研究將從「往復否定論」、「重複的不可重複性」（repeatably unrepeatable）這兩條互相配搭的軸線，將「外部性」進一步演繹為Bakhtin晚年所欲提出的反向民主觀和對話疏離論。據此，過去對話論所強調的被聽聞、誰在被陳述等問題意識，此番被更為多重異質甚至缺乏共識慾望的話語意識影響滲透。此類語藝情境或困境，正是特定言者在論述打造的過程中，所有意或無意體現的「空間之外、時間之後」的理解的（不）可能性。英文摘要：This research aims to introduce Mikhail Bakhtin's perspective of ”outsideness” in his later years and elaborate its significance for the (im)possibility of understanding. First, it attempts to indicate the specific character of ”outsideness” through comparison to some earlier writings by Bakhtin. Inspired by Caryl Emerson and her interpretation of some emergent issues referring to ”outsideness” from the Russian intellectuals, this research states that ”defamiliarization” and the ”reversed democratic model” might be inherent in Bakhtin's re-problematization of dialogue, and that furthermore, rhetorical strategies and the rhetorical situation of ”outsideness” should be crystallized into two different but related lines of ”reciprocal negation” and the ”repeatably unrepeatable”. Based on theoretical deduction, this research argues that the Bakhtian perspective of ”outsideness” is different from the traditional triangular paradigm of rhetorical events which focuses purely on the fusion and balance (rather than conflict and dissonance) among rhetor, listener and subject. What matters during these later years of Bakhtin is that the basis of communication definitely proceeds from deliberation or creative consciousness of ”rhetor” to ”superaddressee” (as an absent present). Finally, the specific discursive formation that is outside of it in space and after it in time would be the critical case for rhetorical analysis in the future.起始頁-結束頁：57-108資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201909_(70).0023篇名：不合時宜的吟遊詩人之聲：「撒旦磨坊」與市場社會並列篇名：The Voice of the Anachronic Bard: ”Satanic Mill” and Market Society作者：許甘霖(Kan-Lin Hsu);劉邦立(Pang-Li Liu)關鍵字：基督教的人性概念;博蘭尼;市場社會;浪漫主義神學;布雷克;Christian concept of man;Karl Polanyi;Market Society;Romantic Theology;William Blake期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：70期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文檢視博蘭尼和布雷克作品中「撒旦磨坊」相關語境的關鍵字，透過文本內關聯性和互文性分析，發現博蘭尼「撒旦磨坊」的具體指涉是包括濟貧制度和相關機構設施在內，透過道德改造將勞動力轉化為虛構商品並使之適應競爭性勞動市場所需紀律的社會機制。而布雷克以「心靈鍛造的鐐銬」批判人類藉著抽象的人性概念合理化自身無視同類苦難的態度。據此「布雷克視角」重新詮釋《鉅變》，本文認為博蘭尼的「抽象概念組成的人性形象」呼應布雷克的「心靈鍛造的鐐銬」，他批判古典政治經濟學的「經濟人預設」和「市場心態」悖離基督教根本精神而成為社會錯位的根源。通過馬革頓教派反律法主義的人性概念，博蘭尼賡續了布雷克對工業主義文明的批判。英文摘要：Following a clue mentioned by Kari Polanyi-Levitt, this paper proposes a Blakean reading of the Great Transformation. By intra-textual and intertextual analysis of key words frequently used in linguistic contexts relevant to ”satanic mill” from works by Polanyi, we argue that ”satanic mill” in The Great Transformation mainly refers to the institutional ensemble of poor relief, including legislation and associated establishments, which aimed to convert labor into a fictitious commodity by way of humiliating and dehumanizing moral correction. Taking the perspective of the symbolism and doctrine of the antinomian Muggletonianism, Blake critiques the human image made from abstractions, because human beings justify their selfish motives and behaviors towards their human fellows traditionally held to be created in God’s image. Polanyi criticizes the postulate of homo economicus, in which the market mentality of the classical political economy caused humankind to turn its back on the fundamental doctrines of Christianity and should be blamed for social disasters in England's early industrialism and the early twentieth century. It is through the Muggletonian concept of men that Polanyi's critique of market society echoes Blake's romantic theological critique of the Enlightenment and industrialism.起始頁-結束頁：109-167資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201909_(70).00301篇名：論搭配否決權的按年齡配給並列篇名：On Age Rationing Combined With the Veto Right作者：林耕漢(Keng-Han Lin)關鍵字：老年人;健康照護;按年齡配給;分配正義;世代正義;the elderly;health care;age rationing;distributive justice;generational justice期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：71期出版年：2019中文摘要：老年人對醫療照護資源的高度需求已經對公共的健康照護體系形成了負擔。在某種程度上，這造成了世代間分配正義的問題。有鑑於此，已經有許多學者建議社會應該限制老年人獲取某些醫療資源，這樣的主張被稱為是按年齡配給（age rationing）；並且，丹尼爾斯（Norman Daniels）以謹慎壽命論述（the prudential lifespan account）來支持這項主張。依據這項論述，謹慎且理性的人會分配較少的醫療資源給老年時的自己。由於這是個人自己的決定，因此這就展現了對老年人的尊重，同時又能為年輕人節省更多的醫療資源。然而，本文將指出謹慎壽命論述依然有不夠尊重老年人的問題。為了展現對所有人的尊重，我們應該讓按年齡配給搭配否決權。英文摘要：The high demand for medical care resources for the elderly has placed a burden on the public health care system. To a certain extent, this is a problem of distributive justice between generations. In view of this, many scholars have suggested that society should limit the elderly's access to certain medical resources, which is called age rationing. Norman Daniels supports this suggestion by using the prudential lifespan account, according to which, a prudent and rational person will allocate fewer medical resources to himself in old age. Since this is an individual's own decision, this demonstrates respect for old people while saving more medical resources for young people. However, this article will point out that the prudential lifespan account is still not enough to ensure respect for the elderly. In order to show respect for everyone, we should combine age rationing with the veto right.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201912_(71).0012篇名：平等正義的涵蓋面並列篇名：On the Coverage of Equal Justice作者：陸品妃(Pin-Fei Lu)關鍵字：形式與實質平等落差;轉型社會民主;平等整合;「個人即政治」;公民性別正義責任;政治女性主義;羅爾斯;the gap between formal and substantive equality;democracy in transitional society;integrated equality;”personal is political”;gender justice duty of civility;political feminism;Rawls期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：71期出版年：2019中文摘要：當代民主施行平等正義予公民時，若得以落實，必要涵蓋甚麼面向呢？本文認為，此將仰賴以平等為核心重新理解再出發的公民行動，亦即平等正義的應用需要整合平等，因此論證平等整合如何可能。首先闡明，公民生活中不論於公共或私密場域，個人享有平等形式面與實質面二者之重要適當性。其次建立理論初步可行性，論說羅爾斯式自由主義兌現平等整合方式。全文驗證檢討範例為性別不平等。英文摘要：How should equality in democratic justice cover our lives? I believe that for the realization of equal justice, personal actions by citizens or political agents are in need of an integrated idea of equality, and so I argue how such integration is possible. First, I demonstrate the importance and adequacy of invoking both formal and substantive equality in the political domain of life, both public and private, in society. Second, I argue for a preliminary possibility of grounding an integrated idea of equality with a Rawlsian political liberalism. Gender inequality serves as the case for examination in the article.起始頁-結束頁：51-101資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201912_(71).0023篇名：日本新左派思潮與東亞反日武裝戰線並列篇名：New Left Thought in Japan and East Asia Anti-Japan Armed Front作者：安井伸介(Shinsuke Yasui)關鍵字：1968;新左派;學運;游擊隊;國族認同;1968;New Left;student movement;partisan;national identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：71期出版年：2019中文摘要：1960年代新左派思潮帶領的學運在日本廣為流行，但進入1970年代後暴力事件陸續發生，導致日本學運風潮快速衰退。東亞反日武裝戰線是於1970年代上半期進行炸彈鬥爭的團體，以三菱重工爆炸事件最為著名。他們為何從事這種恐怖活動？鑒於他們迄今幾乎沒有成為學術研究的對象，本論文從歷史脈絡和政治理論的角度分析東亞反日武裝戰線的思想與行動。他們在學術研究上的重要意義在於，他們象徵著「1970年典範轉換」之後的日本新左派思潮，以及至今日本人面對的原罪意識。英文摘要：The Japanese student movement that arose in the 1960s was led by the new left thought, but violent incidents occurred one after another after 1970, resulting in the decline of this student movement. The East Asia Anti-Japan Armed Front carried out terror campaigns in the first half of the 1970s and was known as the perpetrator of the Mitsubishi Heavy Industries bombing. Why did this group use a means of terrorism? As the literature has scarcely examined this group in great depth, this paper aims to analyze their actions and thought from the historical context and political theory. The importance of including this group in academic studies is that the members symbolized the thought of the Japanese new left after ”the paradigm shift in 1970” as well as the sense of guilt that Japanese are currently facing even today.起始頁-結束頁：103-165資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.201912_(71).00301篇名：自我毀滅的秘密武器？統合主義對統一戰線的制度性侷限並列篇名：A Self-Defeating Secret Weapon? The Institutional Limitations of Corporatism on United Front Work作者：Gerry Groot;林鈺鈴(Yu-Ling Lin)關鍵字：統戰工作;統合主義;系統性限制;宗教與少數民族人士;United Front Work;Corporatism;Systemic Limitations;Religious and Ethnic Minorities期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：包括中國人在內的許多人，都認為「統戰工作」早在中國共產黨於1949年擊潰國民黨後已經完結。事實是，「統戰工作」遠不只是共產黨人與國民黨人的統合，還包括許多政治團體、海外華人、宗教信仰者等等工作。一些少數政黨和團體（如民主黨派）更在孤立國民黨的統戰策略中發揮著重要角色。在往社會主義過渡的過程中（1950<U+223C>1956），這些被中共以統一戰線所認證的所謂民主黨派，在幫助與舒緩這一劇烈轉變中也扮演著重要的角色。民主黨派被中共影響與民主黨派對此的怨懟在1956∼1957年的「雙百運動」中被釋放出來，但因為中國正在廢除私有財產與階級，這些問題都變得不再重要。之後民主黨派也支持著1970年代晚期所開展的經濟改革，而當今中國社會正變得越來越複雜，也積累了更多新的社經團體，故統戰部門和民主黨派也被要求去代表和聯合這些新團體，從而保衛中共的領導權、並同時促進發展與統一。本文認為那些在1950年代面對的問題仍然存續至今、而且似乎更為加劇，因為中共在選擇合作對象上的過度控制，使得這些團體並不能夠準確地代表新社會團體的利益。推斷這些系統性問題，也有助於解釋統戰部門在預防其他的問題上、例如宗教信仰者和少數民族騷動上能力的缺失。英文摘要：Many people, including many Chinese, think that united front work is something that finished when the Chinese Communist Party used armed force to defeat the Guomindang (GMD) in 1949. In reality, united front work was always much more than communist-nationalist cooperation and included many political groups, Overseas Chinese, religious believers and the like. It also included a number of minor political parties and groups (MPGs) some of which came to play important roles in CCP united front strategies aimed at isolating the GMD. In the transition to socialism (1950-56) these so-called democratic parties, reorganized by the CCP along corporatist lines, played important roles in helping and smoothing the dramatic changes. Resentments about problems of CCP influence over the MPGs were aired in the Hundred Flowers movement of 1956/57 but as China was moving towards the abolition of private ownership and class, these problems were not important. The MPGs also helped support the economic reforms which began in the late 1970s. Now that Chinese society is increasingly complex and layered with ever more socio-economic groups, the United Front Work Department (UFD) and the parties are being asked to represent and unite with these new groups to secure CCP leadership and promote both development and unity. This article argues that the problems faced in the 1950s still exist but are now more likely to be detrimental in that the CCP's excessive controls on selection do not allow for an accurate enough reflection of the interests of new social groups that the MPGs are now also expected to represent. Extrapolating these systemic problems may also help to explain shortcomings in the UFD's ability to prevent unrest among other key groups such as religious believers and ethnic minorities.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201912_62(4).00012篇名：「統一戰線」專刊編輯導言作者：Gerry Groot;王韻期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：iii-v資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201912_62(4).00003篇名：中國新統一戰線工作在香港：籠絡人心工程的觀察並列篇名：China's New United Front Work in Hong Kong: Observations of Cooptation and Winning the Hearts and Minds of the People作者：盧兆興(Sonny Shiu-Hing Lo);洪松勳(Steven Chung-Fun Hung);盧海馳(Jeff Hai-Chi Loo)關鍵字：後物質主義價值;統一戰線工作;滲透性政治;北京香港關係;Post-Materialist Values;United Front Work;Penetrative Politics;Beijing-Hong Kong Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：統一戰線工作是中國共產黨在香港實施的長期戰略，旨在贏得香港人心，而經歷了不同的歷史階段演變，尤其是在1997年前後。其意圖是籠絡更多香港人並擴大其在世界範圍內的影響。中國大陸的滲透性政治活動由親北京的不同群體組織進行。統一戰線的工作安排得井井有條，親北京的當局和官員一直在投入大量的人力、資本和資源，以加深其對社會各階層的影響，但是民間社會在教育和青年部門方面的統戰工作受到了強烈的抵抗。許多香港人是後物質主義者，堅持人權、法治和政治透明的核心價值，傾向於抵制強調只以物質利益的統一戰線工作。民主運動通過其在香港的社會動員仍在對抗中央政府的控制和統治。中國在香港開展新的統一戰線工作受到其國內轉向威權主義的影響，使香港的民主政治活動家和激進分子成為中國國家的敵人。隨著香港激烈的社會政治運動的興起，中國統一戰線的力量一直在波動，正如我們從1997年至2012年的最高點所看到的，然後是從2012年至2018年香港的專制主義階段，還有一個低點是在2019年許多香港人發起反對逃犯引渡運動的時候強大的抵抗。中國在香港開展的統戰工作是否能夠而且將更深入地滲透到社會中，還有待觀察，但香港人民的強大抵抗不能忽視，這將影響從現在到2047年的京港關係。英文摘要：United front work is a long-term strategy implemented by the Chinese Communist Party in Hong Kong to win the hearts and minds of the Hong Kong people. The evolution of united front work progressed in different historical phases, especially before and after July 1, 1997. Its intentions to co-opt more people of Hong Kong and to expand its worldwide contacts are prominent and obvious. The penetrative politics of mainland China are conducted by pro-Beijing organizations. United front work has been well-organized because the pro-Beijing authorities and officials have been investing lots of manpower, capital, and resources to deepen their influence on all sectors of the society. However, the united front work on educational and youth sectors in the civil society has encountered strong resistance. Many Hong Kong people are post-materialists who adhere to their human rights, the rule of law, and transparent core values that they tend to resist united front work that emphasizes materialistic gains and attractions. The pro-democracy movement of Hong Kong is still resisting the central government's control and dominance through its united front work in the territory. China's new united front work in Hong Kong has been affected by its domestic turn to authoritarianism, making Hong Kong's pro-democracy political activists and radicals the enemies of the Chinese state. With the rise of Hong Kong's fierce social and political movements, the strength of China's united front work has been fluctuating, which can be illustrated by the high point from 1997 to 2012, then a phase of authoritarianism in Hong Kong from 2012 to 2018, and a low point with strong resistance in the year 2019 when the anti-extradition movement was launched by many Hong Kong people. It remains to be seen whether or not united front work conducted by China in Hong Kong will penetrate deeper into the society; however, due to the possibility of implications for Beijing-Hong Kong relations from now to 2047, the strong resistance from the people of Hong Kong cannot be ignored.起始頁-結束頁：25-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201912_62(4).00024篇名：中共統戰工作的演變：以1997年香港回歸前後為例並列篇名：The CCP's United Front Work Evolution: The Comparative Study Before and After the Handover of Hong Kong作者：賴名倫(Ming-Luen Lai);張廖年仲(Nien-Chung Chang Liao)關鍵字：統戰工作;泛民主派;籠絡;分化;United Front Work;Pan-Democracy Camp;Cooptation;Differentiate期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文內容旨在探討香港回歸前後中共「統戰」工作演變之比較分析。「統戰」作為「三大法寶」之一，對中共政權的發展、延續與外交政策均扮演重要角色，但外界直到2014年「雨傘運動」後才又逐漸重新關注。隨近年來內外區域局勢日趨複雜，中共亦高調宣示強化統戰工作以為因應。有鑑於此，本文希望透過對中共在香港統戰工作的回顧與比較，建構分析框架，以提供若干經驗證據並與學界理論對話。研究顯示，統戰的核心目標在於鞏固中共領導權。初期多採「籠絡」尋求政治同盟以合作對抗主要敵人，後期則轉採「分化」與「圍堵」潛在敵人形成同盟。在各時期依據不同政治目標界定主次要敵人，並靈活運用「籠絡」、「圍堵」、「分化」等策略達成目標。以香港為例，回歸前的統戰工作主要藉「籠絡」次要敵人（泛民主派、親商派）以（「圍堵」）打擊主要敵人（港英政府），在確立香港回歸等階段性成果後。又調整策略，先「分化」泛民主派，後「圍堵」泛本土派進而確保中共對香港的主導權。本文以為，統戰針對不同時期對手採取的靈活策略，確能達成使中共掌握主導權之目標。然而，由近年來中港矛盾漸增的狀況亦顯示，諸多既存政治社會矛盾仍對統戰工作構成挑戰，使其未來發展演變值得吾人持續關注。英文摘要：This study adopts a comparative perspective in exploring the evolution of the ”United Front work” (UF work) of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) before and after the handover of Hong Kong (HK). UF work has played an important role in the development of the CCP, the continuation of the regime, and its foreign policy. However, it was not until the Umbrella Movement of 2014 that scholars renewed their attention on this issue. With the increasingly complex situation both internally and externally for the People's Republic of China (P.R.C.), the CCP recently has expressed its intent to strengthen the functioning of UF work. Therefore, this article examines UF work in HK and constructs an analytical framework to provide empirical evidence and theoretical dialogue. This article points out that the core goal of UF work is to consolidate the leadership of the CCP. In its early days, UF work sought to establish alliances to counter its main enemies. In later stages, it turned to the strategies of ”cooptation” and ”differentiation” of potential enemies. UF work operates using strategies to achieve goals flexibly, based on the different goals for each stage. For example, the early UF work in HK mainly relied on the cooptation of HK capitalists to counter the British colonial administration. After obtaining the support of HK elites which facilitated the handover, it adjusted its strategies to focus more on ”splitting” and ”containing” the Pan-democracy camp to consolidate political power. The paper concludes that UF work indeed enables the CCP to continue its political dominance. However, the increasing contradictions between China and HK also show that difficulties still exist. Hence, it is necessary to continue to pay attention to the future development of UF work.起始頁-結束頁：75-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201912_62(4).00035篇名：作為中共發揮海外影響力工具的媽祖文化並列篇名：Mazu Culture: an Instrument of the Chinese Communist Party Expanding Offshore Influences作者：古明君(Ming-chun Ku)關鍵字：媽祖文化;民間宗教;中共海外影響力;宗教工具化;Mazu Culture;Popular Religion;China's Influence;Instrumentalization of Religion期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年間在中共官方論述中，媽祖文化被上升至國家發展，推動統一等戰略位置。然而，媽祖文化為何？媽祖文化與作為民間宗教的媽祖信仰之間的關係是什麼？黨國如何運用媽祖文化以達到特定的戰略目標？回應上述問題，本文分析媽祖文化此一範疇浮現的過程、及其內涵的演變，所涉及的國家與宗教之間的動態，並聚焦分析一個與媽祖文化密切相關的官辦非政府組織－中華媽祖文化交流協會的成立脈絡、組織運作、活動推動與論述生產。本文指出：媽祖信仰社群在宗教復振過程中採取「文化化」的策略，媽祖文化此一範疇由此浮現。在信仰社群與國家議程的交織與互動中，此一範疇逐步取得官方認可，被黨國收編改造為國家的文化工具，且其目標主要在於發揮海外影響力，而非規管境內信仰社群。本文發現：雖汲取自媽祖信仰，但媽祖文化創造了去宗教化的主體位置，並以文化傳播取代宗教發展，因而得以採取文化交流的形式，作為黨國發揮海外影響力的工具。國家主導下的媽祖文化工作內容，初期以對臺媽祖文化交流為主，近期則配合一帶一路政策，推動更多海洋絲路國家的聯繫交流。以此個案，本文呈現了大統戰與大外宣時期中共民間宗教工作的新貌。英文摘要：In the Xi Jinping era, Mazu culture has been officially recognized by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) as an instrument in the Belt and Road Initiative and of united front work. What is Mazu culture that the People's Republic of China (PRC) party-state has frequently referred to? How does it relate to Mazu belief, a revived popular religion once officially labeled as superstition? How does the party state use Mazu culture to achieve specific strategic objectives? To answer these questions, this study analyzes the emergence and the changing connotations of the discursive category of 'Mazu culture' in the interactions between religious communities and the party state. The study places the analytical focus on a national-level GONGO, Chinese Mazu Cultural Exchange Association, and examines this GONGO's establishment background, memberships, activities, and publications. This study points out that the strategy of ”culturification” adopted by the belief community during religious revival led to the appearance of the category 'Mazu culture' in the late 1980s. Emerging in the belief community's engagement with state agendas, this category acquired official recognition, gradually evolved, and ultimately adapted by the CCP as an official instrument to expand China's offshore influences. ”De-religionizing” and ”culturification” have enabled this instrumental role. The discourse of Mazu culture generates a de-religionized subject position, 'Mazu-ren,' to replace 'Mazu believers.' It also emphasizes 'cultural communication and cultural transmission' instead of religious development. Mazu culture has been used strategically in the party-state's externally-directed policies: in the United Front work towards Taiwan since 1980s, and recently in the Belt and Road Initiative to boost connection with countries located along the 'New Maritime Silk Road.' This case study of Mazu culture uncovers the instrumentalization of China's popular religions in the Great United Front and Grand External Propaganda eras.起始頁-結束頁：103-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201912_62(4).00046篇名：機器學「習」：以文字探勘法探索習近平時期之大外宣戰略並列篇名：Machine Learning: An Application of Text Mining to Xi's Grand External Propaganda Strategy作者：邵軒磊(Hsuan-Lei Shao)關鍵字：文字探勘;機器學習;大外宣;習近平;Text Mining;Grand External Propaganda Strategy;Xi Jinping;Machine Learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：因為中共政經地位的轉變及其「銳實力」的影響，國際上之「中國形象」在近年有相當變化。尤以習近平提出「大外宣」戰略後，上述發展更為顯著，同時其細節也尚待研究。對於研究者而言，因為各種資料的質與量的快速成長，使得以個人經驗與智識判斷為主的研究方式受到挑戰。相對於此，使用數位方法的優點在於得以檢驗並更有效累積；觀察資料與模型，也能適應未來變化而增添調整。因此，本文作者試圖將數位技術應用至此一題目，比如文字探勘、機器學習、主題分析模型等，在龐大現代政治論述文本中建立主題模型，嘗試尋找政治領袖在演講中所透露之政治訊息以及政治價值，亦即指出習近平時期演講在各個主題的概括樣貌。初步的解答是：以習近平自身講話做主題分析後，確實發現其對外與對內用語不同，機器能分辨並歸類其用語特色；也能看出在領域上則「外交、經濟、生態」類文本之主題與「黨建、政治、國防」之主題不同。本研究蒐集了中國國家主席習近平的發言作為語料庫，並使用數位方法初探中文政治文獻，期待藉此關注中共大外宣與銳實力。英文摘要：”China's image” has undergone a dramatic transformation as China keeps expanding its international influence through its rising sharp power. In particular, much of the propaganda work under Xi Jinping has been carried out through a ”Grand External Propaganda Strategy”. Growing concerns about the implications of this strategy demand a closer look at its characteristics and practice. Yet, there is a major methodological challenge of analyzing massive amounts of data efficiently and accurately while not relying solely on personal understandings. To solve this challenge, digital methods are required, which will be the topic of this paper. This research collated Xi's speeches into a database and developed digital tools to process and analyze ”China's Sharp Power” and ”Grand External Propaganda Strategy.” It uses text mining and machine learning, as well as adopting the ”Latent Dirichlet Allocation” (LDA) model to extract the main themes from various propaganda texts in order to identify the political messages and ideologies the Chinese top leadership tried to communicate. This paper demonstrates that there are significant differences between speeches on domestic topics: DIPLOMACY, ECONOMICS and ECOLOGY, and on externally directed topics: PARTY-BUILDING, POLITICS and DEFENCE. This research collected Xi's massive political speeches to a database, developed digital tool to process them, and analyzed ”China Sharp Power” and ”Grand External Propaganda Strategy” to explore the unknown future.起始頁-結束頁：133-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201912_62(4).00057篇名：「銳實力」概念於「後」中國崛起時期之理論化探究並列篇名：Theorizing ”Sharp Power” in Post-Rising China作者：王宏仁(Hung-Jen Wang)關鍵字：軟實力;銳實力;後中國崛起;理論化;Soft-Power;Sharp Power;Post-Rising China;Theorization期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：「銳實力」概念從2017年出現至今，已經引起國內外廣泛的討論。此概念指出，中國或是俄羅斯等威權主義國家，近幾年透過媒體、網絡等等不同管道，試圖操控新聞、編造假消息、滲透民主國家的政治體制，已經對許多國家造成威脅。而這樣的行為，與以往過去吾人所熟知的各種權力概念－例如軟實力－有所不同，因此，需要另外提出新的概念來形容這種由威權主義國家所實踐的新作為。然而，目前對於「銳實力」的探討僅停留在表面的、媒體式的討論，缺乏更為理論化、系統性的文獻檢閱。有鑑於此，本文試圖將「銳實力」概念放在一個「後」中國崛起時期中進行理論化探討，並透過現有國際關係文獻中對於權力面向的各種討論、過往／近期對於中國崛起現象的理解、以及中國外交政策實踐的成效，來重新檢視「銳實力」的意義。本文認為，唯有透過相關議題背景的梳理和檢討，才有可能避免讓「銳實力」概念成為一種彰顯特定（西方）政治立場、或政治正確的媒體宣傳工具。英文摘要：Since its first use in 2017, the term sharp power has attracted discussion and analysis worldwide. The concept has been used to describe how authoritarian regimes such as those in China and Russia use a combination of media manipulation, deceptive information, and social disruption to achieve political goals in targeted (mostly democratic) countries. After reviewing all the significant literature on the subject, this paper argues that the sharp power concept deserves more attention than it has received so far. To theorize the sharp power concept, the author considers multiple power dimensions in the international relations discipline in a general sense, as well as particularly focusing on China's development, and suggests that the concept should not be approached in an isolated manner, but rather, according to a contextualized status that emphasizes connections between existing issues. The concept appears to be a product of the current period following China's emergence as a global power-that is, of the post-rising China age. By examining relevant issues and background data, we can avoid mistakenly using the sharp power idea to represent specific (i.e., Western) political positions or political correctness, as is commonly found in mass media sources.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201909_62(3).00018篇名：「軟實力與銳實力」專刊編輯導言作者：Gerry Groot;王韻期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：ii-iv資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201909_62(3).00009篇名：從中國有嘻哈到中國新說唱：軟實力政策、網路市場與嘻哈次文化的共生並列篇名：Cool Patriot: the Symbiosis of Soft Power Policy, Internet Market, and Hip-Hop Subculture in China作者：戴瑜慧(Yu-Hui Tai)關鍵字：嘻哈;軟實力;流行文化;民族主義;Hip-Hop;Soft Power;Popular Culture;Nationalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：網路與娛樂是當代文化產業的關鍵，如何建立網路娛樂生態系汲取人們的注意力成為網路巨頭的競爭關鍵。中國網路視頻公司愛奇藝在2017年推出綜藝節目《中國有嘻哈》，迅速爆紅成為年度現象。此節目反映政治邏輯、市場邏輯以及小眾次文化共生的文化生產模式，具有龐大的市場潛能與青年文化影響力。但是具有叛逆色彩與社會性的嘻哈文化，如何與中國政府的正能量和中國夢論述共生與接合（articulate）？2018年初，中國政府在歌手PGONE性醜聞事件後展開整肅。但節目組在調整方向後獲得允許繼續製作第二季《中國新說唱》。本研究透過文本的比較分析，理解審查的邊界移動以及小眾文化如何與政治邏輯和市場邏輯共生和轉化。主要有四項研究發現：第一，節目名稱從嘻哈改為說唱。透過重新命名，取消音樂來自西方反叛根源的聯想，重新賦予在地化的想像。第二，第一季的內容以避開爭議為原則，但第二季則主動推廣「中國風」說唱。第三，嘻哈的社會性被取消，愛國潮服才是酷帥。第四，第二季主打新疆說唱，透過營造少數民族、港澳、臺灣、海外華人與外國人的參與，製造天下一家的和諧形象。但當「嘻哈」被重構為「說唱」，反叛被替換為正能量，以酷帥面貌贏得火紅關注的節目也避免不了對自身的解構。英文摘要：Internet and entertainment are the key to the contemporary cultural industry. The network-made variety show has also become the front line of China's Internet industry. The fierce competition and the Chinese government's emphasis on soft power policy allowed Iqiyi company to obtain a valid reason for producing a Hip-Hop program. The program [The Rap of China] has become the most prominent cultural phenomenon in China in 2017. But in January 2018, the sex scandal of the champion PG ONE set off the Chinese government's purge of hip-hop culture. Through the text analysis of the first season [The Rap of China] and the second season [China New Shuo Chang], this research aims to analyze how the hip hop Internet program has transformed in China. What has changed in the definition of ”hip-hop with Chinese characteristics?” How does the show swing between ”rebellious” and ”patriotism”? How does the border shift from the first season to the second season? There are four main findings in this study: First, the terminology of the music genre has changed from ”hip-hop” to ”Shuo Chang”. By renaming, it canceled the association of music with its Western roots, and localized it by relating to another Chinese music genre. Second, the content of the first season was based on the principle of avoiding disputes. However, in the second season, it actively promoted the ”Chinese style” Shuo Chang which has elements from Chinese culture and Chinese Communist Party. Third, hip-hop music was cool because of its rebellious attitude, especially the criticism about racial, class, social inequality. Nevertheless, the program gave ”coolness” a new definition that encompasses the characteristics of wearing tidal suits, behaving nicely, being positive and patriotic. Fourth, the second season created the image to the world that there is no social controversies and the CCP is a popular regime by focusing on the participation of competitors from Xinjiang, Taiwan, overseas Chinese, and foreigners. But when ”hip-hop” was redefined to ”Shuo Chang”, the rebellion was replaced by positive energy, and the program that was known for its cool looks could not avoid deconstructing itself.起始頁-結束頁：25-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201909_62(3).000210篇名：誰削尖中國軟實力？中國國有企業改革發展與在匈牙利投資研究並列篇名：Who Sharpens China's Soft Power? A Study on Chinese State-owned Enterprises and Their Reform, Development and Investment in Hungary作者：周冠竹(Kuan-Chu Chou)關鍵字：銳實力;一帶一路;中國國有企業;匈牙利;Sharp Power;Belt and Road;Chinese SOE;Hungary期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：作者以中國國有企業對匈牙利的投資分析中國「銳實力」對匈牙利的運作。「銳實力」一詞源於美國民主基金會對於中國與俄羅斯外交政策分析報告。該報告對於中國與俄羅斯等威權政體透過網路、媒體等媒介影響公共輿論，進而影響民主程序與政府決策行為，破壞民主與法治。然而，該報告並沒有明確指出中國在「一帶一路」倡議對東歐政治的影響。作者透過分析中國國有企業發展過程與黨與企業的關係的歷史脈絡中發現，中國國有企業對匈牙利的投資與歐盟對中國經貿政策以及中國對外發展戰略有所關係，然而中國國有企業對匈牙利的投資並沒有評估歐盟與匈牙利關係的惡化。中國對匈牙利的投資強化了匈牙利抵抗歐盟政治壓力的能力，強化匈牙利政府走向威權主義。最後，作者在實證研究中發現，中國政府透過中資企業商會建立國有企業、當地華商與匈牙利官員的私人關係。作者認為，中國未必有意破壞民主政治，但是中國重視私人關係的政治與商業文化以及國家利益為重的經濟行為，削尖了中國的軟實力。英文摘要：The author analyzes China's ”Sharp Power” against Hungary by studying Chinese state-owned enterprises' (SOE) investment in Hungary. The term, ”Sharp Power,” originated from a foreign policy analysis report published by National Endowment for Democracy, which pointed out how authoritarian regimes, such as China and Russia, utilize internet and media to affect public opinion on democracy procedure and public decisions. However, the report did not indicate how Chinese government utilized” Belt and Road” initiatives to affect Eastern European states. The author discovered that Chinese SOE's investment in Hungary is highly related to EU's anti-dumping policy and China's foreign strategy. However, Chinese SOE's investment ignored the deterioration of Hungary-EU relations. Moreover, investment from Chinese SOEs enhanced Hungary's abilities to resist political pressures from EU, which encouraged the Hungarian government to step into an authoritarian regime. Finally, the author discovered from empirical studies that the Chinese government built private relationships among Chinese SOEs, local Chinese businesses, and high ranking Hungarian officers. The author believed that the Chinese government may or may not have intention to deteriorate its democracy system, but valuing their private relations in business and political culture in economic activities all helped sharpen its soft power.起始頁-結束頁：63-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201909_62(3).000311篇名：「自由祖國」還是「愛國主義教育基地」？旅臺陸生的認同、情感與意義建構並列篇名：”Free Motherland” or ”Patriotic Education Base”? Identity, Emotion and Meaning Construction of Mainland China's Students in Taiwan作者：張可(Ke Zhang)關鍵字：陸生學位生;閩南籍陸生;族群認同;情感;Degree-Pursuing Mainland Students;Students from Southern Fujian China;Ethnic Identity;Emotions期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：2011年，臺灣開放大陸地區學生來臺攻讀學位，政策初衷認為可以通過增加陸生對臺灣政治與社會的認同，繼而化解衝突，促進兩岸和平。七年多過去了，陸生群體究竟發生了什麼變化，過去的研究多聚焦於交換生而非學位生，而其中那些與臺灣有著千絲萬縷聯繫的閩南籍陸生及其族群認同的研究更是付之闕如。本文透過對33位旅臺陸生學位生的深度訪談，以及七年多來的參與式觀察和追訪所累積的一手資料，從以往較少關注的情感與意義建構的角度入手，探究陸生旅臺之後國族認同的變化過程及其機制。本文指出，過去認為陸生在臺灣的日常生活實作將有助於加深彼此瞭解的說法過於簡單。正是受傷害的情感與意義的重構，繼而造成了陸生旅臺之後群體的分化與重組。最後，面對習近平新時代「中華民族偉大復興」話語下所激發的日益高漲的中國民族主義，以及臺灣年輕世代強烈的「天然獨」意識，文章提出避免雙方衝突加劇的可能方式。英文摘要：In 2011, the KMT government approved the policy for Chinese mainland students to pursue university degrees in Taiwan. The original intention of this policy was to increase mainland students' acknowledgement of Taiwan's regime and to also entertain conflict and to promote cross-Straits peace. Seven years later, previous studies focused on exchange students and not on degree-pursuing students. Other than that, there is also lack of research on the identity relationship between the students from southern Fujian China (閩南) and Taiwan native ethnic groups. This paper uses research based on the in-depth interviews with 33 mainland students in Taiwan and with the first-hand data that was accumulated by participatory and tracking observations for more than 7 years. The paper also focuses on the perspective of emotion and meaning construction which has been paid less attention to in the past. Lastly, it explores the changing process and mechanism of the national identity of the mainland students. The research shows the contradictory result to the initial purpose of the policy. It also found that the reconstruction of meaning after feeling hurt led to the differentiation and reorganization of the mainland students. In conclusion, the paper also explores the possible way to avoid the intensification of the conflict across the Strait, which was caused by the young generation in China and their attitude towards rising nationalism under Xi's new era as well as with them facing the ”natural independence” mentality in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：95-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201909_62(3).000412篇名：內生化的制度選擇與長期經濟增長：以河北省縣域地區差距為例，1952∼1998並列篇名：Endogenous Institutions and Economic Growth: An Empirical Evidence Look into the Economic Performance at the County Level in the Hebei Province from 1952~1998作者：遊五嶽(Wu-Yue You);李飛躍(Fei-Yue Li);張冬(Dong Zhang);劉明興(Ming-Xing Liu)關鍵字：經濟增長;內生化制度;實際政治權力;歷史過程;Economic Growth;Endogenous Institutions;De-facto Political Power;Historical Process期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：帶來經濟持續增長的良好制度往往內生於制度形成的歷史過程，通過挖掘河北省各個縣在抗日戰爭中的革命經歷，我們發現戰爭過程通過影響各個縣政治菁英的實際政治權力，塑造了他們制度選擇的動機和激勵，從而影響了地方的長期經濟增長。並且，由抗戰歷史所塑造的兩個方面實際政治權力對經濟增長的影響是不同的：當由武裝力量和根據地歷史所塑造的地方政治菁英集體行動能力和社會動員能力越強時，經濟的增長績效越好；而如果由上層革命機關分布所塑造的地方政治菁英與上層菁英之間的政治聯繫越緊密時，經濟的增長績效則會變差。英文摘要：Institutions good for long-term economic growth are always endogenous to the historical process that it formed. By investigating the conflicts during the Anti-Japanese War in Hebei, we found that the war shaped the de-facto political power of local elites by shaping their choice of institutions and policy, which then influenced the economic performance. We also present that the two sides of the de-facto political power had different impacts on the economic growth. County cadres with stronger capacity in collective action and social mobilization due to the strength of military forces would have incentive to protect property rights and withstand the pressure to extract economic resources excessively. However, county cadres with close connections to the higher-level authority due to the distribution of CCP's committees in the warfare area would extract more economic resources, which in turn led to poorer growth performance.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201906_62(2).000113篇名：雙人成舞？性別團體在當代中國拓展政治空間的策略：以三個性別團體推動反家暴立法為例並列篇名：It Takes Two to Tango? Gender Groups' Strategies to Expand Political Space in Contemporary China: Case Studies of Three Gender Groups in the Campaign Against Domestic Violence作者：伍維婷(Wei-Ting Wu)關鍵字：國家與社會關係;社會運動;女性主義官僚;性別團體;The State-Social Groups' Relations;Social Movement Theory;Femocrats;Gender Groups期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：在當代中國，性別團體與國家的互動變動顯著。以2015年為例，3月7日中央政府啟動跨省分的逮捕行動，十多名女權行動者被約談，最終逮捕五名，國際間以「女權五姐妹」事件稱之。然而同年12月27日，《中國人民共和國反家庭暴力法》經全國人大通過，這是一部婦女團體推動十餘年的法案，被認為是一次成功「由下而上」的立法經驗。過去文獻無法解釋為何性別團體與國家有如此劇變的互動，也因此如何理解性別團體推動反家暴的經驗，將能豐富我們對中國國家與社會關係的理解。本文研究三個長期遭受中央政府打壓的性別團體，如何能在反家暴議題，持續與國家合作，參與公共政策的實踐。立基於2009年到2017年的田野，本研究提出「女性主義官僚」的形成，期能為理解國家與社會提供另外一個視角。女性主義官僚與性別團體的結盟，成功將性別意識鑲嵌於政府機制中，也協助女同志團體同語突破國家對於同性戀群體不明確態度，建立關係。女性主義官僚的形成，為過去文本所分析的關係以及社會資本理論，增加「共同信念」的變項，更能理解變動中的國家與社會關係。英文摘要：In contemporary China, the interaction between the state and gender groups presents the most dynamic pictures. For example, on March 7, 2015, the central government launched a series of actions to arrest more than a dozen feminist activists. In the end, five feminist activists were criminally detained. This incident was later known internationally as ”the Five Feminists Incident”. However, on Dec. 27, ”Anti-Domestic Violence Law of the People's Republic of China” was passed by the National People's Congress. This law was promoted by the womens' groups and finally won the support from the government. Literatures from the past are unable to explain the dramatic changes of the relationships between the state and gender groups. Therefore, understanding the experience of the campaign against domestic violence will enrich our discussions regarding the relations between the state and its social groups in China. This paper analyzes three gender groups that has suffered long-term repression from the state, and yet, organizers have successfully built collaboration with the local government in the campaign against domestic violence. Based on field research from 2009 to 2017, this study has concluded that the emergence of a group of ”femocrats” could provide another perspective when discussing the state-social groups' relations. The alliance between femocrats and gender groups has successfully embedded gender perspectives within the governmental institutions. And furthermore, femocrats has helped a lesbian group to build up the relationship with local governments even when the state's attitude toward homosexual groups is still vague. In addition to constructing mutual trust and reciprocal benefit, the shared belief in gender perspectives helps us to better understand the dynamics of the relationships between the state and its social groups.起始頁-結束頁：41-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201906_62(2).000214篇名：中國國家資本主義之下私企成為國家冠軍私企的過程分析：阿里巴巴個案研究並列篇名：An Analysis on the Process of Privately Owned National Champions in Chinese State Capitalism: The Case Study of Alibaba Group作者：鄭家琪(Chia-Chi Cheng)關鍵字：中國大陸;中國國家資本主義;政企關係;阿里巴巴;China;Chinese State Capitalism;Government-Enterprise Relation;Alibaba期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文分析私有企業、地方政府與中央級國企的合作如何轉變中央政府政策，使私有企業成為國家冠軍私企。彼此在合作過程中，產生不同類型的中國國家資本主義制度變遷。以阿里巴巴為個案，研究顯示中國國家冠軍私企的出現與地方政府的政策目標息息相關，在電子商務監管體系不足的狀況之下，提供了國家冠軍私企對制度環境的解釋空間，以及地方政府偏差選擇行為的空間，進而使私企與地方政府產生共享利益的合作。私企與政府合作的整體過程，從「層化」的制度變遷類型朝向「轉化」類型，亦即從擴大市場占有率，並且取得與國有企業相當資源，擁有改變既有制度的解釋能力，超越國企成為國家冠軍私企。英文摘要：This paper analyzes how the cooperation among the privately-owned enterprises (POEs), the local government, and the State-owned enterprises produces the Privately Owned National Champions (PONCs) and further devotes its attention on explaining how the PONCs can influence the policy made by the central government, and the different typologies of institutional changes of Chinese state capitalism. Using Alibaba as the main focus of this paper, this research shows that the appearance of PONCs is highly correlated to the local government's policy purpose. On the one hand, the insufficiency of the regulatory institutions in the e-commerce industry causes slacks, so the PONCs are able to explain those incomplete institutions, which in turn causes the local government to make biased choices based on these slacks. As a result, this cooperation creates the shared interests of the POEs and the local governments, which shows the change of their cooperation model from layering to conversion. Thus, POEs can expand their market shares, as well as earn the resources equivalent to the state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and ultimately, have the ability to suppress them to become the PONCs.起始頁-結束頁：71-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201906_62(2).000315篇名：多重威脅結構下的國家行為邏輯：中國戰國時期之同盟策略分析並列篇名：The Logic of States' Actions under the Multiple Threat Structure: Analysis of the Warring State System's Alliance Strategy作者：唐豪駿(Hao-Chun Tang)關鍵字：權力平衡理論;多重威脅;霍布斯邏輯;戰國;Balance of Power Theory;Multiple Threat Structure;Hobbesian Logic;Warring State期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文在對權力平衡理論進行簡要的回顧後，指出權力平衡理論在討論戰國時期各國的行為策略時，只能提供片面的、個案的解釋，而且在事件的預測上往往與史實相反，且在各國違反權力平衡邏輯的行為背後，似乎有一套系統性、趨勢性的行為邏輯。故此，筆者根據結構論的假設，假定個體層次的行為互動受到宏觀層次的結構邏輯支配，主張戰國體系存在一套與權力平衡邏輯截然相反的邏輯。而此一邏輯之所以與權力平衡邏輯不同，在於戰國時期特殊的多重威脅結構。由於多數主要行為者在多數時間皆面臨兩個以上明顯而強大、且彼此獨立的威脅，而權力平衡理論在處理多重威脅的情況時存在許多侷限，故在行為策略的選擇上便無法成為國家的指導原則。在多重威脅結構下，取代權力平衡理論成為國家指導原則的這套行為邏輯，筆者稱之為霍布斯邏輯。英文摘要：By examining the Balance of Power (BOP) theory, this article suggests that the BOP theory can only supply a lopsided view to explain the strategy of the state in an individual case. Besides, the predictions of the BOP theory frequently are the opposites of history, and the violations of the BOP logic seem to leave behind a systematic and tendentious rule of actions. According to the assumption of structuralism, the interactions of logic at the micro-level are dominated by the logic at the macro-level; however, this article argues that there is a systematic logic which is entirely different to the BOP logic in the Warring State system. The logic of the Warring State system is unique because of the Multiple Threat Structure in it. The logic of the Warring State system is unique because of the Multiple Threat Structure that is included in it. However, powerful and independent states in the Warring State Period cannot be explained by this due to the BOP theory, which is limited to dealing with multiple threat scenarios. Therefore, the BOP theory cannot be the guiding principle when states are choosing their strategy of actions. Instead, ”Hobbesian Logic” becomes the rule of interactions under the Multiple Threat Structure.起始頁-結束頁：109-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201906_62(2).000416篇名：彭真在1989年中共「天安門事件」中的角色和活動並列篇名：Peng Zhen's Roles and Activities in the Tiananmen Square Incident of 1989作者：鍾延麟(Yen-Lin Chung)關鍵字：彭真;天安門事件;鄧小平;趙紫陽;Peng Zhen;Tiananmen Square Incident of 1989;Deng Xiaoping;Zhao Ziyang期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：1989年的「天安門事件」是中共建政以來遭遇的一次重大政治危機，學生、民眾群集表達對其統治的不滿，中共最後決定動用武力壓制。彭真是中共元老級的政治人物，他在此一事件中的角色問題，中共出版的官方傳記對於敏感環節多予迴避，西方學界和相關著作則無甚了解。彭真在事發之時雖然已無任何黨政要職，但並沒有缺席，而是努力協助中央處理相關事態，也發揮重要影響。彭真在此事發展過程中的態度，其實存在微妙的變化。他一度支持中央總書記趙紫陽主張的溫和與對話方針，但在鄧小平決定戒嚴後改變立場，並且認為繼續堅持己見的趙紫陽失職犯錯。其後，彭真憑藉其多年累積的黨內聲望和資歷，以及先前擔任全國人民代表大會常務委員會委員長的影響力，完成中央使命：勸退全國人大常委會領導成員，使之放棄提前召開全國人大常委會議討論當前政治焦點問題的計畫。彭真成功的政治遊說，讓中共中央得以排除可能來自全國人大常委會的政治干擾，更加緊握處理學潮示威的主導權和機動性。彭真的相關作為雖有助中共維繫政權，但也扼殺了全國人大常委會難得嘗試展現自主性的機會。英文摘要：For the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 were a great political crisis to its rule. During this event, many students and masses gathered in the heart of the nation's capital to express their dissatisfactions and grievances towards the CCP, to which the Party Center led by the paramount leader Deng Xiaoping finally decided to brutally crackdown on the protests by the force. Peng Zhen had already retired from the important post of senior CCP's Politburo member and the Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC) before the eruption of the Tiananmen Square protests. However, as an influential old revolutionary, he was still deeply involved in the political process, wielding enormous influence and assisting the Party Center led by Deng in coping with the severe political incident. It is noteworthy that Peng initially supported Party General Secretary Zhao Ziyang's moderate approach in dealing with the student protests. However, after knowing Deng's decision to impose the martial law in the nation's capital, he quickly changed his attitude to firmly stand with Deng, and began to criticize Zhao. Moreover, Peng made good use of his high revolutionary status and prestige, successfully dissuading the leading members of the NPC's Standing Committee from convening the emergency meeting before the scheduled time to independently handle the student protests. Peng's efforts assisted the Party Center led by Deng in putting the NPC's Standing Committee under its tight controls; therefore, Deng and his loyal followers could adopt their wishes of using a heavy-handed-approach to put an abrupt end to the protests. Peng helped the Party Center pass through the political crisis in 1989 to maintain it rule. However, Peng's actions also seriously damaged the increasing autonomy and authority of the NPC, which he devoted himself to building when he was the head of this political organ.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201903_62(1).000117篇名：實驗主義與政策試點：中國大陸的公立醫院改革並列篇名：Policy Experimentation and Test Sites: China's Public Hospital Reforms作者：周嘉辰(Chelsea C. Chou)關鍵字：實驗主義;試點;夜間燈光;公立醫院改革;Policy Experimentation;Test Sites;Nighttime Lights;Public Hospital Reform期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以中國大陸公立醫院改革為例，探討中國大陸政策試點的運作邏輯。長期以來，「實驗主義」被許多學者歸納為中國大陸政策改革的基本模式，在最近的文獻發展裡，中國研究學者對由下而上所發展的地方創新已有相當多面向的研究成果，但關於由上而下所發布的政策試點的研究則嫌不足。為了完整瞭解中國大陸政策改革的模式，本文聚焦於政策試點，探究中央政府將特定地區列為試點的原則。本文透過迴歸分析與案例研究，發現中央政府所選擇的地方試點，多出現在經濟發展欠佳的地區。這是因為，在公立醫院改革的情況裡，經濟發展較差的地區，醫療問題也多較為嚴重，改革的迫切性較高，阻力也較小。因此，試點的挑選與該政策在當地已成功展現初步成果、以及可以繼續成功執行的預期性相關，當前試點的邏輯因而多屬於確認哪些地方可以作為示範地區。英文摘要：This paper explores the logic of China's policy experimentation through an examination of public hospital reforms. For a long time, ”experimentalism” has been summarized by many China scholars as the basic model of policy reform in China. In recent development, many researchers focus on bottom-up local innovations, and the study on top-down policy experimentation with local test sites is relatively insufficient. To have a better grasp of China's gradual style of reform, this paper focuses on top-down policy experimentation and examines how the Chinese central government selected local test sites in public hospital reforms. The results show that the prefectures and counties with lower levels of economic development were more likely to be selected as test sites. This is because medical problems were more serious in poor areas, and implementing the reform in these places would meet less resistance. This paper provides large-N evidence and case study research to this argument. In order to have positive feedback of experimentation, the central government tended to choose the localities with a higher probability for the reform to be successful. In other words, the logic of choosing local test sites is to demonstrate the merits of reform.起始頁-結束頁：35-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201903_62(1).000218篇名：中共對網路空間主權之概念與作為並列篇名：Exploring PRC's Concept of Cyber Sovereignty作者：王清安(Ching-An Wang);黃基禎(Ji-Jen Hwang)關鍵字：網路空間;網路空間主權;網路安全;網路疆域;Cyberspace;Cyber Sovereignty;Cyber Security;Cyber Territoriality期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來網路攻擊事件已經對一個國家的政治、經濟與軍事造成一定的影響。其主要原因是國家行為者，在國家境內無法針對跨國境資料流動實施管轄。各國相繼成立「網路安全法」，賦予政府可以監控資訊流動，以保障網路用戶與企業資料安全，及強化國家境內關鍵基礎設施資安防護。因此，形塑網路空間主權，建構資料在地化（data localization）管理，已成為解決網路空間衝突、分攤維護國際和平的可行性手段。雖然建立資料在地化管理，可以保護個人、企業與國家安全。然而，本研究發現，中共形塑的網路空間主權，自2016年《網絡安全法》頒布後，政府部門依法對境內的網路用戶、網路營運商實施管轄，其網路空間已建構出與世界網路隔離的內部網路。與此同時，中國政府整合軍、民網路產業合作，其所建構出的網路空間疆界，在政治上，已對現行網路空間秩序產生衝擊。經濟上，將增加全球網路營運商進入中國大陸市場的成本，致使貿易保護形成，不利於全球化經濟發展。此外，軍事上，在國安部門獲得外商進入中國大陸市場所繳出的商品原始碼後，將有利於掌握、監控他國網路資訊，為戰時創造出不對稱作戰優勢。總體而言，中共所形塑的網路主權，絕非僅是強化國家境內的網路安全，而實現強國夢、強軍夢的具體表現。英文摘要：Given the number of cyber-attacks in recent years, it has been confirmed that cyber-attacks can cause a huge impact on a state's political, economic, and military aspects due to the fact that the state actors cannot exercise jurisdiction over cross-border data flows within the territories. A so-called Cyber-Security Law was therefore established by states to empower their governments to monitor the flow of data in order to safeguard the security of users and enterprises in the cyberspace, as well as to strengthen the information security protection of national critical infrastructures in the state. Therefore, the shaping of cyber sovereignty and the construction of data in localized management have become extremely important tools for preventing cyber conflicts and maintaining international peace. Technically, generating data can be managed locally so that personal, business, and national security can be protected. However, this study finds that, in terms of China's cyber sovereignty, since the ”Cyber-Security Law” was promulgated in 2016, by law, the CCP has legitimacy to implement jurisdictions in internet users and telecom operators, and also shape cyber sovereignty into an isolated network from the world's networks. At the same time, the Chinese government has integrated its military and civilian networking industry to create a so-called cyber territoriality. Politically, it has had an impact on the current order in cyberspace. Economically, it may increase the cost of global network operators entering the Chinese mainland market, resulting in the formation of trade protection, which is not conducive to global economic development. In addition, when the national security department has obtained the source codes of foreign merchants entering the China's market, the department may use this information to facilitate the controlling and monitoring of information in other countries' networks and to create asymmetric operational advantages in the wartime. In conclusion, the strategic implication of China's cyber sovereignty is not only to strengthen the national cyber security, but also to realize the dream of great power and the dream of a powerful military.起始頁-結束頁：67-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201903_62(1).000319篇名：意識形態與中國居民的環保態度並列篇名：Political Ideology and Environmental Attitudes in China作者：徐生權(Sheng-Quan Xu)關鍵字：意識形態;環保態度;中國;環境政治;Political Ideology;Environmental Attitudes;China;Environmental Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：62卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：大量文獻證明意識形態的分歧會對人們的環保態度產生顯著影響，美國的「左／自由派」人士有著更加積極的環保態度。但是很少有人去討論這種意識形態的影響在中國又是如何。由於中國國情的特殊性，中國的意識形態「左—右」的分野與美國有著重大差異，這也給意識形態對環保態度影響的探究帶來了複雜性。利用CGSS2010的數據，本研究發現，意識形態「左—右」的分野的確會對中國居民的環保行為產生影響。不過，由於中國的「威權環保主義」策略，意識形態「左—右」的對立並沒有成為影響人們環保態度的最重要的意識形態分歧，反而是「威權主義—自由主義」這一意識形態光譜上的區分成為中國居民的環保態度的顯著預測因素，即「自由主義」的立場越強，包括環保支出意願、環保行為在內的整個環保態度越消極。但這種消極態度可能更多是對「威權環保主義」治理策略的質疑，相對的，在保護環境、節約資源成為中國基本國策的背景之下，偏向「威權主義」的人表現出了相對積極的環保態度。本研究也說明了，意識形態對環保態度的影響在不同政體的國家有著不同的作用機制。英文摘要：A large number of studies have proved that political ideology has a significant impact on people's environmental attitudes. In the U.S., leftists/ liberals have more environmental concern than rightists/conservatives. However, researchers paid only scant attention on how political ideology affect Chinese people's environmental attitudes. As a one-party state, the political ideology divergence on ”left-right” in China is different from what is in America and what means ”left” in such two countries are not the same. Thus, it becomes complex to examine how the political ideology affects China's citizens' environmental attitudes. Employing data from CGSS2010, the research examined the political ideology divide and their effects on people's environmental attitudes in China. Due to the authoritarian environmentalism in China, results documented that there is significant impact of the political ideology divide in environmental attitudes, but the ideological division on environmental attitudes in China is primarily split between authoritarian and libertarian. The left-right ideology divides contributes just on pro-environmental behaviors. However, the stronger the position of ”liberalism,” the more negative the overall environmental protection attitude. Since environmental affairs is related to the redistribution of social resources, when the government takes ”authoritative” means to carry out environmental protection measures, it will inevitably lead to opposition from ”liberals.” There is a conclusion that ideology does have an impact on environmental attitudes, but it has different mechanisms in different countries.起始頁-結束頁：101-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.201903_62(1).000401篇名：家庭關係中親密與自主的平衡並列篇名：The Balance between Intimacy and Autonomy in Family Relationship作者：孫頌賢(Sung-Hsien Sun);施香如(Hsiang-Ju Shih);蔡美香(Mei-Hsiang Tsai)關鍵字：自我分化;家庭界限;家庭關係;涵容;親密與自主的平衡;Containing;differentiation of self;family boundary;family relationship;the balance between intimacy and autonomy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：56期出版年：2019中文摘要：家庭關係中「親密」與「自主」的平衡，對個體的人格發展具有極重要的影響力。在華人文化下，個體經歷著不充分「自主」、但擁有「親密」的家庭關係中，似乎仍可以擁有良好的身心適應。本期所刊登的三篇研究論文，正呼應了家庭界限中「親密」與「自主」平衡議題的重要性。三篇研究帶來的啟發，包括：（1）自主性的彰顯，已成為華人文化家庭中的特殊議題；（2）尋求自主性是一種辯證式的平衡過程；（3）親代與子代都需要學習自我分化；（4）諮商關係中兼具親密與自主的「涵容」，可能修復破壞性家庭關係帶來的創傷。最後提出在未來相關研究議題上的建議，期望有更多的學者與諮商實務工作者，能提供更豐富的相關研究方向與成果。英文摘要：Through family growth experience, people have been seeking for the following answers to the ”three questions of life” in our lives: First, who am I? Second, am I worth being loved? Could I have the ability to love someone? Third, how can I live? What is the meaning of living? The interpersonal theory of psychopathologist Harry Stack Sullivan argues that individuals are influenced by the interpersonal behavioral dynamics of ”love” and ”power” in parent-child relationships. In the family therapy, the concepts of family boundary and self-differentiation all try to respond to the ”three questions of life”: the individual all seeking for the balance between independence and intimacy” in family relationship. This balance has a very important influence on the individual's personality development. In Chinese culture, the influence of family boundary and self-differentiation on individuals is also different from the Western culture. In Chinese families, individuals seem to have a good physical and mental health in a family relationship that is not fully ”autonomy” but has sufficient ”intimacy”. In this published journal, these three research papers reflect the importance of the balance between intimacy and autonomy in family boundary. The titles of the three research papers include: (1) The impact of parental expectations on Taiwanese college students' career indecision: The mediating role of career decision self-efficacy. (2) Effects of a parenting group based on Bowen family systems theory for mothers with young adolescents. (3) Themes, symbols and healing of play therapy: The clinical case of a physically abused child. The implications of the three studies include: (1) Whether an individual could have autonomy in family relations will become a special topic in Chinese families. Under the Chinese culture with the theme of ”self in relationship”, individuals are not easy to be completely themselves in the family. This is and importance task that if the counselor could help the client to find his autonomy from the situational context of affective connections. (2) Seeking autonomy is a dialectical balancing process. In family relationships, absolute intimacy or absolute autonomy is not a good family function. Intimacy with autonomous affirmation, control with affective connections, such balance is a philosophy, but also an art. This reflects the ”dialectical thinking” of Chinese culture, which is like Tai Chi. Black contains white and white contains black. In the future, we need more research to understand how to achieve a balance between autonomy and intimacy, and more to reflect the characteristics of Chinese families. (3) Both parents and children need to learn to develop towards differentiation of self. These three papers have different research subjects, including: college students, mothers of adolescents, children suffering from family violence. These subjects included two generations of parents and children in the family. This also shows the importance of paired research. When studying with ”relationship” as the focus, it is more likely to see the positive impact of two generations learning self-differentiation. (4) In the counseling relationship, the ”containing” behavior with both intimacy and autonomy may promote the traumatic recovery of destructive family relations. When intimacy and autonomy are out of balance, invalid family boundary and self-differentiation can be harmful and even traumatic. If the therapist could re-provide a ”containing” relationship of the balance of intimacy and autonomy, it is one way toward trauma recovery. However, this is an importance current issue about how to promote change and transformation in the counseling process in Taiwan's counseling psychology. We need more research to explore. Finally, it is also suggested that more research issues and directions in the future, including: Expect more researchers and practitioners to provide more relevant research results.起始頁-結束頁：1-15資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190900560012篇名：台灣大學生父母期待對發展、焦慮未定向之影響：生涯自我效能的中介效果並列篇名：The Impact of Parental Expectations on Taiwanese College Students' Career Indecision: The Mediating Role of Career Decision Self-Efficacy作者：毛菁華(Ching-Hua Mao);許鶯珠(Ying-Chu Hsu);方紫薇(Tzu-Wei Fang)關鍵字：父母期待;生涯未定向;生涯自我效能;焦慮未定向;發展未定向;Career indecision;career self-efficacy;developmental indecision;indecisiveness;parental expectation期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：56期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探究台灣大學生父母期待對發展、焦慮未定向的影響，和生涯自我效能在父母期待與未定向間的中介效果。以台灣北、中、南和東部共九所大學院校633名大學生為研究對象，採用階層迴歸分析考驗研究假設。茲將研究結果分述如下：（1）發展未定向僅能被「自覺期待之表現」與「達到父母期待」所預測，且大學生自覺對父母期待做愈多，或達到父母期待程度愈高，其發展未定向程度愈低；（2）「知覺的父母期待」、「自覺期待之表現」與「達到父母期待」三者皆可預測焦慮未定向。且大學生自覺對父母期待做愈多，或達到父母期待程度愈高，其焦慮未定向程度愈低。但「知覺的父母期待」程度愈高，焦慮未定向程度亦愈高；（3）生涯自我效能的各個面向對於父母期待（自覺期待之表現與達到父母期待）和發展或焦慮未定向之間關係多有完全中介或部份中介效果。根據研究結果，父母期待不同層面之涵義，對發展、焦慮未定向具有不同預測效果。另一方面亦證明在華人文化下的台灣社會可佐證社會認知生涯理論（SCCT）的論述，環境脈絡因素都需透過自我效能而對定向、未定向產生間接影響。英文摘要：When probing into career issues in Taiwan, it is imperative to understand that in terms of social norms, Taiwan is a Chinese collectivist culture, where Taiwanese parents are deeply concerned about their children's career development and heavily involved in their career choices. Therefore, compared to the influence of family in Western individualist culture, the influence of family on career decision-making in Chinese collectivist cultures is worthy of further exploration. To date, very few studies have evaluated the influence of parental expectations on the career decisions of Taiwanese students; therefore, the present study elucidated the effects of parental expectations on children's career indecision. This study examined the impact of parental expectations on developmental indecision and indecisiveness of college students and the mediating effect of career decision self-efficacy. Employing measures of ”Living up to Parental Expectations”, ”Career Decision Self-Efficacy Scale”, ”Career Developmental Indecision Questionnaire”, and ”Career Indecisiveness Questionnaire” as research tools, the researchers used stratified random sampling to select 9 colleges/universities in Taiwan. The questionnaires were administered to 633 university students in eastern, northern, central, and southern Taiwan. The retrieved data were analyzed using hierarchical regression analysis to test the research hypotheses. Findings were as follows: (1) Both ”perceived self-performance (PSP)” and ”living up to parental expectations (LPE)” of parental expectation were significant predictors of developmental indecision. The greater the PSP and LPE, the less developmental indecision sampled college students experienced. (2) All the PSP, LPE and PPE of parental expectation were significant predictors of indecisiveness. More PSP and LPE was associated with less indecisiveness among the college students. More ”perceived parental expectation (PPE)” was associated with higher indecisiveness. (3) Both the relation between PSP and career indecision and the relation between LPE and career indecision were completely or partially mediated by career decision self-efficacy. This corroborated the discourse of Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT) and suggests that social context, in this case Chinese culture in Taiwanese society, exerts indirect impact on career decision/indecision, mediated by self-efficacy. This study found that PPE, PSP and LPE produced different predictive results for developmental indecision and indecisiveness, which can be used to reinterpret the previous divergent findings on career indecision. In particular, the results of this study demonstrated that parental expectation could be a double-edged sword, being good and bad at the same time. An individual may need to compromise self needs and repress oneself to meet the expectations of parents, leading to the inability to make career choices and being trapped in indecision. On the other hand, parental expectations may also reflect attentiveness and affirmation towards the children, or be seen as a kind of understanding and care. In the latter case, the attainment or fulfillment of parental expectations is a form of recognition, encouraging and motivating the moving-forward of this parent-child consensus. The present study found that career decision self-efficacy plays a mediating role between parental expectations and career indecision. Hence, career counselors are suggested to assist students by enhancing their career self-efficacy, which appears to be effective in reducing career indecision. According to Bandura (1977), the formation of self-efficacy is rooted in four reference points: performance accomplishment, vicarious experience, verbal persuasion, and emotional arousal. Therefore, when a counselor is meeting with a client, the positive impacts of past successes can be particularly highlighted in the conversation, while exploring important influencers outside the family, such as school teachers or older club members, as these exemplary figures often make up part of the missing function of parents in a child's career development.起始頁-結束頁：17-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190900560023篇名：青少年母親親職適應團體之成效研究－Bowen家庭系統理論之運用並列篇名：Effects of a Parenting Group Based on Bowen Family Systems Theory for Mothers with Young Adolescents作者：張在蓓(Tsai-Pei Chang);張世華(Shih-Hua Chang)關鍵字：Bowen家庭系統理論;青少年母親;情緒成熟;親子分化;親職團體;Bowen Family Systems Theory;differentiation within the mother/child subsystem;emotional maturity;parenting group;mothers with young adolescents期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：56期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討Bowen家庭系統理論運用於青少年母親親職適應團體在降低團體成員親子間焦慮、提升其親子分化程度，與改善其情緒成熟度的立即性與追蹤性效果。本研究採取混合研究之崁入式準實驗設計，主要以量化研究評估研究參與者在團體進行期間其親子間焦慮每週的變化程度，以及團體結束及團體結束四週後，其在親子分化程度與情緒成熟度的改變，另以焦點團體訪談之質性研究分析資料，探討研究參與者在參加此團體後，對其個人、親子關係，及家庭系統的幫助與改變情形，作為量化研究結果之佐證與補充。研究參與者為新北市國中女性家長共11人，分為實驗組六人與比較組五人，實驗介入為連續八週、每週二小時運用Bowen理論之青少年母親親職適應團體。本研究結果發現：經過研究團體之實驗介入後，研究參與者的親子間焦慮狀態前後下降約50%；其親子分化程度之提升具有立即性效果與追蹤性效果；而其情緒成熟度則不具有立即性效果與追蹤性效果。在參與研究團體之後，研究參與者主觀感知的改變包括：（1）個人內在改變與母親角色再定位；（2）親子互動模式與親子界限的改變；（3）親子衝突的改善或以情緒穩定方式因應衝突；（4）家庭系統成員互動與三角關係的改變。最後，本研究依據上述研究結果，對未來親職團體實務與相關研究提出若干建議。英文摘要：Families with adolescents need to deal with increased anxiety in parent-adolescent relationships and make adjustments to adolescents' psychological development (Carter & McGoldrick, 2005). In Taiwan, mothers are the main carers of children in families (Taiwan Executive Yuan, 2011), and play a major role in the emotional and personality growth of adolescents (Bartle-Haring, Brucker, & Hock, 2002). However, research has pointed out that mothers tend to have huge emotional problems and anxieties with parenting, which might result from inadequate mother-adolescent boundaries, as well as the anxieties of the mothers themselves, family members, and society expectations (Gilbert, 1999). In order to help mothers with adolescents to deal with their parenting anxiety and have better relationships with their adolescent children, some parenting educators and researchers have advocated the application of family system theories in parenting groups (Ham, 2011). This study aimed to examine and explore the effects of a parenting group based on Bowen theory for mothers with young adolescents in Taiwan. An embedded quasi-experimental design of mixed method research was used for the study. The primary purpose of this study was to examine the effects of the parenting group on reducing mothers' anxiety toward the parent/ adolescent relationship, enhancing differentiation within the mother/child subsystem, as well as increasing participants' emotional maturity. The secondary purpose of this study was to explore participants' personal experiences and understandings of the parenting group in the changes among oneself, the mother/adolescent relationship, as well as the family systems. The group model consisted of eight two-hour sessions for a total of sixteen hours for eight successive weeks. Participants were eleven mothers with at least one young adolescent child in Taipei, and they participated in either the experimental group or the comparison group. Both quantitative and qualitative methods were used. Quantitative data were pre-test and post-test scores on Chinese versions of the Differentiation in the Family System Scale (DIFS-Chinese version) and Differentiation of Self Inventory-Revised (C-DSI) in each of the two groups. Participants' anxiety toward the mother/adolescent relationship was assessed in the experimental group by a group observer in each group session, and their follow-up scores on the DIFS-Chinese version and C-DSI were collected four weeks after the group ended. Qualitative data were collected by a focus-group interview for participants one week after each of the two groups ended. Mean scores on the group observation assessment showed that participants' anxiety toward the mother/adolescent relationship decreased about 50% in the first and final group sessions. Results of the ANCOVA analyses and dependent t-tests indicated that there were immediate and follow-up effects on increasing differentiation within the mother/child subsystem for the experimental group. However, no immediate or follow-up effects on improving participants' emotional maturity were found. Further, qualitative data were coded and analyzed using thematic analysis, and findings revealed that the parenting group provided participants with assistance in their intrapersonal changes as well as supporting positive changes in their mother/adolescent relationships and in their family systems. In terms of their intrapersonal changes, participants gained insights and made adjustments on their mother roles and expectations to decrease their anxiety and emotional reactivity toward their adolescent children. As for the positive changes in their mother/adolescent relationships, participants made some adjustments in the mother-adolescent boundary. They started to understand and respect adolescent children's autonomy needs and decisions, and tried to make a positive connection with them. Further, their mother-adolescent conflicts dampened. Even though the number of conflicts did not decrease, participants acquired some strategies to make themselves calm down to be able to deal with the conflicts more effectively. In addition, in terms of the changes within their family systems, some participants reported that their husbands' relationships with adolescent children had improved, and others mentioned that interactions with other family members such as their own mothers and another child had also improved. Findings of this study suggested that a parenting group based on Bowen Family Systems Theory can help mothers with young adolescents to decrease their anxiety and improve their differentiation with their adolescent children. Implications of the findings for the parenting group based on Bowen theory as well as suggestions for the future study are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：59-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190900560034篇名：遊戲治療中的主題、象徵與療癒：以一名身體受虐兒為例並列篇名：Themes, Symbols and Healing of Play Therapy: The Clinical Case of a Physically Abused Child作者：吳東彥(Dong-Yann Wu);黃宗堅(Tsung-Chain Huang)關鍵字：身體受虐兒;象徵;遊戲主題;遊戲治療;Physically abused child;play themes;play therapy;symbol期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：56期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究採取主題分析法，探究一名身體受虐兒在十五次的遊戲治療中，所呈現出的重複遊戲主題，分別為：（一）囚禁與脫逃、（二）界限的逾越與維持、（三）隱藏與現身、（四）死亡與重置、（五）兩極對立的辯證式消長。研究者除試圖從中萃取有意義的主題（what），同時也特別彰顯遊戲行為主題背後的啟動原因（why）及展現的方式（how）之外，亦關注遊戲主題與治療關係之間如何交織影響，最後則嘗試呼應遊戲主題可能具有的象徵意涵。隨著治療的進行，案主更能展現對內、外在經驗的涵容與自由流動，漸漸不再將生命能量全然置放於攻擊師長或反抗學校規範，而開始有能力遵守規則及要求，並且為自己的學業負起責任。案祖母亦表示案主已經不再刻意反對或是挑釁，兩個人有更多的時間可以和平共處，並且有較多正向的關係連結。研究亦發現，當治療者能夠協助案主矯正其投射性認同的機制後，案主的自我發展似乎從初期以全然「壞我」為主的狀態，轉變為開始能夠看見自己的正向力量或資源。在自我發展的內涵上，案主的有能感（competence）、整合感（integration）、人際互動關係（interpersonal relationship），以及欲力（libido）投注的方向也開始有所不同。文末也針對治療歷程及研究結果，提出具體建議與省思。英文摘要：Recent studies have call for an increased attention to use play therapy as a crucial method for the treatment of physically abused children. While much work has been undertaken to examine the relationships between play therapy and treatment efficacy, few studies have addressed the symbolic and healing perspectives of children's play themes. In addition, the dynamic process of the therapeutic relationship has long been neglected. The researchers argued that not only the play behaviors between the sessions, but also the contextual and sequential meanings behind the play themes should be examined. Thus, the present study was aimed to synthesize the existing literature into a more process-oriented model that explains why and how play therapy works for the clients. Based on the approach of Thematic Analysis, the present study explored the repeated play themes from a physically abused child's 15 play sessions. Home-Room teacher, school counselor as well as the client's grandmother's reports were collected to increase data validation. Inter-Rater reliability between two researchers was carefully examined. Researchers read each play sessions' transcriptions and classified concepts based on conditions, contexts, action strategies and results. Researchers also conducted a re-inspection to verify the theoretical structure obtained in the above-mentioned analysis. Attention was placed on whether there was evidence pointing away from the theories obtained. Researchers also conducted continuous modifications and supplementary works based on discussions with scholars in related fields. Five major themes were identified from the data analysis: (1) captivity and escape; (2) go beyond or maintaining boundaries; (3) hide and seek; (4) death and replacement; (5) dialectical relationship between opposites. The researchers not only extracted meaningful themes of the child's play, but also draw attention to why the play behaviors were activated and presented. In addition, the interactions between play themes and the therapeutic relationship were investigated. The symbolic meaning of the play themes was also explored. As the therapeutic process continued, client was more able to contain his inner and outer experiences and allow them to flow. He was less against his teachers or school norms, in addition, he was more able to follow the rules and take responsibility for school assignments. Client's grandmother indicated that he was less provocative and had more positive interactions with her. The results also showed that, when the therapist can work on the client's projective identification, then the client was more likely to move his ”bad me” identification to a more positive self image, that is, he became more realized that ”bad” and ”good” can both exist within himself. He was more able to set up a boundary and forgive the person who abused him. As to the content of his ego development, the client's abilities of competence, integration, interpersonal relationship and the devotion of libido were also improved. The present study adds to the existing literature on the etiology and underlying healing process of play therapy to a Taiwanese physically abused child. This has been done in an effort to increase understanding in Taiwanese families and to test previous conceptualizations and findings based on the available literature, which has typically observed or measured from White, middle-class families in America. This study highlights the importance of incorporating theoretical and methodological advances in the mainstream literature into research with culturally diverse population, while remaining sensitive to the culture-specific issues of Taiwanese - an obvious requirement that has not been met in much of the previous research. Influential reflections as well as practical applications were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：97-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190900560045篇名：自我及其在生活世界中的運作：從存在現象學處境結構觀之並列篇名：Self and How It Operates in a Life world: An Existential Phenomenological View作者：劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);夏允中(Yung-Jong Shiah);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang);孫頌賢(Sung-Hsien Sun)關鍵字：在世存有;存在現象學;自我;處境結構;認同;Be-in-the-world;existential phenomenology;identification;self;situational structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：55期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文由存在現象學來看自我及其在生活世界中的運作，著眼於在世存有的三個相扣環節：（1）世界如何存有；（2）人如何存有；（3）人與他者如何共同存有於世，以探究由客觀性處境與超越性籌劃所共構的處境結構。自我認同被看作動詞，指涉：「個人在其置身處境之中，如何領會自己、他者與整體局勢，並為自己編撰、導引與主演一齣個人戲劇，用以展現自己所選擇與設計的角色形象」。自我認同之實踐則涉及劇中之「我他交往」策略運用，以及情節與意義之雙重開展。任一齣個人戲劇的配角演員，也都同時是他們自己的個人戲劇的主要編劇、導演與演員；而任一齣戲的主要編劇、導演與演員也同時是他者的個人戲劇中的配角。從存在現象學重新解讀本期文章顯示，在做自我角色定位時，需要：覺察過去選擇的角色定位，欣賞過去的正向經驗，協調不同自我角色的重要性與優先性，形成明確角色內涵。在籌劃未來可能性時，需要與他者共同協調出能夠完成各自個人戲劇的我他交往策略與舉措：為過去的個人戲劇所帶來的結局承擔責任，挑選他者，並據以調整自我展現策略與舉措，預見不同我他交往策略與舉措可能為自己和他者招致的損與益，並根據他者回應而調整自我展現及我他連結之策略與舉措，展開新劇本，串起過去、當下與未來的流動。建議未來研究針對存在現象學之各種成對相互構成（關注自我與他者、處境與籌劃、行動與意義、安身與立命以及文化與自我）來尋求研究架構和方法上的突破。英文摘要：In this paper, the self and how it operates in a life world is illuminated in an existential phenomenological view. The situational structure, the result of the co-construction between objective situatedness and transcendent projecting, is analyzed based on analyses of (1) how the world exists, (2) how a person exists, and (3) how a person and the others coexist in the world. Along this line of thinking, self-identification is considered as a verb instead of a noun. It refers to ”how a person composes, directs, and stars a personal drama in order to display the character image he or she chooses and designs. The practice of self-identification involves the application of I-other-relating strategies and the unfolding of plots and meanings in one's personal drama. A personal drama may be composed of scenes of various fields or from various points of time flow. The core of a drama locates in both (1) what is displayed and perceived on the stage and (2) what is communicated by the composer, director, and star. For each personal drama, all of the supporting actors are the main composer, director, and star in their own personal drama; the main composer, director, and star is a supporting actor in others' personal drama. The current issue includes 5 papers. They are ”self-identity and self-esteem during different stages of adolescence: the function of identity importance and identity firmness, ”a case study of the multi-selves conflicts coordination theory and intervention program to a male batterer who values the Chinese face and family,””developing and evaluating the scale for social benefits and losses of deviant behaviors,””using self-regulated theory to understand effective job searching self-regulatory strategies: mid-aged job seekers in Taiwan,””drug offenders learned in the savoring group program.”These papers showed the following results. At the point of defining character, one needs to: (1) be aware of past decision about one's character definition, (2) appreciate one's past positive experience, (3) arrange the importance and priority of various selves, and (4) clearly define specific content of one's character. At the point of projecting future possibilities, one needs to negotiate and cooperate with the others to come out with mutual-accepted I-other-relating strategies and actions. These may include but not limit to: (1) take the responsibility of whatever result from previous personal drama, (2) with true understanding, pick up the others appropriate for I-other-relating, (3) adjust self-presenting strategies and actions in correspondence of the others, (4) foresee possible benefits and losses for oneself and relating others resulting from the I-other-relating strategies and actions under consideration, (5) adjust understanding about one's situatedness based on the feedback from the others, (6) adjust self-presenting and I-other-relating strategies and actions based on the feedback from the others, (7) negotiate among selves and deal with conflicts among them, (8) cut off the habitual connection with negative past experience, (9) terminate the familiar old personal drama, (10) initiate unfamiliar new personal drama, (11) establish the connection of past-present-future via appreciating the past, savoring the present, anticipate the future. The projecting helps to direct one's personal drama toward avoiding personal losses, protecting one's self-esteem and face, extending positive emotional experience, avoiding hurting others, avoiding disappointing others, taking care of others' needs, and establish mutual-accepted I-other-relating strategies and actions. Suggestions about research framework and methodology for future research are provided based on various pairs of co-constitution from existential phenomenology, such as I-others, situatedness-projecting, praxis-meaning, settling-down-on-the-earth and pursuing-meaning-echoing-the-way-of-heaven, as well as self-culture.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190500550016篇名：Self-Identity and Self-Esteem during Different Stages of Adolescence: The Function of Identity Importance and Identity Firmness並列篇名：青少年自我認同與自尊：認同重要性與認同確定性之功能作者：陳坤虎(Kun-Hu Chen)關鍵字：Adolescence;identity firmness;identity importance;self-esteem;自尊;青少年;認同重要性;認同確定性期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：55期出版年：2019中文摘要：Adolescence is often regarded as a transitional stage between childhood and (emerging) adulthood. Adolescence also is viewed as a stage with heightened risks to a healthy development (Adams, Gullotta, & Markstrom-Adams, 1994; Roberts, Lewinsohn, & Seeley, 1996). Erik Erikson (1968) postulated that identity formation is the most important developmental task during adolescence. Researchers also suggested that a more confirmed sense of identity is more likely to lead to positive mental health (Erikson & Erikson, 1950; Marcia, 2002) and optimal psychological functioning (e.g., self-esteem; well-being) (Adler, Lodi-Smith, Philippe, & Houle, 2016; Lillevoll, Kroger, & Martinussen, 2013; Schwartz et al., 2011; Waterman, 1992). Besides, self-esteem is also an important developmental issue in the field of adolescence, reflected to as self-worth or self-image, is the global evaluative dimension of self (Harter, 2006). Researchers have been interested in self-esteem changes during adolescence in the long run (e.g., Harter, 2006; Kling, Hyde, Showers, & Buswell, 1999). For example, researchers generally found that self-esteem often decreases when children make the transition from elementary school to junior high school (Hawkins & Berndt, 1985; Twenge & Campbell, 2001). Robins and his colleagues also indicated that this decrease in self-esteem might take place during life transitions (e.g., from elementary school to junior high school, from junior high school to high school; from high school to college) (Robins, Trzesniewski, Tracy, Gosling, & Potter, 2002). In the past, several studies demonstrated that low self-esteem can influence adolescent mental health and psychopathology (e.g., depression, eating disorders, delinquency…) (Kuhlberg, Pena, & Zayas, 2010; Harter, 1993; Unger, Kipke, Simon, Montgomery, & Johnson, 1997; Usher, Zahn-Waxler, Finch, & Gunlicks, 2000). Numerous studies investigated adolescent self-esteem in various ways (e.g., Baldwin & Hoffman, 2002; Prinstein & Dodge, 2010; Roustit, Campoy, Chaix, & Chauvin, 2010), but the role of self-identity in self-esteem changes during adolescence has relatively received little attention. Based on Erikson's belief that a more confirmed sense of identity is more likely to lead to positive psychological adjustment (Erikson & Erikson, 1950) and help individuals ensure the direction, purpose, and meaning of life, this study proposed that all aspects of identity firmness are key predictors to self-esteem at all substages of adolescence. In addition, as different stages highlight different needs for the various aspects of identity, this study hypothesized that, in early and middle adolescence, social and image identity importance would significantly predict self-esteem; while in late adolescence, only personal identity importance would be significantly related to self-esteem. To examine the above hypotheses, four stepwise regression analyses of four serial studies on self-esteem using the aspects of identity importance and firmness as predictors were conducted in three different age levels of adolescents. Study 1 (N = 1,285 participants from junior high, high school, college students) generally supported the hypothesis that identity firmness could predict adolescent self-esteem. That is, the results of Study 1 showed that there were different patterns on identity importance in predicting self-esteem among three adolescent stages, but same patterns on identity firmness (i.e., personal identity firmness, social identity firmness) in predicting self-esteem among three adolescent stages. Study 2 (N = 203 participants from three different colleges) successfully replicated the findings of Study 1. In Study 3 (N = 185 undergraduate students) and Study 4 (N = 146 undergraduate students), the measurement of identity importance and identity firmness was revised. Again, the findings were consistent with those of the previous two studies. In sum, this study suggested identity importance and identity firmness are crucial factors contributing to adolescent self-esteem.英文摘要：Erik Erikson（1968）認為自我認同為青少年最重要的發展任務。過去研究亦指出個體若越能有自我認同感，則會擁有正向的心理健康，及最適的心理功能表現（例如：自尊、幸福感）。此外，自尊亦為青少年重要的發展議題之一，它反映著個體的自我價值、自我形象及對自己整體的評價。過去諸多研究顯示，青少年的自尊問題會影響青少年的心理健康或心理病理（例如：憂鬱、行為偏差）。雖過去探討青少年自尊有諸多取向，但鮮少從自我認同來探討青少年的自尊。基於Erikson自我認同感之觀點，本研究認為青少年認同確定性越高，其自尊亦會越高。此外，由於不同青少年時期，其內在需求有所不同，因此本研究假設早、中期之青少年，其社會及形象認同重要性能預測其自尊，而晚期青少年則個人認同重要性能預測其自尊。本系列研究以逐步回歸分析探討不同階段青少年，其認同確定性及認同重要性是否能預測其自尊。研究一（共計1,285名國中、高中、大學樣本）支持研究假設，亦即認同確定性可預測青少年自尊，而認同重要性則隨不同的發展階段，對自尊有不同的預測效果。研究二（共計203名三所大學生樣本）成功複製研究一之結果。研究三（185名大學生樣本）及研究四（146名大學生樣本）更新認同確定性、認同重要性測量工具，得到與研究一、研究二相同的相同結果。總結，本研究建議認同確定性及認同重要性皆為青少年自尊重要的預測因子。起始頁-結束頁：27-57資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186201905005500201篇名：災害防救與社區韌性發展：以屏東大後部落為例並列篇名：Disaster Management and Development of Community Resilience: A Case Study of the DaHo Tribe in Pingtung County in Taiwan作者：林煥笙(Huan-Sheng Lin);余孟哲(Meng-Che Yu);劉康慧(Helen K. Liu)關鍵字：災害防救;社區韌性;調適治理;協力;原住民部落;disaster management;community resilience;adaptive governance;collaboration;aboriginal tribes期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：57期出版年：2019中文摘要：社區自主防災的成效左右災害治理體系之穩健，亦攸關在地社群永續發展的公平正義，因此災區居民能否培育出應變災害及社區發展的韌性，當屬重要的課題。然而現有文獻對此建構過程還沒有足夠的關注，對於弱勢社區如何從他助轉換為自助的動態描繪，仍存有一定的理論空白。爰此，本文以屏東縣來義鄉大後部落的社區自主防災發展為例，在調適治理的分析框架下，透過深度訪談及文獻分析，檢視社區韌性如何經由外力輔助逐步成熟。研究發現，非營利組織的參與有助於建立社區自主韌性，而領導者則掌握權力調節的策略性角色。此結論一方面細緻化調適治理框架中，對於領導權力調節的討論，另方面亦彰顯多層次治理體系、網絡、協力，以及學習等社區自主防災的成功要件。作者認為，倘若政府部門能夠釋放更多自主空間給基層社會，此般公民力量就較有機會展現其彈性；而確保社區關鍵組織的建立、重視多元社區的個殊性，以及維持社區防災所需資源等層面，則共同構成災害治理的穩固制度基礎。英文摘要：The effectiveness of a community self-prevention program for disaster is the key to the development of a disaster management system and is strongly associated with the fairness and justice of the sustainability of the local communities. More specifically, it is essential to investigate whether residents have the capacity to establish their autonomy and cultivate skills for community self-prevention for disaster programs. The existing literature presents a gap in theory building for understanding the transformation of forming a disaster-prevention program within a community, rather than a top-down and command and control process. By using in-depth interviews with the leaders and participants of the disaster-prevention program of the DaHo Tribe of Laiyi Township in Pingtung County, this paper identifies two key actors in the transformation process: the participation of nonprofit organizations helps to build the capacity of the local residents while the local leaders play a strategic role in power distribution among the local residents. Our findings not only contribute to the theoretical debate of the power distribution among leaders, but also highlights the potential of building multilayered institutions, participation and collaboration, self-organization and networks, and learning and innovation through the disaster-prevention program. The implications from our paper illustrate that government should adopt a governance tool that includes citizen participation in the policy implementation phase and grants civil society a higher degree of flexibility to form a bottom-up multi-level governance system that resolves concerns and issues of the local residents, such as disaster prevention and other public affairs. Finally, this paper suggests that the public sector still plays a significant role in collaborative disaster-response networks, especially in having to collaborate with NGOs and local communities in addressing various types of natural disasters; it also recommends the establishment of a community-based organization, integrating indigenous culture and knowledge, and equipping the local community with necessary skills and resources.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201909_(57).00012篇名：位置決定腦袋？政府部門系統使用者角色差異下的資料協力意向並列篇名：Where You Stand Depends on Where You Sit? A Close Look at the Government Data Collaboration among System Users with Different Information Roles作者：曾冠球(Kuan-Chiu Tseng);胡龍騰(Lung-Teng Hu);莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);張鐙文(Teng-Wen Chang);張智凱(Chih-Kai Chang)關鍵字：政府資料協力;跨機關電子資料交換;電子化跨域治理;「免書證、免謄本」系統;科技執行架構;government data collaboration;cross-agency information sharing;electronic cross-boundary governance;the no-certificate and no-transcript system;the technology enactment framework期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：57期出版年：2019中文摘要：當前諸多資訊分享的文獻，都在指認公部門推動這類計畫可能面臨的執行障礙。儘管資通科技接受的文獻已汗牛充棟，公部門跨機關電子資料交換也日益普及，但迄今為止，鮮有針對影響機關間資料協力意向進行調查之研究。縱使有的話，研究者也傾向採取「單一組織觀點」（unitary organizational perspective）來看待政府資料協力。在上述背景下，作者試圖透過次級資料的分析，針對先前五都的「免書證、免謄本」應用服務系統之機關使用者進行系統性探究。申言之，運用來自於該系統中兩組緊密相關的「資訊角色」（即資訊貢獻者與資訊受益者）所呈現之統計資料，作者試圖探究上述應用服務系統的使用者，究竟是基於何種評估與考量，而表現在政府資料協力的意向。這些受測者指出影響渠等知覺上接受上述系統的決定因素，彼此之間的知覺歧異，以及資訊角色對於協力意向所產生之差異。倘若「位置決定腦袋」，則受測者的資訊角色的確可能影響其協力意向，亦即，作為資訊貢獻者和受益者考量之因素有別。整體而言，本研究的主要貢獻在於凸顯不同機關同仁的資訊角色差異，對於協力意向所造成之影響。作者期望透過此一調查分析，而有助於增進學術與實務工作者的知識。英文摘要：Current literature and studies on information sharing are used to identify key factors in information-sharing relationships to outline the challenges faced in the public sector. Despite the abundance of IT innovation acceptance literature and the growing popularity of cross-agency information sharing in the public sector, few studies have yet investigated system users' intention toward government data collaboration. In addition, most researchers have generally taken ”a unitary organizational perspective” on government data collaboration. Against this research background, this paper samples the institutional users of ”the no-certificate and no-transcript system” in five metropolitan areas. Using survey data from two closely related roles (i.e. information providers and information receivers), the authors explore the way they perceive IT adoption pertaining to collaborative governance. These respondents identified the determinants of IT acceptance perceptions, variation in these perceptions, and the informational roles with stronger divergent views of adoption in data collaboration. Specifically, if ”where you stand depends on where you sit,” then the difference between the two related roles could account for variances in their intention toward data collaboration. The contribution of this paper is to shed light on the data collaboration perceptions of users, with two closely related roles, in different interacting organizations responding to the same system mentioned above. Overall, this paper intends to share its findings with academics and practitioners.起始頁-結束頁：39-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201909_(57).00023篇名：為何選擇就讀軍警院校？公共服務動機的角色並列篇名：Why Chooses to Join the Cadets? The Role of Public Service Motivation作者：黃婉玲(Wan-Ling Huang)關鍵字：工作保障;公共服務動機;軍警院校;職業選擇;行政管理;job security;public service motivation;Police/Military Academy;occupational choice;administrative management期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：57期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討工作保障以及公共服務動機，對台灣青年學子軍警院校的就讀選擇有何影響，並進一步分析個別公共服務動機構面的解釋力。由於不同科系的學生在公共服務動機的程度上，可能先天便存有差異，為控制學科屬性的影響，筆者針對全台灣2015學年度入學之行政管理相關科系大一新生進行問卷調查（合計共27校31系1,791位新生），並進一步將之區分為一般大學院校與軍警院校學生兩類。邏輯斯迴歸分析結果指出，工作保障仍是吸引台灣青年學子選擇就讀軍警院校的重要因素，整體公共服務動機對於軍警院校就讀選擇的解釋力則相對有限。但若進一步將公共服務動機拆解成不同構面，則可發現希望能投入公共服務的程度越高，選擇就讀軍警院校的可能性也越高；但越渴望能參與政策制定的青年學子，則越不會選擇就讀軍警院校。上述研究發現，除了能與過去公共服務動機文獻中，「吸引－選擇－留任」相關研究進行對話，也能為軍警院校學生的招募，提供實務上的建議。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate the extent to which job security and public service motivation (PSM) determines the decision to join the Cadets among youths in Taiwan. Particular attention is paid to the explanatory power of the individual dimensions of PSM. The data for this study come from a survey of 1,791 freshmen at 27 different universities in 2015 who majored in public administration. The respondents include students who attended general universities and those who attended the Police/Military Academy. Our analysis shows that job security is still an important reason attracting the youths to join the Cadets, while overall PSM has only a limited explanatory power. However, it is found that Attraction to Public Service (APS) and Attraction to Policy Making (APM) are significantly associated with the students' decisions if further dividing the concept of PSM into different dimensions. Respondents having a higher level of APS are more likely to join the Cadets, whereas those having a higher level of APM are less likely to do so. Our finding suggests that we should revisit Perry & Wise's (1990) hypothesis of attraction-selection-attrition and offers practical advice about recruitment policy for the Police/Military Academy.起始頁-結束頁：83-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201909_(57).00034篇名：從實務經驗與〈初探我國地方政府從事災害防救組織協力之動機：理論與實務的比較〉一文進行對話並列篇名：Discussing ”Searching Motivations of Local Governments in Taiwan to Conduct Disaster Management Collaborations” From Practical Perspectives作者：李香潔(Hsiang-Chieh Lee);莊明仁(Ming-Jen Chuang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：57期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：119-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201909_(57).00045篇名：理論與實務之間的交流：回應《從實務經驗與〈初探我國地方政府從事災害防救組織協力之動機：理論與實務的比較〉一文進行對話》並列篇名：The Dialogue between Theory and Practice: Response to the Critique on ”Searching Motivations of Local Governments in Taiwan to Conduct Disaster Management Collaborations: Comparisons between Theoretical and Practical Perspectives”作者：張鎧如(Kaiju Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：57期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：127-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201909_(57).00056篇名：書評：成本效益分析之變革：從政治實務觀點探討成本與效益議題並列篇名：Book Review: The Cost-Benefit Revolution: Discussing Costs and Benefits from a Practical Perspective作者：吳舜文(Shun-Wen Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：57期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：137-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201909_(57).00067篇名：集體行動觀點下的跨域合作、行動支持度感知及行動成果－以地方政府節能減碳為例並列篇名：Collective Action Perspectives on Interlocal Collaboration, Perception of Action Support and Action Outcomes: A Study of Local Government Energy Saving and Carbon Reduction Movement作者：陳思先(Ssu-Hsien Chen)關鍵字：地方政府;集體行動;節能減碳;跨域合作;行動支持度感知;local governments;collective actions;energy saving and carbon reduction;interlocal collaboration;perception of action support期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：56期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究以地方政府為分析單位，探討集體行動樣態在跨域合作機制的實踐及其對節能減碳行動成果的影響，並以地方政府對行動支持度的感知為調節變項，探討支持度感知對跨域合作與行動成果之間的干擾效果。變項數據資料蒐集來源有二種，其一以政府公開次級資料蒐集整理地方政府相關客觀資訊（包括行政院環保署低碳永續家園資訊網及各個跨域平台網站），其二以公文發送方式，請地方政府依據實況填答問卷，問卷量表工具除已進行專家效度之外，並均通過信度與效度檢定；直轄市及縣市回覆率100%（有效樣本數＝22），鄉鎮市及具公法人地位的自治區（直轄市山地原住民自治區）回覆率66.67%（有效樣本數＝136）；本研究以描述性統計、相關分析及迴歸分析進行變項之統計分析。研究結果發現，在鄉鎮市及原住民自治區層級的地方政府中，跨域合作機制的涉入，對其減碳通勤行動與降低碳足跡誘因行動的落實有顯著幫助，而其所在轄區已進行環保議題合作（於跨域平台運作）的時間（資歷／年），亦對其低碳永續家園銀級評等的得獎狀況有正向影響效果。在直轄市與縣市層級的地方政府中，跨域合作機制僅對於縣市落實降低碳足跡誘因行動有正向影響，卻對實務上低碳永續家園得獎率沒有顯著效果。至於行動支持度的感知方面，無論是在鄉鎮市／自治區層級，或是直轄市／縣市層級，都對節能減碳政策行動有幫助，亦顯現出在跨域合作與節能減碳政策行動之間的增強性調節效果。本研究歸結，我國地方政府集體行動在跨域合作機制的實踐，對節能減碳行動有幫助，尤其，當地方政府感受到民眾與團體支持態度時，其影響效果愈正面。英文摘要：Using local governments as analytic units, this research defined interlocal collaboration as a pattern of collective actions among local governments, and tried to detect the impact of the collective actions on local policy movement on energy saving and carbon reduction. Local government perception of the action support was treated as an intervening variable. Data collection was derived based on two approaches: one was from the government open data systems and websites to establish the secondary data set in this research; the other was from a general questionnaire survey to measure local government perception and identification of relevant concepts of the policy actions. The operational instruments of the measurement had already been confirmed by the reliability and validity tests. The questionnaires were delivered to local governments through the bureaucratic-official document system, and the respondents were requested to answer the questions corresponding to the empirical situation or conditions. The responsive rates were 100% of the special-city/county/city samples (with total observation=22), and 66.67% of the country/township/county-administrative-city/special-district samples (with total observations=136). The methods of descriptive statistics, pair correlations and ordinal least square regression were employed in this research. Research findings indicate that, regarding the country/township/county-administrative-city/special-district observations, the participation in interlocal collaboration could generate a positive and significant effect to carry the low-carbon commuting actions and the low-carbon footprint incentive actions. With a longer time participating in the collaboration networks, local governments experienced a better chance to win the designation of national champion among low-carbon sustainability communities. Regarding the special-city/county/city observations, though interlocal collaboration could help facilitate low-carbon footprint incentive actions, it has an insignificant effect on the ability to gain the status and awards of national champion. Perception of action support enhanced local government actions toward energy saving and environmental sustainability on each of the two levels of municipalities. Moreover, action support perception could extend the effect of interlocal collaboration on the action outcomes. To conclude, the collective actions among local governments emerge as a useful mechanism toward local actions on energy saving and carbon reduction. In particular, when local governments perceive a positive image on action support from the public, the effect of interlocal collaboration is enhanced and the action outcome is promoted.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201903_(56).00018篇名：城鎮風貌型塑整體計畫之可評估性衡量及執行評估並列篇名：An Evaluability Assessment and Implementation Evaluation of the Rural Landscape Reformation Comprehensive Project作者：莊麗蘭(Li-Lan Juang);趙永茂(Yung-Mau Chao);王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang)關鍵字：城鎮風貌;可評估性衡量;方案理論;邏輯模型;執行評估;rural landscape;evaluability assessment;implementation evaluation;program theory;logic model期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：56期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究以地方政府為分析單位，探討集體行動樣態在跨域合作機制的實踐及其對節能減碳行動成果的影響，並以地方政府對行動支持度的感知為調節變項，探討支持度感知對跨域合作與行動成果之間的干擾效果。變項數據資料蒐集來源有二種，其一以政府公開次級資料蒐集整理地方政府相關客觀資訊（包括行政院環保署低碳永續家園資訊網及各個跨域平台網站），其二以公文發送方式，請地方政府依據實況填答問卷，問卷量表工具除已進行專家效度之外，並均通過信度與效度檢定；直轄市及縣市回覆率100%（有效樣本數＝22），鄉鎮市及具公法人地位的自治區（直轄市山地原住民自治區）回覆率66.67%（有效樣本數＝136）；本研究以描述性統計、相關分析及迴歸分析進行變項之統計分析。研究結果發現，在鄉鎮市及原住民自治區層級的地方政府中，跨域合作機制的涉入，對其減碳通勤行動與降低碳足跡誘因行動的落實有顯著幫助，而其所在轄區已進行環保議題合作（於跨域平台運作）的時間（資歷／年），亦對其低碳永續家園銀級評等的得獎狀況有正向影響效果。在直轄市與縣市層級的地方政府中，跨域合作機制僅對於縣市落實降低碳足跡誘因行動有正向影響，卻對實務上低碳永續家園得獎率沒有顯著效果。至於行動支持度的感知方面，無論是在鄉鎮市／自治區層級，或是直轄市／縣市層級，都對節能減碳政策行動有幫助，亦顯現出在跨域合作與節能減碳政策行動之間的增強性調節效果。本研究歸結，我國地方政府集體行動在跨域合作機制的實踐，對節能減碳行動有幫助，尤其，當地方政府感受到民眾與團體支持態度時，其影響效果愈正面。英文摘要：This study conducted an evaluability assessment and implementation evaluation of the 'Rural Landscape Reformation Comprehensive Project” in Taiwan, mainly because the project was behind schedule, had undergone a transformation period, and had introduced new elements, such as cross-border integration and financial self-liquidation at that time. This paper aims to explore possible problems in policy design and implementation through secondary data analysis, in-depth interviews, and focus group discussions. The results include the logic model of the project, which shows the important components of the project and describes the causal relationships between them. The results also reveal some problems, such as the poor operation of the cross-border integration platform of the central government and local governments. In addition, the environmental landscape consultants of the county and city did not have the capacity to deal effectively with the planning of cross-border integration and financial self-liquidation. This study also evaluates the impact theory of the project. The results show that the short-term goals could have been achieved reasonably by the project. However, the time period of local governments' implementation was too short. So the quality of the project outputs decreased. The medium- and long-term goals were not expected to be achieved because the scope and scale of the plan were insufficient. In sum, evaluability assessment can be used to examine whether the causal relationships between the project's input, activities, output, and goals are reasonable, and then can provide policy recommendations to improve the project. As a result, it is recommended that practitioners and scholars use evaluability assessment in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：41-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201903_(56).00029篇名：影響警察鎮壓聚<U+8846>活動因素之研究並列篇名：A Study on Factors Affecting Police Repression against Protests作者：陳智昆(Jhi-Kuen Chen)關鍵字：警察;抗議;鎮壓;自利;威脅;police;protest;repression;self-interest;threat期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：56期出版年：2019中文摘要：理論上警察屬於基層官僚，除了聽命執行任務、能創制決策之外，還擁有合法武裝，其行政行為對於民主政治具有重大意義，特別是其與聚眾活動之互動。本研究試圖處理幾個問題，第一，我國聚眾活動運作之概況；第二，警察強制鎮壓行為之內容；以及第三，警察強制鎮壓行為與聚眾活動之互動關係。國內較少利用大樣本及量化技術探討警察處理聚眾活動之研究，而本研究以基層官僚理論及威脅途徑為立論基礎，以二手分析法取材大量新聞報導資料，使用邏輯迴歸分析所得數據。結果顯示，2005至2013年間3,088件聚眾活動事件樣貌，以發生於臺北市為大宗、多數有組織參與其中；各式群眾暴力行為出現比率大多不到一成，而言語暴力、製造聲響行為達到三成；極少案例有人受傷，無人死亡。警察強制鎮壓行為以警告群眾、清淨現場為主；較少攻擊、破壞、或處罰之行為。最後，當抗議者可能危及抗議對象高層的人身安全或出現暴力行為時，將增強警察使用強制鎮壓行為的可能性。英文摘要：In theory, members of the police force act as street-level bureaucrats. They implement, make decisions, and use weapons while performing their duties. It is very important to think about the meaning of police administrative behavior in democratic politics, and in particular the interaction between the police force and protests. This study attempts to understand protest outlines, the content of police repression, and the interaction between police repression and protests. Few domestic studies have examined the police's handling of protests that made use of big samples and quantitative analyses. This study is based on street-level bureaucracy theory and threat approach studies for designing variables, collects and processes huge amounts of newspaper coverage, and then does secondary analysis and logistic regression. The main results are as follows: First, major cases took place in Taipei City and major cases had one or more organizations involved in 3,088 protest event cases from 2005 to 2013. Many kinds of mass violent behavior appeared in fewer than 10% of the cases. But disputes and noise-creating behavior occurred in more than 30% of the cases. Few persons were hurt and no one died. Second, members of the police preferred to warn the persons against taking part in protest activities or preferred to leave nobody in the protest fields rather than implement actions of attack, destruction, or punishment on the protesters. Lastly, the police are likely to implement repressive measures against protests if the masses encounter the protest objects or engage in violent behavior.起始頁-結束頁：83-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201903_(56).000310篇名：政府資料開放與資料管理並列篇名：Open Government Data and Data Management作者：許志義(Jyh-Yih Hsu);王筑莙(Chu-Chun Wang);柳育林(Yu-Lin Liu);許懷元(Hwai-Yuan Hsu)關鍵字：政府資料開放;個案研究法;數據經濟;資料格式;智慧政府;open government data;case study method;data economy;data formats;smart government期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：56期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文旨在探討目前政府開放資料所面臨的問題，以及政府開放資料之推動策略與資料管理可行作法，期望政府各項施政資訊及其開放資料被善加運用，提升數據經濟價值。全文結構如下：一、簡述政府開放資料內涵，並回顧國內外相關政策推動歷程，探討我國政府開放資料問題之所在；二、採用個案研究法，以「交通部國道高速公路電子收費」（Electronic Toll Collection，ETC）及內政部不動產實價登錄批次開放資料為例，探討該機關如何推行開放資料及其相關措施，並將民間資訊公司運用該開放資料開發應用軟體，擴增附加價值之成功案例；三、根據相關文獻及政府開放資料模範單位個案研析，分別探討政府開放資料執行面、組織面、法規面及技術面之推動策略與資料管理可行作法。四、歸納本文主要發現，提出政府開放資料推動策略與資料管理之改善建議，作為政府機關資料開放發展方向及創新做法之參考。英文摘要：This paper discusses the challenges faced by the Taiwan government with regard to open data management. The authors propose strategies and recommendations that can be utilized by the government to promote the use of open data and increase the economic value of open data. In this study, first, the introduction of open government data is briefly presented, followed by a historical review of several foreign and domestic open government data applications; the potential challenges related to open government data are also discussed. In the second part of this study, two cases of successful open data application in Taiwan are examined to show how open government data can be formatted, released, and used for analysis by the public and private sectors: the Electronic Toll Collection Open Data and the Real Estate Transaction Open Data by the Ministry of Interior. Then, based on these case studies and the related literature on open data, we discuss the strategies for successful open government data management from the standpoints of implementation, organization types, regulations, and technology. Finally, the conclusions and policy recommendations are presented for future open data innovation and development in Taiwan government agencies.起始頁-結束頁：131-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201903_(56).000401篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：「賢能政治」才有良善的政治領袖？－從韋伯的觀點省思「中國模式」並列篇名：Only ”Meritocracy” Brings in Good Leaders? Reflections on the ”Chinese Model” from Weber's Perspective作者：楊尚儒(Shang-ju Yang)關鍵字：領袖選拔;賢能政治;中國模式;民主;Weber;selection of leaders;Meritocracy;China Model;democracy;Weber期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Daniel A. Bell認為現今西方自由民主模式並無法有效地解決領袖選拔（Fuhrerauslese）的問題，因而常會選擇出不適當或平庸的政治領導者。相對於此，他從中國現有的共產黨領導者甄補機制中，抽取出一套他認為可以和西方民主相抗衡、並且可以解決後者之缺陷的「中國模式」—賢能政治。值得注意的是，在Bell對於賢能政治的討論中，雖然有引述Max Weber對於政治領導的描述，但他卻忽略了Weber在一戰期間及戰後談及時政的著作。在其中，Weber不僅強烈批評威廉時代的非民主政體、反對以專業官僚為基礎的統治，更抨擊藉由訴諸民族性為自身政治體制辯護的文人言論。同時Weber也強調，德國必須要儘快走向西方式的議會民主制，才能選舉出負責任且具領袖能力與魅力的政治領導者，換言之，只有議會才能是領袖選擇的中心。在這個意義上，Bell和Weber恰恰構成了兩種不同且相對立的政治模式。而Bell自己的「中國模式」，實則也被他所引述的Weber，後者對當時德國政治體制的批評所質疑與挑戰。英文摘要：Daniel A. Bell argues that the current Liberal Democracy is not a sufficient mechanism for leader-selection (Fuhrerauslese), bringing often inappropriate or mediocre leaders. He therefore advocates a Chinese model of Political Meritocracy featured in the leader-selection mechanism of the Chinese Communist Party. He believes that this competing model to the Western Democracy may fix the deficiency of the latter. Despite the fact that Bell does quote Max Weber's description of political leadership in his discussion of Meritocracy, he neglects Weber's publications during and after the War World I in which Weber strongly criticizes the non-democratic regime in William's era and the professional-bureaucratic-based governing. Weber also condemns the ”literati” who defend the political system of the time by appealing to nationality; he emphasized that Germany must implement Parliamentary Democracy as soon as possible in order to select a political leader with responsibility, leadership and charisma. In other words, only the Parliament should be the center of leader-selection. In this sense, Bell and Weber stand for two distinct and opposite political models.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：歐洲議題政治化現象之分析並列篇名：Analysis of Politicization of EU Issues作者：賴昀辰(Yun-chen Lai)關鍵字：政治化;正當性;全球治理;民主赤字;歐盟;politicization;legitimacy;global governance;democracy deficit;EU期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文探討歐洲議題近期出現的政治化現象。傳統上國際事務屬於技術官僚與政治菁英主導的政治領域，然而隨著全球化現象帶來的國際合作範圍擴大及國際組織的公共權威上升，公眾對於全球治理的政策關注度近年來逐漸提高，國際合作與全球治理議題出現了「政治化現象」，而這樣的現象在歐洲尤為明顯。全球治理的政治化現象來自於反全球化思潮主張全球治理制度失能，因為全球化使部分人的利益受損，而當代制度無法妥善解決利益受損的分配問題；另一方面，改善制度失能的政治擴權被續而批評缺乏民主正當性，於是在兩者交互作用下，公眾對全球化現象關注度不斷提高。制度失能及政治擴權的議題經過「政治機會框架」的作用，包括政黨競爭、媒體報導等，出現公眾意識、公眾動員、意見極化等政治化結果。政治化帶來的影響包括結構化政治衝突、使議題轉往正當性辯論，以及改變合作路徑等，使政策議題由政治菁英主導的專業技術性思考轉往公眾以「正當性」為出發點的價值性辯論，這樣的結果是當前的全球治理面臨來自公眾的挑戰，為國際合作帶來限制。本文以歐洲議題為例探討上述政治化機制，主張在政治化現象下，全球治理須正視國際政治制度的民主赤字問題，並擴增公眾參與的管道，政策方能順利推行。英文摘要：This essay explores the politicization phenomenon that the EU politics faces. International relations is widely seen as a social realm dominated by executives and technocrats. However, public awareness towards international affairs has risen in years due to globalization which brings the mismatch between function and form, and even enlarges political competence of international cooperation and public authority of international organization. This phenomenon is especially strong in Europe. The politicization of global issue comes from the anti-globalism wave which argues that globalization damages the interests of underprivileged groups, whose welfare could not be protected under current institutions. Furthermore, politicians try to solve the institutional problem by enlarge institutional competence but often neglect democratic legitimacy, that further increase public awareness on global issues. The consequences of politicization include structuring political conflicts, legitimacy debate, and change the course of cooperation. This research focuses on European issues to observe the phenomenon mentioned above, and argue that global governance must face the democracy deficit problem of international political regime and enlarge the channels for public participation. Otherwise, global governance would face problem of enlarging public challenges.起始頁-結束頁：39-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：民主創新與公共價值創造的實踐－以臺灣都會區參與式預算為例並列篇名：The Practice of Democratic Innovation and Public Value Creation: The Case of Participatory Budgeting in Five Municipalities in Taiwan作者：傅凱若(Kai-jo Fu)關鍵字：民主創新;公共價值;公民參與;參與式預算;Democratic innovation;public value;participatory budgeting;citizen involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣自2014年的縣市首長選舉後，有許多都會首長紛紛採納參與式預算（participatory budgeting, PB）來回應選民，這種都市治理的創新模式，於2015年陸續在各地方擴散開來相繼舉辦，蔚為風潮。這種新型態的公民參與主要發生在公民與行政官僚互動介面上，不僅帶來治理結構的改變，更創造了治理的正當性，達到民主的結果。然而，理論與實務上的運作常常有段落差，因為並非所有的公民參與過程都是平等的。也就是說公民參與的品質往往需要良善的規劃，在過程中運用技巧和程序的設計以達成治理的目標，因此，如何運用創新的參與機制達到民主的結果，在過程中創造何種公共價值是相當重要的議題。本文聚焦在行政機關和議會為主所啟動的參與式預算，藉此深入剖析五大都會區包括臺北、新北、桃園、臺中以及高雄舉辦的過程，透過次級資料分析、參與觀察，及深度訪談等方式，了解PB這種參與機制如何在臺灣的脈絡下被採用，設計和執行過程，並且進一步分析涵容性、透明、參與的效能和正當性等公共價值如何在參與式預算的過程中被創造，持續推動和擴散，希冀回饋公共價值以及公民參與等領域的理論，並對於治理實務有所貢獻。英文摘要：Participatory budgeting (PB) has recently garnered considerable attention in Taiwan since the election of county and city mayors in the country in 2014. This new initiative of democratic governance has been implemented in most municipalities and local communities across Taiwan. This new type of citizen participation mainly occurs in the interface between citizens and bureaucrats. It not only brings about changes in the governance structure but also creates the legitimacy of governance and achieves the goals of democracy. However, theoretical and practical operations often appear as differences because not all citizen involvement processes are equal. The quality of citizen participation frequently requires good planning, using techniques and procedures in the process to achieve governance goals. Therefore, how to use innovative participation mechanisms to achieve democratic results and what kind of public value to create in the process are major issues. Focusing on the PB initiated by municipal governments and congressmen including in Taipei, New Taipei, Taoyuan, Taichung, and Kaohsiung, this paper examines the PB implementation processes in the five major metropolitan areas. Based upon several data sources, including personal involvement of PB programs, field trips and in-depth interviews, the aims of this paper are to discover how the PB is adopted and its design and implementation process in the local context. This study further analyzes how public values, such as inclusiveness, transparency, effectiveness of participation, and legitimacy, are created in the process of PB, and continue to promote and diffuse. As such, this paper will elucidate the contributing factors that can foster public value creation and citizen involvement. On the basis of this research, practical implications and recommendations will be provided.起始頁-結束頁：93-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：迎魂歸鄉－如何在各鄉鎮談「白色恐怖」的一點筆記並列篇名：Welcome Spirits Home: Notes About Talking ”White Terror” in Villages and Towns作者：林傳凱(Chuan-kai Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：直到今天，許多民眾仍然認為「白色恐怖」相關敏感，容易導致不同族群的對立。即便從檔案中，我們可以確定約有45%的政治犯屬於「外省人士」，但這種刻版印象仍揮之不去，成為討論相關議題時的重要阻礙。另一種刻版印象也很常見，認為政治犯大多數是高知識分子，而政治案件集中在大學林立的城市地帶。反之，一些民眾進而認定自己的故鄉安靜、偏僻，與這段歷史離的很遠，沒有探索的必要。這種印象也是誤解。例如1950年代的案件中，涉案者大多左傾，活動範圍則深入各地的工廠與農村。又好比1948年後軍事機關林立（例如空軍官校、海軍官校、陸軍官校、海軍總司令部……）的高雄，則有許多軍人涉案。無論如何，政治犯多為「讀書人」或集中於城市的印象，也與事實存在差距。即便如此，無可諱言，這些印象終究主導了大多民眾的認知框架，進而影響他們想像現實（reality）與回應這段歷史的態度。而這些印象，在沒有建立社會溝通的前提下，也很難通過純粹的學術研究加以破除。那麼，該怎麼在這些刻版印象阻礙下進行對話？跟誰談？在哪談？談甚麼？談論後帶來甚麼改變？這些問題，便是我在這裡試圖回應的問題。本文架構如下：（1）介紹何謂「白色歷史鄉鎮化」；（2）三個實踐案例；（3）結論，探討不同敘事策略對促進對話的助益。起始頁-結束頁：143-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：書評：How Dictatorships Work: Power, Personalization, and Collapse〔獨裁政治如何運作－權力鞏固、個人化及政權危機〕by Barbara Geddes, Joseph Wright, and Erica Frantz〔芭芭拉．蓋德斯、約瑟．萊特、埃莉卡．弗朗茲〕並列篇名：A review of How Dictatorships Work: Power, Personalization, and Collapse by Barbara Geddes, Joseph Wright, and Erica Frantz作者：陳方隅(Fang-yu Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：157-163資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：世界民主大事紀：2019年7－9月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: July-September 2019期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：165-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：制度設計與實際運作－總統兼任黨魁之探討並列篇名：A Study of President Doubling as Party Chairperson from the Perspectives of Institutional Design and Actual Operation作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-chiao Su)關鍵字：總統制;半總統制;憲政體制;總統;黨魁;政黨總統化;presidentialism;semi-presidentialism;constitutional system;president;party chairperson;party presidentialization期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：我國自2000年首度政黨輪替以來，陳水扁、馬英九、蔡英文等總統在其任期中都曾一度兼任與不兼任黨主席，顯見總統是否兼任黨主席是一個不易處理的政治議題。本文試圖從制度設計與實際運作這兩種角度分別探討總統兼任黨魁的議題，並將研究視野擴及世界上其他具有直選總統的國家（即總統制與半總統制國家）。一方面就制度設計的層面而言，本文擬探討的是，在總統身為實權元首的總統制與半總統制國家中，總統兼任黨魁是否符合這兩種憲政體制所講求的權力分立原則？此問題的探討屬於規範層面的分析。另一方面就實際運作的層面而言，本文擬探討的核心問題是，在全世界總統制與半總統制國家中，總統兼任黨魁是否為民主國家憲政運作的常態？此問題的探討屬於經驗層面的分析。關於總統兼任黨魁的議題，目前學界在制度設計層面的研究相當稀少，在實際運作層面的研究則多聚焦於我國本土經驗，極少進行跨國分析。本文試圖同時兼顧制度設計與實際運作層面的探討，並進行全球性的檢視；並希望透過總統兼任黨魁此一議題的探討，對總統制與半總統制的憲政運作有更深入的掌握。英文摘要：Before Taiwan's first party alternation in 2000, it is common that the president doubles as the party chairperson. Afterwards and until now, it does not seem so. The three presidents, Chen Shui-Bian, Ma Ying-Jeou and Tsai Ing-wen, all had taken and quit the party chairperson position, which might imply that the president in Taiwan always hesitates over whether to double as the party chairperson or not. In view of this, the paper aims to investigate if the president ”ought to be double” and ”is doubling” as the party chairperson from a cross-national perspective. The paper explores the two questions: on the one hand, from the perspective of institutional design, in the presidential and semi-presidential democracies where the president has the real power, does the president doubling as the party chairperson conform to the principle of ”separation of powers” which these constitutional systems require? On the other hand, from the perspective of actual operation, is the president doubling as the party chairperson a common phenomenon among all the presidential and semi-presidential countries around the world? In Taiwan, so far there have been some researches on the empirical aspect of Taiwan's president doubling as the party chairperson, but few on the cross-national analysis. This paper tries to analyze this issue from the perspectives of institutional design and actual operation, and investigate it from a global perspective, hoping to get an insight into the constitutional principles and party-government relationship in the presidential and semi-presidential systems.起始頁-結束頁：1-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：不完全契約與夥伴關係－促進民間參與公共建設個案之研究並列篇名：Incomplete Contract and Partnerships: A Case Study on Promotion of Private Participation in Infrastructure Projects作者：曾冠球(Kuan-chiu Tseng)關鍵字：不完全契約;剩餘控制權;公私合夥;促進民間參與公共建設（促參）;incomplete contracting theory;residual right of control;public-private partnership;promotion of private participation in infrastructure projects期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：經濟學家早已發展出不完全契約理論，用以分析契約無效率的成因。由於交易契約難免有所疏漏，買、賣雙方因而擁有某種裁量權，這意味著各造的決定未必能獲得對方的苟同。不完全契約衍生出一些裁量空間，致使契約各造得以做出一些可能影響彼此互動關係的裁決。遺憾的是，有關公私合夥與不完全契約理論的經驗研究仍極為罕見。既有的契約管理知識大多是以完全契約為基礎，然而，一旦我們將注意力轉移到契約條款之外，並深入到契約生命週期之中，將會因此發現：對於公、私部門管理者如何及為何運用手中握有的剩餘控制權，及其對於契約效率帶來的影響，我們所知其實十分有限。職是之故，本研究擬透過個案研究法，並運用半結構式訪談來蒐集資料，同時搭配投資契約與其他官方文件進行綜合分析。本研究致力於補充契約管理文獻既有知識的不足，同時對於公共與私人契約管理者，如何運用不完全契約、財產權理論及關係契約的洞見，以克服長期契約管理之挑戰，也試圖多提供一些見解。英文摘要：The economists develop the incomplete contracting theory to analyze how to furthest avoid the inefficiency due to contractual completeness. The contract for the exchange is incomplete so that the buyer and seller have room for discretion, which means to behave in ways the other did not fully agree to. Incomplete contracts create a zone of discretion in which both parties can make choices that influence the outcomes they both receive. Unfortunately, empirical analyses relating to PPPs and incomplete contracting theory are few. Our knowledge of contract management is largely rooted in complete contracts, yet as we move beyond contract specification and further into the contract lifecycle, we know little about how and why public and private managers exert their residual rights of control, and its potential impacts on the efficiency of contract. In this research, the author will turn to case study approach to assess current and past PPP relationships and to exact lessons for future partnerships. A semi-structured interview protocol will be developed to interview respondents. Contract documentation and supplemental documentation will also be obtained from interviewed public managers. Our expected results will contribute to the literature on contract management capacity as well as our better understanding of how public and private contract managers use incomplete contracting theory, property rights theory, and relational contracting to consciously discern and overcome managerial challenges of long-term contract in the field of PPP.起始頁-結束頁：59-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：權力平衡機制的修正失靈與啟動失靈：戰國時代的案例檢證並列篇名：Ignition Failure and the Adjustment Failure of the Balance of Power Mechanism: Case Study of the Warring States Era Practices作者：陳欣之(Hsin-Chih Chen)關鍵字：權力平衡;抗衡;戰國時代;權力平衡失靈;現實主義;Balance of Power;Balancing;Warring States Era;Failure of the Balance of Power;Realism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：國際關係的權力平衡機制，本身充滿概念定義模糊與高度的理論化缺陷。國際社會的霸權起伏，彰顯權力平衡機制失靈（failure of balance of power mechanism）的獨特現象，霸權更迭的論點，更構成權力平衡機制重複失靈的理論挑戰。本文首先回顧國際關係研究對權力平衡理論的質疑，擬超越美歐國際關係理論的思維窠臼，重新認識權力平衡機制的運作動因與面貌。其次省察東亞戰國時期合縱連橫實踐，以及出現一統帝國的客觀事實，探索權力平衡機制失靈的現象。本文結論以為，國際體系存在權力平衡機制啟動失靈與權力平衡機制修正失靈；探究權力平衡失靈，可以提升吾人對於目前國際體系權力轉換的理解與認識。英文摘要：The concept of the Balance of Power theory in the international relations paradigms is full of theoretical defaults in terms of the concept's definition. The hegemonic transition in the international community exhibits the phenomenon of the failure of the Balance of Power mechanism. The power shifting arguments also constitute theoretical challenges of continuous failure to the Balance of Power mechanism. After reviewing questions related to the Balance of Power theory in International Relations studies, this paper intends to first go beyond the Euro-American conceptual constraints that have haunted IR studies to understand the dynamics and the images of the Balance of Power mechanism based on a different approach. It furthermore attempts to explore the phenomenon of the Balance of Power failure after observing the formation of alliances in China's Warring States Era and the fact that the Chinese empire had been repeatedly founded in the East Asia region. The article concludes by stating that there has been both an ignition failure as well as an adjustment failure in relation to the Balance of Power mechanism in the international system. Further exploring this Balance of Power failure will enhance our understanding of the shifting of international power.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201912_23(2).00012篇名：台灣民<U+8846>的黨性極化及其對民主態度的影響並列篇名：The People's Partisan Polarization and Its Influence on the Attitudes toward Democracy in Taiwan作者：蕭怡靖(Yi-Ching Hsiao)關鍵字：政治極化;黨性極化;極化的測量;民主評價;民主信念;political polarization;partisan polarization;measurement of polarization;evaluation of democracy;democratic beliefs期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：關於政治極化的討論，過去文獻從兩個取向進行分析，一是以民眾在意識型態或議題立場上的距離分布來測量，另一種則是從民眾對於政黨的情感反應來檢視。但不論是從哪一種取向來分析，政治極化對於民主政治運作的影響，都存在正反不同的論述。本文以台灣政治運作為背景，認為民眾的政治極化存在於情感上的黨性對立，而這種黨性極化恐會對台灣民主政治的實務運作產生負面評價，甚至動搖民眾的民主信念。為此，本文利用民意調查的方式，從社會認同理論出發，以社會距離的概念測量民眾的黨性極化，並檢測黨性極化是否對民主運作評價及民主信念產生負面影響。研究發現，以社會距離測量黨性極化具備信度與效度，且多數國民黨及民進黨認同者確實存在情感上的黨性極化，尤其，國民黨認同者的極化程度明顯高於民進黨認同者。此外，民眾的黨性極化雖然會對民主政治的運作評價存在負面影響，所幸並不會動搖民眾心中的民主信念，這對台灣民主政治的運作雖是正向訊息，但為求民主政治運作順暢，也應避免情感上黨性極化的持續升高。英文摘要：There are two approaches used to detect the people's political polarization in the literature. One is to locate people on the spectrum of ideology in order to calculate the distances among them regarding their positions on issues. The other is to measure the people's affective attitude towards parties. Regardless of which approach is adopted, the political polarization undoubtedly has both a positive and negative influence on democracy at the same time. This study argues that the affective polarization of partisanship exists among the people of Taiwan and should negatively influence the evaluation of the working of democracy, and even destabilize the people's democratic beliefs. In order to verify the above arguments based on the social identity theory, the concept of social distance was used to measure the people's partisan polarization and to detect its influence on political attitudes toward democracy. The findings of the research are as follows. First, the study both reliably and validly measures the affective polarization of partisanship based on the concept of social distance. Second, the majority of the KMT's and DPP's supporters are characterized by affective polarization, especially the KMT's supporters, whose level of polarization is higher than that of the DPP's supporters. Third, partisan polarization negatively influences the working of democracy but does not erode the people's democratic beliefs. To sum up, although this research provides a relatively positive message for the working of democracy in Taiwan, the affective polarization of partisanship among the people should be prevented from rising continually to enable the democratic processes to function smoothly.起始頁-結束頁：41-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201912_23(2).00023篇名：國土計畫相關法案的提案連署網絡分析並列篇名：Sponsorship and Cosponsorship Network Analysis on Taiwanese Legislation of Spatial Planning作者：陳世榮(Roger Shihjung Chen)關鍵字：國土計畫;提案;連署;社會網絡分析;指數隨機圖模型;spatial planning;sponsorship;cosponsorship;Social Network Analysis;Experiential Random Graph Model (ERGM)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：台灣新一波國土計畫相關法案於2015年通過，為觀察環境相關的立法決策，本研究針對國會議程設定，以提案連署網絡為對象，分析立委參與的影響因素。著眼國土計畫法案的政策特性，本文結合網絡「行動者－關係」效應，從利益、政黨、認知與網絡結構等面向提出分析與解釋。研究發現，相較於公共利益召喚，基於地方利益所整合的共識更能驅策立委集體行動。遺憾的是，在提案連署網絡中跨黨結盟並未能成形，只有黨內合作主導提案支持關係。不過，本文分析證實提案人確實擁有較周延的調適認知，委員會資深制度已能確保專業影響力，網絡中的互惠與開放結構也頗為顯著，這些都有利於驅動國土計畫法案的議程設定。以上已深化吾人對國土計畫立法決策的瞭解，可做為未來實務與研究的參考。英文摘要：In 2015 three pieces of legislation were passed, which lays down a set of legal foundations for Taiwan's spatial planning. To shed light on the decision making of the relevant legislation, this article focuses on the congressional agenda setting, in which sponsoring and cosponsoring networks among legislators are analyzed to clarify the factors affecting legislators' behaviors and interactions. In response to the policy characteristics of national spatial planning, this paper applies social network analysis with its ”actor-relation” concepts to examine four driving factors that most likely underlie the decisions of legislators, including interest, party, cognition and network structure. The results of the study reveal that legislative collaborative actions in ”sponsoring-cosponsoring networks” are more likely to occur when an integration of local interests emerges rather than a call for common interest. While a cross-party coalition does not appear in the sponsoring-cosponsoring networks, intraparty cooperation dominates the interactions of bill support. It is founded that the sponsors possess more extended ”adaptation” cognition, the seniority system of committee have strengthened legislative professionalism, and ”reciprocity” and ”transitivity” are both dominant types of subgroups within the networks, which all forge the driving forces toward collective actions for the agenda setting. These research findings deepen our knowledge of the relevant legislative decision-making and are deemed to facilitate future research and practice regarding Taiwanese spatial planning and land use.起始頁-結束頁：87-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201912_23(2).00034篇名：中國援助與非洲石油：石油生產與價格的效果並列篇名：China's Aid and Rich Oil in Africa: Effects of Production and Prices作者：平思寧(Szu-Ning Ping)關鍵字：中國援助;非洲;國有企業;石油;安哥拉模式;China's aid;Africa;state-owned entrepreneurs (SOEs);oil;Angola model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：中國於改革開放後的迅速成長，使得中國的國際角色漸漸由受援國轉變為援助國，而中國大陸在能源上的缺口，以及非傳統的援助方式，引起國際社會對於中國援助動機的質疑。有鑑於中國對於能源需求孔急，以及對於石油價格的敏感度高，本文利用「全球中國官方資助資料庫」（AidData's Global Chinese Official Finance Dataset 2000-2014, Version 1.0）所建立的縱橫斷面資料（time-series and cross-section data），檢驗兩個假設：第一，非洲的石油生產與中國對非援助有正面的影響；第二，石油價格與中國對非援助呈現正相關？作者以「二元勝算對數模型」（binary logit model）以及「隨機效應模型」（random-effect model）檢驗2000∼2014年中國對54個非洲國家的援助，統計結果證實了本文的兩個假設。另外，雖然中國援助的金額與石油具有密切關係，但是中國給予非洲國家援助的金額，同樣地考慮當地的經濟情況，給予較為貧窮的國家更多的金援，而統計上，中國也沒有傾向給予威權國家更多的援助。英文摘要：As a new but popular donor, China has taken on more responsibilities for development in poor countries, especially in Africa. However, due to the energy shortage and non-traditional aid policies in China, international society believes that such benevolent behavior is just a means of gaining easy access to oil resources in the region. By using a new dataset, AidData's Global Chinese Official Finance Dataset (2000-2014, Version 1.0), this paper examines whether China's aid is related to African countries' oil production using panel data. In addition, the author also argues that the world oil price level affects China's decisions regarding aid because in addition to its national priority of pursuing energy, China's aid is predominantly delivered by dual-role state-owned entrepreneurs (SOEs) that not only implement government policies to maintain national energy security but who also endeavor to maximize their profits. Oil prices matter because high oil prices harm China's energy security and the benefits of its SOEs as well. The author tests these hypotheses among 54 African countries (2000-2014) using binary logit and random effects models and the statistical results show that higher oil prices and oil production encourage more aid decisions, either with regard to the amount of aid or as to whether to provide finance or not. Finally, this paper finds that these countries' economic performances also affect China's decisions regarding the amounts of aid.起始頁-結束頁：145-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201912_23(2).00045篇名：The Chos<U+014F>njok as a Marginalized Diaspora in South Korea並列篇名：邊緣化的流散：在南韓的朝鮮族作者：李民柱(Minju Lee);崔恩鳳(Eunbong Choi)關鍵字：Chos<U+014F>njok;migration;marginalized diaspora;transformative national identity;Overseas Koreans Act;朝鮮族;移民;邊緣化的流散;變化的民族認同;在外同胞法期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：This paper examines the situation of the Chos<U+014F>njok (Korean Chinese) in South Korea. We developed the term marginalized diaspora, which we define as a diasporic group that has experienced marginalization from the local people or government after migration. The Chos<U+014F>njok is a marginalized diaspora with distinct characteristics in terms of diasporic return. In this paper, marginalized diaspora is used to describe how the Chos<U+014F>njok have suffered economic, social, and political marginalization in South Korea. In addition, we discuss how the institutions and legal system are apathetic toward the Chos<U+014F>njok, mass media present negative representations, and the Chos<U+014F>njok's fragmented identities appear as a result of institutional underdevelopment and the rapid spread of a negative public image. Consequently, we conclude with the suggestion that the present marginalized situation of the Chos<U+014F>njok in South Korea must be reexamined.英文摘要：本文探討了在韓朝鮮族的現狀，並構想出「邊緣化的流散」這個概念。最後，本文將呼籲社會重新審視韓國的現狀。是指一個僑胞群體在移民後被當地社會（居民或政府）邊緣化的現象。從流散朝鮮族的回歸來看，朝鮮族具有明顯的「邊緣化的流散」特徵。本文將「邊緣化的流散」這個概念用於描述朝鮮族在韓國經歷的政治、經濟和社會邊緣化現象。同時，本文還討論了立法機構如何對朝鮮族漠不關心，大眾媒體如何對其負面描述，以及因體制不完善和負面形象的快速傳播造成的朝鮮族分裂的民族認同。最後，本文建議大家重新審視在韓朝鮮族的邊緣化現狀。起始頁-結束頁：197-237資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201912_23(2).00056篇名：事業廢棄物治理模式之困境與契機：旗山農地汙染案為例並列篇名：Predicaments and Opportunities for Industrial Waste Governance: The Case of Agricultural Land Pollution in Qishan District作者：范玫芳(Mei-Fang Fan);邱智民(Chih-Ming Chiu)關鍵字：治理;事業廢棄物;公民參與;新科學政治社會學;在地知識;governance;industrial waste;new political sociology of science;public participation;local knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：事業廢棄物治理牽涉違法棄置不易建立危害因果關係，以及違法行為在法規適用上的爭論。本文以高雄旗山農地廢爐渣汙染爭議為個案，採取「新科學政治社會學」分析途徑，探究事業廢棄物治理所牽涉各層級政府單位與組織之間的權力運作，以及科學知識、規則與權力之間如何交織成動態且複雜的網絡。個案凸顯權力結構和資源不對等的問題，以及事業廢棄物治理的困境。居民發現高雄市旗山區圓潭池內因轉爐石級配料回填造成生物大量死亡且發出難聞氣味。環保局宣稱土壤檢測結果為沒有污染，而農委會農糧署檢測發現水質具強鹼性，且土壤重金屬超過土壤污染管制標準。政府單位對於轉爐石究竟歸誰管有不一致的說法；業者聲稱轉爐石乃煉鋼過程中的「副產品」，不適用「廢棄物清理法」。地方居民組成自救會並結盟公民團體展開一連串公民行動，包括：召開記者會、陳情抗議、環境監測與法庭訴訟，不僅形塑政策論述與科學知識生產，同時影響法規修正。本文展示事業廢棄物違法棄置的複雜網絡、規則重新制定與權力圖像轉換的動態性；在地知識與公民行動結盟在打造新的廢棄物治理模式扮演關鍵角色。英文摘要：Government agencies often face the problem of clarifying causal relationships and regulatory applications in industrial waste disputes. This article uses the case of slag waste pollution on Qishan farmland in Kaohsiung City to explore the dynamic interaction process of power and scientific knowledge production among various levels of government agencies and related organizations. This article adopts the new political sociology of science (NPSS) framework to examine how scientific knowledge, rules and power interact with each other. The case highlights the problems associated with an unequal power structure and resources as well as deficiencies in current industrial waste regulations. Residents found that the Yuantan pool in Qishan was backfilled by slag, which caused a large number of organisms to die and emit an unpleasant smell. The local EPA claims that the soil test results indicated that there was no pollution. However, the Agriculture and Food Agency found that the water quality was strongly alkaline, in excess of the EPA's standard for soil pollution regulations. Different government agencies have competing opinions as to who should take responsibility. The industry claims that slag is a ”byproduct” in the steelmaking process, and therefore the Waste Disposal Act does not apply to it. Following a series of protests and campaigns, local residents and self-help associations engaged in the production of scientific knowledge and lawsuits. Citizen participation has reshaped policy discourses and knowledge production processes, and has led to the amendment of regulatory policies. This article highlights the dynamics of the transformation of networks and power images in relation to the illegal dumping of industrial waste, as well as the crucial role played by local knowledge and citizen activism in the remaking of industrial waste goverance.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201906_23(1).00017篇名：從日本政治資金體系運作論政黨發展的侷限：以《政治資金規正法》和《政黨助成法》為主並列篇名：An Analysis of the Political Funding System to Observe the Limits to Political Party Development in Japan - the Political Funds Control Act and Political Party Subsidies Act作者：鄭子真(Tzu-Chen Cheng)關鍵字：《政治資金規正法》;《政黨助成法》;政黨條款;歷史制度論;政黨政治;Political Fund Control Law;Political Party Subsidies Act;party article;policy transfer;historical New Institutionalism;politics of political parties期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：戰後盟軍統治時期日本採用《政治資金規正法》、《公職選舉法》等推動政黨政治的發展，然其政黨政治最大特色在於自民黨的長期執政。時至90年代，日本為清新政治、打破自民黨長期執政下金權政治的窠臼，新增《政黨助成法》、《政黨法人化賦予法》等，進行政黨政治的改革。本文旨在探討上述現行法律之政黨條款運作之下出現矛盾的定義，加上政黨競爭激烈產生制度間矛盾的局面，藉由檢驗日本《政治資金規正法》和《政黨助成法》的政黨條款，明瞭前法主要政黨數日增、但政治獻金卻逐漸下降，而後法卻是主要政黨數減少、但政黨卻深度倚賴補助款的迥異結果。英文摘要：Japan has adopted the Political Funds Control Act and the Public Offices Election Act to promote the development of party politics since the GHQ period. In Japan, the distinctive characteristic of party politics has been the LDP (Liberal Democratic Party), which was in power for a long time. In the 1990s, in order to make up for the political deficiencies and resolve the problems of money/power-related politics due to the LDP having been in power for a long time, Japan adopted the Political Party Subsidies Act and the Juridical Person Grant for Political Parties Receiving Public Funding Act. This paper attempts to explore the contradictory definitions among the above party law articles and the strong competition between the parties which have resulted in institutional deadlock. By analyzing the current situation regarding the Political Funds Control Act and the Political Party Subsidies Act in Japan, we can ascertain the effectiveness of the Political Funds Control Act in enabling the number of major political parties to increase while donations decrease. The effectiveness of the Political Party Subsidies Act has been seen in the decrease in the number of major political parties, although the parties now greatly depend on party subsidies.起始頁-結束頁：43-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201906_23(1).00028篇名：世代之間的正義與分配：年齡與經濟世代對薪資公平正義認知並列篇名：Justice and Redistribution among Cohorts: Perceptions of Just Earnings among Age and Economic Cohorts作者：張一彬(Yi-Bin Chang)關鍵字：年齡;經濟世代;交叉分類隨機效果模型;分配正義;薪資公平正義認知;age;economic cohort;cross-classified random-effects model;redistributive justice;perception of just earnings期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文對於世代的劃分是著眼於在不同的經濟發展階段成年的民眾，運用薪資公平正義認知的經驗性資料來檢視世代之間對分配正義的認知。方法上本文運用交叉分類隨機效果模型（cross-classified random effects model），來緩解因年齡與世代兩者高度共線關係所導致估計值失真的問題。研究發現薪資公平正義認知不但具有世代之間的差異，同時在年齡群組上也呈現出明顯的不同。其次，個人層次解釋變數的效果上，男性、有婚姻關係、高教育年限、自認為是上層社會階級、以及大陸各省市族群對自身薪資公平正義認知較高。這些傳統上屬於社會優勢族群在資源與機會的取得上具有優勢，產生的結果就直接反應在對自身薪資收入的感受。另外，薪資公平正義認知不同年齡層之間呈現出生命週期效果。20－29歲年齡層的民眾是「薪情」最不美麗的一群，30歲以後民眾才漸漸地滿意自己的薪資。相對的，不同經濟世代間的薪資公平認知呈現出兩極的發展。這樣一個世代正義的樣態有可能民眾對經濟全球化下，產業結構轉變造成薪資結構變化的反應。英文摘要：Previous empirical studies in politics used to regard people as being part of the same political cohort if they grew up in the same political context. This study argues that the concept of a political cohort is inappropriate in explaining differences in the perception of just earnings among cohorts. Given this, the concept of an economic cohort is used in this study and economic cohorts refer to those who grew up in the same economic context. Methodologically, this study utilizes the cross-classified random-effects model to scrutinize perceptions of redistributive justice among economic cohorts because this model is able to correct biased estimators caused by the severe multicollinearity between age groups and cohorts. According to the empirical results, different economic cohorts possess varying perspectives on what just earnings are, while people in different age groups also exhibit significant diversity in their perceptions of just earnings. Secondly, at the individual level, some explanatory variables such as male, marital status, a higher level of education, subjective higher social class, and ethnicity (mainlander) are more likely to regard earnings as over-rewarded. Finally, the perceptions of just earnings reflect the life cycle effect among different age groups. People aged 20 to 29 are those who are most dissatisfied with their earnings, whereas people over the age of 30 gradually become more satisfied with their rewards. In general, senior economic cohorts are more likely to regard their earnings or income as over-rewarded injustice, while junior economic cohorts exhibit a different perspective and regard their income as under-rewarded injustice. The diversity of perceptions of just earnings between senior and junior economic cohorts may be due to changes in income structure caused by economic globalization or industrial change.起始頁-結束頁：103-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201906_23(1).00039篇名：政治哲學與敘事真實：霍布斯自然狀態中的事實與虛構並列篇名：Political Philosophy and Narrative Truth: Fact and Fiction within Hobbes's State of Nature作者：柯汎禧(Fen-Shi Ker)關鍵字：利維坦;歷史敘事;歷史事實;因果關係;自然狀態;Leviathan;historical narration;historical truth;causal relationship;state of nature期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本篇論文聚焦在如何整全地解決「自然狀態的事實與虛構」之爭議。我們將透過重新整理霍布斯式自然狀態在既有討論中的爭議，指出哲學虛構、歷史真實的詮釋爭議，來自於討論者多以經驗主義式的事實，理解自然狀態概念內的經驗描述，進一步來說，透過重新建構霍布斯意義下的「事實」，霍布斯的體系得以消解哲學虛構與歷史真實的對立。最後，我們意圖探討政治哲學與敘事理論的聯繫，本文的觀點是，至少在霍布斯的框架中，自然狀態概念的作用，即是把經驗現象轉化為意義之網，從而使霍布斯得以藉由一種趨近於當代敘事理論的理論性說法，擴大政治哲學的經驗範圍與現實感。英文摘要：This thesis aims to completely resolve the controversy which refers to the state of nature between truth and fiction. By going through disputes related to Hobbes's concept of the state of nature, we attempt to point out that the foundation of interpretive controversy is derived from most interpreters applying thoughts on empiricism to understand empirical descriptions within the state of nature. Furthermore, Hobbes's system could resolve the opposition between philosophical fiction and historical truth within the state of nature through reconstructing the ”fact” from the perspective of Hobbes's context. Finally, the major purpose of this thesis is to clarify the relationship between political philosophy and narrative theory. In my opinion, the function of the state of nature is to transform empirical phenomena into a web of meaning. Hobbes consequently enlarged the empirical range and practical sense within political philosophy with narrative theory approaching a contemporary theoretical perspective.起始頁-結束頁：159-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201906_23(1).000410篇名：Consultation without Representation: How the Conservative Governments in Japan and Korea Capitalized on Labor-Inclusionary Institutions against Labor並列篇名：沒有代表的商議：日本與韓國保守派政府如何利用接納勞工的制度對付勞工作者：尹智煥(Ji-Whan Yun)關鍵字：Consultation without Representation;Corporatism;The Conservative Government;Japan;Korea;沒有代表的商議;統合主義;保守派政府;日本;韓國期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Scholars have conventionally debated whether neoliberal globalization has resulted in the breakdown of corporatism or its resilience. Beyond this dichotomy, this paper uncovers ”consultation without representation” as a new path paved by the conservative governments in Japan and South Korea (hereafter, Korea): Japan's Abe Shinzo cabinet and Korea's Park Geun-hye administration attempted to continue utilizing the format of tripartite consultation in the process of neoliberal reforms without allowing organized labor to represent its interests. This paper argues that the consultation-without- representation path originated from the deliberate strategy that conservative governments used to capitalize on labor-inclusionary tripartite institutions against labor. The governments have kept the tripartite institutions, including Japan's shingikai and Korea's Tripartite Commission, intact to avoid a legislative gridlock that an apparent offensive against corporatism may cause and, furthermore, not to compromise their efforts in moving toward a new moral hegemony over industrial society. However, they have made use of these institutions as a way to weaken the corporatist power of organized labor. Specific patterns of consultation without representation differ between Japan and Korea because the conservative governments developed specialized strategies for utilizing the tripartite institutions on the basis of unique political resources for labor movements in each country. In Japan, the Abe cabinet made use of Rengo's orientation toward policy partnership to confine labor unrest to an institutional boundary. Shingikai functioned as a container that prevented the grievances of Rengo from turning into a society-wide dissidence. Meanwhile, Korea's Park government utilized the radical ideology of labor movements to disqualify them as negotiation partners. The Tripartite Commission was used as a blockade to hinder militant labor movements from influencing the policy-making process. This paper examines the processes of the Worker Dispatch Law revisions in Japan and in Korea to corroborate the argument. This analysis indicates that the conservative rulers have found a new utility of corporatism for neoliberal reforms.英文摘要：學界對於新自由主義全球化是否會造成統合主義崩潰有不少爭論。對此，本論文提出「沒有代表的商議」之概念，並藉以來理解日本與韓國的保守派政府利用勞、資、政三方商議機制，但在排除勞運組織代表其利益的前提下，進行新自由主義改革。本論文主張「沒有代表的商議」的決策路徑，源於保守派政府蓄意利用接納勞工的制度來對付勞工的策略。日本安倍晉三政府保留了「審議會」（shingikai）、韓國朴槿惠政府保留了「三方委員會」（Tripartite Commission），其目的在於避免因為破壞統合主義而可能出現的立法僵局，同時也為了不要讓這兩個政府建構新道德霸權的努力白費。然而，這兩個政府都試圖削弱勞運在統合主義架構中的力量。日、韓的「沒有代表的商議」路徑其實並不相同，而之所以會有差異，主要是因為兩國政府對於其本國勞運所擁有的特殊政治資源，發展出特定的策略來利用三方商議機制。在日本，安倍政府利用「日本勞動組合總連合會」（RENGO）偏好建立政策夥伴的傾向，將勞工的不滿成功侷限在審議會運作的疆界內。在韓國，朴槿惠政府強調意識型態過於基進的勞運不具與政府談判的資格，同時利用三方委員會阻止好鬥的勞運組織影響政策制訂的過程。本文探討日、韓派遣工人法律的修正，藉以印證本文的主張，同時也發現保守派政府成功利用統合主義機制追求新自由主義改革。起始頁-結束頁：215-259資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.201906_23(1).000501篇名：什麼環境中才敢出聲？微觀、宏觀、文化、與制度途徑之「信任」對網路公民參與行為的影響並列篇名：How Do People Get the Courage to Speak Up Online? Influences of Trust on E-Participation作者：李仲彬(Chung-Pin Lee)關鍵字：信任;電子民主;網路公民參與;社會心理途徑;trust;e-participation;e-democracy;psychological approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：69期出版年：2019中文摘要：網路普及的環境中，一些看似「很多」「很大」的網路聲音，常影響到公共政策的走向。但從現有調查資料來看，多數民眾在網路上只是靜靜地當個「潛水客」，不會在網路上參與公共議題的討論、不願將自己的政治偏好顯露在網路平台上（有可能是怕被肉搜、怕被文字圍剿、或是其他原因），若依照哲學家Harbermas的觀點來看，現階段的網路世界還不是一個理想的公共議題言談空間。如何改造網路世界成為民眾願意敞開心胸發言的環境，找到影響民眾網路公共參與的因素，是理論與實務上的重要議題。過去相關研究，大多僅從科技面角度解釋民眾網路公民參與行為，本文則應用二手調查資料，結合政治學公民參與文獻建立模型，在社會結構途徑下因素（例如個人能力資源特徵）之外，聚焦於社會心理途徑下之「信任」的影響效果。資料分析結果發現，傳統社會結構因素所強調的個人特徵（如年齡、性別、與教育程度），對網路公民參與的解釋力並不如預期高，為網路民主的樂觀論點提供了希望。而公民參與理論所強調的「信任」，確實扮演了重要角色，不論是文化、制度、微觀、還是宏觀途徑所產生的信任，對於提升網路公民參與都有正向影響，其中宏觀面的制度成效認知，可以提升網民轉發公共議題資訊的意願，但若要讓網民願意投入公共議題的討論行列，必須讓其認同網路公民參與是一種社會規範責任、信任網路上的網友、信任網路上的隱私安全性與資訊正確性，更必須從未在網路上「被肉搜」或未曾有發言後「被噓」的被霸凌經驗，整合上述，必須非常「信任」網路社會。本文最後依照上述結果提出一些提升網路環境信任度的政策建議。英文摘要：The Internet has become an integral part of people's daily lives; therefore, governments are using it to collect public opinion to meet people's needs. However, the latest statistics demonstrate that online political participants are not representative of the general population, with only a small proportion of netizens engaging in public issues. Under this circumstance, increasing the willingness of e-participation is urgent for e-democracy. Most e-participation research has focused only on technology-related variables, ignoring the significance of trust-related cultural and psychological factors in e-participation models. Therefore, in this study, secondary survey data with 734 samples were analyzed to answer the following questions: Does micro-level, macro-level, institutional, or cultural ”trust” affect netizens' online political participation? Which trust has the strongest effect? The current findings demonstrate that the four trust sources are all significant factors affecting e-participation, particularly the institutional, micro-level trust that arises from self-experience of being bullied or harassed online. Demographic factors (gender and education level) have only a slight impact on e-participation. This paper makes three contributions: First, we link interdisciplinary literature-from political science and technology science-to facilitate theoretical development and to reveal research and knowledge gaps. Second, we provide further understanding of how ”trust” affects e-participation. Finally, we provide some practical recommendations for improving the quality and possibility of e-democracy.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系2篇名：我國行政機關公務人力流動之初探：以跨職系流動為焦點並列篇名：Manpower Mobility in the Internal Labor Market of the Government Administration in Taiwan: An Analysis of Mobility between Class Series作者：王貿(Mao Wang);蘇偉業(Bennis Wai Yip So);賴怡樺(Yi-Hua Lai)關鍵字：公務人員制度;內部人力市場;職系;調任;社會網絡分析;存活分析;civil service system;internal labor market;class series;job transfer;social network analysis;survival analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：69期出版年：2019中文摘要：在行政機關中，公務人力流動是必然的情況，然而以往遷調相關的研究，著重公務人員個人特徵的因素，而不是工作條件的影響。本研究以職系作為工作條件的代表方式，從跨職系流動的情況，探究哪些職系的公務人員，較傾向調離原本所任之職系，從中反思各類職系之工作條件設計，以及專業養成問題，對於我國行政機關專業主義的鞏固乃至於服務品質的穩定有其重要性。為此，本研究綜整國外文官制度對於專業分工與流動之制度設計，以及我國現有職系管理的問題，利用「公務人力資料庫」之資料，首次梳理我國文官跨職系流動的情況，檢視各職系人員轉出職系的比例與職等、留任時間、初任人員轉出職系時之年資，並運用社會網絡分析技術，描繪整體職系流動之概況及相關議題，期能為遷調研究注入新思維，並提供行政機關可思精進的建言。研究發現，我國採取較為彈性之職系管理，且在中低階層人力有專業流失的疑慮，特別是技術類與稀有職系。本研究認為，我國公務人員調任過於著重「點」對「點」職系的規定，忽略「線」性的專業養成觀念。而各職系人力流動更是需進一步探究的議題，建議人事主管機關之思維應從「點」延伸到「線」，並關注各職系發展與公務人員的職涯管理。英文摘要：It is very usual to see manpower mobility among administrative agencies, but the existing studies only focus on how the factors of personal characteristics influence the mobility without regard to the factors of working conditions. Class series is one of factors of the latter. This study examines the pattern of inter-class-series transfers, identifying those class series in which the turnover rates are high. That can help review the design of working conditions of different class series and the issue of professional development. This is significant for consolidating professionalism and stabilizing service quality of the government administration in Taiwan. For this purpose, this article reviews the design of professional grouping and manpower mobility mechanisms of civil services in foreign countries and assesses the management problems of class series in Taiwan’s government. This study makes use of the official public personnel data bank to analyze the mobility pattern among class series, including the turnover rate, the length of stay, the tenure of first class-series affiliation. Social network analysis is adopted to map the pattern of mobility to shed new light on the issue. That is expected to help offer recommendations to overhaul the mechanism. This study finds that the highly flexible class-series management may lead to a professional drain in the mid-to-junior-level staff, especially for the manpower in the technical and scarce class series. This article argues that the design of professional mobility in the civil service of Taiwan only zeroes in on a point-to-point analysis, ignoring the linear aspect of professional development. Hence, this article suggests that the policy approach of the personnel authority should switch from point to line, developing a career management of civil service.起始頁-結束頁：49-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系3篇名：Culture and Corruption: The Blurring Effect of Confucian Relationalism on Legal Boundaries並列篇名：文化與貪腐：儒家關係主義對法規界線的模糊效應作者：余一鳴(Yi-Ming Yu);蔡季安(Chi-An Tsai);顏志龍(Chih-Long Yen)關鍵字：Confucian relationalism;social exchange;differential matrices;guanxi;ziji ren;mosheng ren;華人關係主義;社會交換;差序格局;關係;自己人;陌生人期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：69期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study drew a sample from Taiwan's military to investigate the effects of culture on corruption. In-depth interview data were collected from 19 Taiwanese military personnel and analyzed to examine the cognitive effects of Confucian relationalism on legal boundaries. The results of this study indicated that Confucian relationalism has a blurring effect on legal boundaries. When laws and regulations are clear, there is not much discretionary leeway and civil servants do not let private affairs interfere with their public duty when dealing with strangers while they must devise solutions to help inner circle friends and associates. When legal norms are not clear, civil servants have relatively more discretion; they might use public resources to establish relations when dealing with strangers or to strengthen existing relations when dealing with those in their inner circles. Under clear legal norms and the absence of discretionary leeway, civil servants who illegally utilize resources to satisfy their own needs normally use rationalization to resolve cognitive dissonance in order to help themselves and perform their public sector duties. Rationalization allows civil servants to step across legal boundaries, making it easier to help those in their inner circles.英文摘要：本研究主要探討文化對貪腐的影響。研究採用深度訪談的方式，蒐集19位軍人的訪談資料進行分析，以瞭解華人關係主義對公務員在法規界線的認知影響。研究結果發現，華人關係主義的確會對法規界線產生模糊效果，在法令規定清楚，沒有太多的自由裁量空間時，面對陌生人會公事公辦，而面對自己人則要設法協助解決。在法令規範不清楚時，官員有較大的裁量空間時，面對陌生人，會藉由公共資源來建立自己的關係；而面對自己人則會透過公資源來鞏固原有關係。官員在法令規範清楚，沒有自由裁量空間時，透過違法動用資源來滿足自己人的需求，通常會以幫助自己人解決問題也是在為公家解決問題，等合理化手段來化解認知失調（cognitive dissonance）所造成的心理壓力，透過合理化的手段也讓官員跨越法規界線幫助自己人變得更為容易。起始頁-結束頁：85-118資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系4篇名：公私部門轉換經驗對工作滿意度之影響：以公私部門工作差異認知為中介變項並列篇名：The Effects of Public-Private Sector Switching Experience on Job Satisfaction: Treating the Perception on Public-Private Sector Differences as the Mediator作者：董祥開(Hsiang-Kai Dennis Dong);林嚴凡(Yen-Fan Lin)關鍵字：公私部門轉換經驗;公私部門差異;工作滿意度;工作環境;工作吸引力;public-private sector switching experience;public-private sector differences;job satisfaction;work environment;job attractiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：人力於部門間轉換的現象，於當今就業市場上非常普遍。近年來，有許多國外研究發現，一個人在公、私部門間的轉換經驗會影響其工作態度，並且也會影響其他與工作相關的認知。因此，本研究之主要目的在於，探討我國公務人員的「公私部門轉換經驗」對其「工作滿意度」的影響程度，並以個人對「公私部門工作差異的認知」作為中介變項，來瞭解「部門轉換者」與「非部門轉換者」之間是否會因為對於公私部門工作各方面的認知有所不同，進而造成對工作滿意度的影響。本研究之資料來源為考試院委託執行之調查研究，研究對象為我國現職公務人員，有效回收樣本共計3,326份。經分析資料後發現，公私部門轉換經驗會顯著且負向地影響公務人員的工作滿意度；同時，一個人的「公私部門工作差異認知」在上述關係中，扮演了關鍵中介變項的角色。本研究根據上述研究結果進行討論並提出相關管理及政策建議。英文摘要：Switching jobs is a common phenomenon in the job market nowadays. In recent years, some foreign studies have shown that the experiences of switching jobs among employees could actually influence their working attitudes as well as their perceptions on various aspects of work. Therefore, this study aims at exploring the effects of sector switching on job satisfaction for our public servants, and meanwhile examining their perception on the public-private differences as the mediator. This effort is trying to understand if our public servants, either the sector-switchers or the non-sector-switchers, develop different perceptions on various kinds of work and in turn affecting their job satisfaction. Using a survey implemented by the Examination Yuan (with the current public servants being the target population and with 3,326 effective responses), this study finds that sector switching experience has a negative impact on our public servants' job satisfaction. And the perception on the public-private differences was a significant mediator for the aforementioned relationship. Policy and managerial implications are discussed in this paper accordingly.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系5篇名：青年婚育態度與創新婚育政策主觀評價之研究並列篇名：Youth Attitude and Their Subjective Evaluation on the Innovation of Marriage and Childbirth Policy作者：李俊達(Chun-Ta Lee)關鍵字：結婚;生育;青年;創新;創新政策;marriage;childbirth;youth;innovation;innovation policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來，許多國家積極研擬各項政策設計，希望達到促婚助生的效果。值得探討的是，創新的婚育政策是否能發揮政策效果，解決少子化的問題。本研究以實證調查資料進行統計分析，從差異分析的結果來看，臺灣青年在「婚育需要」上的態度，對多數的創新政策及現行政策的評價，存在顯著的差異。同時，具有婚育需要者的未婚青年，確實顯著地同意創新婚姻政策會帶來較好的預期結果，較有助於提高婚育意願。當未婚者的婚育態度越趨認為婚姻在人生過程中的重要性，則創新婚育政策將更能回應需要，未婚者對於創新政策的同意程度將越高。本研究建議，婚育態度可能是目前生育率難以提升的主要原因。未來有關創新婚育政策的規劃與設計，首要應設法改善未婚者的婚育態度，營造社會氛圍，讓民眾肯認婚育在人生過程中之重要性。英文摘要：In recent years, many countries have been actively formulating various policies, in order to encourage marriage and childbirth. It is worthwhile to probe the effect of such innovative policies in alleviating the problem of fewer offspring. Via two sample t-test analysis based on empirical survey data, the study finds that Taiwanese young people's attitude towards ”marriage and childbirth need” can lead to major difference in their evaluation of most innovative and existing policies. Unmarried youth with marriage and childbirth need tend to agree that innovative marriage policy can bring better effect and is conducive to boosting marriage and childbirth willingness. The stronger their belief in the importance of marriage/childbirth in life, the higher the capability of innovative marriage/childbirth policy in meeting their need and the higher their agreement with such policy. The study believes that the marriage/childbirth attitude of young people is the major factor blocking the increase of birthrate. Therefore, in the planning and design of innovative marriage/childbirth policy, the priority task is to improve the marriage/childbirth attitude of unmarried people, creating a social aura inducing people to recognize the importance of marriage/childbirth in life.起始頁-結束頁：49-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系6篇名：從課責觀點探討臺灣都市計畫委員會審議制度設計並列篇名：Exploring the Institutional Design of Urban Planning Commission Review System in Taiwan from an Accountability Perspective作者：黃偉茹(Wei-Ju Huang);陳瀅羽(Ying-Yu Chen)關鍵字：都市計畫委員會;課責;多重課責主體結構;Urban Planning Commission;accountability;multi-principal structure期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：都市計畫委員會審議為使都市計畫合乎正當法律程序之重要行政程序，對最終計畫內容有決定性影響。然近年都委會相關爭議不斷，公信力受到質疑。而「課責」向來為政府行政體系建制的重要考量，以避免濫權。因此本研究由課責的角度，探討現行制度加諸於都委會的課責系統，是否能滿足各界對其審議應秉持專業、客觀、中立的期待。研究結果發現，現行都委會組織規程與審議制度偏重行政課責的設計，賦予都市計畫各級主管機關首長極大的操作空間去影響所屬層級之都委會審議，依首長意志，的確能影響都委會審議的客觀中立性。但專家問卷的結果顯示，規劃界人士對於現行制度的高度認同，預期將造成制度改革的困境。因此本研究認為制度改革非一蹴可幾，需透過各界長期的溝通與討論，但短期應可透過組織規程的調整，建構都委會的多重課責主體，強化都委會的社會課責關係，弱化其行政課責，合理限縮其所屬都市計畫各級主管機關首長的管轄權限，落實多層級審查之公正性，讓都委會的功能運作更符合社會期待。英文摘要：Review of Urban Planning Commission (UPC) is a part of the legal process in Taiwan urban planning system. It plays a decisive role to determine the final content of a master or a detail plan. In recent years, however, several controversial urban planning projects have harmed the credibility of the UPC review system. People question the objectivity and impartiality of the UPC. In light of this, this study aims to explore the institutional dilemma of the UPC review system from an accountability perspective. The result shows that the institutional design does give the heads of different levels of government, who are responsible for the urban planning review affairs, considerable jurisdiction to manipulate the review result of UPC. Nevertheless, the result of expert questionnaire survey shows that planning community in Taiwan highly support present institutional design. This situation would make the reform of the institutional arrangement of UPC review system become difficult. Based on the understanding, a more pragmatic way is suggested - to adjust the accountability mechanism and to create a multi-principal structure embedded in the UPC review system. By strengthening social accountability and decreasing administrative accountability of the UPC, the jurisdiction of the heads of different levels of government can be reasonably confined and let the operation of UPC in accordance with the expectation of the society.起始頁-結束頁：81-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系01篇名：日本首相解散眾議院之研究：「七條解散」慣例的形成與分析並列篇名：The Study of the Japanese Prime Minister's Dissolution of the House of Representatives: The Formation and the Analysis of the ”Article 7 Dissolution”作者：吳明上(Wu Ming-Shan)關鍵字：政黨政治;眾議院;總選舉;解散權;吉田內閣;party politics;the House of Representatives;general election;Dissolution Power;Yoshida cabinet期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：37卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：政黨政治與政權運作一直是日本政治研究的焦點。大部分的研究是從眾議院選舉的結果，來論述政黨政治的變化，以及執政黨內部權力結構的改變，較少會追溯到首相解散眾議院的決定與影響。然而，眾議院的選舉，往往是因為首相解散眾議院後舉行的。現行憲法體制下，眾議院舉行過25次總選舉，其中24次便是解散後的選舉。在眾議院被解散的24次之中，有21次是首相直接根據憲法第7條行使解散權（七條解散）解散的。但是，吉田首相首次行使「七條解散」之際，因為憲法未有明文的規定，因而導致日本政壇發生重大的紛爭。然而，現今首相被認為可以行使「七條解散」的專屬權力，並得以自由行使。本研究的主要目的在於解釋首相行使「七條解散」的權力，在戰後的政治中，為何及如何形成政治上實踐的「慣例」。英文摘要：Party politics and political power have always been the focus of Japanese political studies. Most of the research papers discuss the changes in party politics and the changes in the internal power structure of the ruling party based on the results of the House of Representatives elections; that is, not much research centers on the decision-making process and the influence of the Prime Minister's dissolution of the House of Representatives. However, many elections are held owing to the Prime Minister's dissolution of the House of Representatives. Under the current constitutional system, the House of Representatives has held a total of 25 elections, of which up to 24 are post-dissolution elections. Among the 24 dissolutions of the House of Representatives, 21 were announced directly by the Prime Minister under Article 7 of the Constitution (Article 7 dissolution). Yet, when the Prime Minister Yoshita first announced the ”Article 7 Dissolution”, there was a major dispute in Japanese politics because the Constitution did not have explicit provisions for this action. Despite the controversy, it is now generally considered that the exclusive power of ”Article 7 dissolution” is conferred on the Prime Minister, who is thus free to exercise it. The main purpose of this study is to explain why and how the Prime Minister exercises ”Article 7 Dissolution” power in post-war politics, making it a convention in political practice.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：從台灣看東亞：台灣民眾東亞社會評價的空間推論並列篇名：The Spatial Inference of the Sociotropic Evaluations for East Asia作者：林昌平(Chang-Ping Lin)關鍵字：東亞;社會評價;最大熵方法;空間聚集;East Asia;sociotropic evaluations;maximum entropy method;spatial clustering期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：37卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文透過最大熵空間推論方法的應用，探討台灣民眾對於東亞社會評價之空間推論與探索，主要目的是希望說明台灣民眾對於東亞社會之總體生活品質以及個體對人尊重程度評價的區域分布狀態，並探討將最大熵方法此項空間推論分析工具，應用在地區比較研究的優缺點。其中，就社會評價的衡量而言，本文以對該社會的生活品質，以及該社會對人的尊重程度為代理變數；前者衡量該社會總體的生活條件，後者則衡量對該社會其他個體的信任程度，故此兩項代理變數，可綜合地衡量台灣民眾對於該國家社會的評價程度。實證分析上，本文以東亞區域中的台灣、日本、韓國以及中國大陸進行探討，其調查資料蒐集的時間點為2011年，調查對象為台灣民眾，所使用的空間單元為鄉鎮市區之行政區劃。分析結果顯示，無論是對總體社會生活品質亦或對個體對人尊重程度，其空間推論結果皆呈現西部高於東部、都會地區出現高評價的機率值較大，顯示因直接或間接社會接觸較高的地區將提升其民眾對外評價之程度，符合社會接觸理論的討論。此外，其預測機率值出現空間聚集的狀況。說明當一鄉鎮市區對社會生活品質（或是對人尊重程度）評價較高時，其鄰近鄉鎮市區對社會生活品質（或是對人尊重程度）的評價亦相對較高。至於就總體環境因子的貢獻程度而言，貢獻度最高的環境因子為代表現代化發展程度的人口數與社會經濟發展程度，緊接著為代表族群接觸分類的原住民集中區、2008年國民兩黨總統選舉得票率，以及代表教育程度的不識字率。整體而言，本文透過不同地區台灣民眾的評價與態度，希冀以不同的研究視野，來觀察台灣民眾對東亞區域的理解與評價。英文摘要：This paper introduces a new spatial inferential tool, the maximum entropy method, to expand the application of spatial analysis with micro-level survey data. The most important attribute of the maximum entropy method is to measure the spatial information with sample location and environmental factors. Therefore, this study applies the maximum entropy method to measure the Taiwanese evaluation of society for East Asia, including Taiwan, Japan, Korea and China with the sample locations and environmental factors. The empirical results shown in this paper reveal that there are spatial heterogeneity and spatial clustering for the evaluation of society by the Taiwanese people. The spatial distribution of the sociotropic evaluation is higher in western regions of Taiwan than eastern regions. Finally, the contribution of environmental factors from high to low are the population, the social-economic development level, indigenous areas, the presidential election vote rate of the KMT and DPP in 2008 and the illiteracy rate.起始頁-結束頁：41-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系3篇名：框架公約聯盟與菸草控制框架公約：跨國倡議網絡的個案分析並列篇名：Framework Convention Alliance and the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control : A Transnational Advocacy Network Case Study作者：吳國偉(Kuo-Wei Wu);林德昌(Teh-Chang Lin)關鍵字：非政府組織;菸草控制框架公約;跨國倡議網絡;世界衛生組織;框架公約聯盟;non-governmental organization;Framework Convention on Tobacco Control;transnational advocacy network;World Health Organization;Framework Convention Alliance期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：37卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：自1990年代以來，菸草疾病對人類健康已造成重大的威脅，其影響亦從已發展國家擴散到發展中國家。若無法有效採取策略的話，估計在2030年會造成每年約一千萬人的死亡。因此世界衛生組織開始思考從一個全球健康規範的角度，來制訂「菸草控制框架公約」。由於世界衛生組織的成員國都是主權國家，故在1999年和2003年之間的公約談判過程中，非政府組織不但與各國政府代表進行互動，且亦試圖在國家的層面之上，建立一個全球菸草控制規範。非政府組織為了強化集體的力量，乃成立了「框架公約聯盟」，建構了跨國倡議網絡，試圖對各國政府代表、非政府組織代表和跨國菸草企業產生影響力。為了要解釋跨國倡議網絡與「菸草控制框架公約」獲得通過之間的關聯性，本文首先將對跨國倡議網絡運作的觀察，區分為五個不同的層面，即議題框架的形成與確立、「框架公約聯盟」的建立、議題設定與談判監督、專業資訊的掌握與傳送，以及策略的擬訂與執行等。其次，在每個不同的層面上，本文亦評估了非政府組織如何實際運用與發揮其影響力。英文摘要：Since the 1990s, tobacco-related diseases have posed a tremendous threat to human health. The impact of such diseases has also proliferated from developed countries to developing countries. It is estimated that tobacco use could cause 10 million deaths by 2030, if no actions are taken. Because globalization has inevitably weakened the capabilities of individual countries to control tobacco consumption, the World Health Organization (WHO) has considered formulating the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) from the perspective of global health regulation. With FCTC as a case study, the article explores the unique interactions between states and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). In the process of negotiating the adoption of the FCTC from 1999 to 2003, both local and international NGOs interacted with governmental representatives from WHO member countries. Furthermore, NGOs were also pursuing global health regulations beyond their respective countries. In order to enhance collective power, many NGOs decided to coordinate their activities, forming the Framework Convention Alliance (FCA) on the basis of transnational advocacy networking. The alliance aimed to make an influence on the stances of governmental representatives and transnational tobacco enterprises, for the final approval of the FCTC. To explain the effectiveness of the transnational advocacy network, this article analyzes this process from five viewpoints: 1) issue-framing; 2) establishment of the FCA; 3) agenda setting and monitoring; 4) possession and provision of professional information; and 5) determination and execution of strategies. From each dimension, the article then assesses how these NGOs in the advocacy network concretely exert their influence.起始頁-結束頁：109-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系4篇名：內閣制國家總統的憲政角色：德國與義大利的個案分析並列篇名：The Constitutional Role of the President in a Parliamentary System : The Cases of Germany and Italy作者：許友芳(Yu-Fang Hsu);蘇子喬(Tzu-Chiao Su)關鍵字：內閣制;總統權力;德國總統;義大利總統;parliamentary system;presidential powers;president of Germany;president of Italy期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：37卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：在傳統的觀點中，當代採行議會內閣制的民主國家在制度設計上，具有一個作為國家象徵而不具實權的國家元首。在君主國體的內閣制中，國家元首為虛位君主（例如英國、日本）；在共和國體的內閣制中，國家元首則為虛位總統（例如德國、義大利）。然而，從2017年至2018年間德國與義大利先後發生的組閣爭議中，我們可以看到這些內閣制國家的總統在組閣過程中扮演舉足輕重的角色，與一般傳統認知中對於內閣制虛位元首的想像有相當落差。事實上，在當代採行共和國體的內閣制國家，總統在憲法規範上的權力，及其在實際憲政運作上的角色，是一個看似淺顯而被忽視，但值得深入探索的議題。本文一方面將對全世界所有共和國體內閣制民主國家的憲法規定進行檢視，以確認總統在內閣制此類憲政體制中的一般角色定位；另一方面則以德國與義大利這兩個內閣制國家為焦點，探討兩國總統的憲法權力與憲政角色。本文的研究發現應能對我國未來的憲政改革提供一些理論線索。英文摘要：Traditionally, the role of the head of state in a parliamentary system would be considered to be a symbolic one, without concrete power. In a monarchy (such as England and Japan) it is the king or queen; in a republic (such as Germany and Italy) the president who is the symbolic leader. However, recent cases in Germany and Italy contradict this assumption. Both presidents played significant roles during the government's formation. The constitutional power which the president holds in a parliamentary system and the role he or she can play in practice is indeed a question which deserves more attention. In this paper, the competencies of the presidents in other countries with parliamentary systems will be examined, to establish a common baseline for presidential power. Secondly, the constitutional power and presidential role in the internal political practice of two countries, Germany and Italy, will be looked into more closely. The findings of this research could offer a useful theoretical foundation for future constitutional reform in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系5篇名：比利時「布魯塞爾－哈爾－維爾沃德」選區分割與權力分享並列篇名：The Split-Up of the Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde Electoral District and Power-Sharing in Belgium作者：劉華宗(Hua-Tsung Liu)關鍵字：布魯塞爾－哈爾－維爾沃德;選區分割;權力分享;比利時;Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde;split-up of electoral district;power sharing;Belgium期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：37卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：布魯塞爾－哈爾－維爾沃德是個選舉區與司法管轄區，位處於法蘭德斯地區，同時包含有布魯塞爾首都雙語區的19個自治區，及法蘭德斯勃蘭邦特省哈爾－維爾沃德的35個自治區。布魯塞爾－哈爾－維爾沃德，是比利時唯一橫跨不同地區與語言區的選區，住在那裡的居民在聯邦國會及歐洲議會選舉可投票給雙語區的候選人，也可選擇投給荷語區的候選人。這種特殊選區與地位，使布魯塞爾－哈爾－維爾沃德自1960年代起，常成為荷、法語族群衝突的焦點。自2002年選舉法修正後，布魯塞爾－哈爾－維爾沃德成為唯一不是以省為疆界的選區。在2003年的憲法法庭判決，新的選舉法所分割的選區其立論是站不住腳的，既不對稱也不平等，最後被宣告違憲必須予以修正。本文除了透過歷史研究剖析布魯塞爾－哈爾－維爾沃德選區爭議的背景與發展，也透過政治菁英的協商與權力分享，分析選區分割爭議最後是如何予以解決。研究發現在制度方面達成兩項成果：選區分割與國家免於裂解；在政策方面達成協議：包括公共財務強化、退休年齡往後延長、健保與失業福利金縮減給付等幾項成果。最後，筆者發現縱貫性研究時間長短不同，會影響權力分享研究的結論。英文摘要：Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde (BHV) is an electoral and judicial district, consisting of the municipalities of the Brussels Capital Region and the province of Flemish Brabant (Halle-Vilvoorde) in the Flemish Region. BHV is therefore the only electoral district in Belgium that overlaps different regions and language areas. As a result, residents of BHV can vote for both Dutch-speaking and French-speaking parties in the Federal and European elections, not only in the bilingual districts, but also in the monolingual Dutch constituencies. This means French-speaking candidates from Brussels can run for the Federal Parliament on party lists in the monolingual Dutch-speaking area. The heterogeneous composition of the district has made BHV a point of contention between the linguistic communities since the 1960s. BHV is the only district where the provincial constituency does not apply to the federal elections, as since 2002 the country's other electoral districts coincide with the provincial borders. In 2003 the Constitutional Court judged that the current division of Belgium into constituencies was indefensible because of the asymmetry and inequality between the provincial constituencies and those in Flemish Brabant and Brussels. In this article we describe the background and development of splitting up the BHV electoral district. This paper also presents an analysis on how to solve the dispute regarding the boundaries of the BHV electoral district through bargaining and power-sharing of political elites. It finds that the results of the system agreements: a BHV constituency split and no breakup of Belgium; and various policy agreements in a public finances consolidation, a rise in the retirement age, cuts in health care and in unemployment benefits, etc. We argue that the length of longitudinal research will affect the conclusions of the power-sharing study.起始頁-結束頁：61-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系6篇名：族群主流化的理論框架與政策意涵並列篇名：Mainstreaming ”Ethnic Mainstreaming”? Its Theoretical Framework and Policy Implications作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-tung Huang)關鍵字：族群主流化;多元文化主義;性別主流化;兩層次主流化;ethnic mainstreaming;multiculturalism;gender mainstreaming;two-prong mainstreaming期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：37卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：我國在1997年修憲之後，「多元文化」便正式成為基本國策。在各式關於多元的討論中，又以族群議題最受各界關注。其中，「族群主流化（ethnic mainstreaming）」是近來政府重點推動的政策之一。在主流化的概念下，政府的角色定位與政策思維，也都隨之出現巨大的改變。對此，本文嘗試從理論框架與政策意涵的角度來梳理此議題，並對當前我國族群主流化的概念理解與政策目標予以進一步的分析與耙梳。整體來看，我國現階段的族群主流化論述，帶有「取代論」的意涵。也就是希望透過政策，創造一處有助於族群間對話的公共平台，進而依此型塑出一項能夠涵容少數與弱勢思維的「新的主流」。面對這樣的發展態勢，本文指出當中論理與實際上的困難。就理論面來看，新主流的創建本身似乎已經超越了既有多元文化的規範框架；就實際面來看，對某些族群而言（如原住民族），新主流的建構或許並非當務之急，且主流化的意涵也未必優於既有的權利論述。有鑑於此，本文指出這些都是當前族群主流化政策進一步推動時必須面對的問題。英文摘要：According to the 1997 Constitutional Amendments, multiculturalism is a fundamental policy in Taiwan. Following this constitutional guidance, the government has tabled a series of policies to improve ethnic development. Over the past decade, ethnic mainstreaming has arguably proved to be both the most popular and also the most controversial policy as the government seeks to establish ”a new mainstream” for future generations. This paper critically analyses the theoretical framework of ethnic mainstreaming and its implications for policy. It argues that the concept of ethnic mainstreaming is certain to affect the trajectory of our current multiculturalism goals for some time to come. This is because the so-called new mainstream itself, at least in theory, implies or even reinforces a unitary rather than a diverse society. For some ethnic groups, such as the most vulnerable indigenous groups, the importance of rights still trumps the establishment of a new mainstream. This article further argues that as promising as it may sound, the discourse of ethnic mainstreaming should never circumvent rights or equal protection.起始頁-結束頁：117-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系7篇名：電子化跨域治理成效指標之設計與衡量：主觀性測量指標的應用與比較並列篇名：The Design and Measure of Electronic Cross-boundary Governance Performance Indicators: The Application and Comparison of Subjective Measure Methods作者：張鐙文(Teng-Wen Chang);莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);胡龍騰(Lung-Teng Hu);曾冠球(Kuan-Chiu Tseng)關鍵字：電子化跨域治理;績效衡量;態度性評價指標;事實性評價指標;效標關聯效度;electronic cross-boundary governance;performance measure;attitudinal measures indicator;factual measures indicator;criterion-related validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：37卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：跨機關資訊分享成效的評估，是當代電子化跨域治理的核心議題之一，但，如何進行有效的衡量，在研究上仍有缺口。是以，本研究嘗試從研究方法中的測量角度，探討何種指標設計較能適用於跨機關資訊分享成效之評估，以作為未來公共組織評估電子化跨域治理成效之參考。本研究經由次級資料分析，以「全國商工服務行政系統」和「國稅資訊系統」之內部系統使用者的觀點進行探討。一方面，評估不同主觀性指標測量結果的相似性，即比較「態度性」和「事實性」評價指標之個別題項的衡量結果在內容效度、建構效度及信度等結果的異同；另一方面，分析不同主觀性指標測量結果與效標的關聯性，即檢視「態度性」和「事實性」評價指標之整體構面衡量結果與外部變項的效標關聯效度，這是過去研究鮮少著墨的部分。在現有的資料條件下，本研究發現，在指標相似性部分，態度性評價指標題項的內容效度、建構效度及信度相對良好與穩定，而事實性評價指標的結果則是優劣參半；在指標關聯性的部分，態度性評價指標的效標關聯效度同樣較佳，較能反映出與關鍵變項之間的關係及強度，事實性評價指標的結果就顯得差強人意。就此而論，未來在評估跨機關資料分享成效時，本研究建議以態度性評價指標為優先考量，事實性評價指標次之。英文摘要：While evaluating the performance of information sharing between public organizations is a critical issue in electronic cross-boundary governance, there is still a research gap in the development of measurement instruments. It is our objective to develop several performance indicators and compare their results through two representative cases (i.e., the Commerce Industrial Service Portal and the eTax Portal ). We conducted a secondary data research using the data collected from the perspectives of internal system users. On the one hand, this research focused on the similarity of two kinds of subjective performance indicators (i.e., attitudinal measures indicator and factual measures indicator) in terms of the indicators' variances within each item on the results of content validity, construct validity and reliability. On the other hand, this research examined the relationships between the subjective performance indicators and other variables in terms of their criterion-related validity, an area of study which is seldom mentioned in the current literature. Based on the existing data, we found that attitudinal measure indicators are more delicate and stable than factual measure indicators for most of the estimations. Accordingly, we suggest that further study should give priority to attitudinal measure indicators for evaluating the performance of information sharing between different organizations.起始頁-結束頁：1-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系8篇名：契約課責的弔詭：政府處理履約績效不佳廠商之多重考量並列篇名：The Paradox of Contract Accountability: Understanding Whether and How Much Public Managers Sanction Contractors for Unsatisfactory Performance作者：曾冠球(Kuan-Chiu Tseng)關鍵字：契約課責;契約裁罰;契約管理;公私合夥;政府採購;contract accountability;contract sanction;contract management;public private partnership;government procurement期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：37卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：作為初探性研究，本研究致力於探討契約管理者如何評估裁罰的執行，以確保包商貫徹契約績效之要求。究實而論，當今全球政府已有愈來愈多的公共服務係由營利與非營利組織所提供，卻是由政府部門支付生產與服務費用。那些具有公共選擇理論背景的簽約提倡者，主張市場競爭下簽約安排將有助於降低服務成本並提高服務效率。相對地，接受傳統公共行政領域訓練的學者們，則質疑簽約之舉將有損政府服務生產與服務提供的管理能力。對於這樣的知識論戰，儘管國內、外文獻多已指出契約管理的重要性，及其對於契約課責效能所帶來的影響，遺憾的是，「契約裁罰」卻殊少出現在簽約外包與委外主題的相關研究成果中。由於裁罰是確保服務品質與契約課責的一個重要面向，實務上也體現在政府採購法的履約管理與驗收程序，故以契約裁罰作為探究主題，理應具有「見微知著」的討論效果。在上述背景下，起人疑竇的是，採購機關如何評估是否針對履約績效不佳的廠商進行裁罰？針對採購官員的深度訪談結果，本研究旨在呈現機關施行契約裁罰的多重考量與制約因素，及其對於學理上委託人－代理人理論、管家理論所帶來之重要意涵。英文摘要：This research intends to focus on the discretion of public managers and examines the use of sanctions in holding contractors accountable for their performance. Currently, more and more public services around the world are paid for by governments but delivered by nonprofit and for-profit organizations. Contracting advocators, who often have roots in the field of public choice theory, champion contracting as a way to reduce service costs and enhance service efficiency through market competition. Contracting critics, who often have roots in traditional public administration fields, counter that contracting may reduce their capacity to produce services and manage service delivery. Despite the burgeoning literature acknowledging the importance of contract management and its seemingly significant contributions to the effectiveness of contract accountability, exploring the use of contract sanctions has rarely been attempted in contracting out and outsourcing studies. Against this background, an essential and intriguing question is whether and how much contracting agencies sanction contractors for unsatisfactory performance. Through semi-structured interviews with contract managers in local government, our results will contribute to the literature on contract implementation and management capacity as well as better our understanding of how public contract managers use principal-agent theory and stewardship theory to consciously discern and overcome managerial challenges while facing contract sanctions being carried out in the public service.起始頁-結束頁：55-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系9篇名：動保文官同情疲勞現象、成因、影響及因應策略之思辨並列篇名：An Empirical Study of Compassion Fatigue Phenomenon: Causes, Influences and Reflections of the Easing Mechanism of Animal Protection Administrators作者：吳宗憲(Chuang-Hsien Wu);郭怡貞(Yi-Chen Kuo)關鍵字：同情;同情疲勞;動物保護;道德困境;利害關係人;empathy;compassion fatigue;animal protection;morality dilemma;stakeholders期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：37卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：護理人員、社會工作人員、神職人員等特殊助人者的工作，常會發生過度融入受助者的痛苦，而產生嚴重的「同情疲勞」現象，影響工作時的專業判斷，造成組織管理困境，甚至反而傷害了原先的受助者。對此，過去的心理學研究，已經建構起細緻的理論，內容包括同情疲勞的意涵、造成同情疲勞的原因、同情疲勞造成的影響，及改善同情疲勞的方法等。然而，在政府部門行政工作中，也有許多會產生「同情疲勞」現象的職務，但傳統政治學與行政學卻因故未投入關注，本研究便以國內動物保護行政人員做為調查對象，結合心理學及公共組織領域的相關理論，對這種特殊的同情疲勞困境，提出嘗試性的解釋，並對實務上的可能解決策略提出反思。研究發現，渠一方面因同情受助者，但卻在執行政府法令產生高度道德矛盾，甚至來自多元利害關係人的道德壓力，使其產生非常嚴重的同情疲勞，影響其行政的判斷能力，產生道德疏離問題及離職的猶豫。但克服此類困境的方法，無論在個人層次、主管層次及政府層次，都仍存在倫理的辯證，尚需後續研究者釐清。英文摘要：Helpers such as nursing personnel, social workers and clergymen are often involved so much in aided people's pain that they may suffer serious ”compassion fatigue”. The ramifications of this range from poor professional judgment, to organization managerial dilemma, to hurting aided persons they serve. Past psychological research has already built an elegant theory for analyzing the meaning of compassion fatigue, the causes of it, the influence of it and the ways to conquer it. Although there are many administrative positions in the government which could lead to ”compassion fatigue”, for some reasons, traditional theories in political science and public administration do not mention this phenomenon. In our article, we take Taiwan's animal protection administrators as the research subjects, combining psychology and theories in public organizations, so that we can propose a tentative explanation for this special compassion fatigue phenomenon and reflect on workable coping strategies. Our research shows that administrators would feel fairly serious compassion fatigue if they are pressured by a combination of the compassion for the aided persons, the moral conflicts of implementing the law and the moral pressure from multiple stakeholders. The fatigue influences their abilities of administrative judgment, resulting in moral disengagement and resignation hesitation. However, on an individual, managerial or even governmental level, there are ethical arguments in conquering these dilemmas, which need to be clarified by future researchers.起始頁-結束頁：115-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：以「事天」為本之治理思想：明末儒者安世鳳《尊孔錄》之研究並列篇名：Viewing the Thoughts on Governance from the Perspective of ”Serving Heaven”: On the Late-Ming Confucianist An Shi-feng's Notes on Honoring Confucius作者：林峻煒(Chun-wei Lin)關鍵字：事天;天人關係;治理;Serving Heaven;Heaven-Man Relations;Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：82期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以明末儒者安世鳳之《尊孔錄》<U+7232>研究對象，並以「事天」為分析其治理思想之視角。在學界既有關於明清之際思想轉變的研究中，學者們多半從「心性之學轉向經世之學」之視野來理解其特徵，以此呈現明清之際思想史的典範性的轉變。本文透過分析安世鳳之《尊孔錄》，指出一種帶有「事天」性質的儒學構想，觀察他如何反省理學，並以「事天」<U+7232>原則，開展關於群體治理活動的論述。我們將會看到，安世鳳之治理思想反映過往關於明清之際思想轉變之理解較受忽略的側面，展示了一條從「天人關係」之視野反思經世實踐的思考路徑，其中，「事君」之重要性被高度地看重，「君臣關係」也被以此一原則來衡量，藉以批判宋儒之士風，並蘊含有「尊君」的思想色彩。英文摘要：This paper aims to analyze the Late-Ming Confucianist An Shi-feng's Notes on Honoring Confucius (尊孔錄), and shows his thoughts on governance and its features. The main argument of ”Serving Heaven,” which is a vision that differs from the existing landscape about the Ming-Qing transition of intellectual history, is the fundamental principle to reflect problems of governance. Not only can ”Serving Heaven” become a discourse to govern, but it also presents a different perspective for criticizing Song-Ming Neo-Confucianism (理學). Simultaneously, another essential principle of ”Serving the Emperor,” which is cognate with the discourse of ”Serving Heaven,” is discussed to show the relationship between the emperor and the officials.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201912_(82).00012篇名：十九世紀末朝鮮的中國認識之背景與「脫中」問題並列篇名：A Study on the Background of the Korean Perception of China and the Issue of 'De-Sinicization' in the Late 19th Century作者：朴炳培(Byungbae Park)關鍵字：中國;朝鮮;小中華意識;脫中;文明論;China;Joseon Korea;Consciousness of Little-China (小中華意識);De-Chinization;Civilization期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：82期出版年：2019中文摘要：十九世紀末朝鮮代韓國對「中國」的認識可分<U+7232>三：「作<U+7232>地區霸權的中國」（清朝）、「作<U+7232>政權正當性的基礎之中國」（明朝）、以及「作<U+7232>文化體系的中國」（小中華意識）。甲午戰爭結束後，朝鮮雖然「脫離清朝的朝貢體系」，卻脫離不了明朝的遺產與小中華意識。即，在受到文明論影響之下，朝鮮社會對於「脫中」問題上引起分歧。首先，激進開化派依據進化論的文明觀念，正面質疑華夷觀念，並沒有把清朝與「作為文化體系的中國」之間劃清界線，並將清朝（以及中國文化）視<U+7232>阻礙朝鮮文明開化之傳統象徵，從而主張全面脫離「中國」。其次，穩健開化派在西方文明和東洋文明的價值觀之間儘量保持中立，在「小中華意識」的歷史經驗上添加了「文明論」，從而指出「東洋」概念。也就是說，當代朝鮮儒教菁英將中華傳統文明和西方近代文明劃等號，從而主張保存中華文明的朝鮮能與近代西方文明國並肩而立。在此立基點上，朝鮮改國號<U+7232>「大韓帝國」，毫無猶豫地採用中國傳統象徵符號，以展現自主獨立國家的姿態。這些認識及思路，在今日仍有助於我們對當代問題，進行深刻而有新意的省思。作者希望透過本研究的成果，讓學界可以從不同的角度，再一次認識到儒教思想在韓半島的發展軌跡。英文摘要：The Korean perception of China in the Late 19th century can be divided into three categories. The first is 'China as a regional hegemon.' The second is China as the basis of the legitimacy of political power. The third is 'China as a cultural system.' After the Sino-Japanese War, Korea tried to modernize itself as it escaped from the China-centered tributary system, and it externally became an independent nation. However, there were different opinions on the issue of the 'de-chinization' process among the Korean society of the age, and how they accepted the civilizational discourse. Firstly, the radical reformists argued for total and complete de-chinization, pointing out that they identified China as a regional hegemon as being tied to China as a cultural system, and they argued that these factors disturbed Korean civilization and enlightenment. On the contrary, the Confucian elites of the moderate reformists completely separated the China that is a regional hegemon from the China that is the cultural system, and they argued that Chinese traditional civilization and Western civilization belong to a universal civilization. Furthermore, the Joseon Dynasty (朝鮮王朝) changed the name of the country to the Korean Empire (大韓帝國) and tried to show that it's a universal civilized country and an independent nation internally and externally based on this awareness. This article will provide a deeper understanding of the Korean perception of China and the de-chinization of issues in the 19th century.起始頁-結束頁：39-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201912_(82).00023篇名：總統道歉的語言學：「蔡英文總統代表政府向原住民族道歉文」的政治語言學分析並列篇名：A Political Linguistics Analysis of President Tsai Ing-wen's Apology to Taiwan's Indigenous Peoples作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-tung Huang);朱容萱(Rong-xuan Chu)關鍵字：道歉;原住民族;政治語言學;言語行為;語言與政治;Apologies;Indigenous Peoples;Political Linguistics Analysis;Speech Act;Language and Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：82期出版年：2019中文摘要：2016年原住民日當天，蔡英文總統代表政府正式向原住民族道歉。這個道歉，也開<U+5553>了我國原住民族歷史正義與轉型正義的新頁。面對這項重要的轉折，學界對此議題的分析卻相對有限，且論者多是從法政或原住民族研究的角度出發，將重點放在道歉後的制度性安排。有鑑於道歉涉及到語言的使用，且又是一種典型的言語行<U+7232>（speech act），這樣的特徵替語言學提供了介入的空間。本研究擬從「語言與政治」（language and politics）的視角出發，透過政治語言學（political linguistics）的分析，來對蔡總統代表政府向原住民族的道歉文進行分析。具體來說，本文嘗試以語言學的方法和分析技法，來對道歉文中的已言（said）、蘊含表現（implicature，即未明言）、未言（unsaid）等部分進行分析，以便了解道歉者如何透過語言的使用和表述，來做出限定、排除、引導、乃至說服，進而建構出一套完整的論述。在此同時，作者也希望通過這樣的分析，藉此探索語言學、政治學、原住民族研究的交錯與接點所在。英文摘要：The 2016 national apology by the Taiwanese President starts a new chapter in historical justice and transitional justice for Taiwan's indigenous peoples. In this political linguistics analysis of Tsai Ing-wen's apology, we explore the language of the apology in light of recent investigations on national apologies as a generic type of political discourse. We examine how the authenticity and sincerity of the apology were accomplished through the use of illocutionary force indicating devices and first-person pronouns. In addition, we demonstrate how the concept of the apology was revisited by using the Atayal term 'Sbalay' and how such a redefined concept shifted the focus of the apology from compensation to reconciliation. Differing from previous political science research on national apologies and compensation arrangements, we reveal how the linguistic features and patterns embedded in the apology - the said, implied and unsaid - were used as a rhetorical strategy for eliciting support from the apology recipients.起始頁-結束頁：81-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201912_(82).00034篇名：民進黨為何攻不下農會？以2017年臺中市潭子區、大雅區農會選舉為例並列篇名：Why Can't the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) Win the Majority of the Farmers' Association Elections? A Case Study of the 2017 Elections in Tanzi and Daya Districts in Taichung City作者：陳麗雅(Li-ya Chen);王業立(Yeh-lih Wang)關鍵字：地方派系;臺中市;農會;民進黨;侍從主義;民主轉型;Local Factions;Taichung City;Farmers' Association;Democratic Progressive Party (DPP);Clientelism;Democratic Transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：82期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺中市各區農會長期由紅黑派系勢力所掌控，而民進黨在2014年地方政府縣市首長取得過半執政優勢，2016年總統大選後又順利取得中央執政權，在此雙重執政優勢下，卻仍然無法在2017年的農會改選中，改變農會長期由地方派系所操控的生態。本文認<U+7232>，若地方派系在農會的經營上，能提高「農會經營績效」，或者維持「內部權力平衡」，即便與執政者不合，也能順利取得農會主導權。據此，本文挑選兩個背景相似但改選結果卻截然不同的臺中市潭子區與大雅區農會<U+7232>例，藉由分析比較其中異同，來論證本文主張，並且也嘗試推演至臺中市其他地區農會選舉。英文摘要：The district farmers' associations in Taichung have long been dominated by the local Red and Black factions. Despite the fact that the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won more than half of the mayor positions in the municipal elections in 2014 plus the presidential election in 2016, the party failed to break the deep-rooted local faction control of Taichung district farmers' associations and achieved little success in those elections in 2017. We propose that as long as the local factions could either enhance the performances of the farmers' associations, or maintain the balance of power within the associations, the factions would be able to sustain their longstanding control over the farmers' association regardless. By looking into the farmers' associations of the Tanzi and Daya Districts in Taichung City, despite their similar backgrounds, we examined how they achieved different results in the 2017 elections, and we are therefore able to substantiate our proposed views. We also hope that such analyses would be applicable to other farmers’ association elections in Taichung.起始頁-結束頁：115-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201912_(82).00045篇名：APEC組織運作建制化的發展：以「半拘束性決議」的出現與「秘書處強化」為例並列篇名：The Development of APEC's Institutionalization: The Emergence of a Semi-binding Decision and the Institutional Enhancement of its Secretariat作者：周子欽(Tzu-chin Chou)關鍵字：APEC;組織變遷;偏差;偏差的動員;建制化;權力;APEC;Organizational Changes;Bias;Mobilization of Bias;Institutionalization;Power期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：82期出版年：2019中文摘要：做<U+7232>亞太地區層級最高的區域官方論壇，APEC在成立之初就被設計<U+7232>相對鬆散的「論壇」形式，俾結合發展程度與戰略利益各異的環太平洋國家加入。其強調共識決、自願主義、不具拘束性的決議等特質，以及組織上資源稀少的秘書處等特性，歷來被懷疑論者認<U+7232>是其運作效度不彰的原因之一。然而，進入二十一世紀以來，APEC確曾出現「半拘束性的決議」和「秘書處強化」的事例，與其草創時的「論壇」體質相背。本文以「偏差的動員」概念<U+7232>核心，釐析這兩項事例背後的政治動力何在、所取得的成就，以及侷限性。由於全球與區域變局所帶來的壓力，本文主張APEC組織運作方式的有必要續朝提升建制化的方向前進。類似的努力在中、美戰略關係惡化的情況下，勢將面對區域內的價值分歧、交疊的政治衝突軸線，以及讓渡部分主權等課題的挑戰。英文摘要：APEC was established in the late 1980s as a non-binding regional forum, rather than a formal international organization. Its flexible, informal way of operation helps its members to work together given their diversities in terms of their development level and strategic interests. However, skeptics believe APEC's ineffectiveness is a result of its loose way of operation aforementioned. In the first two decades of the 21st century, there were cases that dismissed APEC of its ”forum” nature, including the emergence of a semi-binding decision, as well as the institutional enhancement of its Secretariat. Utilizing the concept of ”mobilization of bias”, this paper attempts to offer an historical explanation of these two cases, as well as an initial assessment of what they have achieved and the limitations encountered. The author argues that, in order to cope with the fast changing political economic environment in the region, APEC will need to be much more institutionalized. Further institutionalization, however, will meet challenges rooted in the divergent value systems held by its respective members, superimposed political cleavages in the region, as well as power delegation issues.起始頁-結束頁：153-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201912_(82).00056篇名：APEC的中美領導權之爭：以亞太自貿區議題為例並列篇名：The Struggle for APEC Leadership between the US and China: Taking FTAAP as an Example作者：廖小娟(Hsiao-chuan Liao)關鍵字：中美之爭;亞太經合會;亞太自貿區;論述權;霸權轉移;Sino-US Competition;APEC;FTAAP;Power of Discourse;Hegemonic Transition期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：82期出版年：2019中文摘要：中國大陸正快速崛起成<U+7232>世界第二大經濟體並且極力縮小與美國的差距，而在這中美國力接近以致於競逐領導地位之際，雙方會如何轉移領導地位呢？也就是說，在以霸權馬首是瞻的國際場域中新興強權會如何爭取影響力，成<U+7232>新的支配性強權？除了透過戰爭來重新建立國際體系外，現實主義之權力轉移論和霸權戰爭論都提出支配性強權和潛在強權有可能同樣受益於國際制度安排，因此潛在強權不必然要推翻既存國際體系。在亞太地區由於非拘束性和開放的原則使APEC成了中美競逐區域經貿秩序領導權的最佳場域之一，而在這之中亞太自貿區（FTAAP）議題的發展與演變最具代表性。中美雙方透過爭取主導FTAAP議題的發展顯現出一波波競逐亞太地區經貿整合領導地位的對決，美國從一開始支持到後來杯葛FTAAP的推動，中國大陸則是從消極對待轉而大力提倡FTAAP；雙方爭取領導FTAAP議題的脈絡顯現在時程與重要性、實現路徑、以及涵蓋的範圍三個面向上，最後FTAAP主導權之爭由於美國總統川普另闢議題戰場後化整<U+7232>零。總而言之，中美在FTAAP發展過程的拉扯是支配性強權與後起強權在既有制度中如何爭奪話語權和影響力的縮影。中美爭霸將會持續在不同的議題領域競逐主導權與較量國際影響力，直到其中一方待在體制中付出成本大於利益<U+7232>止。英文摘要：China has risen to become the second largest economy in the world and has continued to grow. This being the case, scholars are concerned with how China and the US will confirm the power transition that will happen between them. Specifically, scholars are interested in how a rising state proves itself as a leader in international areas while a dominant power continue to occupy the leadership. The Power Transition Theory and Hegemonic War Theory propose that it's possible for both dominant powers and potential powers to benefit from existing international institutions; hence, potential powers need not overthrow existing systems. In the Asia-Pacific area, the non-binding and open APEC becomes one of the best areas for China and the US to compete in for the regional leadership of economic arrangements. Among APEC issues, the development of FTAAP is one of the best examples of Sino-US competition. The US initially supports the establishment of FTAAP but abandoned it and chose another way in the end. China initially delt with FTAAP negatively until it realized that it can utilize FTAAP to impede the US. Specifically, Sino-US competitions are revealed in the time-table, importance, realization pathways, and issue ranges of FTAAP. The struggle for leadership of FTAAP got heated in 2018 but then was put aside by Trump. To sum up, the competition of influence in the development of FTAAP is epitome of the struggle over the power of discourse among dominant powers and rising powers, and such competition will continue to occur until one of them cannot bear the cost of competition within the institutions.起始頁-結束頁：187-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201912_(82).00067篇名：誰能制定較好的法律？論《韓非子》法治理論的根本困難並列篇名：Who Can Make Better Law? On the Problems of Hanfeizi's Legal Philosophy作者：洪巳軒(Szu-hsuan Hung)關鍵字：法;政治權力;中材之主;法術之士;Law;Political Power;Mediocre Governors;Legalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：81期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究發現韓非不只強調以法律判別行為的對錯，更進一步設定法律的優劣之別。為判斷法律之良窳，韓非從政治社會的起源、人類行為的傾向，以及法律本身的性質等三個面向設定判斷標準。並且從這三項標準可以尋繹出立法者也必須具備察識時變、因用人情、明辨公私等三項能力。在中材之主不具備立法能力的現實中，韓非的設想是以中材之主任用法術之士以因時而制宜的創制法律。英文摘要：This research finds that Hanfei not only emphasized right behavior that is determined by law, but that he also set up the standards for determining better law. In order to judge better law, Hanfei set up three standards of criteria: the origin of the political society, the disposition of human behavior, and the property of the law. Based on these three standards, lawmakers are required to have three kinds of abilities, which are: to give insight into environmental change, to make use of the disposition of human behavior, and to correctly distinguish between public and private. However, mediocre governors don't have the abilities for making better law. To solve this problem, Hanfei's legalist design assists mediocre governors in making better laws for a well-ordered political society.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201909_(81).00018篇名：武裝部隊的忠誠與團結對內戰發生之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Armed Forces' Loyalty and Cohesion on the Onset of Civil Wars作者：陳秉逵(Ping-kuei Chen)關鍵字：武裝部隊;內戰;文武關係;資訊不對稱;Armed Forces;Civil War;Civil-Military Relations;Asymmetric Information期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：81期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文檢視政府與武裝部隊的關係對內戰爆發的影響。政府所掌握的壟斷性武力是嚇阻與鎮壓叛亂的主要工具。武裝部隊是否願意服從政府指示，為政府奮力作戰，可用於衡量政府鎮壓內亂的能力，也正是潛在叛亂份子推斷起義是否能成功的重要考量。當武裝部隊擁有的自主性越高，或是部隊內部派系傾軋，都會削弱國家鎮壓叛亂的能力，潛在的叛亂份子若推斷政府無力號令武裝部隊，便可能趁機發動內戰。本文分析1946至2014年各國政府與其武裝部隊之間的關係，結果發現，若武裝部隊曾發生抗命、曾發動軍事政變、或內部有對立的情形，國內較容易發生武裝叛亂。本文結論指出，嚇阻武裝叛亂有賴於武裝部隊與政府的緊密結合，潛在叛亂份子對於政府動員武裝部隊的能力較為敏感，而非武裝部隊的數量或裝備。英文摘要：This paper examines the relationship between a state's control over its security forces and the onset of civil war. A government-controlled force represents a state's capacity to deter and repress armed rebellion. Whether armed forces are willing to follow orders and fight for the government or not represents its capacity to repress rebellion. This is a main factor that is taken into account when rebels plan to initiate an armed conflict. More autonomous armed forces, or an internal split within the forces, could weaken a state's capacity for repression. Rebels are more inclined to begin rebellions under these conditions. Using the UCDP data between 1946 and 2014, this paper analyzes the relations between governments and their armed forces. The findings suggest that records of defection in the security sector, experiencing a coup d’etat, or having divided security institutions increases the probability of civil war. The paper concludes that successful deterrence against armed rebellion depends on strong cohesion between a government and its armed forces. Rebels are more sensitive to the information of their government's capacity to mobilize rather than the size and equipment of the government forces.起始頁-結束頁：31-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201909_(81).00029篇名：歐盟規範性權力與中國關係性權力在中東歐國家的實踐並列篇名：The Realization of EU Normative Power and Chinese Relational Power in Central and Eastern European Countries作者：蘇卓馨(Cho-hsin Su)關鍵字：規範性權力;關係性權力;一帶一路;中東歐;Normative Power;Relational Power;Belt and Road Initiative;Central and Eastern European Countries期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：81期出版年：2019中文摘要：自2013年習近平主席做出「一帶一路」的政策宣示，中國正式將歐亞地區納入絲綢之路經濟帶的戰略範圍。中國西北與歐亞地區接壤，在安全與經濟議題上有諸多合作空間。另一方面，歐盟自1990年代蘇聯解體後不斷東擴，2002年明確揭示其「規範性強權」的國際角色後，即試圖藉由入盟審查程序或合作夥伴關係在歐亞地區推動帶有歐盟價值的規範性議程。兩大強權於是在21世紀初在這個自上個世紀以來即被國際關係學者認為是地緣政治上的心臟地帶－歐亞地區（Eurasia）－交會。初期雙方互動熱絡良好，不管是建立各式戰略夥伴關係、經貿高層對話等機制，或是歐盟會員國積極加入支持亞投行的設立並在其中擔任要職，雙邊皆展現高度的合作意願。然而自2018年初，此合作氣氛逐漸變調。2018年2 月德國外交部長公開批評中國「一帶一路」政策背後隱含與歐盟價值相違背的政治藍圖，在2018年5月歐洲議會也完成擴大歐盟審核外國投資案權力的草案，以防中資持續併購歐陸敏感產業與基礎設施。同時，以美國與歐盟為首的西方學界亦興起對中國及俄國「銳實力」的批判。從中國國際關係理論的角度觀之，「一帶一路」為關係性權力（relational power）的實踐，與西方國際關係的二元對立觀點有本質上的差異。無論如何，歐盟試圖形塑的規範性權力與中國正欲推展的關係性權力在歐亞地區確實出現衝撞。本文將分成三大部分，首先第一部分將論述規範性權力與關係性權力的理論背景以及區域整合計畫的實現。第二部分則將以中東歐國家做為案例分析檢視歐盟與中國在不同的權力途徑下如何推動區域整合計畫。最後本文將為這兩大強權在中東歐國家的權力角力成果進行一個初步的分析。英文摘要：Since the policy announcement of the ”Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)” by President Xi Jinping in 2013, China has officially encompassed the Eurasian region into its strategic roadmap within the Silk Road Economic Belt. At the same time, the European Union (EU) has continued its eastward expansion, which it has undertaken since the collapse of the Soviet Union in the 1990s. Since the clear revelation of its international role as a ”normative power” in 2002, the EU has instilled its normative agenda into its accession procedure and partnership programs with third parties. Thus, these two great powers are projected to confront each other in the Eurasian region during the second decade of the twenty-first century. In the beginning, the interaction between these two sides was amicable, with the formation of strategic partnerships and bilateral channels for dialogue between high-level officials. However, since 2018, this climate of cooperation has turned ambiguous. In February 2018, the German Foreign Minister publicly criticized the BRI for the political blueprint that is implied behind the policy, which contradicts European values. In May 2018, the European Parliament also backed plans to more closely scrutinize foreign direct investment in order to protect strategic sectors and infrastructure from Chinese acquisition. A certain discord between EU normative power and Chinese relational power can be observed in the Eurasian region. This article is divided into three parts: the first part delineates the theoretical backgrounds of normative power and relational power with the realization of the two regional integration projects. The second part takes the Central and Eastern European Countries (CEEC) as case-studies in order to perceive how the EU and China respectively drive its regional integration projects via different approaches to power. Lastly, the article makes an early assessment of the two great power's competition in CEEC.起始頁-結束頁：69-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201909_(81).000310篇名：公益資本主義應用於偏鄉振興政策的侷限性：日本瀨戶內海群島個案分析並列篇名：The Limitations of Applying Public Interest Capitalism to Rural Revitalization: A Case Study on the Setouchi Islands作者：李翠萍(Tsuey-ping Lee)關鍵字：偏鄉振興政策;公益資本主義;環境治理;社區再生;Rural Revitalization Policy;Public Interest Capitalism;Environmental Governance;Community Revitalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：81期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究基於制度論的觀點，透過深度訪談、田野觀察與歷史文件資料分析，檢視被重工業污染的瀨戶內海小島，如何在企業財團倡導的公益資本主義之下，透過舉辦國際藝術祭而活化。研究結果顯示，日本式資本主義的制度特質－政府與財團之間的結合關係，以及承襲半封建制度的土地所有權觀念，影響了政府、財團與常民的思維模式與行為，再加上偏鄉的特質，使得強調以企業資本解決社會問題的公益資本主義，在應用於偏鄉振興時，自然而然出現了由上而下、由外而內的振興途徑。財團在政府部門的支持下，主導了振興獲利模式與在地文化詮釋，使島上呈現了明顯的階層差距。同時，偏鄉住民承擔著觀光帶來的外部成本，卻沒有獲得足以支撐島民經濟的實質獲益，因此無法抑制人口流失。本研究於結論嘗試提出三大原則，以減少公益資本主義在應用上的侷限。英文摘要：Through in-depth interviews, field observations, and historical document analysis, this research uses the perspective of institutionalism to examine how private corporations applied public interest capitalism to revitalize the Setouchi Islands via contemporary art festivals. The results of the research show that the characteristics of Japanese capitalism, namely strong ties between businesses and the government, and the conception of property rights inherited from semi-feudalism, affected the thoughts and behaviors of the government, private corporations, and citizens. Adding in the characteristics of rural communities further resulted in a top-down and outside-in revitalization approach when the private corporations intended to address rural social problems through the power of capital. Supported by the government, the private corporation then created the profit-oriented revitalization model and dominated the interpretation of local culture, which led to an increasing divergence between social strata on the islands. At the same time, islanders bore the external cost of tourism without deriving sufficient benefits for the island economy. The Setouchi Islands, which are a so-called example of successful revitalization, have been suffering from population loss. To conclude this research, three principles are provided to reduce limitations of applying public interest capitalism to rural revitalization.起始頁-結束頁：105-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201909_(81).000401篇名：核能規範國際法治化？IAEA於哈薩克設立低濃縮鈾銀行設立協議的探索並列篇名：Global Rule of International Nuclear Law? Exploration on the IAEA's Establishment Agreement of the Low Enriched Uranium Bank in Kazakhstan作者：曾雅真(Yea-Jen Tseng)關鍵字：低濃縮鈾銀行;核安全;核燃料循環;國際法治;國際核能法;International Nuclear Law;International Rule of Law;Low Enriched Uranium (LEU) Bank;Nuclear Fuel Cycle;Nuclear Safety期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：法治（rule of law）概念起源自19世紀的英國法學家戴雪（A. V. Dicey），它已成為當代的一項重要政治概念，國際法治（international rule of law or rule of international law）更是涉及國際關係、國際公法以及治理（governance）的重大議題。在國際原子能總署（International Atomic Energy Agency, IAEA）的推動下，國際社會先後締結《核安全公約》與《用過核燃料暨放射性廢物管理安全聯合公約》，結合國際原子能總署的《基本安全原則》，建構出序階式（hierarchical）的核安全規範框架，構成核能國際法治化的規範基礎。2017年啟用的IAEA低濃縮鈾銀行，是多邊化管控核燃料前端循環的先聲，更是國際核能法治的里程碑。為填補我國學術社群對於國際核能法治的空白，本文首將回顧法治的一般性概念，探尋國際法治的發展脈絡，分析國際法治的表徵，最後透過低濃縮鈾銀行設立協議暨其附加協議的內涵，檢視核能國際法治化的發展與成效。本文以為，國際核能法已具備形式的國際法治特徵，超國界低濃縮鈾循環多邊協力機制的建構，更賦予IAEA得透過國際造法路徑，深化核能安全國際法治化的正當性。英文摘要：The concept of rule of law was originated from the 19th century English jurist A. V. Dicey, which has become an important political concept of the contemporary era. The global rule of law or rule of international law is even more involved major issues in international relations, public international law, and global governance. Under the impetus of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the international community has successively concluded the ”Convention on Nuclear Safety” and the ”The Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management.” In conjunction with IAEA's Fundamental Safety Principles, these documents have constructed a hierarchical nuclear safety legal framework, which constitutes the normative basis for the international rule of nuclear safety law. The IAEA Low Enriched Uranium (LEU) Bank, which was operational in 2017, is the forerunner of the nuclear fuel cycle front end multilateralization and a milestone in the international rule of nuclear law. In order to fill the default of Taiwan's academic community limited understanding to the international rule of nuclear law, this paper firstly reviews the general concept of the rule of law, secondly describes the discussion on the international rule of law, and then examines the development of the international rule of law, illustrating the major characters of the international rule of law, and then through the analysis on the content of the low enrichment uranium bank's establishment agreement, this article tries to describe the development and effectiveness of the international legality of the nuclear safety law. This paper argued that the international nuclear law already has possessed the legality of the international rule of law, and the construction of a multilateral cooperation mechanism for the IAEA's LEU Bank has provided the IAEA with the legitimacy to deepen the international rule of nuclear law with the international rule-making approach.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201912_(68).00012篇名：漸變乎？驟變乎？明代中期以後朝鮮對中文化認同的歷史案例研究並列篇名：Gradually, Then Suddenly? A Historical Case Study of Korea's Chinese Cultural Identity After Mid Ming Dynasty作者：楊仕樂(Shih-Yueh Yang)關鍵字：文化認同;中國崛起;明朝;清朝;朝鮮;Cultural Identity;Korea;Ming Dynasty;Qing Dynasty;Rise of China期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：如果中國崛起為東亞的霸權，區域國家會如何反應？會順從或抗拒？對此，僅是霸權與他國間實力巨大差距此一條件，似乎不足以推導出確切答案，而得取決於中國與東亞國家之間是否有文化認同。在過去中國曾是東亞霸權的時光裡，朝鮮對明朝持續效忠到最後，甚至延續到清朝建立之初，這正是因為對明朝的文化認同感；但在明朝建立之初，朝鮮對明朝卻是口服而心不服。究竟這前後迥異的變化是如何發生的？朝鮮對明朝的文化認同感是如何建立的？是逐漸產生或驟然產生？本研究嘗試探索明代中期以後1449∼1618年間的中韓關係，進而揭露韓國對中國建立文化認同的過程，作為在未來掌握區域國家與中國之間，能否建立文化認同的重要指引。英文摘要：How will regional states react if China achieves hegemony in East Asia? Obey or resist? In this regard, the mere fact that such a huge power disparity between hegemons and other states does not seem to be enough to derive a definitive answer. The key is whether there is a cultural identity between China and East Asian countries. When China was the hegemon of East Asia, Korea sustained its royalty to the Ming against Qing to the very end precisely because of the shared cultural identity. Nevertheless, at the beginning of the Ming, Korea was anything but submissive. How did Korea establish its shared cultural identity with the Ming? Gradually, then Suddenly? This study attempts to inquire the relations from 1449-1618 in depth to provide an important guideline for forecasting the future of East Asia under a rising China.起始頁-結束頁：39-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201912_(68).00023篇名：國際關係歷史社會學的理論：發展與批判並列篇名：The International Relations Historical Sociology Theory: The Development and Critique作者：郭雪真(Hsueh-Chen Kuo)關鍵字：全球化理論;全球社會分殊化;全球轉型;國際關係歷史社會學;Differentiation of Global Society;Global Transformation;Globalization Theory;Historical Sociology in International Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：國際關係學者質疑為什麼沒有一致的全球化理論，國際關係理論又要如何因應全球轉型呢？以國際關係歷史社會學而言，其內部的全球化理論爭論主要呈現在Martin Shaw、Justin Rosenberg及Mathias Albert等人的著作，以及其引發其他學者的批評及回應，尤其是Rosenberg在2005年對於全球化理論研究的嚴苛批評引發了廣泛的回應。Shaw以全球社會理論、Albert和Barry Buzan以全球社會（分殊化）理論充實全球化理論，Albert以社會學者Niklas Luhmann的現代系統理論或功能分殊化概念發展全球社會理論，也受到其他學者的批評。Buzan及George Lawson則以全球社會理論或全球轉型理論，發展其全球化理論。相較於其他的國際關係理論，國際關係歷史社會學提出了較一致的全球化理論。英文摘要：International Relations scholars have questioned ”Why don't we have coherent theories of international relations about globalization?” and how do international relations theories to copy with global transformations? For historical sociology in international relations (HSIR), there are different perspectives about globalization theory. The globalization debates within HSIR present mainly in the works of Martin Shaw, Justin Rosenberg, and Mathias Albert, and the critics and responses of other scholars. In 2005, Rosenberg's rigorous critics on the research of globalization theory that leads to widespread responses for some years. Shaw, Albert, and Barry Buzan enriched the globalization theory with the theory of global society or the differentiation theory of global society. Albert referenced the sociologist Niklas Luhmann's modern system theory or concept of functional differentiation to develop their globalization theory, other scholars critiques their theory. Meanwhile, Buzan and George Lawson developed globalization theory with world (global) society theory or global transformation theory. Compare with other international relations theory, HSIR provide more coherent globalization theory.起始頁-結束頁：75-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201912_(68).00034篇名：派閥政治的再現：第二次安倍政權期間派閥影響力之探討並列篇名：The Reappearance of the Political Factions: Discussion on the Influence of Political Factions During the Second Abe Regime作者：吳明上(Ming-Shan Wu)關鍵字：自民黨;安倍政權;派閥;派閥政治;首相主導;Abe Regime;Faction;Faction Politics;Liberal Democratic Party;Prime Ministerial-Led Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：68期出版年：2019中文摘要：目前，對自由民主黨（簡稱自民黨）派閥政治的研究，普遍認為「派閥政治」曾被視為是自民黨政治的代名詞，並且自民黨是派閥的聯合體。不僅位居政治最高領導者的首相是派閥合縱連橫的決定，而且派閥也扮演關鍵的角色，主導內閣的組成，因此首相的領導權相對地受到了制約。但是，日本政府於1994年通過政治改革法案後，權力集中到以首相為核心的黨中央，派閥的影響力則出現式微的現象。但是，第二次安倍政權期間，不論是總裁（首相）人選的決定，或是內閣的組成，以往派閥的影響力有復甦的現象。本文藉由與小泉政權的比較，來探討第二次安倍政權的派閥影響力的樣貌，對於上述的一般看法，提出不同的觀點。為何選擇小泉政權作為比較的題材？因為小泉首相是將政治改革的成果充分利用的代表者，在政權運作時，小泉排除派閥的影響力，建構出「首相主導」的權力結構。英文摘要：In terms of the recent study of the Liberal Democratic Party's (LDP) politics, it is generally believed that ”Faction politics” was once regarded as synonymous with the LDP's politics, and that the LDP was a coalition of factions. Not only the prime minister, the highest political leader, was decided in accordance with the effect of the competition and cooperation among factions, but faction politics also played a crucial role in the cabinet composition. Thus, the powers of the prime minister were restricted relatively. However, after the Japanese government passed the political reform bill in 1994, the power was concentrated in the hands of the leadership core of the political party, and the influence of the faction decreases. Nevertheless, during the second Abe regime, the factions again influence on both the decision of the Prime Minister and the composition of the cabinet. This article intends to discuss the effect of the faction politics on the second Abe regime by comparing with Koizumi regime. The study will propose different views to challenge the general belief and analyze the effect of faction politics on the second Abe regime. Why was Koizumi regime compared with the second Abe regime? It is because Prime Minister Koizumi was the representative of the political reform, who successfully took advantage of the reform results. In his regime, he excluded the influence of the factions and developed the power structure of the ”prime ministerial-led politics.”起始頁-結束頁：109-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201912_(68).00045篇名：民主、自然資源與經濟發展：一個混合研究法途徑的分析並列篇名：Democracy, Natural Resources and Economic Development: A Mixed-Method Approach作者：張文揚(Wen-yang Chang);詹捷翔(Chieh-hsiang Chan);平思寧(Szu-Ning Ping)關鍵字：民主;自然資源詛咒;經濟發展;大樣本研究;最大相似法;Democracy;Natural Resource Curse;Economic Development;Large-N Studies;Most Similar Method期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：67期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來，儘管是否自然資源不利經濟發展的「（自然）資源詛咒」理論受到注意，但是學界對於自然資源是否能夠促進或是阻礙國家經濟發展之間的關係並沒有定論。本文認為，資源詛咒對經濟發展的影響是條件性的：條件於國家的政治體制之上。自然資源對國家經濟發展的不利影響，可以被民主政體抵銷，這是因為民主政體傾向分配公共財、有較好的治理能力以及維持，或是進行多樣化經濟體制的可能性。這些特徵因此可以避免國家在發展過程中依賴自然資源時蒙受其害。本文先後以「時間序列橫斷面」方法檢視1960∼2016年之間國家的經濟表現；並以「最大相似法」比較兩個撒哈拉以南非洲國家－迦納與喀麥隆之後確認了上述的說法。本文的結果對於相關理論與政策發展都有其意涵。英文摘要：In recent years, though the ”(natural) resource curse” thesis-natural resources have negative impact on economic development-becomes popular, the consensus about whether natural resources promote or dampen economic development does not exist among scholars. This paper argues that the effects of natural resources on economic development is conditional upon political systems. The negative influences of natural resources on development can be offset by democracy, because democratic regimes tend to distribute public goods, have better quality of governance and higher possibility of diversifying the economic system. These characteristics enable the states to avoid the curse brought by natural resources in the development process. This paper gains empirical support by firstly applying the ”time-series cross-sectional method” to examine all states' economic performance over the 1960-2016 period, and then by comparing two sub-Saharan African states, Ghana and Cameroon, through ”the most similar method” design. This paper has both academic and policy implications.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201906_67.00016篇名：宗教團體從威權到民主鞏固時期的政治涉入－以臺灣和南韓為例並列篇名：The Political Involvement of Religious Organizations From Authoritarian to Democratic Consolidation Periods: A Case Study of Taiwan and South Korea作者：姚祺(Qi Yao)關鍵字：東亞民主化;宗教團體;政治涉入;Democratization in East Asia;Religious Organizations;Political Involvement期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：67期出版年：2019中文摘要：在威權時期和民主鞏固的過程中，宗教團體會扮演何種角色，這一問題為不少學者研究探討。從教義教規、組織方式和實際行動等角度，學者們對宗教團體在不同國家威權時期和民主鞏固過程中的作用做了分析。然而，究竟是什麼原因讓宗教團體在民主化過程中採取了支持或者反對的態度呢？為什麼同一種或者相似宗教在不同地區中會扮演全然不同的角色，而不同的宗教團體又會採用一些相似策略呢？本文試圖通過比較在臺灣和南韓幾個宗教團體的不同表現，探索宗教團體從威權到民主鞏固時期政治涉入方式的成因。本文通過比較在不同區域中相似的宗教團體的政治涉入，在排除了區域內部特有因素的影響後，發現威權政府針對宗教團體採取不同的政策並不能直接導致宗教團體會採取特定的介入模式。本文認為，在威權時期，宗教團體的政治涉入受到政府宗教政策措施、宗教政治神學，以及結盟策略的共同影響。在民主時期，宗教團體與政治的關係也從被動回應轉化為一種主動的涉入，其決定因素則主要在於團體對自身利益的考量。英文摘要：The question of which roles religions have played in authoritarian and democratic consolidation periods has been studied by huge amounts of scholars. They have analyzed how religious organizations have worked during the period of authoritarianism and democratic consolidation in different countries or regions with the perspective of doctrine, ecclesiastical institutions, or practice. Which factors have push religion to select supportive or antagonistic attitude toward democratization? Why one religion or some similar religions have different attitudes toward democratization while different religions have taken similar strategies? This paper tries to explore why religions have had different types of involvement from authoritarian to democratic consolidation periods through the comparative cases study from Taiwan and South Korea. Avoiding the influence of local elements by comparing similar religious groups from different areas, this paper finds that different policies the authoritarian governments implementing against different religious organizations will not make religious organizations take specific involvement methods. This paper argues that religious groups decide their political involvement models based on the religious policies and measures the government taking, the political theology and the cooperation strategy the religious adopting during authoritarian period. In the period of democratic consolidation, because religious organizations are not limited or intervened by governments, their relationship with politics will be converted from passive response into active action.起始頁-結束頁：51-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201906_67.00027篇名：「人倫之私」與「人欲之私」：論孔孟思想中「以私害公」之爭議並列篇名：”Private of Human Ethic” and ”Private of Human Desire”: Study on Controversy of ”Destructing Public by Private” in Thoughts of Confucius and Mencius作者：林育瑾(Yu-Ching Lin)關鍵字：私;人倫;人欲;本心;犯意;Selfishness;Human Ethics;Human Desire;Original Intention;Criminal Intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：67期出版年：2019中文摘要：「孝」與「法」在維護公、私領域之秩序上孰輕孰重，一直是爭辯中的議題。孔孟在「父子相隱」、「舜父殺人」和「三年之喪」三則文字中對「孝」的推崇，更將論戰推向高峰。批評者認為法重於孝，孔孟乃徇情枉法、以私害公。維護方認為親情至上，故孝的位階高於法。正反雙方壁壘分明、相互訐難。本文則於當前論者以「二分法」爭辯孝和法之外，從析論「人倫之私」與「人欲之私」起始，以孔孟思想中「天性」、「人倫」、「人欲」、「惻隱」、「本心」，及諸如「犯意」和「犯行」等概念立論，重新檢視荀子、司馬光、蘇轍、蘇軾、朱熹等東亞各儒者和近代學者之論，並進一步以孔孟孝悌倫理思想之立論，論證孔孟並不「以私害公」。英文摘要：Importance of filial piety and law to maintain order in public and private fields has been the issue debated. Praise of Confucius and Mencius for filial piety in three pieces ”Mutual concealing crimes between father and son,” ”Shun's father murder,” and ”Three years of mourning” resulted in the peak of the debate. The critique argued that law was more important than filial piety. Confucius and Mencius favored private affection and neglected the laws. They allowed private to destruct public. Those who supported Confucius and Mencius stated that family love was the priority and filial piety was superior to law. Two sides were sharply opposed and criticized each other. This study beyond the contemporary debate of filial piety and law by ”dichotomy,” starts from the analysis on ”private of human ethic” and ”private of human desire” and sets the arguments to review statements of Confucian scholars in East Asia and contemporary scholars such as Xun Kuang, Sima Guang, Su Zhe, Su Shi, and Zhu Xi by ”human nature,” ”human ethics,” ”human desire,” ”sympathy,” ”original intention,” ”criminal intention,” and ”criminal offense” in thoughts of Confucius and Mencius and further demonstrate that Confucius and Mencius do not ”destruct public by private” by the arguments of their thought of filial piety and ethics.起始頁-結束頁：87-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201906_67.00038篇名：政治菁英的利益算計與檢察獨立改革並列篇名：Political Elites' Interest Calculation and Prosecutorial Independence Reform作者：王金壽(Chin-Shou Wang)關鍵字：法院組織法;政治菁英;保險理論;策略施壓理論;檢察獨立;Court Organization Act;Politic Elites;Insurance Theory;Strategic Pressure Theory;Prosecutorial Independence期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：67期出版年：2019中文摘要：2006年臺灣的《法院組織法》，主要在檢察官改革協會、民間司法改革基金會等團體推動下，獲得重大改變。這次修法帶來了檢察體系幾個重大改革成果。首先，檢察總長的任命方式，改為總統提名、經國會通過之後任命，並且得到四年任期的保障。其次，檢察官人事審議委員會，取得合法性地位；同時檢審會委員的組成方式，「民選」檢審委員改為九位（檢察官選），超過「官派」委員的八位（法務部長與檢察總長任命）。第三，中央特別偵查處的成立。這些修法最大的效果，在於增加了檢察體制的獨立性，同時使得檢察體系內部的權力擴增。本文挑戰司法獨立的主流理論保險理論和與它對話的策略施壓理論。依照保險理論，無法理解此一變革，其強調即將下臺但有遠見的政治人物，主動放棄對司法控制的權力；而策略施壓理論則是預期執政黨會控制、動員司法來介入選舉。但在臺灣發生的此一個案，卻是改革團體先獲得國民黨的支持之後，再尋求民進黨支持。以政治人物的角度去思考司法獨立問題，是本文的出發點。本論文將論證，在臺灣政治人物只注重當下的政治利益，以及政治局勢的高度不穩定，使得被預期即將上臺執政的國民黨支持此任命方式的改變。而對於民進黨而言，即使將因為任命方式的改變而喪失部分權力，但仍然控制提名權，在這些條件結合下，臺灣《法院組織法》的修正才有可能發生。英文摘要：This paper is to study the development of Taiwan's prosecutorial independence which made a great progress in the revision of the Court Organization Act in 2006, examining the insurance theory and its critique, strategic pressure theory. These two theories had made a very different point on whether political competition promotes judicial independence. Insurance theory suggests that political competition makes the political elites promote the judicial independence as political insurance. Strategic pressure theory argues that competition will push political elites try to control the judiciary against the opponents and avoid the risk of losing power. However, judicial independence can not be seen as a static change, but a dynamic process of continuous change, and it inevitably connects with the political environments. We argue that because of political elites' short-term interest calculation and political uncertainty, they accepted a more independent and powerful prosecutorial system.起始頁-結束頁：121-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.201906_67.000401篇名：特別專題編者言作者：段曉林(Hsiao-Lin Tuan);林淑梤(Shu-Fen Lin);林靜雯(Jing-Wen Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會2篇名：探討高中學生於建模導向科學探究之學習成效並列篇名：The Study of Investigating High School Students' Learning Performance Under the Instruction of Model-Based Inquiry作者：蔡哲銘(Che-Ming Tsai);邱美虹(Mei-Hung Chiu);曾茂仁(Mao-Ren Zeng);謝東霖(Tung-Lin Hsieh)關鍵字：建模;探究與實作;模型;Modeling;Inquiry and Practice;Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討在建模導向科學探究的教學策略下，高一學生的學習成效。學生在經過3週建模教學之後，再利用3週時間進行開放式問題的探究教學。學習成效的評估從學生對模型本質認識的變化、建模能力測驗的表現，以及探究的實作作品進行分析。結果顯示：一、學生在教學前後對於模型本質的認識有顯著差異。二、學生在建模能力測驗中對於模型選擇及模型建立歷程的表現較佳，對於模型效化及模型應用歷程則表現較差。三、分析學生作品發現，對於開放式探究，學生能夠掌握選擇正確變因，並且能透過實作找到變因之間的定性關係，但是距離科學社群能夠形成模型解釋實作成果仍有差距。值得注意的是，在建模能力測驗上，模型效化的結果顯示有雙峰現象，模型效化等級較高的學生在模型本質問卷的表現優於等級較低的學生，由此推測若要在模型效化達到較高等級，學生對於模型本質須要有較好的瞭解。臺灣在2019年實施「探究與實作」課程，本研究發現，高一學生受限於數學及建模能力尚未成熟，對於變因複雜的開放式問題探究，無法完成整體探究歷程。建議採用引導式的探究取代開放式探究，讓學生針對變因較單純之現象進行建模。同時建議應協助教師對於模型的認識與增能，以協助培育學生的建模與探究能力。英文摘要：This study aims to investigate 10th grade school students' learning performance from using model-based inquiry instruction. After three weeks of modeling-based instruction, students were engaged in model-based inquiry with open-ended questions for another three weeks. Students' learning performance was analyzed via assessing changes of their (1) epistemological view of models, (2) performance in a modeling ability test, and (3) work collected from practice. Results show (1) a significant difference in students' epistemological view of models after instruction; (2) better performance on model selection and modeling construction processes; however, relatively poor performance in model validation and model application; (3) from their product of inquiry activities, students were found to select the correct variables and find the qualitative relationship among variables. There is still a gap that exists in the students' understanding before they form their models and explain the results of their actual work comparable to the way members of the scientific communities explain their results. A noteworthy finding is that a bimodal distribution exists in the model validation section on the modeling ability test. By comparing their responses on two questionnaires, the authors find that students who were ranked higher in their model validation performed better on questionnaire items related to the epistemological view of models. Therefore, investigators inferred from these results that students need a better epistemological view of models, in order to rank higher in model validation of the modeling competence.起始頁-結束頁：207-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201912_27(4).00013篇名：網路探究活動對國中高、低批判思考能力學生之探究能力及演化概念知識的影響並列篇名：The Influence of Web-Based Inquiry Activity on Inquiry Ability and Evolution Conceptual Knowledge of Junior High School Students With High and Low Critical Thinking Skills作者：陳欣<U+73CF>(Hsin-Chueh Chen);張俊彥(Chun-Yen Chang)關鍵字：批判思考能力;探究能力;演化概念學習;網路探究活動;Critical Thinking Skills;Inquiry Ability;Evolution Learning;Web-Based Inquiry Activity期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在使用Collaborative Web-based Inquiry Science Environment（CWISE）演化教材模組，探討網路探究活動對國中高、低批判思考能力學生探究能力及演化概念知識的影響，並瞭解不同批判思考能力學生的思考偏好。研究對象為七所學校的國中七年級學生共209位，採用質性與量化混和的研究方法。研究者依照學生批判思考能力不同分成高、低兩個組別。研究結果顯示，在探究活動前、中、後，批判思考能力高的學生在探究能力及演化概念知識上的表現情形顯著優於批判思考能力低的學生。另外，學生的探究能力與演化概念知識呈顯著正相關。研究結果亦發現兩組在探究活動後，其探究能力及演化概念知識皆顯著提升，可見此演化教材模組適用於不同批判思考能力的學生。研究者進而依據學生在腦力激盪的發言內容進行質性編碼，觀察不同組別的思考偏好差異。研究結果表明，高批判思考能力學生較多屬於反思型學生；低批判思考能力學生則較多屬於漫想型學生。最後，研究者依據研究結果提出在網路探究教學實踐及研究上的若干建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the impact of a web-based inquiry activity on the inquiry ability and evolution conceptual knowledge of junior high school students who have high and low critical thinking skills. Collaborative Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (CWISE) evolution instructional model was used to analyze students' thinking preferences. The study consisted of 209 students from seven schools and incorporated qualitative and quantitative research methods during analysis of data. According to the students' level of critical thinking skills, the researchers divided the students into two groups. Results showed that students with higher critical thinking skills have better inquiry ability and higher cognitive level of evolution conceptual knowledge before, during, and after the inquiry activity. In addition, the students' inquiry ability was found to be significantly related to their cognitive level of evolution conceptual knowledge. CWISE evolution instructional model significantly improved the students' inquiry ability and evolution conceptual knowledge which means that this web-based inquiry teaching approach may be applicable in science classrooms with mixed-ability students. Researchers found that the students' thinking preferences among these two groups were in accordance with their responses in the brainstorming step in CWISE. Generally, there were more students in the higher critical thinking skills group classified in ”The Reflective Type” than in the ”The Unrealistic Type” compared with students in the lower critical thinking skills group. Finally, this study proposes suggestions for future web-based inquiry teaching practice and research related to science education.起始頁-結束頁：229-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201912_27(4).00024篇名：探討學生科學能力與教師探究教學實務的關係並列篇名：Investigating the Relation Between Students' Scientific Competences and Their Teacher's Inquiry Teaching Practices作者：林淑梤(Shu-Fen Lin)關鍵字：科學能力;探究教學;教學效能;教學實務;評量;Scientific Competence;Inquiry Teaching;Teaching Effectiveness;Teaching Practice;Assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討一個協助教師發展素養導向試題、設計和實施探究教學的教師專業發展計畫，對學生科學能力與學業成就的影響，並探討教師探究教學實務與學生科學能力的關係。7位國中科學教師參與此計畫，經半年發展素養導向試題和探究教案後，實施一學期的探究教學。採用準實驗研究法，比較實驗組和對照組學生的科學能力和學業成就。研究工具為「學校課程科學能力試卷」和「探究教學實務觀察評分表」。前者評量九年級學生「解釋科學現象」、「設計與評估科學探究」和「詮釋科學數據與證據」的三大科學能力。為了比較7位教師探究教學實務的差異，利用「探究教學實務觀察評分表」針對教師的探究教學影片進行評分。研究結果顯示整體實驗組的科學能力分數顯著高於整體對照組，而且整體實驗組在三種科學能力表現也顯著高於整體對照組；然而經個別分析，僅1位教師實驗組的科學能力和學業成就顯著高於對照組。進一步分析7位教師的探究教學實務和學生學習表現的關係，發現個案教師在探究教學的效能，以及給予學生探究學習的機會（含口語表達與動手做）兩個面向，展現出不同表現的探究教學實務，其與學生科學能力表現有關。文末探討影響教師初次實施探究教學實務的各種因素進行討論。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to examine the impact of a teacher professional development (PD) project on students' scientific competences and learning achievement, and to investigate the relationship between teachers' inquiry practices and their students' learning performance. Seven science teachers in junior high schools participated in the project. They developed some literacy-guided items, designed an inquiry teaching plan in six months, and then implement the inquiry teaching plan during one semester. A quasi-experimental design was adopted to compare students' scientific competences and learning achievement between an experimental group and a control group. Two instruments were used in this study: the ”Curriculum Based Scientific Competence (CBSC) test” and the ”scoring rubric of inquiry teaching practices.” The CBSC test assessed grade 9 students' scientific competences of ”explaining scientific phenomenon,” ”designing and evaluating scientific inquiry,” and ”interpreting data and evidence.” Teaching videos were scored by using a scoring rubric for evaluating inquiry teaching practice. Results indicate that the students' total scientific competence score of the experimental group was significantly higher than the control group, and the comparisons of the three scientific competence scores were similar. However, the analysis of individual teacher's groups, the total scientific competence score, and the students' learning achievement of one teacher's experimental group was significantly higher than the students' of another teacher's control group. After analysis of the relationship between seven teachers' inquiry teaching practices and their students' learning performance, the finding indicated that a teacher's effectiveness of inquiry teaching and the provided opportunities for students to engage in inquiry learning (i.e., oral expression and hands-on) were related to the teacher's performance of inquiry teaching practices. In addition, a teacher's use of inquiry teaching practices seemed to have a relationship with their students' learning performance. Finally, the factors which influence a teacher's initial inquiry teaching practices were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：251-274資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201912_27(4).00035篇名：理科大學生在科學探究文本寫作中之能力覺知與學習表現並列篇名：Science Majors' Awareness and Performance in the Practices of Science-Inquiry Writing作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin)關鍵字：科學普及;科學寫作;探究;理科大學生;專題本位學習;Science Popularization;Scientific Writing;Inquiry;College Science Majors;Project-Based Learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究以專題本位學習模式，讓理科大學生在小組情境下從事科學探究文本寫作；藉此提供學生應用及覺知科學教育所需能力的機會，並探討對科學寫作的態度改變及寫作成果的表現。研究採混合研究法，歷經一學期，將國小科學展覽得獎作品，轉寫為適合國小學生閱讀之科學探究文本。研究之初，研究者引介專題任務的目標與進程，並提供一份轉寫作品為範本及評量文本的規準給學生參考；隨後各組選擇一份科學展覽作品進行轉寫；研究者逐週以中介任務做為鷹架，協助學生逐步完成任務。另在學期中，請各組進行兩次期中報告，研究者與同儕提出修訂建議。各組發展作品期間，研究者蒐集質性與量性資料包括：撰寫札記、學生作品、訪談資料、學生學習單、回饋問卷及前、後測量表等。結果顯示：學生對科學寫作態度前、後測間無顯著差異，但其傾向與喜好的改變具小效果量；對從事科學教育所需能力的重要性及勝任度覺知有顯著改變；另從專題任務發展出的作品，可知其所展現的能力及尚待加強的部分。期末藉學生回饋意見，確認收穫、障礙及有助益的項目。透過探究文本轉寫之專題學習，能提升理科大學生對科學教育所需能力之覺知與學習表現。本研究結果可供未來培養學生科學普及文本轉寫能力之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this one-semester-long study focused on science-majors working on small-group basis for developing inquiry-based reading materials from a science-fair outstanding masterpiece for primary students. Project-Based Learning was emphasized as the theory-basis. In the beginning, the purpose of project was introduced; a sample text and a grade rubric were given to them to assist their understanding of the evaluation criteria of a submitted masterpiece. Students then worked together to do their rewriting to inquiry-based narrative-oriented readings. During this process, several tasks were offered to students as scaffold for fulfilling the assigned task. Two mid-term reports were arranged for students to share and revise their semi-products based on peers' comments. In addition, the researcher advised each group to pay special attention to visual representations, figure modifications, and the argumentation and decisions embedded in the context of the text. Mixed methods were used for collecting information from students. Results revealed (1) this project had a small-size effect on intention and likeness of students' attitudes toward scientific writing; (2) students' awareness of the importance toward and their competence of science education were significantly improved after the project; (3) the final student products revealed students' strengths and shortcomings. At the end of the study, for the purpose of improving the design of this project for future investigation, the researcher collected comments from the students on what they had gained through the study, what they found to be obstacles, and what they believed were the benefits of the instructional strategies of the project. It was concluded that the tasks experienced in this Project-Based Learning had enhanced students' awareness and practice of abilities in science education. The findings from this study hopefully will be implicated in developing a course for nurturing college students with the abilities in science popularization.起始頁-結束頁：275-297資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201912_27(4).00046篇名：科學家傳記動畫融入教學對於原住民學生動機與性別意象影響之研究並列篇名：The Exploration of Effectiveness of Agitating Indigenous Students' Motivation and Their Female Images by Using Animated Scientists Biographies作者：陳明秀(Ming-Hsiu Mia Chen);王子華(Tzu-Hua Wang);李嫚珊(Man-Shan Li)關鍵字：女科學家傳記;多媒體教材引起動機;原住民學生;Female Scientist Biographies;Multimedia Motivational Teaching Materials;Indigenous Students期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究透過網路公開之「性別與科技」動畫教材，取其中原住民與漢人女科學家傳記動畫，以閱讀理解策略設計學習單與授課的提問策略，針對花蓮縣3所偏鄉小學5個班級進行為期4週的教學，探究教學中不同族群女科學家傳記動畫教材對原住民學生之動機與性別意象的影響情形。本研究採混合研究設計，研究對象為四到六年級35位原住民學生，分為「原漢組」、「漢原組」，「原漢組」先實施原住民女科學家傳記動畫教學再實施漢人女科學家傳記動畫教學，「漢原組」則相反。研究工具有二，量化使用「多媒體教材引起動機量表」，評估多媒體教材對學生動機引起之影響；而開放填答的學習單為質性資料，探究受測學生對於科學家的性別意象。研究結果發現，不同族群女科學家傳記動畫教材對於引起原住民學生動機之影響力不明顯。而一併使用原住民、漢人科學家傳記教材授課時，先使用「漢人」後使用「原住民」女科學家傳記動畫，對於偏鄉原住民學生引起動機效果較正面。而男女學生表現在不同族群教材受教順序上來看，先使用「原住民」後使用「漢人」教材對於男學生的影響較大且為負面影響。質性資料顯示，原住民學生對於科學家的性別意象上，整體學生接受女科學家傳記教材授課後較無性別刻板印象。英文摘要：This study applied the use of ”gender and technology” to animated instructional materials. These materials included biographies from indigenous and Han female scientists. Reading comprehension teaching strategies were used to teach these materials to indigenous students (n = 35) in five classes (grades 4 to 6) located in three Hualien County rural primary schools over a period of four weeks. Investigators explored the extent that these materials affected students' learning motivation. Student participants were divided into two groups. One group was taught indigenous female scientists first followed by material on Han female scientists material (i.e., ”Indigenous-Han”); the other group was taught material on Han female scientists material first followed by material on indigenous female scientists (i.e., ”Han-Indigenous”). The ”Instructional Materials Motivation Survey Instrument” was used to collect quantitative data from students whereas worksheets were used to collect qualitative data from students. Overall quantitative analysis results suggest that ”Han-Indigenous” teaching order had a greater positive motivational effect on rural indigenous students' learning than the ”Indigenous-Han” teaching order. However, using ”Indigenous” and then ”Han” had a decreased and negative impact on male students' motivation than their female counterparts. Qualitative analysis results suggest that both male and female participants were inspired by the teaching of female scientist animated biographies instructional materials.起始頁-結束頁：299-321資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201912_27(4).00057篇名：臺灣國中青少年之自然連結量表編製與信效度分析並列篇名：The Development of Connection With Nature Scale for Junior-High-School Adolescents作者：曾鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tseng)關鍵字：自然連結;自然經驗;臺灣青少年（國中階段）;環境行為意圖;Connection With Nature;Nature Experience;Taiwanese Adolescent (Junior-High-School Level);Intention of Environmental Behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：過去的重要生命經驗研究及環境經驗調查發現自然經驗能影響環境態度與行為。但直到2000年心理學者開始探討自然連結的心理現象後，才能進一步測量並驗證其內在心理機制。但目前國外學界所發展的自然連結量表都以西方文獻為基礎、以成人為測試對象，仍未有適用於非西方文化及青少年的測量工具。因此本研究主要目的即是以臺灣青少年的真實自然經驗為素材，發展適用於國中階段的「自然連結量表」，同時調查臺灣國中生的自然連結現況及其對環境行為意圖的預測力。本研究採問卷調查法，先透過便利抽樣以238名臺北市及新竹市公立國中學生為預試樣本，進行項目分析和探索性因素分析之後，另加上451名臺中市公立國中學生為正式樣本，進行驗證性因素分析。結果顯示本研究所提出的三構面自然連結量表具有良好的整體適配度及信效度。此外，本研究亦發現住在非市區、有家人陪伴從事戶外活動、曾參加學校戶外課程的學生之自然連結顯著高於沒有這些條件的學生。多元迴歸分析也顯示自然連結中的「感官體驗」及「自然重要性」較「造訪戶外頻率」更能預測環境行為意圖。本文依據結果建議未來研究者可考慮將自然連結納入環境行為理論做進一步的探究，亦可運用此量表評估戶外環境教育課程的效果。英文摘要：Past Significant Life Experience research has shown that nature experiences can influence environmental attitudes and behaviors. Until 2000, when psychologists started to explore the inner psychological phenomenon of people's Connection With Nature (CWN), researchers were able to measure and explain the mechanism of how CWN can motivate people to protect the environment. However, the existing scales relied on western literature and were mainly developed for adults in western cultural contexts. So far, there is no measure designed for adolescents and for people in non-western cultures. The purpose of this research was to develop a specific CWN scale based on what Taiwanese adolescents (junior-high-school level) experienced and perceived in nature. This research also investigated Taiwanese adolescents' current CWN level and how CWN could predict their intention of environmental behavior. Through convenience sampling, this study first surveyed 238 public junior-high-school students in Taipei City and Hsinchu City as pilot study to conduct item analysis and exploratory factor analysis. Then this study surveyed another 451 public junior-high-school students located in Taichung City to conduct confirmatory factor analysis. The result showed that this 11-item CWN scale supported three constructs with acceptable goodness of fit and good validity and reliability. Further analysis indicated that students from non-urban areas who went outdoors with their family and ever participated in school outdoor activities had significantly higher CWN level. Multiple repression analysis indicated that two of the CWN constructs, including sensory engagement and personal meaning of nature significance predicted students' intention of environmental behavior better than the criterion variable of frequency of outdoor visits. Based on these results, this study suggest that future researchers can include CWN into environmental behavior theories and test the CWN-environmental behavior hypothesis or model. The CWN scale may also be used by educators for outdoor environmental education program evaluation.起始頁-結束頁：323-345資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201912_27(4).00068篇名：國小自然領域師資生實習日誌的教學省思內容及層次分析並列篇名：Analysis the Level and Content of Teaching Reflection on the Pre-Service Elementary School Science Teachers' Teaching Journal作者：陳美卿(Mei-Ching Chen);周金城(Chin-Cheng Chou)關鍵字：自然領域師資生;專業發展;教學省思;Pre-Service Science Teachers;Professional Development;Teaching Reflection期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：實習日誌是師資生在教學實習期間幾乎每日必須的紀錄，它賦予教學省思的內涵，提供師資生察覺自己的實習行為，促進思考、檢討教學、改進策略，使師資生能經由省思再建構出自己的教學專業。本研究旨在探討國小自然科師資生在實習期間（3週集中教學實習至半年教育實習階段）其教學省思的實踐現況，且進一步思考如何提升師資生教學省思的層次與內涵。研究對象以4位自然科師資生為個案，針對其教學省思對象、省思層次及省思內容等議題進行探究與分析。資料蒐集包含大學四年級3週集中實習日誌、五年級教育實習週誌及訪談資料等進行內容分析。研究發現，師資生教學省思對象類型以「自身」為主，比例約占50.0%；師資生其教學省思層次以「技術的」層次為主，比例約占60.3%，其省思偏向單純的描述課堂問題；師資生教學省思內容，包含對教育環境、教學信念及教學技巧（數位科技融入）等面向。依據前述分析所修正的實習日誌格式，給其他5位師資生填寫，發現修正後的日誌格式能引導師資生提升省思的層次。研究省思認為教學省思應落實在實習課程中，精緻化引導的問題，並擴大研究對象進行深入的實證研究分析，讓教學省思成為教師的專業發展模式，提升教師的教學成效。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the teaching journals of pre-service science teachers during their practice teaching, and to further consider how to improve the pre-service teachers' teaching reflection. Participants included four teacher interns. Collected qualitative data included the interns' teaching diaries, questionnaire surveys completed interns and researcher-intern interviewers. Results show that pre-service teachers' diaries included information describing: (1) themselves (about 50.0%); (2) classroom problems but without proposing solutions to these problems (about 60.3%); (3) education environment, teaching beliefs, teaching skills, and digital technology integration. Another aspect of the teachers' diaries that investigators looked at was (4) the different log (diary entry) formats the teachers used. In addition, this study proposed three suggestions. An intern's teaching reflections should (1) be included in a future teacher's internship practice and (2) be guided to prevent problems typically encountered when interns use teaching diaries. Future investigators may also wish to (3) expand the number of participants when conducting in-depth empirical research. Intern teaching reflections provide a good basis upon which future professional development models can be designed to improve teachers' teaching effectiveness.起始頁-結束頁：347-368資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201912_27(4).00079篇名：社會性科學議題情境下高中生道德判斷和其依據之探究並列篇名：Exploring High School Students' Moral Judgment and Justifications in Socio-Scientific Contexts作者：盧俊達(Jun-Da Lu);林樹聲(Shu-Sheng Lin)關鍵字：社會性科學議題;高中生;道德判斷;道德判斷依據;Socio-Scientific Issues;Senior High School Students;Moral Judgment;Moral Justifications期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究調查不同類組的高中生在面對社會性科學議題時，其「道德判斷和判斷依據」的情況。研究對象來自臺灣中、南部地區四所學校的部分高三學生，共154人，其中社會組（第一類組）56人、自然組非生物科主修（第二類組）48人、自然組生物科主修（第三類組）50人。研究工具為自行發展之「道德思考問卷」，內容包括「再生醫學」、「基因改造作物」、「動物活體實驗」等三個社會性科學議題。研究者採用歸納法分析資料，再統計各類項的百分比，進而以卡方考驗比較不同類組之間的差異。結果發現：整體而言，學生的道德判斷和依據會隨著情境的不同而不同；在「再生醫學」、「動物活體實驗」議題中，學生道德判斷為應該時，判斷依據傾向「目的論」；道德判斷為不應該時，判斷依據傾向「義務論」；第一類組和第三類組學生在面對「動物活體實驗」時，道德判斷呈現顯著差異（χ^2＝12.60，p＜.005），第一類組傾向不應該，第三類組傾向應該；而第一類組和第二類組學生在面對「基因改造作物」議題時，道德判斷依據則達顯著差異（χ^2＝11.04，p＜.050），第一類組傾向「目的論」，第二類組傾向「義務論」。文末針對社會性科學議題教學中的道德判斷、未來研究提出相關的建議。英文摘要：This study explored moral judgments and justifications of senior high school students with different majors. One hundred and fifty-four subjects coming from four senior high schools located in the central and south-western parts of Taiwan joined this study. This study consisted of 56 students majoring in social science (Group I), 48 students majoring in science without biology (Group II), and 50 students majoring in biology (Group III). The questionnaire used in this study assessed students' moral judgments and justifications in three different Socio-Scientific scenario contexts: ”regenerative medicine,” ”genetically-modified organism (GMO),” and ”animal experiments.” Researchers analyzed data using the inductive method, statistical percentage, and Chi-square tests. Results showed that senior high school students' moral judgments and justifications varied, depending on the Socio-Scientific scenario context. Most students when faced with scenarios involving ”regenerative medicine” and ”animal experiments” were inclined to adopt teleological justifications to support their moral judgments on what they thought they ”should” do and were inclined to construct deontological justifications for their moral judgments on what they thought they ”should not” do. Group I was significantly different from Group III in moral judgments in the context of animal experiments (χ^2 = 12.60, p ＜ .005). Most students in Group I were ”against” and most students in Group III were ”for” these experiments. Moreover, Group I was significantly different from Group II in moral justifications in the context of GMO (χ^2 = 11.04, p ＜ .050). Most students in Group I made teleological justifications and most students in Group II constructed deontological justifications. Implications for the use of moral judgment in Socio-Scientific Issue instruction in future research is also forwarded.起始頁-結束頁：147-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201909_27(3).000110篇名：科學課室教學之教師提問模式分析：以地球科學課室為例並列篇名：Analyzing Teacher Questioning Behaviors in the Earth Science Classrooms作者：鄭嘉惠(Chia-Hui Cheng);楊芳瑩(Fang-Ying Yang);連筱萍(Hsiao-Ping Lien);洪逸文(Yi-Wen Hung)關鍵字：地球科學教育;教師提問;Earth Science Education;Teacher Questioning期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究目的為分析教師於地球科學課室中的提問模式，Carlsen（1991）指出教師的提問行為與課程進行、課程內容及學生回應有關。然而，過去的研究者並沒有深入探討教師問題的內容與連結性。本研究中，作者欲探討教師在特定學科，即地球科學課室內教師的提問行為與問題模式。研究對象為資深的地球科學高中教師，將其上課內容錄影並且製作成逐字稿予以分析。根據科學素養的相關內容，將教師提問根據其目的分為以下四種類別，分別為：學習科學概念、學習科學方法與過程、培養科學態度與價值及其他。不同的問題目的再根據其相關的功能及概念內容進行分類。研究結果發現專家教師在不同的時間序列中皆會穿插不同目的的問題，亦會搭配不同的問題功能，協助學生的概念學習。此外，概念內容分析的結果指出，專家教師會將新的科學知識內容建構在學生的舊概念之上，並且嘗試概念改變。未來應將此研究拓展至不同的教學單元，對於專家教師的發問模式有綜觀性的認識，提供給生手教師值得參考的教學內容與進程。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to investigate teacher questioning behaviors in earth science classrooms. Carlsen (1991) pointed out that teachers' questions were related to context, content and reaction to responses. In literatures, studies analyzing teacher questioning behaviors paid most attention to question types that would inspire students' fruitful thinking and responses. It seems that the context and contents of questions have not been emphasized enough. In this study, questions given by experienced teachers in the earth science classrooms were analyzed with respect to the purpose and function of each question. Questions were first categorized according to the purpose and then further subdivided to indicate how the questions were used. Four categories according to the purpose of questions were identified and reflected the main components of scientific literacy. The four categories are (1) learning of science concepts (content knowledge), (2) understanding of the process of the science (procedural knowledge), (3) scientific values and attitudes (epistemic knowledge), and (4) others (which can't be classified into aforementioned three categories). The various functions of the questions in each category were defined. Bloom's Taxonomy, the structure of scientific reasoning and argumentation, and the nature of science to define functions of questions were taken into account. Results showed that experienced teachers arranged questions with different purposes in each time sequence. Though the questions related to function of memorization appeared most frequently, experienced teachers tried to arrange questions with different functions to promote students' conceptual learning. Furthermore, experienced teachers mostly helped students to construct new scientific concepts based on their prior knowledge. The findings of this study could offer novice teachers a comprehensive understanding of questioning behaviors in science classrooms.起始頁-結束頁：167-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201909_27(3).000211篇名：探討不同角色群眾對國家公園與鄰近社區永續發展議題觀點差異並列篇名：Exploring Mass Opinion on Sustainable Development of National Parks and Neighboring Communities From Different Perspectives作者：林瓊瑤(Chiung-Yao Lin);許毅璿(Yi-Syuan Syu);黃琴扉(Chin-Fei Huang)關鍵字：永續發展;社區民眾;國家公園;Sustainable Development;Community Residents;National Park期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討不同角色群眾對墾丁國家公園與鄰近社區永續發展議題觀點差異。墾丁國家公園是環境永續發展與教育落實的重要場域，然而其區域涵蓋高密度居民且商業開發區域較多，因此在凝聚不同觀點共識上具備高度挑戰性；本研究主軸在於統整與詮釋不同面向群眾的觀點，期許能提供墾丁國家公園與鄰近社區共利發展之參考。本研究場域為墾丁國家公園與其周圍方圓30公里內的地區，研究對象分為三類，包含社區居民、一般民眾及墾丁國家公園工作人員；運用「墾丁國家公園及其鄰近社區之永續發展議題」問卷（Chronbach α值達.90）收集150位研究對象的量化資料，並隨機抽取其中30位進行開放性問卷以彙整質性資料。研究結果顯示：（一）三類研究對象對墾丁國家公園與鄰近社區永續發展重要性看法，均最重視管理層面，其次為生態層面，最後為社會經濟層面；（二）研究對象最重視的向度一致為管理層面的「教育與培訓」、「環境評估」、「衝突解決機制」、「立法」及生態層面的「生物質量（自然環境）」議題；（三）研究對象觀點歧異向度包含社會經濟層面的「總體經濟價值」與「直接投資」，以及管理層面的「衝突解決機制」與「非政府組織」議題項目。本研究建議相關單位未來可依觀點差異調整管理策略。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the public's opinion on the sustainable development of national parks and neighboring communities from different perspectives. The study area was conducted within Kenting National Park and a 30-km radius of the park area. The research participants were divided into three categories: community residents, the general public, and Kenting National Park staff. Investigators of this study collected quantitative data from participants (N = 150) by using the questionnaire ”Sustainable Development Issues in Kenting National Park and its Neighboring Communities.” A random selection of 30 individuals from the research participants were used for qualitative investigative purposes. Investigators used open questionnaires and interviews to collect qualitative data from these individuals. Integrated interpretation through quantitative and qualitative data analysis was employed in this study. Results showed three important findings. First is that all three types of research participants viewed the importance of sustainable development of Kenting National Park and its neighboring communities, its management structure, its ecological construction, and its social economy. Second, research participants viewed the most consistent purposes of Kenting National Park and its surrounding area were ”education and training,” ”environmental assessment,” ”conflict resolution mechanism,” ”legislation,” and ”ecological quality.” Differences in the perspectives of the three groups of research participants included their ”overall economic value” and ”direct investment” of the local economy, and the ”conflict resolution mechanism” and ”nongovernmental organization” projects in the management structure of the park. Further discussion on other aspect of the analysis and recommendations for future investigation are also presented.起始頁-結束頁：185-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201909_27(3).000312篇名：以結構方程模式探討影響高中學生團隊參加創意競賽表現之因素並列篇名：Study on the Factors Affecting the Team Performance of Senior High School Students in the Creative Contest by Using Structure Equation Modeling作者：王裕宏(Yu-Hung Wang);劉佳儒(Jia-Ru Liou);張美珍(Mei-Chen Chang)關鍵字：科學博物館;能源科技;創意競賽;Science Museum;Energy Technology;Creative Contests期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：為推動能源科技教育，教育部指導由博物館統籌規劃辦理「全國能源科技創意實作競賽」，提供一競賽平臺，讓學生以能源為主題進行創意實作，從中決選出具創意且具體實踐的作品。為探析影響高中學生團隊參加競賽表現的因素，本研究透過文獻分析發展影響創意競賽表現模式，以2014∼2017年參加全國能源科技創意實作競賽的387名高中學生為調查對象，進行驗證性因素分析，建構高中學生團隊競賽表現模式，探討在表現模式中各影響因素間的關係。研究結果發現，研究模式適配度理想，適用高中學生團隊競賽表現模式；團隊組成對於競賽表現具有直接顯著的影響，是影響最大的構面因素；知識運用構面對於競賽表現沒有直接影響，參賽動機因素對於知識運用構面有直接影響效果，雖未能直接影響競賽表現，但透過團隊組成對競賽表現具有間接影響效果。本模式分析高中學生參加團隊競賽表現的影響因素，研究結果有助於學校在組織團隊參加比賽時考量學生參賽動機、團隊組成及知識運用對競賽表現的影響。研究另提出具體建議，供學校參加類似競賽活動時參考，如學生團隊的組成方式、學校提供知識運用面的支援等。英文摘要：To promote energy technology education, the ”National Energy Technology Creative Contest” was co-sponsored by the Ministry of Education and the Science Museums, with the aim to provide a competitive platform that could allow students to implement creative projects based on the theme of energy. This study explored the influencing factors that affect the performance of senior high students participating in the contest. Based on literature review, this study developed a contest performance model, and treated the senior high school students (N = 387) participating in the National Energy Technology Creative Contest from 2014 to 2017 as subjects. The confirmatory factor analysis was used to evaluate the contest performance model and explore the influencing factors in the model. Results of this study revealed: 1. the research model had good model fit to the data collected from the student participants; 2. the team composition dimension had a direct and significant influence on the contest performance and was the most influential of the assessed dimensions; 3. the knowledge application dimension had no direct influence on team performance; 4. motivation factors had direct influence on the knowledge application dimension. Although students' motivation did not directly affect team performance, it had a mediating effect on team performance through team composition. The proposed model analyzed the influencing factors that affected the team performance of senior high students participating in the contest. The results of this study may be of interest to high schools in evaluating the influence of motivation, team composition, and knowledge application on team performance when organizing teams. Several suggestions are put forward for reference to schools on team contest, including team composition and support from school on knowledge application from schools.起始頁-結束頁：73-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201906_27(2).000113篇名：追求卓越下的教師專業成長：一個任務導向臉書社團之分析並列篇名：Professional Development for Science Teachers in Pursuit of Excellence: An Empirical Study on the Effectiveness of a Professional Learning Community on Facebook作者：蘇明進(Ming-Ching Su);張文華(Wen-Hua Chang)關鍵字：社會資本;專業學習社群;專業發展;學科教學知識;臉書社團;Social Capital;Professional Learning Community;Professional Development;Pedagogical Content Knowledge;Facebook Groups期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：社群網站的日益普及，提供教師非正式學習的參與途徑，並且改變教師專業學習社群的運作模式。本研究旨在分析一個發展學校本位課程並參與全國教學卓越比賽的任務導向Facebook社團，教師於與其他參與者的互動關係及該社團成員專業發展的狀況。本個案研究採用混合方法，以中部一所小學的教師Facebook社團共11位教師為研究對象，資料蒐集包含為期一年的線上發表討論、線上回應文字、實體聚會錄音、課程研發相關文件和教師晤談，並透過社會資本理論中的結構、關係、認知三大面向結合學科教學知識（Pedagogical Content Knowledge, PCK）架構進行資料分析。研究結果發現，此一社團的運作，以任務參與為運作導向，並以關係面向社會資本為主、認知面向社會資本為輔進行線上互動，結構面向社會資本影響則不明顯；領導者以規範作為關係面向社會資本來源，其他成員則以信任作為關係面向社會資本來源。此外，在教師專業成長上，雖在科學學習知識與科學評量知識層面的變化較不明顯，然而在追求達成任務的歷程中，建立Facebook社團有利於知識的交換與結合，以及對於科學課程知識的理解；且於成員間信任關係的支持下，有助於教師科學信念的改變。本研究的發現與建議可作為未來教師專業學習社群運用Facebook社團功能進行專業成長之參考。英文摘要：The increasing popularity of social networking sites provides informal learning opportunities for teachers and opportunities to changes the way professional learning communities (PLCs) work. The purpose of this study is to analyze the interactions among elementary teachers in their Facebook (FB) group and to examine how such interactions promote professional development among these teachers. A mixed methods design that incorporates both quantitative and qualitative techniques was employed. Participants were 11 teachers in an elementary school in central Taiwan. Data collected for this study included posts and comments on FB, meeting recordings, curriculum documents, and individual interviews. Data were analyzed based on the theory of social capital and the concept of pedagogical content knowledge. Results indicate that the driving force of this FB group was goal-oriented. Among all the posts, relational social capital was the most used, followed by cognitive social capital. Structural social capital, however, was not found to be salient. The leader of this FB group performed by task norms and other members interacted by trust as the sources of relational social capital in the FB group. Although changes to teachers' knowledge of science learning and knowledge of science assessment were not salient, investigators of this study found that the teachers did exchange and combine knowledge so that they could enhance their knowledge of the science curriculum for the purpose of achieving instructional goals as well as enabling the transformation of teachers' beliefs of and orientation towards science teaching in the trust relationship between teachers. Implications of this study may be of importance to educators and policy makers who are interested in using FB for professional development among elementary teachers.起始頁-結束頁：97-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201906_27(2).000214篇名：偏鄉學生面臨科學探究式專題導向教學法之學習挑戰並列篇名：Challenges in Adopting Place-Based Science-Inquiry Project-Based Learning Pedagogy in Rural Schools作者：洪萱芳(Hsuan-Fang Hung);林英杰(Ying-Chieh Lin);顏瓊芬(Chiung-Fen Yen)關鍵字：地方本位教育;科學探究;專題式導向教學法;學生特質;環境教育;Place-Based Education;Science Inquiry;Project-Based Teaching;Student Characteristics;Environmental Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文主要探討以生活經驗為起點出發的地方本位教育模式，結合科學探究式專題導向法對偏鄉學生的學習成效。研究文獻指出，許多科學知識的教學並未充分連結學生的生活經驗與背景知識，使得許多學生在學習歷程中遭遇挑戰，進而影響自我學習認同；此外，學生在進行科學學習時，因為先備知識不足，導致其在科學學習過程中學習動機低落，學習成效亦受到極大影響。因此本研究希望透過探討9位中部偏鄉小學五年級學生為主要研究對象，由1位自然科學專業知識與教學資歷極為豐富的教師擔任教學者，希望在排除教師學科知識較弱的因素下，探討偏鄉學生面對科學探究式專題導向教學法的挑戰。研究發現，本研究所建構的地方本位教育之科學探究式專題導向教學法，較適合對周遭環境敏感度較高的學生，因不管原有知識架構完整與否，透過經驗的連結，可協助發展出系統化的知識架構，對學習成效有正面影響。另外，研究結果也顯示，傳統講授法對於學生的學習認同與習慣影響深遠，包含傾向有標準答案的教學與強調學習結果忽略過程的學習方式等，因此若要推動創新教學法，必須正視傳統教學法對學生帶來的影響。英文摘要：This research used place-based education theory as the main framework to develop a place-based education module using the cross-cutting concept of ”Structure and Function” to integrate multi-subject science concepts into the science curriculum. Outdoor education pedagogy and project-based learning strategy were used in the module. Researchers used plants in the Dadu Mountain and Gaomei Wetland areas where the participating school for this research was located. The purpose of the science instruction used in this study was to connect students' knowledge of plants developed from their interactions with these plants grown in the mountain and wetland areas with their knowledge developed from textbooks in the classroom. Five curriculum units were developed. These units consisted of 19 formal lessons and 2 extended lessons. Data collection methods included pre- and post-interviews with students, lesson worksheets and concept maps, and class observations and field notes. Scientific identity survey was conducted before and after the module was implemented. Affection survey was conducted at the end of the module. Research outcomes found that students' past learning experiences with traditional pedagogy appeared to be the reason why they experienced difficult challenges using the new implemented pedagogy. Students' learning motivation and learning engagement were observed to be positively influenced by the module, and the concept of the ”Structure and Function” used to integrate the multi-subject science concepts was shown to help students in their systematic learning of the material. Using plants grown in the school area and the local community had a positive influence on low performing students, because these students were able to connect their daily life experiences with their classroom learning experiences. This connection further improved their learning motivation.起始頁-結束頁：121-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201906_27(2).000315篇名：開放式生物探究活動對馬來西亞高二高、低參與度學生之科學探究能力與覺知的影響並列篇名：The Influence of Implementing Open Inquiry Biology Project on the Science Inquiry Competency and Perception of the 11th Graders With High and Low Engagement in Malaysia作者：林玉蓮(Yoke Lin Lim);段曉林(Hsiao-Lin Tuan)關鍵字：探究能力;科學探究能力檢核表;探究實驗;參與度;Inquiry Competency;Scientific Inquiry Scoring Rubrics;Inquiry Experiment;Engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究主要探討開放式生物探究活動，對高二高、低參與度學生，科學探究能力與覺知的影響。研究採用質量合併方式，以高二理科3個班級（共137人）為研究對象，分高、低參與度，共30組，進行5個月的教學研究。透過科學探究能力檢核表（Oregon Department of Education [ODE], 2007）檢核書面計畫內容：I形成探究問題或假說；II探究的設計；III數據的收集與呈現；IV結果分析與詮釋。統計歸類各組報告的優缺點及問題，以探討探究能力精進的情況。並將檢核分數作描述性統計分析，以SPSS 20統計軟體作無母數分析，探討高、低參與度學生其探究能力的變化。此外於研究前與後收集學生探究能力與理解之覺知（Hsieh, Tuan, & Chin, 2010），並進行t檢定分析，以確認高、低參與度學生對探究的覺知差異。研究顯示：高、低參與度學生的探究能力在向度I∼III有統計差異，向度IV則沒有差異。完成稿的檢核平均分數顯示向度I與II高於向度III與IV。低參與度學生的「探究的理解」；高參與度的「探究能力」覺知向度個別達顯著差異。活動前，低參與度與高參與度學生的「探究的理解」覺知向度達顯著差異。活動後，高、低參與度學生的「探究能力」與「探究的理解」均沒有顯著差異。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the influence of implementing open inquiry biology project on the science inquiry competency and perception of the 11th graders with high and low engagement in Malaysia Chinese Independent School. Mixed qualitative and quantitative methodology were applied in the study, a total of 137 students (30 groups) from three science classes were classified into low and high participant. This study started in the beginning of academic year and lasted for five months. The scientific inquiry scoring guide (Oregon Department of Education [ODE], 2002): I. forming a question or hypothesis, II. designing an investigation, III. collecting and presenting data, IV. analyzing and interpreting results, was applied to assess inquiry proposal. The scores analyzed through descriptive statistics were then analyzed through nonparametric statistics by using SPSS20. The problems raised in the proposal were collected to study the improvement of inquiry competency. A questionnaire analyzed by t-test was conducted before and after the study to measure students' perceptions of Inquiry Competency (Hsieh, Tuan, & Chin, 2010). The results indicated that performance of high participant groups was better than low participant groups in facets I, II, III and the difference was significant. Final scores in I and II were higher than III and IV. The questionnaire result showed significant difference in students' perceptions of understanding of inquiry (SUI) of low participant groups, significant difference in students' inquiry competence (SIC) of high participant groups, whereas pre-test indicated significant difference between low and high participant groups in facet SUI but not significant difference in facets SIC, SUI of post-test.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201903_27(1).000116篇名：大規模線上開放課程授課教師經驗、經驗本質及反思並列篇名：Instructors' Experiences, Experiential Essences and Reflection in Massive Open Online Courses作者：汪耀華(Yao-Hua Wang);張基成(Chi-Cheng Chang)關鍵字：大規模線上開放課程;教師經驗;現象學;經驗本質;MOOCs;Teacher Experience;Phenomenology;Experiential Essence期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：為探究大規模開放式線上課程（Massive Open Online Courses, MOOCs）授課教師如何能吸引大量學生的教學技巧，本研究選取MOOCs平臺內最具人氣的三門課程，旨在探討授課教師經驗及其本質，並進行反思。先對4位教師（其中一門課由2位教師共同授課）進行現象學強調的深度訪談，將訪談資料轉成逐字稿後，進行資料內容的三角交叉驗證。再透過現象學資料分析步驟，分析逐字稿，寫出教師授課經驗，並進行經驗主題分類及分析結果的三角交叉驗證。分成課程型態、教材模式、教學方法、教師任務、課程價值5個面向主題闡述相應的教師經驗描述。歸納MOOCs授課教師經驗本質：異於傳統教育的MOOCs教師課程與教學、MOOCs教師角色及MOOCs課程價值。對於這些經驗及其本質，吾人應反思：一、創新科技促進師生之間、學生之間及學生與課程平臺之間的互動；二、廣納業界或實務專家合作，增加學習的多元選擇性；三、擴增MOOCs的應用面，增加謀利益的價值；四、教師從MOOCs教學中反思，有利於精進教學能力；五、提供助教及專業錄影人員，有效分攤教學負擔。最後，從反思得到啟示並提出建議。英文摘要：The study selected the top three courses with the highest enrollment rate from a Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) platform to investigate and reflect on the instructors' experiences and their essences. Deep interviews using a phenomenology approach were conducted with four instructors. One of three courses was co-taught by two instructors. The interview data was transcribed into transcripts, and then a triangular verification on the content from the transcripts was conducted. The transcripts data were analyzed using a phenomenological procedure through a series of evaluative steps. The instructors' experiences were recorded, and then a thematic category of their experiences was as well as a triangular verification on the data analysis results were also performed. There were five thematic experiences recorded from the instructors' experiences. These thematic experiences, included instructional type, mode of teaching materials, teaching method, teachers' tasks, and value of courses. The experiential essences in the MOOCs were found to be course and instruction, teachers' roles, and value of courses in MOOCs different from traditional education. Further reflections should be made by applying 1. innovative technologies to facilitate the interactions between teachers and students, among students, and between students and a course platform; 2. incorporating industry experts to collaboratively give lectures for increasing diverse learning options; 3. broadening the applications of MOOCs for enhancing the value and benefits of course content and instruction; 4. elaborating instructional abilities through reflections on MOOC instruction; and 5. offering assistants, professional video recorders, and rear-end makers for effectively sharing instructional burdens. Finally, inspirations and suggestions were proposed based upon the reflection on the essences of teaching experiences from the MOOC instructors.起始頁-結束頁：25-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201903_27(1).000217篇名：科學學習生態系統的資源流通性與社會包容性並列篇名：Science Learning Ecosystem's Resource Mobility and Social Inclusion作者：李偉廷(Wei-Ting Li);謝百淇(Paichi Pat Shein)關鍵字：社會包容性;社會網絡分析;非制式科學教育;科學學習生態系統;Social Inclusion;Social Network Analysis;Informal Science Education;Science Learning Ecosystem期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究透過科學學習生態系統的觀點，以科學學習環境問卷調查高雄地區的科學學習機構（N=33），透過社會網絡分析法及內容分析法進行資料分析，試圖刻畫高雄地區的科學學習生態系統，以提供實證性的建議，強化資源的流通與使用，並促進均等的科學學習機會，以提升公民科技素養。本研究發現，高雄地區的科學學習生態系統中，「高級中等以下學校」、「傳播業者」（電視、電臺、網站）及「博物館」在提供與接受資源上總流通量最高，而「圖書館／社教館所」有較高的機會與其他科學學習機構建立資源連結，亦即是最佳的資源集散中心。此外，也發現「圖書館／社教館所」與「博物館」與其他類型的科學學習機構相比，所提供的科學學習服務對於弱勢族群最為友善，能提升其進行科學學習的機會。本研究可以使決策者在思考如何有效分配科學學習資源時，有所依循，以提升資源使用的效率，避免資源的浪費。英文摘要：This study uses a ”science learning ecosystem” framework, and social network and content analysis methods to investigate 33 science learning institutions in Kaohsiung, Taiwan. The purpose of this investigation is to provide recommendations, based on empirical evidence, on how to make the flow of science learning resources effective, efficient, and equitable in promoting public scientific literacy. The findings of this investigation revealed that elementary and secondary schools, public broadcasting communication networks (television, radio, and Internet), and public museums demonstrated the highest level of resource exchange in the science learning ecosystem. Public libraries and social educational institutions also offered the highest opportunity to connect to other science learning institutions, making them an optimal center for receiving and distributing science learning resources. In addition, public libraries, social educational institutions, and museums were found to be the most inclusive in their services for underprivileged groups, providing these groups opportunities for science learning. This system-wide study provides information to educational authorities and decision makers which they may find useful when making well-informed decisions on how to best distribute new resources efficiently to avoid a waste of resources.起始頁-結束頁：49-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.201903_27(1).000301篇名：自閉症類群障礙與發展遲緩幼兒共享式注意力與模仿能力的表現並列篇名：Performance of Joint Attention and Imitation in Toddlers With Autism Spectrum Disorder and Those With Developmental Delay作者：吳進欽(Chin-Chin Wu);林昇億(Sheng-Yi Lin);朱慶琳(Ching-Lin Chu)關鍵字：共享式注意力;自閉症類群障礙;語言能力;模仿能力;joint attention;autism spectrum disorder;language ability;imitation ability期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究探討3歲以下自閉症類群障礙（autism spectrum disorder，ASD）與發展遲緩（developmental delay，DD）幼兒共享式注意力（joint attention，JA）與模仿能力障礙與表現型態，及JA與模仿和語言能力的關聯性。受試者為生理年齡25－36個月的ASD與DD幼兒各61名。以修訂臺灣版兩歲期自閉症篩檢工具評估主動性JA（initiating JA，IJA）、回應性JA（responding JA，RJA）、物體操作及手勢動作模仿能力，IJA分為完整IJA（full-IJA，F-IJA）與部分IJA（partial-IJA，P-IJA）。以穆林發展量表測量語言理解、語言表達及整體語言，以適應行為評量系統第二版中文版－幼兒版測量溝通適應。共變數分析控制整體心理年齡後，ASD組的F-IJA、P-IJA、RJA顯著低於DD組，模仿能力無顯著差異。二因子混合設計變異數分析發現組別與非語言溝通能力的交互作用達顯著顯示ASD與DD組的JA與模仿能力存在不同表現型態，ASD組IJA表現最差，而DD組手勢動作模仿表現最差。階層迴歸探究ASD與DD幼兒語言能力的關聯因素，發現ASD組手勢動作模仿和語言理解、語言表達，以及溝通適應具顯著關聯性，P-IJA和語言表達具顯著關聯性，RJA和語言理解與溝通適應具顯著關聯性。DD組僅手勢動作模仿和語言表達具顯著關聯性。本研究顯示ASD幼兒主要缺陷為JA，模仿能力是落後而非缺陷，ASD幼兒在JA、模仿以及語言能力的發展順序不同於DD幼兒。ASD與DD幼兒JA與模仿能力表現型態的差異，導致兩組幼兒語言能力的關聯因素也不同。本研究結果可以作為ASD與DD幼兒早期篩檢與早期療育的參考。英文摘要：Purpose: This study examined the performance and profiles of joint attention and imitation in toddlers with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and those with developmental delay (DD). The contributions of joint attention and imitation to language development were also analyzed. Methods: The sample comprised 122 toddlers aged 25-36 months, comprising 61 toddlers with ASD and 61 toddlers with DD. The Taiwan version of the Screening Tool for Autism in Two-Year-Olds was modified and used for measuring joint attention and imitation, including initiating joint attention (IJA), responding joint attention (RJA), object imitation, and manual imitation. IJA was divided into full IJA (F-IJA) and partial IJA (P-IJA). In addition, the Mullen Scales of Early Learning and the communication subscale of the Chinese Adaptive Behavior Assessment System-II for infant or preschool children were used to measure language abilities and communication adaptation, respectively. Results/Findings: In analysis of covariance (which was controlled for mental age), toddlers with ASD exhibited significant impairment of F-IJA, P-IJA, and RJA instead of imitation compared with toddlers with DD. Two-way mixed analysis of covariance revealed a significant group x nonverbal communication abilities interaction. The results suggested that the profiles of joint attention and imitation of toddlers with ASD and those with DD were distinct. Toddlers with ASD showed weakest ability in IJA, whereas toddlers with DD showed weakest ability in manual imitation. Hierarchical regressions were used to examine the contributors to language development in the 2 groups. For toddlers with ASD, manual imitation was the strongest significant contributor to receptive language, expressive language, and communication adaptation, whereas P-IJA was the significant contributor to expressive language. In addition, RJA was the significant contributor to receptive language and communication adaptation. For toddlers with DD, only manual imitation was a significant contributor to expressive language. Conclusions/Implications: The findings of this study revealed that weak joint attention was the core deficit of toddlers with ASD. However, imitation was delayed instead of being a deficit in toddlers with ASD. The distinct profiles of the 2 groups suggested that the developmental sequence of joint attention and imitation differed between toddlers with ASD and toddlers with DD. Therefore, contributors to language development differed between toddlers with ASD and toddlers with DD. The results of the study offer implications for early screening and early intervention of toddlers with ASD and those with DD.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201911_44(3).00012篇名：修訂版學步期自閉症檢核表在不同場域篩檢自閉症類群障礙症幼兒的正確率並列篇名：Detection of Autism Spectrum Disorder in Different Settings: Accuracy of the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers作者：洪楹佳(Ying-Chia Hung);陳奕臻(I-Chen Chen);吳進欽(Chin-Chin Wu)關鍵字：自閉症類群障礙症;修訂版學步兒自閉症檢核表;特異度;敏感度;autism spectrum disorder;Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT);specificity;sensitivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：修訂版學步期自閉症檢核表（Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers，M-CHAT）為國際上常見的自閉症類群障礙症（autism spectrum disorder，ASD）幼兒篩檢工具。然而，M-CHAT在臺灣的研究不多。因此，本研究探究M-CHAT在臺灣的不同場域（如：基層診所與綜合醫院）篩檢ASD幼兒的正確率。18－29個月的幼兒共272名，包括：ASD幼兒74名、發展遲緩（developmental delay，DD）幼兒87名與一般發展（typically developing，TD）幼兒111名，由主要照顧者填寫23題「是／非」選項的M-CHAT。以卡方檢定（chi-squared test）比較ASD、DD與TD幼兒在M-CHAT題目失敗率的差異，單因子變異數分析（analysis of variance，ANOVA）檢驗三組幼兒在總分及不同簡版分數的差異。然後，以訊號偵測理論（signal detection theory，SDT）決定M-CHAT的切截分數，並以判別函數分析（discriminant function analysis，DFA）找出M-CHAT的結構矩陣，決定關鍵題目。在綜合醫院場域使用時，M-CHAT篩檢ASD與DD幼兒，以任4題失敗作為切截分數，敏感度與特異度皆為.72。使用不同簡版時的敏感度為.62-.72，特異度為.85-.91，簡版14題（Brief 14）篩檢率正確率最佳。在基層診所場域使用時，M-CHAT篩檢ASD與TD幼兒，以任3題失敗作為切截分數，敏感度為.81，特異度為.83。使用不同簡版時的敏感度為.62-.72，特異度為.95-.99，一樣是簡版14題篩檢正確率最佳。M-CHAT用在綜合醫院場域篩檢ASD幼兒正確率尚可，用在基層診所場域篩檢ASD幼兒正確率良好。本研究結果支持M-CHAT可以在臺灣用於ASD幼兒的早期篩檢，特別是在基層診所場域。然而，在不同場域使用M-CHAT，需要使用不同的切截分數。英文摘要：Purpose: The Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT) is a well-researched screening tool that was originally developed for detecting autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in toddlers. However, few studies have examined the accuracy of the M-CHAT for detecting ASD in the Taiwanese population. Thus, this study examined the accuracy of the M-CHAT for detecting ASD in Taiwanese toddlers in different settings (i.e., primary clinics and general hospitals). Methods: The M-CHAT comprises 23 questions with yes/no responses, and it is designed to detect ASD in toddlers aged 16-30 months. In this study, the M-CHAT was administered to 272 caregivers of toddlers aged 18-29 months. The 272 caregivers comprised those of 74 toddlers with ASD, 87 toddlers with developmental delay (DD), and 111 toddlers who were typically developing (TD). The chi-square test was used to examine the failure rate of each M-CHAT item among the ASD, DD, and TD groups. Analysis of variance was also used to examine the sensitivity and specificity of the total scores of the 23 M-CHAT items and the various short forms among the three groups of participants. In addition, signal detection theory was used to determine the optimal cutoffs of the M-CHAT, and discriminant function analysis was conducted to obtain the structure matrix for deciding the critical items. Results/Findings: When the M-CHAT was used for discriminating between the ASD and DD groups in general hospitals, sensitivity of .72 and specificity of .72 were obtained. The cutoff was the failure of any 4 of the 23 M-CHAT items. For the different short forms of the M-CHAT, sensitivities of .62-.72 and specificities of .85-.91 were obtained; ”Brief 14” was the best short form of the M-CHAT. When the M-CHAT was used for discriminating between ASD and TD groups in primary clinics, sensitivity of .81 and specificity of .83 were obtained. The cutoff was the failure of any 3 of the 23 M-CHAT items. For different short forms of the M-CHAT, sensitivities of .62-.72 and specificities of .95-.99 were obtained; ”Brief 14” was the best short form of the M-CHAT. Conclusions/Implications: The accuracy of the M-CHAT was adequate in general hospital settings and favorable in primary clinic settings. The study results suggest that the M-CHAT can be used as a screening tool for detecting ASD in toddlers in Taiwan, especially in primary clinics. However, different cutoffs in the form of different M-CHAT scores should be used depending on setting (primary clinic or general hospital).起始頁-結束頁：33-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201911_44(3).00023篇名：社會技巧促進系統提升國小低年級學童社會技巧表現之研究並列篇名：Effectiveness of Social Skills Improvement System in Promoting Elementary School Pupils' Social Skills作者：林家如(Chia-Ju Lin);王慧婷(Hui-Ting Wang);呂翠華(Tsui-Hwa Lu)關鍵字：同儕介入;社會技巧;社會技巧促進系統（SSIS）;社會技巧訓練;peer-mediated intervention;social skills;Social Skills Improvement System(SSIS);social skills training期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：個體必須具有足夠的社會技巧才能表現出適當的社會互動行為，以幫助個體獲得他人接納以及適應環境之能力。本研究旨在探討社會技巧促進系統（Social Skills Improvement System，簡稱SSIS）的團體介入課程，輔以同儕介入，能否提升國小低年級兒童的社會技巧表現。本研究採單一受試之跨受試實驗設計，以四名國小二年級具有社會技巧訓練需求之學生為對象，每名研究對象配對一名班級同儕。本研究所稱SSIS團體介入課程共有10單元，每單元模擬真實情境中可能發生之事件，對應10個目標社會互動行為與社會技巧步驟。介入前，研究者先針對四名同儕以任務腳本充分練習使其熟練介入策略及每單元的社會技巧步驟後，始與研究對象配對一組參與SSIS團體介入課程；介入中，研究者說明與示範正確的社會技巧，配對之同儕與研究對象共同演練社會技巧步驟，提供研究對象回饋如增強、讚美或提示，以及協助研究對象修正行為。本研究以社會技巧步驟達成率檢核研究對象各階段的社會技巧表現，視覺分析四名研究對象介入前後的表現，均有臨床顯著變化，說明SSIS團體介入課程輔以同儕介入能提升低年級學童社會技巧表現，兩者間具有功能關係，以及具有維持效果和高社會效度。研究發現研究對象與配對之同儕回到原班級中鮮少互動，故研究對象缺乏動機表現出習得的社會技巧，建議未來社會技巧課程能在班級自然情境及以班級發生的真實事件施行，期能強化維持效果。英文摘要：Purpose: Individuals require sufficient social skills to demonstrate appropriate social behavior in order to gain acceptance from others and to adapt to their environments. Everyone has the need to learn social skills and be accepted by others in groups. In school settings, peers inherently constitute long-term interaction companions for students. The current study investigated the effectiveness of the Social Skills Improvement System (SSIS) with peer-mediated intervention in improving young pupils' social skills. Methods: A single-case concurrent multiple-baseline-across-participants design was used to examine the effectiveness of SSIS with peer-mediated intervention in improving the social skills of four elementary school students who required social skills training. First, the researcher taught the peers how to initiate conversation with target students by modeling appropriate social skills and providing feedback and prompts. Peers who mastered these tasks participated in the SSIS sessions with the target students. This study applied 10 SSIS units to 10 target social behaviors. During the intervention, the researcher instructed and modeled correct social skills. The paired peers practiced social skills with the target students in simulated events, the researcher provided prompts or praise and corrected the target students' behavior to enhance their performance. Results/Findings: The results demonstrated a functional relationship between the SSIS with peer-mediated intervention and social skills performance. The intervention had a significant effect in that it could improve the target students' social skills performance and maintenance effect. The teachers' questionnaire responses indicated that this research had high social validity, the SSIS was effective, and learning social skills was important to young pupils. Conclusions/Implications: The SSIS with peer-mediated intervention could stimulate target students to demonstrate appropriate social behavior. Concurrently, peers' social skills performance changed when they participated in the intervention. However, when the target students and paired peers returned to the classroom during the maintenance phase, they did not demonstrate the learned social skills or interact with one another. The reason for this is that the peer-mediated intervention could not be maintained in the class; hence, the target students had little motivation to demonstrate appropriate social behavior. Accordingly, implementing the SSIS in a natural classroom setting for the whole class is recommended. Teaching social skills through real events that occur in the classroom contributes to social skills maintenance.起始頁-結束頁：63-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201911_44(3).00034篇名：國內運用創造力教學模式對學生創造力影響之後設分析並列篇名：Meta-Analysis of The Effect of Creativity Teaching Model on Domestic Students' Creativity作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：後設分析;創造力;創造力教學;階層線性模式;meta-analysis;creativity;creativity teaching;hierarchical linear modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在後設分析臺灣2007年至2018年間，38篇有關創造力教學模式（包含創造力教學／創造思考教學／創造性問題解決教學）之相關研究作一量化的統整，結合階層線性模式（HLM）的分析技術，希冀對創造力教學相關模式之推動成果獲致較明確的結論。並且進一步探討不同文件性質、樣本性質、不同研究方法、不同研究性質對創造力影響之差異。結果顯示，創造力教學的教學總效果為低度效果量，提供創造力教學融入能提升學生創造力的依據，再次驗證近10年來，以創造力為題的教學方案，對創造力產生正向立即的影響，更能客觀地解釋其成效。除此之外，出版類型、研究設計、領域科目、研究工具、教育階段是影響創造力教學成效的重要調節變項，有對照組的研究設計其效果量大於無對照組，在領域科目上，仍是以「自然與生活科技」此一領域的實驗效果量較佳；在研究工具方面，以威廉斯測驗的研究效果量較佳，表示使用該測驗可以看出創造力或創造思考教學的效果達顯著。而在教育階段，以中年級的效果較佳，低年級的效果最差，也符合創造力發展的歷程。英文摘要：Purpose: The influence of a teacher's creative teaching on students and the teacher is a popular issue in educational administration and research on curriculum and instruction. Relevant studies are numerous. From the aspect of research methodology, some relevant creative teaching problems are worth thinking. For instance, following questions are rather difficult to answer. Does teachers' creative teaching present effects (influence)? If so, which subject and what type of students is it used for? What kind of creative teaching behaviors would be more effective? What is the generality? How is the variability? Accordingly, in addition to applying traditional literature review to the research, the use of quantitative meta-analysis for integrating past research results might be able to comprehensively inspect the questions. Multilevel analysis has become a popular research issue domestically and internationally. Methods: Based on the innovation and breakthrough of methodology, multilevel meta-analysis is utilized in this study for integrating relevant studies so as to discuss the effectiveness of creative teaching models. In this case, it does not simply achieve the purpose of literature integration but presents the value of statistical methodology application and promotion. As a result, a quantitative integration of 38 pieces of research on creativity teaching models (including creativity teaching / creative thinking teaching / creative problem-solving teaching) in Taiwan during 2007-2018 is preceded meta-analysis in this study. With the combination of hierarchical linear modeling (HLM), it is expected to acquire more definite conclusions about the promotion of creativity teaching models. Furthermore, the effects of various document properties, sample properties, research methods, and research properties on creativity are discussed. Results/Findings: The results reveal low total creativity teaching effect for the reference for the integration of creativity teaching into the promotion of students' creativity. It also verifies the positive and immediate effect of creativity based teaching programs on creativity in the past decade to more objectively explain the effectiveness. Moreover, type of publication, research design, area and subject, research tool, and education stage are important moderators on the effectiveness of creativity teaching. Research design with control groups is comparatively stricter; the experimental effects in the area of ”science and technology” are better; and, research with Williams test appears better effects, showing good reliability of the test. In terms of education stage, middle-age graders present better effects, while lower graders show the worst effects. It also conforms to the creativity development process. Conclusions/Implications: As a result, ”meta-analysis” combined with the analysis of Hierarchical Linear Modeling (HLM) is used in this study for the quantitative integration of learning outcomes with creative teaching models (including creativity teaching/creative thinking teaching/creative problem-solving teaching) domestically, expecting to acquire a definite conclusion for the learning effectiveness with creative teaching models.起始頁-結束頁：93-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201911_44(3).00045篇名：科學探究專業成長方案對國小集中式特教班教師實施探究教學專業知能改變之個案研究並列篇名：Case Study on Self-contained Special Education Classroom Teachers' Professional Development for Scientific Inquiry Teaching作者：吳雅萍(Ya-Ping Wu);陳明聰(Ming-Chung Chen)關鍵字：科學探究專業發展;特殊教育教師;探究教學;集中式特教班;嚴重認知障礙學生;professional development for scientific inquiry teaching;special education teacher;inquiry teaching;self-contained classroom;students with significant cognitive disabilities期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣特殊教育職前師資培育並未強調科學教學的訓練，然在職場任教時，卻需擔任集中式特教班的自然科學教學工作，再加上目前在職特教師資訓練方案尚處於開發階段，實有必要發展專屬於特殊教育教師科學教學專業的進修方案。因此，本研究旨在透過個案研究，探討五位國小集中式特教班教師參與科學探究專業成長方案的專業知能改變與歷程，期待研究結果能作為未來規劃集中式特教班科學課程教學進修方案之參考依據。本研究的資料分析採跨個案分析、持續比較法，方案內容強調「使用引導式探究材料、對應問題的解決策略，以及跨自然領域的教師社群」，形式包括「自然科學一日工作坊、範例課程、與自然專家諮詢討論、研究者的個別指導」。方案時間持續一年半，蒐集的資料包含專業成長會議的錄音、教學影片、各類文件資料、訪談逐字稿、教師日誌與研究者日誌。研究發現，五位特教班教師在參與成長方案前的自然課樣態多是講述法。實施探究教學初期，他們只能倉促地完成探究教學步驟，且發現一般性教學與評量問題；在成長方案介入後，他們不但逐漸改變自己對探究教學的概念，而且提高了探究教學的技巧和流暢性，隨之帶動了特教生的參與動機，也為學生建立起異同比較和討論的探究過程技能。然而，即便如此，個案教師仍欠缺引發學生提問與預測的探究教學技巧。最後，研究者提出「跨領域的教師社群組織、教學範例、教學模板」，都是成長方案中影響特教教師學習科學探究教學的重要鷹架。英文摘要：Purposes: Nationally, preservice teacher education does not emphasize training related to science teaching. However, when teaching in self-contained special education classrooms, teachers must teach science. Furthermore, current in-service teacher training programs are still in the developmental stage; therefore, professional science teaching training programs must be developed for special education teachers. Methods: This study adopted a case study methodology to explore the professional knowledge transformation and progress of five special education teachers in self-contained classrooms; the teachers were determined to participate in a scientific inquiry professional development program. Data were analyzed through cross-case analysis and a constant comparative method. This program emphasized the use of guided inquiry teaching materials, corresponding problem-solving strategies aligned to teachers' problems, and a cross-disciplinary science-based teacher professional learning community. The program consisted of a Natural Science Curriculum day workshop, models of curricular implementations, consultations with science education experts, and individual guidance from the first author/researcher. Data were collected over a one and a half year period and included professional development meeting records, teaching video clips, various other documents, interview transcripts, teaching self-reflection logs, and researcher notes. Results/Findings: The results of study are outlined as follows: Before participating in the professional development program, the five special education teachers typically used a narrative or lecture approach to science teaching. In the initial stages of implementing inquiry teaching, the teachers performed the teaching steps of inquiry teaching hastily, resulting in general teaching and assessment problems. After the implementation of the professional development program, the teachers not only changed their concepts of inquiry teaching but also enhanced their inquiry teaching skills and teaching fluency. This change in teacher conceptual knowledge and skills resulted in an increase in the motivation and participation of students with significant cognitive disabilities; this increase further enabled students to develop the ability to compare similarities and differences and discussion skills related to inquiry processes. However, the participating teachers still lacked the inquiry-based instructional skills of guiding students' questioning and prediction skills and needed to improve it continually. Conclusions/Implications: After participating in a scientific inquiry professional development program, five special education teachers demonstrated the characteristics of inquiry teaching and facilitated their students’ learning participation and some inquiry skills, such as observing, operating, comparison and discussing. Our study proposes the organization of cross-disciplinary teacher professional learning communities, models of curricular implementations, and teaching templates as essential scaffolds for positively influencing special education teachers in professional development programs in effectively developing skills for scientific inquiry teaching. A few suggestions related to in-service programs and future studies are specified based on the findings of the study. The results of this study can serve as a reference for the future planning of science teaching professional development programs for special education instructors teaching in self-contained classrooms.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201907_44(2).00016篇名：自閉症兒童詞彙發展趨勢及內容初探並列篇名：Preliminary Study of the Vocabulary Development of Young Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders作者：鄒啟蓉(Chi-Zong Tsou)關鍵字：自閉症;詞彙發展;語言發展;autism;language development;vocabulary development期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究目的在探討自閉症兒童詞彙發展趨勢及被最多兒童習得的早期詞彙類型及內容。研究者使用幼兒版的「華語嬰幼兒溝通發展量表」，請領有醫院診斷證明的學齡前自閉症兒童家長勾選兒童的表達性詞彙。本研究資料及分析來自兩個小的研究：研究一採縱貫性研究設計，探討30位自閉症兒童前後六個月的詞彙發展；研究二採橫斷性設計，將51位詞彙總量在200以內的自閉症兒童，依詞彙總數分為50以內、100以內及200以內三組，並分析各組的詞彙類型與內容。本研究有以下發現：一、在詞彙總量50以內時，占比最高的四大類詞彙分別是具體名詞、動詞、人稱及遊戲與日常活動等，顯示此四類詞彙是最早習得的詞彙類型。二、詞彙總量在50以內、100以內或200以內之各組，廣義名詞的總數皆比動詞多，且兩者有顯著差異，顯示名詞優先是此三個詞彙區間皆有的發展現象。三、整體而言，四大類詞彙發展速度呈現名詞發展速度最快，其次是動詞，然後是修飾詞，而功能詞是最慢發展的詞彙類別，此四大類別詞彙習得先後順序與文獻中一般兒童類似。四、自閉症最早習得的詞彙與台灣一般兒童的最初詞彙有部分雷同。五、自閉症兒童的具體名詞和人稱詞彙在初期詞彙的習得比例上可能與一般兒童有差異。上述研究結果顯示，自閉症兒童詞彙學習的趨勢及內容與一般兒童有相似處，但也顯現出一些獨特的學習現象，值得後續探討，並做為實務介入參考。英文摘要：Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the expressive vocabulary development of children with autism. Four research questions were investigated: (1) What are the types of words first acquired by children with autism? (2) Is ”noun bias” still observed in the vocabulary development of these children? (3) Is there a significant rate difference in the acquisition of nouns, verbs, modifiers, and function words? (4) What are the first words acquired by children with autism? Methods: The toddler version of the Taiwan Mandarin-Chinese adaptation of the Communicative Development Inventories (MCDI-T) was employed as the main assessment tool. The research analysis was based on data from two small studies. Study 1 involved 30 children with autism; the children were tested twice, with a 6-month interval, and the average age of the 30 children was 45.97 months at the initial test. In study 2, the expressive vocabulary of 51 children with autism was analyzed using the MCDI-T. The average age of the 51 children was 52.08 months. The vocabulary on the MCDI-T was regrouped to investigate the developmental trend for each type of word. On the basis of previous research, the vocabulary was regrouped in various ways, such as nominals (including concrete nouns, people's names, natural phenomena, and outdoor places) and nonnominals (including verbs, modifiers, games and routines, time words, and function words). Of the 51 children, 20 had a total vocabulary of between 1 and 50 words; 9, between 51 and 100 words; and 22, between 101 and 200 words. Results/Findings: The following major findings were obtained. (1) When the total vocabulary was 50 words or fewer, the main four categories of words were concrete nouns, verbs, people's names, and games and routines. (2) The number of general nouns was significantly higher than the number of verbs when the vocabulary size was between 1-200, indicating that noun bias also occurs in children with autism. (3) Nouns were discovered to be acquired more quickly than verbs, verbs more quickly than modifiers, and modifiers more quickly than function words. The order of acquisition of different categories of words were similar to those of normal children. (4) The actual words first acquired in each semantic class were extremely similar to those for children without autism, as demonstrated in other research conducted in Taiwan. (5) The proportions of concrete nouns and people's names in the total vocabulary may differ from those of children without autism and are worthy of further investigation in the future. Conclusions/Implications: The vocabulary development pattern of children with autism had similarities and differences with that of normal children. The findings can be applied to assessment and intervention practice.起始頁-結束頁：29-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201907_44(2).00027篇名：遊戲式身體活動對靜態平衡能力與注意力之影響：一對具妥瑞症狀之泛自閉症雙胞胎國中生個案研究並列篇名：Effect of Game-Based Physical Activities on Static Balance and Selective Attention - A Case Study of Junior High School Twins with Autism and Tourette Syndrome作者：莊佩璇(Pei-Hsuan Chuang);賴世<U+70F1>(Shih-Chiung Lai)關鍵字：自閉症;妥瑞症;注意力;遊戲;靜態平衡能力;autism;attention;game;Tourette syndrome;static balance期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究依據Gentile提出的運動技能分類法，由易到難，設計出適合自閉症學生的遊戲式身體活動，以探討遊戲式身體活動對國中自閉症學生之靜態平衡能力及注意力之影響。研究對象為一對七年級具妥瑞症狀之泛自閉症國中生雙胞胎。在遊戲式身體活動介入前進行平衡能力測量與田字注意力測驗。遊戲式身體活動進行連續八週，一週兩次，一次45分鐘，每次活動結束後，進行靜態平衡能力的測量；注意力評估部分，於每週第二次活動結束後，進行田字注意力測驗。八週活動介入後，分別在第九週及第十週進行保留期的靜態平衡能力測量與注意力測驗。最後，以座標軸散布圖方式呈現時間遞移過程中其靜態平衡能力及注意力之動力變化。本研究有以下發現：一、兩名個案靜態平衡能力的進步軌跡都有進步，但差異頗大，且弟弟的進步幅度優於哥哥。二、個案哥哥的選擇性注意力有提升的趨勢，弟弟則為退步的趨勢。上述研究結果顯示：一、遊戲式身體活動訓練後能提升國中具妥瑞症狀之泛自閉症學生在張眼及閉眼單足站立之靜態平衡能力，且具有良好的介入及維持效果。二、遊戲式身體活動訓練後在提升國中具妥瑞症狀之泛自閉症學生選擇性注意力上成效不一致，對妥瑞症狀發作頻率較低者（個案哥哥）的選擇性注意力有所提升，但對妥瑞症狀發作頻率較高者（個案弟弟）的選擇性注意力則無明顯改善，甚至有倒退趨勢。英文摘要：Purpose: On the basis of the motor skill taxonomy proposed by Gentile, the researchers designed easy-to-difficult game-based physical activities, which are suitable for students with autism and Tourette syndrome. The study investigated the effects of the game-based physical activities (GPA) on static balance abilities and selective attention in junior high school twins with autism and Tourette syndrome. Methods: The participants were seventh-grade twins with autism and Tourette syndrome. Static balance tests and the Tien-Character Attention Test were empirically applied before the intervention that involved the game-based physical activities. The GPA lasted for eight weeks, twice per week, once for 45 minutes. The static balance was measured after each GPA course, whereas the Tien-Character Attention Test was applied once per week. The 8-weeks changes of the balance and attention were dynamically presented in the coordinate systems. Results/Findings: Through the 8-week intervention involving game-based physical activities, we obtained the following findings: 1) for both twins, the trajectories of improvement in static balance abilities showed very different trends, with the younger brother outperforming the older brother; and 2) the selective attention ability (inferred from the Tien-Character Attention Test scores) of the older brother improved, whereas that of the younger brother degenerated. Conclusions/Implications: The conclusions drawn in this study are outlined as follows: 1) After the intervention involving the game-based physical activities, the static balance abilities of the junior high school twins with autism and Tourette syndrome improved in the acquisition phase as well as the retention phase. 2) The selective attention of the twins with autism and Tourette syndrome was inconsistent. The older brother showed a higher frequency of tics in Tourette than the younger brother did. The younger brother showed more improvement in selective attention abilities from the game-based physical activities than the older brother did. A relatively high frequency of tics in Tourette seemed to engender no improvement in selective attention abilities, and a high frequency of tics may degenerate selective attention abilities.起始頁-結束頁：57-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201907_44(2).00038篇名：點字觸覺繪本教學方案提升國小盲生寫作能力之行動研究並列篇名：Action Research on Braille Tactile Picture Book Teaching Program to Enhance the Writing Ability of an Elementary Student with Visual Impairment作者：曾怡惇(Yi-Tun Tseng);謝曉菁(Hsiao-Ching Hsieh)關鍵字：盲生;寫作教學;點字觸覺繪本;student with visual impairment;writing teaching;braille tactile picture book期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：盲生的學習管道除聽覺外，即以觸覺為主。觸覺的學習，能讓盲生駐足長留，反覆摸索，印象深刻。然以點字為讀寫媒介的盲生寫作教學，極具挑戰性，如何提供盲生一個適切的教學方案，以提升其寫作能力，乃視障教育的重要議題。有鑑於此，本研究目的在發展點字觸覺繪本教學方案，並探討研究參與者盲生（小佑）寫作能力的變化情形。本研究採協同行動研究，透過教學討論、參與觀察、訪談、寫作檔案、師生言談語錄等資料，蒐集探討點字觸覺繪本教學方案，提升小佑寫作能力之成效。根據研究結果，獲致以下結論，包含：一、點字觸覺繪本教學方案可供視障教育寫作教學之參考；二、教師的提問技巧有助於小佑寫作思維的建構；三、小佑的寫作表現，在總詞彙數、相異詞彙數、相異詞出現率、平均句長方面逐漸遞升增長，標點符號的使用，從無到有，臻至善用；四、點字觸覺繪本教學方案深受小佑的喜愛與肯定。並提出研究建議：一、應儘早培養盲童精熟點字摸讀與讀寫能力，多提供體驗的機會，做完整的解說與引導思考，建立應有的詞彙概念。二、選擇適合盲童身心靈發展階段的繪本，並考量盲童成長環境的條件，作為選擇與製作觸覺繪本之依據。三、宜向下扎根，提早以學前盲童為研究對象，探討如何將點字觸覺繪本教學技巧應用於年幼盲童之教學。英文摘要：Purpose: Tactile learning is the main learning approach for students with visual impairment, apart from hearing. Tactile learning allows students with visual impairment to repeat the study material as often as they desire, which ensures that the learned knowledge is deeply embedded in the students' memory. However, it is extremely challenging to teach students with visual impairment to read and write using braille as the exclusive medium. A critical issue in the education of students with visual impairment is devising an approach to provide a suitable teaching program to improve their writing skills. This study used braille tactile picture books to develop an instructional program for a female elementary school student with visual impairment, namely Yusuke, and explored the effectiveness of the teaching program on the student's writing skills. Methods: This study applied a collaborative action research methodology. Data were collected from teacher discussions, participant observation, interviews, writing file assessments, and teacher-student conversations to determine the effectiveness of the teaching program on Yusuke's writing skills. Results/Findings: The braille tactile picture book teaching method underwent several adjustments, and the final version met the unique needs of the participant in the writing course. The teacher's questioning skills influenced the participant's style and response content, which in turn affected her thinking in writing structure and construction. The participant's writing performance, measured by the number of total words, different words, type token ratio, and mean length of utterances, demonstrated a gradual increase. Furthermore, the participant's writing components were more complete and her use of punctuation improved when compared with her previous performance. The participant was highly satisfied with the program and enjoyed the classes considerably. Conclusions/ Implication: First, the braille tactile picture book program is a promising writing course teaching model for people with visual impairment. Second, the teacher's questioning skills had a significant effect on the participant's writing ability. Third, the braille tactile picture book teaching program motivated and improved the participant's writing performance. Finally, the participant exhibited a strong positive reaction toward this program. Suggestions: Children with visual impairment should learn to read and write in braille as early as possible in order to enrich themselves by gaining exposure to different opportunities and establishing the concept of vocabulary. Furthermore, during the selection of suitable picture books, the physical and mental age of the concerned children with visual impairment should be considered, along with the conditions of their living environment. Finally, more research is required to determine suitable techniques for applying the braille picture book program for preschoolers with visual impairment.起始頁-結束頁：83-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201907_44(2).00049篇名：特殊教育類科師資生職前特殊教育專業表現水準之調查研究並列篇名：Special Education Preservice Teachers' Professional Performance Levels作者：吳雅萍(Ya-Ping Wu);陳偉仁(Wei-Ren Chen);陳明聰(Ming-Chung Chen)關鍵字：特殊教育類科師資生;教師專業標準;職前特殊教育專業表現水準;preservice teacher of special education;preservice professional performance levels of special education;professional standards for teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：教育部於2016年發布「中華民國教師專業標準」，揭櫫以標準本位培育師資的重要性，特殊教育專業標準和專業表現水準的內容也陸續產生，本研究以13所特殊教育師資培育學系與學程之師資生為調查研究對象，探討其對「特殊教育類科師資生職前特殊教育專業表現水準」（五等量表）的具備程度，總共發放2,283份問卷，回收1,941份，剔除無效問卷後，剩下1,929份有效問卷，問卷可用率為99.38%。本研究以描述性統計、重複樣本單因子變異數分析、獨立樣本單因子變異數分析、獨立樣本多變量變異數分析進行分析，主要發現為：（一）特殊教育類科師資生在40題職前特殊教育專業表現水準中，其整體自我評定結果皆落在部分具備（3分）與大部分具備（4分）之間。（二）特殊教育類科師資生在五個因素的具備程度，以「專業倫理因素」的具備程度最高，「班級教學因素」的具備程度最低。（三）特殊教育類科師資生在五個因素的專業表現之具備程度有顯著差異，且在「專業倫理因素」的具備程度顯著高於其他四個因素，且「班級教學因素」顯著低於其他四個因素。（四）不同年級特殊教育類科師資生在職前特殊教育專業表現水準的具備程度達顯著差異，且愈高年級的具備程度優於愈低年級。（五）不同年級的特殊教育類科師資生，在每一個因素的具備程度均隨著年級愈高，表現愈好，且依序為：專業倫理、精進協作、課程與教學、班級教學、教育專業。本研究據此進一步提出對特殊教育類科師資培育的討論與建議。英文摘要：In 2016, the Ministry of Education issued the R.O.C. Professional Standards for Teachers (PST), declaring the importance of professional teacher education standards. Therefore, research on the effects of the PST within the field of special education and for teachers' performance was in high demand and duly emerged. Purpose: To analyze the professional performance quality of special education preservice teachers in Taiwan. Methods: A 5-point Likert scale survey, the Scale of the Special Education Pre-Service Professional Performance Levels, was applied to all special education preservice teachers from 13 universities in Taiwan. In total, 2283 questionnaires were distributed, of which 1941 were returned and 1929 were valid (99.38%). Descriptive statistics, independent and repeated measures one-way analysis of variance, and independent measures one-way multivariate analysis of variance were used for data analysis. Results/ Findings: The main findings concerning the special education preteachers' professional performance quality were as follows: (1) Overall, the degrees of qualification for the preservice professional performance levels of special education were between most qualified (4 points) and partially qualified (3 points). The highest score was for ”understanding and encouraging positive behaviors among special education students” (M=3.89), and the lowest score was for ”counseling knowledge and career development skills (transition)” (M=3.11). (2) The highest score among the five factors was for ”professional ethics”, and the lowest score was for ”class management”. (3) Significant differences were observed between the five factors. ”professional ethics” scores were statistically higher for special education preteachers than the other four factors' scores were, and ”class management” scores were significantly lower than the other factors' scores were. (4) Overall, the degrees of qualification among the preservice professional performance levels of special education teachers differed significantly according to grade. The senior preservice teachers possessed significantly higher levels of qualification than the junior preservice teachers did.(5) Among the five factors of professional performance individually, senior preservice teachers also demonstrated significantly higher scores than junior ones for professional ethics, collaborative deliberation, curriculum and instruction, class management, and educational profession. Conclusions/Implications: On the preservice professional performance levels of special education, special education preservice teachers from 13 universities in Taiwan exhibited the degrees of qualification located between most qualified (4 points) and partially qualified (3 points) on the scale. Degrees of qualification differed significantly according to grade. The senior preservice teachers demonstrated significantly higher levels of qualification than junior ones did. The implications regarding teacher cultivation for the special education preservice teachers are discussed, including for curriculums concerned with special education students' career transitions, special event processing, special education policies, and clinical teaching abilities. Further research on this subject is warranted.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201903_44(1).000110篇名：身心障礙者職業重建個案管理員與支持性就業服務員的專業知識重要性及具備程度並列篇名：Importance and Preparedness of Knowledge Domains for Vocational Rehabilitation Case Managers and Supported Employment Specialists in Taiwan作者：林真平(Chen-Ping Lin)關鍵字：支持性就業服務員;專業知識;職業重建個案管理員;knowledge domain;supported employment specialist;vocational case manager期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在了解臺灣職業重建個案管理員與支持性就業服務員對其專業知識重要性的評定及具備程度，並比較兩類專業人員在評定知識範疇重要性及具備程度方面是否有顯著性的差異。研究者改編Leahy等人（2009）的問卷，問卷包含12項知識範疇及73個知識次範疇，以了解兩類專業人員對知識範疇及次範疇對其工作的重要性及自身的具備程度，研究共計取得96名職業重建個案管理員及162名支持性就業服務員有效問卷。研究結果顯示，兩類專業人員對不同知識範疇對其職務重要程度的認定排序有所不同。「個案與案量管理」對職管員而言是最重要的，而「就業開拓與安置服務」則是支持性就服員認為最重要的。此外，職管員在其中六項知識範疇的重要性評比顯著高於支持性就服員，凸顯職管員及支持性就服員對其職務所需知識範疇的重要性有所區分。雖然兩類專業人員在身心障礙者職業重建的過程中扮演不同的角色，整體而言，職管員及支持性就服員認定其工作所需的中等重要程度的知識範疇仍有九個一致，顯示兩類專業人員有多個共同的專業知識範疇。在評定中等程度重要性的知識範疇中，職管員僅有「個案與案量管理」達中等以上具備程度，而支持性就服員僅有「就業開拓與安置」達中等以上具備程度。雖然這些人員已取得職業重建專業人員的資格認證，但研究顯示，他們在認定職務所需重要知識的具備程度仍顯不足。本研究建議職業重建領域有必要檢討目前養成教育及培訓制度的不足之處，而現職的兩類專業人員均需接受繼續教育以充實仍未完全具備的專業知識。英文摘要：Purpose: The purposes of this study were to examine the importance and preparedness of knowledge domains for vocational rehabilitation case managers and supported employment specialists in Taiwan and to determine whether any differences in knowledge domains existed between the two professional groups. Methods: The author revised the inventory presented by Leahy et al. (2009). The inventory used in this study contained 12 knowledge domains and 73 knowledge subdomains. The inventories of 96 vocational rehabilitation case managers and 162 supported employment specialists were analyzed. Results/Findings: Results revealed that the two professionals ranked the importance of knowledge domains differently. ”Case and Case Load Management” and ”Job Development and Placement Services” were rated as the most important knowledge domains by vocational rehabilitation case managers and supported employment specialists, respectively. Overall, vocational rehabilitation case managers rated six knowledge domains to be significantly more important than those rated by supported employment specialists, and these domains were ”Individual Counseling,” ”Career Counseling and Assessment,” ”Case and Caseload Management,” ”Medical, Functional, and Environmental Aspects of Disabilities,” ”Foundations, Ethics, and Professional Issues,” and ”Rehabilitation Services and Resource.” Among the 12 knowledge domains, vocational rehabilitation case managers rated only 1 domain as below medium importance and supported employment specialists rated 3 domains as below medium importance. The results also showed that the levels of preparedness of vocational rehabilitation case managers in ”Career Counseling and Assessment” and ”Case and Caseload Management” were significantly higher than those of supported employment specialists. Conversely, the level of preparedness of supported employment specialists in ”Vocational Consultation and Services for Employers” was significantly higher than that of vocational rehabilitation case managers. Among the knowledge domains that were rated as above medium importance, ”Case and Case Load Management” and ”Job Development and Placement Services” were rated as above medium preparedness for vocational rehabilitation case managers and supported employment specialists, respectively. Conclusions/Implications: The results of this study provide empirical evidence for the vocational rehabilitation profession. Although the two professionals ranked the importance of the 12 knowledge domains differently, they rated the same nine knowledge domains as of medium importance for their work. The results present that the two professionals have several common knowledge domains. Although all the participants were qualified professionals, their preparedness for several essential knowledge domains were insufficient. It is necessary to examine the current preservice training curriculums and qualifications for certification. Moreover, current vocational rehabilitation case managers and supported employment specialists should receive continuing education to increase their levels of preparedness in the required knowledge domains.起始頁-結束頁：31-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201903_44(1).000211篇名：我們真的認識數學障礙嗎？－臺灣數學障礙20年研究回顧與問題探究並列篇名：Understanding Mathematics Learning Disabilities: Two Decades of Research in Taiwan作者：王宣惠(Wang, Hsuan-Hui);洪儷瑜(Hung, Li-Yu)關鍵字：內容分析;文獻回顧;數學障礙;學習障礙;Mathematics learning disabilities;learning disabilities;content analysis;review期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：數學能力影響個體日常生活與就業品質，亦為學習障礙者常見困難，但相較於閱讀障礙，數學障礙研究較少。本研究旨在了解臺灣數學障礙研究的樣貌，對照當代數學障礙定義與研究發現作為反思，主要回顧1995至2017年刊登於國內學術期刊之26篇數學障礙期刊論文以及14筆科技部研究，共計40筆數學障礙研究，進行內容分析。結果發現，臺灣數學障礙研究大致包括特質診斷與教學介入二主題，且以後者為多，顯示數學障礙學生的教學服務較受關注。整體而言，國內期刊論文實徵研究數量不多，且僅有少數能連結當代腦神經科學與核心缺陷之實證。在數學障礙概念的採用上，科技部研究與期刊論文之間有差距，科技部研究多反映出數學障礙定義的流變，但多數期刊論文仍採取差距標準。概念的差距反映出多數期刊論文對特質診斷的探究較忽略國際趨勢，研究對象可能與當代定義有差異而難以比對。此外，教學介入實徵證據少，且核心能力教學研究比率偏低。在八項科技部教學研究中，僅有一項探討基礎計算能力的教學；而在五篇實徵性期刊論文中，則主要探討資訊多媒體的應用、後設認知解題策略與圖示表徵策略對數學障礙學生文字題解題表現的效果。另外，國內期刊論文與科技部研究皆偏重文字題解題表現，且較缺乏語言歷程相關因素之區辨。本文根據上述發現，反思國內累積之實徵證據是否能提供教育工作者對數學障礙有完整的認識、引導出適合數學障礙學生的學習介入之探討，並據此對未來研究提出相關結論與建議。英文摘要：Purposes: Mathematical ability influences quality of life and employment opportunities. Mathematics learning difficulties are common among people with learning disabilities. However, the field of mathematics disabilities is an area notably lacking in research in comparison to reading disabilities. The aim of this study was to delineate the contours of the research field of mathematics learning disabilities (MLD) in Taiwan. Methods: This study explored research in MLD from 1995 to 2017 in Taiwan, including 26 journal articles obtained from Google Scholar and the federated search system of the National Taiwan Normal University Library and 14 studies funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST). Through content analysis, the contemporary definitions and research findings related to mathematics learning disabilities were concluded which provided the framework of the study. Results/Findings: According to the results, features or diagnosis and interventions were the two primary topics concerning MLD. The number of intervention studies was relatively higher than that of features- or diagnosis-related studies, indicating that intervention received more attention in the field. However, evidence-based research was limited, and studies using contemporary evidence related to neuropsychology or cognitive deficit were even rarer. The evolution of and changes to the concept of MLD could be found in research funded by MOST, but not in journal articles, thus indicating a research-publication gap. The gap indicated that concepts of MLD in most journal articles neglected international definition and research trends, which meant that research participants could be various. Therefore, the results of local studies might be difficult to compare with the contemporary international literatures. In intervention research, the evidence of effect instruction was limited. Specific intervention explorations were limited and basic mathematical abilities were neglected in intervention studies. In the eight MOST intervention studies, only one investigated basic calculation instruction; in the five empirical journal articles, investigation mainly addressed the solving of mathematics word problems with the application of computer science multimedia, metacognitive strategies, and schematic representation strategies. In addition, students' performance of mathematics word problems was the main focus in journal articles and in the research funded by MOST. However, relevant language-processing factors received insufficient recognition and clarification. Conclusions/Implications: Reflections on the contrast between the aforementioned findings and international MLD trends may inform regarding the comprehensiveness of MLD understanding in Taiwan and regarding the appropriateness of interventions used. Finally, to benefit future studies, numerous conclusions and suggestions concerning MLD were specified based on the findings of the study.起始頁-結束頁：59-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201903_44(1).000312篇名：國小兒童臺灣手語理解能力測驗之編製及其在<U+5553>聰學校之應用並列篇名：Taiwanese Sign Language Receptive Skill Test for Children as An Evaluation for Elementary Level Students at Deaf Schools作者：劉秀丹(Liu, Hsiu Tan)關鍵字：手語能力;手語理解;手語測驗;國民小學;線上測驗;elementary level;online assessment;sign language ability;sign language assessment;sign language receptive skill期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：44卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究目的在發展國小兒童臺灣手語理解能力線上測驗，故於參考國內外手語測驗文獻、諮詢專家後，擬定測驗架構與內容並發展成線上測驗，建立測驗信、效度，接著實際施測評量三所啟聰學校國小部33名單純聽障學生的手語能力，以便找出手語學習落後的學生，提供教學建議。研究主要結果如下：一、國小兒童臺灣手語理解能力線上測驗的架構包括詞彙理解、句法理解及段落理解三個分測驗，各有21、20及9個題目，採線上個別施測，大多數學生在25分鐘內完成測驗。二、本測驗具有良好的內部一致性信度、重測信度、折半信度、內容效度。測驗結果與非語文智商、教師對學生的手語評等、學生手語能力自評等有顯著相關，表示具有外在效標關聯效度。高年級學生表現優於低年級學生、父母親為聾人的學生表現優於父母親為聽人的學生，顯示測驗的區辨效度。三、啟聰學校國小聽障學生的手語能力，詞彙平均答對率近八成，句法理解與段落理解約為六成。本研究進一步以學生問題表分析學生表現，並針對值得注意的學生提出建議。四、與手語理解能力達顯著相關的變項包括父母親聽力狀況、年級、年齡、就讀啟聰學校年數、非語文智商、發現聽損月齡、開始學手語的年齡等。英文摘要：Purpose: To develop a test in Taiwanese Sign Language (TSL) to be administered online. To this end, the TSL Receptive Skill Test (RST) was developed and administered to deaf students at the elementary level (grades 1-6). Methods: A previous study constructed and developed the framework and contents of the TSL-RST. After the psychometric properties of reliability and validity were established, 33 elementary students in three schools for deaf children were assessed. The test was created to identify specific linguistic structures that caused difficulties for elementary level deaf students, so that teachers could develop remediation in those areas. Results/Findings: Student testing was undertaken, and the main results of this study are as follows: 1. The online TSL-RST developed for elementary-level deaf students consists of 50 items and includes three subtests: vocabulary comprehension (n=21 items), syntax comprehension (n=20 items), and paragraph comprehension (n=9 items). The test can be completed within 25 minutes by most students. 2. This test has the psychometric properties of internal consistency, test-retest reliability, split-half reliability, and content validity. Furthermore, the results correlated significantly with nonlanguage intelligence quotient (IQ). Criterion validity was established by teacher and student evaluation of the students' sign language levels. The discriminant validity was also established, because test score results revealed that deaf students in higher grades performed better than those in lower grades did, and deaf students with deaf parents also performed better than deaf students with hearing parents did. 3. Elementary-level students had an approximately 80% correct score in vocabulary comprehension and 60% in sentence-structure comprehension and paragraph comprehension. Furthermore, the students' performance was analyzed with a student problem chart to provide suggestions. 4. Background variables which correlated significantly to the TSL-RST included parents' hearing status, grade, current age, years spent at deaf school, nonverbal IQ, the age at which hearing disability was identified, and the age at which the student began to learn sign language. Conclusions/Implications: The author suggested that teachers at deaf schools use TSL-RST annually to evaluate and track deaf students' abilities and to provide supportive teaching or services for students with TSL-related difficulties. The TSL transition program was recommended to lower grade students and new transfer students from mainstream schools. Use of a TSL expression test for children is recommended.起始頁-結束頁：91-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.201903_44(1).000401篇名：大專校院學習障礙學生接受評量調整實施現況之調查研究並列篇名：Assessment Accommodations for Students with Learning Disabilities in Colleges作者：張懷民(Hwai-Min Chang);孔淑萱(Shu-Hsuan Kung);陳秀芬(Hsiu-Fen Chen)關鍵字：大專資源教室;評量調整;學習障礙學生;resource room in colleges;assessment accommodations;students with learning disabilities期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：50期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討大專校院中學習障礙學生接受評量調整實施現況，採自編問卷輔以半結構式訪談方式進行調查研究。問卷依分層隨機取樣，對象為全國大專校院資源教室輔導員，共回收213份有效問卷（有效回收率82%），並對大專授課教師及資源教室輔導員進行訪談。量化資料採描述性統計、單因子變異數分析及雪費法事後比較進行分析；訪談資料則依研究目的做歸納整理，以呼應量化分析結果。結果顯示：（1）大專校院資教輔導員表示，授課老師對學障學生最常運用延長考試時間服務的方式，並且自陳在告知家長或學生評量調整的意義、方式和作業流程方面表現最佳；此外，輔導員亦認同評量調整能有效提高學障學生的學習動機及自信心；（2）在不同性質大專校院方面，以私立技職學校在執行及支持層面上表現較佳，資教輔導員服務年資則以8年以上者處遇能力最好；（3）大專校院學障學生評量調整的主要問題，包括授課教師對評量調整實施方式與認知有差異、教學現場常出現齊頭式的平等、學障學生缺乏自我認同及自我倡導的能力等。最後依據研究結論，對實務及未來研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：The study aims to investigate the current status of assessment accommodations of students with learning disabilities in colleges. A self-made questionnaire along with 10 semi-structured interview sessions were conducted. The questionnaire was distributed to the counselors in college resource rooms and 213 were effectively collected. Quantitative data were analyzed by descriptive statistics, one-way ANOVA, and Scheffe post-hoc comparison. Interview data were summarized according to the research purposes as a supporting evidence to the quantitative results. The findings show that: (a) Extended examination time service was used most frequently in assessment accommodations. The counselors believed that they informed well the parents or students about the significance, methods and operational procedures of the assessment accommodations. In addition, they agreed that the assessment accommodations could effectively improve the motivation and self-confidence of the students with learning disabilities. (b) Significant difference exists among different types of colleges and the working years. Private vocational colleges performed better at the level of implementation and support. Counselors with more than 8 years working experience outperformed the others. (c) The major issues in terms of the assessments accommodations of students with learning disabilities were: (1) there existed disparity in practically executing the assessment adjustment; (2) equality phenomena with regard to assessment adjustment was commonly shown; (3) students with learning disabilities were lack of self-identity and self-advocacy. Finally, based on the results, suggestions for practices and research were provided.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320191200500012篇名：中部地區技專校院學習障礙學生生涯輔導需求之研究並列篇名：A Study of Career Counseling Needs of Technical Colleges Students with Learning Disabilities in Central Taiwan作者：黃筑筠(Chu-Yun Huang);周台傑(Tair-Jye Chou)關鍵字：技專校院;學習障礙;生涯輔導需求;technical colleges;learning disabilities;career counseling needs期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：50期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討中部地區技專校院學習障礙學生（簡稱學障生）生涯輔導需求，及不同背景變項之技專校院學障生在生涯輔導需求與獲得之差異。採自編「技專校院學生生涯輔導需求與現況調查問卷」為工具，共回收212份，回收率70.7%；有效問卷210份，問卷有效率99.1%。結果顯示：（1）整體技專校院學障生生涯輔導需求皆高於獲得；需求程度由高至低為「外在資訊的掌握」、「自我瞭解與評估」、「社會支持系統」；（2）技專校院學障生在生涯輔導需求程度，不因背景變項不同而有差異；（3）除「入學管道」外，不同職群類別、就讀學制、就讀年級及生理性別技專校院學障生，在生涯輔導獲得程度皆有差異；（4）不同背景變項之技專校院學障生在生涯輔導需求皆高於獲得；（5）技專校院學障生最需要之生涯輔導內容為「外在資訊的掌握」，且以職涯資訊提供、職場體驗、職場訓練與實習的需求為最高。文末，根據本研究結果提出建議，供生涯輔導相關工作者實務應用之參考。英文摘要：The results of this study are as follows: (1) The demand for career counseling of all technical colleges students with disabilities is higher than the acquisition. Moreover, the orde is ”mastery of external information”, ”self-understanding and assessment” and ”social support system”. (2) It's nonsignificant in the demands for career counseling needs of technical colleges students with learning disabilities whether the occupation categories, study system, grade of study and gender. (3) There are significant differences for the obtainment of career counseling for students with learning disabilities in the occupation categories, study system, grade of study and gender except in admission. (4) The students in technical colleges with different background variables have higher demand for career counseling than for their career counseling. (5) The most needed career counseling content for technical colleges students with learning disabilities is ”mastering external information” and on top of that, the needs of career information, workplace training and experience and internship. At the end of the article, suggestions are put forward based on the results of this study for the practical application of career counseling related workers.起始頁-結束頁：31-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320191200500023篇名：國小特教班教師教育極重度多重障礙學生之困擾與需求並列篇名：Teaching Challenges and Needs of Special Education Teachers of Students with Multiple and Severe Disabilities at Self-Contained Classrooms in Elementary Schools作者：蕭文翊(Wen-Yi Hsiao);林秀錦(Hsiu-Chin Lin)關鍵字：國小特教班;極重度多重障礙;教師困擾;教師需求;self-contained classrooms;students with multiple and severe disabilities;teaching challenges and needs期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：50期出版年：2019中文摘要：因應零拒絕以及就近入學原則，一些需管灌、氣切照護或醫療設備之極重度多重障礙學生開始就讀住家附近的小學。本研究探討國小特教班教師教育這些學生的困擾及需求，邀請五位國小特教班教師進行三次焦點團體訪談，以質性資料歸納分析，同儕檢證編碼一致性達83%－100%，並以參與者檢核與省思札記確保研究信賴度。研究發現教師面對這些學生有五項困擾：（1）學生密集的醫療照護需求，教師須時刻注意學生身體狀況而無法喘息；（2）學生先天功能受限且反應微弱，教師難以切入課程，產生教學無力感；（3）行政單位支援有限且環境規劃不全，學生學習活動受限；（4）專業團隊服務頻率低且建議不合用，教師無法即時獲得諮詢協助；（5）親師對於照護及教養理念有落差，溝通與合作關係受阻。此外，教師有以下需求：（1）改善班級設備及編擬極重度多重障礙領域之教材與書籍；（2）規劃照護實作研習及極重度多重障礙課程進修管道；（3）行政單位積極地支援與分擔照護責任，建立密切合作關係；（4）提升專業團隊服務內容，建置醫療巡迴團隊。最後針對研究結果提出實務及未來研究建議。英文摘要：This study aims to understand the teaching challenges and needs of special education teachers when they educate the students with multiple/severe disabilities and complex health care needs at self-contained classrooms in elementary schools. Participants were five self-contained special education teachers in New Taipei City. Qualitative data were collected via focus group interviews, and analyzed using inductive coding approach. The consistency in coding between the researcher and peer reviewer are 83-100%. The results are as follows: A. The challenges as below: (1) The system of the schools could not provide professional health and medical care to the students. (2) The students have poor academic performance, so the teachers will feel frustrated in this kind of ineffective teaching. (3) The current administrative system could not provide health and medical care supports properly to the teachers. (4) The service hours of the collaborative teams could only provide rough solutions to the students. (5) Many parents overprotect their children that caused a number of conflicts between parents and teachers. B. The needs as below: (1) The government provides additional funding to improve equipment and compile books providing instruction on how to educate the students with multiple and severe disabilities. (2) Increase more opportunities for teachers to pursue further knowledge about teaching and caring the students. (3) The school administration actively shoulder the responsibility of caring the students together with the teachers. (4) The government should establish professional medical collaborative teams.起始頁-結束頁：65-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320191200500034篇名：學術性向資優青少年之情緒智力、班級人際關係與學習投入的關係：一個雙中介因子模型之研究並列篇名：Investigating the Relationships among Emotional Intelligence, Classroom Relations, and Student Engagement in Academically Gifted Adolescents: A Two-mediator Model作者：王文伶(Wen-Ling Wang)關鍵字：同儕關係;師生關係;情緒智力;資優青少年;學習投入;emotional intelligence;gifted adolescents;peer relationships;student engagement;teacher-student relationships期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：49期出版年：2019中文摘要：在本研究中，作者主要關注於學術性向資優青少年的情緒智力、班級人際關係（師生和同儕關係）與學習投入之間所存在之因果影響與可能機制。故根據相關文獻提出研究假設，建構了一個情緒智力、師生關係、同儕關係以及學習投入的雙中介因子模型。此理論模型主張學術性向資優青少年的情緒智力能正向影響其在資優資源班之師生和同儕關係以及學習投入，且其情緒智力對學習投入的影響中，師生和同儕關係扮演著中介角色。本研究採用問卷調查法，樣本來自桃園市七所國民中學的學術性向資優資源班共205位資優學生。為檢驗樣本資料是否與假設模型之間達到適配，作者利用AMOS軟體進行結構方程模型之分析。研究結果支持所提出的理論模型，顯示在學術性向資優資源班，資優青少年的人際關係，於情緒智力與學習投入之間，具部分中介效果。作者亦針對研究發現提出在資優教育實務上的意涵與建議。英文摘要：In this study, the author paid particular attention to the possible mechanisms and the causal relationships among emotional intelligence, classroom relations (including teacher-student relationships and peer relationships) and student engagement in academically gifted adolescents. On the basis of the literature, the author proposed a two-mediator model suggesting that gifted adolescents' emotional intelligence would facilitate their classroom relations and engagement in gifted resource classroom, and both teacher-student relationships and peer relationships would play the mediating roles in the association between emotional intelligence and student engagement. A questionnaire survey of academically gifted students was conducted by the author. Quantitative data were collected from 205 gifted adolescents in 7 junior high schools in Taoyuan City. To evaluate the fit between the collected data and proposed model, structural equation modeling based on AMOS software was used to analyze the data. The results supported the assumed model and revealed that, in academically gifted resource classroom, the link between students' emotional intelligence and engagement was partially mediated by students' teacher-student relationships as well as their peer relationships. Implications and potential practices for gifted education are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系5篇名：幼兒書本和文字概念評量中文版之信度和效度探討並列篇名：A Study on Reliability and Validity of the Chinese Version of Preschool Word and Print Awareness Assessment作者：林湘雅(Hsiang-Ya Lin);王秋鈴(Chiu-Ling Wang)關鍵字：書本和文字概念;信度;效度;word and print awareness;reliability;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：49期出版年：2019中文摘要：有鑑於國內缺乏書本和文字概念的標準化評量工具，因此本研究轉譯Preschool Word and Print Awareness Assessment為「幼兒書本和文字概念評量中文版」（Preschool Word and Print Awareness Assessment- Chinese Version，PWPA-C），以138名四至六歲的正常發展幼兒和32名語言發展遲緩幼兒為對象，進行信度和效度的檢驗。PWPA-C的全量表內部一致性信度為.69，重測信度為.88，評分者間信度為.97。內容效度部分，PWPA-C轉譯後經學者專家審查調整為適用於臺灣幼兒的測驗工具。建構效度方面，PWPA-C全量表與書本概念、文字形式、文字常規和文字功能等分向度有中度到高度的顯著相關（r＝.57∼.88，p＜.01），且四個分向度間呈現低度到中度的顯著相關（r＝.22∼.44，p≦.01）。另外，四到六歲幼兒隨年紀增長，書本和文字概念也會持續的發展，除了四歲組與五歲組幼兒之間未達顯著差異外，其他年齡組間皆達顯著差異。最後，典型發展幼兒的分數顯著高於語言發展遲緩幼兒。效標關聯效度分析幼兒在PWPA-C與「早期讀寫發展困難檢核表」中「印刷覺識」得分之相關係數為.42，呈現中度顯著相關。以上結果顯示PWPA-C為具有良好信、效度的標準化測驗工具，可用於評量四歲到六歲幼兒的書本和文字概念發展。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to adapt the ”Preschool Word and Print Awareness Assessment (PWPA)” into Chinese version, and to investigate its reliability and validity. One hundred and thirty-eight typical developing four-to-six year-olds children and 32 language development delayed children were examined by ”Preschool Word and Print Awareness Assessment- Chinese Version (PWPA-C)”. The internal reliability of PWPA-C was .69, test-retest reliability was .88, and inter-rater reliability was .97. The PWPA-C was viewed by scholars and experts, and each item has been examined carefully and adjusted to suit Taiwan's preschoolers. In terms of construct validity, the full scale of PWPA-C had a moderate to high correlation with the book convention, print convention, print form, and print function (r=.57~.88, p＜.01). And there was a significant low to moderate correlation (r=.22~.44, p≦.01) between subscale. In addition, as children between four to six years old grew older, their word and print awareness also developed. There were significant differences among age groups, except the comparison between the 4-year-olds and 5-year-olds. Children with normal development also had significantly higher scores in PWPA-C than those with language development delayed. Regarding to criterion-related validity, Pearson correlation coefficients of the scores between PWPA-C and Print Awareness Subtest of Early Literacy Screening Checklist was .42, indicated a significant moderate correlation. The results as above indicated that PWPA-C had adequate reliability and validity and could be used for assessing preschoolers' word and print awareness.起始頁-結束頁：35-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系6篇名：電腦支援協作學習融入科學實驗課程對視障學生科學過程技能之影響並列篇名：The Influence on Scientific Process Skills of Visual Impaired Students in Science Experiment Courses Blended with Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning作者：陳玫君(Mei-Chun Chen);羅豪章(Hao-Chang Lo)關鍵字：科學過程技能;科學實驗;視障學生;電腦支援協作學習;computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL);science experiment;science process skills;visual impaired students期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：49期出版年：2019中文摘要：為了協助視障生完成科學實驗課程並發展其科學過程技能，本研究利用資通訊科技（ICT）營造雲端協作學習環境，結合動手做實驗活動，將電腦支援協作學習（CSCL）導入視障生科學實驗課程的設計，並探討在此科學實驗課程學習活動中，視障生在13項科學過程技能的表現情形。本研究採取質性研究設計為之，以判斷抽樣方式選取中部某特殊學校視障部國中三年級學生七人為研究個案，透過課程活動錄影、教師手札、訪談、教學省思日誌、和雲端平臺紀錄五個管道蒐集研究分析所需的資料，並且以質性資料分析方法對所蒐集的資料進行分析，再以編碼者間一致性和三角校正整合分析資料，以求研究的信度和效度。研究結果顯示，視障生在科學實驗課程學習活動中，其13項科學過程技能都有機會可以展現；在課程不同階段學習活動中，視障生的科學過程技能表現情形不同；不同的科學過程技能，在不同階段學習活動中有不同的表現情形；以雲端平臺做為CSCL的協作學習環境，融入科學實驗課程設計，有利視障生發展科學過程技能。本文最後也對後續的研究和推廣，提出若干的建議。英文摘要：To assist impaired students develop their13 science process skills in the process of science experiments, this research created a cloud-based collaborative learning environment using information and communication technology (ICT). We combined the cloud-based collaborative learning environment with hands-on into science experiment courses and investigated students' performance of 13 science process skills during the course. Qualitative method was adopted and 7 the ninth grade impaired case students were involved in this course using judgment sampling. Multiple research data collected from Videos, classroom field notes, transcripts of interview, reflection notes, and cloud platform discussions/report. Intercoder reliability and triangulation were used as a qualitative research strategy to test reliability and validity. As results shown, impaired students had opportunities to use 13 science process skills in the process of science experiment course and they selectively used process skills in different learning activities. Science experiment course design with the cloud-based collaborative learning environment was favorable for developing students' 13 science process skills. Based on our findings, possible directions for future research and instructional promotion are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：63-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系7篇名：The Effects of Using Story Map as Prompting and Instructional Strategies on Oral Retelling for Students with Mild Intellectual Disabilities並列篇名：故事圖作為提示和教學策略對促進輕度智能障礙學生口語重述成效之研究作者：葉芷呤(Chih-Yin Yeh);陳明聰(Ming-Chung Chen);陳思涵(Szu-Han Kay Chen)關鍵字：story retell;story map;students with intellectual disabilities;narrative;故事重述;故事圖;輕度智能障礙;敘事期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：49期出版年：2019中文摘要：Improving oral narrative ability is one of the essential goals of speech and language therapy for children with intellectual disabilities (ID). This study aimed to investigate the effects of story map strategy on retelling for children with ID who had difficulties in oral narrative. Three 5th and 6th grade students with intellectual disabilities participated in the experiment. The multiple treatment design of single-subject research was adopted. Three conditions were manipulated, including (a) baseline: teaching with typical strategy and asking students to retell without story maps, (b) intervention B: teaching with typical strategy and asking students to retell with story maps, and (c) intervention C: teaching with story mapping strategies and asking students to retell with story maps. The accuracy of retelling, the total number of Chinese words (NW), and different Chinese words (NDW) were used as indicators to evaluate the performance of narrative. The results indicated that (a) the effect of using story map as a prompt is significant on increasing NW, but not on improving the accuracy of retelling and NDW of retelling, (b) the effect of adding story mapping teaching strategies during telling the story is significant on improving the accuracy of retelling and NW of retelling.英文摘要：改善口語敘事能力是智能障礙兒童語言治療的重要目標之一。本研究旨在探討故事圖策略對有口語敘事困難之智能障礙學生的重述表現之成效。本研究以三位五、六年級的智能障礙學生為對象，利用單一受試研究法的多處理設計，操弄三種條件，分別是：基線期（A）－以一般方式教學並讓學生在沒有故事圖提示下重述；介入期（B）－以一般方式教學並讓學生在有故事圖提示下重述；介入期（C）－以故事構圖策略教學並讓學生有故事圖提示下重述。本研究採重述正確率、總詞彙數、相異詞彙數作為敘事表現的指標。研究結果指出，只使用故事圖提示下，總詞彙數有顯著的提升，但未能改善重述的正確率。而以故事構圖策略來教學並提供故事圖提示，則能顯著的改善重述的正確率和總詞彙數。研究者並依研究發現對未來研究提出相關建議。起始頁-結束頁：93-113資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系01篇名：臉書讓我更幸福？現實與線上互動對主觀幸福感之作用暨中介變項之探討並列篇名：Facebook Makes Me Happier? The Effects of Realistic and Online Interaction on Subjective Well-Being and Their Mediating Variable作者：楊朝鈞(Chao-Jun Yang);簡晉龍(Chin-Lung Chien)關鍵字：友誼關係;主觀幸福感;臉書使用;歸屬感;關係品質;Facebook use;Friendship;Need to belong;Relationship quality;Subjective well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：人際互動與幸福感有密切關係。隨著社群網路興起，人際互動有了新形式。本研究以臉書（Facebook）為例，探討在現實（面對面）與線上兩種脈絡下的友誼互動對幸福感之作用，以及關係品質扮演的中介效果。本研究以有使用臉書的一般民眾（含社會人士與學生）為對象，透過網路問卷，請參與者填寫現實互動、臉書互動、關係品質、及主觀幸福感等量表。共收到412份問卷，有效樣本為380。主要統計方法為結構方程式模型，結果發現：（1）朋友間的現實互動可透過關係品質預測主觀幸福感；（2）在控制現實互動的效果下，朋友間的線上（臉書）互動可透過關係品質預測主觀幸福感；（3）現實互動與臉書互動對關係品質具有相當的預測效果。這顯示若能妥善使用臉書，能加深關係品質，進而提升幸福感。英文摘要：Interpersonal interaction is closely related to subjective well-being (SWB), but with the rise of social network sites (e.g., Facebook (FB)), a new form of interpersonal interaction has emerged. Taking FB as an example, this study examined the effects of realistic (face-to-face) and online (FB) interaction on SWB and tested the mediating effect of relationship quality. Previous research studies on the effect of Facebook use on SWB have revealed very inconsistent results (the so-called ”Facebook paradox”). Our paper has exhaustively reviewed previous studies and proposed that FB interaction, defined as active and reciprocal interaction with friends through FB, as a type of Facebook use might be beneficial to SWB. Data were collected through an online questionnaire, and 412 participants (including students and non-students) filled in the scales of realistic interaction, online (FB) interaction, friendship quality, and SWB. Among them, 38 cases who were not FB users and/or showed response sets were excluded from further analysis. Using structural equation modeling, the data were analyzed among the valid sample (241 females, 136 males). The Sobel test and the bootstrapping method with 5000 bootstrap samples were used to test the significance of the mediating effects. The results showed that: (1) realistic interaction with friends has a significant positive effect on SWB, acting through the mediating variable friendship quality; (2) controlling for the effect of realistic interaction, online (FB) interaction with friends still has a significant positive effect on SWB, acting through the mediator friendship quality; and (3) both realistic and FB interaction have fairly equal effects on friendship quality, through a model comparison approach. We conclude that FB interaction is beneficial to SWB, beyond the effect of realistic interaction. Thus, our study provides one solution to the Facebook paradox and thus contributes to issues relating to FB interaction. Implications, limitations, and future directions are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：183-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201912_51(2).00012篇名：臨床護理師職業倦怠雙元三因子效度研究並列篇名：A Validation Study of Bi-factor Structure of Chinese Nurses Burnout with ESEM作者：趙燕(Yan Zhao);王郁琮(Y. Lawrence Wang);王智弘(Chi-Hung Wang)關鍵字：探索性結構方程模式;職業倦怠;雙元因子模式;護理師;Bi-factor Model;Burnout;Exploratory Structural Equation Model;Nurses期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究採用Moreno-Jime'nez等人編製之護理師職業倦怠量表（Nursing Burnout Scale, NBS）中文簡版為測量工具，以分層隨機抽樣方式選取江蘇省523名臨床護理師<U+7232>研究對象，以Mplus8.1統計軟體進行資料分析，比較職業倦怠一因子、三因子、高階因子以及雙元因子四模式，應用CFA與ESEM進行參數估計，旨在探討華人臨床護理師職業倦怠因素結構。研究結果顯示，臨床護理師職業倦怠雙元三因子ESEM模式之適配度最佳，護理師職業倦怠除了「情緒衰竭」、「低成就感」與「對人冷漠」等三種特定倦怠因子之外，還蘊含著一個「整體倦怠」因素。唯，整體因子與「對人冷漠」特定因子能夠有效解釋對應觀察變項之變異，而「情緒衰竭」、「低成就感」特定因子只能解釋小部分觀察變項的變異。本研究結果呼應了由Meszaros Adam、Szabo、Szigeti與Urban（2014）提出的職業倦怠雙元因子結構，顯示職業倦怠雙元因子模式具有跨文化、跨情境、跨行業的類推性。比起CFA，在參數估計上ESEM提供了更合理精準的雙元因子參數估計值。本研究結果可提升心理計量研究對於護理師職業倦怠多維度潛在結構之認識。並可提示醫院管理者，在為處於危機中之臨床護理師提供干預時應考慮其職業倦怠總分。然而，因「情緒衰竭」與「低成就感」分量表之題項並未完全反應對應之特定因子，因而在實務或研究中需慎用此二分量表因子分。未來研究可進一步探討諸如性別、年資等背景變項在職業倦怠雙元三因子模式的測量恆等性。英文摘要：This study validated the bi-factor structural construct of the Nursing Burnout Scale (NBS) by using a stratified sample of 523 nurses from Jiang Shu, China, who completed the short version of the NBS survey in Chinese. Mplus software (version 8.1) provided the statistical outputs for all analyses conducted in this study. The findings for four alternative burnout constructs-single-, three-, high-order, and bi-factor models-employing confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) and exploratory structural equation modeling (ESEM) approaches improved our understanding of work burnout among nurses in the hospitals in China. Statistical comparison among a series of nested CFA and ESEM models revealed that a bi-factor model with a global burnout factor and three content-specific factors-emotional exhaustion (EE), depersonalization (DP), and reduced personal accomplishment (PA)-involving the ESEM approach outperformed all other models in terms of the model data fit. Only global burnout factor and the content-specific DP factor explained the considerable unique proportion of variance in the observed scores. The content-specific factors EE and PA only explained a small unique proportion of variance in the observed scores. The findings support the bi-factor structure of the NBS that was originally proposed by Meszaros et al. in Hungary (2014). Moreover, the findings provide insights into understanding the cross-culture and cross-situation factorial consistency of nursing burnout. Compared with CFA, ESEM is a better approach for validating the bi-factor factorial structure. The findings improve our understanding of the complexity of the multidimensional structure of job burnout among nurses. Moreover, the proposed method provides hospital administrators with the total burnout score to ensure timely intervention for the staff who are at risk. However, the EE and PA scores should be interpreted carefully because these scores reflect a very small proportion of the burnout content. Further investigation on invariance measurement based on gender and time will provide insights into the generalizability of the bi-factor nursing burnout structure.起始頁-結束頁：207-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201912_51(2).00023篇名：員工協助方案人員面對保密議題之倫理判斷歷程研究並列篇名：Ethical Judgment Process for Employee Assistance Program Professionals on Confidentiality Issues作者：張素惠(Su-Hui Chang);莊謹鳳(Jin-Fong Chuang);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：保密;員工協助方案;倫理;倫理判斷;倫理衝突;Confidentiality;Employee assistance programs;Ethical conflicts;Ethical impact;Ethical judgment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討員工協助方案人員面對保密議題之倫理判斷歷程研究。針對六名企業內部EAPs人員採個別深度訪談，以敘說研究中採用「類別－內容」進行質性分析。研究結果發現企業內部EAPs人員會涉及不同型態的保密議題，並會經歷衝突、判斷與影響階段歷程：一、在衝突階段會遭遇：1.行政力量介入EAPs運作，導致保密兩難的壓力；2.當事人對保密知覺態度的差異；3.涉及保密例外與預警責任的衝突；二、在判斷階段會考慮五個面向：1.以員工協助方案人員倫理守則作為基礎判斷；2.考量個案的權益是否受到傷害作為判斷；3.以個案最大福祉作考慮；4.評估並啟動相關資源協助；5.善用知情同意並尊重當事人自主決定權；三、在影響階段會透過支持系統協助並找到自身調適的方法：1.內部自我調適；2.尋求外部支持系統協助；3.重新定位EAPs服務功能；4.調整因應策略。這些歷程將會不斷沉澱與思考，逐漸形成下一次處理倫理衝突事件的經驗判斷。最後，本研究依據研究結果提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study explored the ethical judgment process of employee assistance program (EAPs) professionals on confidentiality issues. In-depth interviews were conducted with six EAPs professionals within the company, and the ”category content” strategy was used for conducting qualitative analysis in the narrative study. The study found that EAPs professionals within the company have different types of confidentiality issues and experience the conflict, judgment, and impact stages of the ethical judgment process. First, the following confidentiality issues are encountered in the conflict stage: (1) the involvement of administrative forces in the operation of EAPs, thus leading to a confidentiality dilemma, (2) the differences in the attitudes of the parties toward the perception of confidentiality, and (3) the conflicts in the consideration of the confidential exception and the duty to warn. Second, in the judgment stage, EAPs professionals within the company make ethical judgments and decisions based on five aspects: (1) by using the EAPs code of ethics, (2) by considering whether the rights of the client are harmed, (3) by considering the optimal welfare of the client, (4) by evaluating and initiating related resource assistance, and (5) by considering the informed consent aspect in the decision for the parties. Third, in the impact stage, EAPs professionals within the company seek support from the support system and develop their adjustment methods: (1) internal self-adjustment, (2) inquiry pertaining to the external support system assistance, (3) redefining of the EAPs service function, (4) adjustment and coping strategies, and others. These processes will continue to precipitate and reflect, gradually forming the next treatment experience and judgment of ethical conflict events. Finally, based on the research results, this study also proposed relevant suggestions for the practical development of EAPs and the future research of the ethical issues of these programs.起始頁-結束頁：231-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201912_51(2).00034篇名：完美主義的領域特定性：端視於個體特性及檢視的領域並列篇名：Domain Specificity of Perfectionism: Depends on Whom and What the Domains Being Examined作者：許庭韶(Ting Shao Hsu);許維素(Wei-Su Hsu);李俊仁(Jun Ren Lee)關鍵字：完美主義;性別差異;領域特定性;Domain-specific;Gender differences;Perfectionism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本論文檢視完美主義是普遍性或是領域特定性，以及性別所產生的影響。研究一以幾近完美主義量表修訂中文版檢視運動員以及一般生在運動、學業領域的完美主義。研究一發現在高標準裡，領域、學群、性別的主要效果顯著，學群與領域、性別與領域間的交互作用達顯著。在相關分析部分，在運動員部分是沒有相關，但是，在一般生則呈現運動以及學業領域高標準的相關性，但如果將運動員以及一般生合併計算，則不管男性或是女性都沒有相關。因素分析顯示運動員為兩因素，但一般生為一因素。研究一高標準分數的差異以及領域間無相關的現象，基本上支持完美主義為領域特定性，但一般生在領域間高標準的相關，以及因素分析為單一因素，卻是支持完美主義跨領域的特性。基於運動與學業是向度差異非常大的領域，這可能產生兩者間的特殊性。研究二則以一般生在生活以及學業領域檢視此議題。研究二發現學業跟生活在高標準分數的差異，但性別間則無差異，性別與領域間無交互作用；相關分析部分僅女性呈現生活以及學業領域在高標準以及落差的相關性，男性則無此相關；因素分析的結果為一因子。本研究認為探討完美主義領域特定性時，需要同時考量實驗參與者對於研究者所挑選領域知覺的重要性以及領域間的相關性。英文摘要：This study examined the concept of perfectionism pertaining to universality or domain specificity and observed the influence of gender on this concept. The Chinese version of the Almost Perfect Scale-Revised was used as the perfectionism index. We measured perfectionism in a certain domain by inserting the leading sentence to the questions of Almost Perfect Scale-Revised, for example, in sports. In the first study, athlete and nonathlete college students were recruited as participants. The study and sports domains were examined. This study found that the influences of the type of domain, type of participant, and gender at high standards were significant. Significant interaction was observed between the type of participants and the type of domains and gender. In a correlation analysis, a correlation was observed between the study and sports domains for nonathlete students but not for athlete participants, irrespective of the high standards or discrepancies present. No correlations were observed between the study and sports domains in terms of gender for high standards. However, a correlation was observed between study and sports domains for discrepancies for female participants. Factor analysis revealed two factors for athlete students but only one factor for nonathlete participants. The first study observed the differences between different domains in terms of the high standards and the unrelated phenomenon between the domains supported perfectionism as domain specificity, but the correlation between high standards between domains, and the result of a single factor for the non-athlete participants supports perfectionism as domain general. The second study further examined this topic pertaining to the life and study domains of college students. We observed a difference between the study and life domains in terms of the high standard scores. However, no differences were observed among genders, and there was no interaction between the gender and domain aspects. The correlational analysis revealed a significant correlation between life and study domains in terms of high standards and discrepancy for female participants but not for male participants. The factor analysis results presented a single factor. According to the results of this study, we suggested that the domain-general and domain-specific issues can be considered based on the perceived importance of the examined domain to participants and the characteristics of participants.起始頁-結束頁：257-274資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201912_51(2).00045篇名：諮商心理師全職實習與專業督導的現況調查研究並列篇名：Survey on the Current Internship Training and Supervision in Counseling Psychology作者：林烝增(Cheng-Tseng Lin);林家興(Chia-Hsin Lin)關鍵字：全職實習;專業督導者;督導方式;實習諮商心理師;Clinical supervision;Intern counseling psychologists;Internship;Supervision orientations期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究採用問卷調查，以全職實習的諮商心理師與其實習機構的專業督導者為研究對象，想要瞭解其實習與接受專業督導的情況。本研究聯繫158個單位，有95個單位同意參與，回覆率60.13%，發出180組配對問卷，回收資料整理，獲得103組配對樣本，共206份有效問卷，問卷回收率為57.22%。本研究調查實習諮商心理師的實習項目與時數、不同場域的實習諮商心理師在實務項目與接案問題類型、在接受督導的情況、雙方對督導關係滿意度、督導者採用的督導方式。結果發現，實習心理師平均每週個案量為7.76人時，個別諮商一年平均為285.10人時；每週平均接受督導1.5小時。不同場域實習心理師在下列實作項目；「婚姻與家庭諮商」、「初談」、「教學與工作坊」、「心理衛生推廣工作」、「入班座談」等有顯著的差異。擔任專業督導者，執業年資10年以上最多，占67.9%，督導者年資5-10年為多；督導者個人諮商理論學派，前三項分別為關係及經驗取向（35.9%）、後現代取向（20.4%）以及動力取向（14.6%）。醫療場域的督導者年資較淺於社區與學校場域，提供的督導時數卻較高；督導者與實習心理師對督導關係皆是滿意的；督導者在評量時會因不同學派而有顯著差異，關係及體驗取向的督導者評分高於認知行為取向的督導者。本研究除了調查實習現況，對調查結果與內涵進行分析與討論，並針對未來研究與實務訓練提出相關建議。英文摘要：This survey study investigated the current conditions of counseling psychology internship training and the experiences of supervisors and interns in their supervision relationships. The participants of this study were intern counseling psychologists and their clinical supervisors. The researcher contacted 158 internship programs or sites, and 95 of them agreed to participate in this study. Moreover, 360 questionnaires were distributed to 180 pairs of supervisors and full-time intern psychologists. The exclusion of unmatched individual participants' and invalid questionnaires provided a total of 103 usable supervision dyads, and 206 valid questionnaires were collected successfully. The effective response rate was 57.22%. The questionnaire was designed to understand the variation in the allocation of training hours and assigned tasks as well as the chief complaints by clients across different training sites. The questionnaire also included items to investigate the experiences of interns while receiving supervision, the satisfaction levels pertaining to supervision for both supervisors and interns, and the theoretical orientation or approaches adopted by the supervisors. The findings of this study are as follows: (a) the intern psychologist participants in this study reported an average client load of 7.76 h per week and 285.1 h annually, and the supervision hours were 1.5 h per week. (b) The appointed tasks and chief client complaints varied with the training sites. For instance, significant differences were found across different sites on task items such as ”couple and family counseling,” ”intake,” ”workshop and lecture,” ”mental health promotion,” and ”in-class outreach.” (c) In this study, 46.2% of the clinical supervisors recruited into the current study were accredited by the Taiwan Counseling Psychology Association or the Taiwan Guidance and Counseling Association, 67.9% of them had been in practice for more than 10 years, and the experience duration of the participants as clinical supervisor ranged from 4 to 10 years. (d) The top-three most frequently adopted theoretical approaches are ”experiential” (35.9%), ”post-modernist” (20.4%), and ”psychodynamic” (14.6%). (e) The supervisors in the medical settings were less experienced than their counterparts in the community or school setting. However, their supervision hours exceeded the hours of supervisors in the community or school setting. (f) Overall, both supervisors and intern psychologists reported a high level of satisfaction with their supervision experiences. Specifically, 50.5% of the intern psychologists reported that they were ”very satisfied” with their experiences of receiving supervision, and 35% of them reported that they were ”satisfied.” Moreover, 27.25% of the supervisors reported that they were ”very satisfied” with their experience of delivering supervision, and 65.6% of them reported that they were ”satisfied.” (g) Supervisors' theoretical orientations had significant influence on their evaluation of interns' performance and competence. Supervisors adopting a relational or experiential approach tend to rate interns higher on the scale than those who adopt a cognitive-behavioral orientation. The findings of this survey were then analyzed and discussed. Based on our discussion, the implications on future research and clinical training in counseling psychology are described.起始頁-結束頁：275-295資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201912_51(2).00056篇名：諮商教育新手工作者的教學行動：以覺察與反思為訓練主軸的大學部輔導與諮商實習課程為例並列篇名：A Novice Counselor Educator's Action Research on Teaching: An Undergraduate Counseling Practicum Course Based on Awareness and Reflexivity-focused Training作者：姜兆眉(Chao-Mei Chiang);蘇盈儀(Ying-Yi Su)關鍵字：大學部輔導與諮商實習課程;自我覺察督導模式;行動研究;諮商員教育;覺察與反思;Action research;Awareness and reflexivity;Counselor education;Self-awareness Supervision Model;Undergraduate counseling practicum course期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本行動研究起始於研究者作為諮商教育新手工作者，初任大學部輔導與諮商實習課程授課教師，希冀以臺灣輔導諮商專業發展脈絡為基底，回應學生學習需求以及銜接教、學、用，思考並安排實習課程之規劃與進行。研究之行動場域為研究者之大學部輔導與諮商實習課程，研究者課程規劃主要以自我覺察督導模式進行團體督導與個別督導，以及同儕督導、課程教學以進行課程。本行動研究目的為發展符合臺灣在地脈絡之實習課程規劃。研究資料蒐集以焦點團體訪談法進行，共以三階段進行：學期初、學期中、課程結束三個月後。由於研究者身兼教學者、督導者，研究訪談由研究助理執行以維護研究倫理；送出學習成績評量之後，研究者以歸納分析法進行資料分析。行動「中」的發現：一、課程前：（一）過去接受督導的經驗、（二）修習輔導與諮商實習課程的期待、（三）接受課程督導之前的整體狀態；二、課程進行中：（一）觀察督導者的位置與姿態、（二）觀察督導者的督導策略、（三）接受督導者督導後的影響、（四）對課程安排規劃之建議；三、課程進行後：（一）實習課程的學習、（二）以受督者為中心的督導、（三）督導者的督導策略、（四）接受督導者督導後的影響、（五）對於課程安排規劃之建議。本研究亦呈現研究者依據此次行動結果之調整、行動反思、以及延續行動方向。英文摘要：This action research was initiated from the aspect of a researcher's reflection on being a novice counselor educator. The researcher in this study was the instructor of an undergraduate level practicum for the first time and reflected on the manner in which this course should be arranged based on the guidance and counseling professional development context in Taiwan, professional development requirements of students, connecting course instruction, students' learning, and professional practices. This study aimed to develop a course plan for undergraduate counseling practicum in terms of the Taiwanese context. Data collection was conducted using three focused group interviews that were conducted at the beginning of the course, in the middle of the course, and 3 months after the end of the course. As the researcher was an instructor and a supervisor of the course, all the interviews were conducted by research assistants who received focused group interview training in order to ensure individual participants' rights protected. The researcher did not access the research data until the participants' grades of the course were submitted. An inductive analysis was used for data analysis. The observations and findings obtained during the action research were as follows. First, the participants reported the following at the beginning of the course: (1) previous supervisory experiences, (2) expectations from the practicum course, and (3) their entire status before receiving supervision. Second, the participants described the following in the middle of the course: (1) observations of the supervisor's attitudes, (2) observations of the supervisor's supervision strategies, (3) influence after receiving supervision, and (4) recommendations for future course arrangement. Finally, the participants reported the following 3 months after the end of the course: (1) learning gained from the practicum course, (2) details pertaining to ”supervisee-centered” supervision, (3) supervisor's supervision strategies, (4) influence after receiving supervision, and (5) recommendations for course arrangement in the future. The researcher's modification of the course plan based on the results of this study, reflections on this action research, and continuous actions of the researcher are presented.起始頁-結束頁：297-320資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201912_51(2).00067篇名：家長參與、科學學習動機與偏鄉地區國中生科學學習成就並列篇名：Relationships among Parental Involvement, Science Motivation and Science Achievements of Junior High School Students in Rural Towns作者：謝曼盈(Manying Hsieh);張景媛(Ching-Yuan Chang)關鍵字：科學學習成就;科學學習動機;家長參與;結構方程模式;Parental Involvement;Science Achievements;Science Motivation;Structural Equation Modeling (SEM)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討偏鄉地區國中生家長參與、科學學習動機與一年後科學學習成就三者間的關係。研究對象為425位八年級國中生，包括221位男生和204位女生，平均年齡為14.36歲，標準差0.48歲。研究工具為阿拉巴馬教養量表兒童版的正向親職、家長參與分量表，以及國中生科學學習動機量表，以套裝軟體IBM SPSS 18和Amos 20進行資料分析，使用結構方程模式進行考驗，並採取兩階段的分析策略：第一階段考驗研究的測量模式；第二階段考驗研究的結構模式，再以多群組分析以考驗假設模式的跨性別不變性，以拔靴法（bootstrapping）考驗科學學習動機的中介效果。研究結果支持家長參與、科學學習動機、科學學習成就之間的理論關係，顯示假設模式具有跨性別的不變性，且科學學習動機在家長參與和科學學習成就間扮演部份中介變項的角色。綜上，研究結果顯示偏鄉地區家長參與越高，子女一年後的科學學習成就越高，當家長的陪伴能適當引發和鼓勵子女的科學學習動機時，更能有助提昇學生的科學學習成就。研究結果與Coleman的社會資本理論一致，並支持Grolnick與Slowiaczek的所提出的動機模式。最後依據研究結果提出促進偏鄉地區學生科學動機之相關建議。英文摘要：This study explored the relationships among parental involvement, science motivation and one-year later science achievements of the junior high school students in rural towns in Taiwan. The research subjects consisted of 425 8th grade junior high school students, including 221 males and 204 females. The mean age of the students was 14.36 years, with a standard deviation of 0.48. The parental involvement and positive parenting subscales of the Alabama Parenting Questionnaire Child Form (APQ-Child Form) as well as the Junior High School Student Science Motivation Scale were used in the study. The software IBM SPSS 18 and AMOS 20 were used for analyzing the data. The structural equation modeling (SEM) techniques were used to evaluate the hypothesized theatrical model, and a two-stage analysis strategy was applied. The fit of the measurement model was estimated in the first phase, and the fit of the structural equation model was estimated in the second stage. Moreover, multiple group analysis was applied in order to evaluate gender differences, and bootstrapping was applied in order to examine the mediation effects of science motivation. The study results offered support for the theoretical relationships among parental involvement, science motivation and science achievements. The multiple group analysis results provided support for the gender invariance of the hypothesized theatrical model, and the bootstrap results confirmed the partially mediating role of science motivation in the relationship between parental involvement and science achievements. In summary, the results demonstrated that parental involvement can impact their children's science motivation, which in turn can improve the school's success in science education one year later for the junior high school students living in rural towns. The findings were consistent with Coleman's theory of social capital and provided evidence that supports Grolnicks and Slowiaczek's motivational model. Based on the above results, some suggestions were proposed for improving students' science motivation in rural towns.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201909_51(1).00018篇名：翻轉教室對國中小學生學習成效影響之統合分析並列篇名：A Meta-Analysis of the Learning Effects of Flipped Classroom on Elementary School and Junior High School Students作者：嚴銘政(Ming-Cheng Yen);黃寶園(Bao-Yuan Huang)關鍵字：統合分析;學習成效;翻轉教室;Flipped classroom;Learning effects;Meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國內運用翻轉教室對國中小學生學習成效之影響，以Hedges與Olkin（1985）技術等統合分析法進行資料分析。自臺灣博碩士論文加值系統進行論文蒐集，以「翻轉教室」、「翻轉教學」、「翻轉學習」等關鍵詞進行篩選，篩選後且達標準之論文共49篇，包括認知層面48篇，情意層面31篇。蒐集之研究報告利用Borenstein、Hedges、Higgins與Rothstein設計的Comprehensive Meta-Analysis（CMA）3.0版軟體進行整體加權平均效果量（g值）、同質性檢定、出版偏誤檢測及類別模式分析。結果顯示：一、翻轉教室對國中小學生學習成效之影響是正向有效的，認知層面的效果量為0.308，達到Cohen小的效果量；情意情面的效果量為0.517，達到Cohen中度效果量。二、存有調節變項影響翻轉教室對國中小學生的學習成效，認知層面的調節變項有學科領域、數位學習平台使用的有無與種類、自學教材的類型、自學檢核機制的有無與形式、學生中心教學活動方式及教學實驗時間；情意層面的調節變項有學生年級、學科領域、數位學習平台使用的有無與種類、自學教材的類型、自學檢核機制的有無與形式、學生中心教學活動方式及教學實驗時間，其中有使用數位學習平台、以自錄教學影片為學生課前自學教材、及有檢核學生自學狀況等三種調節變項均能提升翻轉教室認知或情意層面的學習成效。最後，根據結果提出相關建議，俾供國中小教師、翻轉教室研究者，以及統合分析研究者參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the learning effects of flipped classrooms on elementary school and junior high school students in Taiwan. The data were analyzed according to the method of Hedges and Olkin (1985) and other technology of meta-analysis. The keywords ”flipped classroom,” ”flipped teaching,” and ”flipped learning” were used to search for relevant theses in the Taiwanese Master's thesis system. A total of 49 relevant theses, including 48 in the cognition domain and 31 in the affective domain, were obtained. The theses were analyzed on the overall weighted mean effect size (Hedges' g), homogeneity by using Cochrane's Q, and publication bias by using a funnel plot and the trim and fill method. Categorical model analysis was performed on the theses by using the Comprehensive Meta-Analysis version 3.0 software, which was designed by Borenstein, Hedges, Higgins, and Rothstein. The conclusions of this study are as follows: (1) Flipped classrooms positively influence learning effects for elementary school and junior high school students in Taiwan. The effect size for the cognition domain was 0.308, which equaled Cohen's small effect. The effect size for the affective domain was 0.517, which equaled Cohen's medium effect. (2) Moderator variables influence the learning effects of flipped classrooms on elementary school and junior high school students in Taiwan. Moderator variables of the learning effects of the cognitive domain include subjects, types of e-learning platforms, self-learning materials, self-learning inspection mechanisms, student-centered instructions, and elapsed teaching time. Moderator variables of the learning effects of the affective domain include students of different grades, subjects, types of e-learning platforms, self-learning materials, self-learning inspection mechanisms, student-centered instructions, and elapsed teaching time. According to the obtained results, some suggestions are proposed for elementary school and junior high school teachers, flipped classroom researchers, and meta-analysis researchers.起始頁-結束頁：23-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201909_51(1).00029篇名：台灣十年來教師閱讀教學與學生閱讀表現關係之探討：來自PIRLS 2006、2011與2016的證據並列篇名：The relationship between teacher reading instruction and students' reading performance in the past ten years of Taiwan: Evidence from PIRLS 2006, 2011 and 2016作者：陳明蕾(Minglei Chen)關鍵字：國際閱讀素養調查研究;閱讀教學;閱讀表現;PIRLS;Reading instruction;Reading performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：自2006年開始，台灣已陸續參加三屆國際閱讀素養調查研究（Progress in International Reading Literacy Stud，PIRLS），分別是PIRLS 2006、2011及2016。本研究以PIRLS教師問卷中，針對教師課室內閱讀教學的共同題為資料，探討台灣教師課室內閱讀教學活動頻率的變化情形，並以線性混合模型分析不同教學頻率對學生不同閱讀表現的主要效果，以及不同教學頻率與調查年度的交互效果。三次調查共有482位台灣教師完成教師問卷，及13,208位台灣四年級學生完成閱讀理解測驗。每位學生都有五種閱讀成績，分別是總成績、故事體成績、說明文成績、直接理解成績、與詮釋理解成績。三次調查中教師課室內閱讀教學的問卷共同題共有五大題，分別是：（1）教師以何種方式組織學生、（2）教師使用哪些閱讀材料、（3）教師進行哪些閱讀教學、（4）教師教導哪些閱讀策略、（5）學生閱讀後，教師請學生做哪些活動。結果發現：（1）相較於2006與2011的調查年度，2016年時有更多教師經常使用小組方式進行閱讀教學。但是不論教師偏好使用全班教學、小組教學或個別化教學，都不影響學生五種閱讀成績的表現；（2）相較於2006年，2011與2016這兩個調查年度，都有更多教師開始使用長篇小說進行閱讀教學，此外，2016年也有更多的教師更常使用「非小說」類的材料進行閱讀教學。而且，當教師愈常使用長篇小說進行閱讀教學，學生五種閱讀成績的表現就會愈好，且與調查年度無交互作用；（3）每天（或幾乎每天）會讓學生自行默讀的教師比例，隨著調查年度呈遞增趨勢。而且，當教師愈常讓學生自行默讀，學生的故事體成績與說明文成績就愈好，且與調查年度無交互作用。此外，會經常教學生略讀策略的教師比例，也隨調查年度而呈現遞增的現象。教師經常使用其它教學活動的比例，則出現2016與2006的高於2011年的現象。但教師使用這些教學活動的頻率不影響學生閱讀成績；（4）經常教學生就閱讀過的材料提出理由支持自己的看法，或就閱讀的材料進行預測，以及描述閱讀材料的風格與結構的教師比例，隨著調查年度呈遞增趨勢。教師經常進行其它閱讀策略教學的比例，在三次調查年度間無明顯變化趨勢。且教師進行閱讀策略教學的頻率，並不影響學生的任何一種閱讀表現。值得注意的是，2016年的資料發現「歸納與統整」的閱讀策略教學，對學生說明文成績有單純主要效果，且是教師愈常進行「歸納與統整」的閱讀策略教學，學生說明文成績就愈好；（5）經常要求學生就閱讀過的材料口頭回答或口頭概述的教師比例，也隨調查年度遞移逐漸增加。當教師愈常讓學生進行口頭概述或口頭回答問題，學生五種閱讀成績的表現就愈好，且與調查年度無交互作用。2016年時經常要求學生就閱讀過的材料和同學討論的教師比例，明顯高於2006與2011年的教師比例。經常在閱讀結束後以紙筆形式，要求學生就讀過的材料寫一些回應或進行小考的教師比例，在三次調查年度間無明顯變化趨勢。而且這些教學活動的頻率都不影響學生閱讀成績。英文摘要：The reading performance of fourth-grade students in Taiwan has shown a trend of improvement since PIRLS 2006 to PIRLS 2016. Theoretically, because of the teachers' day-to-day reading instruction in classroom, teachers have inevitably taken a key role in affecting the reading performance of the students. So far, little is known on relationship between the reading instruction and student reading performance in Taiwan. Therefore, the current study focused on the impact of activities of teacher reading instruction in Taiwan on the reading outcomes of students. By analyzing the ten-year PIRLS data, the present study can not only understand which aspects of teachers' factors play key role on students reading performance, but also serve as an important empirical evidence for formulating future reading education policies. The linear mixed model was used to analyze the main effects of different teaching frequencies on students' different reading performance. And the interaction between different teaching frequencies and the survey year. In three surveys, a total of 482 Taiwanese teachers completed the teacher questionnaire and 13,208 fourth-grade students in Taiwan completed the reading comprehension test. Each student has five reading grades, which are total score, story score, explanatory text score, direct understanding of grades, and interpretation of comprehension scores. There are five major questions in the questionnaires for teachers' indoor reading teaching in three surveys, namely: (1) how often teachers use different types of grouping for reading instruction, (2) how frequently teacher asked their students to read various types of literary and informational texts, (3) how often frequently teacher teaching language skills, (4) how often frequently teacher asked their students to practice reading strategies in teachers' reading instruction (5) how often frequently teacher asked their students to do various types of responses after students reading a text. It was found that teachers preferred the ”small grouping type” than ”whole-class” in PIRLS 2016 survey, but there were no effects of grouping type on students' reading performance. However, when teacher more frequently asked students: to read longer fiction books with chapters, silent reading, and oral response on reading materials, the better performance of the reading scores of the students. It is worth noting that the frequency of reading skills or strategies teaching in teachers' reading instruction does not affect students' reading performance. Only in PIRLS 2016, when teachers more frequently asked students to make generalization and draw inferences, the better performance of the expository reading scores of the students. These findings are discussed in relation to reading education policy and the literature on instructional contexts.起始頁-結束頁：51-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201909_51(1).000310篇名：知覺教師回饋、個人成就目標、學業自我效能與無聊之關係：中介效果與條件間接化效果分析並列篇名：Perceived Teacher Feedbacks, Personal Achievement Goals, and Academic Self-efficacy on Boredom: The Mediation Effect and Conditional Indirect Effect作者：彭淑玲(Shu-Ling Peng)關鍵字：知覺教師回饋;個人成就目標;條件間接化效果;無聊;學業自我效能;Academic self-efficacy;Boredom;Conditional indirect effect;Personal achievement goals;Perceived teacher feedbacks期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究依據探討學業情緒的控制－價值理論，說明情境（知覺教師回饋）與個人因素（個人成就目標、學業自我效能）如何共同對無聊產生影響。據此，本研究目的為：（1）建構「知覺教師回饋、個人成就目標與無聊之中介模式」，以瞭解個體知覺教師給予的回饋如何形塑其持有的成就目標、進而影響無聊。（2）考驗學業自我效能在上述中介模式上的調節效果。為完成上述目的，本研究以1105位七年級學生進行施測，並以數學科為主，蒐集資料以結構方程模式（structural equational modeling, SEM）進行中介效果與條件化間接效果分析。研究結果發現：（1）「自我參照回饋→趨向精熟目標→無聊」與「常模參照回饋→逃避表現目標→無聊」兩個中介模式受到觀察資料支持，可解釋當學生知覺不同教師回饋類型時，會形塑不同個人成就目標以對無聊產生間接效果。（2）學業自我效能會調節「自我參照回饋→趨向精熟目標→無聊」之負向間接效果：當學生持有的學業自我效能程度逐漸提升時，自我參照回饋透過趨向精熟目標對無聊的抑制效果會隨之增強。本研究依據研究結果提出建議，以作為國中教學輔導與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The study, grounded on the control-value theory of academic emotion, examined how the contextual factors (i.e., the perceived teacher feedbacks) and personal (i.e., the personal achievement goals and academic self-efficacy) factor have impact on boredom. Accordingly, the objectives of the present study are twofold: firstly, to construct four mediation models for investigating the relationship among the perceived teacher feedbacks, personal achievement goals, and boredom (i.e., ”the perceived self-reference feedbacks → mastery-approach goal → boredom”, ”the perceived self-reference feedbacks → mastery-avoidance goal → boredom”, ”the perceived normative-reference feedbacks → performance-approach goal → boredom”, and ”the perceived normative-reference feedbacks → performance-avoidance goal → boredom”); secondly, to test whether the above mediation relations can be moderated by the academic self-efficacy. Methodologically, a math survey was conducted with 1105 participants of 7th grade students in Taiwan, and the researcher analyzed the collected data using the technique of structural equation modeling (SEM) to test both the mediation effect and conditional indirect effect. The results showed that the two mediation models of ”the perceived self-reference feedback → mastery-approach goal → boredom” and ”the perceived normative-reference feedback → performance-avoidance goal → boredom” were supported by the observed data, which adequately captures the relationship among the perceived teacher feedbacks, personal achievement goals, and boredom. Specifically, mastery-approach goal fully mediates the prediction of the perceived self-reference feedback on boredom, and performance-avoidance goal fully mediates the prediction of the perceived normative-reference feedback on boredom. Also, it was found that the academic self-efficacy well moderates the negative indirect effect of ”the perceived self-reference feedback → mastery-approach goal → boredom.” In other words, when the level of individual’s academic self-efficacy is gradually increasing, the inhibition effect that the perceived self-reference feedbacks with individuals' adoption of mastery-approach goals pose on boredom increases. Based on the findings, relevant recommendations were proposed for further research, teaching practices, and junior high school counseling.起始頁-結束頁：83-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201909_51(1).000411篇名：「團隊創造力互動歷程模式」之建構－科學領域教學團隊的創意互動並列篇名：Exploring the Process of Generating Group Creativity within a Science Teacher Group作者：劉家瑜(Chia-Yu Liu);林偉文(Wei-Wen Lin);吳昭容(Chao-Jung Wu)關鍵字：科學教學創新;教學團隊;團隊創造力;Group creativity;Scientific creative teaching;Teacher learning group期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：科學教師要能創新教學以提升學生學習興趣與效能，除了其個人特質與領域知能，教學領域中的社會組織－即教學團隊，亦扮演著支持或抑制創意表現的關鍵角色。本研究檢視一科學領域教學團隊的討論歷程，釐清成員們如何透過對話以擴展想法、促進理解，並探究團隊創造力之發生軌跡。本研究於七次參與觀察及四次半結構式訪談後，建構團隊創造力互動歷程模式。團隊對話文本採紮根理論為基礎的分析方式，依序找出團隊討論歷程的28個第一階意義分類及九個第二階意義分類；接著，以曼－惠特尼U考驗確認團隊創造力歷程之基本及特殊對話元素；其後，以訪談資料補足與修正模式。最後，依據研究結果建構團隊創造力互動歷程模式，成員會以基本對話元素穩定團隊運作，並以「目標性的脈絡」、「擴展」、「理解」、「暫停」、「訊息精緻化」等五個非線性固定的循環階段，促進團隊創造力的發生。最後亦討論此模式應可為有意參與或籌組社群的科學教師及團隊帶來實質助益。英文摘要：Creative teaching is becoming essential in sparking student's interests and enhancing their performances. To improve teaching, teacher learning group is a good way to support teacher competence development. However, few studies have focused on how teachers make effective dialogue and generate creativity with others within a teacher learning group. Thus, we adapted Csikszentmihalyi's systems model to reveal the way of the dialogue within a middle school science teaching group affected the developing process of group creativity. The mixed-method approach was adopted and data from video recordings and semi-structured interview during 2016-2017 were collected. We used constant comparative analysis to analyze the data. First, twenty-eight dialogue elements of group creativity in first order and nine in second order were identified. Next, a serial of Mann-Whitney U tests was conducted to examine the general and unique dialogue elements. After modifying by the interview data, the Interactional Group Creativity Model was constructed. In this model, group members would discuss fluently with the general dialogue elements. Furthermore, group creativity would be promoted with the unique dialogue elements, which are contained in five stages: 1. Goal-oriented context stage: Group members achieve shared understanding in group goals and directions; 2. Expanding stage: Group members demonstrate multiple teaching ideas proposing, alternative solution raising, and teaching resources sharing to broaden the group's thinking and knowledge; 3. Understanding stage: Group members perform illustration seeking, explaining, and feedback to reinforce group's knowledge basis in this stage; 4. Suspending stage: By distracting their attentions temporarily, group members consider more possibilities and developed appropriate ideas; 5. Information elaborating stage: Within the spiral circulation of the two stages, ideas and information are elaborated through contextualization and combination. It is noteworthy that the five stages are nonlinear but circles that might be generated within single or multiple stages. Group creativity developed and elaborated in the spiral circulation between the five stages. Based on the results, relevant empirical and theoretical research have been discussed, and the practical suggestions for scientific teacher groups have also been proposed.起始頁-結束頁：109-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201909_51(1).000512篇名：家庭脈絡下的親子共讀與幼兒發展關係－臺灣幼兒發展調查資料庫的應用與分析並列篇名：Effects of Shared Book Reading Practices on Child Development in the Context of Taiwanese Families: Applying Data from Kids in Taiwan Study作者：林佳慧(Chia-Hui Lin);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu);張鑑如(Chien-Ju Chang)關鍵字：幼兒發展;家庭社經地位;結構方程模式;親子共讀;Child development;Shared book reading;Socio-economic status;Structural equation modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文使用臺灣幼兒發展調查資料庫36月齡幼兒第一波家庭問卷資料，旨在了解臺灣家庭中親子共讀的實施情況，以及家庭社經地位、親子共讀兩個因素對幼兒發展的直接與間接因果關係路徑，分析資料共納入2,164位幼兒。研究結果發現：臺灣育有36月齡幼兒的家庭中，約三分之二的父母每週會共讀至少一次，約三分之一的父母則從未與孩子共讀或共讀次數每週少於一次。再者，透過結構方程模式分析發現：親子共讀的實施受到家庭社經地位直接的影響，標準化迴歸係數為.60，意謂家庭社經地位這個因素可解釋親子共讀36%的變異性；親子共讀同時也對幼兒發展具有.51的直接效果，可解釋幼兒發展變異的28%，但家庭社經地位並沒有直接影響幼兒的發展，而是透過親子共讀的中介對幼兒發展產生間接影響。在各項幼兒發展能力中，親子共讀對幼兒的認知記憶能力和語言表達能力有最明顯的效果，效果量分別達.44和.41，其次是幼兒的情緒能力和讀寫萌發能力，效果量分別達.38和.37。親子共讀對幼兒的社會能力、注意力／執行功能、語言理解的發展也有正向效果，但效果量相對較小。另外，本研究也透過多群組分析，檢視受訪者為父親或母親、幼兒托育照顧方式與時間、幼兒的性別或出生排序對此因果路徑關係有無調節效果。結果均無發現有群組差異，顯示無論是由父親或母親所進行的共讀，對幼兒發展均有顯著效果，幼兒的性別或出生排序也沒有對結果造成差異。但幼兒托育照顧方式與時間則出現群組差異，當幼兒接受的每日托育照顧服務時間愈長（如11－24小時），親子共讀對幼兒發展的影響效果就愈高。英文摘要：In this study, we used the data from the study of Kids in Taiwan: National Longitudinal Study of Child Development and Care to understand parent-child shared book reading practices in Taiwan and the association between home environment factors, such as socio-economic status and childcare operation, and shared book reading practices as well as between shared book reading practices and children's development in cognition, language, and socio-emotions when they were 36 months old. The total number of children who participated in this study was 2,164. This study found that about two thirds of the parents read books to their children at least once a week, and one-third of the parents never read to their children or read to them less than once a week. Moreover, using structural equation modeling analysis, three latent variables were constructed, namely the socio-economic status, shared book reading practices, and the development of the child. The results indicated that socio-economic status had a significant relation with shared book reading practices. The β value was 0.6, which indicated that the socio-economic status factor could explain 36% variation of shared book reading practices. Furthermore, shared book reading practices had a β value of 0.51 (i.e., explaining 28% variation) for its relation with the development of the child. Socio-economic status, however, exhibited an insignificant relation with the development of the child. In this sense, shared book reading practices mediated the relationship between the socio-economic status and the development of the child. Shared book reading practices exhibited the highest effect on the cognitive memory development of a child and had a large effect on the language expression and emotional development of the child. In this study, we also compared different subgroups to investigate the existence of moderating factors and found that the respondent types (father or mother), child's gender, and birth order did not have any moderating effect on the causal model. Noninvariance of structural weights was observed in three subgroups of childcare operations. A stronger relation between the socio-economic status and shared book reading practices was observed for parents who did not use any childcare services (i.e., children who were cared by their own parents full time) than for parents who used childcare services less than 10 hours per day and parents who used childcare services 11-24 hours per day. The effects of shared book reading practices on the child's development was the largest for the group using 11-24 hours of childcare services but was the least for the group that did not use childcare services. This result may imply that shared book reading practices can improve the child's development most effectively though parents who can only spend limited time with their children.起始頁-結束頁：135-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201909_51(1).000613篇名：影響數位閱讀表現的學生與環境因素：PIRLS 2016資料探討並列篇名：Personal And Environmental Factors Affecting Students' Digital Reading Performance: Exploring Data from the PIRLS 2016作者：張郁雯(Yuwen, Chang);柯華葳(Hwawei, Ko)關鍵字：紙本閱讀;家庭學習資源;數位使用;數位閱讀;閱讀自信;Digital reading;Digital use;Home resources for learning;Print reading;Reading confidence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究的目的為探討學生個別因素（紙本閱讀能力、性別、閱讀自信、電腦使用自我效能）以及環境因素（家庭學習資源、家中數位設備與數位使用經驗）對國小學童數位閱讀表現之影響。資料來源為13個國家共69507位國小四年級學童在PIRLS 2016紙本以及數位閱讀表現與相關問卷資料。運用IDB Analyzer第四版進行相關與迴歸分析。結果發現紙本閱讀能力、閱讀自信、電腦使用自我效能、電腦使用經驗、家庭學習資源以及家中數位設備能共同解釋數位閱讀表現49%－73%的變異。其中，紙本閱讀表現大約可以解釋六成數位閱讀表現的變異，顯示兩者涉及共同的歷程，但數位閱讀也需要異於紙本閱讀的技能。雖然大多數國家紙本與數位閱讀表現是女生表現優於男生，當控制了紙本閱讀成績，僅剩四個國家數位閱讀表現的性別差異達顯著水準，顯示多數國家兩性的閱讀落差不因閱讀形式而有所不同。家庭學習資源可以分別解釋數位閱讀表現與紙本閱讀表現變異的14%和16%，家庭學習資源透過對紙本閱讀之影響間接影響數位閱讀表現，但仍有0.6%－2.3%的變異是家庭學習資源直接影響數位閱讀表現。閱讀自信每增加1分，數位閱讀表現平均可以增加16分；而電腦使用自我效能每增1分，數位閱讀表現平均增加4分。閱讀自信的重要性高於電腦使用自我效能。電腦使用經驗與數位閱讀表現的關係，因國家不同而不同。使用電腦和數位閱讀能力的關係也因所從事的活動性質不同而不同，意味著學童如何使用數位工具比數位近用對數位閱讀能力更為重要。英文摘要：The purpose of the study is to examine the effects of personal factors (print reading performance, gender, and reading confidence, and self-efficacy for computer use) and environmental factors (home resources for learning, digital devices in the home, and digital use) on digital reading performance in primary students. The data of 69507 fourth graders from 13 countries participating in the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) 2016 were examined. Correlation and multiple regression analyses were conducted by the IEA IDB Analyzer software version 4. The results showed that print reading performance, reading confidence, self-efficacy for computer use, home resources for learning, digital devices in the home, and digital use as predictors, the regression line can explain 49%-73% the variation of digital reading performance. Print reading ability can explain 60% variance in digital reading performance, which suggested that processes readers use to comprehend digital text are similar to what is required to comprehend print text. It also suggested that digital reading requires a different set of skills from those required to read the print text. Most countries in the study, girls have outperformed boys in print reading and digital reading. When holding print reading performance constant across genders, gender gaps are no longer statistically significant. This means that digitalization does not exacerbate gender inequality. Home resources for learning can explain 14% and 16% variation respectively in digital and print reading performance. The indirect association (through the effect of home resources for learning on print reading skills) accounts for most of the variation, the direct association accounts for 0.6-2.3% of the variation. Increasing in reading confidence of 1 point could increase in the digital reading of 16 points while increasing in self-efficacy for computer use of 1 point, the increase in digital reading is only 4 points. This suggests the importance to boost students' reading confidence. The relationship between digital use and digital reading skills varies across countries and the activities for which student use computers. What students do with ICT are more important than digital access to them.起始頁-結束頁：161-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201909_51(1).000714篇名：正向心理學介入對幸福與憂鬱效果之後設分析並列篇名：Effects of Positive Psychology Interventions on Well-Being and Depression: A Meta-Analysis作者：陳景花(Jing-Hua Chen);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)關鍵字：正向心理學介入;幸福;後設分析;憂鬱;Depression;Meta-analysis;Positive psychology interventions;Well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來，由於正向心理學持續的蓬勃發展，相關研究受到世界各地的研究學者所關注；關於正向心理學介入研究的整體效果評估，目前有兩篇後設分析論文已經發表，一篇是Sin與Lyubomirsky（2009）的研究（1977－2008），另一篇則是Bolier等人（2013）的研究（1998－2012）。因此，為了解正向心理學介入對幸福與憂鬱效果後續發展情形，本研究將接續Bolier等人（2013）的研究，研究時間界定為2013－2017年，共納入47篇期刊論文（48項研究），實驗組6143人，控制組4509人。研究結果發現：（1）正向心理學介入對於增進幸福感與減緩憂鬱症狀，具有低度至中度之間的正向效果，且有持續性的效果。（2）調節變項以介入時間、介入方式、年齡層次、招募方式、招募類別、樣本特徵、學生類別、控制條件及不同語言發表論文，顯著影響正向心理學介入效果。基於研究結論，本研究分別以（1）正向心理學介入研究成果推廣，（2）教育實務應用，以及（3）未來研究方向，提出研究建議。英文摘要：Positive psychology research has been developing continuously for the past few years and has become a focus of research attention worldwide. The effects of positive psychology interventions have been examined by Sin and Lyubomirsky (2009; 1977-2008) and Bolier et al. (2013; 1998-2012). The purpose of this study was to explore the effects of positive psychology interventions on well-being and depression. The study time was defined as 2013-2017. The present study undertook a systematic literature search using the PerioPath Index to the Taiwan Periodical Literature System, the China National Knowledge Infrastructure, ProQuest, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar. A total of 47 articles describing 48 studies met the criteria for inclusion. The studies concerned a total of 10,652 participants, 4,509 of which were in control groups. Primary outcomes were subjective well-being, psychological well-being, and depression. Positive psychology interventions included individual interventions and group training. Recruitment was conducted both online and offline. Positive psychology interventions that were used were gratitude interventions, strengths interventions, forgiveness interventions, engagement and flow interventions, savoring interventions, and meaning-oriented interventions. The results revealed that (1) the effect size of the fixed effect model was 0.309 for subjective well-being, 0.451 for psychological well-being, and 0.376 for depression. Positive psychology interventions had a low to moderate positive effect. At follow-up from 1 to 6 months, the effect size was still significant for subjective well-being and depression, indicating that the effects were fairly sustainable. Additionally, the results revealed that (2) moderators were intervention time, intervention methods, age level, recruitment method, recruitment category, sample characteristics, student category, control group treatment conditions, and different languages, all of which had a significant influence on subjective well-being, psychological well-being, and depression. Moreover, indications regarding literature collection, publication bias, and cultural differences were found, and the quality of the studies varied widely. The results of the meta-analysis indicated that positive psychology interventions were effective for the enhancement of subjective well-being and psychological well-being as well as for reducing depression symptoms. Finally, according to the conclusions, suggestions for positive psychology intervention research, educational practice, and future research are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：551-585資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201906_50(4).000115篇名：笑話中歧義與推論歷程之眼動分析並列篇名：Ambiguity and Inference Processing in Verbal Jokes: Analyses of Eye Movement作者：呂昕頤(Hsin-I Lu);詹雨臻(Yu-Chen Chan);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen)關鍵字：歧義笑話;幽默技巧;笑話類型;眼球追蹤;推論笑話;Ambiguity jokes;Eye tracking;Humor techniques;Inference jokes;Joke categories期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：幽默是人類高層次的認知能力，相較於幽默指涉的內容，幽默刺激所使用的技巧更能引起幽默的愉悅感受；眼動追蹤技術的特色為客觀直接，可以記錄參與者的認知與情感歷程的內在表徵。本研究透過眼球追蹤技術比較不同笑話技巧（歧義與推論）的眼動差異，由客觀眼動指標與主觀評定，探究笑話理解的認知及情感歷程。以兩個實驗進行研究，採用受試者內設計，共68位參與者。實驗一探討歧義笑話技巧，獨變項為刺激類型（語音歧義笑話、語音歧義非笑話、語意歧義笑話、語意歧義非笑話、語法歧義笑話、語法歧義非笑話），依變項為眼動指標，包括首次凝視時間、總凝視時間、平均凝視次數、回視次數及平均瞳孔大小；以及主觀的理解程度與好笑程度的評定。實驗一結果顯示，參與者閱讀笑話與非笑話的營造句之首次凝視時間並無顯著差異，符合本研究假設。在笑話認知歷程，「語音歧義笑話」相較於「語法歧義笑話」，在總凝視時間最短及回視次數最少。實驗二比較推論笑話與歧義笑話的眼動軌跡，獨變項為刺激類型（語意歧義笑話、語意歧義非笑話、橋界推論笑話、橋界推論非笑話、推敲推論笑話、推敲推論非笑話）。實驗二結果顯示，推論笑話（橋界與推敲）在總凝視時間、回視次數與平均瞳孔大小皆顯著大於「語意歧義笑話」，表示推論笑話的認知理解歷程比語意歧義笑話來得久且較深層處理，其認知涉入較多而產生較高的愉悅感受。綜合兩個實驗，笑話的好笑程度受難度影響，除具備難度適中、可理解的條件，笑話技巧亦是另一重要的關鍵。未來可延伸至認知神經科學領域比較不同笑話類型的認知、情感與笑反應的大腦機制，亦可透過不同笑話技巧進行幽默的訓練課程。英文摘要：Humor is a high-level cognitive ability in humans. In jokes, it is the humor-generating technique and not the content of the humorous stimulus that generates amusement. Eye-tracking techniques can provide a direct and objective recording of participants' internal representations in various cognitive and affective processes. The present study thus aimed to compare the cognitive and affective processes associated with distinct humor techniques (i.e., ambiguity and inference jokes) by using eye-tracking techniques, with both objective eye movement indices and subjective ratings. Sixty-eight participants participated in two experiments that had within-subjects designs. Experiment 1 investigated various categories of ambiguity jokes by using stimulus categories (phonological jokes, phonological nonjokes, semantic jokes, semantic nonjokes, syntactic jokes, and syntactic nonjokes) as independent variables and both objective eye movement indices (first pass gaze duration, total viewing time, average fixation counts, regression counts, and average pupil size) and subjective ratings (comprehensibility and funniness) as dependent variables. Results supported the hypothesis that first-pass gaze durations for setup lines do not differ significantly between jokes and nonjokes. Additionally, total viewing time and regression counts were shorter and lower, respectively, while reading phonologically ambiguous jokes than for syntactically ambiguous ones. Experiment 2 compared the effects of semantically inferential and semantically ambiguous jokes. The experimental design was the same as in experiment 1, except that the stimulus categories were semantically ambiguous jokes, semantically ambiguous nonjokes, bridging inferential jokes, bridging inferential nonjokes, elaborative inferential jokes, and elaborative inferential nonjokes. Results demonstrated that total viewing time was longer, regression counts were higher, and average pupil size was bigger for inferential jokes (bridging inferential jokes and elaborative inferential jokes) than for semantically ambiguous jokes. It was concluded that the cognitive processing of inferential joke takes more time and is more complicated than that of semantically ambiguous jokes, and this consequently results in deeper cognitive involvement and amusement. Taken together, the results of the present study indicate that the greatest pleasure accompanies this cognitive comprehensibility with the deeper semantic processing but that joke techniques also play a major role. Future research might use neuroimaging techniques to further investigate the neural correlates of cognitive, affective, and laughter processing of various types of joke techniques as well as design humor training courses on joke techniques.起始頁-結束頁：587-609資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201906_50(4).000216篇名：四向度完美主義之建構暨其與成就目標、學習倦怠之關係並列篇名：Construction of 4-Dimensional Perfectionism and Its Relationship with Achievement Goals and Burnout作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang)關鍵字：四向度完美主義;成就目標;自我導向型完美主義;完美主義追求;學習倦怠;4-dimensional Perfectionism;Achievement Goals;Burnout;Perfectionistic Strivings;Self-oriented Perfectionism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：完美主義為重要的人格因素，影響學生的學習動機、行為、適應。過去研究多以「特質」或「來源」分類完美主義，然研究結果卻有不一致的現象，即以單一「特質」或「來源」的分類似乎可有再細分空間。既然「特質」、「來源」皆是完美主義重要的分類方式，且以單一「特質」或「來源」的分類似乎有再細分空間，那麼似乎可結合二者來分類完美主義。因此，本研究建構2特質（完美主義追求／在意）× 2來源（自我導向型／社會期許型）的四向度完美主義，並探討其與成就目標、學習倦怠之關係。所以，本研究建構三個驗證性因素分析競爭模式以探討完美主義分類架構，以及建構「完美主義、成就目標、學習倦怠關係模式」以分析三者關係。本研究抽取二批八年級學生為樣本，共1310人，以結構方程模式進行分析。結果顯示：（1）「四向度完美主義模式」比「完美主義來源二階模式」、「完美主義特質二階模式」更適配；（2）「完美主義、成就目標、學習倦怠關係模式」與觀察資料適配；（3）自我導向型、社會期許型完美主義追求依序最能預測趨向精熟、趨向表現目標；（4）趨向精熟、趨向表現目標負向預測學習倦怠；逃避精熟、逃避表現目標正向預測學習倦怠；（5）自我導向型完美主義追求負向預測學習倦怠；自我導向型完美主義在意正向預測學習倦怠。本研究結合「特質」、「來源」分類完美主義以擴展過去研究；並發現四向度完美主義與四向度成就目標相對應關係，提供相關研究更豐富訊息；且以四向度成就目標的趨、避焦點分析其與學習倦怠關係彌補過去研究缺口。在教學應用上父母、教師可藉由提升孩子自我導向型完美主義追求、趨向精熟目標，降低社會期許型完美主義在意、逃避表現目標，將有效降低其學習倦怠。英文摘要：Perfectionism is a highly influential personal disposition that affects students' learning motivation, behavior, and adjustment. Most studies have classified perfectionism according to its ”character” or ”resources”; however, the study results have been mixed. Thus, more detailed classification of perfectionism might be necessary. Furthermore, both ”character” and ”resources” are useful means by which to classify perfectionism. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to construct a 4-dimensional perfectionism model by employing 2 character aspects (perfectionistic strivings/perfectionistic concerns) and 2 resource aspects (self-oriented perfectionism/socially prescribed perfectionism) and explored the relationships of the 4-dimensional perfectionism with achievement goals and burnout. Accordingly, this study performed confirmatory factor analyses of three competing models of perfectionism in order to construct the 4-dimensional perfectionism model and then constructed a model of perfectionism, achievement goals and burnout in order to analyze the relationships of perfectionism with achievement goals and burnout. The participants were 1,310 junior high school students, and structural equation modeling was used. The following results were obtained: (a) the 4-dimensional perfectionism model fitted the observed data better than the other two competing models; (b) the model of perfectionism, achievement goals, and burnout fitted the observed data well; (c) self-oriented perfectionistic strivings had the strongest effect on approach-mastery goals, and socially prescribed perfectionistic strivings had the strongest effect on approach-performance goals; (d) approach-mastery and approach-performance goals negatively predicted burnout, and avoidance-mastery and avoidance-performance goals positively predicted burnout; and (e) self-oriented perfectionistic strivings negatively predicted burnout, and self-oriented perfectionistic concerns positively predicted burnout. This study classified perfectionism through combining both its ”character” and ”resources” dimensions to expand past studies. The findings concerning the relationships between 4-dimensional perfectionism and 4-dimensional achievement goals yield more abundant information than past related studies. The study focused on the perspectives of approach and avoidance to analyze the relationships between 4-dimensional achievement goals and burnout to overcome the research gap. In pedagogical implications, parents and teachers can promote children's self-oriented perfectionistic strivings and approach-mastery goals and decrease their socially prescribed perfectionistic concerns and avoidance-performance goals to lessen their burnout.起始頁-結束頁：611-635資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201906_50(4).000317篇名：中文晤談評量問卷內部結構之探究：個案層次分析並列篇名：A Study of the Internal Structure of the Chinese Session EvaluationQuestionnaire (C-SEQ): Client-Level Analyses作者：陳慶福(Ching-Fu Chen);陳凱婷(Kai-Ting Chen)關鍵字：中文第五版晤談評量問卷;內部結構;英文第五版晤談評量問卷;晤談影響;Chinese Session Evaluation Questionnaire (C-SEQ);Internal structure;Session Evaluation Questionnaire Form 5 (SEQ-5);Session Effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：晤談評量問卷（Session Evaluation Questionnaire, SEQ）是一份過去經常被作為評量諮商影響的自陳式工具，且此問卷在過去，也經常被視為是評量諮商歷程與結果的工具。Stiles、Gordon和Lani（2002）所發展的最新版Session Evaluation Questionnaire Form 5（SEQ－5），係由21對語意區分的相對形容詞所組成，各題項均採7點評量的方式計分。研究目的：本研究採用陳慶福和林妙容（2016）翻譯自SEQ－5的中文第五版晤談評量問卷（Chinese Session Evaluation Questionnaire, C－SEQ），探討個案層次C－SEQ的內部結構。研究方法：參與者為2017年4月至2017年7月間，至台灣的21所大學諮商輔導中心接受心理諮商之大學生，共計200位（N=200），每一位參與者在最近一次接受諮商後，填答一份中文C－SEQ，本研究據此進行C－SEQ內部結構的探討。研究結果：本研究的資料經由探索性因素分析和驗證性因素分析，可以確認C－SEQ包含：深度性、順暢性、正向性和激動性的四個因素結構；在晤談評量向度和晤談後情感評量向度分別為深度性與順暢性，以及正向性與激動性。研究結論：個案層次的C－SEQ包含四個因素的結構，此問卷的深度性、順暢性與正向性因素間存在低度至中度的相關；此問卷可提供國內諮商實務之回饋和諮商歷程研究之用途。本研究依據研究的發現與限制，提出對未來諮商實務與研究的具體建議。英文摘要：The Session Evaluation Questionnaire (SEQ), which is a self-rating instrument, has been widely applied in measuring the impact of counseling sessions. The SEQ may be conceived as a bridge between the counseling process and outcome. The SEQ Form 5 (the latest version of the SEQ; Stiles, Gordon, & Lani, 2002) includes 21 bipolar adjective scales in a 7-point semantic differential format. Objective: The purpose of the present study was to explore clients' responses to the Chinese SEQ (C-SEQ), which was translated by Chen and Lin (2016). The clients' responses to the C-SEQ were elicited and then analyzed to understand the internal structure of the C-SEQ. Methods: A total of 200 clients from 21 Taiwanese universities were recruited using heterogeneous convenience sampling by the researchers between April 2017 and July 2017. After each client attended his or her latest individual counseling session, he or she was asked to complete one copy of the C-SEQ. Thus, our collected data were drawn from the questionnaires. Results: Exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis were conducted. The influences of counseling sessions, including the dimensions of session evaluation and postsession mood evaluation, were measured. The results of this study corroborated the premise that four factors are elicited from the C-SEQ, namely Depth, Smoothness, Positivity, and Arousal. Thus, the C-SEQ assesses two dimensions of session evaluation, Depth and Smoothness, as well as two dimensions of postsession mood, Positivity and Arousal. Conclusion: The internal structure of the C-SEQ encompasses four factors: Depth, Smoothness, Positivity, and Arousal. Intercorrelation coefficients between Depth, Smoothness, and Positivity were between low and medium (.27- .67, p ＜ .01). The C-SEQ is now available as an instrument for giving feedback regarding counseling practice and counseling process research in Taiwan. Additionally, based on the findings and limitations in this research, suggestions for counseling practice and future research are offered by the researchers.起始頁-結束頁：637-658資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201906_50(4).000418篇名：青少年案主觀點的諮商關係體驗∼初探性研究並列篇名：Adolescent Clients' Perception of the Counseling Relationship: An Initial Qualitative Analysis from the Client Perspective作者：王櫻芬(Ying-Fen Wang);黃瑛琪(Ying-Chi Huang);陳宛宜(Wan-Yi Chen)關鍵字：人際依附;共通因子;青少年案主;諮商關係;Adolescent clients;Attachment;Common factors;Counseling relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究之主要目的在探索於台灣現有的學校諮商脈絡之下，青少年案主與其諮商工作者互動的關係體驗，尤其是其中情感連結部分之經驗。研究者以六名接受過三次以上的諮商，且仍正處於諮商關係中的青少年案主為對象，採用質性研究法，進行半結構式深度訪談。研究參與者的平均年齡為15.5歲（介於13∼18歲）。五名為女孩，一名為男孩，國中生和高中生各三名。研究者採用質性內容分析進行訪談資料之分析。研究結果發現青少年案主在諮商中的關係體驗，可分為「案主知覺治療師個人特質」、「案主知覺治療師的對待態度」、「案主對諮商關係的評價與回應」，以及「案主接受諮商後的改變」四個主要類別。其中研究者認為最重要的發現為「案主對諮商關係的評價與回應」類別，此類別可再細分出「案主知覺諮商關係不同於其他人際關係」、「案主經驗到對諮商工作者的正向情感」和「案主在諮商關係中內在歷程與行為的改變」三個次類別。研究結果顯示青少年案主在諮商中會感受到諮商工作者所展現的尊重、平等、同理、接納和在乎案主的態度，他們知覺到此人際關係異於其他人際關係，體驗到對諮商工作者的信任和親密感，在諮商中的行為表現有所改變。他們認為諮商經驗促進了自我瞭解、情緒表達更有彈性，並調整在諮商室外與其他成人互動的方式。根據研究發現，作者提出後續研究以及實務介入上的建議，如：研究上可以探討不同諮商階段中諮商關係的變化，及其對諮商成效之影響；以及實務上，針對青少年案主的諮商介入，應特別注意展現尊重、平等和同理等態度，以利建立正向情感連結。英文摘要：The purpose of the current investigation was to explore adolescent clients' experiences in the counseling relationship, especially the emotional bond to their therapist, in the context of school counseling in Taiwan. Six adolescent clients who received counseling for at least three sessions and were currently receiving counseling were recruited to participate in this study. A qualitative method with semi-structured in-depth interview was adopted to understand participants' experiences. The mean age was 15.5 years, and ages ranged from 13 to 18 years. Five of the participants were girls and one was a boy. Three were junior high school students, and the rest were senior high school students. Data were analyzed using qualitative content analysis. Findings revealed four categories of experiences regarding the counseling relationship: clients' perception of therapists' personal traits and emotions, clients' perception of therapists' attitude toward them, clients' reaction and evaluation of the counseling relationship, and clients' changes outside the counseling sessions. The most significant finding identified by the authors was that clients' reaction and evaluation of the counseling relationship could be divided into the following three subcategories: clients noticed that the counseling relationship was different from their other interpersonal relationships, clients experienced a positive emotional bond when interacting with their therapists, and clients' internal reactions and behavior changed within the counseling relationship. Findings of the current study indicated that when adolescent clients perceive that their therapists treat them with respect, equality, acceptance, and care, which differs from their other interpersonal experiences, adolescent clients develop a sense of trust and intimacy with their therapist and are willing to cooperate with the therapist on therapeutic tasks, even changing the manner in which they interact with the therapist. After receiving counseling, they reported increased self-understanding, developed a more flexible manner of emotional expression, and exhibited more adaptive interpersonal behaviors. Based on these findings, the authors propose that future research could explore changes of the nature of the relationship during the course of counseling and effects of the counseling relationship on outcomes across the stages of counseling. Additionally, it is suggested that in clinical practice, building emotional connections and providing a positive interpersonal experience should be underscored when counseling adolescent clients.起始頁-結束頁：659-683資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201906_50(4).000519篇名：學齡前幼兒之社會支配性與影響因素及其資源控制策略之探討並列篇名：Young Children's Social Dominance, Influencing Factors, and Resources Control Strategies作者：蔡秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Tsai);周育如(Yu-Ju Chou)關鍵字：幼兒;社會支配性;資源控制策略;Children;Resource control strategy;Social dominance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討學齡前幼兒之社會支配現象。研究分為兩個階段，第一階段以110位四至六歲幼兒為對象，由教師填寫「幼兒社會支配性量表」與「幼兒道德行為量表」，父母填寫「父母管教方式問卷」，藉以瞭解幼兒社會支配性之年齡、性別分布以及相關影響因素；第二階段以第一階段由各班選出之社會支配性得分最高的30名幼兒為對象，由教師填寫「資源控制策略量表」，研究者則進入現場實地觀察目標幼兒的互動行為，藉以瞭解高社會支配性幼兒資源控制策略的使用情形。第一階段的研究結果發現，幼兒社會支配性隨年齡上升，無性別差異；父母懲罰式管教以及幼兒本身的道德行為都與中、大班幼兒的社會支配性有關。第二階段行為觀察的結果則發現，社會支配性高的幼兒多是雙策略控制者與利社會策略控制者；隨年齡上升，幼兒會增加利社會控制策略之使用；幼兒控制策略的使用因對象而異，高社會支配性幼兒與高社會支配性幼兒互動時，較多使用利社會的策略，與一般幼兒或低社會支配性幼兒互動時，則較多使用強制策略。本研究結果可增進吾人對幼兒社會支配性之瞭解，也提供家長與教育工作者之參考。英文摘要：This study was designed to investigate the phenomenon of young children's social dominance. The study evaluated age and sex differences and assessed the associations between parenting, moral behavior, social dominance and the resource control strategies of young children. The study was divided into two stages. In the first stage, a total of 110 preschoolers (ages 4-6) were rated by their teachers on social dominance and moral behavior and their parents filled in the parenting behavior questionnaire. In the second stage, 30 highly dominant children were rated by their teachers on resource control strategies and observed resource control behavior in a play situation. The study determined that young children's social dominance increased with age. A significant difference in social dominance was evident between age groups but not between sexes. Children's social dominance was correlated with negative parenting and children's moral behaviors. In parenting, six-year-old children's social dominance was correlated with the deprivation of rights. Five-year-old children's social dominance was correlated with corporal punishment parenting. Children's moral behaviors improved along with the age increase and were highly correlated with social dominance. After controlling for the age difference, moral behaviors and social dominance were still correlated. As evident in the observation of various age groups' resource control behaviors, the highly social dominant children exhibited stronger resource control strategies. Most of them were bistrategic controllers and prosocial controllers. The use of the prosocial control strategy increased along with age but the coercive control strategy did not. The top two prosocial control strategies the children employed were giving suggestions and offering objects, and the least used strategy was verbally misleading a partner. The top two coercive control strategies the children employed were taking objects directly and thwarting a partner, and the least used strategy was physical aggressiveness. Highly dominant children tend to use the prosocial control strategy when interacting with other highly dominant children. However, when interacting with low-dominance children, they tend to use the coercive control strategy. The study not only improved our understanding in young children's social dominance, but also provides a reference for parents and educators.起始頁-結束頁：685-705資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201906_50(4).000620篇名：Connecting Principled Information and Worked Examples: Effects of Content Abstractness and Solution Complexity並列篇名：連結原理與實例：抽象內容與複雜解答的效果作者：廖心玫(Hsinmei Liao)關鍵字：Analogical mapping;Example complexity;Principle abstractness;例題複雜性;原理抽象性;類比映對期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Two experiments were conducted to investigate the effect of content abstractness (Experiment 1) and solution complexity (Experiment 2) for connecting principled information and worked examples. College students who had not learned the selected statistical distribution studied the principled information and two examples. In Experiment 1, the participants completed tasks for principle-example mapping and example-example mapping. Overall, their performance in principle-example mapping was lower than that in example-example mapping. They also committed more one-to-many errors and mapped fewer parallel contents and more nonparallel contents in principle-example mapping in comparison with those in example-example mapping. However, these effects were weaker when one example in the example-example pair was relatively complex. In Experiment 2, the participants completed tasks for principle-simple example mapping and principle-complex example mapping. Their performance in principle-complex example mapping was lower than that in principle-simple example mapping. In addition, the participants made more one-to-many errors and mapped fewer parallel elements and slightly more nonparallel elements. This study adds direct evidence to the research literature concerning the process of connecting a principle to its example. Abstractness causes principle-example mapping difficulty but not example-example mapping difficulty. Because a general element in the principle may be mapped onto several possible candidates in the example, mapping of corresponding elements between the principle and example is less accurate. However, principle-example mapping provides learners an opportunity to examine elements not demonstrated in the examples, and such learning tends to be more accurate in comparison to example-example mapping. Furthermore, pairing a simple example with the principle appears to facilitate learning of the parallel content, whereas pairing a complex example with the principle tends to promote learning of the nonparallel content. The implications of these findings are discussed.英文摘要：本研究透過兩個實驗調查抽象內容（實驗1）與複雜解答（實驗2）對連結原理與實例的影響。未曾學習過特定機率分配的大學生研讀某原理與兩個實例。在實驗1中，參與者完成原理－實例映對以及實例－實例映對作業。整體而言，他們在原理－實例映對的表現低於實例－實例映對的表現。與實例－實例映對相較，他們也犯了較多一對多錯誤，而且在原理－實例映對作業上對比出較少對等的內容但較多非對等的內容。然而，當實例－實例作業中一個例題較為複雜時，這些效果變得較為微弱。在實驗2中，參與者完成原理－簡單實例以及原理－複雜實例映對作業。結果發現，他們在後者的表現低於前者。此外，參與者在後者犯了較多一對多錯誤，並且對比較少的對等內容但稍多的非對等內容。這項研究為文獻增加了關於連結原理與實例之歷程的直接證據。與實例－實例映對相比，抽象性確實導致原理－實例映對的困難。部分原因是該原理中的一般元素可以對應到實例中幾個可能的候選者。這種效果的結果是原理和實例之間的相應元素的映對不太準確。然而，原理－實例映對為學習者提供了檢驗未出現於實例中的元素的機會，並且與實例－實例映對相比這種學習往往較為準確。（儘管總體而言，原理－實例映對不如實例－實例映對準確。）另一方面，原理－實例映對也受到實例的解決方案複雜性的影響。將簡單實例與原理配對似乎有助於學習對等內容，而將複雜實例與原理配對則傾向於促進對非對等內容的學習。文末針對這些發現的意涵進行討論。起始頁-結束頁：707-727資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201906_50(4).000701篇名：十九世紀首位美籍傳教士裨治文在華教育事業與美國教育制度的引介並列篇名：The Educational Enterprise of the First American Missionary E. J. Bridgman and His Introduction of American Educational System in the Nineteenth Century China作者：周愚文(Yu-Wen Chou)關鍵字：美國教育制度;教育移轉;教會學校;裨治文;American education system;mission schools;educational transfer;E. C. Bridgman期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文旨在探討十九世紀首位來華美籍傳教士裨治文的教育事業，及其對引介美國教育制度的影響。本文採歷史研究法，經考證及分析一手中、英文史料後發現，裨治文在華31年間，除直接布道外，還藉翻譯聖經、出版書籍、發行報刊及設立學校來傳福音。他所撰《美理哥合省國志略》是首部美人介紹美國及其教育制度之作，廣為時人鈔引。另他在穗、澳、港、滬設立學塾，教育貧童，並倡「設學輔教」策略，起初未獲所屬美部會支持，但仍以己力募款興學。裨夫人也積極在穗、滬、京設立女塾，興學輔教。直到他病逝後，1877年在華各差會才改變態度，改支持興辦教育事業。之後，美部會擴展華北教育事業，更建立教會學校系統，故裨治文早期引介美國教育制度的先驅角色實不可忽視。英文摘要：The aim of this article is to explore Rev. E. J. Bridgman and his influence of introducing American educational system in the nineteenth century China, who was the first American protestant missionary to China in 1830. This study used historical method and primary sources. During his thirty-one year's service in China, not only he preached the gospel directly, but also translated Scriptures, published an influential book, A Brief Account of the United Provinces of American, and journal to introduce USA and her educational system. Besides, he established a few primary schools at Canton, Macao, Hong Kong and Shanghai for poor children for evangelism and training native assistants. He also initiated a strategy ”education as means to evangelism”, which was not recognized by the American Board in the beginning until the resolution made by The Shanghai Missionary Conference 1877. As the pioneer and founder for the missionary enterprise and the establishment of its mission school system of American Board later, and introducing American educational system, their Mr. Bridgman's educational efforts should not be forgotten.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820191265040012篇名：批判識讀教育融入影像培力教學：一個東南亞移工自拍影片工作坊的實踐與省思並列篇名：The Instruction of Visual-Empowerment on the Perspective of Critical Pedagogy: A Case Study on the Practice of Self-filming Workshop among Southeast Asian Migrant Workers作者：柯妧青(Wan-Ching Ke)關鍵字：自我再現;批判識讀教育;東南亞移工;影像培力;critical pedagogy;self-filming as empowerment;Southeast Asian migrant workers;self-representation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:4期出版年：2019中文摘要：基於個人核心關懷，研究者參與一項「東南亞移工自拍影片工作坊」計畫，教導移工拍攝「第一人稱」影片自我發聲，並蒐集資料以探究批判識讀教育理論如何實踐於影像培力教學。研究對象為研究者所指導的六位參與自拍課程之菲律賓籍加工區女作業員。研究發現，移工的感知與覺察力雖有差別，以提問（problem-posing）及對話（dialogue）方式引導其透過生命經驗與個人故事進行反身性思考，確能呈現具主體性的對話文本；自我觀看方式的影片製作歷經「啟動思考」、「產生想法」、「形成概念」、「產製意義」動態循環，啟發移工於自我再現的過程中自我整理與深度思考，建構具批判反思力的影音文本，展現其能動性。英文摘要：Based on my concerns about subjectivity and representation of ”non-mainstream” communities, the ”self-filming” workshop, my being participated with six Southeast Asian migrant workers, has been my critical-oriented case study aimed to explore how the video production can help marginalized others empower and voice for themselves. And these six Filipino factory workers are definitely reported in the article. My research findings are as the followings. Firstly, each of migrant worker's difference reveals some perceived self-awareness and sensibilities. Subsequently, critical-literacy theory, as my research methodology that emphasized on ”problem-posing” and ”dialogue”, could guide the Southeast Asian migrant workers to raise their consciousness of subjectivity at life-experience-based film works and to inspire them to establish alternative perspectives via self-looking and critical-thinking ways. And finally, the films could be presented exactly as high-cultural and dialogue-valued texts.起始頁-結束頁：39-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820191265040023篇名：原住民文化融入數學課程的發展：以一所實驗小學為例並列篇名：The Development of Integrating Indigenous Culture into Mathematics Curriculum in an Experimental Elementary School作者：徐偉民(Wei-Min Hsu)關鍵字：文化融入數學課程;共學探究;原住民學生;實驗小學;課程發展;culture-integrated mathematics curriculum;co-learning inquiry;indigenous students;experimental elementary school;curriculum development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討小學教師和數學師培者共同發展和實施原住民文化融入的數學課程。學校教師意圖發展與實施文化融入的數學課程，來提升學生對原住民文化的理解及數學學習的表現。本研究採個案研究，以實驗小學教師和研究者組成的共學探究社群為對象，先探討社群成員課程發展的歷程與焦點，再了解教師課程使用的情形。結果顯示在課程分析與設計時，教師關注問題的情境與表徵，意圖讓學生對問題的呈現感到熟悉且容易理解，並逐漸從學生的觀點來思考課程設計與數學的教與學；在課程實施時，教師幾乎完全使用設計的課程內容，使用後的反思與修正大都聚焦在表徵的合適性上。本研究發展文化融入數學課程時採用的分析、設計、實施、評鑑和修正的歷程，可作為實驗學校課程發展時的參考。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the development and implementation of integrating indigenous culture into mathematics curriculum through school teachers working with a mathematics educator. The school teachers intended to integrate indigenous culture into mathematics curriculum design to improve the students' understanding on indigenous culture and mathematics performance. The case study method was employed and the members of Co-Learning Inquiry Community (CLIC) which constituted by the researcher and school teachers were the participants. The results indicated that the teachers concerned on the presentation of problems which included cultural scenario and representations when they analyzed and designed the curriculum. They intended to help the students to be familiar with and to understand the presentation of problems easily. Moreover, the teachers gradually thought about curriculum design, mathematics teaching and learning from the students' perspectives. In the curriculum implementation, the teachers almost followed the contents of designed curriculum. After the implementation, the focus of discussion and reflection was on the appropriation of problem representations. The curriculum developmental processes which this study adopted included analysis, design, implementation, evaluation, and revision could be as the reference for other experimental schools on curriculum development.起始頁-結束頁：77-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820191265040034篇名：課程與教學改革經驗之辨證與反思並列篇名：Dialectic and Reflection on Reform Experiences of Curriculum and Instruction作者：卯靜儒(Chin-Ju Mao);黃政傑(Jenq-Jye Hwang);陳麗華(Li-Hua Chen);藍偉瑩(Wei-Ying Lan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：117-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820191265040045篇名：教育學者張彭春的思想演進及其對《世界人權宣言》之鍛造（1923－1948）並列篇名：The Evolution of Educator P.-C. Chang's Thinking and His Participation to the UDHR (1923-1948)作者：劉蔚之(Wei-Chih Liou)關鍵字：世界人權宣言;張彭春;教育史;The Universal Declaration of Human Rights;P.-C. Chang;history of education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:3期出版年：2019中文摘要：直接主導聯合國《世界人權宣言》制定的張彭春在教育學界頗受忽視。本文運用張彭春所有著作與聯合國官方會議紀錄等一手史料與檔案，探討他橫跨中西文化的知識背景與能力提升轉化之過程，以理解為何早期表現平平、急於複製西方經驗使中國現代化的他，竟能在人類歷史關鍵舞台上，本於人文化成的大同世界理想，發揮重大貢獻。結果發現，留美期間，張彭春開始透過比較教育學，潛心窮究西方現代化歷史，展開中西比較的第一步。這不僅成為日後在中西文化間穿梭比較與折衝的基礎，更奠定其於《宣言》制定過程中得到共鳴與贊同的獨特優勢。本文最後建議：一、杜威影響僅為張彭春思想來源之一，不宜片面強調；二、評價張彭春的起點應由他的西方知識而非儒家素養開始；三、張彭春的比較方法與素養是對《宣言》產生影響力的關鍵因素；四、張彭春之貢獻在使《宣言》具普世性，多於使之儒家化。英文摘要：Peng Chun Chang or P.-C. Chang, who led the enactment by the United Nations' of ”The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” was a widely neglected scholar in the field of education. This study analyzes P.-C. Chang's writings, important speeches, and official meeting records of the United Nations. From the educational perspective, this article explores how P.-C. Chang's knowledge background and abilities across Chinese and Western cultures elevated and transcended his previously known abilities. It was found that Chang went through an early stage during which he hastily attempted to borrow western practices to promote the modernization of Chinese education. After his thoughts gradually matured, his goal became: to create a humanized world of great harmony based on Humanism. In addition, this research also developed four conclusions. 1. Dewey's ideas merely serve one of the many sources that impacted P.-C. Chang's ideology and should not be overemphasized. 2. An evaluation of P.-C. Chang's historical importance should root from his knowledge of Western Culture, not Confucianism. 3. P.-C. Chang's comparative method and literacy were critical to the influence he had on the Declaration. 4. P.-C. Chang's contributions to the Declaration were more on universal values than in Confucianism.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190965030016篇名：公立國中小教師介聘案例暨相關法律問題探討並列篇名：Teacher Transfer Cases in Public Elementary and Secondary School and Related Legal Issues作者：黃源銘(Yuan-Ming Huang)關鍵字：不適任教師;教育行政;教師介聘;unqualified teacher;educational administration;teacher transfer期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文從行政爭訟案例發想其問題意識，即公立國中小教師申請介聘，經原服務學校及介聘委員會通過，卻遭介聘學校教評會以該教師有《教師法》第14條第1項各款為由審核未通過，引發的介聘制度及相關法律問題進行探討。本文透過法規研究、制度研究以及個案（案例）研究等途徑，輔以文獻分析及案例分析為研究方法，結果發現，現行公立國中小介聘制度須經過二校教評會審議，可能造成審議結果意見相左而導致申請介聘教師權利受損，況且以介聘程序連結不適任教師之處理，恐有違反不當連結之嫌。本文認為要避免此一情況，經介聘委員會決議通過後，應授權由受聘學校校長直接聘用，無須再由介聘學校教評會審查，以化解二校教評會意見相左之困境。英文摘要：Rooted in the administrative litigation cases, this paper discusses teacher transfer system and relevant legal questions resulted from disagreeing review results in teacher transfers. Notable events have occurred in which teacher transfer among schools applied by the elementary and secondary teachers have been approved by the original school and its teacher transfer committee but disapproved by teacher evaluation committee of the teacher transfer schools with the reason of the teacher violating the regulations of Item 1, Article 14 of ”Teacher's Law”. According to the research findings, the current teacher transfer system in public elementary and secondary schools must be reviewed by the teacher evaluation committee of both schools and the teacher's right to apply for teacher transfer may be damaged due to the difference in the review results and opinions. Besides, the link to unqualified teachers used by the treatment of the teacher transfer procedure may cause improper link. This paper suggests that to avoid this situation, the principal of the employing school should be authorized to directly employ this teacher after the teacher transfer is approved by the teacher transfer committee meeting.起始頁-結束頁：41-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190965030027篇名：論「通過／不通過制」在大學教育的誤用與重塑並列篇名：On the Misuse and Reestablishment of the Pass/Fail Grading System in University Education作者：林俊儒(Jun-Ru Lin);林昆翰(Kun-Han Lin);何萬順(One-Soon Her)關鍵字：成績平均積點;通過／不通過制;零學分課程;學習評量;學習規劃;grade point average;pass/fail;zero-credit course;grading evaluation;learning planning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文首先釐清「通過／不通過制」（Pass／Fail，簡稱P／F制）的學習評量方式與「百分制」和「等第制」之異同，以及P／F制與成績平均積點（grade point average，簡稱GPA）的關係，並且呈現P／F制在臺灣高等教育發展上與零學分課程之間的緊密連結。接著，從學分與授課的對應關係，說明「服務學習」、「教學實務與實習」與「外語能力檢定」此三種零學分課程如何誤用P／F制，並指出其中的可能弊端以及背後的政策思維。從教育政策的角度觀察，P／F制與其他評量方式各有利弊得失。在提示P／F制的適用課程、對象與階段的理論基礎上，本文主張多元的學習規劃設計，建議大學可從多元的學習評量方式著手，重塑教學管理的方向，期能更加符合適才適所的教育精神。英文摘要：In this paper, we argue for the misuse of pass/fail grading system (P/F) in Taiwan's zero-credit courses and depict the potential drawbacks and the thinking behind such policies. We first clarify the similarities and differences between P/F and other grading systems and explain the relationship between P/F and grade point average (GPA). We then reveal the close connection between P/F and the development of zero-credit courses in Taiwan's university education. Based on the correspondence between credits and credit hours, we further demonstrate how P/F is seriously misused in the zero-credit courses of ”service-learning”, ”internship and practice of teaching”, and ”graduation requirement of foreign language proficiency” and point out their possible drawbacks and the thinking behind such policies. From the perspective of education policies, P/F, like other grading systems, has its advantages and disadvantages. Building on the discussion of the theoretical foundation of P/F's suitability and applicability in terms of courses, participants, and learning phases, we propose a diversified approach towards designing learning planning. We thus further suggest that by considering a diversified range of grading possibilities, universities can reshape the direction of course management to better facilitate students' individual educational goals.起始頁-結束頁：67-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190965030038篇名：臺灣教育行政學遺失的一塊：兩格論戰之意義及其在教育行政之啟示並列篇名：The Missing Piece of Educational Administration in Taiwan: The Griffiths/Greenfield Debate and The Implications on Educational Administration作者：蘇鈺楠(Yu-Nan Su)關鍵字：兩格論戰;教育行政典範;教育行政哲學;理論運動;the greenfield-griffiths debate;paradigm of educational administration;educational administration philosophy;the theory movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:3期出版年：2019中文摘要：理論運動與兩格論戰是教育行政學史上兩件重要大事，前者協助教育行政學成為嚴謹的學科，後者則催化教育行政學從量化典範轉為多元典範。在臺灣，關於兩者的研究與論述極為稀少，對照國內教育行政領域量化研究獨大的現象，衡酌如今全球教育行政之研究範圍愈趨複雜且多元，希望本文能有拋磚引玉之效，作為學界對話的開端。英文摘要：The Theory Movement and The Greenfield-Griffiths Debat are two major events in educational administration field. The former one lift the field as an academic science and the latter one transform the paradigm in it from empirical to multiple. However, there are few papers and voice about both significant events. Comparing the complexes and multiple trend in educational administration field, empirical still play a monopoly role in Taiwan. Therefore, the main goal of this paper is to throw a sprat to catch a whale, hope to begin the conversation in educational administration field in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：91-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190965030049篇名：書評：評《教育領域與研究的社會史》並列篇名：Book Review: A Social History of Educational Studies and Research作者：顧曉雲期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：107-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201909650300510篇名：Ernest Sosa德行可靠論（Virtue Reliabilism）與教育知識論的哲學探究並列篇名：A Philosophical Study of Ernest Sosa's Virtue Reliabilism and Educational Epistemology作者：林建福(Chien-Fu Lin)關鍵字：Ernest Sosa;教育知識論;德行可靠論;Ernest Sosa;educational epistemology;virtue reliabilism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:2期出版年：2019中文摘要：哲學領域中，知識論以探究知識為主要核心任務，教育活動致力於教導學生學會分辨真假並獲致知識，顯然知識是哲學與教育共同關心的重要課題。針對以知識為確證之真信念（justified true belief，JTB）的傳統定義，E. Gettier於1963年提出挑戰並引發熱烈討論，德行知識論遂於1980年代應運而生並逐漸受到重視。E. Sosa同樣質疑以知識為JTB的傳統定義，他提出的德行可靠論是德行知識論的一個派別，主張知識是出自智德的真信念，智德則是使認知者獲致真信念的認知傾向或能力。此外，Sosa把知識區分為動物型知識和反省型知識：前者是認知者展現認知的初階適切性下所獲致的知識，後者則是展現認知的次階適切性下獲致的知識。本文分三大部分：首先，論述Gettier問題對傳統知識之界定的挑戰與Sosa的回應；其次，討論Sosa德行可靠論的重要內涵；最後，省思Sosa德行可靠論中知識與智德的說法，同時對照討論Sosa的知態觀點與教育目標中的認知通觀，尋求相互闡發的可能性。英文摘要：Both epistemology and education are concerned about knowledge. E. Gettier put forward a potentially devastating problem to challenge the long-held justified true belief (or JTB) account of knowledge in 1963 and his challenge caused much heated discussion. Virtue epistemology emerged in such an intellectual climate. Ernest Sosa as one important representative of virtue reliabilism, one school of virtue epistemology, also questioneds the JTB account of knowledge. Moreover, he claimed that knowledge is true belief out of intellectual virtue and intellectual virtue is the cognitive disposition or ability conducive for the knower to reach true belief. Meanwhile, Sosa suggested that knowledge can be divided into two types, namely animal knowledge, the attainment of which requires the first-order aptness displayed by the knower, and reflective knowledge, the attainment of which the second-order aptness. This paper consists of three sections: the challenge raised by the Gettier problem and Sosa's response are firstly expounded; secondly, the main ideas inherent in Sosa's virtue reliabilism are made clear; thirdly, Sosa's views on knowledge and intellectual virtue are separately examined first and then contrasting discussions between Sosa's epistemic perspective and cognitive perspective put forward in philosophy of education are carried out in the hope of mutual interpretations.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201906650200101篇名：行動導向、數學解題情緒控制策略與數學考試焦慮關係之研究並列篇名：The Relations of Action Orientation, Emotional Control Strategies of Math Problem-Solving and Math Test Anxiety作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang)關鍵字：行動導向;考試焦慮;啟動;情緒控制策略;撤離;action orientation;disengagement;emotional control strategies;initiative;test anxiety期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：許多研究顯示行動導向所包含的因素可能為不同向度，且提出探討不同向度行動導向因素區分行動導向組型的必要與價值，然過去甚少研究以多向度觀點，分析不同向度的行動導向與行動導向組型。其次，行動控制理論主張行動導向與情緒控制策略、情緒相關，然過去研究甚少探討不同向度行動導向與不同情緒控制策略關係，且少將焦點置於考試焦慮。故本研究採變項、個人中心分析不同向度行動導向、行動導向組型與四向度情緒控制策略、考試焦慮之關係。本研究抽取二批國二生為樣本，共812人，以結構方程模式、集群分析、多變量進行分析。研究結果顯示：（1）「行動導向、情緒控制策略、考試焦慮關係模式」適配度良好；（2）撤離正向預測正向評估；啟動正向預測解決問題，負向預測逃避問題；（3）正向評估負向預測考試焦慮；解決問題不能顯著預測考試焦慮，反芻思考、逃避問題正向預測考試焦慮；（4）行動導向組型可分成行動導向、樂天乏動、悲天行動、狀態導向四組；正向評估上，行動導向、樂天乏動組大於狀態導向、悲天行動組；反芻思考、考試焦慮上則反之。解決問題上，行動導向、悲天行動組大於狀態導向、樂天乏動組高；逃避問題上則反之。英文摘要：Many studies have shown that the factors included in action orientation are of different dimensions and that it is necessary and worthy to explore action orientation profiles which are differentiated by multi-dimensional factors of action orientation. However, few studies investigated different dimensions of action orientation and action orientation profiles. Furthermore, action control theory maintains that action orientation, emotional control strategies, and emotions are related. However, few studies explored the relations of multi-dimensional action orientation with different emotional control strategies and test anxiety. Therefore, the aim of this study was to adopt variable-centered and person-centered analyses to explore the relations of multi-dimensional action orientation with four-dimensional emotional control strategies and test anxiety. The participants were 812 junior high school students. Structural equation modeling, cluster analyses, and analyses of variance were employed. The following results were obtained: (a) the model of action orientation, emotional control strategies, and test anxiety fitted the observed data well, (b) disengagement positively predicted positive appraise; initiative positively predicted problem-solving and negatively predicted avoidance problem-solving, (c) positive appraise negatively predicted test anxiety; problem-solving did not predict test anxiety; ruminative thinking and avoidance problem-solving positively predicted test anxiety, (d) cluster analyses of action/state orientation profiles revealed four profiles: a high disengagement/high initiative (action orientation) group, a high disengagement/low initiative (optimistic/lacking striving) group, a low disengagement/ high initiative (pessimistic/striving) group, and a low disengagement/low initiative (state orientation) group, (e) positive appraise of the action orientation and optimistic/lacking striving groups was higher than that of state orientation and pessimistic/striving groups; conversely, ruminative thinking and test anxiety of the action orientation and optimistic/ lacking striving groups were lower than those of pessimistic/striving and state orientation groups. Problem-solving of the action orientation and pessimistic/striving groups was higher than that of state orientation and optimistic/lacking striving groups; conversely, avoidance problem-solving of the action orientation and pessimistic/striving groups was lower than that of state orientation and optimistic/lacking striving groups.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420191215040012篇名：社會緊張對於高中職生毒品防治宣導與毒品使用態度之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Social Strains on the Illicit Drugs Prevention and the Attitude toward Illicit Drugs Use for High School Students in Taiwan作者：陳芝吟(Chih-Yin Chen);李承傑(Cheng-Chieh Li);董旭英(Yuk-Ying Tung)關鍵字：社會緊張;毒品防治宣導;毒品使用態度;認同非法手段;social strains;illicit drugs prevention;attitude toward illicit drugs use;illegitimate means期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究基於緊張理論的觀點，探究社會緊張對於高中職學生對毒品防治宣導的態度與毒品使用態度的影響。針對臺灣南部三縣市共1,277位公私立高中職學生進行問卷調查，採用偏最小平方法之結構方程模型分析資料，並以多群組比較性別在此模型的差異。本研究發現不同緊張因素對於毒品使用態度的影響路徑有所不同。日常生活困擾和學校緊張關係會透過認同非法手段影響毒品防治宣導與毒品使用態度；學校負面事件不僅對於毒品防治宣導與毒品使用態度具有直接影響，而且會透過認同非法手段產生間接影響。在多群組比較方面，性別在學校緊張因素對於毒品防治宣導與毒品使用態度上具有調節效果，顯示男女生在此一模型有不同的影響路徑。社會緊張在青少年毒品使用態度上扮演重要的角色，建議學校不僅要多方關懷青少年的日常生活，也要加強青少年毒品的認知教育，減低毒品使用的可能性。英文摘要：Based on strain theory, the aim of this study was to explore the effects of social strains on the illicit drugs prevention and the attitude toward illicit drugs use among high school students. This study was to survey 1277 participants from public and private high and vocational schools in southern Taiwan, including Tainan, Kaohsiung, and Pingtung, and to analyze the data with partial least squares - structural equation modeling as well as multiple group comparison. This study indicated that there were different paths that various strain factors influenced the attitude toward illicit drugs use. Daily life distresses and school strain relationships had indirect positive effects on the illicit drugs prevention and the attitude toward illicit drugs use through illegitimate means. In addition, school negative events not only had direct positive effects on the illicit drugs prevention and the attitude toward illicit drugs use, but also had indirect positive effects on those through illegitimate means. Moreover, gender had a moderate effect on this model, in which the influential path for males was different from that for females. In brief, the strains play a significant role on the attitude toward illicit drugs for teenagers. The academic authorities should pay more attention to their daily life and enhance the cognition of illicit drugs.起始頁-結束頁：35-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420191215040023篇名：青年教育與就業儲蓄帳戶方案之形成及實施成效之初探並列篇名：An Exploratory Study into the Formation and the Effect of Youth Education and Employment Saving Accounts Program作者：潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Wendy Pan);劉青雯(Ching-Wen Liu)關鍵字：多元流程取徑;青年教育與就業儲蓄帳戶方案;空檔年;政策之窗;Multiple Streams Approach;Youth Education and Employment Savings Accounts Program;Gap Year;Policy Window期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣於2016年開始規劃「青年教育與就業儲蓄帳戶方案」之實施內涵，為了解該政策方案，本研究首先以Kingdon（1984, 1995）的多元流程取徑作為分析該政策方案形成之視角。結果發現在學生直接升學缺少自我探索機會與高教學用落差的問題流、執政黨透過在行政與立法部門的優勢，營造政治氛圍催生政策的政治流，以及跨部會網絡資源配套整合的政策流匯聚下，加上政策企業家教育部長的推力，「青年教育與就業儲蓄帳戶方案」順利產出，於2017年開始試辦。其次，本研究針對「青年教育與就業儲蓄帳戶方案」之參與，運用統計數據、文件分析及訪談，進行探討。結果顯示不管是方案申請人數或是職缺成功媒合人數，皆不符合預期。而學生選擇職場體驗者遠多於體驗學習，更映照出社會階級問題。最後基於研究所得，對於政策方案的後續整體評估與改善，提出相關建議。英文摘要：It was not until 2016 that Taiwan has started to formulate the Youth Education and Employment Saving Accounts Program. Applying Kingdon's (1984) multiple streams approach, the study firstly investigates the policy process of the program. The findings indicate that students usually entered universities right after school graduation without having a chance for self-exploration. And the reform of higher education has led to the dilution of university degrees. These became problem issues for the government. Incorporating different policy communities of administrative ministries, legislative divisions, schools and industries, the ruling party facilitated the program creation. Various projects and accompanying measures were drafted for the program. Playing the role of policy entrepreneur, the minister of education triggered the program. When the aforementioned streams of problem, politics and policy merged, the program thereafter was launched in 2017. Secondly, the study aimed to explore the program participation. Methods such as interviews and analysis of statistics, documents and literature, were employed. The study shows that the program applicants in the workplace did not reach the expected amount. Additionally, the magnitude of students entering the track of workplace was much greater than that of students choosing to continue education. It also revealed the inequalities of social classes. Finally, the implications of the study for the program evaluation and betterment were provided.起始頁-結束頁：67-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420191215040034篇名：教保服務人員不當管教案例暨相關法律問題探討：以新北市訴願1070120894號決定為例並列篇名：Discussion on Cases of Improper Discipline of Preschool Educators and Relevant Legal Issues, with a Focus on No 1070120894 Pleading Decision of New Taipei City作者：黃源銘(Yuan-Ming Huang)關鍵字：不當管教;幼兒權益;教保服務人員;improper discipline;children's rights and interests;preschool educators期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文旨在探討教保服務人員因「不當管教」遭解聘並被通報不適任教保服務人員所衍生的相關法律問題。本文透過法規研究、制度研究以及案例研究等途徑，輔以個案與文獻分析為研究方法，從幼兒園教保服務人員不當管教涉及法規範解釋與適用出發，考察行政爭訟案例及實務處理模式。研究中發現，實務運作缺失包括權限劃分不清、主管機關於行使裁量權時亦有怠惰裁量之嫌、教育局函告幼兒園解聘教保人員亦未通知當事人，此在組織與程序保障未盡周全。本文認為，法制施行伊始應明確機關管轄權限，主管機關應正當行使裁量權。同時，攸關憲法工作權保障宜完備組織，並恪遵正當法律程序以符法治國家保障人民權利之核心理念。英文摘要：Purpose of this paper is mainly to discuss relevant legal issues derived from preschool educators being dismissed and determined incompetent for preschool educators in a written notice due to ”improper discipline”. This study was conducted through researches on laws and regulations, systems and case studies, as well as case and literature review. In this paper, administrative litigation cases and current practical treatment modes were reviewed from the interpretation and applicability of laws and regulations on improper discipline of kindergarten educators. It was found in this study that defects of current practices included unclear division of power. Competent authority might also exercise inactive discretion. In addition, the Ministry of Education failed to inform the related person when notifying the kindergarten of dismissing the preschool educator in writing. It was an improper act in terms of organizational and procedural guarantee. In this paper, it is believed that from the beginning of execution of laws, jurisdiction of relevant authorities shall be expressly defined. Competent authority shall exercise its discretion properly. In addition, guarantees critical to constitutional right to work should be provided with complete organization and procedures to meet relevant laws and regulations.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420190915030015篇名：臺灣都會地區國小弱勢學生暑期學習活動資本之研究並列篇名：A Study on Learning Cultural Capital of Disadvantaged Students during the Summer Vacation in Urban Elementary Schools in Taiwan作者：林信志(Hsin-Chih Lin);簡瑋成(Wei-Cheng Chien)關鍵字：文化資本;夏季失落;弱勢者教育;教育公平;cultural capital;summer loss;education for the disadvantaged;educational equity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣的扶助弱勢學生相關計畫與政策大多偏向偏鄉地區，甚少關心都會中弱勢學生學習情形，且相關研究更是少之又少。據此，本研究聚焦於都會地區（以六都為研究範園）國小弱勢學生暑期學習活動資本的公平性，先討論臺灣暑期學習資源活動不同區域的獲得情況，以及探討不同區域弱勢生所獲得的暑期學習活動資本挹注是否有所差別。本研究採問卷調查從事研究，重要研究發現如下：一、都會地區不同區域的國小暑期學習活動資源明顯分配不平均；二、都會地區國小弱勢學生參加校內暑期活動比例較一般生高，參加校外則較低；三、都會地區不同區域國小弱勢學生可獲得暑期學習活動資本有顯著差異，偏遠弱勢生最具優勢，鄉鎮及都會弱勢生顯得更加弱勢。本研究著重過往弱勢教育研究較忽略的都會地區弱勢國小學生與夏季失落議題，且經實證研究分析發現弱勢生的暑期學習活動資本過度集中於偏遠區域，使得鄉鎮與都會區域的弱勢學生顯得更加弱勢，造成新一輪的弱勢教育不平等現象，點出目前弱勢教育政策所忽略的重要現象，據此並提出相關建議，值得弱勢教育政策省思。英文摘要：In Taiwan, disadvantaged student policies mostly focus on r rural areas, and have little interest in disadvantaged students during summer vacation in urban elementary schools. Accordingly, the researcher intends to explore the fairness of learning cultural capital of disadvantaged students in urban elementary schools. This study will discuss the acquisition of learning resources in different regions during summer vacation in urban elementary schools, and the differences in learning cultural capital of disadvantaged students in different regions. This study adopts questionnaire survey. Important research findings as follows: 1. Summer learning resources are clearly not evenly distributed in urban elementary schools. 2. The proportion of disadvantaged students participating in school summer activities is higher than that of general students, and just the opposite in off-campus summer activities. 3. There are significant differences in learning cultural capital during summer vacation among the disadvantaged students in different regions. Remote school students have the most advantage, but students in township and metropolitan schools become relatively unfavorable. This study focuses on frequently overlooked issues of disadvantaged students in urban elementary schools and summer loss. The empirical study shows that learning cultural capital of disadvantaged students during summer vacation is too concentrated in remote areas, and disadvantaged students in township and metropolitan schools have become more unfavorable. We point out the inequality of education of urban disadvantaged children, which is being ignored by education policy. We made recommendations according to the results of this study, and they deserve more implications for educational policy for the disadvantaged.起始頁-結束頁：23-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420190915030026篇名：Caring as a Teacher Virtue: Objections, Responses, and Affirmation並列篇名：關懷作為一種教師的德行：質疑、回應與肯定作者：黃振豊(Chen-Li Huang);鄭威爾(Brent G. Walters)關鍵字：caring relationship;teacher-student relationship;rights vs. virtue;care ethics;Noddings;關懷關係;師生關係;權利與德行;關懷倫理學;諾丁斯期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：The aim of this study is to prove that caring, as conceptualized by Nel Noddings in her works on care ethics, must be a teacher virtue for students to achieve their potential. Several criticisms of caring as a teacher virtue are presented and rebutted. These criticisms include that caring is a private affair, teachers should focus on subject teaching, not every teacher has a caring character, not every student needs to be cared for, male teachers have caring anxiety, caring is a heavy burden, and caring will dominate teachers' professional viewpoints. Additionally, several positive reasons to support caring as a teacher virtue are given: (i) Caring makes education more decent; (ii) caring improves students' academic achievements and positive behaviors; (iii) caring is a win-win strategy; and (iv) caring establishes a connection to being. By way of debunking the criticisms and offering evidence for the positive benefits of caring, the result of this research affirms that caring must be a virtue for teachers.英文摘要：本研究之目的在於證成諾丁斯所構思之關懷倫理的概念應成為教師的德行，使學生得以發揮其潛能。首先，本文陳述並駁斥數項對於關懷做為教師德行的質疑。這些質疑包含關懷應屬私領域之事、教師應著重於科目教學、並非每位教師均有關懷的個性、並非每位學生均需要關懷、男性教師會有關懷的焦慮、關懷是沉重的負擔、以及關懷將宰制教師專業觀。其次，本文提出支持關懷應為教師之德的數項理由：關懷使教育更合宜、關懷促進學生學業成就與正向行為、關懷為雙贏策略、以及關懷可建立和存有之聯結。最後，透過對反對意見之駁斥與提出支持的證據，研究結果肯定關懷應為教師之德。起始頁-結束頁：59-92資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420190915030037篇名：過量教育、學用不一對於工作滿意度的影響並列篇名：The Effects of Over-education and Mismatch on Job Satisfaction作者：趙子揚(Tzu-Yang Chao);陸偉明(Wei-Ming Luh)關鍵字：工作滿意度;生涯與就業協助系統;教育－職業不相稱;過量教育;學用不一;career & vocational helping system;job-education mismatch;job satisfaction;over-education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：隨著高等教育的擴張，過量教育或學用不一的問題漸漸浮現。本研究旨在建構教育與職業不相稱之客觀及主觀評量方法與比較，進而探討過量教育、學用不一對於工作滿意度之負面影響，以及學用不一在不足教育、適量教育與過量教育組透過薪資中介影響工作滿意度之情形。本研究母群為臺灣20－65歲全職工作人口，並以自編網路問卷「臺灣工作型態與滿意調查」共計1,522筆資料進行分析。結果顯示，在教育部的18個學門中，法政與生命科學學群反應出主觀知覺的過量教育；生命科學、生物資源與藝術學群有較高的學用不一；教育、資訊工程學門則有較高的工作滿意度。另外，本研究所建構的客觀與主觀評量之間雖有關聯，但與過往實證結果比較後僅選擇主觀評量進行後續分析。在考量了工作相關變項與薪資後，階層迴歸分析顯示過量教育及學用不一對於工作滿意度仍有顯著的解釋力，其中以過量教育組與不足教育組的工作滿意度顯著低於適量教育組。進一步路徑分析結果顯示，在不足教育組，學用不一會透過薪資中介進而影響工作滿意度，但在適量教育組及過量教育組則無此問題，顯示學用不一且薪資不佳時問題最大，建議未來教育必須更強化與勞動市場的連結。英文摘要：As the population of students in higher education increases, the issues of over education and mismatch of study field emerge. The purpose of present study is threefold. First was to construct subjective and objective assessments to measure over-education and job-education mismatch. Second was to investigate the incremental variation of job satisfaction that over-education and job-education mismatch could account for. Third was to explore the path of mismatch to job satisfaction mediated by salary for groups of adequate, over-, and under-education. A self-reported on-line survey was administered, and 1522 subjects were recruited. After comparing the results of contingent tables and Gamma coefficients, the subjective approach was selected to use for subsequent analysis. The hierarchical regression analyses showed that over-education and job-education mismatch negatively affected job satisfaction after controlling for job-related variables and salary. Finally, the mediating effects between salary and job satisfaction were not significant for adequate and over-educated groups but significant for under-educated group. Based on the findings, further direction for research and suggestion for policy were provided.起始頁-結束頁：93-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420190915030048篇名：環境教育議題融入課程的回顧與展望並列篇名：Review and Foresight for the Curriculum Integration of Environmental Education作者：楊嵐智(Lan-Chih Yang);高翠霞(Trai-Shar Kao)關鍵字：環境教育;議題課程;議題融入;environmental education;issued centered curriculum;integration of issue期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：環境保護長久來受到國際間的重視，我國順應趨勢、時代需求與國家發展，於是在2001年的課程改革，將環境教育納入九年一貫國中小學正式課程中；於今十二年國教新課綱即將實施，環教再次以重大議題融入領域綱要。本文將就環境教育議題融入課程的發展歷程加以探討，藉由相關文獻與重要文件之分析，一方面從脈絡裡瞭解其重要性，並探究課程實施的作法與衍生的困境；另一方面，提出新課綱中環境教育議題的架構，教學設計與融入課程的時間安排，以達成領域與議題的雙贏。英文摘要：Education plays a key in Environmental protection and curriculum development. After the Curriculum Reform in 2001, Taiwan's formal curriculum for environmental education in schools was included as a ”major issue” in the National Curriculum. This course will be extended to a total of 12 years of national education. Re-education once again incorporated the domain outline with major issues. The main idea of this paper was to review what had been done for the curriculum integration of environmental education and to explore the problems. Based on the review of the past, the authors propose what can be done for the new curriculum reform to achieve a win-win situation.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420190615020019篇名：以教習劇場深化學生全球議題之探究與理解－以快時尚議題為焦點並列篇名：Using TIE to Deepen Students' Inquiry and Understanding of Global Issues: Focus on Fast Fashion Issues作者：葉韋伶(Wei-Ling Yeh);陳麗華(Li-Hua Chen)關鍵字：教習劇場;全球議題;快時尚;理解;Theatre-in-Education;global issues;fast fashion;understanding期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文採用研究筆記取徑，紀錄快時尚教習劇場應用在高中多元選修課的課程發展與教學實踐歷程，並援引UbD課程設計模式的六大理解面向，析論學生對議題的理解情形。本研究發現教習劇場的學習活動，有助於學生達成理解的六個面向，尤其是觀點、同理心及自我認識等臺灣中小學教師較少關注的理解面向。此外，本研究從快時尚教習劇場的發展與操作中精粹出五項實踐智慧，可以做為下一輪研究及課程實施的參考。英文摘要：This working paper depicts curriculum development process and teaching practice of the theatre-in-education (TIE) on fast fashion issues in an elective course for high school students. Furthermore, the students' understandings of the issues were analyzed in line with the six facets of understanding based on ”the Understanding by Design (UbD) model” which includes explanation, interpretation, application, perspective, empathy and self-knowledge. The main finding demonstrates that teaching practice of TIE enhances students' six-facets understanding of fast fashion issues, especially in the facets of ”perspective, empathy and self-knowledge” which are rarely of concern by the school teachers in Taiwan. Five practical wisdoms for the reference of the next-stage-research was extracted as well from this TIE research experience.起始頁-結束頁：27-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201906150200210篇名：國語文補救教學長期介入對低年級低成就學生的影響並列篇名：The Effect of a Long-Term Chinese Reading Intervention Program on Primary Grade Students' Reading Growth作者：陳淑麗(Shu-Li Chen);曾世杰(Shih-Jay Tzeng)關鍵字：早期語文介入;補救教學;介入長度;追蹤研究;early reading intervention;remedial instruction;intervention length;follow-up study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究採準實驗設計，以偏鄉地區52名一年級低成就學生為對象，探究國語文補救教學的長期介入效果。實驗組與對照組學生分別有33、19名，依變項為注音和識字能力。研究發現有三：一、長時密集的補救，能有效提升低成就學生的語文能力：介入第一年實驗組在注音和識字能力的進展，均顯著優於對照組；介入第二年只評估識字能力，實驗組的識字能力也顯著優於對照組。二、及早的介入，能讓高比率低成就學生回到同儕水準，且介入時間越長效果越好：介入第一年，97%實驗組學生的注音能力回到同儕水準，識字能力則有39.4%的學生回到同儕水準；介入第二年，識字能力回到同儕水準的學生增加到42.4%，顯示介入時間越長，回到同儕水準的比率越高。三、第三年的追蹤，實驗組學生仍有保留效果，但成效呈現消退的趨勢。英文摘要：Fifty-two grade 1 poor readers were recruited from a remote area in Taiwan, in which 33 and 19 students in the experimental and contrast groups, participated in the study. We provided a 2-year reading intervention program to the experimental group while the contrast group received regular after-school assistance. Dependent measures of reading such as Chu-Yin-Fu-How (Chinese phonetic symbols) and character recognition were collected at the end of 3 consecutive academic years. Three major findings are: 1. The experimental group outperformed the contrast group on the progress of Chu-Yin- Fu-How and character recognition at the end of the first year. Only test of character recognition was conducted in the second year, where again, the experimental group outperformed the contrast group. Results show that long-term and intensive intervention does improve the reading abilities of grade 1 poor readers. 2. As high as 97% and 39.4% participants' returned to grade-1 level on Chu-Yin-Fu-How and character recognition respectively after one year of early intervention. In the second year, higher percentage of participants, namely 42.4%, returned to grade-2 level which indicates an intervention length effect. That is, the longer the intervention, the better the reading growth. 3. The intervention effect was retained in the third year but seemed to fade away.起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201906150200301篇名：高中科學班畢業生之追蹤研究：高中學習經驗探討並列篇名：A Follow-Up Study on the Learning Experiences of Students who Graduated From High School Science Classes作者：于曉平(Hsiao-Ping Yu);張靖卿(Ching-Ching Chang);凌美璦(Mei-Ai Ling)關鍵字：科學班;追蹤研究;高中學習經驗;教育安置;education placement;follow-up study;learning experience in high schools;science class期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究針對101∼104學年第一屆至第四屆科學班畢業且進入大學就讀之學生進行追蹤調查，以瞭解其在高中的各項表現與對高中課程的看法，同時進行與數理資優班、普通班自然組學生之比較，藉此探討不同教育安置型態下學生的學習經驗，提供教育主管機關與學校課程設計和特殊類型班級安置之參考。共回收九校科學班畢業學生454份問卷，另包含數理資優班346份與普通班自然組727份問卷，經由描述性統計與變異數分析結果發現，科學班學生對高中課程的滿意度高，亦認為科學班的學習對其問題解決與自學等能力的提升有幫助，此部分與數理資優班、普通班自然組學生整體差異不大。然而，科學班學生提出相關的改進意見，除了課程較無法做到差異化教學，滿足每位學生的需要，另需加強對人文素養與情意輔導的重視，並應加強相關的配套措施，因先修課程同時得面臨高三的升學壓力，升學管道的暢通成為一大關鍵，科學班的甄選也應以真正對基礎科學有興趣的學生為主，以達成科學班設立的目標與宗旨。英文摘要：This is a follow-up survey to understand the performance of students who graduated from senior high school science classes and have entered a university as well as to obtain their views on the curriculum and learning experience. The study also compared gifted students in the math/science curricular classes and students in regular classes to provide a reference to education officials regarding curriculum design and the identification and placement of gifted students. In this study, a total of 454 questionnaires were collected from science class students, with 346 questionnaires from the gifted class students in math/science and 727 questionnaires from the regular class students. According to the results of descriptive statistics and analysis of variance, science class students were highly satisfied with their high school curriculum and their learning and felt that the curriculum had increased their problem-solving and self-learning abilities. No significant differences were found in most items between gifted class students and regular class students. However, many science class students provided some suggestions for improving the transition to higher education and selecting more suitable students to enter these classes.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201912_64(4).00012篇名：縱貫性網路使用行為對學業成就的影響：潛藏轉移模型分析取向並列篇名：The Effect of the Internet Use Behavior on Academic Achievement: Latent Transition Model Analysis作者：曾明基(Ming-Chi Tseng)關鍵字：網路使用行為;潛藏轉移模型;學業成就;academic achievement;Internet use behavior;latent transition model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：目前探究網路使用行為對學業成就的影響，僅侷限於橫斷性研究，本研究進一步於縱貫性架構下，探究持續動態變化的網路使用行為對學業成就的影響。基於上述，本研究運用屏東教育長期追蹤資料庫國小四年級至六年級學生的固定追蹤樣本，並採用潛藏轉移模型進行網路使用行為對學業成就影響的動態分析。研究發現，網路使用行為可潛在地區分成五個異質群體，且隨著年級的增加，網路使用行為的轉移機率在不同群體的動態變化有所差異。進一步納進學生性別及學業成就分析發現，性別差異影響網路使用行為，且網路使用行為的潛在異質差異在學業成就上的表現不同。針對上述結果，本研究對網路使用行為的形塑及議題發展提出相關的建議。英文摘要：The literature on the effect of Internet use behavior on academic achievement has been limited to cross-sectional studies, but this study adopted a longitudinal framework and used the latent transition model to analyze data from the Pingtung Education Longitudinal Survey database. The study found that Internet use behavior can be divided into five heterogeneous groups, and as the grade increases, the transfer rate of Internet use behavior varies among the groups. Further analysis revealed that gender differences influence Internet use behavior, and that the potential heterogeneity of Internet use behaviors depends on academic achievement. This study proposes suggestions relevant to Internet use behavior and development.起始頁-結束頁：31-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201912_64(4).00023篇名：網路品德教育行為準則建置之研究並列篇名：Development of E-Character Behavioral Standards作者：張志銘(Chih-Ming Chang);周倩(Chien Chou)關鍵字：行為準則;品德教育;網路品德教育;網路素養;behavioral standards;character education;e-character education;Internet literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來，因網際網路盛行促使了社會的重大改變，使得品德教育必須有新的思維與內涵。本研究目的在於建構網路品德教育核心價值的行為準則，以作為發展網路品德教育課程的開端。本研究採兩步驟進行：一、蒐集並分析參與線上研習課程的140位國中、小教師所發表的回應文章，以建立行為準則初稿之開放式問卷；二、實施德懷術研究法，由17位具備數位學習、網路素養與認知或品德教育領域之專家、教授、國中、小教師，透過線上德懷術系統進行審視與修正，最終經三回合的調查，歸納出64個網路品德教育之行為準則。最後，本研究提出相關建議及未來研究方向，以期能為網路世代的品德教育訂立新的範疇與研究取向，並作為未來教育推廣與政策訂定之參考。英文摘要：Traditional personal virtue education is insufficient for addressing the contemporary concerns associated with Internet use; thus, e-character education is proposed as an effective method for bridging the concerns in cyberspace and those in the real world. The goals of this study were to establish and verify the behavioral standards that should apply in cyberspace. An open-ended questionnaire was first developed. After collecting discussion posts on an online course in which 140 elementary and junior high school teachers participated, we drafted an initial version of the questionnaire containing 67 behavioral standards in 12 core value categories. Next, to verify these standards and evaluate their importance, we invited 19 experts (character education experts, experienced teachers, and Internet literacy scholars) to form a Delphi-technique group. After three Delphi rounds, 17 experts reached a consensus on the 64 most important behavioral standards that would be applicable to student behavior in cyberspace. Finally, according to the results, this study provides suggestions for curriculum design, policy formulation, and further research on e-character education.起始頁-結束頁：61-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201912_64(4).00034篇名：學習情境中的個人成就目標與作弊接受度之關係：以學業自我效能為調節變項並列篇名：Personal Achievement Goals and the Acceptability of Cheating in an Academic Context: The Moderating Role of Academic Self-Efficacy作者：彭淑玲(Shu-Ling Peng);黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen)關鍵字：作弊接受度;個人成就目標;學業自我效能;academic self-efficacy;acceptability of academic cheating;personal achievement goals期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究從動機觀點切入，採用個人成就目標與學業自我效能理論瞭解動機變項及兩種作弊接受度（學業作弊、被動作弊）之關係。據此，本研究目的為：一、瞭解國中生對兩種作弊行為的接受程度現況；二、探討個人成就目標與兩種作弊接受度之關係；三、考驗學業自我效能在上述關係中的調節效果。為達成上述目的，本研究抽取938位七至九年級國中生進行施測，並以數學科為領域，蒐集資料以結構方程模式進行分析。研究結果發現：一、男生對兩種作弊行為的接受度均略高於女生；八、九年級學生對兩種作弊行為的接受度略大於七年級學生；二、個人成就目標能預測兩種作弊接受度，其中趨向精熟目標能降低學生對兩種作弊行為的接受度，逃避表現目標則與上述結果相反，而趨向表現目標僅能正向預測被動作弊接受度；三、學業自我效能會調節個人成就目標與作弊接受度之關係：當學習者知覺有高學業自我效能時，逃避表現目標無法預測兩種作弊接受度；當學習者知覺為低學業自我效能時，會提升逃避表現目標對兩種作弊接受度的正向預測力。本研究依據研究結果提出建議，以作為國中教學輔導與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：This study was conducted on the basis of motivation theories and adopted theoretical concepts from achievement goal theory and self-efficacy to explore the motivational variables related to the acceptability of two types of cheating behaviors, namely academic cheating and passive cheating, among Taiwanese junior high school students in the subject of mathematics. The aims of the study were threefold: first, to understand the degree of acceptability of the two types of cheating behaviors among Taiwanese students; second, to investigate the relationships between personal achievement goals and the acceptability of the two types of cheating; and third, to test whether these relationships are moderated by academic self-efficacy. Nine hundred thirty-eight seventh-to-ninth-grade Taiwanese students (473 boys; 23 missing values) participated in the survey, and the researchers applied the technique of structural equation modeling for data analysis. The results indicated that boys were slightly more accepting of the two types of cheating behaviors than girls, and eighth- and ninth-grade students, regardless of gender, were more accepting of both cheating behaviors than seventh-grade students. Moreover, it was found that personal achievement goals can effectively predict the two types of cheating behaviors, which can be negatively predicted by mastery-approach goals and positively predicted by performance-avoidance goals. In particular, performance-approach goals only positively predicted individuals' acceptance of passive cheating. Finally, it was revealed that academic self-efficacy moderates the relationship between personal achievement goals and individuals' acceptance of cheating behaviors. Specifically, a high level of academic self-efficacy perceived by individuals was associated with a decrease in the negative predictive power of students' adoption of performance-avoidance goals with respect to the acceptability of both cheating behaviors. A low level of academic self-efficacy perceived by individuals was associated with an increase in the negative predictive power of students' adoption of performance-avoidance goals with respect to the acceptability of both cheating behaviors. Based on the findings, relevant recommendations are proposed as a reference for further research, teaching practices, and junior high school counseling.起始頁-結束頁：87-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201912_64(4).00045篇名：國中生內、外在學業希望信念之建構及其相關因素之探討並列篇名：Internal and External Loci of Academic Hope Belief for Junior High School Students and Their Relationship With Related Factors作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang)關鍵字：自我觀;助人行為;求助行為;希望信念;感恩;gratitude;help-seeking;helping behavior;hope belief;self-construal期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：過去研究甚少探討希望信念來源，且很少將此議題分析於國中生的學業希望信念。因此，本研究建構三個驗證性因素分析競爭模式以探討國中生學業希望信念分類架構，以及建構「希望信念與其相關因素之歷程模式」以分析自我觀、希望信念、情緒、行為之關係。本研究抽取兩批國中二年級學生為樣本，共1,079人，以結構方程模式進行分析。研究結果顯示：一、「希望信念來源二階模式」比「路徑／動力思考二階模式」、「四向度希望信念模式」更適配；二、「希望信念與其相關因素之歷程模式」與觀察資料適配；三、獨立我、相依我分別正向預測內、外在希望信念；四、內、外在希望信念分別正向預測自豪、感恩；五、自豪、感恩分別正向預測求助行為、助人行為；六、外在希望信念正向預測求助行為。英文摘要：Few studies have explored the locus of hope belief with respect to junior high school students' academic hope belief. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to construct three competing confirmatory factor analysis models of hope belief and a model of hope belief and its related factors to test how the models fit with the observed data and to analyze the relationships between self-construal, hope belief, emotions, and behavior. The participants were 1,079 junior high school students, and structural equation modeling was used. The following results were obtained: (1) The second-order model of the locus of hope belief fit the observed data better than the other two competing models. (2) The model of hope belief and its related factors fit the observed data well. (3) Independent and interdependent self-construal positively predicted internal and external loci of hope belief, respectively. (4) Internal and external loci of hope belief positively predicted pride and gratitude, respectively. (5) Pride and gratitude positively predicted help-seeking and helping behavior, respectively. (6) An external locus of hope belief positively predicted help-seeking.起始頁-結束頁：115-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201912_64(4).00056篇名：設計思考融入職前師資培育課程之實施與成效：以適性教學為例並列篇名：The ”Adaptive Instruction” Course as an Example of the Application and Evaluation of a Teacher Education Program Course Incorporating Design Thinking作者：王佳琪(Chia-Chi Wang);宋世祥(Shih-Hsiang Sung)關鍵字：師資培育;設計思考;適性教學;adaptive instruction;design thinking;teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：「適性教學」在職前師資培育課程中是相當重要的科目，目的在於培育師資生能以學生的需求為出發點，達到適性揚才的目的，培養其在教學現場能因應學生個別差異以進行差異化教學。本研究主要探討設計思考融入職前師資培育課程的價值，從師生觀點分析設計思考對學生學習狀況與學習成效的影響；另外，再從教學者的觀點反思融入課程對教師專業成長及學生學習成效之影響。研究對象為一名教學者及30名師資培育學生。研究工具使用「學生自我效能評估表」、「學生學習興趣量表」、「學生核心能力評分表」等量化工具；另外，亦蒐集教學者的「教學研究日誌」、「學生作業及札記」等質性資料進行分析。在資料處理與分析部分，採用相依樣本t檢定來檢驗學生教學前、後之自我效能和學習興趣的表現，並透過教師教學研究日誌、學生作業及札記，以及學生核心能力評分表等資料，探討以設計思考融入職前師資培育課程中對教師教學及學生學習的影響，最後提供未來類似課程之教學建議。英文摘要：The current study assessed the impact of integrating design thinking into the process of teaching the adaptive instruction course central to a teacher education program. Action research was also incorporated to enhance teaching quality and learning performance. The first purpose of this study was to explore students' self-efficacy, learning interest, problem-solving ability, team cooperation, and learning performance in the teacher education courses incorporating design thinking. The second purpose of this study was to use ”the arrangement of the teaching program,” ”the construction of the learning atmosphere,” ”the planning of class management,” and ”multiple evaluations” as four indexes to explore the teaching effectiveness of the course. Participants in this study were one teacher and 30 preservice teachers taking courses in teacher education. As instruments, we used a self-evaluated checklist of self-efficacy for students and a learning interest scale for students. Moreover, the teaching and reflection journals and student reports in class were included in our investigation. The data analysis methods included paired-samples t test for quantitative analysis and qualitative analysis of interviews, observations, and audio-visual recordings. In addition, suggestions for further study are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：145-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201912_64(4).00067篇名：促進中文閱讀理解教學成效量化研究統合：調節變項影響與評估並列篇名：Synthesis of Quantitative Research on Chinese Reading Comprehension Instruction: Analysis of Moderating Effects作者：謝進昌(Jin-Chang Hsieh)關鍵字：中文閱讀理解;個別研究品質評估;統合分析;量化研究統合;調節變項分析;Chinese reading comprehension;meta-analysis;moderator analysis;quality assessment of primary research;quantitative research synthesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：以實徵研究證據為基礎，探討促進學生中文閱讀理解教學議題逐漸受到重視，而使用量化統合技術推動本議題的研究，亦愈趨興盛，然而，受限研究數量，鮮少文獻針對調節變項進行深入分析，據此，本研究目的除了分析促進中文閱讀理解教學之量化統合效果外，更聚焦於探討教學介入、參與者背景特徵、個別研究品質評估等因素，對於教學效果量可能產生的調節影響。本研究經統合分析與刪除極端值，發現國內促進中文閱讀理解教學平均效果量，分別具有+0.43立即效果（168筆）與+0.39 延宕效果（46筆），為近中等程度教學成效，續經調節變項分析，發現文本重複閱讀具有顯著偏低平均教學效果、使用預測策略則具有較高教學成效，同時，參與者為特殊生或國中階段學生、使用研究者自編評量工具、實驗設計：其他與納入個別研究的品質較差者，皆可產生顯著偏高教學平均效果量。最後針對分析結果提出幾點未來實務與研究建議。英文摘要：Effective instructions for reading comprehension have been studied over the past few decades, and synthesis of quantitative research has also been conducted on such instructions to analyze their effect considering cumulative findings across relevant empirical studies. However, due to the limited number of included studies, more research into moderating effects is required. This study conducted a meta-analysis of the moderating effects of characteristics of instructional intervention, participants, and methodologies. A systematic literature review was undertaken to identify and collect relevant studies. General keywords were searched for in a Taiwanese literature database. A total of 880 Chinese reading-related articles were retrieved, and 173 articles were formally included on the basis of five inclusion and exclusion criteria. After the meta-analysis, an overall average effect size of +0.43 and +0.39 was obtained separately for immediate and follow-up effects. In the analysis of moderating effects, the findings indicated a significantly low average effect size for repeated reading instruction but a large average effect size for the use of a prediction strategy or research-developed measurement tool, struggling or middle-school-aged participants, and studies with poor experimental design or failure to meet relevant standards. Finally, some suggestions and implications are given for future research.起始頁-結束頁：175-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201912_64(4).00078篇名：成年早期與中期樣貌：全心學習、情緒創造、品味能力及圓滿人生之模型建構和其差異比較並列篇名：What Does Early and Middle Adulthood Look Like? A Comparison of Structural Models on Mindful Learning, Emotional Creativity, Capacity to Savor, and Flourishing Life作者：陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);洪兆祥(Chao-Hsiang Hung);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)關鍵字：全心學習;成年期;品味能力;情緒創造;圓滿人生;adulthood;capacity to savor;emotional creativity;flourishing life;mindful learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：過去研究指出，不同成年期於圓滿人生有差異，但缺乏探究全心學習、情緒創造、品味能力及圓滿人生之關係。本研究旨在探究成年早期與成年中期於全心學習、情緒創造、品味能力及圓滿人生的模式建構和其差異比較。本研究者以616位成人為對象，藉由實徵資料蒐集，使用描述統計、結構方程式模型進行分析。研究結果發現：一、成年早期與中期的品味能力於全心學習與圓滿人生之間有中介效果，但情緒創造僅在成年早期的全心學習與圓滿人生間有中介效果；二、成年早期與中期的情緒創造透過品味能力對全心學習與圓滿人生之間扮演遠程中介角色；三、成年中期在新奇產生、變通性、圓滿人生、仁福－正向情緒、玩福－全心投入、和福－意義認同、敬福－勝任要求，以及樂福－樂天知命上的平均得分，均顯著高於成年早期；四、成年早期於情緒準備與情緒新奇上的平均得分，顯著高於成年中期。最後，根據研究結果，針對生活與未來研究方向提出各項建議。英文摘要：Literature indicates potential differences of flourishing life in adulthood. However, studies on these differences in relation to mindful learning, emotional creativity, and capacity to savor are scant. This study therefore constructed a model to study the relationships among mindful learning, emotional creativity, capacity to savor, and flourishing life in early and middle adulthood. In total, 616 adults randomly selected from Northern, Central, and Southern Taiwan participated in this study. Analysis methods included descriptive statistics and structural equation modeling. The results demonstrated the following: (1) The capacity to savor in early and middle adulthood can mediate the prediction from mindful learning to flourishing life, whereas in early adulthood alone, emotional creativity has a mediator effect for the prediction from mindful learning to flourishing life. (2) In early and middle adulthood, emotional creativity to capacity to savor plays a serial mediating role in the prediction from mindful learning to flourishing life. (3) The scores of novelty producing, flexibility, flourishing life, benevolence-blessing positive emotions, playfulness-blessing engagement, harmony-blessing identify meaning, respectful-blessing competent requirements, and optimism-blessing optimistic attitude were significantly higher in middle adulthood than in early adulthood. (4) The scores of emotion preparedness and emotion novelty were significantly higher in early adulthood than in middle adulthood. Based on these results, suggestions regarding life practice and future research are discussed subsequently.起始頁-結束頁：207-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201912_64(4).00089篇名：泰文學習拼字系統之創新教學：泰語學習自我效能、學習興趣、學習焦慮及學習成就之相關研究並列篇名：Exploring Learning Effect on Innovative Thai Spelling System: Correlates Among Learning Self-Efficacy, Learning Interest, Learning Anxiety, and Learning Achievement作者：譚華德(Nitiwat Watthanapas);郝永崴(Yung-Wei Hao);黃明月(Ming-Yueh Hwang)關鍵字：泰文拼字系統;泰語學習;學習自我效能;學習焦慮;學習興趣;learning anxiety;learning interest;learning self-efficacy;Thai language learning;Thai spelling system期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究乃發展一套適用於中文母語者的自然發音泰文學習拼字系統，並應用認知─情意學習理論，檢測此教學系統當中，學習者的泰語學習自我效能、學習興趣、學習焦慮及學習成就之間的關係。經立意取樣方式，於臺灣北部地區三所大學進行九週的教學實驗，每週課程時間為2小時，共183位有效參與者，學習者需協助完成學習情意表現因素之相關問卷，所得資料經由SPSS 23進行信度與效度檢驗，再透過AMOS 20進行結構方程模型驗證。研究結果顯示：一、泰語學習自我效能與學習興趣呈現正相關；二、泰語學習自我效能與學習焦慮呈現負相關；三、泰語學習興趣與學習成就呈現正相關；四、泰語學習焦慮與泰語學習成就呈現負相關。此外，與其他泰文拼字系統相較，本研究開發的系統將可進一步應用於其他泰文教學環境。英文摘要：This study developed a Thai spelling system to facilitate natural pronunciation among native Chinese speakers. It applied the cognitive-affective theory of media learning to explore the effect of this system on learning outcomes. Specifically, with regard to the Thai language, we examined correlations between self-efficacy, learning interest, learning anxiety, and learning achievement. A weekly two-hour teaching course was conducted over nine weeks at three universities in northern Taiwan. Data were gathered using a questionnaire, and they were tested for reliability and validity using SPSS, version 23, after which they results were verified through structural equation modeling using AMOS 20. One hundred eighty-three valid questionnaire responses were collected from participants. Results indicated that (1) Thai learning self-efficacy is positively related to Thai language learning interest, (2) Thai language learning self-efficacy is negatively related to Thai language learning anxiety, (3) Thai language learning interest is positively related to Thai language learning achievement, and (4) Thai language learning anxiety is negatively related to Thai language learning achievement. Compared with other Thai spelling systems, the system developed in this study is more effective and should be used for native Chinese learners of Thai.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201909_64(3).000110篇名：高中生持續參與遊戲意圖之研究：以3D摩托車數位遊戲為例並列篇名：High School Students' Continual Participation in Game Intentions: A Case Study of 3D Motorcycle Digital Gaming Learning作者：張聖淵(Sheng-Yuan Chang);詹<U+52F2>從(Shiun-Taung Jan)關鍵字：持續參與遊戲意圖;遊戲焦慮;遊戲認知疲乏;學習價值;cognitive failure of gameplay;continuance intention of gameplaying;gameplay anxiety;learning value期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究使用平板電腦進行「3D摩托車」數位遊戲，讓未參加過摩托車駕照考試的技術型高中學生模擬騎乘摩托車情境，其中遊戲內容設計了在道路上騎乘摩托車的法規規定、正確騎乘行為，以及其他騎乘行為之干擾，讓使用者學習騎乘技巧與交通法規。進行3D摩托車數位遊戲後，再以問卷調查研究對象在遊戲認知疲乏、遊戲焦慮、學習價值及持續參與遊戲意圖構面之相關性。本研究結果顯示，參與3D摩托車數位遊戲的使用者，其在遊戲認知疲乏與學習價值呈顯著負相關；遊戲焦慮與學習價值呈顯著正相關；學習價值和持續參與遊戲意圖呈顯著正相關。具體而言，本研究結果發現，若3D摩托車數位遊戲能降低使用者遊戲認知疲乏及遊戲焦慮，便能提升使用者之學習價值，進而引發其持續參與遊戲意圖。英文摘要：The ”3D Motorcycle” digital game is designed to regulate the rules of riding a motorcycle on the road for players to familiar with the rules of transportation by simulating their cognitive and affective perception to explore the effect of this design. After conducting ”3D Motorcycle” game playing, a questionnaires were delivered. The relevance of cognitive failure and anxiety, learning value perception and continuance intention. The findings of this study indicated that cognitive failure was negatively related to learning value perception, but gameplay anxiety was positively related to; the perception of learning value was positively related to continuance intention to play this ”3D Motorcycle” game. The implication of this study suggested that those educational institutes of transportation safety can apply this ”3D Motorcycle” game to enhance the perception of transportation rules to reduce future use real motorcycle accidents.起始頁-結束頁：31-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201909_64(3).000201篇名：增進學生文本理解的國小國語文專家教師提問策略分析並列篇名：Investigating Elementary Expert Teachers' Questioning Strategies that Promote Students' Mandarin Chinese Text Comprehension作者：蔡曉楓(Hsiao-Feng Tsai);陳欣希(Hsin-Hsi Chen)關鍵字：言談鷹架策略;教師提問;國語文;閱讀理解;discursive scaffolding strategies;Mandarin Chinese;reading comprehension;teachers' questioning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：32卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究探討國小中年級國語文任課教師運用提問教學時所使用的問題層次及言談鷹架策略。本研究使用質量混合法，以9位專家教師運用國教院研發之「十二年國民教育國小組國語文素養導向教材模組」進行的文本提問教學影片為研究材料。研究者先以量化內容分析法分析教師提問的PIRLS四層次問題層次與言談鷹架策略的比例，之後再以Nvivo對師生對話的段落進行第2次的質性分析，了解教師如何根據對話目的轉換問題層次與言談鷹架策略。本研究成果有三：（1）專家教師使用的問題層次比例由高至低依序為層次二、一、三、四；（2）專家教師所運用的言談鷹架策最多的是「澄清／延伸」，多用於層次一、二的問題；其次是鼓勵學生提供新答案的「高層次思考」，多用於層次三、四的問題；（3）專家教師的提問引導可分為「建構文本細節」、「帶入策略、解決問題」及「發展對文本的評價」三大原則。另外本研究的結論有以下2點：（1）在專家教師的延伸問題中，不同層次的問題扮演不同的角色；（2）專家教師根據教學原則調整問題層次與言談鷹架策略。本研究可做為國小中年級國語文任課教師以多層次問題進行教學的參考。英文摘要：This study investigated how expert Chinese language teachers led inquiry-based reading comprehension of texts through multi-level questioning, and how these teachers implemented specific discursive scaffolding strategies in various levels of questioning. The study employed mixed research method, combining quantitative and qualitative content analysis to examine the transcripts of instructional videos from nine expert teachers who used the Literacy-oriented Elementary Mandarin Chinese Textbooks as experimental teaching materials. The results indicated that the most frequently asked questions initiated by the expert teachers during classes were still level one and two questions. Moreover, teachers used clarification and follow-up as the discursive scaffolding strategies when they initiated level one and level two questions, whereas higher order thinking scaffolding strategy such as requesting alternative answers typically was associated with teachers' level three and four questions. Lastly, there were three different objectives for teachers to use in their questioning strategies, namely ”construct details,” ”incorporate reading strategies to solve puzzles,” and ”develop criticisms.” The teachers flexibly switched questioning levels and discursive scaffolding strategies based on their purpose of dialogue to meet learners' needs. The study concludes that different levels of questions expert teachers asked played different roles in classroom discussion, and that the teachers adjusted question levels and discursive scaffolding strategies based on their instructional principles. The study serves as a reference for future research in instructional dialogue and questioning.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學2篇名：中學生現代公民核心素養之測驗編製並列篇名：Development of a Modern Citizen Core Literacy Test for Middle School Students作者：陳彥君(Yen-Chun Chen);洪素蘋(Su-Pin Hung)關鍵字：現代公民核心素養;試題反應理論模式;試題差異功能;differential item functioning;item response theory;modern citizen core literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：32卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在編製一信、效度良好的中學生現代公民核心素養測驗，以評估臺灣中學生現代公民核心素養狀況。測驗編製係參考現代公民核心能力指標以及國際公民教育與素養調查研究（International Civic and Citizenship Education Study [ICCS]）的評量架構，編擬符合中學生生活場域與經驗的試題。試題編製完成後經學科專家確認內容效度與試題預試，於正式施測階段，採分層便利取樣，蒐集來自全臺北、中、南、東（含離島）各區共22所學校的中學生共1479份有效樣本，以多向度部分給分試題反應理論模式（multidimensional partial credit model [MPCM]）進行資料分析。結果發現：中學生現代公民核心素養測驗具有良好試題內部一致性，認知題與情感行為題的試題區分信度係數（item separation reliability）皆高於.9，五向度的受試者區分信度係數（person separation reliability），介於.593至.882之間，測驗折半信度為.883。效度驗證程序採用試題反應理論效度驗證架構進行，結果顯示本測驗符合五向度測量建構，同時並提供測驗的內容、結構、本質、類推效度與效標關聯效度，顯示本研究所發展的測驗工具具有良好信度與效度。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to design the Modern Citizen Core Literacy Test with well reliability and validity for middle school students. To develop the test, the core competency index as well as the assessment framework of the International Civic and Citizenship Education Survey were used as references. The Modern Citizen Core Literacy Test is developed to reflect the life experiences of middle school students. To establish content validity of the test, a panel of experts from middle schools were invited to review the first version of the test. After a pilot study, the test was administered to a total of 1,479 students from 22 middle schools in Taiwan; they were recruited with stratified purposive sampling. Multi-dimensional Partial Credit Model was used to assess the model-data fit. Five-core literacy were identified: moral literacy, democracy literacy, scientific literacy, media literacy and aesthetic literacy. Moreover, the test showed sufficient internal consistency with person separation reliability ranging from .593 to .882. The Split-half reliability is .883. In addition, the present study adopted item response theory based validation procedure. The results revealed that five dimensions of the Modern Citizen Core Literacy Test exhibited an acceptable model-data fit. Criterion-related validity, interpretability evidence, generalizability evidence, and substantive evidence were all supported, indicating that the test has good reliability and validity.起始頁-結束頁：39-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學3篇名：A Case Study on a Passive Taiwanese University Student's Metacognition Changes in the Process of English Academic Reading並列篇名：臺灣大學生閱讀學術英文後設認知變化之個案研究：以被動閱讀英文教科書者為例作者：羅正佳(Jeng-Jia Luo)關鍵字：English as a Foreign Language (EFL);English for Academic Purposes (EAP);metacognition-based research;passive readers;reading strategy;以英語為外國語（EFL）;後設認知研究;被動讀者;閱讀策略;學術英語（EAP）期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：32卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Interest in exploring English-as-a-Foreign-Language (EFL) learners' English academic reading has been growing due to increased use of course materials printed in English in Taiwan. In higher education settings, there are numerous passive students who use excuses to discontinue reading their English textbooks when they encounter reading difficulties. However, learning to read is a self-regulated process. To date, longitudinal research targeting this student population is scant. Therefore, this study aimed to explore what a passive EFL undergraduate student's story of reading English academic materials suggests about an EFL learner's metacognition changes of English reading for academic purposes over time. The researcher adopted the notion of metacognition as the core framework and employed a case study method, involving a university student who initially considered himself a passive reader of academic English materials, for an entire school year. The data were gathered via questionnaires, follow-up interviews, on-site observations and textual documents. The collected data were then conducted through open coding to document emergent themes and construct meaningful categories. The research findings indicate the dynamics of EFL reading for academic purposes. Based on the results, research implications and pedagogical suggestions are provided.英文摘要：因應國際化的浪潮，臺灣越來越多的大學課程採用英文教材，也帶動學術英語閱讀研究。對閱讀原文書抱持被動態度，遇到閱讀困難時，就找藉口停止閱讀，而不思索解決方法的大學生大有人在。然而，學習是一個自我調節的過程，目前尚未有學者以這個族群做為長期研究的對象。因此，本研究探討這類型學生對本身閱讀英文教科書策略之覺察歷程與調節過程。一名自認對閱讀原文書抱持被動態度的大學生表達參與本研究的意願。為了深入理解該生對學術英語閱讀的看法和閱讀行為是否隨著時間的推移而改變，本人以後設認知理論為基礎，採用案例研究方法，在一整個學年中，透過紙本問卷，後續訪談，現場觀察和文件收集詳實記錄他對英語學術閱讀的所知所感和實際閱讀行為。蒐集的數據和語料再通過開放式編碼進行分析，以建構具有意義的主題，同時將偵測到的改變做系統化詮釋。研究結果顯示學術英語閱讀具變異性，透過持續對話，觀察和省思，該生的閱讀態度及行為改被動為積極。本研究除了採用獨特的研究方法，也提供具體的教學建議。起始頁-結束頁：81-116資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學4篇名：Charles Taylor對自由與權利觀的省思及其對人權教育的啟示並列篇名：Charles Taylor's Critique of the Modern Conceptions of Liberty and Rights and its Applications in Human Rights Education作者：張鍠焜(Huang-Kun Chang)關鍵字：自由;泰勒;權利;Charles Taylor;liberty;rights期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：32卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文的目的是透過加拿大學者Charles Taylor對現代自由觀與權利觀的批判省思，以形成較周全的權利觀點，進而思考如何運用在我們當前的人權教育中，使我們的學生具有適切的權利觀。Taylor對自由與權利的觀點主要有三方面：（1）自由與權利的終極目的是自我實現，因此權利行使應透過個人的「反思性自我評價」進行內在反思的價值判斷，以確定自己的行動符合自我實現方向，才能正確地行使自己的權利；（2）Taylor認為權利並非人所固有的，而是社會所賦予的。社會之所以賦予人權利，本是基於對某些人性能力的重視，因而將這類能力的行使與發展視為權利，讓人們有最大可能空間去展現這種能力；（3）個人之擁有權利及行使權利，都深深依賴於社會。所以人們享受自由和權利，就相對地對社會負有義務，必須保衛這個賦予我們權利的社會，維持它的發展與繁榮，才能讓自己、社會成員及後來者享有這些自由與權利。基於Taylor上述觀點，本文析取出四項原則以做為我國實施人權教育之參考。另外，也分析「理性批判論辯」活動之特性符合此四項原則，可做為人權教育方案之範例。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to form a more comprehensive view of rights based on Charles Taylor's critiques of the modern conceptions of liberty and rights, and to re-envision our human rights education to help our students learn an appropriate view of rights. Three main views on liberty and rights Taylor proposed are as follows. First, The ultimate goal of liberty and rights is self-realization. Therefore, the exercise of rights should be evaluated by the individual's ”reflective self-evaluation” to determine how the exercise of rights corresponds with the orientation of his self-realization. Second, Rights are not inherent to human beings, but given by society. The reason the society gives people rights is based on the importance of certain human abilities. The development of such abilities is regarded as rights so that people have the possibility to demonstrate these abilities. Finally, the exercise of rights is dependent on the society. When people enjoy rights, they are relatively obligated to society. They must defend the society and maintain its development so that all members of the society could enjoy the rights. Based on the viewpoints of Taylor, this paper suggests four principles as guidelines for the implementation of human rights education. This paper also analyzes how characteristics of the ”rational critical debate” conform to these principles and suggests how the activity could be used in human rights education.起始頁-結束頁：117-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學5篇名：課綱為本課程設計經驗之研究：以國中教師為對象並列篇名：Standards-based Unit Design: The Experiences of Middle School Teachers作者：呂秀蓮(Hsiu-Lien Lu)關鍵字：課程設計;課綱使用;課綱為本;學習目標;學習評量;curriculum design;learning assessments;learning objectives;standards-based;the use of curriculum standards期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：32卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探究國中教師以課綱為本設計課程的經驗。10名國中教師接受一系列4天共計32小時課綱為本課程設計工作坊培訓並參與此項研究。研究資料包括田野觀察紀錄、非正式訪談、小組學習反思、單元課程設計成品和半結構式的個別訪談等。分析結果顯示，國中教師相信解構課綱內涵的重要性，認為解構課綱和建構學習目標經驗有助跳脫教科書框架的教學思考模式，然而也是痛苦但有成就感的學習階段。在設計學習評量階段，國中教師認為表現任務能引起學習動機和產出學習成效，並能檢測學習目標的達成，然而其設計的難易度跟學科屬性相關聯；另外，他們相信標準評量表是客觀、有效的學習證據收集工具。在發展學習活動階段，國中教師相信發展學習活動須扣緊課綱，以及學習活動是最容易設計的階段。最後，本研究建議有關當局重視教師以課綱為本設計課程的專業基礎能力之養成。因此，除提供在職教師專業發展的機會外，更應從源頭處培育職前教師這項關鍵的專業能力，以促使教育現場能切實回應十二年國教素養課程之期望。英文摘要：This study examines middle school teachers' experiences of learning standards-based unit design. Ten middle school teachers who received a series of four-day 32-hour three-stage workshops on standards-based unit design participated in the study. The collected data for this study includes field notes, informal conversations, learning reflections, lesson designs, and semi-structured individual interviews. Results indicate that the teachers valued the importance of deconstructing standards, which helped them break the tradition of teaching by the textbooks. This first learning stage was filled with agony but they walked away with a sense of achievement. In the stage of designing learning assessments, the teachers were convinced that performance assignments promote students' learning motivation, positive learning outcomes, and help evaluate the attainment of learning objectives. The difficulty level of performance assignment design is determined by the attributes of each subject. Furthermore, they believed that rubrics are objective and effective student learning data collection tools. In the stage of developing learning activities, the teachers were ascertained that learning activities designs should tie closely with standards and that developing learning activities was the easiest stage. Finally, this study recommends that in addition to teachers' professional development, pre-service teachers need training on standards-based curriculum design to fulfill the curricular expectations of the Twelve-Year Basic Education.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學6篇名：國中社會領域初任教師知覺組織支持、教師同僚共享氛圍和自我效能之關係並列篇名：Perceived Organizational Support, Collegiality, and Teacher Efficacy of Novice Social Studies Junior High School Teachers: The Problems They Faced and Solutions作者：黃易文(I-Wen Huang);湯家偉(Chia-Wei Tang)關鍵字：知覺組織支持;國中社會領域初任教師;教師自我效能;教師同僚共享氛圍;collegiality;novice teachers of social studies;perceived organizational support;teacher efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：32卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國中社會領域初任教師知覺組織支持、教師同僚共享氛圍與其自我效能之關係，並探究其職場之具體困境與因應策略。本研究先透過問卷調查法並以偏最小平方法分析變項關係，再以半結構式訪談去深入了解國中社會領域初任教師有別於其他教師面臨之具體困境與因應策略。在問卷調查部分，研究者取得初任社會領域正式教師共120位之有效問卷。半結構式訪談之對象，則為12位初任社會領域教師。研究主要發現歸納如下：（1）國中社會領域初任教師知覺組織支持及教師同僚共享氛圍對於教師自我效能有正向影響，其中教師知覺之組織支持透過對教師同僚共享氛圍之部分中介，對其自我效能產生影響；（2）國中社會領域初任教師面臨之困境與其他主科之教師會有不同，並需要學校行政端、教師同儕以及初任教師共同的投入並適時援引外部資源來克服。最後，研究者提出相關建議，供國中社會領域初任教師、學校行政單位、教育行政機關及未來相關研究之參考。英文摘要：This study aims to look into the relationship among novice social studies field teachers' perceived organizational support, collegiality, and teacher efficacy in Junior High School context and their perception of the workplace challenges and corresponding solutions. The data was collected using interview and survey methods. Valid survey data was collected from 120 social studies teachers, among which 12 teachers were interviewed. The main findings can be summarized as follows: 1) Collegiality partially mediates the relationship between teachers' perceived organizational support and teacher efficacy; 2) the challenges of novice social studies teachers are not the same as those of other subject areas teachers and it takes the school administration, novice teachers and their colleagues altogether to overcome the hurdles. Based on the findings, suggestions are provided for educational administration authority, school leaders, novice social studies teachers and for future studies.起始頁-結束頁：33-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學7篇名：經濟弱勢學生學習態度與學業表現之縱貫研究並列篇名：Longitudinal Study of Economically Disadvantaged Student's Learning Attitude and Academic Performance作者：廖錦文(Chin-Wen Liao);鄭博文(Po-Wen Cheng)關鍵字：經濟弱勢;學習態度;學業表現;縱貫研究;academic performance;economically disadvantaged;learning attitude;longitudinal study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：32卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討經濟弱勢學生學習態度與學業表現之關聯性及發展變化。本研究採用縱貫性調查，以臺灣貧窮兒少資料庫：弱勢兒少生活趨勢調查（Taiwan Database of Children and Youth in Poverty〔TDCYP〕）之學生問卷（2009年、2011年及2013年），三個時間點的重覆測量，共計1,265位固定樣本追蹤資料。以交叉延宕模型（Autoregressive Cross-Lagged Model〔ARCL〕）及潛在成長曲線模型（Latent Growth Curve Model〔LGCM〕）進行資料分析。研究結果發現：（1）從交叉延宕模型分析結果，學習態度與學業表現存在相互影響效應；（2）經濟弱勢學生學習態度起始狀態與學習態度成長速率具有預測效果；（3）學習態度對學業表現有因果關係之影響，學習態度起始狀態與成長率對於學業表現之起始狀態與成長速率有顯著正向效果。文末，根據研究結果進行討論與建議。英文摘要：The purpose of the present study is to investigate the relationship between learning attitude, academic performance, and developmental changes in economically disadvantaged students. Using a longitudinal approach, panel sample data were collected from 1,265 financially disadvantaged students within the Taiwan Database of Children and Youth in Poverty (TDCYP) in three waves: 2009, 2011, and 2013. Data analysis was performed using the autoregressive cross-lagged model (ARCL) and the latent growth curve model (LGCM). Results are as follows: 1) In the ARCL model, there was mutually influential relationship between learning attitude and academic performance. 2) The initial state of learning attitude could forecast the growth rate of learning attitude for economically disadvantaged students. 3) There was a causal relationship between learning attitude and the effects of academic performance. The initial state and growth rate of learning attitude exerted significantly positive effects on the initial state and growth rate of academic performance. The study provides suggestions based on the results.起始頁-結束頁：71-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學8篇名：向學生學習：教師建構學科學生知識之個案研究並列篇名：Learning from Students: A Case Study of How Teachers Construct Their Knowledge of Content and Students作者：洪郁婷(Yu-Ting Hung)關鍵字：向學生學習;個案研究;學科學生知識;case study;knowledge of content and students;learning from students期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：32卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：在十二年國教課綱的推動之下，愈見重視學生「自發、互動、共好」的行動力。故教師該如何建構學科學生知識，以契合班上不同的多元文化主體、讓學習有效且走向個人化，是急需探討的議題。本研究採為時兩年的個案研究，深入新北市H國中某教師專業學習社群，以及成員所任教之九年A班；運用參與觀察、深度訪談與文件分析，探究該教師社群在教學的歷程中，如何從中建構學科學生知識。研究發現，教師藉由學習證據反覆聆聽師生對話，逐漸理解學生學習；教師並在「構思、行動、診斷、決策」的歷程中逐步構築學科學生知識，連結師生脈絡。研究結論有三，冀能提供教師作為建構學科學生知識的參考：（1）學科學生知識能促使教師更準確搭建學習鷹架；（2）須用聆聽勾勒學科學生知識的輪廓；（3）學習證據為建構學科學生知識的重要媒介。英文摘要：Under the impetus of the 12-Year Basic Education Curriculum, increasing attention has been devoted to its goals, which include taking initiative, engaging the public, and seeking the common good. Urgent discussion is required regarding the ways in which teachers should construct their knowledge of teaching content and students (KCS) to accommodate different multicultural subjects in class and allow for individualized learning in order to achieve the goals above. This research entailed a two-year case study that delved deep into a professional learning community (PLC) of teachers at a junior high school ninth grade class in New Taipei City. The researcher investigated how teachers construct KCS through participatory observation, intensive interviews, and literature analyses. The study found that teachers ”listened” to students' dialogues repeatedly throughout the learning process, and that both parties could gradually understand teaching and learning. The teachers connected all the information related to the students' learning context through a systematic process, which consisted of design, doing, diagnosis, and decision-making. Three main conclusions, which can hopefully serve as references for teachers, are as follows: 1) KCS can help teachers provide more accurate scaffold for learning; 2) Teachers must listen in order to outline KCS; and 3) evidence of student learning is an important medium for constructing KCS.起始頁-結束頁：107-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學9篇名：離島觀光科系學生人格特質、社會資本與創造力對創業意圖影響之研究並列篇名：The Influences of Personality Traits, Social Capital, and Creativity on the Entrepreneurial Intentions of Tourism Students on a Remote Island作者：梁朝棟(Chao-Tung Liang);莊雪蒂(Hsueh-Ti Chuang);梁朝雲(Chaoyun Liang)關鍵字：人格特質;社會資本;創造力;創業意圖;離島觀光;creativity;entrepreneurial intentions;personality traits;remote island tourism;social capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：32卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討離島地區觀光科系就讀學生的創業意圖，並驗證創造力在人格特質、社會資本與創業意圖之間的中介效果。本研究以澎湖地區高中暨大學生為研究對象，進行問卷調查，並建立結構方程的預測模型。本研究結果發現，原創型創造力、橋接型社會資本與開放經驗特質，是強化學生創業意圖的三大主因。原創型創造力產生極具影響力的中介效果，而實用型創造力則對創業準備也有顯著的中介影響。當深度與生態旅遊日益興盛，離島創業形成風潮之際，如何強化青年學子的創業意圖，成為重要的培育方向之一。本研究結果所呈現出，各類人格特質與社會資本透過創造力之中介，對離島創業意圖所產生的複雜互動和綜整影響，會對在地教育機構的教學策略和輔導措施，以及地方政府的產業政策及鼓勵措施有所啟示。英文摘要：The current study investigated the influence of personality traits, social capital, and creativity on the entrepreneurial intentions of students on the Penghu Island, Taiwan and the study also examined the mediating effects of student creativity. The research participants were students from the tourism programmes of National Magong High School and National Penghu University of Science and Technology. Valid survey data were collected and analysed using confirmatory factor analysis and structural equation modelling. The results indicated that the originality type of creativity, bridging social capital, and trait openness were the factors most strongly affecting entrepreneurial intention. Whereas the originality type of creativity possessed the overriding mediating effect, the usefulness type of creativity had a significant effect on entrepreneurial preparation. As ecotourism flourishes and more young people consider entrepreneurship, identifying effective methods for strengthening the entrepreneurial intentions of students has become a crucial objective of talent development. The complex interactions between the variables used in the current study as well as their synthesised effects could have critical implications for the instructional strategies and guidance interventions for local education institutions and for industrial policies and entrepreneurial incentives offered by the local government.起始頁-結束頁：145-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學01篇名：Encountering Chinese Culture Over Changing Times並列篇名：變革時代之中國文化緣遇作者：許美德(Ruth HAYHOE)關鍵字：Chinese culture;encounters;geopolitics;dialogue;resilience;中國文化;緣遇;地緣政治;對話;忍耐期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：This is a personal narrative of encounters with Chinese people and experiences of the culture over a fifty-year period, from 1967 to 2017. The timing parallels closely the 50-year period and anniversary being celebrated by the Education Journal of the Hong Kong Institute of Educational Research at The Chinese University of Hong Kong. The author lived in Hong Kong from 1967 to 1978, as a young Canadian teacher employed by Heep Yunn, an Anglican girls' school. She then returned to a very different Hong Kong in 1997 to lead the Hong Kong Institute of Education in its upgrading to university level and status. In between she experienced China's opening up as a teacher at Fudan University in Shanghai from 1980 to 1982, and a more isolated China during the difficult period from 1989 to 1991 when she served as Cultural Attache in the Canadian Embassy in Beijing. Through these experiences of dramatic change came an ever deeper engagement with Chinese culture, which has kept her active in teaching and research about Chinese education over a period of 50 years and given her a vision of what it can bring to a global world. She thus focuses on the stories of individuals whose strength of spirit enabled them to deal with integrity, courage and grace through times of extreme pressure and geopolitical conflict.英文摘要：這是一篇自1967至2017年、橫跨半個世紀、與中國人民和文化體驗有緣相遇的個人敘事，時間上恰巧和香港中文大學《教育學報》的50周年誌慶吻合。作者於1967至1978年間以一名年輕加拿大教師僑居香港，在聖公會的協恩中學任教。1997年，她回到一個完全不同的香港，領導向大學資格升級的香港教育學院。在此期間，她曾為上海復旦大學的教師，體會中國的改革開放（1980-1982年）；以及加拿大北京大使館文化參贊，感受一個相對孤立、處於困難時期的中國（1989-1991年）。跟感悟這些劇烈變化相伴的，是更深地緣遇中國文化，使她在此50年中積極投身關於中國教育的教學和研究，並給予她展望中國教育貢獻於世界的視野。因此，作者聚焦於一些個人故事－他們的精神力量所賦予的正直、勇氣和榮光，以面對極端壓力和地緣政治衝突的時代。起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：The Development of Early Childhood Education and Care in Australia並列篇名：澳洲幼兒教育和關懷服務之發展作者：Bridie RABAN;Anna KILDERRY關鍵字：early childhood education and care;Australia;policy development;National Quality Framework;access and equity;幼兒教育和關懷服務;澳洲;政策發展;國家質素架構;機會與公平期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Australia is a vast country. It is the largest country in Oceania and the sixth largest country in the world by total area. The Commonwealth of Australia comprises 6 states and 2 territories with a total population of over 25 million people, mainly focused down the south-eastern coast line and concentrated in the capital cities of each state and territory. With respect to early childhood education and care (ECEC), the development of services across the country has changed considerably over time. From families making their own informal care arrangements decades ago, to the more recent era where the Federal government has widened and increased access to ECEC with the aim to raise the quality of children's learning and development outcomes. Using readily available government documents, this article follows the development of ECEC in Australia from its informal beginnings to recent times where the sector has been through a reform phase resulting in the National Quality Framework (NQF) guiding the nation's ECEC quality agenda. With a view to higher educational outcomes leading to better employment and advancement in social conditions, there remain considerable obstacles to realizing a full and seamless quality implementation. In this article, we discuss some of the challenges that lay ahead for ECEC in Australia, and provide some suggestions on how these challenges can be addressed.英文摘要：澳洲幅員廣大，以總面積計是大洋洲中最大和世界第六大國家。澳洲聯邦有6個州和兩個領地，人口超過2,500萬，主要集中在東南海岸線和各州、領地的首府。澳洲幼兒教育和關懷服務的發展幾經轉變，自數十年前由家庭各自安排，到近期由聯邦政府擴大和增加服務，以提升兒童學習和發展的成效和質素。本文參考現有政府檔案，了解澳洲如何開展非正規的幼兒教育和關懷服務，以至於近期服務經過改革，制定出國家質素架構以引領服務發展，目的是提升教育成效，從而改善就業和社會狀況。要<U+9039>致全面而暢順的質素保證，尚有不少障礙。本文會討論當前澳洲在這方面的挑戰，並提供應對建議。起始頁-結束頁：23-40資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：從課程統整到跨領域課程：台灣二十年的論述與問題並列篇名：From Curriculum Integration to Cross-disciplinary Curriculum: Twenty Years of Reform Discourse and Problems in Taiwan作者：周淑卿(Shu-Ching CHOU);王郁雯(Yu-Wen WANG)關鍵字：課程統整;跨領域課程;課程改革;課程實施;curriculum integration;cross-disciplinary curriculum;curriculum reform;curriculum implementation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：台灣自2000年實施九年一貫課程便開始倡導課程統整，試圖鬆動長久以來學校課程堛瑣ヲ鴐伬迭C由於政策的倡導，課程統整成為課程改革的優勢論述，學界和實務界皆投入大量心力。但學界對課程統整有理念分歧，而學校在實施過程中亦備受批評。學者批評學校「為統整而統整」；學校教師責難課程統整的理想過高、不切實際。其後「課程統整」隨<U+7740>課程微調而勢微，及至2014年新課程綱要倡導跨領域學習，統整的理念再度興起。「跨領域」和「課程統整」雖然語彙不同，卻同樣強調統整學習的重要性，而如今的跨領域課程更強調探究歷程和深度學習。時至今日，要實施跨領域課程，在實務上同樣必須面對學校結構和教師文化的難題。本文探討台灣自2000年迄今將近二十年的課程統整論述與爭論，以及實施上的問題，從中提出未來在十二年國教課程中落實跨領域課程的啟示。英文摘要：Curriculum integration had been advocated since the ”Grades 1-9 Curriculum Guideline” was implemented in 2000 for weakening the boundary of school subjects. Because of the policy, curriculum integration became the prominent discourse, and many researchers and educators made great efforts on it. However, some researchers criticized that curriculum integration reform was pseudo-integration. Some school teachers also considered that the goal of curriculum integration was unrealistic. The idea and practice of ”curriculum integration” had become declined until the new curriculum reform emphasized cross-disciplinary learning in 2014. Although ”cross-disciplinary curriculum” and ”integrated curriculum” are literally different, they have the same meaning in the sense of emphasizing learning beyond disciplinary boundary. Cross-disciplinary curriculum in the curriculum reform of the ”12-year Basic Education” especially emphasizes inquiry and deep learning. Therefore, the practical difficulties in the dimensions of administrative structure and teacher culture still exist. This article discusses the curriculum integration discourses and the problems of curriculum implementation in the curriculum reform of the past twenty years, and proposes implications for the cross-disciplinary curriculum implementation in the new Curriculum Guideline of Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：41-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：身體素養評量工具之探討並列篇名：A Study on the International Physical Literacy Assessment Tools作者：林建豪(Chien-Hao LIN);魏豐閔(Feng-Min WEI);林靜萍(Ching-Ping LIN)關鍵字：繪製身體素養旅程工具;生活護照;青少年身體素養評量;加拿大身體素養評量;身體素養學習觀察量尺;Charting Physical Literacy Journey Tool (CPLJT);Pass for Life (PFL);Physical Literacy Assessment for Youth (PLAY);Canadian Assessment of Physical Literacy (CAPL);Rubric of Observed Learning in Physical Literacy (ROLPL)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：回應素養導向課程改革趨勢，體育領域積極投入探究、理解及推展身體素養的概念和實踐。為能將身體素養有效地具象化和量化，身體素養評量工具的開發早已成為許多國家推動身體素養的重要課題之一。本文聚焦於探討國際上廣獲使用的身體素養評量工具，希望藉此為台灣開發身體素養評量工具提供具體參考。International Physical Literacy Association提出「描繪」（charting）身體素養的評量做法，主張從整體的面向描述與定位個體身體素養曲線的消長；PLAY是依據不同使用者和使用需求所設計的身體素養系列評量工具，從不同面向掌握身體素養；PFL為學生和教師提供有價值的信息和回饋，幫助教師評量學生的身體素養，改善學習並了解身體素養的進步和實現；CAPL是評量學童身體素養的工具，涵蓋的測驗內容除了身體素養的四個核心支柱外，更引入穿戴式裝置，測量學童每日的身體活動數據；Dudley（2015）設計的「身體素養學習觀察量尺」在評量內容和表現水準交叉列聯後，能針對個體在不同面向上的表現提供清晰描述，幫助個體和他人了解身體素養學習情形或規劃促進計畫。本文描述國際上身體素養評量工具的內涵和設計，嘗試為身體素養評量工具提出可供參酌的開發建議，落實素養導向體育課程改革的基礎工程。英文摘要：In response to the trend of competency-oriented curriculum innovation, the field of physical education actively dedicates to investigating, understanding and promoting the concept and practice of physical literacy (PL). To effectively concretize and quantify PL, the development of assessment tool of PL has been one of the crucial issues of promoting PL in many countries. This article focuses on investigating diverse assessment tools of PL adopted across the world, for providing substantial suggestions of developing assessment tools of PL in Taiwan. Proposing the assessment practice of charting PL, the International Physical Literacy Association believes in delineating and positioning the rise and fall of individual's PL. According to the conditions and needs of different users, PLAY is a series of assessment tools of PL in capturing the concept of PL from different facets; however, its reliability and validity need to be verified and constructed further. PFL provides valuable information and feedbacks for both students and teachers in supporting teachers for assessing student's PL, improving learning, and understanding the progress and accomplishment of PL. CAPL is an important tool designed to assess the PL of children, with assessment contents including not only the four common and core pillars of PL, but also children's daily physical activity measured by utilizing wearable devices. The ”Rubric of Observed Learning in Physical Literacy” developed by Dudley (2015) represents the assessment foci and performance level in the same tool which might assist others and self in understanding learning conditions or drawing up plans of promotion. This study synthesizes the connotation and design of international assessment tools of PL, provides helpful proposals for developing assessment tools, and indirectly establishes one of the infrastructures of operating competency-oriented curriculum innovation in physical education.起始頁-結束頁：61-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：香港高中中文科課程重設指定範文的理念並列篇名：The Rationale Behind Reintroducing Prescribed Texts in the Hong Kong Senior Secondary Chinese Language Curriculum作者：李玉蓉(Yuk-Yung LI)關鍵字：中文科課程;課程變革;指定範文;課程決策;香港;Chinese language curriculum;curriculum change;prescribed texts;curriculum decision making;Hong Kong期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：踏入21世紀，香港中學中文科課程進行了一項重要革新，就是取消指定範文，容許學校根據學生需要編選教材。然而，教育當局於2015年修訂高中中文科課程，重設指定範文12篇。本文通過分析官方文件和訪談課程決策者，探討重設指定範文的理念。研究發現，重設指定範文主要為回應前線教師訴求，在決策者眼中是無奈的妥協。然而，決策者在決策過程中重新界定問題，為指定範文定位，刻意避免重現課程改革前的學習異化現象，除了強調培育學生的人文素養，亦保留新課程開放教材和重視能力遷移的精神。研究結果對了解指定範文在高中中文科課程的定位和香港中文科課程的發展方向，都有重要意義。英文摘要：Around the year 2000, the Hong Kong secondary Chinese language curriculum underwent a major reform. Significantly, the curriculum no longer prescribed any texts. Instead, schools chose materials to fit their students' needs. In 2015, the revised senior secondary Chinese language curriculum reintroduced 12 required classical texts. This study explicates the rationale behind the changes, through analyzing government documents and interviewing decision makers. The recent change was a compromise by decision makers to address frontline teachers' concerns. However, the decision makers reframed the problems and positioned the prescribed texts in the curriculum. In doing so, the decision makers hoped to avoid the problems of the old curriculum, to preserve the spirit of the new curriculum, and to advance the cultivation of moral and cultural development. The study findings deepen our understanding of the key features of the revised curriculum and the positioning and development of the Chinese language curriculum in Hong Kong.起始頁-結束頁：81-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：教師知識移轉與學生導向設計對學生吸收能力與學習成效影響之研究：以學生先備能力為調節變項並列篇名：The Influence of Teachers' Knowledge Transfer and Student Orientation Design on Students' Absorptive Capacity and Learning Outcome: Student Prior Knowledge as the Moderator作者：彭耀平(Michael Yao-Ping PENG);朱艷華(Yan-Hua ZHU);許艷(Yan XU);李慶章(Ching-Chang LEE)關鍵字：教師知識移轉;學生導向;吸收能力;學習成效;先備能力;teacher's knowledge transfer;student orientation;absorptive capacity;learning outcome;prior knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：影響學生學習成效的因素眾多，過去研究皆以不同理論歸納出其前置變數，並探討兩者的關聯。本研究基於知識轉換理論，輔以行銷概念，提出兩個重要的前置變數：教師知識移轉與學生導向，以探討結構模式中各因素之間的顯著性。本研究以台灣大專校院學生為研究樣本，並以立意抽樣方式取得統計樣本；為降低地區和學校屬性可能帶來的誤差，致力平衡各群組樣本數。本研究共計收取801份問卷。研究結果顯示，教師的知識移轉對於學生吸收能力及學習成效具有顯著影響；學校的學生導向對於學生吸收能力具有顯著影響；學生先備能力將正向調節教師知識移轉對學生吸收能力的影響力。根據其研究結果和發現，本研究提出相關理論意涵與實務意涵的建議，並指出研究限制給未來研究者參考，以豐富研究議題的延續性。英文摘要：There are many factors influencing the learning outcomes of students, and previous studies all concluded with predetermined variables based on different theories and explored the relevance between these theories and learning outcomes. In this study, two important antecedents, teachers' knowledge transfer and student orientation, were put forward on the basis of the knowledge conversion theory and the marketing concept to explore the significance of various factors within the structural model. Purposive sampling was adopted to select college students in Taiwan as samples. Efforts were made for balancing the sample numbers of various groups in order to reduce possible deviations brought by regions and university features. A total of 801 questionnaires were collected. Results indicate that teachers' knowledge transfer had a significant impact on students' absorptive capacity and learning outcomes; student orientation had a significant impact on students' absorptive capacity; prior knowledge of students had a positive moderating effect on the influence of teachers' knowledge transfer on students' absorptive capacity. Based on the results and findings, this study suggested relevant theoretical and practical implications, presented the limitations of the study, and gave suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：103-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所7篇名：二十年來香港課程改革的實施與成果並列篇名：The Implementation and Outcomes of Hong Kong Curriculum Reform in the Past Twenty Years作者：林智中(Chi-Chung LAM);余玉珍(Yuk-Chun YU);李玲(Ling LI)關鍵字：課程改革;課程實施;課程評鑑;香港;curriculum reform;curriculum implementation;curriculum evaluation;Hong Kong期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：自教育當局於2001年以《學會學習－課程發展路向》掀起全面而大規模的課程改革以來，香港學校課程發展在過去18年已進入持續更新的階段，例如2009年推行的「三三四」學制，2015年推動STEM教育等。就不同的官方調查研究所得，這股持續革新的浪潮已得到教師和學校廣泛採納且落實推行。在香港特別行政區政府以此認定課程改革具有積極正面果效的同時，這是否足以反映改革的整體實況呢？有見及此，本文將檢視不同的官方報告和國際調查，以檢視改革的落實程度；藉判別影響課程實施的關鍵因素，衡量改革的真正成效。建基於這些實施因素和成果衡量，本文將為課程改革日後能持續發展提出具體方向和可行策略。英文摘要：Since the implementation of the large-scale and comprehensive curriculum reform in 2001, the Hong Kong education authority has, in the past 18 years, continuously introduced a series of curriculum reforms such as the ”334” curriculum in 2009 and STEM in 2015. In the implementation studies funded by the Government, it was found that this wave of reform has been widely adopted and implemented by teachers and schools. The Government also claimed that the curriculum reform has brought about positive outcomes. Is this really true? This article attempts to review the official reports and studies by academics to assess the level of implementation, to identify the factors affecting the implementation, and also to gauge the outcomes of the reform. Based on the review, direction and strategies of sustainable curriculum development is discussed in the conclusion.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所8篇名：從「基本能力」到「核心素養」－社會認識論的分析並列篇名：From ”Basic Ability” to ”Core Competence”: An Analysis of Social Epistemology作者：黃彥文(Yen-Wen HUANG);歐用生(Yung-Sheng OU)關鍵字：課程改革;基本能力;核心素養;社會認識論;存有論;curriculum reform;basic ability;core competence;social epistemology;ontology期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：回顧台灣近年來兩波課程改革，分別訴諸「基本能力」與「核心素養」兩種觀點，各自的意涵背後涉及了不同的知識觀和意識型態。然而，植基於改革生態學的視野，這兩波課程改革的核心觀點之所以轉變，其實還涉及了歷史脈絡下知識和權力的社會結構辯證關係。值此，本研究採用Popkewitz「社會認識論」的觀點，分析「基本能力」與「核心素養」理念背後論述實踐的時空背景，繼而提出從「認識論」轉向「存有論」的論點，並描繪出課程改革的未來願景。英文摘要：This article reviews the two waves of curriculum reform in Taiwan in recent years, which refer to the perspectives of ”basic ability” and ”core competence” that involve different knowledge types and ideologies. Based on the perspective of reform ecology, the core viewpoints of the two waves of curriculum reform have also involved the dialectical relationship between the social structure of knowledge and power in the historical context. On this occasion, the study is intended to adopt T. S. Popkewitz's idea of ”social epistemology” as the methodology to analyze the space-time background of the discursive practice of ”basic ability” and ”core competence,” and then puts forward the argument of turning from ”epistemology” to ”ontology,” depicting the future vision of the curriculum reform.起始頁-結束頁：31-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所9篇名：台灣課程改革脈絡中教師專業發展的回顧與展望並列篇名：Teachers' Professional Development in the Context of Curriculum Reforms in Taiwan: Retrospect and Prospect作者：洪詠善(Yung-Shan HUNG)關鍵字：課程改革;課程政策;教師專業發展;課程綱要;《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要》;curriculum reform;curriculum policy;teacher professional development;curriculum guidelines;Curriculum Guidelines of 12-Year Basic Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：自1949年以降，台灣中小學經歷多次課程綱要的修訂；2019年台灣實施《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要》，隨<U+7740>課程改革，教師角色論述及其專業發展政策亦面臨再建構的挑戰和機會。本文旨在分析課程修訂脈絡中，教師專業發展政策的演進和展望。運用歷史研究和文件分析，蒐集國民義務教育實施以來，課程與教師專業發展相關政策文件和實徵研究的文獻，首先探析台灣中小學課程修訂脈絡和課程改革的論述中，教師專業發展政策的演進及問題；其次，以教師專業知識動態系統架構，提出教師專業發展和課程實踐的展望。本文歸結課程改革與教師專業發展的政策和論述是相互回應並交互影響的。教師角色從忠實傳遞者到多元的專業角色，教師專業發展政策從強規範到協作支持的多元化發展。在《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要》以學習者為主體、素養導向、連貫統整、學校本位課程發展、多元適性、協作共好等論述下，課程實踐與教師專業發展應透過「法規制度」設計和中介，促進動態系統的有機連結；再者，為落實素養導向的課程實踐，應開展自發創生和協作共學的學習網絡。課程實踐即教師專業發展，期望透過協作支持系統建置課程實踐的鷹架，以持續推進教師專業發展的動能。英文摘要：Taiwan has revised national curriculum guidelines for elementary schools and secondary schools several times since 1949. It will implement the Curriculum Guidelines of 12-Year Basic Education from 2019. In the process of curriculum reform, the role of teachers and the policy regarding their professional development would undergo deconstruction and reconstruction. This article aims to analyze the context and discourse of the curriculum reform, and to explore the policies and discourse of teachers' professional development in Taiwan by analyzing related documents and literature. Secondly, with the aid of the framework of dynamics of teacher knowledge, the article looks ahead to the curriculum practice and teachers' professional development. Results indicate reciprocal influences between the curriculum reform and teachers' professional development. The role of teachers changed from curriculum delivery to diverse professional roles, and the policy of their professional development from strong regulation to collaborative development. The main discourses of the 2019 Curriculum Guidelines include: learner-centered, competency-driven, coherent and integrated, school-based, diversified and adaptive, and cooperation for common good. Referring to the dynamic system of teachers' professional knowledge, the programs of curriculum practice and teachers' professional development should promote the connection of dynamic systems through the design and intermediary of ”regulatory systems.” Besides, to implement the competency-driven curriculum practice, spontaneous and collaborative learning networks should be developed. Curriculum practice is also the professional development of teachers. Through establishing collaborative supporting systems for scaffolding curriculum practice, the capacity of teachers will have sustainable promotion.起始頁-結束頁：49-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所10篇名：香港教科書編審和選用機制：徘徊於控制與自由之間並列篇名：The Textbook Review and Selection Mechanism in Hong Kong: Hovering Between Control and Freedom作者：霍秉坤(Ping-Kwan FOK)關鍵字：教科書;評審機制;自由;控制;textbook;review mechanism;freedom;control期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：教科書是教育的重要環節，聯繫教學內容、系統知識、課程與教學、學習評估。香港教科書編審和選用的機制，雖然一直引發大量爭議，但探討其機制的文章不多。本文將評析教育局在教科書編審機制的特質。教育局在編審過程中，對特定項目加以控制，如編寫內容、編寫取向、價格因素等；然而，對部分項目則容許自由編寫，如附加內容、教學活動、撰寫篇幅等。出版商為爭取通過評審，獲得更大市場份額，需要滿足教育局的要求和學校教師的口味。在選用過程中，學校需要建立選用教科書的方法，經教師商議選用，但教育局未擬定教師選用準則的嚴格標準，教師選擇具有彈性。筆者認為，香港教科書編審和選用的機制中，教育局的取態經常徘徊於控制與自由之間。英文摘要：Textbook, linking teaching content, system knowledge, curriculum and teaching, and assessment for learning, is an important part of education. Although the mechanism for reviewing and selecting textbooks in Hong Kong has always caused a lot of controversy, there are not many articles inquiring into the mechanism. This article analyzes the features of the textbook review mechanism of the Education Bureau. During the review processes, the Education Bureau, on the one hand, controls specific issues such as contents, teaching approaches, and pricing matters. It, however, allows freedom in other issues such as supplementary contents, teaching activities, length of writings. Textbook publishers, aiming to gain greater market share, need to meet the requirements of the Education Bureau and the desires of school teachers. In the selection process, schools need to set the procedure of textbook selection and allow teachers to select textbook. The Education Bureau, however, has not issued rigid standards for the selection and allows flexibility for teachers' choice. The author believes that the Education Bureau often hovers between control and freedom. in the textbook review and selection mechanism.起始頁-結束頁：71-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所11篇名：Andreas M. Kazamias歷史取向比較教育方法論之研究並列篇名：A Study on Andreas M. Kazamias's Historical Approach in Comparative Education作者：黃柏叡(Bo-Ruey HUANG)關鍵字：A. M. Kazamias;比較教育;方法論;歷史研究;A. M. Kazamias;comparative education;methodology;historical study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文探討Andreas M. Kazamias的比較教育研究理念和反省比較教育的發展，並根據探討內容，闡述其相關主張對於比較教育研究的意義。Kazamias是一位具多重身分的知識分子學者，他是比較教育的人文主義歷史學家、左派的批判知識分子和批判的人文主義者，曾發表許多比較教育和教育史的學術著作；他被稱為「希臘式的比較學者」，因為他的研究和著作皆展現出「希臘人文主義」，大量運用古希臘神話、符號和隱喻，批判分析當代教育議題。本文採用「思想研究」方法介紹其歷史取向比較教育方法論：（1）在研究目的上應以理解教育制度和詮釋教育事件為主；（2）在研究性質上應深入了解形成教育現況的質性研究；（3）在研究任務上可同時包括宏觀層面的社會－文化分析和微觀層面的共時性及歷時性教育問題分析。歷史取向的比較教育研究不僅可使比較教育擺脫以預測或政策導向的認識論取向，更可重建比較教育研究中長期被忽視的理解和詮釋研究取向。英文摘要：This article explores Andreas M. Kazamias's philosophy of comparative education and its reflection on comparative educational development. It also elaborates Kazamias's proposition on comparative education and its significance on comparative education research. Kazamias, being a multi-identity intellectual scholar, is a comparative humanist historian of education, a leftist critical intellectual, and a critical humanist. Kazamias has written numerous scholarly books, monographs and articles in comparative education and the history of education. Because of his Greek ethnic background, and also because of the pervading Hellenic humanism in his research and writings, Kazamias is known as the Greek comparativist. By using the methods of ”thoughts study,” this study found that the historical approach in comparative education is: (1) to deal with explanation and interpretation rather than prediction; (2) to use qualitative research to compare, explain and interpret historical phenomena; and (3) to examine both the macro-level of socio-cultural analysis and the micro-level synchronically and diachronically educational problems or issues in the same society.起始頁-結束頁：95-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所12篇名：設計STEAM課程的協同教學－以「感控式綠建築」為例並列篇名：Designing a Collaborative Teaching of the STEAM Course: The Case of ”Green Building With Sensor-controls”作者：盧秀琴(Chow-Chin LU);洪榮昭(Jon-Chao HONG);陳芬芳(Fen-Fang CHEN)關鍵字：STEAM課程;協同教學;專題研究;感控式綠建築;STEAM course;collaborative teaching;subject study;green building with sensor-controls期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：跨領域STEAM課程的協同教學能培養國小學生「探究與實作」的能力；這是全球的教育趨勢，亦是台灣十二年國教的教學重點。本研究採個案研究法，以國小六年級一班共26位學生為研究對象。三位協同教師設計STEAM課程和教學，指導學生執行「感控式綠建築」的專題研究，內容包含：繪畫設計圖、編寫Arduino程式以操縱感控式設備、組裝綠建築。本研究以STEAM教學過程卡、「感控式綠建築」作品、半結構式晤談、教學省思札記等資料進行詮釋分析。研究結果如下：（1）三位教師協同教學STEAM課程，能協助各組學生建構「感控式綠建築」，符合日常節能標準，並達到美觀和實用的效果；（2）各組學生在建構「感控式綠建築」的歷程中，學會STEAM跨科跨領域的技能，以及溝通協調、合作學習的態度。英文摘要：Collaborative teaching of cross-field STEAM course can develop primary students' ability to ”explore and implement.” It is both the global education trend and the target of Taiwan's 12-year compulsory education. This study adopted a case study in a sixth-grade class of an elementary school with 26 students as research subjects. Three collaborative teachers designed STEAM courses and guided students to construct ”green building with sensor-controls,” including drawing design diagram, writing Arduino programs to manipulate sensory devices, and assembling green building with sensor-controls. The data collected included STEAM teaching process card, works of green building with sensor-controls, semi-structured interviews and teaching notes. Results found that: (a) the collaborative teaching of STEAM courses to help each group of students construct the green building with sensor-controls met the daily energy-saving standards and achieved beautiful and practical effects; (b) in the course of constructing the green building with sensor-controls, each group of students learned the cross-field skills of STEAM and ways of communication and coordination, as well as cooperative learning attitude.起始頁-結束頁：113-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所13篇名：利用學習軌道理論進行國小柱體與錐體概念教學之行動研究並列篇名：Action Research on the Application of Learning Trajectory Theory to the Concept Teaching of Cylinders and Cones作者：陳嘉皇(Chia-Huang CHEN)關鍵字：學習軌道;柱體與錐體;教科書;課程;learning trajectories;cylinders and cones;textbook;curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究針對台灣現行兩版本的國小數學教科書，分析探討當中柱體與錐體的相關單元內容；利用學習軌道設計課程，編製教學活動進行教學實驗，檢視兩位不同學習層次學生的學習情形及其解題表現，了解學生在學習歷程中的解題策略及可能的迷思概念；透過教師課後的省思日誌進行教學檢討，以提升教學效能，幫助學生建立完整具系統性的柱體與錐體概念，期望在解決這類題目時有更完備的思維，擁有正確解題的能力。英文摘要：This study focused on two sets of primary mathematics textbooks in Taiwan, analyzing the unit contents about cylinders and cones. It used learning trajectories to design curriculum and arrange teaching activities for teaching experiments, examining the learning performances of two students at different levels of learning. The study aimed to understand the problem-solving strategies of the students and their myths, if any, in the learning process through the reflective diary of the teacher, for improving teaching effectiveness as well as helping students build a complete and systematic conception of cylinders and cones. Students are expected to have complete thinking in solving such problems, and have the ability to correctly solve mathematical problems.起始頁-結束頁：135-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：二元計分的BW作答機率模式精確度研究：蒙地卡羅法並列篇名：The Accuracy of Dichotomous BW Probabilistic Models: A Monte Carlo Study作者：沈采瑱(Tsai-Chen Shen);黃財尉(Tsai-Wei Huang)關鍵字：精確度;BW內嵌模式;BW本位Rasch模式;Accuracy rate;BW based Rasch model;BW embedded model期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討以異常作答偵測指標BW內外注意係數所建構的兩種二元計分BW作答機率模式：BW內嵌模式（BWEM）與BW本位Rasch模式（BWRM）的實用性，期待經由檢視模式作答預測能力的精確度，為模式應用增添可靠的支持。本研究以命中率代表模式的作答預測能力，並作為評估模式的準則。透過比較BWEM與BWRM在不同受試者人數與測驗長度下的命中率，探討兩種作答機率模式於實務應用時需留意之處。透過三因子混合設計變異數分析，研究結果顯示：（1）受試者人數、測驗長度及作答機率模式三者間的確存在交互作用，但是效果量很低；（2）整體、勝券在握與蜀道難登三區，命中率在不同受試者人數、測驗長度及作答機率模式間的確存在顯著差異；（3）BWEM與BWRM的命中率孰高孰低，視所在的作答反應區域而定。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to examine the accuracy of two dichotomous BW probabilistic models constructed by BW aberrance indices: the BW embedded model (BWEM) and the BW based Rasch model (BWRM). This study used the hit rate as an index to evaluate the accuracy of the models. Through examining the differences between hit rates of BWEM and BWRM under different circumstances (number of examinees, test length, and probabilistic model), this study explored the characteristics of these two probabilistic models. The results from the three-way mixed design ANOVA showed: 1. There exists a three-way interaction effect among the number of examinees, test length, and probabilistic model, but the strength of association was not strong. 2. There existed significant differences of hit rates among specific response areas in the conditions of number of examinees, test length, and probabilistic model, respectively. 3. The hit rate of BW embedded model could be higher or lower than that of BW based Rasch model, depending on which response area is concerned.起始頁-結束頁：347-375資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：「國中生線上閱讀理解能力測驗」之發展及相關因素之研究並列篇名：Research on the Development and Related Factors of The Online Reading Comprehension Assessment for Junior High School Students作者：黃秀霜(Hsiu-Shuang Huang);曾雅瑛(Ya-Ying Tseng);甘孟龍(Mon-Long Gan);許力云(Li-Yun Hsu);黃品甄(Pin-Chen Huang)關鍵字：Rasch測量模式;線上閱讀理解能力;on-line reading comprehension;Rasch measurement model期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在編製具有信效度之「國中生線上閱讀理解能力測驗」，透過閱讀理解策略與線上資訊之使用，以了解學生線上閱讀理解能力，並分析不同背景變項對於該測驗工具得分之影響及其差異表現。樣本為1,107位來自臺灣北、中、南三個區域的國中一年級學生，本研究使用Rasch部分給分模式進行測驗之心理計量檢核。研究結果顯示：1.「國中生線上閱讀理解能力測驗」各試題皆符合Rasch測量模式，多元計分試題的等級適切且難度成階層關係，且性別在所有題目均無明顯的差異試題功能存在。2.不同背景變項雖然在線上閱讀理解能力具有差異，惟影響程度並不高。最後，本研究根據研究結果作出具體之相關研究建議，以供未來教學及研究之參考。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to develop The Online Reading Comprehension Assessment for Junior High School Students. With the understanding of students' reading strategies and using online information, junior students' online reading ability was explored. Furthermore, the effect of students' background variables on reading ability were analyzed. 1,107 junior high school students from north, middle and south part of Taiwan were collected to examine the psychometrics characteristics of research tools and the relational model. The results were showed as following: 1. The Online Reading Comprehension Assessment for Junior High School Students fits Rasch Model, there is measurement invariance (gender DIF) existed. 2. Students' background variables affected online reading ability, yet the effect was not strong. Finally, several suggestions were offered for further studies.起始頁-結束頁：377-401資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：「國際華語教師學科教學知識問卷」之編製與教師教學能力素養落差分析並列篇名：Competence Disparity of International Chinese Teachers and PCK Questionnaire: From the International Baccalaureate Perspective作者：蔡雅薰(Ya-Hsun Tsai);洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);余信賢(Xin-Xian Yu)關鍵字：能力落差;國際文憑;華語教學;學科教學知識;Chinese teaching;competence disparity;Pedagogical Content Knowledge;the International Baccalaureate期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究之目的係針對當前全球教育環境下，釐清國際華語教師所知覺的教學能力素養及能力落差，並編製問卷工具調查教師教學能力素養。以Shulman「學科教學知識」為架構，融入International Baccalaureate國際文憑組織的教學理念與標準，關注在職華語教師已具備的教學能力素養，以及在全球化趨勢下未來國際華語教師所應具備的能力素養之間的能力落差。不同於前人偏重語言本位，本研究透過文獻與專家建議，發展「國際華語教師學科教學知識問卷」作為研究工具，並調查國內外382位教師的教學能力素養與落差程度。研究結果發現：在「教學目的」、「教學方法」、「教學設計」、「教學內容」以及「教學評量」五大構面中，華語教師知覺能力落差程度最大為「教學方法」，最小為「教學內容」。其中，知覺落差感受最大的教學能力分別為「針對學生差異進行不同教學策略」、「適性化教學以符合需求及學習風格」以及「能注意到學習者語言背景的多樣性」。本研究並非單純論述華語教師未來所需的教學能力素養，而是藉由問卷的調查，了解目前全球華語教師的處境與實際教學現場的需求，同時以能力落差之分析凸顯傳統教學方法與當前教學現場的差距。本研究結論有二：一方面為在職教師的教學專業發展提供參考方向，另一方面針對臺灣華語師資培育提出建議。英文摘要：This study aims at investigating the teaching competencies of Chinese teachers and their competence disparity under the global contexts, and inventing a plausible tool. An IB-PCK questionnaire, established on Shulman's idea of Pedagogical Content Knowledge, and integrated with the teaching philosophy and standards of the International Baccalaureate (IB), was used to investigate the competence disparity perceived by in-service teachers, and to reveal the gap between what has been acquired and equipped in the teacher education, and what is needed in the classroom nowadays. The results of the investigation also provide some suggestions to the improvement of the teacher training for in service teachers. In this study, the IBPCK questionnaire has been designed and delivered through Google Documents, and 382 valid results are received and analyzed. As a result, those Chinese teachers generally perceive the greatest competence disparity in teaching method, while the least in content knowledge. The rest of these domains are teaching objectives, instructional assessment, curriculum design and. Through the discussion of the competence disparity of in-service teachers, not only can we discover the significant distance between what in-service teachers perceived and what they are asked to prepare in Teaching Chinese as Second Language (TCSL) courses. We can also reinforce the curriculum of pre-service teacher education.起始頁-結束頁：403-428資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：幼兒中文視動整合與視知覺成長模式之探究並列篇名：The Research on the Growth Model of Chinese Visual-Motor Integration and Visual Perception for Kindergarteners作者：吳慧<U+73C9>(Huey-Min Wu);林巾凱(Chin-Kai Lin);李政軒(Cheng-Hsuan Li);楊舒茹(Shu-Ru Yang)關鍵字：仿畫;字形;基本筆畫;視知覺;視動整合;Basic stroke;Chinese character;drawing imitation;visual-motor integration;visual perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：良好的視動整合以及視知覺能力與國字學習的表現息息相關，本研究期望找到仿畫、字形辨識、字體結構辨識之間的相關情形以及成長模式的預測因子。本研究採立意取樣，並追蹤一年的成長，兩年追蹤共233位幼兒。評量工具為「視覺動作整合電腦化評估工具」，又分為「視動整合測驗」和「視知覺測驗」兩種。「視動整合測驗」為仿畫一、二、三筆畫作為分測驗，「視知覺測驗」以一、二、三筆畫的字形辨識以及獨體字、水平字、垂直字的字體結構辨識作為分測驗。本研究以two-wave cross lagged panel驗證幼兒在視動整合中成長模式的預測因子。研究顯示：仿畫與字形辨識間的相關性為最佳，其次為字形辨識與字體結構辨識，最後為字體結構辨識與仿畫的相關，三者之間的相關會隨著年齡而降低。仿畫的自我預測力為最高，仿畫、字形辨識、字體結構辨識獨立當作預測變項時，又以第一年的仿畫預測第二年的仿畫預測力為最高。文末並對實務應用提出建議。英文摘要：The visual-motor integration is a factor to predict writing significantly. While identifying Chinese words, visual perception is used to detect the space and radicals in two-dimensional positions of Chinese characters' morphology. Based on visual-Motor integration and visual perception theory, the relationships among the drawing imitation in Chinese basic stroke, the identification in Chinese character basic stroke, and the structures in Chinese character are explored. The growth model of assessment tool related to the drawing imitation in Chinese character basic stroke, the identification in Chinese character basic stroke, and the structures in Chinese character is validated in this research. The purposive sampling is used in this study. The 223 kindergarteners aged four to six years old participated in the study and were monitored for one year. Computerized Chinese visual-motor integration with three subtests and Chinese visual perception with six subtests are used in this research. A two-wave cross-lagged panel analysis is used to test the validity of the growth model. The Computerized Chinese visual-motor integration and Chinese visual perception Assessment Tool has good validity in a growth model. There was significant correlation among drawing imitation, identification in basic stroke and structure in Chinese character at different time points. Drawing imitation effectively predicated identification in basic stroke and structure in Chinese character. In the end of the paper, the suggestions in the practical application are provided.起始頁-結束頁：429-451資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：中學生閱讀策略使用與數學素養的關聯及其意涵並列篇名：Relationship between Reading Strategies and Mathematical Literacy作者：林素微(Su-Wei Lin)關鍵字：社經文化地位;階層線性模式;補救教學;數學素養;閱讀策略;ESCS;Hierarchical Linear Modeling;Mathematical Literacy;Reading Strategies;Remedial Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：好的開始是成功的一半，如何讀懂問題是邁向成功解題的重要關鍵。國際學生能力評量計畫（Programme for International Student Assessment，PISA）的數學素養旨在評估學生面對未來學習或工作挑戰準備度，其試題貼近生活化、偏重情境的描述，致使題目文字量較高，閱讀負荷相對較重。因此，本研究嘗試探討學生閱讀策略（包含認知與後設認知策略）與數學素養的關聯性。研究針對PISA 2009的臺灣資料，並基於九、十年級入學方式不同可能造成校際差異的考量，因此針對此兩年級分別進行分析。研究中以相關變項資料均完整的樣本進行分析，經過母群加權後，兩年級各為99,314及190,417人。主要分析方法為描述性統計與階層線性模式（Hierarchical Linear Modeling，HLM）。結果顯示，閱讀策略對於九年級學生閱讀素養的校內和校際變異解釋比率為21%和29%，而十年級則分別為8%和11%，顯示這些變項與學生數學素養的關聯值得重視，其中又以九年級的解釋力較十年級高。若社經文化地位最低者與最高者有相同的閱讀策略運用時，將明顯提高其數學素養；低數學素養學生若與高素養學生有相同的閱讀策略運用時，九、十年級預期將有2個年級與1個年級的進步幅度。研究建議，數學教育者應針對這些閱讀策略變項積極規劃有效的數學閱讀理解教學介入方案，考量較低年級者之閱讀策略與數學素養的關聯較強，閱讀策略的教學應及早啟動，且數學課室中的閱讀策略教學應以控制策略和後設認知策略為主要考量，以協助學生發展有效的數學理解，以提升其數學表現。英文摘要：A good beginning is half the battle won. In the process of mathematical problem solving, understanding the problem is the first step. The comprehension of problem is the key to success in problem solving. The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) aims to assess the students' readiness of future learning and working challenges. The reliance on contextual description has caused the reading load of the PISA items to be heavier than traditional items in mathematics. The purpose of this study is to examine the reading strategies, and metacognition accounted for mathematical literacy of 9th and 10th graders of PISA 2009. After excluding the students who did not respond to the reading strategies and metacognition questionnaire, and weighting to ensure that each sampled student appropriately represents the correct number of students in the full PISA population, 99,314 and 190,417 Taiwanese 9th and 10th graders participated in this study. The main methods of analysis are descriptive statistics and Hierarchical Linear Modeling (HLM). The results show that reading strategies (i.e., cognitive strategies and metacognitive strategies) are strongly associated with mathematical literacy. There are 21% and 29%, 8% and 11% of the variance of 9th and 10th graders' mathematical literacy-for within school and between schools can be so explained. Further, if students with the lowest socio-economic status or achievement had used the same reading strategies as their counterparts with the highest socio-economic status or achievement, then their mathematics abilities would be substantially enhanced. Thus, the teachers could consider trying to adapt these variables into consideration for developing mathematical engaging students and as early as possible.起始頁-結束頁：213-248資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：從PISA科學素養評核框架及評核模式之轉變審視澳門學生科學素養的性別差異趨勢並列篇名：Analysis of Trend of Gender Difference in Scientific Literacy of Macao Students through Examination of the Changes of PISA Science Assessment Framework and Mode of Assessment作者：麥瑞琪(Soi-kei Mak);張國祥(Kwok-cheung Cheung);楊文佳(Man-kai Ieong);薛寶嫦(Pou-seong Sit)關鍵字：PISA;性別差異;科學素養;測試模式;閱讀素養;gender difference;mode of assessment;PISA;reading literacy;scientific literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在分析參加經濟合作暨發展組織（OECD）倡議之2015國際學生能力評量計畫（PISA）的澳門15歲學生在科學素養之性別差異。有別於那些高素養表現的東亞國家或經濟體，澳門女生於PISA 2015的科學素養表現顯著優於男生，此顯示女生逐步扭轉過去數輪測試中科學素養的性別差異劣勢，並開始超越男生。為深入了解澳門學生的科學素養性別差異，本研究嘗試從三個視角探討澳門學生科學素養的性別差異發展趨勢：（1）從國際比較角度分析澳門在PISA科學素養表現情況；（2）從本地角度比較澳門男女生在2006與2015兩次科學素養測試的表現差異，重點分析高、中、低表現水準學生在科學素養各個子能力的性別差異；（3）從PISA科學素養評核框架及評核模式改變角度，了解其對學生科學素養的性別差異影響，重點分析閱讀素養對性別差異的關鍵性影響。研究結果揭示澳門女生在過去十年科學素養表現從弱勢得以逆轉而優於男生的原因，並知悉此結果不僅具有質性與量化雙結合之研究內在效度，同時亦具備研究結果往外引申的外在效度，即澳門研究結果亦適用於所有性別差異趨勢與澳門雷同的國家或經濟體。英文摘要：This study seeks to analyze patterns of gender difference in scientific literacy of Macao's 15- year-old students participating in Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2015 Study, organized by Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Unlike a number of high-performing countries or economies in the East Asian region, comparing between PISA 2015 and past cycles of PISA scientific literacy assessment, Macao's females reverted the inferior trend and started to outperform males in scientific literacy performance. This study attempts to investigate Macao's trend of gender difference in scientific literacy from three vantage points: (1) Analyze Macao students' scientific literacy performance from international comparative education perspective; (2) Compare Macao students' scientific literacy performance in PISA 2006 and PISA 2015 from the local education system perspective, focusing on gender difference in the performance of the high-, medium- and low-performing students on the various subscales of scientific literacy; (3) Analyze gender difference in scientific literacy performance in terms of the conceptual change of PISA assessment framework and the operational change of mode of assessment, paying particular attention on the effect of student reading literacy on gender difference in scientific literacy. This study uncovers the reason behind why Macao's females in a decade's time were able to revert the inferior trend and started to outperform males in scientific literacy. This study not only possesses internal research validity, but also external research validity signifying that Macao's findings are also applicable to all other participating countries/economies exhibiting similar trend of gender difference in scientific literacy as Macao's.起始頁-結束頁：249-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：Achievement in Mathematics and Chinese Language: A Growth Curve Analysis並列篇名：數學與國文學業成長曲線分析作者：莫慕貞(Magdalena Mo Ching Mok);朱金鑫(Jinxin Zhu)關鍵字：academic growth;Chinese language;latent growth model;Mathematics;國文;數學;潛在增長模型;學業成長期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study aimed to explore the relationship between students' growth in mathematics and Chinese language over a span of six years. Three waves of longitudinal data were originally collected from the sample by the Hong Kong government via the Territory- wide System Assessment (TSA) in 2007, 2010, and in 2013, when students sat for the TSA in Grades 3, 6, and 9, respectively. The sample used in the current study was comprised of secondary data from 18,614 students (41.0% female or 7,637 girls) from 244 schools in Hong Kong. These students chose to answer the Chinese version of the TSA Mathematics test paper at G9. Parallel-process multilevel latent growth models were created based on students' TSA Rasch measures in these subjects. Results showed that: (1) Students' growths were found to be nonlinear, with accelerated growth in mathematics and Chinese language over time; (2) Growths in mathematics and Chinese language were associated with one another; (3) Negative relationships were found between initial achievements and the rate of growth for both subjects; (4) Boys outperformed girls in initial mathematics, but girls were stronger in initial Chinese language. Girls grew at a faster rate than boys did in both mathematics and Chinese language.英文摘要：本研究旨在探討於六年期間，學生在數學的學業成長與他們在國文的學業成長之關係。原始數據來自香港政府在2007年、2010年和2013年分別通過全港系統性評估（TSA）在三年級、六年級和九年級所蒐集的三波縱貫數據。本研究取樣來自香港244所學校的18,614名學生（41.0%女性，即7,637名女生），作二次分析。這些學生在G9的TSA數學科評估時，選擇了以中文版的試題作答。研究以並行處理多層次潛在成長模式，對學生的Rasch數據進行分析。研究結果顯示：一、學生自三年級到九年級的學業成長是非線性的，隨著時間改變，數學科和國文科的學業成長速度愈來愈快；二、數學和國文的學業成長是相互聯繫的；三、學生在兩個科目的初始成就和這兩個科目的學業成長率之間存在負相關關係；四、在開始時，男生的數學成績表現勝過女生，而女生的國文成績表現勝過男生，但是女生往後無論在數學或國文的學業成長速度都要比男生快。起始頁-結束頁：285-319資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：The Validity of Personal Best, Self-Efficacy, Self-Regulated Learning, and Academic Achievement: Theory of Planned Behavior as a Framework並列篇名：自強不息、自我效能、自我調整學習與學業成就之效度：計畫行為理論觀點作者：吳慧<U+73C9>(Huey-Min Wu);莫慕貞(Magdalena Mo Ching Mok)關鍵字：academic achievement;personal best;self-efficacy;self-regulated learning;自我效能;自我調整學習;自強不息;學業成就表現期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：The relationships between personal best goals, perceived personal best goals from teachers, self-efficacy, self-regulated learning, and academic achievement are explored in this study. The sample for this study includes the academic achievements and background variables of 7,709 students taken from the 2014 Taiwan Assessment of Student Achievement database. There are two hypothesized models in this study. Model 1 is based on studies regarding personal best goals and the Theory of Planned Behavior. Model 2 is based on the Theory of Planned Behavior alone. A structural equation model was used to test the validity of the two proposed model, indicating a good model fit for Model 2. The results of Model 2 show that personal best goals would affect academic achievement through self-regulated learning; perceived personal best goals from teachers affects academic achievement through self-regulated learning; and self-efficacy affects academic achievement both directly and through self- self-regulated learning.英文摘要：本研究探討自強不息、自我效能、學生知覺的自強不息、自我調整學習和學業成就表現之關係，研究樣本是來自臺灣學生學習成就資料庫，包含學科資料與背景問卷資料，共7,709人。本研究以計畫行為理論為基礎，同時探討個體因素與社會脈絡因素對於高中學業成就之影響。本研究驗證兩個理論假設：模式一是以自強不息和計畫行為理論為基礎；模式二是只以計畫行為理論為基礎；並使用結構方程模式驗證模式一和模式二，結果顯示：模式二以計畫行為理論為基礎探討影響高中生學業成就之因素，模式適配度良好，具有良好之效度。另外，結果亦顯示自強不息會透過自我調整學習影響學業成就；學生知覺老師眼中的自強不息透過自我調整學習影響學業成就；自我效能透過自我調整學習影響學業成就，且同時直接影響學業成就。起始頁-結束頁：321-346資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：「腦性麻痺成年人休閒滿意度量表」之編製與信效度衡鑑並列篇名：Development of Leisure Satisfaction Scale for Adults with Cerebral Palsy and Validation Study作者：李偉清(Wei-Ching Lee)關鍵字：休閒滿意度;腦性麻痺;驗證性因素分析;cerebral palsy;confirmatory factor analysis;leisure satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在針對腦性麻痺成年人編製一份具有信效度之休閒滿意度量表，並比較不同背景腦麻者在此測量工具上是否具有組間的不變性。研究者乃依據Beard與Ragheb（1980）的理論編製「腦性麻痺成年人休閒滿意度量表」，測量個體在心理、教育、社會、放鬆、生理及美感等方面所感受之綜合滿意程度，並以全臺灣20歲以上的腦麻者進行問卷調查，採分層隨機取樣之方式來獲得有效樣本，再依分析的需要將該樣本隨機分為兩等分：先以第一組樣本進行項目分析、驗證性因素分析和多群組分析，再以第二組樣本做此一模式的效度複核研究，最後則建立全國性常模。結果顯示：「腦性麻痺成年人休閒滿意度量表」是一份具有信效度的量表，且測量模式的穩定性通過了交叉效度的檢驗，而腦麻者的「性別」與「婚姻」變項在該模式上具有組間的不變性，但腦麻者的「年齡」變項僅具有部分之測量不變性，主要差異則存在於「生理滿意」構面。此外，本量表在應用方面，除可了解腦麻者六個面向的休閒滿意度外，還可以進一步作為其休閒教育或休閒輔導與諮商等領域的研究工具之一。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to construct a reliable and valid leisure satisfaction scale for adults with cerebral palsy. The comparisons were made to see if there was group invariance for adults with cerebral palsy from different backgrounds in this scale. Based on the theoretical framework by Beard and Ragheb (1980), a designed, the Leisure Satisfaction Scale for Adults with Cerebral Palsy, was used to investigate leisure satisfaction of adults with cerebral palsy over the age of 20 throughout Taiwan. This scale measured the overall level of satisfaction experienced by individuals in terms of psychology, education, society, relaxation, physiology and aesthetics. Stratified random sampling methods were used to recruit valid samples, and these samples were randomly divided into two equal parts according to the needs of the analysis. First, the first sample set was analyzed by item analysis, confirmatory factor analysis and multi-groups analysis. Second, the second sample set was analyzed by cross-validation. Finally, a national norm was established. The results showed that ”Leisure Satisfaction Scale for Adults with Cerebral Palsy” was a reliable and valid scale and measurement model passed cross-validation test. The groups invariance were confirmed for cerebral palsy adults with gender and marriage variables. The part of the measurement invariance was also confirmed for cerebral palsy adults with age variable and the main differences existed in the ”physiological satisfaction”. In addition, in terms of application, this scale can be used as a research tool in the fields of leisure education or leisure counseling and consultation, and to understand the six aspects of leisure satisfaction of adults with cerebral palsy.起始頁-結束頁：117-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會10篇名：「員工組織公正感問卷」編製研究並列篇名：Development and Validation of Staff's Organizational Justice Questionnaire作者：戴春林(Chun-Lin Dai);徐偉(Wei Xu);鍾思嘉(Shi-Ka Chung)關鍵字：問卷編製;機會公正;組織公正;opportunity justice;organizational justice;questionnaire development期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：組織公正感是影響員工組織行為的關鍵心理因素，目前在組織公正感的構面研究中缺乏對機會公正的深入探討，影響組織公正感測量工具的內容效度。本研究立足於組織公正的文獻分析，在訪談基礎上歸納分析了50名員工描述組織公正的感受，依此確定組織公正感的五個重要構面，編製了「員工組織公正感問卷」。本研究以600名不同組織類型員工為研究對象，分別對其中220名受試者的組織公正感問卷進行EFA，另外380名受試者進行CFA。EFA的分析結果支持有五個因素可被萃取，CFA的結果進一步確認五因素的測量模型能合理適配資料，表示問卷具有良好的建構效度。本問卷的程式公正、分配公正、資訊公正、機會公正、人際公正各個構面所測得分數之內部一致性分別為0.87、0.88、0.88、0.79、0.82，總問卷之內部一致性為0.94，驗證了機會公正構面的存在。結果也顯示本問卷可以作為員工組織公正感水準之測量工具，並探討機會公正與組織公正及其他構面的關係，且針對組織公正提出了教育管理對策。英文摘要：Organizational justice is the most important psychological factor which will affect the organizational behavior of the staff. At present, there is a lack of in-depth discussion on opportunity justice in the study of organizational justice that will influence the content validity of organizational justice measuring tools. Based on the domestic and international organizational justice literature and interviews, the study analyzed 50 employees' perception of organizational justice, then a questionnaire for measuring organizational justice was developed and defined five important constructs of it. Survey data consisting of 600 employees' responses to organizational justice questionnaire were analyzed for cross validation of score validity, 220 employees were selected for item analysis and exploratory factor analysis, and 380 employees were selected for confirmatory factor analysis and reliability estimation. Results indicated that a five-factor measurement model was validated. Moreover, the internal consistency reliability for procedural justice, distributive justice, information justice, opportunity justice, interpersonal justice and overall organizational justice questionnaire were 0.87, 0.88, 0.88, 0.79, 0.82 and 0.94, respectively. This result can verify the existence of the opportunity justice. The results showed that the questionnaire can be used as a measurement tool for the staff's organizational justice. The study discussed the relationship between opportunity justice and organizational justice and other aspects, and also put forward some educational management advice for organizational justice.起始頁-結束頁：139-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：文化回應的檳榔防制教學之行動研究並列篇名：Action Research in Culturally Responsive Teaching on Prevention of Areca Nut Chewing作者：李雪菱(Shiue-Ling Lee)關鍵字：行動研究;文化回應教學;家庭資本;檳榔栽種區;areca nut (betel nut) plantation;action research;culturally responsive teaching;family capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2015中文摘要：在此研究進行之前，國內外未曾有文化回應的檳榔防制教學研究。為了探究主流檳榔防制教育的難題，並發展回應檳榔栽種區文化的檳榔防制教學，本研究在行動研究的循環歷程中，傾聽檳榔栽種區小學三、四年級學童的生活經驗與受教經驗、進行田野工作，並促成了兒童社區劇場、巡迴演出及社區耆老座談。學校教育應是提升學童文化資本、促成學童階級向上流動的途徑，然而，主流檳榔防制教育較為單面向地傳輸健康風險與污名化的論述，可能使學童在食用檳榔前多一層阻嚇力，卻不足以讓學童在豐富的生活經驗中解套。研究發現，檳榔栽種區低家庭資本的學童，易受環境與同儕示範影響而陷入「身不由己」的兒童貧窮處境；然而，家長的身教言教有助於學童擁有說出「我長大不會嚼檳榔」的自信。此外，忽視學童文化差異易造成學童的學習阻礙，否認學童家庭社會資本也易使學童產生異化感。本研究結合並反思主流檳榔防制教材，回應學童文化的教學行動包括：在理解與陪伴中提昇學童學校文化資本以間接帶動學童家庭文化資本，以及，善用同儕力量，肯認並提升學童家庭社會資本等。英文摘要：To date, there has been no literature published concerning the application of culturally responsive teaching to prevention of areca nut chewing. In order to examine the obstacles to the mainstream preventive education and pioneer culturally responsive teaching on areca nut chewing, the researcher of this paper attempted, through repeated action research, to record the individual and educational experiences with third and fourth graders on areca nut plantations, conduct the fieldwork, establish the applied theater and tour the theatrical company, and organize gatherings of elderly people in local communities and schools. School education is meant to augment school-age children's cultural capital and to be the way that increases social mobility. However, the fact that current areca nut preventive education is limited to the threat to health and stigmatization may well act as a deterrent to schoolchildren before they chew it. It is not sufficient to release them from addiction in real life. The research found that the impoverished children in areca nut plantations are potentially subject to environmental and peer influence, and become involuntary addicts. The parental teaching by words and by examples may develop schoolchildren's confidence to say ”I won't chew areca nut when I grow up.” Furthermore, disregard of the children's cultural diversity may cause an impediment to their learning behaviors, and denial of their family social capital can stimulate a sense of alienation from schooling. To conclude, this research re-examines the mainstream preventive education on areca nut chewing, and further introduces culturally responsive teaching, which is intended to raise school's cultural capital along with school-age children's family cultural capital, providing shared understanding and constant companionship, and develop the strong capacity of the peer group to recognize and to that end to increase children's family social capital.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2302.012篇名：國小二年級不同補救教學方案之實施與成效之比較：攜手計畫與永齡希望小學並列篇名：The Comparison of the Implementation and Reading Progress between Two Remedial Programs on Second Grade Students作者：陳淑麗(Shu-Li Chen);曾世杰(Shih-Jay Tzeng);張毓仁(Yu-Jen Chang)關鍵字：攜手計畫;永齡希望小學;補救教學;弱勢低成就學生;after school alternative program (ASAP);yonglin school of hope;remedial instruction;disadvantaged low-achievers期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2015中文摘要：教育部的攜手計畫與永齡教育基金會的永齡希望小學，分別是公私立機構相當具有代表性的課後補救方案。本研究旨在比較這兩種方案在國小二年級國語文補救教學的執行和成效差異。主要發現有三：一、兩方案的執行方式不同，永齡方案從個案的篩選與管理、補救教材、師資的培訓與督導到成效評估，已建立完整的架構，各校執行方式一致；攜手方案補救教學執行方式差異性較大，由教師自主，大多數教師採用學校教科書為補救教材，在職教師仍看重作業指導；二、永齡組的補救成效明顯比攜手組較佳，但成效主要在識字和聽寫層次，閱讀理解的差異則不顯著；三、經過一年補救教學，在幫助學生脫離讀寫困難以及讓學生回到同儕水準行列上，永齡組的進展都比攜手組好。英文摘要：Issues related to remedial instruction to underachievers have concerned educators, researchers, and policy makers in Taiwan in recent years. The ”After School Alternative Program (ASAP)” of Ministry of Education (MOE) and ”Yonglin School of Hope” of Yonglin Education Foundation are the representative remedial programs by the public sector (government agents) and private sector (non-profit charity foundation), respectively. The objective of this study is to compare the implementation and effects of these 2 remedial programs. The participants are second graders of the primary schools. Major findings are: (1) the implementation frameworks of the 2 remedial instruction programs are different. From the screening and management of cases, the provision of the remedial material, the training and supervision of the remedial teachers, as well as the assessment of the effects, Yonglin program has built a complete framework and maintained a consistent execution. ASAP has more variation in the implementation because the teachers are free to make their own instructional decisions. Most teachers adopt the materials used in the regular classes as the remedial teaching materials. In- service teachers still emphasize on the homework completion. (2) Yonglin program shows better reading progress than ASAP. The major significant differences between programs are in word recognition and dictation scores; the difference in reading comprehension is not significant. (3) After one year of remedial instruction, the progress of the students in Yonglin program is more significant than that of ASAP in both helping students mitigate difficulties in reading and writing, and match the level of performance of their peers.起始頁-結束頁：35-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2302.023篇名：應用模糊層集分析法建構永續大學評估指標並列篇名：Using Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process to Develop Assessment Indicators for Sustainable University作者：王文生(Wen-Sheng Wang);洪秀婉(Shiu-Wan Hung)關鍵字：永續大學;永續發展;評估指標;模糊層級分析法;sustainable university;sustainability development;assessment indicators;fuzzy analytic hierarchy process期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2015中文摘要：世界各國已逐步提升永續發展之概念，高等教育機構之大學若能從事永續教育之推展工作，應可發揮永續發展之擴散成效。本研究主旨在於透過專家問卷調查，依美國高等教育永續促進聯盟、永續未來大學領導人聯盟及加拿大Sierra青年聯盟對永續之定義進行永續大學指標建構評選。評估構面收斂為生態健康、社會正義、學校生計、及教育未來等四主要構面。研究進行利用模糊層級分析法，對教職及研發專家包括產業、政府單位、學術機構、技研單位等37位專家做問卷調查。研究結果顯示，臺灣高等教育機構在推動永續發展之主要構面中，以推動教育未來最為重要。永續大學評估指標則以水源管理、扶助弱勢、健康福祉及師資規劃最為重要。此建構永續大學評估指標之結果，策重凝聚社會對永續大學規劃管理之共識及建構永續大學實務運作之基石。英文摘要：The way to maintain sustainable development is an important global issue. If sustainability education can be developed in the university, this concept will be soon effectively spread to the society. Therefore, the development of a set of assessment indicators to measure higher education sustainability practices and performance becomes a urgent task. The current study uses the definitions of sustainability according to the Association for the Advancement of Sustainability in Higher Education, University Leaders for a Sustainable Future, and the Sierra Youth Coalition, and their concepts are expanded into four dimensions: ecosystem health, social justice, secured livelihoods, and future performance. In addition, this study also uses the fuzzy analytic hierarchy process to analyze the indicators. The survey questionnaires were given to 37 experts of industry, government, education, and research and development institutes. Results show that the indicators of water resource management, help the disadvantaged, health and welfare, and educators program are considered the most important. Additional suggestions and recommendation were given for further planning and practice.起始頁-結束頁：75-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2302.034篇名：評析自然美學的爭論及其在美育上的意涵並列篇名：A Critique of the Debates in Aesthetics of Nature and Their Meanings for Aesthetic Education作者：楊忠斌(Chung-Ping Yang)關鍵字：自然美學;認知取向;非認知取向;美育;aesthetics of nature;cognitive approach;non-cognitive approach;aesthetic education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2015中文摘要：當代美學多只專注於藝術領域的研究，自然美學則對自然美感欣賞方面有深入的討論。本文即在以文獻分析法，分別論述認知取向與非認知取向的自然美學主張，接著評析兩派的爭論點，並闡釋其在美育上的意涵。認知取向的學者強調科學、民間故事、神話與宗教等知識能幫助自然的美感欣賞，非認知取向的學者則反對認知的必要性，主張感官、情感、融入與想像的重要性。兩派的爭論集中在認知與美感欣賞的關係及淺層或深層的問題。本文認為美感欣賞與認知並不衝突，且兩種取向都能達到深層的欣賞。依此，本文對美育提出了三點啟示：一、加強自然欣賞的美感教育；二、結合認知與非認知取向的自然美感欣賞教學；三、由自然美感欣賞教育提升生命的境界。英文摘要：Most contemporary aesthetics always focus on the field of arts, while aesthetics of nature explores more on the aesthetic appreciation of nature. This paper uses literature analysis as the method to discuss the different critical stance between the cognitive approach and the non-cognitive approach in terms of the aesthetics of nature, reviews argument points of the two approaches and interprets their meaning for aesthetic education. Scholars of cognitive approach emphasize that the knowledge of science, folklore, mythology and religion can help us to appreciate natural beauty. Scholars of non-cognitive approach oppose the necessity of knowledge and emphasize the importance of sense, emotion, engagement and imagination. The two debates focus on the relationship between cognition and aesthetic appreciation, and on the problem of trivial and serious in aesthetic appreciation of nature. The study argues that aesthetic appreciation is not necessarily in conflict with cognition, and both are able to reach a deep level of appreciation. Accordingly, this study indicates three meanings for aesthetic education: 1. To strengthen aesthetic education of natural appreciation. 2. To integrate cognitive approach and non-cognitive approach into the teaching of aesthetic appreciation of nature. 3. To expand the vision of life through aesthetic education of natural appreciation.起始頁-結束頁：115-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2302.045篇名：後結構主義的教育研究並列篇名：Educational Research In View of Poststructuralism作者：蘇永明(Yung-Ming Shu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2015起始頁-結束頁：147-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2302.056篇名：影響幼兒語言能力之語文環境之跨層次分析－以家庭及教室語文環境為例並列篇名：A Multi-level Analysis on the Impact of Literacy Environment on Young Children's Language Abilities: An Example of Home and Classroom Literacy Environment作者：白華枝(Hwa-Chih Pai);張麗君(Li-Chun Chang);蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：幼兒語言能力;家庭語文環境;教室語文環境;階層線性模式;young children's language ability;home literacy environment (HLE);classroom literacy environment (CLE);Hierarchical Linear Modeling (HLM)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2015中文摘要：本研究以個體層次之家庭語文環境與群體層次之教室語文環境為自變數，探討兩者對幼兒語言能力之影響。以分層隨機抽樣的方式，共取得臺南巿134位幼兒園教師、478位5至6歲幼兒及其家長之有效樣本。經階層線性模式分析，研究結果顯示，在家庭語文環境層次上，社經地位、語文資源、語文活動，以及親子共讀對於幼兒語言能力有顯著的影響；在班級語文環境層次的語文教學活動對於幼兒語言能力有直接脈絡效果；教室語文教學活動在家庭社經地位與幼兒語言能力之間有調節效果存在。英文摘要：This study used home and classroom literacy environment as independent variables at the individual level, and explored their influences on young children's language abilities. Stratified random sampling technique was employed. Valid samples included 134 kindergarten teachers and 478 parent-child dyads in Tainan city. Through hierarchical linear modeling analysis, the results indicated that, within the home literacy environment level, SES, home literacy resource, home literacy activity, and parent-child shared-reading had a significant impact on young children's language abilities. Within the classroom literacy environment level, literacy instructional activity had a significant direct contextual effect on young children's language abilities. Classroom literacy activity had moderating effect between SES and the young children's language abilities.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2301.017篇名：初任教師創意教學行為之縱貫性研究並列篇名：Longitudinal Research on the Creative Teaching of Beginning Teachers作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：初任教師;創意教學行為;創意角色認定;縱貫性研究;beginning teachers;creative teaching behaviors;creative role identity;longitudinal research期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2015中文摘要：本研究利用階層線性模式的二次成長曲線模式分析初任教師創意教學行為的成長模式，並探討創意角色認定對創意教學行為成長軌跡的影響。本研究以78位國小初任教師為研究對象，採立意抽樣，進行為期兩年，共抽樣四次的縱貫性調查。研究結果發現，初任教師的創意教學行為存在顯著的個體間差異，且其成長曲線在剛開始任教的兩年間呈現先上升後下降之趨勢，各階段的成長率中，第一學期為正成長，但第二學期開始則為負成長。在創意教學行為的總變異量中，來自個體間的變異量佔49.7，而各體內重複測量的變異量佔50.3。此外，本研究也發現，教師的創意角色認定對於初階段的創意教學行為有正向影響之外，也對創意教學行為的成長曲率具有負向的影響效果。英文摘要：Applying the quadratic growth curve in Hierarchical Linear Modeling to analyzing the growth model of beginning teachers' creative teaching behaviors, this study aims to discuss the effects of creative role identity on the growth trajectory of creative teaching behaviors. There are 78 elementary beginning teachers proceeded with four longitudinal surveys in two years. The research findings show the differences in creative teaching behaviors among beginning teachers and the growth curve rises first and then descends in the beginning two years of teaching. The growth rate in various stages appears positive growth in the first term and then negative growth in the second term. In regard to the total variance of the creative teaching behaviors, the variance among individuals reveals 49.7% and the variance of individual repeated measure shows 50.3%. Moreover, it is also found that a teacher's creative role identity presents positive effects on the preliminary creative teaching behaviors but negative effects on the creative teaching behaviors growth curve.起始頁-結束頁：37-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2301.028篇名：大學畢業生取得證照與薪資所得－傾向分數配對法之分析並列篇名：Exploring the Relationship between Certifications and Wages among University Graduate Students: A Propensity Score-Matched Analysis作者：陳清檳(Chin-Pin Chen);鄭博文(Po-Wen Cheng);賴慧敏(Hui-Min Lai);蕭錫錡(Hsi-Chi Hsiao)關鍵字：臺灣高等教育資料庫;傾向分數配對法;證照;薪資所得;Taiwan higher education database;propensity score matching;certifications;wages期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2015中文摘要：高等教育日益普及化，雇主無法僅以教育程度做為判斷求職者的能力，證照成為衡量求職者能力的客觀指標。本研究旨在探討大學畢業生取得證照及其薪資所得之關聯。目前國內皆利用迴歸分析法探討證照對薪資所得效益，此方法論有基準線的差異以及個體自我選擇的偏誤。因此本研究應用傾向分數配對法（Propensity Score Matching, PSM）估算平均處理效果（Average Treatment Effect on the Treated, ATT），分析臺灣的大學畢業生擁有證照對薪資所得的效應。以臺灣高等教育資料庫2004年的調查，即2002年大學生畢業後一年問卷資料，有效樣本數共計4,979人。本研究發現：（1）擁有證照與無證照的大學畢業生，其影響薪資所得之個體基準條件具有差異性；（2）當控制了影響薪資所得的個體基準線差異性之後，證照對於薪資所得的提昇僅微小的影響；（3）同時，證照張數對於薪資所得累積效果影響有限。文末，根據研究結果進行討論與建議。英文摘要：With the increasing popularity of higher education, it is difficult for employers to quickly identify qualified candidates by their educational backgrounds only. Thus, certifications have become an objective measurement of a candidate's ability. This study aimed to investigate the relationship between certifications and wages obtained by university graduates. The extant research has explored the influence of certifications on wages by using the regression analysis method. This method may have baseline differences and self-selection bias. In contrast, the present study applied Propensity Score Matching (PSM) to estimate the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated (ATT), and analyzed the effects of obtaining certifications on wages for Taiwanese university graduates. The relevant data were collected from the 2004 Taiwan Higher Education Database with an effective sample size of 4,979 participants. The results indicated the following: (1) There is a significant difference between the effects of individual baselines on wages for university graduates with or without certifications. (2) While controlling the difference in the effects of individual baselines on wages, certification has a small impact on average wages. (3) The number of certifications also has a small accumulative effect on wages. Finally, practical suggestions are discussed based on these research results.起始頁-結束頁：71-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2301.039篇名：國小攜手計畫數學補救教學課程決定與教學實施之探究並列篇名：Investigation on Curriculum Decision and Instruction Implementation of Mathematics Remedial Instruction at After-school Alternative Program in Elementary Schools作者：徐偉民(Wei-Min Hsu);劉曼麗(Man-Li Liu)關鍵字：國小;數學補救教學;數學課程決定;Elementary school;Mathematics remedial instruction;Mathematics curriculum decision期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2015中文摘要：本研究採用教學觀察與訪談、問卷調查的方法，來瞭解教師在攜手計畫數學補救教學中，其課程決定與教學實施的情況。有8位、300位高屏地區教師分別接受觀察訪談與問卷調查。在觀察與訪談中發現，教師補救教學時，以使用概念與計算的問題為主，先進行全班例題的講解，再讓學生個別練習與進行指導，以達熟練的目標。在實施過程中教師表示會根據學生程度來決定課程，但由於學生程度落差大，所以採用學生原年級的數學教科書為補救教學之主要內容，而學生程度的落差也讓教師在教學時感到困難。問卷調查的結果與觀察訪談的結果相當一致，約8成左右教師表示在課程決定和教學實施上有困難，未來研究者宜針對補救課程教材與教學策略兩方面來提供現場教師的協助。英文摘要：This study aimed at understanding the curriculum decision and instruction implementation of mathematics remedial instruction (MRI) in elementary schools. Classroom observation, interview, and survey data were collected from 8 case teachers, and 300 teachers who taught the After-School Alternative Program (ASAP) in Kaohsiung and Pingtung County of Southern Taiwan, respectively. Analyses of classroom observation and interview data indicated that the main foci of MRI were conceptual understanding and algorithmic practice. Teachers demonstrated how to solve an example task, and then provided similar tasks for students to practice while providing individual guidance for students as needed. Mastering mathematics skills was the primary goal of MRI. Teachers expressed that they diagnosed ASAP students' mathematical competence before selecting MRI curriculum. However, due to the diversity in students' competence levels, they chose the original mathematics textbook as teaching materials. Teachers also struggled with addressing the different learning needs of students, and they needed more time to implement individualized instruction. Survey responses revealed consistency with findings from observations and interviews. About 80% of teachers reported difficulties in decisions related to curriculum materials and instruction implementation of MRI. In the future, researchers should develop curriculum materials and instructional strategies of MRI that assist teachers in implementation of teaching materials and methods.起始頁-結束頁：113-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2301.0410篇名：朝向脈絡式的教育政策研究：評《政策與教育：教育研究的一些基柱》一書並列篇名：Contextualizing Education Policy Studies: Book Review on ”Policy and Education: Foundation of Education Studies”作者：陳榮政期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2015起始頁-結束頁：149-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2301.0501篇名：應用三維列印於STEAM課程對創造力的影響並列篇名：Effects of 3D Printing-Based STEAM Instruction on Students' Creativity作者：游志弘(Chih-Hung Yu);林育慈(Yu-Tzu Lin);陳湘庭(Hsiang-Ting Chen);吳正己(Cheng-Chih Wu)關鍵字：STEAM;三維列印;視覺藝術;創造力;STEAM;3D printing;visual arts;creativity期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：STEAM跨領域教學已普遍被視為培養學生創造力的有效教學方法。本研究於視覺藝術課程中，設計一套融合立體幾何與三維列印的STEAM創作教學活動，並探討應用三維列印於STEAM課程對學生創造力與藝術學習成效的影響。本研究採不等組準實驗研究設計，以臺灣北部某國小六年級三個班級的學生為研究對象，其中兩班為實驗組（49人），施以應用三維列印的STEAM教學，並透過三維列印進行創作；另一班為控制組（24人），施以傳統藝術教學，並利用教師或自行準備的材料進行創作。實驗實施七週，共14節課，透過分析學生實驗前後的創造力、藝術學習成效及學習態度，探討應用三維列印於STEAM教學之效能與可行性。研究結果發現，使用三維列印的STEAM教學在短期內對學生創造力的影響有限，但對於學生製作作品的創造性有正向影響：創作作品的機能性提升，作品中亦涵蓋較豐富的意義轉化，並呈現更抽象複雜的設計意涵，因而增進視覺藝術學習成效。此外，三維列印的設計程序讓學生對問題解決與設計創作有更開放的態度，並對視覺藝術的設計與創作抱持更正向的看法。英文摘要：Interdisciplinary STEAM education has been recognized as an effective instructional approach to foster student's creativity. This study aims to investigate the effects of applying 3D printing in STEAM instruction for the visual arts course on students' creativity, art learning achievement, and attitude. A quasi-experimental design was conducted to evaluate the effects of the proposed instruction. Three classes of sixth-grade students in North Taiwan participated in this study. The experimental group (n = 49) was taught by STEAM instruction based on 3D printing, whereas the control group (n = 24) was taught in a traditional approach. The results show that the STEAM instruction based on 3D printing did not have significant impacts on students' creativity in a short period of instructional time. However, the proposed STEAM instruction had positive effects on the creativity of students' artifacts: students in the experimental group could transfer the meaning of their artifacts to function design, and present more abstract meaning of the artifacts, and also improved art learning achievements as well as attitudes toward artistic design and creation.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20191011040012篇名：探究國小學童教養風格、創客素養和創客學習成效之關係並列篇名：Investigating Parenting Styles, Maker Literacy, and Maker Performance of Primary School Students作者：王承諺(Chan-Yan Wang);汪冠宏(Kuan-Hung Wang);劉明洲(Ming-Chou Liu)關鍵字：教養風格;創客素養;創客學習成效;parenting style;maker literacy;maker performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：創客教育是當代教育的潮流之一，除了致力於教材教法的推展之外，教養風格對於學童的創客素養和創客學習成效的關係是值得探究的，尤其國小學童還處於受到家庭與家長密切生活照顧與學習輔導的階段。基於此，本研究以問卷調查參加花蓮縣「科丁嘉年華」活動的120名國小學生和120名家長，探討不同背景變項下學童知覺教養風格、家長自評教養風格、創客素養和創客學習成效的關係，以及不同學童知覺教養風格在創客素養和創客學習成效的差異。研究結果顯示，背景變項對於創客素養的影響是很低的，而學童知覺教養風格能顯著預測創客素養和創客學習成效。不同教養風格的學童在創客素養表現有所差異：學童知覺教養風格的開明權威型（高回應高要求）和寬鬆放任型（高回應低要求）在整體創客素養上，比冷漠忽視型（低回應低要求）與專制權威型（低反應高要求）有更好的表現；此外，在創客學習成效上也有所差異，開明權威型顯著高於冷漠忽視型、專制權威型也顯著高於冷漠忽視型。英文摘要：The maker education is one of the remarkable trends in contemporary education. Besides promoting its pedagogical material and approaches, how parenting styles may have influence on schoolchildren's learning and performance of the maker literacy is also well worth exploring, particularly for primary students who are still under the palliative care, guidance, and mentoring from their parents and family. Based upon it, this research employs various survey techniques aiming to investigate the individual difference among schoolchildren in maker literacy learning under different background variables, as well as under different parenting styles perceived by the children and the child-rearing styles self-evaluated by the parents. The outcome shows that the background variables exert low impact upon the maker literacy. It also demonstrates that the maker literacy is quite accessible and feasible for anyone who is interested to learn, and easy to achieve. From the aspect of the parenting style, the perceived authoritative (with both high responsiveness and demandingness) and the indulgent (with high responsiveness/low demandingness) are far more effective than the neglectful (with both low responsiveness and demandingness) and the authoritarian (with low responsiveness/high demandingness). Moreover, what is perceived by the children noticeably outweighs what is self-evaluated by the parents. It reveals that it is children's psychological acceptance of parents' childrearing strategy that matters indeed. Only through their spontaneous recognition can the maker literacy learning be effectively enhanced.起始頁-結束頁：25-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20191011040023篇名：國中機器人STEAM跨領域課程發展研究：以彰化縣二水國中培龍計畫為例並列篇名：Development and Effects of an Interdisciplinary Robotics STEAM Curriculum: A Case Study of a Rural Junior High School in Taiwan作者：胡淑華(Shu-Hua Hu);蔡孟蓉(Meng-Jung Tsai)關鍵字：STEAM跨領域課程;科學學習動機;國中學業成就較低者;程式設計自我效能;機器人;interdisciplinary STEAM curriculum;science learning motivation;lower-achieved junior high school students;computer programming self-efficacy;robotics期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：機器人STEAM課程是培養學生運用機器人科技整合活用各科學習的跨領域統整課程，新課綱更是將資訊科技列為國中必修課程之一，然國中階段仍鮮少有實施機器人STEAM跨領域課程之相關實證研究。本研究旨在探討機器人STEAM跨領域課程對於國中生（尤其學業成就較低者）在學習科學、機器人及程式設計的動機和自我效能的影響，並了解學生的學習經驗和感受。本研究採單一組前、後測實驗設計，以63名臺灣中部偏鄉地區國中生為研究樣本，進行兩階段共12節課的機器人STEAM跨領域課程實驗，每階段均以前、後測問卷調查和課程回饋進行長期追蹤分析。主要研究結果發現：一、在第二階段課程實施的前後，整體學生科學學習動機有顯著提升，其中學業成就較低的學生更是在科學學習的自我效能和學習投入等動機有顯著提升，此結果從學生的課程回饋資料分析中亦獲得佐證，然第一階段則無此顯著的提升成果；二、當以第二階段後測和第一階段後測相比，則發現學業成就較低者的機器人學習自我效能（實作和表達兩面向）和程式設計自我效能（演算法面向）均有顯著的提升效果。因此，國中實施兩階段機器人STEAM跨領域課程，不僅可促進整體國中生的科學學習動機，同時亦可促進學業成就較低者在學習機器人和程式設計的自我效能。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the influences of robotics STEAM curriculum on junior high school students' science learning motivation, robotics learning self-efficacy and computer programming self-efficacy. This study also explores students' learning experience and perceptions toward such a curriculum, especially for the lower academic achieved students. A curriculum (two-stage, 12 periods) was implemented with a sample of 63 7th graders intact in three classes in a rural junior high school of central Taiwan. In each stage, pretest-posttest questionnaires were administered to collect data. The results of paired t tests found that overall students' science learning motivation has been improved significantly before and after the second stage of the curriculum, especially for the lower achieved students, which has been validated by the feedback from their learning experience and perceptions. No significant improvement was found for the first stage curriculum. In addition, while comparing the posttests between the two stages, the lower achieved students had significant improvements in the robotics learning self-efficacies of the practice and the expression dimensions as well as in the computer programming self-efficacy of the algorithm dimension. The results suggest that the interdisciplinary robotics STEAM curriculum can lift overall junior high school students' science learning motivation as well as the robotics learning self-efficacy and computer programming self-efficacy of the lower academic achieved students.起始頁-結束頁：51-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20191011040034篇名：範例引導學習與問題導向學習之教學策略對國小學生機器人程式學習的影響並列篇名：The Influence of Example-Led Learning and Problem-Oriented Learning Strategies on the Elementary Student's Robot Programming Learnings作者：李隆盛(Lung-Sheng Lee);楊秀全(Hsiu-Chuan Yang)關鍵字：STEM跨領域教育;問題導向學習;程式設計教學策略;範例引導學習;機器人教育;STEM interdisciplinary education;problem-oriented learning (POL);instructional strategy for programming;example-led learning (ELL);robot education期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：程式設計學習有助提升學習者的運算思維與關鍵能力，但是不同教學策略對學習者的這些能力有何影響？本研究旨在探究「範例引導學習」及「問題導向學習」兩種不同但常用之教學策略，對於國小學生機器人程式學習之影響。針對115名（範例引導學習組57名、問題導向學習組58名）國小五年級學生進行為期14週的機器人程式設計教學實驗，以自訂之關鍵學習能力量表進行前、後測，在課程結束後，同時進行國際運算思維能力測驗。研究結果顯示：問題導向學習組學生學習後的運算思維能力顯著優於範例引導學習組學生－問題導向學習組學生對於問題解決有較多的投入，也相對願意進行主動練習、反覆嘗試與思考；範例引導學習組學生在學習過程中記錄心得並進行分析歸納，加上透過討論，同樣符合十二年國民基本教育新課綱中培養學生實踐「做、用、想」導向的主張。在關鍵能力方面，兩組學生學習後，批判思考能力及創造創新能力方面並無顯著差異；但範例引導學習的教學策略較能提升學習者自主學習、溝通應用、協同合作和問題解決四項關鍵能力。因此，在進行機器人程式設計教學時，可因應學生需求，就兩種策略做適切的選採或混成。英文摘要：Programming learning helps to improve the computation thinking and other key competences of learners such as critical thinking, but how do different instructional strategies affect these skills/competences of learners? This study aimed to explore the impact of two different but widely-used instructional strategies, ”example-led learning” (ELL) and ”problem-oriented learning” (POL), on the robot programming learning of elementary students. There were 115 5th graders (57 in the ELL group and 58 in the POL group) were selected to participate in a 14-week robot programming learning unit. Using a self-developed key competences scale, both pre- and post-tests were conducted on the students. In addition, the International Bebras Contest was also conducted at the end of the teaching unit. The research results show that the students in POL group have significantly better computational thinking skill than the students in EEL group-the students in POL group have more engagement in problem solving, and are more willing to actively learn and repeatedly try and think. However, with the EEL instructional strategy, the students record, analyze, summarize and discuss their experiences in the learning process; thus, it also conforms to the proposition to enhance student's skills of ”doing, using and thinking” in the new national curriculum guideline for graders 1-12. In terms of key competencies, there is no significant difference between the two groups of students in post-learning critical thinking and creative skills; however, the ELL strategy has superior effect to enhance the following four skills of the learners: independent learning, communication application, collaboration and problem solving. Therefore, when teaching robot programming, teachers can appropriately choose either one or mix the two strategies according to student's needs.起始頁-結束頁：77-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20191011040045篇名：一對一畢氏定理對話式智慧家教系統之建置與成效評估並列篇名：Developing One-to-One Dialogue Based Intelligent Tutoring System for Pythagoras Theorem and Its Effectiveness作者：吳慧<U+73C9>(Huey-Min Wu);楊小億(Hsiao-Yi Yang);施淑娟(Shu-Chuan Shih);許天維(Tian-Wei Sheu)關鍵字：畢氏定理;智慧家教系統;補救教學;對話式;Pythagorean theorem;intelligent tutoring system;remedial instruction;dialogue based期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究開發一對一畢氏定理對話式智慧家教系統，其特色是以電腦代理教師，根據教學腳本提出教學問題，再根據學生的作答反應判斷給予適性的學習路徑，並針對錯誤類型給予適當的引導回饋，達到一對一對話式適性教學的學習效果。本研究設計四個畢氏定理的學習主題，以八年級學生共57位（28位男生、29位女生）為研究對象，以班級為單位進行實地實驗，探討系統成效。實地實驗分為實驗組與控制組進行補救教學，實驗組採本研究所設計之一對一畢氏定理對話式智慧家教系統進行學習，控制組則由教師以學習單進行團班教學，兩組班級的教材內容相同。共變異數分析結果顯示，一對一畢氏定理對話式智慧家教系統的教學成效顯著優於團班教學。實驗組不同能力層級學生經過補救教學後，成績皆有顯著進步。此外，學生對數學智慧家教系統傾向正向肯定的態度，學習的興趣也提高了，讓學生能更專注於學習，並得到良好的學習成效，在教學上具有實用性。英文摘要：The characteristics of the one-to-one dialogue-based intelligent tutoring system are providing adaptive feedbacks and instructions to the learner based on the expert teacher dialogue algorithms. There are four learning topics related to the Pythagoras Theorem developed in the intelligent tutoring system. Fifty-seven students (28 males and 29 females) from the eighth grade of a Taiwanese junior high school were selected to participate in this study. Using each class as a unit, students were randomly assigned to the experiment group and control group respectively. In the experiment group, students learned Pythagorean theorem via intelligent tutoring system. In the control group, the tradition instruction was implemented. The pre-test/post-test nonequivalent group design was adopted in this study. The results of ANCOVA indicated that the students with one-to-one dialogue-based intelligent tutoring system can get a higher score than that with traditional instruction. High achievers, medium achievers, and low achievers who received dialogue-based intelligent tutoring system outperformed those who received the traditional group-based program. Dialogue based intelligent tutoring system is effective in benefiting not only students' academic performance but interesting.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20190711030016篇名：具作答回溯機制之認知診斷電腦化適性測驗並列篇名：Reviewable Cognitive Diagnostic Computerized Adaptive Test作者：郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo);曾彥鈞(Yen-Chun Tseng);江鴻鈞(Hung-Chun Chiang)關鍵字：DINA模型;回溯;認知診斷電腦化適性測驗;DINA model;response review;cognitive diagnostic computerized adaptive testing期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：許多研究顯示，具作答回溯機制之電腦化適性測驗比不具作答回溯機制之電腦化適性測驗在能力估計上更精確。目前具作答回溯機制之電腦化適性測驗於試題反應理論上開發，並設計提供受試者潛在連續特徵的總結報告，而非提供足夠的診斷訊息。認知診斷模型可估計受試者認知屬性的精熟狀態，而此對補救教學具有顯著的助益。本研究基於Deterministic Inputs, Noisy ”And” Gate model（DINA模型）來開發具動態區塊回溯機制之認知診斷電腦化適性測驗。透過模擬Q矩陣、試題參數、試題回溯模式、回溯區塊數量、回溯行為、回溯機率等各項設定來探討本研究之效益。在大部分的情形下，研究顯示可比傳統不具作答回溯機制之認知診斷電腦化適性測驗提供更高的估計正確率。英文摘要：Many studies showed that the ability estimate from the reviewable computerized adaptive test would be more precised than that from the non-reviewable computerized adaptive test. Current reviewable computerized adaptive tests were developed based on item response theory and were designed to offer the examinee a summary report of a latent continuous trait rather than to provide sufficient diagnostic information. Cognitive diagnostic models could estimate the mastery status of the examinees' cognitive attributes which would have a great benefit to the remedial instruction. The purpose of this study was to develop a dynamic block-review computerized adaptive testing algorithms based on Deterministic Inputs, Noisy ”And” Gate model (DINA model). The performance of the proposed algorithms was investigated by a simulation study with various settings, Q-matrix, item parameters, item review mode, size of review block, review behavior, and review probability. Under most situation, the results of this study indicated that the proposed algorithm provided higher estimation accuracy than the traditional non-reviewable cognitive diagnostic computerized adaptive test.起始頁-結束頁：29-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20190711030027篇名：五至七年級電腦化比例推理能力評量的發展與應用並列篇名：The Development of a Computerized Assessment on Proportional Reasoning Ability for 5th to 7th Graders作者：羅士然(Shih-Jan Lo);洪碧霞(Pi-Hsia Hun);陳煥文(Huan-Wen Chen);曾建勳(Chien-Hsun Tseng)關鍵字：比例推理;真實情境;發展階段;進展軌跡;電腦化評量;proportional reasoning;authentic tasks;developmental stage;learning trajectory;computerized assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究參酌美國比例推理發展軌跡的理念，研發電腦化比例推理能力評量。評量設計依年級分為三式，五至七年級學生樣本共715人。五年級式別平均答對率為0.49，內部一致性為.77。六年級式別平均答對率為0.55，內部一致性為.82；七年級式別平均答對率0.66，內部一致性為.84。學生比例推理能力與在校成績相關組型，各年級學生比例推理能力皆與在校數學相關為最高，與在校國語相關最低。試題的實徵難度與評量設計所依據的發展階段尚屬一致，惟少數試題中額外的關鍵成分明顯影響難度變異，如變量間呈現等差關係、或題目中含分半與單位分數。換言之，實徵難度可豐富發展理論不同階段中相關認知成分交互運作的脈絡。研究中以實徵難度值-1與0為切點，將試題分為三個層次。24題中，基礎層次有9題，主要為只改變芒果或冰塊的甜度比較題。其次，9題為精熟層次，內容為芒果份數改變各種倍數的缺失值問題。最後，進階層次6題，主要為依數字計算容易程度，活用含整數倍數的策略選擇題。年級與性別二因子變異數分析發現交互作用未達顯著，僅年級因子達顯著，η^2為.08。性別因子未達顯著，與臺灣國中、小學生數學成就無性別差異的結果大致相符。英文摘要：The hypothesized learning progression or learning trajectory in proportional reasoning were adopted to develop a computerized assessment on proportional reasoning ability in this study. According to student's learning experiences, three different forms were assembled for the 5th, 6th and 7th graders with common items. Totally, there were 715 students included in the study as sample. For the form of 5th grade, the average proportion-correct is 0.49 and the alpha is .77. For the form of 6th grade, the proportion-correct is 0.55 and the alpha is .82. For the form of 7th grade, the proportion-correct is 0.66 and the alpha is .84. The correlation coefficient between students' proportional reasoning ability and school achievement is highest in mathematics, and is lowest in language. Most of the item difficulties were concordance with the developmental stages. Some crucial elements such as constant additive differences distracters, halving and unit fractions affect item difficulties substantially. The grade and gender two-way ANOVA revealed that the interaction was not significant. Only the grade factor was significant, and η^2 was .08. The gender factor was not significant. This result was consistent with the gender similarities hypothesis in mathematics achievement for Taiwan elementary and middle school students.起始頁-結束頁：53-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20190711030038篇名：應用正向思考行動學習系統輔助大學生學習困擾與復原力之探究並列篇名：A Study of Positive Thinking Mobile Learning System to Support College Students' Learning Disturbances and Resilience作者：張菀珍(Wan-Jen Chang);陳景章(Kim-Joan Chen)關鍵字：正向思考;行動學習系統;復原力;學習困擾;positive thinking;mobile learning system;resilience;learning disturbances期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究設計一個以Moodle為平臺，融合網路、行動載具及擴增實境的正向思考行動學習系統，以三組有學習困擾的大學生為對象，採用單組前、後測實驗設計，探討大學生因應學習困擾與復原力之成效。實驗採正向思考行動學習系統輔助學習困擾的因應，包括：以行動學習系統提供正向思考引導的多媒體學習資源進行自主學習；運用問題導向小組合作學習及輔導機制進行學期中學習困擾因應的實時學習。研究結果顯示：一、採用正向思考行動學習系統的三組大學生其學習困擾因應及挫折復原力之學習成效，均達顯著差異；二、參與實驗的三組大學生對於正向思考行動學習系統的「教學潛力」層面滿意度最佳。英文摘要：In this research, a positive thinking mobile learning system, which consist of an online learning system based on the Moodle platform and a mobile device with the augmented reality system is designed. This study focuses on the learning effect for three group's college students. We adopt the one group pretest-posttest experimental methodology to explore the learning effectiveness of using the positive thinking learning in coping learning disturbances of three group's students with learning disturbances. We also study satisfaction issue of using the positive thinking mobile learning system function. The experimental group takes positive thinking mobile learning system by self-directive learning. An online learning system is also used to allow students to access multimedia teaching materials at any time. The problem-oriented group cooperative learning and counseling mechanism were using to conduct real-time learning for learning disturbances within semester. The statistic results as fellow: 1. The positive thinking mobile learning system designed by this study can promote the three experimental group college students' resilience and learning effect in coping learning disturbances. And these three experimental groups have significant differences between pretest and posttest in coping learning disturbances and resilience; 2. The ”teaching potential” is the most satisfaction dimension of the positive thinking mobile learning system by the three experimental group college students.起始頁-結束頁：81-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20190711030049篇名：機器人學習活動中的程式學習困境：以南投縣偏鄉機器人中學社團為例並列篇名：The Difficulty of Programming Learning in the Robotics Learning at the Rural Area: An Example from Nantou Junior High School作者：黃元彥(Yuan-Yen Huang);劉旨峰(Eric Zhi-Feng Liu);林俊閎(Chun-Hung Lin)關鍵字：偏鄉學習者;程式學習;樂高創客;機器人學習;機器人學習活動設計;the students in the rural schools;programming learning;Lego Makers;robotics learning;robotics learning design期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究針對南投縣偏鄉機器人社團中學生推行樂高機器人之學習活動，並調查其在程式學習方面的情形與想法，以進行機器人程式學習的反思。研究者以教學者角色進入現場、進行教學的行動研究，並透過照片影像、統計資料、訪談的質性編碼資料，進行機器人程式學習、教學與活動設計的議題探討，藉以針對偏鄉樂高創客的機器人程式學習提出相關的討論與建議。英文摘要：This study is to investigate the programming learning via the junior high school students' robotics learning club in the rural area of Nantou. In addition, the study reflects on the students' learning difficulty of programming in Lego robotics activities. The researcher also participated as a teacher to execute the action research, collecting the pictures, the quantitative and the qualitative data for further discussion toward the programming learning. The learning implications for the disadvantaged Lego Makers of the findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201904110200110篇名：以集群分析方法探討臺灣大學生進行開放式網路資源探究之個人化數位內容策展模式並列篇名：Employing Cluster Analysis to Explore Behavioral Patterns of Taiwanese College Students' Digital Content Curation in the Open-Ended Online Resource Inquiry作者：林佳慶(Chia-Ching Lin);謝雨蓁(Yu-Jen Sie)關鍵字：行為模式;集群分析;數位內容策展;數位學習;behavioral patterns;cluster analysis;digital content curation;digital learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：數位內容策展是學習者個人對於特定主題透過網路資源搜尋與篩選，並融入個人經驗與觀點將網路資訊內容的脈絡關係，進行組織並賦予意義與結論的歷程。本研究提出一個人化數位內容策展活動概念 架構，並進一步探討學習者在進行社會性環境爭議議題探討時所 展現的數位內容策展活動。以45位臺灣南部地區大學生為研究對象，透過螢幕錄影與記錄蒐集學習者數位內容策展活動歷程資料，並利用個人化數位內容策展活動概念架構進行影片分析，進一步採用集群分析方法探討大學生所展現的個人化數位內容策展活動行為與模式。研究結果顯示，大學生除了展現出不同的數位內容策展行為要素，並具有不同的策略模式。本研究根據研究結果，針對未來數位內容策展活動在數位學習相關應用與研究提出討論與建議。英文摘要：Digital content curation addresses one's engagement with online information searching, filtering, reviewing and curating to generate issue-based content integrated with personal opinion and perspective on the aggregated information resources. This study proposed a conceptual framework of digital content curation, and investigated learners' digital content curation activities of exploring social-scientific issues. Forty-five college students in southern Taiwan were recruited, and on-screen capture was employed to record their activities exhibited in performing digital content curation. The proposed framework of digital content curation was employed to code the behaviors of digital content curation, and the method of cluster analysis was conducted to the analyses of the students' behavioral patterns of digital content curation. The findings reveal that college students possessed various behaviors of digital content curation, as well as exhibited three behavioral patterns. We further provide suggestions and discussion about the potential of digital content curation for E-learning.起始頁-結束頁：37-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201904110200201篇名：禮讓參選的賽局分析並列篇名：Game-Theoretic Analysis of Making a Concession Decision in an Election作者：王智賢(Jue-shyan Wang);嚴馥妤(Fu-yu Yan);林玫吟(Mei-yin Lin)關鍵字：禮讓參選;政黨整合;序列均衡;concession election;party integration;sequential equilibrium期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：在臺灣的選舉中，政黨候選人時常在競選過程中發生禮讓參選的現象。本文以賽局模型分析參選人在政黨屬性較接近的其他政黨決定參選時，是否採取禮讓參選的決策。在參選人不知道屬性較接近的其他政黨參選人實力強弱的情況下，我們發現屬性較接近的其他政黨參選人強者型態的比例愈大、給予參選人較多的禮讓好處時，參選人較容易啟動禮讓參選的機制。英文摘要：In Taiwan, a phenomenon commonly occurs that the candidates of a political party yield to other candidates in election campaigns. This paper establishes a model of game theory in which candidates can decide whether to make a concession in an election when the candidates of another party with similar attributes are running for election. In the case of candidates who do not know the capability of other party candidates, it is easier for candidates to start the concession mechanism when the proportion of a strong type among the other candidates is large and when the candidates from another party concede more benefits.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201911_26(2).00012篇名：列項實驗與網路調查之結合：臺灣民<U+8846>對同性戀民代接受程度的探究並列篇名：Combining List Experiment and Internet Survey: Analysis of Taiwanese People's Attitudes toward Acceptance of Homosexual Legislators作者：楊光(Guang Yang);鄭<U+7439>尹(Chin-yin Cheng)關鍵字：列項實驗;網路調查;敏感議題;社會期望偏誤;同性戀;list experiment;internet survey;sensitive issues;social desirability bias;homosexuality期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：同性戀者人權及同性婚姻行政程序涉及國家重要政策，相關的討論在各領域也獲得不少關注。以往臺灣研究同性戀的文章常以質化方法進行，近年開始從量化、民調的研究途徑著力。然而對不少民眾來說同性戀仍屬於較為敏感的議題，故受訪時可能為了迎合社會規範而不願表達真實意見，致使同性戀觀感的民意調查結果與實際情況產生落差。故本文結合列項實驗與網路調查，通過列項問題更準確地了解臺灣民眾對同性戀民代的接受程度，並藉由比較列項問題與直接問題之結果，檢測同性戀議題在民調時是否存在社會期望偏誤；最後利用列項問題檢視過往研究中影響同性戀接受程度的因素，在今日臺灣是否仍發揮著影響力。分析結果顯示：（一）受訪民眾對同性戀接受程度超過七成；（二）直接與間接問法在同性戀接受比例上無統計之顯著差異，亦即受訪民眾對同性戀的態度未因社會壓力而扭曲；（三）個人特質、宗教信仰與政黨認同等因素，仍影響著今日民眾對於同性戀的態度。英文摘要：Homosexual rights and recognition of same-sex marriage involve important national policies and have received great attention from various fields. Due to the sensitivity of homosexual issues, previous studies have adopted qualitative approaches to addressing homosexual issues. Survey methods and polls open the door for these kinds of sensitive issues. Yet, facing the pressure of social norms, interviewees may hide their true opinions on homosexual issues, which leads to the accuracy problem of polling. Thus, we combined list experiment and internet survey and tried to figure out the acceptance of homosexuality in Taiwan. The data showed that the acceptance of homosexuality among Taiwanese is more than 70%. By comparing the percentages of acceptance in direct and indirect questions, we found that most of answers given by the respondents are independent and undistorted under social pressure. Also, personality, religious factors and party identification still play important roles on the acceptance of homosexuality in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：23-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201911_26(2).00023篇名：臺灣選民的真誠投票之推估：模型建構與實證分析並列篇名：Estimating the Sincerity of Taiwan Voters: A Model Building Process and Empirical Analysis作者：張順全(Shun-chuan Chang);許乃偉(Nai-wei Hsu);莊文忠(Wen-jong juang)關鍵字：真誠投票;策略投票;分裂投票;反事實推理;隨機效用模型;sincere voting;strategic voting;split-ticket voting;counterfactual reasoning;random utility model期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：隨著臺灣政治的民主化發展與傳播資訊管道的多元化，使得選民在選舉前就能快速獲得豐富的資訊，正因如此，也使部分選民的投票行為可能受到民調變化或其他人的集體意志而左右，最後作出的選擇並非原先心中所屬意的選項，即所謂非真誠投票行為。探究非真誠投票類型中，策略投票議題一直是政治學者關注及研究的焦點，文獻中，策略投票主要指涉選民考量對選舉結果的期待，在知道其所支持的候選人當選機率渺茫，為避免浪費選票且阻止最討厭的政黨候選人當選，只好將選票轉投給其他政黨中次偏好的選項。從過去國外研究證實，不論單一選區、甚至比例代表制或複數選區制都可觀察到選民曾出現策略投票。至於國內學界，近年來也紛紛投入研究國內各種選舉可能存在策略投票的情況，以及提出相關概念如分裂或一致投票的定義與測量，且許多研究經常關注選民手中不同選票投出分裂投票的結果，從而推測可能係來自策略投票行為。實際上，策略投票實際動機可能非常多元，但是真誠投票的定義則相對明確無爭議。本研究以2012年總統大選合併立委選舉為例，嘗試使用臺灣選舉民主化調查（Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study, TEDS）所提供的選後追蹤調查為主，加上綜合考量選前、選後調查數據，以及比較選舉總體資料。作者們另闢蹊徑，引進美國政治學界研究方法之前沿，參採反事實推理（Counterfactual reasoning）以及隨機效用模型（Random Utility Model, RUM）等相關政治學文獻，應用於修正原先根據民意調查所得的數據，重新校準臺灣地區選民實際投票情境下來自「真誠投票」的合理比例，並歸納不同投票對象對應其真誠選民的特質，以及論述真誠、策略和分裂投票存在各種統計差異的意義。英文摘要：Along with the democratic development of Taiwanese politics and the diversification of information channels, voters now have access to abundant information prior to elections. Owing to this, the final decision of some voters might be swayed by changes in public opinion polls or by the collective will of groups of people. The actual vote of these citizens may not be what they originally preferred, which cannot be characterized as sincere voting behavior. In the investigation of different types of non-sincere voting behavior, strategic voting is undoubtedly a major research issue among scholars of election studies delving into voter psychology. Strategic voting primarily refers to voters who decide to cast their votes for candidates with better prospects of winning so as to avoid ”wasting” their vote. Past overseas literature has confirmed that whether in single-member districts or in proportional representation or multi-member districts, strategic voting has been observed among voters. As for academia in Taiwan, increasing effort has been made in recent years to study strategic voting that may take place in domestic elections, and the definition and measurement of related concepts, such as the effect of split-ticket and party voting. Most studies, however, are confined to observing the results of split-ticket voting, from which they surmise the possibility of strategic voting. In fact, the actual motivation for strategic voting may be very diverse, but the definition of sincere voting is relatively clear and uncontroversial. Instead, this study attempts to base itself mainly on post-election panel records provided by Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study (TEDS), together with an integrated consideration of a pre- and post- election survey and a comparison of election outcomes. With Taiwan's 2012 presidential-cum-parliamentary elections as the source of empirical evidence, this study adopts counterfactual reasoning and literature on the random utility model, applying them to revise the survey results of the original poll data so as to estimate a reasonable proportion of actual sincere voting. Furthermore, it sums up important characteristics of sincere voters who had different vote choices and demonstrated the subtle differences between split-ticket voting, sincere voting and strategic voting. Finally, the study discusses the various statistical differences between these three voting behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：53-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201911_26(2).00034篇名：Please Be My Friend: The Taiwanese Public's Ally Preferences between the United States and China並列篇名：請與我做朋友：臺灣民<U+8846>對於美國與中國之間的盟友選擇偏好作者：林民偉(Alex Min-wei Lin);吳重禮(Chung-li Wu)關鍵字：US-China relations;ambivalence theory;ally selection;public opinion;美中關係;雙歧理論;結盟選擇;民意調查期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：26卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study takes advantage of Taiwan public opinion data to examine citizens' views on whether their country should ally with the United States or China. It tests two hypotheses on how citizens arrive at their choice of an ally: ambivalence toward both the US and China, and an evaluation of which of the two countries is the more powerful. The results reveal that the proportion of the Taiwanese public that would pick China as an ally (41.7%) is almost the same as the proportion that would opt for the US (44.5%). Pan-Blue supporters and those favoring unification with China have a higher probability of choosing China, while Taiwan independence supporters and those identifying as Taiwanese only are less likely to choose China as an ally for Taiwan. Logistic regression analyses show that more ambivalent citizens are more likely to choose China, and that judgement of which country is most powerful is a conditional predictor of choice of ally.英文摘要：本文藉由分析我國民意調查資料，旨在檢視臺灣民眾對於美國與中國兩者之間，結盟國家的選擇偏好。本文驗證一般民眾在選擇國家結盟對象的兩個研究假設：首先為對於美國與中國認知的「雙歧」（ambivalence）；態度，其次為評估兩個國家何者更具影響力。研究結果顯示，臺灣民眾選擇中國作為盟友的比例（41.7%），與支持美國作為盟友的比例（44.5%）；頗為接近。依據實證資料，泛藍支持者與傾向中國統一者較偏好選擇與中國進行結盟，與此同時，認同自己為臺灣人與支持臺灣獨立者較不偏好選擇中國為結盟對象。本文採取「勝算對數模型分析」（logistic regression analyses），統計數據顯示，保持雙歧態度的民眾較傾向選擇中國作為結盟對象；相關數據證實，另一項研究假設亦具有相當解釋力，亦即一般民眾判斷哪個國家更具影響力的認知，是左右他們選擇結盟對象與否的重要考量。起始頁-結束頁：87-112資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201911_26(2).00045篇名：政治中的金錢知多少？台灣政治經費公開的法制評估並列篇名：To What Extent Do We Know about Money in Politics? An Assessment of the Political Finance Disclosure Law in Taiwan作者：蘇彥圖(Yen-tu Su)關鍵字：政治經費;公開;政黨財務;政治獻金;競選支出;political finance;disclosure;party finance;campaign contributions;campaign spending (expenditures)期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：26卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：作為民主社群取得大規模之政治經費資訊的最主要方法，政治經費公開的法制實踐深遠地影響了公眾對於政治中的金錢能有多少認識與理解。藉由檢測台灣現行法制在立法與執行層面所分別存在的管制漏洞，本文嘗試系統性地評量我國的政治經費公開法制。本文主要指出，（1）台灣政治經費公開的完整度與確實性，主要受制於現行法制之諸多立法漏洞，以致不少政治經費，直接成了毋需或者無從申報的暗錢。（2）現行實務在查核與裁罰不實申報上，也有執行不足的隱憂，並從而使得部分公眾對於公開是否確實有所懷疑。本文建議這項法制的改革應揚棄政治獻金中心主義，以切實填補管制漏洞。英文摘要：Disclosure is the most important means by which citizens in a democracy obtain information about money in electoral politics, and as such, the efficacy of the political finance disclosure determines, to a significant extent, what and how much we know about the actual workings of a political finance system. This study assesses political finance disclosure in Taiwan. While recognizing that sanctions against false disclosure are bound to be under-enforced, this study argues that loopholes in the coverage of the disclosure rules are the main culprits for the ”dark money” in Taiwan politics. This study calls for a structural overhaul of the existing regime, the institutional performance of which is seriously hindered by a conventional misunderstanding of the purpose of political finance disclosure. In addition to tracking transactions of political finance at the retail level for the sake of informing voters and enforcing other rules governing political finance, an effective disclosure regime should strive to provide citizens with information about macro-political finance.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201905_26(1).00016篇名：成本考量下雙底冊電話調查的樣本配置並列篇名：Allocation of Dual-Frame Telephone Survey for Given Cost作者：陳鴻嘉(Hung-chia Chen)關鍵字：手機調查;有效樣本規模;調查成本;雙底冊電話調查;權數效應;cellphone survey;effective sample size;survey cost;dual-frame telephone survey;unequal weighting effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：26卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來，隨著唯手機族日增，傳統住宅電話調查面臨了涵蓋率不足的問題，執行手機與住宅電話的雙底冊電話調查便成了必要之舉。進行雙底冊電話調查需要決定樣本如何配置，而配置方式又與權數效應和調查成本有關。準此，本研究依據既有成本比較研究中手機與住宅電話樣本每單位完訪成本比，以及從「數位國情調查」的雙底冊電話調查結果所估計出來的權數效應，試著在調查成本固定的情況下，找出權數效應最小，也就是有效樣本規模最大，讓估計精確性最佳的手機與住宅電話樣本配置。結果顯示，在最常見的住宅電話加上唯手機族之雙底冊電話調查中應配置64.18%的住宅電話以及35.82%的唯手機族樣本。此外，本研究還進一步將此類雙底冊電話調查的樣本配置通式化，使得唯手機族的樣本數成為調查成本與電話使用習慣的函數，讓研究者在規劃這類的雙底冊電話調查時，可依不同的情況代入相關參數後得到有效樣本規模最大的樣本配置。英文摘要：With the increase of cell phone usage in recent years, traditional landline surveys face a problem of incomplete coverage. It is now necessary to conduct dual-frame telephone surveys that includes cell phone samples and landline samples. Designing a dual-frame telephone survey requires a decision on the sample allocation. The allocation of the sample to the dual-frame associates with the unequal weighting effect and the survey cost. Therefore, this study aimed to illustrate an optimal allocation of respondents from landline and cellphone frames that result in the lowest unequal weight effect (i.e., the highest effective sample size) for a given cost by using the relative unit cost of obtaining a cell respondent compared to a landline respondent from a comparison study of survey cost, and an unequal weighting effect from ”Public Value and Electronic Governance.” The results suggested that the optimal design will have 64.18% of the sample completes from the landline frame, and 35.82% of the sample completes from the cellphone frame in a cell-phone-only screened design. Additionally, this paper shows that the sample sizes of cell phone only could be a function of unequal weight effect and survey cost. Thus, the organizer of the cell-phone-only screened design could substitute parameters into the function depending on different situations.起始頁-結束頁：31-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201905_26(1).00027篇名：Mass Production of Individualized Services: Machine Politics in Hong Kong並列篇名：大量提供個人化服務：香港的「機器政治」作者：Stan Hok-wui Wong;Karl Ho;Harold D. Clarke關鍵字：constituency services;non-programmatic benefits;Hong Kong elections;machine politics;pro-Beijing parties;特定選民服務;非政策綱領的利益;香港選舉;機器政治;親北京政黨期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：26卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Political machines are built to distribute spoils, buy support, and influence election outcome. Existing research argues that political machines target poor and illiterate voters because their votes are cheap to acquire with non-programmatic benefits. Using the case of Hong Kong, we critically examine the extent to which the ruling coalition utilizes non-programmatic benefits in elections where votes are generally too expensive to purchase. Using interviews with local councilors and data from the 2015 Hong Kong Election Study, we find that: (1) pro-Beijing parties tend to specialize in the provision of highly individualized services; (2) demand for these services tends to come from non-poor citizens; and (3) unable to monitor individual votes, pro-Beijing parties use services and benefits to influence the turnout of the recipients, rather than their vote choice. These findings suggest that the growing electoral strength of pro-Beijing parties in Hong Kong reflects their responsiveness to constituent demands.英文摘要：政治機器的建立，是為了利益分配、爭取支持和影響選舉結果。現有的文獻認為政治機器一般會籠絡貧窮與教育水平低的選民，因為他們的選票相對便宜。本論文以香港為例，審視當地的執政聯盟有多大程度在選舉中利用非政策綱領的利益（non-programmatic benefits），來爭取貴得難以收買的選票。通過訪問當地的議員和分析2015年《香港選舉研究》的數據，我們發現（1）親北京的政黨傾向提供高度個人化的服務；（2）需要這些個人化服務的市民，一般都不貧窮；（3）因為不能監控個人如何投票，親北京的政黨只能利用服務和利益來影響收益者投與不投的決定，而不是投給誰的選擇。這些發現反映親北京政黨長期的得票增長，是來自他們回應了特定選民的訴求。起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201905_26(1).00038篇名：候選人臉書經營和選舉結果之關聯分析：以2016年區域立法委員選舉為例並列篇名：Taiwan 2016: How Political Candidates' Adoption of Facebook Fan Pages and Interaction with Supporters Relate to Election Outcomes作者：莊伯仲(Po-chung Chuang);金志聿(Chih-yu Chin)關鍵字：立委選舉;社群媒體;按讚;臉書;網路選戰;legislator election;social media;Facebook likes;fan page;online campaign期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：26卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：隨著社群媒體融入吾人生活，成為粉絲、按讚這類網路行為已被證實與實體行動間存在關聯，因此透過候選人臉書的大數據來預測選舉結果，便成為新興研究主題。本文分析2016年區域立委選舉中354位候選人的粉絲專頁經營狀況，發現是否運用臉書與選舉勝敗有顯著關聯，實質經營者36.8%當選立委，無臉書或未實質經營者則僅1.2%。更重要的是，候選人的貼文按讚總數與得票數呈現低度正相關，註冊粉絲數與得票數更達中度正相關，因此兩者均可據以探討勝選關聯性。而本研究建構一初步模型「淨粉絲對比率」，整合候選人按讚數與粉絲數，並排除與同選區對手的無意義重疊粉絲和重複按讚，具有一定推估能力，對全國當選席位的預估準確率有81.5%（72席中59席），在六都更達87.9%（48席中42席）。而這也意味臉書選戰的重要性，以及專業經營的必要性。英文摘要：The adoption of social media in political marketing has grown dramatically over the past ten years, as it creates two-way communication that stimulates and fosters candidates' relationships with voters. However, can the count of ”supporters” and ”likes” recorded on the Facebook page of a candidate predict whether he/she will win the elections or not? In view of this, predicting an electoral outcome using ”big” social media data is a new research topic that has emerged due to the exponential growth of social media. This study examines the extent to which political candidates' use of Facebook fan pages and interaction with their supporters are related to the election outcomes (vote share and election success) of Taiwan's 2016 legislator election campaign. Facebook data were acquired for all 354 candidates. The findings indicate: a candidate's Facebook presence is related to his/her election outcomes. Positive correlations were also observed to exist between the numbers of supporters/likes candidates secured on their official fan pages and their popular vote share. Moreover, the ”net-fans ratio” preliminary model, based on a candidate's likes/supporters and excluding those repeated with respective opponents, has an explanatory power to forecast regional legislators' election outcome with 81.5% accuracy of all the seats, and with 87.9% accuracy of the seats of 6 major municipalities. Hence, Facebook data could be a significant indicator of electoral success.起始頁-結束頁：89-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.201905_26(1).000401篇名：開啟以儒釋道文化的修養諮商心理學理論語實徵研究：邁向自性覺醒的心理療癒並列篇名：Developing Self-cultivation Counseling Psychology Theories and Empirical Studies Based on the Chinese Cultural Traditions of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism: Towards Self-enlightenment Psychotherapy作者：夏允中(Yung-Jong Shiah);黃光國(Kwang-Kuo Hwang)關鍵字：本土諮商心理學;自性覺醒;儒釋道;修養;修養心理學;Buddhism and Taoism;Confucianism;indigenous counseling psychology;psychology of self-cultivation;self-cultivation;self-enlightenment期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：54期出版年：2019中文摘要：本專刊的主題為本土諮商心理學，期許華人學者能開啟以儒釋道文化為基礎，開展修養諮商心理學理論與實徵研究，因此本文提出：（1）華人諮商心理學的困境及其原因與呼喚「本土」的心理治療理論；（2）儒釋道文化自我觀可以開展新的諮商心理學理論，其中儒釋道文化自我觀，基本上是以自性覺醒的修養歷程來減少或根除慾望的我，來達到終極快樂的境界。接著本文分別說明儒家三層次（庶人、士大夫與聖王）修養的自我曼陀羅模型、佛家三層次（未入道者、聲聞／獨覺與佛／菩薩）修養的自我曼陀羅模型與以易經為基礎的內在朝向式多層次立體自我曼陀羅模型；（3）本期所收錄的五篇論文正好可由儒釋道自性覺醒的修養模型來加以詮釋與探討，第一篇論文是宗教的四窗、四鏡、羅盤與黑洞：宗教自我曼陀羅模型的諮商應用，可以用來引導案主通往佛法自性覺醒的修養徑路。第二篇論文發展的儒釋道喪禮儀式的悲傷療癒歷程模式，說明儒釋道文化如何對喪親者產生悲傷倫理療癒。第三篇論文為運用多重時空框架經驗整合能力，可增加對父母感激之情與忍讓行為；第四篇論文關注在文化心理劇，探討華人家庭關係之歷程與效果。從儒與佛家修養自我曼陀羅模型來看孝道與關係的重要性，他們都是往聖王的「至善之性」修養與佛／菩薩境界的重要一環。最後一篇論文探究心理劇中「替身經驗」現象，研究結果對同理能力訓練的有重要參考；從儒釋道的自性修養的模型來看，同理能力是修養的重要先前步驟；（4）本文最後建議，可參考這三個模型，來邁向自性覺醒的修養諮商心理學理論建構與實踐，開展出更有助全人發展的助人專業。英文摘要：The article presents four statements as follows. (1) Reasons for Chinese counseling psychology dilemma and calling for indigenous psychotherapy theories. (2) The maintenance/strength of self is a very core concept in Western psychology and is particularly relevant to egoism, a process that draws on the hedonic principle in pursuit of desires. Contrary to this and based on the three major Chinese cultural traditions, Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism, a self-enlightenment cultivating process aims to minimize or extinguish the desired self, leading to authentic and durable happiness. The self concepts based on the Chinese cultural traditions of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism could open new counseling psychology theories. For the reason, the article presents the three self-enlightenment models based on the three major Chinese philosophies. The universal Mandala Model of Self (MMS) was developed to describe the well-functioning self in various cultures. The MMS is suitable for analyzing the structure of Chinese philosophies to construct the SEM. The ego and self-enlightenment aspects of psychological self-functioning and their underlying processes are compared, drawing on the four concepts of the MMS: biology, ideal person, knowledge/wisdom and action. ”Self” is a psychological term, based on the MMS, the self is the locus of empirical experience, and it takes various actions depending on the social context. It also engages in reflexivity and wisdom when blocked from attaining its goals. The wisdom contained in the personal stock of knowledge can lead individuals to act intelligently in various social contexts. According to the MMS, one important characteristic of individuals is the ability to engage in agency-oriented reflexivity on the meaning of life. People in different cultures exhibit different kinds of wisdom when they think about spirituality, the meaning of their life, and their morality. Individuals' attempts to define their own moral conscience create a normative wisdom that circulates within the society. Confucian three-layered Mandala Model of Self (MMS) of the self-cultivation (ordinary people, scholar and king), Buddhist three-layered (MMS of the self-cultivation (non-Buddhist, <U+015A>r<U+0101>vaka/Pratyeka Buddha and Buddha) and an inward multilayer-stereo MMS based on the Book of Changes are presented. (3) The current special issue include five papers that echo for the three self-enlightenment models based on the Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism. The first paper used the concepts of four windows, four mirrors, compass and black hole of religion into clinical application on the way of self-enlightenment process. The second paper developed the Grief Healing Model of the funeral rituals based on the Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism to elucidate how the Chinese ethics of Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism can be used for grief healing. The third paper found that integration of cross-time-and-space experience increased the positive relationship between adult children and aging parents in terms of gratitude and ”Ren-Rang” behavior. The fourth paper focused the indigenous psychodramatic model in Chinese family relational issues arising from bi-cultural conflict. Based on the Confucian and Buddhist self-enlightenment models, the filial piety and successfully managing close relationships are required by the self-enlightenment process in order to attain the goodness of king and Buddha levels. The final paper illustrated the experience of doubling in psychodrama leading to increased empathy ability. Based on the Confucian, Buddhist and Taoist self-enlightenment models, the empathy ability is needed for the self-cultivation process. (4) Based on these three self-enlightenment models, the construction of self-cultivation counseling theories and their practice could be implemented. Although more research is needed on this front, it is hoped that we will open significant new avenues for mental health and unravel the secret of why Chinese cultural traditions of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism has lasted for thousands of years.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190100540012篇名：宗教的四窗、四鏡、羅盤與黑洞：宗教自我曼陀羅模型的諮商應用並列篇名：Four Windows, Four Mirrors, Compass and Black Hole of Religion: The Mandala Model of Religion and Self Applied to Counseling作者：張蘭石(Nam-Sat Chang)關鍵字：世界軸;宗教;個體施為;曼陀羅模型;黑洞;Axis mundi;black hole;individual agency;mandala model;religion期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：54期出版年：2019中文摘要：作者依「宗教自我曼陀羅模型」建立窗、鏡、羅盤與黑洞等比喻，用來分析宗教人的認知與施為。宗教常被比喻為一扇窗或一面鏡子，「窗」讓人得窺「教義微世界」，而「鏡」則反射個體的「直覺認知」。就實在論而言，宗教像一扇窗而揭示其他世界；從實證論來說，宗教像鏡子般鑒照人自己的焦慮、價值觀與行為。此外，Mircea Eliade指出，宗教都藉禮儀或聖化活動而定義聖、俗，從而建立倫理秩序；其「世界軸」意象如神山與曼陀羅等，象徵「信眾生活世界」所有角色所形成的秩序結構。信仰者將宗教視為行動的指導羅盤，因此本文用可更新之羅盤來類比於動態世界軸。最後，作者以「黑洞」來象徵對「終極實在」的懸擱，以及創教者的「個體施為」。生活世界保留給「神」那唯信能入的中心位置，畢竟是個高深莫測的黑洞；黑洞特別適於類比新教派。四喻分別象徵「宗教自我曼陀羅模型」的四象限，四者任一都可依據其於二維的整合關係而分為四類。窗喻分為車窗之景、天窗之光、氣窗之風與囚窗之寄，鏡分為明鑒之鏡、理念之鏡、焦慮之鏡與藏身之鏡，黑洞分為黑洞之上、黑洞近處、黑洞遠處與黑洞之內，羅盤則分上線羅盤、堪輿羅盤、拼裝羅盤與返魅羅盤。這些比喻提供諮商師與案主一個意象化而鮮活的跨文化平台以發展宗教機制類型學，藉此輔助框架來建立共識以評估案主之宗教信仰與行為。英文摘要：The author uses the analogies of windows, mirrors, compass and black hole derived from the Mandala Model of Religion and Self to analyze religious beliefs and acts. To begin with, the meaning of religion is compared to a window and a mirror. The window offers a view into ”the micro-world of doctrine”, while the mirror reflects an individual's ”intuitive cognition”. In religious realist perspective, religion functions as a window by which the believers get to look into the outside world, into the worlds of myths, miracles, fairy tales and mysteries. They get to see things from the perspective of these other worlds and explain how their faith was shaped. This allows them to critique their own world and in the process to be transformed at a deep level. In the positivist perspective, religion serves as a mirror that reflects back to the viewers what they already believe. It is a powerful mirror, providing divine sanction for people's beliefs, values and behavior, but unfortunately that's all it does in most cases. Besides, based on the Phenomenology of Religion, Mircea Eliade's study of the archetype of the dynamic axis mundi shows that there is always a distinction between the sacred and the profane in all religions. In life-world, the rites or sanctified activities could define the sacred fields. The images of Eliadian axis mundi such as the Kabbalah Tree of Life, Mount Olympus in Greek mythology and the Buddhist mandala depicting a central Buddha figure surrounded by groups of Bodhisattvas implies the hierarchical structure composed of all the various roles in ”believers' life-world”. Given that ”moral compass” refers to a person's ability to judge what is right and wrong and act accordingly, the compass of religion provides a system of behavioral guidelines for society and helps to maintain social stability by binding people to the normative aspects of their society. Because religious believers accept the view which set all human activities within the compass of religion, the author draws an analogy between religious axis mundi and resettable geomantic compass. Finally, the author uses ”black hole” to symbolize the suspension of assumptions about the ultimate reality, as well as the ”individual agency” of religion founders. There is a unfathomable ”black hole” at the faith-demanding center of life-world where ”God” should be. The black hole is especially an analytical simile of cult or new religions guided by self-proclaimed prophet. Regarding the counseling application of the Mandala Model of Religion and Self, the analogies of windows, mirrors, compass and black hole are in the I, II, III and IV quadrants respectively. The analogies in each quadrant can be classified into four categories based on its relationship with other quadrants. The analogies of windows can be classified into ”scenery from moving car window”, ”lighting of skylight”, ”picture seen through prison window” and ”wind of the wind”. Mirrors are classified into ”clear reflecting mirror”, ”mirror of ideas”, ”mirror of anxiety” and ”mirror turned outward”. Black hole can be divided into ”above black hole”, ”inner accretion disk of a black hole”, ”outer accretion disk of a black hole” and ”black hole itself”. Compasses are classified into ”online compass”, ”fengshui compass”, ”reassembled compass” and ”re-enchantment compass”. The Mandala Model of Religion and Self with 16 analogies provides professional counsellors and religious clients a universal, symbolic, pictorial and thus lucid platform to develop a typology of religious mechanisms, leading to the consensus on a framework for the assessment of client's religious beliefs and acts, and help religious people to walk on the path of equilibrium and harmony.起始頁-結束頁：21-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190100540023篇名：建構儒釋道喪禮儀式的悲傷療癒歷程模式並列篇名：The Grief Healing Model of the Funeral Rituals Based on Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism作者：鍾文佳(Wen-Chia Chung);郭怡芬(Yi-Fen Kuo);夏允中(Yung-Jung Shiah)關鍵字：悲傷任務;悲傷療癒;喪禮儀式;儒家倫理療癒;儒釋道喪禮儀式;Confucian ethical healing;funeral rituals;grief healing;the funeral rituals of Confucianism;Taoism and Buddhism;the tasks of grieving期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：54期出版年：2019中文摘要：喪禮儀式是許多人在面對親人死亡時，幫助其度過悲傷階段，具有減輕喪親之痛、達到療癒之效。目前悲傷療癒理論，多以西方學者提出為主，國內關於悲傷療癒理論的本土化研究，主要聚焦在悲傷影響因素、悲傷調適任務或哀悼經驗分析。但目前少有研究，是針對儒釋道喪禮儀式，如何幫助喪親者完成悲傷療癒。故本文最主要目的為提出「儒釋道喪禮儀式的悲傷療癒歷程模式」，此歷程提出倫理關係和諧下會產生的心理反應、喪禮儀式中的因應方式與達成的悲傷任務及悲傷療癒。其中倫理關係和諧就是要實踐儒釋道文化下的關係倫理，包括與往生者以及與天鬼神的倫理關係和諧。產生的心理反應是悲傷失落、不捨不忍、尊敬致誠、順應崇拜與敬畏害怕。在喪禮儀式中的因應方式則有招魂復禮、沫浴拜飯、哭踊設飾、啟殯下葬、卒哭祔祭、安神主牌與按時祭祀。達成的悲傷任務分別是：（1）接納失落事實（2）體驗悲傷之苦（3）適應往生者不存在的事實（4）在新生活中找到並持續與往生者有嶄新的連結。悲傷療癒的內容有盡孝盡仁、慎終追遠、轉化悲傷與持續連結。此歷程可說明在儒釋道文化下的喪禮儀式，因為達到儒家倫理療癒，進而對喪親者如何產生悲傷療癒。最後本文提出討論與建議及未來研究的方向。英文摘要：”Death” is an issue that people can't avoid discussing, and funeral rituals can help the bereaved overcome the sadness and lessen the suffering when facing the death of a loved one. Currently, most grief healing theories are proposed by Western scholars. In Taiwan, most domestic grief healing theories discuss the influential factors of grief, the task adjustments of grief, and the analysis of condolence experiences. However, little research focuses on how the bereaved go through funeral rituals to find peace. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to propose ”The Grief Healing Model of the Funeral Rituals of Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism (GHMFRCTB)”. In this model, the fundamental issue is to put Confucian ethical healing into practice in our daily life, which includes the harmonious ethic relationship with the deceased, the ghost, and God. The psychological reaction to grief in the culture of Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism would be sorrow, reluctance, respect, compliance, and awe. The coping skills of the funeral rituals would be spiritual return, bathing and providing meals, mourning, burial, Tsu-Ku-Fu-Chi, setting memorial tablets, and worshiping regularly. ”Spiritual return” means to let the soul of the deceased return to their body and realize the truth that their relatives passed away. ”Bathing and providing meals” means that the bereaved treat the deceased with respect and not to lose that because of death. ”Mourning” means the bereaved should follow the tradition rules to express condolence. In this situation, people won’t hurt themselves because of too much sadness. ”Burial” means the deceased are accompanied by the bereaved to the graveyard and are buried. It also means the bereaved and the deceased have been separated, not to interfere with each other anymore. ”Tsu-Ku-Fu-Chi” means the worship after burying. It indicates that the deceased change from human to Gods and bless the descendants. ”Setting memorial tablets” means welcoming the part of the soul of the deceased back home. It shows that life is endless and the bereaved can remember their ancestors through memorial tablets. ”Worshiping regularly” means designing the different rituals according to the seasons in order to express their missing. The four tasks of grieving are to accept the reality of the loss, to work through the pain and grief, to adjust to a new environment, and to find an enduring connection with the deceased while moving forward with life. The sign of recovery from grief would be filial piety, ancestor-venerating, grief relief, and continuing bonds. ”Filial piety” means to treat the parents and the deceased well during funeral rituals, which is according to the conventional rules to finish funerals completely. ”Ancestor-venerating” means teaching people not to forget their ancestors and origins; then, family members can appreciate their ancestors' contributions naturally. ”Grief relief” means using funeral rituals to let the bereaved realize and accept the truth that their relatives passed away and mitigate the sadness in their mind. ”Continuing bonds” means offering many kinds of sacrifices to gods or ancestors to regularly maintain the relationship with ancestors. Furthermore, funeral rituals could create meaning-making and utilize the values of Confucian culture to release and modulate suffering, in order to maintain the ethical order of the family and keep their ethical relationship in harmony. In this way, the bereaved and the deceased can continue to maintain their relationship and show the ability to create harmonious ethical relationships meaningfully. In conclusion, the GHMFRCTB could offer explanations to the healing effects caused by funeral rituals of Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism. Finally, the possible clinical applications and directions for future research are suggested.起始頁-結束頁：59-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190100540034篇名：多重時空框架經驗整合能力內涵及其對成人親子關係的效果並列篇名：The Construct of Capacity of Integrating Cross-time-and-space Experience and Its Effect on Relationship between Adult Children and Aging Parents作者：高子淳(Tzu-Chun Kao);葉光輝(Kuang-Hui Yeh);何文澤(Wen-Tso Ho)關鍵字：成人親子關係;成年子女;多重時空框架經驗整合;親子衝突;Adult children;adult child-parent relationship;integrating cross-time-and-space experience;parent-children conflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：54期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究關注成年子女對親子關係的回顧與統合歷程，討論成年子女「多重時空框架經驗整合（簡稱多框架整合）」能力與其親子互動間的關係，並以兩個實徵研究檢驗提出的假設。研究一以問卷調查探討成年子女之多框架整合能力與其對父母感激之情、忍讓行為及親子關係融通三者間的關聯。研究二為一項書寫介入方案，藉由四週的線上書寫練習來提升個體的多框架整合能力，並預期對父母感激之情、忍讓行為及親子關係融通皆有對應的增進。參與者主要為35歲以上，或其父母65歲以上且至少一位健在之成年子女。研究一募得424位有效樣本填答問卷資料，研究二則有42位（26位完成實驗組、16位完成對照組）參加書寫介入方案。研究一結果顯示：多框架整合能力可正向預測成年子女對父母的感激之情、忍讓行為及親子關係融通程度；研究二實驗組書寫介入方案可增進成年子女的多框架整合能力，且其變化量能正向地預測參與者從方案前至方案後三星期之親子關係融通程度、對父母感激之情以及衝突下對父母忍讓行為的變化，其作用效果進一步支持研究一的結果。整體而言，成年子女對過往親子關係經驗的多框架整合能力與其對父母的感激及親子間情感融洽程度關係密切，並願意在衝突情境中展現較多的忍讓行為。此多框架整合能力可經由觀點轉換的書寫練習方案提升，進而對成人親子互動關係有正向影響。英文摘要：Previous studies on parent-child conflicts majorly focused on parent-adolescent interactions and take cognitive improvement training as the solution. However, in an aging society today, communication and conflict issues and their solutions are obviously different between adult children's and teenager's relationships with their parents. Based on decades of interactions with parents, adult children have more common memories and understanding of their aging parents. Adult children have also experienced more interpersonal interaction and cognitive maturity, which give them the capacity to have more consideration in conflict and to form holistic mindsets about a relationship. This implies that emotion and long-term relationships are important features in adult children's relationships with their aging parents. In this study, we consider the distinctiveness of adult children and the perspective of positive psychology for discussing the issues of parent-adult child interaction. This research uses the construct of ”Integrating Cross-Time-and-Space Experience (ICTSE)” and tests its effect on the relationship between adult children and their aging parents. ICTSE is a construct that contains cognitive transformation, emotional acceptance, and relational concerns. Adult children can develop ICTSE capacity by reviewing and reframing their early parent-children interactive experiences, including recalling memories of the relationship, openness and acceptance of the current relationship, and imagination of the future relationship. Study 1 used questionnaires to explore the relationship between ICTSE and feeling of appreciation towards parents, forbearance behaviors towards parents during conflict, and deepening relationships with parents. Study 1 recruited 424 participants. Requirement of participants was above 35 years old with at least one of their parents is alive. Under 35 year-old participants were included if one of their parents above 65 years old. One hundred and forty of them completed the father version questionnaire only, 154 completed the mother version questionnaire only, and 130 completed both version questionnaires. Study 2 was an intervention program of ICTSE, incorporated with a 4-week expressive writing paradigm, which consists of recalling memories of similar life-events with parents and emotional experiences in their relationship. Participants needed to express their feeling in multiple points of view across time (meanwhile, now) and perspectives (self, parents, relationship). Forty-two adult children who were above 35 years old enrolled in the intervention program, 26 of them completed the whole program as the experimental group, and 16 of them were the control group. The results of Study 1 showed the scale of ”Integrating Cross-Time-and-Space Experience” had good reliability and validity. The adult children's capacity of ICTSE positively predicted appreciation, forbearance, and relational deepening to their aging parents. Study 2 showed that the writing intervention of ICTSE promoted participants to review and reframe memories with their parents. The change score of adult children's ICTSE between pretest and posttest positively predicted the change score of appreciation, forbearance, and relational deepening to their aging parents. It shows that ICTSE capacity can be promoted in our writing program by recalling emotional memories and practicing in perspective-changing. With new understanding in relationship events, adult children can discover some unaware feelings or give a functional interpretation to past experiences and would have a more positive attitude toward their future relationship with their aging parents. These integrations of the early-life memory in the parent-child interaction closely related to their relationship makes adult children more willing to forbear their parents in conflict. The effects of ICTSE on appreciation, forbearance, and relational deepening to their aging parents were consistent within two studies, indicating that the construct of ICTSE had both theoretical and practical value.起始頁-結束頁：91-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190100540045篇名：文化心理劇：「景觀人，人觀景」用於變遷中的華人家庭關係議題並列篇名：”Seeing from the Scenes”: A Psychodramatic Model for Resolving Familial Relational Conflicts in Contemporary Chinese Societies作者：李御儂(Yunung Lee);賴念華(Nien-Hwa Lai)關鍵字：心理劇;景中物;創造力準則;諮商本土化;雙文化現象／困境;Bi-cultural phenomena/conflicts;cannon of creativity;indigenization of counseling psychology;object in the scene (OIS);psychodrama期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：54期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究探究華人心理劇工作模式「景觀人，人觀景」處理當代華人家庭關係議題的歷程與果效。本模式聚焦於華人關係主義與西方個人主義並存的「雙文化現象／困境」：案主在諮商目標上，擺盪於「追求獨立自主」與「維持（家庭）關係和諧」兩端；在諮商歷程上，拉扯於自我肯認／表達和謹守華人人際原則（保有面子）之間。本研究將「景觀人，人觀景」模式運用於台北、中國華北、華中、西南地區等九個華人家庭心理劇單元，以任務分析法形成歷程闡述文本，再以雙向主題分析法頗析團體歷程與主角半結構深度訪談稿，以探究模式的歷程與果效。研究發現：（1）治療歷程上，景有助於（a）主角「安全地」自我揭露與宣洩情緒、（b）主角「有面子」地自我賦能、（c）「廣角」照見主角所處的社會系統與文化脈絡、（d）「具體真實」遷移治療中的矯治性經驗；（2）家庭關係上，景令主角（a）意識「華人社會文化」對家內關係的影響、（b）接受對角「人在脈絡中」的限制而轉化關係、（c）與「其他家人」關係不再受對角關係影響。根據以上結果與發現，本研究建議將諮商心理學「發展－脈絡觀」融入心理劇的「創造力準則」，俾使關係座落的地景生態得以在治療情境中現顯，以利評估，並以「景觀人，人觀景」為治療工具，暖化主角的自發性與創造力，突破本土諮商的雙文化困境，帶出對家庭關係的理解與轉化。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate the group process and effects of a Chinese indigenous psychodramatic model titled, ”Seeing from The Scenes; Seeing from The Person”. This model was invented to address and resolve relational issues within families arising from the Western-Chinese bi-cultural phenomena/conflicts in contemporary Chinese societies. The bi-cultural phenomena refer to clients 'struggles between pursuing individual independence and autonomy (modernity) and maintaining relational harmony (traditionality), resulting in their attempts to seek counseling and psychotherapy. Meanwhile, the bi-cultural conflicts emerge in the counseling process from clients' contradictory needs for self-disclosure and self-affirmation (individualism-oriented) and simultaneously to save face for selves and others (collectivism-oriented). Inspired by the ”cannon of creativity” in psychodramatic theory, researchers developed a ten-step working model based on psychodrama's unique perspectives on time and space. The ten steps include theme choosing and scene setting, identifying the critical object in the scene (OIS), interviewing the protagonist who reversed to the OIS, having the OIS empower the protagonist, repetitive role reversals between the protagonist and the opposite party in the troubled relationship, concretizing the sociocultural messages, mirror, enacting new strategies, consolidating the corrective experiences, imprinting the new experiences in mind through pictures or mental images. The model was implemented in nine psychodramatic groups themed around family issues. Participants were recruited from faculty members and graduate students at four academic institutes across Taipei, central China, southwest China, and north China. An expert-researcher group was formed and consisted of the director of psychodrama, the observers, and the researcher teams to identify critical interventions and turning points of each psychodrama session in order to construct preliminary group process notes using analytical procedures based on task analysis. Two semi-structured in-depth interviews were conducted with each protagonist first to collect their experiences during the psychodrama process, and second to understand the perceived effects of the working model on family relationships one month afterward. Two-way thematic analysis was conducted with the group process notes and interview transcripts, which then revealed four themes on therapeutic process and three themes on the therapeutic outcomes in terms of bi-cultural conflict resolutions. The study found four therapeutic mechanisms emerging from the group process: (1) the OIS facilitated self-disclosure and emotional catharsis in a face-saving way; (2) the OIS contains and empowers the protagonists while protecting their faces/public-images; (3) the OIS offered a panoramic view to the systemic contexts protagonists were embedded in; (4) the OIS served as a concrete reminder that carried the corrective experiences from therapy to real lives. As for the therapeutic effects, the study revealed three respects of transformations perceived by the protagonists in relation to their family relationships: (1) the protagonists gained awareness of the impacts of the Chinese sociocultural forces impinged on their familial relationships; (2) the protagonists accepted that the specified family members were shaped and restricted by their socio-historical and cultural contexts and thereby took initiatives to change the interactive patterns; (3) the protagonists understood the distinctive conditions/contexts that gave rise to the current relational difficulties and became able to create new possibilities in their other relationships. Based on the research findings, the current study suggested Chinese psychodramatists incorporate the ”development-contextual perspective” into the ”cannon of creativity” to developed a more comprehensive, systemic model for case conceptualization, assessments and interventions formation which involves the client's person, relationships, and environment. Meanwhile, the current model served as a therapeutic tool to warm-up the spontaneity and creativity within the protagonists so that they can generate deeper understandings regarding familial relationships and develop adaptive strategies in resolving interpersonal conflicts resulted from the Chinese-Western cultural/value clash/confrontation.起始頁-結束頁：123-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620190100540056篇名：心理劇中「替身經驗」現象的探究並列篇名：The Experience of Doubling in Psychodrama: A Phenomenological Research作者：游淑瑜(Shu-Yu You);蔡瑋芸(Wei-Yun Tsai)關鍵字：心理劇;身體經驗;替身;詮釋現象學;Bodily feelings;doubling;hermeneutic phenomenology;psychodrama期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：54期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文的目的在於以詮釋現象學的方法，嘗試揭露心理劇中替身經驗的結構內涵。本研究透過公開招募的方式，招募具有人際議題，並想透過心理劇替身技巧幫助其解決人際議題的成員5位，其中研究者會邀請5位受過250小時以上心理劇治療訓練的成員擔任替身5位，邀請5位受過三年以上心理劇治療訓練的成員擔任輔角。本文的臨床操作是在心理劇治療場境，透過替身場景進行暖身，促進主角與替身的對話。替身場景約進行約30-60分鐘。本研究於替身完後，即請替身撰寫替身經驗描述文，有關經驗描述文本的分析，則遵循著李維倫與賴憶隉]2009）提出之現象學分析方法五步驟進行資料分析。本研究結果發現替身經驗普遍結構的二個行為向度：一是橫向聯繫作用：人際語言、非語言行動。替身會傾聽主角、輔角互動的口語語言與非口語語言，引發身體感受，進入主角的經驗脈絡；一是縱向聯繫作用：話語－身體感受。替身在替身場景中，替身經驗到身體、心理的感受，進入主角經驗脈絡，理解主角的置身所在，因而說出替身話語。同時也發現自發性替身經驗歷程，替身卡住經驗歷程與替身脫卡經驗歷程。透過本研究，解明替身經驗的現象，藉以擴大並充實替身經驗的理論，並提供對同理能力訓練的參考。英文摘要：This study aims at revealing the experiential structure of doubling in psychodrama using a phenomenological method. Five participants with the interpersonal issues were chosen and invited to be the protagnists. Five auxiliaries and five doubles were invited to attend the double-training workshop. In the workshop, the researcher designed a doubling scene to warm up the protagnists. The doubling scene included the protagonist, the auxiliary (who played the person and had interpersonal issue with the protagonist), and the double (who sat beside the protagonist). The director facilitated verbal dialogue between the protagonist, the auxiliary and the double. And the dialogue lasted for 30-60 minutes. The researcher collected the experience-describing of the doubles. Phenomenological analysis (Lee & Lai, 2009) was applied to the descriptions of experience. The experiential structure of doubling in psychodrama consisted of two dimensions of behaviors. One was the horizontal dimension, indicating the interpersonal verbal and nonverbal communication. The double listened to the verbal and nonverbal behavior of the protagonist and the auxiliary, listened to the interaction between the protagonist and he auxiliary. The double arouse bodily feelings and doubled for the protagonist. The other was the vertical dimension, indicating the words-bodily feelings connection. By role-playing or by interacting with the protagonist or the auxiliary, the double experienced the inner and bodily feelings, the double understood the protagonists' experience and was in the role of the double and doubled for the protagonist. There are five experiential themes in the experiential structure of doubling in psychodrama. The first experiential theme was that the double was in the role of the double by role-playing. The second experiential theme was that the double was to reveal the protagonist's inner experience. The double played the role of the protagonist, listened to the verbal and nonverbal behavior of the protagonist and the auxiliary, and listened to the interaction between the protagonist and the auxiliary. The double arouse bodily feelings and was in the role of the double, with an aim to understand protagonists' experience. The double revealed the protagonist's inner experience. The third experiential themewas that the double facilitated the protagonist's inner dialogue. The double listened to the verbal and nonverbal behavior of the protagonist and the auxiliary, and listened to the interaction between the protagonist and the auxiliary. The double arouse bodily feelings and was in the role of the double and doubled the protagonists. The double facilitated the protagonist's inner dialogue. The fourth experiential theme was that the double empowered the protagonists by bodily movement. The double listened to the verbal and nonverbal behavior of the protagonist and the auxiliary, listened to the interaction between the protagonist and the auxiliary. The double empowered the protagonists by bodily movement. The last experiential theme was that the double kept the spontaneous doubling process. The spontaneous doubling experience was that the double listened to the verbal and nonverbal behavior of the protagonist and the auxiliary. The double listened to the interaction between the protagonist and the auxiliary. The double arouse bodily feelings and keep being in the role of the double and doubled the protagonists. The double revealed the protagonist's inner experience, facilitated the protagonist's inner dialogue, and empowered the protagonists by bodily movement. The spontaneous doubling process kept going. The researcher reveals the experiential process which the double is stuck and out of stuck. The researcher revealed two situatedness of the double. One situatedness was that the double was isolated with the protagonists' experience. The other situatedness was that the double was refused by the protagonist and the auxiliary. By being doubled by the director, the double was out of stuck and keep the process of doubling. Based on the results of the study, various significant features regarding the experience of doubling in psychodrama were clarified.起始頁-結束頁：159-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186201901005400601篇名：從能源治理的在地實踐到能源民主的遍地開花？地方能源委員會作為行動者對〈再生能源政策在地實踐之探討：以高雄市推動屋頂型太陽光電為例〉的對話與回應作者：周桂田;林木興期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：56期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：163-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201903_(56).00052篇名：氣候變遷下的網絡觀點：探索環境政治協商的複雜性並列篇名：The Network Perspective in Climate Change: Exploring the Negotiation Complexity of Environmental Politics作者：謝儲鍵(Chu-Chien Hsieh)關鍵字：氣候變遷;社會網絡;環境政治;集體行動;公民社會;climate change;social networking;environmental politics;collective action;civil society期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：56期出版年：2019中文摘要：氣候變遷在近年來已成為全球各國政府，在環境議題上最大的挑戰。本書深刻地描繪出公民社會行動者，如何在氣候議題下推展的工作與付出的努力。作者主要想與行動者、倡議者及政策制定者建議，應該多投入在氣候變遷議題中。首先，作者觀察行動主義者在重要關係上的協商，產生了集體行動的結果。作者透過社會網絡概念，對於政府、NGOs、公民社會的行動者，解釋了環境政治互動下的網絡關係。尤其，跨國行動者的網絡關係，如何在氣候變遷議題下對政策制定產生影響。解釋組織決策時，「網絡關係」（network ties）比成員背景來得更加重要。此外，政治機會在環境政治與治理範疇內顯得相當重要，特別是公民社會行動者的組成複雜性。Hadden教授特別提到網絡的規模，與行動者的連結程度可能並非完全正向相關。書中談到組織行為可回應到所謂的網絡機會（政治過程論），策略則反映出組織的意識形態、結構與資源（組織理論）。此書對於台灣公共行政學界之貢獻可以分為兩塊：一、對於環境治理研究，加強網絡概念於政策制定的互動關係；二、將網絡分析工具帶入政策制定過程，從行動者的角色、結構與功能進行探討，瞭解對於決策結果的影響力。英文摘要：Climate change has become the severest challenge for global governments over time. This book deeply demonstrates the actors' efforts devoted to the issue of climate change in global civil society to convince activists, advocates, and policy-makers to participate in the social movement for environmental policies. First of all, Hadden observed the negotiation process in crucial relations for activists that eventually produced collective action. Prof. Hadden explained the network relationships of political interaction among the actors in public sectors, NGOs, and civil society through the concept of social networking. In particular, one core value of this book is to understand how the network relationships of transnational actors influence policy-making performance with respect to climate change. Actually, the network ties are more important than attributes to describe and explain organizational policy decisions. Otherwise, political opportunity is crucial in terms of environment and governance, especially based on the complexity of the actors in civil society. Meanwhile, the organizational behaviors respond to network opportunity (political process theory), and tactics reflect organizational ideology, structure, and resources (organizational theory). The contribution of this book for Taiwan's public administration includes the following: first, it strengthens the network concept applied to interactive relationships; second, it introduces network analysis to the policy-making process through actors' roles, structures and functions to understand the influence of decision-making results.起始頁-結束頁：171-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.201903_(56).000601篇名：政府資助地方族群型非營利組織之影響－客家社團的多個案研究並列篇名：The Effects of Government Funding on Local Ethnic Nonprofit Organizations: The Multiple Case Studies of Hakka Organizations作者：孫煒(Way Sun)關鍵字：政府資助;地方族群型非營利組織;客家社團;客家協會;客家演藝團體;Government Funding;Local Ethnic Nonprofit Organization;Hakka Organizations;Hakka Association;Hakka performing arts groups期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來在全球性政府再造的潮流下，政府運用經濟性政策工具資助非營利組織，無論在預算規模或政策領域皆明顯擴張。臺灣大多數地方族群型非營利組織的主要收入，也皆是來自於政府資助。本文設計一個政府資助影響地方族群型非營利組織之角色與功能的分析架構，並選擇桃園市中不同性質、規模、設立期間的代表性客家社團包括客家協會以及客家演藝團體，透過質性的經驗研究，深入探討政府資助對於客家社團在提供客家服務、激發創新作法等工具性角色，以及傳播客家價值、強化客家社會資本、提升公民參與、進行政策倡導等表達性角色上所形成的正面與負面的影響。本文總結研究發現得知：政府資助對於其角色產生顯著的「服務提供協力、價值倡議扈從」的影響，也就是說，政府資助直接地增強了客家社團傳承客家文化藝術的工具性角色，然而也間接地削弱了客家社團提供客家價值精神的表達性角色。短期而言，政府的資助確實有助於地方族群型非營利組織提供豐富多元且創新的公共服務，但就長期而言，政府資助也降低地方族群型非營利組織的自主性並產生資源依賴，降低了族群回應性以及族群事務的倡議能力，而不利於培養成熟的公民社會。英文摘要：Under the trend of global government reengineering in recent years, governmental use of economic policy tools to fund non-profit organizations has increased significantly whether in budget size or policy scope. In Taiwan, the main income of local ethnic nonprofit organizations come from government funding. This article constructs an analytical framework to examine the impact of government funding on the roles and functions of local ethnic nonprofit organizations. Representative Hakka Organizations (Hakka associations and Hakka performing arts groups) with different attributes, scale and length of establishment in Taoyuan City are selected as study subjects. Through qualitative empirical research, the positive and negative impact of government funding for Hakka organizations to provide Hakka services, stimulate innovative tools and other instrumental roles, spread Hakka values, strengthen Hakka social capital, enhance citizen participation, conduct expression roles such as policy advocacy were examined. Based on the findings of the empirical research, in terms of service-providing collaboration but advocacy bandwagoning, government funding has a significant impact on their roles. In other words, government funding directly enhances the instrumental role of Hakka organizations in transmitting Hakka cultural and art heritage. However, the expressive role of conveying Hakka values and spirit is also indirectly weakened. In conclusion, the article found that in the short term, government funding has a positive impact on helping local ethnic non-profit organizations provide richer, more diversified and more innovative public services. However, in the long run, government funding may also reduce the autonomy of local ethnic non-profit organizations and generate resource dependence, thereby undermining their ethnic responsiveness and advocates in ethnic affairs.起始頁-結束頁：113-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：假新聞與民主危機並列篇名：Disinformation and Democratic Crisis作者：王泰俐(Tai-li Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：155-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：書評：Democracy Against Domination〔民主對抗宰制〕by K. Sabeel Rahman〔塞比爾．拉赫曼〕並列篇名：A review of Democracy Against Domination by K. Sabeel Rahman作者：林偉修(Wei-hsiu Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：163-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：世界民主大事紀：2019年4－6月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: April-June 2019期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：173-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：歐洲及亞洲監察制度的獨立性分析並列篇名：The Study of the Independence of the Ombudsman System in Europe and Asia作者：汪林玲(Lin-ling Uang)關鍵字：監察使;監察機構;監察制度;獨立性;關鍵項目;ombudsman;ombudsman institutions;ombudsman system;independence;key items期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文分析監察制度的文獻及經比較探究，歸納出15位學者所提出之監察制度獨立性內涵見解；同時本文以歐亞共64個國家（或地區）樣本之監察制度設計中，縷析出獨立於行政機關的程度、法制化程度、職權行使程度、豁免權情形及預算獨立程度五個面向，並歸納出任用程序、解職程序、任期時間、法源位階、利益迴避規範、行政機關具配合義務、具強制權力、獨立調查作為免於起訴、預算保障使監察機構具足夠資源獨立運作等共9個關鍵項目。予以編碼後，經以信度分析，獲得Cronbach's α值為0.82，信度分析指標值高於0.7，顯見本文依據15位學者所提出之監察制度關鍵項目指標之內部的一致性標準。而實務上，監察使本身以及研究監察制度之國內外學者等，對於監察制度獨立性關鍵項目，有何實務見解，經進一步訪談分析後釐清關鍵項目，再以Cronbach's α值為信度分析指標，顯示調整項目後之內部一致性標準值達0.85。而為提升本文之研究價值，更進一步就受訪者所提出的見解予以檢視，探究歐亞監察制度獨立性與透明度、民主程度相關情形，研究顯示歐亞監察制度獨立性指標值與國際透明組織（International Transparency）之清廉指數（Corruption Perception Index）並未達統計上的顯著相關，但與自由之家（Freedom House）的民主指數（Democracy Index）達統計上顯著之正相關性。英文摘要：Based on the literatures and comparative studies of the ombudsman system, this study summed up that 15 scholars have proposed the connotation of the independence of the ombudsman system. And in accordingly, this study classifies the independence of the ombudsman system to nine items which include appointment procedures, removal procedures, term of office, legal basis, incompatibility, enforcement of duty of assistance, the powers of coercion, immunity and budget. Therefore, this study presents the samples of 64 countries (or regions) in Europe and Asia and according to the 9 items above which had been encoded and were quantified. The study showed that the reliability analysis of access to Cronbach's alpha was 0.82, and the value is higher than 0.7, which obviously reach the consistency standard. Thereafter, to intensify the quality of the research, this study conducted a method of semi-constructed/constructed interviews with the ombudsman and ombudsman research scholars in domestic and overseas. Based on the interviewees' practical experience and professional opinions, the researcher adjusted the 9 key items into qualification regulations, appointment procedures, removal procedures, term of office, legal basis, incompatibility, enforcement of duty of assistance, immunity, and budget. It could be found that the item of ”qualification regulations” had been added and the item of ”powers of coercion” had been deleted. This adjustment showed the highest value of the Cronbach's alpha to 0.85 which indicated the high consistency standard of reliability. For the highlight of the research, the researcher further examine the opinions of interviewees to explore the relationship of the degree of the independence with the degree of the transparency (by using the corruption perception index) and the degree of democracy (by using the index of political rights and civil liberties). This study showed that the relationship of the index of the independence of the ombudsman system and the corruption perception index (Transparency International) was not significantly correlated, but statistically significant positive correlation with Freedom House's Democracy Index.起始頁-結束頁：1-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：民主程度和發展程度對各國二氧化碳排放治理的影響並列篇名：The Effects of Democracy and Development on the Governance of Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Emissions作者：薛健吾(Chien-wu Alex Hsueh)關鍵字：民主;經濟發展;二氧化碳;氣候變遷;全球治理;democracy;development;Carbon Dioxide (CO_2);climate change;global governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來，各種氣候變遷的重大災害頻傳，不分國界地威脅到整個人類社會，使得如何有效地對氣候變遷進行全球治理成為刻不容緩的問題。在氣候變遷治理的文獻中，有一個普遍的觀點是，當一個國家的「民主程度」或是「經濟發展程度」增加，將有利於減低該國二氧化碳的排放量；然而，若仔細深究其中的因果關係，則「民主政治」與「經濟發展」事實上對於二氧化碳的排放同時具有正面和負面的影響，這個事實也解釋了為何過去的研究並未在「民主」與「經濟發展」對「二氧化碳排放治理」的影響上達成共識。本文的目的，即在於透過既有文獻的建議，在邏輯上釐清「民主程度」、「發展程度」與「二氧化碳排放治理」三者之間的關係。本文論點的建立有四個階段：首先，本文將論證，由於經濟發展程度的本身就涉及到對環境資源的汲取能力，所以二氧化碳的「環境顧志耐曲線」應該是以一個二階的效果，也就是說，二氧化碳的「環境顧志耐曲線」的效果應該是在考量到各國經濟發展程度之後的殘差值上呈現。其次，由於二氧化碳汙染的性質特殊，所以必須倚靠由「跨國倡議」所引進的規範與觀念來改變人民的價值觀，才能夠使人民注意到這個問題的嚴重性。第三，由於某些穩定的威權國家有維護環境的誘因，而轉型中的民主國家普遍極度缺乏維護環境的誘因，所以民主程度與人均二氧化碳排放量之間應該是呈現「倒U型」的關係。最後，民主政治至少包含了「制度民主」（競爭和參與）和「實質民主」（政治權利和公民自由）這兩種不同的面向，在「制度民主」程度高的國家中，由於競爭性和參與性皆高，政治人物面對著必須透過刺激經濟發展來爭取選票的強大壓力，因此難以採行可能減緩經濟發展的政策來控制二氧化碳的排放量；而在「實質民主」程度高的國家中，人民更可能具足夠的政治權利和公民自由來讓減少二氧化碳排放的跨國倡議和普世價值得以在社會中成功傳播，進而使國家推動相關的立法來規範排放標準，因此「實質民主」的程度就成為國家是否能夠有效控制二氧化碳排放的關鍵。來自全球150個國家涵蓋1972∼2013年的追蹤資料證實了本文的論點。英文摘要：The frequent occurrence of severe natural disasters in recent years highlights the importance of global climate change governance, and especially the management of carbon dioxide (CO_2) emissions. The literature on environmental governance presents the argument that the levels of democracy and development of a state are positively correlated with the state's performance in terms of environmental governance. However, if we analyze the causal relationships between democracy, development, and environmental governance, we find that democracy and development actually exert both, positive and negative effects on the environment. This also explains why previous literature failed to reach a consensus regarding the influence of these factors on environmental governance. The goal of this article is to put forward an argument clarifying the relationship between democracy, development, and states' CO_2 emission governance. I establish this argument in four steps. Firstly, I argue that since the amount of CO_2 emissions per capita can serve as a proxy for the degree of development, the CO_2 environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) effect will be present in the residuals of the CO_2 EKC equation. Secondly, because of the special characteristics of CO_2 emissions, the main impulse urging states to regulate their CO_2 emissions is from transnational advocacy groups that affect people's perceptions, values, and ideas. Thirdly, based on the suggestions of literature on the logic of political survival, both, democracies and stable autocracies may have incentives to protect the environment, while new democracies have the least incentive to do so. Therefore, the relationship between democracy and environmental governance should be U-shaped. Lastly, ”democracy” has at least two different dimensions: (1) the procedural dimension emphasizes the degree of political competition and participation, while (2) the substantive dimension emphasizes the degree of people's political rights and civil liberties. These two different dimensions should exert different effects on environmental governance. In states with a high degree of procedural democracy and a low degree of substantive democracy, political leaders have to compete for votes in order to remain in power; thus, it is more difficult for them to adopt emission regulation policies, as they may compromise their commitments to economic development made to the supporters. Instead, in states that have a high degree of substantive democracy, people are more likely to enjoy more liberties and rights, which are positively associated with the spread of emission-regulation transnational advocacy. Thus, it is more likely for them to realize the emission-regulation policy outputs. Empirical evidence from 150 countries over the 1972-2013 period confirms my argument.起始頁-結束頁：65-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：邊緣人的政治理論－論史珂拉（Judith Shklar）的懷疑主義式自由主義並列篇名：Edge People's Political Theory: On Judith Shklar's Skeptical Liberalism作者：沈明璁(Ming-cong Shen)關鍵字：史珂拉;不正義;重法主義;殘酷;恐懼的自由主義;Judith Shklar;injustice;legalism;cruelty;the liberalism of fear期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：作為一名總是以「邊緣人」角度來看這世界的政治理論家，史珂拉（Judith Shklar）提出了自己的不正義理論。相較於多數自由主義者總是汲汲營營地尋找政治中的最大公約數，史珂拉反其道而行，關注被排除在這最大公約數外的弱勢者或團體。而這樣的不正義理論背後，其實是帶有濃濃的懷疑主義氣味。本文即是要透過史珂拉的懷疑主義，探討如何建構其不正義理論，進而能理解她的自由主義思想。筆者將透過四個部份來解析史珂拉的思想，首先從她對重法主義的批評，帶出她對於追求確定性和尋求標準的理論的質疑，開啟她對不正義的關注。接著第二部份，再由此來觀察史珂拉的恐懼的自由主義來衍生出她的不正義理論，並說明這樣的不正義理論不會是消極無作為的，反之，是積極的，是要我們對受害者更有敏感度，使得我們必須重新反思正義理論。第三部份則是對於殘酷的重視，以及她如何藉由說故事和心理學的方式來將殘酷置於首位，關心受害者處境，進而發展她的恐懼的自由主義。最後一部份，則是探討史珂拉對於烏托邦思想的看法，這也帶出她對於政治理論的看法，希望與恐懼是可以共存的，只要我們記得過去的殘酷與不正義的記憶。英文摘要：As a political theorist, Judith Shklar constructed her injustice theory with reference to skeptical thinking and focused on the underprivileged minority who are excluded from the majority in society. Shklar's theory differs from other liberals in that she is against the idea that a systematic theory of justice should be built. In this article, I will elaborate on Shklar's political thought in four parts: (1) Shklar's criticism on legalism brings out her doubts on the idea of pursuing certainty and criteria among morality, politics, and law; (2) following Shklar's skeptical thinking, readers will come to understand why her injustice theory should be perceived as positive rather than negative. She inspired us to become more sensitive to victimhood and allow us to reflect on the justice theories; (3) I then demonstrate how Shklar interpreted cruelty with story and psychology in ”Putting cruelty first”; (4) Finally, I will explore Shklar's views on utopianism, which lay out her perspectives toward political theory and political philosophy. We can be optimistic if we keep the memories of cruelty and injustice in our minds.起始頁-結束頁：119-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：A Summer of Discontent: a Glimpse into Hong Kong's Anti-Extradition Protests並列篇名：一個充滿抗議活動的夏天－香港反送中抗議活動現場隨筆作者：杜方思(Jean-Francois Dupre)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：161-185資料語文：英文;繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：書評：The Truth Machine: The Blockchain and the Future of Everything〔真理機器－區塊鏈與數位時代的新憲法〕by Paul Vigna and Michael J. Casey〔保羅．威格納與麥克．凱西〕並列篇名：Book reviews: A review of The Truth Machine: The Blockchain and the Future of Everything by Paul Vigna and Michael J. Casey作者：李宣緯(Hsuan-wei Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：187-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：Introduction: Normative and Economic Dimensions of EU-East Asia Relations並列篇名：緒論：歐亞關係中經濟與規範力量的較勁作者：Bart Dessein;Jan van der Harst;Frank Gaenssmantel;Kuo-chun Yeh期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：80期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201906_(80).00012篇名：Confucianism and Chinese Normative Power並列篇名：儒家思想與中國的規範力量作者：Bart Dessein關鍵字：Confucianism;Civil Society;Normative Power;Washington Consensus;China Model;儒家;文明社會;規範性權力;華盛頓共識;中國模式期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：80期出版年：2019中文摘要：Having been the most important economic power of East Asia for centuries and having expanded her cultural influence over an ever larger area, China's violent confrontation with Europe in the First Opium War (Yapian zhanzheng, 鴉片戰爭, 1839-1842) and the ensuing 'unequal treaties' (bu pingdeng tiaoyue, 不平等條約) that started the so-called 'century of humiliation' (bainian guochi, 百年國恥), dramatically put this historical position into question. As a result, Chinese intellectuals began to doubt the viability of Confucianism, and a period of cultural self-criticism set in. This explains why the West was adopted as a normative model for China's development away from Confucianism, and towards 'modernity'. The role of the West as a 'normative power' may have remained rather uncontested until the early 2000s, but the most recent decade has witnessed a renewed Chinese self-assertiveness accompanied by a re-appreciation for Confucianism. China is also increasingly advocating her developmental path as an alternative to the 'Washington Consensus'. This article discusses the nature of the Confucian state's normativity, and puts forward a hypothesis on why contemporary China witnesses a return to Confucian values.英文摘要：幾個世紀以來，中國一直是東亞最重要的經濟大國，並且不斷地在不同區域擴大自身的文化影響力。儘管如此，中國在第一次鴉片戰爭（1839－1842）與歐洲發生暴力對抗後，隨後簽訂的「不平等條約」展開了所謂的「百年國恥」。上述歷史事件發生後，導致知識分子對中國的思想定位開始產生質疑，中國知識分子開始懷疑儒家思想的可行性，並進入文化自我批評的時期，這就說明<U+7232>何西方採納中國的規範性模式由儒家思想發展到「現代性」。直到21世紀初，西方作<U+7232>「規範性權力」的角色仍然是無可爭議，但最近10年見證中國人自我主張的重新發展，同時又重新認識儒家思想。中國越來越強調自身的發展途徑，想藉此取代「華盛頓共識」。本文討論儒家中的國家規範性本質，並進一步探討當代中國<U+7232>何會回歸儒家價值觀的假設。起始頁-結束頁：9-36資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201906_(80).00023篇名：Relabeling Countries with Non-Market Economies as Countries with Market-Distorted Economies: The New EU Methodology in Anti-dumping Investigations at the Heart of a Storm並列篇名：將非市場經濟國家重新定位為市場扭曲經濟體國家：處於風暴中心之歐盟新反傾銷調查法作者：李貴英(Catherine Li)關鍵字：China's Accession Protocol to the World Trade Organization (WTO);Non-market Economy (NME);Analogue Country Methodology;Shifting in Burden of Proof;Significant Market Distortions;中國大陸入會議定書;非市場經濟;類似國價格法;舉證責任轉換;顯著市場扭曲期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：80期出版年：2019中文摘要：The European Union adopted in December 2017 the new Anti-dumping Regulation which aims at protecting its producers against unfair trade practices, especially dumped imports from China. The European Commission's original proposal to revise its anti-dumping rules was put forward in November 2016, just before the 15th anniversary of China's accession to the WTO. The deadline meant that China demanded to be recognized as a having market-economy status, and to no longer treated as a non-market economy in anti-dumping investigations. According to the new regulation, the methodology removes the former distinction between market and non-market economies for calculating dumping margins. Instead, the European Commission will need to prove the existence of a significant market distortion between a product's sale price and its production cost. On that basis, it will be allowed to set prices for products by referring, for example, to the price of the good in a country with similar levels of economic development, or to relevant undistorted international costs and prices. Faced with its obligation to respect WTO rules, the European Commission's new anti-dumping rules are ”country- neutral”. However, this new approach has sustained some major criticisms and constitutes one of the most contentious issues in EU-China bilateral trade relations. This research paper will attempt to address the debate on the interpretation of the key provision in China's Accession Protocol, followed by an analysis of what alternative means and methods for calculating anti-dumping duties would be applied in cases involving China after 11 December 2016.英文摘要：歐洲聯盟於2017年12月通過新反傾銷規則，旨在保護歐盟業者以對抗不公平之貿易行<U+7232>，尤其是來自中國之傾銷進口。歐盟執委會於2016年11月提出修正反傾銷規則之草案，適逢中國大陸加入世界貿易組織15週年（2016年12月11日）前夕。中國大陸認<U+7232>15週年屆滿後應取得市場經濟地位，在反傾銷調查中不應再被視<U+7232>非市場經濟國家。而根據歐盟新規則，歐盟在計算傾銷差額時，不再適用市場經濟與非市場經濟間之區分。反之，歐盟執委會應證明產品銷售價格與其生產成本之間存在顯著市場扭曲。在此基礎上，歐盟執委會可參考具有類似經濟發展水準國家之商品價格，或相關未受扭曲之國際成本與價格，以認定產品價格。<U+7232>了遵守世界貿易組織協定下之義務，歐盟執委會在新反傾銷規則下採取「國別中立」原則。然而此一新方法受到諸多批評，成<U+7232>歐中雙邊貿易關係中最具爭議之一環。本文擬探討關於中國大陸入會議定書關鍵條款之解釋問題，並分析2016年12月11日後評估中國大陸涉案貨品反傾銷稅之替代方式與計算方法。起始頁-結束頁：37-62資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201906_(80).00034篇名：China as a Textile Giant Preserving its Leading Position in the World, and What it Means for the EU並列篇名：中國作為全球紡織龍頭對歐盟的意義作者：Astrid Pepermans關鍵字：China;European Union;Economic Nationalism;Mercantilism;Textile Industry;中國;歐盟;紡織工業;經濟民族主義;重商主義期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：80期出版年：2019中文摘要：Since the mid 2000's China has dethroned the EU as the world's biggest provider of apparel and textiles. China's low labour costs have without a doubt triggered this evolutions. Less clear however are the reasons why, despite the fact that China is rapidly losing its labour cost advantage, the country successfully maintains its leading position in the industry. This article poses that the Chinese government uses a twofold strategy. First of all, the state tries to maintain its competitive advantage in labour-intensive textile products by supporting the relocation of Chinese textile production bases to poorer Chinese provinces and adjacent LDCs (least developed countries). At the same time, the Chinese government launched several policies, pushing the Chinese textile firms to create capital-intensive textile goods, niche-products and international brands. By revealing China's pragmatic approach of combining liberalism and economic nationalism in order to cope with the challenges it faces in the textile sector, this case study exemplifies that liberal and mercantilist policy tools are not mutually exclusive; something that has been insufficiently recognized. Moreover, whereas China's competitiveness was mainly felt in the apparel-producing southern-European countries, China is becoming increasingly competitive in the high-end parts of the sector too.英文摘要：自19世紀中期以來，中國已取代歐盟成<U+7232>全球最大的服裝和紡織品供應國，中國的低勞動力成本無疑地觸發這種轉變，儘管轉變原因尚未明確。中國正迅速失去其勞動力成本的優勢，但其仍成功地保持著在該行業的領先地位。本文將對中國政府的雙重策略進行討論。首先，國家支持將中國紡織品生產基地遷移到中國較貧困的省份和鄰近最不發達的國家，企圖保持其在勞動密集型紡織品的競爭優勢。另一方面，中國政府推出了多項政策，推動中國紡織企業創造資本密集型紡織品、利基產品和國際品牌。通過揭示中國將自由主義與經濟民族主義相結合的務實方針來應對紡織業面臨的挑戰，本案例研究證實自由主義和重商主義政策並非相互排斥，且仍存有未被外界認知的部分。另外，儘管中國的競爭力主要體現在外包南歐國家的服裝生產面向，但中國在紡織業高端市場上的競爭力仍持續增強中。起始頁-結束頁：63-107資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201906_(80).00045篇名：論梁啟超「國民」概念的兩面性：以Bluntschli國家學說作為背景的考察並列篇名：The Two Faces of Liang Qichao's Concept of ”Volk”: A Perspective from Bluntschli's Theory of the State作者：楊尚儒(Shang-ju Yang);林奕蒼(Yi-tsang Lin)關鍵字：梁<U+5553>超;Bluntschli;國家學;國民;脈絡主義;Liang Qichao;Bluntschli;Theory of State;Volk;Contextualism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：79期出版年：2019中文摘要：梁<U+5553>超的政治思想在1903年赴美之後出現巨大的轉變。在此前，梁<U+5553>超比較傾向於民權和政治體系的變動；在之後則趨於保守、反對共和革命。而無論是在思想轉變之前或之後，其論述都是以「國民」這一間接從Bluntschli繼受而來的概念<U+7232>核心。本文試圖藉由脈絡主義的研究方法來指出，梁<U+5553>超是基於當時的情勢和不同的立場，取其所需的部分來使用Bluntschli的國民概念。而之所以他能夠如此使用此一概念，則是因<U+7232>這一概念源於19世紀的德國國家學。後者的特點是，其本質<U+7232>人民主權與君主主權之爭的妥協方案，因此具有兩面性，亦即同時包含了有利於民權的部分亦具有有利於君主制的部分。英文摘要：Liang Qichao's political thought took a dramatic turn after his travels to the United States in 1903. Previously, Liang had tended to emphasize the importance of political rights and the transformation of the political system. Later, his attitude became more conservative, and he began to stand against the Republican revolution. What remains constant throughout his writings, however, is the core concept of the ”people” (Volk), which Liang indirectly took from Bluntschli. Using the contextualist method, this article attempts to point out that Liang merely took the parts of Bluntschli's concept of Volk which served his purposes well, depending upon the situation and political goal. It was possible for him to use the term for opposing purposes as it originated from 19th century German political theory, which was essentially shaped by political compromise between the ruler and popular sovereignty. It, therefore, had a double meaning, which contained arguments both in favor of civil liberties and in support of the persistence of the monarchy.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201903_(79).00016篇名：洛克論宗教寬容：神學與世俗面向的辯證並列篇名：Spiritual or Secular? John Locke on Religious Toleration作者：周家瑜(Chia-yu Chou)關鍵字：洛克;寬容;世俗觀點;懷疑主義;自然法;Locke;Toleration;Secular Perspective;Skepticism;Natural Law期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：79期出版年：2019中文摘要：在這篇文章中，筆者處理當代對洛克宗教寬容理論過度去脈絡化，過度世俗化的詮釋，以當代洛克研究者沃德倫的詮釋<U+7232>例，勾勒出當代對洛克寬容理論的理解圖像，筆者以<U+7232>這種世俗詮釋了導致洛克寬容理論背後的神學脈絡與議題之忽略，因此本文探討此一脈絡，指出洛克與普洛斯特之間的爭議並不在於「政治權力干涉信仰是否有效」這樣一種「手段－目的」的討論，除此之外，此種世俗詮釋所導向的懷疑主義也忽略了洛克對於基督教<U+7232>唯一<U+771E>宗教的信念與其論辯對手其實是一樣堅定不移，本文藉由釐清這些面向要指出的是，唯有在避免這些誤解之後，洛克的宗教寬容理論才能<U+771E>正與其《政府論次講》中對政治權力本質的探討，政教關係之論述等主題銜接起來。英文摘要：This essay argues against the prevailing secular perspective of the reading of John Locke's theory of religious toleration. I argue that this secular understanding of Locke neglects the deep theological concerns hidden behind his account of civil peace. In order to make this argument, I explore Jeremy Waldron's influential interpretation of Locke, and in the second section, I emphasize the theological context of Locke's criticism of infallibility. Finally, I argue that the skepticism of Locke's theory of religious toleration in fact seemingly comes from the secular interpretation discussed above.起始頁-結束頁：41-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201903_(79).00027篇名：帶祖先回家的法律？美國原住民族墓葬保護暨返還法的困境與啟示並列篇名：An Analysis of the US Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990 and Its Lessons for Taiwan作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-tung Huang)關鍵字：原住民族;遺骸;返還;原住民族墓葬保護<U+66C1>返還法;Indigenous Peoples;Human Remains;Repatriation;NAGPRA期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：79期出版年：2019中文摘要：2017年，臺灣發生了「馬遠布農族遺骨返還事件」。對此，論者紛紛呼籲政府效法美國「原住民族墓葬保護暨返還法」（The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990；NAGPRA），盡速制訂出一套系統的制度性安排，以便全面解決遺骨問題。即便該法受到廣泛的關注，國內相關的討論卻相對有限。論者在提及或引介之餘，多未就其規範意旨、條文內容、實施細節、各項爭議等予以檢視；該法30年來實際運作的成效與評估，更是付之闕如。有鑑於此，本文擬從規範與實務這兩個側面來對NAGPRA進行分析，並嘗試反思該法對未來我國立法上的<U+5553>示。本文認<U+7232>，遺骨返還的問題涉及部落認同、倫理情感、文化傳承、科學研究等多重面向，且必然會觸及族人、遺族、博物館、行政機關等多方行動者。有鑑於此，本文指出任何一項制度選擇都會有相應的後果（ramification）。對我國而言，瞭解NAGPRA的優勢與限制，並在本土情境中妥適借鏡，就是對該法施行30年週年最好的紀念。英文摘要：In recent years, indigenous remains and their repatriation have become contentious issues in Taiwan. Although there are no simple solutions to this problem, one way to move forward is by learning from other countries. Intriguingly, although most Taiwanese scholars agree that NAGPRA (The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act) is an exemplar of repatriation, there is a paucity of literature on this topic. This study analyzes NAGPRA from a legal-political perspective. After studying it in-depth, it becomes evident that NAGPRA is by no means a clear-cut success. In retrospect, it is true that NAGPRA has brought a lot of indigenous remains back to the tribes; nevertheless, under the category of culturally ”unidentified/ unidentifiable”, thousands of remains are still legally curated or ”detained” in museums. As an act which attempts to balance different interests, a delay seems to be an inevitable consequence. This article further argues that the best way to celebrate the 30th anniversary of NAGPRA is to learn from its strengths and limitations and, in turn, to apply it to our local context.起始頁-結束頁：69-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.201903_(79).000301篇名：數理資優大腦白質網路結構分析之研究並列篇名：White Matter Network Connectome of Mathematical and Scientific Talents作者：郭靜姿(Ching-Chih Kuo);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);梁庚辰(Keng-Chen Liang);高淑芬(Susan Shur-Fen Gau);吳清麟(Ching-Lin Wu)關鍵字：智力;圖形理論;數理資優;擴散張量影像;Diffusion tensor imaging;Graph theory;Intelligence;Mathematical and scientific talents期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：近期研究已普遍指出數理資優個體的大腦結構與常人不同。然而，多數研究較著重於認知功能與單一大腦區域的運作之關係。本研究首從圖形理論取向探討數理資優、智力與大腦白質網路結構之關係。參與者為42位神經功能正常的成年男性，數理資優與一般成人各21人，其年齡分別為年齡為21.00 ± 1.67歲及年齡為21.48 ± 2.29歲。研究者採用魏氏成人智力測驗第三版評估個體智商，並進行擴散張量影像掃瞄，再依此建構大腦白質網路，使用圖形理論計算大腦網路屬性及各節點之連結效率。結果發現，數理資優組在大腦局部區域內節點之間的傳遞效率較佳，並以左側額上回尤甚。進一步控制數理資優與一般組的智力均等，數理資優組在大腦局部區域內的節點訊息傳輸效率仍占有優勢，並以涉及空間處理能力的左側枕上回群聚程度最佳。其後，分別分析數理資優與一般組在智力與大腦網路拓樸屬性之相關結果指出，僅一般成人作業智力與大腦網路全局效率為正相關，數理資優成人的智力與大腦網路連結則無直接關聯。上述結果不僅提供數理資優與常人在大腦白質結構差異情形的實徵證據，更從大腦拓樸網路之取向區辨數理資優、數理能力以及智力之異同，將可做為往後評估資賦優異的參考。英文摘要：Recent studies have highlighted that people with mathematical and scientific talents develop a different brain structure from those with typical development. However, most of these studies have focused on the relationship between cognitive functions of the brain and the operation of a single area of the brain. This study explores the connections among the network structures with relation to mathematical and scientific talents, intelligence, and white matter. The study recruited 42 men with normal nerve functions. The experimental group comprised 21 participants with mathematical and scientific talents and an age of 21.00 ± 1.67 years; the control group comprised 21 participants with typical developmental and an age of 21.48 ± 2.29 years. The mathematical and scientific talent and typical developmental groups consisted of 21 people each. The researchers adopted the third version of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Test to evaluate individual intelligence, conduct diffusion tensor imaging of participants, and construct a network of white matter to analyze the overall network attributes and nodal efficiencies using graph theory. The results show that the communication efficiency among the nodes inside the local region is relatively better in people with mathematical and scientific talents, particularly the in the superior prefrontal gyrus. Moreover, when intelligence was equal between the two groups, the mathematical and scientific talent group outperformed the other in terms of node efficiency in local regions and the clustering coefficient in the superior occipital gyrus. The relationship between the topological properties and the intelligence of the mathematical and scientific talent group and the typical developmental group showed that only the intelligence of the typical developmental group was positively connected with integrated efficiency across several regions of the brain; however, no direct correlation was shown in the mathematical and scientific talents group. The results not only provided empirical evidence for the disparity in white matter structure between mathematical and scientific talent and typical development groups but also distinguished mathematical and scientific talents, mathematical ability, and intelligence based on the topological network of the brain, which can be used in future assessments for people with mathematical and scientific talents.起始頁-結束頁：389-406資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201903_50(3).00012篇名：親子遊戲治療對外化問題兒童與母親親職壓力之成效並列篇名：Effects of Filial Therapy on Parents of Children with Externalizing Behaviors作者：劉秀菊(Hsiu-Chu Liu);高淑貞(Shu-Chen Kao);高宛琳(Wan-Lin Kao)關鍵字：外化問題;親子遊戲治療;親子關係;親職壓力;Externalization problems children;Filial therapy;Parent-child relationship;Parental stress期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討親子遊戲治療對於外化問題兒童與母親親職壓力之成效。對象為「兒童行為檢核表」外化量尺T分數達邊緣臨床範圍以上（T<U+2265>60分）之六對兒童及其母親，對其進行為期十週、每週一次2小時之親子遊戲治療。本研究成效之評估採質量並呈方式，量化部分採單組前後測設計，團體開始前和結束後實施「兒童行為檢核表」和「親職壓力量表」前測、後測和追蹤測，以及「教師報告表」之前測、後測，進行Wilcoxon符號等級考驗；質性部分，在團體結束後對六位母親進行約1小時之個別訪談，以探究外化問題兒童母親參與親子遊戲治療團體的經驗。研究結果：1.親子遊戲治療對外化問題兒童之內化、外化問題與整體問題，以及母親親職壓力具立即與持續改善效果；2.質性分析顯示，外化問題兒童母親之成效包括：覺察與理解、正向改變與看見美好、家人關係與溝通的改善等面向。綜合上述結果發現，親子遊戲治療對研究對象具有正向之影響。根據研究發現提出建議，以供實務工作及未來相關研究之參考。英文摘要：This study investigated the effects of filial therapy on children with externalizing behaviors and mothers' parenting stress. The results obtained using the Achenbach System of Empirically Based Assessment show that six parent-child pairs among the members had an externalized scale t score above the marginal clinical range (t <U+2265> 60). Based on the study design, the members were invited to participate in a filial therapy group for 2 hours per week over the course of 10 weeks. The study was also conducted over the course of 10 weeks. The study adapted both quantitative and qualitative research methods; the quantitative method uses a single-subject design. The members were administered the pre- and pro-tests of the Achenbach System of Empirically Based Assessment and the Parenting Stress Index, as well as the Teacher's Report. After the test, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to determine the results. For the qualitative method, to investigate the experiences of mothers who had children with externalizing behaviors in the filial therapy session, the members were interviewed individually to explore the experiences of mothers for 1 hour after the session was completed. This study provides the following research findings: (1) Filial therapy had significant effects in terms of not only reducing the children's problems related to internalizing, externalizing, and overall parts but also in rapidly reducing the mothers' parental stress continuously. (2) The qualitative data analyses showed that the effects of the filial therapy program on the mothers of children with externalizing behaviors include awareness and understanding, positive changes, finding wonderful things in life, and improving both family relationships and communication. The study results show that filial therapy had positive effects on all the members, including by reducing children's externalizing behaviors and reducing mothers' parental stress. This study not only proposes relevant recommendations based on the research findings but also provides viable suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：407-435資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201903_50(3).00023篇名：角色提及順位與呈現形式對中文讀者代名詞推論的影響並列篇名：The Influence of Order of Mention and Type of Character Expression on Mandarin Chinese Readers' Pronoun Resolution作者：吳美瑤(Mei-Yao Wu);曾玉村(Yuh-Tsuen Tzeng)關鍵字：代名詞推論;呈現形式;時近效應;提及順位;閱讀理解;Order of mention;Pronoun resolution;Reading comprehension;Recency effect;Type of character expression期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：在有多位角色的文本中，作者常以不同的呈現形式介紹角色，如：人名、代名詞或角色描述名，且角色呈現的順序也不同。當文本中以代名詞指稱前文提及的角色時，讀者需要推論代名詞指稱何者。唯有正確的代名詞推論，才能促成文章的連貫，因此，角色提及順位與呈現形式等因素都會影響讀者代名詞推論歷程。本研究旨在探討此兩因素對中文讀者在代名詞推論的影響，以代名詞推論句的反應時間為依變項探究其推論歷程。本實驗以24位成人與26位六年級學童為研究對象，實驗設計為三因子混合設計：年級×提及順位×呈現形式，採用自我控制閱讀速度作業，紀錄逐句的閱讀時間。結果顯示三因子交互作用未達顯著，進一步分別探討提及順位（第一順位／第二順位）與呈現形式（人名／角色描述名）二因子對兩群年齡層讀者在代名詞推論之影響。結果發現，成人讀者在代名詞推論時，不受提及順位與呈現形式兩因素的影響；六年級學童在代名詞指涉第一順位角色時，閱讀時間不受角色呈現形式的影響，但在代名詞指涉對象為第二順位角色時，以人名呈現角色的方式會有助於代名詞推論。最後，從讀者在角色提及順位（第一順位／第二順位）與呈現形式（人名／角色描述名）所形成的四種情況之閱讀時間來看，六年級學童在代名詞推論的閱讀模式和成人的閱讀模式相近，此結果對於學童代名詞推論的閱讀發展歷程有更進一步的瞭解。英文摘要：Narrative texts often contain several characters, and these characters have different levels of importance in the text. For example, some characters play primary protagonists, whereas others play supporting or minor roles. These characters are introduced in different orders and presented through different types of character expressions, such as proper nouns, pronouns, or role descriptions. When an author uses pronouns to refer to the characters mentioned in earlier sentences, readers must figure out which characters the pronouns are referring to. Therefore, pronouns can be integrated in earlier sentences. As a result, in later sentences, referential processing becomes essential for building discourse coherence. The order of mention and the types of character expression affect readers' pronoun resolution; and developmental data in the literature have shown that the ages of readers affect their pronoun resolution, too. The present study focused on how three factors affected pronoun resolution, namely the order of mention, the type of character expression, and the reader's age. We recruited 24 college students and 26 sixth grade students as the study participants. A three-way mixed design (age × order of mention × type of character expression) was adopted to examine the interaction patterns of these factors. The participants were asked to read texts sentence-by-sentence at their normal speed, and the reading time was then recorded. The results showed that no three-way interaction occurred. Two-way interactions were further examined in participants from separate age groups. The adult participants were unaffected by the order of mention and type of character expression. The sixth grade students were unaffected by the type of character expression when a pronoun referred to the first-mentioned character; however, in terms of the second-mentioned character, the proper name expression of the characters enhanced pronoun resolution in readers. This implies that the name of the character is more important than the role description for readers. Moreover, the reading time patterns were observed to be similar across these four two-way conditions for both age groups. Finally, some applications of pronoun resolution instruction and practical examplaes are serve as suggestions for teachers.起始頁-結束頁：437-454資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201903_50(3).00034篇名：動勢取向舞蹈治療團體對女大學生身體意象之效果研究並列篇名：Effect of Dongshi Based Dance Therapy Group on Body Image in Female College Students作者：馬心怡(Hsing-Yi Ma);姜忠信(Chung-Hsin Chiang);李宗芹(Tsung-Chin Lee)關鍵字：正向身體意象;身體意象;預防方案;舞蹈治療;Body image;Dongshi-based dance/movement therapy;Positive body image;Prevention program期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：身體意象為現代女性自我發展之重要議題之一，過去預防方案多注重身體意象的負向之影響因素。近年「正向身體意象」重視個體對自己身體正向感受以及身心調和，但尚欠缺實踐探究。本研究旨在以動勢概念發展身體意象促進方案，探討此方案對提升女大學生自我身體欣賞、覺察程度，及降低負向身體意象之效果。本研究招募三組受試者，依次是實驗組（N = 14）、體育課組（N = 15）及控制組（N = 20），共49名某國立大學女性大學生參與。實驗組受試者接受每週1次，每次1.5小時，共計8次之團體介入。三組皆採用自陳氏問卷，於介入前、介入後以及三個月追蹤之三個時間點進行資料搜集。結果顯示，相較於體育課組及控制組，實驗組在身體覺察上於後測及三個月追蹤皆較前測有顯著之效果，實驗組的外貌比較行為亦較控制組有明顯降低。本研究嘗試以動勢取向舞蹈治療作為基礎，發展身體意象促進方案，初步發現可有效提升大學女生的身體覺察程度和比較外貌的行為。英文摘要：Body image is a crucial issue in the self-development of modern women. Body dissatisfaction is believed to be one of the risk factors for eating disorder development in women in adolescent and young adult age brackets. Therefore, body image promotion programs have been provided for these groups. However, these programs have primarily emphasized negative body image factors. Although the concept of positive body image has been developed to emphasize positive feelings about one's body and body-mind attunement, a well-organized program is required to ensure this concept is put in practice. Moreover, most body image promotion programs focus on cognitive or behavioral methods of changing negative body image or body dissatisfaction, and such programs seemingly disregard strategies for directly experiencing or becoming aware of one's body and changing one's body image. Therefore, this study developed a body image promotion program that draws from Dongshi-based dance and movement therapy to examine its effectiveness in developing body appreciation and responsiveness and reduce negative body image. A total of 49 female students (aged 18-25 years) were recruited from a university in Taipei and were then categorized into three groups-namely, the experimental (N = 14), physical education (N = 15), and control (N = 20) groups. The experimental group attended eight weekly 1.5-hour sessions of the proposed program. Data for all three groups were collected using a self-reported questionnaire with three data collection points, namely, before participation, after participation, and during a 3-month follow-up. The results showed a significant effect on body awareness and physical appearance comparison behavior in the post-test and 3-month follow-up for the experimental group compared with the physical education and control groups. In conclusion, this study developed a Dongshi-based dance and movement therapy program to promote positive body image for female college students, with the initial results indicating an improvement in body awareness and appearance comparison behavior among the participants. Study limitations and suggestions for future research are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：455-471資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201903_50(3).00045篇名：科學探究能力評量之標準設定與其效度檢核並列篇名：Validating the Standard Setting on Multimedia-based Assessment of Scientific Inquiry Abilities作者：林小慧(Hsiao-Hui Lin);吳心楷(Hsin-Kai Wu)關鍵字：科學探究能力;效度驗證;標準設定;Bookmark標準設定法;Bookmark;Scientific inquiry abilities;Standard setting;Validation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究係以臺灣大台北地區605位11年級學生接受科學探究能力評量施測所蒐集的實徵資料，以達到兩項研究目的。其一為依據待加強、基礎、精熟三個等級之標準表現描述，設定科學探究能力評量之標準，其二則從內部、過程及外部等多元效度證據來源，檢核Bookmark法進行科學探究能力標準設定的適切性及有效性。研究結果顯示，本研究科學探究能力的標準設定可獲得過程效度證據的支持。其次，內部效度評估結果顯示，14位標準設定成員在第一輪到第二輪之各表現等級的標準誤均在可接受範圍（SE ＜ 0.12），表示成員內標準設定結果檢具可靠性。另以二輪決斷分數中位數之樣本平均數的標準誤評估標準設定方法內的一致性，結果顯示各表現等級的標準誤均在可接受範圍（SE ＜ 0.12），表示標準設定方法內的結果相當一致。再者，以獨立樣本t檢定進行標準設定成員間一致性的考驗，分析結果顯示不同群組成員所設定的決斷分數均未達顯著差異。此外，標準設定極端值的監控結果發現，僅有少數極端值出現，故而對於整體決斷分數的影響甚微。因此，本研究科學探究能力標準設定可獲得內部效度證據的支持。最後，本研究以群聚分析標準設定，透過探討Bookmark法所得決斷分數之輻合效度，結果顯示二種標準設定法將學生分為三個表現等級之相關係數達顯著水準，表示在判斷表現等級有相當程度的一致性。另利用區別分析檢核標準設定的一致性，分析結果顯示，Bookmark法在「觀察與定題」、「計畫與執行」、「分析與發現」及「推理與論證」整體分類一致性依序為79.50%、86.00%、100.00%、89.90%，可見Bookmark標準設定法所得出的決斷分數在各表現等級分類之區別力相當高，可獲得外部效度證據的支持。綜合以上證據，研究結果顯示經由Bookmark法所設定之科學探究能力標準適切而且有效。英文摘要：This study developed a standard setting for Grade 11 of the Multimedia-based Assessment of Scientific Inquiry Abilities (MASIA) based on three levels of standard performance descriptions: below basic, basic, and proficient. The study also used a bookmark to identify the cut-off scores. Furthermore, the study discussed the correct degree of the MASIA standard, which depends on multiple levels of evidence, namely procedural, internal, and external evidence for validity. First, the result of the procedural evaluation for validity showed that the standard setting of scientific inquiry abilities adopted in this study is supported by the procedural evidence for validity. Second, the result of the internal evaluation for validity showed that the standard error of each performance level that participants reached in rounds one and two were within an acceptable range (standard error [SE] ＜ 0.12), thus indicating good intra-rater consistency. The consistency within the standard-setting method was evaluated using the standard error of the sample mean based on the median of the cut-off scores from round two. The result showed that the standard error of every performance level was within an acceptable range (SE ＜ 0.12), thus denoting high consistency within the results of the standard-setting method. Third, the inter-rater consistency of the standard setting was examined using an independent sample t test, and the results showed that none the cut-off scores set by the participants of different groups reached statistical significance. Therefore, the standard setting of scientific inquiry abilities can be supported by internal evidence for procedural validity. Finally, this study treated the quasi-setting results derived from the cluster analysis as convergent validity-based evidence to assess external validity. The results showed that the correlation coefficient of the three performance levels of the students differentiated by two standard-setting methods reached statistical significance, thus indicating that those who judged the performance levels of the students had a certain degree of consistency. Moreover, a discriminant analysis was conducted to determine the consistency of the standard settings, and the results revealed that the consistency of the factors classified into ”observing and questioning,” ”planning and experimenting,” ”analyzing and concluding,” and ”reasoning and arguing” were in the following sequence: 79.50%, 86.00%, 100.00%, and 89.90%. In the present study, the cut-off scores obtained by the bookmark presented high discrimination for each performance level category and can be supported using external evidence for validity. These results suggest that the bookmark standard setting of scientific inquiry abilities are appropriate and effective.起始頁-結束頁：473-502資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201903_50(3).00056篇名：青少年優勢力量表之發展研究並列篇名：Development and Validation of a Strengths Scale for Adolescents in Taiwan作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang);李宜玫(Yi-Mei Lee);吳清麟(Ching-Lin Wu)關鍵字：國中生;量表發展;優勢力;Adolescent;Scale development;Strengths期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在發展青少年優勢力量表。量表發展第一階段以438位中學生及73位國中教師為對象，以質性方法蒐集國中青少年優勢力相關內涵，所得結果為編製題目之基礎。第二階段進行專家效度檢核後，以170位國中生進行預試分析，建立正式量表。第三階段為正式量表信效度驗證，431位研究參與者中，男生218位（50.6%），女生213位（49.4%）；年齡介於12至16歲，平均年齡14.31歲（SD=0.77）。所建立的正式量表包含9個構念，共47題。構念名稱分別為，內省負責、創意好奇、夢想企圖、活潑幽默、利他合群、幸福感恩、隨和友善、轉念釋懷以及樂觀希望。分數愈高表示該部分之優勢力愈明顯。各分量表Cronbach's α係數介於.80至.93，各因素相關在.39∼.70之間。驗證性因素分析結果顯示，模式適配度頗佳，組合信度在.61到.91之間，平均變異抽取量除了樂觀希望分量表為.35外，其餘為.47到.71間，潛在因素相關為.42∼.82，整體而言，具有不錯之建構效度與效標關聯效度。九個分量表中以創意好奇分量表最高，活潑幽默分量表最低，僅利他合群具性別差異。根據結果進行討論，並提出未來研究及實務應用建議。英文摘要：The study was developed in three stages to establish a strengths scale for adolescents in Taiwan. In the first stage, the participants were 438 junior high students and 73 junior high teachers and data related to the strengths of junior high students were collected; we created questions about the scale based on the results. In the second stage, after expert validation was conducted, we conducted a pretest on 170 junior high students and established a formal scale. In the third stage, we verified the reliability and validity of the scale. The participants were 431 junior high students, (218 boys (50.6%) and 213 girls (49.4%) between the ages of 12 and 16 years (M = 14.31, SD = 0.85). The strengths scale for adolescents in Taiwan contained 47 items and nine constructs, namely introspection and responsibility; creativity and curiosity; dream and ambition; activeness and humor; altruism and cooperativeness; happiness and gratitude; friendliness and amiability; reframing and relief; and optimism and hope. High scores indicate a high degree of strengths in a specific construct. The Cronbach's α of each subscale was between .80 and .93, and the factor loadings of each subscale were between .486 and .952. The correlativity of each factor was between .39 and .70. The result of a confirmatory factor analysis showed a good fit; the component reliability was between .61 and .91. The average variance extracted of the subscale, optimism and hope, was .35, and that of the other subscales was between .47 and .71. The correlation between each latent factor ranged from .42 to .82. Overall, the results indicated good construct validity and criterion validity. The study reported that among the nine subscales, creativity and curiosity scored the highest, whereas activeness and humor scored the lowest. Gender differences were only noted in altruism and cooperativeness. Finally, the results and suggestions for application and future studies were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：503-528資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201903_50(3).00067篇名：A Passion for English Learning? Comparing the English Learning Motivations and Self-Perceived English Proficiency between Two Types of College Students in Taipei, Taiwan並列篇名：對英語學習的熱情？比較臺北市兩種類型大學生的英語學習動機與自我知覺英語能力作者：何彥如(Yann-Ru Ho)關鍵字：College students;English learning motivation;Self-perceived English proficiency;大學生;自我知覺英語能力;英語學習動機期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：50卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study investigated the English learning motivations and self-perceived English proficiency between two types of college students in Taipei. Students from public, private, comprehensive, and vocational colleges were selected and 720 effective samples were obtained. Factor analysis, t-test, MANOVA, and multiple regression were used to conduct the data analysis. A scale with 15 items of English learning motivations was designed and 12 items were retained after an item analysis and exploratory factor analysis. Using exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis, three factors-intrinsic motivation, instrumental motivation, and passivity towards requirements motivation-were extracted. This scale had high internal consistency reliability (α = .850 - .913), test-retest reliability (r = .88 - .93), and good construct validity. The research findings are as follows: First, intrinsic motivation had the highest intensity, whereas passivity towards requirements motivation had the lowest intensity. This result differed from those of many studies that found that East Asian students had low intrinsic motivation. Second, among the three motivations, intrinsic motivation differed significantly based on sex (female students ＞ male students) and between the type of college (comprehensive college students ＞ vocational college students). For instrumental motivation, comprehensive college students had significantly higher motivation than vocational college students did. Third, students' self-perceived English proficiency was not high (1.64 on a 3-point scale). The female students' mean score was significantly higher than that of male students. Moreover, college students' comprehensive mean score was significantly higher than that of vocational college students. Furthermore, the results also revealed the strong predictive power (31.9%) of background variables (gender and college type) and three types of motivations on students' self-perceived English proficiency. Finally, this study offered suggestions for increasing students' English learning motivation.英文摘要：本研究探討綜合與科技兩類大學生的英語學習動機和自我知覺英語能力。從臺北市抽樣公私立之綜合與科技大學，共得720份有效問卷。資料分析採EFA與CFA、t檢定、MANOVA和多元迴歸等。自編「英語學習動機量表」，因素分析抽出內在動機、工具性動機和外在要求的被動性動機等三因素，以及「自我知覺英語能力量表」，均具良好信效度。研究發現：1.內在動機強度最高，有別於東亞大學生的英語內在動機較低的結果；而外在要求的被動性動機最低，也呼應近期部份大學學生廢除英檢畢業門檻（外在要求動機），轉而重視內在學習動機之訴求。2.學生的自我知覺英語能力不高，平均為1.64（3點量表）。3.大學生之背景變項加三種學習動機對其自我知覺英語能力的預測力為31.9%。最後，提出增強學生英語學習動機的建議。起始頁-結束頁：529-549資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.201903_50(3).000701篇名：德國師徒制之現代化轉型及其社會建構並列篇名：The Modern Transformation and Social Construction of the German Apprenticeship作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：工業革命;師徒制;職業教育;industrial revolution;apprenticeship system;vocational education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:2期出版年：2019中文摘要：制度化師徒制源自中世紀時期的歐洲，其在十三、十四世紀已躍居為歐洲產業發展的重要型態，但工業革命及其後之技術革新，對師徒制幾乎造成「殲滅性」衝擊，大多數歐洲國家的師徒制逐漸萎縮最終消亡，而德國師徒制則由原本僅侷限於手工業擴散至工業化產業，並轉型為舉世聞名的雙元制職業教育。本文首先探究德國師徒制的歷史發展、社會建構，最後再進一步省思借鏡師徒制所隱含之挑戰。在傳統師徒制逐漸衰落的過程，相對於大多數歐洲國家採取「任意主義」的做法，德國則在「社會市場經濟」模式下採取國家干預，且在利益相關者之博弈競合，將師徒制回歸為行會集體主義管制，成功地抵禦了自由市場之衝擊。再者，德國學徒制之形成與發展，奠基於該國歷史文化與政經脈絡等，若未詳盡探究學徒制發展的源頭動力、建構配套措施，即貿然予以借鑑，即易陷入借鏡之困境。英文摘要：Germany's apprenticeship system originated in the Middle Ages, and became a major factor in the early industrial development of Europe during the 13th and 14th centuries. However, the industrial revolution and the technological advances which followed in its wake practically wiped out the craft-oriented apprenticeship system in most parts of Europe. In Germany, nonetheless, the apprenticeship system was transformed into its world-renowned dual system of vocational education. In this paper I trace the historical and social development of the German apprenticeship system, and also examine some of the challenges to be faced when one attempts to adopt it in another context. This study shows that while the traditional apprenticeship system was in a state of gradual decline, in contrast to the ethos of voluntarism on the rise in most parts of Europe, Germany adopted a social market economy characterized by centralized government control. At the same time, amidst the cooperation and competition of various stakeholders, the German apprenticeship system returned to the collectivism of the guild system, and thus managed to fend off the challenges posed by the growing free market. This study also shows that the apprenticeship system in Germany developed in accordance with its particular historical situation in terms of culture, government, and economics. It is argued that any attempt to adopt the German apprenticeship system elsewhere without taking this into account is unlikely to bring good results.起始頁-結束頁：39-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190665020022篇名：多元入學方案的系統性矛盾與統合：以辯證認識觀解析T大經驗並列篇名：Systemic Conflicts and Integrations of the Multiple Entrance Program: A Case Study on University T's Experiences from the Perspective of Dialectical Epistemology作者：曾正宜(Jeng-Yi Tzeng);謝小芩(Hsiao-Chin Hsieh)關鍵字：矛盾;多元入學方案;高等教育;統合;辯證認識觀;conflict;multiple entrance program;higher education;integration;dialectical epistemology期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:2期出版年：2019中文摘要：教育部於2002年推行多元入學方案，希望能落實多元發展、社會公平及適性選擇等理念，但此方案如何影響學校及相關學生則需進一步探討。本研究以T大的施行經驗為例，透過教師、行政人員與學生的訪談，從辯證認識觀之微觀視角解析學校、各學系、不分系，以及學生等主體內與主體間所面臨的矛盾及其辯證型態。研究發現，多元入學方案一旦啟動，所涉及的便不只是招生方式的改變，它會觸發學術至上的傳統價值與學生多元化學習需求之間的衝突，進而引起學校、各學系、學生之間的系統性矛盾。故除了建立共識與相關配套措施之外，也需暢通溝通管道與對話機制，並藉由系統性思考問題之矛盾本質及其相對立場中的統合前景，在一系列價值反思以及制度規範變革中，尋求校園多元化願景之具體意義以及實際作為。英文摘要：The Ministry of Education launched the Multiple Entrance Program in 2002 to realize principles such as diversified development, social justice, and adaptive prioritization. However, how this program affects universities and students at stake requires further investigations. We conducted a case study on University T, whose innovative student recruitment programs are well-known. We interviewed program-related students, teachers, and a staff member, and analyzed conflicts emerged from the data in accordance with the perspective of dialectical epistemology. We found that once the program is activated, it not only changes the practice of recruitment, but also triggers tensions and conflicts between the department tradition of academic supremacy and students' diversified learning needs, invoking systemic conflicts among university, departments, and students. Therefore, in addition to building consensus and providing supporting measures, the university needs to promote active conversations among the involved parties, and to systematically examine the nature of conflicts and the prospects of integrations, in order to figure out what a diversity campus means to the university and how to achieve it through a series of policy and regulation modifications.起始頁-結束頁：77-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190665020033篇名：書評：社會學習領域課程標準的想像及啟示－評介《美國社會領域課程標準》及《C3美國社會領域州課程標準架構》並列篇名：Book Review: National Curriculum Standards for Social Studies: A Framework for Teaching, Learning, and Assessment & College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for Social Studies State Standards作者：陳麗華期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：117-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190665020044篇名：杜威實驗學校的課程理念與實踐並列篇名：Theory and Practice of Curriculum in John Dewey's Laboratory School作者：宋明娟(Min-Chuan Sung)關鍵字：杜威實驗學校;課程史;課程理念;課程實驗;Dewey School;curriculum history;curriculum theory;curriculum experiment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以課程的歷史與哲學研究方法，探討杜威於芝加哥大學辦理實驗學校（1896至1904年）的課程理念與實踐。首先分析杜威哲學的經驗論，再論其課程理論並重社會、學生與知識的取向，其次梳理杜威學校的課程理念以及相應的實務梗概，復次探討杜威實驗學校課程觀的歷史意義。研究發現，杜威的課程實驗所欲解決之問題，是在同時兼重上述三種課程取向的前提下，發展合適的教材，為此採行的主要途徑是以古往今來典型的社會活動作為取材來源。此外，杜威辦學當時與其後之課程理念一脈相連，其課程學理與實務相得益彰；雖然杜威獨到的課程理念未必受到完全的理解與認同，然其樹立課程實驗的精神典範，則為該校課程實驗之重要價值。英文摘要：This study aims at analyzing the theory and practice of curriculum in Dewey School (1896-1904) using the historical and philosophical research method in the field of curriculum. Firstly, John Dewey's theory of experience is discussed, and his theory of curriculum orientation, with emphasis not only on society, but also on learner and knowledge is explained. Then the theory and practice of curriculum in Dewey School is elaborated. Finally the perspective of curriculum in Dewey School is analyzed in the context of curriculum history. It is discovered that the main problem which Dewey faced in the curriculum experiment was to find subject-matter that reflected the aforesaid three dimensions of curriculum orientation. He solved the problem by applying the sources of curriculum in the typical social activities especially called social occupations. Besides, the coherence of his curriculum theory from the beginning of his school practice till long time after indicates that his curriculum theory enriched practice and vice versa. No matter whether Dewey's curriculum theory was fully understood or accepted by others, the spirit in the curriculum experiment which he set before is valuable, classic and immortal.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190365010015篇名：I. Morris幸福課程的哲學檢視並列篇名：A Philosophical Examination of I. Morris's Happiness Curriculum作者：陳伊琳(Yi-Lin Chen)關鍵字：Aristotle;正向心理學;幸福;品格教育;德行;Aristotle;positive psychology;happiness;character education;virtue期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:1期出版年：2019中文摘要：為了教導學生變得幸福／快樂，英國Wellington公學首創幸福課程。本文旨在分析I. Morris《在學校中教導幸福與福祉》的幸福觀，據以判斷幸福可教嗎？本文指出Morris的幸福觀歷經轉變，起始直接承襲自正向心理學觀點，側重主體心態的調整（如學習正念冥想、樂觀、感恩）。中期採取Aristotle幸福行動理論，他將幸福視為活動過後自然體驗到的感受與狀態。後期明確主張幸福是依德而行的活動，因此幸福課程應以品格教育為架構。整體而言，Morris幸福課程可視為正向心理學與Aristotle幸福論的複合物。基本上，幸福課程的單元自始至終皆取自正向心理學主題，強調讓學生學會經實證有效的幸福技巧，而後改為強調這些主題皆須與個體德行的施展連結。幸福課與品格教育於是密不可分。本文結論是：幸福不但可教，且需要教，但鑑於幸福的多義性，幸福的教學也有必要從後設觀點檢視其所反映的幸福觀。英文摘要：Wellington College introduced happiness curriculum to teach students to be happy. This paper aims to analyze I. Morris's conception of happiness manifested in Teaching Happiness and Well-Being in Schools, and evaluate whether happiness can be taught. The author points out that Morris's conception of happiness has gone through some changes. Initially, he inherits positive psychology’s (PP for short) idea of happiness, placing emphasis on mastering the subject's attitudes of mind such as learning mindfulness meditation, optimism, and gratitude. Afterwards, Morris specified his conception to be Aristotle's activity theory of happiness. He considered happiness to be feelings experienced as a corollary of these activities. Finally, Morris indicated that happiness is an activity in accordance with virtue. Happiness curriculum therefore shall take character education as its framework. On the whole, Morris's happiness curriculum can be seen as a compound product of PP and Aristotelian eudaimonism. The subjects included in the curriculum are derived from the main themes of PP, aiming at teaching the empirically validated ”techniques for happiness”. Later on, the essential role of virtue was underscored. It is concluded that happiness can and should be taught. However, considering the ambiguity of happiness, we should put the conception of happiness into critical scrutiny.起始頁-結束頁：43-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190365010026篇名：晚清甲午前在華中外人士對於美國教育的介紹並列篇名：The Introduction of American Education by Missionaries and Chinese Officials and Commoners in Late Ch'ing China before 1894作者：周愚文(Yu-Wen Chou)關鍵字：甲午;美國教育;教育移轉;晚清;American education;Chia-Wu;educational transfer;late Ch'ing期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文旨在探討甲午前在華中外人士對美國教育的介紹，透過對49種當時出版專書之分析，發現主要屬史地類，編著者以傳教士居多，出版時間以同光朝較多。其中有教育記事者26種，內容涉及中小學、大學、女子教育、陸海軍校、聾啞院、師範學堂、神學院、醫學院、法學院、育嬰院、教育行政制度、技藝館、圖書館等主題；範圍涵蓋一特區29州。但對國名與地名、中小學與大學的譯名不一，因美國由公立共同小學、免費公立中學及州立大學所構的教育階梯，與以8-4制為主的三級學制尚在形成，更增加清人理解的困難。又用中國科舉概念去理解與轉譯美國學制易生誤解，雖略及教育行政制度，但未辨明教育權屬地方而非聯邦。總之，甲午前清人無法從論著中認識美國教育的完整面貌，不利日後的教育借用。英文摘要：The aim of this article is to explore the introduction of American Education in late Ch'ing before 1894. Historical method was used: forty-nine volumes of historical and geographic books, traveling records, and diaries written by missionaries, diplomats, local officials and commoners were analyzed. Among them, twenty-six volumes of these had recorded educational events in the U.S. A., involving elementary and middle schools, colleges and universities, girls' education, military academies, blind and deafen schools, normal schools, professional schools of law, medicine and theology, Several reasons were argued to cause difficulties to get a full picture of American education were found, making borrowing the concepts challenging. First, the educational institutions recorded were located in Washington D. C. and 29 states, and the names of country, states, and educational institutions were translated differently, leading to confusion. Moreover, as the American common education system and school system of 8-4 pattern were just starting to form, it was harder for outsiders to understand. Further, the concepts of civil service examination in China were used to interpret American system by a few authors, causing misunderstanding. Finally, although the educational administration system had been mentioned in some books, it was not clearly stated or explained that the right of education belonged to states instead of the nation.起始頁-結束頁：79-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820190365010037篇名：書評：品格教育的復興：評《亞里斯多德品格教育》並列篇名：Book Review: Aristotelian Character Education作者：蘇永明期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：65:1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：123-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708201903650100401篇名：隱喻影像之視覺意象認知及其藝術教育意涵並列篇名：Cognition of Visual Imagery and Art Education Implication about Metaphoric Images作者：李佳蓉(Chia-Rong Lee);李俊儀(Chun-Yi Lee)關鍵字：隱喻影像;視覺意象認知;認知趨向;metaphoric images;cognition of visual imagery;cognitive trend期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：當今諸多影像在使用上，多數都應用隱喻技巧，除具美學性、趣味性外，更能誘發觀者有抽象、深層思考。對觀者來說，究竟會先就影像外觀造形、形態進行聯想，產生視覺意象而後引發隱喻概念，亦又會受到哪些因素影響，成為本文主要研究焦點。本文以量化研究為主，以隱喻影像為實驗樣本，針對高中生族群進行視覺意象認知調查。本研究結果發現，高中生對當今隱喻影像，依據視覺意象認知分析結果，可歸類出三種不同的類型：「自然風格類」、「調和人文類」、「具象對比類」；當高中生面對隱喻影像時，也易受已存心理對影像之「造形設計」、「創意感受」、「風格呈現」之意象因素而影響意象認知。透過此項研究結果，發現學生並非只對影像的視覺隱喻表現形式簡單或繁複產生視覺意象認知偏好，反倒是會受到上述三種視覺意象因素影響其認知趨向。故建議教師應可在教學、教材媒體選擇上，可聚焦於高中生對隱喻影像之意象認知所產生的不同感受，於教學時進行造形、創意、風格等面向之鑑賞教學策略，並強調隱喻影像所帶來的情感訴求，尊重個體之美感認知差異，逐步使高中生建立美感敏銳度及培養象徵性思考能力。英文摘要：Nowadays, many images use metaphoric skills. In addition to aesthetic and interest, they can also arouse viewers deeper and abstract thinking. Did viewers associate the look of images with cognition of visual imagery, which then caused metaphoric concept? What kind of image association came to their mind after seeing the images? What are the influence factors? These are the main research foci of this study. In the study, the survey of cognition of visual imagery for senior high school by the quantitative methods was employed. The results revealed the experts’ criteria for selection of metaphorical images, and nine metaphoric images were categorized into three main styles by the teenagers, including natural style, harmonic-humanism style, and figurative-contrast style; Upon seeing a metaphorical image, the teenager was likely to be affected by the image factors hidden in their minds, such as ”form design”,” feel of creativity” and ”style presentation”, and then made up their minds about their cognitive preference over visual imagery. Results of study indicate that students were influenced by the three visual imagery factors and did not only produce simple preferences for cognition of visual imagery. Therefore, it is suggested that teachers should be able to focus on the different feelings of students' imagery perceptions of metaphorical images by choosing teaching media. On the other hand, the teachers will be able to practice appreciation strategy of form, creativity and style presentation in teaching and emphasize the emotional by metaphorical images. Finally, to respect the individual differences in aesthetic perception, it will enable high school students to establish aesthetic acuity and cultivate symbolic thinking ability.起始頁-結束頁：89-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420190615020042篇名：師資培育白皮書發布後師資職前培育和教師專業發展之省思並列篇名：Reflections on the Pre-Service Teacher Education and the Teacher Professional Development after the Publication of the Teacher Education White Paper作者：林政逸(Jeng-Yi Lin)關鍵字：師資培育;師資培育白皮書;教師專業標準;teacher education;Teacher Education White Paper;teacher professional standards期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：我國2012年發布「師資培育白皮書」，以「師道、責任、精緻、永續」為核心價值，培養具有教育愛、專業力與執行力之新時代良師，作為發布後10年我國師資培育發展的施政藍圖。本文透過文獻探討及分析相關文件，從政策執行的角度來分析師資培育之相關政策與衍生之問題，檢視師資培育白皮書重點政策落實的情形，研究發現如下：一、師資培育白皮書政策已陸續實施並有具體成果。二、教師專業標準指引已發布，但內容仍有修正之必要。三、師培政策推動聚焦於師資職前培育階段，教師專業發展階段之師培政策推動較少。四、缺少教師進修研習具體內容之規範。五、師資培育公費制度朝優質化與專業化方向發展。英文摘要：In 2012, the Ministry of Education in Taiwan published the ”White Paper on Teacher Education”. The White Paper took ”ethics, responsibility, exquisiteness, Sustainability” as the core values to cultivate in the new era of teachers with educational love, professionalism, and execution in mind. It was also served as a blueprint for the implementation of teacher education policies within the decade after the publication of the White Paper. The study conducted literature review and analyzed relevant documents to explore relevant teacher education policies, as well as analyzed the policies of teacher education from the perspective of policy implementation. The study also examined the implementation of key teacher education policies. The research conclusions are as follows: 1. The policies of the Teacher Education White Paper have been implemented accordingly and concrete results have been shown. 2. Teacher Professionalism Standards Guidelines has been promulgated, yet further revision on the details is necessary. 3. The implementation of teacher education policies focuses on pre-service teacher education, but the relatively policies concerning teacher professional development are insufficient. 4. Lack of regulations for the specific contents of in-service training for teachers. 5. The teacher education scholarship system is developing towards quality and specialization.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420190315010013篇名：臺灣本土語文教師科技教學內容知識指標之建構研究並列篇名：Indicator Development for the Evaluation of Taiwan Native Language Teachers' Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge作者：李元鴻/Singko Laway(Yuan-Hung Lee);陳昭秀(Chao-Hsiu Chen)關鍵字：臺灣本土語文;德懷術;科技教學內容知識;教師專業發展;Taiwan native language;Delphi technique;technological pedagogical content knowledge;teacher professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣本土語文教育的師資來源多元，如何確保本土語文教師具有適切的資訊科技融入教學知識與技能極具重要性。本研究為解析本土語文教師在科技教學內容知識需呈現的特質與面向，由本土語文、教師專業發展、數位學習等領域共11位專家，以德懷術方式共同發展本土語文教師資訊科技應用的教學專業知能TPACK測量工具，並歷經三回合發展出七面向共37個題項。經分析三回合專家意見的資料後發現，第二回合量表的專家意見一致性優於較第三回合的量表。本研究結果除了可以作為未來本土語文教師使用科技增進個人教學知能之參考，亦有利於相關研究者進一步探討本土語文教師之科技教學內容知識（TPACK）。英文摘要：In Taiwan teachers of native languages are recruited from multiple sources. Therefore, it is crucial to verify the knowledge and the ability of integrating technology into native language instruction. This study employs the Delphi technique to develop an instrument to measure Taiwan native language teachers' technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK). After three rounds of review and revisions, the final version of the instrument to measure Taiwan native language teachers' TPACK were developed including 37 questions divided into 7 aspects by 11 experts from domains of native language, teacher professional development, and e-learning. The analysis of the three-round expert questionnaires indicate that the experts agree more on the second-round instrument than on the third-round instrument. This study can be of reference to researchers and practitioners for improving native language teachers' TPACK.起始頁-結束頁：29-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/1816650420190315010024篇名：心智圖法與ATDE模式應用於創新研發專題課程之研究並列篇名：A Study of Applying Mind Mapping and ATDE Styled Teaching to Creativity Development Project Curriculum作者：常雅珍(Ya-Jane Chaung);洪錦益(Ching-I Hung);黃寶園(Pao-Yuan Huang);黃詩庭(Shih-Ting Huang);李佩綺(Pei-Qi Lee)關鍵字：心智圖法;創新研發專題課程;ATDE模式;mind mapping;creativity development project curriculum;ATDE styled teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：15卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：研究者欲解決專題課程中遇到的困難，發現心智圖法有益學生產品研發設計與構思，並有助於系統性的分析質化研究結果，ATDE模式則可以掌握學生學習歷程，因此本研究目的在設計一套課程，應用心智圖法與ATDE模式於創新研發專題課程，此一心智圖法創新主題分析方式通過發明專利。本課程根據ATDE模式將研發過程分為「確立發明方向」、「構思發明內容」、「製作發明作品」、「質化研究評估作品」、「改良作品」、「量化研究評估作品」六階段，透過引導大學生「七合一多功能親子逃難背心」之研究，具體說明課程實施之六階段歷程與成效，「七合一多功能親子逃難背心」作品通過新型專利，並獲得國際發明競賽首獎。質性研究結果歸納出傳統逃難包的缺失、七合一多功能「親子逃難背心」的優點及改進方向，量化研究結果顯示逃難背心之收納、防撞、分隔口袋、合併睡袋、背心設計、防水材質的特色顯著優於傳統之逃難包，其螢光醒目、使用方便、親子共用的實用性也顯著優於傳統逃難包。研究者最後提出結論與建議，做為未來研究者之參考。英文摘要：Mind mapping is beneficial to the design and conception of student product development, and contributes to the systematic analysis of qualitative research results. The ATDE styled model can grasp the student learning process. The purpose of the study is to propose a method that integrates mind mapping and ATDE styled teaching for creativity development project curriculum. The method obtained an invention patent of Taiwan ROC. Based on ATDE styled teaching, the curriculum is organized in six phases: ”Direction identification”, ”Framework buildup”, ”Prototype implementation”, ”Quality evaluation”, ”Prototype Improvement”, and ”Quantity assessment”. The first step of the method demonstration is to design the curriculum that induces college students to invent the family-oriented rescue vest with 7-in-one multi-function product successfully. A utility model patent of Taiwan ROC, was obtained based on the study and the project won a gold medal in International Invention Exhibition. The qualification analysis result shows the drawbacks of other rescue packs, the advantages of our vest, and the features to be improved. The quantification analysis result show that the family-oriented rescue vest has the benefits of compact, crash-proof, water-proof, isolated pockets, sleeping bag, and wearable. These features are not available in conventional rescue packs. In addition, our vest is easy to be identified and used for parents and their own children. Finally, researchers draw the conclusion and suggestions for the future research.起始頁-結束頁：61-63+65-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.3966/18166504201903150100301篇名：探索五位理工科女性世界中的創造力：她們對創造力的詮釋以及理工背景對其創造力的影響並列篇名：Exploring Creativity in the World of Five Women Majoring in Science and Engineering: How They Interpret Creativity and How Their Educational Backgrounds Affect Their Creativity作者：宋玉英(Yuk-Ying Sung);高振耀(Chen-Yao Kao)關鍵字：理工科女性;創造力;聚斂思考;擴散思考;convergent thinking;creativity;divergent thinking;females majoring in science and engineering期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究從理工科女性的角度探討其如何詮釋創造力，同時瞭解她們的生活經驗對其創造力展現的影響。研究者從女性主義的立場出發，採用質性研究中的敘事研究法進行闡述，以立意取樣選定五位研究參與者，並透過半結構式的深入訪談、非參與性觀察及文件檢視以蒐集資料。研究結果發現，五位理工科女性的共同特質包括處事態度嚴謹、目標導向、喜歡彈性靈活的模式、對學習與工作充滿自信、多樣的興趣嗜好及正向積極六項特質；另外，從能力的觀點，她們定義創造力為解決問題的能力、發挸更多新問題的能力、表達的能力及改變的能力，而解決問題的能力是其核心，此反映出科學創造力的本質；至於富有創造力產品的元素，除了新穎，她們還提到成本效益、滿足客戶需求、美感、好玩等。此外，五位理工科女性基本上皆認為理工科系嚴謹的邏輯思考訓練對於創造力展現是有所幫助的，此與文獻所提出創造力的展現不僅需要擴散思考亦需要聚斂思考的論點不謀而合。還有值得注意的一點是，五位研究參與者皆提出創造力不僅可以表現在藝術方面且可以涵蓋各個領域的看法，此乃支持了創造力存在於人類各個活動領域之論述，也說明了過去有些實證研究以學生的主修領域來區分高低創造力組是不適宜的，同時給予將來有關創造力的實證研究可資參酌之提醒。英文摘要：This study examined how women majoring in science and engineering interpreted creativity and how their life experiences affected their expression of creativity. This study used a qualitative research method for narrative inquiry combined with the feminist approach to explore major research questions. Purposeful sampling was used to recruit five participants. Data collection involved semistructured in-depth interviews, document review, and observation. Data analysis revealed six qualities these women had in common: earnestness, goal orientation, preference for flexibility, professional and academic confidence, diverse interests, and proactive attitudes. From the perspective of ability, these women defined creativity as the ability to solve problems, to produce problems, to express themselves, and to facilitate transformation. They believed that the ability to solve problems was at the heart of creativity, which was in line with the essence of scientific creativity. For key elements in creative products, they mentioned novelty, cost-performance ratio, customization, aesthetic feeling, and playfulness. Moreover, they believed that logical reasoning derived from their professional training was helpful for their expression of creativity, supporting the argument that convergent thinking is integral to creativity. Notably, these women mentioned that creativity could be expressed not merely in arts but in any human endeavor, upholding the viewpoint that creativity exists in every field. This also implies that some empirical studies' use of college students' majors as a means for categorizing them into high- and low-creativity groups is inappropriate and suggests that such research design should be avoided in future.起始頁-結束頁：55-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201909_64(3).00032篇名：設計STEAM課程培養國小學生的STEAM素養：以「動物模仿獸」為例並列篇名：Design STEAM Course to Train STEAM Literacy of Primary Students: Taking ”Animal Mimicry Beast” as an Example作者：盧秀琴(Chow-Chin Lu);馬士茵(Shih-Yin Ma)關鍵字：Arduino程式設計;STEAM素養;STEAM專題研究;協同教學;動物模仿獸;animal mimicry beast;Arduino programming;collaborative teaching;STEAM literacy;STEAM project study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：跨領域STEAM課程的專題研究能培養國小學生的STEAM素養，是全球的教育趨勢，也是我國十二年國民基本教育的教學重點。本研究採個案研究法，以國小五年級一個班級共28位學生為研究對象，由三位不同領域的協同教師設計「動物模仿獸」的STEAM專題研究，教導學生動物的特殊習性、撰寫Arduino設計程式、選擇材料組裝動物模仿獸；各組學生以兩個月的時間撰寫Arduino程式操控感應器以模仿動物的特殊習性、畫設計圖、組裝動物模仿獸。研究者蒐集Arduino學習單、動物模仿獸討論單、學習日誌、動物模仿獸作品、半結構式晤談、教師省思札記等質性資料，進行編碼、分類與詮釋。研究結果顯示：一、各組學生能撰寫Arduino程式去操控各種感應器，達到動物模仿獸身體顏色、叫聲頻率、改變發光頻率的效果；二、各組學生從畫設計圖到組裝的過程，學會正確測量容積、選擇正確材料以組裝動物模仿獸，呈現模仿獸的完整功能，以及具有特色的造型與質感；三、各組學生從STEAM專題研究中培養STEAM素養，擁有跨領域的整合能力。英文摘要：Research on cross-disciplinary science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEAM) curriculums could help primary students to develop their STEAM literacy. STEAM represents a global education trend and the target of Taiwanese students' 12-year compulsory education. In this case study, 28 students from a fifth-grade elementary school class were included as research participants. The STEAM curriculum theme of ”animal mimicry beast” was chosen by three teachers from various fields to teach students about the specific behaviors of animals, to write Arduino design programs, and to select materials for assembling animal mimicry beasts. After the teaching, the students wrote Arduino program control sensors to mimic animals' individual behaviors, drew design diagrams, and assembled animal mimicry beasts during 2 months. The data collected included Arduino learning sheets, animal mimicry discussion lists, learning logs, animal mimicry beast works, semi structured interviews, and teacher feedback for data coding, classification, and interpretation. The results indicated that (1) each group of students was able to write Arduino programs to control various sensors and enable animal mimicry beasts to change color, tweet frequency, or light frequency. (2) Each group of students who created design diagrams and assembled animal mimicry beasts learned to correctly measure volume; to select appropriate materials for assembling animal mimicry beasts; and to present their animals' full functionality, distinctive shapes, and textures. (3) Each group of students developed STEAM literacy from their STEAM projects studies and exhibited cross-disciplinary integration capabilities.起始頁-結束頁：85-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201909_64(3).00043篇名：Comparing the Learning Progress of Creating and Using QR Codes in a Vehicle Maintenance Course並列篇名：QR圖碼應用於汽車修護課程翻轉學習模式差異之研究作者：張俊興(Chun-Hsin Chang);蔡其瑞(Chi-Ruei Tsai)關鍵字：e-learning;epistemic curiosity;learning outcomes;QR code;vehicle maintenance;數位學習;求知性好奇心;學習表現;QR圖碼;汽車修護期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：To understand how QR code technology can be integrated into an engineering course and affects learning outcomes in a vehicle maintenance course, this study divided students into two groups: one that created QR-code content (hereafter ”creating-QR code”) and another that used QR-code content (hereafter ”using-QR code”). This study then examined which approach was more beneficial for learning outcomes. The students were required to either search for or scan information and would thus exhibit two types of epistemic curiosity (EC), namely ”deprivation-type EC” and ”interest-type EC,” in relation to information seeking. Teachers administered pretests to identify participants' abilities, and students were segmented into either a high- or low-level ability group. Results revealed that with respect to learning progress, the creating-QR code group outperformed the using-QR code group in learning about vehicle maintenance. In addition, comparison of the results of the two types of EC indicated that students in the creating-QR code group employed a higher degree of ”deprivation-type EC” than those in the using-QR code group. However, there were no differences between the two groups with regard to ”interest-type EC.” These results suggest that as one form of flipped learning, teachers can assign students the task of creating QR codes. This can enable knowledge consolidation and improve student learning outcomes in a vehicle maintenance course.英文摘要：本研究之研究目的為於汽車修護技能課程中融入QR圖碼進行翻轉學習，並探討製作翻轉課程學習內容的學習者及使用翻轉課程的學習者，兩組學習者學習成效的差異。在學習前後，將利用前、後測瞭解兩組學習者學習狀況的差異，並就前測成績將學習者分為高、低分組。而在實驗過程中，學習者自行應用智慧型裝置讀取QR圖碼，以獲得相關資訊自主學習，因此本研究將量測學習者的探究型及興趣型求知性好奇心。研究結果顯示，製作學習內容組的學習表現較使用學習內容組的學習表現來得好，且製作學習內容組的探究型求知性好奇心亦較高，但兩組在興趣型求知性好奇心並沒有顯著差異。研究結果支持教師應用QR圖碼於汽車修護翻轉學習課程中，能有助於學習者在汽車修護專業之學習。起始頁-結束頁：119-141資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201909_64(3).00054篇名：Revolutionary Drawing: Measuring Adaptive and Innovative Creativity並列篇名：調適性與創新性創造力之評量作者：洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);戴凱欣(Kai-Hsin Tai);陳柏熹(Po-Hsi Chen);蘇少祖(Shao-Zu Su)關鍵字：adaptive creativity;convergent thinking;creativity assessment;divergent thinking;innovative creativity;調適性創造力;聚斂性思考;創造力評量;擴散性思考;創新性創造力期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Creativity measurement has been the subject of empirical research for decades, with the most prominent notions about the creative process being Torrance's Tests on Creative Thinking (TTCT). However, those studies focused on divergent thinking measurement. To integrate divergent and convergent thinking measurements, the present study developed a novel image-based creativity measure, named ”revolutionary drawing,” in which images replace the conventional response scale, to examine the interrelatedness of creative thinking types: adaptive creativity or innovative creativity. The target sample of this study was 332 teachers who had joined the creative development program, from whom 324 valid data were collected for analysis to test the hypotheses. Our evidence indicated that the two types of creativity were negatively correlated. Moreover, three of the four sub-abilities of innovative creativity, cross-category, multiple-direction, and reverse thinking, were positively inter-correlated. Only originality thinking, the fourth sub-ability of innovative creativity, was not correlated to the other three sub-abilities of innovative creativity. The two sub-abilities of adaptive creativity, diffusive thinking and enriched thinking, were positively correlated. The results of this study revealed that females performed better than males with respect to age differences in innovative creativity. The younger participants performed better than the older participants, but on adaptive creativity, only participants aged under 30 performed better than participants aged 40 and over. The findings of this study suggest that revolutionary drawing could be used for testing innovative creativity and adaptive creativity as cognitive processes for divergent and convergent thinking.英文摘要：創意的量測一直是近代實證研究的主題，最突出的是托倫斯的創造性思維測驗（TTCT），這些創造力評量工具大多強調擴散性思考的評量，對聚斂性思考較少著墨。本研究開發一個可同時應用擴散性與聚斂性思考的圖像量測工具─「圖繪展開創意評量」，以圖片取代傳統反應量表，並可用來測量調適性創造力及創新性創造力。本研究的研究對象為332位參與創造力發展課程的教師，其中有效樣本為324筆，並以此進行研究假設驗證。研究結果顯示，這兩種類型呈現負相關。創新性創造力中除了原創性思維外，另外三個創新性思維類型：多向性思維、異類思維及逆向思維皆呈正相關。調適性創造力中的同類性思維與豐富化思維兩者呈正相關。研究結果顯示，女性在創新性創造力方面的表現優於男性，較年輕的受試者表現優於比較年長的受試者，但在調適性創造力方面，只有30歲以下的受試者表現優於40歲以上的受試者。本研究建議「圖繪展開創意評量」可用於評量個體的創新性創造力與調適性創造力，是一種能同時評量擴散性思考與聚斂性思考的評量工具。起始頁-結束頁：143-168資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201909_64(3).00065篇名：Influence of a Creative Problem-Solving Approach on College Students' Creativity and Its Relation With Team Cohesion並列篇名：創意問題解決模式對大學生創造力之影響與團隊凝聚力之關聯性作者：陳秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Chen);陳宥蓉(Yu-Jung Chen)關鍵字：creative problem-solving;creative thinking;Industry 4.0;team cohesion;創意問題解決;創意思考;工業4.0;團隊凝聚力期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study attempts to present further perspectives upon the effectiveness of developing creative thinking among engineering majors in college both through the incorporation of creative problem-solving (CPS) method and the influence of team cohesion in an engineering course so as to explore the impact of the proposed pedagogical approach on students' creative thinking. The 18-week course plan created in this research features the context of Industry 4.0. A total of 48 participants were enrolled in the course and divided into groups each of which was expected to develop a thematic project. To provide a holistic understanding of the CPS approach's influence on students' creativity, the present research applied a mixed methodology, which included survey questionnaires (team cohesion questionnaire), creativity measurement (creativity test), as well as semi-structured interviews. Descriptive statistics, t-test and Pearson product-moment correlation were adopted to analyze the quantitative results. Qualitative contents of semi-structured interviews were used to support the quantitative data. The results showed that the engineering college students had a significant improvement between their pre-test score on creativity and their post-test score. Furthermore, a significant change in students' types of creative thinking was also found in terms of their innovative creativity. Besides, interviews with student participants echoed with the quantitative results and showed preferences among students toward certain types of creativity. The qualitative results reveal how some students praised the benefits of the CPS steps as well as those of creative thinking techniques taught in class, how some of them also pointed out the difficulties and reasons that might have influenced their development of a team project, and how the same challenges caused them to struggle with creative thinking and the maintenance of team cohesion. Finally, the research results are summarized and limitations are acknowledged to engage instructors and future studies in a discussion about the implementation of creative training among students and about how it may facilitate their creative thinking.英文摘要：本研究旨在探討創意問題解決模式對工程學院大學生創造力之影響並探討其創造力與團隊凝聚力之關聯性。研究情境實施在臺灣北部某所公立大學機械工程系課程，研究編製創意問題解決模式，融入「工業4.0理論與實務」專題實作課程，教學課程為期18週，參與者為48名大專生，並將其分為四人小組製作創意專題。本研究採用混合研究設計，蒐集問卷調查（團隊凝聚力問卷）、創造力測量（創意繪圖展開測驗）與半結構式訪談等方式，深入瞭解創意問題解決歷程融入創意思考教學之有效性。本研究採用描述性統計、t檢驗與Pearson相關分析量化之結果。質化分析則採用半結構式訪談來支持量化之結果。研究結果顯示，機械工程系大學生在創意繪圖展開測驗的表現中前後測有顯著性的改善；在學生的創意思考方面，「創新性的創造力」也有顯著性的變化。此外，從質性結果中，發現部分學生對於課堂中教授的創意問題解決步驟和創意思維技巧給予肯定的評價，也有部分學生指出影響其創意產品製作和團隊凝聚力的可能困難和原因。最後，根據量化與質化分析之研究結果，本研究提出研究限制與相關建議，以供教育現場教師及未來相關研究之參考。起始頁-結束頁：169-201資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201909_64(3).00076篇名：中學生考試壓力與個人特性：潛在類別分析並列篇名：Examination Stress and Personal Characteristics Among Taiwanese Adolescents: A Latent Class Approach作者：趙子揚(Tzu-Yang Chao);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung)關鍵字：五大人格;不確定性;考試壓力;個人特性;潛在類別分析;big five personality traits;examination stress;latent class analysis;personal characteristics;uncertainty期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究欲將個人特性納入既有的中學生考試壓力架構之中，並檢驗中學生之考試壓力與其個人特性之關係，驗證高考試壓力且中成就的學生，其個人特性上有特定的組型，包含較高的不確定性、神經性、低自尊、外控性，以及較低的外向性。本研究採分層隨機抽樣，共召募了1,858名臺灣九年級學生完成問卷填答。在問卷上，本研究採用中學生考試壓力量表，以測量學生考試壓力的程度，同時以自編之26題二元計分的個人特性問卷，作為個人特性的測量；在學業成就方面，本研究以學生在2014年之國中教育會考分數作為指標；在資料分析方面，本研究以潛在類別分析，以學生考試壓力、學業成就及個人特性之作答資料，將學生進行分類。結果發現，以本研究所蒐集之資料而言，將學生分為四類最為適當，並將這四類學生分別命名為高壓中成就組（22%）、中壓高成就組（26%）、低壓中成就組（32%）及低壓低成就組（20%）。相較於中壓高成就組及低壓中成就組的學生，高壓中成就組的學生有較高的不確定性、神經性、低自尊、外控性，以及較低的外向性，此結果與先前理論相符。同時，研究結果也發現，低壓低成就組的學生亦有較高的低自尊，以及程度中等的不確定性及外控性。研究結果顯示，中學生的考試壓力與其個人特性有關聯性，除了驗證先前理論可能影響壓力的神經性、外向性、自尊及外控性等個人特性之外，也說明學生的不確定性可能是影響考試壓力的其中一項個人特性。本研究將就中學生考試壓力與個人特性的關係進行討論，並提出教育實務上的建議。英文摘要：In this present study, we explore whether examination stress among 9th graders in Taiwan is related to their personal characteristics, specifically whether students subject to high levels of examination stress have a certain pattern of characteristics. The sample consists of 1,858 9th graders in Taiwan. The Examination Stress Scale (ExamSS) was used as a measure of examination stress. Scores from the Comprehensive Assessment Program (CAP) 2014, the largest standardized achievement test for junior high school students in Taiwan, were used as an index of academic achievement. A questionnaire compiled by the researcher and comprising 26 dichotomous questions was used to measure personal characteristics, including uncertainty, neuroticism, extroversion, low self-esteem, and locus of control. A latent class analysis (LCA) was conducted to categorize students according to the data of ExamSS, CAP 2014, and personal characteristics. The LCA results show that the data best fit a four-classes model, classifying students into high-stress-medium-achievement (22%), medium-stress-high-achievement (26%), low-stress-medium-achievement (32%), and low-stress-low-achievement (20%). The profiles of these four classes show that, by comparison with the medium-stress-high-achievement group and the low-stress-medium-achievement group, the high-stress-medium-achievement group has higher rates of uncertainty and neuroticism, lower extroversion and self-esteem, and greater tendency to externalize the locus of control. In the other hand, the low-stress-low-achievement group is shown to have low self-esteem, and medium uncertainty and external locus of control. In this study, we have found that examination stress is correlated with personal characteristics, such as uncertainty, neuroticism, extroversion, low self-esteem, and external locus of control. According to the results of this present study, some suggestions were proposed, hoping that educational policy can be used to change social atmosphere and provide counselling in schools where it is needed so as to effectively reduce examination stress among adolescents.起始頁-結束頁：203-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201909_64(3).00087篇名：國小校長共創式領導與教師專業學習社群關係之研究：以教師信任為中介變項並列篇名：The Study on Relationship Between Co-Creating Leadership of Elementary School Principals and Teacher Professional Learning Communities: Teacher Trust as a Mediator作者：丁一顧(Yi-Ku Ting);王淑麗(Shu-Li Wang);江姮姬(Heng-Chi Chiang)關鍵字：校長共創式領導;教師信任;教師專業學習社群;principals co-creating leadership;teacher professional learning communities;teacher trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探究校長共創式領導、教師專業學習社群，以及教師信任之間的相關與中介效果。本研究採問卷調查研究法，以臺北市、新北市及桃園市國民小學之教師為對象，共獲得有效問卷838份，研究工具為「共創式領導、教師信任與教師專業學習社群調查問卷」，資料分析則採Pearson積差相關與結構方程模式。研究發現：一、校長共創式領導、教師專業學習社群與教師信任間具顯著高度正相關；二、校長共創式領導可直接影響教師專業學習社群；三、校長共創式領導可藉由教師信任的中介作用，間接正向影響教師專業學習社群。最後，研究者根據研究結論提出相關建議，以作為實務推動及未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were as follows: (1) to examine the relationship among principal co-creating leadership, teachers professional learning community, and teacher trust; and (2) to verify the mediating effect of teacher trust. The study employed a survey method generated by the researchers entitled ”Principals' Co-creating Leadership, Teachers' Professional Learning Community, and Teacher Trust Inventory.” Participants were 838 elementary school teachers from Taipei City, New Taipei City and Taoyuan City. Data was analyzed by Pearson correlation and structural equation modeling. Three main findings were elaborated as follows: (1) There is a positive and significant correlation among principals' co-creating leadership, teacher professional learning communities and teacher trust. (2) Principals' co-creating leadership has significant direct effect on the teacher professional learning community. (3) The impacts of principals' co-creating leadership on teachers' professional learning communities are partially mediated by teacher trust. According to the research findings, several suggestions for the implementation and further studies are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：237-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201909_64(3).00098篇名：應用字本位教學法對提升初級華語學習者漢字與詞彙能力之成效研究並列篇名：Effectiveness of Applying a Character-Based Teaching Method to Improve the Proficiency of Primary Chinese as a Second Language作者：林振興(Zhen-Xing Lin);王暄博(Hsuan-Po Wang)關鍵字：序列位置效果;初始效應;漢語作為第二語言學習;鍵接圖教學法;Chinese as second/foreign-language learning;key-image mnemonic;primary effect;serial position effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：不同於拼音書寫系統，漢字視覺組成複雜多變，對以華語作為外語或第二語言之學習者而言，構成極大挑戰。本研究欲以字本位教學法為基礎，涵納第二語言學習的雙碼理論和符合認知心理學的創新記憶術，發展適合華語學習者之策略，以解決漢字難學之學習難點。本研究以菲律賓基督教靈惠學院八年級的華語初級學習者為研究樣本，探討在不同教學法中的學習成效。因此，研究設計在不同教學法中，探討三個研究問題：初始效應、漢字（認讀與書寫）學習成效、詞彙學習成效。經過兩個月的實徵教學研究，結果顯示，接受字本位教學法之學習者，漢字與詞彙的表現皆優於接受詞本位教學法之學習者；此外，初級學習者的漢字學習成效符合序列位置效果之初始效應理論。英文摘要：Learning Chinese as a second language (CSL) is difficult because visual characters of Chinese are complicated, and phonetic writing systems are different. The study aimed to develop a learning strategy for overcoming the difficulty in learning Chinese characters for CSL learners by implementing a combination of a character-based learning method and dual code theory of learning a second language with innovative memory based on cognitive psychology. The study targeted primary CSL learners among eighth-grade students of Grace Christian College, Philippines and analyzed the results of different teaching methods. The study investigated three research questions for different teaching methods, including a serial position effect, the effectiveness of learning Chinese characters (reading and writing), and the learning results of vocabulary. After a learning experience of 2 months, the result indicated that the character and vocabulary performance of students who received the character-based teaching method was superior to those who received the word-based teaching method. In addition, the effectiveness of learning Chinese characters among the primary CSL learners was consistent with the theory of the serial position effect.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201906_64(2).00019篇名：問世間「生涯」為何物？臺灣大學生生涯概念原型分析研究並列篇名：What Do You Mean When You Think of Career? A Prototype Analysis of the Conception of Career Among Taiwanese College Students作者：王秀槐(Hsiu-Huai Wang);陳珍德(Jen-De Chen)關鍵字：大學生;生涯;原型分析;華人文化;career;Chinese culture;college students;prototype analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：如何建構生涯以「安身立命」，是青年時期的重要核心議題，對生活在西方與華人文化脈絡影響下的現代臺灣青年而言，「生涯」究竟有何涵義？本研究旨在探討臺灣大學生對於「生涯」一詞所抱持的概念。以「原型分析」為手段，透過200位大學生的參與，經由生涯詞庫建立、擴展、驗證、分類等階段，釐清「生涯」一詞所呈現的概念與範疇。研究結果顯示，臺灣大學生之生涯概原型架構，在水平向度上，可分為「內在」與「外在」兩大體系，「內在」體系包含「定錨」與「修為」、外在體系包含「工作生活」與「家庭生活」，其下又界定出「定向」、「定位」、「選擇」、「信念」、「實力」等基本概念，其下再包含「未來發展」、「個人終極關懷」等15個基本概念與36個下位概念。在垂直向度上，內在體系為一個五層的概念架構，強調大學生內在的自我探索與知行培養，呈現大學生如何決定生涯方向與如何實踐；外在體系則為一個四層的意義系統，重視個人與外在的社會關係和現實脈絡，代表大學生如何思考自身與社會的關係。研究發現臺灣大學階段青年的生涯概念內外兼具，涵蓋多元，反映出西方個人主義取向、華人傳統儒家思想，以及現代青年生涯處境的交互影響。英文摘要：To develop and construct an optimal career is one of the major challenges for youths in today's world. For college students, who are facing the key stage of career development, the concept of ”career” is crucial. However, the meaning of ”career” is complicated and blurred and there is a dearth of systematic research on the multi-facet notions of career with its universality and cultural differences. Therefore, the present study seeks to explore the concept of 'career' among Taiwanese college students situated in the flux of Western and Chinese cultures. By employing the prototype analysis method, a group of 200 college students were invited to participate in the processes of establishing, expanding and validating career-related terms and phrases in defining the circumscription and scope of career, and then a semantic analysis by similarity sorting was implemented to obtain the features classification of the career concept among these college students. Data of similarity sorting were analyzed using cluster analysis; a tree diagram depicting the meaning structure of career was constructed based on the result of calculating the normalized root mean square distance, which mirrors the distance among each clusters. The clustering results yielded to hierarchical tree diagram of the conception of career consisting of multiple levels. In the horizontal dimension, there was an ”intrinsic” versus ”extrinsic” division, labeled as superordinate level 1 and ”anchoring” and ”cultivating,” labeled as superordinate level 2. Under the superordinate levels, two layers of basic level concepts were also identified. Basic 1 level concepts include (from left to right): ”orienting,” ”locating,” ”choice making” (under ”anchoring”), ”beliefs about work,” ”competence” (under ”cultivating”), ”work life,” and ”family life” (”extrinsic”). Basic 2 level concepts consist of ”future development,” ”existential concerns” (under ”orienting”), ”quality of being,” ”attributes for striving” (under ”locating”), ”prevail through effort” (under ”beliefs about work”), ”dance with opportunity,” ”education,” ”professional abilities” (under ”competence”), ”thorough and practical concerns of job,” ”financial independence,” ”stress of reality,” ”work loyalty,” ”social and global reality” (under ”work life”), ”family relationship and responsibility,” and ”quality of life” (under ”family life”). Underneath the basic level concepts, there are 36 subordinate level concepts. As to the vertical dimension of the career prototype, the intrinsic dimension which contains 5 levels of concepts is a complicated meaning system, emphasizing the internal process of self-exploration and cultivation. The intrinsic system reflects concepts about decision-making and actualization of career development among college students. The extrinsic dimension contains 4 levels of concepts, highlighting college students' consideration of their relationships with the external social context including family, work, and the global world. The result showed that the meaning of career were multi-facet and all-embracing, reflecting a mixed influences from Western individualist orientation, Chinese cultural tradition and contemporary working world. This pioneering study has paved the way for establishing culturally-fit career theories as well as career guidance and counseling.起始頁-結束頁：39-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201906_64(2).000210篇名：偽科學信念與科學素養的共存與抗衡－民眾參與科學和偽科學活動之探究並列篇名：The Coexistence and Conflict of Pseudoscience Belief and Scientific Literacy: Investigate Adults' Engagement in Scientific and Pseudoscientific Activities作者：林淑梤(Shu-Fen Lin);林煥祥(Huann-Shyang Lin)關鍵字：科學素養;科學參與;偽科學;偽科學活動;engagement in science;pseudoscience;pseudoscientific activity;scientific literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在探討臺灣民眾於2012∼2015年3年期間偽科學信念和偽科學活動參與（如看偽科學節目）有無顯著變化，進而探討科學素養、偽科學信念和有關科學參與、偽科學參與各面向之相關性。另外，依據2015年民眾的科學素養和偽科學信念的高、中、低程度，將民眾區分為九群，探討不同偽科學信念的三群民眾在科學素養、科學與偽科學的情意和實務各面向的差異，以及具有較多偽科學健康實踐經驗之民眾特徵。研究資料為2012∼2015年公民科學素養調查研究的資料庫。研究結果顯示，臺灣民眾於2012∼2015年3年期間偽科學信念顯著地減低，但健康有關的偽科學經驗（如用磁性療法）和觀看偽科學節目頻率卻顯著地增加。影響民眾參與偽科學健康活動的主因是民眾的偽科學信念，而非民眾的科學素養。低科學素養的民眾中，職業與科學較無關的青年、已婚、女性則最容易接受偽科學信念。值得注意的是，高偽科學信念的民眾在科學學習的愉悅感顯著高於中偽科學信念群。高偽科學信念群有較多高學歷者，屬於樂於學習、接受科學與偽科學事物者，卻可能無法區辨科學與偽科學的差異。建議未來在大眾科學教育方面，可加強女性民眾區辨科學與偽科學的主題（如健康、醫療等），以降低偽科學對民眾可能造成的危害。英文摘要：The first purpose of this study was to investigate whether Taiwanese adults' pseudo-scientific beliefs and engagement in pseudo-scientific activities (i.e. watching pseudo-scientific TV programs) changed significantly. The second purpose was to investigate the relationship among science literacy, pseudo-scientific beliefs, and engagement in scientific and pseudo-scientific activities. According to the levels of subjects' scientific literacy and pseudo-scientific beliefs in 2015 civic science literacy survey, a representational sample of adults was categorized into nine groups to investigate the difference of scientific literacy, scientific and pseudo-scientific affection and practice aspects among three groups with different levels of pseudo-scientific beliefs, and which groups of adults had more experience of pseudoscience health practice. The data base of 2012 and 2015 civic science literacy survey was analyzed. The results indicated that Taiwanese adults' pseudo-scientific beliefs descended significantly from 2012 to 2015, but their pseudo-scientific experience of health practices (e.g. magnetic therapy) increased significantly. The main factor that influenced adults' participation in pseudo-scientific health practices was their pseudo-scientific beliefs, rather than their scientific literacy. Among the adults with lows scientific literacy, youth, married, and women seem accept most easily pseudo-scientific belief. It is noted that people with high pseudoscientific beliefs had significantly higher scores of enjoyment in scientific learning than those with medium pseudoscientific beliefs. There are more adults with high education background in the group with high pseudoscientific beliefs. People with higher pseudoscientific beliefs may be interested in learning science and accept scientific and pseudoscientific things, but they lack ability to distinguish between science and pseudoscience. To decrease possible harm from pseudoscience, it is suggested that certain topics (i.e. health, medical treatment) for women to distinguish science from pseudo-science should be addressed in public science education.起始頁-結束頁：69-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201906_64(2).000301篇名：應用平衡計分卡及資料包絡分析法建立績效評估之系統：以公立S大學之行政單位為例並列篇名：Applying Balanced Scorecard and Data Envelopment Analysis to Establish a Performance Evaluation System of Administrative Units within S University in Taiwan作者：林安邦(An-Pan Lin);黃世翔(Shih-Hsiang Huang);莊雅婷(Ya-Ting Chuang);姜驊凌(Hua-Ling Chiang)關鍵字：平衡計分卡;高等教育機構;資料包絡分析法;績效評估系統;績效管理;balanced scorecard;data envelopment analysis;higher education institutions;performance evaluation system;performance management期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究之目的在於建立一套合理的績效評估系統，藉以提升高等教育機構的績效評估品質。由於高等教育機構肩負著教育服務的責任，而行政單位則是主導學校的營運規劃。因此，本研究結合平衡計分卡與資料包絡分析法作為績效評估工具，並以臺灣的公立S大學的13個行政單位作為研究對象。第一階段，本研究基於平衡計分卡的理論框架建立11項績效指標，包含：「流程構面」、「顧客構面」、「學習與成長構面」、「財務構面」等四個構面。第二階段，本研究採用資料包絡分析法，衡量行政單位的績效表現狀況．區別有效率與無效率之行政單位。績效表現良好的單位被當作標竿學習對象；反之，無效率單位需要重新調度資源。本研究可以作為管理者擬定營運策略及資源分配的參考，引導行政事務工作者提升工作效率與效能，達成高等教育機構之校務發展目標，成就永續經營的願景。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to establish a reasonable performance evaluation system to improve the quality of performance evaluation of higher education institutions. Higher education institutions shoulder the responsibility of education services, and administrative units lead the operational plans of schools. Therefore, this study combined the Balanced Scorecard and Data Envelopment Analysis as a performance assessment tool. The 13 administrative units of S University in Taiwan were selected as the research objects. In the first stage, the 11 performance indicators in this study were based on the theoretical framework of the Balanced Scorecard. The facets include ”Internal processes perspective”, ”Customer perspective”, ”Innovation and learning perspective” and ”Financial perspective”. In the second stage, this study used data envelopment analysis to distinguish between efficiency and inefficiency administrative units. The results of the study show the performance of all administrative units. Units with good performance were used as benchmarks. Conversely, the inefficient units needed to reschedule resources. Proposed resource adjustment recommendations for relatively inefficient units. This data is used as a reference for managers to formulate operational strategies and resource allocations, to guide administrative affairs staff to improve work efficiency and effectiveness, to achieve the school development goals of higher education institutions, and to achieve the vision of sustainable management.起始頁-結束頁：163-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：認知診斷模型DINA模式之差異試題功能分析並列篇名：Detection of DIF in DINA Model: An Application of Mantel-Haenszel Procedure作者：李信宏(Hsin-Hung Li);林銘嫻(Ming-Hsien Lin)關鍵字：DINA模式;Mantel-Haenszel;差異試題功能;認知診斷模型;cognitive diagnostic model;DIF;DINA model;Mantel-Haenszel期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以認知診斷模型（cognitive diagnostic model, CDM）DINA 模式為研究對象，應用Mantel-Haenszel進行DIF分析和檢測。研究中將計算Mantel-Haenszel檢定統計量所需的勝算比（odds ratio）分組方式，依據測驗總分（MH-T）、受試者擁有的屬性向量（MH-P），以及答對待檢定試題必有的屬性向量（MH-I）等，區分為三種方法，再搭配屬性分布、樣本數、試題參數和DIF大小等因子進行模擬研究。結果顯示：MH-T和MH-I的型一錯誤率都在顯著水準.05上下，而MH-P則有較高的型一錯誤率；在檢定力方面，不論DIF量的多寡，MH-I的拒絕率都比MH-T高，而MH-P的檢定力則易受屬性分布的影響。當受試者的屬性向量過於集中而部分屬性向量人數稀少時，MH-P所得統計量的誤差變大，導致其檢定結果不佳。英文摘要：This study applies the Mantel-Haenszel procedure to investigate DIF that generated by a cognitive diagnostic model, DINA. Three matching criteria are used to calculate the Mantel-Haenszel chi-square test statistic: the total scores (MH-T), the attribute profile of examinees (MH-P) and the attribute profile of items intended to be tested (MH-I). Simulation studies include factors such as item parameters, attribute distributions, sample sizes, and the amount of DIF. Results show that the MH-I method has great powers in detection DIF while controlling a reasonable type I error rate.起始頁-結束頁：189-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：國民中學學生數學成就表現之跨國比較：以TIMSS為例並列篇名：The International Comparison of Achievement in Mathematics of Eight Graders Based on TIMSS Data作者：劉春初(Chun-Chu Liu);王澤宇(Tse-Yu Wang);陳威仁(Wei-Jen Chen)關鍵字：國際數學與科學研究趨勢調查;麥氏生產力指數;資料包絡分析;Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA);Malmquist Productivity Index (MPI);Trend International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究採用國際教育成就調查委員會（IEA）所發展之國際數學與科學教育成就趨勢調查（TIMSS）作為研究分析之資料基礎，並且以資料包絡分析（DEA）以及麥氏生產力指數（MPI）等研究方法，對於臺灣與其他國家的國民中學學生數學表現良莠進行更進一步的評估。分析結果發現：1.根據DEA的分析結果可看出在三個時期中，臺灣的總效率相對其他各國都屬相對無效率的情形，但與2007年中臺灣的技術效率則達到相對有效率，而以色列與新加坡則是當前提升臺灣學生數學成就上可參酌的對象。2.根據MPI的分析結果則可看出，若以總要素生產力指標而言，並沒有國家在三個年度中有明顯成長的現象，但若以其他各項指標觀之，可知道有許多國家亦持續不斷努力提升學生的數學學習興趣、自信、評價以及成就，是以藉由從各指標的觀察，則能根據分析結果縮小範圍進一步確認以色列與新加坡為臺灣可供參酌學習的國家，是為臺灣當前欲提升學生數學學習興趣、學習自信、學習評價以及成就的具體學習標竿對象。英文摘要：This study combined data envelopment analysis (DEA) and Malmquist productivity index (MPI) to evaluate and compare the achievement in mathematics of eight graders in Taiwan with other countries by using the data of Trend International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS). The results can provide information to improve teaching and learning in science and mathematics. The results indicate the following: 1. The analysis of DEA shows that the overall efficiency of Taiwan and other countries were all inefficiency, but the technical efficiency of Taiwan in 2007 was efficiency, and Singapore and Israeli are Benchmarking of Taiwan. 2. The analysis of MPI shows that Total factor productivity of Taiwan and other countries were all less than 1. But if we observed from others indexes of MPI, we could find that many countries were keep improving their interests, self-confident evaluation, and achievement in mathematics of students. And analysis of MPI could help make sure that Singapore and Israeli are Benchmarking of Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：臺灣學生數學學習內容表現之探討：來自TASA和TIMSS的跨資料庫比較並列篇名：Taiwan Students' Mathematics Performance: A Comparative Analysis of TASA and TIMSS Database作者：曾建銘(Chien-Ming Cheng);吳慧<U+73C9>(Huey-Min Wu);趙珮晴(Pei-Ching Chao)關鍵字：國際數學與科學教育成就趨勢調查;傾向分數配對法;臺灣學生學習成就評量;數學;mathematics;Propensity Score Matching;Taiwan Assessment of Student Achievement;Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：跨國資料庫的接軌，可了解學生能力在不同試題表現情形，而傾向分數配對法（PSM）是一個可行的統計方法。本研究以TASA 2010和TIMSS 2011的資料進行分析，研究發現：數學測驗架構中，臺灣學生學習成就評量資料庫（TASA）考量的是九年一貫課程八年級的內容，至於國際數學與科學教育成就趨勢調查（TIMSS）是國際測驗，不以此為限，為各國八年級課程的綜合；因此，TIMSS和TASA的數學評量內容和試題比重不甚相同。業經PSM挑出兩考試中背景相似的4,908人，發現TIMSS中覺得較困難的試題，幾乎是TASA評量架構中或實際的九年一貫能力指標中沒有的部分，尤其是資料詮釋。為了不與國際數學測驗脫勾，課程內容、數學科教師訓練以及評量試題設計可思考調整補強。英文摘要：Cross-national database of convergence such as Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and the local database Taiwan Assessment of Student Achievement (TASA), comparing students’ performance in various items has become a possibility with the use of the statistical method Propensity Score Matching (PSM). The study use TASA 2010 & TIMSS 2011 database and results show that TASA uses the grade 8 mathematics curriculum guidelines as framework, while TIMSS is not restricted to unique curriculum guideline and more focused on the combination of international eighth grade curriculum of mathematics. Hence, the proportions of the test items of the two databases are not equal. For instance, TASA shows heavy emphasis on Algebra, while TIMSS is more focus on data and probability. Using the PSM method, 4,908 students of almost similar background demography are selected from the two databases. Comparative analysis show that TIMSS has more difficult items as compared to TASA; more difficult in terms of the scope of the TIMSS items are beyond the grade 8 mathematics curriculum guidelines, more specifically are the data interpretation. In sum, in order for Taiwan to be abreast with the international community, mathematical curriculum, mathematics teachers, and assessment design should be improved.起始頁-結束頁：27-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：國小學童計算能力之測量、發展軌跡與預測路徑並列篇名：The Measurement and Developmental Trajectories of Arithmetic Competences and Prediction Routes of Arithmetic Competences in Elementary Students作者：洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung);連文宏(Wen-Hung Lien)關鍵字：分解與重組能力;計算;發展軌跡;數學事實提取能力;arithmetic;decomposition and regrouping;developmental trajectories;math fact retrieval期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：國外研究指出，學童的計算能力發展從「數數」開始，逐步進展到「分解與重組」以及「數學事實提取」能力，最後再發展出成熟的「複雜計算」能力，而這些能力之間有其彼此影響的預測路徑。因此，本研究之目的乃以「基本數學核心能力測驗」作為研究工具，透過探索式因素分析和精熟分析的方法來探討臺灣國小一至六年級學童計算能力之發展軌跡，並以結構方程模式探討這些能力之間彼此的預測路徑。研究結果顯示：小一學童之個位數加法和減法事實提取能力尚未發展成熟，到了二年級則發展成熟，據此推論臺灣學童從數數進展到加減法事實提取能力發生在小一和小二之間，而乘法事實提取能力到小三也發展成熟；「分解與重組」能力在小一和小二尚未從「複雜計算」能力中分化出來，直到小三才分化出來形成獨立的因素。計算能力之間預測路徑的研究結果顯示，低年級學童的「數學事實提取」能力可以有效預測「複雜計算」能力，中年級學童的「數學事實提取」能力可以分別預測「分解與重組」和「複雜計算」能力，但「分解與重組」仍無法預測「複雜計算」能力，其到高年級才能進一步預測「複雜計算」能力。本研究結果與國外研究比較，對我國學童之計算能力發展提出建議。英文摘要：The arithmetic competences were approved to develop from counting to decomposition and regrouping, math fact retrieval, and then complex calculation. Furthermore, math fact retrieval could predict the competence of decomposition and regrouping and complex calculation, respectively. And the decomposition and regrouping could predict the complex arithmetic competence. Two purposes of this study are: Firstly, to investigate the trajectories of 1st to 6th graded students' arithmetic competences in Taiwan; and secondly, to explore the predictive relation of these arithmetic competences of students of each grade. The results revealed that the trajectories of arithmetic competences from counting to math fact retrieval happened between grade one and grade two in Taiwan. However, the strategy of decomposition and regrouping had not been extracted from complex calculation in grade one and two. This was extracted as an independent calculation competence since grade three and after. The math fact retrieval could predict the complex calculation in grade one and two. At grades three and four, the math fact retrieval could predict complex calculation and decomposition and regrouping, respectively, but the competence of decomposition and regrouping could not predict the complex calculation. However, this predictive route would be significant statistically in grade five and six. The implication, limitation and suggestion of this study would be mentioned in these regards.起始頁-結束頁：51-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「國中學生數學學業投入量表」之發展與編製及其信、效度研究並列篇名：The Development of the Inventory of Mathematics Academic Engagement for Junior High School Students作者：李靜儀(Ching-Yi Lee);龔心怡(Hsin-Yi Kung)關鍵字：行為投入;情感投入;認知投入;數學學業投入;affective engagement;behavior engagement;cognitive engagement;mathematics academic engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究之目的在編製一份適合國中學生使用的數學學業投入量表。編製過程首先參酌相關文獻並建立量表，再針對347位預試樣本進行項目分析與探索性因素分析，藉以了解量表的因素結構與刪減不適合題項；接續以本研究之目的在編製一份適合國中學生使用的數學學業投入量表。編製過程首先參酌相關文獻並建立量表，再針對347位預試樣本進行項目分析與探索性因素分析，藉以了解量表的因素結構與刪減不適合題項；接續以1,290位國中學生為正式樣本進行驗證性因素分析，建構量表模型並確立整體適配度，以及考驗內在結構；最後以351位學生為效度樣本，以複核效化檢驗量表之穩定性。研究結果顯示：本量表共編製41題，數學學業投入量表之認知投入、情感投入與行為投入三個二階分構面有良好的適配度，各題目測量之因素符合理論構念，且量表的理論架構可得到實徵資料支持；量表同時具有良好的內部一致性信度；以正式樣本之數學自我概念、數學自我效能及數學學業成就做為效標，顯示數學學業投入量表有良好的效標關聯效度；複核效化檢驗顯示量表模式具有穩定性。總結本研究發展之「國中學生數學學業投入量表」有良好之信、效度以及穩定性，是一個符合實證的測量工具，可提供教育工作者做為評量國中學生數學投入程度之運用，後續研究者亦可應用本研究所架構之量表進行相關研究。1,290位國中學生為正式樣本進行驗證性因素分析，建構量表模型並確立整體適配度，以及考驗內在結構；最後以351位學生為效度樣本，以複核效化檢驗量表之穩定性。研究結果顯示：本量表共編製41題，數學學業投入量表之認知投入、情感投入與行為投入三個二階分構面有良好的適配度，各題目測量之因素符合理論構念，且量表的理論架構可得到實徵資料支持；量表同時具有良好的內部一致性信度；以正式樣本之數學自我概念、數學自我效能及數學學業成就做為效標，顯示數學學業投入量表有良好的效標關聯效度；複核效化檢驗顯示量表模式具有穩定性。總結本研究發展之「國中學生數學學業投入量表」有良好之信、效度以及穩定性，是一個符合實證的測量工具，可提供教育工作者做為評量國中學生數學投入程度之運用，後續研究者亦可應用本研究所架構之量表進行相關研究。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop the Inventory of Mathematics Academic Engagement (IMAE) for junior high school students in Taiwan. To validate the inventory, the preliminary scale was developed based on literature reviews, item analysis, and exploratory factor analysis of 347 participants, and the formal scale was established by confirmatory factor analysis of 1,290 participants, and cross-validation of 351 participants. The results revealed that (1) The IMAE consisted of 41-items with three second-order factors, which were cognitive engagement, affective engagement, and behavior engagement. (2) The IMAE had reasonable coefficient of internal consistency reliability and stability. (3) The criterion-related validity seemed to be good when taking the math self-concept, math self-efficacy, and mathematics achievement as criteria. (4) Confirmatory factor analysis indicated that the IMAE had acceptable construct validity and the proposed model has stability after examining the cross-validation. In sum, the IMAE is a practical tool with good reliability, validity, and stability. It can be offered to the educators for evaluating junior high school students' learning engagement in mathematics and proceeding further researches.起始頁-結束頁：83-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：Establishing a Comprehensive Large-Scale Data Infrastructure for Educational Research: The Example of the German National Educational Panel Study作者：Jutta von Maurice;Daniel Fus;Hans-Gunther Rosbach關鍵字：german national educational panel study;research data infrastructure;educational research;longitudinal data, data dissemination, scientific use file期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷4期出版年：2015英文摘要：Educational research profits greatly from the availability and analysis of longitudinal survey and competence test data. As the collection of such data and the preparation of a corresponding large-scale database is a challenging and expensive task, the results of these efforts ought to be shared among the scientific community. This article introduces the illuminating example of the German National Educational Panel Study (NEPS) and provides an insight into some of the key processes implemented in preparing and disseminating its rich empirical data to researchers from different disciplines and from all over the world. First, a short overview of the design and research topics of the NEPS is presented. The NEPS thus has a clear focus on competence development and educational processes-taking into account the relevant life-course-specific learning environments as well as issues of social inequality and educational decisions. Other major aspects include the special situation of persons with migration background and the various returns to education. As part of six different starting cohorts-ranging from early childhood to late adulthood-about 60,000 participants are interviewed and tested regularly in different survey modes. Second, the article describes the most relevant work processes for the creation of Scientific Use Files-for example, data cleaning and editing, coding and variable generation, documentation and metadata management, as well as data enrichment. The data protection and dissemination strategies are also explained here. Third, the article finally also gives some basic information about data usage as well as an outlook on future developments within the NEPS.起始頁-結束頁：9-40資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2304.012篇名：Data Analyses with IEA's TIMSS and PIRLS International Databases作者：Pierre Foy;Li-Qun Yin關鍵字：item response theory;jackknife repeated replication;matrix sampling;multi-stage cluster sampling;plausible values;PIRLS;TIMSS期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷4期出版年：2015英文摘要：Large-scale assessments in education, such as IEA's TIMSS and PIRLS, rely on sophisticated assessment instruments, elaborate sample designs, and leading-edge item response theory to meet their analytical objectives. Both assessments provide a rich and complex database intended to support and promote secondary analyses. This paper describes the complex international database structures and the statistical methods and procedures for analyzing TIMSS and PIRLS data, with examples provided for illustration. Three essential elements must be considered by researchers in any statistical analysis based on data from the TIMSS and PIRLS international databases. The first is the use of sampling weights in order to produce accurate and reliable results. Second, both assessments apply the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique to derive proper estimates of sampling variance. Finally, with student achievement reported as sets of five plausible values, statistical analyses are performed five times, once for each plausible value, and the final results aggregated across the five plausible values. Researchers and users of the TIMSS and PIRLS international databases who conduct their analyses as described in this paper should feel confident in the results their analyses will yield.起始頁-結束頁：41-61資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2304.023篇名：U.S. ”National Teacher and Principal Survey” as a Valued Resource for Teacher and Principal Studies作者：Jian-Gang Xia;Xing-Yuan Gao;Jian-Ping Shen關鍵字：national teacher and principal survey;schools and staffing survey;questionnaire;data;research;policy;implication期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷4期出版年：2015英文摘要：In this paper we introduce and review the US National Teacher and Principal Survey (NTPS) as a valued resource for teacher and principal studies. The introduction covers NTPS's original format and historical development as the Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS) and its redesign and new format. The review examines and discusses how the SASS data have been utilized for educational research and policy analysis. We finally discuss the implications for other education systems.起始頁-結束頁：63-91資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2304.034篇名：Challenges and Opportunities for Estimating Effects with Large-Scale Education Data Sets作者：Guan Kung Saw;Barbara Schneider關鍵字：large-scale data;estimating effects;educational valuations期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷4期出版年：2015英文摘要：School leaders and policy makers are often faced with serious challenges when determining the allocation of scarce resources for specific programs and practices. These decisions, typically made at the district, state or federal level, have become increasingly reliant on scientifically-based evidence that can inform what programs work, for whom, and under what conditions. To answer these questions researchers draw on a variety of methodological designs and statistical techniques to make robust inferences regarding the effect of relatively recent or existing programs and/or practices. The science of estimating effects has grown considerably over the past decade, aided in part by the availability of large-scale data sets that make it possible to simulate near-experimental conditions without employing traditional methods that require randomization of units (e.g., students, schools, districts) to treatment and control situations. These methods are particularly useful especially where randomization of subjects is not feasible. This article examines the opportunities and potential statistical problems when estimating effects with large-scale data sets for education policy and research.起始頁-結束頁：93-119資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2304.045篇名：運用開放軟體R處理大型教育資料庫並列篇名：Using R to Analyze International Large-Scale Educational Assessment Data作者：紀馥安(Fu-An Chi);許清芳(Ching-Fan Sheu)關鍵字：國際大型教育測驗資料;Intsvy;PISA;R;international large-scale educational assessment data期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷4期出版年：2015中文摘要：目前教育工作者處理大型教育資料庫常用的工具多為商用的統計軟體。資料管理與分析的流程因此不易與其他研究者分享，結果也較難被覆驗。信度不能累積的研究成效也不容易幫助指引教育政策的改進方向。本研究的主旨在示範如何運用開放軟體R管理與分析大型教育資料庫的檔案。案例為，包括本國在內共十五個國家，十五歲學生數學成就表現與多個影響該表現的相關因素（PISA 2012）。範例分析，除了使用R的基本功能外，特別嵌入Caro與Biecek（2014）針對處理大型教育資料庫發展的intsvy套件並結合maptools等相關套件將分析結果呈現在地圖上以利比較。文中提及的檔案管理及資料分析過程皆可使用提供在附錄的R 程式碼複製。英文摘要：Currently, researchers use mostly commercial software to analyze educational data. Researchers who do not have access to these commercial software can not easily replicate results others have reported in publications. Consequently, computational findings often do not cumulate reliably to offer valid guidelines for educational policy making. This paper demonstrates how to use the free, open-source R computing environment (R Core Team, 2015) to manage and analyze international large-scale educational assessment data. The example is comprised of mathematics achievement and covariates for 15-yearold students from 15 countries, including Taiwan (PISA 2012). In particular, the ”intsvy” package developed by Caro and Biecek (2014) is applied to manage the data and the ”maptools” package (Bivand & Lewin-Koh, 2015) is used to link numerical summaries to geographical boundaries of countries examined in the illustration. R code to perform analysis of data from PISA detailed in the paper is provided to facilitate reproducibility.起始頁-結束頁：121-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2304.056篇名：性別化的課程轉化：高中公民與社會科教師的性別議題教學並列篇名：Gendered Curriculum Transformation: the Teaching of Gender Issues of High School's Civics and Society Teachers作者：蘇苑瑜(Yuan-Yu Su);劉美慧(Mei-Hui Liu)關鍵字：高中公民與社會科;性別議題;課程轉化;性別差異;civics and society;gender issues;curriculum transformation;gender differences期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷3期出版年：2015中文摘要：本研究旨在探討不同性別的高中公民與社會科教師如何進行教科書性別議題的課程轉化並分析其差異。本研究採個案研究法，邀請臺灣北部地區一所男女合校高中之公民與社會科男、女教師各一位，以其任教的一年級班級為研究場域，透過參與觀察、訪談與文件分析等方法蒐集資料。研究發現，教師對教科書性別議題的理解與詮釋因性別而異，其傾向以自身性別經驗詮釋性別議題。男教師認為教科書太偏女權，因此從性別不均衡的教科書另闢蹊徑，於教學時多闡述男性經驗與處境；女教師則大致贊同教科書內容，進而挖掘並批判教科書隱而不見的性別歧視。此外，男教師強調社會結構對性別的影響；女教師則從生理性別出發詮釋性別，這是一種性別化的課程轉化。然而，性別經驗的侷限使男、女教師的課程轉化忽略整體社會的性別建構意義、認為自身性別為父權社會下實質的受害者，教師的性別運作課程與教科書的正式課程仍有落差。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to analyze the gender differences between male and female Civics and Society teachers in their curriculum transformation of gender issues as presented by textbooks. The participants of this study were two Civics and Society teachers- one male and one female- as well as their students who were senior high school students in northern Taiwan. This study is a case study which utilized participant observations, interviews and document analysis to collect data. Results showed that the male teacher and the female teacher each had different interpretations of gender issues because of their different individual gender experiences. The male teacher believed that the textbook was biased towards women's rights. In response to this perceived bias he searched for and utilized different approaches that were not provided by the gender-imbalanced textbook. The female teacher agreed with most of the textbook supplied content and she attempted to uncover and criticize gender discrimination. The male teacher emphasized the influences social structure has on gender experience, while the female teacher interpreted gender issues from the perspective of biological sex. This is a kind of gendered curriculum transformation. In addition, both teachers neglected to focus on the social construction of gender meaning because of their limited gender experiences. There was also a gap between the teachers' implemented curriculum and the formal curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2303.017篇名：國小教師對周長與面積單元課程資源運用之研究並列篇名：A Study on How an Elementary School Teacher Uses Curriculum Materials to Teach Perimeter and Area作者：陳嘉皇(Chia-Huang Chen)關鍵字：周長;面積;學習軌道;課程資源;perimeter;area;curriculum materials;learning trajectories期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷3期出版年：2015中文摘要：本研究旨在探索國小教師運用「學習軌道」（learning trajectories, LTs）當成教學工具，比較其學習LTs前後對課程資源的運用情形？研究問題包含「周長與面積」單元有關教學目標的設定？「周長與面積」LTs的臆測與數學概念分析？對學習的作業做何種調整的行動？運用何種表徵協助學生學習？如何對學生數學解題的策略進行解釋？研究對象為臺灣中部某公立小學之A師，採質性描述方式進行探討，分析的資料來自訪談教師之文稿與省思日記。研究發現教師於LTs學習前之目標設定強調以計算能力培養之課程內容取向，對學生學習軌道之臆測以長方形周長與面積公式之計算應用為主，學習LTs後則以實測與圖形要素關係理解之學生思考作為導向，學習軌道路徑為：測量與計算線段的長度→理解長方形圖形構成的要素→理解長方形周長公式並應用解題→理解1平方公分代表的意義→理解長方形圖形面積構成的要素→理解長方形面積公式並應用解題。研究結果對於教師「如何」進行課程資源運用，與教師進行的課程資運運用內容是「什麼」，提供明確、成功的範例。英文摘要：The objective of this study was to explore whether elementary school teachers use course materials in a different manner after learning how to use learning trajectories (LTs). The research questions concern the setting of teaching objectives for the unit of perimeter and area in mathematics, the speculations and analysis of mathematical concepts with regard to the LTs of perimeter and area, adjustments in learning assignments, the use of representation to assist students and the means of explaining problem-solving strategies to students. The subject of this study was a teacher serving at a public elementary school in Central Taiwan. We adopted a qualitative approach in analyzing data from interviews with the teacher and the reflections in the teacher's journal. The findings indicate that before the teacher learned how to use LTs, the learning objectives were focused on strengthening the arithmetic of the students, and the speculation of student LTs primarily involved calculating and applying the formulas for the perimeter and area of rectangles. However, after learning how to use LTs, the focus shifted to gauging student understanding on the relationship among shape elements. The LT was therefore modified to the following procedure: measuring and calculating the length of segments, understanding the elements composing rectangle shapes, understanding the perimeter formula of rectangles and how to use it in problem solving, understanding the meaning of 1 square centimeter, understanding the elements composing the area of rectangle shapes, and understanding the area formula of rectangles and how to use it in problem solving. The results of this study provide a clear and successful example of how a teacher employs curriculum materials and what the employment includes.起始頁-結束頁：39-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2303.028篇名：國中學生學校歸屬感影響模式之研究並列篇名：The Effect of School Belonging in Junior High School Students作者：阮孝齊(Hsiao-Chi Juan)關鍵字：學校歸屬感;學習動機;結構方程模式;中介效果;school belonging;learning motivation;SEM;mediation effect;TEPS期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷3期出版年：2015中文摘要：學生在學校受教育的過程，以及對於學校的歸屬感，影響其教育效果甚大。學校活動以及教師行為對學生成就的影響機制仍在建構中。許多研究指出，學校歸屬作為青少年學校行為與心理功能的中介因素，透過學習動機可作為預測學業成就的有效變項。本研究目的在透過模式建構，探討國中學生在校參與各項活動，以及接受教師行為，透過學校歸屬感以及學習動機，對其學業成就之影響。透過相關分析與結構方程模式進行統計分析，並驗證其整體模式效果。本研究對象為臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫（TEPS）中，合併2003年第二波國中學生調查的資料，清理出13,247個樣本作為對象。研究主要發現（1）對教師的教室教學感受正向的學生、與對於學校活動感受正向的學生，其學習動機與學校歸屬感較正向，學業成就亦較正向；（2）焦慮感對學校歸屬感具有負向影響，但對學業成就具有正向影響；（3）學習動機對學業成就具有正向影響；（4）學校活動、教室教學透過學校歸屬感對學習動機產生正向影響；（5）整體模式適配良好，共能解釋約40%的總體變異量。據此，本研究對未來研究與學校教學與行政實務提出相關建議。英文摘要：The process of schooling and students' sense of belonging to school affect their education achievement quite a lot. The mechanism of school activities and teachers' behavior to students' achievement is under development. The former researches show that the sense of school belonging may play as a mediating factor between psychology demands and obvious behaviors for early adolescents. This research tries to conduct a model to figure out the mediation effect of school belonging among school activities, teacher behaviors, and learning motivation on academic achievement. In the research the SEM and correlation analysis are used to structure the hall model and estimate the parameters. The research uses the junior high school students' data from the second wave Taiwan Education Panel Survey (TEPS) collected in 2003, and the sample size is 13,247. The result shows that: (1) The students with positive feeling about teacher instruction and school activities tend to have higher sense of belonging to school and learning motivation as well as better academic achievement. (2) Students' anxiety has negative effect on their sense of belonging, but it proves to be positive on their motivation and achievement. (3) The learning motivation has positive effect on the achievement. (4) The mediation effect of school belonging is significant between school activities, teacher behaviors and learning motivation. (5) The fitness index of the fixed model is acceptable, and the R square of hall model is approximately 40%. The research offers several concrete suggestions for teaching and school administration.起始頁-結束頁：81-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2303.039篇名：評析儒家文化下Deardorff跨文化能力模式在我國小學國際交流之應用並列篇名：A Critical Analysis of the Applicability of Deardorff's Intercultural Competence Model to International Exchange Activities of Taiwan's Primary Schools Within Confucian Culture作者：黃文定(Wen-Ding Huang)關鍵字：跨文化能力;國際交流;國際教育;儒家思想;小學;intercultural competence;international exchange activities;international education;Confucianism;primary schools期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷3期出版年：2015中文摘要：本研究旨在評析Deardorff跨文化能力模式在東亞儒家文化脈絡中，小學國際交流情境下的應用性。為達成此研究目的，本研究採取半結構式訪談法與文件分析法，先探討Deardorff之跨文化能力模式，並闡釋其歷程模式對小學國際交流規劃之啟示。在儒家文化脈絡的應用性分析上，本研究分析歸納過去探討儒家溝通能力觀點之論著，從儒家觀點揭示Deardorff理論模式不足之處，並闡釋儒家觀點與Deardorff所提出之能力要素相通之處。Deardorff理論模式在小學國際交流中的應用性則著重於可欲性與可行性的分析，本研究選取3所具豐富國際交流經驗的學校，訪談其負責交流活動的教育實務工作者，並蒐集4所小學（含前3所）國際交流相關文件（含成果報告書、教材、學習單、日記、心得以及活動影片）進行分析。本研究發現，Deardorff的歷程模式可應用於我國跨國校際交流活動之規劃，而其能力要素具有可欲性，能切合國際交流的需求。然而，東亞儒家文化脈絡所強調之人際關係的維繫與禮節是該能力模式所忽略的，應納入該模式中。同時，特定能力要素的達成受限於小學生之文化背景知識、認知發展以及外語能力，有賴教師有系統地介入與引導，以提昇學生的跨文化能力。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to provide a critical analysis of the applicability of Deardorff's intercultural competence model to the international exchange activities of primary schools within the East Asian Confucian cultural context. In order to achieve the research purpose, semi-structured interview and document analysis are adopted as research methods. The research begins with inquiring into Deardorff's intercultural competence model and interpreting its implications for planning international exchange activities between primary schools. As for the analysis of the applicability of Deardorff's model to Confucian cultural context, the research analyses and summarises previous literature on Confucian notions of communication competence. From Confucian viewpoints, the limitations of Deardorff's model are revealed and what it has in common with Confucian viewpoints are interpreted. The analysis of the applicability of Deardorff's model to international exchange activities between primary schools focuses on desirability and feasibility. The research selects three primary schools with rich international exchange experiences, and conducts interviews with their educational practitioners in charge of international exchanges. International-exchange-related documents (including result reports, teaching materials, worksheets, journals, reflective writings, and films of activities) from four primary schools (including the three mentioned above) are collected and analysed. The research results indicate that Deardorff's process model is applicable to planning international exchange activities of Taiwan's primary schools, and its competence components are desirable for the needs of international exchange. However, the maintenance of interpersonal relations and manners emphasised in the East Asian Confucian cultural context are overlooked and should be included in the model. Furthermore, because the attainment of some competence components is constrained by primary students' cultural background knowledge, cognitive development and foreign language ability, teachers' systematic intervention and instruction are necessary to promote students' intercultural competence.起始頁-結束頁：125-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2303.0410篇名：心性陶冶：大學如何強化學生的內在生命並列篇名：Cultivating the Spirit: How College Can Enhance Students' Inner Lives作者：溫明麗(Sophia Ming-Lee Wen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：23卷3期出版年：2015起始頁-結束頁：169-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2015.2303.0501篇名：Vocabulary Retention via E-Flashcards Aided with Social Media並列篇名：社群媒體輔助電子閃示卡對單字記憶的影響作者：翁慈凰(Tzu-Huang Weng);陳怡如(Yi-Ju Chen)關鍵字：active recall;applications;learning intentions;spaced repetition;vocabulary;主動回想;應用軟體;學習意向;間隔重複;字彙期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：With the innovative emergence of smart mobile devices, the potential of mobile-assisted language learning has been recognized globally by English teaching professionals. In particular, numerous smartphone applications on language learning has been created and pedagogical framework designed. In view of this, this study aimed at investigating the influence brought forth by using two applications jointly on learners' intentions to learn English vocabulary: an e-flashcard named ”Ankidroid Flashcards” and a social networking mobile messenger named ”LINE”. The result shows that combining these two applications has significantly influenced learners' intentions to study vocabulary. Furthermore, the recall design has significantly influenced learners' intentions, and the interaction function in LINE groups has brought positive influence on learners' intentions.英文摘要：在行動裝置的年代，行動語言學習已受到全球性的肯定，尤其是應用軟體在教育方面的用途，亦展現了前所未有的潛力。本研究探討在合併使用兩種應用軟體的情形下，學生在英語單字學習意向上的成效。這兩種應用軟體分別為電子閃示卡“Ankidroid Flashcards”及在亞洲高度風行的“LINE”社交媒體。從100位自願參加研究的網路語言學習者的學習後問卷分析得知，合併使用這兩種應用軟體確實可使學生在英語單字的學習上有正面的意向，而“Ankidroid Flashcards”電子閃示卡中的「主動回想」及「間隔重複」兩項幫助記憶的功能，也有助於學習者的正面心態。此外，“LINE”社交媒體的互動功能亦對學習有正面的影響。起始頁-結束頁：57-86資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20190411020032篇名：發展面試互動情緒感知與評量機器人之設計思考並列篇名：Design Thinking for Developing Emotional Sensing and Evaluation Robot of Interactive Interview作者：王聖銘(Sheng-Ming Wang);黃絜如(Chieh-Ju Huang);林書瑄(Shu-Xuan Lin)關鍵字：人本設計;案例式推理;情緒感知;設計思考;機器學習;user-centered design;case-based reasoning;emotional robot;design thinking;machine learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究探討如何應用設計思考方法，提供不同背景的使用者，於面試互動中情緒感知及評量的方法與系統。若能透過系統化及跨領域設計，發展能模擬面試，並偵測面試者之情緒，以及整合語意偵測及專業關鍵字評量的對話機器人，將有助於面試者透過自我練習與評量的回饋，增進面試時的專業表現。研究顯示，若導入情感運算技術及機器學習機制，深化互動服務機器人與使用者之間的互動與回饋，則更能符合服務情境與未來創新服務發展的需求。本研究架構於跨領域整合設計思考、情緒偵測技術及案例式推理分析的方法，以模擬面試的服務情境為實證研究案例，建置情緒感知機器人的原型系統，針對情緒感知的方法進行規劃與測試，並提出三個情緒偵測分析指標：臉部表情快樂指數、眼睛眨眼頻率、個人履歷文本語意情緒；作為本研究情緒感知的分析依據，以實驗結果分析相關技術整合的成效，以及系統發展之價值、效用與示能性。本研究以應用案例式推理分析的方法，建立互動服務情境及使用者專業背景與情緒感知評價系統的連結，除能符合人本設計以使用者為導向的需求及系統應用之示能性外，後續可透過案例庫累積，逐步調整各情緒偵測指標之權重，建立情緒感知機器人在未來學習機制的基礎。英文摘要：As the application of design and technology has become more interdisciplinary and integrated, the development of interactive service robots (ISRs), which are designed according to unique situational requirements, has emerged as a popular trend. Research has shown that if affective computing technology and machine learning mechanisms can be introduced to enhance interaction and feedback between ISRs and users, ISRs can better satisfy the needs of a greater number of people. In addition, they may be better aligned with both the service context and the future development of innovative services. Based on an interdisciplinary integration framework, this study combines the concept and method of design thinking, emotion-detection technology, and case-based reasoning (CBR) to simulate the service situation of an interview, and thus to develop a prototype emotion-sensing robot (ESR) system. The results of the experiment were then used to analyze the effectiveness of integrating corresponding technologies as well as the value, utility, and affordance of the developed system. This study constructed an ESR prototype and validated its worth as an application by integrating and testing core emotion-detection technologies. The ESR developed based using an interdisciplinary approach is able to connect user needs and the application of technology to the development of corresponding functions. Furthermore, this study introduced CBR analysis to establish a link between an interactive service context, the professional backgrounds of users, and an emotion-sensing evaluation system. Despite meeting both user requirements and user-centered design requirements, as well as demonstrating the feasibility of the system, future studies are necessary to enrich the cases in the database of CBR system and establish a foundation of machine learning principles for ESRs.起始頁-結束頁：87-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20190411020043篇名：探討先備知識對競爭遊戲式題庫練習之影響：以HTML5證照輔導為例並列篇名：The Impact of Prior Knowledge on Competitive Game-Based Item Bank Practicing: Taking HTML_5 Certification Tutoring as an Example作者：黃國豪(Gwo-Haur Hwang);陳碧茵(Beyin Chen);賴泑伶(Yu-Ling Lai);蘇宥鋐(You-Hong Su);曹雅涵(Ya-Han Cao)關鍵字：先備知識;遊戲式學習;題庫;證照輔導;競爭遊戲;prior knowledge;game-based learning;item bank;certification tutoring;competitive game期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：過去的題庫練習系統只能適用於個人，無法與他人一起學習，因此，本研究開發並加入能與同儕互動的競爭與遊戲元素於題庫練習系統，期望能透過競爭遊戲式學習提高學習者的學習動機與學習成效。本研究進行為期6週的教學實驗，蒐集學習者的學習動機與學習成效，並進行資料的整理與分析。結果發現，不同先備知識的學習者在競爭遊戲式學習的環境下，皆能保持高度的學習動機。而在學習成效方面，低先備知識的學習者在選擇題的進步幅度之平均分數顯著高於高先備知識的學習者，表示競爭遊戲式題庫練習系統較適合於低先備知識的學習者，而較不適合高先備知識的學習者。英文摘要：In the past, practice system was only applicable to individuals and cannot learn with others. Therefore, we developed an item bank practicing system that join the elements of competition and games. We hope to improve learners' learning motivation and effectiveness by competitive game-based learning. In this study, we conducted a six-week teaching experiment. We collect the data of learners' learning motivation and effectiveness to conduct analysis. The results showed that different prior knowledge learners can keep high learning motivation in the competitive game-based learning environment. As to learning effectiveness, the low prior knowledge learners are significantly higher than the high prior knowledge learners in the progress amplitude of multiple choice questions average score. It means that the low prior knowledge learners are more suitable than the high prior knowledge learners when using the competitive game-based item bank practicing system.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20190111010014篇名：數位圖畫書的圖文比例對學生創造力影響之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Effects of Picture to Text Ratio of Digital Picture Books on Students' Creativity作者：黃思華(Tzu-Hua Huang);吳佳娣(Chia-Ti Wu);楊旻錦(Min-Jin Yang);劉遠楨(Yuan-Chen Liu)關鍵字：共識評量技術;陶倫斯測驗量表;創造力;圖文比例;數位圖畫書;consensual assessment technique (CAT);Torrance tests of creative thinking (TTCT);creativity;picture to text ratio;digital picture books期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究設計了三種不同圖文比例的數位圖畫書，探討使用其教學是否會對學生的創造力有所差異。研究對象為新北市某國小四年級學生共83位，分為「圖畫組」：閱讀圖畫比例為100%的數位圖畫書，有33位學生；「橋梁組」：閱讀圖畫比例為70%的數位圖畫書，有22位學生；「標準組」：閱讀圖畫比例為50%的數位圖畫書，有28位學生。共經過6週的教學實驗，每週安排閱讀圖畫書及完成學習單的教學活動，於實驗前、後進行陶倫斯測驗量表之前測與後測，課程結束後徵求自願者進行半結構式訪談；最後，邀請9位專家，利用共識評量技術評量每次閱讀圖畫書結束後的學習單。研究結果發現，「圖畫組」學生具有較佳的一般創造力及藝術與人文領域創造力。建議未來的閱讀教學若能增加數位圖畫書的圖畫呈現，可對學生創造力帶來正向的影響。英文摘要：This study designs three digital picture books with a different picture to text ratios, and examines whether teaching with the digital picture books affects students' creativity. Research subjects are 83 fourth graders in an elementary school in New Taipei City. The students are divided into a ”picture book group”: 33 students read the digital picture book with a 100% picture to text ratio; ”bridging group”: 22 students read the digital picture book with 70% picture to text ratio; ”standard group”: 28 students read the picture book with 50% picture to text ratio. After a six-week teaching experiment, picture book reading and teaching activities on the learning form are arranged each week. Pretest and post-test of the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking are administered before and after the experiment. Volunteers are requested after the course ends for a semi-structured interview. Nine experts were invited to use the consensual assessment technique for the learning form after each picture book reading. Research results found that students in the ”picture book group” had better creativity and art and humanities creativity. Future studies on reading are recommended to improve the presentation of pictures in the digital picture book, as it may have a positive effect on students' creativity.起始頁-結束頁：23-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20190111010025篇名：運用數位說故事於偏鄉國小在地文化課程之行動研究並列篇名：An Action Research of a Mobile-Based Digital Storytelling in a Rural Elementary School作者：黃淑賢(Shu-Hsien Huang);陳炯憲(Chung-Hsian Chen);施如齡(Ju-Ling Shih)關鍵字：在地文化課程;行動研究;偏鄉教育;數位說故事;local culture curriculum;action research;rural area education;digital storytelling期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：偏鄉國小由於地理位置及學生人數較少，教學資源及經費不及都市國小，學習容易造成城鄉差距；因此，本研究運用智慧型手機，藉由數位說故事融入在地文化課程教學，解決以往偏鄉在地文化課程學習成效不佳的問題。學生透過數位說故事的製作，建構在地文化認知。本研究採用行動研究，探討學生在製作數位說故事的教學活動後，對在地文化的學習成效與認同感。研究結果發現，學生透過在地文化真實情境中學習，運用智慧型手機攝影素材並製作數位說故事，其大部分學生之學習動機、學習態度、課程滿意度良好。在學習成效方面，各項前、後測量化數據皆達顯著差異，尤其是學習弱勢的學生進步幅度最大。結果顯示，此教學方式不僅能提升學生對於在地文化的認知，也能縮減學生之間的學習差距。另外，從質性資料分析學生作品，其表現超出個別學生之平日水準，顯示以攝影製作在地文化數位說故事的課程方式，確實可提升學生對在地文化的學習成效，亦能增進其對在地文化的認同感。英文摘要：Educational resources of elementary schools in the rural area are relatively less than those in the urban area due to the far-distance location and small number of students. To improve students' poor learning outcomes on local culture curriculum, this study used digital storytelling activities using mobile devices to enhance students' cultural awareness. In this study, students' learning achievements, local culture awareness, and sense of recognition are investigated through action research. Research results show that the mobile digital story-telling activities have positive impact on the students' learning achievement, motivation, attitude, and curriculum satisfaction. In terms of the learning effectiveness, the results of the pre-test and post-test of every individual tasks have reached significant differences, especially the students with low learning achievements; and the qualitative evaluation of the students' projects were better than their daily assignments. In sum, the local culture photographic digital storytelling curriculum designed in this study can increase the effectiveness of students' learning to local culture, and promote students' sense of local culture identity.起始頁-結束頁：51-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20190111010036篇名：VIP視障數位學習平臺之研發與成效評估：以嘸蝦米輸入法線上課程為例並列篇名：Development and Evaluation of the VIP E-Learning Platform and its Online Courseware: Using Boshiamy Input Method Course as an Example作者：王建立(Jan-Li Wang);楊叔卿(Shelley Shwu-Ching Young);黃勤偉(Cin-Wei Huang);林怡瑄(Yi-Hsuan Lin)關鍵字：中文輸入;視障學生;無障礙網頁;線上學習;嘸蝦米輸入法;Chinese literacy;visually impaired students;accessibility website;online learning;boshiamy input method期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：11卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：在二十一世紀資訊時代，線上學習已逐漸成為人們普遍的學習模式，然而，目前由於大多數網頁設計欠缺無障礙設計的考量，導致視障者無法與一般人一樣享有平等線上學習的機會。為解決此問題，本研究過程區分為兩階段施行。第一階段，依據全球最新「Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0無障礙網頁開發規範」，訪談視障者之需求及進行使用者需求分析，開發完成無障礙線上學習系統（VIP視障數位學習平臺），接著再針對視障學生的學習需求，設計嘸蝦米輸入法教材導入線上學習；第二階段，為進一步探討本系統之實際學習成效，由一組國小五年級先天盲學生及其家長為實驗對象，進行為期5週的線上學習，經由觀察、訪談與系統歷程紀錄等方式蒐集研究資料，透過多重資料交錯比對後，分別從視障學生及其家長兩面向進行成果分析。研究結果顯示：一、視障學生透過本系統學習，對中文識字與輸入之技能可獲得良好的學習成效，雖然在學習初期遭遇了一些瓶頸，但到了學習後期已逐漸能獨立進行線上自主學習；二、家長在進行線上學習初期，需花較大的心力調適對視障學生的學習支持，但當視障學生已具備足夠的自我線上學習能力後，其負擔逐漸降低，從初期的協助教學者逐漸轉變為在旁支持的角色。根據本研究結果，未來將持續增加教學課程，並推廣本系統給予更多的視障學生學習，期能藉著網路數位科技之設計應用達到平權學習，使更多視障學生受益。英文摘要：The 21st century is an age of information. Although e-learning has been globally regarded as a common learning mode, the visually impaired cannot enjoy the equal access to online learning. To solve this problem, we have made a great effort in two phases. In the phase one, we conducted needs analysis and in-depth interviews with the target users and then developed an online learning system, called Visually Impaired People E-learning Platform (VIP), under the guidelines of WCAG 2.0. To improve learning and teaching effectiveness of the VIP system, we designed an e-Boshiamy courseware to meet the actual needs of the visually impaired learner onto VIP. After robustness Web Accessibility Testing and expert evaluation, the results showed VIP is a user friendly, WCAG 2.0 oriented online learning platform for Taiwanese visually impaired. In the phase two, we intended to evaluate the system feasibility by conducting an experiment on a congenital visually impaired 5th grader and her parents for five weeks. Through observations, in-depth interviews, and log data analysis, the results showed as follows: (1) The congenital visually impaired student develops initial concept of Chinese character recognition and input skills using VIP and e-Boshiamy curriculum. Although the learner relied heavily on her parents in the very beginning of online learning, she could gradually develop self-directed online learning independently. (2) Initially the parents had to put great efforts to support the visually impaired student to learn online. However, after the visually impaired student developed enough self-directed learning competency, the parents' accompanying workload had been greatly reduced and their role of parents shifted from instructors to coaches as well. According to the results of this study, we plan to promote the VIP platform and the online learning in the hope to benefit more visually impaired people in the near future.起始頁-結束頁：77-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X201901110100401篇名：世界民主大事紀：2019年1－3月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: January-March 2019期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：195-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：婚姻平權與法律動員－釋字第748號解釋前之立法與訴訟行動並列篇名：Marriage Equality and Legal Mobilization: The Litigation and Legislative Actions before Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 748作者：官曉薇(Hsiao-Wei Kuan)關鍵字：法律動員;社會運動;婚姻平權;釋憲;釋字第748號;同性婚姻;legal mobilization;social movements;marriage equality;constitutional petition;Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 748期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣將在2019年成為亞洲第一個婚姻平權的國家。司法院大法官在2017年5月24日作成的釋字第748號解釋課予行政及立法機關在2019年5月前完成對於同性伴侶之合法化工作，若未在期限內完成立法，則同性伴侶得在期限屆至後直接至戶政機關進行婚姻登記。在立法、訴訟和公投等不同的法律改革形式中，臺灣以訴訟方式完成了婚姻平權的目標。究竟為什麼臺灣的婚姻平權運動選擇了司法訴訟，作為完成婚姻平權目標的手段？在婚姻平權訴訟的提出時，婚姻平權團體是如何考量選擇訴訟策略抑或立法策略？在婚姻平權運動所提起的釋憲行動中，運動團體又做了哪些努力及動員？本文在詳細觀察並分析臺灣的婚姻平權運動發展之後，發現婚姻平權運動採取了立法及訴訟策略併行的策略。臺灣的婚姻平權運動並不將立法和訴訟視為是相互排斥互相擠壓的策略，但兩者之間被視為具有立法為主、訴訟為輔的主副關係。在分析婚姻平權運動的法律動員過程及立法動員過程後，本文發現兩者之間具有一定的關連性。婚姻平權運動對於訴訟行動採取以及資源動用，是在立法遊說遭遇挫敗、停滯不前之後，才轉而採取法律動員。而在釋憲行動的評估之上，也是採取樂觀的態度，期待大法官的宣告結果能作為在立法遊說的槓桿和籌碼。婚姻平權運動團體對於採行訴訟或立法作為達成運動目的的手段之務實態度，可說是本文之重要發現，臺灣的婚姻平權團體並非一廂情願的以法律或運動菁英的態度提出訴訟，而是在評估時機點及立法遊說的成效之後進行的。運動團體也瞭解立法仍舊是最終的決戰場，而也評估釋憲行動不論結果如何，都能作為一種達成立法目標的槓桿工具。英文摘要：On May 24, 2017, the world was impressed by the decision made by the justices of the Constitutional Court in Taiwan regarding the constitutionality of the legal ban on same-sex marriages. The decision of the Constitutional Court (hereinafter ”the Court”) concludes that denying two persons of the same sex the equal right to marry violates both their equality and the constitutional right to marry. At first glance, international observers may soon conclude that Taiwan's court victory on same- sex marriage is another example of marriage equality activism's adoption of litigation as a strategy to achieve social reform. Such observation will immediately trigger the debate that whether the court is a better place than the Legislative for radical social reform such as legalization of same- sex marriage. Both the opposing opinions in such debate have assumed that social activists view these two paths, the Legislative and the court, as contradictory to each other. By examining the process of Taiwan's marriage equality movement before the Court decision, this paper found out that social activists in the marriage equality movement in Taiwan adopted legal mobilization as a complementary strategy when the legislative action encountered obstacles. This paper thus argue that the marriage equality movement in Taiwan viewed these strategies, both legislation and litigation, as parallel, rather than mutually exclusive, paths to achieve its goal.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：性交易的罪與罰－釋字第666號解釋對性交易案件的法律效果並列篇名：The Crime and Punishment of Commercial Sex: The Legal Consequences of the Judicial Interpretation No. 666作者：陳美華(Mei-hua Chen)關鍵字：妓運;性工作權;娼妓治理;性;性別平等;sex workers' rights movement;right to sex work;policing prostitution;gender equality;sexuality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以訪談與判決書的內容分析來討論釋字第666號的出現及其對性交易法律實踐的影響。本文指出民進黨堅持廢娼、馬英九政府又未能落實性交易除罪化，導致基層法官透過聲請釋憲的方式來解開政治僵局；但大法官僅強調買賣雙方的平等權，而未能直面《憲法》是否保障性工作權的問題，為日後的修法埋下變數。新法對性交易的懲罰固然有微罪化的傾向，但不論在警政取締或法院裁判的過程都已喪失該號解釋強調性別平等的原則。首先，警政機關因為績分制與「喬裝員警」的關係，導致性交易取締呈現性別化、階級化、國族化的現象。其次，在司法執行上，全台地方法院只有15%的判決引用該號解釋並做出不罰性工作者的判決，影響有限。此外，絕大多數法院也默許「喬裝員警」慣行，而且法官的心證常對性工作者不利。整體而言，日常的警政與司法實踐大幅消減該號解釋所宣示的性別平等原則。英文摘要：Basing on interview data and content analysis of summary court cases regarding commercial sex, the article aims to examine the emergence and impacts of Judicial Interpretation No. 666. I argue that the summary court justices felt forced to file constitutional petition to unpack the deadlock of prostitution policy simple because President Ma failed to decriminalize commercial sex in his presidency. As the supreme court only emphasized on the equal rights of both sex sellers and buyers, the Interpretation No. 666 failed to reveal whether sex work is a kind of freedom of occupation protected by constitutional law. It paved the way for the uncertainty of amending prostitution regulations. Although the new regulations make commercial sex a small crime, they fail to materialize the gender equality principle, which was asserted in the Interpretation No. 666, in terms of daily implementation of prostitution policy. Firstly, police crackdowns on commercial sex is very much gendered, racialized and classed due to the merit system of National Police Agency and the institutionalization of using 'undercover police' to detect commercial sex. Secondly, there were only 15% of commercial sex cases issued by judges of summary courts cited the Judicial Interpretation No. 666, and ruled for not punishing sex workers. The impact of the Interpretation No. 666 is limited. Moreover, the majority judges of summary courts still turned a blind eye to the practices of using 'undercover police', and judges usually preferred clients' testimonies than that of sex workers. Therefore, the gender equality principle asserted by the Judicial Interpretation No. 666 and the new prostitution regulations are diminished.起始頁-結束頁：45-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：你還是不懂我的明白－「大尾鱸鰻2」原住民族歧視風波的批判論述分析並列篇名：You Still Don't Get It: A Critical Discourse Analysis of Discrimination Against Taiwan's Indigenous Peoples in David Loman 2作者：黃之棟(Chih-tung Huang);朱容萱(Rong-xuan Chu)關鍵字：大尾鱸鰻2;批判論述分析;歧視;原住民族;族群;David Loman 2;Critical Discourse Analysis;Racism;Indigenous Peoples;Ethnic Groups期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：2016年，強檔賀歲喜劇「大尾鱸鰻2」在台上映，並再次創下票房佳績。正當該片因賣座而受到各方關注的同時，這部影片卻引發了歧視原住民族的爭議。由於本片播映當時正值「原住民族歷史正義與轉型正義」的最高峰，它所引發的歧視爭議也被認為具有指標性的意義。有鑑於本案的重要性，本文嘗試透過「批判論述分析」（critical discourse analysis; CDA），來對「大尾鱸鰻2」爭議進行解讀，並嘗試透過理論的檢證來釐清本案之所以引發歧視爭議的原因。誠如CDA所言，當代的歧視態樣早已不再以直接歧視為主，而是以更加細微的方式出現。這也連帶使得既有分析工具不再能有效識別並處理這類「幽微種族主義」（subtle racism）下的歧視類型。本文指出，有鑑於歧視問題涉及到語言、表達等面向，實有必要透過語言學相關的研究典範來加以檢視。對此，本文把每次爭議都視為社會對話的契機，強調吾人必須透過這個機會，重新檢視、商榷、進而辯論既定標準，以便扭轉社會對少數與弱勢的刻板印象。唯有如此，未來才能減低歧視發生並降低誤解的可能。對本文而言，這也是CDA對本土議題最大的啟發。英文摘要：This study employs Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) to investigate discrimination against Taiwan's indigenous peoples in a one-minute long scene from the film, David Loman 2. A description of the scene is firstly provided to allow a contextualization in the debate about ideological construction of racism in the film. This is followed by an elaboration of the principles of CDA which allows readers to follow analytical analysis of discriminatory aspects of the scene. Finally, narrative data gathered from interviews with key stakeholders are presented as a supplement to the in-depth discourse analysis of specific utterances by the film director, made in the aftermath of the media incident regarding allegations of racism. The study concludes with a discussion about possible solutions to reduce the recurrence of stigma and prejudice against Taiwan's indigenous peoples in media.起始頁-結束頁：89-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：追求地方政治研究的新典範並列篇名：To Pursue a New Paradigm of Local Political Studies作者：王金壽(Chin-shou Wang);翁立紘(Frank Li-hong Weng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：127-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：探索台灣地方政治運作的基本特性並列篇名：Exploring the Basic Natures of Taiwan's Local Politics作者：丁仁方(Jen-fang Arthur Ting)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：針對王金壽、翁立紘對於筆者等發表在本刊的論文（丁仁方、趙卿惠、李依霖，2018）所提出的評論，筆者等對《臺灣民主季刊》編輯委員及王教授深表感謝，讓筆者等可以再度佔用本刊有限的篇幅來澄清若干關鍵問題。以下筆者代表原文其他兩位共同作者進行答覆，相信透過不同觀點的對話，應該更可以促進更多人更掌握台灣地方政治運作的基本規則與特性，並促進台灣政治學界對侍從體制有更深入的研究。起始頁-結束頁：141-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：我國推動電子投票的契機、挑戰與未來並列篇名：Opportunity, Challenge and Future of Promoting Electronic Voting in Taiwan作者：劉嘉薇(Jia-Wei Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：155-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：書評：當政治不再變遷，法律動員如何可能？並列篇名：Book Review: How Social Movement Could be Possible without Political Change作者：林建志(Chien-chih Lin.)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：163-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：書評：中國刑辯律師－法治與不自由體制之博奕？並列篇名：Book Review: Criminal Defense Lawyers in China: Struggling for Rule of Law Against an Illiberal Regime?作者：陳玉潔(Yu-jie Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：171-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：師資養成公費制度之歷史探究並列篇名：A Historical Approach on the Government-Funded System for Teacher Preparation作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang)關鍵字：公費制度;師資培育公費制度;師範教育公費制度;government-funded system;government-funded system of normal education;government-funded system of teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究以1994年《師資培育法》為準，區分為國家以公費培育整體師資的「師範教育公費制度」，以及公費培育部分師資的「師資培育公費制度」，探究公費制度發展之設計目的、演進及其限制。經過歷史探究後，歸納之結論如下：一、公費制度設計目的從養成國家教師再到均衡區域師資，其功能包括吸引優秀人才穩定教師素質與促進社會流動；二、隨著社會環境變遷，師資培育公費制度包括公費待遇、服務義務、賠償公費等規定，與師範教育公費制度的原先設計差異不大；三、師範教育公費制度的舊問題延續至師資培育公費制度，包括公費制度未因師資培育模式不同而免其存在受到質疑、培養教師專業知能與態度功能有限及公費制度吸引優秀人才有限，使其新制度是否能解決均衡區域師資的目的，仍有待檢驗。英文摘要：This study used Taiwan's Teacher Education Act of 1994 as a cut-point for distinguishing normal education (fully funded) and teacher education (partially funded) government-funded systems, examining the design concept and limitation of government-funded systems. This study's findings of a historical approach analysis are: (1) The objective of developing the government-funded systems is to prepare national teachers during normal education stage and strive for regional equity in the context of teacher education openness; the function of government-funded is to attract talents and promote social mobility. (2) The treatment, obligation, and compensation of government-funded of teacher education were little difference in time between normal education and teacher education with social change. (3) Limitations on the design of the government-funded system during normal education to current in diversity teacher education are the existence of government-funded system is questioned, the limitation to prepare perspective teachers' professional knowledge and competence, and the limitation of attraction to talent. The goal of new institution to equalize the teacher quality between different regional is still be reviewed in the future. As a result, the paper offers some suggestions that focus on the limits of government-funded teacher education through perspectives after historical analysis to be as reference for revising relative institution.起始頁-結束頁：99-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201906_64(2).00042篇名：僑生與本地生的目標設定、全心學習、意志力及巔峰幸福之模型建構和其差異比較並列篇名：Comparative Study on Goal Setting, Mindful Learning, Volition, and Flourishing Among Overseas Chinese Students and Local Students: Comparison of Structural Models作者：陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);余民寧(Min-Ning Yu);洪兆祥(Chao-Hsiang Hung)關鍵字：目標設定;全心學習;意志力;巔峰幸福;flourishing;goal setting;mindful learning;volition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在比較僑生與本地生的目標設定、全心學習、意志力及巔峰幸福之模型建構和其差異情況。研究對象共計826位大學生，其中有559位為僑生，本地生則為267位。在資料分析上，採用描述統計、t考驗、多變量變異數分析及結構方程式模型。研究結果顯示：一、僑生與本地生的全心學習在目標設定對巔峰幸福的路徑關係上，扮演中介角色，而意志力並未對巔峰幸福的路徑達到顯著關係；二、本地生的意志力在目標設定對巔峰幸福扮演中介角色，僑生的意志力則未扮演中介角色；三、本地生及馬來西亞籍僑生在「目標接受」、「意識注意控制」、「內隱注意控制」、「正向情緒」與「勝任要求」上，均顯著高於港澳籍僑生。最後，本研究依據研究結果，針對高等教育及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：In the multicultural context, this study explored relationships and compared differences among goal setting, mindful learning, volition, and flourishing of overseas Chinese students and local students. In total, 826 college students were recruited from Taiwan's universities and colleges, including 559 overseas Chinese students and 267 local students. Data were collected and analyzed using description statistics, t test, multivariate analysis of variance, and structural equation modeling. The results demonstrated that: (1) The mediator effects of local and overseas Chinese students' mindful learning and volition on the route from goal setting to flourishing exhibited no significant effects by volition on flourishing. (2) For local students, volition played a full mediator role between goal setting and flourishing, but for overseas Chinese students, volition did not play a mediator role. (3) The scores of local students and Malaysian overseas Chinese students for goal acceptance, conscious attention control, implicit attention control, self-determination, positive emotions, and competent requirements were significantly higher than those of Hong Kongese and Macanese overseas Chinese students. Finally, based on the results and findings, several implications and concrete suggestions for higher education and future research were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：131-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201906_64(2).00053篇名：大學生健康老化多元創意教學課程之成效研究：從健康覺察到行動並列篇名：Effects of Multiple-Creative Teaching Strategies in a Healthy Aging Course for College Students: From Health Self-Awareness to Action作者：陳毓璟(Stephanie Yu-Ching Chen)關鍵字：生命歷程;代間學習;高齡導師;健康自我管理;health self-management;intergenerational learning;life course;older mentor期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究運用行為改變的跨理論模式和健康自我管理計畫方法，再融入代間學習的策略發展成健康老化多元創意課程，並評量此課程的立即學習成效和延宕效果。研究對象為選修老化相關課程之大學生35人。本研究採質量並重的混合研究方法，運用單組前測、後測及後後測的研究設計之量化分析，以及透過課程觀察紀錄和學生反思報告之質性資料分析來記錄學習歷程與成效。研究結果發現，健康老化多元創意教學對學生健康老化知識、態度和健康行為的學習影響皆具有正面顯著的影響，且經過1年後，不論知識、態度或行為，其正面成效不僅持續，且部分指標有愈來愈佳之趨勢。除學生提出多增加代間互動之課程建議外，本研究針對未來課程設計與研究亦提出建議。英文摘要：This study used a trans-theoretical model of behavioral change and evaluated a health self-management program. The teaching strategy of intergenerational learning was integrated into a multicultural healthy aging curriculum, and immediate learning and delay effects were evaluated. In total, 35 college students studied an elective course on elder health care. The research design combined qualitative and quantitative methods, adopting a single group for pretest, posttest, and follow-up and performing co-inspection of qualitative data of observation records and students' reflective reports to explore the learning process and effects. The results demonstrated that multiple-creative teaching strategies in a healthy aging course had a mostly positive and significant effect on students' health knowledge, attitudes, and health behaviors. After a year, positive results for health knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors were not only sustained but increased. In addition to students' suggestions on how to increase intergenerational interaction, this study provides suggestions for subsequent course and research design.起始頁-結束頁：161-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201906_64(2).00064篇名：屆退人員貢獻老化退休準備核心知能指標建構及其對退休準備教育的啟示並列篇名：Constructing the Core Competence Indicators of Contributive Aging Retirement Preparation Among People Approaching Retirement and Its Implications for Retirement Preparation Education作者：胡夢鯨(Meng-Ching Hu);王怡分(Yi-Fen Wang)關鍵字：屆退人員;核心知能指標;貢獻老化;退休準備;contributive aging;indicators of core competence;people approaching retirement;retirement preparation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究聚焦於「屆退人員貢獻老化退休準備核心知能指標之建構」，為我國即將退休的中高齡者建構一套系統化的貢獻老化退休準備核心知能指標，藉此探索出對退休準備教育的啟示。研究者採用半結構訪談與德懷術問卷調查法，蒐集退休人員繼續貢獻社會的意願、途徑及應具備的退休準備核心知能等資料，進行質性與量化的分析，以建構出「屆退人員貢獻老化退休準備核心知能指標」。研究結果歸納出屆退人員貢獻老化退休準備核心知能指標，包括四個向度：貢獻意願、貢獻障礙、貢獻準備及貢獻途徑；八個構面：內在原因、外在原因、個人障礙、環境障礙、內在準備、外在準備、貢獻類型及貢獻方式，共72項指標，並得到對未來規劃實施退休準備教育的重要啟示。英文摘要：This research focused on constructing the core competence indicators of contributive aging retirement preparation among people approaching retirement, and the implications of future preretirement education are described in this paper. This study adopted the Delphi technique to collect and analyse data, constructing the core competence indicators of contributive aging retirement preparation among people close to retirement. This study concluded that 72 indicators exist for contributive aging retirement preparation, and that these indicators encompass four areas: (a) intentions of contribution, (b) disabilities of contribution, (c) preparations of contribution, and (d) paths of contribution. (a) is categorized into two surfaces: intrinsic factors and external factors. (b) is categorized into two surfaces: personal disabilities and environmental disabilities. (c) is categorized into two surfaces: intrinsic preparation and external preparation. (d) is categorized into two surfaces: contributing styles and contributing types. The innovation of this study is constructing the core competence indicators of contributive aging among people close to retirement, a subject that has seldom been researched in Taiwan and overseas. The value of this study lies in the indicators that have been developed to assess retirement preparation among people approaching retirement.起始頁-結束頁：191-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201906_64(2).00075篇名：國中教育會考英語科聽力測驗實施的回沖效應初探並列篇名：A Pilot Study of the Washback Effect of the Incorporation of English Listening Test in the Comprehensive Assessment Program for Junior High School Students作者：曾芬蘭(Fen-Lan Tseng);游羽萱(Yu-Xuan You);蔡逸凡(I-Fan Tsai);陳柏熹(Po-Hsi Chen)關鍵字：回沖效應;國中教育會考英語科聽力測驗;教學策略;English listening test of the comprehensive assessment program for junior high school students;teaching strategies;washback effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究探討國中教育會考實施英語科聽力測驗如何改變國中英語教學，並透過訪談近年來大幅減少英語聽力「待加強」能力等級學生人數比例之學校教師，歸納其提升學生英語聽力學習效益的教學方式。首先，透過問卷調查國中英語教師的教學是否根據國中教育會考英語科聽力測驗試題的命題方式進行調整，並比較國中英語教師在國中基本學力測驗時期與國中教育會考時期的教學方式，調查結果顯示：一、兩時期的課程教材仍以課內教材為主，但國中教育會考時期教師的教學素材更趨向多元，課外教材的使用比例增加，教材電子書的使用比例大幅提升；二、兩時期教學時間仍以單字、文法、閱讀最多，但國中教育會考時期閱讀、聽力、口說的授課時間均增加；三、國中教育會考時期定期評量中含聽力的比例比國中基本學力測驗時期高約近10%。由此可知，國中教育會考英語科聽力測驗實施確實對國中英語教學產生回沖效應。接著篩選2015∼2017年國中教育會考英語科聽力測驗「待加強」能力等級學生比例下降最多的學校，透過訪談這些學校的英語科教師，歸納其共同教學策略，如分組合作學習、英語聽力理解策略教學、差異化教學、精熟學習、注重發音與口說等，並予以介述，以提供其他國中英語科教師參考。英文摘要：This study investigates the effects of the incorporation of English listening test in the comprehensive assessment program for junior high school students (CAP henceforth) on the teaching in junior high school classrooms. Attention is also given to the teaching strategies or methods that the interviewed teachers believe to help improve students' listening comprehension. Through questionnaires, this study explores the differences of high school English teachers' overall approaches to teaching, and further compares their teaching strategies and assessment approaches in the period of the basic competence test for junior high school students with those in the period of the CAP. The main findings are as follows: First, teachers employed textbooks as the main source for instruction for both periods, with more additional extracurricular and electronic materials in the period of CAP. Secondly, for both periods, teachers spent most time in the instruction of vocabulary, grammar, and reading; however, the overall time allocation for the teaching of reading, listening, and speaking is increased with the incorporation of the listening comprehension test. Thirdly, listening comprehension assessment was included as part of the regular midterms and finals more than 10% in the period of CAP. The findings of our study indicated there was positive washback effect with the incorporation of English listening test. The above findings are further complemented with the interviews with the high school English teachers of the 14 selected schools whose students' scores for the CAP English listening test have significantly improved from 2015 to 2017. By presenting several common teaching strategies that are shared by the interviewed teachers of the sampled schools, this study offers some suggestions for effective approaches to teaching English listening.起始頁-結束頁：219-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201906_64(2).00086篇名：生活課程教師專業素養指標之研究－以教學能力成熟度模型與模糊層級分析法為途徑並列篇名：Application of a Teaching Capability Maturity Model and Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process in Constructing Professionalism Indicators for Life Curriculum Teachers作者：陳殷哲(Yin-Che Chen);胡美雲(Mei-Yun Hu)關鍵字：生活課程;修正式德爾菲法;教師專業素養;教學能力成熟度模型;模糊層級分析法;fuzzy hierarchical analysis;life curriculum;modified Delphi method;teacher professionalism;teaching capability maturity model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：2014年《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要總綱》中，「生活課程」是專為國小低年級設置的銜接課程，為一門超越學科的統整課程，教師需具備足夠的專業素養，方能落實十二年國民基本教育核心素養之課程理念。本研究旨在建構一套「生活課程教師專業素養指標」，先瞭解國民小學生活課程教師之專業素養，再結合教師教學能力成熟度模型，分為「初始級」、「基本課程管理」、「進階課程管理實施」、「量化管理」與「永續最適化」五個層級，其下包含15個指標向度及45個指標檢核項目，並以修正式德爾菲法取得專家學者之共識，進而透過模糊層級分析法分析各層級指標之權重分配及重要性排序，藉此建構出一套系統化及科學化之指標體系，期能提供生活課程教師自我檢核與專業成長，並作為教育行政機關推動教師專業發展與師資培育之參考依據。英文摘要：Guidelines for a 12-year basic education curriculum were announced and implemented in Taiwan in 2014. In these guidelines, ”life curriculum” is defined as a course that is designed to bridge the gap in elementary and kindergarten course knowledge for first and second graders. Teachers should demonstrate adequate professionalism to fully implement the core literacies embodying the curriculum ideas of the 12-year basic education curriculum. This study aimed to develop a set of indicators for the professionalism of life curriculum teachers. Literature on Taiwanese and international studies was first reviewed to establish criteria for the professionalism of life curriculum teachers. The teaching capability maturity model was adopted, which divides professionalism into five levels, namely the beginner level, basic curriculum management, advanced curriculum management and implementation, quantitative management, and sustainable optimization, and incorporates 15 dimensions and 45 indicator checkup items. A modified Delphi method was adopted to obtain consensus among experts and scholars. A fuzzy hierarchical analysis was performed to assign weights and ranks to the indicators at all five levels. This empirical indicator system was therefore developed to serve as a self-assessment tool for life curriculum teachers to develop their professionalism; moreover, the indicators may serve as a reference for educational administrative agencies to promote the development of teacher professionalism and support future teachers.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).00017篇名：青少年健康素養：由健康促進觀點建構定義與能力指標並列篇名：Defining Adolescent Health Literacy and Constructing Its Indicators From a Health Promotion Perspective作者：廖梨伶(Li-Ling Liao);劉潔心(Chieh-Hsing Liu);施淑芳(Shu-Fang Shih);鄭其嘉(Chi-Chia Cheng);張子超(Tzu-Chau Chang)關鍵字：青少年;指標;健康素養;德懷術;adolescent;Delphi;health literacy;indicator期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：健康素養對健康狀態、健康不平等、醫療支出、醫療照護可近性、健康資訊的理解及醫療場域中的決定行為皆有重要影響。然而，目前健康素養的相關研究卻仍存在以醫療場域為背景及以成人為對象的問題，因此，本研究旨在以健康促進觀點建構青少年健康素養之定義與能力指標。本研究以國中三年級學生及高中職三年級學生為指標發展之目標對象，為能建立青少年健康生活情境之基礎資料，故訪談青少年及與其生活情境相關之重要他人，共85名青少年、23名家長與34名教師，並同步參酌國中與高中職健康教育教學相關能力指標，發展青少年健康素養之定義與能力指標，由八位健康教育相關背景之專家學者及八位資深的健康教育教師，進行兩回合的德懷術後定稿。本研究發展出青少年功能性、互動性及批判性健康素養之定義，並依其定義發展出青少年健康素養能力指標共56項；在個別指標部分，適用國中階段之指標13項，適用高中職階段之指標18項，共用指標部分共25項，指標內容共涵蓋10個健康議題。由於本研究之健康素養定義與能力指標之發展乃依據青少年之真實生活情境，也同步考量國家健康教育課程綱要，故可作為健康素養測量工具發展及教學介入策略之重要參考依據。英文摘要：Research has demonstrated that health literacy significantly affects health status, health inequality, medical expenses, accessibility of medical care, understanding of health information, and decision-making behavior. However, most studies on the topic of health literacy have focused on adults and are based on a medical perspective. This study proposed a definition of health literacy and an ability indicator for adolescents. The target study population were students in their third year of junior and senior high school. Thirty-four teachers, 23 parents, and 85 adolescents were interviewed to collect data concerning the real-life context of adolescents. The collected data and national health education curriculum guildines were used as a reference to develop health literacy definitions and abilities. Eight health education experts and eight senior teachers were invited to conduct a two-round Delphi survey. Based on the 3 types of adolescent health literacy (functional, interactive, and critical health literacy), this study developed health literacy definitions and 56 abilities (10 for the junior high indicator, 18 for the senior high indicator, and 28 for the junior and senior high indicator) covering 10 issues. The definitions and ability indicators in this study were developed on the basis of real-life adolescent contexts and considered Taiwan's health education guildines. Therefore, the results can serve as a valuable reference for developing health literacy measurement instruments or intervention programs.起始頁-結束頁：25-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).00028篇名：攜手同行：建構特教初任教師導入方案之旅並列篇名：A Journey on Constructing an Induction Framework for the Novice Special Education Teachers at Secondary School Level作者：胡心慈(Shin-Tzu Hu);張育琳(Yu-Lin Chang)關鍵字：特教初任教師;教師專業成長;導入方案;induction;novice special education teachers;teacher professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究以一尚未實施特教初任教師導入制度的縣市為對象，建構為期1年的以縣市為本位的導入方案。研究者採用合作行動研究法解決現場問題，與特教輔導團合作，邀請12名資深優良特教教師擔任16名國中身心障礙類科初任教師的跨校輔導教師，教師們從一開始彼此陌生，歷經彼此觀望、輔導教師主動、雙方均能主動互動到互相加入LINE群組成為攜手同行的好夥伴。在特教初任教師之專業成長需求上，發現其學期初較多的需求在行政方面的資訊提供及情緒支持，在度過「存活期」後才開始回歸特教專業，在教學與學生問題處理上提出較多問題。至於輔導教師的輔導策略與成長則發現：輔導教師的實際作法以在網路上聯繫居多，但亦夾雜訪視和共同輔導、團體座談、一起到特教績效優良的學校觀摩等方式，過程中輔導教師也獲得成長，最後能共同對未來如何落實導入方案提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to construct an induction framework for the novice special education teachers at secondary school level. The co-operative action inquiry research was utilized. The researchers were co-operative with 12 expert special education teachers of Wellbeing County to mentor 16 novice teachers. The results of this study indicated the process of this framework was step by step, from the beginning at each other feeling strange and watching each other, then the mentors took the initiative, after this periods, both of them could take the initiative to interact with each other, at last, they all joined the line group to become good partners working together. The professional needs of the novice special education teachers were in the administrative matters at first, then they needed professional support in teaching and managing students' challenging behaviors. Many strategies were being used in this program, e.g. modeling, evaluating, discussing, which made both senior and novice teachers grew and developed. The authors made some suggestions to Wellbeing County, teachers participating this program and researchers.起始頁-結束頁：53-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).00039篇名：高中教育目標之分析與比較並列篇名：Study of High-School Educational Goals作者：郭丁熒(Ding-Ying Guo)關鍵字：自我形塑;高中;教育目標;educational goals;self-construction;senior high school期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在進行高中教育目標之分析與比較，以346所普通高中、完全中學、綜合高中、完全暨綜合高中的105學年度之教育目標進行分析。經採質性分析，辨識出2,816筆教育目標陳述，分類為17項次類目、並進一步歸納成自我形塑、探索學習、德行養成、素養陶冶、社會參與及職業準備等六類目。所獲得之2,816筆教育目標陳述，再以SPSS for Windows 21.0版套裝軟體進行次數分配及卡方檢定。研究發現：一、高中之教育目標相當多元，彰顯全人教育受重視之現象；二、高中教育目標相當重視學生自我形塑，較不重視職業準備；三、不同背景高中之教育目標差異不大，有強調學生「自我形塑」的定型化現象。根據研究發現，本研究提出「高中教育目標六大類目可提供各校發展教育目標之參考」、「學校可與本身的背景關聯，以建立特色」、「學校發展特色目標，不宜背離高中教育之定位」等建議。英文摘要：This study analyzes and compares the educational goals of different high schools. All of the investigated educational goals were announced in 2016 and were from a total of 346 schools, consisting of senior high schools, 6-year high schools, comprehensive high schools, and 6-year-comprehensive high schools. Through qualitative analysis, this study identified 2,816 statements of educational goals that were then classified into 17 subcategories. The subcategories obtained were subsequently organized into 6 categories: self-construction, exploratory learning, moral development, literacy cultivation, society participation, and occupational training. Moreover, the 2,816 statements were further analyzed using SPSS for windows 21.0 to obtain a frequency distribution and the chi-square test. The findings of this study indicated that various high-school educational goals play a crucial role in the holistic education of high schools. The self-construction category was emphasized in high-school educational goals, whereas the occupational training category was the least commonly referenced educational goal. Furthermore, the self-construction category was prevalent in the educational goals of high schools from different backgrounds.起始頁-結束頁：81-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).000410篇名：校長領導對教師學習領導的影響：檢視信任關係與學業強調的調節作用並列篇名：The Effect of Principal Leadership on Teacher Leadership for Learning: How Trust and Academic Emphasis Moderate?作者：陳文彥(Wen-Yan Chen);潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Wendy Pan)關鍵字：信任關係;校長領導;教師領導;教師學習領導;學業強調;academic emphasis;principal leadership;teacher leadership;teacher leadership for learning;trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：在講求分享管理的學校經營中，教師學習領導十分重要，惟過去甚少有研究觸及其如何受到校長領導之影響。為了檢視校長對教師發揮促進學習的領導具有何等效應，特別是此效應是否會因學校裡的信任關係及重視學業程度而有所差異，本研究以國中教師為對象，運用問卷調查法進行探討，共回收1,340份有效問卷，研究結果獲得以下重要發現：一、國中教師對於本研究所探討的四個焦點（校長領導、教師學習領導、教師對校長的信任關係及學校學業強調），知覺程度均達中高標。不過，教師學習領導之得分顯著高於其他三者；得分次高者為信任關係。二、教師背景變項對其知覺程度之影響，系統性達顯著水準者為教師兼任行政與否。三、校長領導對於教師學習領導的影響效果，受到信任關係與學業強調的調節；信任關係對於校長領導的影響力具有加乘作用，而高學業強調則對校長領導之影響力產生壓抑效果。有關學業強調之正向功能，其強度不若西方脈絡中所呈現的，適足彰顯本研究發現具有的文化意涵。英文摘要：Teacher leadership for learning is significant for school management in the context of shared governance, while there is scarce literature regarding how it is influenced by principal leadership. To examine principal effect on teacher leadership and how the effect is moderated by teacher trust in principal and school academic emphasis, the study administered a survey to 1,340 junior high school teachers in Taiwan. Important findings are concluded as follows: (1) Teacher perceptions of principal leadership, teacher leadership for learning, teacher trust in principal and school academic emphasis all reached moderately high level. Teacher leadership for learning was ranked as the top, followed by teacher trust in principal. (2) Among the demographic variables, teachers with formal administrative post or not was found to exert significant influence on the aforementioned teacher perceptions. (3) The effect of principal leadership on teacher leadership for learning was moderated by teacher trust and academic emphasis. In other words, principal effect on teacher leadership was more vivid in schools where teachers had higher degree of trust in principals, and less evidently in schools with stronger extent of academic emphasis. The study features itself with cultural implication for its presenting weaker significance of academic emphasis than that found in the western context.起始頁-結束頁：119-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).000501篇名：世界民主大事紀：2018年10－12月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: October-December 2018期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：179-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：國中學生面對網路謠言之回應行為初探：以Facebook謠言訊息為例並列篇名：Responses of Junior High School Students to Internet Rumors: A Case Study of Facebook Posts作者：黃慧宜(Hui-I Huang);周倩(Chien Chou)關鍵字：資訊可信度;資訊驗證;網路謠言;臺灣國中學生;information credibility;information evaluation;Internet rumors;Taiwan junior high school students期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究以國中學生為對象，探討學生面對疑似網路謠言訊息時的態度與行為，希望藉此瞭解學生對於網路謠言訊息之因應方式，以提供教育工作者或未來研究者參考。本研究以問卷調查法進行，蒐集臺灣北、中、南部地區共578名國中學生樣本所填寫之問卷，研究結果如下：一、學生認為在所有常用的網路服務或網路媒介中，幾乎都能察覺網路謠言的存在；二、學生普遍具備尋找線索進行資訊可信度判斷的能力，也能區分不同線索的重要性，但卻不一定能夠利用這些線索正確判斷網路訊息的真偽；三、學生對於網路謠言的有趣性感受與可信度判斷評價有關，且不會因謠言類型的不同而產生改變；四、學生最常使用的網路謠言處理方式為「看看就算了」，大部分傾向不處理，不會主動查證、澄清，但通常也不會傳播謠言。此外，學生的處理行為也會依網路謠言訊息的類型而不同，如學生較常查證或澄清的是「恐懼型謠言」，較常傳播的則是「新奇型謠言」；五、學生較常使用「與同學、朋友、家人討論」等方便快速的方式進行網路資訊驗證，較少選擇費時但更能確保結果正確無誤的資訊驗證方式。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore and understand how junior high school students evaluate the credibility of online rumors, thereby helping educators and researchers to better understand their responses related to Internet rumors and their information evaluation behavior. The results were obtained from a survey of junior high school students in Taiwan (N = 578), which are as follows: (1) The students were aware of the Internet rumors appearing on the commonly used network services. (2) The students understood the process of evaluating the information obtained through online platforms; however, they lacked the ability of accurate and effective evaluation. (3) The personal interest of the students toward Internet rumors was related to the credibility evaluation process, and their evaluation remained unchanged when they encountered different types of rumors. (4) The students did not respond positively to Internet rumors or identify and clarify these rumors. They did not spread these rumors either. Students would use different approaches based on the type of rumors. For example, students were more likely to identify or clear bogie rumors and spread curiosity rumors. (5) The students eager to evaluate the credibility of online information would use faster and easier approaches, such as discussing the rumor with their classmates, friends, or family instead of using time-consuming but effective approaches.起始頁-結束頁：149-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).00062篇名：技術及職業教育政策之接受度：實踐研究新視角並列篇名：Policy Acceptance of Technical Vocational Education: A Perspective From a New Act on Field Study作者：洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);葉建宏(Jian-Hong Ye);范靜媛(Jing-Yun Fan)關鍵字：技術及職業教育法;配合意願;推拉因素;接受度;感知價值;acceptance attitude;intention to use;perceived value;push and pull factors;Technical and Vocational Education Act期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：為落實技術及職業教育人才的實作能力，臺灣於2015年1月14日公布《技術及職業教育法》之後，依該法第25條及第26條規定，技職校院專業科目或技術科目之教師須定期赴業界研習或研究，但目前此類教師參與研習與研究人數仍然偏低，因此，引發本研究探討此議題之動機。本研究以調查研究法，透過立意抽樣方式蒐集資料，邀請技職校院專業科目或技術科目之教師與技職校院師資培育生為研究對象，有效參與者為244人；並根據推拉因素與期望價值建構技術及職業教育政策接受度與意願之模式，運用驗證性因素分析及結構方程模式檢定研究假設。研究結果顯示：科技與產業的推力及拉力對於消弭學用落差的感知價值呈現正相關，但消弭學用落差的感知價值對於政策的配合意願卻呈現負相關。研究結果發現，認知與行為意願有落差，易造成徒法無以執行。因此，本研究建議教育主管機關提供更多的獎勵機制，以提升技職校院專業科目或技術科目之教師配合政策之意願。英文摘要：Since the introduction of the Technical and Vocational Education Act (hereinafter ”TVE Act”) in Taiwan in 2015 under Articles 25 and 26, technical teachers are required to pursue advanced study or research in the industrial field. However, few technical teachers are willing to abide by this policy, which eliminates the difference between learning and practice. This study conducted a survey by collecting data from 244 teachers of technical skills or subjects in technical vocational colleges. The results indicate that pull and push factors were positively related to the perceived value of the TVE Act, whereas the perceived value of the TVE Act was negatively related to their intention of implementation. Feedback from some of the research participants indicates that the mandatory policy of the regulation may be one of the factors leading to the exclusion of the policy. the result, this study suggested that the education policy should not only stipulate teachers' obligation to do research or only to learn from its profession, but incentives also need to be provided as a push factors to attract technical teacher's intention to follow the policies, so that professional or technical subjects in technical vocational schools can be improved.起始頁-結束頁：181-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).00073篇名：探討科學想像力融入國小自然科課程單元之成效：以「簡單力學－力與運動」單元為例並列篇名：Effectiveness of an Instructional Experiment Using Scientific Imagination Integrated Into a Nature Science Course for Elementary School Students: An Example of ”Simple Machines - Force and Motion”作者：王佳琪(Chia-Chi Wang);楊棨棠(Chi-Tang Yang)關鍵字：科學想像力;科學想像力情境測驗;科學想像力歷程模式;準實驗設計;quasi-experimental methods;scientific imagination;scientific imagination process;scientific imagination test-verbal期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究目的旨在以科學想像力歷程模式為基礎，探討科學想像力融入國小自然科「簡單力學─力與運動」課程教材，是否能有效提升國小高年級學生的科學想像力及教學品質。研究設計採準實驗不等組前、後測設計，以臺南市某國小六年級兩班共72人為研究對象，分為實驗組36人與對照組36人，實驗教學為期五週。本研究使用「科學想像力情境測驗」為研究工具，包含漫想力、聯想力、奇想力及妙想力四個成分，分別在實驗教學前、後進行施測，並以兩組在實驗教學前後的差異分數，進行獨立樣本t檢定與效果量分析；同時，更輔以學生課堂發言、同儕互動紀錄及課程教學自我檢核，檢視學生科學想像力教學成效，以作為教學提升之回饋。研究結果指出，實驗組學生的科學想像力及課堂表現優於對照組學生，表示科學想像力融入自然科教學能顯著提升國小高年級學生的科學想像力，其結果對於未來科學教育融入想像力教學有正面成效。英文摘要：This study primarily aimed to investigate the influence of the effectiveness of an instructional experiment employing scientific imagination integrated into a nature science course for elementary school students. In this study, quasi-experimental methods with a nonequivalent pretest-posttest design were used. This study included 72 elementary school students as participants. The participants were categorized into the experimental (n = 36) and control groups (n = 36). For the experimental group, a scientific imagination process was integrated into the nature science course for 5 weeks. The instruments of this study included a scientific imagination test-verbal (SIT-Verbal). An independent sample t test and Cohen's d were used to examine the scientific imagination of students regarding the instructions. The results indicated that students who received scientific imagination teaching exhibited scientific imagination and class performance superior to that of students in the control group. This result indicates that the incorporation of scientific imagination into teaching can significantly increase the scientific imagination of students and does not deteriorate their performance in terms of learning science. The use of science education using imaginative teaching has a positive feedback.起始頁-結束頁：213-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).00084篇名：以校務研究觀點探討行政管考制度之建構並列篇名：The Study of Developing the Administrative Performance Evaluation System From the Perspective of Institutional Research作者：林安邦(An-Pan Lin);姜驊凌(Hua-Ling Chiang);莊雅婷(Ya-Ting Chuang);張國恩(Kuo-En Chang)關鍵字：校務研究;管理考核制度;績效考核;institutional research;oversight and evaluation system;performance appraisal期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：校務研究的思維是以一套系統性的資料蒐集模式，能幫助大專院校自我研究分析，發掘校務治理問題，提供決策時的客觀參考，是提升高等教育品質與學校永續營運的重要方法。另一方面，學校行政具有主導學校營運的功能，對學校內的各類資源需做妥善且適當的規劃，因之，校務研究的管理思維若能融入學校行政，增進創新行政作為，大專院校應能達成總體發展目標。本研究以國立S大學為例，探討該校行政管理考核制度導入校務研究思維，並結合資訊化方式形塑出屬於S大學的管理考核模式，運用該專業機制，進行各項校務發展計畫執行、追蹤、考核、回饋與改善之管理，確保各項校務工作執行成效與品質。案例分析結果顯示，S 大學的管理考核制度融合了校務研究資訊支持反饋圈的概念，並履行了校務研究的五種角色，同時兼具品質控管及績效考核的管理方式，促使行政工作者的工作目標與校務目標有效整合，如此不但促進了S大學行政效率及效能的提升，並可從S大學逐年提升的世界大學排名得到佐證。藉此案例分析，期可作為其他大專院校推動校務研究及施行校務管理的參考。英文摘要：Institutional research (IR) is a kind of systematic data collection, which enables the self-assessment action of the higher education, finds out the problems of the school affairs and governance, and provides the data based information for related decision making. Thus, IR is an important approach to improve higher education quality to contribute its sustainable development. The administration has a function which can guide the university's operation appropriately, which should combine the IR cogitation closely to improve the progress of the university's overall goals. This study takes public S University as a case and investigates its administrative management which integrates the IR cogitation and joints to informationization. S University develops its special oversight and evaluation system to check school affairs planning, tracking, evaluating, feedback, and improvement, and ensure these affairs' performance and quality. Based on the case study results of S University, we find the administrative oversight and evaluation system of S University not only combine the IR information support cycle but also implement the 5 roles of IR. By both quality control and performance appraisal of this system, the goals of administrative staffs and school can effectively integrate. This mechanism ensures the effectiveness and quality of administrative affairs and attains proof from the world university ranking of S University. By this case study, we wish to provide some views of IR study and implementation for other institutions.起始頁-結束頁：241-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).00095篇名：高中美術資優班學生創造力、學業成就與藝術表現之關係研究並列篇名：Relationships Between the Creativity, Academic Achievement, and Art Performance of Artistically Gifted Senior High School Students作者：潘裕豐(Yu-Fong Pan)關鍵字：高中美術資優生;創造力;學業成就;藝術表現;academic achievement;art performance;artistically gifted senior high school students;creativity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：64卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究主要目的在依據Amabile的創造力三成分模式以檢視高中美術資優生的創造力與學業成就和藝術表現之間的關係，以及瞭解創造力與學業成就對藝術表現是否具有解釋力，並且對美術資優生是否該加考學科測驗做出理論上的解釋。本研究以調查研究法蒐集三所高中、共84位資優生的三項成績，分別為創造力測驗成績、學科成績及藝術表現成績。研究結果發現：一、不同學校間在學科成績與藝術表現上呈現顯著差異，而創造力則未達顯著差異；二、三個變項間的關係顯示，創造力與藝術表現呈現低度相關，而學科成績則與創造力和藝術表現部分達顯著相關；三、在預測力上，創造力和學科成績對藝術表現之分析結果顯示，創造力與藝術表現能力有顯著關係，創造力愈高，藝術表現也愈高。而學科成績的高低與藝術表現也具有預測力。最後，根據本研究結果，建議高中美術資優班選才指標上，學業成就表現應該列入美術資優班指標之一。其次，除了術科成就表現外，選才指標亦應加入創造力的成就表現。英文摘要：Based on Amabile's three models of creativity, this study addresses the differences and relationships between the creativity, academic achievement, and art performance of artistically gifted senior high school students. The possible predictive power of creativity and academic achievement for art performance is also explored. A survey was used to collect the test results in creativity, academic subjects, and art performance of 84 artistically gifted students from three senior high schools. The following conclusions were drawn from the results of the study: (1) Differences were noted between schools in terms of academic subjects taught and the art performance of students. (2) Creativity had a low to moderate correlation with art performance. Art performance and creativity had partially significant correlations with academic subjects taken. (3) The analysis results revealed that creativity and academic grades could affected the art performance of students. Creativity had significant explanatory power for art performance. The higher the level of creativity was, the better the art performance of students was. Moreover, grades in academic subjects had significant explanatory power for art performance. Academic grades had predictive power for art performance. The results of this study suggest that achievement in academic subjects is related to performance in artistic disciplines. Disciplines requiring artistic talent should therefore be included in the graded subjects. In conclusion, fine art talent should be considered an academic achievement.起始頁-結束頁：267-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.201903_64(1).001001篇名：每日下上班正負向心情的關係：放鬆與心理抽離的中介效果及盡責性與情緒穩定性的調節效果並列篇名：The Relationship Between Employee Daily Work Moods and Subsequent Start-of-Workday Mood: The Mediating Role of Relaxation and Psychological Detachment and the Moderating Roles of Personality Traits作者：蔡泓育(Hung Yu Tsai);方沴淳(Li-Chun Fang)關鍵字：每日工作心情;心理抽離;放鬆;人格特質;經驗抽樣法;mood of daily work;psychological detachment;relaxation;personality traits;experience sampling method期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：員工每日經歷心情波動是無可避免的事，因此，本研究試圖釐清，當員工在職場遭遇心情狀態改變時，會採取何種手段維持正向心情或修復負向心情。本研究依據「努力－修復模式」論點，以經驗抽樣法進行10個工作天的資料蒐集，總共收集44位企業員工資料。分析結果顯示，當員工為負向心情時，會傾向選擇從事心理抽離的方式藉此改變自身的認知，進而改變後續的負向心情；若員工為正向心情時，較會採取放鬆活動來保持自身狀態，進而維持後續的正向心情。此外，高情緒穩定性的員工，亦能增強修復體驗（心理抽離與放鬆）與後續心情狀態的正向關係，而低盡責性的員工，同時則能減弱修復體驗（心理抽離與放鬆）與後續心情狀態的正向關係。英文摘要：It is unavoidable for employees to encounter change their moods in the daily working experience. Consequently, this study is trying to explore how employees take different types of behaviors or strategies to maintain their positive moods or to repair negative moods, and their subsequent effects. Drawing from the effort-recovery model, this study used the experience sampling design to collect the daily data (i.e., end-of-workday mood, psychological detachment, relaxation, and start-of-workday mood) from 44 actual employees across two weeks (10 working days; Monday to Friday). The result shows that when employees encounter high activation negative work mood, they will engaging in psychological detachment and changing cognition can help them to gain mood repair experience and thus improve their bad moods. When employees have positive work moods, they will engaging in relaxation can help them obtain mood maintain experience and thus maintain their good moods. Furthermore, employees with high emotional stability strengthen the positively relationships between recovery experience (psychological detachment, relaxation) and start-of-workday mood. Employees' with low conscientiousness weakened the positive relationship between recovery experience (psychological detachment, relaxation) and start-of-workday mood.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201912_19(2).00012篇名：家族集團股權結構與家族領導雙元性對「主理人－主理人」代理問題之探討並列篇名：The Impact of Ownership Structure and Family Leadership Duality on Principal-Principal Agency Problems in Family Business Groups作者：盧逸君(Yi-Chun Lu);詹淑婷(Shu-Ting Chan);蘇怡方(I-Fang Su);鍾喜梅(Hsi-Mei Chung)關鍵字：「主理人－主理人」代理問題;資源依賴理論;家族集團;金字塔股權結構;家族領導雙元性;principal-principal agency problem;resource dependence theory;family business group;pyramidal ownership structure;family leadership duality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：家族集團透過金字塔股權結構，形成股份控制權與盈餘分配權不相當的分離現象而導致剝削誘因，即為代理理論所指「主理人－主理人」代理問題。然家族成員除直接持股分子企業外，亦可透過核心公司或集團內其他分子企業間接持股以達控制。本研究透過1996∼2004年共17個台灣家族集團、371間分子企業之縱橫資料，以多層混和效果最大概似模型（multilevel mixed-effects maximum likelihood model, ML model）探討股權結構對集團分子企業的「主理人－主理人」代理意涵；並結合資源依賴觀點，討論集團領導人與分子企業領導人的親屬關係（家族領導雙元性），對於調和股權結構與此一代理問題的影響。研究發現，家族領導雙元性得減緩家族成員直接持股或透過核心公司持股集團分子企業造成的「主理人－主理人」代理問題。英文摘要：Agency theory argues that the differential ownership structure inside a family business group will generate distinctive agency problems or performance consequence. In that, the higher degree of pyramidal ownership structure will generate greater divergence between voting rights and cash-flow rights, and thus the higher level of principal-principal agency problem in the affiliated firms in a family business group will be. Employing agency and resource dependence perspective, this study tries to examine the principal-principal agency problem from the distinctive ownership control type (direct ownership, the ownership of the core firm, and the ownership from other affiliates) by considering the condition of family leadership duality in family business groups. With longitudinal data of Taiwanese family business groups from 1996 to 2004, including 371 firms from 17 groups, this study adopts multilevel mixed-effects maximum likelihood model (ML model) to find out that family leadership duality cast moderation effect with family direct ownership and the ownership of the core firm on the affiliated firm to alleviate the principal-principal agency problem in the affiliated firms.起始頁-結束頁：29-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201912_19(2).00023篇名：工會領導者謙遜與工會團隊集體謙遜對勞資關係氣候的影響：檢視勞資合作的中介角色並列篇名：Exploring the Effects of Union Leader Humility and Collective Humility of Union Management Team on Industrial Relations Climate: Mediating Role of Union-Enterprise Cooperation作者：林豪傑(Hao-Chieh Lin);郭嘉博(Jia-Bo Guo);王議賢(Yi-Hsien Wang)關鍵字：勞資關係氣候;勞資合作;高層理論;領導者謙遜;集體謙遜;industrial relations climate;union-enterprise cooperation;upper echelons theory;leader humility;collective humility期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究檢視工會領導者謙遜與工會團隊集體謙遜對勞資關係氣候的影響。藉由蒐集55位人資主管與163位工會幹部的55組配對問卷資料，結果顯示工會領導者謙遜會提升工會團隊的集體謙遜；另勞資合作在工會領導者謙遜及工會團隊集體謙遜與勞資關係氣候之間具完全中介作用。過去研究大多探討勞資關係氣候對員工態度或行為的影響，經檢視工會領導者特質在組織層次之勞資合作與關係氣候中的角色，本研究填補勞資關係文獻之缺口。另檢視工會領導者謙遜的外溢效果，亦回應學者主張擴大高層理論的適用對象、全面地探討領導者與團隊之社會性互動對組織運作的影響。而從組織內部互動為主軸的研究脈絡，延伸到企業與工會的關係介面，本研究也提升了謙遜研究的理論意涵。英文摘要：This study employs the upper echelons theory to examine the respective effect of union leader humility and collective humility of union management team on industrial relations climate. Analytical results based on 55 sets of dyadic data collected from 55 human resource supervisors and 163 union stewards show that union leader humility produces a spillover effect on union management team and thus promotes collective humility. Also, union-enterprise cooperation plays a full mediating role in translating union leader humility and collective humility of union management team into advantageous industrial relations climate. Our study contributes to the industrial relations and upper echelons research. By exploring how union leader characteristics shape union-enterprise cooperation and relationship climate at the organization-level, we complement prior studies, which tend to examine the effects of industrial relations climate on employee attitude and behaviors. An examination of the spillover effects of union leader humility also responds to recent calls for expanding the research targets of upper echelons theory and more comprehensively identifying the effects of the social dynamics between top leaders and their cadre on an organization. Moreover, we advance the theoretical implications of humility research by extending its prior oblique focus on intra-organizational dynamics to inter-organizational interface as well.起始頁-結束頁：57-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201912_19(2).00034篇名：快樂的員工比較會兼顧工作與家庭？員工正向情感特質與職家衝突間關係之中介機制探討並列篇名：Are Happy Employees More Able to Balance Work and Family? Examining the Mechanisms of the Relationship Between Employee Positive Affectivity and Work-Family Conflict作者：陳建丞(Chien-Cheng Chen);王秀菁(Hsiu-Ching Wang);何青燕(Ching-Yen Ho)關鍵字：正向情感特質;職家衝突;自我堅韌性;知覺組織支持;positive affectivity;work-family conflict/family-work conflict;ego-resilience;perceived organizational support期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來員工情感與職家衝突已然成為近年來研究與實務界所重視的議題，然而卻鮮少有研究將員工情感與職家衝突做連結，並將員工情感如何影響職家衝突的過程予以模型化。本研究以擴大建立理論（broaden-and-build theory）為基礎，透過實地調查法來檢視員工正向情感特質影響到職家衝突感（例如工作－家庭衝突、家庭－工作衝突）的中介機制。本研究以台灣地區54家企業的233位員工為研究對象，採時間遞延的方式蒐集問卷，結果顯示我們提出的兩個中介變數（亦即問題解決能力與知覺組織支持）會中介員工正向情感特質與職家衝突的關係。本研究結果將對實務界人士，以及工作情感與職家衝突相關文獻，提供實質上的研究意涵。英文摘要：In recent years, workplace affect and work-family conflict have been an issue of great interest to researchers and practitioners. However, there has been very little research to precisely model the process, in which employee affect lead to work-family conflict/family-work conflict in organizational settings. The main purpose of this study was to extend the broaden-and-build theory by examining the mediating mechanisms between employee positive affectivity and work-family conflict/family-work conflict. Data were collected longitudinally from 233 employees in 54 organizations in Taiwan. Results showed that the two proposed mediating variables (i.e., problem-solving and perceived organizational support) mediated the relationship between positive affectivity and work-family/family-work conflict. Results of this study will provide practical implications and theoretical implications for the literature of workplace affect and work-family conflict/family-work conflict.起始頁-結束頁：83-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201912_19(2).00045篇名：創新學習成長氛圍、工作要求－個人能力適配度對員工經驗開放性特質與工作創新表現關係的影響：三階交互作用之檢視並列篇名：Exploring the Three-Way Interactive Effect Between Innovative Climate for Learning, Demand-Ability Job Fit, and Openness to Experience on Employee Creativity作者：紀乃文(Nai-Wen Chi);方沴淳(Li-Chun Fang);張雅文(Ya-Wen Chang)關鍵字：經驗開放性;個人－工作適配;工作創新表現;創新學習成長氛圍;openness to experience;person-job fit;creativity;innovative climate for learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：現今企業為維持競爭力，擬透過招募具有創意員工來提升其競爭優勢。本研究依據特質活化理論，員工知覺的創新學習成長氛圍應會調節經驗開放性特質與其工作創新表現的關係。亦依據Lam、Chuang、Wong及Zhu（2019）建議，檢視員工工作要求－個人能力適配是否調節創新學習氛圍的調節效果。本研究從多元產業與不同時間點抽取224對配對樣本。多層次模式分析結果發現：（1）當員工知覺組織具備高度創新學習成長氛圍時，經驗開放性與工作創新表現呈正向關係。（2）若員工工作要求－個人能力適配較高時，可強化創新學習成長氛圍對經驗開放性與工作創新表現的調節效果；若員工工作要求－個人能力適配較低時，則會減弱創新學習成長氛圍對經驗開放性與工作創新表現的調節效果。英文摘要：To maintain sustainable competitiveness, companies have to recruit creative workers in order to enhance creativity at work. Based on trait activation theory, we argued that the relationship between employees' openness to experience and creativity depends on innovative climate for learning. Moreover, based on Lam, Chuang, Wong, and Zhu's (2019) typology, we further theorized that employees' demand-ability (D-A) job fit can further moderate the moderating effect of innovative climate for learning (i.e., moderated moderating effect). We applied a time-lag design and collected data from 224 supervisor-employee pairs in various companies. The results of multilevel modeling showed that employees' perceived innovative climate for learning strengthened the positive relationship between openness to experience and creativity. In addition, when employees' D-A job fit is high, the moderating effect of innovative climate for learning is enhanced. However, when employees' D-A job fit is low, the moderating effect of innovative climate for learning is attenuated.起始頁-結束頁：109-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201912_19(2).00056篇名：高績效工作系統對工作績效之影響：人力資本及員工創意自我效能之調節式中介模型檢測並列篇名：High Performance Work System and Employee Job Performance: A Moderated Mediation Model of Human Capital and Creative Self-Efficacy作者：呂家美(Chia-Mei Lu);陳世哲(Shyh-Jer Chen);王議賢(Yi-Hsien Wang);曹瓊文(Chiung-Wen Tsao)關鍵字：高績效工作系統;人力資本;創意自我效能;工作績效;high performance work system (HPWS);human capital;creative self-efficacy (CSE);job performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：從資源基礎理論（resource-based view, RBV）及能力－動機－機會（ability-motivation-opportunity, AMO）理論的觀點，跨層次分析鑲嵌於員工本身之人力資本在高績效工作系統（high performance work system, HPWS）與工作績效關係間之中介效果，並檢視員工創意自我效能（creative self-efficacy, CSE）對上述中介機制的調節影響。從120家獨立及連鎖美容／美髮店，以一位店長對三位美容師／美髮設計師，共360組配對的有效樣本分析發現，員工人力資本中介HPWS與個人工作績效的正向關係，以及員工的CSE高低將影響人力資本中介效果顯著與否。研究結果顯示在跨層次的HPWS研究中，納入員工人力資本及CSE解釋員工績效的適切性，除嘗試釐清HPWS與工作績效間關係之疑義，亦提供相關管理與實務意涵。英文摘要：Drawing on the resource-based view (RBV) and the ability-motivation-opportunity (AMO) perspective, the strategic human resource management research is advanced by a joint investigation of the mediation role of human capital embedded in employees in linking high performance work system (HPWS) and employee job performance and the moderating role of creative self-efficacy (CSE) in influencing the mediation. This study tested the above moderated mediation model with matched data from 360 professional beauticians/ hairdressers and their store managers of 120 chained and independent beauty/hair salons (with one store manager to three beauticians/hairdressers). The multi-level analysis results showed that human capital mediated the positive relationship between HPWS and job performance. Moderated mediation analysis of individual-level CSE further indicated that human capital mediated the HPWS-employee creativity performance relationship for employees with low level of CSE. Theoretical and practical implications of our findings are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：133-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201912_19(2).00067篇名：從工作敬業到家庭敬業：溢出－橫向傳播模式之探討並列篇名：From Work Engagement to Family Engagement: A Test of Spillover-Crossover Model作者：鄒雅棓(Ya-Pei Tsou);李少仁(Shao-Jen Lee);吳宗祐(Tsung-Yu Wu)關鍵字：工作敬業;家庭敬業;工作對家庭增益;溢出－橫向傳播模式;work engagement;family engagement;work-family enrichment;spillover-crossover model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究依據溢出－橫向傳播模式，同時探討敬業在不同場域（工作到家庭）與不同個人（個人到配偶）間的轉移，並探究性別的調節效果。具體而言，本研究試圖檢視員工的工作敬業是否透過工作對家庭增益（工具路徑、情感路徑）之中介，將工作敬業從職場傳遞至家庭，使其自身產生家庭敬業（溢出效應），進而影響配偶的家庭敬業（橫向傳播效應），並試圖瞭解是否有性別差異。本研究蒐集雙薪夫妻的配對資料，共回收有效問卷261組。研究結果發現，個人之工作敬業可透過工作對家庭增益（工具路徑、情感路徑）之中介，以預測自身的家庭敬業；個人之家庭敬業亦可預測配偶的家庭敬業；男女在上述敬業的溢出－橫向傳播歷程中，有差異存在。本研究之理論與實務意涵、研究限制、未來研究方向將在最後提出討論。英文摘要：Drawing on spillover-crossover model, we investigate how engagement transfers from workplace to family and from employees to their spouses as well as the moderating role of gender. Specifically, we propose that employees' work engagement will be associated with their own family engagement via work-family enrichment (instrumental path and affective path; i.e., spillover effect), which in turn is related to spouses' family engagement (i.e., crossover effect), and we also predict that gender difference exists in above spillover-crossover process. In this study, we collected the dyad data of working couples and obtained 261 valid pairs of data. The results showed that employees' work-family enrichment mediates the relationship between employees work engagement and their family engagement. Also, employees' family engagement is positively related to spouses' family engagement. Moreover, men and women differ in the spillover-crossover process of engagement. Taken together, the result supports the perspective of spillover-crossover model. The theoretical and practical implications as well as the research limitations and future research directions are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201906_19(1).00018篇名：當工作要求在不該出現的時候出現：探討非工作時間工作要求即時通訊對工作－家庭平衡之影響並列篇名：When Job Demands Appear in Inappropriate Time: Exploring the Effect of Instant Messaging of Job Demands During Non-Working Hours on Work-Family Balance作者：黃瓊慧(Chiung-Hui Huang)關鍵字：工作要求即時通訊;負向情緒;工作控制;家庭支持;工作－家庭平衡;instant messaging of job demand;negative emotion;job control;family support;work-family balance期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究聚焦在早已存在於人們工作與家庭間多年但卻較少被關注的議題：非工作時間工作要求的即時通訊對連結工作與家庭兩介面的影響過程，以及此過程的性別差異。本研究引用工作要求－控制－支持模式的觀點，以305位全職工作者為樣本，探討員工在非工作時間的工作要求即時通訊對其工作－家庭平衡之影響。研究結果顯示，非工作時間之工作要求即時通訊負向影響員工的工作－家庭平衡，而這種關係會受到負向情緒的部分中介，同時此中介作用在男性顯著但在女性不顯著。此外，高工作控制有助於減緩工作要求即時通訊與負向情緒之間的正向關係；而高家庭支持則有助於減緩負向情緒與工作－家庭平衡間的負向關係。英文摘要：This study focuses on the issue of work-family interface that has long existed for many years but has received less attention: The impact process of instant messaging of job demands during non-working hours on work and family, and the gender differences in the process. Drawing on the perspective of job demand-control-support model, this study employed 305 full-time workers as a sample to explore the impact of instant messaging of job demands during non-working hours on the employees' work-family balance. The results show that the instant messaging of job demands during non-working hours negatively affect the work-family balance of employees, and this relationship is partially mediated by the negative emotions. In addition, the mediating effect is significant in males but not in females. Moreover, high job control helps to slow down the positive relationship between the instant messaging of job demands and negative emotions, and high family support helps to slow down the negative relationship between negative emotions and work-family balance.起始頁-結束頁：27-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201906_19(1).00029篇名：如何將工作壓力轉化為助力？員工建言與積極性人格的角色並列篇名：How Does Job Stress Lead to Job Performance? The Role of Employee Voice and Proactive Personality作者：楊君琦(Chun-Chi Yang);黃淑芬(Shu-Fen Huang);賴怡瑄(Yi-Xuan Lai)關鍵字：壓力因應策略;工作負荷;工作績效;員工建言;積極性人格;stress coping strategy;workload;job performance;employee voice;proactive personality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究嘗試以壓力因應理論，探討職場工作者面對高工作壓力時，如何與何時可以展現高工作績效？具體來說，本研究視工作負荷為壓力源，假設員工感知負荷高時，若能採取建言因應壓力，將可提升工作績效，而積極性人格高的員工，採取建言因應策略的傾向愈高、工作績效愈好。本研究採兩階段（間隔兩週）配對問卷調查法，以銀行產業員工為樣本，共蒐集392套員工與資深同事之配對樣本，研究結果發現：員工建言在工作負荷與工作績效間具完全中介效果，積極性人格具有調節式中介效果，由調節效果圖觀之：只有積極性人格高的員工才會採取建言的行為因應壓力以提升自我績效，本研究假設皆成立。最後，本研究針對分析結果提供學術理論與實務上的建議。英文摘要：Using transactional process theory of stress coping, this study try to explore the relationship between work load and job performance as well as the mediating role of employee voice and the moderating role of proactive personality. Three hundred and ninety-two ongoing colleges dyads questionnaire were collected in two stages (apart two weeks) from Taiwan. Regression results indicated that workload has positively influence on employee voice, as well as job performance. Employee voice fully mediated the relationship between workload and job performance. Proactive personality moderated the relationship between workload and employee voice, suggesting that the positive relationship between workload and employee voice will be stronger when employees with high proactive personality. Furthermore, the mediating effect of employee voice on the relationship between workload and job performance will be stronger when employee with high proactive personality. Discussion of the theoretical and practical implications of these findings were offered in the final section.起始頁-結束頁：53-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201906_19(1).000310篇名：時間控制感對健康耗損歷程的調節效果：工作要求－資源理論之時間性觀點並列篇名：Perceived Control of Time as a Moderator of the Health Impairment Process: A Temporal Perspective of the Job Demands-Resources Theory作者：林姿葶(Tzu-Ting Lin)關鍵字：時間性工作要求;工作績效;工作倦怠;時間控制感;time-related job demands;job performance;job burnout;perceived control of time期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：考量現代快速緊湊的工作型態導致的壓力反應與後果，本研究立基於工作要求－資源理論，探討時間性工作要求對工作績效之影響效果，與工作倦怠在其中扮演之中介角色，並探討時間控制感對此中介歷程之調節效果。透過整合個人時間資源與時間性工作要求，本研究以調節式中介模式進行檢驗，探究時間控制感對工作要求－資源模式之健康耗損歷程之減緩效果。研究採用問卷法施測，蒐集了221對主管與單一部屬之有效成套問卷。結果顯示時間性工作要求對工作績效的耗損效果，會透過工作倦怠的完全中介；而時間控制感不僅對時間性工作要求與工作倦怠間關係具有顯著調節效果，對健康耗損之整體中介歷程亦具有調節效果，顯示時間控制感實為關鍵的個人資源，需要更多未來研究持續以時間觀點探究與驗證工作要求－資源理論。英文摘要：Considering the fast-paced and compact working style of contemporary life, this study explored the effect of time-related job demands on job performance, and it further explored the mediating role of job burnout as well as the moderating role of perceived control of time based on the job demands-resources theoretical model (JD-R model). By integrating the concept of temporal personal resources with that of time-related job demands, a temporal perspective was adopted and applied with a moderated mediation model to comprehensively explore the buffer effect of perceived control of time on the health impairment process described by the temporal JD-R model, that is, the relationships between job demand, job burnout, and job performance. Using a questionnaire method, data on 221 supervisor-subordinate dyads were collected. Results indicated that time-related job demand influenced burnout, which, in turn, influenced job performance. In addition, perceived control of time had negative moderating effects not only on the relationship between time-related job demands and burnout but also on the mediation of burnout between time-related job demands and job performance. This study adds to the literature by highlighting perceived control of time as a promising personal resource for determining employees' job performance. Future research is necessary to explore and validate the temporal JD-R model.起始頁-結束頁：73-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201906_19(1).000411篇名：Mediated Moderating Effects of Role Breadth When Dealing With Inadequate Co-Workers: A Social Compensation Perspective並列篇名：角色廣度的中介式調節影響：從社會補償觀點檢視當知覺同儕不足時的反應作者：葉穎蓉(Ying-Jung Yeh);The-Ngan Ma;黃姵慈(Pei-Tzu Huang)關鍵字：social compensation;role breadth;affective organizational commitment;organizational citizenship behavior;social loafing;社會補償現象;角色廣度;情感性組織承諾;組織公民行為;社會閒散期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Borrowing from social compensation theory, the authors examine the mediated moderating effect of role breadth on the relationship between affective organizational commitment and organizational citizenship behavior (OCB) in instances where employees perceive inadequate ability or lack of motivation in their coworkers. The study hypothesized that the perceptions of co-workers' lack of abilities or work intention might increase employees' role-breadth if they had strong affective organizational commitment, and thereafter increased the engagement of OCBs. Data collected from 251 full-time supervisor-employee dyads indicate that social compensation only occurred following perceptions of inadequacy in ability, but not of low work intention. Moreover, interaction plot data indicate that role expansion occurred due to perceptions of low ability in one's peers, but role definition scope decreased when employees became aware of their peers' low work intentions. The findings suggest that compensatory behavior occurs via role definition expansion. Theoretical and practical implications are discussed.英文摘要：本研究以社會補償理論觀點，探討當知覺到同儕能力不足，或是工作動機不足時，員工會不會有組織公民行為的補償行動。本研究提出假設，當知覺到同儕不足時，員工的情感性組織承諾高的人，會擴大自己的角色廣度，而展現更多的組織公民行為。本研究收集了251對主管－部屬的配對資料來檢驗研究假設。研究結果發現，社會補償作用只發生在知覺同儕的能力不足時：當知覺到同儕的能力不足時，情感性組織承諾愈強的人，會透過增廣角色的定義進而提升組織公民行為。相反的，當知覺同儕的怠惰，是因為工作動機不足，而非能力的問題，則會減緩前述正向關係之強度。本文最後並根據研究結果提出理論與實務建議。起始頁-結束頁：101-118資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201906_19(1).000512篇名：團隊安全氣候、員工安全行為與安全後果之關聯：社會影響理論觀點並列篇名：The Relationships Among Group Safety Climate, Employee Safety Behaviors, and Employee Safety Outcomes: The Perspective of Social Influence Theory作者：熊欣華(Hsin-Hua Hsiung);胡宛仙(Wan-Hsien Hu);李佳如(Chia-Ju Lee)關鍵字：團隊安全氣候;安全責任感知覺;不安全行為;安全順從行為;group safety climate;felt safety responsibility;unsafe behavior;safety compliance behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：19卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究依據社會影響理論，探討並驗證團隊安全氣候、安全責任感知覺、正負面安全行為（包括安全順從與不安全行為）與員工工作安全（包括危險事件與意外傷害）之間的關係。本研究以北部某消防局的46個消防分隊與所屬的272位消防隊員為研究對象，進行兩階段的問卷調查。研究假設以多層次結構方程模型來驗證。研究結果顯示：（1）團隊安全氣候可直接降低員工不安全行為；（2）團隊安全氣候可正向提升員工的安全責任感知覺，並間接增進其安全順從行為；（3）透過員工不安全行為的中介，團隊安全氣候可間接降低員工危險事件的發生；（4）透過員工安全責任感知覺與安全順從行為的中介，團隊安全氣候可間接降低員工意外傷害的發生。依據研究發現，本研究提出相應的理論與實務意涵。英文摘要：Drawing on social influence theory, this study described and examined the relationships among group safety climate, employees' felt safety responsibility, positive/negative safety behaviors (comprising safety compliance behavior and unsafe behavior), and employees' work safety (comprising dangerous events and physical injuries). Our research participants were 272 frontline firefighters nested in 46 teams in a city fire department of the Northern Taiwan. We conducted a two-wave survey to collect data and examined hypotheses using the multilevel structural equation modeling (MSEM) method. The results of MSEM showed that: (1) group safety climate directly decreased employees' unsafe behaviors; (2) group safety climate enhanced employees' felt safety responsibility, and indirectly increased employees' safety compliance behaviors; (3) through the mediation of unsafe behaviors, group safety climate indirectly decreased employees' dangerous events; (4) through the mediation of felt safety responsibility and safety compliance behaviors, group safety climate indirectly decreased employees' physical injuries. On the basis of the research findings, this study offered relevant theoretical and practical implications.起始頁-結束頁：119-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.201906_19(1).000601篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：章英華;林明仁期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：59期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press2篇名：婚姻狀況與體重變化的性別差異並列篇名：Gender Differences in the Effects of Marriage on Body Weight作者：張峰彬(Fengbin Chang)關鍵字：婚姻狀況;身體質量指數;固定樣本追蹤調查;固定效果模型;marital status;body mass index (BMI);panel data;fixed effects models期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：59期出版年：2019中文摘要：雖然男女兩性在結婚之後普遍容易出現體重上升的情形，但如何解釋結婚事件和個人體重變化的關係，在學者當中並未出現一致看法。目前至少有4種觀點：一、婚姻選擇性假說（marriage selection hypothesis）；二、婚姻義務假說（marriage obligation hypothesis）；三、婚姻保護性假說（marriage protection hypothesis），以及四、婚姻市場假說（marriage market hypothesis）用來詮釋婚後發福的現象。為了釐清這些不同的觀點，本研究利用華人家庭動態資料庫於2004－2018年間，共10個波次的長期追蹤資料，並結合固定效果（fixed effects）模型來驗證進入婚姻是否對個人身體質量指數（body mass index, BMI）產生影響效果。我們以隨時間變動的方式將婚姻狀況區分為2種：一、未婚；二、已婚（或同居）。本研究的分析結果驗證婚姻選擇性效果的存在，體重較重的男性單身者和女性單身者都會被排除在結婚候選人的行列之外，而且婚姻選擇性效果在女性會大於男性。另外，在控制婚姻選擇性效果之後，婚姻義務假說和婚姻市場假說皆獲得實證資料的支持。固定效果模型的分析結果顯示已婚狀態和體重之間存在正向關係，而且女性在婚後增重的機率高於男性。至於婚姻保護性假說則並未獲得實證資料的支持。英文摘要：The association between weight and marriage has been an important issue in social science. In understanding the relationship between marital status and body weight, there are four perspectives: (1) the marriage selection hypothesis; (2) the marriage obligation hypothesis; (3) the marriage protection hypothesis; and (4) the marriage market hypothesis. With longitudinal survey data from the Panel Survey of Family Dynamics (2004 to 2018), this analysis examined gender differences in the relationship between marital status and body weight. We found support for the marriage selection effect, in that both men and women with a lower body mass index (BMI) are more likely to get married than their counterparts with higher BMI. Using fixed effects models, our findings also support the marriage obligation and marriage market hypotheses. On the one hand, marriage is associated with weight gain for both men and women. On the other hand, married women tend to gain more weight than married men. We found no support for the marriage protection perspective.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201912_(59).00013篇名：快樂在年齡上的變化：U型的爭辯與臺灣兩性的差異並列篇名：Happiness Changes With Age: U-Shape Debate and Gender Differences Among Taiwanese作者：陶宏麟(Hung-Lin Tao);鄭輝培(Hui-Pei Cheng)關鍵字：快樂;生活滿意;主觀福祉;年齡;U型;happiness;life satisfaction;subjective well-being;age;U-shape期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：59期出版年：2019中文摘要：主觀福祉（subjective well-being）包含快樂與生活滿意，一般文獻又會以生活滿意代表快樂。當代的主觀福祉研究一直在爭論其與年齡間是否具有U型關係，即年輕與年長者主觀福祉高，中年期最低。本文首先回顧20多年來國外文獻對此U型關係的爭論，接著使用臺灣家庭動態資料庫資料分析年齡與主觀福祉間的關係，本文發現年齡與主觀福祉的U型關係在總效果上比直接效果上更明顯，前者是模型中不控制其他變數，後者是控制其他變數，也就是所有因素在年齡上的變化對主觀福祉的影響為總效果，後者是排除可控制變數後，年齡對主觀福祉的影響。本文也發現生活滿意較快樂在年齡上的U型關係更為明顯，這部分與國外研究的發現一致。所得比較會影響生活滿意，比較不影響快樂，而且所得與男性的生活滿意U型形狀有關，而與女性的U型形狀無關，說明男性的主觀福祉比較會受所得影響，這也呼應國外文獻所說，物質條件的變動比較會影響認知上的主觀福祉－生活滿意，比較不影響情緒上的主觀福祉－快樂。英文摘要：Subjective well-being (SWB) can be represented by happiness and life satisfaction. In the literature, happiness often is represented by life satisfaction. Contemporary SWB research has been debating whether there is a U-shaped relationship between age and happiness. That is, the young and the elderly show a high level of SWB, while the middle-aged shows a low level of SWB. This study first reviews the debate over international studies on the U-shaped curve, then uses the Panel Study of Family Dynamics (PSFD) to investigate the relationship between age and SWB, and finds that the U-shaped relationship is more significant for the total effect than for the direct effect. The total effect is the effect of age on happiness derived from a model without control, while the direct effect is the effect of age on happiness derived from a model with control. Life satisfaction shows a more U-shaped pattern than happiness does, in line with the literature. Income is more correlated with life satisfaction than happiness. Men's life satisfaction U-shape is correlated to income, while women's life satisfaction U-shape is unrelated to income. This reflects the fact that one's economic condition has greater influence on cognitive SWB-life satisfaction than on emotional SWB-happiness.起始頁-結束頁：35-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201912_(59).00024篇名：高齡親代與中壯子代之經濟依附行為探討：親子與家戶的分析並列篇名：Economic Dependence of Grown-Up Children on Their Elderly Parents: An Analysis of Children, Parents, and Families作者：劉千嘉(Chien-Chia Liu)關鍵字：啃老族;人口普查;中壯子代;高齡父母;parasite singles/couples;population census;grown-up children;elderly parents期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：59期出版年：2019中文摘要：老年父母與子女同住在過去被視為東方社會的孝道體現，但近年媒體以「啃老族」描繪經濟上依附高齡父母的成年子女，並建構出一污名的群體形象。事實上，造成中壯子代經濟依附高齡父母的社會驅力甚多，但僅零星的個案報導，卻也造成了公眾對此群體有偏狹的認識。為能進一步描述此群體的生活樣貌，本文運用2010年人口及住宅普查資料，並聚焦於30－54歲、未工作與高齡父母同住且經濟上依附父母的中壯子代，藉由分析其家戶、親代與子代特性，嘗試探討人力資本、家庭生命歷程、家庭照顧需求對中壯子女依附其高齡父母的影響。研究發現如下：一、人力資本弱勢之中壯子代依附高齡父母的可能性愈高；二、單身／未婚的中壯子代將增加其依附的可能性；三、當家中有需長期照顧的家人時，將提高中壯子女經濟依附的可能。英文摘要：In the past, the case of elderly parents living with their children was considered a manifestation of filial piety in Eastern societies. However, in recent years, the media have used the term ”parasite singles/couples” to describe grown-up children who are economically dependent on their elderly parents and has constructed a stigmatized image of them. In fact, there are various factors leading to grown-up children depending on elderly parents economically; however, at present, only a few such cases are being reported, causing a narrow understanding of this group among the public. Since there is no empirical research that specifically addresses this group, this study utilizes the 2010 population and census data of Taiwan and focuses on the grown-up population aged between 30 and 54 years, unemployed, living with their elderly parents, and economically dependent on them. The study analyzes the characteristics of the families, parents, and children to explore the effects such as human capital, family life course, and family care need on grown-up children depending on their parents. The research findings are as follows: (1) grown-up children with weak human capital are more likely to depend on their elderly parents; (2) single/ unmarried grown-up children have a higher possibility of dependence; (3) grown-up children who have a relative in need of long-term care have an increased possibility of depending on their parents for their economic needs.起始頁-結束頁：89-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201912_(59).00035篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：陳端容期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：58期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press6篇名：死亡率模型之比較：以臺灣資料為例並列篇名：Mortality Model Comparison: Using Taiwanese Data作者：李永琮(Yung-Tsung Lee);劉議謙(I-Chien Liu);宮可倫(Ko-Lun Kung)關鍵字：死亡率模型;非高斯分配;期間效果;mortality models;non-gaussian distributions;period effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：58期出版年：2019中文摘要：死亡率模型之探討是保險精算領域重要之研究課題，近年來國際上有許多新模型發展，然而相關文獻鮮少使用臺灣資料進行實證。本研究介紹幾個比較新穎的模型，提供我國保險公司參考，包括Plat於2009年提出的M9、O'Hare與Li於2012年提出的M10、Mitchell et al.於2013年提出的Mc-1與Mc-2等，利用Human Mortality Database（HMD）資料庫1970-2014年之20-90歲臺灣單齡組死亡率資料進行配適與預測，並考慮非高斯分配（variance gamma分配、normal inverse Gaussian分配、skewed t分配）於Mc-1以及Mc-2模型之期間效果以檢視兩模型之預測能力。研究結果發現在配適能力上，若以殘差平方和平方根（root sum of squared errors, RSSE）作為衡量標準，男性資料適合Mc-2模型，女性資料適合M9模型。在死亡率趨勢中，若以Akaike information criterion（AIC_c）為衡量基礎，女性資料存在非高斯分配之特性。在模型預測能力上，不論以RSSE或平均絕對百分比誤差（mean absolute percentage error, MAPE）作為衡量標準，男性資料皆以Mc-2模型最佳，女性則以M10模型最佳，且預測之對數死亡率95%信賴區間大多皆包含樣本外資料。整體而言，本文建議臺灣死亡率男性資料適合Mitchell et al.於2013年提出之Mc-2模型，而女性資料則適合用M10模型。英文摘要：We investigate how new mortality models perform with Taiwanese mortality data. Although much progress has been made in the mortality model literature, practitioners still adopt the Lee-Carter model (1992) for the mortality forecast of the Taiwanese population. We compare the recently developed Mitchell et al. (2013) models with one- and two-factor models, namely Mc-1 and Mc-2, that incorporate heavy-tailed distributions such as variance gamma, normal inverse Gaussian, and skewed t distributions into period effects with two increasingly popular parametric models with cohort effects, namely the M9 and M10 models. Using age-specific mortality rates from Human Mortality Database (HMD), we show that the female mortality trend in Taiwan is non-Gaussian, as the model selection criteria such as AIC_c strongly support this. Our results suggest the two-factor Mitchell et al. (2013) model captures the male mortality rates better, while the M10 model performs better for female mortality rates in terms of root sum of squared errors (RSSE) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE).起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201906_58.00017篇名：臺灣青壯年人口的居住轉換序列分析並列篇名：A Sequence Analysis of Taiwanese Adults' Housing Transitions作者：張詠菡(Yung-Han Chang)關鍵字：居住轉換;序列分析;房屋所有;家戶組成;housing transition;sequence analysis;homeownership;household composition期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：58期出版年：2019中文摘要：居住選擇涉及成年生活的多重層面，而隨著社會變遷，成年人的發展歷程漸偏離傳統路徑，但過往臺灣少有研究從動態視角追蹤檢視青壯年人口的居住轉換。部分研究雖觸及居住安排及房屋所有權的轉變，但研究的對象年齡限於26歲以下或是35歲以上，較少涵蓋30歲前後的居住變化。本研究使用華人家庭動態資料庫，以年齡介於27-39歲之2003年主樣本為研究對象，採用序列分析，追蹤2003至2016年間，三世代樣本（1964-1967、1968-1972、1973-1976）的居住轉換。研究發現不同世代樣本的居住轉換路徑分歧，其中1973-1976世代出現留巢及離巢後返回之路徑軌跡；另一方面，該世代樣本在30歲左右時，在家戶組成及居所類別上皆出現變化，意味著即使三十而立不一定能達到，30歲在居住轉換上仍具有指標意義。英文摘要：Housing choices are related to multiple aspects of adult life. Whereas young adults' transition to full adulthood has gradually deviated from the traditional track along with social changes, the dynamics of housing transition have rarely been investigated in Taiwan. Although some studies examined the changes of living arrangements and housing tenure of the population aged under 26 or above 35, not many studies looked into the housing changes of those aged around 30. This study used data from the Panel Study of Family Dynamics and adopted the main respondents (ages 27-39) interviewed since 2003 as the sample. By dividing the sample into three cohorts (1964-1967, 1968-1972, 1973-1976), the analysis of housing transitions between 2003 and 2016 was conducted with sequence analysis. Research results showed that there were distinct differences in housing trajectories among different cohorts. Trajectories of staying at or returning to the parental home after leaving were found among the 1973-1976 cohort. Moreover, based on analysis of the long-term trajectories, changes of household composition and housing tenure tended to surge around age 30. This finding implies that age 30 is still the critical age of housing transitions, even though ”independence at the age of thirty” may be hard to achieve.起始頁-結束頁：39-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201906_58.00028篇名：從全民健保研究資料庫評估高齡人口的醫療利用並列篇名：Using National Health Insurance Database to Evaluate the Health Care Utilization of Taiwan's Elderly作者：余清祥(Jack C. Yue);王信忠(Hsin-Chung Wang);許筱翎(Hsiao-Ling Hsu)關鍵字：人口老化;醫療利用;長壽風險;全民健康保險;巨量資料;population ageing;medical utilization;longevity risk;National Health Insurance;big data期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：58期出版年：2019中文摘要：因應我國快速人口老化，近年有不少政策規劃與高齡化有關，而與老年生活需求有關者又可分為三個面向：經濟、醫療、照護。由於現在對人類壽命變化趨勢瞭解仍舊不足，致使許多政策需要根據現況調整，確保制度的財務健全及永續經營，例如我國勞工保險退休金條例、軍公教年金改革等。國內外對於退休生活的研究以經濟需求居多，但單純依賴壽命不足以描述生活品質，需要加上健康方面等需求，因此本文目標為探索高齡人口的醫療利用，分析就醫次數、疾病類型、醫療院所等特性，評估我國老年人的健康現況及需求。本文依據全民健康保險研究資料庫2005年百萬高齡抽樣檔，輔以2005年百萬人抽樣檔，其中高齡檔的抽樣比例約為45.7%，亦即每兩位65歲以上人口就有1人被抽出，減少高齡人口樣本數不足的影響，提高估計值的準確度。套用本文提出的死亡判斷準則，健康保險高齡抽樣檔提供相當可信的高齡死亡率，與內政部公布值非常接近。此外，除了門診次數及金額較高，發現老年人口醫療利用的年成長率也較高，而且就醫時有明顯的慣性行為，愈集中在同一地點就醫的死亡率愈低。英文摘要：Population ageing is speeding up in Taiwan due to the lower fertility rates and declining mortality rates. Thus, the life arrangements after retirement have been receiving a lot of attention in recent years, and more public resources have been allocated to elderly-related policies. The elderly's needs can be classified into three categories: finances, medical utilization, and living care, and many countries have devoted efforts in seeking the solutions to fulfill these needs. However, it is a difficult task, since we don't have enough information about the elderly. Take the study of mortality improvement and life expectancy as an example. The trend toward longer lives surprises many people, and the annual increment in life expectancy is still over 0.2 years in many countries. Underestimation of life expectancy causes financial insolvency in public insurance systems and the private sector. Our study goal is to explore the medical needs of Taiwan's elderly via estimating their medical utilization, such as inpatient and outpatient visits. The study material is a sample data set of one million elderly people from Taiwan's National Health Insurance Database. The sample coverage is about 45.7%, i.e., almost one in two of Taiwan's elderly are drawn, and this big data sample can greatly reduce the sampling bias and increase the accuracy of estimation. For example, we used this sample data to estimate the elderly mortality rates and found that they are very close to the official statistics. Also, the medical utilization of Taiwan's elderly has a high degree of inertia.起始頁-結束頁：89-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.201906_58.000301篇名：編輯報告並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：陳昭如期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：45期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室2篇名：彩虹家庭的現身：家長與子女表現的整合分析並列篇名：The Coming-Out of Rainbow Families: A Meta-Analysis of Outcomes for Parents and Offspring作者：李怡青(I-Ching Lee)關鍵字：同性父親;同性母親;人工生殖;領養;same-sex fathers;same-sex mothers;artificial impregnation or insemination;adoption期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：45期出版年：2019中文摘要：同性伴侶經營家庭（簡稱彩虹家庭），從過往社會中的極少數，到現今挑戰不同社會對於家庭規範與法律保障的局限性。在多國通過婚姻平權法案之後，同性伴侶擁有人工生殖與領養的權利，使其家庭樣態更加多元。過往整合分析研究者發現彩虹家庭的家庭功能、家長與子女的表現，和異性伴侶家庭（簡稱預設型態家庭）一樣好，但未能檢視研究與樣本特性對於兩類家庭比較結果的影響，尚有不足。此外，即使多國已通過婚姻平權法案，許多學者和民眾仍有刻板印象（如，男性能否稱職養育子女？）或疑慮（如，異性伴侶家庭的優勢在小孩年紀較長時才出現？）。本文以量化整合分析方法，比較彩虹家庭與預設型態家庭的家庭功能、家長和子女表現，重複驗證兩類家庭型態一樣好的結論。此外，本文回答過往的實徵研究與整合分析無法回答的問題：同性伴侶父親的表現與同性伴侶母親一樣好，亦與預設型態家庭的表現一樣好。本文亦發現，人工生殖或領養的家庭功能兩類家庭大致相仿；子女的種族比例與家庭功能、家長和子女的表現無關；隨著年齡增長，彩虹家庭子女的認知表現與自我評估會越來越好。文中並深入探討家庭功能、家長與子女表現的促進因子與危險因子。英文摘要：Same-sex families were once considered an anomaly, but they have now become a force which challenges norms and demands legal protections for alternative families. After the passage of marriage equality legalization in various countries, same-sex couples have gained the rights to artificial impregnation and adoption, thus diversifying same-sex families. According to previous meta-analyses, overwhelming similarities between same-sex and different-sex families were observed; however, the lack of evaluation of the variation in the effect sizes has limited the contributions of these studies. In addition, even though legal protections for same-sex families have been offered in various societies, stereotypes (e.g., could men be good caretakers?) and concerns (e.g., perhaps the advantages of different-sex families would be apparent when toddlers grow up) still exist. This article utilizes a quantitative meta-analysis to compare same-sex and different-sex families in terms of family functions, and outcomes for parents and offspring. This research replicates the findings in previous meta-analyses. There is virtually no difference between these two types of families. Extending previous findings, same-sex fathers are as good as same-sex mothers and different-sex parents. Examining children born via insemination or adoption also demonstrates similarities in same-sex and different-sex families. Children's racial composition does not moderate family functions or outcomes for the parents and their offspring in the two types of families. The age of the offspring matters only in the case of a couple of indicators. When the children grow older, children in same-sex families perform better in cognitive evaluations and self-evaluations than children in different-sex families. The above findings are consistent with the previous research consensus that parental sexual identity has little effect on family functions, or on outcomes for parents and children. I will further discuss potential facilitating and risk factors for family functions and outcomes for parents and their offspring.起始頁-結束頁：7-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201912_(45).013篇名：打造同志家庭：女同志家長如何協助子女建立家庭認同並列篇名：Constructing the Same-Sex Family: How Lesbian Mothers Help Their Children Build Family Identities作者：潘琴葳(Chin-Wei Pan)關鍵字：女同志家長;同志家庭;家庭認同;繼親家長;同志家長社群網絡;lesbian parent;same-sex family;family identity;step-parent;same-sex parents' community期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：45期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究探討女同志家長如何在不利的社會處境中，透過親職實作協助子女理解家庭組成，建立自我肯認及家庭認同，並且應對外界的異樣眼光。筆者訪談23位女同志家長，針對訪談資料進行分析，有以下幾點發現。首先，女同志家長本身的身分認同是同志家庭認同的關鍵，家長必須有堅定的認同，在日常生活中以言教和身教，成為子女的學習楷模，並且透過各種教育方式，提供子女正確的知識，進而建立自我肯認及家庭認同。其次，繼親家長在家庭中需要有明確的定位，以利協助子女建立對家庭的認同。再者，是否對外揭露同志家庭的資訊，各個家庭在考慮子女的福祉下，採取不同策略。此外，在目前法律保障不足，社會環境對於同志家庭及子女仍然不夠友善的情形下，同志家庭社群發揮了提供家長生育及教養資訊、情感支持，同時給予子女人際支援網絡的功能。本研究最後並根據研究結果，對於女同志家長、公共政策及未來相關研究方向提出建議。英文摘要：The study tries to explore how lesbian parents help their children build family identities while living in a society which is still not entirely friendly to same-sex families. Through interviewing 23 lesbian parents, the author has found that lesbian parents' self-identities are essential for helping their children build self and family identities. For lesbian stepparents, it is important to establish clear roles in order to help the children build their family identity. Further, lesbian parents have concerns for the welfare of the children in deciding whether to come out publicly as a same-sex family or not, and their decisions on this may vary. Last, most lesbian parents join same-sex parents' communities, which not only support lesbian parents, but also their children. Following on these findings, recommendations are made as to how lesbian parents can help their children build family identities; public policy and future studies are suggested.起始頁-結束頁：59-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201912_(45).024篇名：同志分手調適：外在壓力源與身分認同的影響並列篇名：A Study of Adjustment after LGB Break-Up: The Influence of External Stress and LGB Identity作者：曾秀雲(Hsiu-Yun Tseng);謝文宜(Wen-Yi Shieh)關鍵字：同性伴侶;外在壓力源;身分認同;分手調適;same-sex couples;external stresses;LGB identity;break-up adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：45期出版年：2019中文摘要：近年來國內外對於外在壓力源與同志身分認同的相關研究越來越多，可惜未能進一步探討外在壓力源與身分認同對於分手調適的影響，亦未能提供男女同志多群組測量恆等性的相關證據。本研究以網際網路問卷調查，尋找曾經歷同性之間情愛關係（至少半年以上），最近一年內結束伴侶關係，並且肯定本研究重要性，願意分享個人經驗的受訪者，共計273位，包括100位男同志與173位女同志。研究結果發現：（1）男同志與女同志因性別權力結構位置不同，在面對外在壓力源與同志身分汙名時，呈現明顯的性別差異。例如：男同志隱藏警戒身分，以及傳統婚嫁的外在壓力較女同志高，內化恐同的程度也較女同志高。（2）無論男同志或女同志，外在壓力確實影響同志身分認同與分手調適；結果支持性少數壓力模型。此外，同志身分認同在外在壓力源與正向分手調適之間具有中介效果，對於男同志的正向影響明顯高於女同志；外在壓力源對負向分手調適則為直接影響。英文摘要：In recent years there have been an increasing number of studies on the impact of external sources of stress on LGB identity. However, these studies did not go further to examine the impact of external sources of stress and LGB identity on break-up adjustment, nor did they provide evidence or measurement of variation between LGB males and LGB females. This study used on-line questionnaires to find participants who approved of the importance of this study and were willing to share their experiences; had experienced same-sex relationships longer than six months; and had ended their relationships within a year. Two hundred and seventy-three participants (100 LGB males and 173 LGB females) were recruited. The research findings are: (1) LGB males and LGB females experience differences in their roles in the gender power structure, and they have obvious gender differences in their external stressors and LGB identity. For example, the external stress for LGB males in evading disclosure of their gay identity and in facing traditional marriage expectations is higher than for LGB females, and males' degree of internalization of homophobia is higher, too. (2) For both LGB males and LGB females, external stressors affect the LGB identity and breakup adjustment process. The LGB identity is found to be a full mediator between external stresses and positive break-up adjustment. The results provide support for the sexual minority stress model. The external stresses directly influence negative break-up adjustment. The LGB male's identity has a stronger impact on positive break-up adjustment than does the LGB female's identity.起始頁-結束頁：93-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201912_(45).035篇名：評《酷兒同志：中國後社會主義時期的同性戀身分與同志政治》：酷兒也是同志，同志也是人民並列篇名：Book Review: Queer Comrades: Gay Identity and Tongzhi Activism in Postsocialist China作者：江河清(Ho-Ching Jiang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：45期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：143-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201912_(45).046篇名：變革中的新創與僵固：評Digital Entrepreneurship, Gender and Intersectionality: An East Asia Perspective並列篇名：Book Review: Digital Entrepreneurship, Gender and Intersectionality: An East Asia Perspective作者：勤定芳(Ting-Fang Chin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：45期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：153-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201912_(45).057篇名：編輯報告並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：陳昭如期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：44期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室8篇名：孕產照護邏輯：台灣女性的新生育選擇與共同修補並列篇名：The Logic of Maternity Care: Taiwanese Women's New Reproductive Choice and Shared Doctoring in Childbirth作者：施麗雯(Li-Wen Shih)關鍵字：溫柔生產;助產師;生育自主;生育選擇;照護邏輯;共同修補;gentle birth;midwife;reproductive autonomy;reproductive choice;the logic of care;shared doctoring期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：44期出版年：2019中文摘要：1960年代後從美國開啟的兩波女性生育自主運動，強調對自我身體控制和生育選擇權。面對當代生產醫療過度介入問題，新興的生育改革運動延續選擇權訴求，將助產照護視為解決生產醫療化問題並回復自然的身體自主與生育選擇。相關研究指出當代女性生育選擇有限，助產照護作為生產的新選擇，是否可以促進女性生育自主與照護品質，又如何做到？為回答這些問題，本文分析近年台灣衛生福利部以試辦計畫引進助產師到醫療院所提供給女性的新選擇，討論共同照護模式下的女性經驗，藉此探討生育選擇與孕產照護實作。延伸Annemarie Mol的「照護邏輯」和「選擇邏輯」討論，本文探討台灣孕產照護實作，透過訪談和在北部一家醫院的參與式觀察，分析生產照護活動與待產本身的不穩定性和複雜性，以及選擇助產師或溫柔生產帶來的調節與修補。本文指出選擇有助於女性生育自主，但並非強調「選擇邏輯」。透過分析實作上的「照護邏輯」，可幫助我們了解在多變的產程和照護活動中，產婦需求、實證醫學、醫學常規之間如何因應當下狀況進行「共同修補」，以達成順利生產目的。英文摘要：Since the 1960s, reproductive choice has been at the center of two waves of U.S.-led women's reproductive rights movements. In response to medicalization of childbirth, the women's movements asked for getting back to nature and for greater autonomy and free choice in method of birth. Many studies have shown that women's reproductive choices are limited by the social and medical system. Therefore, it is significant to examine what is the meaning of having reproductive choices within the medical practice, and how and to what degree the practice of midwifery and the idea of free choice empowers women's autonomy. Can choice bring better maternity care to women? To answer these questions, this paper explores Taiwanese women's new reproductive choices and their practice in maternity care. Based on interviews and participant observation in a local hospital which practices midwifery, the paper delineates women's new choices and how such choice influences women's experiences of maternity care. Drawing on Annemarie Mol's discussions on the logic of care and the logic of choice, this paper analyses women's situation in relation to choice, the constitution of choice, and how women's choice fluctuates during the process of birth. It first argues that having the opportunity to choose midwife care can facilitate women's agency and strengthen their autonomy because a midwife plays a role as an articulator in between women's needs and medical-led routine practice. However, this paper does not stress the importance of ”the logic of choice”. Instead, it argues that, with successfully giving birth to a child as the goal, the improvements will depend on an adaptable shared doctoring mediating the pregnant women's needs and the medical-led routine practice, since the process of childbirth is unpredictable.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201906_(44).019篇名：性別差異及其不滿：淺析萬一一諧擬的扮裝攝影並列篇名：Gender Difference and Its Discontents: A Brief Analysis of Yiyi Wan's Masquerade Photography作者：呂筱渝(Hsiao-Yu Lu)關鍵字：女性特質;性別差異;扮裝;諧擬;針孔攝影;femininity;sexual difference;masquerade;mimicry;pinhole camera期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：44期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文使用文獻研究與圖像分析法，探討萬一一的攝影作品觸及的性別議題，包括女性特質、性別二元及性別階序、性別差異與性別的觀看權力等。本文首先引用英國女精神分析師Joan Riviere對女性特質的研究，說明一向被視為與生俱來的女性特質，其實是女性解除外來敵意與舒緩內心焦慮的方法，並援引Simone de Beauvoir和Luce Irigaray的性別研究視角、Griselda Pollock的女性藝術史觀點、人類學家Louis Dumont的階序格局，以及Laura Mulvey的觀看理論等，討論萬一一作品中呈現的性別議題。在圖像分析方面，萬一一的《壓抑？釋放？》攝影集透過多種象徵、隱喻等影像修辭，嘲諷並諧擬宗法父權社會中男尊女卑的性別處境；她也以自我扮裝與自拍的《女正男酷》攝影集系列作品，做為回應此一性別處境的策略：以攝影中的觀看問題討論性別的主動、被動位置，並藉由諧擬被攝者的受迫姿態，凸顯女性特質的後天文化成因，與其背後不斷運作的性別權力關係，傳達女性身體訊息的意念，探索女性身體歡愉的企圖。萬一一以影像創作對抗男性話語權的策略，再現當今社會文化慣於將女性物化、標籤化為性別「他者」的壓迫現象，不但讓女性承受的歧視與壓抑能如實呈現，也為台灣沉寂許久的女性主義藝術平添精彩的一章。英文摘要：This research adopts literature research and image analysis to review gender and sexual issues reflected in Wan Yiyi's photographic works of art, including issues of womanliness, the binary nature of gender, gender hierarchy, gender differences, and differing observation rights of the genders. First, the research cites the studies on womanliness made by English psychoanalyst Joan Riviere to illustrate that the portrayal of womanliness that used to be deemed female innate attributes actually constitutes a way for women to relieve external hostility and internal anxiety. The research also utilizes the gender research perspectives of Simone de Beauvoir and Luce Irigaray, Griselda Pollock's perspective of female art history, Louis Dumont's gender hierarchy, and Laura Mulvey's viewing theories to discuss the gender-related issues within Wan Yiyi's works of art. In terms of image analysis, Wan Yiyi's ”Repression? Release?” photographic album uses many forms of symbolism and metaphors to ridicule the male machismo of patriarchal societies. Through her self-masquerade and self-portrait series ”Wowoman & Yesman”, Wan provides a strategic response to the situation: depicting the active and passive gender positions; using photographic simulation of the suppressed to illustrate the features of ”womanliness” forced by the cultural environment; portraying the on-going power relationships; and illustrating the meaning as well as the joyous intention of the female body. Wan Yiyi's strategy in resisting male superiority illustrates how modern culture has objectified woman and labeled woman as the suppressed ”other” gender. Not only does it crystalize the discrimination and suppression that women must bear, but it also adds a brilliant chapter to Taiwan's feminist movement.起始頁-結束頁：47-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201906_(44).0210篇名：破解二元對立，改寫能動主體：性暴力受害者脆弱性的正面意義並列篇名：Understanding the Rape Victim: Moving Beyond Binary Opposition of Agency and Vulnerability作者：王曉丹(Hsiao-Tan Wang)關鍵字：強暴;性暴力;同意;被害者化;能動主體;脆弱性;rape;sexual assault;consent;victimization;agency;vulnerability期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：44期出版年：2019中文摘要：社會論述再現性暴力經驗時，經常誤解受害者主體。台灣現有文獻雖已提出不少批判觀點，但仍應繼續發展理解受害者的適當分析框架。本文以「能動主體」的概念，從個體在結構下的資源與限制之觀點，重新建構主體概念，旨在重讀性暴力受害者。本文的重點在於批判社會論述中的二元對立化約論─關於強暴是什麼的「同意或不同意」（第二節）、關於主體位置的「被害者或能動主體」（第三節）、關於人性的「能動性或脆弱性」（第四節）。本文主張，這些非此即彼、被二元化約的兩極，侷限了認知框架，使得非坐落於光譜兩極的性暴力經驗難以被發覺，甚至被誤讀，也造就了社會論述中譴責被害者的重要資源。為了避免上述問題，必須拒絕二元對立化約論，一方面應打斷「能動性－陽剛氣概－主體位置」的鏈結關係，避免追求完全能動性，致力翻轉過去控制文化的理解模式；另一方面，必須在認識論上翻轉脆弱性的意義，從負面轉向正面，唯有保持所有人皆易感、易受傷的脆弱性，才得以具備能動性，而發展一種協助受害者的倫理。本文建議，女性主義政治應該以此種新的認識論為基礎，致力發展改變社會主流強暴論述的策略與行動。英文摘要：Although there is some feminist literature in Taiwan criticizing how the social discourse misunderstands the agency of the rape victim, very little touches upon the operation of social discourses that dominate the way in which rape victims are perceived, judged, and evaluated. This paper aims to explore the cognitive distortion of social discourses regarding rape victims, and discusses the possibility for change in terms of reinterpreting the concept of agency and vulnerability. Western feminist literature is reviewed and it is argued that the binary oppositions of ”consent/non-consent” in the defining of rape, ”victim/agent” in subject position, and ”agency/vulnerability” in human nature, have all resulted in the social production of victim condemnation. In order to escape the dilemma of identifying rape victims only in accordance with this dichotomy, it is important to understand that other points of reference exist along the continuum. In achieving this, a new epistemology of rape can emerge that not only connotes a more positive understanding of vulnerability but also reshapes the idea of agency by breaking its links with masculinity in the subject position of the victim. This paper concludes by suggesting how feminist politics can strive towards transforming rape discourses based on this new epistemology.起始頁-結束頁：77-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201906_(44).0311篇名：書評：全球化年代下的親職焦慮與策略：評Raising Global Families: Parenting, Immigration, and Class in Taiwan and the US並列篇名：Book Review: Parental Anxiety and Strategies in the Age of Globalization: Book Review of Raising Global Families: Parenting, Immigration, and Class in Taiwan and the US作者：曾凡慈(Fan-Tzu Tseng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：44期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：109-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.201906_(44).0401篇名：「在壞的時間過個好生活」：南投縣國姓鄉南港村的日常倫理的探討並列篇名：Living a Good Life in Bad Times: A Study of Ordinary Ethics in Nang-gang Village, Guoxing, Nantou作者：容邵武(Shaw-Wu JUNG)關鍵字：日常倫理;權力規訓;日常語言;921地震;南港村;ordinary ethics;disciplinary power;ordinary language;the 921 Earthquake;Nang-gang Village期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019中文摘要：南投縣國姓鄉南港村這個鹿茸產值高居台灣首位的小村莊，原本深深依賴著親屬和熟人網路的運作以養鹿，然而1999年的921地震天崩地裂的破壞力硬生生中斷了南港村民日常生活。人類學對日常倫理的研究指出，當生活世界損壞讓村民必須面臨生活處境為何如此的詢問，這是一個倫理詢問的時刻，促使個人行動，讓個人與社區生活過得更好的倫理處境。日常倫理的研究強調當世界充滿了暴力和危險時，只有回到日常生活才能找到希望和行動，而這個日常生活不是如同震後最常被提到的所謂往前看、拋諸腦後的生活世界，反而人們是要回到它、照顧它、在其中發掘生存倫理的地方。然而，倫理主體總是在傅柯式的權力規訓（disciplinary power）體制與道德規範（moral norms）下行動，主體一方面因為由外而加的體制獲得主體性和自由，卻也會在這個過程中面臨緊張、衝突和模糊，試圖從中找到較好的生活世界。在此理解上，本文描述了地震多年後南港村二種方式重組天災和人為所導致的日常世界變動，一個是個人回返舊有模式來拼湊對變動世界的理解；另外一個是社區要找出新的養鹿的方式，無論是社群經濟或投入競爭型的營利公司以迎向新的挑戰。我嘗試指出村民從個人與社區二個層面，在日常生活平淡無奇的行動裡逐步重整自己和自己、自己和他者的關係，重回安身立命的倫理世界，以及其中所發生的協商、矛盾和調整。英文摘要：Nang-gang Village, Guoxing, Nantou, a small village but with the highest deer antler yields on village base in Taiwan, had close kinship and intimate networks for raising deer, which has been broken down in the wake of a devastating earthquake in 1999. ”Ordinary ethics” research in anthropology has demonstrated that people are in a position to ask themselves an existential question of why they end up being here, and this is an ethical moment when people need to stop and consider how to act ethically in order to make the world inhabitable again. It focuses on the everydayness where people can incubate hope and action to alternate from violence and danger, and yet it is not the everydayness that was similar to normalcy loud claims demanded to return back to after the earthquake, but a world that people would work on, perform certain practice, and develop a new existential ethics. On the other hand, needless to say, a reflective subjectivity is made possible by disciplinary regime and moral norms in a Foucauldian sense. Subjects enact her freedom to act under the truth regime, but are certain to experience tensions, conflicts and ambiguities from within and without, when making a better living world. Taking cues from ordinary ethics research, this article shows two paths villagers in Nang-gang Village have materialized to rebuild their disrupted world thanks to natural disaster and man-made measures. One is what I call a (re)fashioning of changing world from old modes of activities; the other is to create new ways of raising deer to meet new challenges, whether it is a community-oriented economy, or it is a profit-driven business. I aim from these two paths to demonstrate the negotiations, struggles, and attunements villagers have grappled with in making themselves into a new ethically appropriate daily life not only in the eyes of themselves, but also for others.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：從關係性論述探究轉型正義中的原住民族傳統領域議題並列篇名：On Traditional Territory of Indigenous Peoples in the Process of Transitional Justice: An Inquiry from the Perspective of ”Relational” Discourse作者：陳毅峰(CHEN Yi-fong);余崇維(YU Chung-Wei)關鍵字：轉型正義;傳統領域;關係性;原住民族;歷史實踐;空間;transitional justice;traditional territory;relational positioning;indigenous peoples;historical practice;space期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文旨在探討原住民族轉型正義中的傳統領域議題，我們透過分析轉型正義與傳統領域這兩個運動中常見的詞彙，探討這兩個運動修辭中的複雜意涵，並嘗試導入「關係性」視角進行收束。在轉型正義的分析上，將轉型正義拆解為轉型與正義，探究轉型正義定義層次的轉變，尋找原住民族轉型正義的論述空間，並從敘事的自我此一視角，強調「關係性」的轉型正義。接著，在傳統領域的分析中，本文亦針對傳統與領域兩個概念進行重構，借用歷史實踐及議題抗爭評論者對領域內涵的考察，強調傳統領域不僅是固著的絕對空間，而是與人們的行動密切相關，是具有關係性的空間維度。本文認為，轉型正義與傳統領域並非彼此平行，而是在這兩個概念中皆內蘊的關係性維度而有所交集。英文摘要：This paper aims to investigate the issue of indigenous traditional territory under the umbrella of transitional justice. The authors analyze two vocabularies appearing frequently in the indigenous social movement, transitional justice and traditional territory, to explore their complex meaning and to introduce ”relational” perspectives for the closing remarks. Transitional justice is broken down into ”transition” and ”justice” to clarify the definitional change of the transitional justice in order to enlarge the discursive dimension of indigenous transitional justice, and to emphasize what we proposed ”relational” transitional justice from the perspective of Alasdair MacIntyre's ”narrative self ”. In the analysis of traditional territory, this paper intends to re-interpret the two concepts of both tradition and territory by using James Clifford's historical practice and David Harvey's relational spacetime thinking. Traditional territory is not only a fixed and absolute space but also possessed of relational positioning. We argue that traditional justice and traditional territory is not separate and parallel to each other, but instead a mutual supplement concept because of their embedded relational dimension.起始頁-結束頁：57-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：邁向新的世界文學：試論「逆．少數文學」並列篇名：March Towards a New World Literature: On ”Reverse-Minor Literature”作者：<U+7B39>沼俊<U+6681>(SASANUMA Toshiaki)關鍵字：世界文學;第三世界文學;少數文學;李維英雄;新井一二三;池澤夏樹;world literature;third-world literature;minor literature;Ian Hideo Levy;Arai Hifumi;Ikezawa Natsuki期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019中文摘要：從前「世界文學」通常意味著以歐美男性作家為主的「經典」名單。然而，1980年代以後，從諾貝爾文學獎的獲獎名單上，也可看到這種尊重從前西洋現代主流文化所忽略的區域－亞洲、非洲、拉丁美洲、東歐、女性、殖民地、散居等－之態度。近來，在後殖民理論、文化研究、女性學等思潮背景下，從前的「世界文學」已被解構到了一定程度。如今，思考這些領域已經成為「政治正確」之一環。不過，今日的「解構性世界文學」仍然有不小的問題。因為，今日的「世界文學的擴大」，還是以國際強勢語言為前提，倘若欲讓第三世界文學成為「世界文學」的成員，還是必須把其翻譯為歐美日的強勢語言，並在其讀者市場上市。藉由翻譯出版，蒐集各式各樣的當地語言文化，以便供應「宗主國」的市場，讓其消費，而這樣的行為，可說是全球化經濟中的一種「剝削」。為對抗以強勢語言的霸權地位為前提的全球文學秩序，本文嘗試探討「逆．少數文學」。「逆．少數文學」就是德勒茲與伽塔利「少數文學」（litterature mineure）的反轉，意指自相對強大的語言集團移動至相對弱小的語言集團之文學。本文首先回顧一下，第二次世界大戰後日本所開展的「世界文學」觀之變遷，接著藉由美籍日語作家李維英雄、日籍中文作家新井一二三，探討此種「異邦人」的文學，以摸索更新「世界文學」、「第三世界文學」的可能性。英文摘要：In the past, ”world literature” usually meant a ”classical” list consisting of European and American male writers. However, since the 1980s, from the Nobel laureate list for literature, one can also see that the respect has also been paid for the areas and persons that had been neglected by the modern Western mainstream culture before, such as Asia, Africa, Latin America, Eastern Europe, women, colonies, scattered-living areas, etc.. Recently, within the fields of postcolonial theory, cultural studies, and female studies, the ”world literature” has been deconstructed to a certain extent, such that thinking about these areas has become a part of ”political correctness”. However, today's ”deconstructive world literature” still carries big problems, because today's ”expansion of world literature” is still based on the premise of a hegemonic international language. If the third-world literature becomes a member of ”world literature”, the books must be translated into a hegemonic language in Europe, America, and Japan, and come into the market so that books are available to readers. Through translation and publishing, a variety of local languages and cultures is collected for the market of ”sovereign countries”, which can be seen as a kind of ”exploitation” in the global economy. In order to counter the global literature order dominated by the hegemonic language, this paper attempts to explore ”reverse-minor literature”. ”Reverse-minor literature” is the reversal of ”litterature mineure”, which means reversing from a relatively powerful language group to a relatively weak language group. This essay first reviews the changes in the concept of ”world literature” that Japan carried out after Second World War, and then moves on to examine such ”foreign people” literature through the American-Japanese writer Ian Hideo Levy, and Japanese-Chinese writer Arai Hifumi, in order to explore the possibilities of updating ”world literature” and ”third-world literature”.起始頁-結束頁：105-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：排除或融入：做個就業好公民的障礙者就業論述分析並列篇名：To Be a Hard-Working Citizen: An Institutional Ethnographic Study of the Employment Discourse for People with Disability作者：葉琇姍(Hsiu-Shan YEH)關鍵字：工作福利;生命歷程;身心障礙者;職業重建;庇護工場;workfare;life course;persons with disabilities;vocational rehabilitation;sheltered workshop期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019中文摘要：先進國家在福利改革的脈絡下，以促進就業來減少人們依賴福利。臺灣在1990年代中期後面對日益嚴重的失業問題，亦開始強調就業的重要性，促進障礙者就業更被描述為一種人權進步的政策，但長期由專業主導的努力，並未使障礙者就業的問題獲得明顯改善。促進障礙者就業一方面成為福利服務想因應的問題，另一方面又成為倡權者想解構的議題，本研究從這兩個矛盾中出發，探究臺灣的障礙者及家庭，是在何種情境下，將就業視為重要的生涯選項？根據障礙者家長及專業人員的訪談資料，本研究分析國家、特殊教育體系、專家學者、與專業人員如何採取行動，製造使障礙者必須就業的氛圍，排除其他服務論述，並促使障礙者的家庭相信與配合，讓障礙者扮演就業好公民的角色。未來，如要使障礙者有更多社會參與與融和，應挑戰促進障礙者就業的意義，並解構這些促成選擇的結構，此外應重新省思障礙者真正的需求，擺脫以有酬就業判斷障礙者價值的論述，才能誘發出更多元及適切的障礙者服務。英文摘要：To promote the employment of persons with disabilities (PWD) is an important social policy issue worldwide. The goal of welfare reform since 1980 in advanced countries has been to reduce welfare dependency by moving people from welfare to work. Without an urgent pressure to reform the welfare system, Taiwan has introduced supported employment services in the 1990s and has endeavored to promote the employment of PWD. However, the situation for PWD has not improved. On the one hand, the welfare services system tries to solve this problem; on the other hand, the rights advocates for PWD seek to deconstruct the problem. This study aims to explore why PWD families prioritized getting jobs instead of other services for the PWD career planning. Based on interviews with PWD families and professionals, the author analyzes how the government, special education system, experts and professionals create the atmosphere in which PWD families must not refuse to get jobs. Those actions also exclude the possibility for developing other service discourses and lead PWD families to believe that the PWD should act as good and hardworking citizens. The study suggests that we should challenge the real meaning of employment and deconstruct the structures for families making decisions. The PWD families will benefit from this change to participate and to be integrated into the society. The professionals should also change the discourse of judging PWD based on paid employment. All these actions can finally contribute to creating multiple and proper services for PWD.起始頁-結束頁：147-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：當代大學實踐轉向的底／基層觀察導讀並列篇名：Introduction: Observing Contemporary Universities' Turn Towards Praxis from the Grassroots Level作者：蔡侑霖(You-Lin TSAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：195-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：人社知識實踐型計畫的美麗與哀愁並列篇名：The Beauty and Sorrow of Practice-based Project in Humanities and Social Sciences作者：蔡博方(Po-Fang TSAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：201-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：誰的「創新」？怎麼「實踐」？對人文創新與社會實踐計畫的再思考並列篇名：Whose ”Innovation”? How to ”Practice”? Reconsidering the Humanity Innovation and Social Practice (HISP) Project作者：李晏佐(Yen-Tso LEE)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：219-233資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：大學發展社區參與式行動研究之動力、路徑與困境：以科技部HISP與教育部HFCC的四個行動方案為例並列篇名：Incentive, Path, and Challenge for University to Develop Community Based Participatory Action Research: Four Cases from Taiwan's HISP and HFCC Projects作者：林子新(Zi-Xin LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：235-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：「自主學習」：未來大學的革命還是實驗品並列篇名：Self-Regulated Learning: A Revolution or Experimentation for the Future of Universities作者：曾美芳(Mei-Fang TSENG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：247-260資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：跨領域還是換領域？行動研究田野工作省思並列篇名：Cross-discipline or Change Discipline? Reflecting on Fieldwork of Action Research作者：陳玉苹(Yuping CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：261-274資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：反思高等教育的社會實踐：台社論壇回應文並列篇名：Rethinking Social Practice of Higher Education: A Response to Taishe Forum作者：戴興盛(Hsing-Sheng TAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：275-281資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：以革命為志業：陳明忠的人格與風範並列篇名：Revolution as Vocation: The Character and Moral Paradigm of Chen Mingzhong作者：呂正惠(LU Cheng-hui)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：114期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：283-302資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：優生進化與罪罰變革：風化的解禁並列篇名：Eugenic Evolution and Changes in Crime and Punishment: Removing Statute of Limitations for Sex Offenses作者：許雅斐(Yafei HSU)關鍵字：妨害風化;優生學;進化論;法益;性價值;性交易第三方;contra bonos mores (sex offenses);eugenics;evolutionism;legal good;sexual values;third parties working in the sex trade期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019中文摘要：社會風化的概念與19世紀以來的優生學與進化論息息相關。隨著生物學的快速發展，在以種族基因為優秀遺傳基礎的前提下，每個家庭都必須傳承優良的血緣，促成國家社會的進步。為此，刑法中的相關條款被用來保護特定的性道德情感（一夫一妻異性戀婚姻家庭）。直到1960年代後期，許多德國學者重新思考，刑法的性犯罪條款究竟要保護什麼樣的性？這可以歸屬於法益的範疇嗎？除了區隔道德與法益的界線之外，他們也致力於探究性價值基礎與性管制原則之間的關連性，促成了一連串的刑法改革。新的立法目標在於，將刑法的管轄範圍僅限於懲處那些嚴重危害社會的行為，而諸如性工作及性交易第三方等，過去被認定為妨害風化的不雅行為，也逐一除罪化。本文將以德國性交易第三方的除罪化過程為例，探討其中的知識論點與歷史過程，並與台灣當前的相關法條對照，以凸顯當代社會風化概念與罪罰變革之關連。英文摘要：Modern criminal codes demonstrate that political decisions about negative sexuality are the core of sexual offense legislation. ”Contra bonos mores”(sexual offenses) are thought as crime because they are harmful to the moral welfare of society. Indeed, the concept of gross indecency has much to do with the eugenics and evolution theory of the 19th century. Under the premise that ethnic genes are the ”excellent” genetic basis, each family must inherit (excellent) blood and promote the progress of the national society. A complete reform of the laws concerning sex and sexuality was introduced on November 23, 1973. The reform was driven by the changing views about sexual morality in society, which rapidly ousted the traditional longstanding assessments about wrongdoing with respect to sexual conduct. In the 19th century, the relevant section was named ”Offenses against Morality”(Straftaten wider die Sittlichkeit). In 1973, it was renamed as ”Offenses against Sexual Autonomy,” to reflect the objective of these rules, which is to protect the rights of individuals, and not morality. The new sexual-political landscape braced for a major historical shift reflected the demarcation line of state protection. This article will take the decriminalization process of the third party in sex trade in Germany as an example to shed light on the inquiry of the changing regulatory policies in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：容不下文化準公地的都市治理？臺北市補缺型藝文空間的困局並列篇名：Are Cultural Quasi-Commons Excluded by Urban Governance? The Dilemma of Prosthetic Art and Cultural Space in Taipei作者：王志弘(Chih-Hung WANG);高郁婷(Yu-Ting KAO)關鍵字：文化治理;複合性藝文場所;藝文展演空間;都市發展;土地使用分區;cultural governance;compound artistic venues;artistic and cultural facilities;urban development;zoning期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019中文摘要：「補缺型藝文空間」乃彌補官方設施不足的小型藝文場地，並因其社交網絡與創意育成效果而具有「文化準公地」特質。這類空間多採複合商業模式以填補低迷的藝文消費需求，也受限於租金、市場及官方治理框架。作者基於文獻分析，佐以個案訪談和觀察，討論這類藝文空間的困局。首先，作者描述臺北市複合型展演空間的演變，以及隨著社會變遷、公安事件及晚近文化策略而更迭的政策措施。接著，作者彙整商業登記、都市計畫管制、消防建管等法規，描繪補缺型藝文空間如何陷落於難以契合的多重治理框架，以及不同單位的差異政策之間。酒類供應既是促成準公地交流氣氛的媒介，也是引發管制的癥結。在降低成本、接近藝文市場而立足住宅街區卻缺乏合法身分時，補缺型藝文空間容易因居民檢舉而難以經營。作者主張，即使這類場所可以在治理縫隙中求生，仍應構築更彈性且易於遵循的治理模式以利發展。英文摘要：”Prosthetic art and cultural space” refers to venues for art and cultural activities that work to compensate for the insufficiency of official facilities. These venues tend to act as ”quasi-commons” due to the social networks associated with them, and they tend to help cultivate new artistic or cultural groups. These spaces usually adopt a multi-sided business model that earns revenue from non-cultural and art activities to compensate for the low demand of such market, and are also much hindered by renting, the market, and the framework of governance. Through literature analysis, as well as field observation and in-depth interviews, we discuss the conundrum faced by these prosthetic venues. We will firstly review the vicissitude of the performance venues in Taipei that operate in multi-sided ways, and show how relevant policies and measures have been changing along with societal conditions, concerns of public security, and the recent focus on cultural strategies. We then juxtapose the official rules of business registration, urban planning, fire prevention and control, and regulation on buildings to highlight how the prosthetic art and cultural space is ill-fit with the current multiple framework of governance as well as the differed policies between departments. In particular, alcohol is both the catalyst for quasi-commons and the crux that triggers the intervention of official regulation. While concerns of cost and a desire to stay close with the artistic niche market have gathered the prosthetic space in given residential areas, these venues also become illegalized and hence prone to be reported, which puts their sustentation under threat. We argue that, while these spaces manage to survive within the fractures of governance, a more flexible and easy to abide governance pattern should still be constructed for their better development.起始頁-結束頁：35-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：主體思考與「士大夫傳統」：從重讀葉榮鐘的《美國見聞錄》談起並列篇名：Thoughts on Subjectivities and ”the Tradition of Chinese Scholars”: Rereading Yeh Rongzhong's Meiguo Jianwen Lu (Notes on My Journey to the United States)作者：徐秀慧(HSU Hsiu-Hui)關鍵字：葉榮鐘;《美國見聞錄》;台灣問題;反殖民;士大夫傳統;儒學;Yeh Rongzhong;Meiguo Jianwen Lu;Taiwan issues;anti-colonialism;the tradition of Chinese scholars;Confucianism期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019中文摘要：葉榮鐘撰稿的《台灣民族運動史》，1971年由《自立晚報》出版社出版，完成這項捨我其誰的民族史撰寫的志業與宿願後，葉榮鐘偕夫人終於在1974年實現了到美國參訪、探視親友的心願，回台後還撰寫了《美國見聞錄》一書，不幸因病竟成遺作。擺脫長期被國民黨監視的葉榮鐘，透過美、加之行的考察與思索，並且藉由在波士頓、華盛頓發出致林莊生的書信，道出他對台灣未來出路的看法：「與八億之中國人民同其運命」。本文的目的即在透過探討向來被忽視的《美國見聞錄》的語境，耙梳葉榮鐘何以發出台灣的未來只能「與八億之中國人民同其運命」的論斷。並追溯他秉持經世濟民的「士大夫傳統」理念，終生致力於反殖民、反壓迫的民族革命運動與復興民族文化的志業，以闡明他如何超克台灣殖民地現代性的史觀，將傳統士大夫的理想與他對社會主義新中國的認同相聯繫，展現他對東西方文明的比較，思考傳統文化如何更新與再造，以重建民族文化與中國人的主體性。他對「台灣往何處去」的思考，不僅聯繫於他對民族文化的思考，也扣合於他對二戰後世界秩序的省思與批判思維，其對人類世界和平的企求，所體現的是源自儒家經典《禮記．禮運》大同章中「天下為公」理想世界的「士大夫傳統」。此一傳統歷經乙未割台、台灣光復與「分斷體制」，依舊再現於葉榮鐘晚年對於民族、國家的未來與人類道德遠景的承擔。葉榮鐘思考的並不僅僅是台灣的出路問題，也是崛起後的中國如何維護世界和平的原則問題。如何連結社會主義與儒學倫理傳統則是當今中國具備和平崛起的實力與國力時所必須正視的問題。這是終生致力於反殖民、反壓迫志業的葉榮鐘先生其人其文，以一個殖民地臺灣的抗日文人，留給兩岸中國人珍貴的思想遺產。英文摘要：Three years after the publisher Independence Evening Post published History of Taiwan National Movement, Yeh Rongzhong, the book's author, finally visited the United States with his wife in 1974. He published Meiguo Jianwen Lu (Notes on My Journey to America), recollecting not only what he saw in North America but also his thoughts on Taiwan's future. During his four-month visit in the United States and Canada, he read many books about Chinese Communist Revolution, social changes in post-1949 China, and history books about China and Taiwan around World War II as banned by the KMT government. Away from the KMT's surveillance, Yeh Rongzhong considered Taiwan's future in his letters to Lin Zhuangsheng when he was in Boston and Washington, DC. In these letters, Yeh expressed the idea of ”sharing the same destiny with 800,000,000 Chinese people.” Yeh Rongzhong was one of the few Taiwanese intellectuals who having survived the 228 Incident, Land Reforms, the White Terror, the Korean War, and the Cold War, remained strongly identified with the PRC government. This essay traces Yeh's idea of ”sharing the same destiny with 800,000,000 Chinese people” in his Meiguo Jianwen Lu, a literary work which has been neglected by scholars for a long time.起始頁-結束頁：75-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：和解的障礙：中國內地與香港情感結構的比較分析並列篇名：The Obstacles to Reconciliation: A Comparative Analysis of Mainland Chinese and Hong Kong's Emotional Structures of Feeling作者：史唯(Wei SHI);劉世鼎(Shih-Diing LIU)關鍵字：情感結構;恐懼;自豪;主體;他者;內地與香港矛盾;和解;emotional structure of feeling;fear;pride;subject;Other;tension between mainland China and Hong Kong;reconciliation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019中文摘要：香港的國族認同以及香港與中國內地之間的矛盾一直是香港97回歸中國後的主要問題。本文試圖通過對近年在香港最具爭議的影片《十年》（2015）和內地最有影響力的影片《戰狼2》（2017）的分析，梳理出兩部影片所各自隱含的情感結構，包括影片各自所召喚出的主體以及與其相對應的他者想像，彼此之間的情感位置的斷裂如何導致不同的他者想像，從而帶出了兩地之間衝突難以解開的心理癥結所在。不僅如此，本文也嘗試探討兩部電影的想像面臨怎樣的局限和困境，從而打開新的思考空間和可能性。英文摘要：Hong Kong's national identity and its tension with mainland China have been one of the most contentious issues since the 1997 handover. This article investigates the emotional structures of feeling manifested in the recent two films Ten Years (2015) and Wolf Warriors 2 (2017). In particular, we are interested in the emotional positions articulated by the films, and how the division of these positions entails different forms of imaginations about Others. In doing so, this article considers the reason why the tension between Hong Kong and mainland China remains unresolved. Moreover, it considers the predicament and limitation faced by the imaginations of the two films, as well as the possibilities for the future.起始頁-結束頁：127-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：東亞去殖民主義思想的系譜與朴玄埰的民族主義論並列篇名：The Genealogy of East-Asian Decolonialism and Park Hyun-Chae's Discourse on Nationalism作者：延光錫(YEON Gwang-Seok)關鍵字：去殖民主義;朴玄埰;民族主義;民族經濟;社會性質;decolonialism;Park Hyun-Chae;nationalism;national economy;social characteristics期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019中文摘要：2017年南韓總統朴槿惠遭彈劾解職，以及因此提前的總統選舉與政權交替，皆對當代南韓政治社會局勢產生了重大的影響，打造了最新一波的政治社會轉型。在此期間，《我只是個計程車司機》（2017）和《1987：黎明到來的那一天》（2017）這兩部電影不只取得了商業性成功，也對身處歷史當下的我們應該如何重新歷史化20世紀後半期的南韓，提出值得認真思考的若干重要問題。本文關注這兩部電影所隱含的「去歷史化」傾向，試圖脈絡化東亞和第三世界的去殖民主義思想的歷史性，從而重新思索去殖民化中的主體。因此，本文承擔了一個既陌生又「危險」的課題，即重構東亞「去殖民主義」的思想史系譜。通過重新挪用毛澤東（1893-1976）、竹內好（1910-1977）和溝口雄三（1932-2010）等人所形成的東亞區域的思想史脈絡，本文將南韓思想家朴玄埰（1934-1995）所提出的「民族主義論」、「民族經濟論」和「社會性質論」賦予新的定位，並藉由這些思想資源提出新的理論問題，進而理解並克服21世紀南韓社會所面對的知識思想危機。英文摘要：The impeachment of President Park Geun-hye and the early presidential election in 2017 that ensued had brought about a profound impact on the political and social situation in South Korea. Situated at this conjuncture, the movies A Taxi Driver (2017) and 1987: When the Day Comes (2017) released in the same year have not only made a remarkable commercial success, but also gave impetus to thinking about how to ”re-historicize” the South Korean history of the second half of the 20th century. With a deep concern for the ”de-historicization” tendency latent in these two films in mind, this article undertakes the task of contextualizing the historicity of narratives of decolonization in East Asia and the Third World, in order to rethink the issue of subjectivity in such context. For this reason, this article tries to tackle the somewhat unfamiliar and ”precarious” intellectual task of restructuring the genealogy of ”decolonialist” thoughts in East Asia. By revisiting the regional landscape of the late-twentieth-century East Asia history of ideas, which was heavily influenced by Mao Zedong (1893-1976), Takeuchi Yoshimi (1910-1977), Mizoguchi Yuzo (1932-2010) and others, I try to reposition the ideas raised by South Korean thinker Park Hyun-Chae on nationalism, national economy and social characteristics, in order for us to better utilize these intellectual legacies to formulate new research questions, and to better understand and overcome the intellectual crisis of South Korea in the 21st century.起始頁-結束頁：167-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：從「撥亂反正」、「撥正反亂」到「病藥相發」：關於當代中國大陸歷史理解的省思並列篇名：From Redressing the Wrong to the Misdiagnosis of Post Revolution: A Critical Reflection on the Historical Understanding of Contemporary Mainland China作者：賀照田(HE Zhao-tian)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：195-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：你解殖／資了嗎？全盤解析新自由主義國家－編按並列篇名：Decolonialization and Anti-Capitalism? A Comprehensive Analysis of Neo-liberal States-Editorial Introduction作者：黃道明(Hans Tao-Ming HUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：209-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：新自由主義的巨視世界與微觀世界：我們可以做什麼？並列篇名：The Macro-Worlds and the Micro-Worlds of Neoliberalism: What Can We Do About Them?作者：Adrienne Chambon;王增勇(Frank T. Y. WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：113期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：211-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor' Note作者：王甫昌期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：38期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201912_(38).012篇名：「我們NGO」：太陽花運動中的網絡關係與社運團結並列篇名：The Story of ”We-NGO”: Explaining the Networks and Solidarity of the Sunflower Occupy Movement作者：許恩恩(En-en Hsu);吳介民(Jieh-min Wu);李宗棠(Tsung-tang Lee);施懿倫(I-lun Shih)關鍵字：社會運動;抗爭政治;太陽花佔領運動;社運團結;中國因素;social movement;contentious politics;Sunflower Occupy Movement;movement solidarity;China factor期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：38期出版年：2019中文摘要：社會運動並不總是齊心團結，甚至常以分裂收場；分裂或鬥爭不必然阻礙集體行動動員，但一場大型抗爭運動往往需要一定程度的內部團結，才能達成主要目標。「太陽花佔領行動」克服了分裂難題達成團結，促成空前規模與強度的抗爭。本文結合量化與質化方法，透過集體行動與集體認同的交互論證，以波蘭「團結工聯」為參照個案，說明以「反黑箱服貿民主陣線」為主軸的「社運團結」形成過程及其內涵。我們首先建構社運組織參與抗爭資料庫，以社會網絡分析社運組織的結盟關係及趨勢，指出在佔領運動爆發前，網絡內部已經趨向更密集且凝聚的結盟關係。接著，透過對社運組織工作者訪談及檔案資料，分析社運組織所構成的次群體文化規範，也呼應網絡分析中以重要事件作為組織間連結合作的基礎。這場運動主框架以「民主」與「抗中」互為表堙A而以「公民社會」作為集體行動框架。太陽花不只是一場「學運」，而是涵蓋更廣闊而持久的一場「公民運動」中的一系列大規模抗爭動員。英文摘要：Rather than embodying solidarity, many social protest movements have ended in internal schism. The Sunflower Occupy Movement of 2014, however, overcame the solidarity problem and resulted in what was to be an unprecedented protest in modern Taiwanese history in terms of both its duration and scale of mobilization. This movement involved a large number of social movement and nongovernmental organization (NGO) activists, who mobilized resources and devoted themselves wholeheartedly to supporting the 24-day occupation. The Sunflower Occupy Movement originated in a campaign against the Cross-Strait Services Trade Agreement (CSSTA) signed by the ruling Kuomintang government and the People's Republic of China in 2013. In the wake of that signing, social movement groups forged an umbrella organization, Democratic Front, to campaign against the CSSTA and played a pivotal role in the subsequent Sunflower Occupy Movement. This paper, employing an organizational perspective and using the Polish Solidarity Movement as a reference case, explains the origin of movement solidarity within the Sunflower Occupy Movement. Methodologically, we used a triangulation strategy composed of quantitative network analysis and qualitative in-depth interviews. The network analysis demonstrates trends in the cross-issue mobilization of the social movement sector and how intensified co-operation led to a high level of coalition, which was indispensable for movement solidarity. Interviews with social movement activists illuminate the micro-processes and dynamics of network-formation, norm-making, and solidarization within the movement circle. The movement's master frame is constituted of ”defending democracy” and ”fighting China,” while adopting ”civil society” as a collective-action frame. In these ways, we reconstruct the ”We-NGO narrative” that activists invented during the movement to strongly express their mutual trust and collective identity. The Sunflower Occupy Movement represents not merely a student movement, but a series of large-scale protests of a broader and lasting civic movement. This paper thereby contributes to a deeper understanding of this eventful mobilization.起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201912_(38).023篇名：「（<U+8FB6>日）<U+8FCC>人」、「做事人」與「艱苦人」：台灣無家者場域內的行動主體並列篇名：Crooks, Laborers, and the Miserable: The Homeless in Taiwan as Subject Acting within Field作者：黃克先(Ke-hsien Huang)關鍵字：無家者;場域;行動主體;習癖;江湖資本;the homeless;field;habitus;acting subject;jiang-hu capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：38期出版年：2019中文摘要：台灣無家者現象日益受到社會大眾及學界注目，但被再現的樣貌多是孤離原子化且缺乏社會關係；此外，他們若非為受國家、資本主義等鉅觀結構決定的被動受害者，就是具備過度、無限制的能動性；結果，我們終未看見作為行動主體的無家者如何開展社交互動，並鑲嵌於整體社會過程之中。在此，我反省無家者領域文獻陷於客觀主義與主觀主義之缺憾，提出「場域內行動主體」的視角來分析無家者民族誌資料，論證無家者場域因江湖資本及身心狀態不同而區分成的三種無家者－「<U+FFFD><U+FFFD><U+FFFD><U+FFFD><U+8FCC>人」、「做事人」與「艱苦人」。三種人因過往生命經驗形成迥異的習癖，搭配當前擁有的資源及無家環境的特性，形塑出各自謀生方式及生活策略。同時，三種人彼此也透過道德劃界工作，來建構自我認同並獲得尊嚴。但是無家環境普遍惡劣的條件及不確定性也常迫使他們反思並改變行為模式，以致在這三種類型穿梭。如此，我們可看見無家者經歷台灣經濟發展及身處慈善文化脈絡下的特殊生存樣貌，從其中也看得出他們雖努力求生但往往難脫貧脫遊，持續生活在這個有「魔力」的公園場域裡，實則陷於底層的社會再生產過程。英文摘要：The homeless have been attracting increasing attention in Taiwan recently, but the way they are pictured is still caught between objectivism and subjectivism: The former tends to portray the homeless as passive victims inflicted upon by capitalism and the state, and the latter exaggerates the power of agency among the homeless. I develop a subject-acting-within- the-field lens to articulate the two perspectives, showing how the subjectivity of the homeless in Taiwan is realized in social interactions and social reproduction situated in the historical process of political economic and cultural development. Based on ethnographic data, I display how three types of homeless, defined via the possession of jiang-hu capital and physical-mental state, make their respective living differently, based on the interplay between their habitus shaped by previous lived experiences, their current resources, and the homeless environment. Meanwhile, they all construct identities and maintain their dignity by engaging against each other in moral boundary-making work. Through this paper, I demonstrate a particular process of social reproduction, where the homeless strive hard but fail to exit from poverty in the Taiwanese contexts of political economy and charity culture.起始頁-結束頁：63-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201912_(38).034篇名：在中國因素下香港本土意識的分歧與整合：2003至2016年並列篇名：The Divergence and Integration of Local/Indigenous Consciousness in Hong Kong under the China Factor: From 2003 to 2016作者：鄭祖邦(Tsu-bang Cheng)關鍵字：本土意識;中國因素;民主;民族;香港;local/indigenous consciousness;China factor;democracy;nation;Hong Kong期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：38期出版年：2019中文摘要：隨著中國政經實力的崛起對全球各地產生了程度不一的影響，而位處中國邊緣的台灣和香港更是由於歷史發展與地緣政治的糾葛，有著更為深刻而全面性的影響。在台港兩地與中國日益密切的交流互動中，一個令人感到有趣且弔詭的現象就是，當中國愈想透過各種手段與方式來促進兩岸三地的統一或融合時，台港兩地的人心卻離中國愈來愈遠，中國因素的作用力似乎持續推進台港兩地社會本土意識的高漲。在當前香港本土意識的發展中，除了凸顯出與中國官方民族主義的對立之外，另一個複雜與特殊的面向在於，隨著政治形勢的轉變，在本土意識的內容上出現了分歧乃至於衝突。在本文的分析中劃分出三種主要的本土意識類型：民主回歸論、民主自決論、民族自決論。它們也分別對應了三種不同的抗爭模式：和理非非、公民抗命、勇武抗爭。不同立場的行動者與團體基於情感、利益、認知的差異形成了不同的本土論述內容，進而採取了不同的抗爭策略與行動，而這些分歧也使得香港的民主運動面臨整合與團結的難題。英文摘要：With the growth of its political and economic influences, China has been impacting the world differently. Located on the periphery of China, Taiwan and Hong Kong have complicated connections with China in both geopolitics and history. In this paper, we observe many social conflicts and contradictions in the interactive process among Taiwan, Hong Kong, and China. There is an interesting and paradoxical phenomenon: The more closely these areas are integrated, the greater is the local/indigenous consciousness in Taiwan and Hong Kong. With the framework of the China factor's action and reaction, we focus on the development of local/ indigenous consciousness in Hong Kong. In addition to confronting Chinese nationalism, there has been a complex and unique development of Hong Kong's local/indigenous consciousness: cleavages and conflicts, along with the changing political situation. In the analysis, we propose three types of local/indigenous consciousness: democratic reunification, democratic self-determination, and national self-determination. These three types also correspond to three modes of contention: peaceful, rational and non-violence, and no foul language/ civil disobedience/ brave fight. Different types of local/indigenous discourses have their own supporters regarding different affections, interests, and ideologies. Different supporters also employ different resistance strategies based on their discourses. Furthermore, these cleavages bring about integration problems in Hong Kong's democratic movement.起始頁-結束頁：115-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201912_(38).045篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor' Note作者：王甫昌期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).016篇名：社群媒體與大學生的網絡界限：伴遊圈、談話圈、接觸圈並列篇名：Social Media and Network Boundaries among College Students: Reconstructing Companions, Conversations, and Contact Circles作者：張明宜(Ming-yi Chang);傅仰止(Yang-chih Fu)關鍵字：網絡界限;社群媒體;社會圈;抽樣調查;多層次分析;network boundary;social media;social circles;sampling surveys;multilevel analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019中文摘要：網絡大小及界限是探索社會互動的核心議題，但實證研究卻難以探索網絡界限如何區隔、有何明確標準得以劃分不同層次的社會圈。這項社會網絡文獻上的難題，隨著社群媒體的發展迎來另類挑戰和機會。社群媒體一方面透過即時頻繁的互動，讓網絡界限益加多變莫測，另一方面提供完整的接觸紀錄，有利於辨別網絡界限如何區隔。本研究試圖掌握社群媒體的研究契機，透過多元的實證資料及多層次分析方法，挑戰個人網絡研究的核心難題。研究議題依據網絡界限的論述基礎，利用社群媒體紀錄的優勢，嘗試區辨由核心網絡往外擴張到弱聯繫的不同社會圈，並以大學生在臉書上的「伴遊圈」、「談話圈」、「接觸圈」為例，分析不同社會圈如何有所區隔。實證資料取自全國各大學及學院，共58個科系、1,531位大學部應屆畢業生提供的網路調查及臉書活動記錄。多層次分析結果顯示臉書上的聯繫同質性和相似性均有助於區辨伴遊圈、談話圈、接觸圈等不同的個人網絡範圍，得以延伸社會網絡研究傳承中的重要概念，區辨清晰的網絡界限。研究成果展現如何藉由爬梳完整的數位足跡資料，重建個人在社群媒體留下的互動紀錄，再結合具代表性的調查樣本資料，揭示在數位時代中如何區隔個人接觸網絡的層層界限。英文摘要：As a fundamental issue of social network studies, the boundaries of personal networks are always hard to specify and differentiate. Not only is it challenging to conceptualize how far an individual's social circles may reach, but it also poses a daunting task for researchers to design effective approaches that help construct comprehensive network structures with clear boundaries. Conventional network generators based on surveys and other methods help reveal network boundaries by relying heavily on participants' cognitive abilities to recall or estimate how they interact and connect with others, which can result in various biases or errors. With the surge of social media, researchers have unprecedented opportunities to avoid such recall biases and errors by using automatically recorded data of social networking, even though the new communication means often accommodate fleeting contacts that make network boundaries more contingent. To explore how network boundaries emerge on social media, this study integrates data from both sampling surveys and social media. Based on multi-stage clustered sampling, we interviewed 1,531 senior students from 58 college departments in Taiwan who completed an online survey and authorized the use of their contact records on Facebook. The interaction records at both contact and tie levels on Facebook helped us identify who may comprise each of three network subnets located from core to periphery: companions, conversations, and contact circles. Paired with sociodemographic variables taken from the online survey, these contact records further facilitated multilevel analyses on how network structures in a particular academic year affect network size and boundaries in the following year. Overall, while personal networks on Facebook tend to expand when a user updated his or her activity posts more frequently and regularly in the previous year, the size of core networks also increases if more network members in the previous year were similar to the user in terms of sociodemographic background and online behaviors. In addition to revealing how network structures help expand subsequent personal network size, this study shows how an integrated approach of combining survey data from a nationally representative sample with Facebook contact records helps delineate the boundaries of subsets in personal networks.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).027篇名：協商「發展律令」：早期童年的育兒實作與親職治理並列篇名：Negotiating ”Developmental Imperatives”: Childrearing Practices and Parental Governance in Early Childhood作者：曾凡慈(Fan-tzu Tseng)關鍵字：科學育兒;早期童年發展;專家論述;母職實作;親職治理;scientific childrearing;early childhood development;expert advices;mothering practices;parental governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究關注當代「科學育兒」的親職建構與家長經驗，聚焦在早期童年被定義為發展關鍵期的專家論述，以探究母親們如何應對其中蘊含的育兒要求，並強調論述異質性以及孩子行動能力對於日常照護實作的影響。首先，本研究將這種新興的專家論述命名為「發展律令」，再區分四種主要類型：情感依附、社會適應、大腦開發、正常性，分別訴諸特定的科學權威，建構不同的兒童特質與問題化，也配置各自的育兒技術與母職角色，並透過多樣管道進入私己的家庭生活。發展律令的規範力量植基於社會上既存的家庭觀念與母職意識形態，唯新的論述以科學之名擴充母親們的職責範圍，並設定緊迫時間性來強化育兒投入。而母親們對發展律令的接納與實踐程度，則是與她們原本具備的親職價值及資源條件持續協商的結果。同樣重要的是：嬰幼兒本身亦是影響母親選擇、調整與反思專家建議及權威的重要行動者。即便表面上看似母親們基於不同利益與興趣而自我治理，育兒現實必然是在論述與照護實作的動態來回中，隨著嬰幼兒的發展進度，乃至於孩子的回應與意願而共同構成。英文摘要：This study explores the discursive construction of parenthood and mothers' experiences in the process of ”scientific childrearing” and focuses on contemporary parenting advice for early childhood development. The analysis is based on qualitative interview data from 41 mothers and related postings by mothers on two online parenting forums. These new parenting discourses are conceptualized as ”developmental imperatives” and categorized into four themes: emotional attachment, social adaptation, intellectual potential, and normality. Each theme incorporates specific scientific theories, childhood perspectives, problematics, childrearing techniques, and aspects of the mother's role. The dominance of these developmental imperatives is enhanced by extant ideologies of motherhood, while the new parenting discourses have expanded the range of mothers' responsibilities for the child and resorted to concepts of ”crucial periods” to ensure mothers' engagement. This study finds mothers' preference for the specific developmental imperative depending on its assumption about childhood and developmental goods, but mothers' daily practices have been compromised by their resources. In addition, young children's own temperaments and abilities also strongly influence mothers' choice, adaptation, and reflection on expert advice and authority. Since the child is an actor in the parent-child relationship, no developmental goals and mothering practices can be actualized without his or her willingness and collaboration.起始頁-結束頁：47-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).038篇名：經濟社會學觀點下的「台灣奇蹟」：現象、重新概念化與另類可能並列篇名：The Taiwan Economic ”Miracle” from the Perspective of Economic Sociology: Phenomena, Reconceptualization and Alternative Interpretations作者：謝國雄(Gwo-shyong Shieh)關鍵字：經濟發展;資本主義;積累體制;調節模式;經濟社會學;Economic development;capitalism;accumulation regime;modes of regulation;economic sociology期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019中文摘要：以最近出版的《未竟的奇蹟：轉型中的台灣經濟與社會》作為楔子，本文藉此檢視台灣經濟發展的各種概念與論點，並探索其與資本主義和經濟社會學的關係。本文首先指出本書的貢獻，並從現象、全書鋪陳，以及概念與理論層次來與本書切磋，之後則從「台灣經濟發展」的各種故事（論點）來定位本書導論章〈「台灣製造」的崛起與失落：台灣的經濟發展與經濟社會學〉的「未竟的奇蹟」之衰退論。本文接著提出另類觀點，借鏡調節學派對戰後西方資本主義「黃金時期」的研究成果發展出來的積累體制（accumulation regime）與調節模式（modes of regulation）的觀點來檢視這些故事，嘗試以「外包積累體制」與「純勞動調節模式」來掌握台灣經濟發展史的特徵，並指出本書各篇論文在這個觀點下的貢獻。最後，本文汲取經濟社會學晚近的「文化轉向」（the cultural turn）與「實作轉向」（the practical turn）的洞識來尋求超越調節學派之道。英文摘要：After briefly reviewing the recently published Unfinished Miracle: Taiwan's Economy and Society in Transition, this paper presents different conceptions and stories of Taiwan's economic development and recapitulates it as capitalist development. Enlightened by the regulation school, informed by the golden age of capitalism from the end of World War II to the 1970s, this paper employs the concepts of the ”subcontracting accumulation regime” and ”labor-only modes of regulation” to grasp the development of capitalism in Taiwan. The contributions of the essays collected in Unfinished Miracle: Taiwan's Economy and Society in Transition are then highlighted anew. It is recommended to learn from the cultural turn and the practical turn of economic sociology to go beyond the heritage of the regulation school.起始頁-結束頁：99-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).049篇名：朝向台灣經濟社會學研究的未竟之路：回應謝國雄並列篇名：Toward an Unfinished Agenda for Economic Sociology of Taiwan: A Reply to Shieh作者：李宗榮(Zong-rong Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：131-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).0510篇名：在剝削與創新之間：回應謝國雄並列篇名：The Dilemma of Taiwan's Economy Between Exploitation and Innovation: A Reply to Shieh作者：林宗弘(Thung-hong Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：153-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).0611篇名：評Social Movements in Taiwan\'s Democratic Transition: Linking Activists to the Changing Political Environment並列篇名：Book Review of Social Movements in Taiwan's Democratic Transition: Linking Activists to the Changing Political Environment作者：蕭遠(Yuan Hsiao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：169-176資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).0712篇名：評Taiwan\'s Social Movements under Ma Ying-jeou: From the Wild Strawberries to the Sunflowers並列篇名：Book Review of Taiwan's Social Movements under Ma Ying-jeou: From the Wild Strawberries to the Sunflowers作者：林祐聖(Yu-sheng Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：177-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).0813篇名：評介《媒介宗教》：開眼看見它／祂並列篇名：Book Review of Mediating Religion: Music, Image, Object, and New Media作者：黃克先(Ke-hsien Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：183-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).0914篇名：評《不正常的人？台灣精神醫學與現代性的治理》並列篇名：Book Review of Abnormal People? Psychiatry and the Governance of Modernity in Taiwan作者：孫志硯(Chih-yan Sun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會學卷期：37期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：193-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中央研究院社會學研究所&臺灣大學社會學系&臺灣大學出版中心DOI：10.6676/TS.201906_(37).1001篇名：房市之錯誤定價－貨幣幻覺或市場對未來景氣觀感？並列篇名：Mispricing in the Housing Market-Money Illusion or Market Perception?作者：楊屯山(Jerry T. Yang);鄭帆婷(Fan-Ting Cheng);林哲群(Che-Chun Lin)關鍵字：房市錯誤定價;貨幣幻覺;貝氏向量自我迴歸模型;經濟信心指數;mispricing;money illusion;Bayesian VAR;economic sentiment indicator期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：28卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文參考房市錯誤定價的公式，以向量自我迴歸（vector autoregression; VAR）及Bayesian VAR模型，檢驗其與通貨膨脹率之間的關係，來佐證貨幣幻覺之存在與否，並分析房市錯誤定價的程度與（1）房價租金比、（2）租金成長率、（3）房價報酬率、及（4）通貨膨脹率等變數的相關性。其次，加入經濟信心指數（Economic Sentiment Indicator, ESI）及其組成成分指數在迴歸式中，測試市場對未來景氣的觀感，與房市錯誤定價的影響。結果發現，英國房市的錯誤定價與通貨膨脹率，僅存在不顯著的負相關性，而與ESI及其四項組成成分指數，均呈現顯著的正相關性。即市場對未來景氣越表樂觀，房價租金比之主觀預期值越高，或房價越容易被高估。然而，不論解釋變數為何，通貨膨脹率皆與錯誤定價呈現不顯著的負相關，不足以佐證或支持貨幣幻覺的假說。英文摘要：We derive a formula for mispricing in the housing market and examine the impact of the inflation rate on mispricing to test the money illusion hypothesis, that asset mispricing results mainly from the inflation rate, and a significantly negative relationship between these two is expected. We employ a Bayesian VAR model to estimate the mispricing in the UK housing market, and regress the estimator on the inflation rate and Economic Sentiment Indicator (ESI) as a proxy for market perception. Our results show that house mispricing in the UK has a significantly positive relationship with the ESI and its component the Confidence Indicators of the Consumer, Retail Trade, Construction, and Services. We find no evidence to support the money illusion hypothesis with there only being an insignificantly negative relationship between mispricing and the inflation rate. Our results can shed light on the formation and dynamic process of house mispricing.起始頁-結束頁：1-16資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會2篇名：預售屋大量估價模型之建立並列篇名：A Mass Appraisal Modeling of Pre-sale Housing作者：江穎慧(Ying-Hui Chiang);朱智揚(Chi-Yang Chu);張金鶚(Chin-Oh Chang)關鍵字：預售屋;大量估價;住宅價格;pre-sale housing;mass appraisal;housing price期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：28卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：相較於中古屋已發展大量估價系統網站供民眾查詢住家房價，預售屋因具有個案特徵，難以直接適用中古屋模型進行估價。本文納入基差與商譽變數以建立預售屋大量估價模型，實證結果顯示預售屋平均單價與附近成屋價差比為35.5%，基差為23.73萬元，上市上櫃建商相較於非上市櫃建商預售屋價格高出5.7%；模型估計樣本外的平均絕對百分比誤差為11.82%，±10%及±20%命中率分別為48.81%與86.07%。建立預售屋大量估價模型除可供民眾查詢預售屋價格，亦可應用於稽核預售屋價格申報不實的情況，且可藉由長期預測觀察預售屋與成屋市場價格變化，有助於價格資訊流通與穩定市場價格。英文摘要：Pre-sale housing possesses the property of futures, meaning that prices are affected by the prices of nearby existing housing. Besides, in the case of pre-sale housing traded before the completion of the building, consumers depend on the developer's reputation to evaluate the house's quality. To sum up, the basis and the developer's reputation are important in the appraisal of the pre-sale housing. This paper uses the hedonic method to build an empirical model. The empirical results show that the average price of pre-sale housing in Taipei is 35.5% higher than that of the surrounding existing houses, and for developers that are listed on the stock exchange or in the over-the-counter market, the price is 5.7% higher than that for non-listed developers' housing. In the results for the out-sample model, the MAPE is 11.82%, with a ±10% hit-rate and 48.81% and 86.07% with a ±20% hit-rate. Establishing a mass appraisal of pre-sale housing can provide a search channel for consumers, and also monitor the change between the pre-sale housing market and the existing housing market. It is helpful for information transparency and for stabilizing market prices.起始頁-結束頁：17-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會3篇名：媒體新聞能否預測住房市場？並列篇名：Can the News Media Predict the Housing Market?作者：江明珠(Ming-Chu Chiang);許秉凱(Bing-Kai Shiu)關鍵字：房價;交易量;預售屋;中古屋;向量自我迴歸模型;新聞情緒;house prices;amount;new house;existing house;vector autoregression model;media sentiment期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：28卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文擷取2005年至2017年間，聯合報、經濟日報中與房市相關的新聞，建構媒體新聞的情緒分數，解析新聞情緒與住房市場價格、交易量間的關係。在控制影響住房市場的總體經濟變數後，向量自我迴歸模型（vector autoregression model, VAR）的估計結果顯示，首先，較少證據支持房價的上漲與新聞的情緒間存在顯著關係；但交易量與新聞情緒間的關係則較為顯著。其次，當聯合報新聞情緒越高，房市交易量可能向下修正，且在去除廣告及雜訊新聞後，情緒對交易量的負向影響更為強烈。再者，當房市交易量越大，經濟日報新聞的樂觀情緒越高漲，從而有更多對房市榮景的報導。英文摘要：The study uses a vector autoregression model to investigate the influence of media sentiment on prices and trading volume in Taiwan's housing market. It constructs sentiment indices from the housing market news of two newspapers, the United Daily News (UDN) and Economic Daily News (EDN). The empirical results based on samples from 2005 to 2017 indicate that an appreciation in lagged prices has no significant influence on media sentiment. By contrast, media sentiment and changes in trading volume are significantly interrelated. Moreover, when UDN sentiment increases, the trading volume may decrease, with this decrease becoming even greater when advertisements and noise news that are irrelevant to the housing market are excluded. Finally, the larger the trading volume, the greater the EDN sentiment, which may result in more optimistic news about the housing market.起始頁-結束頁：37-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會4篇名：不動產逆向抵押貸款評價與提前解約之分析並列篇名：Analyzing the Pricing and Termination of Reverse Mortgages作者：王文楷(Wen-Kai Wang)關鍵字：計價問題;實質選擇權;不動產逆向抵押貸款;提前解約;pricing problems;real options;reverse mortgage;termination of contract期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：28卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：我國自2013年3月1日開始試辦不動產逆向抵押貸款（reverse mortgage, RM）以來，國人對此類商品漸漸熟悉，越來越多的金融機構也開始推出RM合約。RM合約的相關研究，包含了如計價避險、社會福利或保險以及法規等不同方面的討論。本研究以計價方面為討論主軸，建構一評價模型，探討我國RM合約評價問題。本文目的除了評價RM合約價值，也利用實質選擇權理論（real option theory）分析發生提前解約的最佳條件為何。本文之貢獻除了對RM合約提出不同訂價的觀點外，也提供提前解約時最低房價方便的估計方式。實證顯示，RM合約生效初期提前解約的門檻偏低，造成提前解約的可能性較高。英文摘要：Following the government of Taiwan's introduction of the concept of the reverse mortgage (RM), RMs have become available and been noticed in Taiwan since March 1^(st), 2013. Several financial institutions in Taiwan have also introduced different types of RMs. Studies on RMs mainly focus on pricing and hedging, the social-welfare effect, and policies. In this study, we establish a model to price RMs. In addition, we apply real option theory to estimate the optimal conditions under which a borrower should terminate a RM. This study provides a different analysis in terms of pricing an RM, and estimates the optimal house price at which the RM should be terminated. The empirical evidence shows that the likelihood of an RM being terminated is higher at the beginning of the duration of the contract.起始頁-結束頁：63-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會5篇名：大陸地區家計單位住宅租買選擇對於消費支出影響之估計並列篇名：An Estimation of the Impact of Tenure Choice on Households' Consumption Expenditure: A Case Study of Chinese Households作者：林祖嘉(Chu-Chia Lin);鐘韋竣(Wei-Tzun Chung)關鍵字：租買選擇;消費支出;Heckman二階段估計模型;tenure choice;consumption expenditure;Heckman two-stage model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：28卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究目的在探討中國大陸家計單位租買選擇對於食衣住行育樂等支出的影響，因為購屋支出占比很大，家計單位在考慮未來購屋需要的金額時，就會影響到現在的各項支出。本研究利用「中國家庭金融調查」的5,503筆樣本，將家計單位分成租屋、購屋有貸款及購屋無貸款三類家庭，首先估計這些家庭租買選擇的行為，接著再利用Heckman二階段估計模型，來估計租買選擇對於各項支出的影響。本研究估計結果顯示，做為調整項的inverse Mills ratio的估計係數非常顯著，而且加入租買選擇後得到影響各項支出的估計係數，與沒有考慮租買選擇下的估計係數有顯著的差異。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to analyze the impact of Chinese households' tenure choice on consumption expenditure, including food, clothes, housing, transportation, education, and leisure. Since housing expenditure usually counts for a large share of household expenditure, households have to consider their future expenditure on housing when they decide how to distribute their ordinary expenses. This study separates households' tenure choice into three types, namely, rental, owner-occupied with mortgage, and owner-occupied without mortgage. By applying a data set from the ”Chinese Household Financial Survey (CHFS)” with a sample size of 5,503, this paper then estimates the size of the impact of important factors affecting tenure choice. Then, by applying the Heckman two-stage model, we estimate the impact of tenure choice on households' consumption expenditure. In addition to a significant coefficient for the inverse Mills ratio, the estimated results show that the estimated coefficients are quite different with or without tenure choice.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會6篇名：綠建築評估項目對住宅不動產估價調整率之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Green Building Indicators to the Percentage Adjustment of Valuation on Residential Building作者：孫振義(Chen-Yi Sun);曹妤(Yu Tsao)關鍵字：綠建築;綠建築溢價;不動產估價;green buildings;green building price premium;real estate valuation期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：28卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：為瞭解不動產估價師在綠建築價格查估之觀點，本研究透過「綠建築講習課程」與「層級分析法專家問卷」進行調查與分析，研究結果顯示不動產估價師對於取得綠建築標章之住宅，平均願提高9.77%之查估價格。此外，對於綠建築查估價格最具影響力的前三項綠建築指標分別為：「室內環境」、「節能設備」以及「空調系統」，且當綠建築等級越高時（總得分數越高），綠建築的溢價幅度亦會隨之提高，但當綠建築等級高至一定程度後，其溢價增加幅度便會趨於平緩。最終，本研究提出一份「住宅類綠建築估價應用表」，以作為估價實務時之參考。英文摘要：In order to understand real estate appraisers' opinions on green building price assessment, this study conducts surveys and performs analysis based on ”Green Building Class” and ”Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) Questionnaires”. The results of this study show that real estate appraisers are willing to raise the average appraisal price by 9.77% for those green buildings that have obtained the green building mark. Moreover, the first three green building indicators that have the greatest impact on the green building valuation are ”indoor environment”, ”energy-saving equipment” and ”air-conditioning system”. The empirical analysis confirms that when the green building level is higher (the total score is higher), the green building premium will also increase. However, when the green building level (total score) reaches a certain level, the increase in the premium will tend to be flat. Finally, this study presents a ”Residential Green Building Valuation Application Form” as a reference for real estate appraisers in valuation practice.起始頁-結束頁：27-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會7篇名：不動產估價的另類選擇：模糊實質選擇權模型並列篇名：A Study on Alternative Methods of Real Estate Valuation: Fuzzy Real Option Model作者：蘇進雄(Chin-Shyong Su);陳澤義(Tser-Yieth Chen);王詩韻(Shin-Yun Wang);吳雪伶(Hsueh-Ling Wu)關鍵字：模糊實質選擇權模型;不動產估價;估價準確性;fuzzy real option model;real estate valuation;valuation accuracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：28卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在提倡模糊實質選擇權模型在不動產估價的適用性，因此我們修改以往研究所提的選擇權評價模型與模糊實質選擇權模型，建立新的不動產抵押選擇權模型與擴展版模糊實質選擇權模型（Et-FROV模型）。實證結果顯示Et-FROV模型可以縮小誤差幅度與提高估值的準確性，此先進模型可以解決估價失真問題。更重要的是，我們不僅可以準確估計標的資產之保本價值（即保本93%），還可以獲得其增值利潤（即增值84%），此為我們的主要貢獻。因此，這個先進模式可以提供美國暨其他國家之另類參考。英文摘要：This study aims to promote the applicability of a fuzzy real option model in real estate valuation. To this end, we have modified the option pricing model and the fuzzy real option model proposed in previous studies to create a novel real estate mortgage option model and an extended fuzzy real option model (Et-FROV model). The empirical results show that the Et-FROV model can reduce the error margin and improve valuation accuracy. Moreover, the advanced model can solve the problem of valuation distortion. More crucially, we can not only accurately estimate the underlying asset's hedging value (i.e., capital preservation at 93%), but can also derive its value-added profit (i.e., added value at 84%), which is our principal contribution to the literature. Hopefully, this advanced model can provide an alternative reference for the United States and other countries.起始頁-結束頁：51-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會8篇名：建商新推個案銷售時機及方式之選擇並列篇名：Marketing Timing and Methods Adopted by Housing Developers Launching New Residential Projects作者：李尚華(Lee Shang-Hua)關鍵字：預售屋;新成屋;代銷;自建自售;Logistic迴歸模型;presale housing;new housing;consignment agencies;self-building and self-selling;logistic regression model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：28卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：建商銷售策略包含銷售時機及銷售方式，隱含增加報酬及降低風險之經濟意涵。銷售時機分為新成屋及預售屋二種時機，係以遠期交易與期貨訂價理論作為評估依據；銷售方式分為建商委託代銷公司銷售或建商自售兩種方式，透過雙方機會成本與比較利益法則決定。實證結果顯示，上市櫃建商、高總銷及高主力總價建案，建商傾向預售及委託代銷公司銷售。另外，在景氣時期，建商委託代銷公司銷售預售屋，透過代銷公司相互競價接案，增加利潤；不景氣時期，建商以風險考量，雖以成屋銷售，但仍期望銷售風險由代銷公司埋單。本文建議，建商擬定銷售策略應在不同景氣時期依建案財務規劃及建案特徵權衡評估。在房市景氣時期，選擇代銷公司銷售預售屋以增加利潤；不景氣時期，選擇代銷公司銷售成屋以分散風險。英文摘要：Marketing timing and sales methods are strategies commonly used by housing developers to increase remuneration and lower risks. On the basis of forward contracts and futures price theories, the timing of sales can be divided into two categories: timing for selling new housing units and timing for selling presale housing units. Moreover, since the marketing methods involve consignment agencies or self-selling, the opportunity cost and comparative advantage of both methods are analyzed to determine which method to select. The results of this study reveal that developer companies that are over-the-counter entities listed on the market or have high total sales and expansive housing products are more likely to sell presale housing or contract consignment agencies. Under a prosperous economy, developers contract agencies to sell presale housing, thus increasing their profit through the competition among such agencies. However, in an economic recession, developers only sell existing houses to avoid risk, and expect the sales agencies to bear the risk. According to the study's results, it is recommended that developers establish marketing strategies by evaluating the financial planning and characteristics of residential projects during different economic periods. When the housing market is prosperous, developers can contract agencies to sell presale housing units and increase their profit; when the market is in recession, the developers can contract agencies to sell existing houses to spread the risks.起始頁-結束頁：83-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會01篇名：少年時期藥物濫用者的復元歷程探究並列篇名：A Study on the Recovery Process of People Beginning in Drug Use during Adolescence作者：劉心穎(Shin-Yin Liu);陳毓文(Yu-Wen Chen)關鍵字：少年;藥物濫用;復元歷程;adolescence;drug use;recovery process期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：藥物濫用問題長久以來存在於我們的社會中，隨著快速攀升的少年藥物使用人數，犯罪、教育、社會等問題接踵而至，少年藥物濫用問題已是我們不得不積極面對的現況。儘管過去研究有不少討論，但仍多聚焦於藥物使用與預防，而少有對於復元的探討。本研究試圖以藥物濫用復元者自身的經驗，了解曾經的毒品使用者一路走來所經歷的轉變與轉折。透過深度訪談5位曾於少年時期長期使用非法藥物、現已復元者，藉以探討他們的藥物使用經驗、決定改變的原因，以及持續復元的歷程。本研究發現，引發受訪者改變藥物濫用行為的動機在於遭遇到重大生命事件，也就是轉捩點，例如車禍、入獄等。而改變歷程則有5個共同階段，包括：轉捩點、身癮戒除（過渡期）、下定決心、心理與社會復元，以及穩定期。除了自身的努力外，宗教、家人、學校或工作是他們在復元歷程中非常重要的助力。依照本研究結果，建議助人工作者要把握改變的契機，以朋友的角色與藥物濫用少年建立關係，並透過多方合作，以建立能夠協助他們走過復元歷程的支持網絡。英文摘要：In the past few years, the number of adolescent drug abusers has increased sharply and became a serious problem. Although some research had explored related issues, most focused on prevention rather than recovery. To better understand the process of recovery, this study attempted to examine the experience of those who used drugs in adolescence, tried to understand their motivation for not using drugs, and factors facilitating their recovery. The study used a qualitative research design and conducted in-depth interviews with 5 individuals who had a history of drug use during adolescence, and has recovered for at least 6 months. Research findings indicated that their motivation to change happened during critical events, such as being prisoned, or after a serious car accident. These events were defined as a turning point for recovery. In general, there were 5 stages in their recovery process, including: a turning point, an abstinence of physical addition (the transitional period), determination, psychological and social recovery, and finally, the continued abstinence. The study also examined the facilitating factors during their recovery process. These included religion, support from family members and friends, going back to school, or being employed. Based on these results, the study suggests that professionals working with young drug users should start with building up a non-authoritarian relationship and be a friend to them. Moreover, they should also work closely with other professionals to create a supportive environment for these young drug users. Furthermore, an integrated service system from family, school and community should be established to better assist their recovery.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201912_23(2).00012篇名：我國機構式照顧服務員職能模型建構及相對權重評估之研究並列篇名：The Study on Construction of Competency Model and Evaluation on Relative Weight for Care Workers in Institution作者：王怡分(Yi-Fen Wang)關鍵字：照顧服務員;職能模型;長期照顧;相對權重;care workers;competency model;long-term care;relative weight期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究聚焦「我國機構式照顧服務員職能模型建構及相對權重評估之研究」，為我國機構式照顧服務員建構模組、系統化的能力指標，藉此為長期照顧服務人才培育提供重要啟示。本研究透過三回合德懷術調查及相對權重分析，據以建構我國機構式照顧服務員的職能模型，研究結果發現，我國機構式照顧服務員職能模型內涵可歸結出6項職能集群，分別為身體照顧、生活照顧、緊急狀況處理、活動帶領、心理支持、職業倫理，以及21項職能要素及74項行為指標；其第一層級權重體系以「緊急狀況處理」集群排序第一，第二層級則以「應變措施」要素排序第一。本研究所建構之職能模型具有完整的架構，可做為長期照顧政策發展的依據，亦可用來實際評估機構式照顧服務員的能力是否完備，藉以健全長期照顧的人才培育制度。英文摘要：This study focuses on ”constructing of competency model and evaluating on relative weight for care workers in institution” to development a modular and systematic indicators and its implication to the talents cultivation of long-term care service. A team of Delphi technique and relative weight analysis were used to construct the competency model for care workers in institution. The findings of the research present that the context of competency model for care workers in institution in Taiwan is concluded in 6 competency clusters including physical therapy, life consideration, emergency management, activity engagement, psychological support and occupational ethics, and 21 competency factors and 74 competency indicators. The weight system of competency model for care workers in institution in Taiwan shows that: ”emergency management” taking first hierarchy as the prioritized weight sequence of the main aspect, and ”contingency measures” taking second hierarchy as the prioritized weight sequence. The findings of research not only a complete framework to develop the effective long-term care policy, but also use to assess the ability and provide the implications for personnel training of long-term care.起始頁-結束頁：49-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201912_23(2).00023篇名：尋找消權與充權的距離：醫務社會工作者於督導過程充權經驗之研究並列篇名：Seeking the Distance between Disempowerment and Empowerment: Research on the Experiences of Empowerment during the Supervision for the Medical Social Workers作者：韓麗年(Li-Nien Han);游美貴(Mei-Kuei Yu)關鍵字：充權;督導;醫務社會工作;empowerment;supervision;medical social work期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：醫務社會工作者在高度專業發展的醫療環境中，經常性的感受到消權狀況，會影響到充權弱勢個案及其家庭的能力。故，本研究採質化研究深入訪談八位醫務社工，探討受督者經由督導過程中所感受到的充權經驗，並使其轉化為自身力量的歷程，以作為醫務社會工作督導者對受督者充權策略之參考。研究結果顯示，醫務社工在個案服務、跨專業合作、醫院行政組織三面向感受到消權，經過督導者在受督者個人、醫療團隊、組織階層的充權行為之後，會令受督者產生內在力量、肯定工作價值、轉換思考方向、開始爭取專業平權的四階段充權經驗。最後於研究建議中提出：一、充權知能融入社會工作部門教育訓練課程；二、督導者著重身教示範；三、社工部門更主動積極建立專業地位，在醫院組織內展現社會工作價值；四、專業團體針對醫務工作內容進行集體倡議，促使醫務社工從自我充權邁向集體充權之路。英文摘要：The medical social workers often feel disempowered at a highly professional development of the medical environment. Also, the situation could affect the social workers' services to the vulnerable patients as well as their family in the hospitals. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to explore the medical social workers' experiences of empowerment with his/her supervisors during the process of supervision. The main research questions are to explore how the social workers transform those experiences into their own power; what their supervisors used to shape the strategies of empowerment; what the distances are between the disempowerment and empowerment. This study adopts the qualitative research method and includes in-depth interviews of eight medical social workers to explore their experiences. The results of the study show that the social workers who feel disempowerment at the aspects of casework, teamwork and hospital administrative organization may initiate a four-stage empowerment process. The process includes that the supervisees find the improvement of their inner strengths, recognize the value of social work, rethink the direction of their work and embark on fighting for professional equality as a result of the supervisors' empowerment conducts. The following four suggestions have been put forward. Firstly, it is suggested that the training programs for the supervisors be integrated into the general education and training courses of the social work department. Secondly, the supervisor is expected to lay great emphasis on his/her own example. Moreover, the social work department should advocate social work professional value within the internal organizations. Lastly, the professional medical social groups seek collective awareness of the medical social work content, in order to promoting medical social workers from self-empowerment to collective struggle for rights.起始頁-結束頁：91-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201912_23(2).00034篇名：社區整體照顧服務體系之運作與展望：以南投縣為例並列篇名：The Operation and Prospects of the Community Integrated Care Service System: A Case Study of Nantou County作者：陳正益(Zheng-Yi Chen)關鍵字：長期照顧;照顧管理;夥伴關係;long-term care;care management;partnerships期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：社區整體照顧服務體系屬於長照2.0之創新計畫，從2017年正式施行以來，其運作模式與實施策略迭經調整與修正，而照顧管理模式之運作以及公私協力夥伴關係之建立，實攸關社區整體照顧服務體系之實施成效，值得深入檢視與探究。循此，本研究以南投縣為研究場域，運用深度訪談法，針對照管中心專員、網絡單位個管員或負責人進行資料蒐集與歸納分析。研究結果顯示，照顧管理層面正面臨權責不明、效率不彰、跨專業團隊合作與長照資源不足等困境；再者，長照政策修正頻繁、民間決策參與不足、行政體系長期分立、培力角色未能彰顯等影響因素，公私協力夥伴關係亦面臨鬆動與解組的挑戰。文後則分別針對照顧管理與夥伴關係層面，提出以照管中心作為單一窗口，建構全責、全程的照顧管理模式，以及建立決策參與及溝通對話機制，強化政府行政效率與培力角色，藉以形塑公私部門平等、尊重與信任之夥伴關係等建議。英文摘要：The Community Integrated Care Service System is an innovative program under the Ten-Year Long-Term Care Plan 2.0, which aims to establish a community-based integrated service delivery model. Since its official implementation in 2017, its operation model and implementation strategy have been adjusted and revised. The operation of care management and the establishment of public-private partnerships are closely related to the implementation of the community's integrated care service system, which is worthy of in-depth review and exploration. This study takes Nantou County as the main research field, using in-depth interviews with care managers of the long-term care management center and case managers or leaders of private organizations to collect data. The research results show that at the care management level, there are difficulties such as unclear authority and responsibility allocations, inefficiency, lack inter-professional teamwork and insufficient long-term care resources. In addition, the government's long-term care policy is still changing, private sector's role in decision-making is minimal, the administrative system have long been alienated from each other, and the role of empowerment is not obvious. The public-private partnerships are facing the challenge of loosening and disintegration. At the end of this article, several suggestions are made on care management and partnership, including care management center as the only contact, enhancement of related knowledge about inter-professional teamwork, building a long-term care resource network, and establishment of a mechanism of decision-making involvement and communications/dialogues, so as to integrate the divided long-term care administrative system, strengthen the government's administrative efficiency and role of empowerment, and shape the public-private partnership that is equal, respectful and trusting.起始頁-結束頁：137-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201912_23(2).00045篇名：臺灣社區整合照顧的經驗與挑戰：以健康照護專業服務為例並列篇名：The Experience and Challenge of Community - Based Integrated Care in Taiwan: The Example of Health Care Services作者：李佩芳(Pei-Fang Lee);鄭清霞(Ching-Hsia Cheng)關鍵字：長期照顧;整合式照顧;健康照護專業服務;Long-term Care;Integrated Care;Health Care Service期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：23卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：為了實踐在地老化並降低醫療與長期照護成本，以居家社區為基礎的長期照護服務整合模式，受到老化國家的重視與推廣，臺灣也積極發展整合服務，為此，本研究以剛起步的臺灣長期照顧2.0制度運作的整合服務為研究標的，採用焦點團體、深度訪談與實地觀察方法，以Reed et al.（2005）之微觀、中觀及鉅觀三種層次架構，分析當前臺灣社區整合照顧發展的經驗與挑戰，希望能提供政策發展參考。本研究主要發現如下：（1）支付制度讓競爭關係大於整合關係，建議增強整合誘因與機制；（2）欠缺品質檢核機制，應透過專業對話，建立專業的權限、角色、責任與問責；（3）個案資訊取得不易，造成整合服務的高門檻與困難度；（4）整合服務缺乏統整、協調的決策者，建議照管專員或A個管承擔此角色發揮功能。英文摘要：In order to practice aging in place and reduce the cost of medical care and long-term care, the home and community-based integration model is valued and promoted by the aging countries. Taiwan is also actively developing integrated care. Hence, the purpose of this research is to observe the integration care practice under the Taiwan's long-term care 2.0 system, and provide suggestions for policy development through the practical experience analysis. This study uses focus group, depth interviews and observation research methods to collect the integrate care practice information and uses the micro, meso and macro views constructed by Reed et al. (2005) to analyze the current experience and challenges of integrated care in Taiwan. The main results of this research are:(1) The payment system makes the competition relationship greater than the integration relationship between the professional workers, and it should be recommended to enhance the integration incentives and mechanisms; (2) The system lacks a quality supervision mechanism. This system should be developed through discussion between different professional worker to clarify the different professional worker's authority, role, and responsibility; (3) It is difficult to obtain client's information, which leads to the barriers in integrated care; (4) The system lacks a decision-makers to enhance the consolidation and coordination of the integrated care. The care manager or case manager should play this role.起始頁-結束頁：179-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201912_23(2).00056篇名：高危機、低意願：親密關係暴力高危機案主受助經驗之探索並列篇名：High Risk, Low Will: Exploring the Help- Seeking Experiences of High Risk Battered Women in Intimate Partner Violence作者：沈慶鴻(Ching-Hung Shen)關鍵字：求助;低意願;高危機;親密關係暴力;help-seeking;high risk;intimate partner violence;low will期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：「高危機、低意願」是親密關係暴力防治工作的難題，本研究因此期待除了瞭解「高危機」案主對處遇服務「低意願」的原由，還檢視其受助經驗以為現況解惑或處遇工作的參考。研究者透過社工、警察的協助，邀請「高危機、低意願」案主參與本研究，並以個別訪談法收集資料；而歸納來自北、中、南部15位女性「低意願」案主的經驗後發現，多數受訪者其實對其危險處境「高意識」，然其對處遇服務的「低意願」，反映了她們對接受服務可能刺激相對人的擔心，並在現實因素考量、服務成效有限、個人計畫尚未達成，以及仍想和相對人生活在一起等意圖下婉拒了服務；彙整受訪者過往的受助經驗後，研究者也發現，受訪者的「低意願」亦與其和網絡成員負向的互動經驗有關，以致多數受訪者雖充分感受到社工、警察的關心，但也都表示社工、警察無法同理她們的處境。由於「低意願」案主並非沒有服務需求，因此研究者建議充足的資源配置、多樣的服務內容及齊一的服務品質，可能是減少高危機案主「低意願」的重要策略。英文摘要：”High risk but low will” of battered women are the obstacles which social workers of domestic violence incessantly encounter. Therefore, the research aims to understand the reasons of the battered women with ”high risk but low will”, and to explore the experiences of them while mandated to services. Fifteen battered women were recruited as interviewees from different counties invited by social workers and police. Individual interviews were conducted to collect data. It was found that most of the interviewees were highly aware of their dangerous situation. However, they refused to be mandated to services from social workers and police in consideration of being threatened by their batterers. Besides, ill financial condition, ineffective services, their uncompleted plans, and wishes of living with their batterers stopped them from seeking helps. It was noteworthy that negative experiences of services network also lead to the interviewees' low will for formal service. Most of the interviewees felt caring but lack of empathy from social workers and police in the services. According to the results, the study suggests that 'low will' clients still have needs for service. To avoid pushing them away from formal helping systems while being referred, providing stable quality and multiple services, as well as resources allocation are highly recommended for enhancing battered women's low will.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201906_23(1).00017篇名：從社會資本觀點探究原鄉社會資源整合與網絡建構：以南投縣原鄉地區為例並列篇名：Exploring Social Resource Integration and Network Construction in Indigenous Region from Social Capital Perspective: Case of Nantou County作者：莊俐昕(Li-Hsin Chuang)關鍵字：社會資本;網絡模式;夥伴關係;資源整合;網絡建構;social capital;network model;partnership;resource integration;network construction期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究旨在以社會資本觀點探討影響原鄉社會服務輸送的內外部因素，並據以提出有助於促進資源整合與網絡建構的相關建議。為達到研究目的，本研究以質性研究方法進行，立意選取南投縣13位公私部門社會服務領域的實務工作者進行個別深度訪談。結果顯示，原鄉地區社會服務輸送存在著許多內外部的優劣勢，經過分析和討論後，本研究從社會資本的觀點提出七項有助於促進資源整合與網絡建構的相關建議，包括：（1）降低家族或派系對資源過度的操控，以締造資源分享與整合之網絡建構的利基；（2）營造部落內外部組織水平／同儕式的關係，以促進並活化組織間的網絡運作；（3）營造部落內、外組織的信任感，以促進利害關係人彼此間的合作與協力關係；（4）打造部落內、外組織之平等與互惠關係，以排除網絡合作與協力的障礙；（5）強化鄉公所之橋接與連結的功能，發展成為部落內外組織的網絡平台；（6）善用連結型社會資本開拓並導入外部資源，以帶動資源網絡運作的正向迴圈；以及（7）整合政府部門的服務方案，形塑民間與政府組織有效的網絡關係。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the influencing factors of social services delivery in the indigenous region, and then propose relevant suggestions to promote resource integration and network construction from the perspective of social capital. In order to achieve the aims, this study adopted qualitative research methods, and deliberately selected 13 practical practitioners in the social service field of public and private sectors in Nantou County to conduct individual in-depth interviews. The results show that there are many internal and external advantages and disadvantages in the social service delivery of the indigenous region. According to analysis and discussion, this study proposes seven suggestions to promote resource integration and network construction, including: (1) to create a niche for network construction of resource sharing and integration by reducing the excessive manipulation of resources by families or factions; (2) to promote and activate network operations between organizations by creating a level/peer relationship between the internal and external organizations of the tribe; (3) to promote cooperation and synergy between stakeholders by creating a sense of trust within and outside the tribal organizations; (4) to remove barriers to network cooperation and collaboration by creating equal and mutually beneficial relationships between internal and external organizations of the tribe; (5) to develop into a network platform for internal and external organizations of the tribe by strengthening the function of bridging and linking of township public offices; (6) to develop and introduce external resources to drive the virtuous circulation of resource network operations by making good use of linking social capital; and (7) to shape effective network relationships between civil and government organizations by integrating government service plans.起始頁-結束頁：45-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201906_23(1).00028篇名：掌握變遷中的家庭：家庭生命歷程發展理論與研究反思並列篇名：Understand the Changing Family: Reflections on the Family Life Course Development Theory作者：劉香蘭(Hsiang-Lan Liu)關鍵字：家庭研究;家庭生命歷程發展理論;家庭變遷;生命歷程理論;家庭週期;family research;family life course development theory;family change;life course;family life cycles期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：23卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：家庭作為一個社會制度，其變遷一直是家庭研究重要領域，更是家庭政策關注所在，尤其當代家庭的組成已打破異性戀和婚配的基礎，並隨社會變遷產生多元家庭，造成家庭理論與服務介入的挑戰。各家庭理論中，家庭生命歷程發展理論是既能從鉅視角度掌握家庭變遷與社會變遷的鑲嵌性，也能從微視角度分析家庭變化之歷程，成為掌握家庭變遷的主要理論之一。為能呈現該理論的主要內涵與研究應用的實況，本文主要有兩大部分，一是家庭生命歷程發展理論的整體性描述；二是依據研究主題、研究方法檢視國內外相關文獻。共歸納三個主要研究意涵：一、以家庭生命歷程發展理論為基礎的研究主題多關注於家庭壓力與階段變遷的議題；二、國外文獻針對跨國家庭生命歷程之比較和家庭各階段變遷已進行比較性研究；三、對理論概念之正確運用、關注於遷移和累積性效果和比較性的研究是國內發展相關研究可精進之處。英文摘要：The family, as a social institution, and its change is not only an area of family research but also still the main concern of family policy. The foundation of family formation basing on marriage and heterosexuality has been broken and the diversities of family are huge challenges for family theories and family research. Among many family theories, the family life course development theory can capture the embeddedness of family change and social change on macro level as well as insight the patterns and processes of family changes on micro level. This study consists of two main parts. The first one is to describe the propositions, major contents, and concepts of family life course development theory. The second part is to capture current research issues by reviewing research topics and methods of some studies in Taiwan and abroad. There are three main implications: first of all, the papers reviewed by this study basing on family life course focus on family pressures and family transitions; secondly, the papers aboard reviewed by this study applied comparative methods to describe the different patterns between counties and family stages; last, particular attention should be paid to the correct use of concepts about family life course, stress on the cumulative effect of family events and comparative study for advanced research in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：91-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.201906_23(1).000301篇名：臺灣個人勞動所得不均度成因之分解並列篇名：Decomposition of the Determinants of Labor Income Inequality in Taiwan作者：陳建良(Chien-Liang Chen);曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);林佑龍(Yo-Long Lin)關鍵字：勞動所得;不均度;分量迴歸;擬真分解;Labor Income;Inequality;Quantile Regression;Counterfactual Decomposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：55卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究採分量迴歸與重複抽樣（bootstrapping），搭配1990年至2014年長達25年期間的個人年度勞動所得資料，以新方法和新資料型態探討勞動所得不均度變化，歸因於薪資所得者的教育年數、工作經驗、性別、婚姻狀態、公私部門與產業別等，各種特性所佔比例，並進行分配變化趨勢成因的擬真分解。結果發現，教育年數及教育報酬率的提高，有助於勞動所得的全面提升，尤以中間和基層勞工的受益較大；產業別的報酬率變化，反映金融海嘯之後的產業結構演進，對低所得族群有較大的負面衝擊。至於其他特性和報酬率的分配，影響效果都屬其次。本研究結果隱含，透過合理的補貼和在職訓練，提升弱勢族群的教育報酬率，有助於勞動所得不均度的改善。英文摘要：Using twenty-five years of data from 1990 to 2014 on individual annual labor income, this study analyzes the determinants of Taiwan's labor income inequality based on a quantile regression technique with the bootstrap method. We utilize new econometric methods and data sources to examine whether changes in labor income inequality are attributable to workers' education years, working experience, gender, marital status, public or private sector employment, and industry sectors. The results suggest that more schooling years and larger marginal rates of return to education lead to increases in an individual's labor income, especially for low- and middle-income workers. Changes in returns to different industry sectors show that industrial structure adjustments arising from the 2008-2009 global financial tsunami may have an adverse effect on low-income labors. Other factors that affect wage inequality are secondary. The results therefore imply that governments can reduce labor income inequality through education subsidies and on-the-job trainings for the disadvantageous workers.起始頁-結束頁：147-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系2篇名：套牢問題、過度投資、與在職搜尋並列篇名：Holdups, Overinvestment, and On-the-Job Search作者：周嗣文(Eric S. Chou);唐震宏(Jenn-Hong Tang)關鍵字：套牢問題;過度投資;工作搜尋;Holdup Problem;Overinvestment;Job Search期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：55卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文利用Kiyotaki and Lagos（2007）的架構，在具有在職搜尋（on-the-job search）的勞動搜尋模型中，探討關係專屬投資（relationship-specific investment）的效率性。投資的效率受到兩種扭曲的影響：組合外部性（composition externality）及套牢問題（holdup problem）。前者源自於工作間的異質性，而後者源自於契約的不完全（incompleteness）以及投資的專屬性（specificity）。通過以解析及數值分析的方式求解模型，我們證明這兩種扭曲均可能造成投資不足（underinvestment）以及過度投資（overinvestment），而且這兩種扭曲的效果可能相互扺銷。英文摘要：By adapting the model of Kiyotaki and Lagos (2007), we analyze the efficiency of relationship-specific investment in job search models that feature on-the-job search. Investment is inefficient due to two distortions: the composition externaltiy and the holdup problem. The former stems from the heterogeneity among jobs. The latter arises from the incompleteness of contracts and the specificity of investment. By solving the models analytically and numerically, we show that both distortions can lead to under- and over-investment, and that the effects of the two distortions may offset each other.起始頁-結束頁：191-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系3篇名：兩階段TREE/LOGIT短期匯率反轉門檻值模型並列篇名：A Two-stage TREE/LOGIT Method to Construct the Short-term Exchange Reversal Model with Thresholds作者：莊瑞珠(Rwei-Ju Chuang);<U+6E29>淑梅(Shu-Mei Wen);陳秀淋(Show-Lin Chen);周靖秦(Ching-Chin Chou)關鍵字：匯率反轉;未預期總體經濟指標訊息;門檻值;兩階段模型;訊息交易策略;Trend Reversion Price Reversal;Unexpected Macroeconomic News;Thresholds;Two-stage Method;News Trading Strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：55卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：探討匯率波動的原因是國際金融的重要主題之一，許多研究驗證未預期經濟指標對長期平均匯率影響，然而匯率短天期變動則相對缺少討論。觀察匯率的長期日平均變動較為穩定，但在重要經濟指標公佈時，受未預期訊息的影響，匯率可能產生短天期反轉。所謂反轉是指和原本波動趨勢不同出現較巨大由漲勢轉跌勢或由跌勢轉漲勢的短期狀況。本文修正Caginalp and Laurent（1998）價格K線型態指標研究中反轉定義擴大為移動性5天期的反轉。未預期之總體經濟指標是指官方實際公佈值與市場共識值的差異，此差異值可能必須超過或低於某特定數值才會影響短期反轉之機率。以決策樹演算法作為第一階段門檻值篩選工具，過濾個別未預期消息面指標與反轉方向互動的關係。第二階段則輸入各門檻值並建構羅吉斯迴歸模型。選擇全球金融市場主要交易貨幣並將資料分為次貸風暴前後兩期間探討未預期總體指標對匯率反轉的影響。本研究主要結論：（1）各國造成匯率短天期反轉的關鍵因素不一，但同一貨幣在兩階段受到指標訊息影響因素相當一致。（2）未預期經濟成長類基本面指標訊息在次貸前後皆為影響匯率反轉的因素。（3）其中五種指標之未預期消息面必須注意門檻值（非0）影響。英文摘要：Understanding fluctuations in foreign exchange rates is one of the major issues of concern in the international finance market, as the trend of a foreign exchange rate may reverse when announced macroeconomic indices do not match forecasts. Mussa (1976) proposed that about 90% of fluctuations in exchange rates are due to unexpected news. Therefore, this study presents the two-stage TREE/LOGIT model to identify which indices with thresholds lead to such short-period reversals. The first stage applies a decision TREE algorithm to determine the possible threshold difference between the forecast index and the announced one that correlates to the reversal. The next stage makes use of the LOGIT model with thresholds to quantify the statistical significance of a combined set of indices as the optimal predictor of a reversal. With this model we analyze each of the five major currencies exchanges rates, for before and after the u.s. subprime mortgage crisis in 2007, and identify the relevant indices that precede a reversal under different investment risk aversions. We conclude that the category of economic growth indices is the primary factor for predicting an exchange rate reversal, either before or after the crisis, for all the currencies in our study. Each currency in turn has its own other different decisive categories before and after the crisis with various trading suggestions under significant threshold news.起始頁-結束頁：247-277資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系4篇名：外籍勞工對本國勞工薪資與雇用之影響：臺灣之實證研究並列篇名：The Impact of Foreign Labor on Domestic Wages and Employment: Evidence from Taiwan作者：李長泰(Chang-Tai Lee);張景福(Ching-Fu Chang)關鍵字：外籍勞工;本國勞工;薪資;就業;Foreign Labor;Native Worker;Wage;Employment期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：55卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文係以2002年至2014年臺灣各縣市行業之本國勞工及外籍勞工就業人數的合併資料，以及勞保被保險人與事業單位檔案的合併資料，分別從勞工層級與廠商層級的角度來探討引進外籍勞工對整體本國勞動市場以及製造業各行業在薪資與雇用之影響。研究中除了直接以外籍勞工密集度作為解釋變數並以固定效果模型進行分析外，亦採用「差異中的差異」（difference-in-differences）方法並針對製造業做進一步之驗證。經估計後我們發現，引進外籍勞工對本國勞工之薪資與雇用有負面影響，但此效果隨著性別、職業類型以及行業別的不同而存有明顯差異，然而整體而言仍是以負面影響居多。英文摘要：This study sets out to investigate the impact of foreign labor on the wages and employment of local workers from both the individual-level and firm-level perspectives. By matching several survey and administrative data-sets from 2002 to 2014, we specifically use the density of foreign labor in each industry and in each firm as the key explanatory variable for the individual-level and firm-level estimations, and further employ the fixed effects model and difference-in-differences approach to deal with the endogenous problem caused by some unobserved factors. Our results show that there is indeed a negative impact of foreign labor on the wages and employment of local workers, but the effects vary significantly with gender, job categories, and industrial classifications.起始頁-結束頁：279-321資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系5篇名：解除市場管制的社會福利效果：疊代模型的分析並列篇名：The Social Welfare Effect of Deregulation in the Goods Market: Analysis of an Overlapping-Generations Model作者：金志婷(Chi-Ting Chin)關鍵字：解除管制;內生成長;社會福利;疊代模型;Deregulation;Endogenous Growth;Social Welfare;Overlapping Generations期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：55卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：已有許多文獻探討解除市場管制對社會福利的影響，大多文獻都支持解除市場管制可以提高代表性個人的福利，可惜的是並沒有文獻在疊代模型中探討這個問題。本文在疊代模型中考慮獨佔性競爭的設定，得到以下幾點結論：（1）解除市場管制確實能提升年輕世代的福利、但卻會降低年長世代的福利；（2）疊代模型中，將所有世代的福利加總，無論是否考慮未來世代的福利，解除市場管制都能夠提高整體社會的福利；（3）僅考慮既存世代的福利之下，疊代模型中解除市場管制所能提升的整體福利不及代表性個人模型；（4）同時考慮既存世代與未來世代的福利時，疊代模型中解除市場管制所能提升的整體福利超過代表性個人模型；（5）疊代模型中，出生與死亡的機率越大，因市場管制而受害的人口比例將越低。英文摘要：The recent economic literature argues that deregulation in the goods market has beneficial impacts on social welfare and that full deregulation is optimal for the infinitely-lived agent, yet no study has tried to estimate the welfare effect of deregulation in the model with new generations. This paper considers the degree of monopoly in an overlapping-generations model and offers the following conclusions. (1) Deregulation in the goods market is harmful to older generations, but is beneficial for younger generations. (2) Deregulation in the goods market raises total social welfare regardless of which future generations exist in the overlapping-generations model. (3) The welfare benefit of deregulation for the infinitely-lived agent is larger compared the overlapping-generations model that only contains current generations. (4) The welfare benefit of deregulation for the infinitely-lived agent is smaller than that in the overlapping-generations model that has future and current generations. (5) The higher the death and birth rates are, the lower the proportion is of the population harmed by regulation in the overlapping-generations model.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系6篇名：強／弱式財政永續性之研究：分量共整合模型之應用並列篇名：A Study of Strong/Weak-form Fiscal Sustainability: Evidence from the Quantile Co-integration Model作者：沈美利(Mei-Li Shen);李政<U+5CEF>(Cheng-Feng Lee);欉清全(Ching-Chuan Tsong);劉修祥(Hsiou-Hsiang Liu)關鍵字：強式／弱式財政永續性;分量共整合;Strong-Form and Weak-Form Fiscal Sustainability;Quantile Co-integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：55卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：2011年的歐洲債務問題對全球經濟的影響相當大，使得政府財政永續性的議題受到關注，本文使用Xiao（2009）所提出的分量共整合架構，分析11個「經濟合作暨發展組織」（Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD）國家的財政收入與支出是否存在長期關係，並討論強／弱式永續性。實證結果發現，11個國家的財政收入與支出均具有分量共整合關係，但財政永續性的強／弱式，則因不同的國家，在不同的分量上，而有不同的結果。詳言之，有六個國家的共整合係數有明顯的不對稱性情形，在低分量上，面對負的經濟衝擊，共整合係數顯著的小於1，屬於弱式永續性；但在高分量上，面對正的經濟衝擊，其值則無法顯著異於1，屬於強式永續性，文中亦探究其可能的原因。再者，有三個國家的財政屬於強式永續性，其共整合係數接近於1，不隨著分量改變而有顯著的改變。第三，有兩個國家的共整合係數在所有分量上，顯著的低於1，屬於弱式永續性。最後，我們亦提出具參考性的政策涵義。英文摘要：This research uses the newly developed quantile co-integration framework by Xiao (2009) to examine whether a long-run relationship exists between government revenues and expenditures among eleven OECD countries. After establishing the co-integration, we proceed to show whether the co-integration relationship changes across quantiles, depending on the size and sign of the shocks that hit the fiscal variables. As such, the framework can help us to distinguish whether a country exhibits strong-form or weak-form fiscal sustainability. Our results suggest that there exists a long-run relationship between the two series for all eleven countries in a quantile sense, implying fiscal sustainability holds for these countries. However, the forms of fiscal sustainability are different over various quantiles and for these countries. For five countries, the relationship shows an asymmetric pattern over different quantiles, depending on the size and sign of the shocks, whereby under lower quantiles negative shocks with large absolute values tend to weaken the relationship (less than one), and thus they have weak-form fiscal sustainability; in the upper quantiles, large positive shocks do not weaken this relationship, and thus these countries have strong-form fiscal sustainability. This research provides possible explanations for these results. Finally, strong-form sustainability holds over all quantiles for three countries, while two of the 11 countries show weak-form sustainability. Policy implications are provided based on the empirical results.起始頁-結束頁：41-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系7篇名：臺灣的金融發展和經濟成長：地下經濟的角色並列篇名：Financial Development and Economic Growth in Taiwan: The Role of the Shadow Economy作者：林朕陞(Chen-Sheng Lin);洪福聲(Fu-Sheng Hung)關鍵字：地下經濟;銀行發展;股市發展;經濟成長;因果關係;Shadow Economy;Banking Development;Stock Market Development;Economic Growth;Causality期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：55卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：現存探討金融發展與經濟成長之互動關係的文獻，都只關注地上（或官方）經濟層面上的表現，完全忽略了地下經濟在兩者互動關係中所扮演的角色。為彌補文獻，本文首先進行臺灣地下經濟規模的估算，然後以共整合模型探討地下經濟對我國金融發展（包含銀行及股市）與官方經濟成長的因果關係、相互解釋的能力、模型配適度與預測能力是否有所影響。結果顯示，在長期均衡關係中，地下經濟的存在使我國金融體系原是符合銀行導向為基礎的結論消失了。在長期因果關係中，不論是否考慮地下經濟，我國均存在需求追隨的股市發展型態，但考慮地下經濟之後需求追隨的銀行發展型態不復存在。在短期互動關係中，考量地下經濟之前，官方經濟成長促進銀行發展但不影響股市發展，而銀行與股市之間不存在資金排擠效應；考量地下經濟之後，官方經濟成長降低股市發展但不影響銀行發展，銀行與股市之間出現資金排擠的效應。在短期因果關係中，地下經濟的存在會顯著影響金融發展與官方經濟成長之間的因果關係。預測誤差變異數分解則發現，地下經濟為我國官方經濟成長及股市發展的重要解釋變數。最後，在樣本內配適度及樣本外預測能力評比中發現，將地下經濟納入的模型表現較佳。英文摘要：Most recent studies exploring the empirical correlation between financial development and economic growth (the finance-growth nexus) only focus on the growth rate of the formal (or official) economy, while completely ignorting the roles of the shadow economy. To explore the roles played the shadow economy in this correlation, we first estimate the size of said economy in Taiwan and then employ the cointegration model to investigate whether or not the presence of this type of economy significantly alters the correlation between financial development (including banking and stock markets) and economic growth in Taiwan. We proceed with our investigations by comparing two models. The first one examines the correlation between financial development and economic growth, without considering the shadow economy. We then compare this to the second one, which explores the correlations among financial development, the official economy, and the shadow economy. We find that whether the shadow economy is present or not plays an important role in determining the finance-growth nexus of Taiwan. Furthermore, we present some results showing that the second one outperforms the first one in terms of the in-sample fit and the out-of-sample forecasts, validating that the shadow economy does play an important role in the finance-growth nexus of Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：71-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系8篇名：總體經濟參數與政策搭配問題並列篇名：Macroeconomic Parameters and the Assignment Problem作者：曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);曹真睿(Jen-Ruey Tsaur);林彥慶(Yen-Ching Lin)關鍵字：政策搭配;總體經濟參數;動態穩定性;Assignment Problem;Macroeconomic Parameters;Dynamic Stability期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：55卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：鑑於Caves and Jones（1973）探討政府應如何運用匯率政策與財政政策來追求全面均衡的目標時，僅以內部均衡線與外部均衡線的相對斜率做為抉擇政策搭配的依據，Chen（1977）乃進一步闡明內部均衡線和外部均衡線的斜率孰大孰小端視邊際進口傾向是否小於1/2而定。準此，邊際進口傾向是否高於1/2，遂成為當局決定政策搭配方式的準則。本文修訂Chen（1977）隱含經濟體系始終處於充分就業的頑強設定，考量所得也會影響貿易收支後發現：邊際進口傾向與邊際儲蓄傾向的相對大小，才是政府選擇政策搭配的決定因素。具言之，若邊際進口傾向高（低）於邊際儲蓄傾向，則應以匯率政策維持內（外）部均衡，而以財政政策維持外（內）部均衡；相反的搭配會導致經濟體系的動態不安定。英文摘要：Caves and Jones (1973) employ the Swan diagram to illustrate the assignment problem and suggest that the slope of the external-balance schedule being flatter than the internal-balance schedule implies higher relative effectiveness of exchange-rate (government expenditure) changes for securing an external (internal) balance. Chen (1977) further demonstrates that Caves and Jones' proposition is valid if and only if the size of the marginal propensity to import falls short of one half. This clear result of Chen (1977) comes from the robust assumption that the output is fixed at the full-employment level. This present research assumes that, unless the economy is lying on the internal-balance schedule, the output is capable of influencing the trade balance. We therefore show that the relative magnitude between the marginal propensity to import and the marginal propensity to save is crucial in determining the policy assignment. More specifically, if the size of the marginal propensity to import is smaller (larger) than the size of the marginal propensity to save, then an exchange-rate policy should be set up to secure the external (internal) balance and a proper fiscal policy should be executed to secure the internal (external) balance.起始頁-結束頁：115-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系01篇名：The Effect of a Nurse-Led Cognitive Behavioral Protocol on Depressive Symptoms and Coping Strategies of Dementia Caregivers作者：Yuqin PAN;Ruyi CHEN關鍵字：randomized controlled trial;cognitive behavioral intervention;family caregivers;patients with dementia;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Family caregivers of patients with dementia (PWD) often experience depressive symptoms and use poor coping strategies. Cognitive behavioral interventions may enhance positive appraisals of caregiving-related issues and the utilization of active coping strategies among caregivers, which may help prevent caregiver depression. However, there is a shortage of primary, community-based mental health services in China, and little research has been conducted on the effect of nurse-led mental health programs in this population. Purpose: This study explored the effect of a nurse-led cognitive behavioral intervention on depressive symptoms and coping strategies among family caregivers of PWD in China. Methods: This randomized controlled trial used data from a sample of 112 caregivers screened from 276 potential participants in a city in southeastern China. The sample was randomly assigned to an intervention group (n = 56) and a control group (n = 56). The intervention group received five monthly in-home, nurse-led cognitive behavioral sessions and telephone consultations after each session. The control group received five monthly, short, general conversations with nurse interventionists at the participants' homes, in the hospital, or via telephone. Depressive symptoms, coping strategies, and the demographics of caregiving dyads were collected at Time 1 (baseline), Time 2 (the end of the 5-month intervention), and Time 3 (2-month follow-up). IBM SPSS Statistics Version 19.0 was used for data analysis. Results: Eighty-two participants (intervention group: n = 47, control group: n = 35) completed the three evaluations. No significant group differences were found in baseline characteristics between the two groups. The general linear model repeated-measures analysis of variance indicated a significant difference in depressive symptoms and active coping between groups over time, with p ＜ .001 for the interaction between depressive symptoms and groups and p ＜ .01 for the interaction between active coping and groups. A similar result did not occur for passive coping. The t tests further supported a significant interventional effect on participants' depressive symptoms and active coping. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This nurse-led cognitive behavioral intervention was effective in decreasing depressive symptoms and improving active coping among study participants. The findings suggest the improvement of mental health services and social policies in China to support family caregivers of PWD.起始頁-結束頁：1-11-007資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003272篇名：Oral Dysfunction in Patients With Head and Neck Cancer: A Systematic Review作者：Shu-Ching CHEN關鍵字：head and neck cancer;oral dysfunction;systematic review期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Head and neck cancers (HNCs) and their treatment may cause oral function impairment. Purpose: This study was designed to identify oral dysfunction in patients receiving treatment for HNCs using a systematic review. Methods: The PubMed, Embase, and CINAHL databases were searched for studies on oral function impairment in patients receiving treatment for HNCs published between January 2014 and May 2019. Only descriptive, correlational, and interventional quantitative studies that included patients receiving treatment for HNCs who presented with oral dysfunction, were published in English during the aforementioned time frame, and were accessible in full-text versions were selected. Results: Twenty-eight studies (13 cross-sectional, two longitudinal, 12 randomized controlled trial, and one retrospective chart review) fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Oral mucositis, dysphagia, xerostomia, trismus, and chewing and speech problems were the most common oral dysfunctions. Age, cancer stage, tumor location, treatment modalities, treatment status, treatment dose, and pretreatment oral function were factors associated with oral dysfunction. Although individual interventions were shown to improve oral dysfunction, the related evidence was inconclusive. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Primary HNCs and their treatment significantly deteriorate oral function. A holistic and interdisciplinary approach may maximize oral function.起始頁-結束頁：1-14-010資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003633篇名：Needs Assessments Enhance Patient-Centered Care Quality作者：Chia-Yi WU期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：1-2-001資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003654篇名：Prevalence of Depression and Its Influence on the Quality of Life of Jordanians Living in Residential Care Facilities作者：Rasmieh AL-AMER;Maha SUBIH;Hanan ALDARAAWI;Sue RANDALL;Wafaa Mousa Mustafa OTHMAN;Yenna SALAMONSON關鍵字：depression;geriatrics;nursing homes;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: As a third-world country experiencing a rise in the elderly population and changes to traditional family structures, improving psychological health is critical to improving quality of life (QoL) in the older adults living in residential care facilities in Jordan. Purpose: This study aimed to (a) estimate the prevalence of depression among nursing home (NH) residents in Jordan; (b) measure perceived QoL in these NH residents in the dimensions of mobility, self-care, usual activity, pain and discomfort, and anxiety/depression; and (c) assess the influence of depression on each of these QoL dimensions. Methods: This cross-sectional study recruited a convenience sample of 155 participants living in a residential care facility in Jordan. The instruments used included a sociodemographic and clinical questionnaire, the Mini-Mental State Examination, a Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS), and the EuroQol, which is a five-dimension, five-level questionnaire. The data were presented as means, standard deviations, and percentages as well as adjusted odds ratios (AORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Results: A high prevalence of depression was found in the study population, with 72.3% having a score between 6 and 9 on the GDS, which is suggestive of depression. Moreover, 18.1% scored <U+2265> 10 on the GDS, which is indicative of a nearly continual state of depression. With regard to the QoL dimensions, 84.5% of the participants reported experiencing pain, 81.9% reported anxiety/depression, 80.6% reported problems performing usual activities, 75.5% reported problems with self-care, and 63.2% reported mobility difficulties. Pain, anxiety, and depression were found to be significantly associated with level of depression (AOR = 2.78 and 95% CI [1.18, 6.57], AOR = 5.81 and 95% CI [2.14, 15.78], and AOR = 4.75 and 95% CI [1.87, 12.07], respectively). Conclusions: Depression is common among NH residents in Jordan and is associated significantly with poor QoL. This study yielded empirical data that may be used to develop strategies to enhance or promote the mental health status and QoL of NH residents in Jordan.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-006資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003375篇名：Cognitive Dysfunction and Its Predictors in Adult Patients With Cancer Receiving Chemotherapy: A Cross-Sectional Correlational Study作者：Dhuha Youssef WAZQAR關鍵字：patients with cancer;chemotherapy;cognitive dysfunction;oncology nurses期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Chemotherapy-related cognitive dysfunction, one of the most frequently reported symptoms in patients with cancer, has a negative impact on the daily lives of patients. No research has examined cognitive dysfunction and its potential predictors in adult patients with cancer receiving chemotherapy in Saudi Arabia. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to examine the socio-demographic, clinical, and psychological factors associated with cognitive dysfunction in adult patients with cancer receiving chemotherapy. Methods: A cross-sectional correlational study was carried out with a convenience sample of 100 adult patients with cancer receiving chemotherapy at a university teaching hospital in Saudi Arabia. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, and sociodemographic and clinical surveys were completed by participants. Descriptive statistics and linear regression were used to analyze the data. Results: The data showed that the participants experienced moderate-to-severe cognitive dysfunction. Participants performed poorly in the divided attention and memory cognitive domains. Age, educational level, and depression factors were found to be significant predictors of cognitive dysfunction. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Cognitive dysfunction is commonly seen in patients with cancer receiving chemotherapy. Chemotherapy, age, and psychological factors increase susceptibility to cognitive dysfunction in adult patients with cancer. Oncology nurses should be aware that patients with cancer may be extremely vulnerable to cognitive dysfunction. Furthermore, age and psychological factors must be considered when developing symptom management and supportive care intervention programs to reduce the incidence of negative cognitive outcomes in this population.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-008資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003406篇名：Readiness for Behavior Change in Patients Living With Ischemic Heart Disease作者：Nidal F. ESHAH關鍵字：behavior;change;heart;readiness;stage of change期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Readiness for behavioral change may be evaluated by assessing the patient's stage of change, as described in the transtheoretical model. Identifying readiness to change in patients with ischemic heart disease may enhance the effectiveness of interventions that target risk reduction and lifestyle modification. Purpose: This study was designed to assess the readiness of patients with ischemic heart disease to change health behaviors as well as to identify the factors that significantly predict this change. Methods: A descriptive correlation design approach was adopted, and a convenience sample of 122 patients with ischemic heart disease was recruited from an outpatient cardiac clinic. Readiness for behavioral change was evaluated by assessing the stages of change of the participants, as described in the transtheoretical model. Data on readiness to change were collected using the ”readiness for lifestyle change inventory.” Results: A total of 62.2% and 43.4% of the participants were in the precontemplation phase of change for ”cease smoking” and ”be physically active,” respectively; about 33% of the patients were in the maintenance phase for ”control weight”; 36.1% were in the maintenance phase for ”reduce consumption of high-fat foods”; and 51.6% and 57.4% were in the maintenance phase for ”eat fruits and vegetables” and ”practice relaxation,” respectively. Participants who were overweight or obese showed higher readiness to practice physical activity, and those with high cholesterol levels showed a higher readiness to reduce the amount of fat in their diet. Higher income was found to predict higher readiness to eat fruits and vegetables. Conclusions: Patients are not adequately ready to change their health-related behaviors. Higher cardiovascular risk predicts higher readiness to change health behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-009資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003367篇名：Validation of the Supportive Care Needs Survey Screening Tool Chinese Version for Patients With Head and Neck Cancer in Taiwan作者：Chan-Chuan HU;Kai-Lin YOU;Li-Yun TSAI;Yuan-Yuan FANG;Sin-Yuan JHANG;Pei-Jen LOU;Cheng-Ping WANG;Jenq-Yuh KO;Yun-Hsiang LEE;Yeur-Hur LAI關鍵字：SCNS-ST9;care needs;head and neck cancer;psychometrics;validation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The increasing number of cancer survivors and the trend of shifting cancer treatments into outpatient clinics have increased rapidly the supportive care needs of patients with cancer. However, no brief assessment tool is available to screen for these needs. Purpose: In this study, we aimed to (a) translate and develop a nine-item Chinese version of the Supportive Care Needs Survey Screening Tool (SCNS-ST9-C) and (b) examine the psychometric properties of this tool in a sample of patients with head and neck cancer (HNC) in Taiwan. Methods: In this two-phase instrument validation study, the SCNS-ST9-C was translated and evaluated for content, face validity, and feasibility in Phase I and was examined for internal consistency reliability and construct validity (including factor structure and theoretically supported correlations) on a sample of patients with HNC in Phase II. Results: In Phase I, the SCNS-ST9-C was translated and developed by three bilingual doctoral-prepared nurse researchers (Chinese and English). A standardized score system ranging from 0 to 100 was built, with higher scores indicating higher unmet supportive care needs. Good content and face validity were confirmed by five cancer care experts and 20 patients with HNC, respectively. In Phase II, 116 subjects were recruited. A clear four-factor structure, which incorporated one of the original five dimensions (sexuality care needs, with one item) into the dimension of psychological and emotional care needs, was identified using exploratory factor analysis. Good internal consistency reliability for the overall SCNS-ST9-C was supported by a Cronbach's α of .75 and its four subscales (domains). Good construct validity was also confirmed by the theoretically supported correlations. Better performance status and longer time since treatment completion correlated negatively with the SCNS-ST9-C (i.e., lower unmet care needs), whereas higher distress (anxiety, depression, and symptoms) correlated positively with the SCNS-ST9-C (i.e., greater unmet care needs). Female patients reported higher overall unmet care needs and psychological and emotional care needs and higher scores on the care and support needs subscale than male patients. Conclusions: The SCNS-ST9-C is a brief, low-burden, and psychometrically valid instrument that may be applied in ethnically Chinese settings. This tool takes 1-2 minutes to complete. Further testing of the psychometrics of this instrument in different cancer populations is recommended.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-002資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003608篇名：A Correlational Study of Skin Toxicity and Quality of Life in Patients With Advanced Lung Cancer Receiving Targeted Therapy作者：Jui-Chun CHAN;Yun-Hsiang LEE;Chien-Ying LIU;Hui-Hsuan SHIH;Pei-Kwei TSAY;Woung-Ru TANG關鍵字：lung cancer;skin toxicity;targeted therapy;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Oral targeted therapy is increasingly used worldwide to treat patients with advanced lung cancer. The adverse skin toxicity that is associated with treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors often results in acneiform rash, dry skin (xerosis), pruritus, and paronychia, which may cause discomfort in patients and affect their quality of life. Purpose: This study was designed to explore changes in skin toxicity and quality of life (measured overall by three subscales) as well as the correlation between skin toxicity and overall quality of life over a 3-month period for patients with advanced lung cancer receiving oral targeted therapy. Methods: This study used a longitudinal research design. Baseline data were collected before initiating targeted therapy. Data for the effects of targeted therapy on skin toxicity and quality of life were collected at 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks after therapy initiation. Data on skin toxicity were collected using the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events Version 4.03, and quality of life was measured using the Chinese version of the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibitor-18 questionnaire. Demographic and clinical data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, and Spearman's rank correlation coefficient was used to measure the correlation between skin toxicity and quality of life. Results: Thirty-two patients participated in this study. The symptoms of skin toxicity that increased over the 3-month study period included xerosis and paronychia, whereas acneiform rash and pruritus fluctuated during this period. Over the study period, more than 70% of the participants exhibited symptoms of skin toxicity. Skin toxicity was the greatest and quality of life was the lowest, respectively, at the end of the study. All of the symptoms of skin toxicity were significantly correlated with quality of life, although each varied over time (r = .36-.61, p ＜ .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this study indicate that healthcare providers should consider the impact of skin toxicity on quality of life in patients with advanced lung cancer who are receiving oral targeted therapy. These findings may be used to design interventional measures for skin and medical care to improve quality of life in patients with advanced lung cancer.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-003資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003399篇名：Supportive Care Needs of Patients With Lung Cancer in Mainland China: A Cross-Sectional Study作者：Tian ZHANG;Hongye HE;Qunhui LIU;Xiaoqing LV;Yongxia SONG;Jingfang HONG關鍵字：lung cancer;need;supportive care needs期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The diagnosis and treatment of lung cancer necessitate a variety of supportive care needs. To our knowledge, no studies have been conducted that target specifically the supportive care needs of patients with lung cancer in Mainland China. Cross-cultural studies indicate that supportive care needs vary by cultural background. Thus, it is necessary to investigate the supportive care needs of patients with lung cancer in the cultural context of China. Purpose: This study aimed to describe the level of supportive care required by patients with lung cancer in China and to examine the relationships between supportive care needs and demographic factors and between supportive care needs and treatment variables. Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study design was adopted. Five hundred fifty-four patients with lung cancer were recruited using a convenience sampling method from inpatient departments in four tertiary teaching hospitals that are affiliated with a medical university in Anhui Province, China. The Nursing Professional Social Support Needs Scale and background information list were used as the data collection instruments. A Wilcoxon rank sum test and a Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test were conducted to examine the differences among the professional supportive care needs of patients of different demographic characteristics and under different treatment conditions. Results: Participants self-reported the highest scores in the domain of informational needs (M= 3.67, interquartile range = 1.25). The most common supportive care need was ”to be cared for by nurses with skilled venipuncture techniques.” There were significant differences in needs across different genders, age groups, educational levels, and income levels (p ＜ .05). Patients with metastasis and other illnesses had greater supportive care needs in terms of total and subscale scores in Stages III and IV (p ＜ .05). Conclusions: Patients with serious diseases and heavy socioeconomic burdens have greater supportive care needs. Therefore, healthcare providers should improve their awareness and expertise to identify the needs of their patients and to provide supportive care to patients with lung cancer. In addition, patients with high supportive care needs should be identified.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-004資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000033810篇名：The Development of a Standardized Framework for Primary Nurse Specialists in Diabetes Care in China: A Delphi Study作者：Qiuling XING;Mingxia ZHANG;Fang ZHAO;Yingxia ZHOU;Yongzhen MO;Li YUAN關鍵字：primary nurse specialists in diabetes care;core competence;systematic framework;index weight期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The number of patients with diabetes has been increasing rapidly according to a 2017 report by the International Diabetes Federation. Diabetes has become one of the most challenging public health problems, and there will be an estimated 143 million patients with diabetes in China by 2035. This puts considerable pressure on nurses who specialize in the care of patients with diabetes in China and increases related social and financial burdens. Clinical practice has proven that strengthening the core competencies of nurses and establishing an evaluation system of core competencies improve both healthcare quality and patient quality of life. However, no core-competence system framework currently addresses the unique characteristics of nurses in China. Purposes: The purpose of this study was to construct a core-competence system framework for primary nurse specialists in diabetes care. Methods: A brainstorming approach was conducted that worked to conceptualize the core competencies of nurse specialists in diabetes care in China. Next, a study group organized this information and conducted a seminar; 50 experts and patients with diabetes were invited to develop the first draft of the framework. Afterward, 50 experts were selected to participate in the Delphi survey. Most indicators were retained after a three-round Delphi process, and the superiority chart was used to determine the weights of the six dimensions. Results: Forty-seven experts completed the consultation. The experts' rate of response ranged from 94% to 100%, the authority coefficient was .91, and the Kendall's coefficients of concordance in Grades 1-3 were .793, .418, and .542, respectively. An increasingly detailed, three-grade system framework was developed, including six first-grade indicators (diabetes professional knowledge, diabetes-related knowledge, communication skills and health education ability, specialized skills, clinical judgment, and specialty development capacity), 23 second-grade indicators, and 87 third-grade indicators. The weights of the six first-grade indicators were .221, .149, .192, .209, .160, and .069, respectively. Conclusions: The core-competence system framework includes six core competencies, which represent the main characteristics of primary nurse specialists in diabetes care who are highly recommended by experts. It is important to keep in mind that this is only a theoretical framework and thus must be further tested in clinical practice settings in China.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-005資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000033011篇名：Work-Related Predictors of Sleep Quality in Chinese Nurses: Testing a Path Analysis Model作者：Yuan LI;Jinbo FANG;Chunfen ZHOU關鍵字：Chinese nurses;path analysis;predicting model;sleep quality;work-related factor期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Good sleep is essential to human health. Insufficient quality sleep may compromise the wellness of nurses and even jeopardize the safety of patients. Although the contributors of sleep quality in nurses have been previously studied, the direct and indirect effects of modifiable work-related predictors remain uncertain. Purpose: The study was designed to explore the direct and indirect effects of modifiable work-related factors on sleep quality in Chinese nurses. Methods: A multistage sampling method was employed in this cross-sectional study to recruit 923 participants. An evidence-based predicting model was postulated and then subsequently tested and optimized using path analysis. Results: The final model fit the data well, with the involved predictors accounting for 34.1% of the variance in sleep quality of the participants. Shift work, job demands, exposure to hazards in work environments, chronic fatigue, and inter-shift recovery were identified as direct predictors, while whereas job satisfaction, job control, support at work, and acute fatigue were identified as indirect predictors. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Sleep quality in Chinese nurses is influenced directly and indirectly by various modifiable work-related factors. Interventions such as adjusting work shifts and reducing job burdens should be prioritized by administrative staff to ensure the sleep quality and clinical performance of Chinese nurses and to subsequently improve nursing care quality.起始頁-結束頁：1-10-006資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000031912篇名：Evaluating the Effectiveness of Interventions on Increasing Participation in Cervical Cancer Screening作者：Gonul KURT;Aygul AKYUZ關鍵字：cervical cancer screening;home visit;invitation;cervical cancer;Pap smear test期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Although cervical cancer is highly preventable through regular screenings using Pap smear or human papillomavirus-deoxyribonucleic acid tests, cervical cancer remains a prevalent women's health issue across the world. Therefore, encouraging women to screen for cervical cancer is very important for the early detection of cervical cancer. Purpose: The purposes of this study were to (1) assess the effectiveness of three interventions that are typically used to increase the uptake of cervical cancer screening during home visits and (2) determine the participation rate in cervical cancer screenings after invitation, the health promotion perceptions, and the cervical cancer and screening-related knowledge of women. The three interventions noted in Purpose 1 were one-on-one training accompanied by an educational brochure, providing the educational brochure only, and giving an invitation without any relevant information. Methods: This interventional study was conducted on women who were between the ages of 30 and 65 years in three Turkish provinces (Ankara, Malatya, and Trabzon). Five hundred twenty home visits were made, and 356 women who did not have a Pap smear test within the previous year were invited for cervical cancer screening. Women were randomized into one of three intervention groups, and the participants in each group were invited to attend a national cervical cancer screening program and to undergo a cervical cancer screening using the related intervention type. Results: The results showed that the interventions used during home visits and knowledge were effective in encouraging women to participate in cervical cancer screening. It was determined that the participants who had received one-on-one training accompanied by an educational brochure had a higher cervical cancer screening rate than their peers who were offered a brochure only or a verbal invitation only. Conclusions: Invitations to screenings that are made by providing training accompanied with a brochure were found to be effective in increasing the participation of women in cervical cancer screening.起始頁-結束頁：1-11-002資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000031713篇名：Tobacco Control in Cancer Care作者：Shu-Ching CHEN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：1-2-001資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000035314篇名：Chinese Version of the Assessment of Survivor Concerns Scale for Gynecological Cancer Survivors: A Psychometric Study in Taiwan作者：Li-Yun TSAI;Kung-Liahng WANG;Jung-Mei TSAI;Shiow-Luan TSAY關鍵字：gynecological cancer survivors;fear of cancer recurrence;assessment of survivor concerns;quality of life;confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Most gynecological cancer survivors outlive the acute stage, and many reach permanent survival. However, the fear of cancer recurrence (FCR) is stressful and affects quality of life. Purpose: This study was designed to validate a Chinese version of the Assessment of Survivor Concerns (ASC) questionnaire in terms of its ability to assess FCR in gynecological cancer survivors. Methods: A two-stage study procedure was employed. The first stage involved the translation of the ASC questionnaire from English into Chinese using the methods proposed by Guillemin, which include translation, back-translation, consensus meetings, and a trial of potential users. In the second stage, a pilot study was completed with 37 gynecological cancer survivors followed by a psychometric property study with 287 gynecological cancer survivors. Construct validity was determined using confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) with structural equation modeling. Convergent validity was determined using composite reliability and the average variance extracted values of the ASC model. Discriminant validity was determined by comparing the model fitness of the ASC model against the model fitness of a one-construct model. Concurrent criterion validity was assessed using the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer's Quality-of-Life Questionnaire Core 30 as the auxiliary instrument. Reliability was determined by measuring the internal consistency reliability using Cronbach's α in addition to the 3-week test-retest reliability with a 95% confidence interval of the intraclass correlation coefficient. Results: The process of translation and back-translation was performed to ensure the conceptual equivalence of the Chinese version with the original ASC questionnaire. For CFA, the fit indices of the ASC model (X^2 = 9.87, p ＞ .05; root mean square error of approximation = .03. comparative fit index = 1, nonnormed fit index = 1) indicated appropriate model fitness. For convergent validity, the composite reliability and average variance extracted values of the ASC model were satisfactory. For discriminant validity, the model fitness of the ASC model was significantly improved over the one-construct model. For concurrent criterion validity, the ASC scores correlated negatively with the scores of the global quality of life and the five functions (physical, role, cognition, emotions, and social) of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer's Quality-of-Life Questionnaire Core 30, as hypothesized. For reliability, the Cronbach's α and the 95% confidence interval of intraclass correlation coefficient for the ASC model were .91 and [.18, .68], respectively. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The Chinese version of the ASC questionnaire is a valid and reliable instrument that is suitable for assessing FCR in gynecological cancer survivors in clinical and research settings.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-003資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000032315篇名：Decisional Balance for Insulin Injection: Scale Development and Psychometric Testing作者：Hui-Chun HSU;Shi-Yu CHEN;Yu-Chi HUANG;Ruey-Hsia WANG;Yau-Jiunn LEE;Ling-Wang AN關鍵字：insulin injection;decisional balance;transtheoretical model;type 2 diabetes mellitus期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Insulin-naive patients are often reluctant to receive insulin treatment, and even insulin-treated patients frequently have poor rates of adherence to their prescribed insulin injection regimes. Assessing attitudes toward insulin injection may help in the design of interventions that improve the insulin injection behaviors of patients with type 2 diabetes (T2DM). The concept of decisional balance has been associated with behavior in many studies and may be useful in assessing the attitude of patients with T2DM toward insulin injection. Decisional balance for insulin injection (DBII) has not been widely assessed in patients with T2DM. Purpose: The aim of this study was to develop an insulin injection (DBII) scale that is valid for insulin-naive and insulin-treated patients and to test the psychometric characteristics of this scale based on the concept of decisional balance. Methods: This cross-sectional study administered an 18-item DBII scale, including pro and con subscales, to 95 insulin-naive and 237 insulin-treated patients in Taiwan. The decisional balance score was calculated as the mean score of the pro subscale minus the mean score of the con subscale. Construct validity was examined using exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis; concurrent validity was assessed by examining the association between the score of the DBII scale and the stages of behavioral change and of hemoglobin A1 c for, respectively, insulin-naive patients and insulin-treated patients; and reliability was assessed using internal consistency and test- retest reliability. Results: A 13-item DBII scale supported by exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis was developed. The stages of behavioral change and hemoglobin A1 c levels were found to be significantly associated with the scores of decisional balance of the 13-item DBII scale for both insulin-naive and insulin-treated patients. The Cronbach's α ranged between .78 and .92. Conclusions: The 13-item DBII scale is appropriately short and possesses satisfactory validity and reliability for both insulin-naive and insulin-treated patients with T2DM. Healthcare providers may use this scale as a checklist to guide clinical discussions related to insulin therapy with both insulin-naive and insulin-treated patients with T2DM across time.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-004資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000031616篇名：The Relationship Between Work Environment Satisfaction and Retention Intention Among Nursing Administrators in Taiwan作者：Chiou-Fen LIN;Chung-I HUANG;Che-Ming YANG;Meei-Shiow LU關鍵字：nursing administrator;work environment satisfaction;intention to stay期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Nursing administrators are essential to ensuring the quality of healthcare provided in hospitals. The nursing manpower shortage that has affected hospitals in Taiwan over the past decade has weighed particularly heavily on nursing administrators, who are expected to maintain high levels of nursing care quality in frequently understaffed healthcare settings. Purpose: The objective of this study was to explore the relationship between work environment satisfaction and nursing administrator retention in Taiwan. Methods: This study used a cross-sectional, questionnaire-based survey to collect data from a sample population of nursing administrators. A set of indicators of quality nursing work environments was developed and included in the questionnaire. A total of 1,829 questionnaires were distributed, and the effective response rate was 95.57%. Results: The average overall rate of satisfaction with the current work environment across all domains was 3.59 (SD = 0.61). The highest level of satisfaction was found in the domain of safe practice environment (M = 3.83, SD = 0.70), and the lowest was found in the domain of informatics (M = 3.38, SD = 0.91). Length of administrative position tenure was significantly correlated with retention. Each of the eight domains significantly influenced retention. The domain of support and caring was the most significant predictor of nursing administrator retention. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Length of administrator position tenure was significantly correlated with nursing administrator retention. Moreover, intention to stay among junior administrators was particularly affected by the support and caring domain. Therefore, it is recommended that nursing departments develop effective strategies to assist and encourage junior administrators to strengthen their career prospects and satisfaction.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-005資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000031217篇名：Nursing Students' Perceptions of Nursing Metaparadigms: A Phenomenological Study作者：Ayse DELIKTAS;Oznur KORUKCU;Ruveyde AYDIN;Kamile KABUKCUOGLU關鍵字：health;nursing;metaparadigm;paradigm;students期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The paradigm is a vital concept steering the development of a scientific discipline. Paradigms that shape the education, research, and practice steps of a discipline are defined as metaparadigms. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore the perception of nursing students regarding metaparadigms in nursing at Akdeniz University in Antalya, Turkey. Methods: This was designed as a descriptive phenomenological study, and data were collected from 13 fourth-year students who were chosen via a purposeful sampling method and interviewed face-to-face using a semistructured format. Data were analyzed using the data analysis steps of Giorgi, who is an expert in descriptive phenomenological studies. Results: Most of the participants in this study associated nursing with humanism. Some of the participants stated that a fundamental building block of the nursing profession is conscience, whereas others stated that nursing is a way to touch people's lives and is now regarded as a professional practice. It has been reported that students have difficulties identifying metaparadigms in nursing and that they believe that human beings have the potential to widen their horizons with wisdom and social skills. According to the participants, the health metaparadigm refers to the harmony between human beings and their environment and to the autonomy of the individual. Moreover, the participants emphasized the well-being of individuals. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The participants in this study characterized humans with well-being, transcendence, adaptation and interaction skills with their environment, and harmony beyond physiological mechanisms, which was considered to be promising for the perception of future nurses. It is recommended for nursing educators to enable their students to raise their professional awareness and to internalize professional values.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-007資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000031118篇名：Effects of Smoking and Physical Activity on the Pulmonary Function of Young University Nursing Students in Caceres (Spain)作者：Sergio RICO-MARTIN;Jorge M. DE NICOLAS-JIMENEZ;Mariana MARTINEZ-ALVAREZ;Sergio CORDOVILLA-GUARDIA;Esperanza SANTANO-MOGENA;Julian F. CALDERON-GARCIA關鍵字：pulmonary function;smokers;physical activity;young;nursing students期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The simultaneous effect of physical activity (PA) and smoking on pulmonary function in young people remains unclear. Propose: The aim of this study was to determine the influence of smoking and PA on pulmonary function in young university students in Caceres, Spain. Methods: A sample of 120 young nursing students was studied (60 smokers and 60 nonsmokers). All subjects underwent spirometry with a COPD-6 portable device, and their level of PA was quantified using the International Physical Activity Questionnaire. The influence of PA and smoking on pulmonary function was determined by comparing hypotheses. Results: Significant differences were observed between smokers and nonsmokers in terms of percent forced expiratory volume in 1 second, percent forced expiratory volume in 6 seconds, lung age, and the difference between lung age and chronological age (LA-CA) in those who practiced mild PA. In the subjects who performed moderate and vigorous PA, these differences were not noted. In the intragroup analysis, significant differences were observed in smokers in terms of percent forced expiratory volume in 1 second, percent forced expiratory volume in 6 seconds, lung age, and LA-CA; however, in the control group, differences were only observed in terms of lung age and LA-CA. These findings were confirmed in the multivariate analysis. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Our findings confirmed a deterioration in pulmonary function in smokers who did not perform moderate or vigorous PA. The level of PA performed was positively related to pulmonary function in smokers, whereas in nonsmokers, improvements were only significant in LA-CA.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-008資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000032219篇名：An Exploration of Factors Related to Quality of Life in Indonesian Care Workers in Home-Based Care Settings作者：Shu-Fen LO;Li-Jung CHANG;Mark HAYTER;An-Chi O YANG關鍵字：Indonesian care workers;quality of life;stress perception;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Indonesians constituted 79% of foreign care workers for long-term care in Taiwan in 2015. Therefore, it is crucial to explore the effect of work stress and quality of life (QoL) on this population. Purpose: This study aims to explore stress levels, social support requirements, and perceived QoL among Indonesian care workers (ICWs) who work in home care settings. Methods: A cross-sectional design was used. Data were collected between 2014 and 2016 from a convenience sample of ICWs working in eastern Taiwan using a self-administered questionnaire that comprised the Stress Perception Scale (SPS), Social Support Scale (SSS), and World Health Organization Quality of Life-Brief scale. One hundred fifty-seven valid questionnaires were collected. The response rate was 80.51%. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, one-way analysis of variance, Pearson's correlation coefficient, and multiple regression analysis. Results: The results found that the average SPS of the sample was 70.50, with low QoL scores and requirements for more social support. In addition, significant and positive correlations were found between QoL and SPS, SSS, duration of patient care, and hours of care per week. Stepwise regression analysis showed that the most predictive variables for QoL were time spent caring, preservice training, psychological stress, and emotional support, which together accounted for 60.9% of the total variance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study facilitated understanding of the stress on ICWs and the impact of social support on their QoL. The findings suggest that new immigrants in Taiwan should be introduced to foreign care workers or nursing attendants. Moreover, long-term-care-related teachers should work with homecare institutions or agencies to develop a teaching model for innovative care skills to relieve the perceived stress of ICWs.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-009資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000031420篇名：What Are the Barriers at Home and School to Healthy Eating?: Overweight/Obese Child and Parent Perspectives作者：Hee Soon KIM;Jiyoung PARK;Yumi MA;Mihae IM關鍵字：children;feeding behavior;focus groups;pediatric obesity;South Korea期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Most studies that have investigated factors influencing eating habits among obese children have focused mainly on individual or interpersonal factors and applied quantitative research methods. Purpose: This study was undertaken to identify the barriers in home and school settings that hamper healthy eating in overweight and obese children in South Korea. Methods: Focus group interviews were conducted with 15 overweight/obese children and 15 parents. A standard manual with open-ended questions was developed. Content analysis was used to identify key findings. Results: Participants were aware of the importance of home and school environments in shaping children's eating habits. Five major barriers, respectively, at home and at school emerged from the data. At home, the food preferences of parents affected the eating habits of their children. Moreover, parents worried about providing differentiated diets for siblings and about the permissiveness of grandparents toward grandsons. Furthermore, working parents preferred easy-to-prepare instant foods and said that their children ate overly quickly. At school, children cited time pressures, poor cafeteria environments, and ineffective nutrition education as barriers, whereas parents worried about inconsistent management by teachers and the unsafe food environment around the school. Conclusions: These environment-related barriers may be resolved through changes in the behavior of children, parents, and teachers as well as through the continued efforts of schools, community stakeholders, and policymakers, all of whose cooperation is essential to fostering a healthy food environment for children.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-010資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000032101篇名：Evidence-Based Practice and Nursing Research作者：Li-Yin CHIEN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：1-1-001資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003462篇名：Evidence-Based Practice Curriculum Development for Undergraduate Nursing Students: The Preliminary Results of an Action Research Study in Taiwan作者：Hsiao-Ying HUNG;Yu-Wen WANG;Jui-Ying FENG;Chi-Jane WANG;Esther Ching-Lan LIN;Ying-Ju CHANG關鍵字：baccalaureate nursing education;curriculum design;evidence-based practice;teaching strategies;undergraduate nursing students期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Equipping undergraduate nursing students with sufficient competence in evidence-based practice (EBP) is essential to meeting future practice needs. Integrating necessary EBP knowledge and skills systematically into the formal curriculum allows students to obtain better learning experience and outcomes. However, in Taiwan, a systematic nursing curriculum that integrates EBP concepts across the 4-year nursing baccalaureate program has not yet been developed. Moreover, engaging students in the clinical application of evidence remains a key challenge facing nursing education. Purpose: This study aimed to construct an EBP undergraduate nursing curriculum and develop clinical scenarios that support EBP teaching. Methods: Three cycles of action research, incorporating both focus group interviews and questionnaire surveys, were applied to construct and evaluate the appropriateness and feasibility of the EBP nursing curriculum and relevant teaching strategies. Results: An EBP nursing curriculum was constructed that integrates the three levels of learning objectives and corresponding learning outcomes, teaching content, and learning activities. Scenario activities were developed to familiarize students with the EBP process and to maximize their learning with regard to the clinical application of evidence. Next, a preliminary evaluation showed the appropriateness and feasibility of the developed curriculum, which was shown to foster the EBP competency of students and increase their confidence and positive attitudes toward EBP. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: A systematic EBP bachelor nursing curriculum with effective pedagogical strategies was developed. The associated process and the elicited information may offer a valuable reference for other nursing schools.起始頁-結束頁：1-11-002資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002983篇名：Nonadherence in Hemodialysis Patients and Related Factors: A Multicenter Study作者：Nurten OZEN;Fatma Ilknur CINAR;Dilek ASKIN;Dilek MUT;Turker TURKER關鍵字：nonadherence;treatment;hemodialysis;dietary and fluid restrictions;medication期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Nonadherence to dietary and fluid restrictions, hemodialysis (HD), and medication treatment has been shown to increase the risks of hospitalization and mortality significantly. Sociodemographic and biochemical parameters as well as psychosocial conditions such as depression and anxiety are known to affect nonadherence in HD patients. However, evidence related to the relative importance and actual impact of these factors varies among studies. Purpose: The aim of this study was to identify the factors that affect nonadherence to dietary and fluid restrictions, HD, and medication treatment. Methods: This descriptive study was conducted on 274 patients who were being treated at four HD centers in Turkey. The parameters used to determine nonadherence to dialysis treatment were as follows: skipping multiple dialysis sessions during the most recent 1-month period, shortening a dialysis session by more than 10 minutes during the most recent 1-month period, and Kt/V ＜ 1.4. The parameters used to determine nonadherence to dietary and fluid restriction were as follows: serum phosphorus level ＞ 7.5 mg/dl, predialysis serum potassium level ＞ 6.0 mEq/L, and interdialytic weight gain ＞ 5.7% of body weight. The Morisky Green Levine Medication Adherence Scale was performed to determine nonadherence to medication treatment. A patient was classified as nonadherent if he or she did not adhere to one or more of these indices. The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale was used to identify patient risk in terms of anxiety and depression. Logistic regression was used to determine the predictors of nonadherence. Results: The nonadherence rate was 39.1% for dietary and fluid restrictions, 33.6% for HD, and 20.1% for medication. The risk of nonadherence to dietary and fluid restriction was found to be 4.337 times higher in high school graduates (95% CI [1.502, 12.754], p = .007). The risk of nonadherence to HD treatment was 2.074 times higher in men (95% CI [1.213, 3.546], p = .008) and 2.591 times higher in patients with a central venous catheter (95% CI [1.171, 5.733], p = .019). Longer duration in HD resulted in 0.992 times decrease in risk of nonadherence to treatment (95% CI [0.986, 0.998], p = .005). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Educational status, being male, having a central venous catheter, and having a short HD duration were found to be risk factors for nonadherence. Nurses must consider the patient's adherence to the dietary and fluid restrictions, HD, and medication treatment at each visit.起始頁-結束頁：1-11-008資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003094篇名：Factors Associated With Depressive Symptoms in Female Victims of Intimate Partner Violence in Southern Taiwan作者：Hsiu-Fen HSIEH;Bih-Ching SHU關鍵字：intimate partner violence;physically abused women;personality;depressive symptoms期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Intimate partner violence (IPV) is known to cause physical suffering and psychological problems, which burden society. In addition, IPV-related psychological problems such as depressive symptoms may lead to disabilities, chronic mental illness, and an increased risk of suicide. Purpose: This study was designed to explore the factors associated with depressive symptoms in women who were physically abused by intimate partners. Methods: This cross-sectional study recruited 72 physically abused women from two domestic violence prevention centers in southern Taiwan. The questionnaires that were used to collect data included the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire, the Conflict Tactic Scale, and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale. Results: Sixty-six of the participants (91.67%) met the inclusion criteria and completed all questionnaires. Fifty-five (83.3%) of the participants were found to have depressive symptoms. Depressive symptoms were positively associated in this sample with younger age, a lower level of extraversion, and a higher level of neuroticism. These three factors explained 59.5% of the total variance in depressive symptoms. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Youth and neuroticism were found to be significant risk factors for developing depressive symptoms in female victims of IPV, whereas extraversion was found to be a related protective factor. The results of this study indicate that clinical workers should provide female victims of IPV, especially relatively young victims, with services that help ameliorate neuroticism to reduce the risk of depressive symptoms.起始頁-結束頁：1-6-005資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003035篇名：Motivation to Care: A Qualitative Study on Iranian Nurses作者：Neda ASADI;Robabeh MEMARIAN;Zohreh VANAKI關鍵字：nursing;motivation;quality care期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The performance of nurses, which is rooted in personal motivation, determines the quality of care. Therefore, it is important that nurses are motivated to provide high-quality care. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore the factors that affect caring motivation from the perspectives of nurses in Iran. Methods: This was a qualitative study. Seventeen nurses were interviewed using a semistructured, in-depth interview method. The interviews were recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed using content analysis. Results: Data analysis led to the identification of the two themes of (a) self-valuation and (b) providing beneficial care. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings of this study increase scholarly understanding of the caring motivations of nurses. These motivations may be used in related programs by senior nursing managers to improve the quality of nursing care.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-006資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002946篇名：The Relationship Between Critical Thinking Skills and Learning Styles and Academic Achievement of Nursing Students作者：Fatemeh SHIRAZI;Shiva HEIDARI關鍵字：academic achievement;critical thinking skills;learning styles;nursing student期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Academic achievement is one of the most important indicators in evaluating education. Various factors are known to affect the academic achievement of students. Purpose: This study was performed to assess the relationship between critical thinking skills and learning styles and the academic achievement of nursing students. Methods: In this cross-sectional study, 139 sophomores to senior-year nursing students were selected using a simple random sampling method. The data were gathered using a three-part questionnaire that included a demographic questionnaire, the Kolb's Learning Style Standard Questionnaire, and the California Critical Thinking Skills Questionnaire. The previous semester's grade point average of the students was considered as a measure of academic achievement. The data were analyzed using descriptive and analytical statistics in SPSS 20. Results: The mean score for critical thinking skills was 6.75 ± 2.16, and the highest and lowest scores among the critical thinking subscales related to the evaluation and analysis subscales, respectively. No relationship between critical thinking and academic achievement was identified. ”Diverging” was the most common learning style. The highest mean level of academic achievement was earned by those students who adopted the ”accommodating” style of learning. A significant relationship was found between learning style and academic achievement (p ＜ .001). Conclusions: According to the findings, the critical thinking skills score of students was unacceptably low. Therefore, it is essential to pay more attention to improving critical thinking in academic lesson planning. As a significant relationship was found between learning style and academic achievement, it is suggested that instructors consider the dominant style of each class in lesson planning and use proper teaching methods that take into consideration the dominant style.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-010資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003077篇名：The Feasibility Study of a Revised Standard Care Procedure on the Capacity of Nasogastric Tube Placement Verification Among Critical Care Nurses作者：Feng-Huang YANG;Feng-Yu LIN;Yueh-Juen HWU關鍵字：critical care;intervention study;nasogastric tube;placement verification期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Evidence-based studies propose that the aspirate pH test may be easily and reliably conducted to verify the proper placement of nasogastric tubes (NGTs). Nurses rarely implement this procedure because of the lack of related knowledge. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore the feasibility of implementing a revised standard care procedure to enhance nurses' ability to verify placement of the NGT. Methods: his study used a quasi-experimental, longitudinal research design. Nurses from two intensive care units were randomly assigned to the experimental group (n = 35) and the control group (n = 31). A revised standard-of-care procedure to confirm the proper placement of an NGT was incorporated into a slideshow presentation, a printed leaflet, and an audit checklist. The experimental group received continuous education and individual teaching on the revised standard-of-care procedure, whereas the control group did not receive additional education and continued to provide conventional care. The study gathered data using scales designed to address knowledge of and attitudes toward verification of NGT placement and the checklist for auditing the NGT care procedure. Scales were implemented before and after the practice program was conducted, in Months 1, 2, and 3, to evaluate the feasibility of the developed improvement measures. Results: This study found significant improvements in the experimental group in terms of knowledge regarding NGT placement verification and the NGT care auditing procedure. The positive improvement of the intervention on the NGT care auditing procedure remained for at least 3 months after the end of the intervention. Conclusions: The findings suggest that using an aspirate pH test is a feasible approach to verify NGT placement in critical care units, a crucial aspect of care necessary to promote patient safety and quality of care.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-003資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003028篇名：Psychometric Testing of the Turkish Version of the Stroke Self-Efficacy Questionnaire作者：Gulcihan ARKAN;Ayse BESER;Meryem OZTURK HANEY;Vesile OZTURK關鍵字：stroke;self-efficacy;Rasch analysis;psychometric testing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: When stroke survivors return to their lives in society, they often face issues such as physical or cognitive impairment, dependence on others, social isolation, and reduced self-esteem, which may lead to disastrous consequences in patients' self-perceived self-efficacy and self-confidence in everyday life. Self-efficacy plays an important role in the well-being of stroke patients. Accurate assessment of the stroke patients' self-efficacy by health professionals is critical to obtaining data regarding their functioning levels. Purpose: The aim of this study was to evaluate the psychometric properties of the Turkish version of the Stroke Self-Efficacy Questionnaire (T-SSEQ). Methods: A sample of 185 stroke patients (mean age=64.78 ± 10.7) was recruited from a university hospital in Izmir, Turkey. Data were collected between April and October 2016. Translation and back-translation processes were used to translate the T-SSEQ into Turkish. Data were analyzed using the Rasch partial credit model with the Winsteps program to investigate the response scale analysis, tests of fit to the model, unidimensionality, local dependency, item and person separation reliability, separation index, and differential item functioning. Results: The Rasch analysis showed goodness of fit for both the activity and self-management subscales. Moreover, both scales were identified as being unidimensional in structure. Furthermore, the participants were able to distinguish between the categories of the response options, and scale reliability was supported for both subscales using Rasch analyses. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: These results indicate that the T-SSEQ is acceptable for use with Turkish stroke patients in both practice and research settings. Furthermore, the questionnaire is suitable for nurses to use in designing interventions and evaluating stroke patients' self-efficacy in clinics, home care, and rehabilitation centers.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-007資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003089篇名：Validity and Reliability of a Chinese-Language Instrument for Continuous Assessment of Exercise Stages of Change in Adults作者：Shih-Hui CHEN;Hsiang-Ru LAI;Su-Ru CHEN;Pi-Chu LIN;Kuei-Ru CHOU;Pi-Hsia LEE關鍵字：instrument development;psychometric analysis;validity;reliability;exercise stages of change;continuous measurement期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Single- and five-item measures have been used prevalently to assess exercise stages of change. Few studies have investigated the development of instruments that are able to continuously measure exercise stages of change and have conducted associated psychometric analyses. Purpose: This study aimed to translate the original, English-language version of the University of Rhode Island Change Assessment-Exercise 2 (URICA-E2), a continuous exercise stages of change assessment instrument, into Chinese and then to test the validity and reliability of the translated version. Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted. Participants consisted of 325 adults from Taipei, Taiwan. The URICA-E2 was translated into Chinese using a standardized procedure. Psychometric analyses, including validity, reliability, and cluster analysis, of the Chinese-version instrument were conducted. Results: The content validity index was .987. Confirmatory factor analysis confirmed that the overall model fit was standardized, as the factor loadings of all of the items and the composite reliability and average variance extracted for the six exercise stages of change satisfied the convergent validity criteria. The average variance extracted for each construct of the stages of behavior change satisfied the discriminatory validity criteria. Values of Cronbach's α for the six exercise stages ranged from .80 to .94. The intraclass correlation coefficients for test–retest reliability after 2 weeks ranged between .74 and .87. Conclusions: The Chinese-language version of the URICA-E2 developed in this study exhibited excellent validity and reliability. This instrument may be used by healthcare professionals and the academic community to effectively and continuously measure the intentions and attitudes of adults at various exercise stages of change and to guide the provision of appropriate interventions.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-009資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000031010篇名：Smoking Status Among Patients With Newly Diagnosed Lung Cancer in Taiwan作者：Chia-Chen YANG;Chien-Ying LIU;Kwua-Yun WANG;Fur-HsingWEN;Yu-Chin LEE;Mei-Ling CHEN關鍵字：continued smoking;exercise;lung cancer;self-efficacy;smoking cessation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Continued smoking after receiving a diagnosis of cancer seriously affects disease prognosis and survival. The prevalence and risk factors of continued smoking among patients with newly diagnosed lung cancer are unknown in Taiwan. Purpose: The aims of this study were to assess the smoking status of patients with newly diagnosed lung cancer and to identify the characteristics that are associated with different smoking statuses. Methods: Baseline data of a longitudinal study on smoking behaviors after lung cancer diagnosis were analyzed in this study. Patients were consecutively recruited from three medical centers in northern Taiwan. A structured questionnaire and medical chart reviews were used to collect data. Multinomial logistic regression analysis was used to examine the factors associated with continuing to smoke after being diagnosed with lung cancer. Results: Among the 406 patients with newly diagnosed lung cancer who were recruited, 47.0% were never-smokers and 53.0% were ever-smokers. Among the second group, 38% were former smokers, 18% were recent quitters, and 44% were current smokers. Compared with former smokers, current smokers were more likely to be younger (OR = 1.05), to not exercise regularly (OR=2.74), to currently live with smokers (OR= 2.48), and to have lower self-efficacy for refusing to smoke (OR = 0.95). Compared with recent quitters, current smokers were more likely to have lower self-efficacy for refusing to smoke. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: A significant proportion of ever-smoker lung cancer patients in Taiwan will continue to smoke after receiving their diagnosis. Variables known to modify the risk factors associated with continued smoking such as regular exercise and better refusal self-efficacy should be considered and incorporated into future smoking cessation programs for patients with lung cancer.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-004資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000029311篇名：Maintaining and Improving Psychological Well-Being作者：Yea-Ing Lotus SHYU期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：1-1-001資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000033312篇名：The Relationship Between the Quality of Work and Organizational Commitment of Prison Nurses作者：Ayfer KARAASLAN;Manar ASLAN關鍵字：prison nurse;work-related quality of life;organizational commitment期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Nurses working in prisons are exposed to security problems while serving those who may be uninterested in their own healthcare, face high risks of drug and alcohol addiction, and may have aggressive personalities. For this reason, nurses working in prisons may have more problems with work-related quality of life than their non-prison-nurse peers. Purpose: This descriptive research study was conducted to evaluate the work-related quality of life and organizational commitment of nurses who work at prisons and detention centers. Methods: According to 2015 data, approximately 513 nurses currently work in prisons in Turkey. The study group consisted of 224 nurses who currently work in prisons or detention centers. The data were collected by sending a created link address to the e-mail addresses of nurses who work in these facilities. A 13-item sociodemographic information form, including a demographics datasheet, a work-related quality of life scale, and an organizational commitment scale, was used to collect data. Results: The participants reported a moderate level of work-related quality of life and organizational commitment. Moreover, work-related quality of life was shown to affect organizational commitment, with 20% of the total variance in organizational commitment explained by work-related quality of life. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study supports that work-related quality of life affects organizational commitment positively. Therefore, regulating working conditions by taking into consideration employee security will positively affect job satisfaction in terms of both the institution and the employee. Moreover, as nurses do not only work in hospitals, taking this action should also work in different settings. Administrators should ensure the work-related quality of life of the prison nurses by understanding the difficulties of prison nursing.起始頁-結束頁：1-10-007資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000028613篇名：Frail Phenotype and Disability Prediction in Community-Dwelling Older People: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies作者：Shu-Fang CHANG;Chih-Ling CHENG;Hsiang-Chun LIN關鍵字：frailty;disability;systematic review;meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The World Health Organization has identified frailty as a crucial factor affecting successful aging. Systematic literature reviews have yet to focus on the relationship between stages of frailty and disability in community-dwelling older adults. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationships between various frailty types and disability in community-dwelling older adults and to explore how various frailty criteria have been used to assess disability in this population. Methods: A systematic literature review and meta-analysis were conducted on articles from the following databases: Cochrane Library, CINAHL, PubMed, and Ovid. Database search criteria included articles that were published between January 2001 and July 2017 and study samples that included community-dwelling adults aged 60 years and older. We excluded studies that were conducted in institutions or hospitals and experimental studies on frailty. Two reviewers independently assessed eligibility and extracted data. A random-effects model was used to analyze the literature and to calculate the pooled disability of frailty. Results: In total, nine studies with a total sample of 32,998 participants that recorded 8,666 disabilities and a mean follow-up time of 30.4 months (SD = 29.26) were pooled for the meta analysis. Using various indicators to predict the risk of disability compared with robust older adults, those with frailty faced a higher risk of disability, followed by older adults at risk of frailty. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Frailty is a crucial health consideration among older adults. Those who are frail have the highest relative risk of disability, followed by those at risk of frailty. Early assessment of frailty may effectively prevent the occurrence of frailty-induced disability in older adults.起始頁-結束頁：1-10-010資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000029914篇名：Comparisons of Health Promoting Behavior, Depression, and Life Satisfaction Between Older Adults in Rural Areas in South Korea Living in Group Homes and at Home作者：Sohyune R. SOK;Bo Kyeong CHEON;Min Kyung GU;Ok Sun KIM關鍵字：aged;group homes;health promoting behavior;depression;life satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: In South Korea, population aging is advancing at a more rapid rate in rural areas than urban areas, leading to a particularly high percentage of rural-dwelling older adults. Purpose: The aim of this study was to examine and compare health promoting behaviors, depression, and life satisfaction between rural-dwelling older adults who live, respectively, in group homes and at home. Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study design was employed. Study participants included 160 older adults aged 65 years and older who were living in group homes (n = 80) and at home (n = 80) in Gyeonggi province, South Korea. The Health Promotion Lifestyle Profile-II was used to examine health promoting behaviors, the Korean Geriatric Depression Screening Scale was used to examine depression, and the Life Satisfaction Index was used to examine life satisfaction. Data were analyzed using SPSS Version 21.0. Results: The data showed significant differences between the two groups in terms of health promoting behaviors (t = -9.035, p ＜ .001), depression (t = 20.861, p ＜ .001), and life satisfaction (t = -12.153, p ＜ .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The mean scores for health promotion behaviors and life satisfaction were higher, and the mean score for depression was lower in the group-home group than the at-home group. The findings from this study may be employed as basic data for establishing residence-appropriate nursing intervention protocols for older adults living in rural areas.起始頁-結束頁：1-11-003資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000029015篇名：Alcohol Consumption as a Moderator of Anxiety and Sleep Quality作者：Ke-Hsin CHUEH;Christian GUILLEMINAULT;Chia-Mo LIN關鍵字：anxiety;daily alcohol consumption;poor sleep;sleep quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Although people who sleep poorly may attempt to relieve anxiety for better sleep quality, whether daily alcohol consumption is a factor that moderates anxiety and sleep disturbance is not known. Purpose: The aim of the study was to explore (a) the association between anxiety and sleep quality and (b) whether daily alcohol consumption acted as a moderator between anxiety and sleep quality in those who reported sleeping poorly. Methods: Eighty-four participants aged 20-80 years who reported poor sleep (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index ＞ 5) in northern Taiwan were enrolled in this cross-sectional study. A structured questionnaire covering demographics (including daily alcohol consumption), level of anxiety, level of depression, and perceived sleep quality was used to collect data. Results: The participants were mostly women (72.6%). The mean age was 41.81 (SD = 12.62) years; 51.2%, 19.0%, 13.1%, and 14.3%, respectively, had minimal, mild, moderate, and severe anxiety. After adjusting for factors related to sleep quality using multiple regression analysis, receiving sleep therapy, consuming alcohol on a daily basis, and having anxiety were found to be predictors of poor sleep quality. Moreover, daily alcohol consumption was found to moderate the relationship between anxiety and sleep quality. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: People who sleep poorly should avoid misusing alcohol to self-treat poor sleep quality or anxiety and should instead utilize sleep hygiene education and mental healthcare. Daily alcohol consumption may be a moderator between anxiety status and sleep quality.起始頁-結束頁：1-6-005資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000030016篇名：Stress, Workplace Violence, and Burnout in Nurses Working in King Abdullah Medical City During Al-Hajj Season作者：Ahmad RAYAN;Mo'men SISAN;Omar BAKER關鍵字：stress;workplace violence;burnout;Hajj期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca, one of the largest mass gatherings in the world, is associated with various challenges for nurses. One of these challenges is increased levels of workplace violence. Therefore, handling and mitigating workplace violence against nurses during Hajj, when nurses face a higher risk of violence and most experience stress and burnout, is of particular importance. Purpose: The aims of this study were to identify the types and sources of workplace violence, examine the relationship between burnout in nurses and the variables of stress and workplace violence, and identify from the perspective of nurses measures to effectively handle and mitigate these issues during Hajj season. Methods: This study used a descriptive correlational design. A convenience sample of 118 nurses completed the Perceived Stress Scale, the Maslach Burnout Inventory, and the modified version of the Joint Programme on Workplace Violence in the Health Sector published by the International Labour Office in Geneva. Data analysis was done using an independent samples t test and Pearson product-moment correlation. Results: One hundred eighteen nurses completed the study. Over two thirds (65%) were female, and 56% reported experiencing at least one type of violence, of which bullying/ mobbing, racial harassment, threats, and physical violence accounted for 61%, 15%, 12%, and 12%, respectively. Nurse managers displayed violent behaviors against 54% of the participants. Participants reported high levels of stress and burnout. A positive relationship was found between stress and emotional exhaustion (r = .387, p ＜ .01). Providing effective security measures and staff training regarding how to deal with violence at the workplace were the main measures identified to help reduce workplace violence. Conclusions: Providing effective security measures and tailored intervention programs addressing how to deal with violence in the workplace may enable nurses to handle violent behaviors more effectively.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-008資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000029117篇名：Mediating Effects of Social Support on Depression and Suicidal Ideation in Older Korean Adults With Hypertension Who Live Alone作者：Eun Jeong NAM;Jong-Eun LEE關鍵字：older adult;living alone;depression;suicidal ideation;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Older adults who live alone are less physically and emotionally healthy and report higher levels of depression relative to those who do not live alone. Suicide is the most problematic health issue reported by older adults who live alone. In particular, vulnerable older adults who live alone experience difficulty obtaining self-care and medical services; therefore, early detection of depression is difficult, and there are few opportunities to implement suicide prevention strategies in this population. In addition, social support for depression is an important factor affecting illness and economic vulnerability in older adults who live alone. Purpose: This study aimed to examine the relationship between depression and suicidal ideation in vulnerable older Korean adults with hypertension and to explore the mediating effect of social support on this relationship. Methods: The study used a cross-sectional design. Vulnerable older adults who were 65 years old or older with hypertension and who received home visit services from a public health center were invited to participate. The participants completed structured questionnaires, including the 15-item Short-Form Geriatric Depression Scale, 12-item Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support, and 19-item Scale for Suicidal Ideation, and provided information regarding their demographic characteristics, health status, and economic status. Descriptive and correlation analyses were performed to examine the correlations among these variables. The three-step regression analysis method proposed by Baron and Kenny was used to examine the mediating effect of social support. Results: The mean depression, social support, and suicidal ideation scores of participants were 23.64 (± 2.04), 35.94 (± 15.40), and 7.80 (± 7.73), respectively. In addition, depression was negatively correlated with social support (r = -.27) and positively correlated with suicidal ideation (r = .21), whereas social support was negatively correlated with suicidal ideation (r = -.35). Social support mediated the relationship between depression and suicidal ideation (Z = 2.69). Conclusions: Social support was identified as an important variable for older adults with chronic illness who lived alone. Interventions that include social support hold the potential to reduce depression and suicidal ideation in this population.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-002資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000029218篇名：Investigation of the Experiences of Mothers Living Through Prenatal Loss Incidents: A Qualitative Study作者：Ruveyde AYDIN;Oznur KORUKCU;Kamile KABUKCUO<U+011E>LU關鍵字：termination;pregnancy loss;motherhood;abortion;Turkey期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Fetal death causes women to experience negative feelings after the loss. These lived experiences influence the future pregnancies and maternal health of women negatively. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the experiences of women whose pregnancies were terminated because of medical indications. Methods: A ”design for definitive status study” type of qualitative research design was used. Ten women who were hospitalized between April and July 2017 at the Akdeniz University Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology and had subsequently experienced pregnancy loss during their hospitalization were enrolled as participants. Thematic analysis was used to analyze the data. Results: The pregnancy loss experiences of participants were investigated under the five main themes of (a) lived experiences before the termination of pregnancy, (b) lived experiences after pregnancy termination, (c) willingness to see the baby after termination, (d) posttermination care requirements, and (e) physical condition of hospital rooms during hospitalization. The participants expressed feelings of hope, fear, and worry over being unsuccessful before fetal death and feelings of loneliness, disappointment, blame, and avoidance after fetal death. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: In the aftermath of fetal death, health professionals should use insightful and empathic communication skills to help mothers cope with their loss. In addition, some of the participants wanted to see their babies, and some did not. Thus, individualized care is very important for women who experience pregnancy loss.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-004資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000028919篇名：Using a Text Mining Approach to Explore the Recording Quality of a Nursing Record System作者：Hsiu-Mei CHANG;Ean-Weng HUANG;I-Ching HOU;Hsiu-Yun LIU;Fang-Shan LI;Shwu-Fen CHIOU關鍵字：nursing record;record quality;text mining期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Most nursing records in Taiwan have been computerized, resulting in a large amount of unstructured text data. The quality of these records has rarely been discussed. Purpose: This study used a text mining method to analyze the quality of a nursing record system to establish an auditing model and associated tools for nursing records, with the ultimate objective of improving the quality of electronic nursing records. Methods: This study utilized a retrospective method to collect the electronic nursing records of 6,277 patients who had been discharged from the internal medicine departments of a medical center in northern Taiwan from January to June 2014. SAS Enterprise Guide Version 6.1 and SAS Text Miner Version 13.2 software were used to perform text mining. Nursing experts were invited to examine the electronic nursing records. The text mining results were compared against a benchmark that was developed by the experts, and the efficiency of SAS Text Miner was examined using the criteria of specificity, sensitivity, and accuracy. Results: In this study, 27,356 nurse-formulated events were used in the analysis. The results of the nurse-formulated events showed an 8.08% similar error with system-formulated events, 29.72% were identified as necessary and appropriate names, 17.53% were retained, 10.15% involved error event names, and 34.52% were not classified. In this study, the sensitivity of SAS text mining in the training (testing) data set was 96% (95%), and the specificity and accuracy were both 99% (99%). Conclusions: The results of this study show that text mining is an effective approach to auditing the quality of electronic nursing records. SAS Text Miner software was shown to identify inappropriate nursing record content quickly and efficiently. Furthermore, the results of this study may be included in in-service education teaching materials to promote the writing of better nursing records to improve the quality of electronic nursing records.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-009資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000029520篇名：Predictors of Caregiver Burden in Caregivers of Bedridden Patients作者：Aysun BEKDEM<U+0130>R;Nesrin <U+0130>LHAN關鍵字：caregiving;caregiver burden;caregiver health;home care;nurse期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Caregivers are at risk of experiencing caregiver burden. It is therefore important to determine the caregiver burden of caregivers who provide care to bedridden patients and related factors. Purpose: The aim of this study was to determine the caregiver burden of caregivers who provide care to bedridden patients and the factors that impact this burden. Methods: This cross-sectional study was executed at a state hospital in Istanbul, Turkey, on bedridden patients registered in the home healthcare unit and their caregivers. During study period, the researchers made 312 visits to patients and their caregivers. A sociodemographic questionnaire, the Burden Interview, and the Katz Index of Independence in Activities of Daily Living were used to collect data. Descriptive statistics, an independent sample t test, one-way analysis of variance, and stepwise multiple regression analysis were used for data analysis. Results: The participants reported a moderate level of caregiver burden. Existing caregiver health problems, caregiver employment status, the ability of the caregiver to maintain his or her own good health, type of home, and the degree of patient dependence in terms of activities of daily living were each found to be significant predictors of caregiver burden. Conclusions/Implications of Practice: The support provided to caregivers by home healthcare units is important in terms of protecting the physical, mental, and social health conditions of caregivers and preventing the exacerbation of caregiver burden.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-006資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000029701篇名：Care Needs of Patients at the End of Life With a Noncancer Diagnosis Who Live at Home作者：Jiwon LEE;Younghye PARK;Kyounjoo LIM;Ari LEE;Hanul LEE;Jong-Eun LEE關鍵字：end-of-life care;care needs;chronic illness;home care nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: As the population ages, the prevalence of various chronic diseases increases. Palliative care for patients at the end of life with a noncancer diagnosis is currently limited because of the difficulties of demarcating the boundaries of the end-of-life care period and of determining the various care needs of patients at the end of life. Purpose: This study aimed to investigate the levels of importance and difficulty of the multidimensional care needs for patients with a noncancer diagnosis during various end-of-life stages. Methods: This study is a retrospective survey. Home health-care nurse specialists (HHNS) reviewed medical and nursing records and responded to a structured questionnaire. The caring experiences of HHNS with 115 patients, who were 40 years or older, had received home care nursing throughout the stable (between the onset of the end-of-life stage and 1 week before death) and near-death (1 week before death) stages at Seoul St. Mary's Hospital in Korea, and had died between September 1, 2014, and December 31, 2015, were analyzed. Results: The care needs of ”coordination among family or relatives” and ”support for fundamental needs” were more important in the stable stage than in the near-death stage. The care need of ”loss, grief care” was more important in the near-death stage than in the stable stage. The care need of ”physical symptoms management” was the most difficult to meet in both stages. Lower Palliative Performance Scale score was associated with a higher level of care need, particularly in the ”management of physical symptoms” and ”psychological support” realms in the stable stage and in the ”coordination among family or relatives” realm in both stages. Conclusions: End-of-life stage and initial score on the Palliative Performance Scale were found to have a significant influence on the multidimensional care needs of patients with a noncancer diagnosis. Thus, healthcare professionals should assess patient care needs according to disease trajectory to provide continuous and holistic care.起始頁-結束頁：1-11-002資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002772篇名：Development and Psychometric Testing of the Registered Nurses' Perceptions of Rewarding Scale作者：Jaana SEITOVIRTA;Aku-Ville LEHTIMAKI;Katri VEHVILAINEN-JULKUNEN;Lasse MITRONEN;Tarja KVIST關鍵字：registered nurse;reward;scale development;psychometric testing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Rewarding is a powerful way to recognize, manage, and retain staff. However, the perceptions of registered nurses (RNs) toward rewarding have not yet been extensively examined in nursing studies. It is important to identify optimal and potentially innovative ways to reward RNs by taking their perceptions into consideration. Purpose: The aim of this study was to develop and psychometrically test the Registered Nurses' Perceptions of Rewarding Scale (RNREWS). Methods: A cross-sectional study design was used. The scale was developed in the three phases of item generation, content validity testing, and examination of psychometric properties. Tests of the scale included evaluation of content validity, exploratory factor analysis, parallel analysis, and internal consistency tests using Cronbach's alpha. Survey participants included 402 RNs working in Finnish healthcare in Autumn 2015. Results: The RNREWS was found to have acceptable construct validity and good internal consistency. Exploratory factor analysis indicated that a 66-item scale with a 14-factor structure fits the data best. The final scale includes two subscales. The first is ”reward type preferences” with 61 items covering 13 factors, and the second is ”significance of rewarding” with five items covering one factor. The two sets of items accounted for 73.1% and 58.5% of the variance in responses and earned Cronbach's α values of .90 and .80, respectively. Conclusions: The RNREWS is a valid and reliable instrument for acquiring knowledge regarding the perspective of RNs on rewarding in the nursing context. The results enhance the understanding of the range of rewards that may be implemented in the nursing profession and may assist human resources managers and administrators to formulate effective reward systems for their RNs to improve the rewarding and retention of nursing professionals. However, cultural equivalence and linguistic differences must be considered if this scale is to be applied in other countries or environments.起始頁-結束頁：1-11-005資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002763篇名：Inequity of Palliative Care for Non-Cancer Patients作者：Mei-Ling CHEN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：1-2-001資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.00000000000003244篇名：The Nutritional and Social Contexts of Celiac Disease in Women: A Qualitative Study作者：Julian RODRIGUEZ-ALMAGRO;David RODRIGUEZ-ALMAGRO;MCarmen SOLANO-RUIZ;Jose SILES-GONZALEZ;Antonio HERNANDEZ-MARTINEZ關鍵字：chronic disease;celiac disease;illness experience;phenomenology research;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Previous studies have confirmed that women who are diagnosed with celiac disease report a lower quality of life than men who are diagnosed with the same illness. Purpose: This article describes the life experiences of women with celiac disease, especially those who adhere to a lifelong gluten-free diet. Methods: A phenomenological design based on the Giorgi method was used. Twenty-two women who were diagnosed with celiac disease and were between 16 and 75 years old completed the semistructured interviews. Results: The results showed that celiac disease has differing effects on the lives of women sufferers. The general feeling of being a woman with celiac disease was described as an effort toward achieving a normalized life. Four categories emerged from the results: feelings at diagnosis, limitations in daily life, social perceptions of the illness, and personal meanings of celiac disease. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study shows that celiac disease and its treatment reduce mental and social quality of life in women. Organizations and public institutions should carry out public awareness campaigns targeting celiac disease and promote quality of life in sufferers of celiac disease in general.起始頁-結束頁：1-6-009資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002845篇名：Validation of the Korean Version of the MacNew Heart Disease Health-Related Quality of Life Questionnaire作者：Kyoungrim KANG;Leila GHOLIZADEH;Sally C. INGLIS;Hae-Ra HAN關鍵字：health-related quality of life;MacNew;myocardial infarction;Korean;validation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is an important concept in patients with cardiac diseases, including myocardial infarction (MI). Disease-specific tools offer valuable insights into the impact of a disease on various aspects of a patient's life. Purpose: The aim of this study was to assess the psychometric properties of the Korean version of the MacNew Heart Disease HRQoL Questionnaire (Korean MacNew). Methods: One hundred thirty-six patients who had experienced MI about 3 months earlier were recruited from two tertiary hospitals in South Korea. The internal consistency and various types of validity of the Korean MacNew were assessed. Exploratory factor analysis with varimax rotation was performed to identify a better structure for this instrument. Results: The internal consistency of the Korean MacNew was established with Cronbach's alpha coefficients ranging from .88 to .93. Face validity and construct validity (both discriminant and concurrent) of the Korean MacNew were established. Strong positive correlations were found between the total Korean MacNew and the single-item global QoL scale (r = .73, p ＜ .001). As expected, the total Korean MacNew also had strong negative correlations with the Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale 21 (r = -.81, p ＜ .001) and the single-item fatigue scale (r = -.51, p ＜ .001). The outcomes of exploratory factor analysis showed a better result with the five-factor structure in the Korean MacNew. Conclusions: The Korean MacNew showed consistently acceptable psychometric properties of reliability and validity in patients with MI. Therefore, this instrument may be recommended for assessing the HRQoL of patients with MI in Korea. However, caution should be taken in using the subscale scores.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-003資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002746篇名：Psychosocial Predictors of Adjustment to Disability Among Patients With Breast Cancer: A Cross-Sectional Descriptive Study作者：Qingyue ZHANG;Shan XIAO;Ling YAN;Liyuan SUN;Yan WANG;Mengqiu HUANG關鍵字：acceptance of disability;breast cancer;psychophysical rehabilitation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Acceptance of disability relates to the process of adaptation, which reflects how the values of a patient change over time to accept herself or himself as an intrinsically worthy person. Acceptance of disability (AOD) plays an important role in the adjustment of persons with physical disability to their environment. However, no studies on the level of AOD in patients with breast cancer are available in the literature. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the significant factors that influence disability acceptance in Chinese women with breast cancer. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted on 292 patients with breast cancer between January and April 2017. Participants were assessed using the Acceptance of Disability Scale-Revised, Medical Coping Modes Questionnaire, Sense of Coherence Scale, Social Relational Quality Scale, and general information questionnaire. Multiple regression analysis was used to determine the factors associated with the level of disability acceptance. Results: The mean score for AOD was 79.14 and ranged from 32 to 128. Multiple regression analysis indicated that family intimacy, friendships, confrontation, manageability, family commitment, marital status, surgery, and acceptance-resignation significantly affected disability acceptance, explaining 49.1% of the total variance in disability acceptance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The participants had a moderate level of disability acceptance. Disability acceptance is an important factor in the psychosocial adaptation to cancer. Healthcare staff should pay special attention to low scores for this factor and explore the potential of psychological interventions to effectively reduce the posttraumatic stress response, encourage the adoption of positive coping strategies, and hasten disability acceptance and return to society.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-007資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002837篇名：Factors Influencing Self-Care Competence in Korean Women With Rheumatoid Arthritis作者：Sohyune R. SOK;Ji Sun RYU;Sun Hee PARK;Mi Hueon SEONG關鍵字：women;self-care;uncertainty;self-esteem;rheumatoid arthritis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The incidence of many chronic diseases is increasing rapidly in South Korea. Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic disease for which treatment by both doctors and long-term self-care by patients is deemed very important for successful disease management. Purpose: This study is designed to examine and identify the factors influencing self-care competence in Korean women with rheumatoid arthritis. Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive design was employed. Participants included 132 women aged 20 years or older who were visiting rheumatoid arthritis outpatient clinics at hospitals in Seoul and Gyeonggi-do, South Korea. Measures included a demographics form, Self-as-Carer Inventory, Korean Activities of Daily Living scale, Visual Analogue Scale, Mishel Uncertainty in Illness Scale-Community Form, and Self-esteem Scale. Results: The analyses illustrated the significance of the prediction model (F = 21.744, p ＜ .001). The value of the adjusted R^2 was set at .401, corresponding to 40.1% explanatory power.Uncertainty (β = -.43) and self-esteem (β= .26) were identified as having the most influence on self-care competence in Korean women with rheumatoid arthritis. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This cross-sectional study yielded preliminary evidence that nursing interventions that reduce uncertainty and improve self-esteem in Korean women with rheumatoid arthritis are necessary to promote the self-care competence of this vulnerable population. Health-care professionals should recognize uncertainty and self-esteem as factors that influence self-care competence in Korean women with rheumatoid arthritis.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-008資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002798篇名：Environment-Friendly Practices in Operating Rooms in Turkey作者：Yelda CANDAN DONMEZ;Arzu ASLAN;Meryem YAVUZ VAN GIERSBERGEN關鍵字：nursing;operating room;environment-friendly;greening;environmental health期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Environment-friendly practices refer to decreasing energy consumption, using resources carefully and sustainably, and reducing environmental pollution. An environment-friendly hospital is defined as a hospital where energy is saved, carbon emissions are decreased, and productivity and quality are increased. Operating rooms (ORs) account for most wastes generated daily by hospitals. Thus, adopting environment-friendly healthcare practices in ORs will have a positive impact on the environment. Purpose: The aim of this study was to identify and recommend environment-friendly practices that are feasible for implementation in ORs in Turkey. Methods: Data on the environment-friendly practices that are currently being practiced in the ORs of hospitals in Izmir Province were collected using face-to-face interviews with nurses who were in charge of ORs in Izmir Province. The interviews were conducted using an OR identification form and Greening the OR Checklist. The study population included all of the hospitals in Izmir Province, and the study sample included 18 ORs in the 11 hospitals that consented to take part in the research. Permission to conduct this research was obtained from the ethics committee of the nursing school as well as from the participating hospitals where the study was conducted. Results: The hospitals included in the study had, on average, 7.44 ± 7.32 ORs, each of which employed an average of 16.83 ± 17.16 nurses. Four fifths (83.3%) of the ORs always monitored their wastes, and 88.9% gave their batteries to recyclers. In addition, 72.2% renewed their surgical sets to reduce excessive use of materials, and 72.2% preferred using reusable materials instead of single-use materials in their surgical sets. However, 66.7% of the ORs had no environmental team, 93% did not use an environmentally safe surface cleaner, 83.3% did not use sensor controls on lights, and 66.7% did not use LED lights. Conclusions: Although most hospitals did not have a special team to recommend and enforce environment-friendly procedures, the OR nurses did their best to protect the environment.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-010資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000002969篇名：Development and Validity Testing of an Assessment Tool for Domestic Elder Abuse作者：Qinqiuzi YI;Junko HONDA;Naohiro HOHASHI關鍵字：domestic elder abuse;assessment tool;validity test;content validity index期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The older adult population is increasing in number, and elder abuse is expected to become a more pressing problem. Developing tools to assess the presence and severity of elder abuse is important to both effectively prevent this abuse and provide increased support for families. Purpose: This study was intended to test the validity of an Assessment Tool for Domestic Elder Abuse (ATDEA). The items that constitute this tool were derived from a literature review. Methods: Two rounds of self-administered questionnaire surveys were conducted with nurses working at home-visit nursing stations. Round 1 was used to evaluate the face validity, and Round 2 was used to test the content using the content validity index (CVI). Results: Two hundred forty nurses participated in the two studies. In Round 1, 56 nurses evaluated 38 items derived from a literature review, resulting in the development of a 36-item ATDEA. In Round 2, 184 nurses evaluated the content validity of the 36-item ATDEA. The Item-CVI (I-CVI) scores ranged from .61 to 1. Twenty-eight of the items met or exceeded the I-CVI threshold of .78, whereas the eight items assessing self-neglect did not. The overall Scale-CVI score for the assessment tool was .90, which met the threshold of .90. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of validity testing established the preliminary validity of this assessment tool. In addition, as self-neglect is known to damage the wellbeing of older adults, six of the eight items assessing self-neglect were retained in the ATDEA despite their failure to meet the threshold I-CVI of .78. The remaining two self-neglect items were not included in the ATDEA because of excessively low I-CVI scores (＜.70). Thus, the final version of the ATDEA includes 34 items. The authors recommend that nursing professionals use the ATDEA as a checklist to assess the presence of elder abuse and to discern the subtypes and severity of this abuse. When evaluating elder abuse, the higher the degree of severity, the greater the urgency to provide support.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-004資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000027810篇名：How Do Hospitalized Adolescents Feel Safe? A Qualitative Study作者：Neda JAMALIMOGHADAM;Shahrzad YEKTATALAB;Marzieh MOMENNASAB;Abbas EBADI;Najaf ZARE關鍵字：psychological safety;adolescent;hospitalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The feeling of safety makes an important contribution to the sense of well-being and quality of care for hospitalized adolescents, who are at a higher risk of feeling unsafe. Feeling unsafe during hospitalization may have a negative impact on recovery. Nurses must be sensitive to the possibility that patients feel unsafe, even in the absence of obvious direct physical threat. Purpose: This study explores the experiences of hospitalized adolescents to obtain an understanding of psychological safety. Methods: A qualitative study using unstructured interviews was conducted to explore the sense of psychological safety of hospitalized adolescents aged 12-18 years and registered in a general medical or surgical pediatric unit. Purposive sampling was used to recruit new qualified participants until data saturation was reached (N = 16). Results: Psychological safety is reflected by the four themes of receiving comprehensive support, protection of human dignity, relaxing environment, and attempts to adapt. Conclusions: Hospitalized adolescents stated that healthcare services should provide comprehensive support in a relaxing environment that allows them to retain their human dignity and that elicits feelings of psychological safety.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-006資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000028511篇名：Constructing Knowledge Through Research, Disseminating Knowledge Through Publication作者：Chung Hey CHEN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：1-1-001資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000031512篇名：Effectiveness of a Tailored Lifestyle Management Program for Middle-Aged Women With Coronary Artery Disease: A Preliminary Study作者：Ching-Ching TSAI;Ai-Hsien LI;Chung-Ming TU;Kai-Lin HWANG;Chii JENG關鍵字：lifestyle management;middle-aged women;coronary artery disease期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a leading cause of death in women. Many of the risk factors for CAD relate to lifestyle and thus may be influenced by lifestyle modification. However, middle-aged women often find it difficult to adjust their lifestyle behaviors. Thus, providing individualized treatment is crucial to reducing the risk and incidence of CAD in this population. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the effectiveness of a tailored lifestyle management program (TLMP) for middle-aged women with CAD. Methods: An experimental design was employed. Thirty-five middle-aged women with CAD (with stenosis [＞ 50%] of at least one main artery as determined by cardiac catheterization examination results) were recruited. The 35 women were randomly assigned to the experimental group (n = 17) or the control group (n = 18). Both groups received regular health education during their hospitalization. After discharge, the experimental group received the 12-week, home-based TLMP. A generalized estimating equation was used to examine the effects of the TLMP on metabolic and biomarker indicators for CAD. Results: The average age of participants was 56.1 ± 5.6 years. No significant demographic differences were identified between the two groups. Compared with the control group, the experimental group had a significantly higher high-density lipoprotein level (B = 7.83, p ＜ .001), a lower level of total cholesterol (B = -49.21, p = .04), and a lower waist circumference (B = -6.42, p ＜ .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study suggests that using tailored interventions is an effective approach to improving high-density lipoprotein, total cholesterol, and waist circumference in middle-aged women with CAD. This result is expected to have important implications for women’s healthcare, particularly in terms of preventing the incidence of CAD.起始頁-結束頁：1-10-006資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000027113篇名：The Effectiveness of Function-Focused Care Interventions in Nursing Homes: A Systematic Review作者：Su Jung LEE;Mi So KIM;You Jin JUNG;Sung Ok CHANG關鍵字：aged care;caring intervention;daily activities of living;integrated care;nursing homes期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Since the Omnibus Budget and Reconciliation Act was passed in South Korea in 1987, function-focused care (FFC) has been used in long-term care to achieve the highest possible levels of self-care and independence for older adults. However, many perceive nursing home residents with cognitive function impairments as having little restorative potential. Purpose: The purpose of this review is to report on evidence and strategies relating to FFC interventions in nursing home settings and to summarize the effects of FFC on the functional abilities of resident subgroups. Methods: A literature review using EMBASE, MEDLINE, and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature was conducted for articles published between January 1, 2000, and February 20, 2016. Twenty-two eligible studies were identified. Relevant data were extracted, and the results were synthesized into an integrated literature review. Study quality was appraised using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool and the Risk of Bias Assessment tool for Non-randomized Studies. Results: This review included 22 trials that were of moderate to high quality. Our systematic review confirmed the FFC interventions as integrated and dedicated processes; the five key strategies underpinning effective FFC interventions; and the effectiveness of FFC interventions on physical, psychosocial, and cognitive functions. The five key strategies underpinning FFC interventions included interactive learning for caregivers, the content of learning programs for caregivers, residents' preferences and interests, optimizing approaches according to residents' functional status, and the conceptual frameworks of FFC interventions. Most of the studies (n = 15) evaluated psychosocial functions and found significant improvements in aspects such as mood, affect, and behavioral problems. Likewise, the 13 studies assessing physical function found significant improvements in effectiveness in aspects such as movement, balance, and activities of daily living. Only four studies looked at cognitive function effectiveness, using measures such as place finding, verbal use, and memory. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Our review found scientific evidence that FFC interventions improve functional abilities across various levels of cognitive function in nursing homes. Nursing homes may employ effective strategies to maximize the effects of FFC interventions and use educational materials to teach caregivers to implement FFC interventions competently.起始頁-結束頁：1-13-010資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000026814篇名：Longitudinal Effects of Body Mass Index and Self-Esteem on Adjustment From Early to Late Adolescence: A Latent Growth Model作者：Eun Kyoung YUN;Hanna LEE;Ji Uhn LEE;Jun Hee PARK;Young Min NOH;Yu Gil SONG;Jung Hwa PARK關鍵字：BMI;self-esteem;adjustment;adolescence期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Mental and physical development during adolescence is a factor that may affect quality of life in adulthood. Purpose: The aims of this study were to investigate the developmental trajectories of body mass index (BMI), self-esteem, and adjustment among students from early to late adolescence and to examine the longitudinal relationships among these variables. Methods: Data from 2006 to 2012 were collected from the Korean Welfare Panel Study. Of the initial sample of 521 students, 487 completed a validated questionnaire measuring BMI, self-esteem, and adjustment. Latent growth curve modeling analyses were conducted to examine the relationships among the variables. Results: Univariate linear growth models showed a significant increase in BMI and significant declines in both self-esteem and adjustment across three time points from childhood to adolescence. The goodness of fit of the multivariate conditioned model supported the validity of the proposed longitudinal model (comparative fit index = .93, root mean square error of approximation = .08). Change in BMI was significantly linked with change in adjustment (β= .18, p ＜ .05) but not with change in self-esteem, whereas change in self-esteem exerted a statistically significant effect on change in adjustment (β= .47, p ＜ .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Our findings indicate that BMI and self-esteem are key determinants of student adjustment in school settings. Therefore, future health education interventions should focus on enhancing the positive physical and mental self-concepts of students, which should improve health and social behavior among students and subsequently afford a better quality of life for these students in adulthood.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-003資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000026615篇名：An Educational Intervention Using Steno Balance Cards to Improve Glycemic Control in Patients With Poorly Controlled Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus作者：Yueh-Chu WU;Edy KORNELIUS;Yi-Sun YANG;Yih-Fen CHEN;Chien-Ning HUANG關鍵字：steno balance cards;diabetes education;Type 2 diabetes mellitus;poorly controlled期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is largely attributable to lifestyle factors. Although physiological and medical care needs must be met, psychosocial factors should not be neglected. Purpose: The aim of this study was to determine whether a 6-month intervention consisting of educational sessions using Steno Balance Cards, which involves guided group dialogue, resulted in better glycemic outcomes than conventional diabetes education. Methods: Patients with T2DM whose glycolated hemoglobin A1c levels were higher than 8% were recruited from September to October 2015. Ninety-two patients were assigned to either the psychosocial balance dialogue (PBD) group (n = 46) or the standard care (SC) group (n = 46). The PBD group received instructions about diabetes using the Steno ”Balance Card” method, which involves the use of themed picture cards to elicit group dialogue. The Balance Cards were developed by the Danish Steno Diabetes Center. In the SC group, patients received general diabetes education using a conventional teaching mode. Results: In the PBD group, glycolated hemoglobin A1c decreased 1.3% from 8.1% ± 0.7% to 6.8% ± 0.8%, whereas it decreased 0.6% in the SC group from 8.0% ± 0.6% to 7.4% ± 0.7%, with p ＜ .05. At the end of the 6-month study period, the PBD group and the SC group completed a health-related quality of life questionnaire (12-item Short-Form Health Survey) and a wellbeing index (WHO-5) questionnaire. In the PBD group, the difference before and after the intervention showed that the wellbeing (WHO-5) score increased by 45.4 points, whereas the physiological score increased by 28.0, and the mental component score increased by 29.0. In the SC group, the well-being (WHO-5) score increased by 6.4, whereas the physiological score increased by 4.7, and the mental component score increased by 9.6. There were statistically significant differences in questionnaire scores between the two groups (p ＜ .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this study indicate that the dialogue sessions using Steno Balance Cards are beneficial for patients with T2DM in terms of improved glycemic control and quality of life.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-005資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000027516篇名：The Cognitive Impact of Chronic Diseases on Functional Capacity in Community-Dwelling Adults作者：JinShil KIM;Eunok PARK;Minjeong AN關鍵字：cognition;functional capacity;community dwelling adults;chronic disease期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: People with chronic diseases may experience poor cognitive functioning associated with advanced age, progression of disease, or other comorbid chronic conditions. Empirical evidence of this phenomenon is limited despite the clinical relevance of cognitive decline and associated adverse outcomes such as poor physical functioning. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to examine cognitive functioning in the domains of memory, attention, and executive function and its association with functional capacity in a sample of community-dwelling adults with a spectrum of chronic diseases. Methods: An exploratory cross-sectional study was conducted in a sample of community-dwelling adults with chronic diseases, including hypertension (58.9%), diabetes mellitus (DM; 20.0%), and dyslipidemia (14.4%). Participants' mean age was 64.1 T 11.2 years, and 48.9% were male. Ninety persons completed the face-to-face interviews, which evaluated cognitive functioning in the domains of memory, attention, and executive function using neuropsychological tests and the physical well-being test, which measured functional capacity using the Duke Activity Status Index. Results: Compared with those with other chronic diseases, our sample with hypertension and DM had significantly more memory loss and poorer executive function. These significant differences were nullified when adjusting for age, gender, and education. Approximately one third had functional limitations (n = 29, 32.2%), using a cutoff point of 35 or less (Duke Activity Status Index). Memory loss (delayed recall, b = 1.5, p = .016) and poor executive function (Trail Making Test Part A,b = -0.2, p ＜ .001) were predicting factors of functional decline, independent of age, gender, education, and comorbidity. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Cognitive function, particularly memory and executive function, was poorer among chronically ill Korean adults in the community with hypertension or DM than their counterparts. Functional decline was worse in the presence of memory loss and poor executive function. Studies examining the mechanism by which overall functioning is impacted by cognitive decline and its relevance to functional declines in a larger representative sample are warranted.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-004資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000027217篇名：Moving Into Action: The Master Key to Patient Education作者：Zhila FEREIDOUNI;Raheleh SABET SARVESTANI;Gholamreza HARIRI;Seyed Amin KUHPAYE;Mehdi AMIRKHANI;Majid NAJAFI KALYANI關鍵字：patient education;nursing;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Illness and hospitalization are situations that increase the need for assistance and education. Poor education is currently the most common source of patient complaints in the health sector in Iran. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the perspectives and recommendations of nurses to improve patient education. Methods: This research followed a qualitative exploratory design with a qualitative content analysis approach. The study participants, including eight head nurses and 16 staff nurses, were selected through purposive sampling. The data were collected through semistructured interviews, focus group sessions, and observations during 2016. Results: Coding and analysis of the data generated one main theme, two subthemes, and four categories. The subthemes were ”strengthen total commitment” and ”reconstructing the infrastructure,” and the categories were ”developing motivational factors,” ”facilitating change by every impetus,” ”systematizing activities,” and ”contextual promotion.” Conclusions: Study findings provide a complete picture of patient education and challenge managers to develop new strategies to plan and implement appropriate changes.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-007資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000028018篇名：Psychometric Properties of an Arabic Version of the Patient Satisfaction With Nursing Care Quality Questionnaire作者：Alaa ALBASHAYREH;Omar M. AL-RAWAJFAH;Huda AL-AWAISI;Suja KARKADA;Sulaiman D. AL SABEI關鍵字：nursing care;Oman;quality;patient satisfaction;Patient Satisfaction with Nursing Care Quality Questionnaire (PSNCQQ)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Quality measurements are crucial to healthcare quality improvement, and patient satisfaction with nursing care is widely adopted as a key outcome indicator of the overall quality of healthcare. There is a lack of instruments to measure patient satisfaction with nursing care in an Arabic context. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to develop and validate an Arabic version of the Patient Satisfaction with Nursing Care Quality Questionnaire and to explore patient satisfaction with nursing care across hospital units. Methods: This was a cross-sectional, methodological research study. A forward-backward translation process and face and content validation using a panel of experts and a pilot test were used to produce an Arabic version of the Patient Satisfaction with Nursing Care Quality Questionnaire. A convenience sampling technique was employed to recruit 292 adult patients who were hospitalized for more than 48 hours. Data were collected over the first quarter of 2016 using a secure electronic survey method. Results: The item-level content validity index ranged from .83 to 1, and the scale-level content validity index was .94. Evidence of construct validity was obtained. Exploratory factor analysis revealed a two-factor model that explained 69.3% of the total variance. Confirmatory factor analysis showed that the two-factor model fits the observed data. Internal consistency was satisfactory and similar across different hospital units. Cronbach's alpha estimates for Factors 1 and 2 were .83 and .96, respectively, with an overall Cronbach's alpha estimate of .96. Level of patient satisfaction with nursing care was quite high (mean = 4.30/5, SD = 0.74). Conclusions: This study provides a 17-item, Likert-scaled, self-reporting instrument, which is psychometrically sound for its content, comprehension, readability, and practicality, to measure patient satisfaction with nursing care quality in an Arabic context.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-002資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000027319篇名：Nursing Staff Characteristics on Resident Outcomes in Nursing Homes作者：Juh Hyun SHIN關鍵字：nursing home;quality of care;administrator;nursing management期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: The outlook of administrative staff and registered nurses (RNs) plays a critical role in the management of nursing homes. No previous study has compared the outcomes of nursing homes with RNs on staff with those of nursing homes without RNs on staff in Korea. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between nurse-led nursing homes, staff turnover, and resident outcomes in nursing homes in Korea. Methods: Using a cross-sectional design, 36 nursing homes with 30 or more beds participated. Primary data included 15 quality indicators. Results: Nursing homes with RNs had statistically significant better resident outcomes. RN turnover related positively to the prevalence of falls (β= 1.68, p ＜ .05) and tube feeding (β= 1.71, p ＜ .01) and negatively to incontinence (β= -1.53, p ＜ .01). Nursing homes with RNs with tenures greater than 1 year had statistically significant lower prevalence of falls (β= -0.47, p ＜ .05), incontinence (β= -0.45, p ＜ .05), weight loss (β= -0.53 p ＜ .05), and bed rest (β= -0.54, p ＜ .01) and increased range of motion (β= -0.51, p G .05). Interestingly, having a nurse as a director for more than 1 year related negatively to the incidence of urinary tract infection (β= -0.56, p ＜ .05) in residents. The rate of RN turnover was found to impact fall prevalence (β= 1.68, p ＜ .05) and tube feeding (β= 1.71, p ＜ .01) positively and to impact incontinence (β= -1.53, p ＜ .01) negatively. Conclusions: Turnover of nursing home staff and length of tenure may contribute to the more effective management of nursing homes, higher-quality long-term care insurance, and RN-staffing-related laws. Assessing staff characteristics and the tenure of employees promotes the effective management of nursing homes.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-008資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000026920篇名：The Relationship Between Nursing Workload, Quality of Care, and Nursing Payment in Intensive Care Units作者：Li-Yin CHANG;Hsiu-Hui YU;Yann-Fen C. CHAO關鍵字：nursing workload;care quality;nursing payment;patient classification system期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Background: Nursing workload is highly associated with patient safety. It has been argued that the imbalance between nursing payment and nursing workload in Taiwan National Health Insurance (NHI)-covered intensive care units (ICUs) has resulted in the inadequate allocation of nursing manpower. However, limited empirical data are currently available to support this argument. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the correlation between nursing workload, quality of care, and NHI-covered nursing payments in ICU settings. Methods: This macrodata analysis study retrieved data from the existing ICU patient classification system, nursing quality monitoring system, and infection control monitoring system of a medical center in central Taiwan. Data on the Therapeutic Intervention Scoring System-28 (TISS-28) and non-TISS-28 scores, nursing hours, and nursing labor utilization rate were retrieved for the 23-month period beginning in January 2013 and ending in November 2014. The indices of care quality used in this study included incidence of falls, pressure sore density, incidence of restraint use, incidence of tube self-extraction, and infection density. Results: A total of 92,442 data sets were collected from eight ICUs, with 61% of the direct ICU nursing hours categorized as TISS-28 and 39% categorized as non-TISS-28. Mean nursing hours totaled 12.5 hours. The direct nursing hours, the total nursing hours, the bed occupancy rate, the nursing hours calculated by patient classification system, and the nursing hours calculated by nurse-patient ratio were statistically, significantly correlated respectively with all of the care quality indices except for incidence of falls. The number of items of patient care in the patient classification records was greater than that of NHI-covered nursing payments. The NHI-covered nursing payment for every patient accounted for only 4.77% of the total medical expenses in the ICU. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Data from the patient classification database, quality monitoring database, and medical cost database indicate excessive nursing workload and underpayment from the Taiwan NHI program. Current nursing workload was significantly associated with care quality. This study provides empirical data for administrators to consider when revising nursing staffing and NHI payment policies.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-009資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000026501篇名：Patent Rights Protection and High-Tech Exports: New Evidence from Taiwan並列篇名：專利權保護與高科技產品出口：臺灣的新證據作者：許鈺珮(Judy Hsu);陳忠榮(Jong-Rang Chen)關鍵字：patent rights;high-tech;semiconductor;export;HMR;PPML;專利權;高科技;半導體;出口;HMR模型;PPML方法期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：An array of literature empirically examines the impact of patent rights (PRs) protection on international trade, but most studies employ the traditional gravity model to estimate and ignore firm-level behavior. Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein (2008) propose a two-stage, non-linear least squares estimation procedure (the HMR model) to correct potential biases embodied in the gravity estimation of trade flows, which decomposes the impact on trade volumes of all trade resistance measures into their extensive and intensive margin components. Yet, Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2015) suggest that the HMR model is incorrectly specified and propose the Poisson pseudo maximum likelihood (PPML) methodology to solve heteroscedasticity. Utilizing the HMR model and the PPML method, this paper empirically investigates how differences in PRs protection may influence Taiwan's semiconductor exports to 119 destination countries from 1995 to 2010. Our results support the effectiveness of an importing country's patent harmonization in stimulating importation of high-tech goods from Taiwan.英文摘要：過去探討專利權保護與國際貿易間關係的實證研究大多使用傳統的引力模型，忽略廠商層級的效果。Helpman et al.（2008）提出一個兩階段、非線性最小平方估計法（HMR模型），修正引力模型的潛在偏誤問題，分析國家間專利權保護程度的差異對於廠商出口決策與出口數量之影響。然而，Santos Silva and Tenreyro（2015）認<U+7232>HMR模型仍存在估計偏差，故提出PPML方法來解決異質變異問題。本文運用HMR模型和PPML方法，探討1995至2010年間，臺灣與119個進口國的專利權保護程度差異對臺灣半導體產品出口之影響。實證結果顯示，當進口國專利權保護程度提升時，對臺灣高科技產品出口確實產生顯著正向的影響。起始頁-結束頁：517-553資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心2篇名：臺灣高教擴張對年輕世代薪資及職業聲望的影響：反事實的分析並列篇名：Does a College Degree Still Pay? A Causal Analysis of the Impact of College Expansion on Earnings and Occupational Prestige in Taiwan作者：關秉寅(Ping-Yin Kuan);彭思錦(Ssu-Chin Peng);崔成秀(Seongsoo Choi)關鍵字：高教擴張;反事實分析;臺灣年輕世代;職業聲望;薪資;college expansion;counterfactual analysis;the Taiwanese young generation;occupational prestige;earnings期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文利用2003年及2009年「華人家庭動態調查資料庫」樣本，評估臺灣高教擴張對年輕世代的薪資與職業聲望的影響。從反事實分析架構的角度，本文主張要有效分析高教擴張對於臺灣大學畢業生的影響，應區分無論擴展與否都會上大學的「必<U+7232>者」、因擴張而有機會大學的「順勢而<U+7232>者」以及無論擴張與否都不會上大學的「必不<U+7232>者」等三類人。透過結合配對法及DID模型之分析，研究結果發現高教擴張改善了「順勢而<U+7232>者」的薪資與職業聲望，但對「必<U+7232>者」則有直接或間接的負面影響。英文摘要：This paper conducts a counterfactual analysis to estimate the effects of college expansion on earnings and occupational prestige of the young in Taiwan. The study uses two datasets collected by the Panel Study of Family Dynamics and a DID model for analysis. The study uses matching to identify three counterfactual groups: ”compliers,” ”always-takers,” and ”never-takers” and then uses the DID model to estimate the proposed causal effects. The findings show that compliers benefit from college expansion in both earnings and occupational prestige of both the first and the current jobs. Always-takers' advantages in their first-job returns have been negatively affected by the expansion. In short, college expansion narrows the gap in socio-economic status between always- takers and compliers but increases the gap between those with and without college degrees.起始頁-結束頁：555-599資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心3篇名：「人權的悖謬」和「無權利者的權利」：紀傑克論非人的激進政治化並列篇名：”The Paradox of Human Rights” and ”the Rights of the Rightless”: Zizek on the Radical Politicization of the Inhuman作者：蔣興儀(Hsing-Yi Chiang)關鍵字：紀傑克;人權;難民;心理分析的政治性;普遍性;Zizek;Slavoj;human rights;refugees;the political of psychoanalysis;Universality期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文闡述紀傑克的實踐的反文人主義，它強調非人的重要性及其可能的政治行動。本文以難民問題<U+7232>例，先指出目前將人權等同於公民權的悖謬與極限，然後說明難民問題如何能夠將人權政治轉化<U+7232>非人的政治，藉此突破此一極限。作<U+7232>非人的難民被排除到政治共同體之外，他們並非人道主義要去救援的對象，而是他們要賦予自身激進的政治行動的可能性。作<U+7232>絕對的無權利者，難民因此有權利宣稱他們自身代表普遍人性，這不僅可以挑戰現存象徵秩序的殘酷邏輯，並且能夠透過解放他們自身來解放人性。英文摘要：The essay elucidates Zizek's practical anti-humanism which places emphasis on the importance of the inhuman and the possible political consequences drawn from it. By focusing on the problem of refugees, the essay shows the limit of the politics of human rights that prioritizes citizenship, and endeavors to clarify how the refugee problem serves as an impetus that transforms radically the politics of human rights into a politics of the inhuman. The inhuman elements of refugees, derived from their being excluded from the political community, don't make them objects to be rescued by humanitarian aid but rather confer upon them the possibility of becoming the subjects of radical political acts. Refugees, as the absolute rightlessness, who have the right to assert that they themselves stand for universal humanity, not only challenge the cruel logic of the existing symbolic order, but also are capable of emancipating humanity by emancipating themselves.起始頁-結束頁：601-640資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心4篇名：論反抗權在康德法政哲學思想中的合法性與正當性問題－另一種解讀的可能性並列篇名：On Legality and Legitimacy of the Right of Resistance in Kant's Legal and Political Philosophy -A Heterodox Reading作者：陳欣白(Hsin-Pai Chen)關鍵字：康德;反抗權;合法性;正當性;言論自由;Immanuel Kant;right of resistance;legality;legitimacy;freedom of speech期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文嘗試為「反抗權」在康德法政哲學思想中的「合法性」與「正當性」問題提出不同以往的解讀方式，說明在「法權的普遍原則」下，康德雖未肯認反抗的「正當性」，但他依據同樣原則對「言論自由」作<U+7232>一項「消極的反抗」的強調，卻說明了「理性立法」相較於「實定立法」在「證立上的優位性」，以致人民的反抗作<U+7232>即使難以受到實定法律的保障，也應當被視<U+7232>一項「超越實定法的、道德上的權利」。英文摘要：Kant defined the ”right to resist” as a ”coercive power” against the head of state. Therefore, under the requirement of the ”principle of separation of powers ”, people's rebellion is no doubt illegal. However, Kant also emphasized that in addition to revolution and rebellion, there is also a ”passive resistance”. It is not a kind of ”coercive power” per se, but ”a right that cannot be abandoned or given up of an individual who lives in any society. This article attempts to make a different reading on the legality and legitimacy problem of the right of resistance in Kant's legal and political philosophy, and to discuss in which sense Kant's emphasis on the freedom of speech did suggest the idea to which the right of resistance should be regarded as an over-positive right of people.起始頁-結束頁：641-671資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心5篇名：「區域與都市經濟特刊」編輯報告並列篇名：Editor's Report: Special Issue: Regional and Urban Economics作者：賴孚權(Fu-chuan Lai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷5期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：673-674資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心6篇名：具土地成本的地方公共財與產業聚集並列篇名：Local Public Goods with Land Costs and Industrial Agglomeration作者：蔡智發(Jyh-fa Tsai);林韋銘(Wei-ming Lin);王千岳(Chian-yue Wang)關鍵字：地方公共財;新經濟地理學;地租;核心邊陲;稅;local public goods;new economic geography;land rent;core-periphery;tax期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究在新經濟地理學的架構下，探討公共財之提供對於產業在兩區分佈的角色。公共財的提供考慮地租內生的土地成本以及土地稀少性資源的特性。公共財在空間上的分佈有兩類，平均分佈與集中於市中心。與Tabuchi（1998）比較，本研究指出公共財可提升效用水準而增強聚集之向心力，當兩區的運輸成本較低時，若兩區的公共財提供之稅率相等，產業分佈有兩種可能性：完全聚集於兩區中任一區或對稱分散。與Andersson and Forslid（2003）比較，本研究顯示提供公共財之稅率愈高，將造成產業分散之離心力愈強，因<U+7232>地方公共財之提供需要土地投入，故而減少了住宅可使用之土地。英文摘要：Under the new economic geography framework, this study analyzes the effect of provision of public goods on industrial distribution between two regions. The major properties for provision of local public goods are the endogenous land rent for land costs and the scarcity of land resources. This study explores two patterns of public goods, a uniformly spreading pattern and a concentrated pattern in the city center. Comparing with Tabuchi (1998), our model can increase the centripetal force for agglomeration due to the increase in utility level. When transportation costs are small and tax rates for provision of local public goods are equal, industrial distribution has two types, full agglomeration at one region or symmetric dispersion. However, compared with Andersson and Forslid (2003), our model shows the centrifugal force for dispersion increases with a higher tax rate because the provision of public goods needs land and thus reduces the land available for housing.起始頁-結束頁：675-710資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心7篇名：基礎建設類型、經濟整合與外人直接投資並列篇名：Type of Infrastructure, Economic Integration, and Foreign Direct Investment作者：王羿傑(Yi-jie Wang);王光正(Kuang-cheng Andy Wang);梁文榮(Wen-jung Liang)關鍵字：經濟整合;市場不對稱;基礎建設技術類型;外人直接投資;Cournot競爭;economic integration;market asymmetry;technology type of infrastructure;foreign direct investment;Cournot competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文探討經濟整合對會員國基礎建設技術類型、外人直接投資與社會福利的影響。我們證明引進會員國市場規模不對稱，會促使小國選擇偏離大國的技術類型。當兩國的技術類型<U+7232>循序決定時，選擇Hotelling線段中點<U+7232>大國的優勢策略。其次，當貿易成本夠大、調整成本係數小且大國的市場較大時，經濟整合會使小國的最適技術類型遠離大國的類型，減少小國的外人直接投資；反之，當貿易成本夠小且調整成本係數大時，則會得到相反結論。再者，當大國的市場規模較大、貿易成本夠小且調整成本係數大時，經濟整合會提高小國（降低大國）的社會福利水準。英文摘要：We analyze the impacts of economic integration on the optimal technology types of infrastructure, FDI, and welfare of two member countries. We show that introducing a larger relative market size of the large country will induce the smaller country to select an optimal technology type of infrastructure apart from that of the large country. Locating at the center of the Hotelling line is the dominant strategy of the large country, when the technology types of infrastructure are sequentially determined. Next, economic integration will cause the small country to take its optimal technology type of infrastructure farther apart and decrease its FDI when the trade cost and the relative market size are large and the adjustment cost is small, while the reverse occurs otherwise. Moreover, economic integration can improve (worsen) the welfare of the small (large) country, when the adjustment cost and relative market size are large and the trade cost is small.起始頁-結束頁：711-734資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心8篇名：臺北市電影映演產業的產品差異化與空間競爭並列篇名：Product Differentiation and Spatial Competition between Movie Theaters: Evidence from Taipei作者：劉玉皙(Yu-hsi Liu);佘健源(Chien-yuan Sher)關鍵字：Hotelling模型;產品差異化;空間競爭;電影產業;電影放映市場;Hotelling model;product differentiation;spatial competition;movie theaters;film exhibition market期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究探討廠商在二維競爭時的產品差異化策略。戲院在片單及地理位置兩維度上進行差異化，但短期間戲院位置無法變動，片單差異度才是戲院的主要策略變數。實證結果顯示：臺北市戲院若兩兩配對，平均片單差異程度為0.5015（完全差異化為1）；而戲院距離與差異化程度為反向關係。這表示距離仍是臺北市電影映演市場的重要考量因素。此外，距離對差異化的影響是非線性的，若相距小於5公里，距離對差異化的影響就不顯著。戲院的相對規模亦影響其差異化決策，「大型對大型」的差異化競爭模式與「小型對小型」有別。所有權亦影響差異化程度。英文摘要：Using data from Taipei film theaters, we study how firms decide on their degree of product differentiation when they compete in a two-dimensional space. Theaters compete on programming lists and locations; the programming list is the main strategic variable, while location is fixed in the short run. Using the degree of differentiation in weekly programing list as the dependent variable, we show that the degree of differentiation is negatively correlated with the distances to competitors. Our empirical results confirm that distance is still an important factor in Taipei's movie exhibition market. The results are consistent with the theoretical predictions in the literature on extended Hotelling models. But the relationship between distance and product differentiation could be non-linear since the negative correlation is insignificant when competitors are within 1 to 5 kilometers. We also find that if two theaters belong to the same chain, they are less likely to differentiate from each other.起始頁-結束頁：735-765資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心9篇名：「跨國學習政策」中文與英文知識建構比較：以德國長期照顧保險為例（1995－2017）並列篇名：Cross-country Policy-learning as Knowledge-making: Comparing Literature Printed in Chinese and English about the German Long-term Care Insurance (1995-2017)作者：王品(Pin Wang)關鍵字：長照保險;現金給付;女性主義;知識建構;政策學習;long-term care insurance;cash benefits;feminism;knowledge-making;policy-learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：由於臺灣人口高速高齡化，過去二十年政府曾思考要學習高齡國德國與日本開辦長期照顧保險。但德、日制度重大差別<U+7232>德國選擇給付「現金」，日本則因<U+7232>婦女團體反對，故捨「現金」而僅給「服務」。臺灣長保法草案學習德國設計「現金給付」，引起婦女、勞工與老人團體的反對，憂心多數家庭會選擇領錢，而照顧負擔仍舊落在女性家屬身上。立法過程中，筆者察覺臺灣鮮少探討德國長保「現金給付」之制度特色與實施成效。此點是否能獲得科學證據支持？本研究以系統性方法探索，發現臺灣在學習德國長保政策所建構之中文知識，與國際英文知識間存在顯著差異。英文摘要：Taiwan has been enthusiastically learning elderly-care policies from abroad, as its population is rapidly aging. It has even drafted a long-term care insurance (LTCI) bill-following what super-aged countries like Germany and Japan did decades ago. While Germany chose ”cash benefits,” Japan opted for ”service-only,” owing to feminist groups' opposition. When Taiwan attempted to adopt the German LTCI model, feminist, labor, and elderly advocacy groups criticized the government intensely. They worried that if cash payments were available, most Taiwanese would opt for them, rendering no alleviation of burdens on family caregivers-mostly women. During Taiwan's legislative debates, however, there seemed to be little discussion on the program characteristics and consequences of the original German cash benefits. The present study sets out to explore this phenomenon systematically and finds significant differences and omissions exist in the knowledge about the German LTCI between the scholarly literature published in Chinese and English languages.起始頁-結束頁：339-384資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心10篇名：從效率與公平評估臺灣的大學入學制度改革並列篇名：Evaluating Taiwan's Matriculation Reform from the Perspectives of Efficiency and Fairness作者：陶宏麟(Hung-lin Tao);吳澤玫(Tse-mei Wu)關鍵字：大學入學;效率;效益主義;極端自由主義;羅爾斯社會正義論;matriculation;efficiency;utilitarianism;libertarianism;Rawlsian social justice期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文依據效率及效益主義、極端自由主義和羅爾斯社會正義論這三種道德理論的公平觀，評估民國73年以後的大學入學制度改革。73年的改革解除女性職涯限制及提升上大學機會，既增加媒合效率，也符合三種公平觀。83年後的多元入學制度減緩傳統聯考向家庭背景具優勢者傾斜的趨勢。繁星使低所得家庭及非都會區高中生更有機會進入理想大學，符合羅爾斯的公平觀；推甄、繁星與申請讓學生和校系直接自行配對，滿足極端自由主義的公平觀。三種入學管道的學生在穩定性、學業表現和學習滿意度都高於指考學生，顯示其提高了效率，且符合效益主義的公平觀。英文摘要：This study evaluates Taiwan's matriculation reform after 1984 from the perspectives of efficiency and three conceptions of fairness in moral theory-utilitarianism, libertarianism, and Rawlsian social justice. The matriculation reform of 1984 removed limitations on women's career choices and enhanced women's opportunities to go to college. It also enhanced efficiency and satisfied all three conceptions of fairness. The Multiple Admission Program after 1994 mitigated the influence of family background in the traditional matriculation system. Multi-Star Admission enabled students in low-income families and nonmetropolitan schools to enter top colleges, satisfying Rawlsian social justice. The Admission via Recommendation, Multi-Star Admission, and Admission via Application programs allowed students to be paired with colleges according to their own wills directly, satisfying libertarianism. Students admitted by the Admission via Recommendation, Multi-Star Admission, and Admission via Application programs had high stability, grades and satisfaction. Accordingly, these three types of admission enhanced efficiency, which is in line with utilitarianism.起始頁-結束頁：385-426資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心11篇名：大學社會創新組織間的中介溝通與信任建立機制分析並列篇名：Interorganizational Cooperation outside the Market: A Case Study on University Outreach and Social Innovation in Taiwan作者：熊慧嵐(Huei-lan Xiong);周睦怡(Muyi Chou);施聖文(Sheng-wen Shih);陳東升(Dung-sheng Chen)關鍵字：跨組織合作;信任;跨界活動者;社會創新;權力不平等;大學社會實踐;interorganizational cooperation;trust;boundary spanner;social innovation;power inequality;university social responsibility and outreach期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以跨界活動者理論（individual boundary spanner）個案分析臺灣「人文創新與社會實踐計畫」，說明以在地社會創新<U+7232>主軸的計畫型政策，如何透過中介組織，建立公部門、大學，與個別研究者或實作者等參與者之間的信任及溝通機制。旨在說明，當跨組織合作建構於不平等的權力關係下，組織之間的信任建立仰賴在制度保障與支持的互動中，持續且有效地溝通；這需要來自不同組織的跨界活動者在個人、組織和制度間，透過創新的方式解決問題，創造信任的正向循環。跨界活動者所創造的溝通機制也必須轉化融入組織互動的正式規範，以持續強化跨組織的互信與合作。英文摘要：This research analyzes the building of trust in interorganizational cooperation via a case study on the ongoing Humanity Innovation and Social Practice project in Taiwan, involving governmental agencies, universities, researchers, and practitioners in localities. Boundary spanner theory is adopted to elaborate how trust and communication mechanisms can be established when an asymmetric relationship of power inevitably exists among stakeholders. This study reveals that these cooperative parties have to constantly prove themselves trustworthy and willing to trust others through practicing. To achieve this goal, boundary spanners of each cooperative party play pivotal roles to facilitate continuous communication and mutual understanding between organizations. They share similar practical experiences and a problem-oriented mindset, which enable them to find solutions together based on institutional responsibility and supportive mechanisms when facing challenges. This constructive kind of interaction benefits cooperation not only at the individual level but also at the organizational level, and permits sustained interorganizational cooperation.起始頁-結束頁：427-465資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心12篇名：不識字又兼無衛生？論自然資源在公共衛生與教育中對女性的影響，1960－2017並列篇名：Destined to Be Less Educated and Unhealthy? Testing the Impact of Natural Resources on Female Public Health and Education, 1960-2017作者：張文揚(Wen-yang Chang)關鍵字：自然資源;自然資源詛咒;人力資本;公共衛生;教育;女性;natural resources;natural resource curse;human capital;public health;education;women期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：自從Ross（2008）基於「自然資源詛咒」論述探討中東與北非地區婦女地位如何受到石油影響以來，學者們對於自然資源如何影響女性地位有相當豐富的討論，但卻一直沒有共識。本文認為，自然資源同時影響了女性的衛生與受教權。自然資源的經濟結構導致執政者欠缺投資人力資本的意願；政府出於自身的動機不易推動產業多樣化，因此資源<U+7232>主的經濟結構難以改變。這些因素解釋了女性的教育與衛生權<U+7232>什麼在資源豐富的國家中受到限制。在驗證上，作者採用1960－2017年之間126－164個國家的數據，實證結果除了支持上述見解以外，也有深刻的政策意涵與理論貢獻。英文摘要：Since Ross (2008) explored whether or not the status of women in the Middle East and North African region is affected by oil on the basis of the ”resource curse” thesis, scholars have extended this link into a variety of discussions. Consensus, however, is far from conclusive. This paper argues that natural resources also affect female education and health rights. The author proposes that natural resources discourage political leaders from investing in human capital of women. Additionally, they also lack strong incentives to diversify the resource -based economy. These factors account for why women's education and health outcomes are limited in resource-rich states. To lend empirical support, the author applies natural resource data of 126- 164 states between 1960 and 2017. Empirical results not only support the arguments as mentioned, but also provide policy implications and theoretical contributions to the status of women in resource-rich states.起始頁-結束頁：467-516資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心13篇名：治水工程對選舉結果的影響：以高雄為例並列篇名：The Impact of Flood Control Works on Electoral Results: The Case of Kaohsiung作者：佘健源(Chien-Yuan Sher)關鍵字：回顧型投票;災害管理;易淹水地區水患治理計畫;巢狀勝算對數模型;追蹤資料;retrospective voting;disaster management;Regulation Project of Flood-prone Areas;nested logit model;panel data期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文分析易淹水地區水患治理計畫對高雄地區選舉結果的影響，以討論臺灣是否有回顧型投票的現象。筆者先由個體的選擇行為建立村里的得票率模型，再整合高雄地區各村里歷屆選舉、治水工程投入、水患災情以及所得的長期追蹤資料，檢視高雄地區縣市首長執政期間各村里治水計畫的變動，和2005年到2014年間縣市長選舉各村里得票率變動的關聯。本研究發現，政府在各村里所投入的治水資源，在統計上能顯著地拉開現任地方首長和一般候選人的選情；然而，筆者卻沒有足夠的證據能主張，治水資源的投入也能為代表中央執政陣營的候選人帶來選舉利益。英文摘要：This study analyzes the impact of the Regulation Project of Flood-prone Areas on electoral results in Kaohsiung, and discusses whether Taiwan has the phenomenon of retrospective voting. The present study constructs a regression model for aggregate data based on representative voters, and combines information regarding the voting share of each candidate in each village for several elections, the allocation of flood control works, flooding records, and median income in each village. It examines the relationship between the change in flood control works allocated in each village during different mayoral terms, and the change in voting shares for each candidate in each village among elections. This study finds that flood control works can create a significant difference in voting shares between the incumbent mayor (or county magistrate) and an ordinary candidate; however, there is insufficient evidence to conclude that these constructions can also make a difference in voting share between an ordinary candidate and the candidate from the national incumbent pary.起始頁-結束頁：153-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心14篇名：有價就有假：探討華人古董藝術品市場中的贗品文化並列篇名：There Will Always Be Forgeries: Situating Forgery Culture in the Chinese Antiques Market作者：李玉瑛(Yu-Ying Lee)關鍵字：贗品;贗品文化;鑑定;收藏;古董市場;fake;forgery culture;authentication;collection;antique market期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：俗云「有價就有假」，只要有藝術市場存在的一天，贗品就會一直存在。一般在藝術史和博物館學的範疇中，關於「真偽」的研究多偏重於文物藝術品的鑑定技術，但是都忽略了贗品如何生產、行銷與消費。本文把文物藝術品放在商業流通的市場脈絡下思考，從社會文化、市場的流通交易，以及鑑定權力系統來分析贗品文化。本文以場域理論討論藝術品的中介與權力關係，主旨在顯示藝術品的價值／格是來自市場交換，有賴中介者的文化社會資本和場域位置來給予藝術品符號價值。本文認為贗品文化鑲嵌於藝術世界中評斷藝術品價值／格的知識／權力系統。英文摘要：This paper analyzes the relationships between forgeries, market prices, and the existing knowledge/power dynamics in the art world and authentication system. This paper aims to discuss art forgeries in the context of Chinese cultural relics and the art market and to argue that art forgeries are socially embedded. Forgeries are common in the art market, and therefore, authentication is crucial for collectors, auction houses and connoisseurs. Regarding authenticity, many discussions in the field of art history and museology focus mainly on the skill or professional knowledge of authentication. However, this paper argues that the skill of authentication cannot explain the fact that forgeries are still restricted by social aspects of the market and the sign value.起始頁-結束頁：187-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心15篇名：軍閥政權與身體政治：馮玉祥主政時期的河南省放足運動及其反挫（1927－29）並列篇名：Warlord Regime and Body Politics: The Footbinding Liberation Movement of Henan Province under Feng Yuxiang's Rule and Its Backlash, 1927-1929作者：苗延威(Yen-Wei Miao)關鍵字：馮玉祥;放足運動;放足處;軍閥政權;身體政治;Feng Yuxiang;the footbinding liberation movement;the Bureau of Footbinding Liberation (fangzu chu);warlord regime;body politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究以一起放足人員遭虐殺的事件為起點，討論民國軍閥馮玉祥掌控河南省政期間（1927－1929）發動的放足運動及其意涵。本文以官方編纂的刊物《放足叢刊》、馮玉祥的日記與回憶錄、地方志等史料為主，輔以相關文獻，對馮玉祥政權特設的河南省政府一級機關「放足處」所施行的各種行政手段以及當時的社會條件，進行歷史社會學式的考察，並指出，當纏足文化成為官署查辦取締的對象時，在軍閥政權根基仍不穩固的情況下，其纏足治理非但成效不彰，而且還將守舊身體、傳統性別秩序、封建政體和軍事對手打造為共同敵人，並引發出非預期的反挫後果。英文摘要：This research aims to explore the historical-sociological implications of the footbinding liberation movement in Henan province under the rule of Feng Yuxiang, 1927-1929. Using primary data such as official documents and publications, diaries, memoirs, chorographies, and so on, and relevant literature, we start at discussing an incident where officers of the Bureau of Footbinding Liberation (fangzu chu), an ad hoc department Feng set up for anti-footbinding affairs, were violently and cruelly killed by hostile troops in western Henan, and then we examine the Bureau's administrative strategies and their social consequences. It was impossible to change the tradition with administrative power of punishment, however. At the end, we conclude that Feng's warlord regime failed in footbinding goverance because it tended to see its people who resisted the anti-footbinding efforts, together with its military rivals who were in doubt about the ”revolutionary” gender order, as the enemies of society.起始頁-結束頁：225-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心16篇名：結構性脆弱的悲歌：外籍漁工的日常工作與健康經驗並列篇名：The Elegy of Structural Vulnerability: Migrant Fishermen's Working and Health Experiences作者：梁莉芳(Li-Fang Liang)關鍵字：外籍漁工;健康;工作經驗;結構限制;結構性脆弱;migrant fishermen;health;working experiences;structural constraints;structural Vulnerability期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：與移工健康相關的研究，多從防疫與管理的觀點切入，視移工為治理的對象，較少從社會結構的角度，理解其處境。透過質性深度訪談，本研究採取結構性脆弱的分析取徑，檢視政治經濟、文化與身心動態等交互作用，如何形塑外籍漁工日常的工作與健康經驗。研究發現，在跨國脈絡下，鑲嵌於遷移體制與勞動體制的制度性安排，影響漁工的勞動條件、工作環境、職業傷病與健康。本研究希望豐富移工健康研究的分析取徑，與目前主流的研究對話；其次，國內外相關研究仍在萌芽階段，本文希望在既有的基礎上，增進學術社群與社會大眾對外籍漁工處境的理解。英文摘要：The mainstream research on migrant workers' health adopts the perspective of disease prevention and management, which regards migrant workers as the subject of governance. The approach pays little attention to social infrastructures and institutional arrangements that shape their health experiences. Relying upon qualitative interviews, this study adopts the approach of structural vulnerability to examine how the intersectionality of political-economic, cultural, and psychodynamic factors affects migrant fishermen's working and health experiences in their everyday life. The research findings point out that, in the transnational context, the institutional arrangements embedded in the migration regime and labor regime impact migrant fishermen's working conditions and environment, occupational hazards, and health. Using migrant fishermen's daily experiences as the entry point of the investigation, first, this research aims to enrich the analytical approach to migrant workers' health; second, extended from the current studies, this research hopes to provide further understanding of migrant fishermen's situations and experiences.起始頁-結束頁：263-300資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心17篇名：原住民族部落健康與文化主權：磯崎村復健站的自主性發展歷程並列篇名：Indigenous Health Promotion and Cultural Sovereignty in Taiwan: The Autonomy of the Jiqi Rehabilitation Center作者：張瀠之(Ena Ying-tzu Chang);鄧湘漪(Hsiang-I Teng)關鍵字：原住民族健康;部落健康;文化主權;文化照顧;磯崎村;Indigenous health;Indigenous community health;cultural sovereignty;cultural care;Jiqi期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以花蓮縣豐濱鄉磯崎村復健站為基礎，揭露多族群的原住民部落健康促進行動關注族群和諧，熟稔運用在地社會關係、在地資源、深度理解地方人情義理，並與醫護專業協作的自主性老人照顧模式，以達成貼近生活的社區賦權自決行動。強調「文化主權」概念，以民族誌思考當代原住民族部落健康。立基於部落日常生活文化實踐的長者照顧，在族群文化與健康行動的思辨中，對國家政策與實務運作提出挑戰。為減緩政策與實踐間的落差，強化資源分配和運作的結構性差異、弱化績效評鑑指標、信任具備文化能力的文化轉譯者等成為政策規劃的思考方向。英文摘要：This paper, based on experiences at the physical rehabilitation center at Jiqi (磯崎), a multi-ethnic Indigenous community, explores how the health initiative sought community empowerment and self-determination through utilization of internal resources , social relations, deep understanding, and flexible deployment of local knowledges, in connection with support from external medical institutions. Building on ethnographic work and expanding on the concept of 'cultural sovereignty', the paper reveals how elderly care grounded in daily local cultures challenges existing health promotion policies and practices. To increase compatibility between policy and local implementation, this paper proposes two directions worth considering for Indigenous health policy-making: 1) highlight structural differences for resource allocation and program operation while reducing reliance on quantitative and indicative evaluation and, 2) release decision-making and operation capacities to local cultural translators with both mainstream and Indigenous knowledges.起始頁-結束頁：301-327資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心18篇名：雅典民主與法治如何相輔相成？以埃斯奇尼斯與德摩特尼斯的法庭演說為例並列篇名：How Were Athenian Democracy and the Rule of Law Complementary to Each Other? A Case Study of the Law Court Speeches of Aeschines and Demosthenes作者：黃俊龍(Chun-liong Ng)關鍵字：雅典民主;法治;埃斯奇尼斯;德摩特尼斯;訟棍;人民利益;命運;性格證據;Athenian democracy;the rule of law;Aeschines;Demosthenes;sykophantai;popular interest;fortune;evidence of character期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文的目的在於，從古雅典社會的角度，理解直接民主與法治的關係。本文指出，雅典法庭透過精巧制度，維持開放與理性的審議空間。其次，法庭考量三個無法根本解決的難題：訟棍、人民利益的界定，以及命運操弄。本文結論，雅典法治意指：在開放與理性審議的法庭中，陪審員綜合考量法條、法律精神、輿論與個別案件背景，回應前述三個根本難題，盡力做出符合人民利益的判決。雅典民主與法治相輔相成的意義在於：法治強化人民主權，而人民保護法律，排除非理性因素的干擾。本文僅挑選埃斯奇尼斯與德摩特尼斯兩位雅典政治領袖的作品為代表。英文摘要：This paper examines the relationship between democracy and law from an Athenian perspective. This paper argues that the Athenian law court maintained an open space of deliberation through institutional arrangements. Besides, the law court considered three dilemmas: sycophancy, conflict of public interests and the manipulation of fortune. This paper concludes that the Athenian rule of law means the jurors' thoughtful responses to these dilemmas. The law court provided the space for deliberation where the jurors, in their search for the highest public interest, took into account factors such as the relevant statutes, the spirit of law, public opinions and the background of individual cases. Athenian democracy and law complemented each other, for the laws made the people sovereign while the people protected the laws against irrational interference. To limit the scope of this paper, the court speeches of Aeschines and Demosthenes are chosen as the focus of discussion.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心19篇名：盧梭的公民宗教如何幫助我們理解當代政治生活中的信仰衝突？並列篇名：How Could Rousseau's Civil Religion Help Us Understand the Conflict of Beliefs in Modern Political Life?作者：葉明叡(Ming-Jui Yeh)關鍵字：公民宗教的當代理解;國家制度;信仰;憲法;世俗主義;modem understanding of civil religion;national institution;belief;constitution;secularism期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：在後神權政治的當代，已沒有高於一切價值的權威來指導人們的政治生活，當不同宗教或政治信念／信仰（beliefs）對於政治生活的規範產生衝突時，最終無可避免發生信仰對決。雖然主權國家的憲法看似為中立、世俗的裁決者，實際上憲法也是基於某種價值體系來對政治、非政治生活進行劃分，並對政治生活採取不寬容的齊一化。透過對盧梭文本的探索及詮釋，本文提出「公民宗教的當代理解」，主張運用此一新的分析架構，可釐清與評估信仰衝突問題的核心，並發現公民宗教若透過適當的「國家制度」傳遞，可培養公民的愛國心與義務感，逐漸消弭信仰衝突。英文摘要：In this post-theocracy era, there is no absolute authority that can guide our political life. When different religious or political beliefs conflict with each other in the normativity of political life, eventually, a conflict of beliefs is bound to happen. Although the constitutions of sovereign states seem to be neutral and secular judges, they are in fact imposing a value system that distinguishes the public and private realms and are intolerant of parochial values in political life. Through an examination of Rousseau's texts, this essay proposes a modem understanding of civil religion, arguing that this understanding could serve as a useful analytical framework to clarify and evaluate the conflict of beliefs. The essay also finds that if the civil religion is preached with proper national institutions, it cultivates the citizens' love of their home country and their duties. Hence, the problems that arose from conflicting beliefs would be ameliorated.起始頁-結束頁：41-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心20篇名：以「治」領「政」：當代中國讀書人觀看自由民主的一種方式並列篇名：Good Governing More Basic than Good Politics: Some Modern Chinese Appraisals of Liberal Democracy作者：許雅棠(Ya-tang Hsu)關鍵字：治理;政治;中國政治思惟;自由民主;governing;politics;Chinese thinking mode of politics and governing;liberal democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文選擇四位有代表意義的中國當代政治學者，彼此都熟悉西方自由民主體制，雖無思想互動，但在思想表達上，卻不約而同地呈現出不同於已然普世流行之自由民主思惟，並且共同呼應著中國古代政治思想傳統一種以治理為重的思考。此種思惟對於西方自由民主所展現之以政體為重的思惟與體制安排，採取了批判的態度，呈現一種以「治」為重，以「政」為輕的思想特質。雖然四位學者關於如何安置自由民主制度的態度有別，但是這種不約而同以治理為重的共通性，不啻顯示中國古代政治思想與傳統仍有其旺盛的生命活力。英文摘要：Liberal democracy, in spite of its bad performance in many countries, is still taken to be the final human political establishment in its thinking mode and institutional framework among most political scientists. But some serious challenges are on the rise. The one I introduce here comes from ancient Chinese political tradition and is exemplified by four modem Chinese political scientists, who are all familiar with the doctrine of liberal democracy, but disagree with its thinking mode: the primacy of the politics of liberal democracy. Independently, they all put political primacy on good governing and treat it as the basis of any regime, democratic or not. This paper tries to expound this uniquely critical point on liberal democracy, and reveals its connection with the tradition of ancient China's political thought.起始頁-結束頁：73-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心01篇名：臺灣青壯年人口健康行為的影響因素並列篇名：Determinants of Health Behavior among Working-age Population in Taiwan作者：洪乙禎(Yi-chen Hong)關鍵字：健康行為;飲食習慣;運動習慣;health behavior;eating habit;physical activity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：31卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣民眾主要死因以慢性疾病居多，健康行為被視為控制慢性病及促進健康的重要途徑。具體的健康行為可包括：規律運動和均衡飲食等良好生活型態。本文利用2004－2008年國民營養健康狀況變遷調查之資料，選取19至64歲人口為對象，檢視人口特質和社經背景等因素對於能否落實蔬果攝取和規律運動的影響效果。結果顯示，教育程度越高、中等收入之人口，落實健康行為的比例高於其他族群。此外，年齡越長者，規律運動或足量水果攝取的比例越高；女性攝取足量水果的比例高於男性；經濟條件佳、有伴侶者，則對於攝取蔬果有所助益。英文摘要：The majority of the top 10 causes of death in Taiwan are chronic diseases. Active health behaviors such as eating habits or physical activities are regarded as a critical pathway for preventing chronic diseases and promoting health. By using the 2004-2008 Nutrition and Health Survey in Taiwan, this study selects the population aged 19 to 64 as the object, and discusses the effects of socioeconomic conditions and other influential factors on health behaviors, including regular exercise and fruit and vegetable intake. The results indicate that the groups with higher education level or middle income have higher probability of implementing health behaviors. Economic status shows positive effects on the behavior of fruit and vegetable intake. In addition, other demographic factors, including age, sex, and marital status, affect the behaviors of regular exercise and fruit and vegetable intake.起始頁-結束頁：111-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心01篇名：文化研究二十年－編輯室的話並列篇名：Editorial: Twenty Years of Cultural Studies in Taiwan作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：4-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00012篇名：沒有人是一座島嶼－編輯室的話並列篇名：Editorial: No Man is an Island作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：4-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).00013篇名：臺灣都市與區域發展之文化策略批判研究回顧，1990s－2010s並列篇名：A Review of Critical Research on Cultural Strategies for Urban and Regional Development in Taiwan, 1990s-2010s作者：王志弘(Chih-Hung WANG)關鍵字：文化治理;文化經濟;都市再生;創意城市;文化抵抗;Cultural governance;Cultural economy;Urban regeneration;Creative city;Cultural resistance期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文回顧臺灣學界針對都市與區域發展之文化策略的批判性研究成果，嘗試掌握臺灣學界知識生產的特質。首先，作者彙整對於文化發展策略的主要批判，涵蓋地方營造、歷史保存、展演節慶及創意城市等主題，提出國家宰制、階級支配、資本逐利、文化失落和環境危機等批評，以及對於文化抵抗的期許。接著，作者評述本地學界據以掌握發展之文化策略的框架性概念：文化生活圈、文化規劃、創意群聚與創意城市，以及文化治理等，並連結上三個立場不同但互有交流、以學術機構為核心的知識網絡，探討其理論連結和實踐關切。最後，作者提議以分析和重建文化生活支持網絡，作為新的研究與實踐議程。英文摘要：This article revisits the critical research on cultural strategies associated with urban and regional development in Taiwan's academia. The author first summarizes criticism centering on cultural strategies paralleling the development of Taiwan: critics have discussed the effects of community buildings, historic preservation, performative festivals, creative cities and so on to propose that they actually embody state control, class ruling, the liability of capital to pursue greater profit, cultures that gradually lose their glamour, and the environmental crisis. Against these problems, critics have also envisioned cultural resistance. The author then shows the framing ideas local scholars have adopted so far to explore these cultural strategies of development. These include the living sphere of culture, cultural planning, creative clusters, creative cities and cultural governance, ideas that are connected to a network of knowledge constituted by three academic institutions which hold different positions yet have mutual exchanges. After discussing their respective theoretical connection and concerns regarding practices, the author concludes that an analysis as well as a reconstruction of the support network for cultural life should be pivotal, and should therefore be considered as the next agenda of research and practices.起始頁-結束頁：13-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00024篇名：音樂、國家、與時間性：以日本二戰前後音樂關於日本特質的論爭為例並列篇名：Music, State, and Time: Controversies on Musical Japaneseness during Wartime Japan作者：楊建章(Chien-Chang YANG)關鍵字：音樂;日本;現代主義;法西斯;時間性;Fascism;Temporality;Music;Modernism;Japan期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文的焦點，以1930年代到1940年代初，日本作曲家與評論人對於音樂中的「日本特質」（日本的<U+306A><U+308B><U+3082><U+306E>）的討論，以及與當時最重要的政治文化事件—「皇記二千六百年」，的音樂活動為主要對象。本文認為，當時的音樂論述中對於「日本的」現代主義音樂的想像，與對於日本帝國以及法西斯體制下的戰時日本，有著微妙的對應關係，尤其是呈現在音樂與國家論述的時間特性之中。英文摘要：The fascist connection with music during WWII in European contexts has been well documented and studied in the past decades. Less attention was paid, however, to the fact that the musical link to political fascism was developed in contemporaneous Japan. This paper examines wartime Japan in their music-aesthetic discourses during the 1930s and early 1940s, focusing on the modern manifestation of ”Japanese quality”(日本的<U+306A><U+308B><U+3082><U+306E>) in music. In particular, this paper analyzes the characterization of the temporality of the state and the temporality in music, and explains how music and state were put on a parallel scale of time.起始頁-結束頁：13-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).00025篇名：不同時空下的臺日天涯淪落人：1960年代臺語流行歌曲和社會邊緣人並列篇名：Outcasts of Modern Taiwanese and Japanese Societies: The Socially Marginalized Individuals in Taiwanese Popular Songs in the 1960s作者：陳培豐(Pei-Feng CHEN)關鍵字：社會邊緣人;農村人口移動;集團就職;情感結構;望鄉歌謠;股旅演歌;The social marginals;Rural emigration;Structure of feeling;The homesickness song (Boukyou enka);The Wandering Knight-errant tale song (Mata tabimono enka)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019中文摘要：以1960年代臺、日流行歌曲為取徑，本論文試圖去探究孤獨不安、流浪失業、無依無靠及落魄淪落等社會邊緣人的情感結構，乃是來自什麼原因，在何種時代背景之下，如何被形構而成。在比較江戶時代（1603-1867）末期、大正時期（1912-1926）的日本，以及1960年代臺日兩地所發生的大規模農村人口移動後，本論文發現基於農村人口移動現象之共時性和類似性，臺灣人雖然在1960年代以大量翻唱日本「望鄉歌謠」的方式來作為描繪自身畫像的養分，但對臺日雙方而言，這場人口移動的歷史、社會、政治、經濟與族群意義卻明顯不同。特別是在人口移動發生時，日本政府進行了妥善的配套措施，使離鄉的苦痛、風險、衝擊降低，但國民黨政府卻任由臺灣農村青年孤單前往都市，自生自滅。在不同社會氛圍和條件下，臺日「望鄉歌謠」對於帶有社會邊緣人色彩之作品的需求和喜好，有著明顯不同。為了傾訴自身處境，臺灣人在翻唱「望鄉歌謠」時，便有在地化及擴散翻唱歌曲對象的必要性。而由於1960年代的臺灣社會和以江戶末期為舞臺的「股旅演歌」具疊映關係，因此基於臺灣工業化進程的後進性，以及政治環境的困厄，兩種不同時空的歌曲藉由「同為天涯淪落人」之遭遇為媒介，而有了水乳交融的空間。1960年代間，臺日同步走向高度經濟成長之路，但戰後歷史在兩者身上刻劃的傷痕卻大不相同，而「股旅演歌」的翻唱成為突顯戰後臺日歷史傷痕之深淺的反射物。英文摘要：Taking the Taiwanese and Japanese popular songs as the subject of study, this pa-per attempts to examine the nature of the structure of feeling of the marginalized people and the historical background of its development in the 1960s' Taiwan. After comparing Japan's late Edo period (1603-1867) and the Taisho period (1912-1926), and the rural population movements occurred in both Japan and Taiwan in the 1960s, this paper finds that under different social atmospheres and conditions, the preference of the homesickness songs (Boukyou Enka) for those social marginals were significantly different in Japan and Taiwan. In order to present their own situation, Tai-wanese people localized the subject when covering the genre of Japanese homesickness songs. It also extended to cover the Japanese Wandering Knight-errant tale songs (Mata Tabimono Enka) which often took the late Edo period as the historical stage and echoed the social situation of Taiwan in the 1960s. The two types of song genre merged through the stories of the misfortune in reflecting the backwardness of Taiwan's indus-trialization process and the distress of the political environment. In the 1960s, Taiwan and Japan took a path of high economic growth, but the scars imprinted during the postwar era were very different. The Taiwanese covering of the Wandering Knight-errant tale song became a reflection of the differences in the histori-cal scars of Japan and Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：61-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).00036篇名：空間與文化研究分析框架的對話並列篇名：A Discussion of Spatio-cultural Analytical Frameworks作者：陳東升(Dung-Sheng CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：63-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00037篇名：民族誌、文化與地方並列篇名：Ethnography, Culture, and Place作者：莊雅仲(Ya-Chung CHUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：86-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00048篇名：邁向共生的都市並列篇名：Towards a City of Coexistence作者：呂欣怡(Hsin-Yi LU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：92-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00059篇名：後殖民主義之「後」：超越後殖民想像及底層研究作為批判「理論」並列篇名：Beyond Postcolonial Imagination and Subaltern Studies as Critical Theory作者：陳奕麟(Allen CHUN)關鍵字：後殖民主義;底層研究;西歐中心主義;治理性;文化批判;社會理論;Postcolonialism;Subaltern studies;Eurocentrism;Governmentality;Cultural critique;Social theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文試圖對兩種後殖民主義的文化批判傳統加以澄清並反思。一方面，所謂後殖民理論文獻引起了激烈爭議，但筆者認為許多問題是定義矛盾所造成的，並在不同的學科裡產生了不相容的思考模式。另一方面，「底層研究」（subaltern studies）植根於不同的具體歷史脈絡和理論範疇，同時產生了不同類型的問題意識。透過反思兩種不同但相關的後殖民主義及其跨學科影響，本文主張釐清知識和其事實脈絡之間所產生的共棲關係，才有助於解構殖民文化權力的運作。但兩者最終批評的對象仍然是以西歐為中心的理論正統權威或歷史主流經驗，因此原則上能建立在共同研究架構上。英文摘要：This paper is an analysis and critique of two genres of postcolonial cultural critique. On the one hand, so-called postcolonial theory has sparked heated debate in the literature. I argue that many problems are caused by contradictions in definition; in different disciplinary contexts, they have created incompatible conceptual mindsets. On the other hand, subaltern studies is rooted in a different concrete historical context and theoretical framework, thus at the same time creating a different kind of problematic. Through a critical reassessment of these different but related postcolonialisms and their interdisciplinary influence, this paper will emphasize the collusive relationship between knowledge and its field of practice in order to deconstruct the operation of colonial cultural power. Yet the object of critical gazing for both is still Eurocentric theoretical authority or its historical prevalence, thus in principle can ultimately be viewed within the same frame of analysis.起始頁-結束頁：101-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).000610篇名：殖民現代性主體的生成與破滅：再論〈植有木瓜樹的小鎮〉並列篇名：The Formation and Disillusionment of Colonial Modernity Subject: A Further Discussion on ”A Town with Papaya Trees”作者：黃琪椿(Chi-Chun HUANG)關鍵字：日殖時期;殖民現代性;自我;Japanese colonial period;Modernity;Subject期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019中文摘要：知識分子問題一向為龍瑛宗所關心的命題，過往研究亦多注意到其筆下知識分子已經不同於過往，為新的主體狀態。本文通過西方與日本的精神史脈絡，重新詮釋龍瑛宗創作〈植有木瓜樹的小鎮〉前後的精神狀態，探討龍瑛宗所塑造的新主體的意涵。本文研究指出龍瑛宗塑造了從殖民地資本主義產生新的現代性個人主體，這個新的現代性個人主體具有「經濟個人主義」特質，深信個人是自身與能力的所有者，憑藉個人努力就可以獲得利益且向上發展。不過，在殖民地環境下，這個新的現代性個人主體甫出場就帶著破滅的印記。本研究更進一步指出龍瑛宗深刻揭示了日本在臺推動的資本主義的性格，以及被殖民的臺灣人僅能分得殘渣利益的幻影。英文摘要：The issue of intellectuals has always been the topic that Long Ying-Zong is concerned about. Past studies have also noted that the intellectuals he writes are different from the past and are the new subject state. Through the spiritual history of the west and Japan, this paper re-interprets the mental state before and after Long Ying-Zong's creation ”A Town with Papaya Trees”, and discusses the implication of the new subject shaped by Long Ying-Zong. This paper points out that Long Ying-Zong has shaped a new modern individual subject generated from colonial capitalism. This new modern individual subject has the characteristics of ”economic individualism” and believes that individuals are the owners of themselves and their abilities and can gain benefits and develop upward with their own efforts. However, in the colonial environment, this new modern individual subject appeared with a broken mark. This study further points out that Long reveals deeply the character of Japanese-driven capitalism in Taiwan and the illusion that the colonized Taiwanese can only get a residual benefit.起始頁-結束頁：107-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).000411篇名：去殖民、去冷戰與去帝國的閾限性：以波瓦新聞劇場與東亞流行文化為方法的社區即興喜劇《大歹紀》並列篇名：The Liminality of Decolonization, De-Cold War and Deimperialization: Boal's Newspaper Theater and East Asian Popular Culture as Method in Drama Box's Community Commedia Dell'Arte News Busters!作者：黃浩威(How Wee NG)關鍵字：被壓迫者劇場;新聞劇場;義大利即興喜劇;東亞流行文化;戲劇盒;新加坡劇場;Theater of the Oppressed;Newspaper theater;Commedia dell'Arte;East Asian popular culture;Drama Box;Singapore theater期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019中文摘要：新加坡華語劇場的研究大多從歷史線形式或分段式角度分析，未曾將其文化實踐置於後殖民、後冷戰與後帝國的脈絡中思考。本文的研究對象是新加坡最為活躍之一、具社會批判意識，並以華語社區劇場著稱的劇團－戲劇盒。劇團一方面必須應對政府具帝國想像的「環球藝術城市」政策，同時受制於沿襲自英殖民體制的多元文化主義話語，並在後冷戰脈絡中以英語為工作語言的環境中，實踐具有政治批判與社會參與意識的華語劇場。筆者認為，通過借鑑陳光興（2006）「亞洲作為方法」思考劇團的文化實踐，能彰顯其文化干預在後殖民、後冷戰與後帝國脈絡中的意義。即興喜劇系列的《大歹紀》是戲劇盒最為著名的社區劇場製作之一，該劇在不同政府組屋區巡演，具有強烈的義大利即興喜劇的風格，應用奧古斯都．波瓦（Augusto Boal）被壓迫者詩學（poetics of the oppressed）中的新聞劇場（newspaper theater），並挪用東亞流行文化針砭時事。筆者將重點論述2007年7月4日在牛車水廣場（Kreta Ayer Square）的演出。該地點位於已故建國總理李光耀政治選區的一個戶外市民空間，而演出的社會政治意義重大，不僅戲謔新加坡2006年大選，質疑高薪養廉、能賢制度與精英主義，亦反思選民的政治冷感、保守與短視。《大歹紀》雖可於去殖民、去帝國與去冷戰的脈絡中探討，但由於劇團與政府有著既協作亦抗爭的多重關係，該劇的文化抗爭有一定的閾限性－此一反思是「亞洲作為方法」警惕二元對立思維模式的回應。英文摘要：The research on Singapore Chinese theater has largely focused on the study of theater groups, productions and/or practitioners within fixed historical timelines. There exists a gap in the consideration of how socially engaged Chinese theater in contemporary Singapore can potentially contribute to the discourse on decolonization, de-Cold War and de-imperialization. This paper examines Drama Box, one of Singapore's most prolific theater companies, known for its socially engaging Mandarin productions and community theater. Drawing from Chen Kuan-hsing's ”Asia as method”, I consider the theater group's cultural practice in relation to the state's ongoing project for developing Singapore into ”a global city for the arts,” the official framework of multiculturalism which draws from British colonial legacies, and the post-Cold War milieu for using Mandarin as a medium for political critique and social engagement in Singapore where English is an official working language. Focusing on the 2007 production of News Busters!, Drama Box's Mandarin community comedy theater series touring in different government housing estates and inspired by the farcical and satirical conventions of Commedia dell'Arte, I analyze how it appropriates Augusto Boal's newstheater techniques and East Asian popular culture genres and motifs for sociopolitical critique. Paying particular attention to the performance at Kreta Ayer Square, I examine the sociopolitical significance of its satire in an open civil space located in the late Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew's constituency. This is a play that has satirized the Singapore General Election in 2006, questioned the government's rationale for high ministerial salaries, meritocracy and elitism, and reflected on the political apathy, conservatism and myopia of voters. While the cultural intervention of News Busters! potentially contributes to decolonization, de-Cold War and de-imperialization, its liminality lies in Drama Box's multifaceted relationship with the state, which is simultaneously collaborative and oppositional. Such an understanding problematizes binarized thinking, as proposed by ”Asia-as-method”.起始頁-結束頁：123-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).000712篇名：邁向反知識原詩：詩人工作者谷川雁的聲響認識論並列篇名：Toward the Ur-Poesy of Oppositional Knowledge: Tanigawa Gan's Epistemology of Sound作者：羅皓名(Hao-Ming LO)關鍵字：反知識;谷川雁;聲響認識論;日本新左翼;原詩;Opposite knowledge;Tanigawa Gan;Sound epistemology;Japanese New Left;Ur-poesy期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019中文摘要：谷川雁（Tanigawa Gan, 1923-1995），是對日本新左翼思想及運動有著顛覆性衝擊的詩人思想家。在由日本越境至臺灣島上的批判性藝術行動－帳篷劇與舞踏中亦出現了他的痕跡。回顧由此連結出的水脈，其中的思想與行動可以被視為對知識的破壞性創造工作。「如果不顛覆世界的映像，就永遠無法顛覆現實。先從印象（image）開始改變！」谷川雁的這個戰法，換言之就是顛覆既有的思考框架、召喚新可能性之想像、在思想層次上開啟的革命戰爭。在他的思想中，民眾同時作為反動溫床與革命動力源的能量場。在「異端之民」的深處，存在著作為革命陰極（相對於以前衛黨或知識分子代表的陽極）的「原點」。對此，他如雙頭怪獸般同時拒絕學院派的知性秩序，也拒絕「大眾的沈默」。以「工作者」為方法，他試圖在對前者的組織語言及後者的生活語言的雙重破壞上，創造「朝反方向結晶的知性」的新語言。這個新語言啟動於與埋藏在現實表層底下的異端之民的「原詩」的共鳴。從這條思路中，我們可以發現一條以聲響串接的思想方式。這對製造具有知識生產性的思想噪音這項工作，提供了一些可用的音源。英文摘要：Tanigawa Gan is a poet and thinker who has a subversive impact on Japanese New Left thinking and movement. His trace can also be found in such critical art actions as Tent Theatre and Butoh, which travels from Japan to Taiwan. Looking at the context of his influence, the thoughts and actions in it can be seen as the work of destructive creation of knowledge. Tanigawa said: ”If you do not subvert the reflection of the world, you will never be able to subvert the reality. Start with the image.” This proposition is his tactics. It is to subvert the existing framework, to summon the imagination of new possibilities, and wage revolutionary wars at the ideological level. In his thoughts, people are an energy field of both reactionary and revolutionary motives. In the depth of ”heretical people,” there is an ”Origin” as the cathode of revolution (relative to the anode as represented by vanguard party or intelligentsia). Like a double-headed monster, he refuse intellectual orders of the academism and reject ”the mute of the masses.” The ”Maker” (工作者) method that he used, attempted to undermine both former's organized language and the latter's living language, subsequently created a new language that ”crystallized at the opposite direction of intellectual.” This new language started by the resonance of the ”ur-poesy” which is buried under the surface of reality. In this route, we can find a thinking approach which concatenated by ”sound.” It provides some useable ”sources” for how to create a work with productive intellectual thought of noise.起始頁-結束頁：141-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).000513篇名：做土的問題：文化研究「建制」在上海並列篇名：The Problem of Making Soil: The ”Institutionalization” of Cultural Studies in Shanghai作者：羅小茗(Xiao-Ming LUO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：162-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).000814篇名：「臺灣－文化研究」作為第三隻眼：從我的精神與知識構造入手並列篇名：”Taiwan-Cultural Studies” as the Third Eye: Entering through the Construction of My Spirit, Emotion and Knowledge作者：郭佳(Jia KUO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：178-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).000915篇名：壓抑的「言語」與再造的「身體」：《香．夭》重演之過程及其評論並列篇名：Repressed Words and Renovated Bodies: The Extended Version of Requiem HK作者：董顯亮(Xian-Liang DONG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：187-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).000616篇名：以誰作為方法？：從文化研究、亞洲研究到臺灣研究並列篇名：XX as Method?: A Journey from Cultural Studies to Asian Studies and Taiwan Studies作者：陳佩甄(Pei-Jean CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：196-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).001017篇名：再思文化研究教育的政治空間並列篇名：Rethinking the Politics of Cultural Studies and Pedagogy作者：鄭<U+4E98>良(Keng-Liang CHENG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：206-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).001118篇名：序言並列篇名：Preface作者：今福龍太(Ryuta IMAFUKU);朱惠足(Huei-Chu CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：214-225資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).000719篇名：前往「濱田康作共鳴體」的世界並列篇名：濱田康作共鳴体<U+3078>作者：今福龍太(Ryuta IMAFUKU);朱惠足(Huei-Chu CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：226-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).000820篇名：來自「水之島」並列篇名：「水<U+306E>島」<U+304B><U+3089>作者：濱田康作(Hamada KOUSAKU);朱惠足(Huei-Chu CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：230-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).000901篇名：安身於主體性的想像之外並列篇名：Beyond the Imagination of Zhu-ti-xing作者：張馨文(Hsing-Wen CHANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：232-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00122篇名：文化研究在臺灣體制化的20週年－我的再學習與再反思並列篇名：Twenty Years of the Institutionalization of Cultural Studies in Taiwan - My Re-Learning and Retrospection作者：姜亞築(Ya-Chu CHIANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：242-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00133篇名：之後，前往東南亞並列篇名：<U+305D><U+3057><U+3066>東南<U+30A2><U+30B8><U+30A2><U+3078>作者：東松照明(Shomei TOMATSU);朱惠足(Huei-Chu CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：248-252+254-269資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).00104篇名：「文化研究」從哪裡來：一段思想移動／運動的筆記並列篇名：Where is ”Cultural Studies” from? - Notes on the Trajectories of Thinking Movements作者：劉雅芳(Ya-Fang LIU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：257-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00145篇名：「文化研究」的展望與回望並列篇名：Prospects and Retrospects of Cultural Studies作者：蔡孟哲(Meng-Che TSAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：265-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00156篇名：巴西島，漂流並列篇名：<U+30D6><U+30E9><U+30B8><U+30EB>島、漂流作者：今福龍太(Ryuta IMAFUKU);朱惠足(Huei-Chu CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：270-295資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).00117篇名：亡魂顯影的思辨：論「靈異錄像」與「觀落陰」的視線邊界並列篇名：The Speculation of Ghosts: The Ghosts in Supernatural Videos and Blindfold Taoist Rituals作者：梁廷毓(Ting-Yu LIANG)關鍵字：鬼魂;影像;靈異影像;觀落陰;Ghosts;Images;Supernatural Videos;Blindfold Taoist Rituals期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019中文摘要：幽靈、鬼魅，近年來時常成為臺灣乃至於亞洲當代藝術書寫中，用以描述攝影、影像、投映裝置的美學論述，以及描繪其感知型態的語詞。影像彷彿提供了歷史幽靈復返的路徑，讓被壓抑、骯髒、受迫之人，以鬼魂之姿重回當下，並有能力展開時間的調度，在過去與當下、現實與虛構之間穿梭與擾動。但是，當「鬼魂」不以一種隱喻的修辭存在，不再只是「過去的復返」、「精神的纏繞」，不再是人所賦予的倫理學化的想像，不再背負其歷史的冤仇與創傷，仍然執意（或無意）進入影像之時，我們該如何理解影像與鬼魂的關係？當人們想透過觀落陰「見到」已逝親人的亡魂時，觀看如何得以不經由光線，與「影像」產生關聯？首先，本文會從臺灣當代藝術的影像實踐與評述中的鬼魂性質，作為問題意識的展開，再進行鬼魂概念的思辨，並進一步以「靈異影像」與「觀落陰」為例，分別從監視器當中「攝入鬼魂的影像」、「否定光線的影像儀式」，探討這兩者在影像生產、觀看機制，以及放映形式上，蘊含何種特殊的影像概念。一方面，這些「影像」被排拒在影像研究的範圍之外，鮮少被討論過；另一方面，理性的話語也面臨難以論述、脈絡化這些「影像」的困局。這些位處於我們視線之外的幽影，讓影像的生產過程不再倚賴光源、傷痕敘事與歷史事件，卻直面觀看本身的困難，直逼影像認知的界限。文末，筆者嘗試將這些還在形塑中的「影像」與「類影像」概念，重新置放到臺灣當代藝術關於影像研究、論述中的鬼魂性質與想像當中，並進行相關的反思與問題的推進。英文摘要：The terms 'ghosts' and 'spirits' have recently been commonly adopted in the aesthetic discourse as the function of narrating photography, images and installations in the field of contemporary art writings in Taiwan and across Asia. The images, as if providing a portal for the return of the spirits of the past, allow the repressed and suppressed able to traverse to and from past and present, reality and fiction in the form of apparitions. Nevertheless, how should we understand the relationship between the image and the apparition when the apparition within the image escapes its role as the metaphor and no longer merely refers to the notion of 'the return of the dead' or 'the affiliation with the soul', and no longer carries the burdens and traumas of history? When one expects to 'see' the ghosts of their lost beloved through the Blindfold Taoist Ritual, how is this 'seeing' of an 'image' made possible without the interference of light? To begin with, the text discusses the characteristics of ghosts within realizations and critiques of images in Taiwanese contemporary art before further reflecting on the definition of ghosts. Through investigation of the two examples, 'Ghost in Supernatural Video' and 'Blindfold Taoist Ritual', particularly in their image production, mechanism of reading as well as ways of projection, the text explores the implied perceptions of the image through 'the photographed ghosts' and 'the image ritual without light' in surveillance images. These are 'images' taken less seriously, and at the same time, there has been the intricacy of narrating these 'images' and putting them in context through rational reasoning. To conclude, the author attempts to ponder over the characteristics of ghosts by means of the still-evolving notion of 'image' as well as its relating concepts in Taiwanese contemporary art.起始頁-結束頁：271-300資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).00168篇名：來自微觀語言區的發想並列篇名：<U+30DF><U+30AF><U+30ED>言語<U+5E2F><U+304B><U+3089><U+306E><U+767A>想作者：川<U+6E80>信一(Shinichi KAWAMITSU);朱惠足(Huei-Chu CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：296-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).00129篇名：中國特色的都市公共空間與地方文化自主性：評介王笛的《茶館：成都的公共生活和微觀世界1900－1950》及The Teahouse under Socialism: The Decline and Renewal of Public Life in Chengdu, 1950-2000並列篇名：Urban Public Space and Local Cultural Autonomy with Chinese Characteristics: Review of Wang Di's The Teahouse: Small Business, Everyday Culture, and Public Politics in Chengdu, 1900-1950 (Chinese Version) and The Teahouse under Socialism: The Decline and Renewal of Public Life in Chengdu, 1950-2000作者：劉世鼎(Shih-Diing LIU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：29期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：301-313資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(29).001710篇名：邁向意識之海物語並列篇名：意識<U+306E>海<U+306E><U+3082><U+306E><U+304C><U+305F><U+308A><U+3078>作者：谷川雁(Gan TANIGAWA);許時嘉(Shih-chia HSU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：316-326資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).001311篇名：書寫島嶼、來自島嶼的深窪、腳邊的黑暗並列篇名：島<U+3092>書<U+304F><U+3068><U+3044><U+3046><U+3053><U+3068>、島<U+306E>窪<U+307F><U+304B><U+3089>、足許<U+306E>闇作者：崎山多美(Tami SAKIYAMA);朱惠足(Huei-Chu CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：327-334資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).001412篇名：另一個離於島並列篇名：<U+B610> <U+D558><U+B098><U+C758> <U+C774><U+C5B4><U+B3C4>作者：高銀(Un KO);林于珊(Yu-Shan LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：335-354資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).001513篇名：日本尼西亞的根部並列篇名：<U+30E4><U+30DD><U+30CD><U+30B7><U+30A2><U+306E>根<U+3063><U+3053>作者：島尾敏雄(Shimao TOSHIO);朱惠足(Huei-Chu CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：355-358資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).001614篇名：無人是孤島－給喬吉並列篇名：No One Is an Island-For Georgie作者：泰瑞西亞．提艾瓦(Teresia TEAIWA);郭佩宜(Pei-Yi GUO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：359-362資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).001715篇名：追尋Nim'anoa女神並列篇名：Searching for Nei Nim'anoa作者：泰瑞西亞．提艾瓦(Teresia TEAIWA);郭佩宜(Pei-Yi GUO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：363-364資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).001816篇名：《認識之浪：海象認識論》緒論（節譯）並列篇名：An Excerpt from the Introduction of Waves of Knowing: A Seascape Epistemology作者：卡琳．阿米莫多．英格索(Karin Amimoto INGERSOLL);陳耀宗(Yau-Chong TAN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：365-379資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).001917篇名：《關係詩學》（節選）並列篇名：Selection from Poetique de la relation作者：愛德華．格里桑(Edouard GLISSANT);林書媺(Shu-Mei LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：380-399資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).002018篇名：琉球共和社會憲法C／我（試）案並列篇名：琉球共和社會憲法C私（試）案作者：川<U+6E80>信一(Shinichi KAWAMITSU);林家瑄(Chia-Hsuan LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：401-415資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).002119篇名：群島響和社會平行憲法並列篇名：群島響和社<U+4F1A>〈平行〉憲法　<U+65AD>章作者：今福龍太(Ryuta IMAFUKU);蔡鈺淩(Yu-Ling TSAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：416-437資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).002220篇名：島嶼作為世界之起源／終結：呂則之（澎湖）與崎山多美（八重山）的離島民族誌想像並列篇名：Islands as the Origin/End of the World: Ethnographic Imaginations from the Penghu (Taiwan) and Yaeyama (Okinawa) Islands作者：朱惠足(Huei-Chu CHU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：28期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：438-459資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.201912_(28).002301篇名：食品安全促進並列篇名：Food Safety Promotion作者：許輔(Fuu Sheu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：563-565資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).PF062篇名：欠缺風險溝通的食品風險治理架構並列篇名：Deficit risk communication in the food risk governance framework作者：徐健銘(Chien-Ming Hsu);周桂田(Kuei-Tien Chou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：566-568資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).PF073篇名：中藥調劑資格與產業傳承之政策改革並列篇名：Policy reforms concerning qualification of Chinese medicine dispensing and inheritance of chinese herbal industry作者：陳俞沛(Yu-Pei Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：569-573資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).1081044篇名：台灣醫療院所各類病床發展回顧：1985-2017年並列篇名：A review of hospital and clinics beds in Taiwan from 1985 to 2017作者：葉馨婷(Shin-Ting Yeh);吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu)關鍵字：醫療網計畫;病床;醫院整合醫學;社區式照護;居家式照護;Medical Care Network Plan;beds;hospitalist;community care;home care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：第一期醫療網計畫訂定2000年一般醫療設施每萬人口40床（含精神病床）之目標。本文系統性回顧我國醫療院所病床的分類與沿革發展。研究結果發現病床分類上越趨精細，且總病床數持續增加，2000年後醫院急性一般病床數增加趨緩，然特殊病床明顯增加，且以安寧病床、慢性呼吸照護病床、血液透析床、及亞急性呼吸照護病床增加最多；2017年每萬人口病床數為69.83床，已超過醫療網40床之目標。2064年預估我國總人口數將減少至1,758萬人，每萬人口病床數將因人口數減少而增加，減少病床與增加使用效率同等重要。本研究建議（1）將加護病床、燒傷病床、燒傷加護病床、嬰兒病床、急診觀察床等急性特殊病床納入管理；（2）因應多重慢性住院病人的增加，一般內科病房宜轉型為醫院整合醫學病房；（3）慢性一般病床應加速退場，（4）透析病床、安寧療護、呼吸照護治療、急性後期照護不應計入急性病床；透析病床屬治療床，其它後三者宜朝使用長期照顧機構提供服務。英文摘要：The Medical Care Network Plan, established in 1986, set the goal of having 40 physical and mental health beds per 10,000 people in general medical facilities by 2000. This study systematically reviewed the classification and development history of hospital and clinic beds in Taiwan. The classification of beds has become more complex, and the number of bed types has continued to increase. After 2000, the number of acute care beds increased slowly, but the number of special beds increased significantly. The most-increased special beds included hospice palliative care beds, chronic respiratory care beds, hemodialysis beds, and subacute respiratory care beds. In 2017, the number of beds per 10,000 people was 69.83, exceeding the original goal of 40 beds. In 2064, the total population will decrease to 17.58 million; thus, the number of beds per 10,000 people will automatically increase. Reducing the number of beds is as important as increasing efficiency. We suggest: (1) incorporating acute special care beds such as intensive care beds, burn beds, burn unit intensive care beds, infant care beds, and emergency observation beds into management; (2) transforming general medical beds into hospitalist beds to better respond to the increasing number of multiple chronic patients; (3) accelerating the withdrawal of chronic beds; and (4) excluding hemodialysis beds, hospice palliative care beds, respiratory care beds, and post-acute care beds from the acute beds category. Regarding this last suggestion, the hemodialysis bed is a treatment bed, and the others should be served by long-term care institutions.起始頁-結束頁：574-589資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).1080635篇名：WHOQOL-BREF之心理計量特徵的回顧研究並列篇名：A review on the psychometric properties of the WHOQOL-BREF作者：林立中(Li-Chung Lin);姚開屏(Grace Yao)關鍵字：世界衛生組織生活品質問卷簡明版;系統性回顧研究;生活品質;WHOQOL-BREF;review study;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：世界衛生組織生活品質問卷簡明版（WHOQOL-BREF）是一個廣泛使用於醫藥、公衛界的跨文化測量工具，目前已發展50餘國版本，然缺乏在不同國家或地區檢驗其心理計量特徵，本研究採用系統性回顧法，以評估其在不同樣本族群的信、效度。本研究於PsycINFO與MEDLINE資料庫，搜尋1998至2019年6月檢驗WHOQOL-BREF心理計量特徵的英文研究，共50篇文獻。研究發現WHOQOL-BREF之生理、心理、社會關係、與環境範疇具有高內部一致性信度與再測信度。此4範疇可有效區辨健康組與疾病組，並與健康相關問卷有顯著正相關，與疾病相關問卷有顯著負相關，具良好的區辨與效標關聯效度。然其建構效度不佳，部份研究無法驗證世界衛生組織所提出的4因素模型。綜觀此50篇研究發現，採取較不嚴謹的分析方法可能是造成WHOQOL-BREF建構效度不佳的原因。本研究依據心理計量理論及其模擬研究結果，建議未來在檢驗WHOQOL-BREF之建構效度時，於EFA採用迭代主軸法、多重方法決定因素數、與promax轉軸。於CFA採用較嚴謹的模型適配指標切結分數，並謹慎採用模型修正指數。英文摘要：The short version of the World Health Organization Quality of Life (WHOQOL-BREF) questionnaire, a cross cultural instrument, is widely used in medical and public health fields, with versions developed in over 40 countries. Because research to evaluate the psychometric properties of the WHOQOL-BREF in diverse sample groups is scant, this study systematically reviewed the reliability and validity of such research. We searched studies, written in English, of psychometric properties examined in the WHOQOL-BREF in MEDLINE and PsycINFO (from 1998 to the May 2019). Fifty papers were finally included. The findings showed that the physical, psychological, and social relationships and the environmental domains of the WHOQOL-BREF had appropriate Cronbach's α and test-retest reliabilities. All these four domains showed good discriminant and criterion-related validity, representing a significant differentiation between the healthy and unhealthy groups, and exhibited significantly positive and negative correlations on questionnaires measuring health and syndrome of illness symptoms. However, the WHOQOL-BREF performed poorly in construct validity. The four-factor model proposed by the WHO was not fully validated in studies reviewed. An overview of these 50 papers indicates that inappropriate statistical analysis approaches may be a reason for poor construct validity. Based on the psychometric theory and its results from simulation studies, this study recommends conducting exploratory factor analysis using iterative principle axis factoring, promax rotation, and multiple methods to determine the number of factors as well as using confirmatory factor analysis with strict cut-off scores in goodness-of-fit indices and cautiously adopting a modification index for evaluating the psychometric properties of the WHOQOL-BREF.起始頁-結束頁：590-603資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).1080876篇名：中醫資源可近性對於中醫門診利用之影響並列篇名：The association between the resource accessibility and the utilization of Traditional Chinese Medicine作者：林宜瑾(Yi-Chin Lin);郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo)關鍵字：中醫資源不足地區;中醫資源可近性;中醫門診利用;差異中之差異法;areas deficient in TCM resources;accessibility of TCM resources;ambulatory care utilization of TCM;difference in difference期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：探討中醫資源可近性不同變化情形，對於民眾中醫門診利用之影響，並分析中醫資源可近性與不同利用習慣者的關係。方法：本研究以中醫巡迴醫療施行區域與各年度的每萬人口中醫師數作為可近性之測量指標，共分為兩個子研究樣本：「可近性增加組」與「可近性降低組」，並依照可近性變化情形再區分個案組（中醫資源可近性有改變）與對照組。利用傾向分數配對（Propensity Score Matching）篩選對照組，以廣義估計方程式（GEE）進行差異中的差異法，搭配使用二部模型（Two-part model）進行分析；本研究採用健保資料庫進行分析，研究期間為2011年至2013年。結果：可近性增加組的個案其中醫門診利用皆顯著增加，中醫利用率的勝算比（odds ratio, OR）為1.094，個案組的中醫利用次數與費用改變率分別較對照組增加0.022%與0.128%；但對於可近性降低組的個案而言，其中醫門診利用皆顯著減少。結論：中醫資源對於中醫門診利用會造成影響，故建議主關機關能持續保障醫療資源缺乏地區民眾的之中醫就醫權益，並且須擬定相關政策以改善當前不同地區中醫利用差異之問題，以落實全民健保精神。英文摘要：Objectives: Our objective in this study was to characterize the means by which changes in the availability of TCM affect the ambulatory utilization of TCM among various groups of TCM users. Methods: TCM mobile health care coverage and the number of TCM physicians per 10,000 were used to define accessibility. We focused on two groups of patients, as follows: individuals who faced an increase in access to TCM and individuals who faced a decrease in access to TCM. We also considered individuals who did not face any changes in access to TCM as a control group. Propensity score matching was used in the selection of the control group. After parameter matching, difference-in-difference analysis was used in conjunction with the generalized estimating equation (GEE) within a two-part model for analysis. Results: Individuals who were provided greater access to TCM increased their utilization of TCM, compared to the control group, as follows: probability (+1.094 x), frequency (+1.022 x), and cost (1.128 x). Individuals who experienced a reduction in access to TCM decreased their utilization of TCM, compared to the control group, as follows: probability (-0.823 x), frequency (-0.940 x), and cost (-0.763 x). Conclusions: Our results reveal that access to TCM resources affects the ambulatory utilization of TCM. We therefore recommend that efforts be made to improve access to TCM in areas where TCM resources are scarce and that the government develops policies aimed at narrowing the differences in the utilization of TCM.起始頁-結束頁：604-616資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).1080727篇名：應用離散事件電腦模擬技術推估主治醫師工時限制對我國醫療服務提供之影響－以六個外科系專科別為例並列篇名：Application of discrete-event simulation modeling to project the effect of limiting the work hours of visiting staff on medical service volume: the case of 6 surgical specialties作者：陳仁傑(Jen-Chieh Chen);譚家惠(Elise Chia-Hui Tan);吳育庭(Yu-Ting Wu);陳錫杰(Hsi-Chieh Chen);陳佳宜(Chia-Yi Chen);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang)關鍵字：主治醫師;工時;醫療服務;離散事件;系統模擬;visiting staff;work-hours;medical service;discrete event;system simulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：主治醫師納入勞動基準法的議題爭議許久，然而有關制定工時上限對醫療服務提供與民眾就醫衝擊的相關研究尚付之闕如。本研究以電腦模擬方法推估健保特約西醫醫院六個外科系科別之主治醫師工時限縮後對醫療服務量的影響。方法：以問卷調查與深度訪談收集醫師工作內容、每項工時及排班邏輯；分析健保申報資料之全年門診、檢查及手術服務、手術耗用時間等醫療服務量資料，建構主治醫師全年醫療服務量現況模型，並依據三種可能工時限縮方案（每週總工時及連續工時上限：80/28, 76/28, 72/24）進行推估，比較其對於醫療服務提供的影響。結果：相較於主治醫師現行工作現況，三種工時限縮方案皆可能導致門診量的減少與手術排程的延後，且對於區域醫院層級以下的醫療服務提供者影響較大。工時限縮方案中以每週工時上限72小時，連續工時上限24小時的方案，對醫療服務提供與民眾就醫權益影響最鉅。結論：本醫師工時模型及分析結果可供主管機關做為制訂主治醫師工時限縮決策之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: Research is lacking on the effect of implementing work-hour limitations for hospitals' visiting staff in terms of the provision of medical services and accessibility to the public. This study used discrete-event computer simulation to estimate the effect of limiting the work hours of visiting staff on the medical service volume of 6 surgical specialties in hospitals under the National Health Insurance system. Methods: In-depth interviews and questionnaires were used to collect data on visiting staff's work content, elapsed working time, and scheduling logic. We also analyzed the National Health Insurance claims database to obtain the annual volume of outpatients, examinations, and surgical services and the total elapsed time. Based on these data, we developed a medical service model for the 6 surgical specialties and proposed 3 work-hour limitation models (maximum weekly working hours/maximum hours of continuous work: 80/28, 76/28, and 72/24); the effects of the models on the provision of medical services were compared. Results: Compared with the model currently applied for visiting staff, the model in which work hours were reduced led to decreased outpatient volume and delay in the surgical schedule. It had a greater effect on hospitals with an accreditation level lower than that of regional hospitals. The work-hour limitation model with a maximum of 72 working hours per week and a 24-hour limit on continuous duty had the greatest effect on the provision of medical services. Conclusions: The model and research results established in this study provide the competent authorities with a reference when making decisions regarding the limitation of work hours for visiting staff.起始頁-結束頁：617-632資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).1080668篇名：台灣醫療機構執行公開揭露機制之可行性分析並列篇名：Feasibility analysis of the incorporation of open disclosure practices in medical institutions in Taiwan作者：張修維(Shiu-Wei Chang);翁詩亮(Shih-Liang Weng);蔡家瑜(Chia-Yu Tsai);林東龍(Dong-Long Lin)關鍵字：公開揭露;不良事件;德菲研究法;醫療事故預防及爭議處理法;open disclosure;adverse event;Delphi Method;Medical Incident Prevention and Dispute Resolution Bill期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：衛生福利部已擬定「醫療事故預防及爭議處理辦法」草案，該草案融入歐美先進國家公開揭露機制之作法和精神。未來台灣實際推動該法案，可能遭遇何種障礙和需要哪些配套措施，需進一步探究。方法：除參考國外推動公開揭露經驗的文獻外，以德菲研究法收集國內16名對醫療爭議議題學有專精者的意見，瞭解其對於台灣推行公開揭露機制之障礙和所需配套措施等看法。結果：歷經三回合問卷，專家共提出38項醫療機構推行公開揭露的障礙，其中30個項目具高度共識；共提出41項推行公開揭露所需配套措施，其中34項具高度共識。結論：本研究建議包括：第一，面對醫療不良事件時，醫療機構需破除隱晦和究責個人的管理框架，建立說明真相的機制和組織文化；二是，改善負面或敵對的社會文化與法制，創造處理醫療爭議的友善環境；三是，透過教育訓練建立醫療人員揭露技巧與自信。英文摘要：Objectives: The Ministry of Health and Welfare has recently drafted a bill entitled ”Medical Incident Prevention and Dispute Resolution,” which seeks to incorporate the strategy and content of open disclosure practices that are in place in Europe and the United States. In the event that Taiwan implements this bill, the potential obstacles that may be encountered should be investigated as well as the coordinated set of measures that the bill will require. Methods: In addition to referring to the experience of other countries practicing open disclosure, this study employed the Delphi method to collect opinions from 16 domestic experts on the question of medical disputes. The aim was to analyze the obstacles and evaluate the coordinated set of measures needed to implement open disclosure in Taiwan. Results: After 3 rounds of questionnaires, the experts surveyed proposed 38 recommendations addressing the barriers medical institutions may face when implementing open disclosure. High consensus was reached on 30 of these recommendations. Additionally, 41 recommendations were offered regarding a coordinated set of measures for implementing open disclosure, with high consensus achieved for 34. Conclusions: The recommendations obtained through this research include the following. First, when medical institutions deal with adverse medical events, the tendency of management to conceal and blame individuals should cease. Instead, solutions should be implemented to establish mechanisms and bring changes to the organizational culture to ensure the truth is preserved. Second, improvements are warranted in terms of the hostile social culture and legal system. A friendly environment should be created to ensure that medical disputes are resolved amicably. Third, efforts should be made to foster mature open disclosure behaviors and enhance the confidence of medical staff through education and training.起始頁-結束頁：633-645資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).1081059篇名：評論：台灣醫療機構執行公開揭露機制之可行性分析並列篇名：Commentary: a review of hospital and clinics beds in Taiwan from 1985 to 2017作者：林金定(Jin-Ding Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：646-646資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).1081050110篇名：作者回覆：台灣醫療機構執行公開揭露機制之可行性分析並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary: feasibility analysis of the incorporation of open disclosure practices in medical institutions in Taiwan作者：張修維(Shiu-Wei Chang);翁詩亮(Shih-Liang Weng);蔡家瑜(Chia-Yu Tsai);林東龍(Dong-Long Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：647-647資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).1081050211篇名：Study of Osteoporotic Fractures（SOF Index）衰弱量表的效度驗證－一般社區長者以及獨居長者的應用並列篇名：Validity of the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures Index (SOF Index): cases of community-dwelling older adults and older adults living alone作者：胡倍瑜(Bei-Yu Hu);游曉微(Hsiao-Wei Yu);邱慈穎(Tzu-Ying Chiu);林莉玲(Li-Ling Lin);陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen);陳雅美(Ya-Mei Chen)關鍵字：衰弱;衰弱量表比較;效標關聯效度;獨居長者;frailty;comparison of frailty index;criterion-related validity;old adults living alone期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：台灣長照照顧管理評估量表以Study of Osteoporotic Fractures（SOF Index）指標作為衰弱篩檢工具。本研究目的是以國際常用Frieds Frailty Phenotype作為標準，檢視SOF與Frieds Frailty Phenotype量表一致性。方法：本研究為橫斷研究採立意取樣面訪問卷收案，收案對象為台北市某行政區65歲以上社區長者（N = 471，包含一般社區長者369位、列冊關懷獨居長者102位）。資料分析探討Frieds Frailty Phenotype量表與SOF量表在全部長者、社區長者、及獨居長者的同時效度為何。結果：以Frieds Frailty Phenotype量表為標準量表時，全部長者結果顯示與SOF量表呈現中度相關（r = 0.51*）。在一般社區長者以及列冊關懷獨居長者中，亦與SOF量表呈現中度相關（r = 0.53*; r = 0.44*）。SOF加入Frieds Frailty Phenotype緩慢指標後，與Frieds Frailty Phenotype的一致性在全部長者、一般社區長者以及列冊關懷獨居長者分別提升到0.70*、0.72*、0.56*。結論：兩量表評估結果與世界先進國家研究結果相似，SOF量表雖有低估傾向，但是可以作為評估台灣社區長者及獨居長者衰弱的工具。使用SOF量表加入「緩慢」指標可以進一步提升SOF量表的準確性。英文摘要：Objectives: To measure the degree of frailty in older adults, it is common to use Frieds frailty phenotype index in Taiwan and advanced countries, whereas the Taiwanese government uses the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) index. This study aimed to compare the consistency between SOF index and Frieds frailty phenotype index to assess frailty in general community-dwelling older adults and those living alone in one district in Taipei City, Taiwan. Methods: This was a cross-sectional survey study. Purposive sampling was employed to collect data from 471 older adults living in Taipei City, including 369 community-dwelling older adults living with families and 102 living alone. Spearmans rank correlation analysis was employed to assess the concurrent validities of the two indices in all elderly by residential status, community-dwelling older adults, and those living alone. Results: There was a moderate association between Frieds frailty phenotype index and SOF index in all older adults (r = 0.51*), community-dwelling older adults (r = 0.53*), and those living alone (r = 0.44*). When the indicator of slowness from the Frieds frailty phenotype index was included in the SOF index, the value between the two indices increased for all older adults (r = 0.70*), community-dwelling adults (r = 0.72*), and older adults living alone (r = 0.56*). Conclusions: The SOF index can be a valid screening tool to evaluate frailty for older adults in Taiwan, consistent with results from advanced countries. Adding the indicator of slowness to SOF index is recommended as effective frailty screening tool.起始頁-結束頁：648-659資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).10809312篇名：學齡兒童社會信任：家庭與班級層級因素探討並列篇名：Family and class characteristics associated with social trust among school-aged children作者：簡毓(Yu-Hsian Chien);王郁婷(Nadia Wang);王一安(I-An Wang);蔡貞慧(Jen-Huoy Tsay);張淑慧(Su-Hui Chang);陳娟瑜(Chuan-Yu Chen)關鍵字：社會信任;兒童晚期;多層次;班級;學校;social trust;late childhood;multilevel;class;school期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：探討國小學童社會信任分布及相關之家庭與班級層級環境因素。方法：本研究資料來源為台灣北部某縣市「兒童少年身心發展生活需求現況調查」。研究族群為公立小學共2,691位四年級學童，回應率為97.3%。該項行政調查資料採自填式紙筆問卷收集資訊，問卷內容包含有社會信任、個人及家庭狀況、學校及社區環境特性等。統計分析採多層次多元邏輯斯迴歸模型估計不同層級之社會環境因素與兒童晚期社會信任之相關性。結果：父母社經地位和親子關係與學童社會信任有正向相關：父母一位（含）以上非本國籍與學童低社會信任程度有顯著相關（調整勝算比1.36，95%信賴區間1.02-1.80）、感到被家人忽略與學童低社會信任程度有顯著相關（調整勝算比1.61，95%信賴區間1.22-2.11）。父母曾出席親師會與學童高社會信任程度呈正相關的現象出現於父母教育程度相對較高的班級中，而若班級父母教育程度相對較低，父母曾參加過親師會與學童社會信任程度較低相關。結論：個人及學校班級環境皆與學齡孩童的社會信任程度有關，尤其是個人的家庭特性。當社會資本為兒童健康發展的保護因子時，有必要進一步瞭解個體的社會信任於兒童晚期至青春期時的演變以及在家庭、學校與社區等層級中的可修飾環境因子，這將有助於兒童社會資本的正向發展。英文摘要：Objectives: Social trust, an essential component of social capital, plays a significant role in shaping one's health and well-being. The present study aims to investigate the distribution of social trust in late childhood and associated social factors. Methods: Data were obtained from the Survey of Physical and Mental Development and Living Needs of Children. A total of 2,691 fourth-grade students were ascertained from public elementary schools in one of the northern counties/cities in Taiwan (response rate = 97.3%). Data were collected from a paper-and-pencil self-report questionnaire containing questions about individual demographics, parentchild interaction, community violence exposure, and social trust. Results: Multilevel multinomial logistic regression analyses indicated that parental socioeconomic status (e.g., having at least one immigrant parent (adjusted Odds Ratio [aOR] = 1.35, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.02-1.79)) and parent-child relationship (e.g., feeling neglected (aOR = 1.61, 95% = 1.23-2.12)) are strongly correlated with children's low social trust level. The reduced odds of low social trust level associated with parent-teacher meeting attendance was salient only in the classes characterized by higher parental education (p＜0.05). Conclusions: Non-native parents, unfavorable parentchild interaction, and community violence exposure were strongly associated with one's endorsed low social trust in late childhood. Future research is needed to explore how social trust evolves through adolescence and to delineate probable modifiable social factors.起始頁-結束頁：660-672資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).10808013篇名：評估台灣飲食頻率問卷效度之初探研究並列篇名：Pilot study of the validity of food frequency questionnaires in Taiwan作者：盧立卿(Li-Ching Lyu);游家佳(Chia-Chia Yu);劉志怡(Chih-Yi Liu)關鍵字：飲食頻率問卷;食材;餐次結構;相對效度;熱量校正;food frequency questionnaire;food ingredient;meal structure;relative validity;energy calibration期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷6期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：評估本研究室研發兩種飲食頻率問卷之效度（validity），分別為食材為主飲食頻率問卷（food and ingredients-based food frequency questionnaire, FIFFQ）以及餐次結構食譜為主飲食頻率問卷（meal and dish-based food frequency questionnaire, MDFFQ），亦探討熱量校正（energy calibration）前後的差異。方法：150位受試者執行141項之MDFFQ後，5個月後再執行161項之FIFFQ，並以24HDR校正兩種FFQ，並評估FFQ校正前後的相對效度（relative validity）。結果：以平均相關係數而言，FIFFQ與24HDR營養素校正前後為0.03與0.25，六個食物類別校正前後為0.17與0.32。MDFFQ與24HDR營養素校正前後為0.03與0.25。以平均一致性比例而言，FIFFQ和24HDR營養素校正前後為35%與41%，食物類別校正前後為37%與43%。MDFFQ和24HDR營養素校正前後為33%與41%。以FFQ和24HDR的加權kappa結果而言，FIFFQ營養素校正後Kw範圍為0.00-0.39，MDFFQ校正後為0.02-0.43。結論：不論在營養素或食物種類的相關性與一致性，熱量校正後的FFQ普遍優於校正前，且兩者與24HDR之效度結果為可接受的（acceptable）。因此，建議以飲食頻率問卷探討飲食與其他結果變項（如：疾病）關聯時，熱量調整（energy adjustment）或使用定量飲食評估工具（如：飲食回憶或飲食紀錄法）進行熱量校正可能是必須的。英文摘要：Objectives: The main purpose of this study was to assess the validity of two food frequency questionnaires: the food and ingredients-based food frequency questionnaire (FIFFQ) and the meal and dish-based food frequency questionnaire (MDFFQ). The effect of energy calibration on validity was also examined. Methods: A total of 151 participants completed the 141-item MDFFQ and then the 161-item FIFFQ 5 months later. Validity was assessed by comparing the questionnaires according to 24-hour recall (24HDR) and after energy calibration. Results: The average of the correlation coefficients between the FIFFQ and 24HDR for 28 nutrients was .03, which increased to 0.25 after energy calibration; for six food groups, it was 0.17 or 0.32 after energy calibration. The average of the coefficients of the correlation between the MDFFQ and 24HDR was 0.03, which increased to 0.25 after energy calibration. Before and after energy calibration, the average percent agreement between the FIFFQ and 24HDR was 35% and 41% for 28 nutrients and was 37% and 43% for 6 food groups, respectively. The average percent agreement between the MDFFQ and 24HDR was 33% or 41% after energy calibration. The weighted kappa ranged from -0.01 to 0.40 for the FIFFQ and 24HDR and from 0.02 to 0.43 for the MDFFQ and 24HDR after energy calibration. Conclusions: The FIFFQ and MDFFQ exhibited acceptable correlations and validity after energy calibration. Therefore, the use of these food frequency questionnaires to assess dietary patterns may require energy adjustment or quantitative dietary measurements such as recall or records for calibration purposes to improve their association with outcome variables.起始頁-結束頁：673-686資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201912_38(6).10806214篇名：減少農藥自殺死亡的策略：支持禁用巴拉刈的證據並列篇名：Strategies to reduce pesticide suicide: evidence supporting the ban on paraquat作者：張書森(Shu-Sen Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：453-456資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).PF0515篇名：日本介護制度沿革對台灣長期照顧體系發展之啟示並列篇名：Lessons learned from the evolution of long-term care programs in Japan and the implications for Taiwan's long-term care system development作者：游曉微(HSIAO-WEI YU);鞏愛華(AI-HUA GONG);植村尚史(HISASHI UEMURA);陳雅美(YA-MEI CHEN)關鍵字：日本介護制度;長期照顧十年計畫2.0;社區整合照顧;long-term care program in Japan;Taiwan's National 10-Year Long-Term Care Plan 2.0;community integrated care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：台灣長期照顧十年計畫2.0和日本介護制度皆以發展社區照顧為目標。本文回顧日本介護政策因應國內「照護意識轉變」和「政策永續原則」啟動社區力量、整合醫療和福祉支持服務之變革。本研究與日本早稻田大學合作，透過日本長照學者剖析介護政策脈絡，反思並提出我國長照政策建議。日本介護制度從「社會福利制度」轉變為建構「地域性整合照顧服務體系」，並融入在宅、醫療、介護、介護預防、生活支援等要素，讓高齡及獨居長者能在習慣居住的區域持續生活終老，目前日本介護制度的改革方向已朝抑制照護費用並強化失能預防策略。本文就日本介護制度修正軌跡，提出三項政策建議，包括「落實長照和醫療一體化」、「強化社區預防照顧實證策略」、「健全台灣照顧服務體系全天照護與多元整合機制」，並作為台灣長照政策省思。英文摘要：The Taiwanese 10-year Long-Term Care Plan (LTC) 2.0, which is in line with Japanese LTC program, aims at developing an integrated community-based care system. This study reviewed the paradigm changes in elderly care and sustainable policy development principles implemented in Japan, the evolution of community empowerment, and the integration of Japan's health care and LTC services. This study collaborated with researchers from Waseda University, who outlined the historical context for the development of the Japanese LTC system; reflected on the lessons learned from Japan's experiences; and developed recommendations for Taiwan's future LTC policy. The Japanese LTC system evolved from a government welfare system to an integrated community-based care system, with the primary aim of providing assistance to the elderly-with and without family caregivers-by incorporating home health care, medical care, LTC, disability care, and support for daily activities. Japan's current LTC programs are designing strategies to decrease the burden of LTC costs and develop evidenced-based practices for the prevention of disabilities in their high-risk population. The current study reflected on the trajectories of Japanese LTC policy revolution and developed the following proposals for future Taiwanese LTC policymaking: (1) implement a comprehensive care continuum for medical and LTC services; (2) strengthen evidence-based disability prevention programs for community elderly; and (3) develop an efficient, 24-hour integrated home- and community-based LTC service system.起始頁-結束頁：457-469資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).10802016篇名：老年歧視概念分析並列篇名：Conceptual analysis of ageism作者：陳伊如(YI-RU CHEN);邱怡玟(YI-WEN CHIU);龍紀萱(CHI-HSUAN LUNG)關鍵字：老年歧視;刻板印象;偏見;歧視;概念分析;ageism;stereotype;prejudice;discriminate;concept analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：長久存在的種族和階級歧視，孕育了對高齡者的刻板印象及偏見，即形成第三大歧視—「年齡歧視」（Ageism），尤指對年長之老人所產生的歧視，也就是所謂的「老年歧視」。在全球老年人口的快速增長下，「老人照護」成為21世紀健康照護的主要議題之一，若老年歧視存在於健康照護或長期照護中，將會影響老人的感受與權利，對其健康會產生有害的影響。護理人員是老人照護團隊中的重要成員，其對老人的價值、看法及信念等將會影響他們對老人的照護行為。然而，「老年歧視」在台灣仍是一個相當模糊的名詞，有著許多不同的概念性及操作性定義，少數的研究僅著重於探討學生或護理人員對老年之刻板印象及態度，在照護上之實務探討相當不足。因此，本文將分析老年歧視與刻板印象、偏見和歧視行為之間的相互影響，對老年歧視提出定義性特徵，並舉例說明老年歧視概念與實證，以期能增進從事老人照護相關人員對老年歧視概念之了解，提供照護高齡者人員參考，並有助於護理臨床實務及未來研究之應用。英文摘要：Ageism is stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination against people based on their age; this is fostered by longstanding racism and classism. It is the third major type of discrimination and affects older adults in particular. With the elderly populations increasing rapidly worldwide, care for older adults is becoming a main healthcare-related issue of the 21st century. Ageism in healthcare or long-term care affects the feelings and rights of older adults and jeopardizes their health status. Nurses are crucial carers for older adults. Their values, views, and beliefs regarding older adults affect their care behavior. However, in Taiwan, no consensus has been reached on ageism, and the topic has not been sufficiently discussed or researched. Related studies have focused on examining the stereotypes and attitudes, but not care practices, of students or nurses toward older adults. This study analyzed the interactions between stereotypical, prejudicial, and discriminatory behavior and ageism, elucidating the defining attributes related to the concept and providing examples and evidence of ageism in action. This study may provide staff involved in elderly care with a better understanding of ageism while providing a useful reference for caregivers of older adults. This conceptual analysis may improve current nursing practices and lead to value future research on the topic.起始頁-結束頁：470-477資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).10809517篇名：從工作要求資源模式檢視公共衛生護理人員職業倦怠因素：以公共服務動機為調節變數並列篇名：Factors associated with public health nurses' burnout from the perspective of job demands-resources model: public service motivation as a moderator作者：陳敦源(DON-YUN CHEN);吳舜文(SHUN-WEN WU);陳揚中(YANG-CHUNG CHEN);王光旭(GUANG-XU WANG)關鍵字：職業倦怠;工作要求資源模式（JD-R）;公共服務動機（PSM）;公共衛生護理人員;occupational burnout;job demands-resources model (JD-R);public service motivation (PSM);public health nurses期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本研究以全國的公衛護理人員為研究對象，企圖系統性分析衛生所護理人員工作負荷與疲憊之問題癥結，藉以提出對維持公衛護理人員職場健康與福利保障的改善建議。方法：以E-mail寄送網路問卷給全國提供郵件的衛生所護理人員，調查期間自2018年7月25日起，至2018年8月13日止，實際寄件總數為3,742份，問卷回收量為1,215份，回覆率為32.5%。在排除台北市與非護理人員之樣本後，本研究針對剩餘751名護理人員進行分析。結果：在工作要求部分，工作負荷、繁文縟節均會正向的影響工作與服務對象倦怠，而每週工時僅對工作倦怠有正向影響；工作資源部分，組織支持能減緩工作倦怠，同事支持能減緩服務對象倦怠；而公共服務動機（PSM）與工作和服務對象倦怠皆有負向關連，但在PSM的調節效果上，PSM卻會強化工作負荷、繁文縟節與工作倦怠的關連性。結論：建議應檢討衛生所護理人員的工作負荷，以及工作上繁文縟節的情形，並避免加班超時工作；PSM高可能是促進公衛護理人員積極投入工作的美德，有助於減緩職業倦怠，但可能會因為其投入意願更多，導致在高工作負荷與繁文縟節的工作環境下，工作倦怠的情形更嚴重。英文摘要：Objectives: To analyze the relationship between the work burden and burnout of nursing staff in public health centers to propose suggestions for improving their health and welfare. Methods: An online survey of nursing staff in public health centers was conducted by contacting the said staff through email. The survey was conducted from July 25 to August 13, 2019. The authors sent out 3,742 emails and received 1,215 responses (response rate: 32.5%). After survey samples from Taipei and non-nursing staff were excluded, the sample size was 751. Results: Regarding the work demands dimension, work burden and red tape were positively correlated with work burnout and client burnout; weekly working hours were positively correlated with work burnout. In the work resources dimension, organizational support relieved work burnout, while client support alleviated client burnout. Although public service motivation (PSM) was negatively correlated with work and client burnout, it exacerbated the relationships of work burnout with work burden and red tape when it was analyzed as a moderator. Conclusions: The authors suggest that policy makers should reduce the workload, red tape, and over time working hours of nursing staff in public health centers. PSM could be an impetus for increasing work engagement and thus alleviate work burnout. However, it could also exacerbate the work burnout of the nursing staff due to increased work engagement in scenarios of a heavy workload and red tape.起始頁-結束頁：478-497資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).10806918篇名：台灣非愛滋替代治療藥癮者全民健康保險資源使用情形探討並列篇名：Medical care utilization under National Health Insurance by people with heroin addiction enrolled in a methadone substitution treatment program作者：黃紀諺(CHI-YEN HUANG);董鈺琪(YU-CHI TUNG);諶立中(LIH-JONG SHEN);鄭淑心(SHEU-SHIN CHENG);洪嘉璣(CHIA-JI HUNG);楊銘欽(MING-CHIN YANG)關鍵字：美沙冬替代治療;藥癮者;全民健康保險資源使用;傾向分數;methadone substitution treatment program;drug addicts;National Health Insurance utilization;propensity scores期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：我國於2009年起對非愛滋病之藥癮者提供治療補助，本研究以回溯性世代研究法，探討穩定使用美沙冬替代治療與否，對於藥癮者健保使用之影響。方法：以2009至2014年間之美沙冬替代治療藥癮者作為研究樣本，以傾向分數加權後使用加權複迴歸分析美沙冬替代治療之穩定組與中斷組間健保資源使用情形之差異。結果：在門急診點數對數值之加權複迴歸檢定結果顯示，在控制性別、年齡、收入、就醫場所層級別、權屬別、地區別後，穩定組年平均門急診點數對數值比中斷組增加9%（p=0.0023）；在門急診就醫次數部分之卜瓦松複迴歸分析結果顯示，控制前述變項後，穩定組年平均門急診次數較中斷組增加14%（p＜0.001）。結論：穩定組之健保門急診之年平均次數、年平均點數對數值都顯著高於中斷組，惟傾向權重配分後之中斷組年平均住院點數多於穩定組，雖未達統計上顯著差異，仍可後續研究探討其原因。英文摘要：Objectives: Since 2009, the Taiwanese government has subsidized treatment for non-AIDS-related drug addiction. The aim of this retrospective cohort study was to investigate the effect on National Health Insurance (NHI) resources of treatment for people with addiction who enrolled in a methadone substitution treatment program. Methods: Data from 2009 to 2014 of people with drug addiction who were treated with methadone were collected as samples. Analytical tools such as the Inverse Probability of Treatment Weighting (IPTW), which is based on propensity score and weighted multiple regression, were used to further compare the use of NHI resources by the stable-treatment and interrupted-treatment groups. Individual characteristics of sex, age, and income level were controlled for in addition to the level, ownership, and Bureau of NHI branch of the medical institution. Results: According to the weighted multiple regression analysis results of the NHI point values of the outpatient and emergency departments, the NHI point values of the stable-treatment group increased by 9% relative to the interrupted-treatment group (p = 0.0023). The results of a Poisson regression on the NHI utilization frequency of outpatient and emergency department visits indicated that with the same control variables, the average NHI utilization frequency of the stable-treatment group increased by 14% relative to the interrupted-treatment group (p ＜ 0.001). Conclusions: Among people with addiction who enrolled in the methadone substitution treatment program, those in the stable-treatment group had not only higher logarithmic NHI point values but also higher NHI utilization frequency in their outpatient and emergency department visits compared with the interrupted-treatment group. Although no statistical significance was observed, further research should investigate why, after IPTW, the average annual inpatient point values for the interrupted-treatment group were higher than those for their stable-treatment counterparts.起始頁-結束頁：498-508資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).10706719篇名：台灣安全針具法實施五年後安全針具替換率與針扎率的變化並列篇名：Changes in safety needle replacement rate and needlestick injury rate five years after the implementation of Taiwan's Safety Needle Act作者：吳雪菁(HSUEH-CHING WU);謝曼麗(MAN-LI HSIEH);郭育良(YUE-LIANG LEON GUO);陳宜傳(YI-CHUAN CHEN);歐育珊(YU-SHAN OU);蕭淑銖(JUDITH SHU-CHU SHIAO)關鍵字：醫療法第56條;安全針具;針扎率;替換率;針扎防護通報系統;Article 56 of Medical Care Act;safety needle;needlestick injury rate;replacement rate;EPINet期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：了解台灣醫療法第56條修正實施五年後，醫療院所之安全針具替換與醫療人員針扎率變化趨勢，並分析其相關性。方法：本研究方法為次級資料分析，取得健保署所提供之2011－2016年醫療機構之針具申報數量，及中文版EPINet資料庫擷取2011－2016年針扎通報事件資料中，符合「醫院層級、2011年之前加入通報之醫院及2011至2016年每年皆有持續通報者」，共得36家通報醫院資料，並進一步以全國醫療人員數標準化後推估出全國醫療人員之針扎發生率，進行分析。結果：台灣醫院機構在安全針具立法五年後，安全針具的替換率以靜脈留置針最高達93.7%，但空心針及胰島素針的替換率則只有23.7%與31.0%。推估各年度全國各類針具針扎發生率，其中「所有針具」與「靜脈留置針」的針扎率顯示有逐年下降，但「空心針注射器」、「胰島素注射針」則呈現波動。相關性分析顯示安全針具替換率越高，針扎率越下降；其中靜脈留置針達顯著負相關（r=-0.99，p＜.001）。結論：雖然醫療法規定五年內醫療院所須全面提供安全針具，但事實上安全針具的使用雖有增加但部分類別卻仍然有限。安全針具替換率愈好與針扎率降低有關，未來應進一步了解未確實落實安全針具全面替換的原因，以利於政策的落實與進一步檢討。英文摘要：Objectives: Analyse the correlation between changes in medical institutions' safety needle replacement rate and needlestick injury rate five years after the implementation of Article 56 of Taiwan's Medical Care Act. Methods: Using secondary data analysis, this study obtained needle usage data from the National Health Insurance Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare during 2011-2016. Over the same period, needlestick injury incident data meeting inclusion criteria were sourced from the Chinese version of the Exposure Prevention Information Network database for analysis; the criteria are those data from hospital level institutions, those institutions which have reported data since 2011 and those institutions which persistently reported data during 2011-2016. With data from 36 institutions, it went further to estimate the needlestick injury rate among healthcare workers. Results: Five years after legislation was passed requiring hospitals to replace safety needles, the replacement rate for peripheral venous catheters reached 93.7%, whereas those for hollow needles and insulin injection needles were only 23.7% and 31.0%. Annual estimation of needlestick injury rates for various needle types in Taiwan indicated that needlestick rates for all needles and peripheral venous catheters have been declining but those rates for hollow needles and insulin injection needles are fluctuating. Correlation analysis revealed that higher safety needle replacement rates correspond to lower needlestick injury rates; notably, the peripheral venous catheter exhibited a significant negative correlation (r=-0.99, p＜.001). Conclusions: Although the Medical Care Act requires medical institutions to replace a full range of safety needles within five years of the implementation and the use of safety needles has indeed increased, their use in some categories remains limited. Better replacement rate of safety device was related to lowered injuries. Factors for incomplete implementation should be investigated in the future to facilitate further policy implementation and review.起始頁-結束頁：509-520資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).10806020篇名：影響台灣家庭使用長照十年計劃2.0的相關因素分析並列篇名：Factors influencing the utilization of the National Ten-Year Long-Term Care Plan 2.0 in Taiwan作者：鄧桂芬(KUEI-FENG TENG);李玉春(YUE-CHUNE LEE);楊哲銘(CHE-MING YANG);黃國哲(KUO-CHERH HUANG)關鍵字：長照十年計劃2.0;長照服務使用;政策宣傳;家庭照顧者;the National Ten-Year Long-Term Care Plan 2.0;long-term care service utilization;propaganda;caregiver期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：探討影響台灣家庭使用長照十年計劃2.0（簡稱長照2.0）服務項目的相關因素。方法：收案對象為符合長照2.0申請資格民眾的家庭照顧者，利用半結構式問卷進行面訪或電訪，共完成212位照顧者的調查。結果：長照2.0服務項目使用狀況與前傾因素構面中的教育程度（p = 0.011），使能因素構面中的社會福利身份別（p = 0.008）及曾接觸長照2.0資訊（p ＜ 0.001），需要因素構面中的罹患失智症（p = 0.018）及領有身心障礙手冊（p = 0.008），以及照顧者因素構面中的性別（p = 0.002）、年齡（p = 0.031）、及工作情形（p = 0.035）等因素，有顯著的關連性。另一方面，整體而言，前傾因素構面、使能因素構面、需要因素構面、及照顧者因素構面，均對長照2.0服務項目使用狀況有顯著性的影響力（F = 1.737, p = 0.007; adj-R^2 = 0.149）。結論：調查結果顯示，前傾因素構面、使能因素構面、需要因素構面、及照顧者因素構面，均會影響民眾使用長照2.0服務項目。建議衛生福利部應持續擴大長照2.0服務政策之宣傳，正視將可能成為中低收入戶家庭之長照需求，以及鼓勵男性照顧者使用長照服務支持資源。英文摘要：Objectives: To explore the factors associated with the use of the National Ten-Year Long- Term Care Plan 2.0 (NTLCP 2.0) in Taiwan. Methods: Research data were collected using a semistructured questionnaire. Study samples were caregivers of people qualified to receive care under the NTLCP 2.0. Completed questionnaires (n = 212) were obtained using face-to-face or telephone interviews. Results: The results indicated that education (p = 0.011; in the predisposing dimension); social welfare status (p = 0.008); awareness of the NTLCP 2.0 (p ＜ 0.001; both were in the enabling dimension); dementia diagnosis (p = 0.018); being a disability identification cardholder (p = 0.008; both were in the needs dimension) of those people being cared for, as well as gender (p = 0.002), age (p = 0.031), and working conditions (p = 0.035) of caregivers had significant effects on NTLCP 2.0 utilization. Moreover, the results of the multiple regression analysis demonstrated that all four dimensions were significantly associated with NTLCP 2.0 utilization (F = 1.737, p = 0.007; adj R^2 = 0.149). Conclusions: The results of this study demonstrated that all four dimensions were significantly associated with NTLCP 2.0 utilization. It is suggested that the Ministry of Health and Welfare continuously promote the NTLCP 2.0 and even expand it to cover those people who currently do not qualify. Furthermore, efforts should be devoted to increase the willingness of male caregivers to use the NTLCP 2.0.起始頁-結束頁：521-536資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).10808101篇名：評論：奉養父母的末代，子女棄養的首代並列篇名：Commentary: the last generation to take care of their parents and the first generation to be abandoned by their kids作者：李丞華(Cheng-Hua Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：537-537資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).108081012篇名：作者回覆：奉養父母的末代，子女棄養的首代並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary: the last generation to take care of their parents and the first generation to be abandoned by their kids作者：鄧桂芬(Kuei-Feng Teng);李玉春(Yue-Chune Lee);楊哲銘(Che-Ming Yang);黃國哲(Kuo-Cherh Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：538-538資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).108081023篇名：環境低溫對於類流感急診就診之影響：時間序列分析並列篇名：Impact of low ambient temperatures on influenza-like illnesses-related hospital emergency visits: a time series analysis作者：黃彥嘉(YEN-CHIA HUANG);林育如(YU-JU LIN);施惟量(WEI-LIANG SHIH);方啟泰(CHI-TAI FANG)關鍵字：流感病毒;環境低溫;時間序列分析;influenza-like illness;low ambient temperature;time series analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：2016年初，年假期間出現前所未有的長時間冬季低溫，流感病例數爆增。但低溫與此波流感疫情之間相關性迄今仍未有研究。本研究目標為以時間序列方法分析低溫是否為急診流感就診比例上升之預測因子。方法：以時間序列方法分析2007年1月至2016年12月疾病管制署「即時疫情監視及預警系統」大台北區類流感（influenza-like illness）急診就診人次占全部急診人次比例（下稱就診比例），並將中央氣象局台北測站氣溫紀錄納入動態迴歸模式分析。另因例假日流感病患湧向醫院急診，將每週放假天數作為干擾因子。最後以2017年1月至2017年12月實際數據對預測模式進行外部驗證。結果：大台北區類流感急診就診比例時間序列符合ARMA（1,1）模式，前一週就診比例與當週就診比例具高度相關性（自迴歸係數0.92，p＜0.001）。動態迴歸模式分析發現：前一週最低溫（係數-0.07，p=0.01）與當週放假天數（係數0.2，p＜0.001），為類流感急診就診比例之顯著預測因子。外部驗證結果顯示：含有氣溫及放假天數的時間序列模式能準確預測2017年初流感高峰時間點；全年預測值R^2達85%。結論：環境氣溫與下一週類流感急診就診比例具高度相關性，最低溫愈低，下一週類流感急診就診比例愈高。流感防治整備應變需將低溫預報納入考量。英文摘要：Objectives: Taiwan had its longest recorded cold wave during the 2016 Chinese New Year holiday; a surge in influenza cases followed. To assess the effect of a cold wave on influenza activity, we used a time series model to analyze the relationship between low ambient temperatures and influenza-related emergency visits. Methods: We obtained weekly data on the proportion of influenza-like illnesses (ILIs) among emergency room visits in Taipei from January 2007 to December 2016. Data were from the Real-time Outbreak and Disease Surveillance of the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control. Ambient temperature data were from the Taiwan Central Weather Bureau. We used an autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model to analyze the association between low temperatures and ILIs. The validity of predictive models was tested against January 2017 to December 2017 data as external validation. Results: The time series of ILI-related emergency visits in Taipei was consistent with the ARIMA (1, 1) model at an autoregression coefficient of 0.92 (p ＜ 0.001). ARIMA analysis indicated that the lowest temperature in the previous week (coefficient: -0.07, p = 0.01) and the number of holiday days in the week (coefficient: 0.2, p ＜ 0.001) were significant predictors of the proportion of ILI-related emergency visits. External validation demonstrated that the time series model with temperature and holiday covariates accurately predicted the timing of the ILI surge in the 2017 winter vacation, with an R^2 of 85% for the overall fit in 2017. Conclusions: Cold waves are a predictor of increased ILI-related emergency visits. Thus, influenza preparedness measures should incorporate ambient temperature forecasts.起始頁-結束頁：539-550資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).1080314篇名：膝關節置換術前使用免疫抑制劑與感染的關係並列篇名：Association between immunosuppressive medications and postoperative infection following total knee arthroplasty作者：柯絲珊(SIH-SHAN KE);劉冠麟(KUAN-LIN LIU);鍾和肯(HO-KEN CHUNG);溫淑惠(SHU-HUI WEN)關鍵字：全人工膝關節置換術;抗腫瘤壞死因子;術後感染;類風濕性關節炎;total knee arthroplasty;anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha;post-operative infection期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷5期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：類風濕性關節炎（Rheumatoid Arthritis，簡稱RA）使用抗腫瘤壞死因子（anti-tumor-necrosis-factor alpha，簡稱anti-TNFα）在全人工膝關節置換術（Total Knee Arthroplasty，簡稱TKA）後發生感染的風險較高，但仍未有定論。本研究欲探討RA患者術前使用anti-TNFα在TKA術後發生感染的風險。方法：我們使用2012至2015年全民健康保險資料庫之全人口檔，納入1,126位RA患者並接受TKA手術，追蹤術後三個月內發生感染情形。研究樣本TKA術前三個月RA用藥分為三組：疾病調節抗風濕藥物（Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs，簡稱DMARDs）組（n=854）、anti-TNFα組（n=178）與皮質類固醇組（n=94），並以多重邏輯斯迴歸分析RA用藥與術後感染之勝算比（Odds Ratio，簡稱OR）及95%信賴區間（confidence interval，簡稱CI）。結果：三組TKA術後感染發生率（人月）依序為DMARDs組0.011（95% CI:0.006∼0.014），anti-TNFα組0.008（95% CI:0.0002∼0.0176）與皮質類固醇組為0.005（95% CI:0.0002∼0.0157）。校正干擾因子後，anti-TNFα組發生術後感染的OR為DMARDs組之0.862倍（95% CI:0.291∼2.548）；若與皮質類固醇組相比，發生術後感染的OR為2.662倍（95% CI:0.25∼28.342），皆無統計顯著。結論：RA患者TKA術前三個月使用anti-TNFα，與DMARDs或皮質類固醇相比，術後三個月之感染風險並無顯著不同。英文摘要：Objectives: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) receiving anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha (anti-TNFα) therapy may have an increased risk of infection after total knee arthroplasty (TKA). However, conflicting results have been provided for the association of anti-TNFα and postoperative infection. In this study, we examined whether RA patients receiving anti- TNFα therapy have an elevated risk of postoperative infection after TKA. Methods: We used the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database of the whole population from 2012 to 2015. The medical records of patients with RA who had undergone TKA were obtained (n = 1126). We divided patients into three groups based on RA medications: disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) (n = 854), anti-TNFα (n = 178), and corticosteroids (n = 94). Multivariate logistic regression was used to estimate the odds ratio (OR) of infection as well as the corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI). Results: The incidence rate (per person-month) of postoperative infection for each group was as follows: DMARDs: 0.011 (95% CI: 0.006-0.014), anti-TNFα: 0.008 (95% CI: 0.0002-0.0176), and corticosteroids: 0.005 (95% CI: 0.0002-0.0157). After adjustment for potential confounders, RA patients with anti-TNFα use did not have increased risk of infection compared to those with DMARDs (OR = 0.862, 95% CI: 0.291-2.548). Similar finding was found for comparison with corticosteroids (OR = 2.662, 95% CI: 0.25-28.342). Conclusions: The risk of postoperative infection in RA patients receiving anti- TNFα is similar to the risk in those treated with DMARDs or corticosteroids.起始頁-結束頁：551-561資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201910_38(5).1080745篇名：我們從台灣上一波自殺死亡率高峰學到甚麼？並列篇名：What have we learned from the last surge of suicide mortality in Taiwan?作者：廖士程(Shih-Cheng Liao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：329-334資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).PF046篇名：我國電子煙管理及其閘門效應防制政策之省思並列篇名：Rethinking the management policy for prevention and control of the gateway effect of the electronic cigarette in Taiwan作者：陳再晉(Tzay-Jinn Chen);鐘珮純(Pei-Chun Chung);陳冠文(Kuan-Wen Chen);林廷育(Ting-Yu Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：335-337資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).1080157篇名：政策、能源與健康：從哥斯大黎加的健康環境權談起並列篇名：Policy, energy and health: the right to a healthy and ecologically balanced environment in Costa Rica作者：張弘潔(Hung-Chieh Chang);Edgar Zavala-Pelayo期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：338-341資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).1071268篇名：健康資訊功能整合的國際趨勢並列篇名：Progress toward functional integration in health informatics: an international perspective作者：楊瓊瓔(Chiung-Ying Yang);陳慈純(Tzu-Chun Chen);徐尚為(Shang-Wei Hsu);李卓倫(Jwo-Leun Lee)關鍵字：資訊通訊技術;健康服務;功能整合;整合照顧;information and communication technology;health service;functional integration;integrated care期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：在老年社會慢性疾病整合照顧的概念中，與資訊通訊技術相關的「功能整合」至為重要，跨國分析比較顯示整體功能性整合成功的案例並不多見，但透過資訊通訊科技系統整合成功的個別案例正逐漸累積。本文之目的在蒐集分析各國為了促進健康照顧與長期照顧疾病管理所開發之資訊通訊科技產品，以及這些產品與服務的運作情形。全文依據資訊通訊技術的種類大致區分為「遠距醫療與穿戴裝置」、「應用程式與數位治療」、「智慧手機與人工智慧」三大類別，透過期刊、其他定期與非定期出版之文獻、各國政府出版品、和各新科技開發之官方網頁，搜集資料後，將各國比較明顯的成功案例、廠商、技術產品、功能列表簡介，希望讀者可以藉由本文連結資訊通訊技術的最新進展。本文的最後以資訊及通訊科技介入健康服務在視訊、簡訊、健康監測三方面的貢獻，並以其中發展最迅速的居家照護進展，以及它對於台灣長照2.0政策的階段性含義作為結論與建議。英文摘要：Studies on functional integration in information and communication technology (ICT) for integrated care of older adults with chronic diseases are needed but rarely conducted. Therefore, this study gathered and analyzed information on the operational situation and expiration of ICT developed in various countries for disease management in health care and long-term care. This paper has three sections, each focusing on one ICT-telemedicine and wearable devices, applications and digital therapy, and smartphones and artificial intelligence. By reviewing journal articles, periodicals, government and international organization reports, and ICT product websites, this paper compares (using tables) success cases, ICT firms, and products and their functional introduction to update readers on the latest progress in ICT applications. This paper concludes by summarizing the contribution of ICT in the use of video, publication of newsletters, and health monitoring, focusing especially on the development of ICT in domiciliary care and its policy implications for long-term care in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：342-354資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).1080349篇名：從國際經驗省思全民健保地區預算之分配方法並列篇名：Geographical allocation of the healthcare budget in the National Health Insurance program: what can we learn from other countries?作者：陳珮青(Pei-Ching Chen);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang);陳宛琪(Wan-Chi Chen);郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo)關鍵字：總額支付制度;地區預算;醫療資源分配;風險校正;健康不平等;global budget;resource allocation;resource allocation;risk adjustment;health inequity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：全民健保自1998年陸續實施牙醫門診、中醫、西醫基層、醫院等部門之總額支付制度，在此制度下將預算分配到健保署各業務分組，以促進各地區醫療資源之有效自主管理。然而目前各總額部門之地區預算分配方式互異，雖遭致許多批評但應如何修訂迄今仍難凝聚各方共識。部分醫界代表及專家學者認為，除了現行地區預算分配方式中納入的分配參數，也應將各地區醫療需求程度差異、人口風險因子、醫療服務提供者之執業成本、醫療服務供給等因素納入考量。因此本研究經由文獻探討，瞭解實施總額支付制度或醫療先進之國家，其地區醫療預算分配方式、參考因素、發展趨勢與經驗，以提出臺灣全民健保總額支付制度下地區預算分配方式之改善方向及具體建議，提供主管機關作為未來政策修訂之參考。本研究經由文獻探討發現，英國、澳洲、紐西蘭等國有進行地區醫療預算之分配，且均採用「以人口為基礎」（population-based）、或稱為「以需求為基礎」（need-based）之預算分配方法。分配預算的參考因素或校正因子除了基本的年齡、性別組成，多數國家也納入民眾罹病狀態、社經特性以反映不同地區民眾對醫療需求的差異；有些國家亦將供給面的成本差異或未被滿足的醫療需求等因素納入分配預算的條件。各國預算分配機制除了反映醫療需求的差異，也期望透過地區預算的分配降低地區間的醫療資源分配不公平。本研究建議於未來的地區預算分配機制中，納入罹病狀態與社經特性等參考因子，並建議發展本土化、共通性的社經特性測量工具，並進行調查研究以瞭解現況下民眾有多少未被滿足的醫療需求。英文摘要：In 1998, the National Health Insurance program of Taiwan implemented a global budget payment system for dental outpatient services, followed by traditional Chinese medicine, primary care, and hospitals. Under this scheme, the annual healthcare budget is distributed among six regional service areas for enhancing self-management within each area. However, the formulas used in the allocation of the annual budgets differ across sectors. This situation has drawn criticism from healthcare providers, and stakeholders have yet to reach a consensus regarding the types of revisions that should be implemented. For the formulation of healthcare budgets, many medical professionals and researchers are demanding the inclusion of factors such as the variations in healthcare needs, personal risk factors, costs involved in the healthcare service provision, and distribution of healthcare providers in the region. In this study, we review the methods employed in other countries for the distribution of budgets as well as the factors included in their formulas, trends in the development of the budget allocation systems, and their experiences following implementation. Our literature review revealed that the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand allocate healthcare funds according to population-based (also referred to as ”needs-based”) distribution formulas. These formulas include factors pertaining to age and gender, morbidity, and socioeconomic status. Some of these formulas also account for differences in the supply-side costs and ”unmet needs” in the healthcare provision. The methods in question are ostensibly highly effective in accounting for regional healthcare variations and also aim to reduce inequity in healthcare resource distribution. We suggest that morbidity and socioeconomic status should be included in the resource allocation formula in the future. According to the literature review findings, the government should develop localized measures of socioeconomic status that can be applied across Taiwan. The government should also investigate the status quo in relation to ”unmet needs” in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：355-371資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).10709410篇名：台灣與西太平洋五國非傳染性疾病防治現況並列篇名：Non-communicable diseases prevention and control: the current status in Taiwan and 5 Western Pacific Countries作者：林宛禛(Wan-Chen Lin);曾育慧(Yu-Hwei Tseng);林宜靜(Yi-Jing Lin);林峻吉(Chun-Ji Lin)關鍵字：非傳染性疾病;過早死亡;健康促進政策;non-communicable diseases;premature death;health promotion policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：非傳染性疾病（non-communicable diseases，NCD）為導致全球死亡及失能最主要原因之一，約68%的死亡與罹患NCD有關，因此降低NCD的負擔，已成為各國永續發展的首要任務。本文旨在探討我國與5個西太平洋國家NCD監測指標趨勢，探究其國家社經環境背景或健康促進政策發展情形，據以呼籲我國應積極參與全球行動，及提出未來國家政策制定的參考建議。方法：運用聯合國全球永續發展指標資料庫及世界衛生組織全球衛生觀察站資料取得各國從2000年至2015年每5年NCD監測指標資料，如NCD過早死亡機率、酒精消費量、目前吸菸率、過重與肥胖率等，我國則以國家監測或運用國家調查資料計算取得。結果：隨著NCD過早死亡機率降低趨勢，各國平均餘命亦隨之增長，並以日本及韓國的NCD過早死亡機率相對較低。在危害行為表現上，韓國酒精消費量相對較高，中國及越南的消費趨勢有上升；各國目前吸菸率均呈現降低趨勢，其中男性目前吸菸率以台灣相對較低。各國過重與肥胖率仍呈現上升趨勢，其中馬來西亞及台灣男性相對較高，且兩國之身體活動不足率亦相對較高。結論：我國NCD防治仍有待改善，未來應持續重視國家整體NCD防治政策，及建置監測指標蒐集平台，以評估政策進展並與國際接軌。英文摘要：Objectives: Non-communicable diseases (NCD) are one of the leading causes for global deaths and disabilities, accounting for approximately 68% of deaths. International communities have made it a top priority to reduce the burden of NCD as part of the effort to achieve sustainable development. The study intends to provide policy implications for Taiwan by investigating the trends of premature NCD mortality and risk factors in Taiwan and five other countries in the Western Pacific Region. Methods: The paper retrieved 2000-2015 data for five countries from the UN Global SDG Indicators Database and WHO Global Health Observatory Data Repository, including premature NCD deaths, alcohol consumption per capita, prevalence of current tobacco use, and prevalence of overweight and obesity. Data for Taiwan were obtained from databases of national surveillance and surveys. Results: Increase in life expectancy was accompanied by a decreasing trend of premature NCD mortality in each country. In Japan and South Korea, premature NCD mortality was relatively low, compared to other countries. In terms of behavioral risk factors, South Korea's alcohol consumption per capita was higher, while China and Vietnam experienced a rising trend. Prevalence of current tobacco use in all countries was decreasing, with the lowest male smoking rate in Taiwan. However, trend of overweight and obesity was on the rise in all countries. Malaysians and Taiwanese males had higher prevalence than other populations. Similarly, physical inactivity rate was higher in these two countries. Conclusions: NCD prevention and control in Taiwan need to be strengthened. We suggest that a comprehensive NCD prevention framework be implemented, including development of a surveillance system conducive to monitoring, evaluation and international comparison.起始頁-結束頁：372-385資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).10801811篇名：評論：台灣與西太平洋五國非傳染性疾病防治現況並列篇名：Commentary: non-communicable diseases prevention and control: the current status in Taiwan and 5 Western Pacific Countries作者：江東亮(Tung-liang Chiang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：386-386資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).1080180112篇名：<U+59D9>娠糖尿病篩檢策略之成本效果分析並列篇名：Cost-effectiveness analysis of screening strategies for gestational diabetes mellitus作者：周盈邑(Ying-Yi Chou);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：<U+59D9>娠糖尿病;全面篩檢;高風險族群篩檢;成本效果;遞增成本效果比;gestational diabetes mellitus;universal screening;targeted screening;cost-effective;incremental cost-effectiveness ratio期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：<U+59D9>娠糖尿病（gestational diabetes mellitus，GDM）與孕婦及新生兒發生第二型糖尿病與不良結果有關。篩檢是辨識孕婦是否罹患<U+59D9>娠糖尿病的重要方法，全面篩檢與高風險族群篩檢係重要的篩檢策略，但目前對於合適的篩檢策略尚缺乏共識。因此，本研究目的為從第三付費者觀點，探討<U+59D9>娠糖尿病篩檢策略之成本效果。方法：本研究以決策樹模型評估三種<U+59D9>娠糖尿病篩檢策略之成本以及健康生活品質校正生命年（quality-adjusted life years，QALYs）：全面篩檢、高風險族群篩檢、未篩檢。本研究使用全民健康保險研究資料庫資料與文獻回顧估計模型參數，及敏感度分析評估研究結果的穩健度。結果：相較於未篩檢，全面篩檢與高風險族群篩檢皆具備成本效果，與高風險族群篩檢及未篩檢相比，全面篩檢能減少<U+59D9>娠糖尿病併發症發生風險，全面篩檢相較高風險族群篩檢的遞增成本效果比，每增加一個健康生活品質校正生命年需增加928元成本，敏感度分析結果一致。結論：全面篩檢係有成本效果之<U+59D9>娠糖尿病篩檢策略，並能改善孕婦及新生兒照護結果。英文摘要：Objectives: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus and adverse outcomes for both mothers and infants. Screening is a valuable method for identifying women at risk for GDM, and universal screening along with targeted screening is a key strategy for such identification. However, consensus is lacking regarding which GDM screening strategy is appropriate for pregnant women. Hence, the objective of this study was to compare the cost-effectiveness of GDM screening strategies from the third payer perspective. Methods: A decision tree model was used to assess the costs and quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) for three GDM screening strategies: universal screening, targeted screening, and no screening. The Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database and a literature review were used to estimate the model parameters. Sensitivity analysis was performed to evaluate the robustness of assessment. Results: Compared with the no screening strategy, universal screening and targeted screening were cost-effective. Universal screening was a cost-effective approach for decreasing the risks of GDM complications compared with targeted screening or no screening. Relative to targeted screening, universal screening generated an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of $928/QALY gained. Sensitivity analysis provided similar results. Conclusions: Universal screening is a cost-effective approach for improving maternal and neonatal outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：387-399資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).10801213篇名：建立全民健保職業工會財務異常管理機制之研究並列篇名：Establishment of a financial anomaly management mechanism of National Health Insurance for craft unions作者：蘇宜貞(I-Chen Su);莊美惠(Mei-Hui Chuang);許<U+7D89>華(Hsiu-Hua Hsu);簡文娜(Wen-Na Chien);洪品妤(Pin-Yu Hong);王琳斐(Ling-Pei Wang)關鍵字：全民健康保險;職業工會;財務實地訪查;National Health Insurance;craft union;onsite financial inspection期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：職業工會健保費採「集體預收、分期彙繳」模式，潛藏極大已收未繳風險，本研究旨在找出財務異常關鍵指標，提出工會財務異常管理機制之建議。方法：本研究結合質性與量化方法，與勞保局實地訪談，並就中彰投勞政主管機關及303家曾受健保實地訪查工會，進行問卷調查，再就2012－2016年間，工會健保財務訪查缺失實績值及欠費紀錄，進行健保資料探勘及統計檢定分析，最後以三角驗證法交叉檢驗。結果：勞保局透過罰則以「補助款撥付權」為「工會財務監控手段」，且85%工會財務查核項目與健保署相同。中彰投勞政主管機關在異常工會管理具勞健保跨域合作意願；有24.8%工會內控不足無財務管理辦法，87.6%工會基層支持外部財務稽查，並建議嚴查健保費是否被挪用。經綜整實地訪談、問卷調查、卡方檢定及羅吉斯迴歸分析，確立4項工會財務異常（欠費）關鍵指標，包括：「健保費未設立專戶儲存」、「專戶存儲之保險費移作他用」、「健保費專戶未2人以上共同開戶及管理」、「健保費存款餘額不足」。結論：健保署、勞保局及縣市政府工會財務查核之共同項目，可作為跨機關聯合監控基礎。本研究結合4項財務異常關鍵指標及現行27項健保工會訪視紀錄表查核項目，將訪查缺失影響程度分為：重大、中度、輕微3級，綜整研究結果及健保署中區業務組執行現況，建構全民健保職業工會財務異常分級管理模式，並提出具體執行建議。英文摘要：Objectives: Craft unions typically collect the national health insurance premiums from all members at one time and then pay the premiums in instalments. However, this method involves a high risk that the premiums have been collected but not paid. This study identified the key factors for financial anomalies and proposed suggestions for craft unions regarding financial anomaly management mechanisms. Methods: Combining qualitative and quantitative methods, this study conducted onsite interviews on the personnel of the Bureau of Labor Insurance and performed questionnaire survey on the personnel of government authorities on labor affairs as well as 303 craft unions that participated in the national insurance program in Taichung, Changhua, and Nantou, Taiwan. Moreover, data mining and statistical analysis were performed on the actual data missing in the financial inspection on craft unions' health insurance premiums and the unions' overdue payment records from 2012 to 2016. Finally, triangulation was conducted for data cross-validation. Results: The Bureau of Labor Insurance facilitated financial monitoring on craft unions by imposing the penalty of terminating grant disbursement. In addition, 85% of the financial audit items used by the unions were consistent with that adopted by the National Health Insurance Administration. Government authorities on labor affairs in Taichung, Changhua, and Nantou were willing to collaborate with health insurance authorities for the management of craft unions with financial anomalies. Moreover, 24% of the craft unions showed insufficient internal control and lacked a financial management mechanism; 87.6% of the union members supported external financial audit and suggested strictly examining whether the insurance premiums were misappropriated. Through onsite interview, questionnaire survey, chi-square analysis, and logistic regression analysis, four key factors for financial anomalies (overdue bills) among craft unions were determined, namely ”no exclusive account established for health insurance premiums”, ”misappropriation of the premiums saved in the exclusive account”, ”the exclusive account for health insurance premiums not opened and managed by more than two people”, and ”insufficient balance of the health insurance premium deposit”. Conclusions: The items used in the craft union financial audit that are commonly adopted by the National Health Insurance Administration, Bureau of Labor Insurance, and county and city governments can be used as the basis for collective financial monitoring across agencies. This study combined four key factors for financial anomalies with the current 27 items used in the financial inspections on craft unions' health insurance premiums and divided the level of influence of missing inspection data into strong, moderate, and weak. Finally, this study constructed a health insurance financial anomaly classification management model for craft unions and proposed concrete suggestions according to the research results and the current work status of the Central Division of the National Health Insurance Administration.起始頁-結束頁：400-415資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).10711914篇名：影響老年病人就診科別醫師使用電子病歷交換意願因素之初探研究並列篇名：Factors affecting physicians' intention to use electronic medical record exchange for older patients作者：佘明玲(Ming-Ling Sher);黃興進(Hsin-Ginn Hwang);翁儷禎(Li-Jen Weng)關鍵字：電子病歷交換;電子病歷交換使用意願;科技接受模式（TAM）;健康資訊交換;EMR exchange;intention to use EMR exchange;Technology Acceptance Model;health information exchang期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：探討影響醫師取用其他醫療機構電子病歷意願的因素。方法：由文獻探討歸納影響醫師使用電子病歷交換意願之因素，經德菲法與文獻再搜集形成正式問卷，藉以對某醫療體系不同層級醫療機構之醫師進行問卷調查。以因素分析探討影響因素之資訊科技與非科技向度，再以階層迴歸探討所得向度對醫師取用其他醫療機構電子病歷意願與不同途徑取用可能性之影響。結果：因素分析後呈現九因素，階層複迴歸分析顯示影響醫師取用電子病歷交換意願的資訊科技因素為「資訊專業完整與知覺有用性」，非科技因素包括「病情需要病歷資訊」、「醫師需有時間取用」、「節省問診時間」、「取用快速可存為依據」四因素。不同診療途徑取用電子病歷之預測因素略有不同。結論：若欲提升醫師取用病人電子病歷交換之意願，宜重視臨床使用經驗，提供所需專業可信完整資訊，方有助於政策目標之達成。英文摘要：Objectives: To determine factors that may influence physicians' intentions of accessing electronic medical records (EMRs) at other institutions. Methods: A literature review was conducted to summarize factors that may affect physicians' intentions of using EMR exchange. A questionnaire based on the Delphi method and a literature review was administered to physicians at different levels within medical institutions. Health information technique (HIT) and non- HIT factors were extracted through factor analysis and subjected to hierarchical regression analyses to investigate the dimensions potentially affecting physicians' overall intention of using EMR exchange. The possibility to use EMRs when facing elderly patients at defferent medical services-including in-patient services, out-patient services, emergency health services, and health promotion-was also investigated. Results: Nine factors were extracted after the factor analysis. Then, the hierarchical regression analyses were conducted using these nine factors. The HIT factor ”Integrated Professional Data and Perceived Usefulness” was concluded to affect the intention of physicians to use EMR exchange. The influential non-HIT factors included (1) information required regarding patients' conditions, (2) physicians having time to access relevant information, (3) interrogation time shortening, and (4) quick access and data saving for subsequent use. The factors affecting the likelihood of EMR exchange varied marginally among different types of medical services. Conclusions: To improve physicians' intentions of using EMR exchange, user experiences in EMR exchange at clinical practices should be emphasized. Providing professional and reliable integrated information is helpful for achieving health care policy objectives.起始頁-結束頁：416-430資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).10802515篇名：台灣地區學校護理人員社會支持對其工作壓力與幸福感之中介影響研究並列篇名：The mediating effect of social support on the relationship between working stress and well- being among school nurses in Taiwan作者：楊靜昀(Ching-Yun Yang);張彩秀(Tsai-Hsiu Chang);蔡國瑞(Kuo-Jui Tsai);劉秀枝(Shiu-Chin Liu);劉潔心(Chieh-Hsing Liu)關鍵字：學校護理人員;社會支持;工作壓力;幸福感;school nurses;social support;work stress;well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本研究為瞭解學校護理人員社會支持對其工作壓力與幸福感之中介影響。方法：研究母群體以全國高中職及國中小學校之學校護理人員，採隨機分層取樣，以問卷資料收集，進行描述性、相關、中介階層迴歸分析。結果：學校護理人員之社會支持、工作壓力、幸福感得分為中等程度。社會支持、幸福感與工作壓力呈顯著負相關；社會支持與幸福感呈顯著正相關。學校護理人員社會支持在工作壓力與幸福感之關係間具有部分中介效果。結論：學校護理人員的社會支持在工作壓力與幸福感的關聯性上存在著中介效果，提升學校護理人員社會支持有助於減少工作壓力對學校護理人員幸福感之影響。根據研究結果，建議學校主管及機關政策給予行政支持、學校護理人員同儕支持增進工作能力、學校護理專業團體應紮根校護的專業素養教育及工具發展，帶動對學生照護的新視野。英文摘要：Objectives: To understand the mediating effect of social support on the relationship between work stress and wellbeing experienced by school nurses. Methods: School nurses from elementary, junior high, high, and vocational schools in Taiwan were selected using stratified random sampling, to whom questionnaires were given to collect the required data. A descriptive analysis, correlation analysis, and hierarchical regression analysis and various mediation methods were performed to examine the mediating effect of social support on the relationship between work stress and wellbeing. Results: School nurses' social support exerted a mediating effect on the relationship between work stress and well-being. Therefore, increasing school nurses' social support can reduce the effect of work stress on their well- being. Conclusions: According to the research results, this study recommended that the school and government authorities should provide administrative and policy support for school nurses, and the peer support from other school nurses can enhance school nurses' work abilities. Professional school nurse organizations should enhance school nurses' professionalism and facilitate instrument development, promoting a new horizon for student care.起始頁-結束頁：431-444資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).10712116篇名：Walk ScoreR作為台灣地區宜走性環境測量工具之效度檢驗並列篇名：Validation of Walk ScoreR for estimating neighborhood walkability in Taiwan作者：賴鼎富(Ting-Fu Lai);林倩宇(Chien-Yu Lin);黃翊軒(Yi-Hsuan Huang);廖邕(Yung Liao)關鍵字：Walk ScoreR;宜走性環境;地理資訊系統;Walk ScoreR;neighborhood walkability;geographic information system期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：即使在美國、加拿大、與日本地區，已有研究證實Walk ScoreR作為宜走性環境測量工具之效度，但對於台灣地區仍屬未知，因此本研究檢驗Walk ScoreR與使用地理資訊系統（geographic information system，GIS）所取得之客觀宜走性環境指標之相關性，以驗證Walk ScoreR應用於台灣地區之效度。方法：以台灣地區之65歲以上高齡者為目標族群，進行電腦輔助電訪調查，蒐集自陳資料（社會人口學變項與居住之村里），有效樣本為1,040人；使用GIS計算五項客觀宜走性環境指標（人口密度、十字路口密度、總目的地數、人行道面積與大眾運輸站點密度），接著使用Walk ScoreR網站（https://www.walkscore.com/）取得各村里Walk Score分數，使用皮爾森相關係數（Pearson's correlation coefficient）檢視Walk Score分數與客觀宜走性環境指標（GIS）的相關程度。結果：統計顯示Walk Score分數與客觀宜走性環境指標具有顯著正相關，其中Walk Score分數與十字路口密度（r＝0.7）及總目的地數量（r＝0.7）之相關性最高。結論：本研究結果與西方國家及日本一致，Walk ScoreR作為宜走性環境測量工具，具有易操作與低成本的特性，且在台灣地區有良好的效度，但該工具在東部及離島的應用須較為謹慎。建議未來政策制定者與公共衛生研究者能利用Walk ScoreR以取得台灣各鄰里之宜走性。英文摘要：Objectives: Although some studies have evaluated the concurrent validity of the Walk ScoreR as a measure of neighborhood walkability in the United States, Canada, and Japan, whether the Walk ScoreR is a valid measure in Taiwan has not yet been determined. Accordingly, this study examined how Walk ScoreR is correlated with geographic information system (GIS)-derived characteristics of neighborhood walkability for residential neighborhoods in Taiwan. Methods: A computer-assisted, telephone-based survey was conducted on older Taiwanese adults. Self-reported data (sociodemographic and residential neighborhood) were collected from 1040 Taiwanese residents aged 65 years or older. Five environmental characteristics (population density, intersection density, local destinations, sidewalk availability, and access to public transportation) were calculated for each neighborhood by using a GIS. Consequently, Walk Scores were calculated on the Walk ScoreR website (https://www.walkscore.com/) by inputting residential neighborhood information. The Pearson correlation coefficients between Walk ScoreR data and objective measures of environmental attributes (GIS data) were determined. Results: Significant positive correlations were discovered between the Walk ScoreR data and five GIS-derived environmental characteristics. Walk ScoreR was most strongly associated with intersection density (r = 0.70) and number of local destinations (r = 0.70). Conclusions: Consistent with the results obtained in Western countries and Japan, Walk ScoreR, a simple and low-cost tool, appears to also be a valid measure of neighborhood walkability in Taiwan. However, the tool should be applied with caution in the eastern regions and offshore islands of Taiwan. Walk ScoreR data can enable policy makers and public health practitioners to identify the walkability of local areas in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：445-452資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201908_38(4).10803617篇名：限制致命工具以減少自殺死亡：原理與應用並列篇名：Restricting high-lethality means to reduce suicide deaths: principles and applications作者：張書森(Shu-Sen Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：223-227資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).PF0318篇名：成人每日靜態行為時間上限之建議並列篇名：Recommended limit for time spent in daily sedentary behaviors among adults作者：古博文(Po-Wen Ku);陳上迪(Shang-Ti Chen);鄭聖儒(Rutherford Ru);陳俐蓉(Li-Jung Chen)關鍵字：久坐;加速規;客觀測量;切分點;prolonged sitting;accelerometer;objective measure;cut-off point期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：久坐已逐漸被視為公共衛生的重要課題，並建議所有成人均應設法減少每日靜態行為。本篇綜論在於檢視靜態行為與健康之相關議題，並討論發展每日靜態行為時間上限的可能性。透過回顧每日靜態時間的相關研究證實，本文針對以下與靜態時間及健康有關之議題進行評析與討論：（1）探討各國成年人每日從事靜態行為的現況；（2）彙整與分析世界衛生組織以及各國針對靜態時間所發布的指導原則；（3）透過系統性文獻探討與統合分析的研究證據，探究每日靜態行為時間上限的建議；（4）靜態行為的測量方法可能會調節靜態時間與死亡率間的關係。最後歸結本文的結論與提出未來建議。整體而論，花費過多時間在靜態行為會提高成年人的罹病率及死亡風險。自陳式問卷相較於儀器測量，較容易低估每日靜態時間。儘管近來已有統合分析建議成年人每日超過9小時靜態時間會增加死亡風險。但基於使用客觀測量靜態時間的研究有限，目前仍未足以訂立有關每日靜態時間的建議上限。未來仍需持續累積採用大型樣本且使用客觀儀器測量靜態時間的前瞻性世代以檢驗這些發現。英文摘要：Prolonged sitting is increasingly being considered a severe concern in public health recommendations, which suggests that all adults should reduce the amount of daily sedentary time. This review examines several crucial aspects of sedentary behaviors and health and discusses the possibilities of developing public health guidelines on daily sedentary time. The following issues were observed and analyzed to review the evidence regarding sedentary time and health: First, the profile of the daily sedentary time of adults across different countries was described. Second, the physical activity guidelines provided by the World Health Organization or government authorities of various countries were reviewed. Third, evidence was obtained on systematic reviews and meta-analyses to explore the recommended limit of daily sedentary time; spending a higher amount of time on sedentary activities than the recommended threshold may damage adult health. Fourth, measurement methods of sedentary behaviors may moderate the associations between sedentary time and mortality across studies. Finally, conclusions and suggestions for future research were proposed. In summary, an increased sedentary time is associated with high morbidity and mortality risks in adults. Self-reported questionnaires typically underestimate the total sedentary time compared with that obtained using device-based measures. Recent meta-analyses revealed that sedentary time of ＞9 h/day may increase the all-cause mortality risk. However, based on few studies conducted with objectively-assessed sedentary time, the current evidence is insufficient to form guidelines. More large-scale and long-term prospective studies with objective measures of sedentary time are required to validate these findings.起始頁-結束頁：228-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).10800919篇名：從英國發展早期感知與預警系統的經驗為例，看台灣健康照護體系之應用並列篇名：Appling early awareness and alert (EAA) systems to Taiwan healthcare system - an example learned from UK作者：楊雯雯(Wen-Wen Yang);蒲若芳(Raoh-Fang Pwu)關鍵字：前瞻性評估;早期感知與預警系統;醫療科技評估;歐洲科技偵測國際網絡中心;英國國家衛生研究院創新觀測中心;horizon scanning;early awareness and alert (EAA) system;health technology assessment;International Information Network on New and Emerging Health Technologies (EuroScan);National Institute for Health Research Innovation Observatory (NIHR IO)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：新醫療科技日新月異，售價與日俱增，前瞻性評估已被用來做為感知和預警健康照護系統決策單位的方法學，以利於對未來可能造成照護體系影響的新醫療科技能盡早就所需的法規、財務衝擊、環境建置、人力培訓、倫理考量等事宜預做安排與規劃。英國有多年執行早期感知與預警系統的經驗，辨識對國民健康服務有影響的新醫療科技是其範疇之一，借鏡英國篩選出新醫療科技清單的經驗可做為健保總額匡列年度新醫療科技預算之參考。惟政策制定者應先決定納入分析科技的類型、時機點、篩選條件和選題機制、產品價格和健保收載價格落差的處理、產品上市延期影響總額執行的因應措施，以及給付優先順序設定的條件。英文摘要：Due to the rapid development of health technologies and the ever-rising healthcare costs, horizon scanning, also known as early awareness and alert (EAA) activities, is the method aiming at identifying new and emerging health technologies that may have impact on health system and early alerting and informing policy-makers to arrange and plan following issues, such as regulatory environment, financial management, workplace preparedness, training and education, and ethics. The Horizon Scanning Research and Intelligence Centre in UK has several years of experience in EAA activities. Identifying new and emerging health technologies influencing the National Health Service is one activity within their remit. We could learn the experience of EAA's processing to produce their final lists of health technologies as the guidance when planning our own fiscal budget for new health technologies under the scheme of global budget. However, policy-makers should first decide the scope, the timing within reasonable frame, filtration criteria, who and how to process the topic selection, how to manage the gap between manufacturer's suggested price and National Health Insurance price, the strategies to cope with the impact, resulted from the unpredictable delayed approval of health technologies, on the executing fiscal budget, and the setting of the criteria to prioritize the health technologies within the fixed amount under the fiscal budget.起始頁-結束頁：236-251資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).10713520篇名：台灣各縣市高齡者密度及公車資源之空間分析並列篇名：Relationship of regional elderly density and bus resource based on geographical analysis作者：蔡怡萱(Yi-Hsuan Tsai);邱靜如(Ching-Ju Chiu);朱宏杰(Hone-Jay Chu)關鍵字：公車資源;使用率;高齡者;bus resource;usage rate;elderly期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：公車為高齡者外出最倚賴之公共運輸載具，然公車資源分佈與高齡人口分布區域是否相符並不清楚。本研究分析各台灣縣市高齡者比例與公車資源之地理分佈相關性，以及資源分布是否影響高齡者使用行為，提供高齡者公車需求與供應之實證數據分析。方法：縣市高齡人口根據內政部2016年人口年齡分布統計取得，縣市公車站牌由交通部GIS-t地理倉儲系統以及PTX公共運輸整合資訊流通平台公開資料取得，各縣市高齡者公車使用率由2016年民眾日常使用運具狀況調查取得。以相關係數分析公車站牌密度與高齡者公車使用率之相關性，再以GIS分析呈現縣市公車資源配置與人口需求、老化狀況、及公車使用率之間的關係。結果：各縣市高齡者公車使用率和縣市公車站牌密度（每平方公里公車站牌數）相比，成正相關（R：0.74，p＜.001），可及距離與高齡者使用率雖無顯著意義，但趨勢上可看出距離越長，使用意願越低（R：-0.44，p＝0.051），公車站牌密度最低站牌間距最長的五個縣市為苗栗縣，彰化縣，南投縣，台東縣以及花蓮縣，主要分布於中部與東部。單一路線站牌服務人口數和各縣市高齡人口呈顯著正相關（R：0.48，p＝0.025），單一路線站牌服務人口數最多的四個縣市是雲林縣，苗栗縣，嘉義縣，台東縣。結論：公車資源較足夠的縣市，高齡者公車使用率相對較高。然而，高度高齡化的縣市，公車使用率卻嚴重偏低，公車可及性差；站牌密度低距離遠，公車的服務量低：單一路線站牌服務人口數高，公車資源相對不足。公車資源分布城鄉差距明顯，雲林縣，南投縣，彰化縣，苗栗縣，嘉義縣和東部最缺乏，極需政府重視與加速建置。英文摘要：Objectives: Bus is the most used mode of transportation for the elderly, yet it is not clear about the relationship between bus resource and the elderly population distribution. This study compared the regional elderly density and the bus resource distribution to investigate whether the bus resource meets the needs of the elderly. Methods: Data on regional elderly population was retrieved from the Ministry of the Interior at Executive Yuanin 2016. The number of bus stops was obtained from GIS-t, a geographic information system and Public transport data exchange managed by the Ministry of Transportation and Communications. The bus usage rate of the regional public transportation resource came from the survey of people's daily use of transportation vehicles, in 2016. Correlation analyses and the Quantum-GIS was used to present the relationship among the distribution of bus resource, the regional population demand, the aged condition, and the bus usage rate. Results: The regional elderly public transport usage rate was positively related to bus stops density (Bus stops per Square kilometer) (r= 0.74, p＜ .001). The distance between bus stops had a trend of negative association with the elderly bus usage rate (r: -0.44, p= 0.051). Inside the last five list of bus stops density were Miaoli County, Changhua County, Nantou County, Taitung County and Hualien County which were located in the central and eastern Taiwan. The number of the elderly was serviced by per bus route stop which was positively related to the regional aging ratio (R: 0.48, p= 0.025). The top four numbers of the elderly serviced by per route bus stop were Yunlin County, Miaoli County, Chiayi County and Taitung County. Conclusions: The richer the bus resource a regional area has, the higher usage rate of public transportation there is. However, it was found that the regional areas with more elderly people have fewer bus resources, and there is a gap between urban and rural areas in terms of the bus resource distribution. Yunlin County, Miaoli County, Chiayi County, Changhua County, Nantou County and the eastern Taiwan have fewer bus resources. It is vital for the government to give more concern to this issue and facilitate the construction of public transportation.起始頁-結束頁：252-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).10710901篇名：臺灣園藝類型援外計畫對民眾蔬果攝食量之影響－以吉里巴斯為例並列篇名：The effectiveness of Taiwan's Horticulture Aid Project and its impact on people's fruit and vegetable intake in Kiribati作者：鄭晏宗(Yan-Tzong Cheng);曾筠凊(Yun-Ching Tseng);楊文山(Wen-Shan Yang)關鍵字：國合會;計畫評核;援外計畫;反事實分析法;傾向分數配對法;TaiwanICDF;evaluation;aid project;counterfactual analysis;propensity score matching期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本文旨在探討臺灣的政府開發援助藉由園藝類型計畫介入之成效，亦以實證方式說明臺灣的援外計畫之具體效果。方法：本研究為橫斷式研究，採準實驗設計，並選取計畫參與家戶與非計畫參與家戶以符合實驗組與控制組之實驗設計。資料收集主要係以自編結構式問卷蒐集受訪者資料，資料分析則以受訪家戶之蔬果攝取量探討計畫介入成效，並運用反事實分析法控制受訪者社經背景，降低選樣誤差，以確認研究變項之因果關係。結果：本研究共計回收171份有效問卷，其中包括63計畫參與家戶與108非計畫參與家戶。受訪家戶平均每戶每日蔬果攝取量為2.42份（SD＝5.07、Median＝2），計畫參與家戶之「每戶每日蔬果攝取量」較非計畫參與家戶高出0.89份（p＜.05）。迴歸分析的結果亦顯示，「是否參與計畫」為每戶每日蔬果量之影響因素（p＜.05）。本研究以傾向分數配對法（Propensity Score Matching，PSM）執行反事實分析，結果顯示，即使控制了樣本的背景因素，是否參與計畫仍然對蔬果攝取存在積極作用。結論：受評計畫符合計畫改變理論，且確實影響吉國蔬果飲食行為。英文摘要：Objectives: To explore the Taiwanese government's development aid and aid effectiveness of the horticulture project's intervention and use evidence-based approach to prove the effects of the Taiwanese aid project. Methods: This study is a cross-sectional study with a quasi-experimental design and mixed methods. In order to comply with the framework of quasi-experimental design, we selected and assigned participants (using household as a unit) of the projects to the experimental group and non-participants to the control group. As for data collection in the field, we collected data through a structured questionnaire. We used the vegetable and fruit intake of the interviewees to explore the effectiveness of the project's intervention. Also, we used counterfactual analysis to reduce the selection bias to confirm the causal relationship. Results: A total of 117 valid questionnaires were collected, including 63 participants and 108 nonparticipants. The average household consumption of vegetables and fruits is 2.42 units (SD=5.07, Median=2). Comparing project participants with non-participants, consumption of vegetables and fruits of the participants is 0.89 units higher than non-participants (p＜. 05). Results from regression analysis indicate that participation in the project significantly affects consumption of vegetables and fruits (p＜. 05). The counterfactual analysis shows that even when controlling the background factors, participation in the project still affects vegetable and fruit intake. Conclusions: The project is in line with the theory of change and there are statistically significant intervention effects on fruit and vegetable intake.起始頁-結束頁：265-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).1071302篇名：兩岸三地青少年約會暴力盛行率及其與憂鬱情緒關係之探討並列篇名：The prevalence rate and depression underlying adolescent dating violence among Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Shanghai作者：沈瓊桃(Apr il Chiung-Tao Shen);趙雨龍(Marc us Yu-Lung Chiu);高建秀(Jianxiu Gao)關鍵字：親密關係暴力;約會暴力;青少年;憂鬱;兩岸三地;intimate partner violence;dating violence;adolescent;depression;Taiwan;Hong Kong;Shanghai期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本文旨在探討不同的華人社會中，青少年經歷約會暴力的盛行率及其與憂鬱情緒之關係。方法：本研究對象是在兩岸三地（台灣、香港、上海）就讀國、高中的青少年共3,138位（來自42個學校）。抽樣方法採用兩階段式的分層隨機抽樣。測量工具是自我報告式的問卷調查，其中包括「約會暴力量表」與「青少年憂鬱情緒自我檢視表」。結果：共有31.7%（N＝994）的研究參與者表示曾有交往的經驗；平均開始交往的年齡為13.7歲。台灣青少年的施暴盛行率為22.5%；受暴盛行率為29.9%。香港青少年的施暴盛行率為32.2%；受暴盛行率為42.7%。上海青少年的施暴盛行率為22.5%；受暴盛行率為49.2%。兩岸三地在施暴與受暴的盛行率上有顯著差異。香港青少年有較高的施暴盛行率；上海的青少年有較高的受暴盛行率。此外，t檢定結果顯示約會暴力受害者的憂鬱程度顯著地高於沒有受暴經驗者。結論：兩岸三地青少年施暴與受暴的盛行率高，亟需情感教育以及約會暴力防治方案。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aims to examine the prevalence rates and depression underlying adolescent dating violence in three different Chinese societies: Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Shanghai. Methods: Data were collected via self-report measurements from a probability sample of 3,138 students in 42 middle and senior high schools. The measures included Dating Violence Scale and Adolescent Depression Inventory. Results: The research results show that 31.7% of the participants had dating experiences and that they started dating at the age of 13.7 on average. Among those who dated in Taiwan, the prevalence rate for dating violence perpetration is 22.5%, and the prevalence rate for dating violence victimization is 29.9%. Among those who dated in Hong Kong, the prevalence rate for dating violence perpetration is 32.2%, and the prevalence rate for dating violence victimization is 42.7%. Among those who dated in Shanghai, the prevalence rate for dating violence perpetration is 22.5%, and the prevalence rate for dating violence victimization is 49.2%. A comparison of the three above-mentioned Chinese societies shows that the prevalence rates are significantly different: Hong Kong has highest prevalence rate for dating violence perpetration, and Shanghai has highest prevalence rate for dating violence victimization. Moreover, t-test shows that the depressive degrees are significantly higher among dating violence victims than those who do not have dating violence experiences. Conclusions: The present findings of the high prevalence rates in dating violence underscore the importance of relationship education and dating violence prevention and intervention programs for adolescents.起始頁-結束頁：280-288資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).1080113篇名：Validity of acute myocardial infarction inpatient process measures on the report card in Taiwan並列篇名：台灣AMI品質報告卡住院過程指標的效度驗證作者：陳宗泰(Tsung-Tai Chen);薛亞聖(Ya-Seng (Arthur) Hsueh);陳芸華(Yun-Hua Chen);郎慧珠(Hui-Chu Lang);范傑閔(Chieh-Min Fan);魏中仁(Chung-Jen Wei);王宗倫(Tzong-Luen Wang)關鍵字：AMI;public disclosure;mortality;readmission;patient and hospital levels;心肌梗塞;品質公開;死亡率;再住院率;病人和醫院層級期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the validity of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) process measures on the public report card in Taiwan. If the quality measure of report card is highly valid, then it can enhance confidence over the use of report cards by citizens, and physicians would be more willing to make improvements based on the results of performance. Methods: The study analyzes the associations between the 5 process measures reported and the negative outcome measures from 2011 to 2012. Subjects were selected from the National Health Insurance Association (NHIA) admission files and had a principal diagnosis of acute AMI (ICD-9-CM 410) during the study period. The main outcome measures include return to the emergency department (ED) within 3 days, unscheduled readmission within 14 days, and 30-day mortality at the patient and hospital levels. Results: Four process measures are all negatively associated with the outcomes at hospital level, except for the LDL examination. Conclusions: Regarding the requirement for validity transparency of a report card, our research suggests that these process measures currently used on the AMI report card in Taiwan are valid based on their associations with negative outcomes. In other words, a hospital that achieves high scores on process measures probably also realizes better outcome quality.英文摘要：目標：檢視台灣心肌梗塞品質報告卡過程指標的效度。若報告卡的品質指標具有高效度，則可以增加民眾使用品質報告卡的信心，醫師也較願意根據成效結果做出改善。方法：本研究主要分析2011到2012年，5個公開的過程指標與負向結果指標的關係，選取對象為前述期間健保資料庫住院資料有急性心肌梗塞主診斷（ICD-9-CM 410）的病人。主要的結果指標分別為病人和醫院層級的3天內重返急診、14天內非預期性再住院，以及出院30天死亡率。結果：除了低密度脂蛋白檢查指標外，4個過程指標皆與醫院層級的結果指標有顯著負相關。結論：因應報告卡效度透明化的要求，我們的研究指出，立基於報告卡使用的過程指標與負向結果有相關，現行台灣AMI品質報告卡上的過程指標具有效度。換句話說，在過程指標獲得高分的醫院，可能也具有較佳的結果品質。起始頁-結束頁：289-300資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).1071154篇名：評論：醫療品質指標風險校正模型，是否應納入病患社經特性？並列篇名：Commentary: should patient's socio-economic status be incorporated into risk adjustment models for outcome measures作者：郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：301-302資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).107115015篇名：作者回覆：醫療品質指標風險校正模型，是否應納入病患社經特性？並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary: should patient's socioeconomic status be incorporated into risk adjustment models for outcome measures作者：陳宗泰(Tsung-Tai Chen);薛亞聖(Ya-Seng (Arthur) Hsueh);陳芸華(Yun-Hua Chen);郎慧珠(Hui-Chu Lang);范傑閔(Chieh-Min Fan);魏中仁(Chung-Jen Wei);王宗倫(Tzong-Luen Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：303-304資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).107115026篇名：職場健康資產管理－潛在健康生產力損失推估模型之建立並列篇名：Workplace health asset management: establishment of a potential health-related productivity loss estimation model作者：葉婉榆(Wan-Yu Yeh);陳叡瑜(Ruey-Yu Chen);李昕亮(Hsin-Liang Lee)關鍵字：職場健康促進;減效出席;工作壓力;健康生產力;健康行銷;workplace health promotion;presenteeism;work stress;health-related productivity;health marketing期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：工作者的身心健康問題除了影響工作表現，還可能導致病假、抱病上班等「健康生產力減損」的後果，影響企業的營運效能。本研究運用職場員工「減效出席」（presenteeism）現象（指身心負荷過重或有症狀／疾病，卻仍勉強上班）和病假天數，建立「潛在健康生產力損失模型」（potential health-related productivity loss model），估算企業因員工健康問題所損失的人力成本，並分析影響因素。方法：資料來源為某健診機構企業健檢客戶在2017年2月至9月間收集的326份問卷，另納入政府勞動統計數據估算潛在健康生產力損失經濟價值。結果：在各種身心症狀中，感冒、頭痛、肌肉骨骼、消化、皮膚、情緒、睡眠問題和減效出席關聯性較高，有無這些症狀者健康生產力損失也有顯著差異。在納入主計處報告的薪資和工時參數後，換算調查對象之潛在健康生產力損失平均為2,038.84元／月。多元線性迴歸分析顯示，職場員工的年齡、工作個人生活衝突、疾病和身心不適症狀數量，和潛在健康生產力損失經濟價值有正向關係。結論：藉由本研究建立的推估模型，可成為健康促進介入方案投入／成效的評估指標，另對於因健康和壓力問題造成的減效出席風險因素，也提供企業做為提供職業健康服務的實證依據，作為職場健康問題改善優先次序的參考。英文摘要：Objectives: Workers' physical and mental health problems negatively affect their work performance as well as their employers' daily business operations; coming to work sick lowers productivity and sick leave increases labor costs. In this article, we establish a ”potential health-related productivity loss model” that uses the concept of ”presenteeism” (the psychological tendency to feel obligated to be present at work despite experiencing physical or psychological stress overload or suffering from symptoms of an illness) and days of sick leave to estimate labor costs incurred by a company because of employee health conditions and analyze influencing factors. Methods: Data were obtained from 326 questionnaires collected by corporate health check clients of a health management institution between February and September 2017. Government labor statistics were also included in the model and were used together with questionnaire data to estimate potential health productivity losses. Results: Close correlations were identified between sickness presenteeism and symptoms of physical/psychological discomfort related to common colds; headaches; musculoskeletal conditions; digestive disorders; and skin, mood, and sleep problems. Potential health productivity loss was significant among workers with these symptoms compared with the productivity of workers without these health conditions. After including the salary and working hour parameters reported by the Taiwan Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, the mean potential health productivity loss of the survey respondents was calculated to be NT$2,038.84 per month. The results of the multiple linear regression analysis indicated that employees' age, degree of work and life conflict, and number of illnesses and physical/mental symptoms were positively related to the monetary value of potential health productivity loss. Conclusions: The estimation model established in this study can be used as an indicator to evaluate the cost/benefit of workplace health promotion intervention programs, and empirical evidence concerning presenteeism-related risk factors can encourage companies to provide occupational health services and prioritize health promotion.起始頁-結束頁：305-315資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).1080047篇名：全民健康保險醫療資源潛在空間可近性分析－以台灣北部四縣市為例並列篇名：Potential spatial accessibility of health care resources: an example of four counties and cities in northern Taiwan作者：謝京辰(Ching-Chen Hsieh);廖興中(Hsin-Chung Liao);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：空間可近性;醫療資源;進階式兩階段流動搜尋法;地理資訊系統;spatial accessibility;health care resources;enhanced two step floating catchment area (E2SFCA);geographic information systems (GIS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討台灣北部四縣市醫療資源在地理空間上的可近性，並納入醫療資源不足提升服務據點，評量其對醫療資源空間可近性改善的程度。方法：使用內政部人口資料、交通部道路距離、中央健康保險署西醫巡迴地點、山地離島地區醫療給付效益提昇計畫（Integrated Delivery System，IDS）提供醫療服務地點、醫師及院所資料，以台灣北部四縣市各村里民眾為研究對象。本研究以道路交通距離15公里內每萬人口西醫師數為空間可近性的測量指標，利用「進階式兩階段流動搜尋法」針對各村里西醫醫療資源空間可近性進行評估。結果：共有11個村里在15公里的範圍內，沒有任何的西醫師資源（佔0.14%），144個村里在可近性較低的區域（佔2.84%），1,723個村里在可近性較適當的區域（佔97.02%）。巡迴醫療及IDS資源投入後，可近性不足的村里減少為99個（佔2.33%）。結論：巡迴醫療及IDS所涵蓋的村里，大部分位於可近性不足之地區，已回應到實際的情況，整體資源配置尚無明顯錯置現象。然而，仍然有2.33%的人口（174,575人）處在醫療資源不足的區域。英文摘要：Objectives: The purposes of this study were to evaluate potential spatial accessibility of health care resources in four counties and cities in northern Taiwan and examine the provision of medical services in areas with shortages of health care resource to identify the degree to which the potential spatial accessibility of health care resources has been be improved. Methods: We conducted our studying using data concerning population, physicians and medical institutions, travel distance, health insurance mobile health care, and integrated delivery system (IDS) service locations. The study subjects were the populations living in the villages of four counties and cities in northern Taiwan. This study calculated physician to population ratio within a 15-kilometer travel distance and applied this ratio as an indicator of the spatial accessibility of health care resources in the use of the enhanced two-step floating catchment area method. Results: Eleven villages (0.14%) had no physician resources within 15 kilometers, 144 villages (2.84%) were in less accessible areas, and 1,723 villages (97.02%) had sufficient resources within 15 kilometers. After mobile health care and IDS service resources were implemented, the number of villages with insufficient accessibility was reduced to 99 (2.33%). Conclusions: Most of the villages covered by mobile health care and IDS are located in areas with insufficient accessibility. The policies promoting these two services have responded to the actual situation, and there is no obvious misallocation of overall resources. However, 2.33% of the population (174,575) still resides in areas with insufficient medical resources.起始頁-結束頁：316-327資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201906_38(3).1080168篇名：從公衛觀點談病人自主權利法與「死亡識能」的增能並列篇名：From public heath perspective to discuss the Patient Autonomy Right Act and death literacy enhancement作者：陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen);吳丕玉(Pi-Yu Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：111-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).PF029篇名：台灣全面禁用石綿了嗎？從石綿產品的進口量看可能的管制漏洞並列篇名：Is a total asbestos ban achieved in Taiwan? Probable regulatory flaws are found based on the import data of asbestos-containing materials作者：施聿芃(Yu-Peng Shih);李俊賢(Lukas Jyuhn-Hsiarn Lee);鄭雅文(Yawen Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：115-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).10800810篇名：生命早期經驗與非傳染性疾病防治：歷史備忘錄並列篇名：Early life experience and the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases: a historical note作者：江宛霖(Wan-Lin Chiang);江東亮(Tung-liang Chiang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：118-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).10713111篇名：青少年電子煙使用與吸菸意圖或吸菸行為之關聯性：系統性文獻回顧並列篇名：Association of e-cigarette use with smoking intentions and behaviors among adolescents: a systematic review作者：賴鼎富(Ting-Fu Lai);林倩宇(Chien-Yu Lin);廖邕(Yung Liao)關鍵字：青少年;理性行動論;電子煙;吸菸意圖;吸菸行為;adolescent;Theory of Reasoned Action;e-cigarette;smoking intention;smoking behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：世界衛生組織指出，吸菸為全球主要的健康危險因子。近年來電子煙在青少年族群中的使用率逐漸提升，而青少年電子煙使用與其未來吸菸意圖及行為的關聯仍有爭論。本文以PubMed、PsycINFO、CINAHL資料庫、與華藝線上圖書館，系統性回顧2014年1月至2018年2月，以中、英文發表的青少年電子煙使用與其未來吸菸意圖及行為相關研究，共納入18篇符合納入規範的文獻。現有研究多來自於美國，且多為橫斷性設計，僅有少數追蹤不超過一年的縱貫性研究。我們依循部分理性行動論的架構，將研究結果歸納成「電子煙使用與吸菸意圖之關聯」與「電子煙使用與吸菸行為之關聯」兩大主軸。結果指出，青少年的電子煙使用與其吸菸意圖、吸菸行為及吸菸的數量與頻率均呈正相關。建議未來研究採用長期的縱貫性設計，以利於確認其因果關聯，作為公共衛生研究與實務之參考。英文摘要：The World Health Organization reported that smoking is a primary health risk factor. The prevalence of e-cigarette use in adolescents has increased recently. However, the association of e-cigarette use with smoking intentions and behaviors is unconfirmed. Through PubMed, PsycINFO, CINAHL, and Airiti Library, this study systematically reviewed studies published in English or Chinese language that have examined the association of adolescent's e-cigarette use with smoking intentions and behaviors from January 2014 to February 2018. We identified 18 empirical studies satisfying the respective criteria. Most of the studies had cross-sectional designs and were from the United States; only a few longitudinal studies had follow-up periods of less than 1 year. Based on the Theory of Reasoned Action, this systematic review provided some evidence of positive associations between e-cigarette use and smoking intentions, smoking behavior, and smoking frequency among adolescents. Future research must investigate the association of e-cigarette use with smoking-related behaviors by using longitudinal designs with long-term follow-ups to determine the respective causality for informing subsequent policymaking and research.起始頁-結束頁：124-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).10713612篇名：以條件性收載管理協議加速癌症創新藥品的可近性並列篇名：Managed entry agreement to improve access to innovative cancer medicines作者：施廷芳(Sophy TF Shih);王正旭(Cheng-Hsu Wang)關鍵字：藥品給付政策;風險分攤;癌症;managed entry agreement（MEA）;pharmaceutical benefits policy;risk-sharing arrangement;cancer;managed entry agreement (MEA)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：癌症創新藥的開發為治療帶來新契機，但高治療費用使得受惠病患侷限於少數，如何解決高價癌症新藥的普及是全球各國面臨的難題。本綜論以官方重點文件分析加上敘述型文獻回顧，重點探討澳洲與英國於其歷史背景下的變革為出發點，針對昂貴的創新藥所引進的加速審查與條件性收載給付辦法進行討論。為了有效管理醫療給付決策的風險，加速審查及以療效表現為基礎的之條件性收載給付為近年來發展的策略。澳洲政府實施的條件性藥品收載管理辦法與目前英國癌症藥品基金，都是透過藥品收載管理（Managed Entry Agreement，MEA）的方式，讓有希望前景的新治療，在進一步收集療效證據的同時，透過暫時性的過渡給付讓病人提早受惠癌症新治療。MEA雖然立意良好但也不是萬靈丹，其潛在問題例如資料收集、藥物安全性疑慮、終止給付的反彈等也需慎重考量。透過參考英澳兩國的條件性給付辦法，可以提供醫界與健保當局在討論高價藥給付困境時，以加速台灣癌症創新藥品普及的可行性。英文摘要：Innovative medicines bring a promising future for cancer treatment. However, the benefit to patients is limited by its high cost. Access to these innovative cancer medicines through reimbursement is a pressing issue for government authorities around the globe to resolve. Analyses of key policy documents with a narrative literature review were conducted to provide suggestions for policy consideration. This review focused on the financial risk-sharing programs of pharmaceutical benefits in Australia and United Kingdom (UK) that have had extensive experience. Various risk-sharing arrangements for pharmaceutical benefits have been implemented to contain the risk related to reimbursement decision-making. Accelerated appraisal process and performance-based arrangement are two tactics undertaken by the developed countries to deal with the high costs of innovative medicines. The Australian Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme and UK Cancer Drug Fund are two exemplary schemes using managed entry agreement (MEA). MEA allows conditional reimbursement to new medicines subject to its development of clinical evidence. It allows early access to new medications while new evidence are being collected. However, several barriers, such as collection of high-quality data, safety of new medicines and issues around de-listing, have been identified for a successful MEA to be implemented. Overseas experience is valuable to the Taiwanese government authorities in the context of pharmaceutical benefits policy discussion.起始頁-結束頁：139-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).10712213篇名：台北市成年酒駕初犯者的酒精使用型態、酒癮及酒駕行為之相關性並列篇名：Alcohol use pattern, alcohol dependence, and their correlation with driving under the influence in adult first-time DUI offenders in Taipei City作者：張祜銘(Hu-Ming Chang);陳亮妤(Lian-Yu Chen);范瓊月(Chiung-Yueh Fan);郭彥君(Yen-Chun Kuo);楊添圍(Tien-Wei Yang);鄭婉汝(Wan-Ju Cheng);黃名琪(Ming-Chyi Huang)關鍵字：酒後駕駛;酒精使用疾患;酒精依賴（酒癮）;driving under the influence (DUI);alcohol use disorder;alcohol dependence期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本研究旨於探討台北市酒駕初犯者之飲酒問題及其與酒駕行為之相關性。方法：針對參與台北地方檢察署舉辦「酒害衛教之團體課程」的酒駕初犯者進行匿名自填問卷調查，包括以酒精使用疾患辨識問卷來篩檢酒精使用疾患、華人飲酒問題篩檢問卷篩檢酒精依賴（酒癮）、簡式健康量表評估情緒困擾，並收集飲酒與酒駕行為參數。本研究定義高頻率酒駕為自陳每個月酒駕兩次以上，並利用邏輯迴歸分析找出高頻率酒駕的相關因子。結果：在597位酒駕初犯中，酒精使用疾患佔52.3%，酒癮佔34.4%。具酒精使用疾患和酒癮者有較高的比例具狂飲行為、飲用烈酒、情緒和睡眠困擾。酒精使用疾患、酒癮、在工作地點飲酒都是預測高頻率酒駕的相關因子。酒精使用疾患和酒癮個案出現高頻率酒駕行為的比例，分別為非酒精使用疾患和非酒癮患者的5倍及2倍。結論：酒精使用疾患和酒癮與高頻率酒駕呈現顯著相關。我們建議針對酒駕初犯進行飲酒問題的篩檢及介入，以期減少酒駕行為以及酒精相關危害。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated alcohol use problems in first-time offenders of driving under the influence (DUI) in Taipei City and the risk factors for a high frequency of DUI. Methods: We conducted an anonymous survey for first-time DUI offenders who attended the mandatory educational program held by Taiwan Taipei District Prosecutors Office. Participants completed the following self-rated questionnaires: the Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test for screening alcohol use disorder (AUD); the C-CAGE questionnaire for screening alcohol dependence (AD); and the Brief Symptom Rating Scale for screening psychological symptoms, alcohol drinking, and DUI variables. We defined a high frequency of DUI as occurrence of 2 or more DUI behaviors per month. Results: Among 597 participants, 52.3% and 34.4% had AUD and AD, respectively. Offenders with AUD or AD had higher risks of binge-drinking behavior, consuming a high alcohol concentration, and psychological and sleep problems. AUD, AD, and drinking at the workplace were potential risk factors for a high frequency of DUI. Notably, compared with offenders without AUD and AD, offenders with AUD and AD respectively had 5 and 2 times higher likelihoods of having a high frequency of DUI. Conclusions: AUD or its more severe form, AD, is relatively common in first-time DUI offenders. In particular, having AUD or AD is associated with an increased risk of a high frequency of DUI. Routine screening for alcohol use problems and ensuing intervention programs or referral to treatment are warranted for all DUI offenders to reduce the recidivism rate and alcohol-related harm.起始頁-結束頁：150-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).10713414篇名：評論：酒駕－凝視冰山的視角與距離作者：陳娟瑜期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：163-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).1071340115篇名：評論：台北市成年酒駕初犯者的酒精使用型態、酒癮及酒駕行為之相關性作者：孫亦君期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：165-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).1071340216篇名：作者回覆：台北市成年酒駕初犯者的酒精使用型態、酒癮及酒駕行為之相關性作者：張祜銘;陳亮妤;范瓊月;郭彥君;楊添圍;鄭婉汝;黃名琪期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：166-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).1071340317篇名：醫院保健志工代謝症候群培訓課程成效之研究：應用Natural Helper概念並列篇名：A study of effectiveness on the metabolic syndrome training program to hospital health volunteer: applied Natural Helper concept作者：莊瑋芷(WEI-CHIH CHUANG);陳富莉(Fu-Li Chen)關鍵字：醫院保健志工;Natural Helper;態度;自我效能;hospital health volunteer;Natural Helper;attitude;self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在設計Natural Helper概念融入醫院保健志工培訓課程，探討培訓課程對於醫院保健志工的專業知能、態度與自我效能之成效。方法：採類實驗設計，研究工具包括：1.自填式問卷，內容包含代謝症候群相關知能、擔任社區保健志工態度與自我效能等；2.訓練課程教材包含：Natural Helper概念與應用、自信心訓練、代謝症候群、營養與運動認知等。實驗組進行約六小時培訓課程及面對面諮詢介入、對照組無介入課程，共分前、後、後後測三次進行問卷施測，資料採描述性統計、重複測量變異數分析與廣義估計方程式（Generalized Estimating Equation，GEE）等統計分析。結果：經GEE分析組別與時間交互作用結果顯示，代謝症候群知能部分，實驗組在後測、後後測均顯著高於對照組；擔任社區保健志工態度與自我效能部份：實驗組後測顯著高於對照組，但後後測，兩組則無顯著差異。結論：醫院保健志工培訓課程後測對於代謝症候群知能、營養知能、運動知能、態度與自我效能有立即顯著成效。但後後測僅知能部份有持續效果，擔任社區保健志工態度與自我效能部份則沒有持續成效。建議未來在教育訓練課程應強化Natural Helper自信心技能訓練及實作經驗。英文摘要：Objectives: The study purpose is to design the Natural Helper concept into the hospital health volunteer training course to explore the effectiveness of the training and consultation on the professional literacy, attitude, and self-efficacy of hospital health volunteers. Methods: A quasi-experimental design was adopted in conjunction with a self-administered questionnaire and self-developed curriculum. The questionnaire incorporated of professional literacy, attitude, and self-efficacy. The curriculum content included topics on the concept and application of Natural Helpers, training on self-confidence, and concepts related to metabolic syndromes, nutrition, and exercise. The experimental group participated in an intervention program that involved a training curriculum 6 hours and consultation, whereas the control group did not participate in the program. The questionnaire was administered in a pretest, posttest, and post-posttest. The collected data were analyzed using statistical methods. Results: A GEE was adopted to analyze the interaction effect of grouping and time. The results revealed that the literacy scores of the experimental and control groups were significantly correlated in both the posttest and post-posttest. In the posttest, significant correlations were also observed between the two groups in terms of their attitude and self-efficacy scores, but no significant correlation was observed in the post-posttest. Conclusions: The training curriculum and consultation exerted an immediate and significant effect on hospital health volunteers' attitude, self-efficacy, and literacy in metabolic syndromes, nutrition, and exercise. However, the post-posttest verified that the retention effect of the intervention program was only observable in the volunteers' professional literacy. The hospital health volunteers' attitude, self-efficacy had no sustained maintenance. Subsequent about training curricula are recommended to focus on enhancing Natural Helpers' skills in maintaining self-confidence as well as increasing their practical experience.起始頁-結束頁：167-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).10707818篇名：從醫師經驗探討醫院的醫療糾紛處理制度並列篇名：Preliminary study of hospital systems for malpractice dispute management based on physicians' experiences作者：蔡依倫(Yi-Lun Tsai);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung);鄭雅文(Yawen Cheng)關鍵字：醫療糾紛;醫院制度;醫師工作環境;malpractice disputes;hospital systems;physicians' working environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：醫療糾紛是重要的社會議題，但目前探討醫師經驗的研究不多，也缺乏醫院態度與做法的相關資訊。本研究從醫師經驗探討醫院的醫療糾紛處理制度，並針對相關政策提出具體建議。方法：本研究採用深度訪談法，對象為18位在過去十年內曾有醫療糾紛經驗的受僱醫師。結果：目前院內制度對醫師當事人多提供法律方面和賠償金的協助，卻缺乏同事或主管關懷等實質的心理支持，並普遍存在羞恥與究責文化。對糾紛事件的回應則是大致了解事件經過，卻鮮少深入探究根本原因或提出預防措施。大多數的醫院態度相對被動，僅少數落實醫療糾紛的預防制度。結論：衛生主管機關應要求醫院定期舉辨醫療糾紛的教育訓練，加強醫護人員對於醫療糾紛的知識態度，並針對每個醫療糾紛進行根本原因分析，提出預防措施，且留存檔案作為相關政策依據。此外應要求醫院落實預防制度，主動介入協助通報的不良結果或病人抱怨，及早消弭潛在的醫療糾紛。英文摘要：Objectives: This study explored the characteristics of hospitals' systems for malpractice dispute management. Suggestions are proposed for improving hospitals' policies in this field. Methods: Eighteen physicians who had experienced malpractice disputes in the past 10 years were interviewed. Results: Most physicians received legal and financial support from hospital systems for malpractice disputes, but emotional support from colleagues and supervisors was inadequate due to a prevalent culture of shame and liability in malpractice dispute contexts. Hospital systems were reported to examine dispute events to assure monetary compensation but not to discover root causes of events or to devise preventive strategies. Most hospitals were determined to be reactive, with few implementing policies to proactively prevent malpractice disputes. Conclusions: Government authorities handling health affairs should request that hospitals organize educational activities regularly to improve medical staff members' knowledge and attitudes regarding malpractice disputes. Each malpractice dispute requires root cause analysis and recording of results to guide future policies. For resolution of potential malpractice disputes, hospitals should implement preventive policies to enable early assistance when adverse outcomes or patient complaints occur.起始頁-結束頁：178-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).10710719篇名：運用文字探勘分析全民健保與五項總額支付制度之民眾知覺感受並列篇名：Application of text mining in the public perception analysis of global budget payment and National Health Insurance systems作者：江婉琪(Wan-Chi Chiang);林應龍(Ying-Lung Lin);禹良治(Liang-Chih Yu);張鈺旋(Yu-Hsuan Chang);陳俞安(Yu-An Chen);王復中(Fu-Chung Wang);黃珮珊(Pei-Shan Huang);林寬佳(Kuan-Chia Lin)關鍵字：全民健保與五項總額支付制度;情感分析;文字探勘;公眾感受;National Health Insurance (NHI) and five global budget payment system;text mining;sentiment analysis;public perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本研究為發展與評估一套健保文字探勘技術以彌補傳統量性監測工具的不足並克服質性資料分析與解讀上的困難。方法：以106年度全民健保與五項總額支付制度之全國民意調查為基礎。運用文字採礦技術探討民眾對於健保意見感受之語意結構。進一步將上述語意結構進行情感分類，評估其做為輔助監測民意之適切性。結果：六大文本的詞頻統計皆近似齊夫經驗法則，少數高頻詞彙影響多數的文本內容。透過文字雲得到共有語意特徵為「很好」、「滿意」和「不錯」等對健保正向的評價。於因素分析皆呈現多元的潛在語意結構，整體解釋變異達70％以上。情感標記圖之分布皆呈反拋物線，點座落位置與色彩間的對比差異說明質、量性資料彼此具互補效益。結論：本研究具體實證如何從公眾的自由評論中，提取出輿情感受與意向，同時藉由情感標記，偵測文字評論背後的情感與情緒，將可作為探討民眾對於健康政策感知的另一項調查方法依據。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to facilitate text mining for overcoming the limitations of traditional questionnaire-based surveys and the challenges of analyzing textual data for monitoring public perceptions regarding the different fields of the National Health Insurance (NHI) system. Methods: The study data consisted of the 2017 national survey and public polls regarding people's satisfaction with NHI and five global budget payment systems in Taiwan. We derived the structure and information from the text of responses through text mining and further applied sentiment analysis by using lexical signifiers and classifying emotions to determine whether the data lean toward positive or negative emotions. Results: (1) The rank-frequency distribution for all texts of the six major fields of medical care followed Zipf's law. This means that a few high-frequency words affected most of the textual content. (2) The results in word cloud visualizations could reflect public perceptions regarding various topics. The most common semantic features were ”very well,” ”satisfied,” and ”good.” Most participants, especially dialysis patients, provided positive comments on different types of medical care in the NHI system, which shows that the health care offered by the NHI system meets peoples' needs. (3) Factor analysis further indicated that our semantic results explained more than 70% of the variance for the six major texts. For the majority of the dialysis patients, the semantic structure of responses consisted of positive words and was significantly different from those of other texts. (4) The reverse para-curve and color differences in valence-arousal space further produced qualitative and quantitative results indicating the subjects' positive perceptions and opinions. Conclusions: Public perceptions and opinions are essential for policy evaluation and implementation. They play a critical role in policy innovations. This study outlines the potential benefits of text mining and sentiment analysis techniques for developing an NHI sentiment analysis system that can aid in the assessment of public perceptions and opinions regarding the health care system. Police surveillance can benefit by incorporating such a systematic approach into the visualization and standardization of data content.起始頁-結束頁：189-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).10713720篇名：探討慢性腎臟病患者衛教介入措施對其自我管理、生活品質及生理數值控制之長期追蹤並列篇名：Effect of a prevention program on the self-management, quality of life, and disease control of patients with chronic kidney disease作者：唐敏華(Min-Hua Tang);李文欽(Wen-Chin Lee);丘周萍(Chou-Ping Chiou)關鍵字：慢性腎臟病;生活品質;自我管理;chronic kidney disease;quality of life;self-management期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：慢性腎臟病指腎功能逐漸且難以逆轉的衰退，為避免提早進入透析階段，目前醫療團隊提供慢性腎臟病患者疾病控制、飲食治療及日常保健等相關衛教，但病人是否能確實了解衛教內容及落實自我管理，最後得到良好的控制進而提升生活品質，實值得研究探討。方法：本研究採縱貫性研究設計，於南部某醫學中心腎臟科門診進行收案，共收集150位慢性腎臟病患者。以結構性問卷進行資料收集，於收案時、三個月及六個月時進行三次問卷填寫。資料以廣義估計函數式模式（GEE）進行相關資料分析。結果：腎臟病患者之照護與衛教計畫的實施後，隨著時間的增加，病人的自我管理、整體生活品質及eGFR皆有顯著改善情形。另每日規則運動、隨時間增加及eGFR的改善，與生活品質呈正相關。結論：本研究有助於瞭解腎臟病照護與衛教計畫的實施後，腎臟病患者自我管理、生活品質及eGFR的長期變化，建議醫療團隊可介入多元及適才的照護模式，運用衛教計畫的介入及良好的生理控制以提升慢性腎臟病患者之整體生活品質，延緩病人腎功能的惡化，避免提前進入透析階段。英文摘要：Objectives: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a long-term disease, and to prevent it from developing from the early stage to the dialysis stage, patients follow the advice of their medical team. However, whether patients thoroughly understand the content of the health education that they are provided with and implement self-management to enhance their quality of life is worthy of research and investigation. Methods: This study employed a longitudinal research design and recruited 150 patients with CKD from a medical center in southern Taiwan. Structured questionnaires were used to collect their data a total of three times, and the data were analyzed using GEE. Results: The patients' average score on the short-form Mandarin Health Literacy Scale for CKD was 9.06 ± 3.205, and their self-management, overall quality of life, and eGFR demonstrated significant improvements over time. Conclusions: This study clarified long-term changes in the self-management and quality of life of patients with CKD. Medical teams are advised to provide diverse and proper care models to delay the deterioration of kidney function as well as prevent the need for dialysis in patients with CKD.起始頁-結束頁：203-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).10711401篇名：從醫院到社區的四種照顧轉銜模式觀察與討論：以台灣某縣長期照顧管理中心為例並列篇名：An observation and discussion of four care transfer models from hospital to community: an example of a county government long-term care management center in Taiwan作者：李佩芳(Pei-Fang Lee)關鍵字：長期照顧;服務轉銜模式;照顧管理專員（照專）;long-term care;transfer service model;care manager期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本研究觀察台灣某縣長期照顧管理中心為因應從醫院到社區的服務轉銜，而逐步嘗試的四種轉銜服務模式。希望藉由訪談參與其中的照顧管理專員，檢視並分析其發展歷程的問題。方法：本研究將X縣的轉銜服務發展歸納、區分為四種轉銜模式，以質性研究訪談方式，立意取樣訪談六位歷經不同階段的照顧管理專員，探究模式發展歷程中的問題。結果：本研究將X縣的發展歷程區分為傳統模式、照專入院、駐院照專與準照專模式。結果發現，傳統模式與準照專模式相對具有轉銜服務效益，但四種模式皆無法單獨因應家屬照顧安排決策過程的多變性。同時，醫院、服務提供單位與照管中心間仍缺乏足夠的溝通與協調。結論：政策的規劃與執行宜更加重視使用者的立場與需求，同時也應持續強化不同服務單位間的溝通與協調，同時中央政府或可多增加跨縣市的經驗交流並提供必要的實務指引、支持或財務支援。英文摘要：Objectives: This paper reports on four transfer service models trialed by a long-term care management center run by a county in Taiwan. These models were developed to transfer care services from the hospital to the community. Reviews and analyses from the care managers were obtained during the development of the models. Methods: The transfer services of X county were classified into four models. To identify problems in the model development process, qualitative research methods and purposive sampling were employed to analyze data obtained from six care managers who experienced various stages of development process. Results: The development stages of X county's transfer service can be classified as the traditional model, visit care manager model, resident care manager model, and the quasi-care management manager models. The traditional and license-specific models are relatively service-effective. However, the four transfer models cannot manage the variability of the family carer's decision-making process, and communication and coordination between the hospitals, service providers, and long-term care manager center are inadequate. Conclusions: Policy planning and practice should focus on the position and requirements of users and continue to strengthen communication and coordination between different service units. The central government can also simultaneously increase information exchange among local governments and provide the required practical guidance and financial support.起始頁-結束頁：215-222資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201904_38(2).1071232篇名：從永續發展目標看藥物濫用防治：善用全國性流行病學調查的發現並列篇名：The prevention and treatment of drug abuse in sustainable development goals: making good use of the findings of national surveys作者：陳為堅(Wei J. Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).PF013篇名：尊嚴善終：我國病人自主權利法施行之整備並列篇名：End of life in dignified way: preparedness for implementation of Patient Autonomy Right Act作者：陳再晉(Tzay-Jinn Chen);林廷育(Ting-Yu Lin);陳冠文(Kuan-Wen Chen);鐘珮純(Pei-Chun Chung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：5-8資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).1071034篇名：台灣青少年選手專項化問題與肌力訓練之角色並列篇名：Specialization problems of youth athletes in Taiwan and the role of strength training作者：林政東(JENQ-DONG LIN)關鍵字：過早專項化訓練;運動傷害;肌肉骨骼系統失衡;結締組織;early specialization training;sports injuries;musculoskeletal imbalance;connective tissue期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：台灣升學制度及一些措施鼓勵青少年運動競賽，使青少年過早投入專項化訓練與比賽，此一作法較不符合運動訓練原則。本文以相關關鍵字搜尋資料庫並進行文獻探討，發現過度重視青少年運動成績，將促使過早進行專項化訓練，雖在國際分齡運動賽事上屢創佳績，但選手卻易運動傷害，錯失強化骨骼與肌腱的最佳時期，甚至可能影響20歲後運動表現。建議考量青少年從事多樣化（diversified sports）運動，並以肌力訓練為其發展平衡的肌肉骨骼解剖結構，建立強<U+976D>的骨骼、肌腱…等等結締組織，減少青少年運動傷害，亦為20－30歲高強度訓練及巔峰表現作準備。現行強調運動成績的趨勢，除了不利於運動表現的發展，亦容易導致青少年遭受運動傷害，建議政策上應編訂一套有利於青少年運動生涯發展的措施。英文摘要：Taiwan's further education system and several measures that encourage youth sports and competitions have caused teenagers to enter specialized training programs and competitions prematurely; this practice does not seem to conform to the principles of sports training. This article searched databases using relevant keywords to conduct a literature review, discovering that Taiwan places too much emphasis on teenagers' athletic performance, resulting in early specialization training. Despite achieving positive results at international sports events of various age levels, the athletes experience sports injuries or miss the most suitable period for strengthening their bones and tendons even if they are not injured. In addition, their athletic performance after the age of 20 is affected. These are all caused by measures that encourage early specialization training. Such practices are not merely detrimental to the development of the sports in Taiwan, but also cause the youth athletes to experience sports injuries throughout their lifetime. The most satisfactory practice is for the youth athletes to engage in diversified sports as well as use strength training to develop a balanced musculoskeletal anatomy, and build strong connective tissue such as bones and tendons to reduce their sports injuries. Such practices prepare them for high-intensity training and peak performance aged 20-30 years, thereby achieving the greatest well-being for these youth athletes.起始頁-結束頁：9-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).1070365篇名：雲嘉南地區大氣細懸浮微粒濃度與交通污染源相關性分析並列篇名：Correlation of atmospheric fine particulate matter with traffic sources in Yun-Chia-Nan area in Taiwan作者：黃淑倫(SU-LUN HWANG);林裕清(YU-CHING LIN);蕭光佑(KUANG-YU HSIAO);林玠模(CHIEH-MO LIN);紀妙青(MIAO-CHING CHI);黃友珊(YU-SHAN HUANG)關鍵字：雲嘉南;細懸浮微粒;機動車密度;Yun-Chia-Nan;fine particulate matter;motor vehicles density期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：大氣細懸浮微粒（fine particulate matter, PM_(2.5)）濃度可能受交通污染源的影響，本研究以台灣雲嘉南地區為研究地區，探討大氣PM_(2.5)與交通污染源的關係。方法：分析行政院環境保護署空氣品質監測站之PM_(2.5)數據及機動車密度登記資料。研究區域為雲林縣、嘉義縣市與台南市。以敘述性統計（平均值、中位數、最小值和最大值）分析PM_(2.5)濃度、氣象因子與機動車密度；以斯皮爾曼等級相關（Spearman's Rank Correlation Coefficient）探討PM_(2.5)濃度、氣象因子與機動車密度的相關性；以複迴歸分析機動車密度對PM_(2.5)濃度的影響。資料分析期間為2015年1至12月。結果：2015年雲嘉南地區PM_(2.5)平均濃度為26.4μg/m^3，冷季（11∼4月，35.0μg/m^3）高於熱季（5∼10月，17.8μg/m^3）。機動車平均密度分別為380.1（汽車）與734.8（機車）輛／平方公里。機動車密度雖與PM_(2.5)濃度呈正向關係但未達統計顯著，溫度為影響雲嘉南地區PM_(2.5)濃度之重要因子。機動車密度對PM_(2.5)的影響可能存在區域差異性。台南市：汽車密度每增加1輛／平方公里，PM_(2.5)增加0.762μg/m^3。嘉義市：機車密度每增加1輛／平方公里，PM_(2.5)增加0.362μg/m^3。嘉義縣：汽車密度每增加1輛／平方公里，PM_(2.5)增加0.977μg/m^3。雲林縣：汽車密度每增加1輛／平方公里，PM_(2.5)增加1.030μg/m^3。結論：溫度為影響雲嘉南地區大氣PM_(2.5)濃度的重要因子。交通污染源對雲嘉南地區PM_(2.5)的影響可能存在區域差異性，值得後續深入探討。英文摘要：Objectives: Levels of atmospheric fine particulate matter (PM_(2.5)) may be affected by the traffic sources. This article explores correlations between the PM_(2.5) level and traffic sources in Yun-Chia-Nan area in Taiwan. Methods: Data regarding PM_(2.5) levels and motor vehicle density in 2015 were obtained from Environmental Protection Administration monitoring stations and Environmental Resource Database, respectively. The study area covers four southwestern districts of Taiwan: Yunlin County, Chiayi City, Chiayi County, and Tainan City. Mean, median, minimum, and maximum values for PM_(2.5) levels, meteorological variables, and motor vehicle densities were calculated. The relationship between PM_(2.5), meteorological variables, and motor vehicle density was estimated using the Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. A multiple linear regression model was used to explore the associations of PM_(2.5) with motor vehicle density. The study duration was January-December 2015. Results: In 2015, the annual mean PM_(2.5) level was 26.4 μg/m^3; PM_(2.5) levels were higher in the colder season (November-April; 35.0 μg/m^3) than in the hotter season (May-October; 17.8 μg/m^3). The motor vehicle densities were 380.1 car/km^2 and 734.8 motorcycle/km^2. The relationship between motor vehicle density and PM_(2.5) level was positive, but nonsignificant. Temperature was the major factor influencing the PM_(2.5) levels. Moreover, the effects of motor vehicle density on the PM_(2.5) level varied geographically: for every 1-car/km^2 increase, the PM_(2.5) level increased by 0.762, 0.362, 0.977, and 1.030 μg/m^3 in Tainan City, Chiayi City, Chiayi County, and Yunlin County, respectively. Conclusions: Temperature is the major factor influencing PM_(2.5) levels in Yun-Chia-Nan area in Taiwan. The effect of traffic sources on PM_(2.5) level might have geographic variation. Further relevant research is warranted.起始頁-結束頁：19-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).1071046篇名：Macroeconomic conditions and Internet search for end-of-life care: an analysis using Google Trends並列篇名：經濟景氣與生命末期照護相關字詞搜尋之關係探討－以Google趨勢分析作者：吳丕玉(PI-YU WU);王鶴偉(HO-WEI WANG);陳端容(DUAN-RUNG CHEN)關鍵字：Google Trends;end-of-life care;macroeconomics;economic recession;Google趨勢;臨終照護;總體經濟;經濟衰退期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Objectives: End-of-life (EOL) care imposes a significant financial burden on most caregivers, but the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and people's EOL care awareness remains unknown. This study employed Google Trends (GT) to explore the association between Internet search for EOL care and macroeconomic conditions. Methods: The weekly average Taiwan Stock Exchange (TWSE) weighted index from January 2008 to December 2013 was used as the macroeconomic index. Local Google searches for EOL care-related keywords from January 2008 to December 2015 were downloaded from GT. A series of correlation analyses was performed on the TWSE and the GT for each keyword at the concurrent time and at 3, 6, and 9 months later to ascertain the nowcasting and forecasting effect. Results: The GT indices for EOL care-related keywords were negatively correlated with the concurrent and previous TWSE indices. For each keyword, either the 6-month or 9-month forecasting effect was higher than the concurrent nowcasting effect, suggesting that worse economic conditions (lower TWSE) might be a factor associated with people's awareness of advanced EOL care. Conclusions: To better understand how people may be more sensitive to circumstances related to EOL care decisions, macroeconomic conditions and the implications of Internet search behavior should be further considered.英文摘要：目標：照護生命末期的家人對許多照護者而言會造成龐大的經濟壓力，經濟景氣變壞是否與增加人們關心生命末期照護的訊息，尚未有探討。本研究藉由Google趨勢收集的資料，探討生命末期照護相關字詞搜尋狀況與經濟景氣之關係。方法：自雅虎財經網站下載2008年1月至2013年12月間的每週台灣加權股價指數作為經濟景氣的指標。從Google趨勢的網站下載台灣2008年1月至2015年12月間生命末期照護相關字詞的搜尋強度。分析方式為對各個關鍵字搜尋指數進行與台股大盤指數間的相關性分析，除了同期間指數與關鍵字搜尋指數的比較外，也分別對股價指數與各個關鍵字3,6,9個月後的關鍵字搜尋指數做相關分析，以探討股價對關鍵字搜尋具有同期效應或領先預測的效應。結果：整體而言，生命末期照護相關字詞的Google搜尋趨勢與反映經濟景氣的股市大盤指數間呈現負相關。股市大盤的股價走勢與其後的6個月後或9個月後的末期照護相關字詞相關性較為顯著，顯示當大環境經濟不理想時，人們對於生命末期病人照護的關切增加，人們想要了解安寧緩和療護的照護方式的搜尋行為也越多。結論：總體經濟景氣的變化與人們的網路搜尋行為有一定的關係，間接可幫助了解經濟環境與個人的臨終照護決策的相關性。起始頁-結束頁：31-41資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).1070517篇名：護理人員留任意願之相關因素探討：護理工作環境與性格特質的交互作用並列篇名：Factors related to nurses' intentions to stay: the interaction between nurses' work environment and personality traits作者：曾旭民(HSU-MIN TSENG);陳慧玲(HUI-LING CHEN);莊月娥(YUEH-O CHUANG);黃瑋婷(WEI TING HUANG)關鍵字：留任意願;護理工作環境;五大性格;職場壓力;retention intention;nursing work environment;big five personality;work stress期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：全球化護理人員短缺已成為健康照護領域重要的課題。雖然有相當多的研究探討護理人員留任的相關課題，但多數研究大多關注於組織政策或個別護理人員的態度等相關因素，較少針對個體與環境交互作用之影響。本研究的主要目的乃依據個人與環境互動的理論架構，了解影響護理人員留任意願之相關因素，並特別著重於臨床工作環境、性格特質與其交互作用。方法：採橫斷式問卷調查研究設計，取樣北部某醫學中心之正職護理人員，研究工具包括基本與工作相關特質、護理工作環境、五大性格、護理職場壓力、與留任意願等量表。結果：本研究有效回收170份。階層迴歸分析結果顯示，工作環境與護理留任意願具顯著關係，而性格特質中之情緒穩定性對工作環境中的工作量合理性構面因素與留任意願之顯著關係具有交互效果。結論：研究結果能提供醫院重要的應用價值，護理管理者應考量採用差異化人力資源管理策略，依據不同性格特質進行工作特性安排的適配性，進而提升護理人員留任意願。英文摘要：Objectives: The current worldwide nursing shortage represents a major problem for the health sector. Despite extensive investigation into predictors of nurses' intention to stay, most studies have focused on the attitudinal and organizational aspects concerning individual nurses. This study, however, employed a framework of person-environment interactions as the basis for an investigation of the interaction effects of personal (i.e., Big Five personality traits) and contextual factors (i.e., perceived practice work environment) on nurses' intentions to stay. Methods: A cross-sectional survey was conducted on registered nurses at a medical center in northern Taiwan. The nurses completed a questionnaire with items covering demographics and the following topics: work, Big Five personality traits, work environment, work stress, and intention to stay. Results: One hundred seventy nurses completed the questionnaire. Hierarchical regression analysis results indicated that the nurses' intentions to stay were largely influenced by how they perceived their work environment as well as the interaction between perceived workload and the emotional stability personality trait. Conclusions: This study's findings have critical implications for hospitals because they can be used to promote an effective work environment using differential human resource strategies to reduce nursing turnover.起始頁-結束頁：42-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).1070828篇名：居家醫療資訊科技服務平台之需求探討並列篇名：Exploring the requirements of home medical carers and carees for a technological information platform作者：陳雅美(YA-MEI CHEN);王映捷(YING-CHIEH WANG);黃國晉(KUO-CHIN HUANG);黃松共(SONG-KONG HUANG);楊昆澈(KUEN-CHEH YANG);姜遠萍(YUAN-PING CHIANG);鍾國彪(KUO-PIAO CHUNG)關鍵字：居家醫療資訊科技服務平台;焦點團體訪談;內容分析法;technological information platform of home medical care services;focus group;content analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在了解居家醫療服務過程之主要參與者對於資訊科技平台的需求，以作為國家相關單位及長照產業之參考。方法：本研究以居家醫療服務的主要參與者為研究對象，包含三類型：（1）醫師、（2）護理師，及（3）長照服務的使用者與潛在使用者，採立意抽樣方式取得研究樣本，運用焦點團體訪談進行資料收集。後續，使用內容分析法（content analysis）進行資料分析，將訪問內容進行主題編碼歸類，進而了解臨床人員及民眾對於居家醫療資訊科技服務平台的需求及期待。結果：臨床人員及民眾對於居家醫療資訊科技服務平台的需求大致可歸納為四大主題，分別為：（1）提升行政效率、（2）照護連續性、（3）長期照護服務諮詢與整合、及（4）照護品質。醫護端期望透過科技平台使作業流程更為精簡順暢，以協助行政效率有所提昇，並希冀科技平台可輔助進行資訊交換共享，以掌握個案的生理資訊，進而增進照護連續性及照護品質；長照服務的使用者與潛在使用者則期望透過平台追蹤專業照顧人員的服務狀況並與其進行即時互動，同時亦希望平台協助進行相關評估且將服務進行整合，並透過單一窗口獲得高品質的服務。然而，目前應用於我國居家醫療服務過程的相關資訊系統，因具有（1）照護資訊分散於各資訊系統；（2）行政管理作業支援功能不夠全面；（3）無法及時提供照護資源的相關資訊；（4）無法達成雙向交流等不足之處，故無法滿足上述需求。結論：雖然台灣政府已有開發居家醫療服務的相關資訊平台，以促進居家醫療服務的發展，然這些資訊系統皆無法完全滿足使用者的需求。因此如何發展具備（1）提升行政效率、（2）增進照護連續性、（3）協助長期照護服務諮詢與整合、及（4）促進照護品質等功能的整合資訊平台將會是我國為未來相關單位應優先考量的面向。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to explore the requirements of home medical carers and carees for a technological information platform. Methods: This was a qualitative study. The research participants, recruited through purposive sampling, were individuals with experience of home medical services, including doctors, nurses, and users and potential users of long-term care services. Content analysis was used to analyze the text. Results: Four themes emerged regarding the requirements that a technological information platform should meet: (1) high administration efficiency; (2) promotion of continuity of care; (3) integration of long-term care services and service consultation; and (4) promotion of quality of care. The doctors and nurses who administered home medical care stated that the platform should promote continuity and quality of care by improving work efficiency and simplifying communication between health care professionals and caregivers (or care recipients). The users and potential users of home care services hoped that they could obtain information about their service status and communicate with health care professionals. In addition, the users and potential users expected that the platform could integrate long-term care services and provide related health and welfare information; moreover, they wished to have access to high quality services through one single platform. Based on our review, the current information technology system of home medical care in Taiwan faces the following four challenges in meeting users’ needs: (1) care information is held in various information systems; (2) the administrative support functions are not sufficiently comprehensive; (3) information on care resources is not provided in a timely manner; and (4) communication is monodirectional, from carers to carees. Conclusions: Although the Taiwanese government has developed several platforms to facilitate the development of home medical care services, these platforms do not meet users’ needs. In an integrated information platform, the following functions must be prioritized: (1) high administrative efficiency; (2) promotion of continuity of care; (3) integration of long-term care services with service consultations; and (4) promotion of quality of care.起始頁-結束頁：53-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).1070649篇名：評論：居家醫療資訊科技服務平台之需求探討並列篇名：Commentary: exploring the requirements of home medical carers and carees for a technological information platform作者：劉立凡(Li-Fan Liou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：66-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).1070640110篇名：老人定點用餐服務現況及參與用餐者之自評效益－以台北市為例並列篇名：Current status of congregate meal services for elderly people and self-perceived benefits of the participants by using Taipei City as an example作者：王映捷(YING-CHIEH WANG);陳雅美(YA-MEI CHEN);李玉春(YUE-CHUNE LEE);楊銘欽(MING-CHIN YANG)關鍵字：定點用餐服務;老人;參與效益;多階層分析;congregate meal service;elderly;the effectiveness of participation;Hierarchical Linear Models期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在了解台北市老人定點用餐服務之現況，並探討參與定點用餐服務對於老人之效益及其相關因素。方法：本研究為橫斷式研究，研究對象包括服務提供者與使用者，抽樣方法為分層等比例群集抽樣，採用面對面訪問，以自行發展的結構式問卷為測量工具，進行資料蒐集，並以多階層線性分析模型進行分析。結果：總計回收有效問卷，在服務提供者為35份（回收率94.6%），在服務使用者為613份（回收率69.6%）。結果顯示，89%的據點每週提供服務的日數為3天以下；使用者參與定點用餐自覺效益在心理及社會面向高於生理面向；高度參與頻率者的自評效益分數顯著高於低度參與者（心理及社會面向p＜0.01）；每週提供定點用餐服務日數為「三次以上」的單位之服務使用者的參與效益較高（心理及社會面向p＜0.05）。結論：參與頻率、據點每週提供定點用餐服務之日數與使用者感受效益具有相關性。然台北市定點用餐提供的日數多為2至3天。建議政府持續輔導與補助定點用餐服務據點，以每週提供五天服務為努力目標，增加老人參與服務的機會。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the status of congregate meal services and understand the benefits of participation on congregate meal services and the associated factors. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study. The participants were the providers and users at congregate meal service sites. We collected data by using stratified proportionate cluster sampling and face-to-face interviews using self-developed structured questionnaire as a tool. Hierarchical linear models were used to identify factors associated with participation. Results: We obtained questionnaire responses from 35 provider (response rate, 94.6%) and 613 user questionnaire (response rate, 69.6%); 89% sites provided services less than 3 days per week. The average scores of self-perceived benefits of users on psychological and social dimensions were higher than the physiological dimensions. Those with higher participation frequency had higher self-perceived benefit scores. In addition, users at the sites providing services more than 3 days per week had higher self-perceived benefit scores. Conclusions: The frequency of participation and that of providing congregate meal services per week are associated with participation benefits. We suggest that Taiwan government to encourage and subsidize congregate meal service sites to increase the service frequency to up to 5 days a week and thus improve the self-perceived benefits of the users.起始頁-結束頁：67-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).10707011篇名：台灣偏頭痛病患發生睡眠障礙之風險：一項全國性之世代研究並列篇名：The risk of incident sleep disorder in migraine patients in Taiwan: a nationwide cohort study作者：李建瑩(CHIEN-YING LEE);蔡雅芳(YA-FANG TSAI);張雯婷(WEN-TING CHANG);蔡東翰(TUNG-HAN TSAI);黃光華(KUANG-HUA HUANG)關鍵字：偏頭痛;睡眠障礙;用藥型態;全民健保資料庫;世代研究;migraine;sleep disorder;prescription patterns;National Health Research Institutes Database;cohort study期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：偏頭痛與睡眠障礙之相關性是複雜的，本研究探討偏頭痛與睡眠障礙之相關性，同時瞭解其他共病與偏頭痛之用藥是否會影響其相關性。方法：本研究為一回溯性世代研究，以承保抽樣歸人檔作為分析資料庫，以新發生之偏頭痛病患作為研究組，且排除曾出現睡眠障礙者，並利用傾向分數配對法，取得無偏頭痛之病患作為對照組。取得研究對象後，進一步控制相關變項，以Cox比例風險模式探討偏頭痛與發生睡眠障礙之相關性。本研究之控制變項為共病情況及偏頭痛之用藥型態。結果：偏頭痛患者之睡眠障礙發生率為6.86%。偏頭痛患者相較於無偏頭痛患者，其發生睡眠障礙之風險比為2.71倍（95% CI=2.50-2.94）。高血壓患者（HR=1.45; 95% CI=1.29-1.64）、重鬱症（單純發作）患者（HR=1.94; 95% CI=1.29-2.92）與精神官能性憂鬱症患者（HR=1.61; 95% CI=1.23-2.11），皆有較高之發生睡眠障礙之風險比。偏頭痛用藥與睡眠障礙則無相關性。結論：偏頭痛與發生睡眠障礙確實具有相關性，高血壓疾病、重鬱症（單純發作）及精神官能性憂鬱症，亦為睡眠障礙之危險因子。英文摘要：Objectives: The correlation between migraine and sleep disorders is complex and may be causal in nature. This study investigated the correlation between migraine and sleep disorders and discussed whether other comorbidities or prescription patterns influence their relevance. Methods: This retrospective cohort study used data from the Longitudinal Health Insurance Database of Taiwan. The study subjects were patients with new-onset migraine who had not been diagnosed as having a sleep disorder prior to migraine diagnosis. To avoid selection bias, we applied propensity score matching to select patients without migraine as the control group. We used the Cox proportional hazard model to analyze differences in the risk of sleep disorder among patients with migraine after controlling for related variables, including comorbidities and migraine prescription patterns. Results: The rate of incident sleep disorders was 6.86% in patients with migraine. The hazard ratio (HR) in patients with migraine was higher than that in patients without migraine (HR = 2.71; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.50-2.94). Patients with hypertension (HR = 1.45; 95% CI = 1.29-1.64), major depression (single episode) (HR = 2.38; 95% CI = 1.47-3.84), or neurotic depression (HR = 1.93; 95% CI = 1.41-2.64) had a higher risk of sleep disorders. Furthermore, migraine medication was not related to sleep disorders. Conclusions: Patients with migraine have a higher risk of sleep disorders than do those without migraine. The rate of sleep disorders is highest in patients with hypertension, major depression (single episode), or neurotic depression.起始頁-結束頁：81-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).10709212篇名：微生物螢光檢測儀於醫院公共空間空氣細菌篩檢與定量分析並列篇名：Preliminary study on monitoring airborne bacteria in hospital environments using a microbe fluorescence sensor作者：簡誌良(CHIH-LIANG CHIEN);蘇富榮(FU-JUNG SU);曠永銓(YUNG-CHUAN KUANG);徐嘉彬(CHIA-PIN HSU);楊宗儒(TSUNG-JU YANG);施志恆(CHIH-HENG SHIH)關鍵字：醫院室內空氣品質;微生物螢光檢測;快速巡檢工具;indoor air quality in hospitals;microbe fluorescence detection;fast screening tool期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：細菌為室內空氣品質管理法中醫療機構的管制項目之一，公共空間細菌量檢測須以培養方式取得，尚無直讀儀器用於較快速的巡檢作業。本研究評估微生物螢光分析法作為快速巡檢工具之可行性與適宜性，針對細菌超標醫院建立可快速篩檢室內空間細菌濃度分布的輔助工具。方法：在8處列管醫院的管制空間、空調機房內及外氣引入口，以微生物螢光檢測儀與可培養性細菌採樣器進行平行採樣，其中可培養性細菌的採樣及分析，乃依照環檢所的標準檢測方法進行。結果：就檢測儀在高細菌濃度下的表現，當測得螢光係數大於2.82 V/s時，有極大機會細菌濃度可能高於1,500 CFU/m^3的法規限值。結論：對於已知細菌超標的醫院，可利用螢光檢測儀作為輔助，研判疑似污染源位置之污染程度，快速確認細菌濃度空間分佈潛勢並對可能超標區域進行改善，其結果應具有一定程度的參考價值。待累積更多比對數據後，可利用巡檢的螢光係數來推估細菌濃度，以利醫療機構即時現場評估室內空間細菌的可能分布。英文摘要：Objectives: In accordance with indoor air quality management regulations, the bacteria concentrations of public spaces in healthcare facilities are determined by using microbial cultures, a method that is time-consuming and inefficient. This study examines the feasibility and applicability of using a semi-portable fluorescence microbe sensor in hospital settings to quickly obtain the potential spatial distribution of airborne bacteria. Methods: Eight hospitals were selected as sampling sites. Both the fluorescence microbe sensor and microbial culture of air samplers were used. Parallel sampling was performed in hospital areas accessible to the public, air conditioning facilities, and fresh air inlets. Results: Fluorescence intensities obtained by microbe fluorescence detection were found to be highly correlated to the bacterial concentrations at 21 sampling locations. When the measured fluorescence intensity is higher than 2.82 V/s, the estimated bacterial concentration has a high probability of exceeding 1,500 CFU/m^3, which is the maximum legal limit. Conclusions: In hospitals where levels of bacteria exceed the legal threshold, the microbe sensor can be used as a fast screening tool to identify the potential spatial distribution of bacteria in real time. Upon completing further studies and comparing more data, using fluorescence intensity to estimate bacteria concentrations is expected to become a more feasible and effective method of monitoring indoor air quality in hospitals.起始頁-結束頁：92-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).10710513篇名：森林圖繪製的探討應用：以MS-Excel繪製為例並列篇名：Feasibility of using Microsoft Excel to draw forest plots作者：蔡崇煌(CHUNG-HUANG TSAI);蔡濬莉(JUN-LI TSAI);王俊堯(JIUN-YAO WANG)關鍵字：森林圖;刺胳針;統合分析;新英格蘭醫學雜誌;forest plot;Lancet;meta-analysis;N Engl J Med期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：目標：免費之RevMan 5.3套裝軟體所畫之森林圖不易做修改，本研究嘗試用微軟Excel 2016重新製作常用統合分析軟體的分析結果及新英格蘭醫學雜誌（NEJM）發表的文獻森林圖。方法：以PubMed搜尋題目關鍵詞為“Excel”AND”meta analysis或meta-analysis”、“Excel”AND”forest plot”，中文資料由思博網中文電子期刊服務搜尋，關鍵字同上。並在Google搜索引擎搜尋關鍵詞為“森林圖或forest plot”作圖法。已發表文獻所呈現的森林圖，主要參考NEJM、刺胳針等期刊的森林圖呈現法。結果：共找到4篇文獻，皆是探討如何使用Excel計算效應量及95% CI，畫森林圖皆非其重點。由期刊上搜尋到的圖形、多元迴歸分析及統合分析套裝軟體計算的結果，皆可用Excel直接畫出，且無論在線條或標記形狀，皆具有極大的修改自由性，更重要為Excel相對較常見，且不難學習。結論：使用Excel製作森林圖可以符合國際學術期刊的呈現法，且容易修改，適合研究及教學的統計實際應用。英文摘要：Objectives: Forest plots drawn using the free software package RevMan 5.3 are difficult to modify. This study sought to recreate forest plots from the results of meta-analyses in published articles of the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM) by using Microsoft Excel 2016. Methods: The topic keywords ”Excel AND meta-analysis OR meta-analysis” and ”Excel AND forest plot” were searched for in PubMed and a Chinese-language electronic journal service. In addition, the keyword ”forest plot” was searched for using Google. Example forest plots were collected from journals such as the NEJM and Lancet. Results: Four articles were found, all of which explored how to use Excel to calculate the effect size and 95% confidence interval without particular focus on drawing forest plots. All forest plots found in the journal search could be plotted using Excel; furthermore, Excel could be used to calculate the results of the multivariate regressions in the meta-analyses. Excel provides great freedom to modify forest plots regardless of the line or shape required and is a commonly used piece of software that is easy to learn. Conclusions: Excel can be used to draw forest plots that are consistent with presentations used in journals; moreover, such plots are easily modifiable and are therefore suitable for practical application in medical research and by teaching personnel.起始頁-結束頁：102-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.201902_38(1).10710801篇名：「重思東亞脈絡下的冷戰」專號導言並列篇名：Special Issue: Rethinking the Cold War In the East Asia Context-Introduction作者：潘光哲(Kuang-Che Pan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：1-16資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：香港與臺北之間：李惠堂與兩岸三地的體育冷戰（1949-1979）並列篇名：Between Hong Kong and Taipei: Lee Wai-Tong and the Cold War in the Sports Field between the Mainland China, Taiwan and Hong Kong, 1949-1979作者：趙崢(Zhao Zheng)關鍵字：李惠堂;冷戰;體育;中華民國;香港;Lee Wai-tong;The Cold War;Sports;Republic of China;Hong Kong期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：既往對於中國大陸和臺灣在冷戰時期體育領域進行競爭的研究，大都以國際體育組織的會籍之爭做為切入點，聚焦於兩岸在外交領域的合法性競爭，體育因之被視為兩岸政權軍事和意識形態對峙的工具，成為被政治所利用和操弄的對象。本文試圖透過著名體育人物李惠堂在1949-1979年的思想與活動，揭示體育人物在這一時期兩岸三地的地緣格局下亦存在相當程度的主體性和能動性，對政治與體育之間的關係進行新的解讀。從1950年代到1970年代，李惠堂往來於香港與臺北之間，作為中華民國政府在體育領域的重要代理人，服務於臺北方面的體育、外交和僑務戰略，延續和擴展中華民國在1949年之前參與國際體育的模式，同時妥善處理與香港社會各方面的關係，以此獲取各種政治回報和拓展自身的商業網絡。儘管他被國民黨政權塑造為「自由中國」在體育領域堛滬垠n象徵，但他在體育政策層面與中華民國政府也長期存在著嚴重的理念分歧與衝突。李惠堂最後三十年的人生史，是兩岸體育冷戰的歷史縮影，折射出大中華地區的體育在兩岸三地的交錯互動下的延續和變異。英文摘要：Much of the literature on competition in sports in both Mainland China and Taiwan has probed into the battle over membership with international sports organizations in the Cold War era, focusing particularly on the legitimate competition in the cross-Strait diplomacy. Sports, in such case, has been considered as the puppet of the confrontations of military regime and ideology across the Strait, utilized and manipulated by politics. This paper reveals that sports figures held, to some extent, the subjectivity and initiatives in a geopolitical pattern of Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Mainland China, by tracing the thoughts and activities of Lee Wai-tong, an illustrious sports figure, between 1949 and 1979, thus shedding new lights on the relationship between politics and sports. From 1950s to 1970s, Lee Waitong, as a prominent agent of the government of the Republic of China (ROC), shuttling back and forth between Hong Kong and Taipei, served the strategies in sports, foreign affairs, and overseas Chinese affairs of the regime. He maintained and broadened the ways in which the ROC participated in international sports. He, meanwhile, properly handled the relationship with Hong Kong society, so as to acquire political rewards and broaden his business network. Although he was constructed as the symbol of ”Free China” in the field of sports by the Kuomintang regime, Lee Waitong had long-term serious disputes and conflicts with the government of the ROC in sports policies. The life history of Lee Wai-tong's last three decades was the history of the cross-Strait cold war in sports in miniature that reflected the continuity and changes of sports in the interactions in Greater China including Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Mainland China.起始頁-結束頁：17-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：冷戰時代的美國與世局：徐復觀的當代新儒家觀點並列篇名：Xu Fuguan on U.S. and the Cold War World: A New Confucian Perspective作者：李淑珍(Su-San Lee)關鍵字：徐復觀;美國;冷戰;新儒家;國際政治;Xu Fuguan;US;Cold War;New Confucianism;International Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：徐復觀素負文名，其雜文中包括三百餘篇國際時論，涵蓋範圍自1950年代至1980年代初，與冷戰時代大致重疊。本文根據這些時論，討論他如何評價領導自由陣營對抗共產集團的美國，以了解冷戰時代新儒家看待世局的角度。徐復觀批評美國打壓各國民族主義、支持反共獨裁政權，但整體而言，他是站在「諍友」的立場上對美國求全責備。他認為蘇聯的侵略野心才是冷戰時期的禍源，而美國以雄大的氣魄領導自由世界對抗蘇聯，它本身不構成「霸權」。只是，為了避免第三次世界大戰爆發，美國對共產集團採取守勢而非攻勢，只求圍堵、不求勝利，以致最終在中南半島鎩羽而歸。就美國國內社會而言，徐復觀對它日趨物質感官頗有微詞，對60年代反文化運動更不以為然；但從處理水門事件的公正、公開上，他看到了美國民主制度的光輝。曾經擔任蔣介石參謀的徐復觀深知國際政治講利害、重實力，但他更相信人類的良心理性在現實與歷史中發揮的作用。他觀察全球政治，在國家興亡、政權起落之際驗證中國傳統政治智慧，對儒家思想與民主政治的信心益發堅定。從他的評論中，我們可以發現新儒家強烈的道德的理想主義，使其主張有別於大多數國關專家的現實主義。英文摘要：The famous scholar and polemicist Xu Fuguan wrote more than three hundred short essays on international politics during the Cold War era. These commentaries revealed a New Confucian perspective on the world order shaped by the confrontation between the USSR and the US in general, and the leading role that the US played in the Western Bloc in particular. Xu denounced the imperialistic Soviet Union as the major threat to world peace, therefore he never regarded the US as a ”hegemony” while it engaging in the Korean War and Vietnam War. For fear of the outbreak of the third world war, the US adopted the policy of containment instead of a more decisive approach, to Xu's disappointment. The prolonged war caused great upheavals domestically and internationally, eventually leading to its defeat in the battlefield of Vietnam. In addition to the discontent with American strategy in Vietnam, Xu was also critical of the US for its aggressive missionary activities and its support of anti-communist dictators in Asia. However, he did not challenge the world leadership of the US in the second half of the 20th century; he even admired the merits of American democracy for dealing with the Watergate Scandal transparently and impartially. Once a major general and Chiang Kai-shek's staff officer, Xu fully realized how power worked in international politics. As a New Confucian, he nevertheless put more emphasis on the importance of conscience and morality in the political arena. His long-term observation of the ups and downs of different regimes globally strengthened not only his faith in democracy, but also his confidence in Confucianism. Such moral idealism rendered his Cold War discourses distinctively different from the realism of most international-relations specialists.起始頁-結束頁：73-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：冷戰時期香港「教育條例」修訂與私立專上院校發展（1948-1958）並列篇名：The Revisions of Education Ordinances and the Development of Post-Secondary College in Cold War Hong Kong. (1948-1958)作者：陳學然(Chan-Hok Yin);張志翔(Zhang-Zhi Xiang)關鍵字：港英政府;冷戰;教育政策;私立專上院校;條例修訂;British Hong Kong;Cold War;Education Policies;Post-Secondary College;Revision of Ordinances期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：香港英國殖民地政府在面對1949年中國山河變色，而戰後全球進入冷戰國際政局的複雜態勢下，管治香港變得困難重重。為了制止各路勢力在港的政治紛爭，並提高政府管治的威信與效能，港府在作為意識型態戰場的教育領域推出新舉措以應時變，在短短十年便三次大幅度修訂教育條例打擊共產主義的滲透工作，同時也對親國民黨及受美國資助的院校進行規管，試圖平衡各方權勢以減少社會矛盾、強化政府管治。但在執行過程中，港府試圖減少社會內部的政治化衝突的初衷，往往又因為其實施的管制手段變得更為政治化，引起中國共產黨方面的輿論反擊。本文以1948至1958年這十年間高度變動的香港社會為研究背景，觀察港府如何藉<U+7740>三次修例以應對其所面臨的政治挑戰，將特別透過條例的釐訂經過與執行情況，分析港府在教育領域嚴加控制意識型態的各種政治考慮，由此而彰示香港在冷戰時期複雜而多元的政治氛圍。英文摘要：After the success of the Chinese Communist Revolution in 1949, the British Hong Kong authority realized that it must adjust its policies to cope with the bipolar global system of the Cold War. To win hearts and minds in culture Cold War, the British Hong Kong authority revised the education ordinances thrice in 1948-1958, partly to stop the infiltration of Chinese Communist agents into the colony, and party to control private schools funded by the Guomindang and the Americans. The goal of these ordinance revisions was to strike a precarious balance between the two rivaling camps which were, in turn, an extension of the global competition between the Communist World and the Free World. Paradoxically, in implementing these revisions the British Hong Kong triggered more conflicts between the two camps, resulting in more social tensions and political controversies. In this paper, we will examine the purposes and implementations of these three revisions of education ordinances, using the revisions as a lens to gauge the complexity and fluidity of Cold War Hong Kong.起始頁-結束頁：135-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：東亞冷戰下的流離轉徙：越南農民雙重革命中的日常生活並列篇名：Displacement and Migration under the Cold War in East Asia: Daily Life in the Double Revolution of Vietnamese Peasants作者：龔宜君(I-Chun Kung);吳鯤魯(Kun-Lu Wu)關鍵字：越南;移墾;小農;戰爭;Vietnam;Settlement;Peasants;War期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：1945年後不斷立國及作戰的越南戰禍綿延長達30年，尤其在冷戰脈絡下，戰爭持續不斷的暴力化及其遺緒，造成人口重組移植及大規模人口移動，就算因此而造成的變遷結果，並非任何政權事先計劃的，卻至今仍影響人民的日常生活。本文初步探索越南人民在軍事與社會雙重革命下，不斷地從一個地方被移植到另一個新的土地的過程，及人民因此承受戰禍之外更為混亂、複雜的苦難經驗。人民遭受迫遷、整體社會中大規模的人口重組移植、農戶的移墾經驗、農村人口流離失所等等，這些過程所造成農村社會階級／結構的變遷、小農（非佃農）階級的出現，都持續對越戰結束後的發展造成相當程度的影響。本文採用在越南中央高地得叻省（<U+0110><U+1EAF>k L<U+1EAF>k）、林同省（Lam <U+0110><U+1ED3>ng），以及東南部的同奈省（<U+0110><U+1ED3>ng Nai）對移墾小農的訪談資料，勾勒出越南移墾小農在軍事／政治與社會雙重革命下所特有的遷移與日常生活。整體而言，越南的組織化的移民作為一種現象，很難用傳統的推拉理論來說明，對移民的影響應有更複雜和細緻的架構來分析。英文摘要：After 1945, Vietnam has constantly involved in state-making and war-making, as war disaster extended for 30 years. Especially in the context of the Cold War, the violent war and its legacy have caused population reorganization and large-scale population movements. Even if the result of the change is not planned by any regime in advance, but it still affects the daily life of the people. This paper explores the process of the Vietnamese people's continuous settlement from one place to another under the dual revolution of military and society, and the people's sufferings because of the chaotic and the complicated experiences beyond the scourge of war. The people have been forced to transfer on and on, the large-scale population reorganization and transplant in the whole society, the migration experience of farmers, the displacement of rural population, etc., which have caused the changes of rural social class/structure and the emergence of peasants. It has continued to have a considerable impact on the development after the end of the Vietnam War. This paper uses interviews with migrant farmers in <U+0110><U+1EAF>k L<U+1EAF>k Provience, Lam <U+0110><U+1ED3>ng Provience, and <U+0110><U+1ED3>ng Nai Provience to outline the unique settlement and daily life under the double revolution in Vietnam. On the whole, Vietnam's organized immigration as a phenomenon is difficult to explain with traditional push-pull theory, and the impact on immigration should be analyzed with a more complex and detailed research frameworks.起始頁-結束頁：199-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：冷戰與東亞安全架構的起源：以「美日安全保障條約」為中心（1947-1970）並列篇名：Cold War and the Origin of the East Asian Security System: On the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan (1947-1970)作者：黃自進(Tzu-Chin Huang)關鍵字：美日安全保障條約;圍堵政策;岸信介;佐藤榮作;Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan;Policy of Containment;Nobusuke Kishi;Eisaku Sato期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文旨在闡述戰後美國東亞政策的內涵以及美日同盟對深化東亞安全架構的實質影響。為此，本文首先探討圍堵政策為何成為戰後美國推動東亞政策的核心理念，以及美日兩國如何因此一理念而可化敵為友並締結美日安全保障條約。復次，再分析1950年代末期的岸信介總理堅持鞏固美日同盟卻必須以修訂安全保障條約為前提之緣由，以及在他推動安保修約的過程中，所遭遇的困難和對策。最後聚焦於1960年代末期的佐藤榮作總理如何向美國保證，收回琉球不會影響東亞的安全架構，以及分擔美國在亞洲的軍事防務、積極支援臺灣與韓國的經濟發展，成為佐藤外交中的重要內容之始末。尤其前者，專論日本如何讓原本美軍駐琉球軍事基地的功能，隨著琉球回歸日本，已擴大由日本全國來承擔之經緯。後者探討他所推動的反共經援外交，對締造臺韓兩國高度經濟成長及促成東亞地區成為全世界最耀眼新興工業區塊的貢獻。英文摘要：The study firstly discusses why containment policy became the core concept of United States' post-war East Asia policy and how the United States buried the hatchet with Japan under the context of this concept. Secondly, the study examines why, at the end of 1950s, Nobusuke Kishi insisted that the consolidation of the United States-Japan alliance should be put under the prerequisite of revising the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan. The study also discusses the difficulties Nobusuke Kishi encountered during the process of revising the treaty and gives examples of his solutions to those problems. Lastly, the study focuses on Eisaku Sato's guarantee to the United States that the Ryukyu Reversion would not weaken the East Asia security structure. The study further examines why Eisaku Sato made sharing the burden of East Asia's military defense with the United States, participating in the containment to People's Republic of China, supporting the economic development of Taiwan and Korea became some of the most important parts of his diplomatic policy by the end of 1960s.起始頁-結束頁：243-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：冷戰時期東亞威權國家對報紙的管制（1945-1987）：以臺灣與韓國的比較為中心並列篇名：Newspapers Control in East Asian Authoritarianism during the Cold War: A Comparative Analysis between Taiwan and Korea作者：金恩美(En-Mei Chin)關鍵字：媒體政策;新聞政策;報紙;言論自由;媒體控制;宣傳;威權獨裁政權;Media Policy;News Policy;Newspapers;Freedom of Speech;Press control;Propaganda;Authoritarian and Autocracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：第二次大戰後，在臺灣與韓國所建構的政權，性質上皆屬於威權獨裁政權。1987年臺灣宣布解嚴、同年韓國亦宣布「民主化宣言」，兩國逐漸轉換為民主社會。對於臺灣與韓國的威權獨裁政權而言，控制媒體是維持政權的重要手段。因為透過媒體宣傳可強化政權的「正當性」與「合理性」，加強對人民的控制。因此威權國家時期，兩國政府都建立制度化的媒體管制體制。本文主要以比較視角，探討臺灣與韓國的報紙管制體制的建構過程與其方法，並分析兩國報紙管制體制出現差異性的原因。本文首先討論臺灣與韓國不同的政權如何形構報紙管制制度，以及兩國控制報業的手法有何不同；同時，亦說明兩國不同政權如何建構出侍從報業。接著，主要以建構制度的時間差，以及兩國政府性質與基礎之不同，分析兩國不同政權建構出不同報紙管制制度的原因。再者，以國際情勢的變化與「正統性」問題為焦點，解釋兩國報紙管制制度產生鬆動與嚴緊的時間差之原因，以及兩國報紙管制制度產生不同發展的背景。英文摘要：After World War II, both Taiwan and Korea constructed regimes that are authoritarian in essence. The situation remained until the commencement of democratization in 1987, when the martial law was revoked in Taiwan and the Declaration of Political Reforms was announced in Korea. To the two authoritarian governments, media control is a vital means to maintain regime stability since the ”legitimacy” and ”rationality” of the regimes can be reinforced through propaganda, enhancing government control over the people. As a result, institutionalized media control systems were both established by Taiwan and Korea governments during the authoritarian era. The present study is a comparative analysis that investigates the construction and techniques of newspapers control systems in Taiwan and Korea as well as what had caused the dissimilarities between the two systems.起始頁-結束頁：309-377資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：瘴癘疾疫與衛生治理：晚清馬偕臺灣傳教行醫的衛生管制反思並列篇名：Miasma, Disease and Governance of Hygiene: From Dr. George Leslie Mackay's Missionary and Medical Experiences in Late Qing Formosa作者：江玉林(Yu-Lin Chiang)關鍵字：馬偕;傅柯;公共衛生;衛生警察;治理性;Dr. George Leslie Mackay;Michel Foucault;Public Health;Medical Police;Governmentality期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：馬偕（Dr. George Leslie Mackay, 1844-1901） 在臺灣傳教行醫30年，留下大量史料，不僅珍藏、再現晚清臺灣社會景況，同時也潛藏近代西方衛生治理的觀看模式。近代西方衛生治理，大致上有兩個不同發展趨勢。一個是英語所稱的「public health」、另一個則是德語所稱的「Medizinalpolizei」。前者習慣譯為公共衛生，後者通常譯為衛生警察。兩者儘管各有不同發展脈絡，但同樣將個人與人口的衛生治理，視為現代國家的重要任務，同時也以法律作為干預人民生活的主要手段。事實上，晚清臺灣社會，已經看得到一些帶有衛生管制效果的律例政令或濟貧安養機構。這些擁有衛生管制效果的措施與機構，究竟源於何種理念？相較於西方公共衛生、衛生警察等帶有生命政治權力作用的衛生治理模式，它們又能夠反應出哪些獨特的衛生治理模式？馬偕史料既見證晚清臺灣社會發展，同時也提供珍貴文化素材，不僅可以比較了解西方公共衛生、衛生警察的治理特色，更可藉此反思晚清以及傳統中國的衛生治理模式、乃至人倫禮教法律秩序的治理形態。英文摘要：During his thirty years missionary and medical activities in late Qing Formosa, Dr. George Leslie Mackay (1844-1901) has witnessed the Taiwanese social and hygienic conditions and left a lot of resources including autobiography, diaries, letters, missionary reports etc. By using these resources, this paper wants to discuss and compare two different models of hygienic governance: the public health/ medical police model basing on the modern state, sovereignty, legal system and police etc., and the traditional Chinese model basing on the Confucianism.起始頁-結束頁：1-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：修養與尚武之間：明治維新以後的陽明學與武士道並列篇名：Somewhere between Self-Cultivation and Martialism: Yomegaku and Bushido following the Meiji Restoration作者：張崑將(Kun-Chiang Chang)關鍵字：陽明學;修養;尚武;明治維新;武士道;Youmeigaku;Self-Cultivation;Martialism;Meiji Restoration;Bushido期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文扣緊明治維新以後的陽明學，如何一步步成為推動國家主義甚至大和魂的精神修養學說，特別是在軍界、政界、學界如何引領風騷，使得「陽明學」溶為「尚武精神」的武士道論。論及「尚武精神」，則不能不注意與其相關的「修養論」，日本近代這套軍人修養論非常不同於儒教士大夫的修養論。本文在第二節交代維新以後陽明學為何會與武士道形成密切的關係，這與維新功臣熱衷陽明學的事實且經過學者的吹捧有關。第三節則企圖分析右派學者如何將陽明學轉換成為「軍人武德」甚至「神道化」的修養論，是一種狂者型的陽明學，使得陽明學染上國家主義或神道學的色彩，並且蔚為主流，促成了「武士道化」的日本陽明學之特色。最後第四節結論中反思戰前這波被武士道化的「日本陽明學」，當時也回傳到中國，成為維新派與革命派軍事將領熱衷的精神修養學說，提出未來陽明學研究的展望課題。英文摘要：This article closely examines how Youmeigaku since the Meiji Restoration became a theory that drove nationalism and even the spiritual cultivation of Yamatodamashi (Japanese spirit) forwards, step by step. The article especially focuses on how Youmeigaku was pioneering in the circles of military, politics, and academia, hence, making itself an ingredient of martial Bushido. When it comes to ”martialism,” the related ”self-cultivation” cannot be ignored. This military self-cultivation in early modern Japan is different from that brought forth by the traditional Confucian officials. In the second section, the article treats the reason why Youmeigaku following the Meiji Restoration emerged closely related to Bushido. This was in large part owing to the fact that the Meiji ministers were keen on and scholars advocated Youmeigaku. In the third section, the article presents a further analysis of how the rightist scholars transformed Youmeigaku into the self-cultivation of ”martial virtue” and Shintoism. It was a fanatic Youmeigaku, colored by nationalism and Shintoism. It thus became a mainstream thought to give birth to the Bushidoized Youmeigaku. Lastly, the concluding section reflects on how this prewar Bushidoized Youmeigaku returned back to China to become a theory of spiritual self-cultivation attractive to both Reformist and Revolutionary generals. The article thereby hopes to open a prospective subject for the future studies of Youmeigaku.起始頁-結束頁：73-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：華資輕工業企業的早期發展：以南洋兄弟煙草公司為例（1905-1915）並列篇名：The Initial Development of a Chinese Light Industrial Enterprise: A Case Study of the Nanyang Brothers Tobacco Company, 1905-1915作者：莊仁傑(Henry Ren Jie Chong)關鍵字：南洋兄弟煙草公司;華資企業;華資輕工業企業;東南亞;The Nanyang Brothers Tobacco Company;Chinese Company;Chinese Light Industrial Enterprise;Southeast Asia期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：清末民初時期的華資輕工業企業，是如何克服草創時期的各種問題，達到穩定發展的階段？本文以南洋兄弟煙草公司為個案，爬梳南洋在1905至1915年之間的公司結構、市場營運、銷售策略、生產方式與公司盈虧等情況，指出南洋煙草能夠突破重重難關，得以在煙草市場站穩腳跟持續發展，與南洋煙草當時在中國市場失利，進而轉往開拓東南亞市場，特別是其他煙草商較少關注的農工礦城市。再加上一次大戰促成許多煙草商暫停拓展東南亞市場，讓南洋煙草得以藉此機會壯大。透過南洋煙草的個案，本文指出華資輕工業企業可在不依賴政府的支持與雄厚資金的情況下，自行在市場中找到了自己的利基市場，以及配合當地社會與政治發展，推出有利於企業的商業策略與商品，讓南洋煙草這類型缺乏豐厚資金與政府資助的企業，得以站穩腳跟，茁壯成長。英文摘要：Through exploring the structure, operation, strategy, manufacture and finance of the Nanyang Brothers Tobacco Company between 1905 and 1915, I will discuss how a Chinese light industrial enterprise overcomes difficulties in its initial stage. Besides the reason that governmental support and huge capital from its owners, a Chinese light industrial company in the early twentieth century can successfully get through in its first stage because it found out its niche market, held the contemporary political and economic trend, and create a proper commercial strategy and goods for the market.起始頁-結束頁：111-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：從風險觀點解析食品謠言並列篇名：The Analysis of Food Rumors: From a Risk Perspective作者：紀慧君(Huei-Chun Chi)關鍵字：風險;治理;食品謠言;群眾的邏輯;Risk;Governmentality;Rumor;Lay Knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究試圖跳脫以往的研究觀點，賦予謠言不同的面貌，問不同的問題。以往多將謠言視為一種虛假的訊息，我們期望能提出一種不同的研究進路，我們視謠言為抗議的聲音，謠言反映的是社會幽暗面，是群眾的邏輯。近年來，臺灣籠罩在食品安全的恐慌中，層出不窮的食品謠言，反映當代飲食活動的深層意涵，人們對食品安全充滿焦慮，食品謠言就是對此種恐懼與失序的表達方式。本研究將食品謠言視為將飲食意義化成風險的一種論述，此種風險論述，在抗議當代社會食物的失序以及混亂，在導引人們如何面對食物，對食物採取什麼行動。謠言除了以特定方式界定食物的風險，謠言亦建構出其間行為者的立場，人們根據所處脈絡、文化以及人際關係，生產出關於食物風險的知識，自我保護，並據以行動。英文摘要：This study investigates rumors not just as a kind of false information, but as a voice of protest, a reflection of the dark side of society, and a logic of the masses. In doing so, rumors are portraited with different faces and new concerns about rumors are raised. In recent years, Taiwan has been shrouded by food panics accompanied by endless food rumors. Since people share similar confusion, anxiety and instability to food safety issues, food rumors have become a way of people's expression of their fear to food panics. Food rumors thus conceals underlying meanings of contemporary dietary culture. To reveal the meanings, we first take food rumors as a statement in which the meaning of diet is turned into a risk. The risk statements protest the disorder and confusion of food, lead people to face food panics, and form the guide for people to take actions. In addition to defining food risks in a specific way, food rumors also construct positions of actors based on their contexts, cultures, and interpersonal relationships. During the construction, actors can produce knowledge about food risks, protect themselves, and act on them.起始頁-結束頁：149-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社12篇名：試析反廢死：「若你至親受此對待」與「被害者人權何在」的論述脈絡並列篇名：On The Anti-Abolition of Death Penalty: The Construction and Justification of ”If Your Family Were the Victim?” and ”Where's the Victims' Rights?”作者：范揚弦(Yang-Shan Fan)關鍵字：死刑;反廢死;主觀化情感思考;三層次安全責任;Death Penalty;The Anti-Abolition of Death Penalty;Subjective Emotional Thinking;Three Levels Duty of Social Security期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文認為反廢死應專用於「若你的至親受此對待」及「被害者人權何在」等等以情感替死刑正當性辯護之人，即便他們也認為殺人者該死、死刑能嚇阻殺人、被害者才是重點，但支持死刑的論點對其而言僅是補充理由。藉由同理心以及「事實→思考→反應」的情感思索結構，可以發現反廢死對於安全責任只關注刑罰層次，這是因為兩質問創造了一個非得在罪人與親人之間選擇其一的脈絡，其強烈反身性讓人以主觀化情感思考作為推論方式，理所當然地得出執行死刑的結論。但整個推論過程中國家權力完全缺席，死刑成為人民與人民之間的關係，制度缺失被隱藏起來。唯有將焦點轉移回社會保護的層次，讓公權力受審，才能確實釐清制度中的漏洞，真正有助於社會安全保障。英文摘要：One says only ”If your family was the victim?” & ”Where's the victims' rights?” is defending the death penalty with emotional feelings. Even they also agree that the murder should be sentence to death, the death penalty deters murders, and the victims should be the priority, yet the justifications of these propositions of pro-death penalty theories are just additional reasons to them. That's why this article calls them ”the Anti-Abolition of Death Penalty” specially. Through the empathy and the fact-thinking-responding structure of emotional thinking, we can discover the Anti-Abolition of Death Penalty only focus on the criminal punishment level of social security. Execution is the certainly conclusion from the frame of the family vs. murder, which is made by the two reflexive questioning, through subjective emotional thinking. However, the absence of State Power in all this reasoning makes death penalty a people to people context, and all system defects are hided. Only put the public power under the spotlight could manifest the defects, improving social security.起始頁-結束頁：193-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社13篇名：從政府治理到轉型研究及風險治理：來自系統、科技與頑強問題的新刺激並列篇名：From Government and Governance Studies to Transition Research and Risk Governance: Critical Impacts from New Concepts of Systemic Transformation, Technological Changes and Persistent Problems作者：張國暉(Kuo-Hui Chang)關鍵字：治理研究;轉型研究;風險治理;複雜系統理論;永續治理;Governance Studies;Transition Research;Risk Governance;Complex System Theory;Sustainability Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：從1980年代開始，治理研究的學術領域逐漸興起，它企圖透過多元行動者加入政策網絡，並讓層級節制為主的權威關係改為彈性分權等方法，來取代傳統政府做為唯一且權威的公共政策規劃、執行及評估等之模式。然而，1990年代後的諸多議題如氣候變遷及金融危機等，可說是頑強到使跨國或單一民族國家的政府們治絲益棼。雖然治理研究的成果及時加入協助因應，但卻力有未逮。因此，約自2000年起，若干歐洲國家及歐盟的研究機構及公私部門等合作開發如何因應頑強問題的新治理模式。它們的成果大致可收攏在轉型研究及風險治理的兩個新領域，除接收了原有治理研究的成果外，也尋求相關跨領域學科如科技與社會、演化經濟學及複雜系統理論等的支援，而企圖發展出兼具理論及實務的創新治理途徑，希望城鎮、國家、國際機構等組織得轉型至以永續為目標的治理體制，來實質地克服頑強問題。本文亦分析該二新領域所受批評、相應策略及若干仍待未來探索的議題等。為免本文概念密集度過高，亦以臺灣燃油機車政體轉型來因應溫室氣體及汙染物排放的頑強問題為例，分析轉型研究途徑如何為邁向低碳社會提出宏觀觀察及政策建議。英文摘要：As a new academic field of governance studies emerged mainly in the 1980s Europe, one of its key contributions attempted to invite important concepts of multi-participation and dynamic power relationship to improve the traditional model of how the government to plan, implement and evaluate public policies. However, several persistent problems, including climate change, global warming and financial crises etc., brought serious challenges to cities, national governments and international organizations. Mainly after 2000, a number of research institutes and polities in Europe such as the Dutch government and European Environmental Agency have worked with think tanks and universities to develop new governance approaches to deal with these persistent problems. They basically shaped two newly emerged academic disciplines of transition research and risk governance, which absorbed not only core ideas from governance studies but also other interdisciplinary fields such as science, technology and society studies, evolutionary economics and complex system theory etc. While both have earned substantial attention and application in policy practice, they also confront some serious critics and challenges. In addition to introduce the academic evolution from governance studies to transition research and risk governance, this research note analyzes of how they respond to the critics and what challenges they might need to deal with in the near future. Moreover, this note takes a potential transition example of motorbike-mobility to explain how to apply transition studies to local cases and makes some policy suggestions.起始頁-結束頁：233-285資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社14篇名：從德川文獻探討近世日本的石敢當文化並列篇名：A Textual Study of Ishiganto in Early Modern Japan作者：吳偉明(Wai-Ming Ng)關鍵字：石敢當;民間信仰;近世日本;中日文化交流;Ishiganto;Folk Religion;Early Modern Japan;Sino-Japanese Cultural Interchange期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：石敢當文化不但在中國普及大江南北，甚至流傳琉球、日本、越南及東南亞等周邊地域。日本是中國域外石敢當文化最盛之邦，其發展與中國迥然不同，引起學界的關注。至今學界的主要成果是民族學的實地調查。本文以德川文獻為基礎，嘗試探討石敢當在近世日本的流傳情況，及其呈現的本地特色，有助加深瞭解近世中日文化交流的性質。石敢當在中世後期傳入琉球與日本，在德川時代落地生根，遍地開花，而且與本土風俗及宗教結合，跟神、佛、儒、陰陽道及修驗道均有互動。近世日本的石敢當自成一格，其格式、稱呼、尺寸、圖案及功能均與中國的有所不同。這種中國文化的再脈絡化反映中日文化交流的性質從來不是單向的傳播中國文化，而是以日本為主體的中國文化在地化。近世日本石敢當文化的主要作用並非提倡中國的風土人情，而是強化日本的民間風俗及本土宗教。英文摘要：Ishiganto is a kind of talismanic stone worshipped in different parts of China. It was also introduced to China's neighbors including the Ryukyu Kingdom, Japan, and Vietnam. In particular, Japan embraced this folk religion most enthusiastically. Its popularity in Japan was as high as in China. Although ishiganto originated in China, it had its unique characteristics in Japan. The differences between China and Japan in ishiganto deserve close investigation. Using Tokugawa sources as the main reference, this paper examines the popularization and localization of ishiganto in the Ryukyu Kingdom and Japan in the early modern period. It will deepen our understanding of the nature of early modern Sino-Japanese cultural interchange. Introduced to the Ryukyu Kingdom and Japan in the late medieval period, ishiganto reached the peak of its popularity in the Tokugawa period. It was fused with native customs and religions, interacting with Shinto, Buddhism, Confucianism, yin-yang and Shugend<U+014D>. Ishiganto in the Ryukyu Kingdom and Japan was different from that in China in terms of format, name, size, design and function. It demonstrates that the popularization of Chinese culture in Japan often came with localization and it was never a one-way cultural flow. Japan turned ishiganto a part of its own culture. Ishiganto in early modern Japan was used to strengthen Japan's indigenous customs and religions more than to promote imported Chinese culture.起始頁-結束頁：287-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社15篇名：義務論與德行倫理學對比分析下的朱子心統性情說並列篇名：On Zhu Xi's Xin Tong Xing Qing from The Contradistinctive Analysis of Deontology and Virtue Ethics作者：陳振崑(Jen-kuen Chen)關鍵字：心統性情;道德理想;道德法則;道德情感;道德情境;Xin Tong Xing Qing (心統性情);Moral Ideal;Moral Rule;Moral Emotion;Moral Situation期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：從比較哲學的視野觀察當代臺灣的儒家倫理學研究，大致發展出兩條可觀的路徑：其一為義務論倫理學的深化與轉向，援引羅爾斯、哈伯馬斯與柯思嘉，進行規範性的理由轉向；其二為跟隨德行倫理學的當代復興，援引余紀元、麥金泰爾、安靖如與斯洛德，從事德行的轉向。本文分析朱子的心統性情說既論述「心之本體」、「心具萬理」，嚴守「義利之辨」與「理欲之辨」，提出「仁」、「義」、「禮」、「智」道德法則；卻又嚮往聖賢氣象。朱子主張「心」主宰「性」、「情」兩面，「心」內含「志」、「意」、「才」、外涉「感」、「應」、「形」。本文嘗試透過義務論與德行倫理學兩者所具有道德特質的對比分析，進而分析朱子的心統性情說在現代道德哲學的討論中，具有哪些義務論或德行倫理學的道德特質？亦即朱子的道德思考是否建立在道德法則的普遍規範、道德理想的目標設定、道德動機的內在要求、道德情感的實質參與或道德情境的具體考量？英文摘要：Observing contemporary Taiwan Confucian ethics research from the perspective of comparative philosophy, it has roughly developed two considerable paths: one is the deepening and turning of deontology, citing John Rawls, Jurgen Habermas, and Christine Korsgaard for normative; The second path is to follow the contemporary revival of virtue ethics, citing Yu Jiyuan, MacIntyre, Stephen Angle, and Michael Slote to engage in the transformation of virtue. This article analyzes Zhu Xi's theory of ”heartmind unites nature and emotion (Xin Tong Xing Qing心統性情)”, which not only discusses the ”inherent reality of the heartmind (Xin Zhi Benti心之本體)” and ”heartmind possess various principles (Xin Ju Wan Li心具萬理)” strictly adheres to ”distinguish between righteousness and personal benefits (yi li zhi bien義利之辨)” and ”distinguish between rationality and desires (li yu zhi bien理欲之辨)”, and proposes the moral laws, ”such as benevolence (ren仁)”, ”righteousness (yi義)”, ”ritural (li禮)” and ”Wisdom (zhi智)”; but also yearning for being the sage and the virtuous. Zhu Xi advocates that the heartmind dominates the two sides of”nature (xing性)” and ”emotion (qing情)”, and the heartmind contains the functions of ”commitment (zhi志)”, ”intentions (yi意)” and ”endowment (cai才)”; be implicated in ”feel (gan感)”, ”respond (ying應)” and ”shape (xing形)”. This article attempts to contrast the moral characteristics of deontology and virtue ethics, and then analyzes the moral characteristics of Zhu Xi's ”Xin Tong Xingqing”. In other words, is Zhu Xi's moral thinking based on the universal norms of moral laws, the goal setting of moral ideals, the inherent requirements of moral motivation, the substantial participation of moral emotions, or specific considerations of moral situations?起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社16篇名：王陽明禮學論述的思想奠基並列篇名：The Foundation of the Wang Yang-Ming's Ritual Thought作者：陳儀(Yi Chen)關鍵字：陽明學;禮治;德性教育;Yang-Ming's Doctrine;Rule of the Rites;Virtue Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以王學流弊為意識開端，通過相關學術問題的分析，試圖探討：陽明學依照其心學特徵，是否能提供一套有助於現實世界穩定、和諧與發展的禮學論述？對此，文章首先通過禮治概念的溯源工作，以及通過當代研究成果的參照，了解儒家禮治觀念在當代社會的發展性，並解釋陽明學在此面向上的實踐困難。進而，文章從「經典閱讀」、「品格陶冶」與「大人之學」三方面進行討論，說明陽明禮治思想具備一種「生活性的德性教育」作為基底，由此基底可確保陽明學能夠在人倫關係的基礎上，以真誠惻怛的人倫情感，提供根源性的道德規範；同時，能夠經由道德反思作用，將既有的客觀規範轉成主體的內在實踐依據；最後，能夠經由人際之間的同情共感，以及整體和諧的實踐目標之設定，從而建立起理想的禮治社會。因此，依照本文研究，陽明確能於其心學特徵之維持中，建構一套裨益現實的禮學論述，而免於陷入主體本位的實踐危機。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to explain how Wang Yang-Ming's doctrine of rule of the rites can be considered useful to establish a stable social system and promote harmony in human relationship. To answer this question, this paper indicated the main difficulties of Wang Yang-Ming's doctrine of rule of the rites in modern society by re-examining the negative development of the Yang-Ming school and analyzing the development of the concept of the rule of the rites in Confucianism. After gaining better understanding the concept of the rule of the rites, this paper attempted to discuss Wang Yang-Ming's moral philosophy in three aspects, which includes classics reading, character cultivation and great man practicing for helping Wang Yang-Ming's doctrine of rule of the rites avoid difficulties. This paper also illustrated a kind of life virtue education as a foundation of Wang Yang-Ming's doctrine of rule of the rites. Through the revealing of the foundation of doctrine of rule of the rites, it shows that Wang Yang-Ming's doctrine of rule of the rites can achieve the goal of social harmony without fail by the following three methods: First, by sincere feeling, which offers the root cause of ethics that is based on the basic human relations; Second, by moral reflection, which transform objective norms into interior moral principles; Third, by interpersonal sympathy, which create harmony goals and establish an ideal society ruled by rites and propriety. Although Wang Yang- Ming's doctrine of rule of the rites suffered from critique regarding its emphasizing of the necessity of Liang-Chih and ignoring of the importance of knowledge excessively, the findings of the research have led to the conclusion that Wang Yang-Ming's doctrine of rule of the rites is helpful to connect the inner morality with the external world and develop the society ruled by rites and propriety without moral subjectivism problem by laying the foundation of the life virtue education.起始頁-結束頁：51-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社17篇名：文字者，國家之精神：清末西學浪潮下漢語之提倡及變革論述並列篇名：Research on Chinese Education Reform in Late Qing Dynasty作者：鍾哲宇(Che-Yu Chung)關鍵字：晚清;漢字;中文教育;張之洞;章太炎;Late Qing;Chinese character;Chinese education;Zhang Zhi-Dong;Zhang Tai Yan期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：清末西學浪潮下，產生出對於中國文字最多樣且激進之改革建議。晚清以來提倡西學之弊端，最明顯的現象即是中文能力的低落，造成新世代學子文化傳承斷層之危機，而文化之背離，可能隱含或引發政治上之背離，是以時論以為小學階段當優先注重國文教育，因小學初等教育為「精神所萌芽，國家精神所維繫」。清末大環境的改變，中文教育不再是士人階層所專用，需拓展至全國人民學習，由此提升國家精神意識，抵抗國民外國化之風潮。當時西學之士常將漢字與西方拼音文字作比較，視漢字為阻礙中國進步之原因，以為西方使用標音文字是進步之象徵，中國使用象形文字較為落後而使用不便。其實影響文字是否通行的關鍵，並不在文字本身，而是受所使用國家民族勢力決定。清王朝覆亡後，當日所提倡之中文教育，在現代國民義務教育中成為「國文」一科。章太炎（1869-1936）對於中國語言文字之提倡及推廣，使其進入現代學科之專業，對於西方社會學之研讀，開啟漢字文化學研究之先聲。英文摘要：In the wave of western learning at the end of the Qing dynasty, it produced the most varied and radical reform proposals for Chinese characters. Since the late Qing Dynasty advocated the drawbacks of Western learning, the most obvious phenomenon was the decline of Chinese language ability, which caused a crisis in the transmission of new generations of students' cultures. Cultural divergence may imply or cause a political divergence. Scholars think that primary school should be a priority. Pay attention to Chinese language education. With the change of the environment in the late Qing Dynasty, Chinese education was no longer exclusively for the scholars. It needed to be extended to the people of the country to learn and promote the use of light and popular texts, which would enhance the nation's spiritual awareness and resist the tide of national foreignization. At that time, Western scholars often compared Chinese characters with Western Pinyin texts. Considering Chinese characters as a hindrance to Chinese progress, they thought that the use of Chinese characters in the West was a symbol of progress. The use of hieroglyphics in China was relatively backward and inconvenient. The Chinese education advocated at the end of the Qing dynasty became the ”national language” subject in modern national compulsory education. Zhang Taiyan (1869-1936) promoted and promoted Chinese language and characters into the professional disciplines of modern disciplines. He began to study the sociology of the West and started the study of Chinese cultural studies.起始頁-結束頁：95-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社18篇名：到聖經中去找「社會主義」：張仕章的基督教社會主義、福音書詮釋與耶穌形象並列篇名：In Pursuit of ”Socialism” in the Bible: Hottinger S. C. Chang's Christian Socialism, Interpretation of the Gospels and Images of Jesus作者：王志希(Zhi-Xi Wang)關鍵字：張仕章;基督教社會主義;耶穌主義;耶穌形象;福音書;Hottinger S. C. Chang;Christian Socialism;Jesusism;Images of Jesus;The Gospels期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：民國基督徒知識分子張仕章被稱為「中國基督教社會主義的代表人物」，而在晚年的時候他曾以「耶穌主義宣傳家」自稱。從1920年代以來，張仕章一直相信自己所主張的耶穌主義就是社會主義或基督教社會主義。本文旨在探討張仕章如何藉著重新詮釋福音書，塑造社會主義者耶穌的形象，來調和基督教與社會主義的關係。首先，本文梳理張仕章對耶穌主義、社會主義以及其他相關概念的使用。其次，我們討論張仕章如何從耶穌與無產階級的關係、耶穌的資本主義批判以及耶穌的帝國主義批判三個方面來嘗試論證基督教社會主義的正當性。最後，本文聚焦於武力革命與階級鬥爭的議題，探討張仕章的福音書詮釋和耶穌形象如何因應歷史處境而變化。最終，張仕章提倡的「社會主義福音」在社會主義中國並不被需要，甚至不被容許。英文摘要：Hottinger S. C. Chang, a Christian intellectual in Republican China, was considered as ”a representative of Christian socialism in China”, and Chang in his later years introduced himself as an ”evangelist of Jesusism”. Since the 1920s, Chang had believed that ”Jesusism”, a term he coined, equaled socialism or Christian socialism. This article explores how Chang, through interpretation of the Gospels, remade the image of a socialist Jesus so as to accommodate Christianity to socialism. Firstly, this article analyzes Chang's uses of some key terms such as Jesusism, socialism and other related concepts. Secondly, we discuss how Chang, based on the relationship between Jesus and the proletarians, on Jesus's criticism of capitalism, and on his criticism of imperialism, attempted to justify the legitimacy of Christian socialism. Lastly, focusing on the issue of whether Christians should support violent revolution or class struggle, one will see how Chang's interpretation of the Gospels and his images of Jesus changed in response to the historical contexts. In the last analysis, ”the Gospel According to Socialism” proposed by Chang was not needed, or even tolerated, in socialist China.起始頁-結束頁：139-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社19篇名：回到心理學去：文藝心理學發展反思並列篇名：Return to Psychology: A Reflection on the Development of Psychology of Arts and Literature作者：潘啟聰(Kai-Chung Poon)關鍵字：文藝心理學;社會科學;心理學;量化研究;質性研究;Psychology of Arts and Literature;Social Science;Psychology;Qualitative Research;Quantitative Research期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文回顧了文藝心理學的發展概況，發現了這門學科的發展速度在2000年以後有減慢的趨勢。歸納現存專書及論文的論述，不少學者認為這門學科主要出現了三種問題，當中包括：有關學科性質和定位的問題、有關研究對象的問題，及有關研究方法的問題。基於這三種疑問，學者們對於學界的發展漸漸持保留的態度。在回顧現存文獻的時候，筆者發現現存文藝心理學的論述較多側重文藝的一面，而鮮有重視心理學及社會科學的一面，以至文藝心理學的研究未能真正發揮心理學的所長。文藝心理學之所以出現這個現況，有兩個可能的原因：第一、歷史因素：學科剛剛開展之時，朱光潛將美學與文藝心理學等同起來；第二、現存因素：現有的文藝心理學教程全重側重文藝的闡述，社會科學及心理學的核心精神及研究方法之教學是缺少了的一環。因此，本文嘗試由心理學的、社會科學的視角去為文藝心理學作出新的定位，以期將學界現存的疑問一一掃清。英文摘要：This article reviewed the development of psychology of arts and literature in Chinese academia and discovered that it had a flourish development in 1980s to 1990s. However, the trend is slowing down after 2000. There is an increasing number of researchers who show their worries to the development of the discipline for mainly three reasons. First of all, some of them think that the discipline nature of psychology of arts and literature is fuzzy; secondly, some think that the research subject of the discipline is unclear; thirdly, some think that there is not standard methodology for research. With such worries, researchers showed their hesitation towards the future development of the discipline. As a branch in social science, psychology has unique research methods with scientific spirit as the core value. Such essence of psychology is seldom seen in present researches and studies of psychology of arts and literature. Thus, we can say that the potentiality of the discipline is not fully utilized, and it can achieve much more if we could put the discipline onto the right track where it belongs. It is noticeable that present studies in the discipline are strong in the 'arts and literature' part, but weak in the ”psychology” part. To rectify this situation, this article intends to reflect on the disciplinary nature, research methodology, and the purposes of study of psychology of arts and literature from a social science point of view.起始頁-結束頁：201-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社20篇名：維根斯坦遺稿的編輯歷史與爭議並列篇名：The History and Controversy of Editing Wittgenstein's Nachlass作者：王士源(Shih-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：維根斯坦;維根斯坦遺稿;維也納版;卑爾根電子版;Wittgenstein;Wittgenstein's Nachlass;Wiener Ausgabe;Bergen Electronic Edition期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：這篇論文的主要目的，在於藉由說明維根斯坦個別著作與整體遺稿間的關係，展示維根斯坦思想發展的連續性與整體性。筆者將維根斯坦遺稿的編輯歷史區分為三個階段：「遺稿執行人版」、「歷史考證版」和「電子與數位版」。這三個階段編輯策略的差異，影響了學界對於維根斯坦哲學的理解與詮釋。首先，維根斯坦遺稿的編輯問題，主要來自於其獨特的寫作與編排文稿的方式，亦即一個「寫作」－「改寫」－「評價」－「打字」－「剪貼」的不斷循環往復的加工處理過程。這個繁複的過程，使得這些著作間形成為一個相互連結的「評論」網絡。然而遺稿執行人卻在未釐清遺稿發展歷程的情況下，常以「選集」的編輯方式，將個別「評論」抽離其原始的論述脈絡。而在「歷史考證版」階段，由舒爾特（Joachim Schulte）編輯的《邏輯哲學論》與《哲學研究》的考證版，以及內鐸（Michael Nedo）編輯的「維也納版」，為維根斯坦思想發展的「連續性」，提供了一條信實可靠的文獻脈絡。最後，卑爾根大學在2000年出版的《維根斯坦遺稿：卑爾根電子版》和2014年推出的維根斯坦遺稿的數位網站版本，讓維根斯坦所有的遺稿以一個整體脈絡的形式呈現。這些文獻學範疇的編輯考證成果，為維根斯坦思想的理解與詮釋，提供了新的可能。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to show the continuity of Wittgenstein's thought in virtue of demonstrating the relationship between Wittgenstein's writings. This research divides the editorial history of Wittgenstein's Nachlass into three stages or editions: the literary executors' edition, the historical-critical edition, and the electronic-digital edition. The differences between the three editions have influenced the understanding and interpretation of the development of Wittgenstein's Philosophy. First, this paper surveys the ”editing intervention” in the literary executors' edition. The difficulty of editing Wittgenstein's Nachlass mainly comes from Wittgenstein's unique approach to writing and arranging manuscripts, that is, a ”writing”-”rewriting”-”evaluation”-”dictation”-”clipping” process. This complicated process allows these writings to form a network of interrelated ”remarks”. However, the literary executors' edition often extracted the individual ”remarks” from the original development context and compiled them in the form of anthology. In the historical-critical edition stage, Joachim Schulte's Logisch-philosophische Abhandlung: kritische Edition and Philosophische Untersuchungen: Kritisch-genetische Edition, as well as Michael Nedo's Wiener Ausgabe, by contrast, provided a reliable literature context to identify the ”continuity” of the development of Wittgenstein's thought. Finally, the electronic edition and digital website edition of Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen present all of Wittgenstein's Nachlass as well as connecting individual remarks with the help of a search tool into an organic wholeness of thought. In other words, the editions from the last two stages provide new possibilities for the systematical understanding and interpretation of the development of Wittgenstein's Philosophy.起始頁-結束頁：241-290資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：國家與典當：戰後臺灣公營當舖的發展系譜並列篇名：State and Pawn: The Genealogy of the Public Pawnshops in Postwar Taiwan作者：洪士峰(Shih-Feng Hung)關鍵字：公營當舖;國家;典當;邊緣金融;金融壓抑;Public Pawnshop;State;Pawn;Fringe Finance;Financial Repression期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文主要以臺灣公營當舖的歷史發展為背景，探討國家在邊緣金融裡的制度安排，如何影響民眾在典當信用的日常生活的實踐。一般認為臺灣戰後各地公營當舖的出現，主要是1950年代初期，政府為回應金融壓抑政策下，避免民眾被民營當舖高利所剝削而設立，以安定社會秩序。但是本研究發現邊緣金融不只具有補充正式金融不足的功能，亦具有政治上的功能與目的。國家刻意壓低公營當舖的利率，以嘉惠當時以軍公教佔多數的持當人，並限制民營當舖執照，以退伍軍人優先申請，形成一個特殊的商業團體。國家在戒嚴時期積極介入典當市場，到金融自由化／民營化時期消極退出的過程，表面上看似經濟考量下的結果，其實整個典當市場一直以來是鑲嵌在家父長制的政治安排。延續這種制度安排的路徑依賴，本研究進一步指出，1990年後全省公營當舖消失的後果是，由民營當舖業者所主導修訂的當舖業法，讓僅存的北、高二市公營當舖處於制度上不利地位，公營當舖被迫做更多的市場考量，對抵押品的收受有著更多的限制，讓更多經濟上的弱勢者被拒於公營當舖門外。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the public pawnshops in Postwar Taiwan and interpret the institutional arrangement of the state in the fringe finance. In respond to the financial repression policy in early 1950s, the public pawnshops were established so as to avoid the private pawnshops exploits the public with high interest rate, which in another way, stabilized the social order. However, this study found that fringe finance not only complemented the function of formal financial inadequacy, but also had political functions and purposes. The state deliberately depressed the interest rate of the public pawnshops in order to benefit the armed forces and the public officers, who were the majority of the borrowers, and limited the amount of private pawnshops, giving the licenses mainly to the veterans, forming a particular business group. During the martial law period, the state had an active interference in the pawn market and withdrew during the financial liberalization period. It seemed to base on economic considerations, yet the entire pawn market had always been embedded in the patriarchal political arrangements. This study further points out that the consequence of the decreasing of the public pawnshops after 1990 was that the Pawnshop Act, mainly amended under the lead of the private pawnshop representatives, put the remaining two public pawnshops in Taipei and Kaohsiung on an unfavorable institutional position as they are forced to take more market considerations and are limited by the types of collaterals, turning their back to more economically-disadvantaged groups.起始頁-結束頁：1-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：石滬資本結構與生產規模之經濟分析並列篇名：An Economic Analysis of Financial Structure and Production Scale on Taiwan's Stone Tidal Weirs作者：徐宇文(Yu-Wen Hsu);張順教(Shun-Chiao Chang);賴法才(Fav-Tsoin Lai);黃瓊儀(Chiung-Yi Huang)關鍵字：石滬;交易成本;財產權;公用財;Stone Tidal Weirs;Transaction Cost;Property Rights;Joint Venture期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：石滬曾經是臺灣及澎湖漁民定置捕魚最重要的一種方法。它的興築可溯及臺灣原住民海灘公用地的集體開發，在漢人集資或是獨資的私有開發時達到高峰。石滬的產權逐漸由公用財而演化為私有財。石滬的開發、組織、管理與運作等程序都涉及產權的建立，以及買賣與僱傭契約。本文以財產權與交易成本分析作為起點，說明石滬所延生的經濟活動、探討參與興築的資本結構，以及石滬之買賣契約的選擇。研究結果發現：1.石滬興築的參與者考量興築之成本效益決定是否建造石滬。2.在考量交易成本之下，石滬的所有人會將石滬視作不動產依契約改變其地役權以追求個人資源之最適利用，3.石滬的規模與興築的石滬的資本結構有關，而漁民對石滬的資本結構的選擇受自己擁有資本的多寡及合資興築的石滬的交易成本等因素的影響。英文摘要：We study the property rights of the Stone Tidal Weirs, set up by the people that lived near the specific shores of Taiwan and Penghu. The financial structure and production scale of the weirs are explored in the framework that their potential owners to reclaiming a Stone Tidal Weir toke the cost and benefit of building it into account. As Stone Tidal Weir were real estates, to reduce the transaction costs of managing it, its owner would exchange its easements with the persons interested in them to pursue his best interests. Furthermore, the scale of Tidal Weir is related to its ownership structure that is affected by the amount of capital its owners own, and the transaction cost of joint venture in constructing it.起始頁-結束頁：55-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：從因果與時間論王充命論之定偶相容性與氣命根源性問題並列篇名：On Wang Chong's Theory of Ming from Causality and Time: The Ding-Ou Compatibility Problem and the Qi-Ming Originality Problem作者：郭芳如(Fang-Ru Kuo)關鍵字：王充;氣;命;因果;時間;Wang Chong;Qi;Ming;Causality;Time期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文論述王充命論具有因果關係，及與因果環節相應的時間排序，並由此因果關係與時間觀，本文主張關於王充命論涉及之必然性與偶然性爭議的「命定論與適偶說是否相容」，及牽涉命論是否與氣論思想不一致的「氣與命何者為較根源概念」的問題，皆無不相容與不一致。由因果關係視之，氣為命論最根源的原因，命定是稟氣以後形成的狀態，適偶為不同遭遇，彼此適值成偶的說明，所以命定不包含結果的必然決定，適偶也非偶然性意涵，所以命定論與適偶說無涉及必然性與偶然性爭議的不相容問題。另外，就氣作為最根源原因而言，命論與氣論也無不一致，皆以氣為最根源的概念。其次由時間觀視之，王充命論雖具有以未來結果當作原因的時間錯置，導致結果預定的錯衍，然命定之時早於結果成為事實之時，仍為命論實質內容，所以命定仍非結果必然決定義，而適偶發生在適值偶遇之時，雖由因果事件聯結無法確定，而有偶然性之感，然命論的因果決定關係確具，所以適偶仍非偶然性義。另外，由於稟氣早於命定，所以氣當為命論中更為根源的概念無疑。英文摘要：This paper argues that Wang Chong's theory of Ming has a dimension of causality and a corresponding temporal order, and from this perspective I propose that there is no incompatibility between Ming-Ding and Shih- Ou concerning necessity and contingency, nor any inconsistency between Ming and Qi concerning their priority. Causally speaking, Qi is the ultimate origin in the theory of Ming, while Ming-Ding is the resulting state after Qi, and Shih-Ou is an account of different things meeting in a coincidence. So the concept of Ming-Ding does not contain the notion of necessary determination, nor does the concept of Shih-Ou the notion of contingency, and consequently there is no incompatibility between Ming-Ding and Shih- Ou. Moreover, so far as Qi is the ultimate origin, there is no inconsistency concerning Ming and Qi about their priority. Temporally speaking, though Wang Chong's theory of Ming contains a certain temporal disorder in taking the future as a cause to pre-determine the result, the time of determination is still prior to the time of happening, and hence Ming-Ding still falls short of necessity. On the other hand, though coincidence occurs when things happen to meet, thus acquiring a sense of contingency underdetermined by causal connections, coincidence still falls short of contingency. Moreover, as Qi is prior to Ming-Ding, Qi should be taken as the ultimate origin beyond any doubt.起始頁-結束頁：103-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：西方中心主義標籤下的韋伯：試論其中國佛教觀並列篇名：While Weber has been seen as Favoring the Eurocentrism: On His View of Chinese Buddhism作者：林錚(Cheng Lin)關鍵字：中國佛教;非專家;西方中心主義;《儒教與道教》;《印度教與佛教》;Chinese Buddhism;Nichtfachmann;Eurocentrism;Konfuzianismus und Taoismus;Hinduismus und Buddhismus期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：倘若韋伯《新教倫理》在理解上所引發的爭議，至今餘波盪漾，吾人或許可以說他的《儒教與道教》從一開始就形成一種更為誘人的陷阱，容易使人認為作者具有西方中心主義的心態。這尤其顯現在韋伯對於中國佛教的詮釋問題上：他通常被視為不重視或者對佛教在中國的情況一無所知－更何況吾人以往相信韋伯對於中國佛教的實質討論，僅限於《儒教與道教》一書極為有限的篇幅。如同本研究將要顯示的，韋伯處理佛教的手法，其實比過去吾人所認為的還要細膩許多。特別是在他從「非專家」的角度來看，分辨大乘與中國佛教之間差別有其必要－這卻是韋伯研究者很少察覺到的一點。他的佛教觀將有助於提醒我們在中國佛教史研究裡，一個過去較為隱晦的面向。另一方面，某些批評為何對韋伯這樣的詮釋視而不見呢？本研究試圖從他的方法論、作品脈絡以及他的讀者的文化認同三個角度，來闡明西方中心主義這個標籤在評價韋伯作品時所帶來可觀的負面影響。英文摘要：If the controversy sparked by Weber's Protestant Ethics is still lingering, we may say that his Confucianism and Taoism formed a more enticing trap from the beginning, and it is easy to make us think that the author has a Eurocentric mentality. This is especially evident in Weber's interpretation of Chinese Buddhism: he is often seen as not paying attention to or knowing anything about Buddhism in China, not to mention that most people used to believe that Weber's substantial discussion about Chinese Buddhism was extremely limited to Confucianism and Taoism. As this study will show, Weber's approach to Buddhism is in fact much more delicate than what we thought in the past. Especially in his ”non-expert” perspective, it is necessary to distinguish the difference between Mahayana and Chinese Buddhism. This is something that those who study Weber's work rarely notice. His view of Buddhism will help remind us of a more obscure aspect in the past in the study of Chinese Buddhist history. On the other hand, why are some criticisms blind to Weber's interpretation? this study attempts to illuminate the considerable negative impact of the label of Eurocentrism in evaluating Weber's work from three perspectives: Weber's methodology, context of his work, and cultural identity of his readers.起始頁-結束頁：147-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：性別主流化與人才培力：醫學大學職員性別意識培力課程之經驗探析並列篇名：Gender Mainstreaming and Personnel Empowerment: A Case Study on the Training Curriculum and Teaching for Medical University Administrative Staff作者：楊幸真(Hsing-Chen Yang)關鍵字：性別主流化;性別意識;培力教育;高教職員;Gender Mainstreaming;Gender Consciousness;Empowerment Education;University Administrative Staff期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：人才培力，是性別主流化核心的一環。如何培養出具備性別平等意識的各種人才，是校園推動性別主流化的成敗關鍵；其中，對於學校職員的性別意識培力更是不可或缺的一部分，但卻也是過往較少受到關注與發展之處。本研究主張，高教職員是校園推動性別主流化、落實性別平等的關鍵行動者；透過培力職員的性別意識與知能，方能有效促進性別主流化在校園裡的紮根與落實。因此，本研究以高雄醫學大學為研究場域，以質性取向固定樣本研究，透過問卷調查與半結構深度訪談進行資料搜集，探究高教職員性別主流化培力教育課程之學習成效，審視反思教育訓練課程與教學，並以此作為大學職員性別培力課程與教學實施之參考。本研究發現，系統性的課程設計及作好制度獎勵配套措施，是提高職員學習動機和參與意願的基本要件。其次，成功的性別培力課程與內容須具備「相關性」、「切身性」，以及涵納「性別特定」觀點。高教職員的性別主流化課程不只著重認知層面的學習，還需有態度改變與實際行動參與的設計，方能讓職員有參與感、認同感及體認改變的可能。最後，根據研究發現，本研究提出高教職員性別主流化培力教育課程之建議。英文摘要：Cultivating the gender consciousness of university administrative staff members is crucial for gender mainstreaming at universities. Administrative staff members of higher education institutions are key agents for promoting gender mainstreaming and implementing gender equality on campuses. This study adopted a qualitative panel design using questionnaires and semistructured in-depth interviews to investigate administrative staff members' learning outcomes from a gender mainstreaming curriculum at Kaohsiung Medical University and subsequently reflected on this educational training. The results indicate that implementing a systematic curriculum and offering rewards are fundamental elements for promoting learning motivation. Moreover, a successful gender mainstreaming curriculum must be relevant and possess a gender-specific perspective. Empowering administrative staff members through education with a gender mainstreaming curriculum emphasizes cognitive learning, attitude alteration and active participation. Basis on these research findings, several suggestions are proposed for gender mainstreaming curricula for university administrative staff.起始頁-結束頁：181-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：性別主流化與友善醫療環境的建構：國外經驗與本土推動實例的探討並列篇名：Gender Mainstreaming and the Construction of Gender Friendly Medical Environment: A Review of Research and Discussion about the Implementation作者：游美惠(Mei-Hui You)關鍵字：性別主流化;性別與醫療;性別與健康照護;性別友善醫療環境;Gender Mainstreaming;Gender and Medicine;Gender and Health Care;Gender Friendly Medical Environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：57卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文將探討透過國家推動性別主流化的政策，在健康照護體系之中，如何藉由醫療環境的改善，更積極達成性別平等目標，同時也應兼顧差異，促成性別友善與社會正義，讓弱勢者能享有更友善與便利的醫療服務，使醫療資源能為全民有尊嚴的共享。研究者引介相關「做性別」與「交織性」等性別理論概念並整理、探討國外性別主流化於醫療現場的實踐經驗相關文獻，希望能轉化理論與他國經驗成為論述資源，做為臺灣推動相關性別主流化工作的基礎。本文聚焦在性別友善的醫療環境之營造上，包含硬體空間與友善態度等工作面向之加強，運用政策的推動力量，加強醫院治理和醫療人員的性別敏感度，逐步加強整體的性別友善程度並落實醫療體系的性別主流化。英文摘要：This research aims at the construction of gender friendly medical environment and the promotion gender equity in healthcare. According to previous literature, attempts to mainstream gender into healthcare often turn out to be simplified reports of sex differences without taking account of the conditions of intersectionality. The article thus deals with the gender friendly medical environment construction and healthcare service delivery in terms of theoretical concepts, ”doing gender” and ”intersectionality”. It is stressed that the expression of ”gender friendly” will vary as it intersects with other factors. The healthcare workers/professions must have knowledge and insight into the meaning of gender for spatial arrangement and gender sensitive social interactions. Gender awareness is necessary to overcome gender bias and to reach equity in health. Furthermore, the policy-making is also explored in this paper. The researcher focuses on two cases implemented in Taiwan to explore the possibilities of putting gender mainstreaming into practice in health care policy. The research finally provides related international trends to justify the importance of constructing gender friendly environment and promoting gender equity through the implementation of gender mainstreaming policy. Hopefully, change will occur in healthcare system with the recognition that gender indeed matters.起始頁-結束頁：231-271資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：Does CSR Engagement Affect Banking Efficiency in the Context of a Stochastic Cost Frontier?並列篇名：在隨機成本架構下銀行從事CSR會否影響其效率？作者：黃台心(Tai-Hsin Huang);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen);吳孟紋(Meng-Wen Wu);張穎中(Ying-Chung Chang)關鍵字：CSR score;stochastic cost frontier;environmental variables;altruistic motive;strategic motive;CSR分數;隨機成本邊界;環境變數;利他動機;策略動機期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：This paper examines the effect of corporate social responsibility (CSR) on the cost efficiency of banks across countries with the measure of CSR compiled from the EIRIS database. We consider CSR as an environmental variable, which allows us to associate CSR with cost efficiency. The empirical results fail to support the greenwashing hypothesis, but partially support the altruistic and strategic motives. Since it takes time for a bank to achieve a higher CSR score, a bank tends to be altruistic in the short-run, while a bank tends to be strategic in the long-run.英文摘要：本文探討銀行從事企業社會責任（CSR），對其成本效率產生何種影響？利用EIRIS資料庫收集跨國銀行業的CSR資料，轉換成標準化分數，視為環境變數之一，進行實證分析。結果不支持漂綠假說，部分支持利他與策略動機。因為銀行CSR分數需經過一段時間的累積，故在短期間CSR分數低於55分時，支持利他動機；高於55分的長期，則支持策略動機。起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201912_27(4).00012篇名：The Heterogeneity of Bidders' Valuation to the Determinants of a Bidding Premium: Evidence from Land Auctions of Taiwan並列篇名：競標者評價的異質程度對標售溢酬的影響：以臺灣土地標售為例作者：王健安(Chien-An Wang);姜堯民(Yao-Min Chiang)關鍵字：Bidding premium;competitive intensity;information asymmetry;bidders' heterogeneity;標售溢酬;競爭程度;資訊不對稱;評價的異質程度期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Using 2010-2014 public auction data of state-owned land from the National Property Administration in Taiwan, this research discusses the determinants of a bidding premium via a sample of 515 cases using the ”first price sealed bids” in three metropolitan areas. We focus on the heterogeneity of bidders' valuation beyond the traditional aspect, such as competition and information asymmetry, and construct three proxies of the heterogeneity of bidders. The literature argues that the number of biddings correlates positively with a bidding premium, but our empirical results indicate that only high heterogeneity and intensive competition result in a higher bidding premium.英文摘要：本研究使用國產署2010年至2014年，來自臺北、臺中、高雄三大都會區採密封式最高價得標而標脫的515筆國有土地為樣本，聚焦於投標人「評價的異質性」程度是否（以及如何）影響標售溢酬的高低。實證結果顯示：競爭程度越激烈，標售溢酬不見得會越高；唯有當競標者的異質程度越高時，越激烈的競爭程度才會導致越高的標售溢酬。起始頁-結束頁：33-59資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201912_27(4).00023篇名：Valuation of Reverse Mortgages Using Stochastic Programming Models並列篇名：以動態規劃模型評價逆向抵押貸款作者：何曉緯(Hsiao-Wei Ho);劉明郎(Ming-Long Liu);曾郁婷(Yu-Ting Tseng)關鍵字：Reverse mortgage;home equity conversion mortgage;stochastic programming model;逆向抵押貸款;住宅逆向房貸;動態規劃模型期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：The aging society problems spread all around the world in recent years. The elders face economic impact and financial difficulties after they retired. The reverse mortgage (RM) programs are then introduced to alleviate the elders' income shortages in many countries. In this paper we propose a bi-objective stochastic programming model to evaluate the fair payment of RM programs. We use Lee-Carter model (1992), CIR-SR model (1985), and Geometric Brownian motion model to forecast mortality, interest rates, and house prices, respectively. Numerical tests and sensitivity analyses using data from Taiwan are also performed to demonstrate the valuation procedure of RM programs.英文摘要：老齡化問題近年來已在全世界迅速蔓延。老年人在退休後面臨嚴重的經濟及財務問題，許多國家則實施逆向抵押貸款政策以減緩老年人缺乏收入所造成的問題。本文提出一個雙目標動態規劃模型，用以估算逆向抵押貸款之合理給付。並以臺灣主要城市之資料為基礎，分別估計死亡率、利率、以及房屋價格，以演示逆向抵押貸款之評價過程。起始頁-結束頁：61-88資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201912_27(4).00034篇名：How Digital Banking Affects Output and Performance at European Commercial Banks並列篇名：數位金融如何影響歐洲商業銀行的產出和經營績效作者：林岳龍(Yueh-Lung Lin);蕭育仁(Yu-Jen Hsiao);陳冠臻(Kuan-Chen Chen);林士傑(Shih-Jie Lin)關鍵字：Commercial banks;digital banking;product innovation;商業銀行;數位金融;產品創新期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：We examine 550 commercial bank observations that are among the first to adopt digital banking in the European region and compare the change in their 2009-2013 financial performance with that of 4,793 nondigital commercial bank observations. We find that larger banks and those affiliated with bank holding companies are more likely to adopt digital finance solutions. It is also found that the commercial banks adopting a digital delivery channel influence profitability changes and there exists a complementary relationship between brick-and-mortar bank and digital bank mode.英文摘要：我們收集550筆採用數位金融模式以及4,793筆尚未採用數位金融模式的商業銀行觀測值，比較兩群體在2009年至2013年期間，有關財務變化的表現。發現大型商業銀行和隸屬金控或集團都會明顯地提升銀行發展數位金融的可能性，我們也發現有發展數位金融模式的商業銀行可以對其獲利能力產生影響，而且實體分行和數位金融模式之間為互補關係。起始頁-結束頁：89-110資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201912_27(4).00045篇名：Equity Issuances and the Value of Cash Holdings並列篇名：權益發行與現金價值作者：黃幼琳(Yu-Lin Huang);陳嬿如(Yenn-Ru Chen)關鍵字：Private placements;equity issuances;value of cash;私募股權;權益發行;現金價值期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：This paper examines the effect of equity issuances on the marginal value of cash. We find the marginal value of cash is higher to firms saving cash from equity issuances than to firms with low or no equity issuances. Our results support the precautionary motive for cash generation. Additionally, the capital market values additional cash higher to firms more likely saving cash from private placements relative to public offerings. Such valuation difference is attributed to the monitoring effect from private placements, and the value difference between the two equity issuance mechanisms varies with the corporate governance environment that firms face.英文摘要：本文探討權益發行對公司現金價值之影響。實證結果發現，當企業透過權益發行累積現金時，其現金價值將高於未進行權益發行或未由權益發行累積現金之企業，此結果與預防性動機之論點一致。此外，相較於以公開發行管道累積現金之企業，由私募股權累積現金之企業具有較高的現金價值，此差異為私募股權所產生之監督效果所致。起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201909_27(3).00016篇名：The Impact of IRS Audits on Tax Avoidance of U.S. Multinational Firms並列篇名：美國政府稅務查核對美國跨國公司避稅行為之影響作者：鄭羽婷(Yu-Ting Cheng);高偉娟(Wei-Chuan Kao);林世銘(Su-Ming Lin)關鍵字：Tax avoidance;IRS tax audits;multinational companies;income shifting;公司避稅;稅務查核;跨國公司;所得移轉期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：We examine the effect of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audits on U.S. multinational companies (U.S. MNCs). We find the IRS audits positively affect U.S. MNCs' worldwide effective tax rate, suggesting that U.S. MNCs conduct less tax avoidance when expecting more IRS audits. Additionally, we find the IRS audits deter MNCs' domestic tax avoidance more than foreign tax avoidance. These results are robust using alternative IRS audits and tax avoidance variables. We also find the IRS audits reduce U.S. MNCs' income shifting. The evidence that the IRS audits reduce tax avoidance and income shifting remains consistent after using two-stage regressions.英文摘要：本文探討美國政府稅務查核對美國跨國公司避稅行為之影響，發現稅務查核提高跨國公司的有效稅率，表示當跨國公司預期較多的稅務查核時，將減少避稅行為。本文亦發現稅務查核減少境內的避稅較境外避稅多，而且能減少跨國公司的所得移轉。無論採用其他的稅務查核與公司避稅變數，或採用二階迴歸式獲致之結果仍與原結果一致。起始頁-結束頁：41-73資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201909_27(3).00027篇名：Does Regulatory Pressure Influence Bank Dividend Payouts? The Role of Country-Level Institutions並列篇名：政府監管壓力是否影響銀行的股利政策？國家層級制度的角色作者：林昆立(Kun-Li Lin);董澍琦(Shuh-Chyi Doong);張鈺娸(Yu-Chi Chang)關鍵字：Bank dividend policy;regulatory pressure;country-level institutions;financial crisis;銀行股利政策;政府監管壓力;國家層級制度;金融危機期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Using a sample of 26 countries, we explore how regulatory pressure influences dividend payouts in various country-level institutions. We find that there is no significant effect of regulatory pressure on bank dividend payouts among all the sample banks. We also document that the negative effects of regulatory pressure on bank dividend payouts are strengthened in countries with common law, strict legal enforcement, and a higher degree of private monitoring and financial freedom. Finally, regulatory pressure was effective in limiting dividend payouts by undercapitalized bank during and after the 2007-2009 financial crisis.英文摘要：本文檢視政府監管壓力與銀行股利政策的關係，並分析國家層級制度對兩者的影響。結果顯示，政府監管壓力對銀行股利發放無顯著效果，但在普通法、法律和私人監督愈健全與金融自由度愈高的國家，監管壓力對銀行股利發放的負向效果會更為明顯。最後，在金融危機期間及其後，監管壓力對資本不足之銀行的股利限制效果較佳。起始頁-結束頁：75-109資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201909_27(3).00038篇名：Using the Expected Final Return Model to Create Optimal Trading Strategy for Options: A Theoretical and Empirical Study Based on Evidence from Short Combination Strategy並列篇名：運用期望到期報酬模型建立選擇權最佳賣出組合策略之理論與實證研究－以賣出組合策略為例作者：黃明官(Ming-Guan Huang);吳明遠(Ming-Yuan Wu)關鍵字：Options;combination strategy;financial quantitative;expected final return model;選擇權;組合策略;財務計量;期望到期報酬模型期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study uses quantitative method to develop expected final return models for option trading. The models are applied to TAIEX weekly and monthly options to verify the effectiveness in creating combination strategy. Empirical results indicate that 30-day and 365-day volatility are suitable for weekly and monthly options, respectively. The resulting profits reveal that short straddle is better than short strangle, and weekly option is beneficial than monthly option. Moreover, optimal expected final return strategy yields higher actual returns than all other strategies. Additionally, profits from optimal expected final return strategy are greatly greater than those from fixed exercise price strategy.英文摘要：本文運用計量法推導選擇權組合策略之期望到期報酬模型，並應用於週及月到期台指選擇權以確認篩選組合策略的效益性。實證結果顯示，週及月到期分別採用30與365日波動率最適宜。獲利表現上，賣出跨式優於勒式且週到期優於月到期，最佳期望到期報酬策略均獲得最大累計實際到期報酬，而且獲利績效亦皆顯著優於固定履約價格策略。起始頁-結束頁：111-145資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201909_27(3).00049篇名：Bank Consolidation and Interest Rate Pass-Through: Evidence from Singapore and Malaysia並列篇名：銀行合併和利率傳導：來自新加坡和馬來西亞的證據作者：Jingya Li;Ming-Hua Liu關鍵字：Bank competition;bank consolidation;interest rate pass-through;Malaysia banks;Singapore banks;銀行競爭;銀行合併;利率傳導;馬來西亞銀行;新加坡銀行期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：We examine the impact of bank consolidations on interest rate pass-through in both countries using an asymmetric error correction model. Our findings show that for Singapore, the markup is higher and that the pass-through of deposit rates to prime rates is less complete in the post-consolidation period. For Malaysia, the markup is lower and the pass-through is more complete in the post-consolidation period. Our findings also reveal that the asymmetric short-term pass-through is exacerbated in Singapore and mitigated in Malaysia in the post-consolidation period. The evidence indicates that bank competition decreased in Singapore but increased in Malaysia after consolidations.英文摘要：我們以非對稱誤差修正模型研究兩國銀行合併對利率傳導之影響。結果顯示，新加坡的銀行合併後，利差更高，利率傳導的有效性降低，利率傳導的非對稱性加劇。馬來西亞的銀行合併後，利差更低，利率傳導的有效性提高，利率傳導的非對稱性減弱。研究證據指出，新加坡的銀行合併降低銀行競爭，而馬來西亞的銀行合併提高競爭。起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201906_27(2).000110篇名：Deviation between Individual Unexpected Earnings and Industry Unexpected Earnings and Equity Pricing: Psychological Biases or Risk Premium?並列篇名：公司未預期盈餘和產業未預期盈餘之離差與股票訂價：心理偏誤或風險補償？作者：余歆儀(Hsin-Yi Yu);李冠樺(Kuan-Hua Lee);雲慕書(Mu-Shu Yun)關鍵字：Post-earnings-announcement drift;standardized unexpected earnings;industry;underreaction;limited attention;盈餘宣告後股價持續反應;標準化未預期盈餘;產業;反應不足;注意力有限期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：We investigate the use of unexpected earnings surprises within an industry for a benchmark in the cross-sectional pricing of stocks. The results demonstrate that the deviation between unexpected earnings of an individual company and of the overall industry is positively related to future expected returns. The risk-adjusted return on the zero-investment portfolio based on such deviation achieves 1.56% monthly. The risk-adjusted returns are possibly attributable to underreaction caused by limited attention. Furthermore, investors exhibit complex responses to surprises; they respond to an individual company's time-series earnings surprises and compare a company's earning with its peers and respond to cross-sectional surprises.英文摘要：過去研究發現公司未預期盈餘能預測未來股票報酬，本研究納入產業因素，發現投資人對於個別公司的未預期盈餘、個別公司未預期盈餘與所屬產業未預期盈餘的偏離程度均有反應。根據偏離程度所構建之零投資組合，平均風險調整後月報酬為1.56%，此報酬無法被既有的報酬預測變數所解釋，可能肇因於投資人注意力有限所造成的反應不足。起始頁-結束頁：33-74資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201906_27(2).000211篇名：Intended Use of Proceeds and Long-Run Performance: Evidence from Private Placements and Public Offerings in Taiwan並列篇名：預期資金用途與長期績效：來自臺灣私募融資與公開發行之實證作者：徐政義(Cheng-Yi Shiu);魏慧珊(Hui-Shan Wei)關鍵字：Private placements;public offerings;capital expenditures;long-run performance;私募融資;公開發行;資本支出;長期績效期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Many believe that increased investment in capital expenditure is what causes the long-run underperformance of initial public offerings (IPOs) and seasoned equity offerings (SEOs). We argue that such underperformance is caused by the agency costs of managerial discretion over free cash flow, rather than capital expenditure per se. The results of the empirical examination of 418 private placements and 416 public offerings by firms on the Taiwan stock markets confirm our hypothesis. We show that placements characterized by increased capital expenditure are associated with better long-run performance, whereas placements in non-investment category and public offerings have significantly negative abnormal returns.英文摘要：許多文獻認為，增加資本支出導致初次公開發行與現金增資後企業長期績效變差。本文則假設由自由現金流量之代理問題所致，而非前述之事後資本支出。經研究臺灣證券市場418件私募融資及416件公開發行，結果支持本文提出之假設，發現資金用於資本支出之私募有較佳之長期績效，而其他類別的私募與公開發行有較差之報酬。起始頁-結束頁：75-120資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201906_27(2).000312篇名：Improving the Market Quality of Underlying Securities: Alternative Issuing Choices of Single Stock Derivatives並列篇名：提升股票現貨市場交易品質：股票衍生性商品發行模式選擇作者：王明昌(Ming-Chang Wang);丁裕家(Yu-Jia Ding)關鍵字：Market quality;single stock options;single stock futures;issuing models;市場品質;股票選擇權;股票期貨;發行模式期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：We set out to investigate the impacts on spot market quality arising from various issuing models of single stock derivatives, examining the following three issuing models used by the Taiwan Futures Exchange (TAIFEX): (i) individual issuance of single stock options, (ii) individual issuance of single stock futures, and (iii) simultaneous issuance of single stock options and futures. We aim to identify any improvements in the market quality of single stock spots attributable to the three issuing models and identify the optimal issuing model. Our results can help the competent authorities to determine the optimal issuing model of single stock derivatives.英文摘要：本研究旨在探討各股票衍生性金融商品發行模式對個股現貨市場交易品質的影響，以臺灣期貨交易所股票衍生性商品的三種發行模式為研究樣本，分別為單獨發行股票選擇權、單獨發行股票期貨及股票選擇權與股票期貨同時發行。檢定發行模式對個股現貨市場交易品質的改善程度，研究結果可供主管機關決定股票衍生性商品最佳發行模式。起始頁-結束頁：121-156資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201906_27(2).000413篇名：The Impact of Deposit Insurance on the Risks and Returns of Commercial Banks: Evidence from China並列篇名：存款保險對商業銀行的風險與回報的影響：來自中國的證據作者：Ming-Hua Liu;Yang Zhang;Kaimeng Zheng關鍵字：Chinese banks;deposit insurance;event study;liquidity risk;Z-score;中國銀行;存款保險;事件研究;流動性風險;Z-score期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：We examine the impact of China's newly implemented deposit insurance policy on the risks and returns of listed Chinese commercial banks. Using a standard event study methodology, we find a positive and statistically significant influence of deposit insurance policy announcement on shareholders' wealth of listed Chinese banks, especially when volume-weighted average stock returns are analyzed. Further analysis shows that joint-equity banks benefit more from the announcements. Using the Z-score and liquidity ratio as proxies of bank risks, we find that deposit insurance policies tend to increase bank risks, probably due to the moral-hazard problem.英文摘要：本文研究中國新存款保險政策對上市中國商業銀行風險和收益的影響。透過標準事件研究方法，我們發現存款保險政策公告對上市中國中銀行股東資產有正向顯著影響。進一步分析顯示，合資銀行從公告中獲益更多。我們還發現存款保險政策傾向於增加銀行風險，可能起因於道德風險問題。起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201903_27(1).000114篇名：Risk Taking Behavior and Financial Constraints: Evidence from the U.S. Property-Liability Insurance Industry並列篇名：美國產物保險公司冒風險行為與財務限制之關係作者：張永郎(Vincent Y. Chang)關鍵字：Risk taking;financial constraints;CEO hubris;risk sensitivity theory;prospect theory;風險承擔;財務限制;CEO傲慢行為;風險敏感理論;展望理論期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study examines the impact of financial constraints on firms' risk taking decisions. By using data from insurers of the NAIC (National Association of Insurance Commissioners) over the 2006-2013 period, this study finds that insurers with a better rating, as well as higher dividend payouts, are significantly and negatively related to risk taking decisions, which is consistent with the primary rationale of the CEO hubris argument, the risk sensitivity theory, and the prospect theory. The evidence proposes that regulators have to pay more attention on firms with higher financial constraints who intend to take more risks.英文摘要：本文以2006－2013年美國產物保險公司的資料探討財務限制對公司風險承擔之影響。本文實證結果發現，有較高財務評比及有支付紅利之保險公司有較低的風險承擔，此結果支持CEO傲慢行為、風險敏感理論及展望理論之基本論點。本文實證結果具重要政策意涵，監管單位應特別注意有較高財務限制但喜歡風險承擔之保險公司。起始頁-結束頁：31-64資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201903_27(1).000215篇名：Strategic Spoofing Order Trading by Different Types of Investors in Taiwan Index Futures Market並列篇名：臺灣指數期貨市場不同類型投資人策略性虛單交易作者：王韻怡(Yun-Yi Wang)關鍵字：Spoofing orders;liquidity;volatility;institutional investors;individual traders;虛單;流動性;波動性;機構投資人;個別交易人期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study investigates the strategic spoofing order trading, including its characteristics, profitability, determinants, and real-time impacts. Both spoofing-buy and spoofing-sell strategies emerge, discernible among not only institutional investors but also individual traders. Spoofing trading is profitable, and traders are more likely to submit spoofing orders when volume and volatility are high, and they are more likely to submit spoofing-sell (buy) orders when the market price is high (low). Spoofing trading induces subsequent volume, spread, and volatility; spoofing-buy (sell) orders have a positive (negative) effect on subsequent prices. These findings provide support for the view that spoofing trading destabilizes the market.英文摘要：本文探討臺灣指數期貨市場之策略性虛單交易。虛買／賣單策略皆存在於機構與個別投資人。虛單交易可獲利，當交易量與波動高，交易人愈可能下虛單；價格高（低）時，交易人愈可能下虛賣（買）單。虛單交易影響市場交易量、價差與波動；虛買（賣）單正（負）向影響價格。研究結果支持虛單交易使市場不穩定。起始頁-結束頁：65-103資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201903_27(1).000316篇名：The Impact of Foreign Investor Sentiment on Taiwan's Stock and Futures Markets並列篇名：外資投資情緒對臺灣期、現貨市場之影響作者：蕭榮烈(Jung-Lieh Hsiao);林靖(Arthur C.H. Lin);王如琦(Christine Wang);何靜(Shirley J. Ho)關鍵字：Market-adjusted relative turnover;foreign investor sentiment index;cash-futures market correlation;市場調整的相對周轉率;外資情緒指標;期現貨市場相關性期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：27卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：By utilizing the market-adjusted relative turnover to filter out the macroeconomic impacts, we construct ”foreign investor sentiment index” in Taiwan and analyze how excess returns, volatility, and cash-futures market correlation are affected by this index. Our results show that foreign investor sentiment has a positive effect on excess returns and cash-futures market correlation, but has a negative impact on volatility. Moreover, both foreign investor sentiment index and net inward remittance of foreign investor (NIRFI) have a good prediction power in cash market's excess returns.英文摘要：本文運用市場調整的相對周轉率並建立臺灣的「外資情緒指標」，探究其對臺灣期現貨市場之影響。主要發現為外資情緒對市場超額報酬率及期現貨市場相關性有正向影響，但對於市場波動性則有負向效果。再者，外資情緒指標及外資淨匯入金額對現貨市場超額報酬率有良好的預測績效。起始頁-結束頁：105-158資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.201903_27(1).000401篇名：台灣經濟學會「2018年經濟學傑出貢獻獎」作者：彭信坤期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：i+526-527資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：【論文摘要】More Missing Women, Fewer Dying Girls: The Impact of Sex-Selective Abortion on Sex at Birth and Relative Female Mortality in Taiwan作者：林明仁;劉錦添;錢楠筠期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：529-531資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：台灣法律經濟學實證的判決資料－介紹與應用並列篇名：THE INTRODUCTION AND APPLICATIONS OF THE LEGAL DATA SETS COMMONLY USED IN TAIWAN FOR EMPIRICAL STUDIES IN LAW AND ECONOMICS作者：林常青(Chang-Ching Lin)關鍵字：法官行為;量刑決定;法律程序與系統;法院裁判書;終結案件資料;大數據;Judge behaviors;Sentencing decisions;Legal procedure and system;Court written judgement;Closed case summaries;Big data期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：法律經濟學的許多實證需要用到裁判書，這些資料不只外國才有，事實上台灣也有相對完整的各級法院判決。本文將介紹司法院的「裁判書」與「司法院及所屬各級法院之終結案件資料」。後者為已整理好且有結構的摘要資訊，而前者則是較無結構的文件，但都可免費下載且可提供豐富資訊。近年大數據與人工智慧為各學科領域帶來許多震撼，如何善用前述裁判大數據也成為本研究領域的重要議題。本文也將分享一些前處理經驗供讀者參考，期能協助研究者跨越進入法律經濟學實證門檻。英文摘要：Many empirical studies in law and economics require the use of the court written judgements. These materials are not only available in foreign countries. In fact, Taiwan also has relatively complete court decisions at all court-levels. This article will introduce the common used two data sets provided by the Judicial Yuan: one is a well-organized and structured summary information and the other is a less structured documents. They both can be downloaded for free and can provide useful information. In recent years, big data and artificial intelligence have brought great impacts in various subject areas. How to make full use of the above data sets has become an important topic in this research field. This article will also share some text pre-processing experience for readers' reference, which may help researchers to overcome the data barriers of empirical research in law and economics.起始頁-結束頁：533-546資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：Improving Standard Moment Estimators of Beta Random Variables並列篇名：改進Beta隨機變數之標準動差估計式作者：李瑞祥(Ray-Shine Lee)關鍵字：Beta distribution;The method of moments;Maximum likelihood method;Jackknife estimator;Beta分佈;動差法;最大概似法;Jackknife估計式期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：The beta distribution of the first kind, including two shape parameters, is a flexible curve specification in studying the classical moment method of statistical principles. The research of this paper, originating with a need similar to that in econometrics, further finds a sequence of explicit high-order moment estimators for the beta distribution. In addition to the trials of weighting different moment estimators, this research also examines a deserving-emphasis condition for estimating the classic four-parameter beta distribution, and permitting moment-equation substitution.英文摘要：第一類型貝塔分佈，包括兩個形狀參數，是學習統計學原理中古典動差方法的一種易於伸縮曲線設定。本文的研究源自計量經濟學之相似需要，進一步發現貝塔分佈具有一系列外顯高階動差估計式。除了對不同估計式進行加權試驗外，這項研究還考察了一個值得重視的情況，估計經典的四參數貝塔分佈，並允許動差方程替換。起始頁-結束頁：547-570資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：培養才藝對升大學的影響－以TYP樣本為例並列篇名：THE EFFECT OF CULTIVATING ART AND TALENT SKILL ON COLLEGE OUTCOMES: EVIDENCE FROM TAIWAN YOUTH PROJECT作者：劉家樺(Chia-Hua Liu)關鍵字：才藝;培養才藝;教育成就;國立大學;國立頂尖大學;Skills;Cultivating art and talent skill;Educational attainment;National colleges;Elite national colleges期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：隨著高等教育擴張，民眾關注教育成就的重點已從上大學轉為上好大學。多元入學的實施提升非考試成績對升學的影響。本文以「台灣青少年計畫」，檢視培養才藝決定因素及培養才藝對升大學的影響，其中升大學分為上大學及上好大學。在培養才藝決定因素分析中發現，基測成績與運動舞蹈、作文演講才藝呈負向、正向關係，顯示認知能力與運動舞蹈和作文演講才藝呈替代和互補關係。其次，在控制才藝天份和各項其他變數下，培養才藝和基測成績皆與上好大學呈正向關係，其中作文演講才藝與上好大學之正向關係最明確。另外，培養才藝與基測成績交乘項和上好大學呈正向關係，隱含在多元入學制度下，同時具有優良才藝和基測成績表現者較能獲得較佳的升學結果。英文摘要：With the expansion of higher education, the public attention on educational attainment has shifted from entering college to entering a good college. The implementation of the multi-channel admission program raises the impact of non-test scores on college outcomes. Using the Taiwan Youth Project, this paper examines determinants of cultivating art and talent skill (cultivating skill), and effects of cultivating skill on college outcomes. In analyzing determinants of cultivating skill, the paper finds that basic competence test scores (BCT scores) are negatively correlated with cultivating sport-and-dance-related skills, and positively correlated with cultivating writing-and-speech-related skills. These findings suggest that the relationship between cognitive ability and sport-and-dance-related skills is substitutional, while the relationship between cognitive ability and writing-and-speech-related skills is complementary. Moreover, after controlling for inherent talent and other characteristics, results indicate that cultivating skills and BCT scores both are positively correlated with entering a good college. Among all skills, the positive correlation between writing-and-speech-related skills and entering a good college is the clearest. Furthermore, the interaction between cultivating skills and BCT scores is positively related to entering a good college, which implies that students who have both decent art and talent performance and good BCT scores may get a better result under the multi-channel admission program.起始頁-結束頁：571-611資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：加寬漲跌幅限制與暫緩收盤觸動之實證觀察並列篇名：AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF WIDENING DAILY PRICE LIMIT AND EXTENDING THE CLOSING CALL作者：曾翊恆(Yi-Heng Tseng)關鍵字：台灣證券交易所;漲跌幅限制;委託積極度;委託成效;暫緩交易;Taiwan stock exchange;Price limit;Order aggressiveness;Order performance;Trading halt期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：國內集中市場「漲跌幅限制」於2015年6月1日放寬至10％後，股價整體振幅隨之加劇。使用日內資料下，本文透過實證模型分析變革如何影響投資人委託決策與弱勢方委託成效。結果指出，機構投資人憑藉「監看」盤面優勢，不僅撤單意願增加，也提高申報大型股新委託頻率，對小型股拆單則見收斂。自然人新委託次數減少，但對大型股出價轉趨急迫。象徵弱勢方的自然人於大型股成交機率上升，惟委託綜合曝險度礙於偏高「監看成本」下仍傾向遞增。至於「暫緩收盤」措施，觸動後非但未「降溫」投資人整體委託積極度，反倒「激化」原本對小型股出價相對保守者。英文摘要：This study employs intra-day data to investigate how the reform of widening the daily price limit to ±10% on 1 June 2015 affects order choices along with performance. Using several empirical models, I find that by virtue of lower 'monitoring' costs, institutional investors tend to withdraw their orders more frequently, submit more new orders for large cap stocks, and make fewer order splitting activities in small cap stocks. Individual investors, symbolizing the uninformed traders in the Taiwan Stock Exchange, submit fewer new orders, but they deliver more aggressive orders for large cap stocks. Although fill rates in large cap stocks increase, the individual investors nonetheless suffer from further integrated risk on limit order submissions owing to their high 'monitoring' cost. As regards delaying closing calls, this measure fails to 'cool down' the entirety of order aggressiveness, but it may instead stimulate the investors who originally submit conservative orders for small cap stocks.起始頁-結束頁：613-650資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：台灣廠商躍過反傾銷稅直接投資之實證分析並列篇名：AN EMPIRICAL STUDY ON THE ANTIDUMPING-JUMPING FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT BY TAIWANESE FIRMS作者：林家慶(Chia-Ching Lin)關鍵字：反傾銷政策;躍過反傾銷稅直接投資;台灣廠商;事件歷史研究法;Antidumping policy;Antidumping-jumping FDI;Taiwanese firms;Event history analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：當出口廠商遭遇反傾銷控訴後，可以使用直接投資替代出口來規避反傾銷稅，這稱為躍過反傾銷稅直接投資。目前台灣被提控反傾銷之密集度在全球名列第1名，但卻尚未有研究台灣廠商躍過反傾銷稅直接投資之實證文章。本研究以1987－2014年間台灣廠商被控訴反傾銷案例為研究對象，共包括13個對台灣提控國家、70個案例、228家廠商。以事件歷史研究法的實證結果指出，台灣廠商被控訴反傾銷，會刺激廠商進行躍過反傾銷稅直接投資，而進行直接投資的國家以第三國為主。英文摘要：When facing antidumping allegations, exporters may consider foreign direct investment (FDI) as an alternative to evade antidumping duties. This is referred to as antidumping-jumping FDI. Currently, Taiwan is the country with the highest frequency of receiving dumping accusations in the world. However, there are currently no empirical research papers on the behavior of antidumping-jumping FDI. Focusing on the antidumping lawsuits against Taiwan during the period of 1987-2014, this research covers 13 countries that have filed antidumping lawsuits against Taiwan, 70 cases and 228 companies. Event history analysis is adopted for this paper. The empirical results show that antidumping lawsuits stimulate companies to implement antidumping-jumping FDI. The destinations of such investments are mainly in a third-country.起始頁-結束頁：651-679資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：流動性衝擊、銀行風險、與放款市場競爭並列篇名：LIQUIDITY SHOCKS, BANK RISKS, AND CREDIT MARKET COMPETITION作者：曾秉倫(Ping-Lun Tseng);郭文忠(Wen-Chung Guo)關鍵字：流動性衝擊;流動性風險;事後監督;信用風險;放款市場競爭;Liquidity shock;Liquidity risk;Monitoring;Credit risk;Credit market competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究企圖建立一銀行風險模型，考慮銀行具備事後監督技術與存款融資下，探討銀行的流動性風險與信用風險之關係。結果顯示此兩項風險之關係取決於流動性衝擊之發生機率：若流動性衝擊機率低，銀行只投資長期風險性計畫案，此時銀行的流動性風險與信用風險呈現正向關係；若流動性衝擊機率高，銀行則傾向投資風險性計畫案並持有足夠的流動性準備，此時銀行的流動風險與信用風險兩者不具相關性。放款市場競爭與存款利率上升均提高銀行的流動性風險性與信用風險。若考慮法規強制銀行持有自有資本，提高資本適足法規將降低銀行的流動性風險與信用風險。本研究亦延伸模型架構討論存款保險、聯邦基金市場、存款準備率、及存款市場不完全競爭等影響。英文摘要：We develop a model of bank risk-taking to explore the relationship between bank liquidity risk and credit risk, in which banks receive deposits as funding and may improve the likelihood of success of their long-term risky loans by devoting monitoring efforts. The results show that this relationship depends on the probability of liquidity shock. When the probability of liquidity shock is low, the banks invest only in long-term risky loans, and then the bank liquidity risk and credit risk are positively correlated; however, when the probability is high, they are inclined to hold long-term risky loans and full liquidity reserves, and then the bank liquidity risk and credit risk are uncorrelated. Moreover, more loan market competition and higher deposit rates increase both bank liquidity risk and credit risk. Both the bank liquidity risk and credit risk are decreasing in adequate capital requirements when imposing capital regulation that requires the banks to use equity capital. We also extend our model to discuss the roles of deposit insurance, the federal funds market, liquidity requirements, and the imperfect deposit market, respectively.起始頁-結束頁：339-394資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：漫步於隨機森林－輔以多數決學習的台股指數期貨交易策略並列篇名：A RANDOM WALK DOWN RANDOM FOREST: ENSEMBLE-LEARNING-ASSISTED TRADING STRATEGIES FOR TAIEX FUTURES作者：鄭仁杰(Jen-Chieh Cheng);江彌修(Mi-Hsiu Chiang)關鍵字：多數機器決學習;隨機森林;交易策略;臺灣加權股價指數期貨;卡馬比率;Ensemble machine learning;Random forest;Trading strategies;TAIEX futures;Calmar ratio期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：應用隨機森林演算法來進行未來期貨價格漲跌的分類預測，本文以技術面與籌碼面指標作為模型訓練的特徵，進而建構輔以多數決學習的台股指數期貨交易策略。藉由參數的重要性衡量，我們辨識出爭議變數，並探究參數配置的屬性擾動之於演算法預測能力及策略績效的影響。利用2007年至2018年的台股指數期貨資料，本文以多重角度測試策略之績效與穩健性。實證結果顯示，在考量交易成本之下，本文所建構之多數決學習台股指數期貨交易策略，要能於其訓練區間及測試區間皆呈現穩定勝出大盤的績效，其隨機森林模型所共同具備的參數配置必須包含3－14日MA與RSI指標、遠月期貨交易量、現貨交易量、期貨外資未平倉量與買賣權未平倉比率。英文摘要：With the ensemble learning of specific TAIEX market characteristics drawn from technical analysis data, in this paper we construct futures trading strategies where price directional forecasts are generated by Random Forest classification models. By quantifying the model attributes' extent of contribution to the overall prediction outcomes, we identify attributes-in-dispute and explore their perturbative effects on the predictive ability of Random Forest and thus the risk-reward performance of the proposed strategies. Using 2007-2018 TAIEX futures data, our in-sample and out-of-sample test results show that, after transaction costs, risk-adjusted outperformance over the market is consistently observable when the Random Forest models adapt the 3-14 days MA and RSI indicators, far-month futures trading volume, spot transaction volume, foreign capital open interest in futures, and open interest ratio in options.起始頁-結束頁：395-448資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：Call Auction Frequency and Market Quality: Active versus Inactive Stocks並列篇名：集合競價撮合頻率與市場品質之探討－交易活絡股票與不活絡股票之比較作者：詹淑慧(Shu-Hui Chan);黃玉娟(Yu-Chuan Huang)關鍵字：Call frequency;Trading speed;Frequent call auction;Market quality;撮合頻率;交易速度;集合競價撮合頻率;市場品質期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：This paper examines the effects of different call frequency regimes on the Taiwan Stock Exchange from 2013 to 2015. The interim performance of the call mechanism during its transition to higher frequencies is investigated, and market liquidity, volatility, and efficiency are used to measure market quality. Regarding active stocks, when the call frequency increases, depth and intraday market volatility improve but trading volume declines significantly. For inactive stocks, the increase in trading frequency leads to a significant improvement in trading volume, spread and intraday volatility. However, depth declines and market efficiency decreases significantly.英文摘要：台灣證券交易所於2013年至2015年間，逐步縮短盤中集合競價撮合循環秒數以加快撮合頻率。本研究以市場流動性、波動性與效率性探討歷次交易制度變革對市場品質的影響，實證結果顯示提高集合競價撮合頻率後，對於交易活絡股票，其市場深度及日內波動性均獲得改善，但成交量顯著減少；至於交易不活絡股票，其成交量、價差及日內波動性呈現顯著改善，但市場深度及效率性則顯著下降。起始頁-結束頁：449-484資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：董監事責任保險對企業避稅決策之影響並列篇名：THE EFFECT OF DIRECTORS' AND OFFICERS' LIABILITY INSURANCE ON CORPORATE TAX AVOIDANCE作者：李建然(Jan-Zan Lee);湯麗芬(Li-Fen Tang)關鍵字：董監事暨重要職員責任保險;董監事暨重要職員責任保險金額;超額投保金額;避稅;財稅差異;Directors' and officers' liability insurance;D&O insurance coverage;Abnormal D&O insurance coverage;Tax avoidance;Book-tax difference期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究以2008年至2015年之上市（櫃）公司為樣本，採用三種避稅衡量方式（總財稅差異、永久性財稅差異及現金有效稅率），探討公司購買董監事暨重要職員責任保險（directors and officers liability insurance，文後簡稱D＆O保險）是否影響公司管理階層避稅決策。實證結果發現購買D＆O保險之公司，管理階層避稅程度較小，愈不會從事避稅行為。換言之，購買D＆O保險將強化公司治理機制，因而較能抑制管理階層從事避<U+7A0E>行為。此外，本文進一步針對有購買D＆O保險的公司，探討D＆O投保金額對避稅行為的影響，研究發現實際投保金額愈大之公司，管理階層避稅程度愈小，愈不可能進行避稅行為。然而值得注意的是，當公司有超額投保情況時，超額投保金額愈大，則管理階層可能因道德危機導致避稅程度愈大。英文摘要：Using publicly available D&O insurance data of the listed firms in Taiwan from 2008 to 2015, and based on three measures to capture tax avoidance activities (total book-tax difference, permanent book-tax difference and cash effective tax rate), this paper examines the relationship between directors' and officers' liability insurance (D&O insurance hereafter) and firms' tax avoidance activities. Our empirical results consistently indicate that D&O insurance is negatively associated with tax avoidance activities. In other words, D&O insurance will enhance the effectiveness of corporate governance, and prevent the management from engaging in tax avoidance activities. Moreover, we also find that D&O insurance coverage is negatively associated with firms' tax avoidance activities. However, our further tests find a positive relationship between abnormal D&O insurance coverage and tax avoidance activities, indicating that the abnormal D&O insurance coverage will induce moral hazard and lead to more aggressive tax avoidance activities.起始頁-結束頁：485-524資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：觀光外匯收入波動之總體經濟效果並列篇名：THE MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF TOURISM RECEIPT FLUCTUATIONS IN TAIWAN作者：張俊仁(Juin-Jen Chang);林雪瑜(Hsieh-Yu Lin);蘇芷(Chih-Hsien Su);楊淑珺(Shu-Chun S. Yang)關鍵字：觀光外匯收入;部門重分配;匯率政策;動態隨機一般均衡模型;Tourism receipt;Sectoral reallocation;Exchange rate policy;DSGE model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：雖然台灣政府積極發展觀光產業，但在2016下半年卻面臨來台觀光客縮減導致觀光外匯收入大幅下降的困境。本文建構一個包含觀光財及一般財之兩部門小型開放經濟動態隨機一般均衡（dynamic stochastic general equilibrium）模型，透過校準（calibration），分析國外觀光客來台觀光的支出（觀光外匯收入）減少對總體經濟的影響。結果顯示，國外觀光客來台支出減少，一方面衝擊觀光財部門的產出，另一方面也將產生部門重分配效果及實質匯率效果，使得一般財部門產出增加。惟後者的效果仍無法彌補觀光財部門所遭受的直接衝擊，造成總產出下降。我們也發現觀光財部門與一般財部門間的勞動替代彈性對總產出效果有重要影響。當兩部門勞動替代彈性變大時，可減緩總產出面臨的負面衝擊。此外，本文也進一步發現補貼國外觀光客支出的政策，雖然能緩和觀光財部門面臨的衝擊，但補貼政策將導致財政狀況惡化，如此使政府必須透過舉債及日後減少支出之財政調整來平衡收支，其結果對整體經濟未必有利。英文摘要：The tourism sector in Taiwan has faced a large decline in foreign exchange receipts starting from the second half of 2016. This paper constructs a small open, two-sector dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model to study the macroeconomic effects of tourism receipt fluctuations. It finds that the decline of tourism receipts has a negative effect on total output. In particular, the tourism sector experiences severe declines in output, labor, and investment. When the elasticity of substitution between labor of tourism and other sectors is high, the negative macroeconomic effects can be mitigated. We also investigate the effect of the tourist subsidy policy. Although the subsidy helps reduce the output decline in the tourism sector, the debt-financed subsidy deteriorates the fiscal position; the required fiscal adjustment - cutting government spending or raising taxes - in turn has negative effects on the overall economy.起始頁-結束頁：163-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：台灣三大金融危機日期的決定並列篇名：DATING THE THREE TYPES OF FINANCIAL CRISES IN TAIWAN作者：沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：銀行危機;通貨危機;債務危機;Banking crisis;Currency crisis;Debt crisis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文指出目前國際學術文獻公佈台灣的三大金融危機日期的資料可能有誤，因而重新研究台灣金融危機日期。三大型態的危機，分別是銀行危機、通貨危機及債務危機。過去許多國際研究分別提供全球世界各國的各個金融危機的日期，但台灣則往往不在他們的樣本上。而有些研究包括台灣的銀行危機日期，不過該銀行危機的日期出現太少，甚至不正確。這種不正確數據可能影響學術研究的正確性與危機預測的準確性。我們重新判定台灣的三大金融危機日期，我們的期間包括1983－2016年，發現台灣共有6次銀行危機，發生在1985年、1995－1996年間、1998年、2000－2001年間、2007年、2008年，1次通貨危機發生在1997－1998年；台灣沒有發生債務危機。接著我們進行預警的計量模型比較。我們考慮下列兩組樣本：（1）用我們建議的銀行危機；（2）用文獻常使用的三篇銀行危機日期；即Caprio and Klingebiel（2003）、Reinhart and Rogoff（2009）與Laeven and Valencia（2013）。我們的結果是我們判定的危機日期較文獻判定的日期好，使用本文建議的樣本可以增加預測銀行危機發生的機率。英文摘要：This study re-dates three crises, the banking crisis, currency crisis and debt crisis in Taiwan. The motivation of for re-dating is because the current crisis dates are either incorrect or incomplete, making early warning signals tend to be incorrect. We re-check the details of the three types of financial crisis dates in Taiwan during the period 1983 to 2016. Our results find that there are six banking crises in Taiwan, which occurred in 1985, 1995 to 1996, 1998, 2000 to 2001, 2007, and 2008. One currency crisis occurred in 1997 to 1998 and there were no debt crises over this period in Taiwan. Then, we build an early warning econometric model to examine whether our bank crisis dating outperforms the dating in the literature. We consider four different banking crisis dating samples: Caprio and Klingebiel (2003), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Laeven and Valencia (2013) and ours. Our results show that using our banking crisis dating provides better fit for the early warning model.起始頁-結束頁：209-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：衍生性金融商品、再保險與風險－以英國壽險業為例並列篇名：DERIVATIVES, REINSURANCE AND RISK: EVIDENCE FROM THE UK LIFE INSURANCE INDUSTRY作者：蕭景元(Ching-Yuan Hsiao);許永明(Yung-Ming Shiu)關鍵字：衍生性金融商品;再保險;風險;Derivatives;Reinsurance;Risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文藉由分析英國壽險公司自2005年至2012年的樣本資料，探討保險公司使用衍生性金融商品與再保險，對於其風險的影響。本文以股東權益報酬率標準差及半標準差，作為保險公司總風險及下方風險之指標。實證結果顯示衍生性金融商品的使用者有較低的風險，然而衍生性金融商品使用量卻與風險產生正相關，此結果可能表示持有過高的衍生性金融商品部位，反而有提高盈收波動及風險之虞。另一方面，再保險使用量比較高的公司，風險也較高，可能係因為保險公司透過再保險使用，使其得以承受比較高的核保風險。英文摘要：Using a sample of UK life insurers from 2005 to 2012, we examine the effects of risk management instruments use on insurers' risk. In our work, we use the standard deviation and semi-deviation of returns on equity as the proxies for insurers' total risk and downside risk respectively. Results show that derivatives participants tend to have lower values in these risk measurements. However, insurers that use more derivatives have higher risk. One of the possible explanations is that the excessive amount of derivatives use could make insurers' income flows more volatile and thus increase insurers' risk. On the other hand, the volume of reinsurance usage is related to higher insurers' risk. This result may indicate that insurers use reinsurance to increase their capability to take higher underwriting risk.起始頁-結束頁：253-295資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：台灣汽車保險風險分類之實證分析並列篇名：AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF RISK CLASSIFICATION IN THE TAIWANESE AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE MARKET作者：彭盛昌(Sheng-Chang Peng);利菊秀(Chu-Shiu Li);劉純之(Chwen-Chi Liu)關鍵字：汽車保險;風險分類;理賠預測;Automobile insurance;Risk classification;Claim prediction期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文主要檢驗汽車保險現行採用及額外之風險因子是否為有效的風險分類？以台灣全體產險公司自用小客車三種車體損失險保單為研究對象，建立不同風險因素組合的預測模型，估計其預測變數係數，再透過估計之預測模型進行樣本內與樣本外的預測，以確認預測模型的準確性。本文的實證結果顯示，在現行採用的訂價風險因素，甲式保單顯示理賠係數是相對重要的風險分類因素；乙式保單則是理賠係數與從車因素；丙式保單則是被保險人的年齡。其次，在額外的風險分類分析，本文發現甲式及乙式保單均顯示前一保單年度的理賠經驗是重要的風險分類資訊，此意謂前三年的理賠係數應給予前一年之理賠經驗給予相對較高的權重，如此保費的訂定或許可以達到更公平。由於目前在實務上，三種保單的定價因素都相同，尤其在費率自由化之後，本文的實證結果，可建議保險公司進行實際的風險分類規劃時，針對不同保單可以考量不同的核保或訂價因素之參考依據，進行有效風險分類差異化的費率創新。英文摘要：This study examines whether the characteristics of risk classification are effective by developing different models to predict claim occurrences. We use three unique types (Form A, Form B, and Form C) of coverage for vehicle damage insurance data in Taiwan. We first identify the basic characteristics of policyholders and vehicles which are currently applied by insurers for property damage to vehicles. We further investigate some supplementary information, which requires small information cost for the insurers to obtain from the insureds. Our evidence shows that, for the crucial risk classification based on the current official rating formula, claim coefficient is a relatively critical factor for Form A, while claim coefficient and car age are important for Form B, and policyholder age is important for Form C. We also find that some additional information such as the claim record in the previous policy year provides useful information for risk classification. Our findings imply that the official rating formula may consider various risk factors among different types of coverage for damage to vehicles. In fact, insurers could improve claim prediction by adding unused information such as the claim record in the previous policy year or other factors. Thus, the deregulation of automobile insurance rating can benefit from an efficient risk classification.起始頁-結束頁：297-338資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所16篇名：資本對銀行績效的影響並列篇名：THE IMPACT OF CAPITAL ON BANK PERFORMANCE作者：李惠妍(Hui-Yen Lee);許永明(Yung-Ming Shiu);王綺楓(Chi-Feng Wang)關鍵字：資本;績效;金融風暴;Capital;Performance;Financial crisis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：我們採用2006至2016年的台灣銀行業的資料，來探討資本對績效的影響。我們使用資產報酬率與股東權益報酬率作為績效的代理變數，並使用股東權益佔資產總額，作為資本的代理變數，並將樣本銀行按照規模大小來分類。我們的研究結果顯示：整體而言，資本越高的銀行，其績效越好，特別是小銀行。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to examine the relationship between capital and bank performance. Data on the Taiwan banking industry from 2006 through 2016 are employed. We further classify our sample banks into large and small banks. By doing so, we attempt to examine whether this relationship will change. Results show that banks with higher capital perform better than those with less. The effect of capital on bank performance is greater for smaller than larger banks.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所17篇名：運用時變參數向量自我迴歸模型探討貨幣政策之有效性並列篇名：MEASURING THE EFFECTS OF MONETARY POLICY: A TIME-VARYING PARAMETER VECTOR AUTOREGRESSIVE APPROACH作者：陳俊廷(Jiun-Ting Chen);張勝凱(Sheng-Kai Chang)關鍵字：利率;貨幣政策傳遞機制;貝氏向量自我迴歸模型;時變參數;馬可夫鏈蒙地卡羅;Interest rate;Transmission mechanism of monetary policy;Bayesian vector autoregression;Time varying coefficient;Markov Chain Monte Carlo期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：傳統上，央行藉操作短期名目利率調控國內物價及產出。然而於利率已降至極低水平期間，此道貨幣政策傳遞機制功效令人存疑。本文試圖回答：日本貨幣政策在利率管道上之效果是否隨時間而有所變化？另外，在近年低利率環境下，大規模寬鬆貨幣政策透過該管道對於實質變數影響為何？本文運用貝氏（Bayesian）統計理論與馬可夫鏈蒙地卡羅法（Markov Chain Monte Carlo, MCMC）估計時變參數向量自我迴歸模型（time-varying parameter vector autoregression）得到以下結論：（1）1975－2015年間，日本利率管道效果及外生衝擊影響於不同期間呈異質性。（2）日本利率政策衝擊在1990年後對產出及失業率無顯著正面影響，支持近年其貨幣政策難以透過利率管道提振景氣的論點。英文摘要：Monetary authorities typically manipulated short-term nominal interest rate in order to smooth domestic price and production. However, the effectiveness of such policy becomes doubtful when the nominal interest rate is close to the zero lower bound. This paper applies Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to estimate a Bayesian time-varying parameter vector autoregression model and attempts to evaluate the effectiveness of Japanese monetary policies through the interest rate channel in recent years. The main empirical findings of the paper are as follows. First, the effects of monetary policy through the interest rate channel show time-varying effects between 1975 and 2015 in Japan. Second, the shock of a decreasing interest rate has little positive effect on production and the unemployment rate. These findings are supported by the view that it is difficult for the quantitative easing policy in recent years to stimulate the economy through the interest rate channel.起始頁-結束頁：31-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所18篇名：探討我國銀行業淨利差、非利息收入占比與獲利穩定性之關係並列篇名：EXPLORING THE NEXUS BETWEEN NET INTEREST MARGINS, NON-INTEREST INCOMEAND PROFIT STABILITY: A CASE OF TAIWAN'S COMMERCIAL BANKS作者：姜麗智(Li-Chih Chiang);胡聚男(Chu-Nan Hu)關鍵字：淨利差;非利息收入;獲利穩定性;道德風險假說;金控銀行;非金控銀行;Net interest margins;Non-interest income;Profit stability;Moral-hazard hypothesis;Financial holding companies;Independent banks期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：以往討論銀行非傳統業務－非利息收入占比（NonII），對傳統業務獲利表現－淨利差（NIM）－之影響的文獻，大多使用單一迴歸方程式，直到Nguyen（2012）使用兩條聯立迴歸式探討NIM與NonII的交互影響關係，唯仍忽略非傳統業務對銀行風險的影響。本研究建立三條聯立迴歸方程式，探討2001－2014年間台灣47家商業銀行NIM、NonII以及整體營運風險（Z-score）三者間之關係。實證結果發現我國銀行的NonII對Z-score之影響，較符合道德風險假<U+8AAC>，即NonII的增加導致銀行獲利較不穩定，並進而使得銀行需要較高的NIM。更值得注意的是，Z-score低的銀行有相對較高NonII，意味著不穩定的銀行越可能從事資產負債表外業務，因此建議我國金融監管單位與銀行經理人員，需要審慎評估銀行資產負債表外活動帶來的風險。英文摘要：Many previous works apply a single equation model to examine the effect of banks' non-interest income ratio (NonII) on net interest margins (NIM). Nguyen (2012) utilizes the two-equation simultaneous model of NIM and NonII to deal with the problem of endogenous regressors. This paper further expands to a three-equation simultaneous model, allowing for exploring the nexus among NIM, NonII, and profit stability (measured by the Z-score) for Taiwan's 47 commercial banks spanning the period 2001-2014. The empirical results show that banks with higher NonII have less profit stability, which corresponds to the ”moral hazard” hypothesis. Banks with lower profit stability (Z-score) not only need higher NIM, but also require involvement in more off-balance-sheet activities to earn higher non-interest income. We suggest that bank regulators and banks' managers should focus more on the risk derived from off-balance-sheet activities.起始頁-結束頁：75-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所19篇名：比較利益、異質生產者與內生彈性並列篇名：COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE, HETEROGENEOUS FIRMS AND ENDOGENOUS ELASTICITY作者：徐則謙(Tsechien Hsu)關鍵字：異質生產者;內生加價;產業平均生產力;比較利益;產業內貿易;Heckscher-Ohlin模型;Heterogeneous firms;Endogenous markup;Industrial average productivity;Comparative advantage;Intra-industry trade;Heckscher-Ohlin model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：結合Heckscher-Ohlin與Melitz（2003）的模型特性，Bernard et al.（2007）（BRS）指出，在僅有部份生產者出口的前提下，貿易自由化透過要素的重新分配，會改變產業間之相對生產力，進而放大稟賦差異所產生的比較利益，BRS將之稱為放大效果（magnification effect）。然而實證上研究比較利益如何隨時間改變的文獻，有些呈現各國間比較利益逐漸放大，有些呈現逐漸縮小的結果。本文指出，若考量競爭對加價的影響，當兩產業之要素密集度差異低於一門檻值時，此放大效果隨貿易自由化非單調（non-monotonically）地變動，反之則單調（monotonic）地變動。數值例子顯示，若是非單調地變動，在自由化程度較低時，進一步自由化強化放大效果，但在程度較高時，該效果隨自由化減弱，並在市場完全融合後消失；反之則放大效果隨自由化逐漸下降並消失。此結果呼應實證發現分歧的現象。雖然BRS亦隱含放大效果之減弱，但此結果伴隨所有生產者出口以及絕對生產力逐漸下降至封閉水準，不符過往實證之發現，因此作者並未加以討論。本模型可在產生非單調關係的同時，在此兩點上滿足過去實證的結果。英文摘要：Bernard et al. (2007) (BRS) combine the Heckscher-Ohlin model and the mechanism of Melitz (2003) to show that if not all firms export, trade changes relative industrial productivity and magnifies the Heckscher-Ohlin comparative advantage through factor reallocation. This paper shows that depending on the difference in factor intensity between industries, the magnification effect changes monotonically or non-monotonically with trade liberalization when the mechanism comes from the increase in markup. BRS also mention the possibility of non-monotonicity. However, the decrease in magnification effect accompanies the decrease in industrial productivity and the result that all firms export, which does not coincide with empirical findings. In this paper, the non-monotonicity is not based on firms' export decision, and industrial productivity increases during trade liberalization. The ambiguous relationship between liberalization and comparative advantage also coincides with the recent empirical findings.起始頁-結束頁：125-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：經濟學門學術期刊評比更新：2019年並列篇名：Ranking of Economics Journals: the 2019 Update作者：林明仁(Ming-Jen Lin);林常青(Chang-Ching Lin);張俊仁(Juin-Jen Chang);曹添旺(Tien-Wang Tsaur);楊浩彥(Hao-Yen Yang)關鍵字：期刊排序;引用次數;影響係數;journal ranking;citation frequency;impact factor期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文延續曹添旺等（2013）《經濟論文》的研究，秉持客觀的量化分析與主觀的質化觀點並重的期刊排序分析原則。在考量快速變遷的國際期刊市場之下，針對快速崛起的重要期刊，給予適當的排序。同時，我們也將重新思考國內期刊對學界的重要性，並考量本土議題對台灣經濟及政策的影響，進一步給予國內期刊在期刊評比上新的地位。英文摘要：Following Tsaur, Wang, Lin, Chen, Chang, and Huang (2013), we use both qualitative and quantitative methods to provide an updated ranking of international as well as domestic economics journals. In response to the rapidly changing market of international journals, this update focuses especially on the new rising journals that were not in our previous list. Since local journals are also very important in both the development of local scholars, and the discussion of Taiwanese economic policy issues, we also rank the local journals based on these factors.起始頁-結束頁：503-542資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201912_47(4).00012篇名：Median Location and Economic Geography並列篇名：中間區位與經濟地理作者：蔡智發(Jyh-Fa Tsai)關鍵字：median location;core-periphery model;New Economic Geography;agglomeration;three regions;中間區位;核心邊陲模型;經濟地理;聚集;三區域期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study explores the role of median location in a footloose entrepreneur (FE) version and Helpman's (1998) version of NEG models. Two kinds of location distribution for three regions are considered: One is an equilateral triangle (with no median location). The other is the distribution in which three points are equidistant between two adjacent points on a line (the middle region is the median region). The results show that there are some differences between these two settings. In the setting with no median location, firms will agglomerate at any of the three regions with low transport costs in the FE model and high transport costs in the Helpman model and will equally distribute among the three regions with high transport costs in the FE model and low transport costs in the Helpman model. In the setting with a median location, the symmetric industrial dispersion among the three regions emerges when transport costs are larger than those in the triangle with no median location in the FE model, because the advantage of median location is lost only when transport costs are larger. However, this symmetric dispersion never emerges in the Helpman model unless transport costs approach zero. In the Helpman model, a unique asymmetric distribution at the median location increases from one-third as transport costs increases. This shows that the advantage of median location exists even in the Help-man model, which provides housing services as a major centrifugal force.英文摘要：本研究探討中間區位在NEG模型的隨處資本家（FE）版本與Helpman's（1998）版本中的角色。考慮包含三區域的兩種空間型態：一為等邊三角形（無中間區位）；另一為一線上的三點且相鄰兩點等距（中點的區位為中間區位）。研究結果顯示這兩種型態會有一些差異。在無中間區位的型態中，在FE模型的低運輸成本以及Helpman模型的高運輸成本時，廠商會聚集於任一區域；而在FE模型的高運輸成本以及Helpman模型的低運輸成本時，廠商會平均分布（分散）在三區域。在具中間區位的型態中，廠商分散（對稱分布）的情況在FE模型運輸成本較高（比較無中間區位）時才會出現，因為此時中間區位的優勢才會消失。但是此種對稱分布在Helpman模型中不會出現，除非運輸成本趨近於0。在Helpman模型中，當運輸成本上升時，一個非對稱分布出現且中間區位的廠商比例由1/3遞增，表示在以住宅為主要離心力的Helpman模型中，中間區位的優勢仍然存在。起始頁-結束頁：543-578資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201912_47(4).00023篇名：亞洲主要股市報酬波動的潛在鏈結程度衡量並列篇名：Measuring the Connectedness of Returns and Volatilities in Asian Stock Markets作者：徐士勛(Shih-Hsun Hsu);李佳磬(Jia-Cing Lee)關鍵字：股市報酬率與波動率;廣義預測誤差變異數分解;鏈結指數;外溢效果;網絡佈局圖;Return and Volatility;generalized forecast error variance decomposition;connectedness;spillover effect;connectedness layout期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究根據Diebold and Yilmaz（2014, Journal of Econometrics）所延伸網絡拓樸（network topology）的概念與分析架構，利用向量自我迴歸模型（vector autoregression, VAR）之廣義預測誤差變異數分解（generalized forecast error variance decomposition）的估計結果，在「控制歐美主要股市影響」下，建立了亞洲各股市報酬率及波動率對應的潛在鏈結（connectedness）關係網絡。我們發現（1）亞洲各股市之間的鏈結有越趨緊密的態勢；（2）鏈結指數在金融危機與外生衝擊事件發生時具有較高的數值，此反映危機發生時各股市間更<U+7232>緊密的依存現象；（3）亞洲股市的金融傳導網絡主要以香港和新加坡<U+7232>中心，而中國與俄羅斯股市則與其餘亞洲股市無顯著的鏈結。英文摘要：According to the network topology and the framework proposed by Diebold and Yilmaz (2014), this paper measures the potential connectedness of returns and volatilities among Asian stock markets while controlling for the effects of European and U.S. stock markets. The main findings are (i) the connectedness among Asian stock markets is getting closer in general; (ii) the larger values of the connectedness index are usually observed in the periods of financial crises; (iii) Hong Kong and Singapore play the major roles as far as spillover effects on Asian stock markets are concerned, whereas China and Russia play only minor roles.起始頁-結束頁：579-620資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201912_47(4).00034篇名：調高健保給付對醫療品質之影響：以2005年自然產給付調高為例並列篇名：The Impact of a Raise in Reimbursement: A Payment Increase for Vaginal Delivery in 2005 as an Example作者：連賢明(Hsien-Ming Lien);韓幸紋(Hsing-Wen Han)關鍵字：剖腹產;誘發性需求;醫療品質;cesarean section;induced demand;healthcare quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：2005年5月健保局將自然產給付加倍，調整至與剖腹產給付一致，期望透過自然產給付增加，來降低剖腹產率並改善醫療品質。這自然產給付增加提供了一個檢視給付提高對醫療品質改善機會。本文使用2004與2006年生產案件，以健保給付當作醫師所得的替代變數，醫療品質則以剖腹產率、住院天數、再住院率進行觀察，分析醫師所得增加和醫療品質間因果關係。<U+7232>控制醫療時無法觀察因子，估計時選用初產產婦，並採用「一階差分」方式來排除內生性偏誤。結果顯示給付增加對剖腹產率沒有顯著關係，但原先自然產比例較高醫師剖腹產率卻有降低；另外，自然產再住院率也顯著下降。我們進一步針對幾個解釋剖腹產偏低效果進行檢驗，發現產婦個人偏好剖腹產是一個可能原因。最後，我們發現這給付調整效果並未外溢到同醫院的婦科、兒科治療。英文摘要：In May 2005, Bureau of National Health Insurance doubled the reimbursement for vaginal delivery to the same rate as paid for cesarean section (c-section) in order to reduce the c-section rate and improve the quality of care. This reimbursement adjustment provides an excellent opportunity to examine whether such a payment increase can improve healthcare quality. Using obstetric cases of firstborns in 2004 and 2006 from National Health Insurance Data, this study examines if there was a negative relation between quality indicators (e.g. c-section, re-admission, and length of stay) and doctor's income, measured in terms of payments paid by NHI for baby delivery. To control for the endogenous bias, the study employs ”first-difference” methods to attenuate the bias arising from unobserved factors, and restricts the sample to firstborn babies. Our results indicate that the doctor's income and c-section rate is statistically uncorrelated on the whole, but negatively related for doctors who previously had a lower percentage of c-sections. Additionally, we found the payment reduces both the 14 and 30 days re-admission after vaginal delivery. Furthermore, the analysis indicates that one explanation- a c-section is preferred by women for the sake of personal reasons- is largely consistent with our empirical findings. Finally, we found the effect of the payment increase did not spill over to gynecology or pediatric services in the same hospital.起始頁-結束頁：621-664資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201912_47(4).00045篇名：Public Information and Information Aggregation in Committees並列篇名：公開訊息對投票行為影響之探討作者：吳震台(Cheng-Tai Wu)關鍵字：strategic voting;public information;Condorcet jury theorem;策略性的投票;公開訊息;Condorcet jury theorem期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：We investigate how public information affects the voting behavior of the voters and the error (information efficiency) of the equilibrium decision of a committee. The influence of public information on efficiency can be decomposed into the information effect and the equilibrium effect. Public information provides an extra piece of information that helps the voters better match their votes with the received signals, and hence may reduce the error. However, it also affects the equilibrium behavior of the strategic voters, and this may increase the error. We show that for any non-unanimous voting rule, when the precision of public information is marginally higher than that of private information, the information effect is negligible, while the equilibrium effect has negative impact on efficiency. Hence, public information with low precision may make the decision of the committee worse. By contrast, for the unanimous rule, the equilibrium effect has positive impact and public information will always improve the efficiency. Furthermore, we find that the existence of non-strategic voters may cause asymptotic inefficiency when the voting rule is too stringent in the sense that it is far away from the simple majority rule. Public information can de facto alter the voting rule to be less stringent through its influence on the votes of the non-strategic voters. Thus, the efficiency can be improved.英文摘要：本文探討公開訊息（public information）如何影響投票行<U+7232>及結果。其影響可以分解成訊息效果（the information effect）和均衡效果（the equilibrium effect）。公開訊息一方面提供額外的訊息，讓投票者做出較好的決。另一方面，由於策略性的投票，公開訊息會影響投票者的均衡行<U+7232>。我們發現，對任何非全體決的投票規則（non-unanimous voting rules），當公開訊息的準確度（the precision of public information）低時，訊息效果可以忽略，但是均衡效果會產生負面的影響，因此，公開訊息反而會讓投票結果的錯誤增加。相反的，在全體決下（the unanimous voting rule），均衡效果的影響是正面的，因此，公開訊息會改善投票的結果。我們進一步探討非策略性投票者（non-strategic voters）對投票結果的影響，當存在這些投票者時，公開訊息實質上（de facto）改變了現存的投票規則，如果這個改變讓實質的規則更接近最適的投票規則，公開訊息就會改善投票的結果。起始頁-結束頁：321-361資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201909_47(3).00016篇名：美國聯準會會議紀要的文字探勘與台灣經濟變數預測並列篇名：Text Mining of the FOMC Minutes and Forecasts of Taiwan Economic Variables作者：黃裕烈(Yu-Lieh Huang);管中閔(Chung-Ming Kuan)關鍵字：文字探勘;美國聯邦公開市場委員;主題模型;情緒分析;federal Open Market Committee;sentiment analysis;text mining;topic models期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文利用文字探勘的技巧，從美國聯邦公開市場委員會（Federal Open Market Committee,簡稱FOMC）所發表的正式官方文件：minutes of the FOMC中萃取出重要的資訊，再利用情緒分析來判斷FOMC對三大經濟「使命」的正／負面看法，並建立指標，以預測台灣的財經相關變數。相較於之前的文獻，本文統一FOMC常用的專門術語，並且考慮了複合字的情況；這可以避免後續在計算文字字數時，產生重覆計算以及語意錯誤的情況。我們也利用統計模型（MAP-PLSA）將每一份文件中的句子依據FOMC的經濟使命分成三個主題，再利用情緒分析技巧，建立各類主題的指標數列。最後，我們以迴歸模型來分析情緒指標與台灣相關財經變數之間的關聯性。英文摘要：In this paper we extract useful information from the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and examine how such information can help predict economic/financial variables. Based on the minutes during 1993-2016, we conduct sentiment analysis to determine the FOMC's attitude towards different topics, i.e., the mandates of the FED. Our approach is different from related studies in the following respects. First, we identify compound words which carry more specific meaning than do single words. Second, we adopt the topic model, MAP-PLSA, for estimating the conditional probabilities of these words/terms, which in turn can be used to classify sentences in the minutes under different topics. Third, the attitude towards each topic is determined by the ”tone” of its sentences. We then proceed to evaluate whether the FOMC's attitude towards different topics can be used to improve economic forecasts.起始頁-結束頁：363-391資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201909_47(3).00027篇名：論家戶所得與資產對子女教育之影響－以1993-1995出生世代及其父母稅務資料為例並列篇名：Education Opportunity Inequality Across Income in Taiwan作者：沈暉智(Hui-Chih Shen);林明仁(Ming-Jen Lin)關鍵字：代際所得流動;反向所得重分配;家庭背景;高等教育;intergeneration mobility;reversed income redistribution;family background;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文探討親代所得與資產如何影響子代教育取得之機會。分析財稅資料中心2000-2015年之母體層級稅務資料，串連親代所得、資產及子代的就學資料後，發現家戶所得及資產與高等教育的就讀機會呈高度相關。台灣大學與公立學校的學生家戶年所得中位數分別超過150、100萬元，遠高於全體樣本中位數86萬元。進一步檢視各大專院校及學制的資產分佈，則凸顯不同學制間鉅額的財富差距及代際流動於教育管道的僵固。最後，各校每生平均教育經費支出與學生家戶所得組成間的正向關係，也凸顯了政府的教育經費補貼其實是反向重分配的事實。英文摘要：This paper explores intergenerational income mobility through the education channel. We use 2000-2015 household income data provided by the Fiscal Information Agency. We find a strong correlation between household income and access to higher education. The median of yearly household income in the full sample is 0.86 million NTD, while the medians among National Taiwan University students and public university students are higher than 1.5 and 1 million NTD respectively. We look into asset distribution in every education category, finding a huge amount of wealth inequality and rigidity of intergenerational mobility. The positive correlation between education subsidy and students' household income shows that government subsidy may lead to income redistribution from the poor to the rich.起始頁-結束頁：393-453資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201909_47(3).00038篇名：姓名筆劃數吉凶與運勢並列篇名：Luck of Chinese Name Strokes and Fate作者：陶宏麟(Hung-Lin Tao)關鍵字：姓名筆劃;術數;自我實踐;教育;快樂;chinese name stroke;occult;self-fulfilling;education;happiness期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文採用2014年「華人家庭動態資料庫」，發現台灣人在命名前採用姓名筆劃術數已越來越普遍。教育程度越高，採用姓名筆劃術數比例越高，要到父母教育程度大學及以上，採用的比例才會下降。如果以快樂、主觀健康、婚姻狀況、受教育年數、所得代表運勢，這些運勢都與隨機姓名筆劃的總格吉凶無關，前三項運勢也與算過筆劃與否無關，教育年數與吉祥姓名筆劃雖正相關，但在控制算過與父母對子女教育投資（遷過戶口與國中有補習）則無關，顯示父母的自我實踐。所得只有在不考慮教育時，才與算過筆劃與否有關，顯示算過與否是透過教育與所得相關。英文摘要：Using the Panel Study of Family Dynamics (PSFD) 2014, this study finds that more and more young Taiwanese believe in the occult nature of the number of strokes in Chinese characters. Education does not reduce this belief. Unless individual's educational attainment is higher than or equal to a college degree, education actually encourages the belief. Using happiness, health status, marital status, educational attainment, and income to represent fate, one's fate is not associated with the number of strokes in one's Chinese name. The former three types of fate are not correlated with the number of Chinese name strokes. Educational attainment is positively associated with the degree of luck in the number of Chinese name strokes. This relation disappears, however when the manipulation of Chinese name strokes and parents' investment in children are controlled, indicating a self-fulfilling prophecy. Income is correlated with lucky number of strokes only when education is dropped, suggesting that the number of strokes is correlated with income through education.起始頁-結束頁：455-502資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201909_47(3).00049篇名：Predicting House Prices with Real-Estate-Related Stocks並列篇名：使用房地產相關股票之價格預測房價作者：林姿妤(Tzu-Yu Lin)關鍵字：real-estate-related stock prices;house prices;in-and out-of-sample prediction;房地產相關之股票價格;房價;樣本內與樣本外預測期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：This paper investigates the forecasting content of real-estate-related stock prices for house prices. Using both in- and out-of-sample tests, this paper shows that real-estate-related stock price indices have extremely robust power in predicting US house prices. The empirical results are highly valuable for investors and policy makers because real-estate-related stock prices are shown to be a reliable predictor reflecting timely market information and are readily available to forecast real estate market movements.英文摘要：本文探討房地產相關股票之價格是否有助於預測房價。透過樣本內與樣本外預測分析，結果發現，房地產相關股票的價格對於美國房價的預測表現極佳。根據此實證結果，由於股票價格可及時反應市場資訊，且無資料修正問題，因此對於投資人及政策制定者而言，房地產相關股票之價格不失為房價之良好預測指標。起始頁-結束頁：159-182資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201906_47(2).000110篇名：生產力差異下的國際通貨與貨幣政策效果並列篇名：International Currency and Monetary Policy in a Model with Heterogeneous Productivity作者：李映萱(Ying-Syuan Li);李怡庭(Yiting Li)關鍵字：國際通貨;生產力異質性;兩國兩貨幣搜尋模型;貨幣政策;international currency;heterogeneity in productivity;two-country two-currency search monetary model;monetary policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文使用搜尋模型探討生產效率如何影響一國貨幣的國際地位，以及國際通貨發行國貨幣政策的效果。當一國市場規模夠大且通膨率低，該國生產力提高有助於其貨幣成為國際通貨。美國作為國際通貨發行國，若生產力高於他國，美元通膨上升將使兩國福利降低，且美國福利受損程度較大，兩國福利差距縮小。他國因生產劣勢使其境內生產者福利遠低於消費者，美國通膨政策將使他國消費者支付更多鑄幣稅,縮小其與生產者的福利差距。若他國生產力較美國高，則美元通膨上升反而擴大兩國福利差距，也惡化了他國境內的福利分配。因此，美國實施寬鬆貨幣政策對其他國家的影響將視其他國家與美國生產力差異程度而定。英文摘要：We construct a two-country two-currency search monetary model to study how improved productivity in a country affects the circulation of its currency, and the monetary policy implications. Increased productivity in a country helps its currency circulate internationally, and this is more likely to occur if its market size is large and inflation rate is low. If the issuer of the international currency (e.g., the U.S.) has higher productivity, it enjoys higher welfare than the other country. In the local currency issuing country, the welfare of its producers is lower than that of consumers, due to the productivity disadvantage. Higher inflation of the international currency results in different impacts between countries, and across different types of agents in the other country: First, it reduces welfare in both countries, with the international currency issuing country suffering higher welfare loss; second, it hurts consumers more than producers in the other country, and thereby reduces the welfare differential, because consumers need to pay more seignior-age taxes. If the local currency issuing country has higher productivity, it enjoys higher welfare than the international currency issuer. Higher inflation of the international currency thus increases welfare differences between the two countries, and also worsens the distribution of welfare in the other country. Monetary policy implications thus depend on heterogeneity in productivity.起始頁-結束頁：183-215資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201906_47(2).000211篇名：台灣親子教育跨代移轉機制之研究並列篇名：On the Intergenerational Transmission of Parental Education and Learning Achievement to their Children: A Study based on Taiwan Data作者：徐美(Mei Hsu);陳明郎(Been-Lon Chen)關鍵字：分量迴歸模型;教育跨代移轉;教育差異;台灣<U+654E>育長期追蹤資料庫;quantile regression model;intergenerational transmission in education;differential in educational attainment;TEPS期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以分量迴歸模型，運用「台灣<U+654E>育長期追蹤資料庫」探究親子教育跨代移轉之假說，並研究父母親教育以及親代教育程度差距，對於子女在校學習能力測驗分數分配變動影響。分量迴歸研究不僅顯示在同一條分數分配上，父母親教育差距衝擊不同分量上子女學習之成效，並可影響子女分數分配之高低差異，這是本研究特色。實證結果顯示，父母親<U+654E>育對子女在校學習成就具有顯著正向的影響，證實親子教育跨代移轉機制的存在。學歷越高的父親對於國中子女成績影響越大，子女成績分配之分量位置就越高。父親教育差異造成子女分數分配之差距，國中子女分數分配在低分量上差距大，在高分量上差距小，但擴大了高中子女在高分量上的成績差異。高中子女成績受到父親學歷影響較大，國中子女成績則受到母親學歷影響較高。研究所及以上學歷母親，子女在高分量上成績表現優異。比較相同教育父親和母親，母親對高、國中子女數學成績在高分量上的影響遠超過父親。英文摘要：Utilizing more efficient estimators from quantile regression models and the reactions in quantile of the whole distribution, we analyze the systematic differences in intergenerational education correlations across the conditional quantiles of pupils' test scores. The key question is whether the bottom of the test score distribution looks different than the top. Our empirical evidence indicates a strong intergenerational transmission of educational inequalities between parental education levels and junior and senior school pupils' learning achievements. Parents with higher education affects pupil's learning in significantly positive ways. The differentials in senior and junior high school pupils' score distribution are positively associated to their father's education. Although these differentials persist in the high tail of these pupils' score distribution, there is convergence in the high tail of junior high school pupils' score distribution. The mother's education has a significantly higher influence on the learning distribution of junior high school pupils' score. By contrast, a father's education has a stronger impact on the learning distribution of senior high counterparts. Given a father, with the same education, a mother significantly and positively affects both junior and senior high school pupils' mathematics scores in the high end of the distribution.起始頁-結束頁：217-272資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201906_47(2).000312篇名：考慮單調性與曲度於貝氏隨機方向距離函數以衡量生產效率並列篇名：Imposing Monotonicity and Curvature Conditions on the Bayesian Stochastic Directional Distance Function to Measure Efficiencies作者：黃台心(Tai-Hsin Huang);林嘉偉(Chia-Wei Lin);胡聚男(Chu-Nan Hu)關鍵字：貝氏方法;方向距離函數;非意欲產出;單調性與曲度;Bayesian approach;directional distance function;undesirables;monotonicity and curvature期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以貝氏方法估計隨機方向距離函數，加入單調性與曲度等限制條件，並連結無效率項與環境變數。為突顯包含非意欲產出的方向距離函數之優點，本文同時估計產出面距離函數，並與方向距離函數之結果比較。實證分析資料為1970至2010年各國總體經濟變數，分別在有無加入限制條件與環境變數的設定下，估計兩種距離函數，從效率分數與技術進步率等角度，分析兩種函數的差異。發現產出面距離函數因忽略非意欲產出，傾向高估各國的技術效率與低估技術進步率；而同時加入限制條件與環境變數的方向距離函數，估計結果最為合理。英文摘要：This paper applies the Bayesian approach to estimate the directional distance function (DDF) with the imposition of monotonicity and curvature, using national data covering 1970-2010. The inefficiency term is further specified as a function of several environmental variables. The salient feature of DDF is its ability to take undesirables into account. For the purpose of comparison we also estimate the output distance function. Evidence is found that the output distance function tends to overestimate the measure of technical efficiency and underestimate the rate of technical change. DDF that imposes monotonicity and curvature is found to be superior to the output distance function in terms of estimated efficiency scores and the rate of technical progress.起始頁-結束頁：273-320資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201906_47(2).000413篇名：A Nonlinear View of Long-Run PPP Using Cross-Sectionally Dependent Heterogeneous Panels並列篇名：非線性長期購買力平價說：使用橫斷面相依異質追蹤資料的檢定作者：陳奕奇(Yi-Chi Chen);林常青(Chang-Ching Lin);冼芻蕘(Chor-yiu Sin)關鍵字：asymmetric adjustment;cross-sectional dependence;long-run PPP;real exchange rate;threshold autoregression (TAR);不對稱調整;橫斷面相依性;長期購買力平價;實質匯率;門檻自我迴歸期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Empirical studies have flourished on long-run PPP using panel unit root tests, which supposedly have high power. In this paper, we adopt, in a panel data context, a nonlinear multiple-regime model, namely Threshold Autoregression (TAR), and perform a panel unit root test for each regime in the TAR. This new procedure takes advantage of two existing approaches: the inference for a TAR model with a unit root, and the panel unit root tests with the augmented panel Dickey-Fuller regression. The real exchange rate dynamics in a panel of 17 OECD countries over the recent floating exchange rate period are investigated. Three distinct regimes are identified. In particular, the support for long-run PPP is much stronger in the post-Maastricht-Treaty period than the period before; in the pre- Maastricht-Treaty period, there is some evidence for long-run PPP when the sterling-dollar appreciated, while the evidence is weak when the sterling-dollar depreciated. Our results are robust to expanding the data set to 2012, using the euro foreign exchange reference rates.英文摘要：過去相當多研究長期購買力平價說（PPP）的文獻，在進行單根檢定時，俱使用追蹤資料以提升其檢定力。本文在橫斷面相依之追蹤資料架構下，採用非線性門檻自我迴歸（TAR）模型，並針對不同匯率狀態進行追蹤資料的單根檢定。我們提出一個嶄新檢定程序，結合兩種現有方法的優點：（一）單根下TAR模型的統計推論，以及（二）擴展的Dickey-Fuller追蹤資料迴歸式的單根檢定。本文分析資料包含17個OECD國家在近期浮動匯率期間的實質匯率。結果發現三個不同的匯率狀態，特別是在馬斯垂克條約（Maastricht Treaty）後期，支持長期購買力平價的證據較<U+7232>強烈；在馬斯垂克條約前期，當英鎊（兌美元）升值時，存在一些長期購買力平價的證據，然而在英鎊貶值時，證據較<U+7232>薄弱。即使將資料延長至2012年，這些實證結果仍具穩健性。起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201903_47(1).000114篇名：台灣匯率貶值政策之探討並列篇名：Exchange Rate Undervaluation Policy in Taiwan作者：陳旭昇(Shiu-Sheng Chen)關鍵字：中央銀行;匯率貶值政策;central bank;exchange rate undervaluation policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文檢視台灣中央銀行自1998－2010年間的匯率貶值政策，目的在於釐清台灣央行是否執行匯率貶值政策，並進一步檢討匯率貶值政策與經濟成長，產業發展，利率政策，房屋價格以及財政收支結構之關係。整體而言，我們說明了台灣央行自1998－2010年間的匯率貶值政策對於台灣經濟可能造成諸多的負面影響。我們建議，央行的貨幣政策必須改弦易張，揚棄匯率貶值政策，並且應減少外匯市場干預與增加匯率政策的透明度與可究責性。英文摘要：This paper investigates the exchange rate undervaluation policy in Taiwan since 1998. We examine how currency undervaluation affects economic growth, industrial upgrading, monetary policy, house prices, and fiscal structure. Overall, we argue that the undervaluation policy adopted by the Central Bank of Taiwan has several negative impacts on Taiwan's economy. It is suggested that the Central Bank of Taiwan should discard the undervaluation policy. The authorities should move towards a more fully market-determined exchange rate, reduce foreign exchange interventions, and increase the transparency and accountability of exchange rate policy.起始頁-結束頁：41-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201903_47(1).000215篇名：酒駕罰則是否有效抑制酒駕？中斷點迴歸設計的應用並列篇名：Does Legal Punishment of Drunk Driving Deter Alcohol-Involved Traffic Accidents? An Application of the Regression Discontinuity Approach作者：蔡偉德(Wei-Der Tsai)關鍵字：中斷點迴歸線設計;刑法185條第3款;道路交通管理處罰條例第35條;道路交通安全規則第114條;regression discontinuity design;Article 185-3 of Criminal Code;Section 35 of Statute Governing Road Traffic;Article 114 of Rules of Road Traffic Safety期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究利用92－102年交通事故調查報告表的資料，及中斷點迴歸設計（RDD）的分析方法，探討97－102年之間酒駕罰則的4次修法對抑制酒駕交通事故的成效。實證結果發現只有102年6月13日同日施行的新修訂刑法185－3及道路交通安全規則第114條，顯著降低酒駕事故的占率約2.8個百分點（是修法前酒駕事故占率均值的44.73%），主要的原因<U+7232>刑事處罰的酒測值門檻入刑法，以及行政處罰酒駕的酒測值門檻降低；而此修法對機車和小客車車主的嚇阻作用並無明顯差別。該次的修法呈現外溢效果，同時顯著降低全台每日喝酒駕車（酒測值大於零，包含未超標酒駕者）事故件數約28件，以及交通事故件數約69件。本文的研究結果將提供修訂酒駕政策的參考。英文摘要：This study examines the effects of the statutory changes in drunk driving penalties on the incidence of alcohol-involved traffic accidents. During 2003-2013, several regulatory changes regarding the punishment for drunk driving were implemented, aiming to deter driving after drinking via raising the fine, extending the license suspension period and adding jail time, etc. Employing the regression discontinuity design, we empirically investigate whether the four statutory changes have effects on the deterrence of alcohol-related traffic accidents, leading to a lower ratio of drunk-driving traffic accidents to total road accidents. Our empirical results indicate that only the last statutory change of Article 185-3 of the Criminal Code, significantly reduced the ratio of drunk driving accidents. That statutory change also had spillover effects, lessening both the number of alcohol-related traffic accidents and the total number of road accidents. Two changes contributed to the drunk-driving reducing effects. One is the insertion of the BrAC/BAC legal level in the statute of the Criminal Code. The other is the lowering of the BrAC/BAC criteria for administrative penalties for drunk driving. Our empirical results provide implications for policy aiming to ban drunk driving.起始頁-結束頁：75-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201903_47(1).000316篇名：媒體報導對防疫管制的影響：以H1N1為例並列篇名：The Impact of Media Coverage on Epidemic Control: Evidence from the Case of H1N1 in Taiwan作者：連賢明(Hsien-Ming Lien);黃勢璋(Shih-Chang Huang);簡毓寧(Yu-Ning Chien)關鍵字：媒體報導;防疫管制;差異中的差異;H1N1疫苗;楊志良;media coverage;epidemic control;difference-in-differences;H1N1 vaccine;Chih-Liang Yang期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：47卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：我國在2009年為防制H1N1疫情蔓延後，推動大規模疫苗接種。但劉小弟接種疫苗後死亡事件，爆發泛綠媒體對疫苗安全強力質疑。衛生部長楊志良隨即抨擊媒體報導將危害國人健康。由於學齡前幼兒接種需打兩劑疫苗，且中間間隔4週，才能提供足夠保護效果。本文因而使用健保資料建構1－6歲幼兒疫苗施打記錄, 著重媒體報導對第二記疫苗（劉小弟事件後）施打比例，來估計媒體報導對疫苗接種的效果。基於泛綠媒體在農業地區的收視率較高，我們採用採差異中差異法模型，透過農、公保家庭小孩估計媒體報導的擴散效果。結果發現媒體報導降低幼兒疫苗如期接種率約為12－22%。DD估計則說明媒體報導具擴散效果。但住院重症率有可能在媒體廣為宣傳下，反而獲得妥善控制。英文摘要：To prevent the spread of the H1N1 pandemic in 2009, the Taiwanese government launched a large-scale H1N1 vaccination campaign. However, the death of ”Liu Xiaodi” after vaccination triggered a pan-green media questioning of the safety of the vaccine. In response, Minister of Health, Dr. Yang, criticized irresponsible media reports that would endanger Taiwanese heath. Because vaccines for preschool children require two doses, with a four-week gap, to ensure sufficient protection, we thus employed the National Health Insurance dataset to obtain vaccination records for children aged between 1 and 6, and used the second dose vaccination rate (after the Liu Xiaodi incident) to investigate the impact of the media effect. Given that the pan-green media has a higher rating in agriculture counties, we also employ the DD method to compare the second dose rate of children covered by public employee insurance and farmer insurance. Our estimates indicate a large reduction in the second dose vaccination rate, ranging from 12% to 22%. Results of DD estimation also confirms the presence of spillover effects. Finally, the reduction of the vaccination rate significantly decreases, not increases, the hospital admission rate due to H1N1. We suspect that the media coverage unexpectedly lowered the H1N1 infection rate.起始頁-結束頁：127-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.201903_47(1).000401篇名：應用HQKMS-DMAIC方法論建立醫療品質指標管理機制並列篇名：Application of HQKMS-DMAIC Methodology for Establishing a Mechanism of Medical Quality Management作者：鄭雅穗(Ya-Suey Cheng);盧以詮(Yi-Chuan Lu);鄭雅文(Ya-Wen Cheng);李松澤(Sung-Tse Li)關鍵字：財務知識管理系統;HQKMS-DMAIC方法論;醫療品質指標管理;管制圖;FKMS;HQKMS-DMAIC methodology;medical quality indicator management;control chart期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：21卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：醫療品質指標是評值與衡量醫療品質的重要工具，近年來為提升台灣醫療品質，屬台灣的醫療品質指標系統正如火如荼發展中。本文以HQKMS-DMAIC方法論建立醫療品質指標管理機制：「定義」以TCPI要素為基準，整合TCPI、QIP與P4P系統之資料要素；「衡量」以管制圖與同儕資料作為衡量工具；「分析」以落於管制圖+2SD或+3SD之外為判讀規則之標準；「改善」依管制圖判讀規則之標準、指標監測議題之重要性與急迫性決定；「控制」為持續監測、追蹤品質之穩定性。應用HQKMS-DMAIC方法論建立之管理機制，有助落實醫療品質指標監測日常化，不但有助病人安全的保障，改善醫病關係，更可促進醫療品質不斷提升與精進。英文摘要：Medical quality indicators are keys to evaluate the performance of medical quality. We proposed a ”hospital quality knowledge management system” (HQKMS), where the DMAIC methodology was implemented for medical quality management. In the HQKMS-DMAIC process, first in the ”Define” phase, all medical quality indicators such as TCPI, QIP and P4P are defined to be the core data sets for quality performance measures. Secondly, in the ”Measure” phase, control charts and the measurement unit for benchmark are determined as knowledge sets by professional users. In the ”Analyze” phase, the system shows signals where there seems to have significant changes in one of the major indicators, or to have urgent attention or actions taken. Relevant solutions and decisions follow immediately in the ”Improve” stage, to help the hospital quality management team achieve the desired objectives. Finally, in the ”Control” phase, continuous monitoring and tracking the performance indicators by the HQKMS ensure the service quality and stability.起始頁-結束頁：147-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201912_21(2).00012篇名：相似的人在臉書上發佈的遊記溝通效果較好－涉入與社交情境的調節效果並列篇名：Enhanced Communication Effect of Travel Notes Similar Facebook Users Post- Involvement and Social Context as Moderators作者：蔡佳靜(Chia-Ching Tsai);張雅霓(Ya-Ni Chang)關鍵字：Facebook發文者;來源相似性;涉入程度;社交情境;溝通效果;Facebook users;resource similarity;involvement;social context;communication effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：21卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究共進行兩個2×2的因子設計，分別探討Facebook發文者來源相似性與涉入程度，以及Facebook發文者來源相似性與社交情境對購買意圖的影響。研究結果如下：（1）來源相似性高組的購買意圖顯著高於來源相似性低組。（2）高涉入組的購買意圖顯著高於低涉入組。（3）來源相似性和涉入程度對購買意圖有顯著的交互作用，亦即高涉入時，來源相似性對購買意圖無顯著影響，而低涉入時，來源相似性高組的購買意圖顯著大於來源相似性低組。（4）來源相似性和社交情境對購買意圖有顯著的交互作用，亦即在離線的情況下，來源相似性高組的購買意圖顯著大於來源相似性低組，而在線上的情況下，來源相似性對購買意圖無顯著影響。英文摘要：The study conducted two 2×2 factorial designs to investigate the effect of resource similarity and level of involvement of Facebook users on purchase intention and the effect of resource similarity and social context of Facebook users on purchase intention. The results are presented below. First, the purchase intention of high resource similarity is significantly greater. Second, the purchase intention of high-involvement is significantly greater. Third, resource similarity and involvement level have a significant interactive effect on purchase intention. Essentially, for high involvement level, resource similarity has no significant effect on purchase intention, while for low involvement level, the purchase intention of high resource similarity is significantly greater. Fourth, resource similarity and social context have a significant interactive effect on purchase intention. Essentially, in the offline context, the purchase intention of highly similar Facebook users is significantly greater, while in the online context, resource similarity has no significant effect on purchase intention.起始頁-結束頁：171-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201912_21(2).00023篇名：電子化企業策略與資訊科技能力之配適對競爭優勢之影響並列篇名：The Effect of Alignment between Electronic Business Strategy and Information Technology Capabilities on Competitive Advantage作者：陳岳陽(Yue-Yang Chen);孫思源(Szu-Yuan Sun);陳昌源(Chang-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：電子化企業策略;資訊科技能力;競爭優勢;配適;e-Business strategy;IT capabilities;competitive advantages;alignment期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：21卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：在競爭激烈的產業環境下，企業需要尋找最適合自己的資訊科技與網際網路系統，才能成就完善的電子化企業。因此，採用適宜的電子化企業策略，並盱衡自身的資訊科技能力加以投資，已儼然成為電子化企業追求持續競爭優勢的關鍵指標。本研究著眼於配適觀點，透過共變異模型、構型離差模型與型態模型三種配適的理論分析，論證電子化企業策略與資訊科技能力兩者的配適績效意涵。以問卷調查法，針對台灣1350大製造業收集資料，共回收107份有效樣本。研究結果顯示電子化企業策略與資訊科技能力之良好配適對於競爭優勢有顯著地影響。本研究建議電子化企業在提升資訊科技的能力時，需兼顧策略上的配合，使整體資源能夠互相搭配，以創造電子化的優勢。英文摘要：In highly competitive environments, firms must explore and exploit advanced information technology (IT) and Internet-based systems to become electronic businesses (e-Businesses). Thus, adopting the appropriate e-Business strategy to match a firm's IT capabilities has become critical to attaining sustainable competitive advantage. Drawing on the alignment perspective, an alignment model is developed to identify the implications of IT performance for business competitive advantage. The results of the e-Business-IT alignment model will not only provide definitive answers regarding the nature of e-Business but also provide guidance for strategic IT/IS management practices. Empirical data used to test the research model were collected from top manufacturing companies in Taiwan, yielding 107 valid samples. The results showed that the alignment of e-Business strategy and IT capabilities has a significant impact on competitive advantage and means that, to create maximum benefits, an e-Business company needs to focus on the optimal strategy and strive to complement it with the development of technological capabilities through complementary resources.起始頁-結束頁：195-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201912_21(2).00034篇名：應用深度學習技術於網路虛假評論偵測並列篇名：Applying Deep Learning Techniques for Fake Review Detection作者：鄭麗珍(Li-Chen Cheng);江彥孟(Yan-Meng Chiang);游政憲(Cheng-Hsien Yu)關鍵字：假評論;文字探勘;深度學習;Fake review;text mining;deep learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：21卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：網際網路蓬勃發展使得電子商務成為消費者重要的採購媒介。消費者為了取得商品的資訊，會到重要的購物論壇或是討論群組閱讀其他消費者的評論心得。這也使得網路的評論對消費者的採購決策有很大影響力和重要性。企業花錢聘用特定的寫手撰寫對自己有利的評論，不肖廠商更聘用寫手散播不利對手的評論。這些虛假評論會誤導消費者也會傷害商品製造商。過去研究都指出這些虛假評論真假難辨。本研究將採用深度學習技術與傳統文字探勘的技術來比較識別虛假評論的內容的效果，資料前處理用傳統與深度學習的技術，機器學習使用了多種傳統與深度學習的模型，來建構識別虛假評論的分類器，本研究實驗將使用過去學者所提出的台灣知名論壇虛假評論真實資料集。英文摘要：E commerce becomes an important channel for consumers to purchase product. Online reviews are an important information resource for consumes before making a purchase. Users always browse online forum that are posted to share post-purchase experiences of products and services. However, the fake reviews in the online forum are harmful to consumers who might buy misrepresented products. Consumers can't identify authentic and fake reviews. This study proposed a novel framework to detect fake reviews which integrated several techniques. There are traditional text mining techniques to deal with textual data including bag-of-words, latent semantic analysis and word2vec for word representation. Next, we used machine learning to train the model to detect fake review, including SVM, deep neural network (DNN), convolutional neural network (CNN) and long short-term memory (LSTM). Finally, we evaluated the performance in a real dataset.起始頁-結束頁：229-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201912_21(2).00045篇名：Stickiness on a Mobile Instant Messaging Service: Perspective of Consumption Value Theory, Flow, and Social Influence Theory並列篇名：行動即時通訊服務黏著度：消費價值理論、沈浸與社會影響理論觀點作者：鄭菲菲(Fei-Fei Cheng);吳金山(Chin-Shan Wu);張榮庭(Arthur Jung-Ting Chang);林加敏(Chia-Min Lin)關鍵字：Mobile instant messaging (MIM) service;consumption value theory;perceived value;social influence;stickiness;行動即時通訊服務;消費價值理論;知覺價值;社會影響;黏著度期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Smartphones have become mainstream products, especially for apps that create diverse content and can generate new business models. The mobile instant messaging (MIM) service is one the most frequently used apps. It not only changes communication behavior but also creates new approaches toward business. Therefore, the current study aims to examine the predictors of stickiness of an MIM service among smartphone users. The research framework was based on the theory of consumption value, perceived value, and social influence theory, with the objective to evaluate why people stick to the MIM service. Data collected from 495 valid respondents were analyzed using the structural equation model (SEM). The results indicated that consumption value and social environment both affect the continued usage intention for MIM services. Moreover, this study shows that social influence is the main prompt for continued use as well as stickiness behavior.英文摘要：智慧型手機已成為目前手機巿場的主流產品，尤其在應用程式（apps）的多元發展趨勢下，產生許多新的商業模式。行動即時通訊（Mobile instant messaging, MIM）服務是近年來蓬勃發展的應用程式之一，它不但改變了人們的溝通行為，同時也為企業帶來新的服務契機。因此，本研究主要在探討智慧型手機使用者在行動即時通訊服務黏著度的影響因素。研究架構是以消費價值理論、沈浸與社會影響理論為基礎，主要目的在於探討人們為何「黏」在某些行動即時通訊服務上。本研究共蒐集了495份資料，並以結構方程模式進行資料分析。研究結果顯示消費價值及社會環境都會影響人們持續使用行動即時通訊服務的意圖。此外，本研究亦顯示社會影響是消費者持續「黏」在行動即時通訊服務的主要原因。起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201906_21(1).00016篇名：行動遊戲應用程式廣告呈現形式與社交元素之廣告效果研究並列篇名：The Advertising Effects of Ad Formats and Social Elements on Mobile Game Applications作者：湯夢涵(Meng-Han Tang);林慧斐(Hui-Fei Lin);林佩錡(Pei-Chih Lin)關鍵字：行動應用程式;行動廣告;社交元素;沉浸經驗;廣告效果;Mobile application;mobile advertisement;flow experience;social elements;advertising effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：行動遊戲應用程式廣告近年來漸受廣告代理商青睞，本研究以沉浸經驗為依據，將行動遊戲分為沉浸程度高及沉浸程度低兩種，來探討行動遊戲應用程式廣告的廣告呈現形式（彈出式廣告vs.橫幅廣告）及廣告社交元素（有社交元素vs.無社交元素）對廣告效果之影響。此研究以2×2×2因子的組間設計進行實驗，統計結果顯示，行動遊戲應用程式廣告之廣告呈現形式與廣告社交元素分別對廣告記憶、點選意願、廣告態度以及下載意圖有顯著之影響。而廣告呈現形式與廣告社交元素以及廣告社交元素與遊戲沉浸經驗在廣告記憶、點選意願以及廣告態度的影響中分別有交互效果影響。英文摘要：In recent years, mobile game applications are increasingly gaining attention from advertising agencies. Using flow experience as the research framework, the purpose of this study is to compare the persuasion effects of different advertising formats (pop-up versus banner ad) and the presence of social elements on persuasion, across mobile games with high and low game flows. A 2x2x2 between-subject experimental design was conducted. The results indicate that both formats and social elements of mobile game applications have significant influences on advertisement retention, click intention, attitude toward advertisements and download intention. In addition, under the influence of advertisement retention, click intention and attitude toward advertisements, there are interactional effects between ad formats and social elements, as well as between social elements and game flow experience.起始頁-結束頁：29-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201906_21(1).00027篇名：物聯網環境下企業風險管理與內部控制稽核機制之研究並列篇名：Enterprise Risk Management and Auditing Mechanism of Internal Control for IoT Governance作者：張碩毅(She-I Chang);張麗敏(Li-Min Chang);萬貴然(Grand Wan);廖展群(Jhan-Cyun Liao)關鍵字：物聯網;企業風險管理;IT治理;內部控制;稽核機制;Internet of Things (IoT);enterprise risk management;IT governance;auditing mechanism;internal control期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究目的為發展物聯網環境下企業風險管理與內部控制稽核機制。在質性研究法及Gowin's Vee知識地圖的基礎下，首先透過文獻探討的方式整理物聯網環境風險因子與內部控制稽核項目；各類風險因子與稽核項目，在企業交叉風險及COSO內部控制整合框架的對應下產生問卷雛型，並透過德爾菲專家問卷的訪談來修正問卷。其次，本研究運用國際內部稽核協會（IIA）所建立的三道防線及能力成熟度整合模型（CMMI）之概念，來進一步發展稽核流程與評估方法。最後，本研究以三家公司來進行個案實證，以驗證所產出的稽核機制被運用在企業內部控制稽核的可行性。本研究成果可貢獻於學術界強化質性研究知識，與實務界在物聯網環境下實施企業風險管理與內部控制稽核之參考。英文摘要：The aim of this research is to explore the factors influencing enterprise risk management and auditing mechanism of internal control in the internet of things (IoT) environment. Applying a qualitative research approach and following the Gowin's Vee research strategy, firstly, this study reviewed the relevant literature and used the Delphi expert assessment method to identify risk factors as well as auditing items in the IoT environment. Secondly, according to the nature of eight types of intersecting risks and internal control framework of COSO 2013, this study constructed the three lines of defense in effective risk management and internal control mechanism based on the evaluation criteria of Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI). Lastly, this research conducted empirical case study from three enterprises to verify that whether the risk factors and auditing mechanism can be effectively used for internal risk control assessment within the corporation. The audit mechanism established in this study and the empirical process of case study can be referenced by academia for enhancing the knowledge of qualitative research, and also by industries as IT governances in the IoT environment.起始頁-結束頁：77-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201906_21(1).00038篇名：探索大稻埕社區之實虛整合創新商業模式並列篇名：Exploring O2O New Business Model of Community Dadaocheng作者：蔡政安(Cheng-An Tsai);程雨萍(Choon Peng Thiah)關鍵字：社區服務創新;實虛整合商業模式;價值創造;社會資本;Community service innovation;O2O business model;value creation;social capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：互聯網科技發展與社會環境變遷兩大因素促使商業模式再創新。互聯網科技發展不僅使產業結構徹底改變，並創造虛實整合商業模式的新趨勢。然而我們處在一個跨組織價值網絡的開放性社會，環境與關係變得複雜化。未來生活將是以社會資本和協同共享商品為中心。在這樣社會環境劇變下，企業若能因應環境變化，能夠不斷創新商業模式是長期成功的重要能力。本研究以價值創造、社會資本、商業模式創新等為研究理論基礎，釐清互聯網科技與社會環境變遷對實虛整合商業模式中元素關係之影響，並藉由大稻埕社區為個案研究，發展社區之實虛整合商業模式，闡明商業模式應用於社區服務創新之可能性，研究同時比較企業與社區之實虛整合商業模式之元素關係差異性。英文摘要：Two factors of internet technology development and social environment change influence business model innovation. The internet technology development not only makes the industrial structure completely changed but creates new trend of O2O business model. However, we live in an open society with cross-organizational value network, the environment and the relationship become more complicated. The future of life will center on social capital and collaborative sharing of goods and services. The long-term successful capability for enterprises to respond radical environment change is to continuously innovate its business model. Based on the theory of value creation, social capital and business model innovation, this research clarifies the influence of internet technology development and social environment change in the relationship of elements in O2O business model. In addition, through conducting the case study of community Dadaocheng, this research develops O2O business model in community context and analyzes the possibility of business model applied to community service innovation. This research also compares the common and different attributes of O2O business model between enterprises and community.起始頁-結束頁：121-146資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.201906_21(1).000401篇名：美容美妝線上品牌社群體驗如何增進使用者之體驗價值、態度及持續使用意圖並列篇名：How Online Beauty Brand Community users' Experience Contributes to their Experiential Value, Attitudes and Continuance Intention作者：許嘉霖(Chia-Lin Hsu);于立宸(Li-Chen Yu);趙心怡(Hsin-Yi Chao)關鍵字：線上品牌社群;使用者體驗;體驗價值;實用／享樂態度;持續使用意圖;Online Brand Community;User Experience;Experiential Value;Utilitarian/Hedonic Attitude;Continuance Intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：研究目的：本研究目的為探討使用者於線上品牌社群之體驗，對其所產生的體驗價值、實用／享樂態度及持續使用意圖之影響。研究設計／方法：本研究以美容美妝線上品牌社群FashionGuide使用者為研究對象，並採用結構方程模式檢定本研究所提之研究模式與假說。研究結果：研究結果發現使用者體驗顯著正向地影響體驗價值，進而顯著正向地影響實用與享樂態度，而實用與享樂態度亦均顯著正向地影響持續使用意圖。再者，研究結果亦證明使用者體驗顯著正向地影響實用態度，但卻無顯著地影響享樂態度。此外，體驗價值於使用者體驗及態度之間具有完全中介之效果亦被證實於本研究中。研究限制／啟發：本研究主要有二個限制，第一個限制為本研究僅以美容美妝線上品牌社群為研究題材，無法一般化至其他類型之線上品牌社群。另一個限制為影響線上品牌社群持續使用意圖之因素眾多，例如：滿意度、信任傾向及產品涉入程度等，未來研究可考慮將其納入研究模式一併探討之。理論／實務／社會意涵：本研究之結果發現可提供予線上品牌社群經營者作為決策之參考依據。創見／價值：本研究提出影響線上品牌社群持續使用意圖之重要決定因素之新洞見。英文摘要：Purpose - This study aims to explore the impacts of users' experience of online brand community on experiential value, utilitarian attitude, and hedonic attitude. In addition, how these factors influence users' continuance intention. Design/methodology/approach - The users of FashionGuide are the subjects of this study. We apply structural equation modeling to test the proposed model and hypotheses. Findings - The results confirm that users' experience is positively and significantly related to experiential value, and in turn, influences utilitarian and hedonic attitude. Both utilitarian and hedonic attitude are also positively and significantly related to continuance intention. In addition, the results show that users' experience is positively and significantly related to utilitarian attitude but has no significant impact on hedonic attitude. Further, experiential value has a fully mediating effect between users' experience and attitudes. Research limitations/implications - This study has two main limitations. First, this study only focuses on online brand community users' experience of beauty products, constraining the generalization of the results. Second, there are many factors that influence continuance intention, such as satisfaction, trust propensity, and product involvement. Future research may consider incorporating these variables into their research model in order to provide a clearer insight into the factors that influence continuance intention for online brand communities. Practical implications/Social implications - These findings provide references for the online brand community managers in their decision-making. Originality/value - This study presents new insights into the determinants of continuance intention for online brand communities.起始頁-結束頁：1-14資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201910_38(4).CNI0012篇名：金融科技監理與我國金融監理沙盒制度之檢視並列篇名：FinTech Regulation and A Review of Taiwan's Financial Regulatory Sandbox Framework作者：彭金隆(Jin-Lung Peng);臧正運(Cheng-Yun Tsang)關鍵字：金融科技;金融科技監理;金融監理沙盒;金融科技創新實驗;FinTech;FinTech Regulation;Financial Regulatory Sandbox;FinTech Innovative Experimentation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：研究目的：本文旨在研究金融科技發展之特徵、風險以及國際上的主要監理策略，聚焦於英國、新加坡及澳洲等三國之監理沙盒制度設計，離析出較具共通性之本質要素，再據以檢視我國之金融科技發展與創新實驗條例之內容，最後歸結出我國金融監理沙盒制度的發展建議。研究設計／方法：比較法制分析方法。研究結果：本文歸結出我國金融監理沙盒制度在五大面向的發展建議：監理機關與業者間的協作機制、降低法規與監理標準不確定性安排、實驗完成後的落地機制、降低市場進入障礙與兼顧實驗參與者保障之安排，以及相關配套措施的建置及落實。研究限制／啟發：各國的監理沙盒機制近年持續發展與演化中，囿於研究時間與資源的限制，本論文無法針對世界各國沙盒制度的最新發展進行系統性的比較，只能選擇最具代表性的三個國家加以分析及深入探討。理論／實務／社會意涵：本文的主要社會意涵在於提出我國監理沙盒及金融科技監理之制度面與實務面運作的反思與調適建議，並提供策略面的分析框架供產官學各界作為未來政策制定與實踐之對話基礎。創見／價值：本文主要價值在於從策略角度分析國際上金融監理沙盒制度的本質要素，並與我國之制度進行對照。英文摘要：Purpose -This article aims to analyze the main characteristics and risks of FinTech development and the regulatory strategies employed by world's regulators to respond to those risks. It also studies the legal construct of the UK, Singapore, and Australia's FinTech regulatory sandbox regimes and identifies their common elements. Design/methodology/approach - Comparative legal and regulatory study Findings - This article examines whether the design of Taiwan's Financial Regulatory Sandbox Regime is in line with core elements of global regulatory sandbox regimes and concludes five dimensions for future reforms: mechanisms for regulator-industry collaboration, arrangements for reducing uncertainty over the applicable laws and regulatory standards, design of the post-experiment regime, arrangements for reducing entry barriers to the market while protecting the interests of participants in sandbox experiments, and mechanisms for supporting and facilitating FinTech innovations. Research limitations/implications - The world's regulatory sandbox regimes have been rapidly evolving for the past few years, and therefore due to the time and resource limit, this research can only chose the sandbox regimes from three most representative countries instead of conducting a systemic study of each country's sandbox regime. Practical implications/Social implications -The social implications of this article lie in its reflections on Taiwan's FinTech regulation, the regulatory sandbox regime and the analytical framework it proposes, to foster strategic thinking, build up foundations for constant dialogue among the industry, policymakers and academics. Originality/value - The core value of this article lies in its identification of the core elements of the regulatory sandbox regime from a strategic perspective and then based on which policymakers and regulators in Taiwan can fine-tune the country's sandbox regime.起始頁-結束頁：15-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201910_38(4).CNI0153篇名：由美國臨時申請案預測未來技術發展趨勢－以電腦通訊技術為例並列篇名：Provisional Application-Based Predication of the Development Trend of Technologies - Taking Computer Communication Technologies as a Case Study作者：李昆鴻(Kun-Hung Lee);陳省三(Sheng-San Cheng)關鍵字：臨時申請案;專利分析;專利布局;Provisional Application;Patent Analysis;Patent Portfolio期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：研究目的：本研究目的在於如何有效利用並提早預測未來的技術發展趨勢，這也將是企業發展與研發布局規劃時的重要關鍵。研究設計／方法：本研究提出四種預測方法，並透過電腦通訊領域的臨時申請案專利資訊作為分析示範案例。研究結果：將預測結果進行驗證比較，證實所提的方法能夠提供快速及準確的預測建議，並可協助學術與企業於實務經營上靈活運用。研究限制／啟發：美國臨時申請案的低成本、較早的優先權申請日等優點，吸引了全球越來越多的企業優先採用此制度申請專利，而有申請臨時申請案的專利具有較高的專利品質及較早被公開的專利資訊，因此適合作為分析預測之參考指標。理論／實務／社會意涵：隨著美國臨時申請案每年的申請總量持續成長的趨勢，未來將有越來越多的臨時申請案資訊可被取得，產業界更要早一步加以利用此資訊率先預測未來的潛力市場及發展趨勢，並提早做出規劃與布局準備，搶得市場利基。創見／價值：本研究的價值在於利用了專利資訊，預測未來具有潛力的技術市場方向，使企業能提早、正確投入資源與規劃，為企業的未來發展取得最佳的戰略地位。英文摘要：Purpose - The purpose of this study illustrates how to make good use of and predict the development trend of technologies in advance, a main factor for enterprises to seek advancement and plan their research and development strategy. Design/methodology/approach - This study proposes four prediction methods, through using the provisional application patent data in computer communication domain as the basis of our analysis and demonstration. Findings - The demonstration and comparison prove that these methods can lead to quick and accurate predictions and be flexibly applied to academic and entrepreneurial practical operations. Research limitations/implications - Due to its lower cost and earlier priority application date, the U.S. provisional application has become a priority system for an increasing number of enterprises in patent application. The patents of provisional application with higher quality and earlier disclosure of patent data is suitable as a reference indicator for analysis and prediction. Practical implications/Social implications -As the annual quantity of provisional application cases increase, more and more provisional application data will be accessed. Thus, it is necessary for enterprises to make use of the data as soon as possible to predict potential markets and development trends, in order to make early preparations for planning and seize business opportunities in the market. Originality/value -The value of this study lies in the use of patent information to predict technological market directions with potential, so that enterprises can invest resources and make plans in an earlier and appropriate manner, and thus, obtain the best strategic position for their future development.起始頁-結束頁：35-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201910_38(4).CNI0354篇名：How Online Beauty Brand Community users' Experience Contributes to their Experiential Value, Attitudes and Continuance Intention作者：Chia-Lin Hsu;Li-Chen Yu;Hsin-Yi Chao關鍵字：Online Brand Community;User Experience;Experiential Value;Utilitarian/Hedonic Attitude;Continuance Intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Purpose - This study aims to explore the impacts of users' experience of online brand communities community on experiential value, utilitarian attitude, and hedonic attitude, and in turn. In addition, how these factors influence users' continuance intention. Design/methodology/approach - The users of FashionGuide are the subjects of this study, and. We applyies structural equation modeling to test the proposed model and hypotheses. Findings - The results confirm that users' experience is positively and significantly related to experiential value, and in turn, influences utilitarian and hedonic attitude. Both utilitarian and hedonic attitude are also positively and significantly related to continuance intention. In addition, the results also show that users' experience is positively and significantly related to utilitarian attitude but has no significant impact on hedonic attitude. Further, experiential value has a fully mediating effect between users' experience and attitudes. Research limitations/implications - This study has two main limitations. First, this study only focuses on online brand communitiesy users'y experience of beauty products, thus potentially constraining the generalization of the results. Second, there are many factors that influence continuance intention, such as satisfaction, trust propensity, and product involvement. Thus, fFuture research may consider incorporating these variables into their research model in order to provide a clearer insight into the factors that influence continuance intention for online brand communities. Practical implications/Social implications - These findings provide to the managers ofreferences for the online brand communities community managers to supportin their decision-making. Originality/value - This study presents new insights into the determinants of continuance intention for online brand communities.起始頁-結束頁：77-88資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201910_38(4).ENG0775篇名：FinTech Regulation and A Review of Taiwan's Financial Regulatory Sandbox Framework作者：Jin-Lung Peng;Cheng-Yun Tsang關鍵字：FinTech;FinTech Regulation;Financial Regulatory Sandbox;FinTech Innovative Experimentation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Purpose -This article aims to analyze the main characteristics and risks of FinTech development and the regulatory strategies employed by world's regulators to respond to those risks. It also studies the legal construct of the UK, Singapore, and Australia's FinTech regulatory sandbox regimes and identifies their common elements. Design/methodology/approach - Comparative legal and regulatory study Findings - This article examines whether the design of Taiwan's Financial Regulatory Sandbox Regime is in line with core elements of global regulatory sandbox regimes and concludes five dimensions for future reforms: mechanisms for regulator-industry collaboration, arrangements for reducing uncertainty over the applicable laws and regulatory standards, design of the post-experiment regime, arrangements for reducing entry barriers to the market while protecting the interests of participants in sandbox experiments, and mechanisms for supporting and facilitating FinTech innovations. Research limitations/implications - The world's regulatory sandbox regimes have been rapidly evolving for the past few years, and therefore due to the time and resource limit, this research can only chose the sandbox regimes from three most representative countries instead of conducting a systemic study of each country's sandbox regime. Practical implications/Social implications -The social implications of this article lie in its reflections on Taiwan's FinTech regulation, the regulatory sandbox regime and the analytical framework it proposes, to foster strategic thinking, build up foundations for constant dialogue among the industry, policymakers and academics. Originality/value - The core value of this article lies in its identification of the core elements of the regulatory sandbox regime from a strategic perspective and then based on which policymakers and regulators in Taiwan can fine-tune the country's sandbox regime.起始頁-結束頁：89-103資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201910_38(4).ENG0896篇名：Temporal Dynamics Analysis of the Effect of Electronic Word of Mouth on Smartphone Sales並列篇名：網路口碑與產品銷售量之動態關係研究－以智慧型手機為例作者：許文錦(Wen-Chin Hsu);江俊達(Chun-Ta Chiang)關鍵字：Electronic Word of Mouth;Sales;Price;Brand;Temporal Dynamic;網路口碑;銷售量;價格;品牌;動態關係期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Purpose -Although word-of-mouth has been demonstrated to significantly affect sales, its impact on different types of products over time remains unknown. To fill this gap, this study examines the influence of product prices and brand on the relationship between word-of-mouth (WOM) and sales over time through a case study on four types of smartphones (high/low prices for strong/weak brands). Design/methodology/approach - Weekly sales data and online WOM of these smartphones were collected from the major Chinese shopping website Tmall.com for six months. This investigation is conducted within the frameworks of signaling theory, perceived risk theory, and uncertainty reduction theory. Findings - Results show that the influence of word-of-mouth on the four types of product sales vary across different sales periods. With the rapid growth in the Asia-Pacific market and the number of global smartphone users, the present study provides empirical evidence for the impact of WOM on smartphone sales in the Chinese market. Research limitations/implications - This study only inspects four models of smartphones with different brands and prices in the Chinese market. Future studies may include smartphones in different price segments for a more comprehensive analysis. Practical implications/Social implications - The results provide important references for smartphone companies to develop marketing strategies in different sales periods and offers a conceptual framework for future research. Originality/value -This paper provides valuable insight into the temporal dynamics and effects of WOM on smartphone sales and offers a foundation for future product branding research.英文摘要：研究目的：網路口碑已被証實能有效影響銷售量，但口碑對不同價格／品牌的商品是否有一致的影響力，又其影響力是否隨時間增減仍未知，本研究以智慧型手機為例探討價格及品牌對口碑與銷售量間關係在不同銷售時期的影響。研究設計／方法：分析四款不同價格和品牌手機（高價／低價x強品牌／弱品牌）在購物網站Tmall.com的口碑及銷售資料以驗證假說。研究結果：重要發現：（1）口碑數量顯著影響銷售量；（2）口碑數量多寡對銷售量的影響會因品牌強弱而有差異，對強品牌的影響大於弱品牌；（3）口碑對銷售量的影響並非都隨時間過去而降低。研究限制／啟發：本研究主要聚焦於口碑對銷售量的影響力，未涵蓋包括消費者需求、市場競爭等可能因素。理論／實務／社會意涵：企業資源有限，本研究結果能協助企業在不同銷售時期訂定差異化行銷策略，讓資源運用效益極大化。創見／價值：本研究為品牌研究提供口碑影響力動態分析的重要創見。起始頁-結束頁：105-117+33資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201910_38(4).ENG1057篇名：Provisional Application-Based Predication of the Development Trend of Technologies - Taking Computer Communication Technologies as a Case Study作者：Kun-Hung Lee;Sheng-San Cheng關鍵字：Provisional Application;Patent Analysis;Patent Portfolio期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Purpose - The purpose of this study illustrates how to make good use of and predict the development trend of technologies in advance, and it will become a main factor for enterprises to seek advancement and plan their research and development strategy. Design/methodology/approach - This study proposes four prediction methods, and through using the provisional application patent data regarding thein computer communication domain is taken for caseas the basis of our analysis and demonstration. Findings - The demonstration and comparison prove that these methods can lead to quick and accurate prediction suggestions and be flexibly applied to academic and entrepreneurial practical operations. Research limitations/implications - Due to its lower cost and earlier priority application date, the U.S. provisional application has become a priority system for an increasing number of enterprises in patent application. The patents of provisional application feature with higher quality and earlier disclosure of patent data is suitable as a reference indicator for analysis and prediction.. Practical implications/Social implications -As the annual quantity of provisional application cases increase, more and more provisional application data will be accessed. Thus, it is necessary for enterprises to make use of the data as soon as possible to predict potential markets and development trends, in order to make early preparations for planning and seize business opportunities in the market. Originality/value -The value of this study lies in the use of patent information to predict technological market directions with potential, so that enterprises can invest resources and make plans in an earlier and appropriate manner, and thus, obtain the best strategic position for their future development.起始頁-結束頁：119-136資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201910_38(4).ENG1198篇名：城市基礎建設服務滿意度評價模式之研究－以公園開放性空間為例並列篇名：Urban Parks: Satisfaction Evaluation Model of City Infrastructure Service作者：黃宗誠(Tsung-Cheng Huang)關鍵字：綠地;機能;滿意度;評價;Green Area;Function;Satisfaction;Evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：都市公園為城市基礎建設重要的開放性空間，如何針對此類空間建立評價模式，實具有相當程度之必要性。本研究探討都市公園空間要素與機能評價滿意度之關係，結果確認都市公園應重視休閒遊憩機能、休閒環境機能及親子互動機能。提升景觀設施、遊樂設施、衛生設施及公共設施等空間要素之完善性，重視道路區比率、停車區比率、入口數、綠覆率、水池面積、遊戲區比率、遊（玩）具數、運動器材數、照明設備、固定座椅、涼亭面積與廁所面積配置情形。透過問卷調查了解遊客對於上述空間要素，大部份仍未達滿意程度。未來可考慮由滿意度較低之項目優先著手改善，循序達到完備都市公園多元服務機能之目標。英文摘要：Urban parks are crucial open spaces of city infrastructures. Thus, a suitable model for evaluating these spaces is required. Studying four urban parks in Tainan, Taiwan, this study explored the relationship between a park's spatial characteristics and its visitors' satisfaction with its functionalities. The results demonstrate that leisure and recreation, the leisure environment, and parent-child interaction functionalities were the most essential functionalities of urban parks. Spatial factors such as a park's landscape and its recreational, sanitary, and public facilities should be optimized. The layout of parks should also be considered-including the roads, parking spaces, greenery, ponds, trees, playground areas, number of entrances, children's recreational facilities, pieces of fitness equipment, lighting equipment, fixed seats, and toilets. Additionally, survey results indicated that visitors were not satisfied with most of the aforementioned spatial factors. Factors accompanied by the highest levels of dissatisfaction should be addressed first to achieve the goal of diversifying urban park services.起始頁-結束頁：1-19資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201907_38(3).CNI0019篇名：緊急事故救護支援系統建置之研究－以LoRa及藍牙技術為例並列篇名：Emergency Ambulance Support System using LoRa and Bluetooth Technologies作者：張定原(Ting-Yuan Chang);李偉成(Wei-Cheng Li)關鍵字：物聯網;LoRa;藍牙;緊急事故救護支援系統;Internet of Things;LoRa;Bluetooth;Emergency Relief Support System期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：救護救險車輛於執行緊急勤務時，常需高速行駛以爭取時間，導致衍伸車禍風險增加的問題，尤其是在車輛通過交叉路口時。本研究透過物聯網科技使紅綠燈號誌智慧化，經由紅綠燈原有號誌變換及加裝之指向裝置提醒，使一般車輛駕駛得知救護救險車輛動向，進而加速救護速度。本研究在通訊連接技術上採用新興LoRa科技，負責偵測救護救險車與路口之遠近，並輔以藍牙系統，負責進行各路口RSSI（Received Signal Strength Indication）值之比對，透過訊號強度變化而獲知救護救險車處於哪一車道及其行進方向。本研究經道路實際測試，確認系統可精確判讀預先安裝於各路口接收裝置的RSSI值，並採用PARAMICS微觀交通模擬軟體6.7版，對各20部裝置／未裝置本研究開發之緊急事故救護支援系統的車輛，模擬其通過交叉路口的時間，發現可提升超過3倍的救護救險車輛車速。期盼未來建置本研究開發之系統後，可減少交通事故、加速救援速度並降低社會成本，落實智慧運輸系統發展之目標。英文摘要：When performing emergency duties, ambulances and rescue vehicles are often required to travel at high speeds. This increases the risk of road accidents, especially when vehicles pass through an intersection. Using Internet of Things technologies, this study developed a smart traffic light signaling system. The use of smart technology to change traffic signals and displayed reminders with installed pointing devices inform general vehicle drivers of the movements of ambulances and rescue vehicles, decreasing rescue time. For a communication connection technology, this study adopts the emerging LoRa (long-range) Technology , which here is responsible for detecting the distances of ambulances and rescue vehicles from intersections. This technology is supplemented by a Bluetooth system, which is responsible for comparing received signal strength indication (RSSI) values at each intersection. From signal strength variations, the lanes and directions in which ambulances and rescue vehicles are driving can be determined. Through field tests, this study confirmed that the system can precisely interpret the RSSI values of receiving devices pre-installed at each intersection. PARAMICS Microsimulation software version 6.7 was adopted for 20 sets of vehicles with and without the emergency relief support system developed for this study in each case to simulate their time passing through an intersection. It was observed that the speeds of ambulances and rescue vehicles can be increased threefold with this system. Implementing this system is expected to reduce traffic accidents, accelerate rescues, and reduce social costs, thereby realizing a smart transportation system.起始頁-結束頁：21-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201907_38(3).CNI02110篇名：內部行銷對警察人員組織承諾影響之研究－以警政署署長室臉書粉絲專頁為例並列篇名：Effects of Internal Marketing on Organizational Commitment of Police Personnel作者：黃瓊玉(Chiung-Yu Huang);張祐豪(Chang Yo-Hao);李小梅(Li Shau-Mei Wang)關鍵字：內部行銷;組織承諾;臉書粉絲專頁;Iinternal Marketing;Organizational Commitment;Facebook fan page期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：警察人員工時長、值勤危險、警力缺口擴大，致警員工作壓力提高與組織承諾降低。因警員廣泛使用臉書，警政署署長室建立臉書粉絲專頁，期藉此實施內部行銷以有效提升警察人員的組織承諾。本研究對臉書粉絲專頁、內部行銷與組織承諾進行探討，以內部行銷為自變項、組織承諾為應變項、臉書粉絲專頁使用情形與人口統計變項為調節變項作為研究架構，並採用紙本與線上問卷進行調查。結果顯示警察人員內部行銷知覺程度對組織承諾有正面影響，粉絲專頁使用情形對內部行銷知覺程度有正面影響，但人口統計變項，對內部行銷及組織承諾影響無顯著差異。因此，建議署長室粉絲專頁加強使用粉絲專頁的機制，如激勵、從大數據了解同仁，做好粉絲專頁內部行銷，提高警察人員之組織承諾。英文摘要：Police personnel have long working hours, dangerous duties, and widening police force gaps. These result in high police work pressure and low organizational commitment. Because police personnel use Facebook extensively, the Director-general's Office of the National Police Agency has created a Facebook fan page to implement internal marketing to increase the organizational commitment of police personnel. This study explored the relationship among the use of a Facebook fan page, internal marketing, and organizational commitment. Internal marketing was the independent variable, organizational commitment was the dependent variable, and the use of Facebook fan pages and demographic variables were moderator variables. We used both paper and online questionnaires. The results demonstrate that police officers' perceptions of internal marketing have a positive effect on organizational commitment. The use of fan pages has a positive effect on the perceptions of internal marketing, but demographic variables have no significant effect on internal marketing or organizational commitment. Therefore, the Director-general's Office should supplement its fan page with incentives, understand police big data, and focus on internal marketing on its fan pages to improve the organizational commitment of police personnel.起始頁-結束頁：41-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201907_38(3).CNI04111篇名：服務型智慧政府策略校準對政府績效影響之研究－資訊科技治理的調節效應並列篇名：Effect of Strategic Alignment of Service-Oriented Smart Government on Government Performance: Moderating Effect of IT Governance作者：洪為璽(Wei-Hsi Hung);林君憶(Chun-Yi Lin)關鍵字：服務型智慧政府;策略校準;資訊科技治理;政府績效;Service-Oriented Smart Government;Strategic Alignment;IT Governance;Government Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：服務型智慧政府是台灣正在追求的目標，亦是當今世界先進國家數位轉型的重點。政府數位轉型新趨勢引起產官學界廣泛討論，但國內對於策略校準與服務型智慧政府績效的關聯，以及策略校準作用於政府績效，資訊科技治理所扮演的角色等方面，研究尚不多。本文使用量化研究探討服務型智慧政府績效、策略校準與資訊科技治理三者間影響關係。研究表明，績效與策略校準間的正向關係都得到驗證，但這兩者卻未受到資訊科技治理調節影響。顯示國內資訊科技治理對資訊化由校準到績效的影響角色未受到認同。這與先進國家愈來愈重視資訊科技治理的情況有些不同。因此，希望研究結果對台灣服務型智慧政府有些啟發，未來國內發展資訊化能更重視資訊科技治理的角色。英文摘要：The Taiwanese government promotes service-oriented smart government. Such digital transformation is also the current focus in other advanced countries. This trend has sparked extensive discussion in industry, government, and academia. However, little research in Taiwan has studied the correlation between strategic alignment and service-oriented smart government performance, role of strategic alignment in government performance, or moderating role of IT governance. This study quantitatively investigates the correlation between service-oriented smart government performance and strategic alignment as moderated by IT governance. This study has demonstrated the positive relationship between performance and strategic alignment. However, the moderating effect of IT governance has not been verified. This indicates that the Taiwanese government has likely not paid much attention to the role of IT governance in the effect of alignment on performance for its informatization. This research finding is somewhat different from a situation where advanced countries are increasingly focusing on IT governance. The study's results will contribute to the development of Taiwan's service-oriented smart government. Future domestic development of informatization must consider the role of IT governance.起始頁-結束頁：63-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201907_38(3).CNI06312篇名：Urban Parks: Satisfaction Evaluation Model of City Infrastructure Service作者：Tsung-Cheng Huang關鍵字：Green Area;Function;Satisfaction;Evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Urban parks are crucial open spaces of city infrastructures. Thus, a suitable model for evaluating these spaces is required. Studying four urban parks in Tainan, Taiwan, this study explored the relationship between a park's spatial characteristics and its visitors' satisfaction with its functionalities. The results demonstrate that leisure and recreation, the leisure environment, and parent-child interaction functionalities were the most essential functionalities of urban parks. Spatial factors such as a park's landscape and its recreational, sanitary, and public facilities should be optimized. The layout of parks should also be considered-including the roads, parking spaces, greenery, ponds, trees, playground areas, number of entrances, children's recreational facilities, pieces of fitness equipment, lighting equipment, fixed seats, and toilets. Additionally, survey results indicated that visitors were not satisfied with most of the aforementioned spatial factors. Factors accompanied by the highest levels of dissatisfaction should be addressed first to achieve the goal of diversifying urban park services.起始頁-結束頁：109-125資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201907_38(3).ENG10913篇名：Emergency Ambulance Support System using LoRa and Bluetooth Technologies作者：Ting-Yuan Chang;Wei-Cheng Li關鍵字：Internet of Things;LoRa;Bluetooth;Emergency Relief Support System期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：When performing emergency duties, ambulances and rescue vehicles are often required to travel at high speeds. This increases the risk of road accidents, especially when vehicles pass through an intersection. Using Internet of Things technologies, this study developed a smart traffic light signaling system. The use of smart technology to change traffic signals and displayed reminders with installed pointing devices inform general vehicle drivers of the movements of ambulances and rescue vehicles, decreasing rescue time. For a communication connection technology, this study adopts the emerging LoRa (long-range) Technology , which here is responsible for detecting the distances of ambulances and rescue vehicles from intersections. This technology is supplemented by a Bluetooth system, which is responsible for comparing received signal strength indication (RSSI) values at each intersection. From signal strength variations, the lanes and directions in which ambulances and rescue vehicles are driving can be determined. Through field tests, this study confirmed that the system can precisely interpret the RSSI values of receiving devices pre-installed at each intersection. PARAMICS Microsimulation software version 6.7 was adopted for 20 sets of vehicles with and without the emergency relief support system developed for this study in each case to simulate their time passing through an intersection. It was observed that the speeds of ambulances and rescue vehicles can be increased threefold with this system. Implementing this system is expected to reduce traffic accidents, accelerate rescues, and reduce social costs, thereby realizing a smart transportation system.起始頁-結束頁：127-142資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201907_38(3).ENG12714篇名：Effects of Internal Marketing on Organizational Commitment of Police Personnel作者：Chiung-Yu Huang;Yo-Hao Chang;Li Shau-Mei Wang關鍵字：Iinternal Marketing;Organizational Commitment;Facebook fan page期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Police personnel have long working hours, dangerous duties, and widening police force gaps. These result in high police work pressure and low organizational commitment. Because police personnel use Facebook extensively, the Director-general's Office of the National Police Agency has created a Facebook fan page to implement internal marketing to increase the organizational commitment of police personnel. This study explored the relationship among the use of a Facebook fan page, internal marketing, and organizational commitment. Internal marketing was the independent variable, organizational commitment was the dependent variable, and the use of Facebook fan pages and demographic variables were moderator variables. We used both paper and online questionnaires. The results demonstrate that police officers' perceptions of internal marketing have a positive effect on organizational commitment. The use of fan pages has a positive effect on the perceptions of internal marketing, but demographic variables have no significant effect on internal marketing or organizational commitment. Therefore, the Director-general's Office should supplement its fan page with incentives, understand police big data, and focus on internal marketing on its fan pages to improve the organizational commitment of police personnel.起始頁-結束頁：143-163資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201907_38(3).ENG14315篇名：Effect of Strategic Alignment of Service-Oriented Smart Government on Government Performance: Moderating Effect of IT Governance作者：Wei-Hsi Hung;Chun-Yi Lin關鍵字：Service-Oriented Smart Government;Strategic Alignment;IT Governance;Government Performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：The Taiwanese government promotes service-oriented smart government. Such digital transformation is also the current focus in other advanced countries. This trend has sparked extensive discussion in industry, government, and academia. However, little research in Taiwan has studied the correlation between strategic alignment and service-oriented smart government performance, role of strategic alignment in government performance, or moderating role of IT governance. This study quantitatively investigates the correlation between service-oriented smart government performance and strategic alignment as moderated by IT governance. This study has demonstrated the positive relationship between performance and strategic alignment. However, the moderating effect of IT governance has not been verified. This indicates that the Taiwanese government has likely not paid much attention to the role of IT governance in the effect of alignment on performance for its informatization. This research finding is somewhat different from a situation where advanced countries are increasingly focusing on IT governance. The study's results will contribute to the development of Taiwan's service-oriented smart government. Future domestic development of informatization must consider the role of IT governance.起始頁-結束頁：165-185資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201907_38(3).ENG16516篇名：上海風雲：捷諾克的圍廠抗爭事件並列篇名：Storm in Shanghai: The Besieged Giantlok作者：倪福全(Fu-Chuan Ni);洪世章(Shih-Chang Hung)關鍵字：危機管理;罷工行動;代理成本;境外投資;Crisis Management;Strike Action;Agency Cost;Foreign Investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本個案描述一家台灣發跡、大陸茁壯的台商傳統製造業，過去運用大陸的勞動成本優勢在全球尼龍束帶產業佔有一席之地，隨著大陸產業政策改變與加工貿易政策改革，優勢逐漸消失。在一次海關大規模查廠事件後，公司決定重新調配上海與泰國工廠之產能，因組織溝通不足引發上海廠員工全體圍廠罷工之危機事件。罷工案例本身就不多，能被深入詳實記錄的更少，本個案提供了寶貴實例，讓學生透過分析瞭解一個罷工抗爭事件的前因、過程、與後果，以及事件發生後的處理解決之道。英文摘要：This case study discusses a Taiwanese traditional manufacturing company that was established in Taiwan and flourished in China. By harnessing labor cost advantages in China, the company occupied a significant place in the global cable ties industry. Because of changes in China's industrial policies and processing trade policy reforms, these advantages gradually diminished. During a large-scale factory inspection by the customs authorities, the company decided to redistribute the production capacity in its factories in Shanghai and Thailand. However, insufficient organizational communication led to a strike organized by employees in the Shanghai factory, during which they blockaded the factory. There are few instances wherein employees have organized a strike in either China or Taiwan and few in-depth and detailed records of such cases exist. Therefore, this case study may serve as a valuable reference to enable students to understand the causes, processes, and consequences of strike actions and the corresponding solutions to resolve them.起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).CNI00117篇名：長庚養生文化村－營運模式的再探索並列篇名：The Business Model of Chang Gung Health and Culture Village作者：詹錦宏(Chin-Horng Chan);王勝本(Sheng-Pen Wang);翁英程(Ying-Chen Weng);楊宗憲(Tsung-Hsien Yang)關鍵字：長庚養生文化村;老人住宅;經營策略;年金改革;Chang Gung Health and Culture Village;Senior Home;Business Strategy;Reform of National Pension Plan期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：政府推動的年金改革及長照2.0政策，對大規模老人住宅的經營造成嚴重衝擊，讓過去10年穩定成長的長庚養生文化村住民人數，在2016年首次呈現減少，機構損益由盈轉虧。2017年1月新上任的戴興業主任，面對的是住民逐漸流失，而且，雖然外在環境急速惡化，更大規模的C棟住宅卻即將開放投入營運。因此，戴興業必須尋找新經營策略，思考如何確保現有住民，挽回流失住民，以及開拓新住民市場。英文摘要：The government's reform of the national pension plan and the amendment of the long-term care system is affecting the business of senior homes. The number of residents at Chang Gung Health and Culture Village (CGHCV) declined in 2016, after a 10-year stable growth period from 2005. Despite the deteriorating external environment, CGHCV plans to open a new large facility in the near future. Shin-Yei Dai, the new director of CGHCV appointed in January 2017 is tasked with determining a business strategy that will keep existing residents, ensure residents who left return, and develop a new market.起始頁-結束頁：13-14資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).CNI01318篇名：家崎科技－CNC鑽孔機台採購的兩難並列篇名：We Solutions Technology-Dilemma of CNC Drilling Machine Purchase作者：邱銘乾(Ming-Chien Chiu);許哲銓(Che-Chuan Hsu);曹聖豪(Sheng-Hao Tsao)關鍵字：採購成本;採購決策;最佳成本;Procurement Cost;Purchasing Decision;Optimal Cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：家崎科技總經理陳大愚理看好專利到期的電極板市場潛力無窮，接下因虧損而退出台灣市場的日本大湘的業務；但由於半導體產業持續往奈米級技術邁進，所以陳總面臨加工品質最重要的CNC鑽孔機採購的兩難─採購與目前工廠正在使用的鑽孔機相同型號，其價格便宜、品質尚可，或增加預算購買價格高，但生產品質較好的機型？本文藉由陳總、李特助及立田廠長的一連串會議討論，將鑽孔機實驗數據進行成本分析，找到影響總成本之關鍵變數，得出必非採購最便宜或最昂貴的機台就是最好的策略，而是需要考量最佳生產成本效益。本個案不僅說明半導體耗材電極板的生產組成要素對成本的影響，還能提供給學生工廠作業情境，透過分析電極板產品成本，讓學生學習生產作業管理、工業工程管理或成本會計知識時，可以動手計算各式生產參數，了解不同的參數如何影響生產效益、人力配置與產品成本。最後，訂定最佳的機器採購決策可以創造企業的競爭優勢。英文摘要：Da-yu Chen, the General Manager of We Solutions Technology, was optimistic about the off-patent CEL (California Eastern Laboratories) body market with unlimited potential and purchased Daisho Giken, a Japanese company that had exited Taiwan's market because of losses. However, because the semiconductor industry is continuously shifting toward nanoscale technology, Chen is facing the dilemma regarding the purchase of CNC drilling machine, which is of considerable importance to machining quality. The dilemma relates to whether to purchase drilling machines with the same model as those currently being used in the plant at low prices and of passable quality or to increase the budget to purchase drilling machines with higher prices and improved production quality. Based on a series of discussions among General Manager Chen, Special Assistant Li, and Plant Manager Masataka Tachida, this paper provides a cost analysis using experimental data related to drilling machines, identifies the key variables affecting total costs, and draws the conclusion that the optimal strategy is not to purchase the cheapest or the most expensive machines, but instead to consider the optimal production costs and benefits. This case study not only serves to explain the effects of the production elements of CEL bodies, which are one of the key semiconductor consumables on thein terms of cost, but also enlightens students about the operation situations in plants. Through an analysis of the product costs of CEL bodies, the study enables students to calculate various production parameters and understand the effects of various parameters on productivity benefits, labor allocation, and product costs while learning about production operation management, industrial engineering management, and cost accounting. Finally, the best machine purchasing decision was determined to create a competitive advantage for the company.起始頁-結束頁：31-32資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).CNI03119篇名：台灣可億隆－作業基礎成本制度的應用並列篇名：Coiler-Application of Activity-Based Costing作者：戴怡蕙(Yi-Hui Tai)關鍵字：作業基礎成本制度;傳統成本法;產品成本;成本;Activity-Based Costing;Traditional Costing;Product Cost;Cost Distortion期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：台灣可億隆為行動電話強波器的製造與銷售商。設立初期恰逢台灣電信市場開放，新的電信產業以客戶需求為導向、較積極改善室內收訊品質，因此台灣可億隆與其競爭者的銷量都大幅增加。然而，在2002年之後，因為市場飽和，導致台灣可億隆銷量成長有限，且毛利率、淨利率都下降。在2004年末，台灣可億隆創辦人思考是否應該重新檢視公司的產品成本計算方式。本個案讓學生透過分析傳統成本法與作業基礎成本制度所得的成本數字之差異，來瞭解台灣可億隆如何藉由作業基礎成本制度而改善傳統成本法的成本扭曲。英文摘要：Coiler is a manufacturer that specializes in producing and selling cellular repeaters. Its early establishment coincided with the opening of Taiwan's telecommunications market. The new telecommunications industry was more consumer-centric, thereby increasing the demand for improvement in indoor reception quality and leading to high sales growth for Coiler and its competitors. However, after 2002, market saturation led to limited increases in Coiler's sales and decreases in gross and net profit margins. At the end of 2004, the founder of Coiler started to consider whether the company should re-examine its calculation method for determining product costs. This case study can help students to understand how Coiler mitigated traditional cost distortions through activity-based costing by analyzing the differences in product costs between traditional costing and activity-based costing techniques.起始頁-結束頁：51-52資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).CNI05120篇名：少年惟興的推人撞車事件－網路時代的衝突處理與僵局並列篇名：Is Wai-Sin a Young Murderer? -Conflict Resolution and Deadlocked in the Internet Era作者：廖秀莉(Hsiu-Li Liao);劉士豪(Su-Houn Liu)關鍵字：衝突處理;網路正義;網路霸凌;Conflict Resolution;Internet Justice;Cyberbullying期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：上網「討拍」尋求「網路正義」，已經成為年輕世代經常採行的衝突解決方式，因上網而招致的網路集體霸凌也越來越常見。本個案是透過一個社會事件，兩個國中生在下課途中發生的意外，從雙方家長的角度，探討衝突解決的可能方式跟網路民意對衝突解決造成各種可能的影響。本個案採取的是角色扮演的策略。在個案討論的第一部份，學員們透過扮演雙方父母進行談判，實際體驗可能會採取的各種處理態度。個案透過安排學員在兩次的談判間的差異，引導同學注意到「網路輿論」對衝突解決所造成的重大影響，讓他們在第二部份的個案討論中，可以客觀地檢視採取「你贏我輸」的處理態度與「引入輿論」的處理方式之後，對衝突解決的可能影響。英文摘要：In the Internet era, using social media to seek help and justice during a conflict has become a common practice for many people. These actions have led to instances of cyberbullying and other examples of harm to those involved. The objective of this case study is to help students to understand how to handle these conflicts. This case presents an incident involving two junior high school students. One student pushed the other, which results in the other being hit by a car, causing serious injury. The students participating in these case discussions are expected to roleplay as the parents of the two involved parties, and they are tasked with reaching a settlement for this incident. After the roleplay, the participants will partake in further discussions regarding conflict resolution and methods to avoid deadlock.起始頁-結束頁：69-70資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).CNI06901篇名：聯德電子涉外稅捐逃漏、公司治理與洗錢防制之探討並列篇名：Cross-Border Tax Evasion, Corporate Governance, and Anti-Money Laundering: A Case Study of Bestec Co.作者：黃士洲(Shih-Chou Huang);簡銀瑩(Yin-Ying Chien)關鍵字：公司治理;證券監管;涉外稅捐逃漏;洗錢防制;跨機關資訊交換;Corporate Governance;Cross-Border Tax Evasion;Securities Supervision;Interagency Information Sharing;Anti-Money Laundering期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：聯德電子經營階層疑似從十多年前公司逐步開始公開發行、興櫃、上市的過程，即預先佈局股權安排，利用將公司資金迂迴匯出再轉回予境內個人，以供作經營家族的個人增資股款，虛增家族可掌控股權，之後並逐年分派鉅額股利，使獲利高達數億元。若從今日法制觀點，上開安排不僅涉及利用境外公司、帳戶，從事迂迴逃漏稅、架空公司治理，亦隱含證券舞弊、洗錢嫌疑。然而，案發當時因資金流程異常，稽徵機關啟動調查後，將全案定調為聯德電子與家族股東逃漏公司、個人應納稅負，僅補徵稅款與罰鍰合計約1.6億餘元，不惟遠低於不法利得，也未追究相關公司治理與證券舞弊各項爭議。本個案擬以此則實例，分從課堂教學、企業營運與監管法制分析的角度，剖析並釐清整體不法行為的事態本質與所涉問題範圍，應當不止於稅捐逃漏而已。公司與證券舞弊因異常金流的行為外觀，容易觸發逃漏稅稽核程序，而在反洗錢新制實施後，例如不法利得的認定與沒收、舞弊受害者，乃至於監管環節的失靈等，皆為今日值得深入觀察的重點。本文也欲藉此個案討論，提出現行公司、證券監理與反洗錢、逃漏稅偵查的興革建議，尤其國內現行欠缺跨機關之資訊分享與調查協作，未來亟待建立有效之合作機制。英文摘要：In 2002, the Taiwanese company Bestec Power Electronics Co., Ltd (hereafter referred to as BESTEC) was preparing to file a public listing application. The company's management orchestrated a fraudulent share scheme to secure absolute control for Chairman Chen's family. BESTEC initially announced a considerable capital increase. They wired US$ 5.1 million in cash, under the disguise of processing fees to a Mauritian paper company's OBU account. Top Tier Co., Ltd was established under the name of a young family member, who was a student at the time, and therefore had no substantial business presence. On the following day, US$ 5 million was wired back to Taiwan from the same OBU account and was deposited into five domestic bank accounts that belonged to Chairman Chen's close relatives. Subsequently, US$ 5 million was funneled back to BESTEC as payments for purchasing nearly 90% of the new shares that were issued in the company's seasoned common stocks offering. Moreover, after the aforementioned fraudulent capital increment, BESTEC consecutively distributed numerous lucrative cash and stock dividends, most of which went to members of the Chen family. At this time, a series of suspicious offshore cash flows and potential income tax evasion were detected by the Central Bank of Taiwan, who relayed the information to the tax authorities in Taiwan. However, the tax authorities concluded the investigation, declared it as pure tax avoidance, and charged additional tax assessments and fines based only on a small portion of the considerably wider illegal gain scheme. In this case, the tax authority did not handle the capital arrangement scheme and even ”legitimized” some of the embezzled company funds for the Chen family. This case study demonstrates that severe company and securities frauds can be hidden beneath apparent tax evasion. From a corporate governance perspective, such suspicious and irregular arrangements and cashflows often trigger other increasingly severe legal issues, including anti-money laundering investigations and the expropriation of company assets through the control of shareholders. This study identifies the sources of illegal gains, the true victims of frauds, and the malfunction of corporate governance and securities supervision. A ”whole-of-government” approach, comprising a cooperation platform and an interagency information sharing mechanism, is essential for amending the current regulatory loopholes.起始頁-結束頁：83-84資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).CNI0832篇名：Storm in Shanghai: The Besieged Giantlok作者：Fu-Chuan Ni;Shih-Chang Hung關鍵字：Crisis Management;Strike Action;Agency Cost;Foreign Investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：This case study discusses a Taiwanese traditional manufacturing company that was established in Taiwan and flourished in China. By harnessing labor cost advantages in China, the company occupied a significant place in the global cable ties industry. Because of changes in China's industrial policies and processing trade policy reforms, these advantages gradually diminished. During a large-scale factory inspection by the customs authorities, the company decided to redistribute the production capacity in its factories in Shanghai and Thailand. However, insufficient organizational communication led to a strike organized by employees in the Shanghai factory, during which they blockaded the factory. There are few instances wherein employees have organized a strike in either China or Taiwan and few in-depth and detailed records of such cases exist. Therefore, this case study may serve as a valuable reference to enable students to understand the causes, processes, and consequences of strike actions and the corresponding solutions to resolve them.起始頁-結束頁：123-123資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).ENG1233篇名：The Business Model of Chang Gung Health and Culture Village作者：Chin-Horng Chan;Sheng-Pen Wang;Ying-Chen Weng;Tsung-Hsien Yang關鍵字：Chang Gung Health and Culture Village;Senior Home;Business Strategy;Reform of National Pension Plan期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：The government's reform of the national pension plan and the amendment of the long-term care system is affecting the business of senior homes. The number of residents at Chang Gung Health and Culture Village (CGHCV) declined in 2016, after a 10-year stable growth period from 2005. Despite the deteriorating external environment, CGHCV plans to open a new large facility in the near future. Shin-Yei Dai, the new director of CGHCV appointed in January 2017 is tasked with determining a business strategy that will keep existing residents, ensure residents who left return, and develop a new market.起始頁-結束頁：135-135資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).ENG1354篇名：We Solutions Technology-Dilemma of CNC Drilling Machine Purchase作者：Ming-Chien Chiu;Che-Chuan Hsu;Sheng-Hao Tsao關鍵字：Procurement Cost;Purchasing Decision;Optimal Cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Da-yu Chen, the General Manager of We Solutions Technology, was optimistic about the off-patent CEL (California Eastern Laboratories) body market with unlimited potential and purchased Daisho Giken, a Japanese company that had exited Taiwan's market because of losses. However, because the semiconductor industry is continuously shifting toward nanoscale technology, Chen is facing the dilemma regarding the purchase of CNC drilling machine, which is of considerable importance to machining quality. The dilemma relates to whether to purchase drilling machines with the same model as those currently being used in the plant at low prices and of passable quality or to increase the budget to purchase drilling machines with higher prices and improved production quality. Based on a series of discussions among General Manager Chen, Special Assistant Li, and Plant Manager Masataka Tachida, this paper provides a cost analysis using experimental data related to drilling machines, identifies the key variables affecting total costs, and draws the conclusion that the optimal strategy is not to purchase the cheapest or the most expensive machines, but instead to consider the optimal production costs and benefits. This case study not only serves to explain the effects of the production elements of CEL bodies, which are one of the key semiconductor consumables on thein terms of cost, but also enlightens students about the operation situations in plants. Through an analysis of the product costs of CEL bodies, the study enables students to calculate various production parameters and understand the effects of various parameters on productivity benefits, labor allocation, and product costs while learning about production operation management, industrial engineering management, and cost accounting. Finally, the best machine purchasing decision was determined to create a competitive advantage for the company.起始頁-結束頁：155-155資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).ENG1555篇名：Coiler-Application of Activity-Based Costing作者：Yi-Hui Tai關鍵字：Activity-Based Costing;Traditional Costing;Product Cost;Cost Distortion期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：Coiler is a manufacturer that specializes in producing and selling cellular repeaters. Its early establishment coincided with the opening of Taiwan's telecommunications market. The new telecommunications industry was more consumer-centric, thereby increasing the demand for improvement in indoor reception quality and leading to high sales growth for Coiler and its competitors. However, after 2002, market saturation led to limited increases in Coiler's sales and decreases in gross and net profit margins. At the end of 2004, the founder of Coiler started to consider whether the company should re-examine its calculation method for determining product costs. This case study can help students to understand how Coiler mitigated traditional cost distortions through activity-based costing by analyzing the differences in product costs between traditional costing and activity-based costing techniques.起始頁-結束頁：175-175資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).ENG1756篇名：Is Wai-Sin a Young Murderer? -Conflict Resolution and Deadlock in the Internet Era作者：Hsiu-Li Liao;Su-Houn Liu關鍵字：Conflict Resolution;Internet Justice;Cyberbullying期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：In the Internet era, using social media to seek help and justice during a conflict has become a common practice for many people. These actions have led to instances of cyberbullying and other examples of harm to those involved. The objective of this case study is to help students to understand how to handle these conflicts. This case presents an incident involving two junior high school students. One student pushed the other, which results in the other being hit by a car, causing serious injury. The students participating in these case discussions are expected to roleplay as the parents of the two involved parties, and they are tasked with reaching a settlement for this incident. After the roleplay, the participants will partake in further discussions regarding conflict resolution and methods to avoid deadlock.起始頁-結束頁：193-193資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).ENG1937篇名：Cross-Border Tax Evasion, Corporate Governance, and Anti-Money Laundering: A Case Study of Bestec Co.作者：Shih-Chou Huang;Yin-Ying Chien關鍵字：Corporate Governance;Cross-Border Tax Evasion;Securities Supervision;Interagency Information Sharing;Anti-Money Laundering期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：In 2002, the Taiwanese company Bestec Power Electronics Co., Ltd (hereafter referred to as BESTEC) was preparing to file a public listing application. The company's management orchestrated a fraudulent share scheme to secure absolute control for Chairman Chen's family. BESTEC initially announced a considerable capital increase. They wired US$ 5.1 million in cash, under the disguise of processing fees to a Mauritian paper company's OBU account. Top Tier Co., Ltd was established under the name of a young family member, who was a student at the time, and therefore had no substantial business presence. On the following day, US$ 5 million was wired back to Taiwan from the same OBU account and was deposited into five domestic bank accounts that belonged to Chairman Chen's close relatives. Subsequently, US$ 5 million was funneled back to BESTEC as payments for purchasing nearly 90% of the new shares that were issued in the company's seasoned common stocks offering. Moreover, after the aforementioned fraudulent capital increment, BESTEC consecutively distributed numerous lucrative cash and stock dividends, most of which went to members of the Chen family. At this time, a series of suspicious offshore cash flows and potential income tax evasion were detected by the Central Bank of Taiwan, who relayed the information to the tax authorities in Taiwan. However, the tax authorities concluded the investigation, declared it as pure tax avoidance, and charged additional tax assessments and fines based only on a small portion of the considerably wider illegal gain scheme. In this case, the tax authority did not handle the capital arrangement scheme and even ”legitimized” some of the embezzled company funds for the Chen family. This case study demonstrates that severe company and securities frauds can be hidden beneath apparent tax evasion. From a corporate governance perspective, such suspicious and irregular arrangements and cashflows often trigger other increasingly severe legal issues, including anti-money laundering investigations and the expropriation of company assets through the control of shareholders. This study identifies the sources of illegal gains, the true victims of frauds, and the malfunction of corporate governance and securities supervision. A ”whole-of-government” approach, comprising a cooperation platform and an interagency information sharing mechanism, is essential for amending the current regulatory loopholes.起始頁-結束頁：205-205資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201904_38(2).ENG2058篇名：審計專業懷疑與個案教學作者：周玲臺關鍵字：專業懷疑;個案教學與寫作;影響力教學期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：專業懷疑是審計專業之主要基石，其不僅是列入教科書與公報中之抽象理論概念，更是需要融入審計人員專業思考、查核規劃、執行程序與評估判斷中之實際作為，重要性無庸置疑。故審計教師之教學目標不僅要滿足觀念、知識的傳授與考試準備，更應包含培育學生養成專業懷疑能力，此種影響學生專業與決策行為之教學方法，可稱作影響力教學（Personal Impact Teaching），而「個案教學與寫作」正是一種能影響學生個人之重要教學方法。本文首先說明作者參與個案教學與寫作的各階段心得，接著以審計專業懷疑為例說明一般課堂講授的內容，與個案教學可能誘發的學生反應有何不同。並選擇十餘個與審計專業懷疑或會計財務相關的中英文教學個案，分為四項主題加以介紹，以降低有意嘗試個案教學者的蒐尋或摸索。起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會9篇名：個案就像一本故事書作者：劉順仁期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：11-15資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會10篇名：學術研究與教學個案之結合作者：吳安妮期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：17-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會11篇名：國泰人壽外匯價格變動準備金制度之意涵：匯率風險、避險成本與損益平穩並列篇名：Foreign Exchange Valuation Reserves for Cathay Life Insurance Co., Ltd.: Exchange-Rate Risks, Hedging Cost, and Earnings Smoothing作者：林純央(Chun-Yang Lin);張窈菱(Yao-Lin Chang);林嬋娟(Chan-Jane Lin)關鍵字：國泰人壽;匯率風險;外匯價格變動準備金;財務報表分析;金融監理;Cathay Life Insurance Co., Ltd.;Exchange-Rate Risk;Foreign Exchange Valuation Reserves;Financial Statement Analysis;Financial Supervision期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本個案描述國泰人壽對外匯價格變動準備金機制的態度，及2011年底該準備金制度發布後，其所受之影響。本個案試圖探討何以壽險業者致力於增加海外投資部位，以及該作為之經濟與會計後果。其次，本個案藉由分析外匯準備金的會計及實質影響，思考該制度對利害關係人之利弊。本個案發現外匯準備金雖然讓匯兌損益較平穩，但經濟實質上並未改善企業的匯率暴險。此外，不論就外匯準備金原始提列的來源或其對企業經營的實質影響，保戶利益皆可能因而受損。英文摘要：This library case describes the attitude of Cathay Life Insurance Co., Ltd. toward the foreign exchange valuation reserves (FEVR) policy that was enacted at the end of 2011, and how it was affected by FEVR. We examine why life insurers increasingly engage in foreign investments and explore the influence of foreign investments on life insurers' financial condition and accounting numbers. By analyzing the effects of the FEVR policy on life insurers' accounting numbers and the economic reality, we discuss its effects on the stakeholders of life insurers. Our findings show that although the FEVR policy can ensure smooth earnings, insurers' exchange-rate exposure is not economically reduced. Moreover, analyses of the origin of FEVR and its real effects on business operation show that FEVR policy is harmful for policyholders.起始頁-結束頁：25-26資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).CNI02512篇名：普祺樂實業有限公司－創造價值的契機並列篇名：Proluck Co., Ltd.: Opportunity to Create Value作者：田耕銘(Keng-Ming Tien);洪嘉馨(Chia-Hsin Hung);黃政仁(Cheng-Jen Huang);張深閔(Shen-Min Chang)關鍵字：作業價值管理;行動應用程式;顧客獲利;策略;Activity Value Management (AVM);Mobile Application (APP);Customer Profitability;Strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：經營者的第一守則是「滿足顧客需求，符合顧客價值主張」，特別是在服務業。但在滿足顧客的同時，公司真的有獲利嗎？普祺樂20多年來，一直秉持「顧客至上」的原則經營企業，卻遲遲在業績及獲利上無法有更大的突破。為此，普祺樂從2013年持續地導入BSC（平衡計分卡）、APP（業務作業資訊化）、及AVM（作業價值管理）。普祺樂藉由BSC確認企業的經營方向，採用APP滿足顧客價值主張，2017年再導入AVM系統，該系統不但提供精確的顧客獲利資訊，也提供員工創造價值的資訊，這讓普祺樂瞭解為何經營績效一直無法有更大的突破，也因為有了精確的顧客獲利資訊，讓普祺樂了解哪個客戶才能真正為公司帶來獲利並成為普祺樂規劃新策略的依據。回首過程，充滿著掙扎與挑戰。英文摘要：The foremost principle of a successful manager is ”fulfilling customers' needs and matching customer value proposition,” particularly in the service industry. The approach a company should adopted to simultaneously earn profits and fulfill customers' needs is a critical topic. Proluck was set up more than 20 years ago on a customer-first principle; however, the company has a long way to go before it can achieve a major breakthrough in performance. To this end, Proluck has implemented a Balance Scorecard (BSC), Mobile Application (APP), and Activity Value Management (AVM) since 2013, with the BSC helping to confirm its business direction. Through the use of APP, the company is able to fulfill customers' value propositions. Proluck began executing AVM in 2017; the system not only provides accurate customer profit information but also presents information regarding employee performance. However, despite these efforts, the company is unsure why it has been unable to achieve an increasingly substantial breakthrough. If Proluck can determine the type of customers that will improve the firm's performance, its managers can set up a new strategy with increasingly accurate customer profitability information. The overall development of Proluck has been fraught with struggles and challenges.起始頁-結束頁：45-46資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).CNI04513篇名：鉅茂科技－與價值創造型態配適的績效獎酬設計並列篇名：Datawin Technology Co., Ltd.: Performance Evaluation and Reward System Designed by Value Creation Patterns作者：傅鍾仁(Chung-Jen Fu);黃瓊瑤(Chiung-Yao Huang)關鍵字：價值創造;成本習性;績效評估;獎酬制度;團隊合作;Value Creation;Cost Behavior;Performance Evaluation;Award System;Teamwork期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：績效評估制度對組織成員的決策與行為有極大的影響，但這些影響多不會直接顯現，而是與其他因素結合，以本位主義、反功能決策及逆選擇等問題形式呈現。如何設計出能激勵員工努力與團隊合作的績效評估與誘因機制，是企業經營者與學術界所共同關切的議題。本個案以本土的代表性資訊系統服務廠商－鉅茂科技公司與其輔導老師的對話及互動過程，探討應如何把價值創造型態與成本習性等兩個重要的整體績效影響因素，融入其績效評估與獎酬制度中，提供員工適切的激勵誘因並促進團隊合作的組織文化。英文摘要：The system of performance appraisal substantially influences decision-making and employee behavior. Most of these influences do not appear explicitly, but are combined with other factors that are present in the form of problems related to self-determination, dysfunctional behavior, decision-making, and adverse selection. Designing a performance evaluation and reward system that can motivate employees to work hard through teamwork is a common concern for business managers. Through the dialogue and interaction between a representative local vendor and a consultant that provides information-system services (i.e., Datawin Technology) to explore how to integrate two crucial factors that influence overall performance (i.e., value creation patterns and cost behavior) into the performance evaluation and reward system to provide employees with appropriate incentives and create an organizational culture that encourages teamwork.起始頁-結束頁：65-66資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).CNI06514篇名：結建民防－AVM打開顧客專案服務價值之黑盒子並列篇名：Jiejian Minfang - Activity Value Management Reveals Customer Project Service Value作者：郭翠菱(Tsuilin Kuo);劉惠玲(Hui-Ling Liu);林雀華(Chueh-Hua Lin);陳力新(Lixin Chen)關鍵字：作業價值管理（Activity Value Management, AVM）;顧客價值;顧客關係管理;Activity Value Management, AVM;Customer Value;Customer Relationship Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：面臨大陸房地產泡沫化的高度競爭複雜環境下，如何精算作業成本利潤來增加顧客專案管理成功的機會，篩選優質顧客，提升顧客價值俾創造長期雙贏關係，是當前建築設計業者亟待解決的重要課題。本個案描述結建民防公司如何克服挑戰成功實施「作業價值管理（AVM）」系統，整合原因與結果之資訊，打開顧客專案服務價值的黑盒子，並經由篩選合適的有價值顧客，為公司長期發展奠定穩固的根基。本個案為田野個案，從實際案例中讓學生瞭解並學習AVM相關理論的重要概念，另外透過AVM所產出的資訊，對顧客不賺錢問題與顧客區隔管理提出改善建議，最後在討論過程中釐清管理顧客價值的利弊得失。英文摘要：Under difficult and competitive market conditions, improving the efficiency of customer project service value and determining how to precisely obtain the cost and profit information of each project are primary concerns for the construction industry. This enables the selection of valuable customer, creation of customer value, and establishment of long-term win-win relationships. This case study describes how activity value management (AVM), a management accounting system, efficiently integrated the causal relationships of management information for Jiejian Minfang (JJMF) and revealed customer project service value by using valuable customer selection mechanisms to develop the longitudinal foundation of JJMF. The findings can helps students to understand and examine AVM for practical application and use the information generated through AVM to accurately distinguish profit- or loss-yielding customers, thus providing the optimal solution for the selection of valuable and profitable customers.起始頁-結束頁：83-84資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).CNI08315篇名：特色醫療整合之合併綜效－以臺北市立聯合醫院為例並列篇名：Synergetic effects of integrating specialty healthcare: A case study of Taipei City Hospital作者：江家瑜(Chia-Yu Chiang);朱炫璉(Hsuan-Lien Chu);黃勝堅(Sheng-Jean Huang)關鍵字：特色醫療;合併策略;差異化策略;組織變革;Medical Specialties;Merger strategy;Differentiation Strategy;Organization Change期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：在醫療市場提供服務的各級醫療院所，因外部與內部環境之改變，競爭越具激烈。臺北市各市立醫院肩負重症醫療、慢性病、精神疾病與公共衛生之責，如何在私立醫院等強敵環伺下轉換並找到公立醫院之角色。本個案以臺北市議會法規委員會舉辦唯一一場座談會之會議記錄，開啟臺北市市立醫院確定邁向特色醫療整合之路，探討公立醫院之合併原因與過程，合併時面臨的組織變革問題、如何解決，以及整合後所產生的效益。個案內容適用於競爭策略、策略管理及醫院成本管理等課程內容之個案教學，預計達成的教學目標如下：（1）透過臺北市各市立醫院之特色醫療整合，了解公立醫院所面臨外部與內部環境之變化；（2）了解公立醫院如何選擇競爭策略；（3）了解公立醫院於整合過程中面臨之組織變革問題，與思考其解決方式；（4）了解公立醫院整合後引發之財務面與非財務面效益。英文摘要：Increased competition in the health care market has caused many hospitals to face difficulties and even become bankrupt. The improvement and transformation of operations is the only method for hospitals to survive, particularly in the case of public hospitals. Integration is a popular strategy for improving hospital performance. This case study primarily focuses on the reasons for and processes of integration, organizational integration and post-integration organizational identification, and the synergy of integration in Taipei City Hospital. The case study emphasizes the correlation between the integration strategy and organizational management of public hospitals and determines whether a differentiation strategy can be used to improve the competitive advantages and synergy of public hospitals.起始頁-結束頁：103-104資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).CNI10316篇名：Foreign Exchange Valuation Reserves for Cathay Life Insurance Co., Ltd.: Exchange-Rate Risks, Hedging Cost, and Earnings Smoothing作者：Chun-Yang Lin;Yao-Lin Chang;Chan-Jane Lin關鍵字：Cathay Life Insurance Co.,Ltd.;Exchange-Rate Risk;Foreign Exchange Valuation Reserves;Financial Statement Analysis;Financial Supervision期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：This library case describes the attitude of Cathay Life Insurance Co., Ltd. toward the foreign exchange valuation reserves (FEVR) policy that was enacted at the end of 2011, and how it was affected by FEVR. We examine why life insurers increasingly engage in foreign investments and explore the influence of foreign investments on life insurers' financial condition and accounting numbers. By analyzing the effects of the FEVR policy on life insurers' accounting numbers and the economic reality, we discuss its effects on the stakeholders of life insurers. Our findings show that although the FEVR policy can ensure smooth earnings, insurers' exchange-rate exposure is not economically reduced. Moreover, analyses of the origin of FEVR and its real effects on business operation show that FEVR policy is harmful for policyholders.起始頁-結束頁：147-147資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).ENG14717篇名：Proluck Co., Ltd.: Opportunity to Create Value作者：Keng-Ming Tien;Chia-Hsin Hung;Cheng-Jen Huang;Shen-Min Chang關鍵字：Activity Value Management (AVM);Mobile Application (APP);Customer Profitability;Strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：The foremost principle of a successful manager is ”fulfilling customers' needs and matching customer value proposition,” particularly in the service industry. The approach a company should adopted to simultaneously earn profits and fulfil customers' needs is a critical topic. Proluck was set up more than 20 years ago on a customer-first principle; however, the company has a long way to go before it can achieve a major breakthrough in performance. To this end, Proluck has implemented a balance scorecard (BSC), APP, and AVM since 2013, with the BSC helping to confirm its business direction. Through the use of APP, the company is able to fulfill customers' value propositions. Proluck began executing AVM in 2017; the system not only provides accurate customer profit information but also presents information regarding employee performance. However, despite these efforts, the company is unsure why it has been unable to achieve an increasingly substantial breakthrough. If Proluck can determine the type of customers that will improve the firm's performance, its managers can set up a new strategy with increasingly accurate customer profitability information. The overall development of Proluck has been fraught with struggles and challenges.起始頁-結束頁：167-167資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).ENG16718篇名：Datawin Technology Co., Ltd.: Performance Evaluation and Reward System Designed by Value Creation Patterns作者：Chung-Jen Fu;Chiung-Yao Huang關鍵字：Value Creation;Cost Behavior;Performance Evaluation;Reward System;Teamwork期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：The system of performance appraisal substantially influences decision-making and employee behavior. Most of these influences do not appear explicitly, but are combined with other factors that are present in the form of problems related to self-determination, dysfunctional behavior, decision-making, and adverse selection. Designing a performance evaluation and reward system that can motivate employees to work hard through teamwork is a common concern for business managers. Through the dialogue and interaction between a representative local vendor and a consultant that provides information-system services (i.e., Datawin Technology) to explore how to integrate two crucial factors that influence overall performance (i.e., value creation patterns and cost behavior) into the performance evaluation and reward system to provide employees with appropriate incentives and create an organizational culture that encourages teamwork.起始頁-結束頁：185-185資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).ENG18519篇名：Jiejian Minfang - Activity Value Management Reveals Customer Project Service Value作者：Tsuilin Kuo;Hui-Ling Liu;Chueh-Hua Lin;Lixin Chen關鍵字：Activity Value Management;AVM;Customer Value;Customer Relationship Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Under difficult and competitive market conditions, improving the efficiency of customer project service value and determining how to precisely obtain the cost and profit information of each project are primary concerns for the construction industry. This enables the selection of valuable customer, creation of customer value, and establishment of long-term win-win relationships. This case study describes how activity value management (AVM), a management accounting system, efficiently integrated the causal relationships of management information for Jiejian Minfang (JJMF) and revealed customer project service value by using valuable customer selection mechanisms to develop the longitudinal foundation of JJMF. The findings can helps students to understand and examine AVM for practical application and use the information generated through AVM to accurately distinguish profit- or loss-yielding customers, thus providing the optimal solution for the selection of valuable and profitable customers.起始頁-結束頁：201-201資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).ENG20120篇名：Synergetic effects of integrating specialty healthcare: A case study of Taipei City Hospital作者：Chia-Yu Chiang;Hsuan-Lien Chu;Sheng-Jean Huang關鍵字：Medical Specialties;Merger strategy;Differentiation Strategy;Organization Change期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：38卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Increased competition in the health care market has caused many hospitals to face difficulties and even become bankrupt. The improvement and transformation of operations is the only method for hospitals to survive, particularly in the case of public hospitals. Integration is a popular strategy for improving hospital performance. This case study primarily focuses on the reasons for and processes of integration, organizational integration and post-integration organizational identification, and the synergy of integration in Taipei City Hospital. The case study emphasizes the correlation between the integration strategy and organizational management of public hospitals and determines whether a differentiation strategy can be used to improve the competitive advantages and synergy of public hospitals.起始頁-結束頁：219-219資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.201901_38(1).ENG21901篇名：朝向一種想像人類學的遺產研究：檳城案例並列篇名：Towards an Anthropology of Heritage Imaginaries: Penang Case Study作者：李威宜(Wei-I LEE)關鍵字：遺產想像;中介者;再現;走動;無形文化遺產;檳城喬治市;heritage imaginaries;mediators;representation;walking;intangible cultural heritage;George Town期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：面對數十年來遺產研究的熱議趨勢，當代人類學的知識生產，可以發揮什麼作用？本文由聯合國教科文組織無形文化遺產（Intangible Cultural Heritage, ICH）公約制定過程的爭點切入，說明人類學者在當代遺產體制變革中的兩種新角色：參與決策制定、觀察中介活動。再以馬來西亞檳城喬治市ICH的實作經驗為例，檢視遺產工作者搶救思維與檔案化的侷限，並重新檢討ICH護衛觀念的困擾，釐清人類學對於ICH「再現」議題的觀點。然後，我將提出一種想像人類學的遺產研究新取向，以遺產中介者為調查對象，觀察想像力在走動式體驗案例中的作用。最後在結論部分，本文將嘗試闡發「遺產想像」的詮釋觀點，具體表述為三個由檳城實作觀察得出的文化遺產理念：復返傳統脈絡的想像工具、打造無形基礎設施的想像工程、訊息交流的想像轉化。英文摘要：Facing the vogue of the heritage study over decades, what can contemporary anthropology do? This paper aims to propose an approach of heritage imaginaries, based on observations at the World Heritage site George Town, Penang, Malaysia. First, in presenting debates occurred during the elaboration process of Intangible Cultural Heritage (ICH) conventions at UNESCO, I will briefly examine two new roles that anthropologists are playing in the renewal of the contemporary World Heritage regime: participant decision-making and observation of mediation activities. Then, through a case study of the experiences of ICH preservation work carried out in Penang, I highlight the limitations of a rescue mentality and the archiving process, review the difficulties of ICH safeguarding, and clarify the anthropological perspective on ICH as ”representation.” Finally, in order to explore a new approach for the anthropological study of heritage, I will propose to take the heritage mediators as objects of research, and observe the work of imagination in concrete walking experiences. In my conclusion, I try to elaborate the concept of ”heritage imaginaries” with three principal ideas crystallised through the Penang case: the return to traditional context as a tool of imagination, the construction of intangible infrastructures as imaginative engineering, and information exchanges as sources of imagination.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所2篇名：廢墟堛熔圻咧飽G彰化鐵道遺產志工的情感勞動並列篇名：Heterotopia in the Debris: Affective Labor of Railway Heritage Volunteers in Changhua作者：郭雅瑜(Ya Yu Kuo)關鍵字：彰化;鐵道遺產;異托邦;志工;情感勞動;Changhua;Railway Heritage;Heterotopia;Volunteer;Affective Labor期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文以2014-2016彰化鐵道遺產保存運動為例，探討鐵道遺產志工屬性及志工情感勞動歷程與目的，由此思考人類學在文化遺產研究的新取向。民族誌主要描繪台灣晚近彰化鐵道遺產保存運動中，志工為何走進遺產廢墟，進行打掃及文資調查；以及，他們如何在具「異托邦」特色的空間內交織出人與「非人」的互動。研究發現，遺產志工係多元異質流動，夾雜公民、常民與菁英之地方社群，有別於宗教團體與社區志工。志工情感勞動依保存運動不同階段而調整其目標與內容，並賦予全球化下地方新視野。英文摘要：Through the case study of railway heritage preservation campaign in Changhua from 2014 to 2016, this article examines the attributes of railway heritage volunteers as well as the process and purpose of their affective labor, thereby proposing a new approach in anthropology to study cultural heritage phenomena. The ethnography mainly depicts why volunteers were motivated to enter the debris, sweeping and investigating cultural resources there. Also, it focuses on how they weave the interaction between human and ”non-human” inside the heterotopic space. The research indicates that heritage volunteers, different from volunteers in modern religious groups and communities, were multiple, heterogeneous, and constantly changing. In addition, they included local citizens, ordinary people, and local elites. The goal and content of their affective labor was adjusted according to different phases of the preservation campaign, which provides new vision for the production of locality under globalization.起始頁-結束頁：47-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所3篇名：新治理性下的再分配政治：池上稻米產業轉型的例子並列篇名：The Politics of Redistribution under New Governmentality: The Case of Rice Industry Transformation in Chihshang Township作者：王乃雯(Naiwen Wang);黃宣衛(Shiun-wey Huang)關鍵字：地理認證;治理性;新自由主義;再分配;稻米產業轉型;geographical indication;governmentality;redistribution;neo-liberalism;transformation of rice industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：池上稻米產業在歷經WTO的衝擊下，由地方糧商發起的地理認證試圖由一條新的路徑來開闢台灣稻米產業的品質之路。然而，受限於台灣早期商標法中，「地名」不能做為商標的限制，鄉內糧商透過以「鄉徽」為商標的取徑，統一聯合對外代表「池上米」。但因辨識度不足，未能提高市場能見度而收場。之後，受惠於WTO中的智慧財產權規範，最終取得了以「地名」作為「地理認證」的標章權利。然而，「地名」由原先的公共財轉換為帶有商品性質的標的後，其權利分配，形成各方勢力斡旋的焦點。另一方面，在池上伴隨「地理認證」而來的是一套新的治理性的誕生。雖然池上米在地理認證成功後因獲得消費者認同，而使農民收入有所增加，但原先存在於糧商與農民之間的獲利分配問題並未解決。推動地理認證的事務官通過選舉成為鄉長，在鄉長任內積極處理池上稻米產業分配結構，再建構「農民─國家」的關係，也為農民對國家的想像創造了另一種路徑，並由此得到地方政治對其治理方式的高度認同。英文摘要：Suffering from the impact of the WTO, the grain merchants of Chihshang Township strove to find a new model for rice purchasing and selling through geographical indication. However, early Taiwanese trademark laws forbade the use of location name for profit. To overcome this regulation, the Chihshang grain merchants united as one group to use the logo of Chihshang Township to represent their legal status, but due to the poor recognition of the Chihshang Township logo in the market, this plan failed. Later, due to the WTO including the protection of intellectual property rights as one important provision, the grain merchants ultimately benefited from Taiwan's entrance and were able to register the term Chihshang for geographical indication. Once public property, the location name gained commodity-like characteristics, and different powers eagerly focused on how to distribute the new rights and profits. At the same time, a new governmentality was born after the registration of geographical indication. Although the income of Chihshang peasants increased due to the success of the ”Chihshang brand,” the basic contradiction of profit distribution between grain merchants and peasants was not resolved. The officer who promoted the geographical indication effectively became the head of the township and actively dealt with the structural problem of distribution within the rice industry. This action re-articulated the peasants' imagination of state effect and helped him acquire the support of most townspeople and become the first person to run unopposed in the 2018 Chihshang township election.起始頁-結束頁：85-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所4篇名：何翠萍、尤瑪．達陸：《共作：記「她方的記憶」泰雅老物件的部落展示》作者：謝景岳(Ching-yueh Hsieh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：134-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所5篇名：Janet Durham: Blood Work: Life and Laboratories in Penang作者：鄭瑋寧(Weining Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：138-143資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所6篇名：Kavich Neang：《一切堅固的終將煙消雲散》Last Night I Saw You Smiling作者：杜韋樺(Wei-hua Tu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：146-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所7篇名：Caroline Parietti and Cyprien Ponson：《本南人無盡的抵抗之歌》BE' JAM BE The Never Ending Song作者：趙恩杰(En-chieh Chao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：150-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所8篇名：甜蜜的殖民主義：從糖業殖民到觀光殖民並列篇名：Sugary Colonialism: From Sugar Plantation Colonialism to Tourism Colonialism作者：黃雅鴻(Ya-hung Huang);紀駿傑(Chun-chieh Chi)關鍵字：原住民族傳統領域;部落地圖;阿美族;台糖花蓮糖廠;大農大富平地森林園區;indigenous traditional territory;tribal mapping;Pangcah People;Taiwan Sugar Company Hualien Sugar Factory;Danong Da-fu Plain Forest Park期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究透過始於2002年參與阿美族傳統領域Karowa地名的訪察以及參與式地圖的繪製過程，產生了與普遍認為糖業為台灣經濟帶動者另一番截然不同的視角；認識到糖業經濟榮景的背後，事實上埋葬著原住民族土地遭掠奪後被迫遠離家園，以及原住民族依存於土地的歷史文化與認同遭到消抹、發展機會被糖業經濟取代的種種傷痛。本文從原住民族傳統領域權的角度切入，藉著探究阿美族傳統領域Karowa成為糖業經濟發展基地的歷史過程，除了揭露土地來源不正義的真相，同時指出殖民主義造成的不正義結果之壓迫性，並未隨著日治時期政權的離去與戰後戒嚴時期的結束而終結。現今花糖改造糖業生產空間的過程雖不見警察式暴力的土地佔領形式，然台糖公司長期漠視土地來源不正義的聲音，將Karowa空間的佔據視為理所當然，如日治時期般在「無原住民」的架構下生產迎合大眾觀光的空間，並未對花糖土地實掠奪自原住民族的歷史以及阿美族傳統領域的存在以任何方式加以承認，而是於花糖打造關於懷舊日本的地方迷思，並忽略Karowa部落地圖呈現的一百多個地名，反而透過網路票選命名平地森林園區的路段。對於視Karowa為家園的阿美族人可說成為壓迫性持續至今的來源之一。本研究指出，台灣原住民族試圖透過參與式製圖，以再領域化方式奪回傳統領域土地論述的主體性，詮釋其傳統領域土地不僅並非「空白」的無主地，且原住民族的主體性與生活軌跡在殖民者來到台灣前即已存在，以破除主流社會長期對原住民族權利的否認或誤認，並以此為基礎進一步訴求回復原住民族土地自主治理的權利。而原住民族傳統領域權的回復不僅牽涉到原住民族的主權議題，尚牽涉到非原住民是否覺知到並承認日常所涉足的空間是在原住民族的領域上，以及是否覺知到在原住民族領域上若不提原住民族的歷史，不僅形同否認殖民者搶奪或占據原住民族土地的歷史事實，也形同否認原住民族既有的土地主權與原住民族的受殖傷痛，使得非原住民同時成為不正義殖民遺緒的共同壓迫者。因此，本研究希冀透過此案例突顯原住民族傳統領域權的現實處境，思考主流社會如何為原住民族重新「創造出空間」，使原住民族回復被剝奪的土地並且補償民族文化原本可在這片土地得到發展的機會。英文摘要：In 2002, this research involved in the project of tribal mapping of Karowa traditional territory that used to be owned by Pangcah People. Contrary to the common belief that sugar industry was the driving force of Taiwan's economy, the project found that the ”success” of sugar economy was made possible by depriving indigenous people from their land by colonizers, and thereby causing indigenous people to lose their livelihood, culture, and identity. By exploring how Karowa traditional territory had become the base for sugar industry development, we attempt to reveal the injustice of land appropriation during Japanese colonial era. We also indicate that such injustice did not end with the end of Japanese colonial regime, nor with the end of martial law period during KMT's regime, it continues with new tourism industry development based in the same traditional territory of the Pangcah people. This paper indicates that Taiwan's indigenous peoples have attempted to recapture the autonomy of traditional territories in the way of reterritorialization through participatory mapping, which is for interpreting independently that their traditional territories are not terra nullius, but also indigenous peoples have existed in Taiwan at least for hundreds of years before the arrival of colonizers. Besides, this paper points out that the return of indigenous traditional territories not only involves indigenous people's autonomy issue, but also involve whether non-indigenous people are aware of and recognize that the touristic space involved is on the indigenous peoples' traditional territories. Non-indigenous people could be the unconscious ethnic oppressor if they are denied access to the true story of land appropriation of indigenous traditional territory by the colonizer. This paper also discusses about and makes recommendations on how the Taiwanese society can begin to work toward recreating ”the native space,” and to undo the injustice that has inflicted upon indigenous people for many decades.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所9篇名：Envy, Jealousy and Evil Eye: A Comparative Study of Pashtun Tribal and Mexican Peasant Cultures並列篇名：羨慕、忌妒及惡魔之眼：普什圖族與墨西哥農村文化的比較研究作者：Irfan Ullah;Mokhtar Saidin;Nasha Rodziadi Khaw關鍵字：culture;emotion;envy;evil eye;Pashtun tribal and Mexican peasant Cultures;文化;情感;羨慕;惡魔之眼;普什圖族與墨西哥農村文化期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：This study focuses on human emotions, specifically envy, jealousy, and the related belief in the evil eye. These emotional states are explored across two different cultures: Pashtun culture in Pakistan and rural Mexican culture, which share similar norms and practices (Gohar, 2018). In the present comparative ethnography, the authors interviewed people in different villages of Swat Valley in Pakistan and contrast their findings with the concepts of envy, jealousy, and evil eye in Mexican culture as highlighted in the previous studies. The findings reveal that envy and jealousy are inherent in both the cultures, and evil eye is treated as a manifestation of them in both. These results have implications for creating awareness about how envy, jealousy, and evil eye interact in different cultural communities.英文摘要：本研究主要關注人類的情感，尤其是羨慕、忌妒與惡魔之眼的相關信仰，在兩個不同文化中的情形：在巴基斯坦普什圖文化及墨西哥的農村中，對之有相似的規範和實作（Gohar, 2018）。在這篇比較民族誌中，筆者訪問巴基斯坦斯瓦特河谷（Swat Valley）不同村莊的人們，並將調查發現與過去墨西哥研究中所突顯的羨慕、忌妒與惡魔之眼的概念進行比較。研究結果顯示，羨慕和忌妒都是兩者文化中所固有的，而惡魔之眼則被視為其表現。本研究結果有助於理解羨慕、忌妒與惡魔之眼如何在不同的文化社群中交互作用。起始頁-結束頁：45-64資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所10篇名：The Reproduction and Inter-Generational Aspects of Jia: Case Studies from a Hoklo Village in Southwestern Taiwan並列篇名：「家」之再生產與跨世代性：臺灣西南部福佬農村的個案研究作者：前野清太朗(Seitaro Maeno)關鍵字：kinship;house society;out-migration;dwelling;Han Chinese;親屬;家屋社會;人口外流;住宅;漢人研究期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Recent trends in kinship studies emphasize the importance of human interaction in the reproduction of kinship relations. This article considers the reproduction of Hoklo Taiwanese kin groups (jia) in a contemporary Taiwanese village, focusing on relations impacted by multiple human and non-human factors. The research was conducted in a Hoklo village in Chianan plain area. Six examples were analyzed for their reproduction of jia through the inheritance of houses. People reproduced kinship relations through co-residence in traditional-styled compounds before the 1960s. Co-residence has gradually fallen out of favor. However, people reinterpret and reorganize ”incoherent” relations that emerged from past co-residences. Decision-chains between or across multiple generations link jia and their relations vertically. As houses and kinship ideals bridge these inter-generational decision-chains, we see how both human and non-human factors create the dynamics of the jia's reproduction.英文摘要：本文探討臺灣福佬人的「親屬」集團－「家」－通過繼承被再生產的過程。近年來，親屬研究開始重新思考「親屬」的概念。漢人研究也受到親屬研究的新趨勢、逐步形成重新分析漢人的「親屬」關係的潮流。這些新的研究主要關注人與人的互動、進而分析「親屬」的再生產。但筆者認為需要進一步關注人與非人因素之間的互動。本文從多元因素之間互動的角度出發、重新探討漢人（包括臺灣福佬人）的「親屬」集團及其關係的再生產機制。筆者在臺灣西南部嘉南平原的一個福佬農村進行田野調查。首先，筆者分別繼承「家」的3個類型：（1）部分維持共有財產、（2）完全分割共有財產、（3）放棄繼承或維持財產共有的狀態。其次，關於這3個類型還區別不同成立緣起的「家」：（a）符合父系理念的「家」、（b）不符合父系理念的「家」，並根據上述的6個類型筆者在田野抽出6個案例進行分析。在1960年代以前的調查村，村民一般居住傳統式的宅院（compound，三合院）。「家」的成員一般在宅院共享他們的生活經驗。1960年代台灣經濟的起飛提高農村的經濟水平，村民家計較有餘裕。並且，上揚的生育率使得增加各個「家」的成員數。結果，曾經人們共同居住的宅院容納不了新出生的子女、人們開始離開傳統式的宅院，並為扶育自己的子女蓋獨立棟的多層住宅（tower house，樓房）。同時，農業機械化不僅減少人力勞動與換工的機會，也降低通過共同居住籌措農業勞動力的需求。本文所探討的6個案例都經歷過共同居住的分解。居住在傳統式宅院的時期，不管是否符合父系理念的「家」，「家」的成員在宅院共享生活上的互動。人們離開宅院以後，他們主要在新的住宅開展互動，此時依據宅院的傳統互動方式已不存在或很少展現的。然而，在繼承宅院的場面人們依然要考慮過去在宅院存在的互動關係。因此人們對現在、過去的關係與「家」的理念做詮釋，同時把三者關係整合起來，試圖整理他們對當今「家」的關係。臺灣福佬人的「家」的再生產過程顯然體現著對過去的詮釋活動。而且這種可謂跨世代的互動是與非人因素（住宅與「親屬」理念）結合起來的。跨世代的非人因素的存在為現代與過去之間牽線塔橋。我們把分析「親屬」的視角從人與人的互動擴大到人與非人因素的互動，會更深刻地理解所謂「親屬」的關係及其內涵。起始頁-結束頁：65-92資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所11篇名：Book Reviews: Manual for Activities Directed at Underwater Cultural Heritage: Guidelines to the Annex of the UNESCO 2001 Convention作者：徐胤承(Yin-cheng Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：94-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所12篇名：Book Reviews: How the World Changed Social Media作者：林怡潔(Yi-chieh Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：99-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所13篇名：Film Reviews: Soviet Hippies作者：司黛蕊(Teri Silvio)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：106-108資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所14篇名：Film Reviews: The Maribor Uprisings作者：呂欣怡(Hsin-yi Lu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：109-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所01篇名：臺灣與南韓之經濟成長比較－合成控制法下的反事實分析並列篇名：A COMPARISON BETWEEN TAIWAN'S AND SOUTH KOREA'S ECONOMIC GROWTH: SYNTHETIC CONTROLS FOR COUNTERFACTUAL ANALYSIS作者：陳宜廷(Yi-Ting Chen)關鍵字：經濟成長率序列;合成控制法;反事實分析;Economic growth rates;Synthetic control method;Counterfactual analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文利用合成控制法（synthetic control method），對臺灣在1991年之後的經濟成長率序列進行反事實分析（counterfactual analysis），以研究若臺灣未曾脫離之前（1962-1991）的經濟狀態，在此期間可能會有的經濟成長率序列；並由實際成長率序列與反事實成長率序列之差異，推估臺灣在1991年之後因各種經濟條件的改變，對經濟成長率序列產生的影響。我們並以同樣的方法，對南韓的經濟成長率序列進行反事實分析，藉此比較兩國在1991年之後的經濟表現差異。反事實分析顯示，在1991年之後，兩國各自的總和效果多數時間皆明顯為負，且均有隨時間推移而擴大的趨勢；此外，臺韓的經濟成長差異不僅來自兩國在此期間的經濟條件差異，亦相當程度地反映出兩國即使維持在先前之經濟狀態下也可能有的差異。英文摘要：In this paper, we apply the synthetic control method to implement a counterfactual analysis for Taiwan's economic growth in the post-1991 period. The analysis explores Taiwan's economic growth in a counterfactual scenario where this period was still under the economic conditions of 1962-1991. We use the difference between the actual growth sequence and its counterfactual counterpart to identify the total effects caused by the structural changes in Taiwan's economic conditions. We also apply the same method to exploring Korea's economic growth in the same period, and compare the economic performance of the two countries based on the counterfactual analyses. We find that the total effects are negative and deteriorated over time for both countries. Moreover, the difference between the two countries' economic performance is due to the difference between their economic conditions in and before the post-1991 period.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：中低收入老人家庭的決策行為－國民年金與戶內資源分配並列篇名：LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME ELDERLY HOUSEHOLD DECISIONS: NATIONAL PENSIONS AND INTRAHOUSEHOLD RESOURCE ALLOCATION IN TAIWAN作者：蔡<U+5F63>涓(Wehn-Jyuan Tsai)關鍵字：國民年金;消費;家庭協商;戶內資源分配;雙重差分法;鄰近配對法;National pension;Consumption;Household bargaining;Intrahousehold resource allocation;Difference-in-differences;Nearest neighbor matching期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：我國在2008年以前老年人口經濟生活的安全網內僅涵蓋社會福利津貼以及職業相關的社會保險，其他未參加相關社會保險的人口則並未享有老年經濟生活的基本保障。有鑑於此，我國遂於2008年10月1日開辦國民年金保險，並正式將上述人口納入公共年金的保障範圍之內。本文主要使用2002-2007年與2009-2015年的「家庭收支調查」，分析國民年金政策對中低收入老人家庭戶內資源分配的影響。透過鄰近配對法建構本文用以分析的樣本，本文主要選擇以戶內擁有65歲以上（含）且領有國民年金保險的老年年金者（或符合領取資格的人口）所在之家庭做為實驗組；65歲以上（含）且領有國民年金保險的老年基本保證年金者（或敬老福利生活津貼的受益者）所在之家庭做為控制組，且應用雙重差分法，評估政策的效果。其中，為檢視所得收入者的個人特質對戶內資源分配所產生差異性的效果，本文亦將受益者的性別併入雙重差分法的分析架構之內。實證結果顯示國民年金政策將致使中低收入老人家庭的總消費支出因而下降9%。另外，所得收入者的性別亦被觀察到其將會對戶內資源的分配造成差異性的影響。英文摘要：Prior to 2008, means-tested social allowance and occupational pension schemes were introduced as a social safety net for limited numbers of the elderly. As a result, Taiwan first introduced national pensions on the 1st of October 2008 for the population not covered by occupational pensions. In this paper, we use the 2002-2007 and 2009-2015 waves of the Family Income and Expenditure Survey to study the effect of national pension policy on the intrahousehold resource allocation of low- and middle-income elderly households. We construct a novel matched dataset using the nearest neighbor matching method. By including the elderly who were 65 years old or older and who were eligible for or a recipient of the old-age pension payment as a treatment group and those who were recipients of the senior citizens welfare living allowance or the old-age basic guaranteed pension payment as a control group, we use a difference-in-differences method to evaluate the policy effects and to investigate whether the gender of the recipient affects that impact. Estimates suggest that, for low- and middle-income elderly households, the national pension policy will lead to a reduction in total expenditure by 9 percent. In addition, our results show that the gender of the recipient indeed affects the impact of national pensions.起始頁-結束頁：43-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：疊代模型中的零利率政策並列篇名：THE ZERO INTEREST RATE POLICY IN THE OVERLAPPING GENERATIONS MODEL作者：金志婷(Chi-Ting Chin);薛智文(Chih-Wen Hsueh)關鍵字：零利率政策;疊代模型;經濟成長;社會福利;Zero interest rate policy;Overlapping generations;Endogenous growth;Social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：既存文獻在確定生命期限與外生成長的疊代模型中發現：若政府給予各世代相同的現金移轉，單純的貨幣政策將引發跨代財富的重分配，進而導致名目利率為零的Friedman法則並非最適的貨幣政策；不過，若貨幣政策可搭配著給予各世代不同的現金移轉，進而完全抵銷貨幣政策所形成的跨代財富重分配，零利率政策將為最適。然而，現實社會的狀況是長期經濟會有正成長且民眾的生命期限具不確定性，本文以不確定生命期限與<U+5185>生成長的疊代模型為架構，並考慮貨幣為交易媒介的功能，得到與既存文獻不同的結論：（1）無論民眾是否收到等額的現金移轉，零利率政策皆非最適；（2）相較於給予各世代等額的現金移轉，政府若可透過給予各世代不同的現金移轉以消除貨幣政策所形成的跨代財富重分配將帶來較高的社會福利；（3）釘住名目利率的政策在一般情況的動態上具有不確定性，顯示無論零利率政策是否為最適，經濟體系未必會隨時停留在長期穩定的均衡上，除非有誠實的政府願意隨時維持實質貨幣餘額的穩定性，名目利率指標在動態上才會具有確定性。英文摘要：In the study of the overlapping-generation model with a certain lifetime and exogenous growth, it was found that if there is a simple monetary policy where each cohort receives an equal lump-sum monetary transfer from the government, this might result in intergenerational wealth redistribution, and therefore the zero interest rate policy (Friedman rule) fails to be the optimal monetary policy. However, if the government provides different fiscal transfers for each cohort, the redistribution effect could be offset and the zero interest rate policy becomes optimal. Nevertheless, the economic growth rate is positive and the lifetime of a person is uncertain in reality. We consider an uncertain lifetime, endogenous growth, and the role of money as a medium of exchange in an overlapping-generation model. This paper results in different conclusions from the literature: (1) the zero interest rate policy fails to be the optimal monetary policy no matter whether each cohort receives an equal lump-sum monetary transfer from the government; (2) the social welfare from different fiscal transfers to each cohort is larger than that from equal lump-sum monetary transfer; (3) the nominal interest rate target is indeterminacy and then the economic outcome does not always stay at the long-run equilibrium, unless the honest government is willing to maintain the stability of the real money balance, and then the nominal interest rate target can be determinacy.起始頁-結束頁：97-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：壹、2019年臺灣經濟情勢總展望之修正作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：145-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：149-176資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷1期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：177-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：經濟全球化與家庭所得不均度－臺灣的實證研究並列篇名：ECONOMIC GLOBALIZATION AND HOUSEHOLD INCOME INEQUALITY: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF TAIWAN作者：賴美<U+9834>(Mei-Ying Lai);劉彥汝(Judith Liu);劉宗欣(Zong-Shin Liu)關鍵字：家庭所得不均度;貿易自由化;國外直接投資;Household income inequality;Trade liberalization;Foreign direct investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：臺灣自1980年代起採取貿易自由化政策，並逐漸讓金融自由化；在此同時，家庭所得不均度亦持續擴大。本研究的目的為實證探討經濟全球化（貿易及金融自由化）是否為造成臺灣家庭所得不均度擴大的原因？我們以1980－2013年時間序列資料，並考慮五個國內控制變數進行分析。實證結果顯示，擴大貿易會降低所得不均度，資本流出會使所得不均度上升，但因資本流出占GDP比例甚低，故整體而言經濟全球化會使所得不均度縮小。造成家庭所得不均度擴大的原因，最主要為國內產業偏向技術工人的技術進步；高等教育使技術工人的相對供給增加也會使所得不均度擴大，但1990年代後高等教育的大幅擴張則有助於降低所得不均度。此外，2002及2004年兩次金融改革後也會使所得不均度上升。英文摘要：Since the 1980s, Taiwan has adopted trade liberalization policies and gradually promoted financial liberalization; meanwhile, the extent of household income inequality has become pronounced over time. The goal of this paper is to empirically investigate whether economic globalization (trade and financial liberalization) has led to the rising household income inequality in Taiwan. Our analysis is based on time-series data from 1980 to 2013 with the consideration of five domestic control variables. The empirical results show that trade openness reduces the income inequality, whereas capital outflows result in an increase in income inequality. Since capital outflows only constitute a very small share of GDP, economic globalization tends to lower income inequality overall. Our results indicate that technological progress in favor of skilled labor is the main driver of the rising household income inequality. Higher education increases the relative supply of skilled workers and also adversely affects the income distribution. However, the massive expansion of higher education beginning in the 1990s helps reduce the income inequality. In addition, the two financial reforms implemented in 2002 and 2004 also contribute to higher income inequality.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：臺灣與韓國產業別總要素生產力之比較：1981－2010並列篇名：INDUSTRIAL-LEVEL TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY COMPARISONS BETWEEN TAIWAN AND KOREA: 1981-2010作者：傅祖壇(Tsu-Tan Fu);林億明(Yih-Ming Lin);林幸君(Hsing-Chun Lin);孔維新(Wen-Hsin Kong);陳柏鈞(Po-Chun Chen)關鍵字：總要素生產力;產業結構;經濟成長來源;KLEMS;TFP;Industrial structure;Origin of economic growth;KLEMS期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文利用臺灣與韓國KLEMS資料庫及產出成長會計帳法，推估臺灣及韓國1981至2010期間之產業別總要素生產力（TFP），並推估各產業別成長來源。本文先簡要介紹KLEMS模型，其次再利用臺灣與韓國KLEMS資料庫進行實證分析，實證結果發現：臺灣與韓國的經濟成長，均以1981－1990經濟成長之表現為最佳，之後則逐漸下滑；經濟成長來源亦主要以中間投入要素的增加為主，其中製造業中間投入之貢獻又比服務業高；製造業中間投入以原物料的貢獻為主，而服務業中間投入則以企業服務的貢獻最高；勞動投入成長的貢獻在臺灣及韓國均非常低。再就總要素生產力而言，臺灣服務業之TFP要遠高於製造業之TFP；相反地，韓國之製造業TFP則優於服務業之TFP。比較臺灣與韓國的產業別TFP表現，實證結果發現：韓國之製造業TFP優於臺灣，而臺灣的服務業的TFP表現則遠優於韓國的服務業。這似乎意味著，在未來之產業發展上，臺灣的優勢產業為服務業，故應更重視服務業之投資，相反地，韓國則應以製造業之投資為優先。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to compare the growth dynamics at the industry level between Taiwan and Korea during 1981-2010 and to identify key drivers which resulted in industrial growth. First, we concisely introduce the KLEMS approach to the growth accounting method. We estimate the industrial-level TFP using Taiwanese and Korean KLEMS databases. The empirical results show that, Taiwan's and Korea's output growth rates during 1981-1990 were higher than those of other periods. After 1990, the output growth rates slowed down for both economies. The contribution of intermediate inputs (II) accounts for majority of the gross output growth rate. The contributions of II of tertiary industries are much less than those of secondary industries. Among the intermediate inputs, material contribution is the highest in secondary industries, whereas service contribution is the highest in tertiary industries. The contribution of labor input is slight in Taiwan and Korea. Furthermore, in Taiwan, the performance of the TFP growth rate in service is better than that of manufacturing industries, whereas the performance of the TFP growth rate in manufacturing industries is better than that of service industries in Korea. Taiwan has greatly outperformed Korea in TFP of service industries in past decades. This implies a good potential to expand service industries in Taiwan. Korea's TFP for the service industries as a whole were found to be negative in all three past decades. This shows the comparative disadvantage of Korea in service industrial development.起始頁-結束頁：47-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：我國經濟成長率與其構成項目近十年在「定基法」衡量下的當季預測績效綜合評析並列篇名：EVALUATING THE CURRENT-QUARTER GROWTH RATE FORECASTS OF TAIWAN'S REAL GDP AND ITS COMPONENTS MEASURED VIA FIXED-BASED METHOD IN THE LAST DECADE作者：徐士勛(Shih-Hsun Hsu)關鍵字：經濟成長率;定基法;連鎖法;景氣循環;預測誤差;時份資料;預測績效;Economic growth rate;Fixed-based method;Chain-linked method;Business cycle;Forecasting error;Vintage;Forecasting performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：針對我國行政院主計總處在每季季中以「定基法」所衡量的實質國<U+5185>生產毛額及其構成項目的當季成長率預測，此研究從衡量相對變異程度的預測能力指標、變動方向預測正確率、效率性、不偏性以及對應的多變量模型作了完整的預測績效評析。和文獻上的已知研究不同，我們除了分別探討構成項目的成長率預測外，也首度採用從2004年11月至2014年8月所公佈的40個不同時點的「時份資料」進行分析。分析結果顯示，實質國<U+5185>生產毛額及其構成項目的當季成長率預測在當季實際變動方向上的誤判率平均高達20％以上，前期的景氣狀態與各項目的預測誤差實現值訊息也未被完全有效使用，因此仍有改善預測績效的空間。由於主計總處所採用的預測模型在目前採行的「連鎖法」與原「定基法」間應仍具有一定的相關與連貫性，此研究關於預測變數誤差間及與景氣狀態之間的關聯性多面向且完整的分析結果，應具有作<U+7232>進一步改善其預測模型的參考價值。英文摘要：In this study, we systematically evaluate the forecasting performance of the Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics (DGBAS) of the Executive Yuan in Taiwan. We focus on the current-quarter growth rate forecasts of real GDP and its components (consumer spending, investment, government spending, imports, and exports), which are measured based on a fixed-based method. For the sample period from November 2004 to August 2014, the quarterly data including forecasts and realizations are collected from 40 different vintages. Some important findings are as follows. First, the examination of direction-of-change forecasts indicates that over 20% of DGBAS current-quarter forecasts predicted wrong directions for changes in real GDP and its components from the previous quarter to the target one. Besides, most forecast errors depended on their past values and on the previous economic state; that information was helpful to improve the forecasting performance. Although DGBAS currently constructs the real values via the chain-linked method instead of a fixed-based one, its reference forecasting models and methods are not supposed to be revised too much. Therefore, the results of this paper are expected to be helpful to improve DGBAS's models and methods for forecasting and real GDP and its components.起始頁-結束頁：85-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：壹、2019年臺灣經濟情勢總展望作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：121-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：125-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：49卷2期出版年：2019起始頁-結束頁：153-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：專家身體技能之特點與對自動化原則的檢討並列篇名：The Characteristic of Expert Bodily Skill and a Critique of the Principle of Automaticity作者：鄭喜(Hsi-Heng Cheng)關鍵字：自動;身體技能;習慣;蒙特羅;詹姆士;automatic;bodily skill;habit;Barbara Gail Montero;William James期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：蒙特羅批評「自動化原則」對於專家身體技能的描述，雖然自動化原則似乎是廣泛流傳的說法。自動化原則主張：當進行順暢時，專家的演出是自動化的，而且並未包含自我反思與心力的運用。筆者認為蒙特羅的批評以及自動化原則皆有其有理之處，因此著手將兩者有理的主張整合起來，再和從詹姆士與杜威的相關想法發展出來的主張相結合，而提出了一套對於專家身體技能的正面描述。英文摘要：Barbara Montero argues against what she calls ”the principle of automaticity,” even though this principle seems to be widely held. This principle offers an account of expert bodily skill, claiming that when all is going well, expert performance is automatic and involves neither significant self-reflective thinking nor mental effort. In this paper, it is argued that both the principle of automaticity and Montero's positive thesis contain plausible thoughts, and a better characterization of expert bodily skill is provided by incorporating tenable ideas from the principle of automaticity, from Montero, from William James, and from John Dewey respectively.起始頁-結束頁：417-454資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201912_49(4).00012篇名：《精神現象學》中的意識之認知及其判準並列篇名：The Cognition of Consciousness and Its Criterion in the Phenomenology of Spirit作者：史偉民(Weimin Shi)關鍵字：黑格爾;判準;意識;精神現象學;Hegel;criterion;consciousness;Phenomenology of Spirit期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文首先指出黑格爾在《精神現象學》中主張認知主體、知識與絕對者不可分離，是以不同的意識之形態間的比較所需的判準，才成為一個問題。其次本文主張：作為認知的形式，一個意識之形態即為一種認知主體據以建構其實在的概念架構，從而意識之諸形態彼此不可共量。本文最後將說明黑格爾如何克服意識諸形態間的不可共量性，解決判準問題。英文摘要：This paper will begin by arguing that Hegel insists upon the inseparability of the knowing subject, knowledge, and the absolute, so that there is for him the problem of the criterion required for a comparison of forms of consciousness in the Phenomenology of Spirit. It will then be maintained that, as a form of knowing, a form of consciousness is nothing but the conceptual framework through which a certain type of knowing subject constructs the reality it inhabits. Forms of consciousness are thus incommensurable. At last, this paper will offer an account of how Hegel manages to overcome the incommensurability among forms of consciousness and solves the problem of the criterion.起始頁-結束頁：455-483資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201912_49(4).00023篇名：論Gettier式思想實驗的兩難並列篇名：On a Dilemma of the Gettier-Style Thought Experiments作者：李國揚(Kok Yong Lee)關鍵字：思想實驗;必然論;反例;證成者;特異情境問題;thought experiment;necessitism;counterexample;justifier;the problem of deviant realization期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷4期出版年：2019中文摘要：Gettier式思想實驗是當代知識理論討論的標準論證工具之一。根據主流的典型論證策略，Gettier式思想實驗既被用來作為反對知識理論的反例，也被用來作為支持知識理論的證成者。本文將指出，Gettier式思想實驗這兩個理論角色的要求是有內在衝突的，而這將導致一個兩難的處境。英文摘要：Gettier-style thought experiments have become a standard methodology in modern epistemology. Not only are the Gettier-style thought experiments frequently used as counterexamples to an account of knowledge, they are also commonly taken to be justifiers of an account of knowledge. This paper argues that there is a tension between these two argumentative roles of the Gettier-style thought experiments, which gives rise to a dilemma.起始頁-結束頁：485-521資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201912_49(4).00034篇名：不作為因果判斷中的假設性思考問題並列篇名：The Problems of Counterfactual Thinking in Omissive Causal Judgements作者：王鵬翔(Peng-Hsiang Wang)關鍵字：不作為的因果關係;對比因果論;反事實思考;因果篩選;規範;Causation by omission;contrastive theory of causation;counterfactual thinking;causal selection;norms期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文運用對比因果論，處理不作為因果判斷中假設性思考的三個問題：不作為如何成為原因項、原因過度滋生、因果篩選。本文主張：一、不作為宣稱是一種對比判斷；二、不作為因果判斷中的假設性思考受到規範限制，它是正常化情境的反事實思考；三、因果篩選涉及規範適用。最後，本文指出，不作為因果判斷的因果篩選，其目的是為了找出適當的干預對象，並提出一種基於成本考量的判準來補充訴諸規範的因果篩選。英文摘要：This article deploys the contrastive theory of causation to deal with three problems of the hypothetical thinking in omissive casual judgements: omission as causal relata, the proliferation of causes, and causal selection. It argues: first, claims about omissions are contrastive judgements; second, the hypothetical thinking in omissive causal judgements is constrained by norms and is counterfactual reasoning in a normalized situation; third, causal selection involves the application of norms. Finally, the point of causal selection in omissive causal judgments is to pick out appropriate targets for interventions, and this article proposes a criterion based on the cheapest cost preventer to supplement the norm-based criteria for causal selection.起始頁-結束頁：287-340資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201909_49(3).00015篇名：An ”Englishwoman's Private Theatrical”: Helen Maria Williams and the New Female Citizen並列篇名：一個「英國女性的私人劇場」：海倫．瑪麗亞．威廉絲與新女性公民作者：翁怡錚(Yi-Cheng Weng)關鍵字：Helen Maria Williams;national identity;universal benevolence;cosmopolitanism;female citizen;海倫．瑪麗亞．威廉絲;國家認同;普世仁愛;世界主義;女性公民期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：Helen Maria Williams's writing moves beyond boundaries of different kinds. Williams's eight-volume Letters from France: Containing Many New Anecdotes Relative to the French Revolution, and the Present State of French Manners, for example, is a combination of several genres, including travel narrative, letters, and her first-hand reports of the events in France between the years 1790 and 1796. This is a study of the first volume of Letters Written in France (1790), comprising twenty-six letters. In this paper, I will endeavour to show the ways in which Williams moves beyond a national frame and employs the epistolary form to provide a transnational outlook at the French Revolution. I will argue that Williams's Letters from France is an important form of cultural and literary participation that enables the reconfiguration of modern nationhood and cosmopolitanism, and allows a new definition of female citizenship to emerge.英文摘要：海倫．瑪麗亞．威廉絲的書寫跨越了數個類別和領域，威廉絲於1790至1796年間陸續出版，終集結成全八冊的《來自法國的書信》即為一例。本文欲探討於1790年問世之第一冊《寫於法國的信》，試圖跳出過往學界閱讀此文本的視角，將其脈絡化並置放於書信體敘事和政治論述之傳統，以釐清十八世紀晚期有關女性書寫、國家認同、世界主義間的思想脈絡與爭議。筆者希望藉此重新審視十八世紀末期女性書寫中蘊含的啟蒙思想和意涵，除此之外，也透過探討女性文學中普世仁愛、多元世界觀的可能性，使新女性公民的身分得到開展。起始頁-結束頁：341-374資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201909_49(3).00026篇名：芭芭拉．克魯格圖文作品之宰制霸權與主體自我並列篇名：Control Hegemony and Subject Self in Barbara Kruger's Works with Pictures and Words作者：陳育菁(Yu-Jing Chen)關鍵字：當代藝術;觀念藝術;霸權;主體;芭芭拉．克魯格;contemporary art;Conceptual art;hegemony;subject;Barbara Kruger期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷3期出版年：2019中文摘要：芭芭拉．克魯格的作品融合觀念與女性主義藝術，對日常生活的建構和消費、誘惑和控制的社會機制進行批判性理解。本論文分為「宰制霸權」與「主體自我」兩大範疇，探討與分析克魯格的圖文作品傳達性屬差異是經過文化詮釋過後的意涵，性屬強制身體變成一個文化符號，刻板印象更有助於製造標準化的主體。軀體美學使身體成為異化的產品、消費的對象，身體是權力的鬥爭場域，為規範權利下幽暗沉默的犧牲品。克魯格的圖文作品慧黠幽默的諷刺性結合，揭示社會隱而不宣的現實，完成階段性的時代任務，極具歷史意義及價值。英文摘要：Barbara Kruger's works blend Conceptual and Feminist art, and critically understand the social mechanisms of daily life construction, consumption, seduction and control. This thesis divides Kruger's works into two categories: ”control hegemony” and ”subject self,” and discusses and analyzes how Kruger's works with pictures and words convey gender differences, which are meanings under cultural interpretation, gender forces bodies to become cultural symbols, and stereotypes facilitate to create standardized subjects. Body aesthetics makes bodies to become alienated products and consuming objects. Bodies are fields of struggle for power and gloomy silent victims under normative rights. Kruger refers to the monitoring and materialization of women under the gaze of patriarchy by way of mirror and sculpture. The ironic combination of Kruger's works with pictures and words, and deployment of humor, reveals hidden realities of society and women's unspeakable claims. Kruger's works complete stage tasks and are replete with great historical significance and value.起始頁-結束頁：375-415資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201909_49(3).00037篇名：Between Reality and Representation: The Crossing of Boundary in Wordsworth, Kant, and Coleridge並列篇名：現實與文學呈現之間：華茲華斯、康德與柯爾律治作品中的疆界跨越作者：李佳容(Chia-Jung Lee)關鍵字：Kant;Coleridge;Wordsworth;aesthetic idealism;the Literary Absolute;華茲華斯;康德;柯爾律治;美學創作;「文學絕對性」期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：This paper will explore the impact of Immanuel Kant and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, two influential figures in Western philosophy, on William Wordsworth's writing to arrive at a finer understanding of this poet's use of language that includes the intellectual and artistic landscape of his poetry as a function of 18th-century aesthetics. A dominant train of thought extending from German Idealism to British Organicism is concerned with the aesthetic presentation of ideas, whose function is the creation of a world in which ”the absolute” can be accessed directly. Kant's core epistemological concept is that the world's rational order is the product of the rule-based activity of ”synthesis.” While Kant believes that the world is comprehensible in light of our inner synthetic faculties, Coleridge supposes that there are ”empirical laws” in nature. However, the ”empirical laws” of the Dinge an Sich challenge our mind's desire to encompass them. Within Coleridge's organic whole, there is a dynamic play of fragmentary forces, and this ironic pattern of the fragmentary and the whole strongly influenced Wordsworth's writing. My study will thus attempt to clarify the more perplexing problem of the nature of Wordsworth's interaction with nature. Here the fragment ”replicates” the whole on the basis of its fragmentary totality. This problematic reflexive mode of ”the literary absolute” invites further exploration. My study, then, aims to provide a fuller understanding of how, in the context of aesthetic idealism, Wordsworth engages with the problem of presenting new, exciting, challenging ideas and emotions in his poetry while at the same time expressing a profound sense of loss.英文摘要：此論文探討西方哲學史中深具影響力的人物──康德與柯爾律治──對華茲華斯的文學創作影響；德國理想主義至英國有機體論皆探討對於思想的美學呈現，美學創作旨在型塑一個「絕對」可被美學直接觸及的世界。康德認識論中的核心論點為世界的理性秩序是由以規則為本的「綜合」活動所創造，而此活動源自人心；相對地，柯爾律治認為在自然中存有「以經驗為根據」的法則，其有機整體論中存有不同片斷力量，而正是此整體與不完整的組合構成其創造哲學，此研究將嘗試揭露出華茲華斯的自然文學呈現中更複雜的交織點──整體中不完整性同時「複製」了整體性──以深入研究華茲華斯文學創作歷程中，受到西方哲學影響的同時，如何亦帶入其深藏的失落感。起始頁-結束頁：143-199資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201906_49(2).00018篇名：Mental Health Disparities by Sexual Orientation in the U.S.: Current Patterns and Recent Trends並列篇名：當代美國心理健康不平等的趨勢：性傾向的差異作者：謝寧(Ning Hsieh)關鍵字：LGB;mental health;marriage equality;sexual orientation;同志;心理健康;婚姻平權;性傾向期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：In the past few decades, U.S. society has gradually become more accepting of gays, lesbians, and bisexuals (LGB). The recent nationwide legalization of same-sex marriage is a monumental example of that acceptance. Despite the progress in civil rights, population-based studies since the early 2000s have noted that LGB populations continue to exhibit poorer health outcomes compared to their heterosexual counterparts. According to minority stress theory, prejudice, discrimination, and violence directed at sexual minorities over the course of their lives accounts for this health inequality. Using representative data from the 2013-2016 National Health Interview Survey, the current study examines recent patterns of, and potential explanations for, mental health disparities by sexual orientation in the U.S. The study investigates whether mental health disparities have narrowed significantly since the introduction of marriage equality and whether younger LGB people experience fewer health disadvantages compared to older ones. Results show that LGB people continue to experience higher levels of mental distress than heterosexuals. Most of the health disadvantages faced by gay men and bisexual men and women cannot be explained fully by access to socioeconomic resources or marital status, whereas disadvantages faced by lesbian women are largely attributable to these factors. Moreover, not only do mental health disparities by sexual orientation persist in the years from 2013-2016, but the disparities are actually larger among younger people. These findings suggest that marriage equality is not a panacea for the mental health of sexual minorities and that much more effort is needed to address fundamental rights for sexual minorities.英文摘要：過去幾十年來，美國社會逐漸接納同志社群（同性戀及雙性戀），並在2015年全面通過同性婚姻法案。然而，自2000年初以來的大規模人口調查研究持續發現，同志與異性戀間仍存有顯著的健康差異，同志的健康狀況普遍較差。性少數壓力理論（minority stress theory）指出，同志群體在社會上面臨的偏見、歧視和暴力，為此健康不平等的主要原因。本研究使用2013－2016全國健康訪查資料（National Health Interview Survey）分析美國當代性傾向與心理健康的關聯和趨勢，以及健康不平等的相關因素。研究發現，同性婚姻法案通過後，同志與異性戀之間的心理健康差異並未顯著下降，且年輕人口中的健康差異反而大於老年人口。此外，社經條件和婚姻狀態無法解釋多數同志群體的健康劣勢（女同性戀除外）。研究結果顯示，婚姻平權並非同志健康的萬靈丹，社會應同時落實其他基本人權保障，才能減低同志與異性戀間的健康不平等。起始頁-結束頁：201-241資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201906_49(2).00029篇名：A Longitudinal Analysis of How Perceived Discrimination Gets Under the Skin: Investigating Gender and Racial/Ethnic Differences並列篇名：歧視感如何影響健康的長期分析：性別和種族的差異作者：楊澤全(Tse-Chuan Yang);孫斐諾(Feinuo Sun)關鍵字：health;perceived discrimination;social support;self-esteem;mediation;健康;歧視感;社會支持;自尊感;中介效應期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷2期出版年：2019中文摘要：There are three gaps in our understanding of the relationship between perceived discrimination and health: (1) the long-term direct effect of perceived discrimination on health is little known, (2) the pathways linking these two concepts are under-explored, and (3) it remains unclear if there is any gender or race/ethnicity difference in these relationships. To fill these gaps, this study applies a recently developed mediation analysis technique to the Americans' Changing Lives longitudinal data (N=1,163) and investigates whether self-esteem and social support mediate the adverse impact of perceived discrimination on self-rated health. Three major findings are obtained. First, an individual's experience of discrimination, even a decade ago, has a significant and negative effect on self-rated health via relationship that cannot be fully explained by variations in individual characteristics. Second, the self-esteem pathway plays a more important role than the social support pathway in mediating the relationship between perceived discrimination and self-rated health, with the former accounting for 70% of the effect, whereas the latter accounts for only 30%. Finally, though there is little evidence for gender or racial/ethnic difference, the self-esteem pathway is more critical for whites than non-whites. These findings suggest that perceived discrimination has a long-lasting effect on health and potential intervention should focus on the psychological pathway to prevent perceived discrimination from being a chronic stressor.英文摘要：現有對歧視感和健康的關係研究中，歧視感對健康的長期影響、影響路徑以及性別和種族差異受到的關注較少。本研究採取一種近期發展出的中介效應分析方法，來對「美國人民生活變遷追蹤調查」數據進行分析，討論歧視感是否會通過自尊心和社會支持，而對美國人民的自評健康狀況有負面影響。研究發現：（1）一個人感受到的歧視會顯著降低個人十年後的自評健康。（2）在歧視感與自評健康的關聯中，自尊感的中介效應（70%）比社會支持（30%）更為重要。（3）雖然總體來看沒有發現明顯的性別和種族差異，我們發現自尊感的中介效應對於白人相較於非白人更為重要。基於這些發現，我們認為歧視感會長期影響健康水平，並建議相關干預治療需關注受歧視者的心理路徑建設。起始頁-結束頁：243-285資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201906_49(2).000310篇名：”Poor Mamma's Panacea” -The Potato in Ulysses並列篇名：「可憐的媽媽的靈丹妙藥」：《尤利西斯》中的馬鈴薯作者：周幸君(Hsing-Chun Chou)關鍵字：potato;Ulysses;Ireland;talisman;food culture;馬鈴薯;《尤利西斯》;愛爾蘭;護身符;飲食文化期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Wandering the streets of Dublin on 16 June 1904, it was not the latchkey which kept Leopold Bloom company, but a more indispensable talisman: the potato inherited from his mother. This potato is usually referred to at critical moments in the text. In the course of his wanderings, Bloom feels strongly reliant on this heirloom. For a long time, this shriveled potato is regarded as a talisman, corresponding with the moly Hermes gives Odysseus to protect him from Circe's magic. But where does the ”magic” of this talismanic moly come from? Why does Joyce depict a reminder of the Great Irish Famine, and thus a symbol of betrayal, as a talisman for his modern-day Odysseus? The shriveled potato in Bloom's pocket, a talisman replete with significances carried by anIrish Jew, seems more mysterious than previously thought. This paper aims to investigate the significances of the potato in Ulysses by tracing the cultural heritages that have endowed it with various implications, including the Andean, the Spanish, the Irish, and the Jewish. The potato in Joyce's text is not only a complex symbol, but an icon of histories and heritages, and of the reality of daily life; thus its significations are multicultural and plural, rather than parochial and singular.英文摘要：1904年6月16日這天，當布盧姆在都柏林街頭漫遊，伴隨著他的不是重要的大門鑰匙，而是對他而言更加不可或缺的護身符：繼承自母親的馬鈴薯。文本中這顆馬鈴薯往往在關鍵時刻被提及。在布盧姆漫步街頭的過程中，他對這項母親的遺物始終有著強烈的心理依賴。長久以來，這顆乾癟的馬鈴薯被視為護身符，等同於赫米斯贈與奧德修斯免於瑟喜魔法的靈草。但是這株護身靈草的「魔力」來自何處？為何喬伊斯在《尤利西斯》中把愛爾蘭大饑荒的提醒物／背叛的象徵描寫為其筆下現代奧德修斯的護身靈物？布盧姆口袋中乾癟的馬鈴薯，一枚由猶太裔愛爾蘭人隨身攜帶、布滿意涵的護身符，似乎遠比想像中更加神秘。本論文企圖追蹤賦予馬鈴薯種種意涵的文化來源，包含安地斯、西班牙、愛爾蘭與猶太傳統，藉以探究《尤利西斯》中馬鈴薯的重要含意。喬伊斯文本中的馬鈴薯不僅僅是個複合象徵，更是一段歷史、一項傳承、一件日常生活現實，其含意廣泛多元而非狹隘單一。起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201903_49(1).000111篇名：Sibling Influences, Sibling Similarities, and Parent Care in Late Life並列篇名：手足影響、手足相似性及對年老父母的照顧作者：林一芬(I-Fen Lin);吳學聖(Hsueh-Sheng Wu);黃敏雄關鍵字：care hours;caregiving;diffusion of responsibility;social comparison;social learning;照顧時數;老年照顧;責任分攤;社會比較理論;社會學習理論期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：Researchers have extensively examined why some particular adult children provide care to their aged parents, but rarely considered sibling similarities and influences in their examinations. Guided by social learning theory and diffusion of responsibility theory, we investigate whether sibling similarities are associated with adult children's care hours, net of the parent's and child's characteristics. Based on social comparison theory, we further examine whether such associations differ across adult children, depending on whether adult children share the same characteristics as their siblings. Using Round 5 data from the National Health and Aging Trends Study, we find that adult children provide more care hours when siblings are close in age, supporting social learning theory. In contrast, adult children provide fewer care hours in the presence of a greater share of siblings who are unpartnered or close to the parents, supporting diffusion of responsibility theory. Consistent with social comparison theory, social learning is stronger for younger adult children, and diffusion of responsibility is weaker when adult children are unpartnered or close to the parents. Findings from this study highlight the importance for future research of going beyond parent-child dyads and incorporate sibling influences when studying the caregiving behavior of adult children.英文摘要：對於哪些成年子女會對年邁的父母提供照顧，已經有相當廣泛的研究。不過，這一些研究甚少考量到成年子女的兄弟姊妹及其相似性對提供照顧的影響。我們在統計上控制父母與成年子女的特質之後，分析子女與其手足的相似性對提供年邁父母照顧時數的影響，檢視研究結果是否呼應社會學習理論與責任分攤理論的論述。另外，我們進一步分析，子女與其兄弟姊妹之間共同特質的存在，是否改變了前兩項理論所預期會有的影響，並藉此驗證社會比較理論。我們使用「美國健康與老齡化趨勢調查」的第五波資料做分析，發現手足之間年齡差距較小時，提供的照顧時數較多，合乎社會學習理論所預期。如果手足之中有較高比例是單身或是與年邁父母的關係較為親密的話，則會提供父母較少的照顧時數，符合責任分攤理論的論點。在較年輕的成年子女之中，社會學習理論所預期的影響較強；當成年子女都是單身或是與父母的關係較為親密時，責任分攤理論所預期的影響較弱。因此，研究結果也支持社會比較理論。本研究的發現有重要意涵，在研究成年子女對年邁父母的照顧行為時，不應該只考慮父母與子女的雙邊關係，還應該考量子女的兄弟姊妹及其相似性對照顧老年父母的影響。起始頁-結束頁：45-73資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201903_49(1).000212篇名：社會學之眼：在馬內的《鐵路》中重新發現社會學並列篇名：Oeil Sociologique - (Re-)Discovering Sociology in Manet's Chemin de Fer作者：陳宗文(Tzung-Wen Chen)關鍵字：社會學之眼;馬內;鐵路;聖拉扎車站;視覺社會學;oeil sociologique;Manet;railway;Gare Saint Lazare;visual sociology期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：49卷1期出版年：2019中文摘要：社會學之眼存在社會學知識產生之前，或社會學成為一門學科之前，用以察驗與開啟社會學問題意識，挑戰觀者既有認知模式。本論文以法國畫家馬內為例，就其1874年展於沙龍的作品《鐵路》，探討畫家的社會學之眼。馬內是許多社會思想家討論過的對象，但未能將馬內與社會學的發生更緊密關聯。馬內的社會學之眼得透過時代精神論、社會變遷論與社會發生論等角度來理解。本論文主張在反身性的考量下，除用社會學檢視其他領域的姿態來自我檢驗，亦應借取其他領域如藝術領域的經驗，來檢驗社會學自身，以自許作為與時俱進，持續「在形成中」之學科。英文摘要：This paper utilizes Edouard Manet's work Chemin de fer, also known as Gare Saint Lazare, to discuss the concept of oeil sociologique (sociological eye). Although being selected and exposed in the Salon of 1873, Chemin de fer was very different, in subject, style and even size, from other paintings exposed in the Salon, such as that of Gerome's Eminence grise. With an oeil sociologique, Manet saw unconsciously and spontaneously ”problematic” dimensions in an ordinary scene. The picture prepares for a good start point of sociological research on railway's impact on modern life. The oeil sociologique is available only when sociological thinking emerges, in a pre-sociological stage prior to consolidation of a discipline called sociology or to initiation of a sociological study. By analyzing Chemin de fer, in accompaniment with Manet's career, I propose that period spirits, social changes and social genetics are potential factors that contribute to the oeil sociologique. Manet's case is a non-reproducible historical experiment occurred in an age when sociology was about to emerge. But the conditions and situations that contribute to Manet's oeil sociologique are heuristic for us in this age of sociology in crisis.起始頁-結束頁：75-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.201903_49(1).000301篇名：題型設計效應：以政治知識為例並列篇名：The Effect of Question Format: A Study in Political Knowledge作者：林瓊珠(Chiung-chu Lin);張一彬(Yi-bin Chang);黃秀端(Shiow-duan Hawang);吳俊德(Jun-deh Wu)關鍵字：開放式題型;封閉式題型;題目主題;政治知識;open-ended question;closed-ended question;question topic;political knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：43期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文根據兩波電話訪問資料，探討問題型式差異對民眾政治知識的影響。除檢視受訪者在不同題目型式的答題情形外，也同時探討問題型式對不同主題的政治知識的影響，最後並探討影響受訪者政治知識表現的因素。本文研究發現：不同題目型式顯著影響受訪者答題表現。相同文字語句測量以及控制其他可能影響因素下，無論是何種面向的政治知識，受訪者在封閉式題型的表現都比開放式題型佳，題型設計效果在政治人物面向的區辨力最大，在制度面向的差距最小。其次，如同預期，教育程度、媒體接觸、年齡等變項顯著影響個人政治知識高低，除了制度面向知識外，問卷型式對政治知識程度的影響力更甚於教育程度。第三，比較兩波資料發現，藉由電視和網路關注選舉新聞的民眾，在開放題型的表現較佳，顯示愈多的新聞關注有助提升選民的政治知識。最後，本文進一步探討問卷型式和性別間交互關係，性別在政治知識差距的大小和問卷型式有顯著關係，採選擇題型式可能使性別間的政治知識差距縮小。英文摘要：By analyzing data from two cross-sectional telephone interviews, this article aims to examine the effect of question format on measurement of political knowledge in Taiwan. It first tackles the response differences among open-ended and closed-ended questions by grouping in terms of question topic. It then further studies the factors that play a role in influencing an individual's political knowledge. The findings suggest that question format significantly affects individuals' responses. Answering the same question wording but in different question formats, the respondents obtained higher scores on closed-ended than open-ended questions. Knowledge questions on the topic of politicians had a higher difference, while the knowledge questions on policies displayed a narrower gap. Secondly and unsurprisingly, variables such as the level of education, media exposure, and age played important roles in one's level of political knowledge. Thirdly, those who paid more attention to election news through the media of television and internet performed better with open-ended questions. This finding illustrates that media exposure positively facilitated political knowledge. Lastly, a further study was done by examining the interaction effects between question format and gender. Different question formats highlight the gender gap. Closed-ended questions narrowed the knowledge gap between males and females, whereas, to some extent, a larger knowledge gap was found in open-ended questions. Question format indeed yields response effects.起始頁-結束頁：7-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心2篇名：教育程度的再思考：大學生政治知識與態度的定群追蹤調查並列篇名：Reconsidering the Measure of Educational Attainment: A Panel Study of Undergraduates' Political Knowledge and Attitudes作者：陳光輝(Kuang-hui Chen)關鍵字：政治社會化;政治知識;教育;問卷設計;political socialization;political knowledge;education;questionnaire design期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：43期出版年：2019中文摘要：由於高等教育的擴張，具有大學學歷的民眾所占比例日漸攀升。傳統的調查多以強調高低多寡的教育「程度」來測量受訪者的教育背景，而忽略了同等教育程度者當中的異質性。本文聚焦於「一般大學與技職大學」以及「公立大學與私立大學」這兩個學校屬性變項，以定群追蹤資料檢視就讀不同屬性大學學生的政治知識與態度是否有所差異。分析發現：相較於私立大學與技職大學學生，公立大學與一般大學的新生有較高程度的政治知識，也對社會運動有較為正面的態度。在大學教育過程中，就讀不同屬性學校學生之間的政治知識與態度間的顯著差異不僅持續維持，甚至有擴大的傾向。因此，因應高等教育擴張導致的影響，調查工作者應該針對受訪者教育背景的測量進行調整。我們建議針對完成高等教育之受訪者，於問卷中進一步追問他們所就讀大學的屬性，蒐集較為完整的資料。英文摘要：The proportion of people with higher education degrees has substantially increased in the last few decades due to the rapid expansion of higher education in Taiwan. It is common in survey research to measure individuals' educational attainment in terms of the ”level” of education they have attained, which ignores the possible heterogeneity among those who share the same level of educational attainment. Two factors are adopted to divide subgroups among undergraduate students: the first factor is whether the undergraduates surveyed are attending a public school or a private one; the second factor is whether the higher education institution the respondent is attending is a university or a vocational college. This paper thus aims to examine the political knowledge and attitudes possessed by a cohort of undergraduate students from a horizontal perspective to see whether there exists substantial deviation among the subgroups (public/private and university/ vocational college). The analysis of panel data indicates that first-year undergraduate students from different types of schools indeed possess unequal levels of political knowledge and attitudes. The gap not only remains significant during the period of attaining higher education, but becomes wider when it is assessed shortly before graduation. It is therefore recommended that survey research should revise the measurement of educational attainment as a response to the expansion of higher education. For respondents holding higher education degrees, we recommend adding questions in surveys to collect data on the type of university or college the respondents graduated from to gather more complete data, and this information should be useful for future studies on similar topics.起始頁-結束頁：45-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心3篇名：企業形象與服務品質對參展商滿意度與行為意向之影響並列篇名：Influence of Corporate Image and Service Quality on the Satisfaction and Behavioral Intention of Exhibitors作者：簡立賢(Li-hsien Chien);紀淑怡(Shu-yi Chi)關鍵字：結構方程式;驗證式因素分析;服務品質;企業形象;參展商;structural equation model (SEM);confirmatory factor analysis (CFA);service quality;corporate image;exhibitors期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：43期出版年：2019中文摘要：本研究以中華民國農會（簡稱全國農會）徵求海外農業展售活動參與廠商業務為例，探討徵展商之服務品質與企業形象對參展商滿意度及展後行為意向之影響，藉此瞭解相關影響參展商滿意度與全國農會徵展業務之關係，從中分析影響參展商參展意願因素與行為內涵，以便作為徵展商規劃徵展內容與調整業務之參考。針對近五年曾參加過全國農會海外徵展之113位參展商進行調查，本文採共變數基礎結構方程式（CB-SEM）分析，透過驗證式因素分析（CFA）及路徑分析法進行研究。統計結果發現：影響參展商對全國農會徵展活動滿意度最顯著的因素為「取得既有訂單」與「提升公司業績」；而影響參展商展後行為意向最顯著的因素為「參展績效」。整體而言，徵展商的服務品質與企業形象對於參展商滿意度具有正向顯著影響，其間企業形象並具有部分中介效果；服務品質對於企業形象也具有顯著提升關係，顯示：全國農會的徵展服務業務以有形、保證、可靠與關懷所呈現的服務內涵，確實獲得參展商一致的肯定，展後忠誠意向也受到參展商滿意度的正向顯著影響，並且願意因此支付較高的參展費用。因此，持續提供參展商應有的服務，以企業形象維繫高度忠誠，可視為全國農會經營海外商展業務提升收益之重要拓展策略。英文摘要：This study discusses the influence of the image and service quality of an exhibition organizer (the National Farmers' Association, NFA) on exhibitors' satisfaction and how the satisfaction affects follow-up re-connect intentions. Covariate-based structural equation modeling with confirmatory factor analysis and path analysis were applied to analyze interview data from 113 exhibitors who had participated in exhibitions abroad hosted by the NFA in the last five years. Empirical results show that the most influential concerns for exhibitors to decide whether to participate in exhibitions are ”intensive industrial attachment” and ”more new business”. Satisfaction with the ”exhibition's performance” is proven to be the most significant factor in influencing the behavioral intention of exhibitors. Positive influences of both service quality and corporate image on exhibitors' satisfaction are significant; also, the image factor is shown to act as a partial mediator. Exhibitors give consistently high ratings to the NFA on their service and reputation; therefore, a higher registration fee is feasible. Overall, it is shown that the NFA is able to manage the business of exhibitions abroad well, with profitable expansion strategies, to strengthen exhibitors' loyalty by providing reliable services with its good reputation.起始頁-結束頁：89-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心4篇名：時間就是金錢：訪問時間觀點下的雙底冊電話調查成本比較並列篇名：Time is Money: A Comparison of the Cost of a Dual-Frame Telephone Survey Based on the Length of Interview作者：陳鴻嘉(Hung-chia Chen)關鍵字：戶中選樣;手機調查;住宅電話調查;調查成本;雙底冊電話調查;random selection within household;cell phone survey;land phone survey;survey cost;dual-frame telephone survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：43期出版年：2019中文摘要：理論上，撥打手機所進行的問卷調查會因為較貴的通話費而有較高的調查成本。但本研究分析一項主題與消費者意向有關的雙底冊電話調查資料後發現，與住宅電話相比，手機調查不需要執行戶中選樣，手機樣本的人口特徵是年輕以及高教育程度，這些特點皆與訪問時間呈現負相關從而降低了調查成本。準此，本研究建議在唯手機族比例越來越高的今日，為避免住宅電話調查因涵蓋率不足所造成的估計偏誤，進行手機調查乃至於雙底冊電話調查勢所必然。至少手機調查成本過高不應是裹足不前的原因。英文摘要：Because of the calling fee, cell phone surveys are expected to be more expensive than land phone surveys. This study examined this assumption by analyzing data from a dual-frame telephone survey on consumer intentions. Contrary to the expectation, the results indicate that the cost of cell phone surveying was lower than land phone surveying because the length of cell phone interviews was shorter. This can be attributed to the fact that cell phone surveys do not need to conduct random selection within a household, and the respondents of cell phone surveys are usually younger and have higher levels of education. Given that the potential for non-coverage bias continues to increase as the cell-only population grows, this study suggests that it is necessary to adopt dual-frame telephone surveying. At a minimum, the cost of cell phone surveys should no longer be a crucial concern.起始頁-結束頁：135-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心5篇名：眾裡尋「輕」千百度：電訪戶中選Young之調整並列篇名：Selecting the Young Respondents: Adjustment of Random Selection within Household作者：陳鴻嘉(Hung-chia Chen);柯秀憓(Siou-huei Ke)關鍵字：戶中選樣;戶籍資料;普查;電話調查;census;household registration;telephone survey;within-household sampling期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：42期出版年：2019中文摘要：現今住宅電話調查中年輕樣本不足的情形一般皆歸因於唯手機族的日漸增多。但事實上，在年輕人多半住在多人戶的臺灣家戶結構限制下，現行住宅電話調查先等機率抽戶，再等機率抽人的抽樣設計，本來就不容易接觸到年輕樣本。準此，本研究以2010普查資料為依據調整戶中選樣表，試圖改善年輕樣本不足的情況。結果顯示，抽樣模擬與實際撥打的成效皆不錯。因此，本研究建議每年根據戶籍或普查資料調整戶中選樣表。英文摘要：The most important reason for the lack of young respondents in telephone surveys may not be the growth of cell-phone-only users among the young generation. Two-stage sampling and household structures are the major factors. Therefore, this study adjusts the method of random sampling within household based on the 2010 census. The results indicate that the adjustment improved participation among young people significantly. Thus, the current research suggests that it is necessary to adjust random selection within household on the basis of census or household registration data annually.起始頁-結束頁：7-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心6篇名：貪腐容忍的性別差異並列篇名：Sexual Difference on Corruption Tolerance作者：陶宏麟(Hung-Lin Tao);邱于恆(Yu-Heng Chiou)關鍵字：貪腐;性別;工作;職業;成功;corruption;sex;work;occupation;success期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：42期出版年：2019中文摘要：本文利用2009年「國際社會調查研究計畫」，發現女性較男性不能容忍成功要靠貪腐。在控制目前就業狀況、職業、所得，男性都較女性更容忍貪腐。失業、低職業地位或低所得者都較傾向認為成功是靠貪腐而來，這樣的心態又以男性較為嚴重。雖然失業的女性相較於有工作的女性更容忍貪腐，但男性失業所增加的貪腐容忍幅度更大。男性在縱向職業間的差異（高階職務與低階體力工）較女性同樣職業間的變化，有更明顯的貪腐容忍改變。所得與女性如何看待成功與貪腐無顯著相關，但低所得男性較高所得男性更容忍貪腐。憂鬱文獻顯示男性的憂鬱多來自成就問題，本文則發現世俗成就低的男性較容易有「認為成功是靠貪腐而來」的酸葡萄心態。若提高女性的工作地位，仍然是女性較同工作地位的男性更不能容忍貪腐。本文的政策涵義是，不論兩性對貪腐容忍的差異是來自先天或後天，提高女性執法與從政比例，可期待貪腐的降低。英文摘要：Using ISSP 2009, this study finds that, compared to men, women are more intolerant toward corruption. This conclusion holds even after controlling for work status, occupation, and income. Respondents with bad current work status (unemployment), low occupational status, and low income tend to be more tolerant of corruption, particularly for men. Although unemployment makes women more tolerant of corruption, it makes men much more tolerant of corruption. The difference in the degree of tolerance toward corruption between the highest and the lowest occupational statuses is greater for men than for women. Income is irrelevant to how women perceive the relation between success and corruption, but low income leads men to believe that to succeed one must be corrupt. Depression literature shows that the main sources of men's depression are related to achievement and employment, while our study demonstrates that men with low achievement are more likely to perceive success with a sour-grapes view. Enhancing women's working status does not change their degree of tolerance toward corruption. Therefore, no matter whether the tolerance difference between the sexes is from nature or nurture, increasing women's participation in politics and law enforcement is expected to reduce corruption.起始頁-結束頁：83-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心7篇名：Respondents' Manifestations of Extraversion in Survey Interviews: Their Relationships with the Extreme Response Style and Attitude Strength並列篇名：受訪者在調查訪問中所表現的外向特質：它們跟極端回答風格與態度強度的關係作者：楊孟麗(Meng-Li Yang)關鍵字：extreme response style;extraversion;participation eagerness;atmosphere of interview;attitude stability;極端回答風格;外向;受訪樂意度;訪問氣氛;態度穩定度期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：42期出版年：2019中文摘要：Two contradictory perspectives concern the significance of extreme responses in survey data, and each is supported by abundant empirical studies. One school holds that extreme responses indicate extreme and hence strong attitudes. The other considers extreme responses to be merely due to the extreme response style (ERS). The contradiction implies that the extent of the validity of extreme responses as an indicator of strong attitudes may need to be investigated by simultaneous examinations from the two perspectives. However, no such study exists. Furthermore, interviewers rely more or less on respondents' characteristics of extraversion to complete an interview. Yet, people higher on extraversion are more likely to have the ERS. This leads to uncertainty about the response quality of cooperative respondents. This study distinguishes two types of extraverted respondents: eager participants and friendly respondents. It forms four hypotheses: (1) Initial extreme responses involve ERS more than strong attitudes. (2) Respondents with higher levels of friendliness are more likely to have ERS. (3) Respondents with higher levels of participation eagerness are more likely to have ERS. (4) Respondents with higher levels of participation eagerness are more likely to have strong attitudes. However, we do not expect that respondents with higher levels of friendliness are more likely to have strong attitudes. The hypotheses are tested by analyzing data of the ”Survey Research on Attitudes toward Death Penalty and Related Values in Taiwan” in HLM models. AIC is used to compare model fits in testing hypothesis 1. Results support the hypotheses.英文摘要：對於調查資料裡的極端回答，有兩種迥異且矛盾的看法，且兩者都有紮實的文獻支撐。一是極端回答代表極端而明確的態度；二則認為它僅出自回答者的回答風格，並不代表明確態度。這項矛盾意味著極端回答作為明確態度的效度程度，需同時從這兩種看法檢視，但未曾有此種研究。另一方面，訪員常需仰賴外向的人格特質完成訪問，但研究發現外向者卻較可能有極端回答的風格。這讓人想問：合作的受訪者之資料品質如何？本文將外向特質區分為受訪樂意度，及在訪問中友善度，並形成四個假設：（1）在初始態度題以極端回答者，較多是因為有極端回答風格而致，較少是因為明確態度而致。（2）樂意度越高，極端回答風格越強。（3）友善度越高，極端回答風格越強。（4）越樂於受訪的人，其態度越明確。但預期受訪者的態度明確度跟其友善度無關。假設之檢驗，則使用多層線性模式分析2014年「台灣民眾對死刑的態度與相關價值調查研究」計畫資料。假設1的檢定並以AIC比較模型適配度。結果支持研究假設。起始頁-結束頁：125-164資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心8篇名：原住民選民的族群投票行為：2012年山地原住民立委選舉之個案研究並列篇名：Ethnic Voting Behavior of Taiwan's Indigenous Electorate: A Case Study of the 2012 Mountain Indigenous Legislators Election作者：包正豪(Cheng-hao Pao);周應龍(Ying-lung Chou)關鍵字：原住民;投票抉擇;族群投票;indigenous people;voting choice;ethnic voting期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：42期出版年：2019中文摘要：原住民政治之一項重要特徵是「大族宰制政治資源」。長期以來，除在原住民立委席次為八席時代，有少數特例以外，平地原住民立委俱為阿美族包辦，而山地原住民立委則是泰雅、排灣兩族寡占。而此現象往往被歸因於「原住民選民有族群投票的傾向」。此一說法，從選舉結果來看，似無疑問。但遽以總體資料的投票結果推論個別選民的投票行為， 恐犯區位推論之謬誤。有鑑於此， 本研究以「2013原住民政治態度與行為調查」為分析資料來源，從個體行為層面出發來剖析原住民選民投票行為。模型證實山地原住民在2012年立委選舉的確有族群投票的傾向。此一研究發現讓我們了解原住民政治版圖中，候選人以家鄉與鄰近鄉鎮為基礎的「核心地盤」是族群投票行為的具象表徵。至於非屬排灣族、泰雅族與賽德克族的其他原住民選民，政黨認同則成為他們選擇是否投票的關鍵。英文摘要：One of the characteristics of indigenous politics in Taiwan is that groups with a larger population usually control more political resources. It has always been the case that Taiwan's indigenous legislators usually come from the plain dwelling Amis and mountain dwelling Atayal and Paiwan. The explanation for this phenomenon is that indigenous people have a tendency toward ethnic voting. This argument is empirically based on election results. However, using aggregate level data to make inferences about individual voters' voting behavior might give rise to a problem of ecological fallacy. Therefore, this study explores the indigenous people's voting behavior by using data from the 2013 Indigenous Political Behaviors and Attitudes Survey. The model indicates that mountain indigenous people had a tendency toward ethnic voting in the 2012 Legislators Election, and the pan-Atayal were more willing to vote for the candidates from their ethnic group than for candidates from the Paiwan. This phenomenon makes us understand that a given candidate has an ”inner territory” which consists of his/her hometown and nearby townships, and this is one substantial feature of ethnic voting behavior for indigenous electoral politics. For other indigenous voters who are neither Paiwan nor pan-Atayal, party identification is the key factor having impact on their voting participation.起始頁-結束頁：165-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心
