01篇名：論非都市土地編定種類及其變更與更正問題並列篇名：A Study on the Changing and Correcting of Non-Urban Land's Classification作者：戴秀雄(Hsiu-Hsiung Tai)關鍵字：非都市土地;編定使用地別;變更編定;更正編定;行政處分;non-urban land;classify lands of various purposes;changing the classification of lands;correcting the classification of lands;administrative disposition期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：23卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：台灣全境非都市土地在民國65到74年間完成編定作業，並自此全面實施非都市土地使用管制。對於土地編定結果不敷使用需求者，民眾依法可循申請變更編定或是開發許可途徑改變土地編定種類。惟近年因配合辦理國土計畫相關作業，卻出現不少在土地初次編定完成30-40年後提出申請更正編定案件，而達到與申請變更編定相同之結果。為何非都市土地的編定結果可以在原結果生效數十年後辦理更正，相關法規究竟如何規範，其法理依據為何，甚至是否具有法理上的正當性，皆屬值得探究之處。由於本主題涉及事項欠缺相關法學研究，本研究嘗試由非都市土地初次編定作業的歷史背景開始，就其迄今之發展於空間規劃與法理面向進行分析，釐清變更編定與更正編定二者之差異，並檢視二者在法理上之妥適性。英文摘要：In order to implement the land use control of non-urban lands under regional plans. Non-urban lands in Taiwan were between 1976-1985 according to the land use purposes classified. Instead of applying for permission in order to change the results of land's classification, the results of land's classification could be changed when it has been done in so-called ”correcting” process. To notice is that, a legal result of land's classification can be (de facto) changed in such ”correcting” process retroactively. For this reason, such ”correcting” mechanism becomes an unique phenomenon in Taiwan's spatial plan system and needs to be analyzed. This phenomenon is how ever not yet academically researched, under neither spatial plan system nor juristical aspects. And the question, how can a result of land's classification in this way legally and legitimately be corrected, becomes juristically even more important, while this ”correcting” process was for the lands in aboriginal areas widely applied. This study reviews the historical background of both changing and correcting processes for the results of land's classification at first. As result of the systematical analysis in contents and structure of relevant Norms, this study has found out that, the ”correcting” process (or mechanism) of the land's classification against Administrative Procedure Act and is neither legal nor legitimate. A further application of this process under Spatial Planning Act is also not suggested.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.202005_23(1).00012篇名：臺灣濕地復育的機運與困境－以茄萣濕地為例並列篇名：Opportunities and Predicaments of Wetland Restoration in Taiwan: A Case Study on Jiading Wetlands作者：陳鵬升(Perng-Sheng Chen);齊士崢(Shyh-Jeng Chyi)關鍵字：土地利用競合;明智利用;茄萣濕地;衝突管理;濕地復育;Land use coopetition;Wise use;Jiading Wetlands;Conflict management;Wetland restoration期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：23卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：臺灣擁有豐富的濕地環境，是動植物重要的棲地，扮演著維護生物多樣性與種源基因庫等關鍵角色，但近年來濕地面臨各種開發，造成環境保育與開發之間的衝突與競合。本文以茄萣濕地為研究範圍，探討濕地保育法施行前後在重要濕地內開路，面臨的不同問題及處理過程，並藉此案例討論臺灣濕地復育的機運與困境。首先，回顧茄萣濕地的土地利用演變進程。其次，蒐集相關會議紀錄、審查紀錄、公告書圖及高等行政法院判決等公開資料。藉由上述資料中各關鍵人員發言內容，確認並歸納出利害關係人重要性矩陣。應用利害關係人分析矩陣，分析、驗證和檢討這些折衝過程中，主要利害關係人之間的衝突、互補、合作及相對重要性與影響力，以釐清主要操作權力的利害關係人及權力運作過程。研究結果顯示，藉由各利害關係人的協調與取捨，透過都市計畫變更程序，將高強度的土地使用轉變為濕地公園（127公頃）的例子，是臺灣濕地保育、復育及教育的第一個，也是最重要的案例。本研究對於提供瞭解案例發展的紀錄，解析其利害關係人與操作方式，以作為未來之借鏡有其必要性。本案例對於臺灣的濕地復育及都市發展如何有效共存提供了重要的方向。英文摘要：Taiwan exhibits plentiful wetlands, which serve as crucial habitats for animals and plants and play a key role in maintaining biodiversity and protecting the gene database of many species. Recently, conflicts and coopetition between environmental conservation and land development surrounding wetlands have arisen. This study explored the problems encountered in the road construction in Jiading Wetlands and solutions thereof before and after the enactment of Wetland Conservation Act, thereby revealing the opportunities and predicaments surrounding the wetland conservation efforts in Taiwan. First, changes in the use of Jiading Wetlands were reviewed. Second, public information such as meeting and review records, documents of announcement, and decisions by the high administrative court was collected; the speeches by key personnel in this information were analyzed to confirm and organize an importance matrix of stakeholders. The matrix was employed to analyze, verify, and discuss the conflict, complementation, cooperation, and relative importance and influence between the stakeholders, thereby clarifying the primary stakeholders and how they exercise their power. The analysis results revealed that the conversion of a high-intensity land use zone to a 127-hectare wetland park was the first and most crucial example of the wetland preservation, restoration, and education in Taiwan, achieved through the coordination and compromises between stakeholders as well as the changes in urban planning. The records on the case were analyzed to clarify the primary stakeholders and their exercising of powers, providing a crucial reference for effective coordination between wetland conservation and urban development in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：47-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.202005_23(1).00023篇名：臺灣衛星連續站坐標時間序列分析與平面坐標基準適用期之探討並列篇名：A Study on the Coordinate Time Series Analyzing of CORS and Applications of the Horizontal Coordinate System in Taiwan作者：周逸屏(Yi-Ping Chou);陳國華(Kwo-Hwa Chen);景國恩(Kuo-En Ching);楊名(Ming Yang);陳鶴欽(He-Chin Chen)關鍵字：一九九七坐標系統2010年成果（TWD97[2010]）;衛星連續觀測站;坐標時間序列分析;應變速率;TWD97[2010];continuously operating reference station (CORS);coordinate time series analyzing;strain rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：23卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：臺灣位於歐亞板塊與菲律賓海板塊交界處，為板塊運動活躍地區，由於板塊間的相對運動，使得臺灣目前使用的一九九七坐標系統2010年成果（簡稱TWD97[2010]），在精度上逐漸失去其準確性。近年來，臺灣地區逐步利用衛星觀測資料建立國家坐標系統，藉以維護其精度及延長適用期。本研究進行357個GPS衛星連續觀測站每日坐標的時間序列分析，以瞭解臺灣地區衛星連續觀測站的坐標時間序列擬合精度，成果顯示臺灣地區衛星連續觀測站在水平方向的時間序列擬合精度（95%信賴區間）為±12.0 mm，並利用坐標時間序列分析得到的GPS衛星連續觀測站速度推得臺灣地區的地表應變速率，以搭配測量作業規範檢視臺灣各地區TWD97[2010]成果的應用精度，提出各行政區適用的坐標系統建議，以提升測繪作業精度。依據本研究結果顯示，臺灣多數地區的TWD97[2010]公告成果在使用約10年之後，即無法符合高精度測量作業的需求，特別在西南部以及東部地區即有更新坐標系統之必要。英文摘要：Taiwan is located at the plate boundary between the Eurasian plate and Philippine Sea plate. Due to the relative motions between the two plates, the accuracy of the current static geodetic datum, TWD97[2010] are decreasing with time. In recent years, Taiwan has gradually established the national geodetic datum using the GPS data for maintaining the internal accuracy. By means of analyzing the coordinate time series on 357 continuously operating reference stations (CORS) data in Taiwan, the results showed the accuracy average is ±12 mm (under 95% confidence interval) in the horizontal component. In addition, based on the strain rate estimation from the CORS data, this study provided the suggestions on choosing the optimum coordinate system to maintain the accuracy of the field surveying in Taiwan. As the results, it showed that the coordinate system could only be used within 10 years for the requirements of the field surveying at a high level in most area of Taiwan. Especially in the southwest and the eastern regions of Taiwan, the coordinate system should be update in time.起始頁-結束頁：83-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.202005_23(1).000301篇名：誰是合格的婚姻移民並列篇名：Who's the Qualified Marriage Immigrant?作者：龍煒璿(Wei-Hsuan LUNG);李丹鳳(Dan-Feng LEE);張育華(Yu-Hua CHANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：115期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：311-333資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：人造社會性：從俗民方法學觀點初探人工智能如何作為一種社會現象並列篇名：Artificial Sociality: Ethnomethodological Inquiry into Artificial Intelligence as a Social Phenomenon作者：劉育成(Yu-Cheng Liu)關鍵字：人造社會性;人類智能;人工智能;俗民方法學;非人社會行動者;HI-AI互動;artificial sociality;human intelligence;artificial intelligence;ethnomethodology;non-human social actor;HI-AI interactions期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：72期出版年：2020中文摘要：社會學著重於關注行動者與社會的關係，其論述之有效性，部分奠基於人類仍是一獨特物種，在思想或行為上有別於其他生物有機體。人類智能與行為的獨特性，或可說是透過人與非人（其他有機體、技術物等）的互動所共構出來。1960年代開始，當科學家認為有可能打造出具有跟人類一樣思考與行為能力的機器時，「人之所以為人」的獨特性也開始受到挑戰。這個挑戰也對行動者與社會之間的那條界線提出了新的問題。本研究將透過俗民方法學的觀點及方法，將人工智能視為社會現象，進而探究如何可能將其放在社會學觀點中來進行討論。本研究也認為，俗民方法學觀點或可提供對人工智能科技之發展，以及將人工智能視為「非人社會行動者」的可能性上所具有的啟發。英文摘要：This article focuses on the topic of artificial intelligence and its relation to sociological theory. There is no doubt that human intelligence is still unique in almost every way, compared to other organisms. The uniqueness of human intelligence presents itself in some aspects such as adaptability, plasticity, and creativity. This uniqueness emerges from the interactions between human and non-human objects. Things may have changed since the 1960s, when people not only started to imagine that they could build a machine that may think like humans, but also realized that they are capable of doing it, raising the question of what it means to be human, and blurring the boundary between social actor and society, which has been a traditional and presumptuous idea in sociological theory. In this article, the author adopts the viewpoint of ethnomethodology, reconstructs artificial intelligence as a social phenomenon, and puts it into the discussion of sociological theory. With ethnomethodology, the author expects to investigate how two kinds of intelligence interact and in what ways the answer may reframe the oldest questions of sociological theory: ”what it means to be human” and ”what it means to be social”.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202006_(72).0012篇名：社會網絡的新公共性－以草根性信仰網絡發展實踐全球公民社會為例並列篇名：Are Social Media a Public Sphere? A Case Study of a Grassroots Gospel Online Network作者：歐陽瑜(Shirley Ou Yang)關鍵字：社會網絡;公共性;全球公民社會;資訊流與權力;分眾傳播;network society;public sphere;global civil society;information flows and power;narrowcasting期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：72期出版年：2020中文摘要：隨著資訊傳播科技的發展，網際網路已成為21世紀的主要物質基礎。本研究採用Castells（2008）全球公民社會的理論視角，探討社會網路連結的新型態公共性如何成為可能？分散式網路邏輯如何挑戰既有制度性權威？本研究採取詮釋性個案研究，參與觀察一個跨國界的草根性華人基督教福音網絡組織，如何透過社會網路科技，以資訊流的權力，突破制度性正當性權威，進入宗教管制的中國，形成全球在地化的宗教言論自由交流論壇。本研究在理論上貢獻，本研究結果延伸了全球公民社會的理論；而實務上的貢獻，透過再思社會網路新公共性的也將能協助我國的公、私部門、公民社會，重新對焦現行資訊傳播科技政策的跨域治理層次，形成更有效的傳播策略，積極地參與全球治理。英文摘要：Drawing from the lens of Castells' (2008) global civil society, this paper investigates how the power of free flow of information takes precedence over traditional institutional arrangement, fostering a new type of public sphere in an interconnected world. By adopting an interpretive case study in a cross-border grassroots gospel online network, this study examines how the decentralized networking logic of social media can penetrate religious restricted China. This paper argues that the line between the public and private spheres becomes blurred in a networked society. Social media make it possible for civil society to go global, and produce its own cultural codes and meanings. Identities are the real drivers of social transformation in this society.起始頁-結束頁：57-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202006_(72).0023篇名：亞當史密斯的帝國論述及其背景並列篇名：Adam Smith's Discussion of Empire and Its Context作者：陳正國(Jeng-Guo Chen)關鍵字：亞當史密斯;尼古拉巴本;帝國;帝國主義;海權帝國;重商主義;殖民;Adam Smith;Nicholas Barbon;Empire;Imperialism;Maritime Empire;Mercantilism;Colony期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：72期出版年：2020中文摘要：當本文強調，欲理解亞當史密斯對帝國的態度，必須從兩層背景來加以理解。一是17世紀出現的海權帝國的觀念及其相關論述，二是英國在英法七年戰爭之後成為西歐海洋強權與帝國的事實。循此，本文建構了英格蘭的貿易與海權帝國的論述。此一現代帝國論述使得政治經濟學擅揚而共和主義退位。史密斯承襲了這套政治經濟學的現代海權帝國觀念以批判征服型帝國。但他另一方面以「自然的」經濟發展邏輯以及正義的帝國統治兩項原則來分析、批評大英帝國近兩百年的海外殖民地發展。本文最後提出，史密斯所追尋的「正義帝國」，是18世紀晚期以後，關心英國殖民統治的作家與政治人物的重要課題，同時也是最重要的遺產。英文摘要：This essay emphatically argues that Adam Smith's attitude toward empire can be better understood in the context of the maritime empire long propagated by the political economists before him. Contesting the revisionist views describing Smith as a pluralist theorist against empire, this essay argues that Smith's political economy enables him to criticize colonial governments and policies within, but not beyond, the parameter of empire. Distancing itself from republican views of anti-imperial politics, the Smithian political economy brings natural affluence and justice, not sympathy and cultural pluralism, to the forefront. Smith's critique of empire develops around the concern of how to govern a colony in accordance with the principles of justice. Henceforth, ”Is a just empire possible?” becomes an emergent question for British intellects and statesmen concerned with British politics at home and abroad.起始頁-結束頁：131-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202006_(72).0034篇名：主權－例外狀態的弔詭：從阿岡本重返施密特並列篇名：The Paradoxes of Sovereignty and the State of Exception: From Agamben Back to Schmitt作者：薛熙平(Hsi-Ping Schive)關鍵字：施密特;阿岡本;主權;例外狀態;獨裁;決斷論;弔詭;Carl Schmitt;Giorgio Agamben;Sovereignty;State of Exception;Dictatorship;Decisionism;Paradox期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：72期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文嘗試從阿岡本（Giorgio Agamben）所提出的「主權的弔詭」的問題意識出發，展開對於施密特（Carl Schmitt）例外狀態理論的重新詮釋：一方面深入探討施密特如何化解這個弔詭，另一方面則對阿岡本的詮釋進行分析與批判。主權的弔詭來自於：主權作為例外狀態的決定權得以合法地懸置法律，從而合法地置身法外。本文指出施密特化解此一弔詭的理論構想是從「獨裁的內在辯證」到「主權者的例外決斷」，而其中蘊含了從規範論到決斷論的基進轉向。接著本文進一步探究主權決斷的效力根源，並指出阿岡本因未徹底化施密特的決斷論，因此其詮釋仍然維持著弔詭。儘管如此，他所提出的對於例外狀態的「法律效力」的批判，仍然啟發著我們進一步思考主權決斷與暴力之間的可能連結。英文摘要：Inspired by Giorgio's Agamben's thesis of ”the paradox of sovereignty,” this essay is a re-reading of Carl Schmitt's theory of the state of exception, and at the same time a critical engagement with Agamben's interpretation of Schmitt's theory. According to Agamben, the paradox of sovereignty originates from the sovereign's power to decide on the exception (hereafter referred to as ”the sovereign decision”), thereby legally placing himself above the law. Unlike Agamben, this essay argues that Schmitt has actually resolved this paradox, first through the ”inner dialectics of the concept of dictatorship” and subsequently through the sovereign decision, which corresponds to his theoretical turn from normativism to decisionism. It then brings to light the hidden foundations of the sovereign decision that has remained underdeveloped in Schmitt's own works. The essay finally contends that Agamben's reading of Schmitt has been based on a misunderstanding of the purpose of Schmitt's conception of sovereign decision as to realize the norm, thereby overlooked the capacity of his decisionism to resolve the paradox.起始頁-結束頁：199-271資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202006_(72).0045篇名：經濟學與存有論並列篇名：Economics and Ontology作者：林沁雄(Richard Chin-Hsiung Lin)關鍵字：存有論;原子論;經驗論;自然法則觀;錯綜複雜;atomism;complex;empiricism;ontology;the natural law outlook期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：72期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文探討經濟學倚重的四項存有論：原子論、經驗論、自然法則觀、複雜觀，並且討論彼等如何影響該學科之分析方法與範疇；另外亦分析這些存有論與當今世界之契合程度以及妥當存有論對削減理論困境的助益。研究顯示，基於社會發展、科技進步、人類特質之益加重要等因素，現階段將經濟世界譬喻為機器論之宇宙觀存有不少弊端，致使伴隨該宇宙觀之前揭存有論與真實世界之契合度日漸下降，造成不相關研究之問題日益嚴重，理論之解釋與應用能力深受打擊。基此，在思想與實務密切合作之前提下，當前首應進行妥當存有論之建立，之後輔以相關分析方法與技能之研發，以便開拓嶄新研究取徑，在帶來更相關研究之餘，亦根源性提升理論之應用能力。英文摘要：This article examines important ontologies of economics: atomism, empiricism, the natural law outlook, and the complicated world-view, and explores their influences on research methods and scopes. We also assess the applicability of these ontologies to the modern world and the benefits of probable ontologies to theory's formation and application. Based on social development, technology advancement, and the increasing importance of human characteristics in the economic arena, the metaphor of economy as a machine has become obsolescent, greatly reducing the compatibility of the above-mentioned ontologies and the real world and, consequently, damaging the applicability of economic theories. With this in mind, under the premise of collaboration between philosophical thinkers and analytical practitioners, the establishment of new and proper ontologies is urgently called for. With these in hand, practitioners can develop new analytical methods and skills that enable a brand-new research approach and contribute to the rise of relevant theories and useful applications.起始頁-結束頁：273-321資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202006_(72).0056篇名：世界史、日本帝國史與臺灣史研究：評《「臺灣人的學校」之夢：從世界史的視角看日本的臺灣殖民統治》作者：藍弘岳期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：72期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：323-338資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202006_(72).0067篇名：政治現實與政治時間：評Beyond Origins: Rethinking Founding in a Time of Constitutional Democracy與Political Realism in Apocalyptic Times作者：陳禹仲期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：72期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：339-350資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202006_(72).0078篇名：疫病、科學與民主作者：曾國祥;吳建昌;吳全峰;葉浩;陳嘉銘;陳禹仲期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：72期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：351-436資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202006_(72).00801篇名：科技風險與倫理評價：以科技風險倫理來評估台灣基改生物與人工智能的社會爭議並列篇名：Technological Risks and Ethical Evaluation: Applying a Risk Theory Ethics to the Social Controversies Surrounding Genetically Modified Organisms and Artificial Intelligence in Taiwan作者：陳瑞麟(Chen, Ruey-Lin)關鍵字：科技爭議;風險;倫理;基因改造;人工智能;AI;ethics;GMO;controversies期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文發展一個「科技風險的倫理理論」，並使用它來進行一種非科學、非量化的倫理風險評估。這個理論主張人道目的、公正、豁免與永續是科技風險社會的優先價值，在面對科技風險的案例時，它們應該優先於效益、自由、慈善等價值，因為它們更能幫助社會管制科技風險。本文使用此理論來分析台灣的兩個科技的社會爭議：第一個是1990年代起的基改生物的科技風險爭議，第二個目前進行中的人工智能的科技風險爭議。英文摘要：This paper aims to develop an ethical theory of risks, for assessing technological risks caused by a variety of techniques and artefacts. Although this theory aims to assess technological risks, it achieves this aim in a non-scientific and non-quantitative way. This ethical theory of risks claims that there are four superior values-humanity, fairness, exemption, and sustainable development-in our risk society and argues that these values help regulate technological risks more properly than do other values, such as utility, freedom, and beneficence, and, therefore, should be considered prior to them. In this paper, I will apply this theory to two social controversies surrounding technological risk in Taiwan: the first case is the controversy that swirled around genetically modified organisms in the 1990s; the second is the controversy currently engulfing artificial intelligence.起始頁-結束頁：13-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：東亞視野下醫學典範的建構與在地化：以五輸穴針灸技術發展史為例並列篇名：Construction and Localization of a Medical Paradigm from an East Asian Perspective: Using the History of the Technological Developmental of Five Transport Points in Acupuncture as an Example作者：鄭宛鈞(Cheng, Wan-Chun);楊仕哲(Yang, Su-Tso)關鍵字：五輸穴;五行穴;鍼灸;典範;在地化;five transport points;five phase points;acupuncture;paradigm;localization期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020中文摘要：在針灸醫學中，五輸穴是被建成醫學典範，而且具有指標意義的特定穴道。隨著中國傳統醫學的傳播，五輸穴用法亦在東亞各地產生變化。事實上，醫學思想的變革與文化交流、戰爭事件以及社會思潮的起伏皆息息相關。對此議題，有學者分別從外感熱病的知識轉型以及中西醫衝突下的空間政治等面向進行討論。本文則是以五輸穴針灸技術發展史作為橫貫東亞社會的探查線，討論五輸穴的醫學典範建構與在地化。五輸穴針灸技術在東亞文明脈絡下建構而成，受到西學知識環流的影響而產生在地化現象。中醫存亡之爭劇烈的中國、臺灣兩地，對於五輸穴的關注轉向子午流注法的研究。在日本雖然曾有古典針灸派大力鼓倡，但最終仍走向以科學化的方式研究傳統針灸醫學。值得注意的是，韓國醫學在西學東漸的壓力下，不僅仍保持著對於古典醫學典範的運用，甚至別開新局。英文摘要：The technology of ”five transport points” represented a paradigm shift in traditional Chinese medicine. The five transport points technology evolved and changed significantly in different societies as traditional Chinese medicine spread across East Asia. Reforms in traditional Chinese medical thinking have been closely related to cultural exchanges, wars, and societal trends, an important example being challenges from Western sciences. Previous studies have focused on the transformation of exogenous febrile disease in Chinese medicine and discussed spatial politics in conflicts between Eastern and Western Medicines. In contrast, this study used the technology of five transport points as an example to discuss the paradigm construction and localism of acupuncture in different societies in the East Asia. This study argues that the five transport points technology was constructed within an East Asian cultural network. Serious debate over the abolishment of traditional medicine occurred in mainland China and Taiwan, leading to a shift in emphasis from the five transport points technology to ”midnight midday ebb flow.” Although use of five transport points was preserved in Japan due to the high esteem given to classical acupuncture there, the research trend in East Asia generally moved toward the application of scientific methodology in examining traditional acupunctural medicine. It is noteworthy that in Korea, not only does the classical medical paradigm of the five transport points technology remain in use, but new artifacts have been developed despite significant pressure for reform from modern Western medicine.起始頁-結束頁：67-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：民國時期上海中醫的開業與營生技術並列篇名：Business Practice and Operating Techniques of Physicians of Chinese Medicine in Shanghai during the Chinese Republican Period作者：皮國立(Pi, Kuo-Li)關鍵字：國醫開業術;中醫;上海;病人;廣告;Business Practice Techniques of Traditional Chinese Medicine;Chinese medicine physicians;Shanghai;patient;advertisement期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020中文摘要：在中國近代醫療史的研究中，對於中醫的知識生產與實作之研究，成果已相當豐碩，但有關醫者之收入及其職業生涯的實際困境與因應之道的層面，則極少被研究者關注。相對於古代醫者的身分與職業並不為社會所重視，宋代以來儒醫的概念興起後，醫者被賦予仁心仁術之形象，但為謀利而講究開業技術，畢竟不是士人為醫的核心理念。但自近代以來，面對西醫的挑戰，受到醫者人數增加，市場競爭激烈的影響，致使更多上層醫者也開始講究開業的技術。而從這些言論中來看，中醫講究開業不僅只是為了謀利，當時中醫還希望建構一種整體的社會形象，規範且合理的看診模式，以爭取患者信任，才能與西醫爭勝。本文以一本於1930年代出版的《國醫開業術》為核心文本，擴展並補充資料，探討當時中醫開業困境和醫療市場上的種種現象，內文以近代中國商業化競爭最激烈的上海為例，梳理中醫在新式開業與營生技術上的各方面言論，進而檢視中醫在當時社會上的作為，以及醫者形象的具體變化。英文摘要：Facing intense competition from Western-style medical doctors and within their own growing ranks, , Chinese medical practitioners of the 1930s started to pay closer attention to their business skills. Thus, doctors of traditional Chinese medicine in that era practiced medicine not only for profit, but also with the aim of building an overall social image as well as a standard and reasonable medical service model. In these ways, they aimed to gain the trust of patients and compete against doctors of Western medicine. This paper adopts the 1930s Business Practice Techniques of Traditional Chinese Medicine as its core text, analyzing its discourse and expanding on the information it provides in order to examine the business obstacles to the practice of Chinese medicine in that era and related phenomena of the medical service market. It treats Shanghai, the city facing most intense business competition in China at the time, as an example, and offers a fresh perspective on the new modes of Chinese medicine practice and business techniques. It aims to explore the actions taken by doctors of Chinese medicine at the time and the specific changes in doctors' images.起始頁-結束頁：113-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：規範市場、協商醫政與再造專業：戰後初期的臺灣省醫師公會，1946-1967並列篇名：Regulating Market, Negotiating Policies and Remodelling Profession: Taiwan Medical Association, 1946-1967作者：許宏彬(Hsu, Hung Bin)關鍵字：醫療市場;醫病關係;醫學倫理;專業化;醫政關係;Medical Market;Doctor-Patient Relationship;Medical Ethics;Professionalization;Medicine and Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020中文摘要：醫師的社會及政治參與是臺灣近代醫療發展中的鮮明特徵。然而，戰後初期臺灣省醫師公會號召群醫集體參與政治之現象卻鮮為學界所討論。本文提出以下幾個問題：為何戰後醫師於二二八事件與白色恐怖陰影下，仍積極參與政治？其中，醫師公會做為法定專業代表機構扮演什麼角色？此現象與戰後醫療環境劇變、法規變遷及專業發展間有何關連？本文發現，殖民時期因總督府對市場高度管制加之對醫師團體的消極態度，故而臺灣開業醫普遍採取「自由業」心態，組織程度不高。戰後因政權轉移出現新醫療體制與大批新從業人員，開業醫面對醫業競爭及醫權不彰情形下，藉法定「臺灣省醫師公會」以集結因應。省公會一方面以專業倫理立場勸導開業醫加入團結對外，另一方面也以利益團體的身份要求新政權介入管制醫療市場。進行遊說與協商的過程中，公會發現須更積極介入政治方能有效管制醫療市場並確保醫權，因而鼓勵會員投入各階層選舉以彰顯醫界影響力，開啟戰後「政醫合作」時代。英文摘要：Taiwanese doctors' various social and political activities have drawn much attention from historians of Taiwan history. However, Taiwanese doctors' collective relationship with the medical market and the state after WWII remains unexplored. Focusing on the role of the Taiwan Medical Association (TMA), this paper raises the following questions: What kind of role did TMA play in shaping the post-war medical profession on the island? What is the relationship between doctors' political activities, the medical market and governmental policy? This article argues that, during the Japanese colonial period, the doctors did not and could not execute their collective influence on medical policy and, for the most part, remained freelancers. However, after WWII under the new Chinese Nationalist government, various kinds of medical practitioners were allowed into the market. To cope with the resultant chaotic and overcrowded market, doctors felt a strong need to unite under the auspices of the newly established TMA around a professional code of ethics that would strengthen their collective influence. Meanwhile, the TMA negotiated with different levels of government and the Legislative Assembly to regulate the medical market. It is in this particular context that TMA encouraged its members to become involved in various types of political elections with the aim of amending the medical regulations in their favour and thus tightening control over Taiwan's medical market.起始頁-結束頁：163-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：中文打字機的技術語言與現代性　評The Chinese Typewriter: A History並列篇名：Technolinguistics and Modernity of the Chinese Typewriter, Review of The Chinese Typewriter: A History作者：嚴曉珮(Yen, Hsiao-pei)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：217-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：常態水與全球敘事：美國水資源管理哲學　評Water: Abundance, Scarcity and Security in the Age of Humanity並列篇名：Normal Water and Global Narrative: America's Water Management Philosophy Book Review on Water: Abundance, Scarcity, and Security in the Age of Humanity作者：廖昱凱(Liao, Yu-Kai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：225-238資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館7篇名：疫情渴望STS：新型冠狀病毒肺炎（COVID-19）疫情中的科技與社會初探並列篇名：Introduction to Forum on COVID-19作者：王秀雲(Wang, Hsiu-yun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：239-241資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館8篇名：防疫下的中醫治療準則與知識空間並列篇名：Guideline and Knowledge Space of Traditional Chinese Medicine in Epidemic Prevention and Control作者：陳柏勳(Chen, Po-Hsun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：243-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館9篇名：由COVID-19看全球衛生治理並列篇名：Examining Global Health Governance in the Midst of COVID-19作者：陳嘉新(Chen, Jia-shin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：257-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館10篇名：溝通、連結與照護：社區防疫網絡動起來並列篇名：Communication, Connection and Care: Mobilizing Community Prevention Networks in Response to COVID-19作者：黃于玲(Huang, Yu-Ling);葉筱凡(Yeh, Hsiao-Fan);洪宜君(Hung, I-Chun)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：267-279資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：家庭主義的分歧？台灣民眾對兒童及老人照顧的福利態度分析並列篇名：Divergent Familialism? Public Attitudes towards Childcare and Eldercare in Taiwan作者：葉崇揚(Chung-Yang Yeh);周怡君(Yi-Chun Chou);楊佑萱(Yu-Hsuan Yang)關鍵字：家庭主義;兒童照顧;老人照顧;福利態度;familialism;childcare;eldercare;welfare attitudes期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：41期出版年：2020中文摘要：家庭主義長久以來特徵化了東亞國家的福利發展，傳統上無論年幼子女或高齡老人的照顧多由家庭來承擔。然而東亞福利國家正在經歷轉型。由於高齡少子化的人口結構轉變，使得東亞國家逐漸擴張照顧服務政策，以協助家庭平衡其工作與家庭照顧責任。福利供給責任因此從原來僅由家庭來承擔的圖像，逐漸轉移到國家、非營利組織、家庭與市場，而有福利多元主義現象的產生。但福利國家的服務轉變仍需建立在社會大眾的民意基礎上。本文以台灣為案例，探討傳統家庭承擔照顧責任的情況目前是否因為照顧對象是兒童和老人而有所不同，分析台灣民眾如何思考兒童照顧服務與老人照顧服務應該由誰來提供，藉此補足過去東亞福利國家與福利態度研究上的缺口。本研究以2012年台灣社會變遷基本調查分析與比較台灣民眾在老人照顧與兒童照顧服務提供上的態度。本研究結果發現兒童照顧是建立在社會連帶的基礎上；但是，老人照顧服務方面卻是呈現自利為主的圖像。因此，雖然台灣民眾對於兒童照顧與老人照顧服務的供給依然是鑲嵌於家庭主義的基礎上，但是卻在不同的照顧服務領域中呈現了家庭主義的分歧。英文摘要：Familialism is/was deeply embedded in East Asian welfare states. However, East Asian welfare states are transforming. On the one hand, family policies are expanding to help people reach a work-life balance due to socio-demographic transformations. On the other hand, the responsibility of welfare provision has been gradually shifted to non-state sectors; therefore, the idea of welfare pluralism is emerging. However, the transformation of the welfare state needs to be underpinned on the micro-foundation of the demand side, which is public opinion. Thus, this study will examine public attitudes towards childcare and eldercare services in Taiwan by analyzing the 2012 Taiwanese Social Change Survey. While our multi-nominal logistic regression models show that childcare is based on intergenerational solidarity, self-interest is more important in explaining attitudes towards eldercare policy. We conclude that despite familialism remaining significant in explaining public attitudes towards childcare and eldercare in Taiwan, divergent familialism can be found in different social policy areas in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202006_(41).00012篇名：以正向少年發展模式推動與社區互惠的少年社會工作實務並列篇名：Positive Youth Development Model: Promoting mutual relationship between youth and community in social work practice作者：李孟蓉(Meng-Jung Lee);劉燕萍(Yen-Ping Liu)關鍵字：少年福利服務;少年發展需求;正向少年發展;優勢觀點;生態資產;youth social services;youth developmental needs;positive youth development (PYD);strength-based perspective;ecological assets期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：41期出版年：2020中文摘要：〈兒童及少年福利與權益保障法〉旨在推動促進兒少年權益與發展為主的兒童少年福利服務，但國內許多現行制度仍以問題解決為主，本文旨在引介正向少年發展模式（positive youth development, PYD），提供我國少年福利轉型之理論架構與實務操作的指引。首先，介紹正向少年發展模式之發展脈絡與理論基礎─發展性系統理論（developmental system theory, DST），強調人類發展乃個體與多層環境彼此互動的過程，視少年成長歷程中的變動為其與生俱來的優勢。正向少年發展模式主張少年正向發展來自個體與多重環境之間的互惠，此模式進一步假設少年邁向正向發展之際不僅問題行為會降低，回饋社會的行為也會增加。其次，統整實證研究對PYD理論模型與假設的檢視，幫助少年工作專業人員更具體瞭解少年個人優勢與生態資產之間的互動關係，以及此互動關係如何影響少年發展。再者，以PYD模式為架構，分析台灣少年工作所面臨的四大困境：1.服務價值：偏重問題解決而非能力發展；2.服務內容：社區中缺乏以少年發展需求為主之服務；3.研究：少有實證研究統整並比較各機構少年方案的運作模式和成效；4.文化價值：華人文化中少年消權的傾向。最後，運用正向少年發展模式主要內涵針對上述困境提出實務與研究之建議。英文摘要：Taiwan government renewed the Protection of Children and Youths Welfare and Rights Act in 2011 to ensure youth development rather than problem solving; however, gaps between the law and direct practice on youth social services remain. This study aims to introduce a positive youth development (PYD) model and provide a theoretical framework for a paradigm shift in youth social services. First, the PYD model is based on developmental system theory (DST), arguing that human development involves continuous interactions between individuals and contexts; thus, the intrapersonal and interpersonal changes during adolescence should be considered as a fundamental strength rather than risk. PYD model hypothesizes that mutually beneficial interactions between youth and contexts will not only result in fewer risk behaviors but more youth contribution to the society. Second, empirical studies were reviewed to examine the above hypothetical relationship and to provide evidence for professionals working with youth to apply the PYD model to their practice. Then, youth social services in Taiwan were reviewed under a PYD lens; four obstacles in implementing development-based services were identified: 1. Values: the current services and programs over-emphasize problem solving rather than capability building; 2. Services: the majority of the existing community programs fail to address youth developmental needs; 3. Research: limited empirical research examining and comparing the process and outcomes across various youth programs. 4. Issues of youth disempowerment in Chinese culture. Recommendations in applying PYD model to improve youth services in Taiwan are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：57-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202006_(41).00023篇名：一個視、聽、語多重障礙者在大學之社會共融學習與生活經驗敘說探究並列篇名：Narrative Analysis of Social Inclusion and Living Experiences of a Student with Multiple Disabilities at University作者：游以安(Yi-An Yu)關鍵字：多重障礙;大學身心障礙生;社會共融;敘說研究;資源教室;multiple disabilities;college students with disabilities;social inclusion;narrative analysis;resource room期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：41期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以一位視、聽、語多重障礙者L在大學的社會共融與學習生活經驗為例，探究分析呈現L在大學學習、生活與人際的完整樣貌，並反思目前大學對障礙生服務之相關議題，為未來大學可及／無障礙的教育環境提出看法與討論。本文主要研究參與者為L，筆者訪談其大學之學習與生活經驗；其次訪談L父母、國小、國中導師、高中游泳教練、大學系主任、大學資源教室組長、學姊、同班同學等重要他人對L在大學階段的觀察與共同學習生活經驗；另外，筆者亦於本文中以敘說方式梳理身為L導師及對L大學學習的反思。研究結果呈現L在大學之社會共融學習與生活經驗的完整歷程與樣貌之外，同時反思目前大學體制對障礙生服務的相關議題，本文提出以下結論：一、大學應重視障礙生權益，正視資源教室定位與倡議行政系統合作；二、大學成為障礙生人際共融的開端與獨立生活的關鍵；三、再思大學教育目的，創立多元學習方式讓所有人獲益。英文摘要：Taking a real story of a female student with vision, hearing and speech disabilities as an example, this article aims to explore the role of a university's learning environment for students with multiple disabilities in the path from school to social inclusion after entering a community. The author interviewed research participant L. about her studying and living experiences at university. In addition, this paper also conducted interviews with L's family and friends, including her parents, elementary and high school teachers, coaches at high school, her university department head, university resource classroom leaders, classmates and many others about their observations regarding L's development during her university life. Moreover, as the teacher of the participant, the author also depicted L's journey and reflects on L's development at university. This paper presents the whole process of L's studying and learning experiences in living independently at school, as well as analyzes the issues related to disabled students' counseling and related services in the current university system. In conclusion, for the university accessible education environment in the future, this study's results indicate that firstly, universities need to address the rights of students with disability, to acknowledge the importance of resource classrooms, and to facilitate collaboration with administrative staff. Secondly, the learning environment in a university has become crucial to social integration and independent living of the students with disabilities. Thirdly, higher education systems need to reflect on the purpose of university education and create a diverse learning environment to benefit all students.起始頁-結束頁：99-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202006_(41).000301篇名：以「察覺－動機－能力」觀點與「網絡關係觀點」初探「新南向政策」對企業國際化歷程之影響：以餐飲服務產業個案為例並列篇名：A Preliminary Investigation into the Influence of New Southbound Policy on Enterprises' Internationalization Process from the Awareness-Motivation-Capability (AMC) Perspective and the Network Relationship View: Case Studies of Food Service Industry作者：許艷(Yan Xu);彭耀平(Yao-Ping Peng);唐資文(Tzy-Wen Tang);鄧天強(Tien-Chiang Teng);李慶章(Ching-Chang Lee)關鍵字：國際化歷程;動態競爭;察覺－動機－能力;新南向政策;餐飲服務業;internationalization process;competitive dynamics research;Awareness-motivation-capability;New Southbound Policy;food service industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：學者在探討企業國際化的研究曾指出，企業必須仰賴其合作夥伴的資源與資訊而推動國際化。而在臺灣政府所推動的「新南向政策」下，企業如何由政府所提供之國際化所需資源與資訊及透過政府所協助整合之各項合作夥伴的力量，將市場擴展至東南亞；與此相關之研究仍相當有限。再者，此「新南向政策」實屬實務面政策，學界應提出更多實務面的建議供企業參考。因此，本研究以動態競爭研究中之「察覺─動機─能力」觀點，與「關係觀點」，以七個國際餐飲服務業者為例，運用個案研究的方式探討餐飲服務產業的國際化歷程。研究發現，廠商必須導入市場導向以取得東南亞市場的顧客與競爭者資訊，並以策略聯盟或尋求當地合作夥伴的方式進入東南亞市場。此研究結果可提供臺灣餐飲服務業者布局東南亞營運據點之參考。英文摘要：Past studies on the internationalization process of an enterprise point out that an enterprise has to rely on the resources and information of its partners to promote internationalization. Under the New Southbound Policy, the Taiwanese government may provide resources and information needed for internationalization and integrate the strength of a variety of partners to assist enterprises in expanding their markets to Southeast Asia. However, few studies have tackled this issue. Furthermore, the Taiwanese enterprises may benefit from the practical suggestions by the academics regarding the practical decree of New Southbound Policy. Therefore, based on the Awareness-motivation-capability (AMC) perspective from competitive dynamics and the Network Relationship View, this study investigates the internationalization process of seven food service providers by the case study method. We find that it adds significantly to these Southbound companies to adopt market orientation approach to obtain customers and competitors' information of the targeted markets. The companies also better enter the markets by building strategic alliance or finding local partners. Our findings may serve as a reference to Taiwanese food service companies when considering expanding service locations in Southeastern Asian countries.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202012_30(3).00012篇名：Time Paths of Weather-Induced Mood Effects on Stock Returns並列篇名：氣象所引致投資人情緒變化的長期股市報酬率影響作者：Anya Khanthavit關鍵字：investor sentiment;return behavior;weather effects;投資者情緒;報酬率行為;天氣效應期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Previous studies on the effects of weather-driven moods on stock returns focus on significance tests but do not examine the time behaviors of these effects. This study estimates the vector autoregressive model to examine the time paths of the effects and analyzes whether the effects are temporary or permanent. Using the daily returns on the Stock Exchange of Thailand index portfolio and the weather conditions in Bangkok, this study finds that weather-driven mood effects exist and are permanent. Significant temporary effects are not observed.英文摘要：過往針對天氣因素所致之情緒波動對於股票報酬率影響之研究著重於當期沖擊之顯著檢定，但並未探究其中時間效應所致影響。本研究以「向量自回歸模型」（VAR模型）估算、檢驗時間效應所致影響，並分析其影響是一時或長久的。本研究運用了泰國證券交易所交易指數共6335個交易觀察日每日報酬以及曼谷的氣候概況，發現天氣導致之市場投資人情緒反應顯著且長久的。本研究並未觀察重要但一時性的效應。起始頁-結束頁：45-76資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202012_30(3).00023篇名：使用者在科技調適中的作用：型態生成論為觀點的多個案研究並列篇名：Effects of Users on Technology Adaptation: Multi-Case Studies from Morphogenetic Approach作者：陳信宏(Shin-Horng Chen)關鍵字：科技調適;型態生成論;科技採用;質化研究;technology adaptation;Archer's morphogenetic theory;technology adoption;qualitative method期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究藉由「型態生成論」的觀點，試圖探索使用者在「科技調適」中對科技結構的作用。透過「型態生成論」的觀點，一些學者認為科技調適可以被視為是一種社會建構。這是因為每一項科技本身都內含了特有的物質與結構。當人們使用一項科技的時候，人們的行為可能會受到科技所內含結構的限制和影響。然而，在現實生活中，人們的行為實踐通常會隨著社會和組織環境改變而不斷變化，但固定科技結構卻無法持續滿足人們現實的需求。故在這種情況下，為了反應情境的變化和滿足實際的需求，科技的使用者會傾向觸發一系列社會互動，以試圖改變科技的結構。為此，科技與使用者之間具有交互作用。經由上述這樣的論點，本研究選擇三家資訊電子業的公司做為個案研究對象，透過質化研究，深入分析與比較這三家公司採用ERP系統的科技調適過程。研究問題包括：（1）在科技調適中，使用者對於科技結構的改變有何作用？（2）使用者如何影響科技結構的內涵？研究結果發現：第一，使用者對於科技結構的改變，可歸納出三種不同的類型。第二，使用者之所以會改變科技結構，乃是使用者具有自覺的原故。第三，使用者會透過三種不同的角色，包括促變者、配合者、旁觀者，來影響科技結構的內涵。本研究獲得的研究結果，一方面會對科技調適現象有更深入的認識，另一方面也會擴展型態生成論的應用範圍。英文摘要：This study explores the user effect for technology-enabled organizational adaptation (i.e., Technology Adaptation). According to Archer's morphogenetic approach, some scholars pointed out technology adaptation could be viewed as a social construction. Technology includes particular material properties and structures. People's action may be constrained and shaped by technology structures. However, in real life, human practices constantly change along with the social and organizational context while the structures fixed within technology cannot satisfy human needs continuously. Under these circumstances, to reflect the contextual changes and human needs, users tend to trigger a series of social interactions to change the structures of technology. Thus, an interplay occurs between technology and users. From this point of view, this study applies a qualitative method to explore three case companies in the information electronics industry in Taiwan; to deepen understanding about different reactions to technology adaptation by observing what happened when these three companies adopt new ERP systems in non-identical conditions. This study attempts to answer the following questions: (1) How users affect technology adaptation? (2) How do users change the inner structures of technology? The research results show that: First, changes in technology structure can be classified into three different types. Second, the reason why users change the structure of technology is because they are conscious. Third, users play three different roles to change the technology structure. This study provides new insights into the importance of the user effect for technology adaptation and expands the application of Archer's morphogenetic approach from social systems to information systems.起始頁-結束頁：77-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202012_30(3).00034篇名：手機遊戲內影音廣告類型與廣告內容之影響並列篇名：Effects of the Types and Contents of Video Advertisements in Mobile Games作者：周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou);楊彩甄(Tsai-Chen Yang)關鍵字：手機遊戲;遊戲內置廣告;獎勵型廣告;好奇心;資訊缺口;mobile games;in-game advertisements;reward-based advertisements;curiosity;information gap期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：手機遊戲現為廣告商投放廣告的重要媒介，且獨立一則影音廣告的置入已是趨勢。本研究以實地實驗法，與獨立遊戲開發業者合作設計兩款新手機遊戲並上架至Google Play商店，檢視遊戲內影音廣告的類型、廣告內容對廣告效果之影響。結果發現：在玩家觀看廣告之前，獎勵型廣告（相較於允許型）有效促成觀看決策和遊戲態度，且效果在失敗（相較於勝利）的遊戲結果時更強烈；在觀看廣告之後，廣告類型（獎勵型／允許型／插播型）與廣告內容（劇情版／真實版／混合版）會透過好奇心的機制，進而影響產品態度和下載意願。本研究提出一個觀看前、後兩階段提升廣告效果的完整架構，豐富資訊缺口理論的內涵，並凸顯好奇心在手遊廣告的重要；結果可供業者製作遊戲內廣告及選擇置入時機時之參考。英文摘要：Mobile games are now important media on which advertisers or brands will place advertisements. Placing an independent in-game video advertisement which covers the interface without being incorporated into the game has become a trend. This study conducts two field experiments to examine the effects of different types and contents of in-game video advertisements. We collaborate with a local mobile game developer and release two experimental games on Google Play Store. The results show that before players view the advertisements, the appearing of reward-based advertisements affect players more than permission-based ones, and effectively facilitate players' viewing decisions and attitudes toward the game (i.e., the media host). This effect is stronger under the condition of failed (vs. successful) game outcomes. After players view the advertisements, different advertisement types (reward-based advertisements vs. permission-based advertisements vs. interstitial advertisements) and advertisement contents (dramatized versions vs. real game scenes vs. mixed versions) will evoke different levels of curiosity and affect players' attitudes and download intentions toward the advertised games. This study proposes a holistic framework for improving the advertising effects before and after players view the commercials; enriches the information gap theory; and emphasizes the importance of curiosity in the context of mobile game advertisements. The results provide important suggestions for practitioners about designing in-game advertisements and selecting the appropriate timing to place them.起始頁-結束頁：111-143資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202012_30(3).00045篇名：董事連結網絡特性、技術多角化與創新績效之關聯性研究：以臺灣電子業為例並列篇名：The Relationships among Characteristics of Interlocking Directorate Network, Technological Diversity and Innovation Performance: Evidence from Taiwan's Electronics Industry作者：黃政仁(Cheng-Jen Huang);張肇元(Chao-Yuan Chang)關鍵字：董事連結;社會網絡;技術多角化;創新績效;結構方程模式;interlocking directorate;social network;technological diversity;innovation performance;Structural Equation Modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以在2010年至2016年於美國專利暨商標局申請專利之台灣電子業上市公司為研究對象，探討董事連結所形成的社會網絡與企業技術多角化暨創新績效之關係，並檢視技術多角化是否為董事連結網絡與創新績效關係之中介因素，並運用結構方程模式（Structural Equation Modeling）與拔靴法（Bootstrapping）之特性，以強化過去文獻及研究方法探討不足之處。主要研究發現如下：（1）董事連結網絡規模、結構洞與中心性對技術多角化具有正向影響。（2）相關技術多角化與非相關技術多角化對創新績效皆具有正向影響。（3）董事連結網絡規模、結構洞與中心性能透過技術多角化進而提升創新績效。英文摘要：This study examines the relationships among the social networks formed by the interlocking directorate, technological diversity, and innovation performance. We also investigate whether technology diversity plays a mediating role between interlocking directorate networks and innovation performance. We choose Taiwanese listed electronics companies that filed patent protections with the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office (USPTO) over the period of 2010 through 2016.We apply Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) and bootstrapping to remedy the inadequacies found in prior literature and certain research methods; and produce main findings as follows: (1) Sizes of the interlocking directorate networks, network structure holes, and network centrality all have positive effects on technological diversity. (2) Related technological diversity and unrelated technological diversity both have positive effects on innovation performance. (3) Sizes of the interlocking directorate network, network structure holes, and network centrality further impact innovation performance via technological diversity.起始頁-結束頁：145-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202012_30(3).00056篇名：社會經濟組織工作者的熱情與耗損：工作特徵立基視角並列篇名：The Enthusiasm and Exhaustion of Socio-Economic Organization Workers: Based on the Perspective of Job Characteristics作者：蔡秦倫(Chin-Lun Tsai);夏侯欣鵬(Hsin-Peng Shiahhou);劉平成(Ping-Cheng Liu)關鍵字：工作特徵論;社會經濟組織工作特徵;工作意義感;工作壓力;職涯承諾;Job Characteristics Model;job characteristics of socio-economic organization;experienced meaningfulness of work;perceived job stress;career commitment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究援引「工作特徵論」與「工作塑造」觀點，以質性訪談重構因應時代變遷之「社會經濟組織工作特徵」，並且提出：工作者之熱情（工作意義感）與耗損（工作壓力）此二關鍵心理狀態，為連結社會經濟組織工作特徵與工作表現的中介機制；續以台灣119位社會經濟組織工作者為樣本，以「迴歸分析」驗證中介效果。重構之社會經濟組織工作特徵包括：技能專精、工作效用、工作助益、問題解決與創新彈性。研究顯示，當工作的技能專精、效用、助益與問題解決屬性越高，工作者的工作意義感越強，進而職涯承諾或滿意越高；工作助益屬性越高，工作意義感越強，工作壓力也越強，進而對組織影響力知覺產生實效。此外，上述五項工作特徵屬性未顯著影響組織獲利力知覺，符合社會經濟組織不以營利為核心的價值。英文摘要：Drawing on the Job Characteristics Model (JCM) and the job crafting perspective, this study explores the characteristics of the motivating socio-economic organization's job. We interview 7 socio-economic organization workers and then propose an enthusiasm/ exhaustion psychological state (experienced meaningfulness of work/perceived job stress) mediating model that linkes the relationship between job characteristics and work outcomes. Based on a sample of 119 socio-economic organization workers in Taiwan, we use the collected data to verify the proposed mediating model through multiple regression analysis. The results indicate that the perceived core job characteristics of socio-economic organization are skill specialization, task utility, task conduciveness, problem solving, and innovation/flexibility. We further find that the experienced meaningfulness of work fully mediates the effects of skill specialization, task utility, and task conduciveness on worker career commitment, and the effects of task conduciveness on career satisfaction. We also find that the experienced meaningfulness of work partially mediates the effect of problem solving on career satisfaction. Relatedly, task conduciveness positively impacts the experienced meaningfulness of work and perceived job stress, in turn influencing the perceived organizational impact on society. Finally, the five perceived core characteristics have no influence on perceived organizational profitability. The above conclusion is in line with the values of nonprofit socio-economic organizations.起始頁-結束頁：183-213資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202012_30(3).00067篇名：會計師雙簽制度對審計品質之影響並列篇名：The Effect of the Dual-Signature Requirement on Audit Quality作者：林孝倫(Hsiao-Lun Lin);杜榮瑞(Rong-Ruey Duh)關鍵字：會計師雙簽制度;審計品質;審計意見;dual-signature;audit quality;audit opinion期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：台灣自1983年開始施行由兩位會計師同時在查核報告上簽名之會計師雙簽制度，本文以雙簽制度施行前後之公開發行公司為樣本，探討會計師簽發之審計意見在單簽或雙簽制度下是否存有顯著差異。實證結果顯示，會計師雙簽制度下，會計師簽發非無保留審計意見的機率顯著較高。同時，雙簽制度施行下，會計師僅對上市公司簽發非無保留審計意見之機率提高，並未提高會計師對其他公開發行公司簽發非無保留審計意見的機率。此外，聘請會計師雙簽的公司，盈餘資訊內涵與盈餘反應係數顯著較單簽制度為高，代表資本市場亦肯定會計師雙簽制度對於盈餘品質之正面影響。英文摘要：Auditing standards and regulations in Taiwan require two audit partners to sign their names on the audit report (dual-signature hereafter) since 1983. This paper examines whether audit quality is higher under the dual-signature requirement than under the single-signature requirement. Empirical results indicate that the dual-signature regime is associated with higher audit quality as proxied by issuing more modified audit opinions, and that such an association exists only for companies listed on the Taiwan Stock Exchange, but not for non-publicly traded companies. In addition, the informativeness of earnings and earnings response coefficients are higher under the dual-signature requirement, suggesting that investors perceive higher earnings quality under the dual-signature requirement.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202008_30(2).00018篇名：責任分攤式查核意見與集團企業合併財務報表審計品質關聯性：以會計師調整數為衡量基礎並列篇名：The Relationship between Shared Audit Opinions and the Audit Quality of Group Enterprises' Financial Statements - Based on the Audit Adjustment作者：李建然(Jan-Zan Lee);陳信吉(Hsin-Chi Chen);蔡宗益(Tsung-Yi Tsai)關鍵字：集團企業;審計品質;責任分攤式查核意見;會計師調整數;group enterprises;audit quality;shared audit opinion;audit adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：我國審計準則公報第54號「集團合併財務報表查核之特別考量」對會計師出具責任分攤式查核意見加以限制，其意涵為準則制定者認為集團各組成個體財務報表由集團主辦會計師事務所一起查核，其審計品質優於分別由不同會計師事務所查核。然而準則制定者的看法是否正確，實有賴實證證據加以驗證。本研究以台灣集團企業為研究對象，探討集團財務報表委由單一會計師事務所查核，對會計師調整數之影響（審計品質替代變數）。研究結果發現，在台灣的審計環境下，集團各組成個體財務報表由不同會計師事務所查核，有較大的會計師調整數；且當委由組成個會計師查核的比重愈大時，會計師的調整數也愈大。此一結果顯示，會計師的獨立性有可能因整個集團合併財務報表由單一會計師查核，造成加深對特定集團客戶的經濟依賴度而受損。英文摘要：The Taiwan Statements of Auditing Standards No. 54 ”Special Consideration - Audits of Group Financial Statements” severely restricts the shared-opinion audit reports on group financial statements. The restriction implies that engaging with the same audit firm in the group company can result in better audit quality for the group financial statements. To evaluate the argument of this restriction, this study examines whether group companies with component firms in Taiwan have higher audit quality when engaging with the same audit firm than those engaging with different audit firms. Using audit adjustment as a proxy for audit quality, this study finds that group companies with component firms engaging with different audit firms have higher audit adjustment (better audit quality), especially when a greater proportion of group assets are audited by other audit firms. The results indicate that engaging with the same audit firm in the group company may impair auditor independence and increase the auditor's economic dependence on the group company.起始頁-結束頁：37-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202008_30(2).00029篇名：The Effects of Relaxing the Reconciliation Requirement in Foreign Private Issuers' SEC Filings on Earnings Management Strategies: IFRS Adopters versus U.S. GAAP Adopters並列篇名：美國證管會鬆綁外國公司編制調節表對採用IFRS或U.S.GAAP公司之盈餘管理策略的影響作者：曹嘉玲(Chia-Ling Chao);洪叔民(Shwu-Min Horng)關鍵字：discretionary accruals;real activities manipulation;reconciliation requirement;裁決性應計數;實質盈餘管理;編制調節表期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：We investigate the earnings management potential of allowing non-U.S. cross-listed firms to choose International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) reporting following the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC's) elimination of the IFRS-to-U.S.-GAAP reconciliation requirement in 2007. We also investigate whether differences exist between earnings management strategies for firms whose filing choice is most likely attributable to the SEC's regulatory change (i.e., firms that switched to IFRS voluntarily from local standards after the elimination) and those for firms that adopted U.S. GAAP voluntarily after the elimination. We find evidence of simultaneity and substitution between discretionary accruals and real activities manipulation (i.e., abnormal production costs and discretionary expenditures) for the two test samples of IFRS adopters and U.S. GAAP adopters. Nevertheless, in contrast to strategies for voluntary IFRS adopters after the elimination, our findings from additional analyses reveal that simultaneous (before the balance sheet date) and sequential (after the balance sheet date) decision processes (i.e., recognizing discretionary accruals and real activities manipulation in order to achieve expected earnings targets) co-exist in firms voluntarily adopting IFRS prior to the regulatory change, and that mandatory IFRS adopters do not manage earnings through discretionary accruals and discretional expenditures simultaneously. We also provide evidence that executives' reporting incentives, which include ”big bath”, income smoothing, and debt covenant restrictions, appear to affect the trade-off decision between discretionary accruals and real activities manipulation. However, the existence and tightness of accounting-based debt covenants seem to play a minor role in this decision for firms that switched to IFRS voluntarily after the elimination. Our empirical results underscore the importance of incorporating reporting incentives and earnings management strategies when examining the effects of regulatory changes in accounting standards.英文摘要：本文旨在探討在2007年美國證管會允許外國公司無需在年報中揭露依美國一般公認會計原則編製之盈餘及股東權益調節數後，在美國上市之外國公司依照國際財務報導準則編製財務報表可能產生的盈餘管理活動，並比較在此新制實施後，較可能受此新制影響之公司（自願採用國際財務報導準則者）和自願採用美國一般公認會計準則之公司兩者間之盈餘管理策略是否存在差異。本研究發現前述兩類公司之裁決性應計數和實質盈餘管理（異常生產成本和裁決性費用）間具有同時發生的替代關係。然而，相較於美國證管會新制實施後自願採用國際財務報導準則之公司，本文之增額測試發現新制實施前自願採用國際財務報導準則之公司，於同時間（資產負債表日前）和前後不同時間（資產負債表日前後）認列裁決性應計數和執行實質盈餘管理來達到預期之盈餘目標，並發現被所屬國家強制要求採用國際財務報導準則之公司，不會同時運用裁決性應計數和裁決性費用來進行盈餘管理。本文並發現經理人的報導動機（如「洗大澡」、盈餘平穩化、債務契約限制）影響裁決性應計數和實質盈餘管理兩者間之取捨，但是對於在新制實施後自願採用國際財務報導準則者而言，債務契約之存在和限制對於該二盈餘管理工具間之取捨，似乎扮演微不足道的角色。本研究之實證結果可做為檢測會計制度變革之影響時，需將報導動機和盈餘管理策略做結合探討之重要依據。起始頁-結束頁：71-133資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202008_30(2).000310篇名：Asymmetric Valuation Adjustments in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income並列篇名：累計其他綜合損益之不對稱評價調整作者：葉疏(Shu Yeh);王全三(Chuan-San Wang)關鍵字：fair value adjustment;other comprehensive income;book value;公允價值調整;其他綜合損益;帳面價值期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：The book value of equity is important in debt contracting, firm equity valuation, and managerial bonus determination, and thus subject to discretionary adjustments by management. Even though annual Other Comprehensive Income (OCI) amounts are independent of the current period profit and loss, annual OCI does constitute a significant proportion of equity book value and thus may also be the object of discretionary management. In this study, we use changes in firms' market value of equity to measure variations in business conditions, and examine whether firms adjust their OCI amounts to manage the book value of equity. We find that the book value of equity increases (decreases) by approximately 0.09% (0.003%) through changes in OCI amounts, for a 1% improvement (deterioration) in the market value of equity over the prior year. These findings of asymmetric adjustments persist when we use a three-year window period that contains more information and accounting reverses. Further analyses indicate that asymmetric adjustments are more significant for firms with more serious agency problems (measured by corporate social responsibility and CEO duality). The findings are robust when changes in net sales are used as the proxy for variations in business conditions and under various specifications.英文摘要：業主權益的金額為執行債務契約、評估企業價值及決定經理人員薪酬等議題的重要考量因素，因此可能受到企業經理人員的權衡調整。年度其他綜合損益（Other Comprehensive Income; OCI）之金額雖不影響當期損益，但卻是決定當期期末業主權益金額的重要因素，因此可能成為權衡管理之對象。本研究使用公司股權市場價值的變化衡量商業條件的變動，用以評估公司是否權衡調整OCI金額，進而管理業主權益的金額。本研究發現當股權市場價值較上年度提昇（惡化）1％時，業主權益的價值經由OCI金額變動而增加（減少）約0.09%（0.003%）。當觀察期間延伸至三年，以包含更多信息和會計迴轉的影響後，這些不對稱調整的結果仍然存在。進一步分析顯示：代理問題較嚴重之公司（以企業社會責任和CEO是否兼任董事長加以衡量），其不對稱調整更為顯著。使用淨銷售額變化作為商業條件變化之代理變數，或改變其他研究設計，本研究結果仍然穩健。起始頁-結束頁：135-173資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202008_30(2).000411篇名：The Benefits of Disclosing Internal Control Weaknesses: Evidence from Taiwanese Banks並列篇名：揭露內部控制缺失之效益：臺灣銀行業之實證作者：郭俐君(Li-Chun Kuo);廖懿屏(Yi-Ping Liao)關鍵字：internal control weakness;Ohlson model;banks;內部控制缺失;Ohlson模型;銀行業期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study uses financial data from banks in Taiwan from 2001 to 2014 to examine the benefits of reporting internal control weaknesses (ICWs). The study argues that reporting non-zero ICWs reveals the high effort undertaken by a firm in assessing its internal control effectiveness and that such effort may be positively valued by the market. The results indicate a strong positive correlation between disclosing non-zero ICWs and market value of equity after controlling endogeneity problems. The results are robust with respect to the additional tests, which include adding other proxies for internal audit quality and considering the effect of mergers and acquisitions. This study is innovative in documenting evidence of the benefits of disclosing ICWs. It contributes to research in this field by supporting regulator's disclosure requirements and encouraging managers to diligently report ICWs.英文摘要：依據我國「金融控股公司及銀行業內部控制及稽核制度實施辦法」，銀行業應建立內部控制制度，並確保該制度得以持續有效執行，本研究以2001年至2014年之銀行業為觀察值，探討內部控制缺失揭露之效益。銀行揭露內部控制缺失雖然反映其營運流程有所缺失，但同時也顯示其評估內部控制制度之努力，因而市場可能給予正面評價。在控制內生性之後，內部控制缺失之揭露與銀行股權之市場價值呈現正向關聯，而考量內部稽核品質或銀行併購等因素之可能影響後，實證結果維持不變。本文顯示當銀行努力辨認與揭露內部控制缺失時，投資人認為其努力是有價值的，此結果不僅支持主管機關之揭露政策，也鼓勵經理人誠實報導企業之內部控制缺失。起始頁-結束頁：175-210資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202008_30(2).000512篇名：Do Government Initiatives and Reasons for Auditor-Client Realignment Influence Audit Fees and Audit Quality? Evidence from China並列篇名：政府舉措與會計師事務所改聘決定是否影響審計公費與審計品質？以中國為例作者：黃能權(Nen-Chen Richard Hwang);劉梧柏(Wu-Po Paul Liu)關鍵字：government initiative;client;auditor realignment;audit fees;audit quality;政府舉措;客戶;會計師改聘;審計公費;審計品質期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study investigates whether the promotion of the initiative to expand and strengthen accounting firm practices by Chinese government since May 2007, and the decisions for auditor-client realignments will affect audit fees and audit quality. Analyzing data obtained from Chinese publicly listed companies from 2002 to 2014, the study first documents that the government initiative and state ownership are significantly influential in managerial decisions as to whether to reveal the reasons for realigning with auditors. We further classify our observations according to the realignment reasons disclosed and find that companies citing client-related drivers for realignments enjoy significant reductions in audit fees. In contrast, companies citing CPA firm-related reasons to switch auditors experience significant deterioration in audit quality after the government initiative to expand and strengthen accounting firm practices was promulgated in May 2007. Based on our experimental results, we draw policy implications and provide related suggestions to regulatory agencies, professional organizations, and accounting firms.英文摘要：本文探討中國政府自2007年5月推動會計師事務所「做大做強」的舉措，與企業改聘會計師事務所的決定是否會對審計公費與審計品質造成影響。通過對2002年至2014年中國上市公司資料的分析，本研究發現，政府的舉措和企業國有化程度對企業管理者是否揭示會計師改聘的原因有顯著的影響。再根據事務所所披露改聘的原因進行分類，本研究進一步發現，因客戶相關因素而造成會計師事務所的改聘，顯著地降低了審計公費。然而，因事務所相關因素而改聘會計師，在中國政府頒布會計師事務所做大做強的舉措後，審計品質明顯惡化。依據實證的結果，本研究向監管機構，會計專業組織，和會計師事務所提出相關建議。起始頁-結束頁：211-256資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202008_30(2).000613篇名：The Effect of Corporate Social Responsibility Performance on Financial Risk並列篇名：企業社會責任績效對財務風險的影響作者：蕭莉芃(Li-Peng Hsiao);陳維慈(Weitzu Chen);林灼榮(Jwu-Rong Lin)關鍵字：corporate social responsibility;market risk;liquidity risk;cost of capital;企業社會責任;市場風險;流動性風險;資金成本期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Since the UN Global Compact was proposed in 1999, entrepreneurs and institutions around the world have placed a steadily increasing emphasis on corporate social responsibility (CSR). Accompanying the increased levels of CSR reporting and activities, researchers raise questions regarding whether the aim of a firm's operations is always to maximize shareholder value regardless of other potential motivating factors, an assumption frequently stated in past literature. The present study infers that a firm with superior CSR performance experiences lower market risk and liquidity risk, from empirically assessing the effect of CSR performance on financial risk. The robustness test also finds that superior CSR performance reduces the cost of capital. Furthermore, the study documents that the performance of corporate governance activities increases the cost of capital. Although there is a positive association between corporate governance performance and the cost of capital, prior research suggests that the corporate governance dimension is distinct from other social and environmental dimensions of CSR. Therefore, if the study excludes the corporate governance dimension from CSR activities, the result supports the hypothesis that CSR performance, in sum, is negatively related to the cost of capital.英文摘要：自從1999年提出聯合國全球盟約（The UN Global Compact）後，企業家與機構團體逐漸重視企業社會責任。由於逐漸增加的企業社會責任報告與活動，許多學者已開始對於公司的營運目標是否如過去文獻所述為極大化股東價值產生疑問。藉由實證探討企業社會責任績效對企業財務風險的影響，本文推論，當公司具有優越的企業社會責任績效，公司會面臨較低的市場與流動性風險。在敏感性測試中，我們也發現公司具有優越的企業社會責任績效，亦會面臨較低的資金成本。然而，與公司治理有關的社會責任績效卻使公司面臨較高的資金成本。雖然公司治理績效與資金成本存在正向關係，過去已有研究指出公司治理面向有別於其他企業社會責任相關的社會與環境面向。因此，如果企業社會責任活動排除公司治理面向，整體而言，企業社會責任績效與資金成本存在負向關係。起始頁-結束頁：257-310資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202008_30(2).000714篇名：Predicting Future Performance Using Fair Value versus Historical Cost: Evidence from Investment Property並列篇名：公允價值與歷史成本之盈餘預測能力：以投資性不動產為例作者：許文馨(Audrey Wen-Hsin Hsu);吳淑幸(Grace Shu-Hsing Wu)關鍵字：predictive ability;investment property;fair value;historical cost;預測能力;投資性不動產;公允價值;歷史成本期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study investigates whether reporting investment property at fair value using IAS 40 provides incremental predictive ability for future performance beyond historical cost. Specifically, this study examines whether recognizing incomes under the fair value model can predict a firm's future income more accurately than the historical cost model. Using a sample of Chinese real estate firms from 2007 through 2014, this study finds that reporting investment property at fair value provides better predictive ability for future income than historical cost. This study also determines that the predictability of income for future earnings under the fair value model increases with the size of accumulated changes in fair value gains and losses of investment properties. The results suggest that the recognition of fair value gains and losses of investment property in income statements can improve the predictability of a firm’s future income.英文摘要：本研究探討依國際會計準則40號「投資性不動產」，採用公允價值模式衡量投資性不動產是否比採用成本模式衡量投資性不動產對未來盈餘更具有增額之預測能力。本研究特別探討採用公允價值模式之企業，其當期盈餘對未來盈餘的預測能力是否高於採用成本模式的企業。以中國不動產業2007年至2014年為樣本，本研究發現相對於以成本模式衡量投資性不動產，以公允價值模式衡量投資性不動產之企業其盈餘對未來盈餘的預測能力較高。本研究進一步發現，以公允價值衡量投資性不動產之企業，其當期盈餘與未來盈餘的關聯性顯著受其投資性不動產之累計公允價值變動損益數所影響。本研究結果顯示認列投資性不動產之公允價值變動數於損益能提升企業未來盈餘的預測能力。起始頁-結束頁：311-334資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202008_30(2).000815篇名：運用社會資本與組織雙面兼具探討組織能力的價值創造過程：前置因素與結果因素並列篇名：The Application of Social Capital and Organizational Ambidexterity to the Value Creation Process of Dynamic Capability: Antecedents and Consequences作者：林谷合(Ku-Ho Lin);彭耀平(Yao-Ping Peng);彭彥群(Yen-Chun Peng);鄧天強(Tien-Chiang Teng)關鍵字：組織雙面兼具;組織學習;組織能力;社會資本;organizational ambidexterity;organizational learning;dynamic capability;social capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以內部社會資本與外部社會資本作為組織在建構並培養探索型及應用型能力的學習機制，探討廠商在本身資源有限的情況下，取得及學習到相關的有價知識與資源的過程。本研究實際調查台灣電子電機製造業廠商，有效樣本共234份。實證結果顯示，廠商間社會資本與廠商內社會資本均對探索型能力有正向影響，對於應用型能力僅廠商內社會資本具正向顯著影響；探索型能力與組織績效間呈現倒U型關係，而應用型能力與組織績效雖為U型關係，但假設不成立；在雙面兼具部分，平衡型雙面兼具與結合型雙面兼具均對組織績效有正向影響。最後，本研究提出理論意涵與實務意涵，以及未來研究的建議。英文摘要：This study selects internal and external social capital as a learning mechanism in the construction and cultivation of exploitation and exploration capability, to discuss the process in which firms with limited internal resources acquire relevant knowledge and resources. Survey data is collected from Taiwan electronics and electronic motor manufacturing firms with 234 valid samples. The empirical results show that both inter-firm and intra-firm social capital have positive effects on exploitation capability, and only intra-firm social capital has a significantly positive effect on exploitation capability. An inverted U-shape relationship exists between exploitation capability and organizational performance and the hypothesis is not supported. In terms of ambidexterity, balanced and combined ambidexterity both have a positive effect on organizational performance. Finally, this study proposes theoretical and practical implications as well as suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202004_30(1).000116篇名：Entrepreneurial Networking Actions and Innovativeness of Opportunities: The Moderator Role of Venture Stage並列篇名：創業網絡行動與機會創新性：創業階段的調節效果作者：謝如梅(Ru-Mei Hsieh);方世杰(Shih-Chieh Fang)關鍵字：entrepreneurship;networking action;innovativeness of opportunities;venture stage;創業;網絡行動;機會創新性;創業階段期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Developing a social network requires entrepreneurs to perform proactive and strategic actions. This study uses a 2-phase study design to investigate the effects of the performance of two social networking actions by entrepreneurs on the innovativeness of opportunities. During the first phase of the study, we interview 20 entrepreneurs from Taiwan's information and communication technology (ICT) firms. Using qualitative analysis, the result indicates that venture stage changes the effect of the two networking actions on the innovativeness of opportunities. The second phase, retrieves 86 complete questionnaires for an empirical analysis. The results indicate that the action of social network broadening exerts a significant positive effect on the innovativeness of opportunities. Furthermore, the positive effects of social network broadening on the innovativeness of opportunities is greater among early-stage ventures than late-stage ventures. Conversely, the positive effects of social network deepening on the innovativeness of opportunities is significantly greater among late-stage ventures than early-stage ventures.英文摘要：本研究指出創業者發展社會網絡應是主動且有策略性之行動，以兩階段研究調查創業者採取之社會網絡行動（網絡擴展與網絡深化）對機會創新性之影響。第一階段針對20位台灣資通訊產業（ICT）創業者，進行深度訪談與質性分析，結果發現前述關係會因為創業階段而受到影響。在第二個階段以2000位資通訊產業創業者為問卷發放對象，共回收86份問卷進行實證分析。研究結果發現網絡擴展行動對機會創新性呈現正向顯著影響效果；但在同樣採取網絡擴展的情況下，新設企業對創新機會的影響會比現有企業來的高。相反地，採取網絡深化的情形下，現有企業在創新機會的影響上則會比新設企業來的顯著。起始頁-結束頁：37-64資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202004_30(1).000217篇名：總經理減薪效應、公司治理與家族企業並列篇名：CEO Pay Cuts, Corporate Governance and Family Business作者：黃麗津(Li-Jin Huang);林穎芬(Ying-Fen Lin)關鍵字：總經理減薪效應;公司治理;家族企業;CEO pay cuts;corporate governance;family business期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：高階管理者薪酬一直是代理問題的焦點。本文有別於過去的研究，從總經理個人薪酬的角度探討績效－薪酬之關聯性，以及公司內外部監督力（獨立董事比例與機構投資人持股比率）所產生之效益。且進一步區分家族企業總經理身分（專業經理人／家族成員），檢測兩者在總經理減薪與績效之差異。配合台灣對薪酬揭露之規定，研究期間為1999－2004年。實證結果顯示，前期績效不佳將導致總經理個人被減薪，且當獨立董事比例越高、機構投資人持股比率越多時，也越容易發生總經理減薪的情況，且當總經理個人被減薪後，績效確實會有所回升。再者，家族成員總經理減薪可能性低於家族企業的專業經理人，而家族企業的專業經理人在減薪後，績效回升的幅度則大於家族成員總經理。英文摘要：CEO compensation has been the focus of agency problems for a long time. This study differs from previous research studies by investigating the relationship between performance and compensation from the perspective of executive compensation, and the benefits of internal and external control mechanisms of companies (the proportion of independent directors and shareholding ratio of institutional investors). The identity of the CEO in a family businesses is made distinct (i.e., professional manager or family member) to examine the responses to pay cuts in difference types of CEOs. In line with the provisions for compensation disclosures in Taiwan, the study was conducted between 1999 and 2004. The results indicate that businesses which underperform in the previous year leads to pay cuts for the CEO, this is more likely to occur when there is a higher proportion of independent directors on the board of directirs. A higher shareholding ratio of institutional investors yield similar results. Nevertheless, CEOs who are family members of family business are less likely to undergo pay cuts compared to professional CEOs. In general, CEO performances are found to rebound following their pay cuts, with professional CEOs having greater improvements.起始頁-結束頁：65-102資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202004_30(1).000318篇名：貪污與經濟成長：企業倫理之作用並列篇名：Corruption and Economic Growth: The Effects of Business Ethics作者：曾子耘(Tzu-Yun Tseng)關鍵字：企業倫理;貪污;經濟成長;business ethics;corruption;economic growth期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：有關貪污對經濟成長的影響有兩種極端的認定：促進作用和破壞作用。本研究以「企業」為本，探討企業倫理對經濟成長之影響，並進一步分析企業倫理對貪污與經濟成長關係之作用。結果顯示，貪污對經濟成長的影響並非一致，對已開發國家，支持破壞作用觀點；對新興國家則支持促進作用觀點。類似的，本文發現，企業倫理對經濟成長的影響有異，企業倫理對已開發國家的經濟成長有正向影響，對新興國家的經濟成長則有負向影響。另外，關於企業倫理對貪污與經濟成長關係之作用，在已開發國家，企業倫理有助減少貪污對經濟成長的負面影響；在新興國家，企業倫理有助減少貪污對經濟成長的正向影響，總結而言，企業倫理會弱化貪污對經濟成長的影響。英文摘要：There are two opposing perspectives regarding the influence of corruption on economic growth: ”grease the wheels” and ”sand the wheels”. This paper explores the influence of corruption and business ethics on economic growth, and the effects of business ethics on the relationship between corruption and economic growth. The results show that corruption influences the economic growth of developed and emerging countries differently. For developed countries, the ”sand the wheels” viewpoint is supported; while for emerging countries, the ”grease the wheels” viewpoint is supported. Similarly, the results of this paper show that business ethics influence the economic growth of developed and emerging countries differently. Business ethics have a positive influence on the economic growth of developed countries, and a negative influence on the economic growth of emerging countries. In addition, the results show that business ethics can reduce the negative impact of corruption on the economic growth of developed countries, and reduce the positive influence of corruption on the economic growth of emerging countries. In short, business ethics weaken the influences of corruption on economic growth.起始頁-結束頁：103-130資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202004_30(1).000419篇名：「物大」便是美？探討廣告產品圖像與模特兒大小比例與品牌關係類型對廣告效果的影響並列篇名：Is a Bigger Picture Better? The Impact of Product-Model Ratio and Brand-Consumer Relationship on Advertising Effectiveness作者：張純端(Chun-Tuan Chang);王欣怡(Hsin-Yi Wang)關鍵字：產品與模特兒大小圖像比例;品牌消費者關係;概念隱喻;廣告效果;product-model size ratio;brand-customer relationship;conceptual metaphor;advertising effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：廣告圖像不僅是消費者觀看廣告的視覺焦點，更是行銷人員傳遞品牌形象的主要溝通方式。研究發現，廣告圖像在畫面空間的安排是一種隱形的力量，能在無形中影響消費者的感覺與認知。本研究以廣告中產品與模特兒圖像大小比例為主題，以概念隱喻作為理論基礎，探討廣告中產品與模特兒大小圖像比例與品牌－消費者關係如何影響廣告效果。本研究以三個實驗進行假設檢定，實驗一使用真實品牌，實驗二、實驗三則使用虛擬品牌。實驗一為2（模特兒大小圖像比例：大vs.小）x2（消費者品牌關係類型：領導者vs.朋友）二因子設計，實驗二中加入產品類型（享樂vs.實用），以排除產品類型的干擾效果，實驗三則使用本國模特兒與品牌，以增加研究的外部性，三實驗均使用廣告態度與購買意圖作為實驗之依變數。研究結果指出，當消費者認為品牌與自己的關係屬於領導者關係類型時，廣告使用產品與模特兒圖像比例大的圖片有較有佳的廣告效果；當消費者認為品牌與自己的關係屬於朋友關係類型時，廣告使用產品與模特兒圖像比例小的圖片有較佳的廣告效果，並證實處理流暢性是上述交互作用的中介機制。英文摘要：In advertising, visuals play an important role in drawing the attention of consumers to promoted brands or products. Recent research suggests that the spatial arrangements of visuals are important. Conceptual metaphors are heavily used to create appropriate visuals in advertising. Elaborating on the conceptual metaphor theory, this research study examines how the product-model ratio (in terms of size) influences advertising effectiveness. The brand-consumer relationship is proposed as a moderator. Three experiments are performed which differ in brands and products. Study 1 uses real brands, while Study 2 and Study 3 use fictitious brands. Study 1 employs a 2 (product-model ratio: large vs. small) x 2 (brand-consumer relationship: leader vs. friendship) full-factorial design. Study 2 takes product type (hedonic vs. utilitarian) into consideration to rule out possible effects on the interaction between product-model ratio and brand-consumer relationship. Study 3 replicates the results of Study 1 by using an Asian model and a brand name in Chinese. Purchase intention and attitude toward the ad serve as dependent measures. The results indicate that ads with a greater product-model ratio (i.e., the product image is well larger than the image of the model) work better when consumers consider the brand as a leader. On the contrary, ads with a small product-model ratio are advantageous when the brand is viewed as the consumer's friend. This study finds that processing fluency is the underlying mechanism that explains this phenomenon.起始頁-結束頁：131-161資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202004_30(1).000520篇名：臺灣權證市場的贏家與輸家並列篇名：The Winners and Losers in Taiwan's Warrants Market作者：詹場(Chang Chan);陳業寧(Yehning Chen);柯文乾(Wen-Chyan Ke);黃尚傑(Shang-Chieh Huang)關鍵字：權證市場;贏家;輸家;個人投資者（散戶）;機構投資者;warrants market;winners;losers;individual investors;institutional investors期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文分析台灣權證市場各類參與者之損益及其影響因素。實證結果顯示：台灣權證市場之輸家為散戶；贏家為權證發行券商、造市券商、經紀券商以及政府。權證時間價值遞減之特性使得權證持有者受損，而主要受損者是身為權證主要買方的散戶。我們也發現散戶投資價外權證及美式權證的損失較大，投資發行價格低與標的股具有高波動或低市值特性之權證損失也較大。此外，高額的價差大幅提高權證交易者的交易成本，也加重散戶的損失。為了促進台灣權證市場之公平交易及健全發展，我們建議主管機關進一步強化權證市場之造市機制，定期進行權證券商之評比，並在實施完整配套政策的前提下考慮開放散戶放空權證。英文摘要：This paper investigates profits and losses of different types of participants in Taiwan's warrant market. We empirically show that the winners of Taiwan's warrant market are warrants issuers, market makers, brokers, and the government, while the losers are individual investors. The losses of warrant holders are caused by the time value decay of warrants, and thus the main buyers, individual investors, become the losers. Individual investors suffer greater losses when trading out-of-the-money warrants and American warrants. They also have greater losses in the trading of warrants with a low issue price, and warrants whose underlying asset has higher volatility or a lower market value. In addition, we show that high spreads significantly increase the transaction costs of warrant holders, which will raise the losses of individual investors. To promote the trading fairness and development of Taiwan's warrants market, we suggest that the regulators should: (1) strengthen the market-making mechanism of warrants, (2) periodically evaluate the performance of warrant issuers, and (3) implement the short-selling mechanism of warrants under complete supporting policies.起始頁-結束頁：163-200資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202004_30(1).000601篇名：從林田山原住民保留地案看原住民保留地之登記及其更正問題並列篇名：Critical Study of the Registration of Indigenous Reservation Lands and Its Correcting - with the Analysis of Lin-Tien-Shan Case作者：戴秀雄(Hsiu-Hsiung Tai)關鍵字：原住民保留地;土地登記;更正登記;indigenous reservation land;land registration;correction of land registration期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：23卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：林田山林場原住民保留地因當年辦理總登記時，先後被重複辦理，導致存在花蓮縣鳳林鎮與萬榮鄉皆有其土地登記，而卻僅於萬榮鄉之登記內中註記為原住民保留地。此案於辦理更正登記時，將萬榮鄉之土地登記塗銷後，引發是否應將原住民保留地註記轉載於鳳林鎮土地登記之爭議。由於案情涉及（一）原住民保留地之法律性質及其與土地登記之關聯，以及（二）登記機關辦理更正登記之審查權限以及證據認定，而二者皆屬我國迄今相關研究罕於碰觸者。因此，本文嘗試藉由林田山案之分析，探討前述兩個問題領域，並且以其分析結果探討林田山案的合理處理方式。由於原住民保留地無論源自日治時期或是歷經增劃編所形成，皆屬基於法規或是行政處分之效力所產生，故在無法規明文規定須以登記做為原住民保留地生效要件情形，是否在土地登記內容中註記原住民保留地，對於各該土地屬性為原住民保留地並無任何關聯與影響。其次，則由於台灣之更正登記程序得依職權啟動，則登記機關對於待更正之登記內容應有完整及對已知事實進行檢視之義務，以避免明知存在之錯誤續存於登記內容中。鑒於林田山案之系爭土地為原住民保留地是已知事實，基於前述理由，林田山案之解決方案應以由登記機關就系爭土地之原住民保留地屬性以更正登記方式註記之，而不須另為事實認定或是另由其他機關囑託辦理。英文摘要：The Problematic in case ”Lin - Tien - Shan” represents a combination of two questions and has resulted confusion of relative agencies of government. One of them is the legal relationship between indigenous reservation land and land registration. The other is namely about the legal nature of the land - registration - correcting process. Both topics are till now only very limited researched. The both topics will be analyzed in this article in order to provide a reasonable solution for case ”Lin - Tien - Shan”. While the indigenous reservation lands are proved to be irrelevant to land registration, the competence of registration agencies should be wider interpreted, in order to avoid the existence of the known errors in land registration. With the above stated issues as knowledgebase, the lands of case ”Lin - Tien - Shan” should be as indigenous reservation land in land - registration - correction process registered.起始頁-結束頁：109-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.202011_23(2).00012篇名：論居住正義及其解方：臺灣與臺北並列篇名：Discourses on Housing Justice and The Solutions: Taiwan and Taipei作者：李得全(Te-Chuan Li);羅<U+714A>(Hsuan Lo);謝一鋒(Yi-Feng Hsieh)關鍵字：居住正義;可負擔住宅;市場失靈;政府失靈;治理失靈;Housing Justice;Affordable Housing;Market Failure;Governments Failure;Governance Failure期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：23卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究討論當前居住正義之內涵，認為居住為人類社會之「基本權利」，應儘可能並兼顧優先提供社會處境最不利的成員適宜的居住環境，亦即體現「適足居住權」為實踐居住正義的重要方針，而在評價適足居住權七項關鍵指標中，本文以較具可操作性的「可負擔性（affordability）」指標開展，以臺北市為案例，研究發現臺北市「房價所得比」及「租金所得比」均屬高度不可負擔，加上「市場失靈」、「政府失靈」及「治理失靈」，更加劇房價及租金高不可攀程度。由於住宅商品化、私有化和金融化日趨嚴重，可負擔住宅已成為亞洲城市的重要議題，而台灣及臺北正深處居住不正義困境。本研究就居住不正義之問題，分析其根本原因，針對各問題研擬解決對策，再依現行各機關權責劃分，以及各解決對策之重覆性排列其優先順序，提出中央與地方政府（含行政、立法、司法部門）之關鍵解方，期待有助於居住正義更向前邁進。英文摘要：This paper deliberates the contemporary housing justice, as a human right, whether its practice gives the earnest priority to underprivileged minorities with maximal interests and equal development opportunities, and meets the 7 criteria of the right to adequate housing. Particularly, the discourse extends from affordability, the easiest factor to be evaluated among the others, and takes Taipei, Taiwan as a case study, which possesses extremely unaffordable ratio of house prices and rent to income, and the serious market failure, government failure and governance failure have further deteriorated the injustice. As housing commodification, privatization and financialization become more and more serious, affordable housing has become an important issue in Asian cities, and Taiwan and Taipei are deep in the injustice of living. This study analyzes the root causes of housing injustice, develops solutions to each problem, and then prioritizes them according to the current division of powers and responsibilities of each agency and the repetition of each solution In order, put forward key solutions for the central and local governments (including administrative, legislative, and judicial departments), and look forward to helping housing justice move forward.起始頁-結束頁：157-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.202011_23(2).00023篇名：高雄市環狀輕軌對鄰近地區住宅價格之影響：以差異中之差異法結合分量迴歸模型之分析並列篇名：Effect of Kaohsiung Circular Light Rail Line on Residential Prices in Neighboring Areas:An Analysis Using the Difference-in-Difference Method and Quantile Regression作者：李春長(Chuen-Chang Lee);梁志民(Chih-Min Liang);簡啟<U+73C9>(Chi-Min Chien);俞錚(Zheng Yu)關鍵字：輕軌;住宅價格;差異中之差異法;傾向分數配對;分量迴歸;Difference-In-Difference;Housing Prices;Light Rail-transit;Propensity Score Matching;Quantile Regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：23卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：高雄市輕軌運輸系統（light rail-transit, LRT）於2013年6月宣告動工，於2017年9月第一階段全線完工（C1站-C14站）。本研究探討輕軌運輸系統建設開工後對鄰近住宅價格之影響。蒐集不動產實價登錄高雄市2012年到2017年登載資料。本研究採用傾向分數配對（propensity score matching, PSM）方法找出兩組相似的樣本，再以差異中之差異法（difference-in-difference method, DD）分析，並分別採用傳統OLS及分量迴歸進行估計。實證結果顯示，以OLS估計結果，從開工後兩年半間對鄰近房價有正向顯著的影響，之後對鄰近房價沒有顯著影響。以分量迴歸而言，在低房價（0.10分量）及中低房價（0.25分量）方面，除了開工一年半後一年間（即2015年）對於鄰近房價具有顯著正向影響外，其它各期都不顯著。在中價位（0.50分量）方面，開工後兩年半內具有顯著正向影響，二年半後至三年半間（即2016年）無顯著影響，於完工前、後半年又開始產生顯著正向影響。此外，輕軌對於鄰近之高價位不動產於開工一年半內有價格提升的現象，之後其效果不顯著。英文摘要：The construction of Kaohsiung City's light rail-transit (LRT) officially commenced in June 2013, and the first phase of the project (stations C1-C14) was completed in September 2017. This study examined the effect of the commencement of the LRT project's construction on the residential prices in neighboring areas. The real estate price registration data for Kaohsiung City from 2012 to 2017 was collected, and propensity score matching (PSM) was used to find two similar sample groups. Thereafter, the difference-in-difference (DD) method was applied and estimations were made using traditional ordinary least squares (OLS) and quantile regression. The OLS estimation results indicated that the project had significant positive effects on residential prices in neighboring areas during the 2.5-year period after the project's commencement. However, the project's effect was not significant after that period. The quantile regression analysis showed the following: for low-priced (0.10 quartile) and moderately low-priced (0.25 quartile) residential units, the project only had a significant positive effect between 1.5 and 2.5 years (i.e. during 2015) after the project's commencement; for moderately-priced units (0.5 quartile), the project had a significant positive effect during the 2.5-year period after the project's commencement but did not influence prices significantly between 2.5 and 3.5 years (i.e. during 2016) after the project's commencement. A significant positive effect was observed between 0.5 years before and after the project's completion. Furthermore, the LRT project also contributed to a rise in the prices of high-priced units during the 1.5-year period after the project's commencement, although this effect ceased to be significant thereafter.起始頁-結束頁：195-221資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.202011_23(2).000301篇名：安寧照顧的運作語意：自主善終並列篇名：Operational Semantics of Hospice Care: Autonomous Good Death作者：阮曉眉(Hsiao-Mei Juan)關鍵字：安寧照顧;社會系統;自主善終;社會演化;hospice care;social system;autonomous good death;social evolution期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：73期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文將安寧照顧視為一個社會系統，透過語意的分析來討論關於安寧照顧這個論題的社會溝通。我將指出，安寧照顧的成功依賴於將「善終」視為重要的溝通議題。在經久的溝通嘗試中，社會沉澱出「自主善終」這個新的歷史語意，更新傳統的善終意義，建立新的行為期待架構。在每次的運作中，安寧照顧必須一再區分好死／不得好死、尊嚴／喪失尊嚴、自主／失去自主。這確保了當下情境的動態性，同時保留說明在現代醫學及安寧照顧中不安寧、不得善終及不自主等照顧黑暗面及壓迫的可能性。一旦形成自主善終的期待框架及心理的感知結構，同時也會引入實際狀況的失望潛能，進而提供支持安樂死的可能條件。英文摘要：By analyzing semantics, this article treats hospice care as a social system and will discuss the social communication of this theme. I will point out that the evolutional success of hospice care depends on taking good death as a communication medium. After society tries to experiment with different communicative possibilities, the new historical semantics term ”autonomous good death” has received much attention, which renews the traditional concept of good death, building new expectations of social behaviors and new cognitive structure. In each operation, hospice care has to differentiate between good death vs. bad death, dignity vs. losing dignity, and autonomy vs. losing autonomy. Therefore, it maintains the dynamics of actual practice, while it can also reflect on the possibility of bad death, unpeaceful death and lack of autonomy. As soon as the expectational frame of autonomous good death emerges, it also brings the potential for disappointment. This opens up the possibility of euthanasia.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202012_(73).0012篇名：追尋世俗正義：德沃金的宗教無神論與跨文化反思並列篇名：In Search of Secular Justice: Ronald Dworkin's Religious Atheism and Intercultural Reflections作者：陳閔翔(Min-Siang Chen)關鍵字：正義;世俗國家;宗教自由;宗教無神論;倫理獨立;跨文化對話;justice;secular state;religious freedom;religious atheism;ethical independence;intercultural dialogue期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：73期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文企圖藉由闡釋《沒有神的宗教》的核心主張「宗教無神論」，來描繪德沃金所追尋的世俗正義觀，進而指出其後期著作中的自由主義式人文思想特質。無疑的，從《法袍正義》到《刺蝟的正義》，晚近有越來越多學者咸信，德沃金宏大的道德、政治及法律哲學敘事中，鑲嵌貫穿著價值一體的正義永恆圖像。宗教雖然是德沃金晚年才特別關注的課題，但實則在《生命自主權》、《民主在此可能嗎？》等作品曾用不同形式或概念論述過，例如尊嚴、生命、寬容及世俗國家等。因此，本文將沿著自由主義的普世路標，把宗教放在德沃金整個法政哲學的理論脈絡中來理解，希望藉由耙梳他晚年留下的思想遺產，能夠對自由主義實踐有更深刻的反思。英文摘要：This article aims to elaborate Ronald Dworkin's ”religious atheism” in Religion without God (2013), in search of his secular justice, and then to clarify the liberal-humanistic thought of his late works. From Justice in Robes (2006) to Justice for Hedgehogs (2011), many scholars believe that there are ”images of justice” of the unity of value in Dworkin's grand narrative of moral, political and legal philosophy. For this, I also analyze Life's Dominion (1994), Is Democracy Possible Here? (2006) and the like, including for instance the ideas of dignity, life, tolerance and the secular state. On the universal way of liberalism, I will discuss religion in terms of legal and political theory and critically reflected liberal practice in order to point out Dworkin's legacies. For this purpose, the article will finally focus on intercultural dialogue and try to show the implications of Dworkin's universalism and humanity.起始頁-結束頁：57-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202012_(73).0023篇名：從多重對應分析論場域理論流變並列篇名：An Appraisal of the Varieties of Theories of Fields in Terms of Multiple Correspondence Analysis作者：戴定皇(Ting-Huang Tai)關鍵字：場域理論;多重對應分析;互動論謬誤;場域效應;theory of fields;multiple correspondence analysis;interactionist fallacy;field effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：73期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文分析多重對應分析對於Pierre Bourdieu場域理論的啟發與新興場域理論的發展。多重對應分析特色是用卡方距離、維度縮減與正交投影，建構幾何空間，以勾勒變數與個體的複雜關係。本文主張：Bourdieu意義下的客觀或結構關係有賴維度的縮減與建構；場域分析的「交錯結構」來自正交投影，有利探討多維度的分化；「結構與功能的同構性」則體現幾何分析的特有解釋模式。新興場域理論的支持者沒有注意到該方法的重要，因此難以區分互動關係與客觀或結構關係，未能深化原有理論的經驗研究綱領。例外是John Levi Martin等人針對該方法的限制，他們轉而發展著重「場域效應」的理論架構和測量方法。研究者應注意特定理論與特定方法的親和性，以便選擇或發展適切的研究語彙和工具。英文摘要：This paper addresses the affinity between Pierre Bourdieu's theory of fields and multiple correspondence analysis (MCA) to appraise subsequent theories of fields. By chi-squared distance, dimension reduction and orthogonal projection, multiple correspondence analysis constructs a ”geometric space” to depict the complex relations between variables and individuals. This article argues that objective or structural relations in Bourdieu's sense rely on dimension reduction and construction, that the chiastic structure of fields come from orthogonal projection, and that structural and functional homology expresses the particular explanation proposed by MCA. Subsequent field theorists, nevertheless, usually ignore the importance of this method, and can thus barely distinguish the interaction and objective relations. John L. Martin and his colleagues, however, are more attentive to the limits of this method. They develop a field theory and an alternative method focusing more on ”field effects”. Therefore, this paper suggests taking seriously how Bourdieu's field theory is inspired by MCA, because we may infer several specific analytical foci and limits from this link. Researchers more sensitive to the affinity between theories and methods may choose or propose more adequately their theory and method.起始頁-結束頁：109-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202012_(73).0034篇名：黑格爾的《邏輯學》與洪耀勳的「真理論」和「辯證」：評《洪耀勳文獻選輯》作者：黃柏誠期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：73期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：191-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202012_(73).0045篇名：世界、風土、主體：評《洪耀勳文獻選輯》作者：鄭會穎期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：73期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：203-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202012_(73).0056篇名：尋找風土與地理哲學觀點下的台灣主體：《洪耀勳文獻選輯》評述作者：黃雅傽薔Z/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：73期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：211-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202012_(73).0067篇名：密涅瓦的貓頭鷹在殖民地文學的黃昏裡飛起：洪耀勳及其文學論述作者：林巾力期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：73期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：221-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202012_(73).00701篇名：懂牠的技藝：跨物種互動的技術組裝並列篇名：Getting to know them: Special Issue on Animals作者：趙恩潔(Chao, En-Chieh);簡妤儒(Chien, Yu-Ju)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：11-14資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：懂牠的痛苦：當實驗室是棲息地，而物種是生物文化回應並列篇名：The Pain of Animals: When Laboratories are Habitats, and Species are Biocultural Responses作者：趙恩潔(Chao, En-Chieh)關鍵字：本體論轉向;清真屠宰;實驗室;物種;生物文化棲息地;the ontological;halal slaughter;laboratory practices;biocultural habitats期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文論證實驗室中動物的「痛苦」不只是高度主觀的感覺，更是不同科技、價值與生理組裝而成的不確定結果。以Putra Malaysia大學清真研究所為主角，我探討科學家如何與為何在特定時刻將「痛」與「苦」脫鉤，並與主流肉類科學所隱蔽的價值預設協商。在一連串人—非人動物互動中，動物與人類一樣，成為特定的「生物文化共養物種」：牠們的特性呈現在由科學與宗教中介的實驗反應之上；牠們的身體一方面是長時期橫跨數洲的人類育種結果，另一方面則由不同的技術與價值組裝而有了Mol所謂的「多重身體」。接著，動物的實驗反應將決定科學家提供宗教法學者何種科學建議，後者將因此暫停或重啟與紐澳之間的肉品貿易，甚至改變紐澳業者屠宰作業流程的實質內容。如此，「痛苦」的研究提醒我們，多重本體論與社會建構論未必互斥；我們甚至可能追隨不同物種在持續變遷的科學知識與文化脈絡下與人互動的長期共變，並將市場、農場與實驗室，都視為是動物的「生物文化棲息地」（biocultural habitat）。英文摘要：This paper explores the ways in which pain is not merely ”subjective” but also constitutes uncertain things resulting from different assemblages of technology, values, and physicality. Featuring the Halal Product Research Institute at University of Putra Malaysia, its scientists, and the animals they study, I explore how and why, at a particular time, halal-conscious Malaysian scientists began shifting the focus of their experiments from insensibility (to pain) to an objectification of pain and stress. I argue that this shift has exposed the hidden values behind mainstream meat science. In the series of human-animal interactions to which they are subjected, farm animals can be understood to be biocultural species as much as we are. Their newly-revealed traits emerge in their responses to the scientifically and religiously arranged experiments of the Institute; their bodies are the living materialization of long-term breeding and standardization across continents, and each animal has multiple bodies due to different combinations of technologies and values. Animals' responses to experiments influence the scientific advisers of religious scholars who issue fatwas, which determines the status of Australia and New Zealand's meat trade with Malaysia as well as the slaughtering methods used. In this vein, the mutable boundaries of laboratories bring humans, farms, slaughterhouses and dinner tables all into an interrelated biocultural habitat.起始頁-結束頁：15-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：懂牠的心聲：動物溝通中的毛小孩主體展現與關係實作並列篇名：The Feelings of Pets: Animal ”Psychics” as Human-Pet Communication and Companionship Consultants作者：簡妤儒(Chien, Yu-Ju)關鍵字：動物溝通;毛小孩;主體性展現;互為主體性;跨物種親密關係;animal communication;furry kids;enactment of subjectivity;intersubjectivity;cross-species intimacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年來「動物溝通」興起，宣稱可運用直覺感知，跨越物種和語言障礙，來了解「毛小孩」的主觀感受，獲得許多動物飼主青睞。本研究嘗試理解動物溝通這樣的「技藝」為何興起、相信溝通的人如何在認知中調和靈性直覺與科學理性間的矛盾，以及它如何介入形塑當代人和伴侶動物關係。研究分析資料包括媒體報導、大眾書籍、網路社群討論，以及對動物溝通師和「毛家長」的訪談。研究發現動物溝通可被理解為溝通師介入調整人和動物關係的一項技藝，但它能否促動毛家長和毛小孩關係的改變，主要取決於溝通師所展現出的動物主體，能否受毛家長和動物「互為主體」的相處經驗印證，以及過程中各方如何共同促動、展現、與實作出毛小孩和毛家長的互為主體。本研究凸顯出當代跨物種親密關係的變遷和多樣性，指出唯有分析實作過程中人和動物關係的動態變化，方能跳脫個人特質或迷信等簡化解釋，理解各方主體如何在過程中被展現、認識和反思，及它對深化跨物種關係的影響和限制。英文摘要：”Animal psychics,” also called ”animal communicators,” have become popular in Taiwan recently. Such psychics claim that they can read animals' minds and reveal their perceptions. This paper explains why cross-species animal communication has become popular in modern society, why some pet owners in Taiwan are believers, and how animal psychics affect contemporary human-pet relationships in the face of the scientific dubiousness of the practice. This study's data include relevant news reports, books, and discussions on the Internet, as well as interviews with animal communicators and pet owners. Instead of examining psychics' and believers' demographic characteristics or reasoning, this study uses a relational analysis to explain this phenomenon and its disputes. I consider animal communication a process through which psychics participate in the (re)construction of cross-species intimacy and relational practices. Psychics attempt to enact empathy and intersubjectivity between owners (furry parents) and their pets (furry kids). The effects of animal communication, nevertheless, depend on whether psychics successfully enact the animal's subjectivity, whether this subjectivity is confirmed by owners in their interactions with animals, and whether owners are willing to reflect upon their relationships. This relational explanation of animal communication illustrates how cross-species intimacy is shaped through specific social practices, and it also demonstrates the ”ontologies-in-practice” in these processes.起始頁-結束頁：67-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：懂牠的聲音：馬來西亞人造燕屋的聲景技術與「自然文化」的非二元空間並列篇名：The Sound of Swiftlets: Technologies of Soundscapes and NatureCultures around Malaysian Cubilose Houses作者：郭育安(Kuo, Yu-An);趙恩潔(Chao, En-Chieh)關鍵字：金絲燕;馬來西亞燕窩產業;聲景;非人能動性;自然文化;Swiftlet;Malaysian cubilose industry;soundscape;non-human agency;NatureCulture期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020中文摘要：燕窩為一種中華傳統美食，儘管人類「養」燕取其窩，實為在半開放的生產空間並仰賴燕音技術誘燕，屬「半野生－半畜牧」的養殖模式。本文藉由分析燕窩生產技術中的鳥鳴錄製與播放，探討金絲燕在馬來西亞燕窩產業中的能動性，及人燕互動的「聲景」如何重構「自然－文化」空間的重要性。有效的燕屋得以從依賴技術的人造空間，漸成為不需播放燕音的「自然棲地」。金絲燕的喜好決定燕屋成敗，人燕權力關係證成了扁平本體論的特定適用之處，而非普同的應用性。同時，燕音播放在不同脈絡中被人感知為「技術」或「噪音」，均涉及多重「聲景調度地景」的能動性及人類對「文化都市中的自然」的特定想像。本文強調非人能動性與聲景的概念，解釋「聲景」如何調度人與非人行動者，創造非二元的「自然文化」空間。燕窩產業曾是檳城喬治遺產城最棘手的議題，文化遺產的論述繼續鞏固自然與文化的二元對立，忽視兩者實為動態交織的狀態。此案例顯示在空間再創造的過程中，聲景的重要性不亞於地景，應是未來跨物種研究值得關注的面向。英文摘要：Cubilose (swiftlet-saliva) has been seen as a kind of traditional Chinese delicacy for hundreds of years. Despite human practices of ”farming” the birds and then using birdsongs to lure them into building new nests, swiftlets remain undomesticated. Humans can only invite the birds to show up and shuffle between ”natural habitats” and ”human-made habitats.” This essay explores the agency of swiftlets and soundscapes in reshaping NatureCultures by analyzing the use of birdsong recordings to stimulate the human-and-bird manufacture of Malaysian cubilose houses. If successful, a cubilose house can gradually become a ”natural habitat” and the broadcastings can be stopped. Largely determined by the birds' preferences, the swiftlet-human relations bespeak a kind of ”flat ontology” that does not easily exist elsewhere. Meanwhile, whether humans perceive birdsongs as ”technologies” or ”noises” hinges upon the agency of soundscapes and people's specific imaginations towards nature in cultural cities. By highlighting non-human agency and soundscapes, this research examines how soundscapes draw and dispatch actors, both human and non-human, and create non-binary spaces of NatureCultures. We look at the tricky case of the numerous cubilose houses in urban Georgetown, Penang. The language of cultural heritage maintains a binary nature-culture opposition, which obscures the fact that the two are intimately intertwined in urban cubilose houses. In the ecosystem of the houses, soundscapes are as important as landscapes, and they can help reveal more about cross-species relations elsewhere.起始頁-結束頁：115-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：懂牠的需求？外來陸龜飼養與繁殖知識的在地發展並列篇名：The Needs of Exotic Tortoises: The Divergent Paths of Local Care and Breeding Knowledge作者：葉貞沂(Ye, Jhen-Yi)關鍵字：陸龜;實驗寵物;地方知識;脈絡性技術;tortoise;experimental pets;local knowledge;contextual technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020中文摘要：陸龜科動物在臺灣是外來的保育類動物。臺灣沒有原生種陸龜，飼養者如何獲得養殖知識？本研究紀要透過資料蒐集與深度訪談臺灣的陸龜飼養者與政府部門相關人員，探討陸龜知識在地化的來龍去脈。研究發現，臺灣陸龜飼養者的照養知識，是在缺乏專家協助的社會脈絡下，由飼養者社群密集交流而發展出的知識技術。飼養者將國外專家知識轉換為數據，並將這些數據資訊「實驗」於所飼養的個體身上。這些實驗型飼養者結合國外知識與在地飼養經驗，發展出養活與養賺兩類知識。養活知識具有社群性特質，是飼養者彼此交換嘗試錯誤的經驗，逐漸累積成文字化的飼養通則；養賺知識則是尚未標準化的經驗知識，僅在飼養者間結點式交流，成為受訪者口中的商業機密。這群積極實驗的飼養者，一方面挑戰常民和科學家的分類，顯示理解動物的生物性往往需要經驗累積；另一方面，也凸顯出知識的性質可能受經濟理性影響，當知識從社群性轉變為經濟性，飼養知識的內涵和交流方式也發生轉變。英文摘要：This study explains how owners of foreign tortoises, which are exotic and endangered species in Taiwan, have learned to breed and care for these animals. This study used in-depth interviews with stakeholders such as keepers(pet owners), breeders, and civil servants to examine the development of knowledge regarding tortoises in Taiwan. This study found that in the early 1990s, tortoise keepers and breeders treated their tortoises as ”experimental pets” due to the lack of local academic and veterinary experts. Owners had to accumulate their own understandings of the needs of various kinds of tortoises through trial and error. As part of this process of experimentation, owners not only translated foreign articles and reports but also developed their own feeding and breeding tricks. Local breeders and keepers developed two very different primary knowledges, to fit different but related purposes: namely, to keep the animals alive and to captive-breed them as an investment. Whether these knowledges could be used for profit shaped the characteristics and spread of these practices. The keeper community openly accumulated and shared their tortoise care knowledge, while the captive breeders were secretive and only shared their knowledge with acquaintances. The accumulation and transition of local knowledge on tortoises both responded and led to the market expansion of these animals in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：157-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：讓動物說話：倫敦野獸（Beasts of London）並列篇名：Let Animals Speak: Beasts of London作者：吳易澄(Wu, Yi-Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：183-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館7篇名：科技與社會研究、科學教育與生物哲學評《台灣的後基因體時代》並列篇名：STS, Science Education and Philosophy of Biology, Review on Post-Genomic Taiwan: Shifting Paradigms and Challenges作者：林陳涌(Lin, Chen-Yung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：193-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館8篇名：CSI：Kuhn、SSK與STS評《STS的緣起與多重建構：橫看近代科學的一種編織與打造》並列篇名：Dis- and Re-connecting Kuhn, SSK and STS: A Review on A Genealogical History of STS and Its Multiple Constructions作者：洪靖(Hung, Ching)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：203-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館9篇名：國家主權與顯微鏡：滿洲鼠疫的遏制，1910-1911並列篇名：Sovereignty and the Microscope: The Containment of the Manchurian Plague, 1910-11作者：雷祥麟(Lei, Sean Hsiang-lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：213-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館10篇名：新型冠狀病毒篩檢爭議中的議題：存在行動者網絡中的自主協商空間嗎？並列篇名：The Controversies in Screening for SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) : Some Spaces of Negotiation within Actor Networks?作者：翁裕峰(Wong, Yu-Feng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：253-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：培力還是侷限？：兒少安置機構、慣習形塑與階級效應並列篇名：Empowerment or Constraint? Residential Child and Youth Care, Habitus of the Service User, and Class Effect作者：陳旺德(Wang-De Chen);陳伯偉(Bo-Wei Chen);林昱瑄(Yu-Hsuan Lin)關鍵字：兒少安置機構;慣習;階級情感;羞恥感;階級處境;residential child and youth care;habitus;class emotions;shame;class conditioning期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：42期出版年：2020中文摘要：兒少安置機構為國家提供弱勢兒少保護的福利服務，其目標在促進服務使用者身心健全發展，然而，過往研究顯示接受安置兒少離院後多有社會適應的問題，少有晉身專業中產階級的案例，其中安置經驗所扮演的角色不容忽視。但目前少有研究探討離院青年的階級處境與安置經驗兩者間的關係。因此，本研究試圖從服務使用者的經驗出發，透過社會心理分析取徑，瞭解安置機構的場域規則如何形塑兒少特定的慣習？以及這些攸關階級的認同和情感，如何影響青年離院後的階級處境？本研究使用先由Pierre Bourdieu提出，後經Diane Reay及Andrew Sayer等人補充的「慣習」概念，分析兒少安置機構（場域）、服務使用者慣習及其離院後的階級處境三者間的關係。研究方法採質性研究，深度訪談15名目前已離院自立生活青年，並輔以1間機構的參與觀察。研究發現兒少安置機構透過層層管制的外在物資供給，以及聽話惜福的內在價值灌輸，形塑服務使用者生產平凡就好的生涯圖像與經常感到羞恥、自責的階級情感。影響所及，離院青年的階級處境雖不乏穩定就業與高學歷的例子，但仍以從事勞工階級職業與低自我評價為主要基調。本研究結果將提供兒少安置機構主管機關與工作人員作為優化服務之參考依據。英文摘要：Residential child and youth care state services ought to improve the well-being and provide social protection for the socially vulnerable. Yet, the existing literature reminds us that these young service users are likely to encounter the challenges of social adaption. Seldom can they become part of the professional middle class in which residential care plays a crucial role. Nevertheless, the interplay between residential care and class inequality is underexplored. Employing a Bourdieusian analysis, this paper explores, both socially and psychologically, how the field of residential care shapes the classed habitus and the emotional landscape of its service users. Data from interviews with 15 ex-service users, alongside participant observations, are used to sketch how the social field of the residential child and youth care service is operationalized, shaping the unequal psychic landscape of class for its residents. This paper concludes that future research on the implementation and improvement of residential child and youth care services can benefit from the voices and experiences of the service user, who should be valued and centered in the service.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202012_(42).00012篇名：「處境學習」在社會工作教育中的運用：以大學部「社會工作研究方法」課程為例並列篇名：Teaching Embodied Knowledge through Situated Learning: Cases from BASW Research Method Curriculum作者：鄭怡世(Yi-Shih Cheng)關鍵字：處境學習;社會工作研究方法;社會工作教育;教學方法;situated learning;social work research method;curriculum design;social work education期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：42期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以研究者於大學部授課之「社會工作研究方法」為例，探究如何透過處境學習的理念進行這門課的教學。處境學習是指在課程中，透過一系列的學習情境，讓學習者可以適當地聯結知識、行動與經驗，進而習得可以行動及知道如何行動的能力。研究發現，處境學習的課程設計有幾個核心要素：一、教師需先梳理出該門課要讓學生獲得什麼樣的知識、經歷什麼樣的行動，以及產生什麼樣的經驗；二、將其轉化為具體的授課內容及一系列可操作的作業；三、學習者經由授課、示範、操作而產生有意義的經驗；四、教師透過引導讓學習者聯結行動、經驗與知識，進而習得各門課所需的處境能力。研究也發現，處境學習運用在大學部「社會工作研究方法」這門課程中，可以提升學生的學習興趣；學生可以透過操作更瞭解研究方法的知識概念；學生更清楚瞭解研究是什麼、為什麼要修習這門課、研究需經歷的步驟，以及對各個步驟的意義及如何操作有更深刻的理解。本文期待可以深化「處境學習」的教學模式，為社會工作創造更多元的教學方法。英文摘要：This study aims to explore how to use the ”situated learning” to incorporate theoretical knowledge, practical actions, and empirical reflection into social work research method curriculums. Situated learning refers to the design of a series of learning situations in the curriculum, so that learners can connect knowledge, actions, and experience, and then learn how to employ ”situational knowledge and ability”. In this study, I will use the BASW ”Methodology of Social Work” as the target to investigate how attendees to this course acquired embodied knowledge of social work research methods. The study finds several elements in the curriculum design of situated learning: First, teachers should be able to translate the core knowledge and competence of the course into lectures as well as specific practical actions. Second, these practical actions should interest the learners and make them willing to cooperate. Third, the learners should generate specific experience through the operation of practical actions. Fourth, the teacher should be able to guide and discuss the experiences generated from the practical action, and link the relationships among action, experiences, and core knowledge. In addition, through this teaching model, students should become more interested in the curriculum, better understand the steps and knowledge of social work research methods through actual operation, and the purpose of social work research method. The findings of this study are expected to enhance the teaching model of ”situated learning” by creating more diverse reference teaching methods for social work education.起始頁-結束頁：57-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202012_(42).00023篇名：被隱沒的聲音：離開家外安置照顧青年之自立生活經驗並列篇名：Hidden Voice: The Independent Living Experiences among Taiwan Young People Leaving Out-of-Home Care作者：胡中宜(Chung-Yi Hu)關鍵字：自立生活;社會排除;表意權;家外安置;離院照顧;leaving care;independent living;out-of-home care;social exclusion;the right of the child to be heard期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：42期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究主要目的係檢視台灣離開家外安置照顧青年自立生活歷程中的排除經驗，運用深度訪談16位青年進行質性分析，結果發現包括：教育學習排除、勞動就業排除、經濟所得排除、身心健康排除與福利制度排除，這些多面向的排除經驗是動態且累積性。最後，本研究建議增進社會參與、青年發聲與促進離院青年社會融入的機會；檢視社會政策，透過福利制度對抗社會排除；以及落實自立生活能力培育與離院轉銜計畫。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the social exclusion experiences among young care leavers. The in-depth interview method was conducted after collecting 16 cases. The results revealed five aspects of social exclusion: education, employment, finance, health, and welfare service. These multi-dimensions of exclusion experiences are dynamic and cumulative. Based on these findings, suggestions for future practice include: (1) engage young care leavers in social participation and provide opportunities for them to express their voice; (2) construct the anti-social exclusion social policies; and (3) fulfill independent living preparation and leaving care plans.起始頁-結束頁：95-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202012_(42).00034篇名：臺灣醫務社會工作專業能力分級制度之初探並列篇名：Preliminary Study of Medical Social Work Competence Classification in Taiwan作者：莊東憲(Tung-Hsien Chuang);陳君儀(Chun-Yi Chen);黃郁雯(Yu-Wen Huang)關鍵字：醫務社會工作;核心能力;能力分級;medical social work;core competence;competence classification期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：42期出版年：2020中文摘要：醫務社會工作係將社會工作的專業知能和方法運用於醫療照護機構，在醫療團隊中協助病患與家屬因應醫療照護過程的各種問題、改善生活品質。基於多元專業的工作脈絡，以及專科社工進階制度的發展，突顯出明確界定醫務社工之專業能力內涵與層級的需求。本研究的目的是建立醫務社工專業能力分級制度的共識性架構，據以澄清並確立醫務社工的專業能力、能力分級之指標與內涵。研究運用質性研究方法，蒐集並分析包含文獻考察、焦點團體，以及修正式德菲法之資訊。研究結果將醫務社工能力劃分為四個分級，包含適應醫療環境、依據標準流程提供服務的新手層級；具備獨立接案、實習教學與方案實施能力的進階工作者；彈性反應脈絡需求、實施臨床教學與專案發展的勝任者；深化專長領域、勝任跨領域協作以及參與研究及政策倡導的精熟者。研究期望建立醫務社工實務能力的共識架構與持續的討論平台，進而發展專業教育與職能評量機制，作為專業責信與醫務社工職涯發展的參考依據。英文摘要：Medical social work is a branch of social work provided in health facilities by social workers with advanced professional knowledge and skills, to patients and their families in need of psychosocial assistance. The aim is to improve their quality of life. Due to its multi-professional work context, and the development of its ladder career system, medical social work highlights the need to define the connotation of professional competence and level among medical social workers. The purpose of this study is to establish a consensual structure for grouping the medical social workers' ability. Hence, this structure would be used for clarification and establishing an index and context for medical social workers' professional ability and capability. Utilizing qualitative research in this study, the gathering and analysis of information includes document investigation, focus groups, and modified Delphi method. The results of this study will include categorizing medical social work abilities into four levels: the novice level of adapting to medical environment and offering services according to standard operating procedures; the advanced beginner level of taking cases independently, practice teaching, and the ability to implement plans; and the competent level of spontaneously responding to contextual demands. This study aims to establish a practical ability consensual structure and a sustaining discussion forum for medical social workers that will further develop into an educational and professional assessment mechanism to serve as a reference for medical social workers' professional accountability and career development.起始頁-結束頁：145-184資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202012_(42).000401篇名：重建關係之路：電商平台中消費者寬恕之特性與效果並列篇名：The Way to Reconstructing Relationship: The Characteristics and Effects of Consumer Forgiveness in E-Commerce作者：李涵(Han Lee);施權峰(Chuan-Feng Shih);黃恆獎(Heng-Chiang Huang)關鍵字：網路購物;服務失誤;消費者寬恕;信任;失誤補救;e-purchase;service failure;consumer forgiveness;trust;service recovery期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：30卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：過往服務失誤相關研究多從企業角度出發，本研究從消費者心理層面視角探討消費者寬恕在電商領域中的重要性與意義、了解影響消費者寬恕之因素及消費者對於失誤補救之內心需求，及其對關係持續意願之影響。本研究採用調查法，以便利抽樣方式在全台灣最大的社群網站及論壇進行樣本收集，採用偏最小平方法進行結構方程模式分析。研究結果發現（1）消費者寬恕會受到關係強度、社會認知、事件侵犯與人格特質所影響。（2）補救結果不確定性與失誤補救時間均能有效調節失誤歸責性、失誤嚴重性及同理心對消費者寬恕之影響。本研究除在學術上彌補相關研究缺口外，亦在實務上提供管理人員有效的補救建議，獲得消費者寬恕，進而達成關係持續之目的。英文摘要：Service recovery has gained increasing attention in the fields of service marketing. However, little prior research has attempted to explore service failure from a customer's psychological perspective. Therefore, this study incorporates ”consumer forgiveness,” an emerging concept in the service marketing field, in an online transaction setting. We explore the existence and significance of consumer forgiveness when service failures occur, examine whether consumer forgiveness is able to enhance people's willingness to maintain relationships with service providers, and identify key determinants of consumer forgiveness. A proposed structural equation model is tested using SmartPLS 3.0 program, with survey data from a convenience sample comprising of 308 subjects recruited from Taiwan's largest community websites and forums. Our results indicate that: (1) consumer forgiveness is influenced by the strength of the relationship (i.e., trust) between firms and customers, attributions and severity of service failure, and consumer empathy; and (2) outcome uncertainty and failure duration moderate the relationships between attributions, severity, empathy and consumer forgiveness. This study not only enhances the extant consumer forgiveness literature but also provides far-reaching marketing implications for service providers.起始頁-結束頁：201-234資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202004_30(1).000701篇名：「五教同源」論述的社會建構：從民初救世團體到當代一貫道並列篇名：The Social Construction of the ”Five Religions, One Origin” Discourse: From Redemptive Societies to Contemporary Yiguandao作者：楊弘任(Hung-Jen Yang)關鍵字：一貫道;宗教生態;政教關係;綜攝模式;Yiguandao;Religious Ecology;State-Religion Relationship;Patterns of Syncretism期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文嘗試描述並分析華人宗教中「五教同源」論述的萌生與演變歷程，聚焦於宗教生態與政教關係對綜攝模式造成的影響，本文將以新的解釋架構指出該論述的三階段演變歷程。首先是在地萌生階段，民國初年，中國華北地帶的華人宗教場域出現一波短暫但顯著的結構變遷態勢，當時，新出現的救世團體成員須體察儒釋道耶回五教的核心使命，修身救世，平息戰亂。這一階段，華洋接觸的宗教生態與時鬆時緊的政教關係促成「對話式」的綜攝模式。第二是異地想像階段，二次戰後，臺灣的鸞堂與戰後來臺的一貫道，在鸞文或訓文中持續出現五教教主或五教聖人的新神聖範疇，但其內容以通俗儒家或道德格言為主，並未與基督教或伊斯蘭教產生實際的宗教交流。這一階段，不對等的宗教生態與高度管制的政教關係形成「化約式」的綜攝模式。第三是多地連結階段，1990年代起，美國與英國主要移民城市出現了原屬基督教、天主教、猶太教或伊斯蘭教等當地西方人成為一貫道信仰者的現象，這一階段，「根源式」的綜攝模式出現在多元並立的宗教生態及宗教自由的政教關係之中。其後，「五教同源」的全新理解，也傳回臺灣與新加坡、馬來西亞等華人道場，促成宗教的創新。英文摘要：This paper aims to describe and analyze the emergence and evolution of the ”five religions, one origin” discourse. Focusing on the influence of ”religious ecology” and ”state-religion relations” on the ”patterns of syncretism,” I propose an analytic framework and point out three stages in the evolution of this discourse. The first stage is the ”local emergence” in the early Republican era (1912~1949) in North China, characterized by a series of temporary, but significant, structural changes. In this stage, newly founded ”redemptive societies” had to acknowledge the core mission, i.e. cultivating one's moral character and aiming for salvation and world peace, shared by five religions, including Confucianism, Buddhism, Daoism, Christianity, and Islam. The religious ecology, featured by the contact between the East and the West, and the state-religion relation, sometimes loose and sometimes tight, gave rise to the ”dialogic” pattern of syncretism. The second stage called ”displaced imagination” took place in Taiwan after the end of World War II. In Taiwan's planchette writing and Yiguandao's spirit writing after it was relocated in Taiwan after the War, words from the founders of five religions could still be found and even a new category of saints -five religious saint - was worshipped in Yiguandao's ceremony though the main focus was on the popular aphorisms from Confucianism or related to morality and there was no religious exchange either with Christianity or with Islam. In this stage, asymmetrical religious ecology and strong regulation of religion led to the ”reductionist” pattern of syncretism. The third stage is ”multi-sited connections” in the 1990s of the global era when westerners, originally Christians, Catholics, Judaists, and Muslims, were converted into Yiguandao followers in some immigrant cities in the U.S. and the U.K. In this stage with the ecology of multiple, coexisting religious beliefs and the state-religion relation emphasizing religious freedom, the pattern of syncretism is based on the discourse of ”one origin.” Afterwards, a new understanding of the ”five religions, one origin” discourse has been transmitted back to Chinese Yiguandao fields in Taiwan, Singapore, and Malaysia, contributing to religious innovation.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202012_63(4).00012篇名：大統戰下的有限自主：中國省級地方臺辦的組織特徵與政治流動並列篇名：Limited Autonomy Under the ”Great United Front”: Organizational Characteristics and Political Mobility of the Provincial Taiwan Affairs Office System作者：蔡儀儂(Yi-Nung Tsai);陳鄭為(Cheng-Wei Chen)關鍵字：中國對臺政策;地方臺辦;組織邏輯;大統戰;China's Taiwan Policy;Provincial Taiwan Affairs Office;Institutional Logic;Great United Front期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：多數關於中共臺辦體系與人事任命的研究，幾乎限於中央層級的分析，例如中共中央對臺領導小組以及國務院臺灣事務辦公室。與先前的研究不同，本文試圖探討省級臺灣事務辦公室的人事任命。我們根據碎裂式威權主義（fragmented authoritarianism）理論，提出「部門吸納」與「小組領導」的概念，分析中國31個省臺辦的組織結構，並探討其組織變遷如何受到特定歷史條件所制約。我們發現，各省臺辦的組織發展邏輯有很強的路徑依賴特性，同時也會依照當前統戰工作的需要而調整。其次，在分析2000∼2018年臺辦主任的仕途歷程後，我們發現習近平主政後的臺辦主任平均任期較短，幹部更替速度也較快。第三，我們的分析顯示，現任省臺辦主任具統戰工作歷練的比例，和過去相比顯著增加。整體而言，我們的實證分析顯示省臺辦的幹部任用模式朝「有限活化」的方向改變。英文摘要：Most previous studies that examined the personnel appointment of CCP's Taiwan Affairs Office system focused on the analysis at the national level, such as the CCP's Central Leading Small Group for Taiwan Affairs and the Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council. Unlike these previous studies, this paper examines the personnel appointment of the Provincial Taiwan Affairs Office (PTAO). Drawing from the theory of fragmented authoritarianism, we propose the concepts of ”department absorbing” and ”leadership of Small Group” to analyze 31 PTAO's organizational structures and examine how particular historical conditions shaped their organizational change. We find that PTAO's organizational development largely follows the logic of ”path dependence,” and the development trajectories have been shaped by the Great United Front. Moreover, based on the analysis of the career development of PTAO directors from 2000 to 2018, we find that under the rule of Xi Jinping, the average term length of PTAO's directors is shorter, and the turnover rate of the cadre is higher. Thirdly, we find that the percentage of current directors who had Great United Front working experiences has been considerably increased. Overall, this study demonstrates that the pattern of PTAO cadre appointment is changing toward a direction of ”limited renewal.”起始頁-結束頁：39-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202012_63(4).00023篇名：「惠臺爭先賽」：大陸惠臺政策擴散之時空演進與路徑並列篇名：”Competing for the Lead of Preferential Policy Innovation”: The Evolution Preferential Policies of Mainland China for Taiwan from the Perspective of Policy Diffusion作者：趙子龍(Zi-Long Zhao);何明帥(Ming-Shuai He)關鍵字：惠臺政策;政策擴散;「惠臺爭先賽」;對臺政策與經濟導向雙重邏輯;Preferential Policy for Taiwan;Policy Diffusion;”Competing for the Lead of Preferential Policy Innovation”;The Dual Logic of Policy and Economic Orientation towards Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：惠臺政策乃是大陸促進海峽兩岸融合發展的重要政策工具，其各級地方政府採納和落實惠臺政策的程度對該政策能否發揮應有的功能具有重要影響。本文基於政策創新擴散的理論視角，運用政策文本計量和空間資訊視覺化分析方法，對1988∼2019年154份惠臺政策文本之擴散廣度、速度、強度和方向進行實證分析。而基於實證分析，可以較為清晰地發現中國大陸惠臺政策創新擴散迴圈過程是由各地方政府「惠臺爭先賽」推動的，而這一爭先賽機制則是中國大陸在對臺工作上特有的「反獨促統」政策導向邏輯和增進地方發展的經濟導向邏輯共同作用的結果。因此，研究結論為：第一，政策在擴散的廣度、速度和強度上顯著增強。第二，政策擴散的方向在省級政府和省級以下地方政府層面出現差異。第三，「頂層設計」在惠臺政策制定過程中扮演著越來越重要的角色。英文摘要：The preferential policies for Taiwan are an important policy tool for mainland China to promote the integration and development of the two sides of the Taiwan Strait. The extent to which local governments at all levels adopt and implement the preferential policies has an important impact on whether the policies can play its due role. Based on the theoretical perspective of policy innovation diffusion, this paper uses the bibliometrics and the spatial visualization to empirically analyze the breadth, speed, intensity, and direction of the diffusion of preferential policies for Taiwan based on 154 policy texts from 1988~2019. It is clear that the ”Competing for the Lead of Preferential Policy Innovation” could play a core role, which promote the cyclic process of policy innovation and diffusion to preferential policy, for Taiwan in Mainland China under the empirical analysis. It is also important to note that this competition originates from the specific logic on Taiwan-related work of Mainland China. This logic integrates the logic of policy orientation on the ”struggle against the independence of Taiwan and promoting the peaceful reunification” with the logic of economic orientation on the local development of economy. The main findings and conclusions are as follow: First, preferential policies of local governments in mainland China for Taiwan have a significantly increasing trend in terms of the scope, speed, and intensity of policy diffusion among local governments in mainland China. Second, there are differences in the directions of policy diffusion between the provincial government and the local governments below the provincial level. Third, the ”top-level design” of the central government plays an important, yet gradual, role in the preferential policy-making.起始頁-結束頁：81-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202012_63(4).00034篇名：中國大陸玩家虛擬移民：電子遊戲的中美族群衝突並列篇名：Virtual Immigration of Chinese Players: China-U.S. Ethnic Conflict in Video Games作者：林子超(Tzu-Chao Lin)關鍵字：虛擬移民;電子遊戲;族群衝突;網路審查;Irtual Immigration;Online Game;Ethnic Conflict;Internet Censorship期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：中國大陸「虛擬移民」始於2016年12月中國大陸文化部向網路遊戲發出監管通知，此舉導致中國大陸玩家紛紛透過VPN技術接入歐美伺服器遊玩線上遊戲。中國大陸玩家帶著「中國式」的遊玩方法進入歐美伺服器，衝擊本地玩家文化結構，面對中國大陸玩家大舉移民，遊戲中的「行為模式」成為虛擬環境中的族群標籤。本文主要分析虛擬移民的成因與現象，藉由問卷調查歐美玩家對於中國大陸玩家虛擬移民現象的反應，並探究歐美玩家對於中國大陸玩家網路行為的喜好，以及網路行為對現實華人社群的觀感影響。理論方面，本文運用Homi K. Bhabha的第三空間（third space），論述虛擬與現實連結的可行性，依此探討虛擬遊戲中的外掛程式問題、中國金農（Chinese gold farmers）與中美虛擬族群衝突。研究顯示，歐美玩家厭惡中國大陸玩家使用外掛程式修改遊戲參數和遊戲中的商業行為。其因源於東方與西方對於「娛樂」的認知不同，中國大陸玩家追求遊戲勝利大於過程體驗，促成遊戲中第三方虛擬道具交易盛行，導致中國金農現象被歐美玩家排斥，並且歐美玩家將金農行為族群化、標籤化。其中，歐美玩家「學歷」較低及「年齡」較輕，對於中國大陸玩家行為越為排斥，且更容易將中國大陸玩家網路行為與現實華人社群相連結，造成虛擬衝突現實化。英文摘要：The phenomenon of ”virtual immigration” in mainland China started in December 2016 when the Ministry of Culture of China was issued for the supervision of online games. This measure caused players to access European and American servers in order to play games online. Chinese players immigration is when a Chinese player enters the American servers with a ”Chinese-style” playing method, impacting the cultural structure of local players. In the face of the massive relocation of Chinese players, the ”behavior mode” in the game has become the label of ethnic group in the simulated environment. This article uses a questionnaire to investigate the reaction of European and American players when faces with the virtual immigration of Chinese players. It will explore whether European and American players' preferences for Chinese players' online behavior will affect the reality of the perception of the Chinese community. In terms of theory, this article uses the third space perspective of Bhabha (1994) to discuss the feasibility of the connection between virtual and reality & the phenomenon of plug-ins in games & the phenomenon of Chinese gold farmers. According to the statistics in this article, European and American players hate Chinese players the most when they often use plug-ins to modify game parameters and commercialization of the game. The reasons for the foregoing are due to the different perceptions of entertainment in the East and the West. Chinese players play to win as opposed to experience the process, which facilitates third-party virtual item trading, leading to the rejection of Chinese gold farmers in European and American players. Among them, European and American players with lower ”education” and younger ”age” are more repulsive to Chinese player behavior, meaning that it is easier to connect Chinese player online behavior with the senses of the real Chinese community, resulting in virtual conflict reality.起始頁-結束頁：117-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202012_63(4).00045篇名：壟斷性侍從主義：中國國家社科基金項目中的國家社會關係並列篇名：Monopolistic Clientelism: The Distribution of National Social Science Fund Projects and ”State-Society” Relations in China作者：王信賢(Hsin-Hsien Wang);鄧巧琳(Ciao-Lin Deng)關鍵字：國家社會科學基金;宣傳系統;「壟斷性侍從主義」;國家知識分子關係;National Social Science Fund;Propaganda System;Monopolistic Clientelism;State Intellectuals Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：國家與知識分子的互動向來是觀察威權國家中國家社會關係的重要視角，也一直都是經典的「中國研究」議題，然卻未有系統性的研究解釋國家如何「管理」知識分子。宣傳系統對中國共產黨而言，不僅在「包裝」方面發揮關鍵作用，也是黨國控制社會的重要工具，特別是在意識形態、媒體與思想工作上。而社會科學研究屬於意識形態的一環，自然必須受宣傳系統控制與引導，故在中宣部領導下的「全國哲學社會科學規劃辦公室」所主導的「國家社會科學基金」項目，向來受中國社會科學界所關注和重視。本文將以國家社科基金項目為例，經由大量的資料搜集與資料庫建構，時間從2008至2017年（包含胡錦濤第二任期與習近平第一任期），透過「文字探勘」以及田野訪談等，分析以下議題：（一）中國大陸國家社科基金項目的運作機制；（二）中共黨國體制如何控制或導引社會科學研究；（三）比較胡錦濤與習近平時期的異同。經由前述分析，本文提出「壟斷性侍從主義」以解釋當前中國國家與知識分子關係，及其對國家社會關係的意義。英文摘要：In Authoritarian governments, dictators not only need to deal with pressure from the internal ruling elites in asking for the sharing of power, but they also face challenges from society, in particular, popular opposition from intellectuals that would topple their rule or trigger political crisis. To understand political change in contemporary China, it is crucial to understand the position of intellectuals in that society and their often troubled relation to the state. The extent of propaganda system's powers has played a pivotal role in repackaging of the CCP and Chinese government. It is also an important instrument in the Party-state's toolbox of thought control. In China, social science research is considered to be ”ideological work,” which must be ”guided” by propaganda authorities. These said propaganda authorities are in charge of planning and research direction. Furthermore, the Central Propaganda Department controls the national planning and funding system for social science research, especially the National Social Science Fund (NSSF). This paper will collate a large body of data (more than 40,000 cases from projects of NSSF covering 2008 to 2017) in order to clarify the precise characteristics of the distribution of academic resources. It will carry out both quantitative analysis (text mining) and qualitative research (field studies) to identify the relationship between the state and intellectuals, of which we call ”monopolistic clientelism,” and the employment of the state capacity for thought work. We are particularly interested in the differences between the Hu Jintao and Xi Jinping era in coping with social control. Our findings suggest that the propaganda and thought management has become one of the key means for guaranteeing the CCP's ongoing legitimacy and hold on power. This type of propaganda epitomizes the broader processes of adaptation and resilience that characterize the CCP's rule today.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202009_63(3).00016篇名：跨界治理策略、機遇與挑戰：粵港澳大灣區發展案例並列篇名：The Strategies, Opportunities and Challenges of Cross Border Governance: A Case Study of the Greater Bay Area in Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao作者：陳德昇(Te-Sheng Chen)關鍵字：粵港澳大灣區;跨界治理;一國兩制;區域經濟整合;Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area;Cross Border Governance;”One Country, Two Systems”;Regional Economic Integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：隨著全球化和灣區經濟發展盛行，灣區發展模式造就美、日成功發展案例。舊金山灣區是以科技著稱，紐約灣區以金融為強項；東京灣區則以製造和金融聞名。作為中國大陸在華南區域發展之「粵港澳大灣區」，期兼具科技創新、製造與金融角色，未來能否實現目標，仍有待評估與觀察。粵港澳大灣區發展是一典型跨界治理案例。首先，此一議題運作涉及「一個國家、兩種制度、三個獨立關稅區」，具有垂直領導功能性，有助執行效率提升，但亦可能衍生制度摩擦和法治矛盾。第二、廣東省與港澳特區政府行政層級，以及地方政府水平協調功能與效果有限，皆與跨界治理能力和機制有關；第三、大灣區是一區域經濟整合議題，其「外溢效果」涉及政治和社會面向互動成效不彰。粵港澳大灣區跨界治理成效與政治體制有顯著的相關性。雖然政治專政採行垂直領導具績效，但在水平協調則較顯弱勢與不足。此外，區域經濟整合與綜效提升雖是核心目標，但是體制、法制、功能、認知與融合協作上則面臨實質挑戰。現階段跨界治理須強化落實法治、柔性治理、信任建構、社會對話與協作能力提升。英文摘要：Due to the prevalence of globalization and regional economic development in greater bay areas, the bay area development model has proven successful in the U.S. and Japan. For instance, the San Francisco Bay Area is famous for its high-tech sector, the New York Metropolitan Area excels in finance, and the Tokyo Metropolitan Area is famous for manufacturing and finance. As a region developed in the southern part of Mainland China, the Greater Bay Area of Guangdong, Hong Kong and Macao is expected to play a role in scientific and technological innovation as well as manufacturing and finance. Nevertheless, whether the regional integration and effective cross-border governance can be realized in this greater bay area remains to be seen. The development of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area is a typical case of cross border governance. First, the issue of its operation involves the ”one country, two systems, three separate customs territories” policy. It functions through vertical leadership, which helps to improve efficiency in implementation, but may also lead to institutional friction and conflicts over the rule of law. Second, the administrative structure of the Guangdong Province, and the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macao, as well as the coordination function and the limited effectiveness of policies at the local government level, are all related to the capabilities and mechanisms of cross-border governance. In other words, the mechanisms of cross border governance depend on effective communication, coordination, and cooperation between the Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Macao governments. Third, the development of the Greater Bay Area is an issue of economic integration. Its ”spillover effects” in politically and socially-oriented interactions are still unclear. The effectiveness of cross-border governance in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area has a high correlation with its political system. Although the Communist Party of China's (CPC) political dictatorship is effective in vertical leadership, it is weak and insufficient in horizontal coordination. In addition, regional economic integration and comprehensive efficiency improvements are the core objectives of cross border governance. However, the operation of cross-border governance has several limitations because it faces substantial challenges in terms of system, legal institution, function, cognition and integration cooperation. At this stage, cross-border governance must strengthen and promote the rule of law, flexible governance, building of trust, social dialogue, and collaboration.起始頁-結束頁：47-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202009_63(3).00027篇名：結構性限制：安倍內閣安全戰略下的臺日關係並列篇名：Structural Restriction: Abe Administration's Security Strategy and Taiwan-Japan Relations作者：何思慎(Szu-Shen Ho);楊雯婷(Florence Wen-Ting Yang)關鍵字：安倍外交;臺日關係;日中臺關係;美日同盟;Diplomacy of Abe;Taiwan-Japan relations;Taiwan-China-Japan Relations;U.S.-Japan Alliance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：安倍首相定調《美日防衛合作指針》修訂，完成防衛法制相關修法，「脫戰後」的日本在「美日同盟」架構下，擴大其在國際政治中的安全角色，但不意味日本在對臺政策上將解構「七二年體制」。囿於日中臺三方互動模式的限制，日方在發展臺日關係之際必觀望日中關係、兩岸關係的發展。本文發現當日中關係處於低點、兩岸關係穩定的情況下，臺日關係最可能有實質的進展。本文首先回顧臺日關係的文獻及介紹本文將採的分析架構；第二部分則將整理出日本近年如何在安全戰略追求新角色；第三部分則論析何種日中關係、兩岸關係最利於發展臺日關係。最後探究「七二年體制」是否有鬆綁的可能。英文摘要：Prime Minister Abe has finished amending The Guidelines for U.S-Japan Defense Cooperation, as well as completed the legislation of defense laws. The ”de-postwar” Japan, based on the framework of ”U.S.-Japan alliance,” will play greater security roles in international politics; however, this does not mean Japan will de-construct the ”1972 system,” a foundation in which Japan, China, and Taiwan all construct and restrain their interaction rules and patterns. Therefore, the ups and downs of the Sino-Japanese relations and Cross-Strait relations still restrict the development of Taiwan-Japan relations. This paper finds that when the Sino-Japanese relations mire in tension and the Cross-Strait relations remain stable, Taiwan and Japan are more likely to achieve substantial development. This article first provides a literature review on Taiwan-Japan relations and introduces analytical framework. Then it investigates how Japan pursue its new role through revising its security strategy. Emphasizing the restrictions in Taiwan-Japan-China interaction pattern, the third part analyzes how the changes in Sino-Japanese and Cross-Strait relations in Abe administration facilitate or refrain the development of Taiwan-Japan relations. The last part discusses the possibility of de-constructing the ”1972 system.”起始頁-結束頁：83-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202009_63(3).00038篇名：中共網際權力之初探：以資訊與通訊科技在國際合作中之吸引力為觀察並列篇名：A Preliminary Exploration of China's Cyber Power: Observing the Attractiveness of China's ICT via International Cooperation作者：楊一逵(I-Kwei Yang);陳秉逵(Ping-Kuei Chen)關鍵字：網際權力;資訊與通訊科技;吸引力;華為;Cyber Power;ICT;Attractiveness;Huawei期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：隨著美國政府近期強烈呼籲各國不應使用中國華為的第五代行動通訊技術（5^(th) Generation Mobile Network，以下簡稱5G），中共在國際間網際權力（cyber power）之虛實已成重要命題。然當前學界對於中共在國際間推動資訊與通訊技術（Information and Communication Technology, ICT）之合作的討論仍然有限。較多的研究係觀察中共內部政治體制與資訊科技政策，從中共對其人民的專制掌控與非民主政體等角度，論證中共網際權力將對其他國家造成網路犯罪、攻擊、間諜行為的隱憂，甚至可能干涉他國內政，形成國家安全威脅。作者注意到此類以零和賽局（zero-sum game）觀點出發之分析脈絡，無法完整解釋中共網際權力之擴散，或說明中共成功推動國際ICT合作之誘因。本文試圖以奈伊（Joseph S. Nye）提出之「網際權力」的內涵來觀察中共對外運用ICT 「吸引力」（attractiveness）之策略，並補充網際權力概念中較少著墨的非零和賽局面向與ICT硬體資源之重要性。透過觀察中共參與國際標準化組織與行動通訊技術之全球治理、推動數位絲路與海外融資政策、並探討華為在產業內之吸引力，研究發現，網際權力的運用脈絡中亦包含非零和賽局的傾向，導致中共得以利用各國對網路通訊科技之需求與希冀發展數位經濟與5G通訊之願景，拓展中國企業之ICT硬體設備與服務在國際上被接受與應用的「吸引力」。英文摘要：The substance of China's cyber power has received much attention in the academic arena due to the U.S. authorities' warning against using Huawei's 5^(th) Generation Mobile Network (5G). However, there has been very few researches that have investigated China's push of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) via international cooperation. Most of the scholarly works on China's cyber power tend to shed light on China's non-democratic ideologies and its authoritative surveillance and control in domestic society. Consequently, the growth of Chinese cyber power has raised concerns about the issues of cybercrime, cyber-attack, and espionage, threatening other countries' society and national security. The authors argue that the aforementioned analytical framework is limited when explaining the widespread incentives for countries who have carried out ICT cooperation with China with respect to the alleged risks of national and information security. Hence, this paper employs Joseph S. Nye's ”cyber power” to observe the ”attractiveness” of China's export of ICT while supplementing the less discussed aspects of non-zero-sum game and telecom hardware in the discourse of cyber power. The authors examine China's involvement of international standardization, global governance of mobile communication technology, digital silk road, overseas lending, and the attractiveness of Huawei within the industry. The paper finds that China's use of ”cyber power” also has the characteristics of a non-zero-sum game. This helps China to expand the ”attractiveness” of China's ICT hardware and service and to foster international cooperation geared toward other countries' needs for developing digital economy, developing 5G technology, and promoting trans-regional cyber communication.起始頁-結束頁：119-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202009_63(3).00049篇名：從周邊反彈中國：越南的反中情緒、論述與宣傳並列篇名：The Backlash Against China from the Borders: Vietnam's Anti-China Emotions, Discourses, and Propaganda作者：黃瓊萩(Chiung-Chiu Huang)關鍵字：越南;南海;群際情緒理論;反中;Vietnam;South China Sea;Intergroup Emotions Theory;Anti-China期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：習近平上臺之後，周邊外交成為中國對外政策重心所在。然在東南亞諸國之中，與中國在政治體制與社會文化等各層面最為相近的越南與其人民，卻對中國最為反感，由2014年的大規模排華示威事件以及2018年反對政府通過經濟特區法案的抗議行動可以得證。本文透過作者田野調查以及文獻檢索等方法，從群際情緒理論切入，透過分析相關論述來探索越南民間對中國的負面情緒如何形成。本研究發現越南對中國的集體憤恨情緒，主要源自於官方為形塑越南國族意識而行之有年地對內宣傳特定中國形象。透過對於越中關係歷史論述的操控，越南官方期望將此針對中國的負面情緒轉化為國家認同與對共產黨政權的支持，同時對外因應中國崛起而對越南造成的壓力。然而在此過程中，官方政策與民間情緒的不一致已然構成諸多矛盾與困難，如何在其中取得平衡，是現階段越南政府亟需面對的挑戰。英文摘要：The Chinese President, Xi Jinping, has made relations with the neighboring countries one of the priorities of Chinese Foreign Policy after he took power in 2013. Vietnam has been the state that shares many aspects with China, including ideology, political system, civil culture, and traditions. However, the Vietnamese people were reported as the group that dislikes China the most among East Asian nations. Evidence of such could be found in cases such as the large-scaled anti-China protests in 2014 and 2018. This article aims at explaining why and how such Sinophobia-like negative emotions have prevailed in Vietnam through the fieldwork done by the author, using evidences that is provided by existing literature, and by using an analytical approach framed by Intergroup Emotions Theory (IET). It has been proven that the intended manipulation of China's image and the creation of discourses regarding the history of Sino-Vietnamese relationship conducted by the Vietnamese political authority have contributed to the long standing anti-China emotions in the Vietnamese society. This article concludes that the Vietnamese authority is facing severe challenges in trying to keep control of the group's emotions and in preventing the overreactions that are arising in its domestic society.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202006_63(2).000110篇名：中共最高領導人出訪的公共外交效果之評估，1993∼2017並列篇名：Evaluating the Public Diplomacy Effectiveness of Chinese Supreme Leaders' State-Visiting Diplomacy, 1993~2017作者：賴聖雅(Sheng-Ya Amanda Lai);薛健吾(Chien-Wu Alex Hsueh)關鍵字：公共外交;國是訪問;中共最高領導人;軟實力;Public Diplomacy;State-Visiting;Chinese Supreme Leaders;Soft Power期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：自從冷戰結束、中共政權進入後鄧時期之後，中國亦開始積極投入各項公共外交布局。在各種公共外交工具之中，中共最經常使用的工具即為最高領導人出訪。在中共官方的聲明裡，中國政府宣告了至少三項中國欲藉其公共外交策略來達成的主要目標：降低他國對中國威脅的感受、增加中國與其他國家的經濟關係，以及促進中國與其他國家的雙邊共同利益。本研究分析中共最高領導人出訪策略從冷戰結束後實施以來至今，是否達成了上述三項官方所宣示的公共外交目標。實證資料顯示，中共最高領導人出訪行為不論是在「降低他國對中國威脅的感受」上或是在「增加中國與其他國家的經濟關係」上，所達到的效果普遍都不顯著，反而是與「使出訪國的國家利益更趨近中國、更疏遠美國」的這個事實有穩定的關聯性。本文的發現對於中共最高領導人出訪外交政策的效果以及中美關係都提供了更具實證性的理解。英文摘要：Since 1993, when the Cold War came to its end and the Communist Party of China (CPC) entered the post-Deng era, China has begun to actively use public diplomacy strategy. Among the various CPC's public diplomacy tools, supreme leaders' state-visiting diplomacy is the one that is most commonly used. In official announcements, the Chinese government has declared at least three main goals that China wants to achieve by using public diplomacy: reducing other states' perceptions of China as a threat, promoting economic relations with other states, and harmonizing both sides' common interests. This article evaluates whether or not Chinese supreme leaders' state-visiting diplomacy has achieved its announced goals through public diplomacy. After analyzing the empirical evidences, this article finds that, although Chinese supreme leaders' state-visiting diplomacy fails to achieve most of its alleged public diplomacy goals, but it has succeeded in changing other countries' interests by moving them closer to China and further away from the United States. The findings of this article shed light on both the research of Chinese supreme leaders' state-visiting diplomacy and the study of the Sino-US contestations.起始頁-結束頁：29-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202006_63(2).000211篇名：差序格局與政治穩定：論非正式制度裡的中共官員與私企主並列篇名：The Strength of Strong Ties and Political Stability: The CCP's Response Towards Adaptive Informal Institutions作者：楊穎超(Ying-Chao Yang)關鍵字：私營企業主;現代化理論;關係;官商關係;Private Entrepreneur;Modernization Theory;Guanxi;State-Business Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文指出中共以非正式制度控制私企主群體。過去解釋私企主為何滿意中共統治，有認為中共以正式制度吸納控制私企主，並推出滿足雙方利益的政策。但此說無法建立私企常走在政策之前行動的因果關係；而認為私企主以非正式制度推動中共改變者，既未交代早期私企主買通官員合作的利從何來，也不能解釋長期以來中共不重視私企，使其平均壽命極短，私企主們卻仍繼續滿意中共統治現象。本文以2014<U+223C>2019年筆者主要在山東，輔以遼寧、江蘇、廣西、四川等省市所作之面訪資料為例，探索中共如何以非正式制度篩選私企主。訪談結果顯示，絕大多數私企主同意在中國大陸經商必須透過政府關係幫助，但在都找關係的前提下，圈子的存在使官員優先配置資源於自己人，使圈內人得以在市場競爭中獲得相對優勢而長期存活。對這些私企主來說，身處圈子使他們呈現出即便對政策不滿意，卻仍支持體制的矛盾態度。針對圈子的「軟」控制研究，使我們更能瞭解中共控制私企主的方式。英文摘要：This article argues that the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) utilizes informal institutions to control entrepreneurs in the PRC. Scholars generally believe that the CCP satisfies entrepreneurs' interests. Some of them claim the CCP is made up of the young and the highly-educated businessmen, who make policies and organizations in order to channel interest articulation. But this claim does not take into account the fact that the state often follows entrepreneurs' actions. Other scholars contend that entrepreneurial interests are satisfied by the adaptive informal institutions that are formed with local officials. They do not explain that the life span of most enterprises in the PRC has been very short, and continues to become shorter. Nonetheless, the CCP still meets the needs of entrepreneurs. Through in-depth case-studies derived from fieldwork in different provinces, this paper comes to the conclusion that most entrepreneurs agree that guanxi (connection) with officials is helpful for running a business. However, under the premise that everybody needs guanxi, the existence of juan-zi (social circle) makes entrepreneurs in the closer circle obtain relative advantage that enables them to survive in the long term. These entrepreneurs are always in controversial situations where they support the regime to be a participant in the juan-zi, even though they are dissatisfied with the policies. As a result, we can better understand how the CCP controls entrepreneurs through studying this ”soft” control style that is found throughout this paper.起始頁-結束頁：77-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202006_63(2).000312篇名：由社群媒體的觀點論習近平主政後對臺統戰策略對我國民眾的影響：以對臺31項措施為例並列篇名：Examining the Impact of the 31 Taiwan-Related Measures on Public Opinion in Taiwan: A Corpus-Based Analysis作者：陳育正(Yu-Cheng Chen);孫懋嘉(Mao-Chia Sun);顧志文(Chih-Wen Ku);林立偉(Li-Wei Lin)關鍵字：對臺31項;新媒體;對臺統戰;語料庫分析;The 31 Taiwan-Related Measures;New Media;United Front Work;Corpus Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以「語料庫分析」方式解析有關「對臺31項措施」所呈現出中國大陸對臺統戰的特色。本文首先探討習近平時期統戰策略發展所呈現之特點，並運用「庫博中文獨立語料庫分析工具」分析「對臺31項措施」新聞報導，進而觀察「誰在帶風向」和「風向內容」，以及分析新媒體使用者在有關對臺31項措施的態度，瞭解「受風向影響」的情形。研究分析發現，中國大陸官方媒體主導新聞報導，同時對臺統戰重點議題置入其中，並且配合播送。我國網路輿情反應方面，在國內媒體與社群發文仍以中立表述的傾向為多數；而整體正負情緒比，國內媒體報導大致趨於中性態度，社群媒體的網民則是負面趨向大過於正面態度。換言之，新聞媒體對於該政策的態度屬於中立，其報導內容也僅是客觀陳述；而社群網民對該政策傾向負面態度，顯示出憂心臺灣的未來發展。英文摘要：This study aims to decode the features of Mainland China's united front work against Taiwan embodied in ”the 31 Taiwan-Related Measures” through the corpus-based analysis approach. To do so, the study examined the development of Xi Jinping's united front work strategies and then employed CORPRO, a Chinese language corpus-based social science software tool, to analyze news texts and public opinion of the 31 measures on news websites and social media for observing ”who constructs news narratives” and ”the content of the news narratives.” Also, the study seeks to understand ”the effect of the news narratives” by examining news media users' attitudes towards the 31 measures. Results show that Mainland China's official media outlets dominated news narratives of the 31 measures and at the same time, embedded the strategies of united front work against Taiwan in the news narratives. Most of online news texts adopted a relatively neutral tone and news coverage was relatively objective. Yet, public opinion on social media tended to oppose the 31 measures, indicating that netizens were concerned about the negative consequences of the 31 measures on Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：111-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202006_63(2).000413篇名：中共對外使用武力之動態衝突抉擇模式：以1962年中印邊境戰爭為例並列篇名：The Dynamic Conflict Decision-Making Pattern for Communist China's External Use of Force: A Case Study of the 1962 Sino-Indian Border War作者：黃鴻博(Hung-Bo Huang)關鍵字：中共對外使用武力;動態衝突抉擇模式;預防性動機;中印邊境戰爭;Communist China's External Use of Force;Dynamic Conflict Decision-Making Pattern;Preventive Motivations;Sino-Indian Border War期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：由於中國崛起以及近年與日本、印度、越南及菲律賓等周邊國家的衝突，有關中共對外使用武力的研究再度引起學界的關注。本文研究問題是：中共對外使用武力的原因眾多，是否可以將諸多原因概念化？中共對外使用武力行為是否變化無常、不可解釋或是僅能靜態分析？如否，何種機制促使中共使用武力？使用武力的最終決策選擇（衝突規模）會受到哪些因素的制約或影響，而呈現動態的衝突抉擇樣式？本文借鑑國際關係領域的預防性動機理論、動態差異理論、聯盟理論及窗戶邏輯、心理學的認知理論、經濟學的展望理論及外交政策分析的多元啟發等相關理論的核心概念，透過將中共對外使用武力原因的概念化過程，以預防性動機為主軸，希冀建構一個「中共對外使用武力之動態衝突抉擇模式」，並且以1962年中印邊境戰爭為案例，採取過程追蹤與類型學等研究方法，用以驗證本模式之適用性。本文透過個案分析，證實了兩個研究假設：（一）中共是出於防止周邊權力地位衰退的預防性動機，而對挑戰其周邊權力地位的國家使用武力；（二）中共使用武力的預防性動機強弱，會影響其最終決策選擇，而呈現動態的衝突抉擇樣式。由此，也初步驗證了本模式的適用性。英文摘要：Due to the rise of China and its rekindled conflicts with neighboring countries like Japan, India, Vietnam, and the Philippines in recent years, the study on Communist China's external use of force has once again attracted much academic attention. This thesis's research questions are: there are numerous causes for Communist China's external use of force, could all these causes be conceptualized? Are Communist China's external uses of force capricious? unexplainable? or could only be analyzed statically? If not, what mechanism facilitates Communist China's final decision for the use of force? What factors would limit or influence the final decision to use force (the scale of the conflict) to exhibit a dynamic conflict decision-making pattern? This thesis draws on the core concepts of various theories such as the preventive motivation theory, dynamic differentials theory, alliance theory and window logic in international relations, cognitive theory in psychology, prospect theory in economics, and poliheuristic theory in foreign policy analysis. Through the conceptualization of the causes for Communist China's external use of force, the author wanted to construct a ”dynamic conflict decision making pattern for Communist China's external use of force” along the axis of preventive motivation. The 1962 Sino-Indian Border War was selected as a case study and was analyzed using both the process-tracing and typology methods to examine the applicability of this pattern. By way of the case study, the two following research hypotheses were verified: First, Communist China's use of force against neighboring countries that challenged its authority and position in the region were caused by preventive motivations to prevent any decline of its regional status. Second, the final decision for Communist China's external use of force was influenced by the strength of its preventive motivations and exhibited a dynamic conflict decision-making pattern. Therefore, the applicability of this pattern was also preliminarily validated.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202003_63(1).000114篇名：中國大陸森林認證政策轉變之分析：協力網絡觀點並列篇名：The Analysis of Forest Certification Policy Change in China: A Collaborative Network Perspective作者：謝儲鍵(Chu-Chien Hsieh);顏良恭(Liang-Kung Yen)關鍵字：協力網絡;環境政策制定;森林認證政策（FSC、PEFC、CFCC）;網絡治理;Collaborative Network;Environmental Policy-Making;Forest Certification Policy (FSC, PEFC, CFCC);Network Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：近二十年來，中國大陸積極推動森林認證政策。儘管政府仍是主要的領導角色，但利害關係人在政策制定過程中也影響著動態的決策結果。本文應用協力網絡理論，探討森林認證場域中行動者角色與認證體系採用結果的相關性。本研究選定參與2012年第一次森林認證會議的36個組織，進行協力合作與網絡互動的問卷調查。分析發現，當行動者「權力分享」與「信任互惠」協力認同程度愈高，則在採用FSC體系時具有差異性；當行動者「權力分享」與「技術資源交換」協力程度愈高，則在採用PEFC體系具有顯著性。透過網絡分析，觀察到「國際組織」在2008年前占據網絡的「中心者」位置，而在2008年後被「公部門」取代。在「結構洞」網絡中，則是由「多元行動者」轉為「二元群體」分布，由政府及國際組織掌控資訊、資源傳遞的功能。國際組織最大的優勢在於掌握非正式的「信任網絡」而成為政策掮客。本研究認為中國大陸森林認證政策利害關係人之間的協力合作，主要建立在國際資源與國家威權的協商上，其協力途徑從「多元」轉為「雙核心」的制衡模式。英文摘要：During the past two decades, the Chinese government has actively promoted the forest certification policy. Despite the government's leadership roles in the policy domain, stakeholders have gradually influenced dynamic decision-making in the development process. This paper applies theories of collaborative network to explore the correlation between the degrees of actors' collaboration and network roles and the results of the system adoption in the forest certification field. This study selected 36 organizations that participated in the first conference in 2012 to conduct surveys in collaboration and network interaction. The analyses found that when more of the actors agree to the collaboration of ”power sharing” and ”trust reciprocity”, the result of FSC adoption is different, while when more of the actors agree to the collaboration of ”power sharing” and ”technical resource exchange”, there is a difference in PEFC adoption. Through network analysis, we found that the ”international organization” occupied the central position but was gradually replaced by the public sectors after 2008. In addition, in the ”broker” network, it was a transition from a ”multiple-actors” to a ”dual-groups” state. The government and international organizations control the functions of information and resource transfer; however, the government gradually starts to take back the power-sharing and has become the center of collaborative networks. But, the strongest advantage for international organizations is for them to grasp the informal ”trust network” among stakeholders from various groups transforming to policy brokers, and to shape a co-opetition relationship with the government. This study illustrates that the cooperation of China's forest certification is mainly based on the network of international resources and national authoritarianism, and that the collaborative model has changed from ”diversity” to ”dual-core” group. Finally, in addition to discussing the collaboration of stakeholders through ”network analysis”, this paper also supplements the arguments of horizontal cooperation and vertical relationship for its theoretical contribution.起始頁-結束頁：41-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202003_63(1).000215篇名：屬地化管理、中國式分權與地方政府的犯罪治理政策：來自轉型期的證據並列篇名：Jurisdictional Management, Decentralization and Local Government Crime Prevention Policies: Evidence from Transitional China作者：楊貴(Gui Yang)關鍵字：屬地化管理;中國式分權;地方政府行為;犯罪治理政策;Jurisdictional Management;Chinese-style Decentralization;Local Government Behavior;Crime Prevention Policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：63卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：轉型期中國不斷攀升的社會犯罪成為政府亟需解決的治理難題。屬地化分級犯罪治理下該難題的挑戰在於如何處理好央地政府間的分權關係。利用1997年至2006年30個分省TSCS資料並結合多層線性模型，本文使用政府支出偏好模型實證檢證了經濟分權與政治集權相結合的中國式分權對地方政府犯罪治理政策的影響。本文發現：屬地化分級管理體制下，地方政府傾向採用中央政府的嚴打政策以回應社會犯罪問題。不過，財政分權使得地方政府在犯罪治理上既沒有動力偏向中央政府的嚴打政策，也沒有意願主動採用替代性的胡蘿蔔政策。與此同時，中央政府可以通過政治激勵和官僚整合控制地方政府犯罪治理的政策行為。2006年之前中央政府堅持嚴打政策，官僚整合促使地方政府積極執行嚴打政策，但官僚整合對地方政府是否採用胡蘿蔔政策卻無實質性的影響。英文摘要：Rising crime rate has been a major concern for all levels of governments in transitional China. One of the greatest challenges is how to handle the relations between the central and local governments since crime prevention is managed by the jurisdictional governments. This paper sets out a governmental expenditure preference model and uses provincial time-series cross-sectional data over 1997~2006, to investigate the effects of decentralization on local government crime prevention policies. Results from multilevel models show that local governments were responsive to crime by Strike Hard policy. However, local governments were less likely to implement Strike Hard measures or adopt carrots policy when fiscal decentralization was higher. Moreover, bureaucratic control only made sense to local governments when the political incentives of the central government were both strong and clear. During 1997~2006, bureaucratic integration urged local governments to use Strike Hard policy, but had no substantive impact on carrots policy.起始頁-結束頁：83-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202003_63(1).000301篇名：成為老年父母的照顧者：成年子女的孝道信念、代間多重時空框架經驗整合能力及代間照顧者角色認同並列篇名：Being a Caregiver for Aging Parents: Adult Children's Filial Belief, Capacity of Integrating Intergenerational Cross-time-and-space Experience, and Their Role Identification of Caregiver作者：吳志文(Chih-Wen Wu);葉光輝(Kuang-Hui Yeh)關鍵字：代間多重時空框架經驗整合能力;代間照顧角色認同;相互性孝道;權威性孝道;Authoritarian filial piety;capacity of integrating intergenerational cross-time-and-space experiencer;reciprocal filial piety;role identification of intergenerational caregiver期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：59期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文探討華人重視的孝道信念是否能透過代間多重時空框架經驗整合（簡稱多框架整合）能力作用，進而提升成年子女對代間照顧者角色產生認同的中介運作歷程，並援引孝道雙元模型，檢證相互性與權威性兩面向孝道不同的影響機制。研究邀請年滿35歲且其父親或母親至少一人健在的成年人填寫調查問卷，分別蒐集到488筆父親版與518筆母親版有效問卷資料。結果顯示：相互性孝道對代間照顧者角色認同的正向效果，不論互動對象是父親或母親，都達顯著水準；但是權威性孝道的效果僅在對象為父親時達顯著水準；而且不論是對父親或母親對象，相互性孝道的效果都較權威性孝道更具優勢性。代間多框架整合能力對代間照顧者角色認同的影響，在父親與母親對象上都具正向顯著效果。相互性孝道可透過多框架整合能力，進而強化成年子女對代間照顧者角色認同的中介歷程，而且在互動對象為父親及母親時皆達顯著；至於權威性孝道透過多框架整合能力影響代間照顧者角色認同的中介歷程，僅在父親對象時達顯著水準。整體而言，孝道信念在華人社會具有鞏固家庭發揮照顧與支持高齡父母的功能，且相互性與權威性孝道對代間照顧關係具有不同的影響效果。本文發現可供實務工作者參考，理解孝道信念如何促進華人子女認同其代間照顧者角色的歷程。英文摘要：Intergenerational relationships play a central role in shaping elderly well-being, especially for Chinese family, in which filial piety is a primary virtue to urge adult children to fulfill their role obligation as a caregiver of their aging parents. This study adopts the dual filial piety model and investigates the different impacts of reciprocal and authoritarian filial piety on adult children's role identification of intergenerational caregiver (RIIC). It is assumed that reciprocal filial piety (RFP) has a more positive influence than authoritarian filial piety (AFP) because the former originates from authentic emotional bonding and facilitates stronger motivation to care about their parents, while the latter is affected by the internalization of Chinese social norms that emphasize children's obedience and submission to their parents. This study further examines the possible mediator, namely Integrating Cross-time-and-space Experience (ICTSE), of the abovementioned relationship between filial piety and RIIC. ICTSE represents a capacity of perspective taking and open thinking which make adult children be able to better review, integrate, and refine their early parent-children interactive experiences by multiple frames about different situations and different roles' perspectives. ICTSE facilitates adult children's self-acceptance in their intergenerational relationships, including their role reversal and identification as a caregiver. This study recruited 724 participants who were above 35 years old. These participants completed the father or/and mother version questionnaire if their father or/and mother was alive and above 60 years old. A total of 488 data were valid for investigating the relationship with father (324 of them were from female participants; average age: 43.03 years old, SD = 6.48 years; average age of their father: 73.15 years old, SD = 8.36 years). In addition, a total of 518 data were valid for investigating the relationship with mother (332 of them were from female participants; average age: 45.76 years old, SD = 7.95 years; average age of their father: 72.25 years old, SD = 8.99 years). This study used structure equation modeling to analyze two hypothetical models. The first model investigated the effect of RFP and AFP on RIIC and showed acceptable model fit for both father- and mother-child relationships. The positive effect of RFP was significant on RIIC for both father-child and mother-child dyads, while that of AFP was significant for only father-child dyad. It also indicated the effect of RFP was more superior to that of AFP for both father and mother targets. The second model further tested the mediating effect of ICSTE and also found acceptable model fit for both father-child and mother-child dyads. The positive effect of RFP was significant on ICSTE for both father-child and mother-child dyads, while that of AFP was significant for only father-child dyad. The effect of RFP was more superior to AFP for both father-child and mother-child dyads. ICTSE had a positively significant effect on RIIC for both father-child and mother-child dyads. The mediating effect of ICTSE in the path from RFP to RIIC was significant for both father-child and mother-child dyads, whereas that in the path from AFP to RIIC was significant for only father-child dyad. This study highlights that filial piety in Chinese society could promote family to bring its functions of supporting and caring for aging parents into fully play. The findings might be important in providing professional consultants and family life educators a better understanding of how filial belief urges Chinese adult to identify their role of intergenerational caregiver and care about their elderly parents' well-being more sincerely.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200900590012篇名：男同志向父親出櫃後關係衝突修復歷程中的子職轉化並列篇名：Filial Changes in the Process of Repairing Conflict Relationship after the Gay Men Came Out to His Father作者：洪雅鳳(Ya-feng Hung);王鎧倫(Kai-lun Wang)關鍵字：父子關係;出櫃;同性戀;孝道;華人文化;Chinese-culture;come out;father-son relationship;filial piety;gay期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：59期出版年：2020中文摘要：男同志在父權體制與重視孝道的華人社會中常被視為是有缺陷的性別他者，更得背負「孽子」的罪名。當男同志向父親出櫃後如何與父親修復關係，以及修復歷程中子職如何轉化是本研究要探究的兩個問題。本研究採用敘事研究取向，深度訪談3位非自願性地出櫃後與父親產生關係裂隙，且現已成功修復關係的成年男性。資料分析方法採用「整體─內容」的分析方法，先採用Gee的微觀論述分析進行初層的語言學分析以輔助理解語言的社會文化意涵，再將每一分析片段置回整體故事以能獲取文本故事的整體意義。研究結果發現父子關係修復歷程大致可分為5個時期，分別對應到不同子職：（1）驟降期，同志兒子會「據實以告」、「順服管教」；（2）低谷緩升期，則「拉開身、心理距離」、「調整外型或生活」；（3）波瀾跌宕期，子職暫時潛伏；（4）穩定回溫期，是「以其他成就彌補無後缺憾」、「反哺及陪伴父親」；（5）跨越期，採「陪伴與體恤父親」、「主動透露感情生活」及「對外收斂同志身分」。這個修復歷程與父親的失落歷程相呼應，修復歷程中的關鍵事件則有離家與經濟自主、母親角色的介入及存在威脅等。在華人文化中，子職幾乎等同孝道，關係修復歷程的子職轉化也是孝道信念的協商與轉變，至於關係修復的程度則仰賴父子在關係中的互動與努力。最後也依據研究結果，對未來研究及助人者提出相關建議。英文摘要：In the Chinese patriarchy and the Chinese society that values filial piety, gay men are often regarded as defective gender other people, and they have to bear the crime of ”unfilial son.” When gay men came out to their fathers, how to repair their relationship with their fathers, and filial changes in the restoration process are the two questions to be explored in this study. This study is based on the narrative research and interviews with 3 adult males who have had a rupture relationship with their fathers after coming out and have been successfully repaired. The data analysis method is Gee's discourse analysis, which is used to achieve the social context hidden in the discourse. Finally, integrating the following results by cross-case analysis. The study found that the repair process of father-son relationship can be divided into five periods, which correspond to different filial pieties. (1) In Sudden-Drop period, the son ”told the truth and hoped the father understood” and ”obeyed discipline to avoid physical conflicts.” (2) In Low-Valley period, the son could ”increase physical or psychological distance to maintain harmony” and ”adjust their appearance or life to please his father.” (3) In Wave period, filial piety temporarily disappeared. (4) During the Recovery period, the son ”increased for no children with other achievements” and ”fed back and accompanied his father.” (5) In Step-over period, the son had adopted ”the way of companionship and compassion to his father”, and ”actively revealed his love relationship to communicate”, and ”restrained his gay status to reduce father's pressure.” The process of repairing the relationship echoes the process of father ’s loss of his son, and this phenomenon is related to the high gay identity, the presence of social support systems, and the involuntary coming out of this research participants. The key events in the restoration process include leaving home and economic autonomy, the intervention of the role of the mother and the presence of survival threats. This study also found that the integration of positive and negative filial dimensions can be close to understanding the filial practice of gay sons. Positive filial dimension refer to those that have made a difference, such as better achievements or traditionally emphasized lineage succession. Negative filial dimension is more implicit, such as obedience to authority discipline, control information to maintain harmony that seem to have no special actions. When the gay son came out to his father, he continued to face the dilemma of conflicting the two identities or roles of the son and the gay. From the perspective of role conflicts, individuals need to try a variety of different strategies to integrate role identity, and to respond to role conflicts through the performance of cognitive acrobatics during the role identity transition. In this study, we can find that in the relationship between father and son, the two roles of son and gay grow and change with the restoration process. In addition, in Chinese culture, filial practice is almost the same as filial piety. Gay son came out to face a dilemma of filial piety. Therefore, the filial changes in the relationship restoration process is also the negotiation and transformation of filial piety belief. As for the degree of relationship repair and whether it is ”successful” coming out depends on the interaction and joint efforts of father and son in the relationship. Finally, the limitations of this study were explained. The three gay men in this study were involuntary to come out to their fathers, and the relationship repair process lasted for 3-8 years. Therefore, the results of this study may be restricted to gay men who are psychologically prepared and voluntarily come out to their fathers. In addition, in this study, the focus of the research was limited to the son's filial changes, and only the gay son was the research participant. Therefore, the appearance of depicting and explaining the relationship repair may not be comprehensive. Based on the research results, relevant suggestions for future research and helpers were also put forward.起始頁-結束頁：35-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200900590023篇名：單次黏土治療應用於有負向情緒的青少年之成效初探並列篇名：The Effectiveness of Single Clay Therapy on Adolescence with Negative Emotions作者：朱惠瓊(Hui-Chuang Chu);胡名鎔(Ming-Jung Hu)關鍵字：青少年;負向情緒;黏土治療;Adolescence;clay therapy;negative emotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：59期出版年：2020中文摘要：黏土媒材具可塑性，處理負向情緒例如失落、憤怒時，透過其特性讓個案找到內在重塑性（resourcing）與充賦權能（empowering）的感受，讓深層的負向情緒透過黏土傳遞與再現，並讓那些原本無法言語的部分可以視覺化。本研究目的為運用具軟黏土特性的人面公仔洩氣球為創作暖身之用具，超輕黏土創作為治療性介入的媒材，引導青少年在本研究單次會談當中能紓解與釋放情緒。本研究以質性研究之主題分析法為分析方法，半結構式訪談進行資料蒐集，共計訪談五位具有負向情緒之青少年。訪談大綱主題包含有對於黏土創作的感受與想法、對負面情緒的影響內涵以及對於情緒的幫助性。本研究結果發現：（1）感受黏土可塑特性，對於青少年在壓力情緒轉化有助益。透過創作時不同的手部肌肉運作與黏土接觸歷程，能夠達到情緒宣洩以及個人生命經驗的再連結；（2）黏土具有重新賦能與框架的特質，能夠激發內在需求、自我對話以及經驗的統整；（3）透過黏土媒材獨特性，能夠連結內外在世界、時間脈絡以及作品意義，產生個人內在療癒力量。依據本研究結果提供未來表達性治療相關研究與實務工作者，在評估個體需求下可以使用黏土作為諮商工作之媒介，但同時也需要考量黏土不同特性進行工具的選擇；再進一步針對不同黏土，例如油土、樹脂土、陶土、超輕土等各種黏土類的應用差異；或者是將黏土運用在不同族群了解其成效。研究限制在於參與者較少，成效評估尚待考量，未來可嘗試在不同領域進一步探究。英文摘要：Clay was with the characteristic of moldability. In dealing with negative emotions such as loss, anger, counselor worked through the characteristics of clay to allow client to find internal resourcing and the feeling of empowerment. Negative emotions were expressed and transformed by the clay, and originally unspeakable emotions can be visualized. And those parts of the original unspeakable can be visualized. For adolescents that were not good at verbal expression, clay has good facilitating effect (Sherwood, 2004). In this study, we use the human face doll deflating ball as warm-up materials and the ultra-light clay as the intervention materials, so that young people through the creative process to achieve the effectiveness of release stress. Data were collected by semi-structure interview and analyzed by thematic analysis. There were five adolescents with negative emotions were interviewed. The interview outline topics included feelings and thoughts about clay creation, impacts for negative emotions, and helpfulness for emotions. The results showed that (1) It was very helpful for adolescents to use clay plasticity to release stress and transform their emotions from negative to positive. Through different creative and contacting movements with clay, emotional catharsis could be achieved, along with reconnection to positive personal life experiences. (2) Clay, with its characteristics of empowerment and reframing, could stimulate internal needs, self-dialogue, and integration of experiences such as important events in early life, to reconnect to emotions from the past and imagine life experiences in a bright and colorful way. The creative process generates self-dialogue and expresses internal needs, for example: ”cases emerged from a state of silence,” ”the comforting effect of human venting balls,” ”self-homogeneity through the plasticity of the medium,” ”the finished product helps rethink the dilemma of life.” The semi-fluid material could enable the re-experiencing and reorganization of the inner emotions; its connotations include ”re-framing the meaning of being rejected by peers,” ”reconstruction of self-confidence,” ”enhancement of self-awareness ability,” and ”Reframing emotional expression.”. (c) Through the unique characteristics of clay, they could link their inner and outer worlds, time context, and the meaning of their actions, resulting in activating their own inner healing power. Further, according to the study, clay could be used as a medium in counseling situations; however, the choice of clay needs consideration. The sensory feeling of the medium is beneficial for promoting the ”re-recovery of the human-face doll discharge balloon,” which can be reshaped through the sensory feelings of ”beating,” ”slapping,” ”pulling,” ”pressing,” and ”vision” and ”smell,” so that the sensation can be re-experience, and thus can catalyze and accelerate the communication of emotions. Concretizing inner feelings represents a ”re-reminder of the positive attitude of a particular work to the right full,” ”a symbol of the power of self-healing within an individual,” ”a magical self-suggestion and metaphor,” and ”a buffer bridge to form a link between the parties and emotions.” It could also be used as intervention to overcome the negative emotions of adolescents through different art media, to understand the differences, and to apply clay to different groups to study its effectiveness. Based on the results of this study, we provide suggestions for related studies and practical activities of expressive art therapy in the future. For example, use of clay in psychotherapy and counseling processes could enhance personal self-awareness; and to explore the effectiveness of different clay such as oil modeling clay, resin clay, pottery clay and light air dry clay may be applied in art therapy research and to apply in different groups. The limitation of the research was that intervention frequency and the small number of participants resulted in certain effectiveness which was discussed, but should be investigated further in different fields.起始頁-結束頁：69-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200900590034篇名：高齡者參與賦能取向式園藝治療團體之治療因素探究並列篇名：The Exploration of Group Therapeutic Factors in the Empowerment-based Horticultural Group Therapy on the Elderly作者：林俊德(Jiun-De Lin)關鍵字：老人諮商;治療因素;園藝治療;園藝團體治療;賦能;Elderly counseling;empowerment;horticultural group therapy;horticultural therapy;therapeutic factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：59期出版年：2020中文摘要：參與園藝治療團體對高齡者具有正面效益，對其治療因素的理解，有助於園藝治療團體相關策略的擬定或概念的修正，亦有助於相關實務能力的提升。本研究之目的在於探討高齡者參與賦能取向式園藝治療團體之治療因素內涵。採用以賦能觀點為基礎的園藝團體方案設計，由園藝治療師及諮商心理師協同領導，針對10名65歲以上之高齡者施以8次園藝治療團體活動。研究方法採用量化與質化混和設計，資料蒐集以問卷及訪談方式進行。於團體結束後施以「團體治療性因素問卷」測量及深度訪談，以理解高齡者參與園藝治療團體的治療因素內涵。問卷統計結果發現參與者普遍認同之治療因素為「對團體正向感覺」、「行動力的引發」、及「認知性的獲得」，透過小樣本無母數統計法進行資料分析，發現治療因素具有階段間顯著差異性，團體後期之得分高於前、中期。透過訪談資料分析，發現「共享性、成就感、技巧學習、期望感、紓壓性、健康關注」等六項助益性主題與量化資料相呼應。整體而言，賦能取向式園藝治療團體對高齡者具有正面助益，理解園藝治療脈絡下之團體治療因素內涵，對高齡者園藝治療之建構與進行具啟發之參考價值。英文摘要：There are more positive effects of the horticultural therapy group on the elderly. To understand the group therapeutic factors is to contribute to decide and modify group strategies and concepts, and promote abilities of group practices. The purpose of this study was to explore the therapeutic factors of empowerment-based horticultural therapy group on the elderly. The horticultural therapy group was designed by the concepts of the empowerment in combination with horticultural activities. There were eight sessions in this group program, including understanding plants, planting plants, gardening and horticultural activities. The group was led by a horticultural therapist and a certified counselor. There're 10 over the age of 65 older people who lived in urban areas invited to participate this group. The research methods were used quantitative and qualitative mixed design. The data collection was conducted using quantitative questionnaires and qualitative interviews. ”Group therapeutic factor inventory” were conducted after second, fifth, and last session of this group, and semi-structed in-depth interviews were conducted after the end of the group to understand the therapeutic factors for elderly people participated in this group. The statistical results of questionnaire surveys were found that was a high frequency of ”positive feeling for group”, ”action elicitation” and ”cognitive acquisition” in the early stage, ”positive feeling for group” and ”action elicitation” in the medium-term stage, while ”positive feeling for group”, ”action elicitation” and ”altruism” in the latter stage of the group. Overall, the highest frequency of ”positive feeling for group” occurred. In order to understand the frequency differences of group therapeutic factors between stages, the Nonparametric statistics method were utilized. The significant differences between the stages were found. There were early and medium-term stage, medium-term and the latter stage of the group, but no difference between early and the latter stage of the group. It had been observed that each frequency of the eight group therapeutic factors has significantly promoted in the latter stage of this group. The results of the interview data analysis were that six beneficial factors such as ”sharing works, accomplishments, horticultural skills learning, expectations, positive emotions, and health concerns” have positive contributions to the elderly. ”Sharing works” were referred to the psychological sharing derived from the completion of horticultural products, that is, the horticultural therapy process allowed the elderly to have the opportunity to share the works completed in the process, and could benefit positively through sharing. ”Accomplishments” were referred to the sense of accomplishment of participating in the horticultural activities. The elderly people felt the gains and achievements through the participation process of this group. ”Horticultural skills learning” were referred to the learning of gardening related skills, that is, the elderly experienced the cooperation, exchange and learning of related skills through the participation of the group. ”Expectations” were referred to expect to participate this horticultural therapy activities, that is, the elderly expressed their expectations and hope for the continuation and participation of future groups in the process of participating in horticultural therapy group. ”Positive emotions” meant the process of horticultural activities brings positive emotions and relief effects, that is, the elderly generally experienced positive relief effects through the participation of horticultural activities, and also have a positive effect on the catharsis of emotions. ”Health concerns” meant that the elderly participants discussed health issues between and after this group sessions, that is, who were involved in this horticultural therapy group to, and experienced the importance of physical health issues through the group process. Overall, there were positive benefits for the elderly participated in the empowerment-oriented horticultural therapy group. Understanding the connotation of group therapeutic factors under the context of horticultural therapy has reference value for the construction and implementation of horticultural therapy for the elderly. According to the research results, it was suggested that a therapeutic factor scale with horticultural therapy characteristics can be developed in the future, and relevant recommendations were provided for follow-up studies and practices.起始頁-結束頁：103-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200900590045篇名：禪宗心性觀溯源與輔導應用之開展－以慧能禪觀的探究與驗證為例並列篇名：The Research of the Original Theory of Chinese Zen Buddhism and its Applications to Education and Guidance: Taking the Theory of Zen Master Hui-Neng and its Verification for the Example作者：王明雯(Ming-Wen Wang)關鍵字：心理健康;正用;自性;自我基模;慧能禪觀;Adaptively consciousness processing;Hui-Neng Zen;mental health;self-nature;self-schema期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：58期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探究慧能禪觀並加以驗證。慧能確立中國禪風，其教化錄—壇經可表徵中國人心理健康觀及修養心理學。探究徑路為：（1）發軔定向及壇經深究：慧能禪觀闡明自性起用的觀點，於生活中實踐自性智慧潛能，達成人際內外和諧，要義有二：其一自性認同—認同人生而有的自性本質、及自立利他價值；其二實踐自性潛能（正用）—包含單純、專注、此時此刻、覺察、不評價、調節等六種特性。研究目的為瞭解不同心理健康狀態及禪修後自我基模特性，對慧能禪觀符合度是否不同。（2）東西會通，開展研究架構及方法：建構自我基模體用的研究架構，依變項有二：其一自我結構（體）關係特性僅指對自立利他價值的符合度，稱為向心性，由低而高層次依序為衝突、否定、自利、適應、和諧、超越等特性，其二自我功能（用）正確知覺習慣（正用量表化）。（3）科學研究：研究一以立意抽樣調查法，抽取三組不同健康程度高中生各18名來比較差異。結果顯示：心理健康程度愈高，對慧能禪觀符合度愈高（高層次關係特性、正確知覺分數均顯著較高）。研究二採不等組前後測設計，禪修組8名參加密集禪修訓練，控制組14名。結果顯示：禪修組後測（變項同研究一）對慧能禪觀符合度提高；控制組則不明顯。（4）驗證與輔導應用：本研究結果支持：僅以部分慧能禪觀對心理健康觀察具適用性及禪修對自我特性的促進效益；後續並深化對慧能禪觀的探究，建構自性實現的理論模式，開展有關研究及在特教輔導上的應用。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the theory of Zen Master Hui-Neng using quantitative method to verify the theoretical characteristics, Master Hui-Neng is well known as the first Chinese Zen Master, who interpreted Buddhism practice with the viewpoint of Chinese culture into the Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch Hui-Neng. This paper aims to interpret the viewpoint of Platform Sutra by content analysis method, and verify how it describes mental health state of people by empirical research as well. In brief, the theory of Hui-Neng states that people are born with self-nature in commonality. Individuals who identify the self-nature and in the ”adaptively” consciousness processing can reach the optimal mental health and state of wisdom. On the contrary, emotional disturbances may be generated for those who do not. The two primary purposes of this study are (1) to investigate the difference of self-schema character and fitness in relate to the theory of Zen Master Hui-Neng in different mental health state, (2) to examine the change of characteristics of self-schema and fitness regarding the theory of Zen Master Hui-Neng after the intensive Zen meditation training in a short term. 54 high school students, who were divided into three different groups based on their mental state. Perception Habit Scale” (PHS) was provided to analyze the results by using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The object-relationship characteristics of self-schema were then decoded and the variables were analyzed by independent chi-square (χ^2) test. The PHS was developed with the viewpoint of ”adaptively” consciousness processing, includes six following indexes: pure-perception, absorption, here and now, awareness, neutrality as mirror, self-adjusting. Another scaling was the characteristics of object-relationships with identification of the self-nature; include six levels of object relations of conflict, denying, self-center, adaptability, concordance, and self-transcendence. The results indicated that (1) The PHSs and distribution of the levels of object-relationships for the subjects of the three groups were significant. The healthier one's mental state is, higher level of object-relationships would be. (2) The main differences of the three groups indicated that there are characteristics of the self-schema and degrees of fitness for the Hui-Neng Zen between different degrees of mental health. To achieve the second purpose, study two employed a pre-post experiment design of unequal groups. Recruiting from senior high schools, there were 8 participants in the experiment group (which attended the Zen meditation training) and 14 participants were in the control group The two variables regarding the characteristics of self-schema are levels of object-relationships which were analyzed by dependent chi-square (χ^2) test, and ”Perception habit scale” (PHS) which were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The results indicated that the differences between pretest and posttest are significant for the experiment group, while the control group is not. That is, for the experiment group after Zen meditation training the score of PHSs, distribution of characteristics of higher level object relationships. To conclude, through the intensive Zen meditation in a short term, both the characteristics of the self-schema and degrees of fitness for the Hui-Neng Zen theory improved. The results of this research supported that the mind (nature) viewpoint of the self-identity system of the Hui-Neng Zen is suitable for the realization of self-schema and state of mental health. Zen meditation may effectively adjust individuals' self-schema characteristics to a better one. Based on the theory of Hui-Neng and findings of this study, the researcher developed a model of the process of self-nature actualization and the application both on counseling and special education. Future application and further studies are highly encouraged in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200500580016篇名：自性的曼陀羅模型：解決黃光國難題的工夫論並列篇名：Mandala Model of the Self: Kungfuism to Solve Hwang Kwang-Kuo Problem作者：陳復(Fu Chen)關鍵字：工夫論;四象;生命世界;自性的曼陀羅模型;黃光國難題;Four dimensions;Hwang Kwang-Kuo Problem;kungfuism;life world;mandala model of the Self期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：58期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文主要從「自性的曼陀羅模型」出發，釐清黃光國本來設計自我的曼陀羅模型只有談到人如何由生物性的「個體」蛻變成社會性的「個人」，使其不再只是「個體我」，而變成「關係我」，卻因只有「自我」而沒有「自性」的概念，使得其模型無法產生曼陀羅的輪轉，讓自我無法發展出自性，儒家思想裡的「成聖」變得毫無機會。本文除釐清曼陀羅的本意外，並指出應該要探索全部儒家思想都在共同面對的四大象限：「德性」、「知識」、「實踐」與「欲望」，「德性」是指對精神的涵養；「知識」是指對世界的認識；「實踐」是指對存在的行動；「欲望」是指對需求的滿足，自性的曼陀羅模型首先因「德性－欲望」（簡稱德性線）與「知識－實踐」（簡稱知識線）這兩個軸線的交會，從而產生意識裡的自我，「德性與欲望」獲得平衡暨「知識與實踐」獲得平衡，因為獲得滋養，則自我就會逐漸蛻變出自性，這就是「相生」的意義；反過來看，「德性與欲望」呈現失衡暨「知識與實踐」呈現失衡，因為彼此衝突，則自我就會呈現停滯與空轉，這就是「相剋」的意義。然而，相生或相剋，卻受到「德性與實踐」、「實踐與欲望」、「欲望與知識」暨「知識與德性」這四種不同人生的組合型態影響，人應該自問：到底應該如何面對將其匯聚與整合出來的四大面向做出安置，如此生命自然能由自我蛻變出自性，拔高其意境，讓自身最終完成「成聖」的理想人生？這就是本文提出「兩線四面」的工夫論，該理論可與傳統的陰陽五行學說相互結合來談。本文提出自性的良性循環路徑，可由此內容發展出儒家倫理治療理論，更可作為實作的觀念工夫，該工夫不只是種意念的轉換，更帶著理論的背景視野來展開對人生命世界的仔細檢視與對治，這是個打通「微觀世界」與「生命世界」的工夫論，因此能從輔導與諮商的角度具體解決「黃光國難題」。英文摘要：In this paper, the author starts from the Mandala Model of the Self (MMS) to illustrate that the MMS developed by Hwang Kwang-Kuo just describe how one changes from a biological ”individual” into a social ”person” to make him or her to become a relational self instead of an individual self. However, the MMS lacks the concept of the self but only contains the ego. The MMS fails to rotate the Mandala leading to incapably develop the self, leaving no room for a person become the sanctification defined by the Confucianism. In addition to clarifying the original meaning of mandala, the author also points out that we need to explore all Confucian wisdom we lying in the four dimensions that we confront together: virtue, knowledge, practice, and desire. Virtue refers to the spiritual self-restraint. Knowledge means the understanding about the world. Practice is the existing actions. Desire is to satisfy one's needs; There are two axes. The first virtue axe includes virtue and desire. The first knowledge axe includes knowledge and practice. These two axes in the mandala model will produce the conscious ego. If these two axes are both balanced, it would generate nutrition to the ego. The ego would the gradually changes into the self, representing the intergeneration for these two axes; On the contrary, if these two axes are not both balanced, this conflict will cause the ego to deteriorate and idle, representing the inter-restriction for these two axes. However, intergeneration or inter-restriction is affected by the four combinations of human life. They are virtue and practice, practice and desire, desire and knowledge and knowledge and virtue. We should ask ourselves the question: how we face and place the four dimensions which converge and integrate ourselves on earth? By doing so, one’s life naturally comes up with the self transited from the ego, attaining the ideal life of sanctification. Accordingly, the kungfuism includes two axes and four dimensions, which can be discussed in combination with the Ying and Yang Theory of as follows. The two axes form the property of the ego and, they are earth in the center, referring to that the ego has its own foundation and serves as the foundation for a social person. The four dimensions are flexible (water), growable (wood), combustible (fire) and sharp (metal), referring to the four basic properties for human and they keep changing. The Book of Changes considers the four dimensions” as the four phenomena taking place in the daily life between the Yin and Yang interplay. Carl Gustav Jung has pointed out that the four dimensions have touched the deepest bottom of the human's unconsciousness, and continue to have a strong impact on it. For this reason, the representation of the four dimensions is universal to the human. In the present paper, the author proposes the path of virtuous circle of the self that from Confucian ethics therapy and its theory can be developed. The Confucian ethics therapy also offers practice, facilitating the meticulous inspection and coping in the life world. The kungfuism can connect the micro world to life world, with the aim to solve the Hwang Kwang-Kuo Problem in terms of both psychotherapeutic and counseling perspectives.起始頁-結束頁：47-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200500580027篇名：以集群分析探討樂悲觀雙向度模式與心理適應之關係並列篇名：Using Cluster analysis to Explore the Relation Between Dual-Axis Model of Optimism/Pessimism and Mental Adjustment作者：趙素儀(Su-Yi Chao);陳坤虎(Kun-Hu Chen)關鍵字：心理適應;因應行為;集群分析;預期信念;樂悲觀;Behavioral coping;cluster analysis;expectancy;mental adjustment;optimism/pessimism期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：58期出版年：2020中文摘要：樂觀為正向心理學中重要的正向特質之一。樂觀同時包含預期信念與因應行為，它可為個體帶來較佳的心理適應。然而過去學界對於樂觀研究大都採取「變項中心取向」（variable-centered approach）派典仍存有疑慮，例如Asendorpf（2014）認為「變項中心取向」極易忽略個體之獨特性；反之，「個體中心取向」（person-centered approach）不僅較符合生態效度，同時亦較能展現個體本身各種心理特質與行為特徵。為此，本研究主張在考量樂悲觀特性時，不僅需納入預期信念與因應行為，同時最好亦能從「個體中心取向」來加以探究。據此，本研究先以「正、負向預期」和「正、負向因應」雙向度發展出「樂悲觀雙向度模式量表」，之後再以集群分析法區分不同樂悲觀型態。研究一以問卷調查法，共收集169名有效樣本，研究結果顯示，本研究發展的「樂悲觀雙向度模式量表」具有良好的信、效度。研究二再以問卷調查法，共收集639名有效樣本，經集群分析法區分出「功能性樂觀」、「中性樂觀」、「中性悲觀」、「失能性悲觀」與「自我設限」等五種樂悲觀型態，這五種型態在心理適應指標上呈現不同程度的差異情形。功能性樂觀與中性樂觀心理適應功能較佳，中性悲觀屬三悲觀集群（亦即，中性悲觀、失能性悲觀、自我設限）中較適應的集群，失能性悲觀極易出現心理適應之問題，而自我設限則最易出現拖延行為。英文摘要：Optimism is a crucial feature in Positive Psychology. Optimistic individuals expect good things to happen. In contrast, pessimistic individuals expect bad things to happen. Optimists and pessimists differ in many ways that have varying degrees of impact on their mental adjustment. In the past studies, optimistic and pessimism were regarded as the two extremes of continuous dimension. Researchers critiqued Scheier and Carver's (1985) theory of optimistic orientations overemphasized individuals' positive expectancy, neglected adaptive behaviors or damaging behaviors that extend beyond the expected beliefs (Norem & Chang, 2002). In other words, Scheier and Carver (1985) ignored mutual influences between beliefs and behaviors, as well as underestimated the possibility of various outcome behaviors. Accordingly, researchers used a variety of statistical methods to prove that optimism and pessimism should be regarded as two dimensions (Kubzansky, Kubzansky, & Maselko, 2004; Mehrabian & Ljunggren, 1997). Furthermore, Chou and Chen (2017) addressed that different combinations of expectations and coping would demonstrate different functions in mental adjustment. They adopted ”positive/ negative expectations” as well as ”engagement /disengagement” as two dimensions based on the variable-centered approach to distinguish optimism/pessimism to ”functional optimism”, ”dysfunctional optimism”, ”functional pessimism” and ”dysfunctional pessimism” Furthermore, Chou and Chen (2017) found that each type of optimism /pessimism played different roles in metal adjustment. For examples, functional optimism and dysfunctional optimism positively predicted to satisfaction of life, functional pessimism negatively predicted to satisfaction of life. Functional pessimism was the best predictor to depressed and anxious symptoms. Dysfunctional optimism was the best predictor to procrastination. However, Asendorpf (2014) critiqued the paradigms of optimism studies that have generally adopted the variable-centered approach (Asendorpf, 2014); for example, Asendorpf (2014) addressed that the variable-centered approach might easily neglect the uniqueness of each individual, whereas the person-centered approach could produce trait clusters that meet ecological validity and demonstrate the behavioral characteristics related to an individual's psychological features. Thus, the study proposed while understanding the characteristics of optimistic and pessimistic traits, researchers should involve expectancy beliefs and behavioral coping as well as adopt the person-centered approach. Accordingly, the study established a scale that reflects positive and negative value of expectancy beliefs and behavioral coping, as well as further explores the differences in their mental adjustment. Study 1 sampled a total of 169 college students (female=40.8=%, male=59.2%) and conducted item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, internal consistency, criterion-related validity to examine the reliability and validity of ”Dual-Axis Model of Optimism/Pessimism Scale-I, DAMOPS-I.” The results showed that four subscales of DAMOPS-I have good reliability and validity. Study 2 enlarged the sample variability, the sample size and rewriting some contents of items, which involving a total of 639 college students (female = 54.9%, male = 44.8%). As Study 1, Study 2 conducted item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, internal consistency, criterion-related validity to examine the reliability and validity of ”Dual-Axis Model of Optimism/ Pessimism Scale-II, DAMOPS-II. ” The result indicated that the four subscales of DAMOPS-II have good reliability and validity. Furthermore, Study 2 adopted cluster analysis based on two dimensions (i.e., positive/ negative expectancy and positive/negative coping behaviors) to distinguish five clusters, namely Functional Optimism, Medium Optimism, Medium Pessimism, Dysfunctional Pessimism, and Self-Handicapping. The results of Study 2 showed five types of optimism/pessimism have different levels of mental adjustment. Both of ”Functional Optimism” and ”Medium Optimism” had a great mental adjustment outcome. ”Medium Pessimism” showed the greatest outcome within three pessimistic clusters. ”Dysfunctional Pessimism” showed heightened vulnerability to mental adjustment (e.g., higher levels of depressed and anxious symptoms, lower level of life satisfaction). ”Self-Handicapping” demonstrated a highest tendency to procrastinate in five clusters.起始頁-結束頁：85-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200500580038篇名：諮商心理師多元文化諮商的實踐探究：以新住民女性諮商為例並列篇名：Exploring Multicultural Counseling Practice Experiences of Counseling Psychologists: The Case of Female New Immigrant Clients作者：王翊涵(Yi-Han Wang)關鍵字：多元文化諮商;多元文化諮商能力;移民諮商;新住民女性當事人;Female new immigrant clients;immigrant counseling;multicultural counseling;multicultural counseling competencies期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：58期出版年：2020中文摘要：全球化下，台灣已成為大量女性婚姻移民的客居地，這群來自中國大陸與東南亞國家的女性來台後，不僅需要面對各種生活適應的挑戰，其亦處於種族、階級與性別的多重弱勢位置。基於多元文化諮商日趨受到重視的文獻與實務脈絡，以及重視新住民女性的心理健康福祉，本文探討七位諮商心理師諮商新住民女性當事人的經驗，以主題分析法來對深度訪談資料進行彙整，耙梳出能有效與之工作的重要策略與原則，期能為以新住民女性為主體之多元文化諮商內涵建構做出貢獻，並能為台灣多元文化諮商教育、訓練規劃的參考。研究首先發現，諮商專業與新住民女性之間存在著服務不可及與語言隔閡的問題。論及如何與新住民女性當事人有效工作，本文歸納出五項重要原則：「簡易語言的使用」、「如實理解」、「增進文化覺察能力」、「在諮商中賦權」及「與社工跨專業合作」。本文最後將這些原則與多元文化諮商能力的三大面向進行對照，提出新住民女性諮商之多元文化能力的具體作法，並呈現當前台灣多元文化諮商實踐的限制，最後則依研究結果對諮商實務與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：It is highly valued that psycho-therapists should be competent in multicultural issues in counseling process. However there has been a lack of awareness among the counseling professionals regarding cultural differences between various ethnicities since 1960s. Therefore a kind of new counseling approach which was more appropriate to minority clients' experiences should be developed. Under globalization, more and more women have been migrating into Taiwanese society by marriage. These women, named as ”female new immigrants”, mainly come from Mainland China and Southeast Asia countries. Their population grew from almost 8,000 in 1998 to around 556,000 in 2019. These women have been observed encountering multiple difficulties from cultural adjustment to discrimination. Their lives in the new home might be overshadowed by the association of their marriages with commodification, marriage agent's intervention, negative media images of ”foreign brides”, traditional gender norms, and racialization. Hence the welfare of female new immigrants is in urgent need of full attention. They might need help or services from counseling psychologists, but there is not so much discussion of counseling training regarding multicultural counseling competencies in Taiwan. The issue is a matter of concern for counseling professionals, and this paper thus explores the counseling experiences of 7 counseling psychologists with these women. The focus is mainly on the useful principles related to counseling practice with female new immigrant clients. The qualitative data was collected from a multicultural counseling perspective and was analyzed using Thematic Analysis method. First, it is found that it is not easy for female new immigrants to access counseling services mainly because of language barrier. Second, five counseling principles have been generated: (1) Simple and straight forward language should be conducted especially while reflecting emotion and structuring; (2) While understanding these women's presenting issues, their life context in Taiwan as well as their native culture need to be equally taken into account; (3) Cultural sensitivity is highly recommended to be enhanced by all counseling psychologists. The useful ways may include continuously receiving supervision, taking relative courses, or adapting the systematic approach in counseling; (4) Empowering female new immigrant clients by emphasizing their self-efficacy, recognizing their strength, using their native culture (such as art or language), valuing their learning abilities, and allowing autonomy; and (5) Collaborating with social workers who have expertise in assisting female new immigrant clients to liaison with counseling psychologists, in adopting out-of-office strategies to facilitate supportive systems, as well as in benefiting clients by locating more social resources. This paper finally put forward five recommendations of how multicultural counseling practice should be formulated specifically benefit new female immigrants: (1) Cross-professional collaboration between counseling professionals and social welfare systems should be developed so that female new immigrants can have the chance to be referred to the counseling psychologists and receive appropriate services; (2) it is necessary to include multicultural issues (racial and ethnic group should be contained) in the counseling training programs for the sake of increasing counseling psychologists' competencies and then they can work well with clients from different cultures; (3) counseling psychologists should improve the skill of out-of-office so that they can exercise institutional intervention when necessary; (4) the professional skills of reflection of feelings should be reframed diversely and flexibly in order that counseling psychologists can appropriately show empathy to female new immigrant clients; and (5) it is required to set resources of counseling interpreters so that the female new immigrants who are not fluent in Chinese or Taiwanese can receive counseling services as well.起始頁-結束頁：127-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200500580049篇名：主編的話：兒童諮商與親師諮詢－生態系統觀點的實務與研究反思並列篇名：Editor's Preface: Child Counseling and Parent/Teacher Consultation: The Practice and Research Reflection through Ecological System Perspective作者：許育光(Yu-Kuang Hsu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：57期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：1-16資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186202001005700110篇名：探討多元專業工作者於兒少保護家庭暴力案件之合作共治模式並列篇名：The Collaboration and Shared Governance Model of Professionals Who Work on Domestic Violence Cases Involving Child and Youth Protection作者：張曉佩(Hsiao-Pei Chang)關鍵字：多元專業;合作共治;兒少保護家庭暴力;Collaboration and shared governance;domestic violence involving child and youth protection;multiple professional期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：57期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究主要目的在探討專業工作者於涉及兒少保護家暴案件中進行合作的機制內涵以及影響合作的因素。本研究共邀請21位在政府部門與社區機構執行兒少保護與家庭暴力防治業務，有3年以上工作經驗的專業工作者參與研究。研究者透過個別訪談蒐集資料，並採用紮根理論分析法的開放編碼、主軸編碼與核心編碼等步驟進行資料分析。研究結果發現影響專業工作者進行合作的核心因素是專業工作者的動能，包括：採取行動的自主性與彈性、對問題的知覺、以及發展信任。採取行動的自主性與彈性，包括：對各個專業權責的瞭解、法律倫理規範與實務現況間的彈性、以及個案複雜度與案量管控。對問題的知覺，包括：訓練背景與專業知識、實務經驗、個人價值觀與個人風格、以及多元文化視框。發展信任，包括：肯定多元的貢獻、透明度與清楚明白的溝通、以及支持與相互性。研究參與者認為可行的合作機制，是由社政單位統籌召開以案家為核心的網絡會議，服務個案與案家的所有專業工作者都必須參與會議，在會議中落實專業角色任務，以達展開有效的對話、資訊分享、資源連結與形成處遇共識等功能，而此會議在開案前、執行期與結案時都需召開以兼具及時性與延續性。依據研究結果與討論，研究者提出持續檢視與覺察身為專業工作者的動能、出席並落實網絡會議的實質意義與價值、以及裝備走出舒適圈的勇氣等建議。英文摘要：The research showed that domestic violence experience has negative impact on individuals, including immediate impact (emotional and behavioral disturbance) and long-term impact (depression, low self-esteem, poor academic achievement, PTSD, and substance abuse). As domestic violence episodes are associated with child and youth protection issues, the complexity of the intervention process will be increased. The nature of domestic violence is multicultural, and many of the services and interventions provided are not entirely suitable for clients or relevant to their day-to-day life experiences. For example, the collaboration between child protection and domestic violence sectors is often problematic. Indeed, the two sectors operate relatively independently and with little integration. However, it is widely recognized that the two sectors need to work more closely together to enhance both adult victims' and children's safety. Since no single agency or professional is able to deal with all the needs of a family alone, the premise of this article is focused on the collaboration and shared governance of professionals to offer comprehensive interventions in order to enhance the likelihood to satisfy the needs of clients and families. The collaboration and shared governance is defined as multiple professional workers from different backgrounds working in cohesion with clients, families, and communities to deliver the highest quality of service. Research and documents have shown that multiple professional collaboration models are not just effective but are also essential for competent, cost-effective, culturally responsive mental health care. The highest quality of service means that multiple professional workers provide coordinated, appropriate, consistent responses aimed at enhancing victim's safety, reducing secondary victimization, and holding abusers to be accountable for their violence. This study aimed at exploring the factors that influence multiple professional workers dealing with the domestic violence involved with child protection and the collaboration and shared governance model. The researcher recruited and invited 21 professionals with over three years of working experience and whose specialty was focused on domestic violence interventions and preventions in government or community agencies. Individual interviews were conducted to gather data, and the data was then analyzed based on the grounded theory and processed by the sequential extractions of open coding, axial coding, and core coding. During the analysis, the core theme was identified as energy of professionals which included three categories: autonomy and flexibility to act, perspectives on problems, and trust development. Autonomy and flexibility to act included understanding the role of each professional, the flexibility between rules/ethics and practice, and the case complexity and caseload. The perspectives on problem included training and professional background, practice experience, personal value and style, and multicultural viewpoint. Trust development included appreciating diverse contributions, transparency and clear communication, and mutual support. Participants reported that the professionals of social welfare in the government should be the one to organize network meetings based on families' needs. All of the professionals who provide services to the family should attend network meetings and perform the necessary tasks for their role. The functions of the network meetings should include facilitating healthy conversations, sharing information, connecting resources, and reaching an intervention agreement. When a suspected case is reported and evaluated on whether it should be open, the network meeting should be held immediately. Network meetings may also be held during the period of intervention or during the moment that the case is evaluated to be closed. The meeting should be held immediately and continuously. The results raised several important implications for training and clinical work. The recommendations from the study include continuing to inspect and be aware of their own energy level as professionals, participating in the network meeting and implementing its true value and meaning, and instilling courage for professionals to walk out of their comfort zone. These recommendations are essential for domestic violence and child protection professionals to collaborate with each other in the future.起始頁-結束頁：17-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186202001005700201篇名：檢驗地方政府預算增減之樣態與成因：漸進預算理論或斷續均衡理論？並列篇名：Assessing the Patterns and Causes of Local Budget Changes: Incremental Budgeting Theory or Punctuated Equilibrium Theory?作者：廖唯傑(Wei-Jie Liao);莊仕憲(Shih-Hsien Chuang)關鍵字：預算編製;預算變動;漸進預算;斷續均衡理論;追蹤資料分析;budget making;budget change;incremental budgeting;punctuated equilibrium theory;panel data analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：59期出版年：2020中文摘要：漸進預算理論和斷續均衡理論是政府預算學界主要的描述性理論。漸進預算理論認為決策者只擁有有限理性，且因要兼顧政治現實，編列預算時往往僅根據前一年度的預算進行微調，斷續均衡理論亦建立於有限理性的基礎上，但欲同時解釋小幅和大幅變動。在台灣，政府編列預算時往往參照往年預算，因此，政府和學者過去較少關注預算變動。本研究分析台灣各縣市2001年至2018年的預算資料。第一部分，我們檢視歲入、歲出、經常支出、資本支出年增率的機率分配圖，討論它們是否符合漸進預算理論或斷續均衡理論的預期。第二部分，我們針對歲入增減、歲入變動、歲出增減和歲出變動等四個變數進行追蹤資料分析，討論造成預算增減或變動的主要原因。本研究發現經常支出較符合漸進預算理論的預期，歲入、歲出及資本支出則較符合斷續均衡理論的預期。其次，本研究的迴歸模型發現選舉相關變數對預算變動的影響不容小覷，舉例而言，選後一年的歲入、歲出增減比例較選舉年低，而選前的歲出變動則較選舉年大。此外，若預算曾出現大幅變動或歲入結構較多元，則較不易再出現大幅變動。我們建議政府應正視預算變動的成因並及早因應可能的預算變動。英文摘要：Incremental budgeting theory and punctuated equilibrium theory (PET) are two of the predominant descriptive budgeting theories in the past half-century. Incremental budgeting suggests that budget-makers only make incremental changes to the existing budget because of their bounded rationality and political reality. PET also follows the concept of bounded rationality but tries to capture both incremental changes and punctuations in one theory. In Taiwan, it is believed that governments usually make their budgets based on the previous year's budgets. Thus, government officials and researchers seldom pay attention to budget changes. Here, we analyze the budgets of Taiwanese local governments from 2001 to 2018. First, we discuss the patterns of budget changes in Taiwan. We examine the distribution plots of four types of budgets (total revenue, total expenditure, operating expenditure, and capital expenditure) to see if they follow incremental budgeting theory or PET. Second, we employ panel data analysis and construct four regression models (revenue changes, expenditure changes, and their absolute values) to examine the causes of budget changes. We find that fluctuations in operating expenditure follow the expectations of incremental budgeting theory, while fluctuations in total revenue, total expenditure, and capital expenditure meet the expectations of PET. In our regression models, we find that elections play an important role in affecting the magnitude of budget changes. For example, budget increases in the years after elections are significantly lower than those in election years. The magnitude of budget changes in the year before elections is greater than that in election years. We also find that the history of punctuation and revenue diversification are negatively related to budget changes. This research has significant policy implications, as governments should take those possible causes of budget changes into consideration to devise sound budget decisions and fiscal policies.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202009_(59).00012篇名：文官體系政治化的發展趨勢與衝擊：兼論英國經驗並列篇名：The Development and Impacts of the Politicization of Civil Service System: With Reference to the U.K. Case作者：洪美仁(Mei-Jen Hung)關鍵字：文官體系政治化;政治回應性;功績制;文官選用;政治顧問;politicization of civil service;political responsiveness;meritocracy;recruitment;political advisors期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：59期出版年：2020中文摘要：專業取才的功績制一向被視為現代化文官體制的核心原則，政治力介入文官的選用則被視為應極力避免的現象，然而過去十多年來大量出現的「文官體系政治化」（politicization of civil service）的研究主張文官的功績制有所侷限，文官體系的政治化在所難免。究竟文官體系政治化的意涵是什麼？呈現何種趨勢？對既有文官體系產生何種衝擊？是值得深入研究的課題。本研究首先爬梳國外文獻，從理論的角度探討文官體系政治化兩種主要的類型，第一種是擴大民選首長及其政務官對文官選用的影響力，以政治標準取代功績制標準選用文官，稱為文官選用的政治化，第二種是運用政治顧問強化對文官的溝通與管理，以提升其政治回應性。跨國調查資料的分析顯示大部分OECD國家政務領導者介入高階文官選用有增加的現象，政治顧問的人數也呈現增加的趨勢。英國個案分析的結果則顯示，不同政策或改革訴求可能引發文官系統政治化的需求，在選取文官的標準上，政策或改革理念比起政黨認同更為重要，選用的政治化可能使得文官不願意提供正直而坦白的政策建議，但並未使得文官系統走回政黨恩寵制，政治顧問的擴增則引發許多爭議以及後續制度上的改革。本文最後以跨國資料分析和英國個案探討的結果為基礎，就台灣文官體系政治化的研究與實務提出反省與建議。英文摘要：Most modern civil service systems are merit-based which place emphasis on the selection of civil servants based on their skills and abilities, rather than their political or personal connections. For the past decade or so, research on the politicization of the civil service has increased rapidly, arguing that merit-based selection has its limitation and there is an urgent need to enhance the political responsiveness of civil servants. Research on the meaning, the trend and the potential impacts of the politicization of civil service is needed. Based on the existing literature, this paper first explores the meanings and typology of the politicization of civil service. The first type of politicization refers to the recruitment of civil servant based on political criteria rather than merits. The second type of politicization is the increase of political advisors to make civil servants more responsive. The analysis of data from expert surveys demonstrates the increase in the degree of politicization in most countries. Furthermore, this papers analyzes the development of the politicization of the UK civil service. The change in the direction of policy of reform triggered the demand for the politicization of civil service, which led to civil servants' reluctance to provide free and frank advice. However, political patronage was not a major concern. The number of special advisors has increased. The inappropriate behaviors of special advisors raised many debates and consequently more regulations are put in practice. This paper concludes with some reflection on the idea of politicization and provides some suggestions on the development of the civil service in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：31-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202009_(59).00023篇名：緊急救援時期的跨部門協力：以東日本大地震為例並列篇名：Cross-Sector Collaboration during Emergency Rescue: the Case of East Japan Earthquake作者：林淑馨(Shu-Hsin Lin)關鍵字：緊急救援;跨部門治理;災害管理;東日本大地震;非政府組織;emergency rescue;cross-sector collaboration;disaster management;East Japan earthquake;non-government organization期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：59期出版年：2020中文摘要：緊急災害的發生通常有規模大、成因複雜、難以預測、機關權責不易釐清等特性，造成的損害超過所在管轄機關的能力或資源能夠因應的程度。為能降低緊急災害所帶來的衝擊，建構緊急情況下的協力關係有其重要性，但卻也受到時間的有限性、不確定性和關係複雜性等因素之影響，緊急情況下協力關係的建構難度遠高於承平時期。研究發現，日本緊急救援時期的跨部門治理，雖然對外設置跨部門整合協調窗口，但政府部門仍扮演主導功能，同時將民間組織納入防救災體系，強化災害救援的反應力。然該制度也面臨下列幾項運作困境：一是制度設計目的雖是「地方負責，中央支援」，但卻可能產生「地方無／失能，中央被動等待」的情形；二是協力對象因同屬風險共受區域，降低協力成效，而中央與地方的垂直協力默契不足；三是NGO雖是政府、企業和民眾間的溝通平臺，但異質性組織間的溝通仍有待加強。英文摘要：Emergent disaster generally is large in scale, possesses complicated causes, is hard to predict and it is difficult to determine responsibility. The damage is also beyond the capabilities of local authorities in terms of scope and resources. Therefore, to mitigate the impact of emergent disaster, it is critical to construct collaborative relationships. However, collaboration during emergencies is much more difficult compared with that during normal times due to the exigencies of time and uncertainty and the complex nature of the relationships. The study found that in Japanese cross-sector collaboration during emergencies, in spite of the fact that there is a single contact window for cross-sector integration, government agencies take on the main leadership role with support from civil society to strengthen responsiveness in rescue operations. However, the system faces several difficulties: (1) the system is designed so that the local government holds responsibility and the central government provides support; however, in actuality the central government could be passive and the local government disabled; (2) as the disaster affects both, both parties may fail to collaborate and the local and central government may lack synergy; (3) an NGO may serve as a communication platform for the government, enterprises and civil society; communication, however, has to be improved.起始頁-結束頁：67-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202009_(59).00034篇名：警察權有多大？讀〈影響警察鎮壓聚<U+8846>活動因素之研究〉有感並列篇名：How Much Power Do Police Have?作者：楊永年(Yung-Nane Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：59期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：111-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202009_(59).00045篇名：從去中心化網路看新科技對公共行政發展的影響並列篇名：The Decentralized Network Viewpoint of New Technology Influence the Public Administration Development作者：陳芙萱(Fu-Hsuan Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：59期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：121-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202009_(59).00056篇名：解構影響臺灣民<U+8846>核電政策偏好之關鍵因素：一個整合性架構的初探並列篇名：Decomposing the Factors of Citizens' Policy Preferences for Nuclear Energy in Taiwan: An Integrated Framework作者：張鐙文(Teng-Wen Chang);黃東益(Tong-Yi Huang);李仲彬(Chung-Pin Lee)關鍵字：風險社會;科技風險;風險感知;核電政策偏好;風險溝通;risk society;technology risk;risk perception;policy preference of nuclear energy;risk communication期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：58期出版年：2020中文摘要：在當代的各種科技風險之中，核能發電是極具爭議且備受注目的議題，尤其當日本福島核災發生之後，社會對核電之「低發生機率、高危害結果」的風險特質愈加敏感。在此種緊張的社會氛圍下，找出影響民眾核電政策偏好的關鍵因素，成為能否有效處理核電爭議的重要前提。本文認為針對這種風險特質較為特殊的政策，如欲有效地辨識民眾偏好的成因，不應侷限於傳統的理論框架。為填補目前核能風險研究的缺口，本研究結合過去科技風險與環境主義的文獻，嘗試提出一個整合性的研究架構，並透過實際資料的佐證，藉此釐清民眾之風險感知的來源及政策偏好的成因，以作為未來政府進行風險溝通之參考。研究結果顯示，本研究所提出的整合性架構，對民眾核電偏好的解釋力為47.5%，一方面證實民眾的議題知識、機構信任、電價承受、環境信念及風險感知對於其核電政策偏好有顯著影響；另一方面，則是確認風險感知對於機構信任、電價承受及環境信念的中介效果。以上成果均是過去核能風險研究鮮少提及與驗證的部分。在此一基礎之上，本研究認為政府惟有改變過去風險溝通與管理的思維，學習從各類利害相關人的觀點去分析與理解風險議題，才能確實掌握問題的癥結與對策；同時，政府更應設計與開放各種制度性溝通與參與的管道，讓不同的利害相關人能夠充分地參與核能發電相關政策的討論與決策過程，才有助於化解長久以來的能源爭議。英文摘要：Nuclear energy is one of the most salient and controversial technological risks in modern society. The reasons for this stem from its characteristics of low-probability and high-consequence. Recent disasters, such as the one in Fukushima, Japan, have also further exacerbated citizen concerns over nuclear technology. In light of these developments, the understanding of the reasons behind public preferences toward nuclear energy is a necessary step toward implementing energy policies that can best approximate citizen expectations and national needs. In order to bridge past research deficiencies, this research has combined the point of view of technology risk and environmentalism in the construction of an integrative framework. Empirical data on public opinion were utilized to identify the variables behind citizens’ nuclear energy policy preferences. The results may serve as references for the implementation of Taiwan’s nuclear energy risk communication. The adjusted coefficient of determination of the model is 47.5%. The results revealed that citizens’ knowledge on policy issues, trust in government, price tolerance of electricity, environmental belief in nuclear energy and risk perception all have significant influences on the formulation of policy preferences. Risk perception was proven to function as an immediate variable whose influence allows trust in the government, price tolerance of electricity and environmental belief in nuclear energy, to have direct and indirect effects on policy preference. These findings have rarely been discussed or verified by past studies. This research suggests that the government should restructure its approaches to risk management and communication, thereby learning to analyze and comprehend the crux of the problem through the point of view of stakeholders. The government should also design and open up different types of communication and participation channels, allowing stakeholders to engage in the discussions and decision processes of nuclear energy policies. Communication should not be limited to the interagency or interparty levels. Only when the dual problems of approach restructuring and stakeholder communication are addressed will tangible improvements be made.起始頁-結束頁：1-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202003_(58).00017篇名：公私協力夥伴關係之爭議與課責－以我國文化創意產業園區委外經營為例並列篇名：Controversies and Accountability of Public-Private Partnerships: The Case of Cultural and Creative Industrial Park in R.O.C.作者：柯于璋(Yu-Chang Ke)關鍵字：文化創意產業園區;公私協力;代理問題;交易成本;課責;Cultural and creative industrial park;public-private partnerships(PPPs);agency problems;transition costs;accountability期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：58期出版年：2020中文摘要：由於創意產業的崛起，文化創意產業園區逐漸成為各國政府結合文化、產業的發展策略，且多採取委外經營模式，然而並非每個園區都能創造經濟效益、達成政策目的。本文透過向後推理邏輯，從目標到手段，並利用代理問題、交易成本理論解釋我國文化創意園區委外經營之問題與爭議、原因及課責方式與機制。首先，經由文獻分析、深度訪談、個案研究與比較方法，羅列包括文化部華山、台中、嘉義、台南、花蓮等與台北松山文化創意產業園區的多項委外經營問題與爭議；其次，本文進一步透過代理問題、交易成本理論詮釋這些爭議的類型與成因；最後，本文歸納這些問題可以區分為政治、法律、財務、行政與專業等五大課責類型，並由國會、組織、法規、民眾與市場等課責途徑予以矯正，使其邁向成功的委外經營。英文摘要：Because of the launch of the creative industry, cultural and creative industrial parks have become one of the developmental strategies of every governments integrating culture and industry, and most of them adopt the method of contracting-out management. However, not every park can create economic efficacy and achieve policy goals. This article focuses on the problems, controversies, reasons, and mechanism of accountability of the outsourcing of R.O.C.'s cultural and creative industrial parks with the theories of principal-and-agency and transition costs. Firstly, this article lists some problems of the cultural parks (five managed by the Cultural Ministry and one by Taipei City Government) with the methods of literature review, depth interview and case study & comparison. Secondly, this article further explains the types and reasons of these controversies. Lastly, this article concludes that there are five types of accountabilities involved such as political, legal, financial, administrative, and professional accountabilities, making the out sourcing more successful.起始頁-結束頁：55-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202003_(58).00028篇名：社會福利民營化與市場化：以日本介護保險制度為例並列篇名：Privatization and Marketization of Social Welfare: The Case of Japan's Long-Term Care Insurance System作者：林淑馨(Shu-Hsin Lin)關鍵字：社會福利;民營化;市場化;準市場;介護保險制度;social welfare;privatization;marketization;quasi-market;long-term insurance system期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：58期出版年：2020中文摘要：1990年代中期以後，國營事業民營化風潮暫告一段落，隨著人口高齡化的進展與高齡福利需求的擴大，各界對於社會福利民營化、營利福利服務可能性的關注與討論逐漸升高。民營化支持論者多從經濟效率出發，認為可以形成競爭和降低成本，但社會福利是以需要特別保護及社會支援者為對象，屬於公共性強的服務，能否交由自由市場機制，放任民間業者來提供？如參考同為亞洲國家，但積極推動長期照護的日本經驗得知，邁入21世紀，該國透過介護保險制度改革，充分運用民間活力擴大服務供給，開放私部門加入照護服務市場，故照護服務轉換為自由市場主義的服務提供體系－亦即強調競爭與選擇，使用者與供給者對等的「契約制」得以藉由介護保險制度而被落實。然而，該制度施行的結果是否真如理論所言達到預期之目的？在考量福利服務的特殊性所導入的「準市場」概念是否能產生競爭，提供優質服務，以及讓使用者發揮自由選擇權？這些都是本研究所欲探討的課題。作者期望透過本研究累積相關理論與實務經驗，以作為今後我國推動長期照護政策時之參考與借鏡。英文摘要：The privatization of state-owned business came to an end after the mid-1990s. With the growth of an aging society and the need for aging welfare, there has been discussion on the possibility of providing privatized social welfare and for-profit welfare services. Supporters of privatization take the economic efficiency perspective, and believe that this would lead to competition and reduce costs. However, social welfare targets those that require special protection and social support. Therefore, can public services such as social welfare be provided by a free-market mechanism? We take Japan's long term care experience as an example. An Asian country, Japan used civil society to expand welfare service provision via reform of its long-term care insurance system and allowed the private sector to invest in the long-term care market. Therefore, long- term care was transformed into a free-market service system which emphasized competition and choice. The Japanese long-term care insurance system is therefore implemented via a contract between users and providers. However, can such a system be as effective as theory suggests? Can a quasi-market mechanism provide high quality service and allow users the freedom to choose? These are the issues that this research seeks to discuss. The author hopes to accumulate theoretical and empirical experiences via this research, and to provide policy suggestions to the nation's long-term care policy.起始頁-結束頁：89-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202003_(58).00039篇名：「績效弔詭」是否為不夠「協力」之反映？對〈協力決策後的績效弔詭：以性別影響評估和生態度檢核表為例〉之回應與反思作者：蘇偉業期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：58期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：127-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202003_(58).000410篇名：是的，問題就在「不夠協力」－回應蘇偉業教授之評論作者：彭渰雯期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：58期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：139-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202003_(58).000501篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：i-iv資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：民主國家政黨法之比較研究並列篇名：A Comparative Study of Political Party Laws in Democratic Countries作者：陳朝政(Chao-cheng Chen)關鍵字：政黨;政黨法;黨內民主;防衛性民主;政黨補助;political party;party law;inner-party democracy;defensive democracy;political party subsidy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以2018年民主指數為標準，篩選31國有政黨法的民主國家，以內容分析法及比較研究法比較一般民主國家及後威權民主國家政黨法之規範內容。研究發現：第一，「政黨與國家」面向中的政黨設立登記、政黨財務監管及國家補助政黨等規定，是一般民主國家政黨法的主要內容，絕大多數後威權民主國家亦有這些規定，這是兩類民主國家較為相同的部分。第二，兩類民主國家差異較大者，包括「政黨與國家」面向中的政黨政治價值之宣示、規定政黨具有法人身份、黨員之資格要求、政黨禁止事項（包括不可違反憲政秩序）及其處分（包括強制解散）；「政黨與政黨」面向中禁止雙重黨籍、規範政黨聯盟等相關規定；「政黨與個人」面向中黨員權利及黨內民主等相關規定。大多數後威權民主國家有這些規定，但有這些規定的一般民主國家僅有少數。整體而言，後威權民主國家較為重視透過對政黨的禁止及處分規定、保護黨員權利和黨內民主的相關規定，護衛國家價值及民主價值。第三，後威權民主國家政黨法的規制程度較高，一般民主國家政黨法的規制程度中等。英文摘要：This study uses Democracy Index of 2018 as a benchmark, screening out 31 democratic countries with political party laws, to compare the content of political party laws in general democracies and post-authoritarian democracies with content analysis and comparative research methods. This study found: First, relevant regulations on registration of political parties, financial supervision of political parties, and party subsidy in ”parties and a state” aspect are the main content of party laws in general democratic countries. The political party laws of most post-authoritarian democracies also have these provisions, which are the relatively similar parts of the two types of democracies. Second, the two types of democracies are quite different, including the declaration of political values of political parties, stipulation of legal person status for political parties, qualification for party membership, and prohibited matters (including no violation of constitutional order) and sanctions (including forced dissolution) within ”parties and a state” aspect; prohibition of dual party membership and regulations on party alliances of ”parties and parties” aspect; relevant stipulations regarding party member rights and inner-party democracy of ”parties and individuals” aspect. The political party laws of most post-authoritarian democracies have these provisions, but there are only a few general democracies that have these provisions. On the whole, post-authoritarian democracies place more importance on safeguarding national and democratic values through the prohibition and punishment toward political parties, and relevant regulations on the protection of party members' rights and inner-party democracy. Third, the degree of regulation of political party laws in post-authoritarian democracies is relatively high, while that of political party laws in general democracies is moderate.起始頁-結束頁：1-44+46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：公平近用、預防風險或增長人口？－助孕科技公費補助的日韓台比較並列篇名：Equal Access, Risk Prevention, or Pronatalism? Public Financing of In Vitro Fertilization in Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan作者：吳嘉苓(Chia-ling Wu);黃于玲(Yu-ling Huang);河政玉(Jung-ok Ha);陳韋宏(Wei-hong Chen);黃昱翔(Yu-hsiang Huang)關鍵字：公費補助;人工協助生殖科技;生殖治理;健康風險;少子化;public financing;in vitro fertilization;reproductive governance;health risk;pronatalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文探討日韓台三國以公費補助人工協助生殖科技的政策。我們將國際上公費補助政策，依核心訴求分為公平近用、預防母嬰健康風險、增長人口三大類型，並以此作為政策評估架構。我們主張採用「生殖治理」的取向，看重多樣的行動者與介入策略，如何在特定歷史情境中結盟與解組，來解釋各國補助政策的歧異路徑。針對日韓台的比較部分，分析資料包括檔案文獻，參與觀察，以及深度訪談47位政策制定的相關行動者。我們發現，少子化是東亞三國施行公費補助助孕科技的重要推力，日韓台政府分別於2004、2006、2015年推出國家政策，但是政策設計與後果差異極大。日本的婦女健康運動早於1990年代即提出助孕科技造成的傷害，而高度反思的醫界善用政府補助政策的機會，建立單一胚胎植入的臨床指引，有效降低健康風險。韓國在不孕團體的推動，以及政府提高生育率的重視，逐步擴大補助，並於2017年將人工協助生殖科技納入健保，公平性最優，但也大幅增加了多胞胎孕產的風險。台灣補助方案最晚推出，僅以中低收入戶為對象，補助普及性為全球最低。本文提出，以降低風險作為公費介入目標，重新調整從助孕補助到母嬰健康的財務分配，是台韓值得推動的政策改革方向。英文摘要：We analyze public financing models of in vitro fertilization (IVF) in Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. To build an analytical framework for policy evaluation, we present three ideal types, representing diverse values and evaluation criteria. The equal access model aims to narrow down the stratified use of IVF due to financial barriers. The risk prevention model tends to limit the number of embryos transferred during IVF by means of financial support so as to reduce the leading complication: multiple pregnancy/birth. The pronatalism model's main agenda is to increase the fertility rate by financially supporting the use of assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs). We take the approach of ”reproductive governance” to identify multiple actors and invention strategies to analyze the trajectory of subsidy policy-making in each country. The data to examine the public financing schemes in Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan, are based on archival data, fieldwork, and in-depth interviews of 47 stakeholders. We found that a low fertility rate served as an important motivation for all three governments to plan a subsidy program for IVF, but that their policy designs and impacts vary greatly. In Japan, the women's health movement criticized the health risk of IVF since 1990s gave important warning signs. The country's medical society took the opportunity of subsidy program to implement a single-embryo-transfer guideline, effectively reducing the health risks of IVF. The South Korean government redefined the demand for IVF from the pressure group of infertile couples, offering a generous subsidy program to boost the country's low fertility rate. ARTs have been covered by National Health Insurance in South Korea since 2017, which significantly increases equal access to IVF, but the risk of multiple pregnancy and birth also increases. Taiwan's subsidy program targets only low-income household, leading to a program with the lowest proportion of eligible users in the world. We propose adopting risk prevention as the core value in reforming the public financing of IVF in South Korea and Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：49-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：當不穩定的多數遇到公投－試論同婚公投的弔詭並列篇名：When the Unstable Majority Meets the Referendum: Exploring the Paradox of Same-sex Marriage Referendum作者：楊婉瑩(Wan-ying Yang)關鍵字：同婚;公投;多數決;少數權利;認知能力;顯著性;Same-sex marriage;referendum;majority rule;minority rights;competence;salience期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：同婚立法的相關研究中，對同婚公投的討論相當有限。本研究以台灣2018年同婚公投本身的特性來解釋其結果，並反思直接民主可能存在的問題。本研究認為，台灣民眾對於同婚的支持與反對，近年來呈現浮動的現象，無法僅由社會經濟文化（教育、世代、宗教）等長期穩定性因素所解釋，必須放置在公投本身的脈絡與實踐限制中來理解。本文以民主基金會2019年民調資料分析，檢視同婚公投兩個層次的弔詭：首先，對公投的認知與態度上，多數民眾覺得選舉相對於公投重要、認為公投議題不易理解、同時主張當多數決與少數權利衝突時應當支持多數決，呈顯出公投直接民主的實際困境。再者，多數人對公投的矛盾認知，正反映了多數反對同婚者的特質。模型分析結果顯示：認為同婚公投較選舉重要且主張保護少數權利者，是最為支持同婚者;然而，持此態度者為相對少數。多數的受訪者，傾向認為選舉較公投重要、多數決價值高於少數權利保護、同婚公投議題不易理解，而這些多數都是傾向反對同婚者。簡言之，同婚公投作為直接民主，不只是公眾意見的表達與彙整，在此過程中，高度政治介入的公投、公投議題的認知理解難度、都可能不對稱地動員或是重新塑造民眾對同婚議題的態度表示。英文摘要：The extant literature has paid scant attention to the role of referendum in the process of passing the same-sex marriage act. This study focuses on the features of the 2018 referendum, and in so doing, it reflexes the possible constraints of direct democracy in Taiwan. It argues that the mass attitudes towards same-sex-marriage have been fluctuated for the past years, such that it cannot be explained away by the long-term socio-economic factors (education, religion, and generation), rather, to account for the change, it has to be placed within the context of the practices and limits of referendum itself. Analyzing the 2019 survey data conducted by Taiwan Foundation for Democracy finds a two-level paradox of referendum: first, in terms of attitudes towards referendum, the majority of respondents are less engaged in the same-sex referendum than in the local elections, consider themselves to be not competent enough to comprehend referendum issues, and support the majority rule even though it might infringe the minority rights. Secondly, these constraints on referendum are closely linked to the position-taking on the same-sex marriage issue. The models show that respondents who are concerned about the referendum and support of minority rights are the most strongly pro-same-sex marriage people. But they are relative few in the sample. The majority of respondents are less concerned about the same-sex referendum than the elections, support the majority rule more than the minority-rights protection, and are not competent to comprehend the complexity of the issues. People with these features are less likely to support same-sex marriage. In short, the same-sex marriage referendum as a form of direct democracy is not simply about the expression of the public opinions; Rather, in the process, the highly political entanglement, the salience, and the complexity of the referendum all asymmetrically mobilize or reshape the public expressions on the issues.起始頁-結束頁：105-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：制度選擇與政府型態的反思－切中要點或是言過其實？並列篇名：Reflections on Institutionalism and Type of Government: Right on the Mark or Overshooting the Mark?作者：吳重禮(Chung-li Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：145-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：「制度論」而非「制度決定論」－我國憲政體制與選舉制度的再思考並列篇名：Institutionalism Rather than Institutional Determinism: A Reconsideration of Taiwan's Constitutional and Electoral Systems作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-chiao Su)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：155-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：香港反送中運動－反思與策略並列篇名：Hong Kong Anti-Extradition Movement: Reflections and Strategies作者：桑普(Sangpu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：167-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：美國聯邦檢察官－當司法獨立遇上政治野心並列篇名：U.S. Attorneys: Judicial Independence and Career Ambition of Prosecutors作者：宋昱(Yu-hsien Sung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：177-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：世界民主大事紀：2020年7－9月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: July-September 2020期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：183-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：偏鄉社群共善的建構條件：柬埔寨村落居民對生態環境危機的回應分析並列篇名：The Conditions of Establishing the Common Good in Rural Communities: An Analysis of Villagers' Responses to Environmental Crisis in Cambodia作者：李翠萍(Tsuey-Ping Lee)關鍵字：偏鄉振興;社群主義;柬埔寨;環境治理;公民社會;rural revitalization;Communitarianism;Cambodia;environmental governance;civil society期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究基於社群主義的觀點，透過柬埔寨兩處偏鄉村落的深度訪談、田野觀察，再輔以文件資料分析，檢視偏鄉公民社會的樣態，並從兩村異同處，剖析阻礙共善建構的因素，藉此了解何以在社群主義價值普及的社會裡，村民面對威脅生計的生態環境危機無法觸發共善行動。研究結果顯示，兩村面對環境危機之所以皆無積極作為，原因在於低教育水準與低所得使村民低估自己參與解決環境問題的可能性，以及赤柬時期對整體社會帶來的集體創傷尚未修復，導致人際信任程度仍不足以支撐成本較高且回饋不確定的共善行動。而從兩村在社群意識上的差異比較，則可看出所得水準、村落型態、與非政府組織提供協助的類型，是導致差異的主要原因。英文摘要：Based on the perspectives of Communitarianism, this research examines Cambodian civil society through document analysis, in-depth interviews and field observations conducted in two rural villages in Cambodia. By comparing the two villages, this research explores factors hindering collective actions for common good in the situation that the environmental crisis threatens villagers' subsistence. The research results show that low education level, low income level, and inherited trauma caused by the Khmer Rouge genocide are factors causing villagers' inactions. Low education level and low income level renders the villagers underestimate their capability to solve the environmental problems. The unhealed trauma creates difficulties for rebuilding interpersonal trust critical for collective action of common good that beneficiaries are uncertain. In addition, this study also finds that income level, physical shape of the village, services and assistances offered by NGOs explain the different sense of community embedded in the two villages.起始頁-結束頁：1-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202012_24(2).00012篇名：外交政策選擇的內因或外因探索：烏克蘭與吉爾吉斯的個案研究並列篇名：Internal or External Factors: Ukrainian and Kyrgyzstan's Foreign Policies作者：楊三億(San-Yi Yang)關鍵字：內部因素;外部因素;外交政策;吉爾吉斯;烏克蘭;Internal Factors;External Factors;Foreign Policies;Kyrgyzstan;Ukraine期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：過往探討一國外交政策發展，論者以為影響外交政策走向多因內部或外部因素所致，前者以為外交政策受國家內部政治發展影響甚鉅，外交政策變化和國內政權轉換過程有極大關連，多數外交決策分析研究途徑著重於此。相對於內部因素，其他研究指出外部強權才是影響國家外交政策走向的主要因素，國際權力體系格局才是主宰國家行為的關鍵所在。內部或外部因素影響這一群國家外交政策發展各有支持論調，作者在這個基礎上提出一些觀察。本文選擇烏克蘭與吉爾吉斯作為觀察外交政策走向，並以此研究內外因素主導如何影響這兩國政策路線發展，選擇這兩國主要因素是烏、吉兩國近期內部有極大的政權震盪現象，如果我們能觀察到這些國家內部發生極大變動之際又能找出其與外交政策變動關聯，那麼就能確認內部因素的重要性。反之，即便內部因素產生激烈震盪但外交政策卻無甚改變，那麼我們就必須重新思考其他因素影響外交政策走向的可能。本文研究指出烏克蘭革命與該國外交政策走向同幅，外交路線配合政權更迭而更動；吉爾吉斯革命與外交政策走向無甚關連。本文的解釋是：一、革命對烏、吉兩國外交路線變化影響甚微，外部強權擠壓或大小國家間不對稱性依賴才是影響兩國路線主因；二、外部地緣政治因素是決定兩國外交政策走向根本性因素，革命造成的政權轉移對外交路線選擇影響，僅為放大、縮小或無甚關聯方式存在。英文摘要：The independence of post-communist countries following the dissolution of the Soviet Union is a crucial topic in academic research on contemporary international relations. The foreign policies and political development of these countries reveal various facets of their transitions. This paper focuses on the relationship between the regime transfer following the break up of the Union and the foreign policies of the countries in order to clarify the effects of internal/external factors on the aforementioned policies. This study examines two countries in order to clarify the relationship between regime transfer and foreign policies. Although the Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan have undergone frequent revolutions, they differ considerably in terms of their diplomatic directions. In the Ukraine, the foreign policy has changed following each revolution and the diplomatic direction has changed after each regime transfer. By contrast, the diplomatic direction of Kyrgyzstan has remained mostly unchanged despite the revolutions. In seeking to explain this difference we draw the following conclusions: (a) A revolution has only a small impact on foreign policy; it is the competition for power and asymmetric dependence that have a major impact. (b) Geopolitical divisions serve as a major factor affecting the foreign policies of the two countries. Revolutions affect foreign policy either in terms of their scope or are simply irrelevant.起始頁-結束頁：67-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202012_24(2).00023篇名：原住民族遺骨與文物返還的制度性反思：從「2017年馬遠布農族遺骸爭議」出發並列篇名：The Repatriation of Indigenous Remains and Cultural Objects: Lessons from the 2017 Mayuan Case in Taiwan作者：黃之棟(Chih-Tung Huang)關鍵字：返還;遺骨;文物;原住民族;馬遠;repatriation;human remains;cultural objects;indigenous peoples;Mayuan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：原住民族遺骨與文物返還是近來國際原住民族運動與原住民族研究（indigenous studies）的一大熱點。而2017年發生的「馬遠布農族遺骸爭議」，恰恰標示出了本土返還議題的爭點所在。有鑑於此，本研究擬從馬遠事件出發，透過制度性的視角來對相關議題進行批判性的檢討。本文指出，所謂的「返還」不只是遺骨或文物物理上的移動與回歸；它所真正處理的其實是權利的重新定義與再探索，更是各關鍵利害關係人間（特別是政府、大學／博物館／研究機構、學術社群、原住民族等）的關係重構。有鑑於問題的複雜，本文提出：吾人應把馬遠一案視為通盤檢討類似案例的契機，透過權利論述與制度設計的雙管齊下，來促成遺骨與文物返還的終極解決。為此，作者指出政府宜展現面對過往黑暗歷史（dark history）的決心，並提供政策引導、經費支持、與法制規範，來協助返還的進程。唯有如此，先人的遺骨才能早日返家安息。英文摘要：Around the world, the repatriation of indigenous remains has long been a contentious issue. Taiwan is no exception. This article examines the Mayuan repatriation case through an institutional lens. It argues that the so-called ”repatriation” is much more complex than the physical return of human remains and cultural objects. The process of repatriation is in fact a redefinition of ownership/rights toward the remains/objects, and a reconstruction of relationships between universities, research groups, and more importantly indigenous peoples. It further argues that this case provides us with an opportunity to revisit the fundamental question of who owns/repatriates what, when and how. Given this complexity, this article stresses that providing institutional arrangements is a must. In so doing, the government should show its determination in facing this dark history and then initiate programs, legal proceedings, and fundings to facilitate the return of indigenous ancestral remains/objects to their communities of origin.起始頁-結束頁：105-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202012_24(2).00034篇名：Responding to Typhoon Risk: Factors That Influence Taiwan's Local Elected Officials' Suspension Decisions並列篇名：颱風來襲：影響台灣地方民選首長停班停課決策之因素作者：王文君(Wen-Jiun Wang);李天申(Tien-Shen Li)關鍵字：Uncertainties;Protective action decision;Accountability;Emergency Management;Typhoon day off;不確定性;避災防護行動決策;課責;災害管理;颱風假期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Local elected officials are expected to advise or mandate their citizens to take protective action when their communities face imminent risk. These decisions are challenging, as they must be made with imperfect information. This study identifies the factors that influence Taiwan's local elected officials' decisions to suspend public and school operations in response to impending typhoon risk. Through an analysis of data collected from semi-structured interviews with nineteen informants, this article reveals multiple interrelated factors that influence such decisions. These factors include (1) the storm's strength, timing, speed, and path; (2) a jurisdiction's geographical, economic, and social characteristics; (3) internal stakeholder factors; (4) external stakeholder factors; and (5) the elected officials' experience, knowledge, and values. These factors contribute to the suspension decision process because officials are under pressure to meet legal, managerial, and political accountabilities. This study reveals the complexities associated with risk response decision making and contributes to our understanding of how public officials make decisions in uncertain situations.英文摘要：面對天然災害的威脅，政府首長有責任警示或要求民眾採取避災措施，以保障其生命財產安全，然而由於災害風險通常具有不確定性，政府首長須在資訊不完整的情況下做出決策。台灣經常遭遇颱風侵襲，地方民選首長依法在颱風來襲之前決定是否停班停課，以降低災害風險，保護轄區民眾安全。本文旨在探索可能影響台灣地方民選首長停班停課決策的因素。本研究對十九位地方民選首長、政治幕僚、行政官員、專家等決策參與者進行半結構式訪談，歸納出五個影響因素，包括：颱風特徵、轄區的地理與社經條件、內部決策參與者的意見、外部利害關係人的壓力，以及首長個人的經驗知識與價值取向。研究結果顯示，地方首長的停班停課決策是一個動態與權衡利害關係的過程，需要同時考慮法規、管理效能以及政治聲望等多種課責壓力，本研究有助於進一步了解政府官員在面對複雜且不確定性的災害風險時的決策行為。起始頁-結束頁：151-197資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202012_24(2).00045篇名：Governing at a Distance or at Arm's Length: The Divergence of Labor Migration Policy in Taiwan and South Korea並列篇名：遠端治理或就近治理：台灣與南韓移工政策的分歧作者：Mason M.S. Kim關鍵字：labor migration;guest-worker programs;recruitment brokerage;civil society;labor unions;勞工移民;客工制度;招募仲介;公民社會;工會期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Facing labor shortages and looming economic challenges, East Asian countries decided to open their labor markets and recruit low-skilled foreign workers. For example, Taiwan adopted a guest-worker program in 1992 that heavily involved private recruitment agencies as labor mediators, whereas Korea launched a temporary labor migration program in 2003 through government-to-government agreements. Despite their similar democratic experiences and developmental histories, why has Korea developed a government-managed guest-worker program while Taiwan has established a brokerage-driven program to control foreign workers? What are the driving factors behind the divergence of labor migration governance between Taiwan and Korea? To answer the question, this paper first compares key features of their foreign labor policy, including recruitment, admission, employment, and return of migrant workers, and then examines the main drivers behind the institutional divergence. This study argues that three factors have largely determined the divergent outcomes of labor migration policies: (1) the power balance between economic and social ministries in the government, (2) political pressures from civil society for migrants' rights, and (3) systematic participation of labor unions in social movements for labor migrants.英文摘要：面對勞工短缺和經濟挑戰加重的問題，東亞國家紛紛決定開放勞工市場並招募低技術的外籍勞工。舉例而言，臺灣在1992年採用客工制度，廣泛仰賴私人招募機構作為勞務仲介，而南韓則在2003年啟動以政府之間協定為方式的臨時性移工專案。雖然兩國民主經歷和發展歷史有一定相似性，但是為什麼南韓發展出一個以政府主導的移工專案，而臺灣卻建立起一個以仲介為中心的移工政策呢？究竟是什麼因素造成了臺灣和南韓移工治理的差異呢？為了回答這個問題，本文首先比較了兩國外籍勞工政策的關鍵特點，包括招募、錄取、就業、返鄉，然後研究這些制度性差別背後的主要因素。本研究論證出三個決定勞工移民政策不同結果的主要因素：（1）政府中經濟和社會部門的權力平衡；（2）來自公民社會中倡議移工權益的政治壓力；以及（3）工會對移工社會運動的系統性參與。起始頁-結束頁：199-248資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202012_24(2).00056篇名：立法委員在委員會發言訴求取向之探究：以第七屆立法院為例並列篇名：An Investigation of Congressional Speech Purposes: the Case Study of the Seventh Legislative Yuan作者：邱師儀(Albert Shihyi Chiu)關鍵字：資訊;選民;政黨;綜合立法;立委發言;Information;constituency;party;conditional;speech期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：國內國會研究對於立法委員發言甚少有系統性的實證研究，然而立委發言被《立法院職權行使法》認定是正式的立法行為之一，與表決同等重要。本文從探討立委發言開始，並聚焦在立委發言的三種訴求取向：政黨、選民與資訊。探究這三種訴求取向的文獻大抵在討論一個主要的研究問題：立法過程中究竟多數黨黨團會不會挾人數優勢，進行以服務選區為導向的「分配立法」？為了回答這個問題，兩大學派－「政黨中心論」與「綜合立法模式」－提出不同論點，並衍生出兩組競爭假設。本文的發現與政黨中心論者Cox與McCubbins的論述一致，他們認為多數黨黨團的影響力高時，會帶動更多選民考量的問政。本文蒐集選制改革後的「第七屆立法院」共八個會期的立委發言做為研究對象，依變項為立委發言的訴求取向-包括政黨、選民與資訊三種，主要自變項包括以個別立委「政黨團結度」測量的「黨團影響力」與以「黨團協商案」測量的法案「議題顯著性」。本文除了是國內少數探究立委發言的量化研究，同時也是國內首篇比較Maltzman模式與Cox與McCubbins模式詮釋力的論文。英文摘要：Taiwan's legislative scholars rarely investigate congressional speech. Congressional speech is legally defined as legislative behavior, just as much as roll call vote. I attempt to look into congressional speech and investigate three targets of it- party, constituency, and information. Previous literature that deals with congressional speech targets start from one major question: does the majority caucus in Legislative Yuan help its members to engage in distributional lawmaking? In answering this question, there are two competing schools of thought. The first is Maltzman's ”conditional model,” and the second is Cox and McCubbins' ”party government model.” The two models prescribe two competing hypotheses, respectively. I found that Cox and McCubbins' model is correct regarding the association between the majority party strength and the pro-earmark speech. As far as the research design, I collected the legislative reports of the seventh Legislative Yuan, which includes eight sessions. These reports cover the information on many legislative speeches held by individual legislators. The dependent variable is the purposes of each of these speeches, and the independent variables include the majority party strength, issue salience and many others. This paper is by far the most complete investigation of congressional speech in Taiwan's lawmaking literature. It is also the first paper in Chinese that deals with the theoretical debate between Maltzman and Cox and McCubbins regarding their views on the interaction of the party, constituency, and information in congressional committees.起始頁-結束頁：1-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202006_24(1).00017篇名：選舉制度與印尼女性國會代表權的發展：開放性名單比例代表制、選區規模、與多黨競爭的交互作用初探並列篇名：Electoral System and the Development of Female Parliamentary Representation in Indonesia: the Interactive Effects of Open-list PR, District Magnitude, and Multi-party Competition作者：孫采薇(Tsai-Wei Sun)關鍵字：印尼;女性國會代表權;配額制度;開放性名單比例代表制;Indonesia;female parliamentary representation;quota system;open-list PR期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：當代民主國家在政治決策過程中，是否兼顧兩性代表平衡，是其政權合法性很重要的來源，並且也是外界評判是否為「良善治理」的一項重要標準。有鑑於女性過往在社會經濟乃至於政治層面的相對弱勢地位，許多國家也嘗試以不同的制度設計，保障女性在國會中的代表席次。在兩性平等的世界風潮下，印尼自1998年以降，在國會選舉法與政黨法歷經數次沿革，試圖提升該國女性國會與各級議會議員的比例。本文試圖從1998年至2019年的五屆大選結果，觀察印尼女性政治參與在國會選舉層面上的進展，並初步探討影響該國女性代表比例的主要制度性因素。不同於傳統認為開放性名單比例代表制會造成黨內競爭與不利弱勢女性候選人的理論，印尼在小選區規模與多黨均勢競爭的情況下，採取開放性名單模式，反而使得未列於名單前段的女性候選人，仍能有機會當選。英文摘要：From the perspective of political inclusiveness and accountability, how to ensure the adequate participation of women in public affairs and include their interests in the legislative process are important issues in contemporary democracies. Many countries have also tried to increase female representation in politics via various institutional arrangements. Under the global trend toward gender equality, Indonesia has undergone several legal reforms to raise the proportion of female candidates in the People's Representative Council (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat, DPR) elections in the post- Suharto era. Using data covering the period from 1998 to the 2019 general elections, this paper intends to examine the participation of women as candidates and as elected representatives in the DPR elections, to highlight the candidacy barriers impeding the entry of women into politics, and to discuss the role of electoral systems as a means of increasing women's political representation in Indonesia. Unlike the traditional theory that the open-list PR will lead to intraparty competition and disadvantage female candidates, in Indonesia within the context of small district magnitude and multi-party competition, open-list PR gives female candidates who are not at the front of the party list a chance to be elected.起始頁-結束頁：67-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202006_24(1).00028篇名：Carl Schmitt論公投及其限制：關於直接民主對代議制之挑戰所做的警告並列篇名：Carl Schmitt on the Plebiscite and its Limits: A warning of the challenge of direct democracy to a representative system作者：楊尚儒(Shang-Ju Yang)關鍵字：公民投票;威瑪憲法;Carl Schmitt;議會制;直接民主;plebiscite;Weimar Constitution;Carl Schmitt;parliamentary system;direct democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：如同今日的台灣，威瑪共和也曾採行公民投票的制度並且以憲法明文規定之。按照立憲者的原意，之所以要將直接民主的要素帶入威瑪憲法，其理由主要在於他們──一如臺灣的立憲者──對於議會的不信任，因此將直接民主要素視為用以補充代議機關之不足，甚或是視為制衡議會的機制之一。德國法學者Carl Schmitt（施密特）不僅曾經深入地分析議會制的正當性，也同樣對威瑪憲法當中的直接民主要素做出了批評：直接民主形成了對於議會制度的挑戰，並間接造成威瑪共和的瓦解。在理論層次來看，施米特對於代議民主與直接民主的觀察雖然在戰後德國被繼受，但他的影響卻常常被低估。因此，本文將對威瑪的直接民主制度進行概略性的剖析。接著則再回到理論面，透過Carl Schmitt的書寫來探討代議民主與直接民主的競爭關係，最後則透過其觀點來反思直接民主的侷限與缺失。英文摘要：As in Taiwan today, direct democratic institutions were also present during the Weimar Republic and enshrined in the Constitution. Similar to the founders of Taiwan's constitution, the founders of the Weimar Constitution brought direct democratic elements into the Weimar Constitution mainly because they lacked confidence in the parliament and thought direct democratic elements could complement the representative system or act as a measure of checks and balances against the parliament. The German jurist Carl Schmitt has not only analyzed the legitimacy of parliamentarism, but has also provided a critique on direct democratic elements in the Weimar Constitution: the elements of direct democracy challenged parliamentarism and indirectly caused the collapse of the Weimar Republic. While Schmitt's theoretical account of representative and direct democracy was widely adopted in the postwar period, his influence remains underestimated. Therefore, this article will first introduce the direct democratic elements in Weimar Germany and then move on to Schmitt's analysis of the tension between representative and direct democracy. Lastly, based on Schmitt's thought, this article will also reflect on the limitations and weaknesses of direct democracy.起始頁-結束頁：109-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202006_24(1).00039篇名：Structural Change in Disaster Response Networks: Indonesia and the 2004 Indian Ocean Earthquake and Tsunami並列篇名：災害應變網絡的結構變遷：以印尼2004年南亞海嘯應變體系為例作者：Thomas W. Haase關鍵字：Self-Organization;Resilience;Disaster Response;Indonesia;Network Change;自我組織;韌性;災害應變;印尼;網絡結構變遷期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：This research aims to investigate whether disaster response systems have the foundations needed to self-organize and overcome the uncertainties present in post-disaster environments. Drawing upon contributions from the resilience, network governance, and complex adaptive systems literature, this article presents the findings of an investigation into the disaster response system that operated in Indonesia after the 2004 Indian Ocean Earthquake and Tsunami. Network data, comprised of organizational actors and their interactions, were collected from newspaper articles and situation reports published between 26 December 2004 and 17 January 2005. These data were transformed into a series of twenty-two relational matrices and processed with network analysis software. Three network measures, namely, density, diameter and components, were computed and plotted by date to evaluate the development and structural evolution of the tsunami response system. The findings indicate that the disaster response system experienced structural change. While additional research is needed to validate these findings, future research should explore the mechanisms that drive self-organization in post-disaster environments, as well as the steps policy-makers can take to design and promote self-organizing disaster response systems.英文摘要：本文以印尼2004年南亞海嘯災害應變體系為研究對象，檢證該應變體系面對重大災害後的自我組織能力。作者以災害韌性、網絡治理，以及複雜適應系統等理論為基礎，運用2004/12/26至2005/1/17期間所發布的新聞報導與災情報告等檔案資料為內容分析素材，建構災害應變組織網絡結構資料庫，分析印尼災害應變體系的組織網絡結構動態。作者採用社會網絡分析常用之結構衡量指標：密度、平均最短路徑、與子群體數量，依據時間序列描繪在災害發生後三週之間，印尼災害應變體系每日的組織網絡結構。研究結果顯示該災害應變體系確實發生網絡結構變遷，建議未來研究可進一步探究災害應變體系自我組織的機制，並探討促進災害應變體系自我組織的策略。起始頁-結束頁：163-219資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202006_24(1).000410篇名：Facilitating Securitized Crowdfunding in Singapore and South Korea並列篇名：新加坡與南韓證券化群<U+8846>募資的比較分析作者：Roland Attila Csizmazia關鍵字：SME;startup company;securitized and equty-based crowd-funding;policies;retail investment;中小型企業;新創公司;證券化與股權型群眾募資;政策;零售投資期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：The idea of crowdfunding has rapidly gained momentum around the world, as ordinary people have been looking for solutions to compensate for the diminishing interest rates on their investments in bonds and bank savings deposits as a result of the financial crisis in 2008-2009. The authorities have long remained inactive, but due to the rapid growth in popularity of crowdfunding, they have slowly introduced or modified regulations. The regulatory authorities have had to identify the interests of stakeholders to facilitate access to micro and small capital, as well as to create a system for platforms serving as intermediaries between fund receivers and providers, while at the same time protecting individual investors against total loss. This research seeks to find and analyze key reasons for the importance of retail funding in Singapore and South Korea as the two countries share a similar historic and economic background in the post-World War II era. It also examines whether and to what extent the regulatory framework in these two countries is patterned upon the framework created in more developed and experienced countries. It focuses on securitized, that is, equity-based and lending-based, crowdfunding and intends to analyze the development and application of crowdfunding regulations in Singapore, which opted for a modification of existing regulations, and South Korea, which opted for an explicit regulation. The study then seeks to identify the main similarities and differences between these two countries in the context of crowdfunding regulations. Finally, it endeavors to answer the question of whether crowdfunding may become a potential source of funding for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in these two countries, with a particular focus on startups devoid of the financial resources needed for growth and for the commercialization of new products and services.英文摘要：在2008－2009全球金融危機後，有不少人利用群眾募資來彌補投資與存款獲利不足的情況。政府單位對於群眾募資行為剛開始並不積極面對，直到出現愈來愈多的群眾募資計畫後，才開始建立或修改相關的法令規定。相關的管制機構除了要分辨利害關係人的利益、好讓他們能得到微型資本，也要為提供資金與接受資金的行為者提供中介平台，同時更需保障個別投資人的權益。本研究試圖分析新加坡與南韓的零售融資，探索兩國如何效法先進國家的群眾募資管制架構以建構本國的架構。本研究以證券化的群眾募資、亦即以股權與債權為基礎的群眾募資型態作為起點，分析新加坡與南韓群眾募資管制規定的發展與應用，主張前者傾向透過修改既有法令以建立管制規定，後者則傾向制定專門管制規定。本研究除了比較兩國群眾募資管制規定的異同之外，亦試圖回答群眾募資是否有潛力成為中小型企業與新創公司的資金來源。起始頁-結束頁：221-275資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202006_24(1).000501篇名：影響臺灣電子提案通過成案門檻之因素並列篇名：The Factors Affecting the Success of Passing the Threshold of an Electronic Proposal in Taiwan作者：林宛萱(Wan-Hsuan Lin);王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang);王禕梵(Yi-Fan Wang)關鍵字：電子參與;電子提案;電子連署;利益團體;網路參與平臺;e-participation;electronic proposal;e-petition;interest group;Join Platform期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：71期出版年：2020中文摘要：在電子治理的浪潮中，臺灣公共政策網路參與平臺的「提點子」機制提供民眾參與公共事務的機會，如果提案能在60天內獲得5,000個連署數，則政府必須對民眾提案做出回應，因此這是一種新的從下而上的政策議程設定機制，希望能鼓勵民眾參與，但過去研究顯示利益團體對於政策議程有很大的影響力，因此這新的電子提案平臺能否減少利益團體的影響力？或是說，利益團體在電子提案平臺的影響究竟為何？是本文的第一個研究焦點。另外，因為通過成案門檻的提案很少，因此本文想要探索到底有哪些因素會影響提案通過門檻的可能性。筆者蒐集提點子平臺在2016年的504筆提案資料作為分析標的，透過卡方分析與統計模型分析，本研究發現有利益團體支持的提案比較會通過成案門檻，而成本分布廣泛的提案比較不容易通過。從學術的角度來看，研究結果顯示利益團體的影響力，不僅限於傳統的政策議程設定，在電子連署上，也扮演重要的角色。在實務上，此研究成果隱含若民眾想要在電子平臺上成功地倡議一項提案，則他們可能要考慮與利益團體合作，以增加提案通過門檻的機會。對利益團體而言，他們應思考如何形塑提案的形象以及框架，以提高通過門檻的可能性。英文摘要：In the wave of e-governance, the electronic proposal platform provides people with the opportunity to participate in public affairs in Taiwan. If proposers gather more than 5,000 signatures within 60 days, the government must respond to those submitted proposals. Therefore, this is a new bottom-up policy agenda setting mechanism, hoping to encourage public participation. However, past studies show that interest groups have a great influence on policy agenda. Can this new electronic proposal platform reduce the influence of interest groups? In other words, what is the influence of interest groups on the electronic proposal platform? It is the first research focus of this article. In addition, because few proposals passed the threshold, this article wants to explore what factors affected the likelihood of a proposal passing this threshold. We collected the data of 504 proposals submitted by citizens on the Join Platform in 2016. Data were analyzed using chi-square analysis and statistical models. Results show that proposals supported by interest groups are more likely to exceed the threshold. Proposals with broad cost distribution are more difficult to pass. From the academic point of view, the results show that the influence of interest groups is not limited to the traditional policy process, but also plays a pivotal role in electronic signatures. In practice, the result implies that if people want to successfully advocate for a proposal on the electronic platform, they should work with interest groups to increase their chances of passing the threshold. For interest groups and their supporters, they should also consider how to shape the image or frame of the proposal to increase the possibility of passing the threshold.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系2篇名：當公民參與遇上專案管理：以臺北市參與式預算的專案管理為例並列篇名：Linking Project Management to Citizen Participation Practice: The Case Study of Participatory Budgeting in Taipei City作者：傅凱若(Kai-Jo Fu);張婷瑄(Ting-Syuan Jhang)關鍵字：參與式預算;公部門專案管理;專案生命週期;participatory budgeting;public project management;project life cycle期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：71期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年來參與式預算（Participatory Budgeting，簡稱PB）在臺灣引起了相當大的關注，已在許多都會區和地方社區實踐。然而，目前對於PB的研究大多關注參與的過程，缺乏對後端執行的結果進行探討，當行政機關無法有效實踐公民參與的提案反而容易對政府治理產生不利的效果。與其他城市相比，臺北市以全市為範圍進行PB的試驗，而為了有效管理提案的執行而採用私部門所開發的專案管理（Project Management，簡稱PM）方式。因此，本研究的主要目的是想瞭解臺北市如何面對不同政治力場的挑戰，並探討如何應用PM制度在PB的提案執行過程。本文根據專案管理的生命週期流程，透過次級資料以及深度訪談等研究方法進行分析，研究發現指出政治環境對於PB的執行有不同程度的影響，但並不會阻礙PB在臺北的發展與進程；而公部門和私部門實質上追求不同的目標，當政府將專案管理的概念整合到公部門中，在應用上會與私部門有所差異。囿限於官僚體系的層級節制和依法行政特性，PM承辦人的裁量權和資源使用的整合程度低，且受限於專案管理能力以及課責機制的設計，讓提案完成的自主性受到層層的管控。因此，本研究提出公部門的專案應被視為是一種社會的過程，強調公共價值的創造而非僅是套用一致管理流程的理性工具。透過本文的發現可以提供公部門在專案管理上理論的發展，以及在實務上推進PB制度的建議。英文摘要：Participatory budgeting (PB) has recently gained considerable attention in Taiwan. This new initiative of democratic governance has been implemented in most municipalities and local communities across Taiwan. However, most of the current research on PB focuses on the process of participation and lacks relevant discussion about the results of PB's projects completion after public participation. As the administrative agency cannot effectively accomplish the projects of citizen participation, it can easily lead to adverse effects on governance. In comparison with other cases, Taipei City takes a different approach to practice PB on a city-wide scale and adopts the idea of project management (PM), which was primarily developed in the private sector, in order to effectively manage PB projects. Therefore, the main purpose of this research is to understand how Taipei City faces the challenges of different political forces and to explore how to apply PM in the PB's project execution process. Based upon the life cycle of PM, this study collects data from document analysis and in-depth interviews. The results found that the political stakeholders have varying degrees of influence on the implementation of PB's projects, but they don't hinder the development and progress of PB. In essence, the public sector and the private sector pursue different goals. When the government integrates the concept of PM into the public sector, the application will be different from the private sector. Limited to the hierarchical control of public institutions and the characteristics of administration by law, the discretion of the PM managers and the capacity to integrate resource use are low. Additionally, constrained by the competencies of project managers and controlled by the design of the accountability mechanisms, the project managers have limited autonomy to complete these PB's projects. Consequently, this study suggests that public projects should be perceived as a social process, emphasizing the creation of public value rather than the application of rational tools to manage the project processes. According to the findings, this study can provide theoretical development of project management in the public sector as well as suggestions on the practical progress of PB implementation.起始頁-結束頁：43-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系3篇名：新北市里層級之水災暨坡地災害脆弱性分析：全盤型脆弱性管理架構的初步應用並列篇名：Comprehensive Vulnerability Management Framework of Village Vulnerability Assessment to Floods and Landslides in New Taipei City: A Preliminary Empirical Study作者：廖興中(Hsin-Chung Liao);張鎧如(Kai-Ju Chang);李天申(Tien-Shen Li)關鍵字：全盤型脆弱性管理;潛在全象分析法;村里水災與坡地災害脆弱性;資源可近性;新北市;comprehensive vulnerability management;latent profile analysis;village vulnerability to floods and landslides;resource accessibility;New Taipei City期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：71期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年來，透過評估社區或地區的災害脆弱性，作為探究地方災害防救政策之依據，已是公共行政學界從事災害防救研究的新興課題。本研究引用McEntire（2005）的「全盤型脆弱性管理」概念與其所提出的脆弱性內涵分析架構，運用潛在全象分析法，探討新北市1,032個里的水災與坡地災害脆弱性，發展相應指標進行災害脆弱性評估，指標中所運用的數據均來自政府機關的官方資料庫、開放資料平臺。本研究將脆弱程度相似的里予以分群，進而針對不同特性的群體，分別提出增強其應變災害能力的相關討論。研究發現，新北市共有27個里對於水災與坡地災害同時具有高度的脆弱性，據此，本研究建議：第一，市政府應建立跨局處的機制，並結合市府、公所、民間、學界的力量，規劃補強策略；第二，市府與公所應全面提升這些里的避難、救難、物資、醫療、長照等各類防救災資源的可近性；第三，建議將這些里列為推動自主防災社區的重點對象，積極強化里民的災害風險意識；第四，針對山區與沿海地區，增強物資、醫療與長照資源；第五，中央與市府、公所須合作以確保防災設施功能正常運作。英文摘要：Community-based hazard vulnerability assessments have gradually become a critical research topic, which attracts public administration scholars who focus on emergency management and disaster policy. This paper adopts the concept of comprehensive vulnerability management and applies McEntire's (2005) theoretical framework to conduct village-based floods and landslides vulnerability assessment in New Taipei City by using Latent Profile Analysis. Indicators and measures in each dimension are public available records from official datasets or governmental open data platform. Total 1,032 villages in New Taipei City are clustered as different groups based on their characteristics related to vulnerability to floods and landslides. The findings show 27 villages are particularly vulnerable to both hazards. We propose five suggestions to enhance those villages' disaster response capability. Firstly, the city government should organize a cross-functional team to develop response strategies and plans about these vulnerable villages. Secondly, resource accessibility related to sheltering, rescuing, goods and materials, medical services, and long-term care services in these villages should be enhanced. Thirdly, the idea of disaster-resilience community should be promoted and implemented to these village residents to increase their disaster risk awareness. Fourthly, resource availability of goods and materials, medical services, and long-term care services in mountain and coastal areas need to be improved. Fifthly, governments at all levels should cooperate with each other closely to certify all disaster-prevention infrastructures function properly.起始頁-結束頁：89-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系4篇名：失望與民主並列篇名：Disappointment and Democracy作者：許國賢(Kuo-Hsien Hsu)關鍵字：失望;民主;民粹主義;disappointment;democracy;populism期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：70期出版年：2020中文摘要：當今民主體制之在生活於其中的公民之間引起諸種失望，已是一明顯之事實。這些失望一方面使政治過程更形顛簸，另一方面更影響特定之民主體制的正當性。做為民主理論的一環，本文將從當代民主研究相對較為忽視之失望這一視角進行切入，分析並探討對民主失望的諸種因由，進而檢視關於如何走出失望的代表性論述。最後，將從「自由人的防衛式民主」這一架構，申說個人自由的確保以及政治之外的生活場域的維護，乃是民主政體的核心要務，亦是使其得以包容、涵納諸種失望與不滿的關鍵所在。要之，相較於激進民主理論的泛政治化傾向，「自由人的防衛式民主」則更多地寄希望於節制政治的膨脹。這乃是將個人自由視為第一要義的不得不然的選擇。英文摘要：Disappointment comes from the negation of expectations one holds by existing facts. It is in essence a negative feeling with grief and regret. It is generally agreed that contemporary democracies have incurred diverse disappointments in different aspects, and thus make them fragile and delicate. This article focuses on this very perspective of disappointment to tackle the origins of it, its further consequences and its possible solutions. Finally, through the framework of ”the defensive democracy of the free”, this article argues that the core mission of a democracy is to secure individual liberty and to defend life beyond politics. The deep-seated idea of the primacy of politics is a facade. Politics exists chiefly to serve the far broader life beyond politics. Excessive politics will lead to still greater disappointment.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系5篇名：原住民族條約簽不簽？加拿大現代條約制度性經驗的本土檢視並列篇名：To Sign or not to Sign? An Analysis of The Canadian Modern Treaty Model作者：黃之棟(Morgan Chih-Tung Huang)關鍵字：原住民族;自治;現代條約;國與國關係;制度設計;indigenous peoples;self-government;modern treaties;nation-to-nation;institutional design期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：70期出版年：2020中文摘要：2016年，蔡英文總統代表政府正式向原住民族道歉，並宣示將儘速落實原住民族自治。自此之後，各界便開啟了新一波的自治討論。在政府所參採的各國經驗中，又以加拿大的「現代條約」模式受到最多關注。有鑑於此，本文擬從「制度設計」的角度出發，通過移地研究的實證資料，來對加國自治制度作一全面性的檢討。分析後發現，原住民族條約以協商來確認彼此關係的做法，確實有助於提升原住民族與政府間的持續溝通。即便如此，當中涉及原住民族主權的關鍵爭議，卻依然難解。這也使得所謂的「國與國關係」之意涵難免還是繼續呈現各說各話的狀態。此外，在當前新自由主義的政策框架下，自治未必有助於公共服務的提升，甚至可能加速原住民族區成為三不管地帶。這些對於原住民族而言，都是和政府簽訂條約之前必須時時警惕與注意的問題。英文摘要：In 2016, President Tsai Ing-Wen delivered a National Apology to the Taiwanese indigenous peoples. Soon after her apology, the Taiwanese government tabled a new proposal for materializing her promise of indigenous self-government. This proposal adopts the Canadian model of modern treaties. That means, the government will establish a tripartite mechanism of negotiation, under which both central, local governments and indigenous tribes/groups could finalize an agreement accordingly. Using detailed policy exposition in tandem with interviews in Canada, this article analyses the modern-treaty model through the lens of institutional design. It argues that modern treaties provide a useful mechanism for renewing and redefining Crown-indigenous relationships. It however still cannot solve the highly contentious debates about indigenous/tribal sovereignty; therefore, the so-called ”nation-to-nation” relationship remains unclear and indecisive. Moreover, the modern treaty model is based on the ideology of neoliberalism. Under this neoliberal thinking, there is no promise that better public service is provided for the indigenous peoples.起始頁-結束頁：33-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系6篇名：臺灣勞工保險「高薪低報」行為對勞保財務之影響並列篇名：The Impact of Taiwan Labor Insurance's ”under-reporting of employees' income” Behavior on Labor Insurance Finance作者：簡聖哲(Sheng-Zhe Jian);王宏文(Hong-Wung Wang)關鍵字：勞工保險;年金;高薪低報;薪資;投保薪資;labor insurance;annuity;under-reporting of employees' income;salary;insurance salary期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：70期出版年：2020中文摘要：勞工保險自實施老年年金以來，高薪低報問題嚴重，主因是勞工請領年金金額的公式當中，平均月投保薪資僅採計最高60個月的投保薪資，導致投保短期高薪即可獲得較高的老年年金計算基準，因此部分勞工與雇主會採取違法的高薪低報行為，來增加勞工收入或降低雇主的人事成本，而這會使勞保基金短收許多保險費，對勞保基金的永續運作造成重大不利的影響，但過去並未有學者針對此一重要議題進行估算。本文利用2016年「勞工投保薪資資料」及「受僱就業者每月收入資料」二項總體資料，來對上述違法的高薪低報行為對於勞保基金財務所造成的影響進行估算，研究結果顯示，勞工保險基金因違法高薪低報行為，每月短收約30億元保費，一年短收約360億元。此外，研究結果也顯示月薪資在2.5萬元至4萬元間的勞工，高薪低報的狀況是最嚴重的，他們會傾向用約2∼2.5萬元附近的薪資投保。最後，薪資超過投保薪資上限的勞工，也有部分採用高薪低報行為。因此本文提出兩項政策建議，一是延長平均投保薪資採計期間，二是加強稽查及建立黑名單制度。英文摘要：Since the implementation of labor insurance pension annuity, the problem of employers under-reporting employee salaries has become serious. The main reason is that the formula for determining the amount of annuity is based on the average of the highest 60 monthly insured salaries during the period of joining the insurance coverage. Some employers and employees take advantage of this formula by underreporting employee salaries in order to increase the income of employees or reduce the employer's costs. This illegal under-reporting problem has decreased the revenue of the labor insurance fund and has had a significant adverse impact on the sustainable operation of labor insurance. However, so far no scholars have estimated the financial impact that this under-reporting behavior has on labor insurance funds. This paper uses two datasets, ”Labor Insurance Salary Information” and ”Monthly Income of Employed Persons”, to estimate the financial impact that under-reporting behavior has on the labor insurance fund. The results show that illegal under-reporting behavior decreases the revenue of the labor insurance fund by about 3 billion NTD per month, which is about 36 billion NTD per year. In addition, the results also show that the problem of under-reporting is the most serious for employees with monthly salaries between 25,000 NTD and 40,000 NTD. They all tend to report the insured salary at around 20,000~25,000 NTD. Finally, some of the employees with wages higher than the insured salary ceiling also under-report their salaries. Therefore, this paper proposes two policy recommendations: one is to extend the period of the insured salary used in the calculation of the amount of the annuity, and the other is to strengthen the audit and to set up a blacklisting system.起始頁-結束頁：67-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系01篇名：選擇沈默還是發聲？影響公務員揭弊意願因素之實證研究並列篇名：Staying Silent or Speaking Out Loud? An Empirical Study on Factors Influencing Civil Servant's Whistle-Blowing Intention作者：黃政勛(Cheng-Hsun Huang);董祥開(Hsiang-Kai Dong)關鍵字：公共服務動機;揭弊意願;感知被報復風險機率;個人承受風險程度;public service motivation;whistle-blowing intention;risk of revenge;individual risk propensity期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：38卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究嘗試以公務人員主觀道德價值判斷角度，搭配公共服務動機理論作為測量依據，探析服務動機如何影響揭弊意願，並利用風險承受程度及感知被報復風險機率作為調節變項進行交互作用分析，進一步探究風險程度對於公共服務動機與揭弊意願之間的差異。研究主軸以2016年「臺灣文官調查IV：公務人員風險偏好、服務動機、與決策類型之關係－建立一個勇於任事的政府」第一波調查內容為分析基礎，經集群分析及階層迴歸等統計分析發現，公共服務動機與揭弊意願間具有顯著正向關係，尤其在公共利益承諾及自我犧牲層面更加突出。此外，本研究發現感知被報復風險機率因素在公共服務動機與揭弊意願之間發揮調節作用，而個人風險承受程度高低並無產生影響，此結果顯示「怕報復預期心理」在揭弊意願中扮演關鍵因素，對於我國實務與學理上完善揭弊者保護提供有利循證基礎，未來法案推動及研究議題應從保護法規制度強化、組織氛圍探悉及個人認知等多重面向進行改善，以降低吹哨揭弊之障礙。英文摘要：This study aims at using the subjective moral judgment of public servants, with the theory of public service motivation as the measurement basis, to explore how service motivation affects whistle-blowing intention, and uses individual risk tolerance and perceived risk of revenge as moderators for interaction analysis to examine the difference in degree of risk between public service motivation and the whistle-blowing intention. This study is based on the 2016 Taiwan Government Bureaucrats Survey IV. Using cluster analysis and hierarchical regression, this research found that there is a significant positive relationship between public service motivation and whistle-blowing intention, especially at the level of public interest commitment and self-sacrifice. Furthermore, this research also found that instead of individual risk tolerance, perceived risk of revenge is a moderator between public service motivation and the whistle-blowing intention. The result showed that the anticipation of facing revenged is key to whistle-blowing intention. To provide an evidence-based foundation for both practice and academy on the protection of whistleblowing, future bill and research could consider improvements about protection laws and regulations, exploration of organizational atmosphere, and personal cognition.起始頁-結束頁：1-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系2篇名：行為主義導向公共政策的設計與應用：以提升大腸癌篩檢率的推力工具為例之探究並列篇名：The Design and Application of Behavioral Public Policy: Nudge-Based Intervention to Increase Colorectal Cancer Screening in Taiwan作者：賴怡樺(Yi-Hua Lai);陳敦源(Don-Yuan Chen);陳志道(Chih-Dao Chen);王英偉(Ying-Wei Wang);吳建遠(Chien-Yuan Wu);周燕玉(Yan-Yu Jhou);周繡玲(Hsiu-Ling Chou)關鍵字：行為經濟學;行為主義導向公共政策;推力;癌症篩檢;混合方法;behavioral economics;behavioral public policy;nudge;cancer screening;mixed methods期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：38卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：行為主義導向公共政策（behavioral public policy）近十年來被大量應用於公共政策領域，其中推力（nudge）因具有低成本、高成效的特徵，更廣泛為各國政府與國際組織所用，惟國內相關研究與應用甚少。本研究試圖建構行為主義導向公共政策設計（policy design）的具體作法，並實際以提升臺灣大腸癌篩檢率的政策進行實作，挑選兩家醫院為個案，設計腸篩衛教單為推力工具，透過實驗搭配觀察與焦點座談的混合研究方法（mixed methods），驗證其成效與可行性。研究結果主要有三點結論與建議：1.推力工具確實能顯著提升大腸癌篩檢的領管率，但作用機制並非簡化的「刺激－反應」，可再考量影響因素，針對實施脈絡與對象客製化設計；2.推力工具效果的測量，不宜只靠實驗法，混合搭配其他研究方法才能較全面且有效；3.推力工具的實施，宜先了解既有運作模式的問題與限制，進行必要的因應調整與再設計。本研究所研提的作法與經驗，應可作為後續研究與實務上設計與實施推力工具的參考，進而發揮拋磚引玉的功能，促發未來更多本土的實務與研究投入行為主義導向公共政策的應用。英文摘要：Nudges have been widely adopted worldwide due to the low cost and high effectiveness and in the field of behavioral public policy they have been widely applied by public policy practice in the last few decades. However, the applications in Taiwan have been limited. This study developed strategies to design behavioral public policy. We chose two hospitals in Taiwan as the context, and employed a nudge-based flier to encourage people to participate in colorectal cancer screening. We conducted a three-part mixed-methods experiment embedded with observation and focus group interviews within to assess its effectiveness. Results show that this nudge-based intervention had a positive impact on the screening rate, while appearing to have a positive spill-over effect. Some obstacles in the context were also found. Evidence suggests that nudges can be customized to contexts and targets based on related factors, while the contextual obstacles should be recognized and solved before implementation. Moreover, evaluating a nudge through a mix of quantitative and qualitative data is the best way to assess its impact on targeted behavior. It is expected that the methodology and findings of the study can inform future research and practice, and initiate more local-scale applications of behavioral public policy.起始頁-結束頁：65-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系3篇名：當代美中衝突之溯源－探索性的結構性分析並列篇名：The Origin of Contemporary US-China Conflicts-Exploratory Structural Analysis作者：林子立(Tzuli Lin);沈有忠(Yu-chung Shen)關鍵字：美中衝突;美中貿易戰;新古典現實主義;國際秩序;US-China conflict;US-China trade war;Neoclassical Realism;international order期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：38卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以新古典現實主義，從「空間」、「認識理念」、「時間」等三個層次，以及「戰略」、「經濟」和「意識形態」三個面向，結構性的檢視了美中在川普任期四年中各項衝突發生的原因與意涵。以空間而言，雙方政治制度分歧以及對國際秩序要求的分歧，使得雙方衝突難免。綜合空間與認識理念，展現在時間層次上，進入美中的各面向的衝突。關鍵的因素不在於何時崛起，而是在於何時感受到威脅。以時間而言，崛起的中國已經是一個不可逆的事實。隨著時間的進展，中國各在經濟、軍事等方面的持續成長，都將縮小與美國的差距。亦即，中國在文化、世界觀、政權運作等許多意識形態的本質上，不僅與美國傳統的民主自由並不相容，也對美國利益產生威脅。本文驗證因為美中兩國的三個層次與三個面向分歧，成為結構性衝突。因此，美中之間的競爭與對抗不會隨著拜登當選總統或是Covid-19疫情結束而落幕，而是會持續性的競爭直到國際體系建立新秩序。英文摘要：This article structurally examines the causes and implications of US-China conflicts from three levels of the spatial, temporal, and cognitive, as well as three dimensions of strategy, value, and economy by neoclassical realism in the past two years. In terms of the spatial, the differences in the political systems of the two sides and the differences in the requirements of the international order make conflicts unavoidable. In terms of the temporal, the rise of China is already an irreversible fact. As time progresses, China's continued economic and military growth will narrow the gap with the United States. The fusion of the spatial and temporal evolved at the cognitive level and entered the conflict of strategic dimension between the United States and China. The key factor is not the word of ”rise”, but the threat. Moreover, China is incompatible with the traditional liberalism in the nature of value systems with the US such as culture, world vision, and governmental operation. This article verifies that because the three-level conflicts between the United States and China combine the three-faceted conflicts, they become structural conflicts. Therefore, the competition and confrontation between the United States and China will not end with the signing of the trade agreement or the end of the Covid-19 epidemic, but will continue to compete until the international system establishes a new order.起始頁-結束頁：121-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系4篇名：新問題、舊矛盾？三級機關政務與常務雙軌制分析並列篇名：New Problems, Old Paradoxes? Assessing the Dual-track System of Third-Level Agency Heads' Appointments作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang);黃宗賢(Zong-Xian Huang)關鍵字：政治任命;官僚政治化;民主治理;文官制度;三級機關;Political appointment;Politicization of bureaucracy;Democratic governance;Civil servant system;Third-level agency期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：38卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：民主國家透過選舉制度取得執政權的民選首長，執政後任命政務領導，實現選舉時的承諾；但無限制的政治任命，將損害維繫國家穩定的常任文官體系。因此，政治任命的範圍與規模，一直都是民主治理的重要課題。在2017年，我國中央行政機關組織基準法第18條的修正，也引發學術與實務界針對三級機關首長改採政務任用與否的討論。雖然看似為一個「新」的制度變革議題，但背後的問題則源自政策過程中的「舊」有矛盾。在民主化後，取得政權的執政者試圖透過政治任命的方式，來「導引」政策方向與「分配」行政資源，但在舊有的制度矛盾下，改革必然與原有文官體制產生碰撞。因此，本研究嘗試釐清兩個研究問題：（1）在政治任命的邏輯下，三級機關政務常務雙軌制背後反映出哪些衝突與矛盾？（2）執政者可以透過哪些方式來化解上述的衝突與矛盾？藉由訪談25位政務官與高階事務官，本研究發現，三級機關首長政務常務雙軌化牽涉政策規劃與政策執行兩者根本上難以區分的議題；由於三級機關首長往往身兼規劃與執行的雙重角色，因而在政務化後，可能引發一系列關於行政中立、政治課責的問題。此外，本研究亦發現執政者對三級機關首長的任用，多是以「控制」行政資源的觀點為主，而較缺乏公共績效面向的討論。基於上述發現，本研究針對我國未來政治任用規範與文官制度改革提出建議。英文摘要：In a democratic country, ruling parties and leaders could appoint political appointees to fulfill their policy commitments. The expansion of political appointments, however, could sabotage the civil servant system and the stability of the government. Therefore, the scope and magnitude of political appointments is a crucial topic in democratic governance research. In 2017, Taiwan's government initiated a revision of Article 18 of the Basic Code Governing Central Administrative Agencies Organizations, leading to rigorous debates of the potential politicization risk of third-level agencies. Although the disputes seem to be ”new” problems of the institutional reform, they might originate from the ”old” paradoxes of policy processes. Moreover, we argue that it reflects the phenomenon that political leaders endeavor to orient public policy and distribute administrative resources, and clash with the existing civil servant system after democratization. We therefore attempt to clarify two research questions in this article: (1) What kind of collisions and paradoxes did the revision of Article 18 of the Basic Code Governing Central Administrative Agencies Organizations reflect? and (2) What strategies could political leaders use to reconcile the above collisions and paradoxes? By collecting data from 25 political appointees and senior civil servants through in-depth interviews, we indicate that the upheaval behind the amendment results from the ambiguous characteristics of third-level agencies, caused by a vague demarcation between policy planning and implementation. In addition, we argue that most political leaders seldom discuss the role of public performance when appointing heads of third-level agencies, but paid more attention on the amount of administrative resources they could control. Based on those findings, we propose practical suggestions for potential reforms in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系5篇名：半總統制下的總理任命權與政府穩定之研究並列篇名：The Presidential Power of the Appointment of a Prime Minister and Government Stability in a Semi-presidential System作者：張峻豪(Chun-Hao Chang);施依婷(Yi-Ting Shih)關鍵字：總統權力;總統;總理;半總統制;總統任命總理權;president's power;president;prime minister;semi-presidentialism;prime minister appointment期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：38卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：總統權力向為半總統制研究者關注之焦點，而在各項權力中，總統對總理的任命權，更經常是評估其憲政角色的關鍵。本文以憲法規範為基礎，嘗試由不同規範方式「再分類」總統的任命總理權，從總統的任命權是否應受到國會同意出發，進一步，再對國會行使同意權的通過門檻進行程度區分，從規範來區分四類閣揆任命權的內容：第一類，總統單獨任命總理；第二類，總統任命總理需經國會同意；第三類，總統任命總理需經國會同意，並且被指定是國會多數提名之人選。第四類，總統任命總理需經國會同意，並且，任命的完成尚有時間限制，分別以法國、羅馬尼亞、保加利亞、斯洛維尼亞等四個同為「總理總統制」的國家作為案例代表。其次，在依變項的設定上，本文控制府會關係這個變項，同以四個國家的「共治」時期，來分析不同憲政規範的周延程度度，是否影響到總統、總理、國會之間的「負責」與「制衡」關係，具體指標包含：倒閣的發生否、內閣的存續力、總統立法權的展現程度，來闡釋任命權對憲政穩定度之影響。本文發現，國會有無對總理任命案之同意權，並不直接與半總統制穩定度相關，然共治期間的國會能否藉同意權來確保半總統制穩定，則與規範方式有相當關連。英文摘要：Presidential power has always been the focus of research on Semi-presidentialism, and among the various powers, whether the President has the substantive power to appoint the Prime Minister is often the key to assessing his constitutional role. Based on the Constitutional norms, this article attempts to ”reclassify” the President's power to appoint the Prime Minister from the degree of the regulations, starting from the President's appointing Premier power whether it needs consent from the Congress. And further, distinguish the degree of threshold appointment which the Congress exercises the Cabinet Appointment/Consent Power. There are four categories of the Cabinet Appointment/Consent Power in terms of rigorous standards. In the first category, the president has direct power to appoint the Prime Minister: In the second category, the Congress exercises Cabinet Appointment/Consent Power : In the third category, the Prime Minister is designated as the candidate nominated by the majority of Congress: In the fourth category, there is a time limit for the completion of the appointment of the Prime Minister. We choose four countries with Premier-presidentialism systems as cases: France, Romania, Bulgaria, and Slovenia. Second, in the setting of dependent variables, this article controls the government association relationship with this variable, taking the period of ”Cohabitation” in four countries to analyze whether the degree of different constitutional norms affects the relationship between ”responsibility” and ”checks and balances” between the president, the prime minister, and the parliament. The index involve: does the Congress has exercises No-confidence Vote? Government durability and degree of the President's legislative Power exercise those explain the influence of Cabinet Appointment Power on the stability of government. The study found, whether Congress has the Cabinet Appointment/Consent Power is not directly related to the stability of a Semi-presidentialism system. However, the Congress has exercised the Cabinet Appointment/Consent Power to ensure the stability of Semi-presidentialism during the Cohabitation is related to the degree of the Cabinet Appointment Power of the Constitution regulations.起始頁-結束頁：55-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系6篇名：川普政府對北韓經濟制裁的政策－中國的角色與回應並列篇名：The Economic Sanction Policy of the Donald Trump Administration on North Korea- China's Role and Response作者：陳鴻鈞(Hung-chun Chen)關鍵字：美國;北韓;中國;經濟制裁;United States;North Korea;China;economic sanction期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：38卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：川普政府對北韓採取極限施壓的政策，經濟制裁是其中的一部分。華府分析中國是北韓獲取相關飛彈與核武技術的來源之一，亦是北韓最重要的貿易夥伴，同時中國更是聯合國安理會的常任理事國。華府希望北京發揮影響力阻止北韓發展飛彈與核武，包括落實聯合國安理會決議案及加強經濟制裁。除此之外，華府亦透過制裁中國企業的方式阻止北韓獲取相關技術與設備。在中國的被動支持下，美國推動的相關制裁案發生作用。中國與北韓之間的貿易量降低。北京亦強化對相關飛彈與核武設備的管制，避免北韓從中國獲得相關技術。英文摘要：The Policy of the Donald Trump administration on North Korea was to exert maximum pressure, and economic sanctions were a part of this pressure. Washington considered China as one source of North Korea's missiles and nuclear weapons technology, and the most important trade partner of North Korea. At the same time, China is a permanent member of the UN Security Council. Washington hoped Beijing would use its influence to stop North Korea from developing missiles and nuclear weapons. American policy included implementing UN Security Council resolutions and strengthening economic sanctions. In addition, Washington also sanctioned Chinese companies to block North Korea's access to related technologies and equipments. With China's passive support, the US sanctions on North Korea had some effects. Trade between China and North Korea decreased. Beijing had also tightened controls on missiles and nuclear equipments to prevent North Korea from acquiring related technologies from China.起始頁-結束頁：117-179資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系7篇名：戰後日本天皇論的起點：丸山真男與津田左右吉的天皇戰爭責任論並列篇名：The Starting Point of the Debate Over Tenno in Post-war Japan: On the Arguments of Tenno's War Responsibility by Masao Maruyama and Sokichi Tsuda作者：安井伸介(Shinsuke Yasui)關鍵字：昭和天皇;大日本帝國憲法;教育敕語;國體;權威;Hirohito;the Meiji Constitution;the Imperial Rescript on Education;Kokutai;authority期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：38卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：自從明治維新以來，日本採取君主立憲的現代國家模式，此前沒有掌握政治實權的天皇，隨之成為日本國的元首，為維持其政治權威，政府也嚴禁國民議論天皇。第二次世界大戰的戰敗打破此禁忌，帶來天皇論的百花齊放現象，天皇的戰爭責任、天皇與近代日本的關係、天皇的本質等成為學術界的熱門議題。日本戰敗後，丸山真男與津田左右吉率先發表天皇論，但兩者的論述呈現明顯的對比：丸山不僅主張昭和天皇該退位，也認為該廢除天皇；津田則認為昭和天皇並無戰爭責任，天皇的存在也不阻礙民主的發展。兩者討論天皇戰爭責任之際，也對天皇的本質進行深入的分析，形成戰後日本天皇論的雛形。本文以政體（法律責任）、國體（思想結構性責任）及變質（政治責任）為主軸，試圖分析丸山與津田的天皇戰爭責任論。透過本文的分析，期望提供理解天皇論的重要視角。英文摘要：A constitutional monarchy was adopted as the political system after the Meiji Restoration in Japan. Tenno (the emperor of Japan), who had not taken actual political power before, became the sovereign of Japan, and the government prohibited people from criticizing Tenno in order to maintain his political authority. The defeat of Japan in World War II broke this taboo, resulting in a boom of academic arguments about Tenno's responsibility for the war, the relationship between Tenno and modern Japan, the essence of Tenno, etc. Masao Maruyama and Sokichi Tsuda presented papers about Tenno soon after the end of WWII, but their statements provided a striking contrast: Maruyama insisted on the abolition of the Tenno system as well as the abdication of Hirohito. On the contrary, Tsuda insisted that Tenno was not responsible for the war, and that the existence of Tenno would not hinder the development of democracy. When they debated over the war responsibility of Tenno, both analyzed the essence of Tenno, which have formed the models of Tenno studies in post -war Japan. This essay aims to analyze the arguments of Tenno's war responsibility by Maruyama and Tsuda with the three aspects of the constitution (legal liability), Kokutai (responsibility of intellectual structure) and degeneration (political responsibility). These analyses provide important viewpoints for appreciating Tenno theory.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系8篇名：影響政策學習效果因素之研究：臺灣地方政府成立騎警隊之分析並列篇名：A Study on the Factors Affecting the Effect of policy learning: An Analysis of the Establishment of Police Mounted Unit in Taiwan Local Government作者：孟繁勳(Fan-Shiun Meng);王俊元(Chun-yuan Wang);詹永茂(Yong-mao Zhan)關鍵字：政策學習;政策延續;政策終結;地方政府;騎警隊;policy learning;policy succession;policy termination;local government;mounted unit期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：38卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：自1990年代起，各國及各政府間為解決政策問題或改善績效而相互學習，經驗學習已成為政府機關政策規劃的重要基礎。2003年我國台北縣（現升格為新北市）仿效美、加等國成立了騎警隊，其後高雄市、彰化縣及臺中市政府警察局相繼引進，然而近一步檢視四個地方政府在成立騎警隊後，歷經時間的推移，卻是分別產生不同的政策結果。此狀況點出本文主要研究問題：影響地方政府政策學習的因素為何？又是哪些原因造成政策學習後的效果可以持續與否？藉由政策學習的理論架構，以及透過國內、外學者專家質性資料的蒐集與分析與討論，本文發現政府縣市首長及機關首長的意識型態在政策傳遞中占了極重要因素，而政策學習平臺之建立以儲存、分享及公開政策知識，有助於讓政策不因隨著選舉、調動、發展及轉任等因素而改變，並降低凌駕專業的意識型態因素。此外，彌補公務員所欠缺的行銷專業，用不同角度思維及經驗發展出的專業跨領域多元學習，也可以提供平臺機關首長作為決策基礎之資訊，進而產生政策適應性而能繼續延續。最後藉由吸取來自各領域不同之專業知識，以社會監督賦予課責，將有助於學習而來的政策有機會延續下去。英文摘要：Since the 1990s, policy learning between governments to solve policy problems or improve performance has become a critical topic. In 2003, Taipei County (renamed New Taipei City in 2010) followed the policy of the mounted police in the United States and Canada to establish a mounted police force, extending the reach of police services to local tourism. The police departments in Kaohsiung City, Changhua County, and Taichung City also established mounted units to enhance their competitiveness. However, a closer look at the four local governments that established mounted police forces produced different policy outcomes over time. To understand this situation, this study first constructs an analytical framework from the discussion of policy learning theory and collects data using in-depth interviews with decision-makers and executives. To expand the breadth of the research, it refers to the success of the New York and Royal Canadian Mounted Police to identify key factors that trigger policy learning and affect the continuation of the policy. This article finds that in terms of the effect of policy learning, the influence of the knowledge of mayors of local government and commissioners of police departments play critical roles in the transmission of policies. Therefore, a national policy knowledge and learning platform can be established to store and share policy knowledge and continuous learning effects. This makes policy learning will not be changed due to such as elections, developments and transfers, and reduce practice ideological factors. In addition, due to the lack of marketing for civil servants, professional cross -disciplinary and multi-disciplinary learning and the use of learning outcomes from different perspectives and experiences can also help provide information for the decision-makers, and enable policies to adapt to changing contexts such as the environment and politics. Finally, encouraging self-learning, ensuring accountability, with social supervision, and through positive competition to improve the effectiveness of policy learning from various fields, will increase the opportunity of the succession of learned policies.起始頁-結束頁：57-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系9篇名：政治興趣、網路政治參與以及傳統政治參與並列篇名：Political Interest, Online Political Participation, and Conventional Political Participation作者：林聰吉(Tsong-Jyi Lin);張一彬(Yi-Bin Chang);黃妍甄(Yen-Chen Huang)關鍵字：政治興趣;網路資訊接觸;網路表意與討論;公民運動參與;投票參與;political interest;accessibility to online political information;expression and discussion of political ideas on the internet;participation of civic movements;voting participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：東吳政治學報卷期：38卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文的目的在於探討政治興趣、網路政治參與以及傳統政治參與三者的關係，研究採用次級資料分析法，主要資料來源為〈臺灣傳播調查資料庫〉。依據概念定義，以及資料庫所能提供的問卷題目，本研究將網路政治參與分為網路資訊接觸、網路表意與討論；傳統政治參與分為公民運動參與、投票參與。運用逐步迴歸以及中介效果分析，本文獲得以下研究發現。首先，網路資訊接觸對於公民運動參與的正面效果，並非是直接的，而是必須透過網路表意與討論為中介。其次，政治興趣、網路表意與討論皆與投票參與無統計上的顯著關係。最後，網路資訊接觸雖被證實與投票參與具顯著關係，但為負相關，並非研究假設所預期的正相關。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to scrutinize relationships between political interests, online political participation, and conventional political participation. The research method used in this study is secondary analysis and the data are adopted from the Taiwan Communication Survey (TCS). According to the definition of political participation and due to the constraint s on the questionnaire from the TCS dataset, online political participation is respectively defined as accessibility to online political information as well as the expression and discussion of political ideas on the internet. Moreover, conventional political participation is categorized into two parts: civic movement participation and voting participation. Using stepwise regression and mediation analysis techniques, we have obtained a couple of empirical results. First of all, the effect of accessibility to online political information on participation of civic movements is indirect, which is mediated by expression and discussion of political ideas. Secondly, political interest as well as expression and discussion of political ideas have no statistically significant relationship with voting participation. Finally, although the effect of accessibility to online political information on voter turnout is statistically significant, its effect is negative which is not what we expected.起始頁-結束頁：113-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：東吳大學政治系01篇名：Does the Left-Right Ideological Distinction Help Differentiate 'Populist' Communicative Patterns on Social Media? An Analysis of the Facebook Posts of Two 'Populist' Candidates in the 2017 German Federal Election並列篇名：左右意識形態是否能分辨社群媒體上的民粹傳播模式？以德國2017年聯邦議會選舉兩位民粹政黨候選人的臉書貼文為例作者：林駿棋(Jiun-chi Lin);Leen d'Haenens;廖達琪(Dachi Liao)關鍵字：AfD (Alternative fur Deutschland);Die Linke ('the Left', 'the Left Party');Populist Communication;Co-occurrence Semantic Analysis;Text Mining;德國另類選擇黨;德國左翼黨;民粹傳播;共詞語意分析;文字探勘期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：86期出版年：2020中文摘要：The term 'populist actors' vaguely describes certain political parties and figures on the edges of the ideological spectrum. Theoretically, it assumes that there are similar communicative features among right-left populist actors since they are given the same label. Nevertheless, most studies have indicated that scholars hold contradicting viewpoints on this issue. This dispute continues when scholarly attention is being directed worldwide to the social media communication of right-wing and left-wing populist parties/politicians. In view of the conflicting insights of previous research, this study investigates whether the conventional left-right distinction makes it possible to differentiate populist communicative patterns found on social media. By proposing a theoretical framework combining populist rhetoric and communication styles, we argue that right-wing and left-wing populist actors are alike in using social media to disseminate such populist rhetoric, while sharing similar communicative patterns. Combining co-occurrence analysis and social network analysis, this study analyzed Facebook posts made by the radical right AfD top candidate Alice Weidel and the radical left Die Linke top candidate Sahra Wagenknecht during the 2017 federal election period. First, our findings show that all four populist characteristics are present in both candidates' posts. These posts are framed to mobilize voters by taking up 'antagonistic' identities. Second, the populist discourse tends to foster so-called 'horizontal' conflict (i.e., discrimination against minority social groups for the benefit of others) through a patriotic style, as well as 'vertical' conflict (i.e., 'the people' versus 'the elites', 'the establishment') through a crisis rhetoric style.英文摘要：「民粹行為者」一詞經常含糊地用來描述在意識形態光譜上處於極端兩側的政黨以及政治人物，理論上假設既然他們被歸類在同一個類別，左右派民粹行為者之間應該有許多共通的傳播特徵，然而多數研究卻對此抱持相左的意見。當學界逐漸開始關注左右翼民粹政黨／民粹人物的社群媒體傳播行為時，這個爭論依然持續著。鑑於過去研究相互衝突的論點，本文探究傳統左右意識形態的差別是否可能區分社群媒體上的民粹傳播模式。透過提出一個結合民粹語言與傳播風格的理論框架，本研究論證左右翼民粹行為者在利用社群媒體傳播民粹式語言的同時，雙方有著相似的論述模式。本研究結合共詞分析與社會網絡分析，分析德國極右派「德國另類選擇黨」（AfD）領先候選人Alice Weidel以及極左派「左翼黨」（Die Linke）領先候選人Sahra Wagenknecht在2017年聯邦議會競選期間的臉書貼文。首先，本研究指出兩位政黨候選人的論述模式皆符合四個民粹傳播特徵，且嘗試透過形塑敵我對立的社會認同動員選民；第二，一方面「愛國宣示」的風格強化民粹論述中人民與少數社會群體之間的差異，另一方面「危機強調」的風格則是透過議題操作強化人民與政治菁英的衝突。起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202012_(86).00012篇名：中國大陸民眾的民主評價差異與民主支持：民主示範效果與愛國／民族主義的調節作用並列篇名：Differences of Democratic Quality Assessment and Popular Support for Democracy in China: The Democratic Demonstration Effect and the Attenuation Effects of Nationalism and Patriotism作者：吳心晒(Hsin-che Wu);黃忠偉(Osbern Huang)關鍵字：民主支持;軟實力;愛國主義;民族主義;中國研究;Democratic Support;Soft Power;Patriotism;Nationalism;China Studies期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：86期出版年：2020中文摘要：威權國家中的公民為何支持民主？既有的現代化理論、重分配理論或文化層面的解釋，都侷限於一國境內的社會結構變動或歷史遺緒。本文希望將國際因素帶入相關討論，並在「強制」與「競爭」兩種機制之外，提出國際間民主政體的「民主示範效果」，是促使威權大眾希望本國「模仿」民主政體的關鍵因素。此外，基於「軟實力」與「公共外交」的概念，我們認為國際間的民主大國，以及鄰近威權國家的民主政體，將更有機會藉由民主的實踐，刺激威權國家公民對民主的渴望。但同時，我們也認為威權國家中的愛國主義與民族主義情緒，將弱化民主示範效果對大眾民主支持的影響。本文以中國大陸、美國與臺灣，作為威權政體、民主大國與民主近鄰的案例，藉由分析2011、2015與2019年在中國大陸所進行的三波民意調查資料，我們發現人們對於美國與中國大陸，以及臺灣與中國大陸之間的民主品質評價差異，將顯著提昇人們的自由民主價值，並降低人們對威權政體的普遍體制支持。同時，我們也發現中國大陸民眾的愛國主義與民族主義情緒，將中和美國與臺灣對大眾民主支持帶來的示範效果。英文摘要：Why do citizens in authoritarian countries support democracy more than the status quo? Modernization theory, the theory of redistribution, and the culturalist approach all focus on state-level social structural changes or on historical legacies. However, in this article, we bring international factors into the discussion and suggest that the ”democratic demonstration effect” of global democracies, in addition to the two mechanisms of ”coercion” and ”competition”, is the key reason behind the strengthening of the wishes of the masses in autocracies to ”imitate” democracies. Furthermore, due to greater ”soft power” and successful ”public diplomacy”, we believe that democratic superpowers, as well as democracies in neighbouring states, will have a greater chance to stimulate the aspirations for democracy of the citizens in authoritarian countries through their own democratic practices. At the same time, however, we also believe that patriotism and nationalism will weaken the ”democracy demonstration effect” on popular support for democracy. To illustrate our theory and test our hypothesis, we take Mainland China, the United States, and Taiwan as cases of authoritarian regimes, democratic powers, and democratic neighbours, and analyze three waves of public opinion data conducted in Mainland China in 2011, 2015, and 2019. We show that differences in democratic quality assessment between Mainland China and its democratic counterparts significantly raises people's liberal and democratic values, and reduces their preference for one-party regimes. In addition, we have found that the patriotic and nationalistic sentiments of the Chinese people tends to neutralize the demonstration effects of the United States and Taiwan on popular support for democracy.起始頁-結束頁：31-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202012_(86).00023篇名：族群政策的歷史起源：20世紀初泰國和菲律賓對南部穆斯林的政策比較並列篇名：The Historical Origin of Ethnic Policy: A Comparative Study of Thailand's and the Philippines' Policies toward Southern Muslims in the Early 20th Century作者：曹航(Hang Cao)關鍵字：族群政策;國族建構;同化;容留;殖民大國;Ethnic Policy;Nation-Building;Assimilation;Accommodation;Colonial Power期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：86期出版年：2020中文摘要：在20世紀初啟動國族建構事業之時，泰國和菲律賓為何會採取不同的政策對待各自南疆的穆斯林少數族群？本文透過考察一個關鍵但未獲重視的外部因素──現代國家形成過程中民族菁英與殖民大國的關係──對上述問題作了回答。作者認為民族菁英與殖民大國的關係是對抗性的還是共謀性的，這會深刻地影響中央政權對少數族群的政策。基於泰國和菲律賓的比較研究，作者揭示了將這一外部因素與國內族群政策聯結起來的兩種機制，即塑造菁英的政治自主性及其戰略取向。具體而言，泰國對其南部馬來穆斯林的同化政策（1910∼1944年）起源於該國與英、法兩個殖民大國的長期對抗關係，因為這種關係造成了泰族菁英較高的自主性和安全化的戰略取向。相比之下，菲律賓對其南部摩洛穆斯林的容留政策（1921∼1941年）則根植於該國與美國殖民勢力的共謀關係，而這種關係發揮作用正是通過限制菲律賓菁英的自主性和塑造其經濟化的戰略取向。上述案例比較展示了民族菁英與外部殖民大國的互動關係為何及如何影響了國內族群政策的起源，將增進學界對東南亞地區國族建構實踐的理解，同時也有助於我們認清第二次世界大戰後該地區族際關係和族群衝突的動態。英文摘要：Why did Thailand and the Philippines adopt different policies toward their domestic Muslim minorities in southern border areas during the early 20th century? This paper addresses the above question by focusing on a critical but underappreciated external factor: the national elites' relationship with colonial powers in the process of modern state formation. I argue that whether the national elites develop an antagonistic or a collaborationist relationship with colonial powers has a great effect on government policies toward ethnic minorities. Elites' political autonomy and their strategic orientation, as two mechanisms connecting this external factor to domestic ethnic policy, are identified in this comparative case study of Thailand and the Philippines. Thailand's assimilationist policy toward Malay Muslims (1910-1944) originated in its antagonistic relationship with Britain and France since the 1880s, because it contributed to a high degree of Thai elite autonomy and to the elites' serious security concerns on nation-building. By contrast, the Philippines' accommodationist policy toward Moro Muslims (1921-1941) resulted from its collaborationist relationship with the American colonial power, and such a relationship took effect by limiting the autonomy of Philippine elites and shaping their economic concerns on nation-building. This controlled comparison shows why and how an external factor contributes to the origin of domestic ethnic policy. It deepens our understanding of nation-building practices in Southeast Asia, as well as the dynamics of inter-ethnic relations and ethnic conflict in this region after World War II.起始頁-結束頁：83-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202012_(86).00034篇名：臺灣行政法人制度推動歷程的歷史制度分析並列篇名：A Historical Institutional Analysis of the Development of Non-Departmental Public Bodies in Taiwan作者：李天申(Tien-shen Li)關鍵字：行政法人;歷史制度論;路徑依賴;關鍵時刻;制度變遷;Non-departmental Public Bodies (NDPB);Historical Institutionalism;Path Dependence;Critical Juncture;Institutional Change期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：86期出版年：2020中文摘要：行政院為進行政府組織改造，自2002年開始推動行政法人制度。行政法人的設置，可視為政府治理與公共服務遞送模式選擇更加多元化的制度變遷。在2000年民進黨首次執政時，行政法人的推動工作尤其困難，但到國民黨執政時轉為順暢。本文以歷史制度論為研究途徑，藉由文獻與次級資料分析，探討關於行政法人制度「常」與「變」的兩個問題：其一，在該制度的推動過程中，為何會有路徑依賴的現象？其二，在民進黨執政時的第五屆立法院，以及國民黨執政時的第七、八屆立法院，在這兩個關鍵時刻為何會發生制度變遷？對此，本文從「結構」、「行動者」這兩個面向來提出解釋。其中，結構的部分，從分立政府或一致政府，以及政府改造的政治氛圍來分析；行動者方面，則聚焦於探討組織成員、立法院、主管機關之間的互動。本文有助於理解臺灣行政法人制度過去的推動經驗，以供未來借鏡。英文摘要：In order to promote reform of government organizations, the Executive Yuan established the system of non-departmental public bodies (NDPBs) in 2002. The establishment of NDPBs can be viewed as a systematic change promoting more diversified governance modes and public service delivery. During the first Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) administration, the promotion of NDPBs was particularly difficult. However, the task became easier after the Kuomintang (KMT) returned to power. This article adopts a historical institutionalist research approach, analyzing the literature and secondary data to explore the issues of ”continuity” and ”change” in NDPBs. First, why does path dependence occur in the process of institutional reform? Second, why did the institutional change occur at two critical junctures during the fifth Legislative Yuan under the DPP administration, and the seventh and eighth Legislative Yuan under the KMT administration? The article proposes an explanation on the dimensions of ”structure” and ”actors.” The analysis of ”structure” is about divided governments or unified governments, as well as the political climate for government reform. The analysis of ”actors” focuses on the interactions between organization members, the Legislative Yuan, and the competent authorities. The article contributes to the understanding of Taiwan's experiences in promoting NDPBs and is useful for future reference.起始頁-結束頁：151-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202012_(86).00045篇名：臺灣非營利組織參與政府災害防救之協力經驗並列篇名：The Partnership Experience Between Non-Profit Organizations and the Government in Disaster Management作者：林淑馨(Shu-hsin Lin)關鍵字：非營利組織;政府;災害防救;協力;災難管理;Non-profit Organization;Governance;Disaster Rescue;Partnership;Disaster Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：86期出版年：2020中文摘要：非營利組織所提供的協助有助於減緩災害的發生，而其快速、機動性的特質正可以彌補政府部門無法及時因應或滿足民眾基本需求的困境，對於當地長時間的災害重建工作有相當的助益，甚至可以成為政府的重要災害整備成員，故非營利組織參與政府災害防救之協力經驗值得重視。有關協力議題本應基於協力雙方的利害關係人來探討才能還原其全貌，然受限於篇幅，本文僅從非營利組織的視角來進行觀察分析。研究發現，臺灣非營利組織與政府在緊急救援過程中的協力關係雖然有進步的趨勢，但「友誼網絡」尚未建立，另外也可以分別從：（1）建立雙向多元溝通協調機制，以強化防救災的運作成效；（2）信任僅奠基在方案承接上，難以累積深厚的信賴關係；（3）協力雙方雖各自擁有資源，卻缺乏有效的整合管道三大面向來探討強化災害防救協力關係的作法。最後，我國非營利組織參與災害防救雖然意味著民主治理與新公共的展現與落實，但卻也出現組織類型、規模與知名度限制協力網絡成員，以及地方政府應急行動的組織能力不足，限制協力成效的發揮這兩項課題。英文摘要：Services that non-profit organizations (NPO) provide can reduce the impact of disasters. Their fast paced nature and high mobility can support the government when the latter cannot react timely enough to or fulfill public needs. They are helpful to local post-disaster reconstruction in the long run, and NPOs can be an important partner to the government during times of disaster. Therefore, the partnership experience of non-profit organizations participating in government disaster prevention is important. Partnerships should be discussed based on the stakeholder relationship; however, due to the length limitation of this article, this study will focus on the NPOs' views on these partnerships. The research has found that while there has been improvements in the NPO and government partnerships during emergency rescue, the ”Friendship Network” has not yet been established. Also, (1) bilateral and multilateral communications should be built to enhance disaster management; (2) it is difficult to build trust relationships when trust is only based on the foundation of case outsourcing; and (3) each body possesses resources that lack integration which fail to enhance the disaster support systems. Finally, NPOs participating in disaster rescue are indicators of the realization of democratic and new governance; however, organization type, scale, and popularity limits these partnerships in expanding their network, and the inabilities of local governments limit the effectiveness of partnerships.起始頁-結束頁：191-236資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202012_(86).00056篇名：2018年臺北市長選舉策略投票之研究並列篇名：Strategic Voting in the 2018 Taipei City Mayoral Election作者：王宏恩(Austin Horng-en Wang);王業立(Yeh-lih Wang)關鍵字：策略投票;2018臺北市長選舉;姚文智;政治行為;Strategic Voting;2018 Taipei City Mayoral Election;Pasuya Yao;Political Behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：86期出版年：2020中文摘要：2018年臺北市長選舉，兩位領先者票數非常接近，極大化了策略投票的誘因，但第三名的候選人仍獲得頗高比例的得票，讓此次選舉有效候選人數成為24年來新高。本研究使用「台灣選舉與民主化調查」2018年臺北市長選舉面訪案（n=1130），分析這個特殊個案中選民的策略投票行為。研究結果發現：（1）資料中大約有9.9%的選民投給第二偏好。（2）選民策略投票與否，取決於對第一偏好候選人的偏好程度高低，或者第一、第二偏好候選人偏好程度的差異。當覺得第一、第二偏好差不多、或者第一偏好又不夠好時，就越可能投給第二偏好。（3）選民策略投票與否，與第一偏好當選機率無關，完全取決於偏好程度本身。（4）在前兩點的作用下，姚文智支持者的策略投票比例並沒有比另兩位候選人的支持者為高。即使臺北市選民認為自己支持的對象不會當選，但對其評價遠大於其他候選人，因此最後仍誠實投票，而無視當選機率，促成了本次選舉的得票分布。英文摘要：In the 2018 Taipei City Mayoral Election, voters were highly motivated to consider voting strategically, given that there was a very close race between the two frontrunners. Surprisingly, the third-place candidate still received a considerably large proportion of the votes in this election, which caused the effective number of viable candidates to reach a twenty-four-year high in Taipei City. In this article, we utilize Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study 2018A (n=1130) to investigate why voters chose to, and chose not to, vote strategically. The results show that: (1) about 9.9% of respondents voted for the second-preferred candidate; (2) the decision to vote strategically was mainly driven by the respondents' approval of the most-preferred candidate and the difference of approval between the most- and second-preferred candidates. Voters are much more likely to choose the second-preferred candidate if the most-preferred candidate is not perceived to be good enough, while the difference between the most- and second-preferred candidates is close. (3) The candidates' perceived chance of winning has no impact on the voters' decision to vote strategically; (4) owing to the two former factors, the tendency of strategic voting is similar across the supporters of the three major candidates. Hence, voters may perceive that their preferred candidate will not win, but also think that their preferred candidate is far better than the other two frontrunners, so they ignore the chances of winning and still vote sincerely. Such a strong preference gap may have contributed to the unique ballot distribution in the 2018 Taipei City Mayoral Election.起始頁-結束頁：237-254資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202012_(86).00067篇名：《荀子》與《呂氏春秋》的「公」概念並列篇名：A Study of the Concept of Gong (Fairness/Impartiality) in the Xunzi and Mr. Lu's Spring and Autumn Annals作者：佐藤將之(Masayuki Sato)關鍵字：《荀子》;《呂氏春秋》;「公」;「私」;The Book of Xunzi;Mr. Lu's Spring and Autumn Annals;the concept of gong (fairness/impartiality);the concept of si (partiality/selfishness)期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：85期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文的目的在於闡明《荀子》和《呂氏春秋》兩書中「公」概念的主要思想角色，是將原來比較抽象的秩序原理落實於治理天下全部人民的具體方策上。《荀子》「公」論的思想意義應該在於將原來只有聖人般的最高統治人能夠達成的秩序原理境界「開放」給中間統治層的「士」來達成，甚至是到人民大眾。相形之下，《呂氏春秋》的「公」概念則主要是最高統治者首要實踐的德目。正如〈貴公〉開頭所說的，此德目就是在天子達成養身之後所要向天下實踐的目標。《呂氏春秋》的作者藉以「至公」一詞概念來讚美堯舜的禪讓行為。按照如此理路，剛登上天子後第一件要做的事情在理論上將會變成要放棄君位。如此，《呂氏春秋》的「公」概念在其實踐上存在著相當難緩的思想張力。英文摘要：This article, based on the author's previous research on the concept of li (principle) found in the Book of Xunzi and Mr. Lu's Spring and Autumn Annals, attempts to elucidate the meanings and roles assigned to the concept of gong (fairness/impartiality) in the thoughts of these two political treatises. While the previous article had demonstrated that the concept of li in the Xunzi and Mr. Lu's Spring and Autumn Annals provided their theories with a core principle for which the socio-political order could build an empire to cover the world-wide scale of its territory, this article tries to show that the concept of gong mainly functioned to manifest this principle in the realm of the actual policies for ruling the people of the world. More concretely, the main theoretical function of Xunzi's concept of gong can be found in his argument that the principle for a socio-political order which had initially been embodied by the ancient sage rulers, became accessible to middle ruling-class people called ”shi” (officer-aspirants) as a practicable virtue. In this line of argument, Xunzi had even regarded gong as a virtue to be practiced by ordinary subjects. In contrast, the concept of gong in the thought of Mr. Lu's Spring and Autumn Annals remained as a virtue to rather be practiced by the ruler himself. As is shown in the argument of the ”Guigong” chapter, it was a virtue that the Son of Heaven would have to put into practice for the people of the world just after attaining the nourishment of his body. On the other hand, the argument in the ”Guigong” chapter went one step further: its author even applauded the abdication of the throne by sage rulers Yao and Shun. Such an argument ironically meant that the first thing to be done after someone succeeded to the throne was to yield it (to the wisest person in the empire). In this point, the concept of gong in the political philosophy of Mr. Lu's Spring and Autumn Annals contained more or less a thorny tension between its fulfillment and its results.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202009_(85).00018篇名：德國與歐盟共同防務整合：自由政府間主義的分析並列篇名：Germany and the Defence Integration of the EU: A Liberal Intergovernmentalist Analysis作者：陳蔚芳(Florence Chen)關鍵字：歐洲聯盟;德國;防務整合;歐盟全球戰略;自由政府間主義;European Union;Germany;Defence Integration;EU Global Strategy(EUGS);Liberal Intergovernmentalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：85期出版年：2020中文摘要：共同防務是歐盟發展較為緩慢的政策領域。雖然歐盟陸續透過CFSP和CSDP促進共同防務的制度化合作，卻還是難以化解外界對其「經濟巨人，政治侏儒，軍事小蟲」的批評，因此2016年提出的歐盟全球戰略（EUGS）深具象徵意義。其中德國身為歐盟最富有的國家，長期以來「重經濟而輕軍事」，也在2016年正式表態承擔共同防務領導責任，被視為一種典範轉變。本文以穆拉維斯基的自由政府間主義檢視歐盟防務整合的發展，並從「利益」與「權力」因素解釋德國對共同防務的偏好形成以及在歐盟政府間談判的角色。本文認為德國對共同防務的積極表態與歐洲近年來面臨的地緣政治環境挑戰有關，德國的變化有助於共同防務發展，但是從部分會員國對PESCO和EI2的顧慮來看，廣度整合與深度整合的分歧仍然無解，強調盡可能擴大參與的「包容性原則」雖然可降低德國遂行獨斷獨行領導風格的可能性，長久來看卻不利於化解分歧或產生共識。英文摘要：Compared to other policy areas, the integration of common defence in the EU is happening at a rather slow pace. Although member states have been encouraged to engage in the institutionalised cooperation of common defence via the CFSP and the CSDP, the EU was hardly able to get rid of the image of being 'an economic giant, a political dwarf, and a military worm'. The launch of the European Union Global Strategy by the European Council in 2016 is therefore considered to be an ambitious manifesto for promoting further defence integration. On the other hand, Germany, as one of the wealthiest countries in the EU, for a long time kept a distance from engaging in out-of-area military operations but published a new white paper on security policy in 2016 promising to take more responsibility in leading common defence. This ambitious movement is appreciated as 'a paradigm shift'. To explain this development, this article applies the analytical framework of liberal intergovernmentalism to explore how the factors of national interests and power affected the formation of German preferences and the engagement of the intergovernmental bargain at the EU level. The author argues that the paradigm shift of Germany on the security policy is to respond to the increasingly serious geopolitical challenges since the 2010s, and it is favourable for further defence integration. But the concern of some member states about the PESCO and EI2 reminds us that the divergence between inclusive equilibrium and great convergence is still unresolved, and insisting on the principle of inclusive equilibrium, nevertheless, is not conducive to overcoming divergences.起始頁-結束頁：45-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202009_(85).00029篇名：國家對外援助與企業對外投資之關聯：以日本的對外援助為例並列篇名：The Nexus between Foreign Aid and FDI: An Investigation on the Impact of Japan's ODA on Japanese Firms' Overseas Investments作者：邱奕宏(Yi-hung Chiou)關鍵字：政府開發援助;外來直接投資;政治風險;跨國企業;對外援助;Official Development Assistance (ODA);Foreign Direct Investment (FDI);Political Risk;Multinational Corporations;Foreign Aid期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：85期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文主旨在探討國家對外援助對其跨國企業從事海外投資的影響及其政治風險考量。本文以日本為例，分析日本政府的對外援助是否影響日本企業的對外投資行為。本文主張，作為日本外交工具的對外援助將降低日本企業對受援國的政治風險顧慮，進而帶動日本對受援國的投資。此關聯凸顯日本對外援助政策政策與日本企業的互動關聯。本文檢視日本對外援助政策的發展，並以量化途徑檢視日本對外援助對日本企業向受援國投資及其在評估受援國之政治風險的影響。英文摘要：The goal of this article is to investigate the relationship between a state's foreign aid and firms' outward investments, as well as the firms' political risk assessments regarding aid recipient states. Specifically, it examines whether Japan's official development assistance (ODA) affects Japanese firms' overseas investments. This paper argues that ODA, as an instrument of Japan's foreign policy, reduces Japanese firms' political risk concerns, while facilitating their investments in ODA recipient countries. Nevertheless, with changing ODA policies over time, whether the ODA-investment nexus remains valid is questionable. By illustrating the evolution of Japan's ODA policy, this article adopts a quantitative approach to exploring whether Japan's ODA affects Japanese firms' political risk assessment, so as to enhance investments in the aid recipient countries.起始頁-結束頁：91-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202009_(85).000310篇名：臺灣地方基層官僚推動參與式預算的治理模式：桃園市案例研究並列篇名：Governance of the Participatory Budgeting of Local Street-level Bureaucracy: A Case Study of Taoyuan City in Taiwan作者：孫煒(Way Sun)關鍵字：基層官僚;簽約委外;參與式預算;治理模式;Street-level Bureaucracy;Contracting Out;Participatory Budgeting;Governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：85期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年來，我國直轄市推動的參與式預算無疑是最受矚目的民主創新之舉，而基層官僚透過簽約委外運用裁量權與自主性在其中扮演了關鍵性角色。本文運用基層官僚的專業知識與技術，政策觀感，工作環境、操作方式等四個核心面向作<U+7232>分析架構，訪談桃園市基層行政機關的基層官僚運用裁量權與自主性推動參與式預算的感知與操作。本文的研究發現在當前新公共管理思潮之下，基層行政機關採用簽約委外來推動參與式預算的主要理由是本身的專業不足。基層官僚雖然肯認參與式預算具有提升在地居民公共意識的價值，但是認為在地居民的提案並非完全合理可行。如何在完成民選行政首長之政策指示以及基層行政機關的使命與政策主軸的前提下，回應在地居民的意見是基層官僚的主要考量。基層官僚的自主性與裁量權展現在設定推動參與式預算的契約中工作項目與續效指標的制度性安排，以及監督廠商與社區領袖進行溝通來了解地方特性與需求，並傳達基層行政機關的使命與政策主軸。此外，基層官僚也進一步透過廠商操控審議程序，主導在地居民提案，合併與調整在地居民的方案，再票選出預算支出計畫。本文認<U+7232>上述基層官僚推動參與式預算的治理模式，運用裁量權與自主性實質地監督並型塑了參與式預算的過程與產出，固然在表面上提升了在地居民參與公共事務的密度，但是否<U+771E>實地反映參與式預算的精神值得深思。英文摘要：In recent years, the municipalities in Taiwan have promoted participatory budgeting, which is without a doubt the most noticed act of democratic innovation. Street-level bureaucrats play a crucial role in exercising discretion and autonomy by contracting out. This paper uses a framework with four dimensions, namely the professional and technical knowledge, policy perceptions, work environments, and operational approaches of street-level bureaucrats in Taoyuan City. They were interviewed regarding their perceptions of and operations in promoting participatory budgeting by exercising discretion and autonomy. This paper found that under the current new public management paradigm, the main reason behind the street-level bureaucracies' adoption of contracting out the promotion of participatory budgeting is their lack of professionalism. Despite the street-level bureaucrats' acknowledgement of the value that participatory budgeting has in enhancing local residents' public awareness, they deem that the local residents' proposals are not entirely reasonable or feasible. How to fulfill the policy directives of elected executive heads under the premise of the street-level bureaucracies' mission and policy focuses, and how to respond to the opinions of the local residents, remain the primary considerations of street-level bureaucrats. The street-level bureaucrats' exercise of autonomy and discretion is well-demonstrated in the institutional arrangement of work items and performance indicators in the participatory budgeting contract setup and promotion in supervising communication between vendors and community leaders to understand local characteristics and needs, and in conveying the mission and policy focuses of street-level bureaucracies. Furthermore, the street-level bureaucrats steered the local residents' initiatives, combined and adjusted the local residents' proposals, and voted for budget expenditure plans through the vendor-manipulation of deliberative procedures. This paper deems that the governance arising from the street-level bureaucrat's promotion of participatory budgeting and exercise of discretion and autonomy has substantively overseen and shaped the process and output of participatory budgeting. Ostensibly, it enhances the local residents' density of participation in public affairs, but whether it truly reflects the spirit of participatory budgeting is worth pondering.起始頁-結束頁：139-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202009_(85).000401篇名：Partnership on the Ice? Power Politics and Economic Engagement in Sino-Russian Arctic Diplomacy並列篇名：冰雪奇盟？中俄關係與北極外交之政治經濟分析作者：冷則剛(Tse-Kang Leng);趙竹成(Zhu-Cheng Zhao)關鍵字：Arctic Diplomacy;Chinese Foreign Policy;Sino-Russian Relations;Northern Sea Route;北極外交;北方航道;中俄關係;中國外交政策期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：70期出版年：2020中文摘要：The purpose of this article is to clarify the myth and reality of the Sino-Russian alliance in the Arctic region. The authors argue that such interactions have to be put in the general framework of grand strategies of the two countries. We argue that structural factors, especially the new containment strategies adopted by the United States, help promote a closer partnership between China and Russia. However, it is the domestic context, such as historical memories and mutual distrust, that limit the scope and directions of Sino-Russia relationship. Economic benefits of collective development serve as a catalyst for cooperation. However, historical legacies and a lack of mutual trust constrain the formation of a formal alliance between China and Russia. A formal alliance between the two countries appears to be unrealistic. The Chinese may adopt multi-lateral diplomacy to strengthen ties with Nordic countries and undertake joint efforts of collective development in the Arctic region. The Russian side will also consolidate international cooperation on Arctic development.英文摘要：本文之目的，在於釐清中俄雙方有關北極政策的迷思與現實。作者認為，中俄有關北極事務的互動，必須放在兩國關係大戰略的架構及內政演變中檢視。國際結構改變促使了中俄聯盟出現的機遇，但內政發展制約了實質聯盟的強化。經濟利益與共同開發是兩國互動的觸媒。然而，歷史的恩怨以及互信的缺乏，制約了兩國在北極事務上發展出進一步的緊密關係。兩國正式的聯盟關係，似乎是一個不切實際的構想。中方會與北歐國家發展多邊關係，共同開發北極。俄方同樣也企圖將北極開發國際化。中國作為一個北極事務的新手，如何在發展多邊關係的同時，也與俄羅斯良性互動，是學術界及政策界共同關切的議題。起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202012_(70).00012篇名：「雙重中心」的邊陲地區：比較金門、香港與澳門「國族認同」的建構因素並列篇名：A Periphery of ”Dual Centers”: Comparing the Construction Factors of ”Nationality” in Kinmen, Hong Kong, and Macao作者：林政緯(Zheng-Wei Lin);陳建民(Chien-Min Chen)關鍵字：金門;香港;澳門;國族認同;雙重中心;Kinmen;Hong Kong;Macao;National Identity;Dual Centers期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：70期出版年：2020中文摘要：透過雙重中心下的邊陲概念與歷史比較途徑，本文討論並解釋金門、澳門、香港三地居民的政治認同，特別是國族認同的程度為何會有異同。在自變項上，本文以雙重中心的國力／文化影響力大小對比，以及該地議會的功能作為解釋的因素，而將金門、澳門與香港，分別定位為「體制內的中國人認同」、「體制外的中國人認同」，以及「體制內的本地認同」等三個模式。本文對於解釋三地的中國認同差異，試圖結合國家綜合國力與國內的議會政治，提出一個更具備比較性的解釋框架。英文摘要：Through the concept of peripheral areas under the ”Double Center” and historical comparison, this article discusses and explains the identity of the residents in Kinmen, Macao, and Hong Kong, especially the different degrees of their national identity. In terms of independent variable, this article uses the Double Center's national strength and the institutionalization of the local council as explanatory factors, and position Kinmen as ”Chinese identity within the system,” Macao as ”Chinese identity outside the system,” and Hong Kong as ”Local identity within the system.” Through the comparative analysis, we can clarify the historical development and the outlines of the three cases more clearly, which could contribute to relevant researches.起始頁-結束頁：41-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202012_(70).00023篇名：國際關係建構主義理論發展的世代危機或轉機：十字路口或死巷？並列篇名：The Generational Crises and Opportunities of International Relations Constructivism's Development: Crossroad or Cul-de-Sac?作者：莫大華(Ta-Hua Mo)關鍵字：建構主義;新建構主義;實踐理論;關係主義;世代對話;Constructivism;New Constructivism;Practice Theory;Relationalism;Generational Dialogue期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：70期出版年：2020中文摘要：1980年代末期建構主義理論迅速崛起成為國際關係學科既有核心理論正式認證的競爭者，歷經30年的發展也面臨停滯、危機與困境，將會走向十字路口或死巷？尤其國際關係理論整體研究正歷經國際關係研究的「實證科學性」與「理論終結」的爭論，建構主義的理論發展停滯正是國際關係理論此整體研究與發展的縮影，遂有不同世代的建構主義學者嘗試以不同的觀點尋求轉機突破困境，其中第三代學者提議「新建構主義」，引發不同世代學者之間的爭論與對話。藉此反思建構主義在後設理論、實質理論、經驗研究及理論本身等方面的可能方向，再造建構主義的未來發展。英文摘要：Since the late of 1980s, constructivism has risen rapidly as the officially accredited contender to the established core of the international relations (IR). In the three decades, it has become a common approach in IR, as time go by, it faced stagnations, crisis, and paradoxes, toward to a crossroad or cul-de-sac? Particularly, the research of international relations is experiencing the debates of ”the science of positivism” and of ”the end of theory,” the stagnations of constructivism is a miniature of the debates. Different generations of constructivists tried to find opportunities with various perspectives for breaking through the paradoxes, including in meta-theory, substantial theory, empirical research, and constructivism itself for recreating the future of constructivism.起始頁-結束頁：77-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202012_(70).00034篇名：不只是茶壺裡的風暴？初選分歧的大選效應並列篇名：Not Merely a Storm in a Teacup? The Electoral Effect of the Primary Division作者：楊婉瑩(Wan-Ying Yang)關鍵字：選舉預期;初選分歧;現任者優勢;政黨優勢;嚇阻與磁吸;Electoral Prospect;Primary Division;Incumbency Advantage;Party Stronghold Advantage;Deterrence and Magnetization期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：70期出版年：2020中文摘要：政黨提名階段的黨內分歧對於大選有何影響？本研究認為兩者之間存在連動的關係，對大選的「選舉預期」將會影響政黨提名時的「黨內分歧」，而提名的「黨內分歧」連帶影響了大選結果。「選舉預期」指的是大選勝算機會的心理推估，乃是連結並同時影響初選黨內競爭以及大選黨際競爭的關鍵因素。選舉預期由兩個因素構成，包括「現任者優勢」對黨內競爭的嚇阻效果，以及選區「政黨優勢」對黨內競爭的磁吸效果，這兩種不同原因導致的黨內競爭，都對大選有著正向的影響。本研究分析第八、第九兩屆立委選舉之政黨提名與大選資料，發現兩大政黨在提名階段的黨內分歧受到不同因素影響，而對大選產生不同作用。對國民黨而言，現任者從初選到大選似乎並無明顯的「選舉預期」優勢，也沒有產生「嚇阻」黨內分歧的效果；反之，政黨的選區優勢則有著「選舉預期」優勢，既刺激了初選的黨內競爭，也提高大選的得票率。相對地，民進黨的現任者具有「選舉預期」優勢，有效嚇阻黨內競爭，較少面對黨內挑戰；而在大選階段，未被黨內挑戰的現任者（選舉預期優勢）相對於面對黨內挑戰的現任者（選舉預期劣勢），在得票上亦處於相對優勢。由本研究的理論推論與資料分析結果可見，政黨提名階段的黨內競爭，絕對不僅止於黨內的風暴，更是預示著大選競爭的諸多玄機密碼。英文摘要：What is the impact of the primary division on the electoral outcome? This study argues that these two exist the linking causal relationship. The electoral prospect affects the primary division (intraparty competition), and the primary division affects the electoral outcomes. The electoral prospect, the psychological calculation on the winning prospect of the election, links and affects the primary division and the electoral outcome. And the electoral prospect was composed of two elements-the incumbency advantage deterring the primary division and the party stronghold magnetizing the primary division, combined together lead to positive electoral outcomes. Analyzing the primary and electoral data of the 8th and the 9th term legislative election, this study finds that the intraparty and interparty competition of the two major parties were affected by different factors in the primary and the final election. For the Kuomintang (KMT), the incumbents not having winning electoral prospect, neither deter the intraparty competition nor win over the interparty election. By contrast, the party strongholds with the winning electoral prospect increase the intraparty competition and lead to the electoral victory. For the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), the incumbents with higher winning electoral prospect, deter the primary division and have a higher chance of winning the election compared to those incumbents with lower winning electoral prospect and facing primary divisions. Inferring from the theories and data analyses, the primary competition and division during the party nomination is not merely a storm in a teacup, it actually connotes a mysterious code for the electoral interparty competition.起始頁-結束頁：121-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202012_(70).00045篇名：任務授權與選擇性參與：中國對聯合國維和行動的人力貢獻（1978∼2018）並列篇名：Mission Mandates and Selective Participation: China's Personnel Contributions Toward Peacekeeping Operations (1978-2018)作者：游智偉(Chih-Wei Yu)關鍵字：中國;和平共處五原則;維和行動;聯合國安全理事會;China;the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence;Peacekeeping Operations;United Nations Security Council期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：69期出版年：2020中文摘要：在堅持和平共處五原則的條件下，中國如何選擇性地增加對維和任務的貢獻人力？本文透過內容分析法檢驗聯合國安全理事會（簡稱安理會）自1978年迄今針對維和任務的決議案以區分安理會對個別任務的不同授權，同時根據聯合國維和人力的貢獻資料呈現中國自1978年以來維和人力的貢獻變化。本文發現：在2003年以前，包括人道救援與促進地主國人權的任務授權為中國貢獻維和人力的充要條件，但在2003年後，這兩個任務授權轉為調節變數，必須搭配其他任務授權（包括協助地主國恢復執政能力、調停停火或部隊撤退、監測停火），中國方願意貢獻維和人力，這個現象反應著和平共處五原則仍有相當程度的影響力。英文摘要：How has China selectively increased its personnel contribution to peacemaking operations under the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence? To answer this question, the present study employed content analysis to examine the United Nations Security Council's resolutions for peacekeeping operations since 1978 to distinguish the mandate of different missions. According to data of personnel contributions by the United Nations member states to peacekeeping, this study revealed changes in China's personnel contribution since 1978. Research findings: mission mandate for humanitarian aid and improving human rights in host countries has been the necessity and sufficiency of the Beijing government's personnel contribution to peacekeeping until 2003. However, as of 2003, the two types of missions have become a moderator; specifically, other types of mission mandate (e.g., recovering governance capacity in host countries, mediating a ceasefire, withdrawing troops, and monitoring a ceasefire) must exist for the Beijing government to contribute personnel to peacekeeping. This phenomenon reflected the influence of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence on China's behavior in the global system.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202006_(69).00016篇名：春秋戰國時代的系統戰爭：三種現實主義外交政策理論的比較並列篇名：Systemic Wars in the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period: A Comparison Between the Three Realism Foreign Policy Theories作者：薛健吾(Chien-Wu Alex Hsueh)關鍵字：中國崛起;守勢現實主義;攻勢現實主義;無政府狀態;新古典現實主義;Anarchy;China Rising;Defensive Realism;Neoclassical Realism;Offensive Realism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：69期出版年：2020中文摘要：中國的快速崛起是否將對東亞區域安全以及中美關係帶來負面的影響，是當代國際關係研究中最重要的問題之一。當代的三大現實主義外交政策理論—攻勢現實主義、新古典現實主義和守勢現實主義，普遍對於中國的崛起是否會帶來衝突的發生抱持著較為悲觀的看法，但是對於這個衝突到底是如何產生的因果機制，卻有著不同的預測。本文考察在歷史上極為接近現實主義「無政府狀態」假定的東周時代所發生的兩場大戰—春秋末年的「齊吳之戰」與戰國末年的「秦滅六國之戰」，並且發現，在一個非常接近現實主義「無政府狀態」假定的環境之下，各國的「擴張理由」和「聯盟政策」，最符合「新古典現實主義」的預測。本文的發現對於以現實主義的外交政策理論來理解中國崛起對國際衝突的影響具有重要的啟示意義。英文摘要：How the rise of China may affect regional security in East Asia and the Sino-U.S. relationship is one of the most important questions in contemporary international relations studies. All the three main contemporary realism foreign policy theories-offensive realism, neoclassical realism, and defensive realism-hold pessimistic attitudes towards the impact of China's rise, but differ in the mechanisms they infer to explain how China's rise will lead to international conflict. In this article, I investigate two systemic wars that occurred in the Spring and Autumn Period (the war between Qi and Wu) and the Warring States Period (the war between Qin and the other six warring states) with historical backgrounds that are similar to the realism's ”anarchy” assumption when compared with all the other historical periods in China. I find that it is neoclassical realism, not offensive realism or defensive realism, which has the most explanatory power in a world of ideal-type anarchy. This finding has important theoretical implications when we try to predict the influence of China's rise on international conflict with the applications of realism theories.起始頁-結束頁：31-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202006_(69).00027篇名：Economic Context, Values, and Soft Power Competition in Southeast Asia: An Individual-Level Analysis並列篇名：經濟條件、價值與美中在東南亞的軟實力競爭：個人層次的分析作者：黃凱苹(Kai-Ping Huang)關鍵字：China;Soft Power;Southeast Asia;the U.S.;Values;中國;東南亞;美國;軟實力;價值期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：69期出版年：2020中文摘要：This article examines whether the attractiveness of values enhances the appeal of a power in the eyes of ordinary people in Southeast Asia. Hypothesizing that people who hold values consistent with either the U.S. or China model will be more likely to choose a development path that is compatible with these values, this article finds that this connection is conditional in the case of China. Specifically, citizens who prioritize economic freedom are more likely to choose the China model only when economic conditions in their own country are poor. For those living under good economic conditions, even though they prioritize economic freedom, they are still more likely to choose the U.S. model. In addition, people with democratic values are more likely to choose the U.S. model regardless of their country's economic conditions. The findings suggest that if it is to successfully challenge the dominance of U.S. soft power in the region, China cannot rely on promoting economic freedom alone since the attractiveness of this value is closely associated with economic ups and downs. Since China lacks moral or normative values that can transcend these short-term fluctuations, it will continue to face an uphill battle when challenging the dominance of U.S. soft power in the region and around the world.英文摘要：本文旨在探討中國與美國發展模式所代表的價值，是否能吸引與其價值觀相似的東南亞民眾，進而增加其軟實力。本文假設，持有與美國或中國模式一致的價值觀的人更有可能選擇與這些價值相符的發展路徑，然研究發現這樣的連結對中國而言是有條件的。持有中國模式所代表的經濟優先價值的東南亞民眾，僅在本國的經濟狀況不佳時才會傾向選擇中國模式。身處國家經濟情勢佳的民眾，雖同樣持有經濟優先的價值，但仍會傾向選擇美國為學習對象。此外，具有民主價值觀的人更有可能選擇美國作為其國家的榜樣，而不管其國家的經濟狀況如何。研究結果認為，如果中國要成功地挑戰美國在該區域的軟實力，僅依靠經濟優先的價值是不夠的，因為該價值的吸引力與經濟波動密切相關。由於中國缺乏可以超越這些短期波動的道德或規範性價值觀，在挑戰美國軟實力於該地區和世界各地的主導地位時，將持續面臨一場苦戰。起始頁-結束頁：65-97資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202006_(69).00038篇名：美國從形式民主、國家民主到進步民主：論賀柏．克羅利的政治思想並列篇名：From Formal Democracy, National Democracy to Progressive Democracy in the United States: On the Political Thought of Herbert Croly作者：韓保中(Bao-Chung Han)關鍵字：形式民主;國家民主;進步民主;新國家主義;Formal Democracy;National Democracy;New Nationalism;Progressive Democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：69期出版年：2020中文摘要：十九世紀末美國工業化與商業化快速發展，大企業托拉斯與政黨派閥結合，造成壟斷經濟、分贓政治、社會衝突與道德低落，人民希冀強大及積極國家處理相關問題。賀柏．克羅利是二十世紀初美國新自由主義思想家，1909年出版《美國生活的應許》提出新國家主義，主張「漢瀰爾頓式手段達成傑佛遜式目標」，1914年出版《進步的民主》成為美國進步主義代表。克羅利指出美國經歷形式民主、國家民主及進步民主階段，早期民主以人民直接參政為核心理念，制憲會議後走向形式法律民主，變成法律統治、精英壟斷、黨派支配及追求地方利益。十九世紀末起主張以國家民主建立強大與積極國家，讓人民能公平行使自由，認同對象從地方及黨派轉向國家。進步民主是二十世紀人民主權及參與民主的發展方向，包括培養公民素養及教育、形塑個人與社會良善關係、重建人民主權與直接參與途徑、建構新的政府關係與角色、發展工業民主與社會教育等。形式民主、國家民主及進步民主，代表美國民主的過去式、現在式與未來式，進步民主契合現今許多民主價值，體現二十世紀初美國新自由主義與進步主義的精神。英文摘要：At the end of the 19th century, industrialization and commercialization advanced rapidly in the United States. However, the emergence of large corporate trusts and party factions created economic monopolies, spoils politics, social conflicts, and declining morality. People looked to a strong and active state. Herbert Croly was a new liberal thinker at the beginning of the 20th century. His 1909 book The Promise of American Life proposed a new nationalism centered on the idea of applying ”Hamiltonian means” to achieve ”Jeffersonian ends”, Croly's subsequent 1914 book Progressive Democracy made him the leading scholar of American progressivism. Croly identified three distinct stages in the development of American democracy -formal democracy, national democracy, and progressive democracy. Primitive democracy was based on the direct participation of the people in politics. After the Constitutional Convention, popular democracy evolved into formal legal democracy-legal rule monopolized by elites pursuing local interests and dominated by parties, pursuing local interests. Faced with the disorder afflicting American society at the end of the 19th century, Croly advocated establishing a strong and active state through national democracy. This state would allow the people to freely exercise their freedom and rights, shifting their identity from their locality and political parties to the state. Progressive as the manifestation of popular sovereignty and democratic participation in the 20th century included developing civic literacy and education, shaping the good relations between individuals and society, rebuilding popular sovereignty and direct participation, constructing new relations between government and citizens, and developing industrial democracy and social education. Formal democracy, national democracy, and progressive democracy can be viewed as the past, present, and future forms of American democracy. Progressive democracy is also consistent with many contemporary democratic values and reflects the spirit and direction of American new liberalism and progressivism in the early 20th century.起始頁-結束頁：99-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202006_(69).000401篇名：編者言作者：吳心楷(Hsin-Kai Wu);楊凱琳(Kai-Lin Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷S期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：i-i資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會2篇名：地方感與環境行為意願之研究：以卑南遺址公園及其周邊在地居民為例並列篇名：Sense of Place and Pro-Environmental Behavior Intention: A Study Among Residents Near Peinan Site Park作者：林佳靜(Chia-Ching Lin);許世璋(Shih-Jang Hsu)關鍵字：地方依附;地方意義;環境行為意願;環境教育;Place Attachment;Place Meaning;Pro-Environmental Behavior Intention;Environmental Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：過去有關地方感與環境行為或態度的研究大多以自然環境保護區為主，對於文化資產保護區的研究仍相當有限，因此本研究即是以具考古遺址的卑南遺址公園及其周邊在地居民為研究場域與對象。本研究主要探討：一、居民對卑南遺址公園的地方意義；二、不同背景居民的地方意義與地方依附之差異；以及三、地方意義、地方依附和環境行為意願之間的關係。研究設計採混合方法，先以質性訪談收集居民的地方意義內涵，接著發展量化問卷檢驗各變項間的關係。研究經分層抽樣共計回收有效問卷數325份，結果顯示：一、居民對卑南遺址公園的地方意義有促進健康、深刻回憶、部落文化與考古遺址等四個面向。二、在居民背景變項部分，參與過園區活動的居民在所有面向的地方意義與地方依附都有顯著較高的認同度。三、促進健康、深刻回憶與部落文化面向的地方意義對地方依附有顯著的預測效果，考古遺址與深刻回憶面向的地方意義及地方依附則對於環境行為意願有顯著預測效果。最後根據本研究的結果，作者針對地方感未來研究與園區管理單位提出實務建議。英文摘要：Most existing research focusing on the sense of place, environmental attitudes or environmental behaviors were conducted at natural reserves. However, there is a lack of research conducted at cultural heritage sites. Therefore, the target population for this study was chosen to be the residents living near archaeological Peinan Site Park, which is a cultural heritage site. The main purposes of this study were to determine (1) the residents' place meaning to Peinan Site Park, (2) the difference of place meaning and place attachment between different background variables, and (3) the relationships between place meaning, place attachment, and pro-environmental behavior intention. This research used mixed methods design combining both qualitative and quantitative approaches. In this study, place meaning was first constructed by resident interviews. Then, a questionnaire was developed to examine the relationships among different variables. This study used stratified sampling method and received 325 valid questionnaires. Results from collected data produced four themes: health promotion, impressive memory, tribal culture, and archaeological site. Participants who had previously joined the activities held by Peinan Site Park had significantly stronger place meaning and place attachment than participants who had not previously joined the activities. Health promotion, impressive memory, and tribal culture in place meaning had significant effects on place attachment. Archaeological site and impressive memory in place meaning and place attachment had significant effects on pro-environmental behavior intention. Finally, implications for future research are presented.起始頁-結束頁：303-326資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202012_28(4).00013篇名：輔導偏鄉國中學生學習飛行科學知識之成效分析：以培訓參與競賽活動為策略並列篇名：Analyzing the Outcomes of Guided Learning of Aviation Science Among Rural Junior High School Students: Based on the Strategy of Training for Competition Participation作者：王裕宏(Yu-Hung Wang);劉佳儒(Jia-Ru Liou);張美珍(Mei-Chen Chang)關鍵字：飛行科學;偏鄉教育;概念圖;競賽活動;Aviation Science;Rural Education;Concept Maps;Competition Activities期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：由於偏鄉地區遠離都會區域，交通不便及人口逐漸流失，學童的學習動機相對較弱，再加上經濟、家庭因素及學校條件不良，更不利於偏鄉教育的發展。對於科學教育，偏鄉學校更是處於弱勢，需要各界投入更多協助與關心，包含教材、軟體的開發與人力的投入，以及多元的學習方式及刺激等。本研究以輔導偏鄉國中學生參與競賽活動為策略，探究學生在為期四個月的飛行科學教學與實作活動之學習歷程與飛行科學知識的學習成效。本研究採個案研究法，以南部某偏鄉國民中學10名學生為研究對象，輔導其參加「全國手擲機飛行競賽」為目標，進行課程活動設計並實施培訓。研究者透過活動歷程觀察紀錄及學習單評量學生的學習歷程與學習成效，另分析概念圖的結構進行計分，探究學生概念圖結構及知識改變情形。研究結果顯示：本輔導活動中透過概念圖的繪製教學及評量顯示有助於個案學生在飛行知識概念的建構；透過參與競賽為學習的策略，可以促進偏鄉學生的學習動機，並可加深科學知識的理解；偏鄉學校雖有諸多不利條件，提供合宜的輔導與配套仍可實施飛行科學探索活動。英文摘要：Students in rural areas tend to be less motivated to learn because of their geographical remoteness from metropolitan regions. Economic background, familial factors, and schooling conditions have also added to the constraints on the development of rural education. When it comes to science education, specifically, rural schools are placed in a difficult situation, because of their need for additional assistance and attention from all sectors of society. This study explored rural junior high school students' learning process and learning outcomes during four months of teaching hands-on activities related to the field of aeronautics. A case study was adopted to target 10 students from a rural junior high school in Southern Taiwan. This study designed curricular activities and conducted training with the objective of guiding students' participation in the Hand Launch Glider Flying Competition. Researchers assessed the learning process and learning outcomes using activity observation logs and worksheets. Students were scored on the structures of their concept maps that analyzed changes in these structures and their knowledge of the instructional content. Results showed the application of concept mapping to teaching and knowledge assessment during the guiding activities were conducive to students' construction of flight knowledge. Moreover, students' participation in learning competitions were an effective strategy to improve their learning interest and deepen their understanding of scientific knowledge. Despite many unfavorable conditions, schools in rural areas can still provide appropriate guidance and supporting facilities for exploration activities about flight science.起始頁-結束頁：327-351資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202012_28(4).00024篇名：合作問題解決自我效能量表發展與科學學習成就關係之探討並列篇名：Development of the Collaborative Problem Solving Self-Efficacy Scale With the Relationship on Science Learning Achievement作者：王淑卿(Shu-Ching Wang);葉宗一(Tsung-I Yeh);王國華(Kuo-Hua Wang)關鍵字：自我效能;合作問題解決評量;科學學習成就;量表編製;驗證性因素分析;Self-Efficacy;Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Assessment;Science Learning Achievement;Scale Construction;Confirmatory Factor Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在發展國中生合作問題解決自我效能（Collaborative Problem Solving Self-Efficacy, CPS-SE）量表作為合作問題解決（Collaborative Problem Solving, CPS）課堂評量工具，並應用以檢驗量表與學生科學學習成就的關係。研究對象是方便取樣自臺灣五個縣市的男女合班國中生，共1,045人。基於學生能力國際評量計畫（Programme for International Student Assessment, PISA）2015 CPS評量架構而建構量表的構面及題項。量表分析過程包括五個階段：一、項目分析；二、探索性因素分析；三、信度分析；四、驗證性因素分析；和五、複核效度分析。研究發現三個值得注意的結果：首先，建構效度的過程中，萃取三個因素，包括共享理解、行動解決和團隊組織。其次，每個分量表的Cronbach's α係數皆超過.95，透過結構方程模式（Structural Equation Modeling, SEM）分析競爭模型，選擇適配度最佳且最簡約的模型，顯示模型和資料的適配度良好，表示CPS-SE量表具備良好的信度和效度。第三，自然科學學習成就表現的高成就生與中成就生在共享理解、行動解決和團隊組織等三個分量表，皆顯著優於低成就生，高成就生與中成就生則無顯著差異。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop the Collaborative Problem Solving Self-Efficacy (CPS-SE) scale as a Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) classroom assessment tool and to use it to examine the relationship between students' CPS-SE and their science learning achievement. Convenience sampling was used to select 1,045 students from coeducational secondary schools in five Taiwan counties. The dimensions and items of the scale were constructed based on the 2015 CPS assessment framework of the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). The scale analysis process comprised of five stages: (1) item analysis, (2) exploratory factor analysis, (3) reliability analysis, (4) confirmatory factor analysis, and (5) cross-validation. Three noteworthy results were found. First, there were three factors extracted through factor analysis during the establishment of construct validity: sharing understanding, taking action on problems, and team organization. Second, the Cronbach's α for each subscale exceeded .95. Applied Structural Equation Model (SEM) the best fit and most parsimonious model was chosen based on model comparisons. Statistical analysis of the model showed goodness-of-fit to the data, which indicated that CPS-SE scale had high consistency and reliability. Third, students who were high and medium academic achievers on science learning scored significantly higher than those who were low academic achievers on three subscales: sharing understanding, taking action on problems, and team organization. There was no significant difference between high-achieving and medium-achieving students on the three subscales.起始頁-結束頁：353-377資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202012_28(4).00035篇名：國小資深與資淺教師教學覺察力表現比較之個案研究並列篇名：Comparing Experienced and Novice Teachers' Performance in Three Phases of the Noticing Measurement: A Case Study作者：林勇吉(Yung-Chi Lin);陳姿蒨(Tzu-Chian Chen)關鍵字：國小數學教師;教師覺察力;評量;Elementary School Mathematics Teachers;Teacher Noticing;Assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討資深與資淺國小教師，在不同評量「提問」階段（開放問題、具體問題、自由回看）的數學覺察力表現有何差異。本研究採用個案研究法，以五位資深國小教師（年資超過八年）、五位資淺國小教師（年資低於三年）為研究對象。研究程序為兩組教師分別接受一對一訪談，在觀看教學影片後，接受連續三個不同設計（開放問題、具體問題、自由回看）的覺察力評量施測。研究結果指出：一、資深教師在「開放問題」的表現優於資淺教師，能夠指出較多的關鍵事件（n＝19 vs. 4）。二、資深與資淺教師在「具體問題」與「自由回看」的整體差異不大。在具體問題中（總平均：資深vs.資淺＝0.55 vs.0.54），資淺教師在注意向度的表現略佳（0.71 ＞ 0.66）、資深教師在回應的向度表現略佳（0.45 ＞ 0.35）；在自由回看中，兩組教師均致力於擴展在第一階段已提過的評論（資深＝資淺＝38％），以及再次回答原本答錯的具體問題（資深＝35％；資淺＝34％）。三、本研究從影片中定義11個關鍵事件，平均而言資深教師能指出較多的關鍵事件（M＝6.6），並且將近半數在第一階段開放問題就能指出（49％）；相對的資淺教師平均能指出的關鍵事件略少（M＝5.6），超過半數都需要具體問題的指引才能指出（61％）。四、影片長度的差異（1∼5分鐘）似乎不影響兩組教師的表現。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to compare the teaching observation abilities of five experienced mathematics teachers with the teaching abilities of five novice mathematics teachers. A case study method was adopted for this study, and data were collected from teachers using open-ended questions, structured questions and second time viewing the videos. Researchers conducted one-on-one interviews with all the participants. During these interviews, participants were asked to watch four short (1-5-minute) classroom teaching videos. After watching each video three times, the participants were asked to answer open-ended questions and structured questions, and to write down comments in response to the instruction presented in the video based on their knowledge of teaching. Results indicated that the experienced teachers were able to point out more critical events in the open-ended question phase; however, there was a slight difference between experienced and novice teachers regarding their answers to the structured questions after viewing the videos a second time. Novice teachers appeared to perform slightly better in the attending-to category (0.71 ＞ 0.66), while the experienced teachers performed better in the responding category (0.45 ＞ 0.35). A third finding showed that experienced teachers were slightly better in identifying critical events (M = 6.6) than the novice teachers (M = 5.6). Finally, the length of the videos did not seem to influence the performance of either group in answering the structured questions.起始頁-結束頁：379-402資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202012_28(4).00046篇名：舉起你的Plickers卡片：以線上形成性評量觀點探究即時回饋系統對學習量化課程之成效並列篇名：Raise Your Plickers Cards: Using a Formative E-Assessment to Examine the Effects of a Paper Interactive Response System on the Learning Effectiveness of Quantitative Courses作者：龔心怡(Hsin-Yi Kung);李靜儀(Ching-Yi Lee)關鍵字：Plickers;行動研究;紙本即時回饋系統;量化課程成效;線上形成性評量;Plickers;Action Research;Paper Interactive Response System;Quantitative Course Effectiveness;Formative E-Assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷S期出版年：2020中文摘要：教育相關系所在規劃課程架構時，常將量化課程列為必選修課程之一，但許多學生不但對量化課程興趣缺缺，更因為對數字的不熟悉，以致於對這些課程出現跟不上進度與不容易專注的情況，進而對學習情境產生焦慮而難以投入，最終影響到課程的學習成效。本研究基於多元評量的精神，以線上形成性評量的觀點，來探究紙本即時回饋系統Plickers對學習量化課程的專注力、學習投入與學習成效之影響。研究期程從2019年2月至6月，實施為期18週量化課程的行動研究，以修習教育統計學的17位學生為研究對象，並以混合研究法進行資料的蒐集與分析，獲致之結果包括：一、Plickers輔助教學有效融入高等教育階段量化課程之可行性高，且能提升學生對量化課程之專注力、學習投入與學習成效。二、透過行動研究，Plickers輔助教學能具體展現出形成性評量與總結性評量之精神。三、教師行動研究之循環歷程，可運用轉化、反思回饋、應用、批判性／創造性思考、激發知識架構作為教師反思及學生學習之修正依據。最後根據本研究發現，提出具體建議，以供相關教學者與後續研究者之參考。英文摘要：During the development of curriculum frameworks for education-related departments, quantitative courses are often listed as compulsory or elective courses. However, quantitative courses are generally unpopular among students. Students disinterested in numbers are disengaged and show reduced motivation to keep up with the course. Such students develop anxiety toward learning, which consequently impacts their learning effectiveness. Using a formative e-assessment approach, the study investigated the effects of a paper Interactive Response System (paper-IRS)-Plickers-on students' concentration, engagement, and performance in their quantitative course. The study applied action research to an 18-week quantitative educational statistics course carried out from February to June in 2019. Participants were 17 graduate students. A mixed-method was used for data collection and analysis. Results showed that (1) Plickers-assisted learning can be effectively integrated into quantitative courses in higher education, and can effectively improve students' concentration, engagement, and performance in an educational statistics course; (2) through the process of action research, Plickers-assisted learning highlighted the features of formative e-assessment and summative assessment; and (3) in the cyclical process of action research, the Transformation, Reflection, Application, Critical/Creative thinking, and Kindling (TRACK) framework can be applied as a reflective process for teachers and an adjustment tool for students. Finally, several suggestions for teaching and research are presented.起始頁-結束頁：403-427資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202012/SP_28.00017篇名：學生在臆測任務課堂表現的數學創造力評量並列篇名：Assessment of Mathematical Creativity for Students Performing in Conjecturing Tasks作者：林碧珍(Pi-Jen Lin)關鍵字：國小學生;評量架構;數學創造力;臆測任務;Primary School Students;Assessment Framework;Mathematical Creativity;Conjecturing Tasks期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷S期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究的目的是建立一個數學臆測任務融入於課堂實踐下，學生表現的數學創造力評量架構，此架構包含任務本身和學生數學創造力的兩個評分規準，透過檢驗兩個研究問題，來瞭解評分規準的可行性。本研究的數學創造力架構增加精緻性元素並修正自Leikin在2009年編製的評量架構。個案教師將分數乘法臆測任務融入於兩屆五年級班級課堂教學中，在10堂課中使用的兩個臆測任務和兩屆學生表現的個人猜想、小組猜想和全班猜想，是本研究蒐集的主要資料。本研究利用兩個評分規準，分析任務本身的教學目標和學生提出的數學猜想。研究發現臆測任務實踐脈絡下的數學創造力評量架構可以從數學創造力觀點評量不同臆測任務的特性，任務中具有概括性的教學目標，能驅動學生的精緻性思考。學生數學創造力的評分規準，是以猜想的數量、類別、新穎性及概括性作為評量學生在臆測任務表現的流暢性、變通性、原創性及精緻性思考的指標。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to construct and examine an assessment framework for measuring mathematical creativity in the use of conjecturing tasks. The assessment framework employed the element of elaboration adapted from Leikin's (2009) framework. Two research questions were investigated in this study. One teacher and the students in her two fifth-grader mathematics classes were the subjects of the study. The tasks and students' individual conjectures, group conjectures, and whole-class conjectures were the main sources of data collected for the study. Two scoring rubrics for the assessment framework were developed and used to evaluate students' cognitive learning outcomes and mathematical creativity. Results showed that researchers were successful in using this framework to evaluate students in various learning tasks from a mathematics creativity perspective. The generalization of an institutional objective is potential to ignite students' thinking of elaboration. The assessment framework revealed students' thinking in fluency, flexibility, originality, and elaboration while performing in conjecturing tasks, counting on the number, category, novelty, and generalization of the conjectures that students proposed in the classroom.起始頁-結束頁：429-455資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202012/SP_28.00028篇名：從澳門某所中學的科學教育實踐案例探討學校多元評量實施的過程並列篇名：Through a Case Study of Science Education of a Macao School Examining Processes of Implementation of Multiple Assessment作者：麥瑞琪(Soi-Kei Mak);張國祥(Kwok-Cheung Cheung);楊文佳(Man-Kai Ieong);薛寶嫦(Pou-Seong Sit)關鍵字：Rubrics評分規準;多元評量;科學教育;核心素養;學習進程;Rubrics Assessment Scale;Multiple Assessment;Science Education;Core Literacy;Learning Progression期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷S期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在以澳門一所進行校本科學課程開發且以素養教育為導向的中學為研究案例，探討素養導向之科學教育多元評量的關鍵特徵，以及在現有的評量基礎上如何基於評分規準（rubrics）的評量設計，來驗證學習指標與學生基本能力的評量方法和具體步驟，使能客觀地評價學生之學習進程是否達到課程標準所訂定之學力水平，從而為改進學校教學、完善教育政策提供依據，並豐實學校多元評量的內涵。同時，通過研究案例學校實施多元評量的過程，本文分析歸納出教師實施多元評量時須兼備「量」和「質」的特點，即評量要能重視對師生雙方的回饋、具有前瞻性、可為學生學習架設鷹架，這樣才能促進學生更好地往下一學習階段發展，終極目的是邁向學習成功。英文摘要：Based on a case study conducted in a secondary school in Macao that practices literacy-based school education and promotes school-based science curriculum development, this study sought to investigate the essential characteristics of multiple assessment in literacy-oriented science education. Based on the current foundation of assessment, the methods and procedures of how rubrics assessment scales can be designed and utilized to verify learning objectives and students' basic competencies in science were the focus of examination in this study. These methods and procedures are able to evaluate objectively whether a student's learning progression can achieve the academic standards as laid down in the curriculum standards, resulting in enrichment of multiple assessment in school and providing evidence for informed policy making regarding school improvement and instructional effectiveness. This case study renders readers opportunities to understand the processes pertaining to the implementation of multiple assessment. Additionally, analysis of these processes allows investigators to understand that multiple assessment possess dual characteristics of ”quantity” and ”quality.” Suggestions forwarded in this study are that investigators using multiple assessment should pay attention to the reciprocal feedback between students and their teachers, and be forward-looking and provide scaffolding support for students to learn better. The ultimate aim of multiple assessment is to guide students to progress to the next stage of learning or development, and migrate closer to success in learning.起始頁-結束頁：457-482資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202012/SP_28.00039篇名：從實作評量探討小組解構問題發展程序性知識與新課綱核心素養並列篇名：Developing Performance Assessment of Procedural Knowledge From Deconstruct the Problem and New Course Outline Core Literacy作者：戴建耘(Chien-Yun Dai);丁淑觀(Shu-Kuan Ting);劉銘恩(Ming-En Liu);黃敦煌(Duen-Huang Huang)關鍵字：協同教學;程序性知識;解構問題;實作評量;Collaborative Teaching;Procedural Knowledge;Deconstruct the Problem;Performance Evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷S期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文主要從學生實作評量歷程，探討解構問題發展程序性知識，與實作歷程小組成員之間自發互動共好的情況。課程以國中跨領域協同教學設計，研究對象為國中152位學生分40小組，透過五個教學活動來探索學生對問題的解構想法及小組間核心素養形成。不同領域教師協同教學共同備課時討論出實作評量，用座標位置強弱區分發展程序性知識優劣，範圍以III區（優秀）＞ II區（基本、良好）＞ I區（不足、落後），期望學生透過解構問題實作學習表現至少能夠進入座標第II區範圍以上。評量結果進入I區有四組占10.0%；進入II區、III區共有36組占90.0%，學習表現未達教學目標有10.0%。經實作前、後測量發現成績高分群差異性高於成績低分群，男生略高於女生，顯見實作學習力與成績高低有相關，與性別也有差異。另外草圖設計評量，大致具有花燈結構與造形外觀完整以上有97.5%，顯見國中生在圖案設計表現沒有問題。問卷內容以小組之間自發（主動探究、解構問題）、互動（團隊合作、知識分享）與共好（實作歷程、創意設計）相關性，三次徑路迴歸分析，皆達顯著，最後依研究結果提出課程設計與評量形式相互搭配等三項建議。英文摘要：This study explored the students' practical evaluation process they develop during their use of procedural knowledge during the deconstruction of problems and teamwork. One-hundred fifty-two junior high students volunteered to participate in this investigation. Investigators explored students' problem solving strategies and the construction of procedural knowledge through actual operations. Teachers involved in this study had two goals when preparing lessons: (1) to develop students' procedural knowledge from deconstruct the problems and (2) to engage students in spontaneous self-driven, interactive, and mutually beneficial teamwork. In accordance with the development of procedural knowledge, coordinated assessment levels were defined as zone III ＞ zone II ＞ zone I. Throughout the course of instruction, students' learning objectives were to achieve at least assessment level II or above. Results showed that 10.0% of the participants achieved zone II and 90.0% of the participants achieved zone III. Before and after implementation, the high-score groups had higher discrepancy of scores before and after the actual operation as compared with scores from the low-score groups. Males had higher discrepancy than females. There was a correlation between the learning ability from actual operation and achievement scores. Difference in test scores existed between males and females. Cubic path analysis results showed that the procedure of the actual operations and creative design were significantly positive and correlated with spontaneous initiative, interactive, and mutual benefit. Two suggestions from the mutual match between course design and type of assessment are also put forward.起始頁-結束頁：483-507資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202012/SP_28.000410篇名：透過科學營探討弱勢學生之探究能力表現並列篇名：Exploring the Performance of Scientific Inquiry Competence of Disadvantaged Students in Science Camp作者：鄭立婷(Li-Ting Cheng);林煥祥(Huan-Hsiang Lin);洪振方(Jeng-Fung Hung)關鍵字：科學探究活動;弱勢學童;探究能力;Scientific Inquiry Activity;Disadvantaged Students;Inquiry Competence期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討弱勢學生在科學探究活動中，所表現出的探究能力有哪些。研究針對臺灣南部某國小三到五年級共10位弱勢學童，進行為期5天共20小時的科學探究活動營，設計4個主題7個活動，在過程中蒐集營隊探究活動之影音資料、學習單及依據研究問題建立檢核表，將所蒐集的資料以模板式分析法進行質性分析，以瞭解學生在活動中的探究學習表現。研究發現國小弱勢學生能達到之探究能力有「想像創造」及「觀察與定題」；需要引導才能達成的為「推理論證」與「計畫思辨」；達成困難的有「計畫與執行」、「分析與發現」及「討論與傳達」。並根據研究發現提出建議，作為未來探究教學設計之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to explore the inquiry competence of disadvantaged students in scientific inquiry activities. The researchers of this study researched on a total of 10 disadvantaged students in the third to fifth grades of a country in southern Taiwan, conducted a 20-hours scientific inquiry summer camp with four themes and seven activities. The sources of data collection included classroom videos and learning sheets in the process. Data were analyzed in order to understand students' inquiry learning performance in activities. The study found that the disadvantaged students of elementary school can reach the competence of ”imagination creation” and ”observation and topic determination”; however, they need to be guided to achieve good performances in ”inference of theory” and ”planning speculation”; and they have difficulty in reaching ”planning and execution,” ”analysis and discovery,” and ”discussion and communication.” Suggestions were made based on the research findings, as a reference for future inquiry teaching design.起始頁-結束頁：197-221資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202009_28(3).000111篇名：探討重要生命經驗與國中青少年環境行為之關聯與自然連結之中介效果並列篇名：An Explorative Research on the Relationships Among Taiwanese Adolescents' Significant Life Experiences and Environmental Behaviors With the Mediation of Connection With Nature作者：曾鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tseng)關鍵字：自然連結;青少年;重要生命經驗;環境行為;Connection With Nature;Adolescent;Significant Life Experience;Environmental Behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：過去40年的重要生命經驗研究已指出自然經驗、家庭、學校教育、環境知識或資訊、環境研究興趣等因素會影響成人的環境行為，且過往15年的保育心理學研究亦初步證實自然連結能預測環境行為。本研究因此結合環境教育與保育心理學的研究成果，探討重要生命經驗、自然連結和環境行為之預測關係，同時也檢驗自然連結的中介效果。由於過往研究多以西方成人為主要研究對象，較缺乏亞洲及青少年群體的資料，本研究乃以配額抽樣調查臺中市616位國中青少年並進行路徑分析。研究結果發現：一、本文所提出的6項重要生命經驗皆可直接或間接預測整體環境行為，且不同重要生命經驗對日常生活管理、說服他人、公民參與等三類環境行為亦有各自擅長的預測能力。二、有4項重要生命經驗能夠預測自然連結，特別是住家附近戶外頻率及造訪遠處自然頻率的預測力最高。三、自然連結可部分中介住家附近戶外頻率及造訪遠處自然頻率對整體環境行為的影響，亦可完全中介環境知識多元性和環境科系就讀興趣對整體環境行為的影響。四、就整體效果來看，自然連結是所有變項中最能預測整體及三類環境行為的因素。本文根據研究結果對青少年群體的重要生命經驗和自然連結研究，以及戶外環境教育實務工作提出相關建議。英文摘要：The Significant Life Experience (SLE) research in the past 40 years has found that nature experiences, family, education, environmental knowledge and information, and an interest in the environmental study were influential experiences for adults’ Environmental Behaviors (EBs). Meanwhile, for past 15 years, the research in conservation psychology has indicated that adult’s Connection With Nature (CWN) can predict EBs. Therefore, the purpose of this research is to combine the findings of environmental education and conservation psychology to explore the relationships among SLEs, CWN, and EBs and to test the mediation effect of CWN. However, existing research focused much more on adults in western cultures. Due to the lack of research data in Asian areas and adolescent population, we surveyed 616 Taiwanese adolescents in Taichung City in Central Taiwan through quota sampling and conducted a path analysis. We found that: (1) All six SLEs proposed by this research can directly or indirectly predict the entire EB. Bedsides, each SLE had its own specific predictability on three different EBs-ecological managements in daily life, persuasion of other people, and citizen engagement. (2) Four SLEs can predict adolescents' CWN. Especially the frequency of outdoor activities in both neighborhood and remote natural areas had the strongest predictability. (3) CWN was a significant mediator to partially mediate the influence of both kinds of outdoor activities on entire EB, and to completely mediate between environmental knowledge, the interest in environmental majors, and entire EB. (4) In terms of the total effect, CWN was most predictive to entire EB and all three kinds of EBs among all variables. Based on those findings, we recommended future research designs in SLE and CWN and proposed practical educational strategies for outdoor environmental education.起始頁-結束頁：223-254資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202009_28(3).000212篇名：評分規準對科學筆記寫作及科學閱讀理解能力的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Rubrics on Scientific Note-Taking and Science Reading Comprehension作者：蔡惠如(Hui-Ju Tsai);鄭夢慈(Meng-Tzu Cheng)關鍵字：科學筆記寫作;科學閱讀理解;評分規準;Scientific Note-Taking;Science Reading Comprehension;Rubrics期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：雖然評分規準在國內推行已久，與評分規準相關的實徵研究多局限於評分規準的設計，甚少有研究探討評分規準對學生實質能力的影響。其次，科學領域的寫作與閱讀能力近幾年來逐漸被重視，故本研究目的主要探討評分規準是否能提升學生的科學筆記寫作表現及科學閱讀理解能力。本研究採準實驗研究法，研究對象為桃園某國中七年級學生，其中兩個班共73人為實驗組，一個班共36人為對照組。兩組實施相同的教學方式，配合教學進度實施三階段的科學筆記寫作共17次，惟實驗組在使用評分規準評量後，會將評分規準發放給學生作為學習鷹架。本研究主要採重複量測共變數分析及共變數分析，以先前學習成就（段考成績）作為共變數進行統計控制，研究結果發現，有評分規準回饋的組別在科學筆記寫作成果與科學閱讀理解上都顯著地有更好的表現。英文摘要：In Taiwan, while rubrics have long been applied in grading, empirical studies mostly focused on the design of rubrics rather than the effects on students' achievements. Given that the ability to write and read in the scientific field is important, this study aims to investigate whether the use of rubrics improves students' performances on scientific note-taking and science reading comprehension. A quasi-experimental design was applied on 109 7th graders, with 73 in the treatment group and 36 in the control group. There are three phases of experiments, in which a total of 17 scientific note-taking activities were graded with the rubrics, and the treatment and control groups differ in whether the rubrics showing the details about their note-taking performance were returned to the students as feedbacks. Data were analyzed by using repeated measures analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) and ANCOVA, controlling for the effect of prior knowledge (midterm exam grades). The results indicated that the use of rubrics significantly improved students' performances on scientific note-taking and science reading comprehension.起始頁-結束頁：255-280資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202009_28(3).000313篇名：以眼球追蹤法探究解決結構良好問題的認知歷程：星體運動為例並列篇名：Using Eye-Tracking Technology to Investigate the Cognitive Processes of Solving Well-Structured Problems on the Topic of Celestial Motion作者：陳怡君(Yi-Chun Chen);楊芳瑩(Fang-Ying Yang)關鍵字：天文教育;訊息處理理論;專家生手典範;眼動分析;結構良好的問題;Astronomy Education;Information-Processing Theory;Expert-Novice Paradigm;Eye-Movement Analysis;Well-Structured Problems期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：星體運動是天文教育的重要核心概念之一，但該概念複雜，學生常遭遇學習困難，教學上亦富有挑戰性。為此，本研究採用認知心理學中的專家生手典範，招募38位受過國民基本教育、擁有先備知識者為研究對象，以眼球追蹤技術輔以訪談，探究在解答「恆星與太陽視運動測驗」這類結構良好的問題時，高、低表現者的認知歷程差異，期許能對教學實務有所貢獻。研究發現：一、高表現者雖有展現向前思考的特徵，即會較費心地理解題幹敘述以形成問題表徵、較能確定正確答案，但也會彈性搭配「手段—目標分析」的廣泛型解題策略解題，以縮小目標範圍，更有效率地解答。二、在解答結構良好的單一選擇題時，高分組主要經歷「上而下」的認知歷程—能以所學知識辨識關鍵區域並解碼訊息，和激活解題所需的領域概念知識。因此，是由長期記憶知識結構的組織品質決定測驗表現，測驗表現與領域特定知識較有關。三、雖然在解題過程中，學生仍是以閱讀與理解文字為主，但相較於關鍵字詞、字句的資訊處理，高表現者在圖形關鍵區域的語義解碼需耗費較多心力，與花費較多凝視時間比例，這顯示圖片關鍵區域的概念理解較有難度。文末對未來相關研究提出建議，也討論了實務上包含教材設計與測驗評量等議題。英文摘要：Based on the expert-novice paradigm, using eye-movement technology supplemented by interviews, this study investigated the cognitive processes of solving well-structured problems on the topic of celestial motion. By comparing the differences between high- and low-performing students' cognitive characteristics, it was hoped that this study could provide evidence-based contributions. Thirty-eight university students who were taking non-earth-science majors but who had taken introductory earth science lessons in high school were recruited. They were asked to answer eight multiple-choice questions which were selected from the entrance examination for high schools and colleges in Taiwan. The results showed that: (1) Although the high-performing students tended to think forward (making more mental efforts in the stem to determine how to represent a problem, and paying much attention to the only correct answer), they flexibly used the means-ends analysis to reduce cognitive overload to answer questions more efficiently. (2) Top-down effects were the dominant information processing, while high-performing students were solving well-structured problems. Top-down effects referred to using acquired knowledge to identify and decode the key areas providing critical information and activated the necessary domain-specific knowledge. Therefore, the students' achievements were mostly determined by the richness and quality of the domain-specific knowledge stored in students' long-term memory rather than their general abilities. (3) While solving the problems, students spent a much greater percentage of time reading the text than looking at the graphics. The high-performing students spent a greater percentage of time processing information and expended more mental efforts on the critical areas of the graphics than the critical areas of the text. This revealed that decoding semantic information of scientific visual representations was the most difficult for students. Both the theoretical and practical implications of the findings are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：281-302資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202009_28(3).000414篇名：運用設計思考提升職前幼教師科學遊戲設計能力之個案研究並列篇名：A Case Study of Using Design Thinking Approach to Improve Preservice Preschool Teachers' Science Game Design Ability作者：黃麗鳳(Lee-Fang Huang);陳雅鈴(Ya-Ling Chen);Hartmut Wedekind關鍵字：幼兒科學教育;幼教師專業成長;建構式教學;設計思考;創意科學遊戲;Early Science Education;Professional Development for Preschool Teachers;Constructive Teaching;Design Thinking;Creative Science Game期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究主要目的為將「設計思考」（Design Thinking, DT）教學理念融入「創意科學遊戲設計」這門課程中，以培養職前幼教師創意思考、動手實作及自我學習等未來科學教學關鍵能力。本研究之研究問題為：教師如何規劃DT融入科學遊戲設計教學？教學的歷程為何？成效為何？挑戰為何？本計畫的主要參與者為授課的二位教師及選修此課程的37位職前幼教師，來自德國的Wedekind教授則擔任本課程之諮詢者。課程結束前，研究者亦邀請鄰近幼兒園之幼兒及其教師實際參與實作，實作結果回饋設計以組作為修正雛型之參考。每次實作約有20位幼兒及二位教師參與活動。本研究主要採用個案研究法，資料收集方式包括：觀察、訪談、回饋問卷及文件收集，收集到的資料主要以質性方式進行分析。DT融入教學的實施歷程分為「創意科學遊戲設計」整體的課程設計及DT融入教學歷程中學生中如何瞭解使用者需求，如何創意動腦及如何執行。DT融入教學之成效整體呈現高分且正向的回饋，學生在同儕互動、師生平等互動、科學遊戲設計能力、引導幼兒科學探究的各項能力都有顯著改善。然而，學生在「引起幼兒探究動機」、「引導提問及解釋探究結果」及「靈活運用不同引導探索模式」能力仍待加強。文末提出DT融入科學教學的主要挑戰及建議。英文摘要：The main purpose of this research was to incorporate the teaching philosophy of ”Design Thinking” (DT) into a pre-service teachers' ”creative science game design” course. Participants in this course were two university instructors and 37 pre-service preschool teachers. Before the end of the course, researchers of this study invited 20 children and their teachers (n = 2) from two local preschools to use the science games that were created during the design course in order to observe whether the design of the games met the children's developmental needs. Researchers adopted a case study method design. Data were collected using observations, interviews, a feedback questionnaire, and document collection and analyzed qualitatively. Results of using science games based on a DT integration design showed higher students' scores on satisfaction and positive feedback on the students' questionnaire. In addition, ”students' interaction in peer interaction,” ”teachers-student equal interactions,” ”scientific game design ability,” and ”the ability to guide children's scientific inquiry” all showed significant improvement. However, ”inspire young children's motivation for inquiry,” ”guidance of questioning and interpretation of inquiry results,” and ”flexible use of different guided exploration modes” were not significantly affected. Suggestions for how to integrate DT into science teaching are also proposed.起始頁-結束頁：99-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202006_28(2).000115篇名：臺灣四年級學生在TIMSS 2011和TIMSS 2015科學答題表現分析並列篇名：The Analysis of the Science Answer Performance in TIMSS 2011 and 2015 for Grade Four Taiwanese Students作者：魏瑞汶(Jui-Wen Wei);張美玉(Mei-Yu Chang);陳義隆(Yi-Long Chen)關鍵字：TIMSS;迷思概念;答題表現;試題分析;課程分析;TIMSS;Misconception;Science Performance;Test Item Analysis;Curriculum Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：國際數學與科學教育成就趨勢調查（Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, TIMSS）目的在於評量各國學生數學與科學領域學習成就的發展趨勢，以幫助各國提升其教學、學習與國家的教育成效。本研究目的在運用TIMSS 2011和TIMSS 2015的四年級科學測驗題目，分析臺灣九年一貫自然與生活科技學習領域課程在TIMSS試題內容的涵蓋情形，瞭解臺灣四年級學生表現顯著低於國際平均和低於國際平均的題目之答錯原因、學生表現顯著高於國際平均和高於國際平均的題目之答對原因。本研究分析145題國際教育學習成就調查委員會（International Association for the Evaluation of Education Achievement [IEA]）釋出的TIMSS題目，並針對桃園市四年級254位學生進行施測，採立意取樣，資料分析採質性與量化二種分析方式，研究結果顯示，TIMSS 2011和TIMSS 2015四年級科學測驗145題IEA釋出的題目中，60.69%的題目超出九年一貫課程四年級範圍，且以生命科學為最多。根據資深教師推測學生答錯的可能原因為：概念未涵蓋在一至四年級課程範圍、迷思概念或錯誤概念、學生易誤解題意或不善於用文字表達。學生可能答對之原因為：生活影片或課外讀物看過、在生活經驗獲得相關知識、概念未涵蓋在自然領域課程但涵蓋在其他領域課程、容易從試題中做推論、試題的敘述或圖片呈現與教科書相似。學生的迷思概念原因有：日常的經驗和生活中的觀察、錯誤的類比所造成之混淆、每天所使用的語言。英文摘要：The purposes of this study were to examine the extent to which the content of grades 1-9 Curriculum in Taiwan were assessed in Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) 2011 and TIMSS 2015 and to explore the reasons for performance whether poor or excellent, on the TIMSS science test by grade 4 students in Taiwan. The study results were as follows: First, in the 145 TIMSS 2011 and TIMSS 2015 grade 4 science items released by the International Association for the Evaluation of Education Achievement (IEA), 60.69% of the item concepts were not covered in the grade 4 Curriculum in Taiwan, and the lack of content concerning life science was reflected in the performance of students in Taiwan. Possible reasons for incorrect responses by students are as follows. First, the concepts were not covered in the curriculum of grade 4 courses. Second, students had misconceptions about topics. Third, it was easy to misunderstand the meaning of the items or students were not good at expressing the meaning of the items in words. Possible reasons for correct responses by students are as follows. First, students may have gained exposure to films or extracurricular readings. Second, students may have obtained relevant knowledge through life experience. Third, concepts may not have been covered in Science and Technology, but were covered within other subjects. Fourth, it was easy to make inferences from the test items. Fifth, the narrative or picture presentation of the test items was similar to that of the textbook. The reasons for the students' misconceptions could be as follows: (1) daily experience and the confusion caused by observations in life, (2) confusion caused by analogical errors, and (3) daily language used resulted in misconceptions.起始頁-結束頁：119-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202006_28(2).000216篇名：科學傳播歷程中程序性知識特徵的框架探究－以飲食保健類科學研究新聞為例並列篇名：A Framing Exploration of Procedural Knowledge Characteristics in Science Communication Process: Examples of Research Based Science News Regarding Healthy Diet作者：李松濤(Sung-Tao Lee);許文怡(Wen-Yi Hsu)關鍵字：科學研究新聞;框架分析;程序性知識;Research Based Science News;Framing Analysis;Procedural Knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以飲食保健類的科學研究新聞為例，以框架分析的方式針對國內四大媒體網路電子報的相關新聞報導中所出現的程序性知識特徵進行探究。研究結果發現，飲食保健類的科學研究新聞在倒金字塔式的新聞寫作方式中，無論是前二段內容或是全文敘述中的程序性知識特徵都著重在描述「結果」與「實驗」等二個框架，其次則是「現象」與「理論」等框架，而僅有三分之一的樣本新聞會出現「科學不確定性」的相關框架，其中又以「過程」與「推論」的不確定性為主，至於「範圍」、「定義」、「測量」與「風險」等科學不確定性的框架都非常稀少，為了增進社會公民對於「科學」的認識，相關結果值得科學傳播社群加以思考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to use framing analysis to explore how characteristics of procedural knowledge were present in research-based science news regarding a healthy diet. Results showed that the characteristics of ”results” and ”experiment” were the two most common frames that appeared in the first two paragraph analyses and whole news analysis followed by the frames of ”phenomenon” and ”theory” in the research-based science news information that were analyzed in this study. In comparison, only one third of the sample research-based science news information revealed frames of scientific uncertainty in which the frames of ”process” and ”inference” were the most common characteristics. For a better understanding about science in whole society, some reflections were provided for the science communication community.起始頁-結束頁：143-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202006_28(2).000317篇名：教師永續發展態度、空汙風險論點與空汙防治行為之關係研究並列篇名：Relationships Among Teachers' Attitudes Toward Sustainable Development, Air Pollution Risk Receptions, and Air Pollution Preventive Behaviors作者：謝百淇(Paichi Pat Shein);陳美智(Mei-Chih Chen);姜幸鐘(Hsing-Chung Chiang)關鍵字：永續發展態度;空汙防治行為;空氣汙染;風險論點;Attitudes Toward Sustainable Development;Preventive Behaviors;Air Pollution;Risk Perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究探討高雄市國中、小學校位於工業區範圍內的教師，其永續發展態度、空氣汙染（簡稱空汙）風險論點與空汙防治行為三者之關係，以空汙風險論點為中介變項，採用調查法收集數據，並使用結構方程模式（structural equation model）檢驗其中的影響關係，共蒐集有效問卷686人。研究工具以自編的教師環境態度調查問卷，共包含三種量表：永續發展態度量表、風險論點量表及空汙防治行為量表。研究結果顯示最佳模式適配度良好，永續發展態度直接影響空汙防治行為及肯定和否定空汙風險，且肯定和否定空汙風險直接影響空汙防治行為。教師持正向的永續發展態度對空汙防治行為的影響，以肯定空汙風險為中介的影響效果比否定空汙風險當中介大，即教師的永續發展態度越正向，越傾向肯定空汙的風險，則越傾向投入空汙防治行為，因此需強化現職老師對永續發展態度的重視。最後將針對研究結果，提出討論及未來的建議。英文摘要：This study explores the relationships among teachers' attitudes toward sustainable development, air pollution risk perceptions, and air pollution preventive behaviors. A total of 686 elementary and secondary school teachers were surveyed and structural equation modelling was used to investigate statistical relationships among the three variables. Findings show that the model fits well to the data and the teachers' attitudes toward sustainable development directly predicts their air pollution risk perceptions and preventive behaviors, and their air pollution risk perceptions directly predicts their preventive behaviors. The more positive the teacher's attitudes towards sustainable development, the more likely they affirm the risk of air pollution and engage in preventive behavior. Therefore, it is critical to strengthen the teachers' attitudes of sustainable development.起始頁-結束頁：169-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202006_28(2).000418篇名：高中科技課程翻轉教學對學習知覺效果的性別差異並列篇名：The Gender Difference of Learning Perception in the Flipped Teaching of High School Technology Curriculum作者：林建良(Chien-Liung Lin);蔡俊彥(Chun-Yen Tsai)關鍵字：性別差異;學習興趣;翻轉教學;Gender Differences;Individual Interest;Flipped Classroom Teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討高中科技課程翻轉教學中男、女生認知、技能及興趣上學習知覺的效果差異，藉以提供高中科技課程翻轉教學設計的參考。研究者採用混合方法分析男、女生對太陽能車學習知覺的差異，量化資料主要以課程回饋單及學習興趣問卷為主，質性資料包含學習問卷及學生晤談等。研究對象為南臺灣某高中實施以太陽能車相關光電科技為主題科技課程的班級，共45位學生，女生14人及男生31人。無母數考驗分析發現男、女生對太陽能車認知及技能的學習知覺無顯著差異，另經無母數考驗分析亦發現，男、女生的情感相關個人興趣在翻轉教學前後有顯著差異。2次曲線模式分析發現男、女生的情感相關個人興趣呈現先降後升的趨勢。質性資料分析則發現女生對於科技課程翻轉教學的學習興趣較偏好在合作互助方面，而男生則以動手做為主。研究發現科技課程翻轉教學中男、女生認知及技能的學習知覺無差異，而在情感相關個人興趣有差異。建議高中科技課程翻轉教學可多安排合作動手做的課程設計，藉以增進學生情感相關個人興趣。英文摘要：This study aimed to measure the gender differences in cognition, skill, and individual interest during the implementation of a flipped classroom teaching approach in a high school technology course. A mixed methods approach was used to analyze collected data. Quantitative data were collected using a course feedback sheet and learning interest questionnaire. Qualitative data were collected using a learning questionnaire and student interviews. A total of 45 students (14 females; 31 males) from one class on solar vehicles in a high school located in southern Taiwan participated in this investigation. A nonparametric Mann-Whitney U analysis test showed no significant gender difference in cognition and skill in learning solar vehicles. Additional results from the same test, however, did show a significant gender difference for individual interest in learning solar vehicles at the end of the course. The analysis of quadratic curve grow model revealed that individual interest between female and male students first decreased and then increased. The qualitative findings showed that female students were more interested in the collaborative process during instruction, while male students were more interested in operating the solar vehicle. Finally, flipped instruction of technology course taught students to apply their cognition and skill in the experience of the practical operation of a solar vehicle. This study suggests that the flipped instruction design in a high school technology course affects boys' and girls' learning differently while providing a suitable learning environment.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202003_28(1).000119篇名：以ARCS動機模式融入引導式探究教學提升九年級生學習動機之行動研究並列篇名：The Infusing of ARCS Strategy Into Guided Inquiry-Based Instruction to Enhance Ninth Graders' Science Learning Motivation-An Action Research Approach作者：賴志忠(Chih-Chung Lai);段曉林(Hsiao-Lin Tuan)關鍵字：ARCS動機模式;行動研究;理化學習;探究教學;學習動機;ARCS Model;Action Research;Physical Science Learning;Inquiry-Based Instruction;Learning Motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究的主旨在探討研究者以Attention, Relevance, Confidence, and Satisfaction （ARCS）動機模式融入引導式探究教學，提升九年級生學習動機之行動研究，本篇論文探討研究歷程所遇到的困難與解決方案，以及學生的學習動機表現。研究對象為中部某城市國中九年級3班學生（N=91），行動研究歷時4個月。資料收集包括：研究者教學反思日誌、學生學習單、學生訪談紀錄及課室活動錄影資料。資料分析採歸納分析法從不同資料交叉比對歸納後提出研究發現。研究者在教學過程，透過教學觀察與反思過程發現與解決教學問題，以提升學生理化科學習動機。結果發現研究者所遭遇的困境為：如何運用ARCS動機策略提升學生動機、如何提升學生學習效率與小組成員互動等問題。研究者運用多元教學策略及學生小組合作方式提升學習效率，以協助學生學習並提升其學習動機。研究後學生對教學方式的回應為：被課程吸引並學到單元核心概念、提升學習信心與成就感、對課程感到公平與滿意等正向情意感受。英文摘要：The purpose of this action research was to explore the influence of Attention, Relevance, Confidence, and Satisfaction (ARCS) strategy with guided inquiry-based instruction on ninth graders' science learning motivation. This investigation explored two areas: problems faced during the implementation process and the solutions used in the study and students' learning motivation outcomes. Three classes (N = 91) of ninth graders in central Taiwan public school participated in the study, and the study lasted four months. Research data included teacher's reflective journals, students' worksheets, and interviews and classroom videotapes. Researchers used analytic induction analysis methods to compare various sources of data to generate findings. In addition, students' feedback questionnaires were administered at the competition of each unit of topic. Data from these questionnaires were also collected and analyzed. Results indicated difficulties in applying the ARCS strategy to facilitate students' science learning, and improve students' learning efficiency and interact with group members. Solutions used by the first author to address these difficulties were trying to improve students' learning efficiency and learning motivation using multiple teaching strategies. Finally, students' feedback was positive in cognitive and affective aspects. They were attracted by the intervention and increased in their core knowledge of the units. Students also felt confident, successful, well-treated, and satisfied with the ARCS infused guided inquiry-based instruction.起始頁-結束頁：25-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202003_28(1).000220篇名：探索臺灣環境學習中心教師專業能力及其影響因素並列篇名：Exploring Environmental Educators' Professional Competences and Influential Factors of Taiwan's Environmental Learning Centers作者：王喜青(Hsi-Ching Wang);周儒(Ju Chou)關鍵字：專業能力;環境教育教師;環境學習中心;Professional Competence;Environmental Educator;Environmental Learning Center期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究嘗試探索臺灣環境學習中心教師自覺專業能力之內容、表現現況及影響能力之相關因素。本研究採用混合設計方式，第一階段為質性研究，共訪談28位在環境學習中心服務年資4年以上的教師，嘗試尋找出重要的環境教育專業能力與影響因素。第二階段運用問卷調查臺灣185位在中心工作之教師，以釐清影響專業能力的重要因素與彼此之關聯性。研究結果顯現：一、環境教育教師的專業能力共有14項，可以分為「一般性個人」、「教育實務」、「環境教育內容」、「環境學習中心經營」等4個能力領域；二、環境教育教師的自覺專業能力以一般性個人領域的能力表現較佳，而「營造促進學習者學習氛圍」、「評估成效與精進教學」與「環境教育基礎認知」等能力表現較弱；三、影響專業能力表現之個人內在因素，主要包括「審慎性人格特質」、「學科專業運用」、「幸福感」及「自我效能感」等4項；四、影響專業能力之外在環境因素，則以「學習者正面回饋」、「成功榜樣」2項為主。其中又以幸福感與自我效能感為影響專業能力的重要關鍵。本文依據研究結果提出未來可在環境教育教師專業發展及後續研究方向上的建議。英文摘要：The purpose of the study was to identify the competences and influential factors perceived by environmental educators in Taiwan's Environmental Learning Centers (ELCs). Investigators adopted mixed methods and conducted a two-stage research process. First, 28 environmental educators with at least four-year working experiences were interviewed to explore their perceived professional competences and factors influencing these competences. Second, based on the findings from these interviews, investigators then surveyed 185 educators of different ELCs to understand the status of perceived competences. Path-analysis through multiple regression was used to clarify the relationships among competences and influential factors. The results showed: (1) there were 14 competences identified that can be categorized into four major areas, including ”general personal competence,” ”pedagogical practical competence,” ”content of environmental education,” and ”ELC management competence”; (2) educators showed good performance in the general personal competence areas. However, educators underperformed in the competences such as ”creating better learning atmosphere,” ”evaluating learning outcome,” and ”basic understanding for environmental education”; (3) personal internal factors that significantly influencing competences included ”conscientiousness personality,” ”application of discipline knowledge,” ”perceptions of well-being,” and ”self-efficacy”; (4) external influential factors that significantly influencing competences were ”learners' positive feedbacks” and ”successful role models.” Among these factors, ”the perceptions of well-being” and ”self-efficacy” were most influential factors to predict competences. The findings of this investigation among ELC educators suggest future professional development and investigation in these areas.起始頁-結束頁：49-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202003_28(1).000301篇名：以任務為導向之方案規劃與實踐對經濟不利與文化殊異資優低成就學生的行動歷程探究並列篇名：A Research on the Planning and Practice of Task-Oriented Programs for Economically and Culturally Disadvantaged Bright Underachievers作者：陳勇祥(Yung-Hsiang Chen)關鍵字：文化殊異;低成就;經濟不利;資優;bright underachievers;culturally disadvantaged;economically disadvantaged期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究先分析經濟不利與文化殊異之資優低成就學生的特質與困境，再依據其需求而規劃以任務為導向之方案，以激發學生之潛能並引導其發掘自身優勢，期能喚起學界對於此類學生之關注與重視。研究參與者為四位來自經濟不利與文化殊異家庭之資優低成就學生，年齡為18至19歲。本研究共規劃四個方案，每一方案分別於寒、暑假，各進行四週，合計二年，共有13位國小四至六年級之原住民學生全程參與。方案規劃分為：「環境生態」、「科學探究」、「文化意識」、「總體營造」等四項主題。行動實踐歷程經過「發現困境」、「找出問題」、「設計內容」、「具體實踐」、「檢討反思」等階段，發現研究參與者於行動歷程逐漸了解自我與環境關係而思考人際意義，使其理解學童感受並發現自身優勢，同時也能反思自身經驗並理解差異而檢視自我評價，進而覺察自我認同的衝突而轉化自身詮釋不同成長環境的觀點。研究參與者於行動歷程之改變為：展現信心與強化動機並持續投入，同時能循序漸進執行任務，終而理解自我的努力，可達成目標之信念。經過結果詮釋與討論，發現研究參與者雖能覺察對自我出身的感受，但甚少關注自身優勢，直到運用其專長帶領學童實踐任務的過程，漸能理解自身背景之特性與反思自我評價。因此，建議教師可從陪伴與傾聽開始，再隨情境改變，適時引導其以不同觀點去看待環境與事件，且應連結家庭與社會資源，藉此深究其內在衝突之不同組型對成就動機的影響，以找出相對應之輔導策略。英文摘要：Purpose: This study first analyzed the traits and plights of economically and culturally disadvantaged bright underachievers. Then, task-oriented plans were established according to their needs to help them to reach their full potential and guide them to explore possibilities. This research is expected to arouse the attention of such students in academia. Methods: The research participants were four economically and culturally disadvantaged bright underachievers aged 18-19 years. Four programs were designed in this study. Each program was conducted for 4 weeks in winter and summer vacations for 2 years. In total, 13 aboriginal students in grades 4-6 of the primary school participated in this study. The programs were divided into four themes: Environmental Ecology, Scientific Inquiry, Cultural Awareness, and Overall Construction. Results/Findings: The course of action and practice had the stages of discovering difficulties, finding problems, designing content, concrete practice, and review and reflection. The practice process consisted of the following steps: (1) determining the relationship between self and environment to think about interpersonal meaning and promote interaction; (2) identifying children's feelings and discovering their advantages; (3) encouraging children to reflect on their own experiences and understand differences while examining past self-evaluations; (4) rethinking culture and environment to empathize with each other and examine their own views on culture to perceive conflicts of self-identity; (5) thinking about the dilemma faced and changing viewpoints to understand the importance of joint action. The changes in the practice process were as follows: (1) students demonstrating confidence and motivation to participate and to continue investment; (2) research participants performing tasks step by step; and (3) students becoming aware of their own efforts required to achieve goals. Conclusions/Implications: The researchers discussed challenges and suggested solutions according to the observation, recording, and dialogue in the action process. Although research participants perceived the disadvantages of their family background, they paid little attention to the advantages they had. They could not understand the characteristics of family background and undertake self-evaluation until they were given assistance by experts in implementing practical tasks. Therefore, teachers are recommended to start with companionship and listening, and then as the situation improves, they should guide students to view the environment and events from different perspectives. In addition, their family and social resources should be connected to continue to promote well-being. Moreover, future research should explore the effect of different forms of internal conflict on achievement motivation to determine corresponding counseling strategies.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202011_45(3).00012篇名：家成、業就？擔任特教老師的非障礙手足之邊界跨越經驗探究並列篇名：Double Special: A Qualitative Exploration of Work-Family Border-Crossing Experiences of Nondisabled Siblings With a Career in Special Education作者：劉益蓉(Yi-Jung Liu);邱春瑜(Chun-Yu Chiu);張睇(Heng-Hao Chang);柯秋雪(Chiou-Shiue Ko)關鍵字：工作－家庭;工作－家庭邊界理論;身心障礙家庭研究;非障礙手足;特殊教育;邊界跨越;border-crossing;family studies;non-disabled sibling;special education;work/family;Work/family border theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：工作與家庭這兩個生活領域具備相異的角色預期跟文化，卻又相連及互相影響。社會觀感中仍慣於將身心障礙者家庭視為需要幫助的對象，但有一群非障礙手足受到家庭經驗影響，選擇進入特殊教育領域成為老師，接著又將專業訓練帶入家中。在工作與家庭研究持續成長的今日，這群在工作及家庭領域都屬特殊的族群會有加倍的需求還是能夠成為兩個生活領域間的橋樑，仍沒有充分的研究資訊。本研究奠基於工作－家庭邊界理論，聚焦在擔任特教老師的非障礙手足身上，旨在探究其工作與家庭間的邊界跨越經驗。研究團隊訪談五位障礙者的姊妹，藉由持續比較法分析深度訪談逐字稿並與理論及文獻對話進行編碼與架構修正。作為第一篇探索我國特教領域中邊界跨越者經驗的文章，本研究發現整體而言，受訪者提及之邊界跨越經驗多為正向陳述。其次，受訪者的工作與家庭領域混合區域大，易出現障礙相關知能的雙向滲透。再來，受訪者的邊界跨越經驗影響與領域中重要人物的互動，進而幫助他們劃分不同情境中的角色定位。最後，受訪者在混合區域中對於障礙的觀感不斷變動，反應出兩個生活領域邊界的彈性變動，但這個變動亦受個人背景影響。根據研究結果，在未來研究上建議持續探究擔任助人工作之非障礙手足經驗；實務上則建議將非障礙手足視為資源，支持他們從個案倡權走向理念倡權，使他們成為家庭與專業人員間的橋樑。英文摘要：Purpose: Studies have documented work and family as two interconnected domains with distinctive sets of values and cultures. Despite the expansion of the work-family literature, the experiences of individuals who have a brother or sister with disabilities and are currently working as special educators (hereinafter ”special educator siblings”) are understudied. For nondisabled siblings who choose to pursue special education-related careers, this life choice could be attributed to their experience of growing up with someone with disabilities. Furthermore, their identity as nondisabled siblings may in turn affect how they interact with students with disabilities. On a societal level, families of individuals with disabilities are often considered objects of assistance. On the other hand, special educators require unique pedagogical training to educate students with additional learning needs. Whether special educator siblings require higher-intensity support and whether they actually benefit from merging what they have learned from work and home have thus far remained unclear. Therefore, this study explored the work- family border-crossing experiences of special educator siblings. Methods: Grounded in work-family border theory, the researchers interviewed five participants who met the predetermined criteria (i.e., working as a full-time special educator and being a nondisabled sibling of at least one individual with disabilities). The five participants were all women aged between 27 and 37 years. Only one was married but had yet to have her own children. Among the five participants, three worked in elementary schools, one worked as an itinerant teacher, and one served at a day center. The types of disability of their brothers or sisters included visual impairment, cerebral palsy, intellectual disability, and multiple disabilities (i.e., intellectual disability with cerebral palsy). The research team, consisting of three nondisabled siblings and one family researcher, analyzed the interviews verbatim. Results/Findings: A constant comparative analysis of the semistructured interview transcripts revealed the following main themes: (a) According to the participants, their border-crossing experiences were generally positive; (b) overlaps in disability-related knowledge and skillsets enlarged the blending area of the two domains, providing a higher level of permeability; (c) participants' border-crossing experiences influenced how they interacted with other domain members (i.e., colleagues, students, and students' parents at work) and border-keepers (i.e., parents and siblings with disabilities at home), which defined their roles in each domain respectively with the flexibility of such borders; and (d) border-crossing experiences in the blending area shaped participants' perspectives of disabilities, but they might also have varied by their demographic backgrounds. Conclusions/Implications: This study serves as the initial exploratory research on this unique population and calls for further investigations into how special educator siblings become resilient when they pursue helping professions. Additionally, the findings suggest that special educator siblings have the potential to foster trusting family-professional partnerships. They may use their border-crossing permeability and flexibility to help facilitate communication and translate their professional knowledge into information for families to comprehend more easily. Professional organizations may establish a list of special educator siblings as a workforce for hosting workshops or founding sibling support groups.起始頁-結束頁：29-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202011_45(3).00023篇名：聽損兒童音韻覺識、快速唸名及其對中文閱讀能力的預測並列篇名：Phonological Awareness and Rapid Automatic Naming of Chinese-Speaking Children with Hearing Loss and their Predictive Relationship with Reading Ability作者：劉秀丹(Hsiu-Tan Liu)關鍵字：快速唸名;音韻覺識;閱讀理解;識字;聽損兒童;character recognition;children with hearing loss;phonological awareness;rapid automatic naming;reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：找出聽力損失兒童閱讀困難的原因是聽障教育界長久以來的重要議題。音韻覺識及快速唸名是預測一般兒童閱讀能力的重要指標，它們是否也能預測聽損兒童的閱讀能力則缺乏相關研究。本研究的目的在於探討聽損兒童是否受限聽力而影響其音韻覺識及快速唸名的表現，並分析此二者對預測聽損兒童中文閱讀能力的重要性。本研究透過三年縱貫性研究，以說華語的33名聽損及45名聽常兒童為對象，先後測得兩組兒童在一年級上學期音韻覺識及快速唸名的表現，接著評量其後續的閱讀能力，分別包含一年級下學期的繪本識詞與繪本閱讀理解、二年級下學期的識字量、以及三年級上學期標準化測驗的閱讀理解。研究結果發現聽損兒童在聲韻結合及去音首兩項音韻覺識能力上，落後聽常兒童，但快速唸名則和聽常兒童相當；聽損兒童在閱讀理解（包括繪本閱讀理解、標準化閱讀理解測驗）落後聽常兒童，但識字能力（包括繪本識詞、識字量）則和聽常兒童相當。本研究亦發現即使排除智力因素，音韻覺識和快速唸名對於聽損兒童的識字均有顯著預測性相關，顯示此二者在聽損兒童的中文識字歷程扮演重要角色。快速唸名對於聽損兒童閱讀理解的預測性相關未達顯著，而聲韻結合、去音首則透過識字的中介作用，對於聽損兒童閱讀理解有獨特貢獻性。本研究結果顯示聲音韻覺識可能是聽損兒童中文閱讀困難的可能原因，和國外聽損兒童的情況類似。因此本研究建議及早促進聽損兒童的音韻覺識及閱讀理解能力。英文摘要：In deaf education, identifying the cause of reading difficulty in children with hearing loss is imperative. The literature suggests that both phonological awareness (PA) and rapid automatic naming (RAN) can predict reading ability in children without hearing loss. However, the effect of either variable on reading ability in children with hearing loss remains unknown. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate PA, RAN, and early reading in the understudied population of Mandarin-speaking children with hearing loss. Furthermore, this study examined how PA, RAN, and other hearing-related variables can predict reading performance in this target group. Methods: This longitudinal study included 33 children with hearing loss and 45 children with typical hearing. In the first grade, predictor variable data were collected from all children during the fall (measures of PA, RAN, and nonverbal intelligence) and outcome variables during the spring (word recognition and reading comprehension of picture books). Chinese character recognition was tested in the spring of the second grade, and reading comprehension was tested in the spring of the third grade. Results/Findings: (1) The PA-blending and PA-onset deletion skills of the children with hearing loss were poorer than those of the children with typical hearing; however, the RAN skills were not significantly different between the two groups. (2) The reading comprehension of the children with hearing loss was lower than that of children with typical hearing, but word/character recognition was comparable between the two groups. (3) After controlling for the influence of intelligence factors, the PA of the children with hearing loss in the first grade had significant predictive correlations with the subsequent word/character recognition and reading comprehension. For example, PA-phonetic reading, PA-onset deleting, and PA-tone awareness were significantly correlated with Chinese word/character recognition in the second grade. PA-blending and PA-onset deleting were significantly correlated with reading comprehension in the third grade. (4) After controlling for the influence of intelligence factors, the RAN in the first grade of children with hearing loss was significantly related to picture-book reading comprehension half a year later. RAN was significantly related to Chinese word/character recognition in the second grade but was not significantly related to reading comprehension in the third grade. (5) The strongest variables for predicting reading comprehension were nonverbal intelligence and PA-phonetic awareness. Conclusions/Implications: The findings from the present study confirmed that the PA and Chinese reading comprehension of children with hearing loss lagged those of children with typical hearing, whereas the RAN and word/character recognition ability were similar for the two groups. This study supports previous research, showing that the reading comprehension challenges of children with hearing loss are related to PA skills in English and extends the findings to Chinese. PA and reading comprehension abilities should be promoted as early as possible for Chinese-speaking children with hearing loss.起始頁-結束頁：53-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202011_45(3).00034篇名：聽覺障礙中學生運用平板學習地理閱讀之行動研究並列篇名：Action Research on Using Tablet PCs in Geography Reading Class for Secondary School Students with Hearing Impairments作者：林家楠(Chia-Nan Lin);洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung)關鍵字：平板;地理科;閱讀理解策略;聽覺障礙學生;geography;reading comprehension strategies;secondary students with hearing impairment;tablet PC期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解聽障學生運用平板學習地理閱讀的教學歷程、可能遇到的問題與解決方案。研究者在學校開設了地理閱讀班，招募了10位聽障學生，歷經了一學年33堂的教學行動方案，透過不斷地省思、修正，歸納出兩個行動階段。行動前期，研究者與行政人員對平板關心的面向不同，遇到了設備管理與借用的問題。課程進行之初，研究者錯估學生操作平板的能力，且不熟悉平板與教學的整合，加上學生主要溝通方式的差異，以致於行動前期研究者疲於解決學生的操作問題。此外，學生可能因為不理解文章內容而無法以平板學習。看到學生使用平板的挫折、訊息接收問題以及教學進度落後時，研究者選擇在課堂減少使用平板，改為讓學生回家獨立完成平板作業，學生卻開始拒絕使用平板。反思與調整教學設計後，在行動後期，研究者提供學習鷹架，銜接軟體操作至學習表現任務，並考量學生特質與能力，整合平板與科技設備，提供學生多元視覺線索，讓學生可以利用平板做為溝通輔具，從迷思概念重新學習，研究者看到平板改善了課堂樣貌，學生也接受使用平板學習。綜合行動歷程的省思與對策，漸進引導平板融入課堂、教師需整合科技教學學科知識、運用科技提供聽障學生適切的溝通輔助是運用平板於地理閱讀課的可行方式。最後，提出本研究之限制與建議，提供運用平板於聽障學生教學之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: This study considered the application of content reading strategies combined with tablet PCs to a geography reading class for secondary school students with hearing impairments to reduce the students' learning difficulties. An action research design was utilized to explore the possible barriers to encounter, the learning difficulties to emerge in the class of students with hearing impairments, and the successful coping strategies for this innovative learning condition. Methods: The geography reading class was designed and taught by the first author on the basis of the student needs and geography learning in middle schools. Ten students in grade 8-12 of a special school for students with hearing impairment were selected. Their levels of hearing impairment ranged from mild to severe, and their major communication mode varied from sign language to oral language and total communication with oral and sign language. The instruction consisted of thirty-three sessions within an academic year. Two researchers worked with four teachers in the school for validating the information of this study. Results/ Findings: Two stages were concluded in this study. In the early stage of the action, different concerns about using tablets were expressed between the administrative staff and researcher, which resulted in the problems of equipment management and checkout. At the beginning of the reading course, the researcher overestimated the student competences of using a tablet. Moreover, difficulties and complexities in integrating the tablets into geography reading for students with different levels of hearing impairment and communication modes emerged. Therefore, the researcher was exhausted by helping students with tablet operation problems during the class. Moreover, students were potentially unable to learn with a tablet because they could not comprehend the geography texts. When the instruction was far behind schedule, students were frustrated with using tablets, and reading comprehension was lacking, the researcher decided to reduce the use of tablets in class and change the using tablets for homework (which students were requested to do at home). However, students refused to use the tablets for the homework. Through reflections and adjustments of the researcher, the integration of pedagogical content knowledge and technological knowledge was tried in the second stage of the action. Considering student characteristics and competences, multiple visual cues were provided, so that students could use tablets as communication aids to discover misconceptions and to relearn. Due to an improved learning condition with more visual presentation when using tablets, students accepted the tablets and showed more competence and interest in using tablets for geographic reading. Conclusions/ Implications: To use tablets in geography reading for secondary students with hearing impairments, teachers must gradually introduce the use of tablets and integrate them into learning reading strategies step by step. Crucial factors include the integration of technology knowledge, pedagogy knowledge, and content knowledge. The teacher must provide appropriate communication assistance with visual cue during the use of tablet. Additional suggestions and limitations are expressed based on the current findings.起始頁-結束頁：87-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202011_45(3).00045篇名：國小自閉症資優生多階層校本方案運作模式之探究並列篇名：Study on Operating Model of Multitiered School-Based Program for Gifted Students with Autism Spectrum Syndrome in Elementary Schools作者：鄒小蘭(Hsiao-Lan Chau)關鍵字：介入反應模式;多階層介入服務模式;自閉症資優生;校本方案;gifted student with autism spectrum syndrome;multi-tiered intervention and service model;Response to Intervention model;school-based program期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究為應用介入反應模式之多階層概念，協同三所國小規劃與執行自閉症資優生之校本方案，以增進學校團隊處遇自閉症資優生的知能。研究透過方案文件、調查問卷與個別訪談等資料，分析多階層介入服務之校本方案運作與模式建構。本研究依學生優弱勢需求、學校設班類型和介入階層，建構出雙類型三階層、單類型三階層和單類型二階層之介入服務模式；階層一著重在普通班老師調整班級經營型態和個案優勢領域學科的課程調整；階層二採同質性興趣小組進行優勢帶弱勢的特定目標介入，可由普通班、資優班或身障資源班提供如專長充實課程、小團體輔導等服務；階層三則由資優教師或符合個案優勢專長的教師提供優勢才能發展之個別或更小團體的課程。各模式的運作步驟為優弱勢評估、組織團隊、介入前會議、執行介入與檢討修正等循環歷程，且介入階層與順序保有彈性因校制宜。校本方案的正向影響包括校本團隊認同且願持續促進方案運作、扭轉教師弱勢補救的慣性思維與教學取向、協助個案導向正向自我概念與提升學習動機及社會技巧、影響同儕對個案的相處態度與縮短人際距離、增加親子互動機會與利於親師溝通；而運作的阻礙有師資跨域專業不足、優弱勢課程拿捏困難、階層介入順序與指標決定困難、人力負荷過重及共備時間不足、媒合介入時間及同質性小團體不易。本研究亦提出解決阻礙的因應策略、結果應用及未來研究建議，期能裨益自閉症資優生獲得學校本位之多階層介入服務的機會。英文摘要：Purpose: A school-based program adopting the multitiered concept of Response to Intervention model was developed to improve schools' treatment of gifted students with autism spectrum syndrome. We implemented the program in three elementary schools and analyzed its practicability. Methods: The operation and model development of school-based multitiered interventions and services were analyzed using data comprising program-related documents, survey questionnaires, and individual interviews. Results/Findings: We developed three models according to the needs of the students based on their strengths and weaknesses, special education class types, and intervention tiers, including the intervention service model of dual-type three tiers, single-type three tiers, and single-type two tiers. The first tier focused on the general education teachers' adjustment of general education classroom management and modification of the curriculum for the advantage of gifted students with autism spectrum syndrome. In the second tier, homogeneous interest expertise groups was adopted to intervene with specific goals for focused on the students' strengths in compensation on their weaknesses. This may be conducted through general education classes, gifted education classes, or resource rooms that offer enrichment curriculum with specialty and counseling with small groups. The third tier comprised individual or small-group programs that could be developed by gifted education teachers or teachers with similar expertise and was suitable to the advantages of the gifted students with autism spectrum syndrome. A cyclic process was conducted in the following order: assessment of students' strengths and weaknesses, team organizing, preintervention meetings, intervention implementation, and review and correction-all to develop the potential strengths of gifted students with autism spectrum syndrome. Our school-based program of multitiered intervention and service had the following positive effects: the school-based teams identified with the program and were willing to continue promoting the program's operation; teachers' habitual thinking and teaching orientation of remedying students' weaknesses were changed; the gifted students with autism spectrum syndrome could be assisted in developing positive self-concept and increasing learning motivation and social skills; peers' attitude toward getting along with gifted students with autism spectrum syndrome was affected and the interpersonal distance was shortened; parent-child interaction opportunities increased; and parent-teacher communication improved. However, the following limitation were noted: lack of interdisciplinary competency of teachers, difficulties in controlling the course to suit students' strengths and weaknesses, difficulties in determining the tiered orders and indicators, excessively heavy manpower burden, insufficient time to cooperate, and difficulties in suitably matching intervention times and homogenous small groups. Conclusions/Implications: In this study, we presented response strategies for resolving operating obstacles and the application of results. Moreover, suggestions were provided for future studies. Our results may aid in increasing the opportunity for gifted students with autism spectrum syndrome for using school-based multitiered interventions and services.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202007_45(2).00016篇名：一位極重度高職自閉症學生前兆行為功能分析與介入成效之初探並列篇名：Functional Analysis and Effects of Precursor Behavior Intervention of A Student with Profound Autism作者：王慧婷(Hui-Ting Wang);陳明宗(Ming-Tsung Chen);阮震亞(Chen-Ya Juan);郭宇婕(Yu-Chieh Kuo);嚴以庭(Yi-Ting Yen)關鍵字：自我刺激;自閉症;行為功能分析;固著行為;前兆行為;Autism;functional analysis;masking assessment;precursor;stereotypy;self-stimulatory behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究者嘗試以前兆行為（precursor behavior）之行為功能分析（functional analysis）與介入的方式，改善一位極重度自閉症高職學生之一連串自動增強的行為問題，例如：連續敲擊物品、咬人與頭撞人或地板，或是在椅子上大力跳動等。當特教生行為問題本身的嚴重程度，在倫理上不允許我們使用行為功能分析去誘發行為問題的時候，近代學界有一些建議的作法。其中一個作法，是以和嚴重行為問題相同反應群的前兆行為，取代個案嚴重行為問題本身的評量與介入。本研究以較為緩和的連續敲擊物品作為前兆行為，研究目的如下：1、執行行為功能評量找出前兆行為之功能，2、在得出前兆行為功能為自動增強後，運用訪談與觀察刪去不適配之感覺輸入形式，最後以海綿及耳塞之觸覺替代策略，以期改善研究對象前兆行為的發生次數。本研究採用單一受試研究法之多元素設計（multi-element design）進行前兆行為功能分析，並採用快速重複不斷基線—介入倒返設計（constant reversal design），評估執行海綿與耳塞兩種觸覺輸入替代策略之成效。本研究結果顯示，使用耳塞的感覺輸入替代之介入策略能顯著降低研究對象連續敲擊物品之前兆行為，兩者間具有功能關係（functional relationship）。本研究開啟了臺灣在處理嚴重行為問題時採用前兆行為評量與介入的實證序端，然而，本團隊並非教育現場工作者為其限制之一，建議未來能由教育現場工作者擔任研究者，更進一步將實證性、更積極的教育介入策略應用於教育現場，以落實行為功能評量與介入的重要意涵。英文摘要：Severe challenging behavior is an unexplored research topic in Taiwan. A recent recommended practice is to indirectly address challenging behavior by assessing and manipulating its less severe and relatively moderate precursor behavior. This practice has the potential to mitigate the necessity of evoking severe challenging behavior and to address ethical concerns when conducting functional analysis. The research team implemented functional analysis and intervention on precursor behavior in order to improve a series of challenging behaviors (i.e., constant tapping objects, biting or hitting a person, hitting floor with head, and vigorously hopping on chair) of a vocational high school student with profound autism. In this case, we selected the tapping objects as the precursor behavior. Purpose: This study examined the results of a functional analysis on the precursor behavior and explored the role automatic reinforcement alternative tactile intervention plays in eliminating this behavior in a student with profound autism. Methods: We used a single-subject multi-element research design with functional analysis and constant reversal design to establish internal validity of the effectiveness of the intervention. The research team conducted a two-phase study: In the first phase, we conducted a functional behavior assessment, comprising functional analysis and masking assessment to validate the hypotheses of automatic reinforcement function of precursor behavior and then the sensory input of automatic reinforcement. In the second phase, after confirming the tactile sensory input which was reinforcing the precursor behavior, we selected sponge and ear plug to investigate the effects. Results/Findings: Results from this study confirmed a functional relationship between using ear plugs as an alternative sensory input and decreasing precursor behavior (i.e., tapping objects). Furthermore, based on anecdotal observation, all other severe challenging behaviors were then eliminated. Conclusions/Implications: This study established initial evidence of effectiveness in precursor behavior assessment in Taiwan. Although the literature indicated precursor assessment may not be applicable for the function of automatic reinforcement as we are not able to control its consequence, this study, however, showed direct intervention with different sensory inputs may be a rational choice for eliminating automatic reinforcement precursor behavior. Finally, the limitation of an external research team led us to suggest encouraging practitioners to be more involved in research to address social validity in response to the literature gap of functional behavior assessment and intervention. Practitioners as researchers also can ensure implementation of more proactive education strategies, such as expanding students' interest and teaching social-communication skills.起始頁-結束頁：29-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202007_45(2).00027篇名：學習障礙大學生韌性發展歷程探究並列篇名：Development of Resilience in College Students with Learning Disabilities作者：曾瓊禛(Chiung-Chen Tseng);洪儷瑜(Li-Yu Hung)關鍵字：大學生;敘事研究;韌性;學習障礙;college students;learning disabilities;narrative analyse;resilience期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究主要透過學障大學生生命敘事，獲得當事人內在觀點，用以理解其韌性發展歷程。本研究邀請三位學障大學生（Y, W, J）參與，以六次半結構深度訪談，對學障大學生及其母親收集研究資料，藉由不同發展時空（國中小、高中、大學）、人我社會情境系統（自我、社會、學校）、以及韌性概念基本元素（危險、保護、適應），建構學障大學生韌性經驗敘事探究空間；並以「內容－類別」分析法，將其韌性發展歷程內容進行重述與論述。研究發現，三位學障大學生韌性發展包括抗衡與復原功能，前者意指抗衡學障帶來的危險威脅，後者則是從適應危機中復原；促進韌性發展的保護機制涉及自我與社會系統，是結合情感與專業的社會支持，藉由發展過程裡的情境事件或轉折點，促使自我系統產生螺旋式向上發展的轉變而成。自我覺知是促發學障大學生韌性發展的關鍵；三位學障大學生自我覺知學障經驗內涵包括學業與非學業適應層面，由學障引發的負向情緒反應與自我和社會他人覺知內容的不一致有關，致使對隱形的學障影響機制產生歧異認知或誤解。來自家庭、同儕、有關專業人員的社會支持，能提供不同比重的情感與專業支持力量，促進三位學障大學生在不同發展階段展現韌性。學障鑑定產生的標籤效應並未在三位學障大學生發展過程產生汙名化影響；鑑定後引進的專業資源，能助益學障大學生與社會他人一致共覺學障現象，進而藉由共尋問題解決之道克服適應困難、防止惡化自我表現，藉由成就感發展正向心理，終於展現韌性。學障相關介入考量與建議於文後陳述。英文摘要：Purpose: Understanding experiences of resilience building in college students with learning disabilities (LD) is important because information on the positive dynamics of adaptive systems during the development process could provide insights into preventive measures and intervention for students with LD. In this study, the development of resilience in college students with LD was explored to further understand manifestations of resilience on the basis of the insiders' views on the experiences of living with LD. Methods: We used a narrative approach to explore life stories of three college students with LD through six in-depth interviews, with the individuals and their mothers. The participants recognized their mothers as the most important significant others; hence, the mothers were asked to provide sufficient information on resilience development during early time. The participants' life stories concerning resilience-building experiences were analyzed through the categorical-content approach in which participants' narratives were derived from the space constituted by different developmental stages of their life, adaptive systems of self-social context dimensions, and essential elements of resilience framework. Results/Findings: Resilience functions of the three participants included resisting or mitigating LD effects, which could potentially disrupt the normal course of development or functioning, and recovering from the crisis worsened by LD and resuming normal functioning relatively quickly. Both the self and social systems played essential roles in building resilience throughout the course of the participants' development. Social support embedded with close relationships and professional knowledge can help such students launch an upward spiral of development and eventually perform protective mechanisms in which transitions and life events might benefit the self-awareness processes. Conclusions/Implications: Participant narratives highlighted that mature self-awareness was the key to resilience building. All participants were aware of the academic and nonacademic challenges in their development. The vulnerability caused by negative emotions might be related to the self-awareness processes when the self and others cannot have identical co-awareness of the LD phenomenon, which leads to misunderstanding or misinterpreting the invisible LD mechanisms. Rather than stigmatizing participants, the eligibility determination process secured appropriate resources and services. Moreover, the participants' resilience was further enhanced by developing adaptive strategies with their significant others to overcome challenges, prevent worsening performance, boost positive psychology by instilling a sense of achievement, and eventually manifest resilience. It may be appropriate to employ resilience framework to design preventive interventions for individuals with LD that can enhance the protective mechanism operations of the self and social systems. With regard to the manifestation of resilience indicated in participants' life stories, educational practitioners are suggested to pay more attention to the self-awareness processes of individuals with LD.起始頁-結束頁：61-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202007_45(2).00038篇名：Yuan Brought Us Together: Teachers' Experiences in Working with Adolescent Cancer Survivors for Successful Middle School Reentry並列篇名：國中教師服務癌癒後學生返校的經驗作者：鄭臻貞(Chen-Chen Cheng)關鍵字：Childhood cancer;middle school reentry;qualitative research;survivorship;teacher's perspective;兒童癌症;國中生癌癒後返校;教師觀點;緣;質性研究;癌癒後兒童期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Purpose: With the advancement of medical technology and effective treatment protocols, many children diagnosed as having cancer can return to school during or after their treatment cycles. However, childhood cancer survivors face numerous physical, socioemotional, and academic challenges on returning to school. Recent studies on school reentry of childhood cancer survivors in Taiwan have mostly been conducted by nursing professionals, who have approached the children's school reentry issues from a medical perspective. Although these nursing researchers recommend multidisciplinary collaboration for serving children with cancer after they return to school, they seldom include teachers' perspectives and approaches in which they could be involved in their research. To understand children's back-to-school experiences and design a successful school reentry program for childhood cancer survivors, it is essential to explore teachers' relevant attitudes and experiences in this regard. Methods: By focusing on childhood cancer survivors' overall well-being on return to school, this qualitative study adopts a phenomenological approach to explore three middle school homeroom teachers' perceptions and experiences working with students. Specifically, each of the participants reflected upon one of their students who were diagnosed as having leukemia or osteosarcoma in Grade 7, received treatment for 2 years, and officially returned to school for Grade 9. Two of these teachers also served as their students' bedside instruction teachers. The research data were collected through 1-2-hour-long semistructured in-depth interviews conducted at the time and place convenient to the participants. With the participants' consent, the interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. The data were then analyzed using thematic analysis to transform teachers' concrete daily experiences to several abstract concepts informing their experiences. These concepts were represented by the themes introduced in the findings. Results/Findings: Thematic analysis of the in-depth interviews revealed teachers' deep sympathy for the students and their mothers, their Yuan-specific cultural beliefs concerning teacher-student relationships, and their creative and flexible ways of maintaining constant and close interactions with students and their mothers and connecting hospitalized students with their classmates. The connections among teachers, adolescent cancer survivors, their peers, their mothers, and other school personnel bridged the otherwise separate entities of school, hospital, and home. Additionally, it created a virtual learning community that offered more learning opportunities for all involved than these settings combined. Teachers reported undergoing a transformation in the process themselves as their understanding about life and death and the meaning of school attendance changed along the way. Conclusions/Implications: The implications of this study comprise encouraging the school teachers of students diagnosed as having cancer to serve as bedside instructors whenever possible, increasing classroom teachers' and bedside instruction teachers' knowledge on childhood cancer and the ramifications of cancer treatment, taking advantage of bedside instructor's official bridging role in ensuring home-school communication and interactions through formal and informal channels, and utilizing real-time or on-demand online instruction and communication programs for hospitalized students.英文摘要：癌癒後兒童返校繼續學業時可能面臨不少挑戰。目前臺灣癌癒後兒童返校方面的研究者大多為護理人員，比較缺少教師方面的角度和參與。從癌癒後兒童的福祉出發，本質性研究以現象學研究派典來探究三位國中教師服務三位癌癒後兒童（一位教師各服務一位學生）的觀點及實際經驗。他們的學生七年級時分別被診斷為骨癌或血癌，經過兩年治療，於九年級返校。本研究以深度訪談方式蒐集研究資料，訪談時間為1-2小時。訪談錄音檔的逐字稿經過主題分析，得到以下結果：教師和學生及家長建立深刻正面關係，以「緣」看待師生關係，擔任學生的床邊教學教師，以極具創意及彈性的做法來增進在校同儕和住院學生間的互動，促進並動員班級、全校、社區的支持及資源整合。教師扮演的橋樑功能將學校、家長（母親）、醫院連接起來創造了一個虛擬卻意義深遠的學習社群。雖然學生學習的時間空間並不相同，教師和學生的學習比在各別學習環境中學習機會更為豐富多元。為了讓學生順利返校，除了鼓勵學科教師擔任床邊教學教師外，原本擔任床邊教學／在家教育的特教教師更應該提升兒童癌症相關知能並擔任學校、家長、及醫院間的橋梁。另外，建議利用網際網絡及技術，開發適合課程平台，讓無法返校學習的學生能在線上和班上同學一起學習及互動。起始頁-結束頁：89-109資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202007_45(2).00049篇名：臺灣身心障礙者母親在不同時間點之困境與服務需求初探並列篇名：Challenges, Needs, and Service Expectations of Mothers of Children with Disabilities作者：賴念華(Nien-Hwa Lai);李御儂(Yu-Nung Lee);羅子琦(Tzu-Chi Lo);蕭雅雯(Ya-Wen Hsiao)關鍵字：本土文化脈絡;身心障礙者;身心障礙家庭;服務期待;障礙者母親需求;Children with special needs;families of people with disabilities;indigenous cultural context;needs of mothers of people with disabilities;people with disabilities;service expectations期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究從臺灣本土文化脈絡向內聚焦，以障礙家庭生命發展為縱軸，探究身心障礙者母親的生命經驗與服務期待，以補現有文獻之缺。研究以天使心家族基金會會員及同儕家長為研究對象，經五場焦點團體訪談十五位來自都會區之身心障礙者母親，發現其困境與服務需求可依身心障礙者生涯發展軸線切分為階段性與跨階段性兩類。階段性含（一）診斷期：困境為難以言喻的情緒、來自家人的壓力；需求是重要他人理解與支持；（二）早療復健期：困境為取捨職涯與家庭衝突、孤立無援心力交瘁、顧此失彼難為母職；需求有極需身心喘息服務、尋求親職衛教資訊、夫妻合力增進理解；（三）進入教育體系期：良莠不齊的教育環境、獨自教導障礙兒與健康手足的挑戰；需求有同儕與丈夫的支持、健全友善的教育環境；（四）離開教育體系期：困境為障礙兒獨立生活及安置的困難、與障礙兒和丈夫共處的窘境；需求有找回自我與重拾關係、優質且充足的安置機構。跨階段性困境為（1）社會汙名化的困窘、（2）缺乏溫度的專業人員、（3）醫療與社福系統的分歧；需求為（1）專業人員的理解與支持、（2）同儕家長間的互助扶持、（3）單一窗口的個管服務。研究者試從本土文化脈絡視角提出初步討論與建議：（一）受訪者以充足性與提升性需求為主：（1）母親自主意識提升、（2）社會倡議去污名化、（3）重視身心障礙者母親心理健康；（二）夫妻關係是母親的身心健康基礎；（三）同儕家長互助網絡之重要性。英文摘要：Purpose: Focusing on the indigenous context in Taiwan, this study aimed to update current knowledge on the family life of mothers of children with disabilities. The difficulties encountered by these female caregivers over the lifespan of their children as well as their needs and service expectations were investigated. Methods: Five focus group interviews were conducted with 15 female caregivers who resided in the urban areas of Northern Taiwan to collect data on their caregiving experiences. Qualitative analysis founded in grounded theory was performed on the transcribed data. Results/Findings: On the basis of the chronological development of children with disabilities, the researchers categorized the difficulties and needs delineated by the caregivers into two groups: ”stage-specific” and the ”life-long.” In particular, across the lifespan of children with disabilities, the stage-specific group identified four stages of life development as well as respective difficulties and needs. During the diagnostic stage, the caregivers experienced difficulties in managing complex and unutterable emotions and intrafamilial stresses, and they required understanding and support from their significant others. During the early intervention and rehabilitation stage, the caregivers struggled between their careers and families, spousal conflicts, social isolation, and an overwhelming demand to care for both children with disabilities and their healthy siblings; therefore, they required ample respite care, parenting education, and spousal alliance. During the schooling stage, the caregivers experienced difficulty in adapting to the education system and confronting the identities of both their children with disabilities and their healthy siblings, who began exhibiting a stronger self-concept. The caregivers consequently expected more support from their partners and fellow caregivers as well as a well-rounded education system. During the placement stage, they worried about their children's ability to live independently and the quality and outlook of placement services, while perceiving the demand to readjust their relationships with their partners and children with disabilities. Thus, in addition to the needs in quality placement institutes, they had to learn and relinquish their caregiver roles, attempt to embrace their own lives again, and reconnect with their partners. Regarding the life-long group, the difficulties experienced by the caregivers across their children's lifespan included social stigmatization, rough attitude of professionals, and bureaucracy in the medical and social welfare systems. In response, the needs and expectations in this category included understanding the support of professionals, mutual support from peer parents, and consolidated case management with one-stop services. Conclusions/Implications: These research findings elucidate the culture-sensitive discussions and suggestions on promoting the rights of female caregivers and destigmatization of disabilities. Furthermore, the transferability of the findings are outlined in the research limitations.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202003_45(1).000110篇名：遲語兒語言發展趨勢和詞彙學習歷程：幼兒期至學齡前期縱貫研究並列篇名：Language Development Trajectory and Word-Learning Process in Late-talking Children: A Panel Study from Toddlerhood to Preschool Stage作者：呂信慧(Hsin-Hui Lu);曹峰銘(Feng-Ming Tsao)關鍵字：早期偵測;快速連配詞彙學習;接收性語言;聲調知覺;遲語兒;Early detection;Fast mapping;Late talkers;Lexical tone;Receptive language期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：早期療育醫療人員常困擾當幼兒被診斷為「遲語兒」後，要如何預測他們日後的語言成長型態和速度，以及在學齡前期出現「兒童語言障礙」的風險。本研究主要目的在探索遲語兒的早期語言發展型態和詞彙學習歷程，並評估這些早期指標的預測效果。研究參與者為32位兩歲「遲語兒」，量測他們靜態的語言表現（如，詞彙表達量、語句表達複雜度、接收性語言、表達性語言）和動態的詞彙學習歷程（快速連配、音韻工作記憶和聲調知覺）等能力，日後再於他們三歲與四歲時蒐集接收性語言與表達性語言能力。在四歲時根據語言能力，區分成「語言障礙」或「語言晚熟」組。結果顯示，這兩組兒童在生理年齡、非語文認知能力和生理狀態方面沒有顯著差異，但兩組兒童於兩歲時已在接收性語言、詞彙學習歷程的快速連配和四聲聲調指認有顯著差異；階層模式（HLM）分析發現控制母親教育程度、語言療育和幼兒教育等因子，「快速連配」與「四聲聲調指認」仍能正向調控遲語兒兩歲至四歲的語言成長斜率；另羅吉斯迴歸分析發現兩歲的「接收性語言」能預測遲語兒在四歲診斷為「兒童語言障礙」的風險，「快速連配」的預測性在邊緣顯著範圍。總結這些結果，意涵遲語兒於兩歲時，理解口語訊息、聲調知覺及詞彙學習歷程表現是預測日後語言發展變化的早期指標。此外，研究結果有利於發展評估兩歲遲語兒童，日後出現語言障礙風險的評量工具。英文摘要：Exploring the predictors of late-talking (LT) children's language development trajectories from toddlerhood to the preschool stage and the benefits of diagnosing a language disorder (LD) at the preschool stage is essential in the clinical practice. Purpose: This longitudinal study examined whether early language abilities and word-learning abilities were predictors of language development trajectories of LT toddlers from toddlerhood to the preschool stage. Specifically, the study investigated whether 2-year-old LT toddlers who were later diagnosed with language disorders at the age of 4 exhibited distinct language profiles and word-learning processes at various ages. Methods: The data in this panel study were collected at three time points (age 2, age 3, and age 4). This longitudinal study recruited 32 two-year-old LT toddlers. At age 4, LT children were classified as having LD or late bloomers (LBs). At age 2, data on the vocabulary size, the sentence complexity, fast-mapping ability of word-learning process, phonological working memory, and lexical-tone perception were collected. In addition, data on receptive and expressive language skills and cognitive ability were gathered at the three ages. Results/Findings: In nonverbal cognitive abilities, the LD and LB groups performed similarly at ages 2, 3, and 4. However, at age 2, the receptive language skill, fast-mapping ability, and lexical-tone perception of the LD group were poorer than those of the LB group. Additionally, after controlling for mother's education level, months of language intervention and attending daycare, the results of the hierarchical linear model revealed that 2-year-old LT toddlers with better fast-mapping ability and lexical-tone perception exhibited faster development of receptive and expressive language skills from ages 2 to 4. Finally, the results of the logistic regression analysis demonstrated that 2-year-old LT toddlers with better receptive language skills were less likely to be diagnosed with LD later at age 4. Conclusions/Implications: At age 2, receptive language skill, fast-mapping ability, and lexical-tone perception were potent predictors of language development trajectories of LT children from toddlerhood through the preschool stage and LD diagnosis later at age 4. Receptive language skill, fast-mapping ability, and lexical-tone perception were essential in fostering the language learning process of LT toddlers. The findings of this study did not only reveal the predictors of LT toddlers' language development but also shed light on designing assessment tools for identifying 2-year-old toddlers who are at a high risk of exhibiting LD later.起始頁-結束頁：33-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202003_45(1).000211篇名：保護因子對於不同復原力類型學習障礙學生之影響並列篇名：Effect of Protective Factors on Students with Learning Disabilities from Different Clusters of Resilience作者：張萬烽(Wan-Feng Chang)關鍵字：社會支持;保護因子;復原力;集群分析;學習障礙;cluster analysis;learning disability;protective factor;resilience;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：由於神經心理功能的缺陷，使學習障礙學生在學業上持續遭遇困難，若加上社會情緒上的問題，就容易對其適應造成影響。從復原力的角度來看，若有良好的個人特質或社會支持，就能協助個人在逆境中有正向的發展。本研究旨在探討自我概念、自我效能、家庭支持、教師支持以及同儕支持等內、外在保護因子對學障學生心理健康是否產生保護作用。以特殊教育長期追蹤資料庫99學年度303位國三學障學生為對象，透過個人取向的復原力研究設計，以瞭解不同保護因子及危險因子集群之學障學生，其及心理適應是否有所差異。結果發現可將學生分為具復原力（20.8%）、適應良好（32.0%）、高度風險（20.5%）以及適應欠佳（26.7%）等四組，以區別分析檢視正確分群的程度，其總正確率為94.7%。此外，比起高度風險和適應欠佳群體，具復原力和適應良好兩組學生有顯著較佳的自我概念、自我效能、家庭關係、師生關係以及同儕關係。本研究最後針對保護因子對於學障學生心理健康的影響提出討論，並對未來研究與實務工作提出建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Learning disabilities in children are assumed to result from a neurological disorder that makes adequate performance in school difficult for them. Additionally, social emotional problems can easily affect adaptive skills in these students. In terms of resilience, having good personal competence or social support helps individuals to adapted well when facing adversity. This study investigates whether internal and external protective factors, such as self-concept, self-efficacy, family support, teacher's support, and peer support, have protective effects on the psychological health of students with learning disabilities. Methods: This study focused on 303 third-grade students with learning disabilities who were registered in the Special Needs Education Longitudinal Study data archive in the 2010 academic year. A research design featuring personal orientation resilience, comprising two indicators, academic performance (risk factor) and mental health (adaptive outcome), was implemented for conducting a cluster analysis. Following grouping, the chi-square test was used to determine the number of students of different gender and educational placements. Moreover, ANOVA was used to determine the difference in risk factors, protective factors, and mental health among students from four clusters. Results/Findings: According to the results, students can be divided into four groups: resilient (20.1%), competent (32.0%), highly vulnerable (20.5%), and maladaptive (26.7%). These findings are supported by a discriminant analysis, which identified 94.7% correctly. Additionally, resilient and well-adapted students were found to have significantly better self-concept, self-efficacy, family relationships, teacher-student relationships, and peer relationships than the high-risk and poorly adapted students. Conclusions/Implications: This study discusses the impact of protective factors on the psychological health of students with learning disabilities and recommends future research and practical usage of the study outcomes. No significant differences in risk factors, protective factors, and mental health were observed, irrespective of the gender or placement, indicating that gender or placement is not a factor influencing the resilience of students with learning disabilities. Second, academic achievement was only associated with teacher's support and did not have any significant correlation with factors such as protective factors and mental health. This indicates that the higher the teacher's support, the better the academic achievement of the students with learning disabilities. By contrast, mental health and all protective factors were positive correlation. Third, students with learning disabilities were clustered into four groups: competent, resilient, maladaptive, and high vulnerable. In terms of risk factors, academic performance of students with good and poor adaptation was better than that of students from the other two clusters. In terms of mental health, differences were observed among the four groups, and students with resilience were the best. In terms of protective factors, students with good adaptability and resilience were significantly better than those with poor adaptability and high risk. In practice, this study was intended to empower families and teachers and promote self-efficacy and self-concept in students with learning disabilities. In terms of research, this study was conducted to consider the sources of risk factors and protective factors, and the variables that influence students with disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：65-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202003_45(1).000312篇名：點與線的選擇：十九世紀末臺灣盲用文字的演變並列篇名：Choosing between Lines and Dots: The Evolution of Reading Systems for People who are Blind in Taiwan during the late 19th Century作者：邱大昕(Tasing Chiu)關鍵字：甘為霖;盲人教育史;盲用文字;特殊教育史;blind education history;Braille;Campbell;special education history期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：45卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：臺灣盲人特殊教育迄今已有一百三十多年的歷史，不過目前對早期盲人教育的瞭解非常有限且有不少訛傳。本文旨在探討與釐清十九世紀末，臺灣盲人所使用的文字系統及其演變過程。使用之資料主要來自英國與臺灣基督教會與圖書館保存的歷史檔案與相關書籍。從英國格拉斯哥大學的特藏室，與臺灣基督長老教會歷史檔案館所保留的盲人讀本，可以得知早期臺灣盲用文字至少有穆恩字體（Moon）和布萊爾點字（Braille）兩種。但根據史料記載，在此之前盲人可能還使用過近似羅馬字母的亞士頓（Alston）線體字。從亞士頓、穆恩等線體字到使用布萊爾點字，過去視為不可避免的進步趨勢。然而盲文字體的選擇涉及許多不同考量，而非單純由學習效率或製作成本來決定。甘為霖考慮不同年齡層盲人的需要而決定點線並用，穆瑞則從盲童發展到文盲明眼人的教育因此將點連成線，最後羅馬字母點字成為主流主要則是考慮到中國方言種類與教會發展之歷史因素。過去許多障礙研究以為，早期特殊教育多由健全者（able-bodied）的角度出發，而不是基於障礙學生自身的需要。障礙權利意識抬頭之後，布萊爾點字和手語才開始為盲啞學校所接受。然而實際上盲文字體的選擇牽涉因素很多，許多時候是同時考慮障礙者與非障礙者的結果。英文摘要：Purpose: Although special education has been provided to people who are blind for more than 130 years in Taiwan, little is known about its early development. The purpose of this article was to explore and clarify reading systems used by people who are blind in Taiwan during the late 19th century, as well as describe the evolution of these systems. Methods: The majority of materials used in this study were historical archives and books maintained by Christian churches and libraries in the United Kingdom and Taiwan. These data were analyzed and compared to determine the types of reading systems for people who are blind that were used in Taiwan during the late 19th century and to reveal reasons for their adoption. Results/Findings: Textbooks for people who are blind maintained in the special collection room of the University of Glasgow, United Kingdom, and the historical archives room of the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan revealed at least two reading systems, namely Moon type and Braille type. However, according to historical records, people who are blind may also have used Alston type, which is similar to the Roman alphabet, before Moon type and Braille type were adopted. The evolution from line-based reading systems, such as Alston type and Moon type, to the dotted Braille type has often been regarded as inevitable. However, the choice of reading system requires consideration of many different factors in addition to learning efficiency and production cost. William Campbell considered the varying needs of people who are blind of different ages and thus decided to use both dots and lines. As for William Murray, he employed Braille for children who are blind and later connected the dots into lines to teach sighted illiterate people. Braille, which is based on the Roman alphabet, triumphed as the mainstream reading system in Taiwan due to the variety of Chinese dialects and the history of missionary work. Conclusions/Implications: Disability studies have often argued that early special education was developed from the perspective of the able-bodied, without considering the needs of students with disabilities. Only with rising awareness of disability rights did Braille and sign language become accepted by schools for children who are blind and those who are deaf. Nevertheless, many practical factors are involved in the choice of the reading system for people who are blind, and the decision in fact results from the simultaneous consideration of people both with and without disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：97-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202003_45(1).000401篇名：輔助溝通系統服務提供者在特殊教育實踐現況之調查並列篇名：Investigating the Implementation of Augmentative and Alternative Communication Service in Special Education by Service Providers作者：李淑靜(Shu-Ching Lee);陳明聰(Ming-Chung Chen)關鍵字：輔助溝通系統;特殊教育;特殊教育教師;語言治療師;考量因素;AAC;special education;special education teacher;speech and language pathologists;consideration factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：52期出版年：2020中文摘要：輔助溝通系統是特殊教育支持服務項目之一，但是臺灣在國教階段特教學校和集中式特教班裡，輔助溝通系統介入服務的現況為何？國內輔助溝通系統服務主要由特教教師和語言治療師執行，因此，本研究透過問卷調查，探討實務工作者提供服務的情形、實踐經驗及對介入輔助溝通系統時的考量因素之自覺重要程度。本研究共回收610份有效問卷，關於實踐經驗和考量因素的重要性部分只使用其中477位一直有提供或曾經提供過輔助溝通系統服務的資料進行分析。結果發現，在服務提供方面，服務對象以發展性障礙為多；設備以低科技比例最高；使用目的以表達需求和想望比例最高；評估選用工作以語言治療師為主，但訓練則以特教教師為主。在服務實踐經驗部分，評估選用、訓練與成效評估和語言評量等三向度的實踐度均偏低，不過語言治療師有較高的實踐度，一直有提供服務者比曾經提供者在前兩向度上有較高的實踐度，而語言評量向度的實踐度最低。實務工作者對介入輔助溝通系統時的四個考量因素（自覺輔具取得、態度與支持、個案能力、成果因素）自覺重要程度皆高，但自覺成果因素重要性較低。文中也根據研究結果進行討論，並提供未來研究和服務上的建議。英文摘要：Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) is one of supportive services that should be provided for students with complex communication needs, required by law. Special education teachers and speech language pathologists (SLPs) are the major AAC services providers in schools. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the current AAC services situation, implementation experience, and importance of consideration factors for providing AAC services. 610 valid questionnaires were gained from teachers of self-contained class or special education schools and SLPs in special education system. Only the data of 477 who continued to provide AAC services or provided before were used for analysis. The major findings were (a) AAC services provided: the major AAC users were students with developmental disabilities, low tech AAC were used most, the main purposes of using AAC were expressing needs and wants, the procedure of AAC selection was SLPs' major job while special education teachers were in charge of AAC training. (b) implementation of AAC services: the degree of implementation in dimensions of assessment and selection, training and outcome measurement, and language assessment were low. But SLPs demonstrated higher degree, and AAC services providers who provided service continuously had higher degree in the previous two dimensions. (c) importance of consideration factors for AAC services: four factors (device obtaining, attitude and support, capabilities of client, outcome) were regarded as very important.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320201200520012篇名：國小一、二年級典型聽力和聽力障礙學童之唸讀速率與閱讀理解表現分析並列篇名：An Analysis of Oral Reading Rate and Reading Comprehension in First- and Second-Graders with Typical Hearing and with Hearing Loss作者：洪右真(Yu-Chen Hung);詹益智(Yi-Chih Chan)關鍵字：聽障;唸讀速率;閱讀理解;國小;hearing loss;oral reading rate;reading comprehension;elementary school期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：52期出版年：2020中文摘要：囿於國內聽障學童唸讀速率相關研究之匱乏，教育工作者缺少參照資料，難以利用唸讀速率作為評估聽障學童閱讀異常表現的指標。有鑑於此，本研究探討低年級典型聽力與聽障學童於短文唸讀速率與閱讀理解表現上的差異與相關性。透過「中文短文唸讀評估工具」中的文本和閱讀測驗，以及「國民小學閱讀理解篩選測驗」，共記錄60名一年級（聽障組23名）與46名二年級（聽障組17名）學童的唸讀速率與閱讀理解表現。研究結果指出：（1）一年級典型聽力組學童的閱讀理解表現顯著優於聽障組學童；二年級時則相較無異；（2）僅有二年級典型聽力組學童的唸讀速率可以反映其閱讀理解表現，顯示唸讀速率和閱讀表現間的相關性會隨著發展逐漸成熟。此外，推測聽障學童須等唸讀相關能力成熟後，其唸讀速率與閱讀理解的關係才會逐漸明朗穩固。綜觀上述，唸讀速率可用於檢視二年級典型聽常兒童的閱讀表現，但針對低年級聽障學童則不適用。英文摘要：In Taiwan, little known is about oral reading rate in children with hearing loss, an important index which education professionals may use to evaluate reading comprehension of this population. In view of this, the purpose of the present study is to explore the relationship between oral reading rate and reading comprehension in low-graders with typical hearing and with hearing loss, as well as these children's differences in the two aforementioned dimensions. Sixty first-graders (23 children with hearing loss) and 46 second-graders (17 children with hearing loss) were administered the Chinese Oral Reading Assessment and Reading Comprehension Screening Test for Elementary School Students. Two major results were obtained: (1) the first-graders with typical reading outperformed their peers with hearing loss in reading comprehension, whereas no difference was found between the two groups of second-graders; (2) the relationship of oral reading rate to reading comprehension was only evident in the second-graders with typical hearing, suggesting that this relationship becomes more obvious with the increase of age. In addition, only when children with hearing loss have mastered the skills necessary for oral reading performance does the relation of oral reading rate with reading comprehension begin to emerge and be consolidated. Overall, although oral reading rate could serve as an indicator of reading performance in the second-graders with typical hearing, its application to the low-graders with hearing loss still remains questionable.起始頁-結束頁：29-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320201200520023篇名：智能障礙勞工之職能與體能檢測之關聯性研究並列篇名：A Study of Correlation Between Occupational and Physical Performance Tests for Workers with Intellectual Disabilities作者：葉翰霖(Han-Lin Yeh);張韋豪(Wei-Hao Chang);姜義村(I-Tsun Chiang)關鍵字：智能障礙者;勞工;職能表現;體能檢測;加油站;汽車美容;intellectual disabilities;workers;occupational performance;physical test;gas station;auto detailing期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：52期出版年：2020中文摘要：身心障礙者穩定就業對自尊、自信心、職業生涯發展及生活獨立自主性皆有正面影響，其中職能表現為持續服務於職場的關鍵因素，而體能表現也影響智能障礙者的身體健康與生活品質。本研究目的為探討工作職能表現與各項體能檢測之關聯性，招募51位加油站或汽車美容之智能障礙勞工進行符合該族群合適的職能表現檢測與相關體能檢測。研究資料以斯皮爾曼等級相關係數與克－瓦二氏單因子等級變異數分析，研究結果顯示：（1）各項職能表現與部分體能檢測達顯著負相關（r = -.33 ~ -.63），即當體能表現愈好職能表現耗費時間越少，其績效亦較佳；（2）經工作任務分組後，除同時具洗車與加油能力工作者於上、下肢肌力及步態移行與其他組有顯著差異之外，其他體能與職能表現在各組間並無差異。本研究發現體能與職能表現存在部分項目之關聯性，可作為未來進一步發展監測智能障礙勞工身體狀況與職能表現之研究基礎。同時，基於考量勞力型工作環境的工作效率與身體負荷能力，建議未來於加油站或汽車美容工作的智能障礙勞工之體能訓練應關注心肺耐力、肌力與肌耐力三個項目。此外，亦建議未來應建立大樣本資料庫，將關聯性較高的項目進一步進行預測力之檢驗分析，以完備智能障礙者就業支持性服務工作。英文摘要：Ensuring employment opportunities for people with disabilities impacts positively on their self-esteem, self-confidence, career development, and life independence. Occupational performance is the main key of maintaining their employment opportunities. Physical performance also impacts their physical health and quality of life. The purpose of this study was to understand the correlation between occupational performance of workers with intellectual disabilities (ID). Fifty- one workers with ID employed in gas station and/or auto detailing were recruited and completed occupational and physical performance tests. Data were analyzed by Spearman's rank correlation coefficient and Kruskal-Wallis test. The results indicate: (1) the significant correlations between occupational and physical performance tests (r = -.33 ~ -.63) implies that with higher physical performance, workers with ID would be more efficient with their works; (2) except the group who work both in gas station and auto detailing had significant difference in walk test, upper and lower muscular strength, there is no other significance among groups. The study concluded that some physical performance and occupational performance are correlated and could be the foundation for future studies in understanding physical conditions and occupational performance for workers with ID. Because gas station and auto detailing are labor-intensive working environment, cardi-orespiratory endurance, muscular strength and endurance are three domains that are recommended in physical trainings for workers with ID to provide enhanced working efficiency and physical capacity. In addition, studies with big data are needed in order to provide stronger evidence to support of enhancing the support service for labors with ID.起始頁-結束頁：49-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320201200520034篇名：家長與教師對國小普通班一年級聽覺損傷學生入學準備能力看法之研究並列篇名：Parents and Teachers' Perspectives on School Readiness of the First-Graders Who Were Deaf-and-Hard of Hearing in General Education Classrooms作者：陳怡慧(Yi-Hui Chen)關鍵字：入學準備能力;聽覺損傷;聽覺障礙;重要性──表現值分析;deaf-and-hard of hearing;school readiness;IPA期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：51期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究採用問卷調查法探討家長與教師對普通班一年級聽覺損傷學生入學準備能力的看法，包括對入學準備能力重要性與具備程度之看法。研究對象包含聽損學生家長124位、級任教師120位、特教教師113位。研究問卷「聽覺損傷學生入小學一年級準備能力」涵蓋八個面向：課室情境適應、課業學習、社會情緒、口語溝通、提問與敘事、生活自理、團體適應、動作。研究結果發現：（1）不同研究對象對入小學準備能力各面向重要性的評定均在重要程度以上；（2）不同研究對象均認為聽損學生在多數入學準備能力面向已達大部分具備程度；（3）就全量表的重要性而言，家長的評定分數顯著高於級任教師及特教教師，級任教師的評定分數顯著高於特教教師；就全量表的具備情形而言，家長的評定分數顯著高於特教教師；（4）不同背景變項之特教教師對聽損學生入小學準備能力具備情形之看法具有顯著差異；（5）依據重要性──表現值分析結果，小一聽損學生在團體適應與生活自理之能力表現符合各研究對象的期待，課業學習與動作為超乎期待之能力，而社會情緒是首先需要提升之入學準備能力。英文摘要：The current study aimed to explore the perspectives of parents and teachers regarding school readiness of the first-grade students who were deaf-and-hard of hearing educated in the general education classrooms in Taiwan. There were 124 parents, 120 classroom teachers, and 113 special education teachers recruited in the study. A self-developed questionnaire with two sub-scales was used for data collection. The instrument covered eight domains: Adaptation in classroom, academic skills, social-emotion, oral communication, requesting and narrating skills, self-care, group adaptation, and motor. The results indicated that all the participants regarded all the domains as ”important” school readiness skills. In terms of the performance level, all the participants unanimously rated the domains of adaptation in classroom, academic skills, self-care, group adaptation, and motor as between ”mostly” and ”fully” possessed levels, and regarded the domain of social-emotion as between ”somewhat” and ”mostly” possessed levels. In both whole sub-scales the scores measured by the parents were significantly higher than those measured by the special education teachers. Moreover, there were significant differences in the measurement of performance level between special education teachers with different demographic variables. Finally, the results of importance- performance analysis (IPA) demonstrated that the domains of self-care and group adaptation were in accordance with the expectation of all participants, and the domain of social emotion was below the expectation of all participants.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320200600510015篇名：高中集中式特教班教師科技教學內容知識與專業能力之研究並列篇名：A Study on Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge for Senior High School Teacher in Self-Contained Classrooms作者：黃彥融(Yan-Rong Huang);林燕玲(Yen-Ling Lin)關鍵字：科技教學內容知識;特教教師專業能力;高中集中式特教班教師;Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK);teacher professional ability;senior high school teacher in self-contained classrooms期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：51期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探究高中集中式特教班教師科技教學內容知識專業能力，並分析不同背景教師在能力上的差異。以研究者自編之「科技教學內容知識能力調查問卷」進行調查，問卷內容綜合教學知識、內容知識及科技知識等能力，透過設計、運用、倫理及熟練度四個向度進行。本研究採立意取樣方式，以參與「特殊教育學校課綱宣導」或「服務群課程推動工作圈」相關研習之教師作為研究對象，剔除掉重複填答、填答不全或無意願參與本研究的相關問卷後，計有225位教師填答本問卷。研究結果以描述性統計作為說明，並使用獨立樣本t檢定進行差異分析。結果發現如下：（1）高中集中式特教班教師具備基礎以上的科技教學內容知識能力，普遍具備相關倫理規範，且能運用科技來更新教學上的新知，但對於科技與教學活動結合及數位科技規劃課程產生相對困難；（2）科技教學內容知識能力不受到性別、最高學歷及大學是否特教系畢等因素而產生差異；（3）高中集中式特教班教師科技教學內容知識專業能力受到教學年資及任教學校類型等背景因素而產生顯著差異。最後，根據研究結果提出在特教教師科技教學內容知識專業能力培育及增能建議，並提出建構特殊教育教師的科技特教教學知識（technological special education pedagogical knowledge, TSEPK）之發展建議。英文摘要：This study was to explore Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK) for senior high school teacher in self-contained classrooms. The researchers investigated the teachers' ability of technology curriculum design, technology curriculum application, technology application ethics and technology application proficiency, and discussed the differences of ability with distinct background. A self-reported questionnaire with measures of technology curriculum design, technology curriculum application, technology application ethics and technology application proficiency were administered to senior high school teacher of self-contained classrooms whom join workshop. Data was collected from 225 teachers after discarding invalid and incomplete questionnaires by purposive sampling. The result was analyzed through descriptive statistics and independent sample t-test. Findings were summarized as follows: (1) Teachers' TPACK ability generally had above the average. Teachers have better performance in ”technology application ethics”, and ”technology curriculum application” needs to be strengthened. Teachers generally have ethics in technology is above the average, and can use technology to update new knowledge in teaching, but it is difficult for science and teaching activities and technology planning courses; (2) Teachers' TPACK ability indicated that no differences in gender and professional background.; (3) There were significant differences in background factors such as teaching years and type of school. According to the research results, the author put forward the suggestions on the cultivation and enrichment of the special knowledge of the science and technology teaching content of the special education teachers, and proposed the development of the Technical Special Education Pedagogical Knowledge (TSEPK).起始頁-結束頁：31-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320200600510026篇名：擴增實境（AR）之比與比值數學教材對國小六年級學習障礙學生學習及課堂注意力成效提升之探討並列篇名：The Effects of Learning and Attention in the Classroom for Students with Learning Disabilities by Using Augmented Reality in Rate and Ratio Instruction作者：蔡浩軒(Hao-Syuan Cai);孟瑛如(Ying-Ru Meng)關鍵字：學習障礙;擴增實境;數學學習;比與比值;課堂注意力;students with learning disabilities;augmented reality;mathematics learning;rate and ratio;attention in the classroom期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：51期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究利用擴增實境（AR）設計數學比與比值教材，以單一受試研究法之撤回設計研究4位國小學習障礙學生，進行每週3次，持續8週，共24次教學。透過改編「課堂注意力行為檢核表」、自編「數學學習成效測驗」、數學診斷測驗（MDA）及訪談瞭解本教材對受試者的學習成效及課堂注意力成效。以目視分析法及C統計分析發現：（1）使用擴增實境（AR）教材教學後，受試者在自編「數學學習成效測驗」上比與比值學習成效達顯著，顯示學習具立即與維持成效，未使用擴增實境（AR）教材教學的圓面積學習成效顯著下降，同時MDA後測與前測結果相較下，百分等級皆提升，在比與比值題型作答皆正確；（2）根據改編「課堂注意力行為檢核表」，受試者在課堂注意力之圖畫、語文、推理注意力向度上皆具立即提升成效；（3）AR數學教材搭配教學介入，對於受試者認知負荷測量有學習反應時間上的個別差異，顯示學習障礙學生在計算能力上確實有瓶頸，但經教學介入後，正確率皆上升，顯示確實能降低認知負荷量並依照自身學習速率進行學習。英文摘要：This study used Augmented Reality (AR) to design mathematical instruction in rate and ratio and single subject withdraw design to evaluate effects of the 4 six grade students with learning disabilities on learning and attention in the classroom. The instruction lasted 8-weeks and was performed three times a week. Instruments were adapted ”Classroom Attention Behavior Checklist”, self-administered ”Mathematics Learning Effectiveness Test”, Mathematical Diagnostic Test (MDA), and interviews. The findings of visual analysis and C statistic showed that: (1) After using AR in teaching rate and ratio, the participants demonstrated significant achievement of learning outcomes in the rate and ratio on the self-administered Mathematics Learning Effectiveness Test, indicating an immediate and sustain effective learning. The achievement of learning outcomes in the circular has decreased significantly without using AR in the classroom. Most students identified correct answers in post-tests and increased their certainty compared to pre-tests on the Mathematical Diagnostic Test (MDA). (2) The participants' attention in drawing, language, and reasoning were better than before, according to the results of adapted ”Classroom Attention Behavior Checklist”. (3) Individual differences existed in cognitive load and reaction times when using AR in the classroom, indicating that computational skills acts as a bottleneck for the students with learning disabilities. The teaching intervention did increase the percentage of correct answers and reduce cognitive load of the participants so they can learn at their own pace.起始頁-結束頁：65-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/20745583202006005100301篇名：中年女性教育人員生涯「意義提升模式（RAISE-up model）」之建構並列篇名：The Construction of RAISE-up Model for Mid-Life Female Educators作者：田秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Shelley Tien);朱惠瓊(Hui-Chuang Chu);鄭曉楓(Hsiao-Feng Cheng)關鍵字：女性生涯;中年女性教育人員;生涯風格設計;生涯敘事;紮根分析;female career;middle-aged female educators;life design;career narrative;grounded analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年來在後現代思潮下，生涯規劃（career plan）之意義已逐漸轉型為生活設計（life design）的概念。本研究目的在以中年女性教育人員為對象，建構生活風格諮商模式之初步架構，用以協助教師理解個人教師專業生涯發展及生活風格。研究參與者為12名資深教育人員，由3位經本研究訪談訓練之諮商心理師擔任訪談員，以敘事訪談方式蒐集資料。所得資料轉謄為逐字稿並進行紮根分析，結果所呈現之諮商歷程架構包括五個步驟：（1）諮商關係之建立（Relationship）；（2）生命故事的開展與生命主題之覺察（Awareness）；（3）生活－生命意義的頓悟與轉化（Insight）；（4）個人優勢力量之聚焦（Strength focused）；以及（5）延伸至未來生涯－生活之規劃設計（Extension to the future）。最後取各階段關鍵字英文字首之字母命名為中年女性教師「意義提升模式（RAISE-up model）」。此歷程模式，由助人者與當事人的關係建立開始，進入協助當事人覺察個人生命主題，催化當事人頓悟個人生命經驗，並藉由經驗中的意義理解而產生優勢能量，賦能個案並協助其延伸面對未來的行動與規劃。本研究最後根據以上發現提出討論，並提出諮商實務及未來研究方面之建議。英文摘要：The concept of ”career plan” has become the idea of ”life design” in recent years as the postmodern philosophy evolved. In the career counseling process, the idea of fit between personal traits and work environment has also been transferred to be construction and empowerment when we interview the clients. The purpose of the study was to establish a hypothesized Career-Life Design Narrative Model for senior educator trough grounded theory. Twelve senior educators from school or university were invited individually. We interviewed those senior educators and audiotaped the interview process. The interviewers were 5 licensed psychologists trained by the first author in order to make sure the interview structure and process are consistent through the whole interviewees. All of them are PhD students or newly graduated from the PhD program in counseling psychology. The interview guide included the following categories: (1) Warm up and story recollection in early childhood, middle school, high school, university and education career; (2) Career/life themes were entitled and reflected to/ by the participants through collaboration with the interviewer; (3) Meaning search through the elaboration of current concerned issues and life themes; (4) Extension the life theme and current concern to the future; (5) Action plan and rehearsal for future plan to expand life meaning. The interview guideline was semi-structured and the outlines included the following questions such as early stories, role model, television show preferred, magazine read, mottos in youth age, and important life events. We also asked the interviewees trying to entitle the life themes for important life experiences. Through the discussion of life themes, the senior educator reflected the meaning of life. New tasks for future life were then emerged. Some of the tasks might be related to their unfinished business. Through the narrative approach of interview, they worked together to deconstruct the false or irrational thoughts about past events. New experiences were them emerged through reconstruction process in the interview. In the process of data analysis, in order to have a detailed examination of the interview progress, all the narrative interview process was transcribed. We then applied grounded theory to analyze the transcriptions. The analysis included open coding, axial coding, and core coding. Several steps were adapted in data analysis. We first scrutinize the transcribed data, identify irrelevant or meaningful contextual materials, code the meaningful units. In the second step, we compared the meaningful units, group the similar units together and conceptualize the categories. In the third step, we compare and group the conceptual categories into domain. Finally, we develop core categories by combining similar conceptual categories. According to Frontman and Kunkel (1994), the first step is ”open coding.” In the second step, similarity comparison, categorization, and definition for each of the conceptual categorization were processed. We denote this step as ”axial coding.” After open coding and axial coding, we then worked together to discuss and agree on specific category themes which is the step of ”selective coding.” At last, a five-stage counseling process emerged. The five stages are: (1) Relationship establishment; (2) Awareness of life them; (3) Interpretation and transference; (4) Strength focusing; and (5) Extension to the future. We called it ”RAISE-up model” by using the first letter of the five stages. In the counseling process, we first build relationship with the client, facilitate his/her self-awareness, help them get insight from interpretation, encouraged them to be assertive about their strengths and them set action plan for future life. For each counseling stage, which is core category, there are counseling skills and tasks which emerged as axial coding. For example, in the first stage, ”Relationship establishment”, we discuss the counseling structure, tell the client what we are going to do in the process. In this stage, we help the client examine his/her emotional status and get ready to share his/her life stories. In the second stage, which is to get the clients be ”Aware of their career/life themes” through telling the stories. The interviewer help the clients explore their roles in the life stories, construct the story and life themes, and even help the clients get insights from the stories. In the third stage, which we called ”Insight stage”, we help the clients elaborating the life themes, deconstructing faulty cognitions and reorganizing the memories into a positive and meaningful script. In this stage, the clients get new ideas from the old experiences. It's also in this stage that the client can see themselves in a positive way. There comes the fourth stage, we called it Strength-focused stage. In this stage, both the client and interviewers can easily sense the client's strengths through story experiences. The clients re-experience how they copy with barriers and get energy to overcome difficulties at certain point of life time. Some of them might encounter happenstance such as important persons who influence their career. Some of the chances are key events, for example participated in a conference or meeting and through the meeting they enter a new position in different cities. The connection with others could facilitate their interpersonal relationship and even provide them with more chances for their career. This is the special characteristic for this model. The final stage is Extension to the future, which focus on action plan based on the clients' strengths. Future time perspective would be another variable important to remind the client think about their future. Generally speaking, the stage ”strength-focused” is the special part of this model. During the research, in the interview process, we did not emphasize on strength purposefully. However, when the interviews progressed, we found that both client and interviewer can work on the strengths even though the stories were about suffering from difficulties and aches. The resilience is one example. They can stand in front of barriers, tolerate the bad temper from family members or colleagues. However, in addition to the tolerance, they can even create energy either through sharing the pain with close friends or devoted to what they think they should do, for example educate the kids at school and work as volunteer related to religion supporting group. The findings were discussed in the following four points: the RAISE-up model vs postmodern reflection; Chinese culture and its relationship with the RAISE-up model; the RAISE-up model and Savickas construction idea. The construction idea proposed by Savickas is actually consistent with the post-modern thought. For applied in career counseling, especially for life design, Savickas (2012) proposed three important components for the life design counseling process: (1) construct career through stories; (2) deconstruct those stories and reconstruct them into an identity narrative and life portrait; and (3) co-construct intentions that lead to the next episode in the real world. This process is consistent with the process of counseling in our RAISE-up model. The different part is that we focus more on the clients' strengths. The process is also consistent with the helping skills model proposed by Hill (2009). Also, the different part is the strength focused. It seems that in the modern society, the counseling direction naturally goes to the individual's strengths. We hope the RAISE-up model created in this study can be generalized to populations in other age-spectrum, not only for ages over 50 in Chinese society. More discussions were provided based on the results. Suggestions for practice and research were also provided.起始頁-結束頁：241-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).00012篇名：邁向志向之旅－青少年生涯目的感發展之歷程研究並列篇名：A study of Taiwanese adolescents' career purpose development process作者：王玉珍(Yu-Chen Wang);曾晴(Ching Tseng);陳之懷(Chih-Huai Chen);簡明彥(Ming-Yan Jian);林欣儀(Xsin-Yi Lin)關鍵字：生涯目的感;生涯發展;生涯發展歷程;青少年;career purpose;career development;career development process;adolescents期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的為探討青少年生涯目的感之影響因素與發展歷程。研究方法方面，研究對象為21位具有生涯目的感之青少年，其中男生有7位，女生有14位，兩年前受訪時為國中七至九年級，兩年後訪談時，就讀九年級者11位、高一有8位、就讀高二／專二者有2位。研究針對研究目的設計兩次訪談大綱，透過半結構式訪談進行資料蒐集，所得資料以質性紮根理論方法進行分析。研究結果發現：（一）生涯目的感帶來的感受與影響包括，是生活重心與歸屬、感受正向情緒、增加行動探索、以及產生未來方向。（二）影響生涯目的感發展的因素，整體可歸納為家庭影響、學校影響、楷模影響、自我內在、現實與成長體會以及意外機緣因素。（三）兩年後生涯目的感的變動可歸納為穩定未變與重新探索兩類。（四）生涯目的感發展歸納為接觸啟蒙、嘗試回饋，關注評估，初步承諾，以及具體承諾／多元開展等五個階段，研究進一步提出生涯目的感發展的動態歷程發展模式。研究結論為生涯目的感對青少年具有重要意義，有不同的發展階段與影響因素，可據此規劃不同之生涯輔導策略，以協助青少年探索建立未來方向。英文摘要：Career purpose is a feeling of fulfillment and satisfaction emerging from the process during when individuals implement and practice their ideas of future career that may bring meaning and social contributions based on one's unique interests, personal characteristics, abilities, and other meaning (Damon, 2008). A sense of purpose benefits life satisfaction, sense of meaning, hope, and positive emotions of adolescents. Career purpose also fosters positive feelings and feedback that are important sources for the development of self-concept of adolescents. The topic of career purpose is significant to career exploration of the youth as well as to school counseling and guidance practice, yet related studies are insufficient in Taiwan. Hence, the present study examined the impact factors and development of career purpose in Taiwanese adolescents. The study aimed to explore the impact of adolescents' career purpose, the development of their career purpose, and their change experience. The participants in the present study were from the 152 adolescent participants in Wang's study (2018) on the career purpose experience of the youth. The interviews at two points in time were conducted respectively with the ones who had goals for the future with firm plans and began to take action to be the participants for the present study. Thirty-one participants attended the Time-1 interview, and they were 12 boys and 19 girls, comprising 13 seventh graders, 10 eighth graders, and 8 ninth graders. Two years later, 21 participants, 7 boys and 14 girls, attended the Time-2 interview. The other ten participants dropped out the study or were lost after they graduated from junior high school or for personal reasons. Four research questions were addressed in the study: (1) What were the feeling and experience of the adolescents with career purpose? (2) What was the impact factor of the career purpose development for adolescents? (3) What was the change experience of adolescents' career purpose two years later? (4) What was the overall development of career purpose? Qualitative research was carried out through individual semi-structured interviews at two points in time to collect data and the authors designed interview guides for the two interviews based on the study purpose. The interview at Time 2 was held two years after the interview at Time 1. All Time-2 interviews were conducted in school counseling rooms. The participants of 9th graders were contacted via their schools for the intentions and arrangements to attend the interview. For those who had graduated from junior high school, they were contacted via e-mail and phones for further information regarding their updated status. Interviews with the participants of junior high school graduates were conducted in the counseling rooms in their new schools with their schools' permission. The Time-1 and Time-2 interviews were held during the participants' lunch break or school free time in two to three successive weeks; each interview session lasted between 70 to 90 minutes. The data collected from the interviews at two points in time were analyzed with the grounded theory method (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). The results of this study reported the following findings: (1) The influences of career purpose on these participants are that they perceive career purpose as a part of life, accompanied with satisfaction, happiness, a sense of achievement, exploration and action, and career goals developing and establishing. (2) The development of career purpose is inducted into establishment factors of career purpose and change factors of career purpose. The former includes external environment factors and self-inner factors. External environment factors refer to the people and growth experience that influence adolescents' career purpose and they are the influences of family, school, and role models. Self-inner factors comprised five elements which are passions and interests that trigger inner motivation; feedback from senses of achievement and meaning that foster further career development; evaluations and confirmation of self and environment; displaying strengths which lead to more confidence and action; and career concerns and thoughts that promote the pursuit and establishment of career purpose. On the other hand, impact factors of career purpose development include reality and growth, accidents and chances, and objections or oppositions from family. (3) Based on the data of 21 participants collected at the Time-2 interview, change experience merged during career purpose developing of two year is inducted into stability and unchanged and re-exploration. A total of nine participants stated their career purpose did not change during these two years. They firmly showed great enthusiasm for their primary career purpose and took vigorous action to pursue their goals. The other 12 participants reported in the Time-2 interview that they dropped their primary goal temporarily. Another steps that they took for their career purpose pursuing could be divided into three types: some re-explored their careers because their pursuit of primary career purpose was hindered; some transformed their careers without core career purpose remaining; and some found more suitable career purpose and changed their goals. (4) The development of career purpose are in five stages-involvement and initiation, action and feedback, concern and evaluation, initial commitment, and firm commitment/multi-development. This study further proposes a dynamic process model of career purpose development. The study concludes that career purpose embedded with varied development stages and impact factors is significant for adolescents during their career development. Under the influences of family, school, individuals, reality and growth and chances, the development of career purpose is an ongoing and non-stop process. The dynamic process model of career purpose development illustrates the whole process individuals go through during their career purpose development. Initially, individuals' interests are generated after the individuals experience and get involved with some event occasionally. The following is the stage of action and feedback consisting of three parts-opportunity activity, action, and positive feedback that are presented in a cycle. The next stage is about concern and evaluation of self and environment. Individuals further evaluate whether they will carry out their career purpose as future goals. After the two-year's development, some participants still stuck to their career purpose steadily and continued to head to their goals which led to a firm commitment. These participants persisted in brushing up on their knowledge and skills, heading to their goals during the process of their career purpose development. Some participants changed their career purpose or career options after confronting disapproval and disagreement from other people. Some other participants experienced a circular process, and experienced all the steps forward, backward, and forward again during the whole career exploration. Throughout the whole dynamic process of career purpose development, individuals may be under the influences of external environmental factors, internal personal factors, and reality and accident factors. School counselors are suggested to adopt different counseling strategies to assist adolescents in exploring and determining future direction. Moreover, the transition of different stages of adolescents may vary from time to time, the development of career purpose and change experience worth further investigation. A suggestion for a further investigation is to examine senior high school students' career development after they enter college via follow-up studies. Another suggestion is to explore the change experience of college graduates who just enter workplace to look into their career purpose development after graduating from school. Narrative research is an alternative method to probe how relevant events and topics merge from the process of the development of career purpose in adolescents and how these events and topics are generated and prospered into unique narrative experiences of career purpose development.起始頁-結束頁：263-286資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).00023篇名：臺灣醫師世家的生涯代間傳遞並列篇名：Intergenerational Career Transmission in a Taiwanese Medical Family作者：顏姿吟(Tzu-Yin Yen);連廷嘉(Ting-Chia Lien)關鍵字：生涯代間傳遞;整合歷程系統;醫師世家;intergenerational career transmission;integrative process systems;medical family期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究從代間的親子互動，探討醫師家庭世代間生涯代間傳遞的內涵。研究參與者是一個臺灣醫師世家的三代家庭成員，其中祖父與父親為醫師、孫子為醫學生，採用敘說研究的方法進行質性訪談，以「整合歷程系統」觀點，運用「類別－內容」方式分析家庭互動對個體自我生涯抉擇與代間傳遞的影響因素。結果發現：（1）臺灣社會對醫師生涯偏愛有文化特殊性，醫師世家子女之生涯抉擇歷程是社會、時間，與空間等三維影響的結果。（2）生涯代間傳遞包含社會模式與親代模式等二模式相互影響：社會模式中，社會塑造卓越意義，影響個體的認同。子女覺知父母價值觀後、或認同此「社會卓越」後，直接或間接抉擇醫師生涯；親代模式中，父母接受「社會卓越」後，認同與凝聚家庭共有意義，不斷迂迴傳遞職業正向訊息，孕育自家之助人利他的「獨家意義」，影響並穩固子女認真學習生涯所需技能，更加速生涯抉擇的時機點。親子相互影響，不能忽視彼此的力量。社會模式建構的「社會卓越」與親代模式建構的「獨家意義」，二者都會影響價值觀的傳遞。最後，根據研究結果進行討論並提出建議以供諮商工作、與未來相關研究參考。英文摘要：In Taiwan, medical doctors have enjoyed privileged socioeconomic status since the Japanese colonial period. Although the prestige of doctoral professions has been challenged by changes in the medical environment and the introduction of the National Health Insurance program, most elite students are still expected to pursue a career in medicine and commit to it. The annual lists of students admitted to medical schools are widely discussed in the media, and they have also become something that high school rankings are based on. These medical students are often found to share similar backgrounds. In addition, there are numerous parent-child or sibling combinations in the field of medicine and even medical families that have produced multiple generations of medical doctors. In such instances, human capital, including property and nonmonetary rewards, is transferred within the family. Although no obvious barriers exist, the path to becoming a medical doctor requires more than well-defined interests or values. Individuals must ace the college entrance test, attend a competitive medical school, acquire comprehensive and systematic knowledge and skills, and pass a series of licensing examinations. Throughout the long and stressful process, the role of intergenerational transfer and the selection of information should not be underestimated. Studies have indicated that within the multigenerational transmission process, individuals' development as well as families' interaction patterns must be identified. Moreover, in the East-Asian social context of Taiwan, in addition to the person's personality characteristics, career decision making often reflects occupational prestige and parental expectations. Therefore, both psychological factors and sociocultural contexts must be considered to understand individuals' career choices. This study applied the ”Integrative process systems perspective” to investigate the influence of a Taiwanese three-generation medical family on its offspring's career development in the family's interaction. Employing narrative inquiry as the method, this study explored the experiences of members across time and space with integrated and dynamic characteristics. Serial interviews were conducted with the grandfather and father, who were doctors, and with the son, who was still a student currently majoring in medicine. They were asked to talk about the family's interaction as well as career choice, including their impressive familial stories, their experiences of career exploration, tendencies toward a specific occupation in different stages of development, the timepoint of commitment, the reason and meaning of becoming a doctor, and the family's interaction patterns before and after members become a doctor. The category-content method was then used to analyze the factors of family interaction affecting an individual's career decision making and intergenerational transmission. With the participants' emotions, meanings, needs, perceptions, and awareness of situations, this study attempted to disclose an individual's identity under ”who I was,” ”who I am,” and ”who I will be” and also to reveal familial and social cultures. The purpose was to present the process of intergenerational career transmission on the medical family and outline the complete construction. In this study, the researcher was responsible for interviews, data transcription, analysis, and interpretation. To avoid the subjective bias of the researcher and establish credibility, a co-analyzer was invited to examine the process and product of the inquiry, determining validity in terms of logicality and persuasiveness. The results of the study revealed that intergenerational career transmission in the medical family was a process of interplay between family subsystems, embedded in social culture, which strived for harmonies between the maintenance of consistency and introduction of change. Individual family members were also mutually influenced by each other. The transfer of cognition and feeling led to the son's decision to follow in the footsteps of his grandfather and father. In other words, intergenerational career transmission had characteristics of systems, processing, and integration. It was a continually changing, adapting, and spreading process. 1. A cultural trait of Taiwanese society is that a career in medicine is highly preferred. The career-selection process for the son was influenced by society, time, and the environment. Society attributes prominent significance to the profession of medical doctor, building the stage for an individual's career-selection process. Identifying with the significance of social prominence, the family created an environment of self-discipline that valued academic achievement and strictly regulated the scope and time for an individual's career exploration. The family gradually conformed to mainstream values and encouraged their children to strive for a career in medicine. 2. Intergenerational career transmission included the influence between two interplaying models: a social model and a parental model. Moreover, parents and their offspring were mutually influenced by each other at the family level. Each factor cannot be separated, and all should be considered in the context. 3. In the social model, the establishment of highly praised social prominence affected individuals' identification with a career in medicine. Children's career choice was influenced directly by accepting the viewpoint of social prominence or indirectly by the awareness of their parent's values. In the parental model, parental identification with social prominence led to the formation of familial meanings. The parents continually implied the positive information of the doctoral profession and proceeded to develop the family's ”unique meaning” of altruism. This unique meaning encouraged the children to acquire competencies required in the field, accelerated the career-selection process, and brought forward the timepoint of commitment. Both ”social prominence” in the social model and ”unique meaning” in the parental model affected the transmission of values interactively. 4. The Taiwanese medical family was a marital-and-maternal-oriented system based on boundaries, rules, and career achievements. The family reinforced the unity of husbands and wives. Both spouses in each generation cooperated in domestic life but stressed the maternal career. The husbands were the role models for the children but spent most of their time at work. On the other hand, the wives assumed more responsibility for caring for and parenting the children. Well-demarcated boundaries and precise rules between subsystems and individuals in the family system, accompanying the family's emphasis on the children's academic achievement, promoted their offspring's pursuit of a career in medicine. Based on these findings, this study produced several discussions and provided suggestions for those working in counseling practice or related research. Career choice is not a simple process of matching an individual with an occupation and was influenced by the systematic context, the individual himself or herself, and the relationship. Therefore, in addition to an individual's independence and autonomy, local counseling practitioners should consider the impacts of social culture, internal and external familial resources, and the awareness of an individual's experiences in each stage of development. This study mainly focused on the phenomenon of intergenerational career transmission in a medical family. Thus, career decision making regarding a career in medicine was emphasized in the interviews. Apart from this topic, wives in the system were found to have quit their own careers immediately and fully support their husbands' careers after marriage. The family also used different parenting styles depending on the sex of the children. Moreover, a third-generation daughter did not choose a career in medicine. From the perspective of a family system, the following questions are raised: what is the career-selection process of these nonmedical profession members? Is there any difference between sons and daughters? In the process, how did mental functioning and accommodation work? Future research should investigate the sex difference, mental functioning and accommodation of nonmedical profession members, and career-selection process of children who have not pursued a career in medicine.起始頁-結束頁：287-310資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).00034篇名：學校輔導教師督導者之督導經驗與學校輔導督導系統建構並列篇名：Exploration of the Supervisory Experiences of School Counseling Supervisors and the Perspectives on School Counseling Supervisory System Construction作者：林淑華(Shu-Hua Lin);田秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Shelley Tien);盧鴻文(Hung-Wen Lu)關鍵字：學校輔導;督導者;督導經驗;督導系統;school counseling;supervisor;supervisory experience;supervisory system期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探究學校輔導教師督導者之督導經驗，以及建構學校輔導督導系統，邀請10位學校輔導教師督導者參與，進行半結構的深度訪談。經謄錄逐字稿，並以紮根理論方法之原則進行分析，研究結果顯示督導者之督導經驗為一動態循環過程，督導理念與輔導知能所形成之專業地圖，引導實際督導的執行，並從實作中深入反思，且此反思進一步回饋至專業地圖，因著重整專業地圖，再次同樣地經歷上述之循環歷程。學校輔導督導系統之建構，可從人、課程、實行模式三向度說明，人—督導者條件，宜符合基本條件，並達成進階條件，同時具備學校知能；課程—督導課程之規劃，應兼具理論與實習，採取層次性與實用性原則，督導者和受督者可共備學習，委由專屬單位或跨單位執行課程；實行模式—督導實行模式之改善，須加強評量機制與提供專輔多元學習機會。依據研究發現，進一步形成學校系統思維督導視域圖，此圖說明督導核心精神為專業主體性之踐履，闡述於督導過程中宜運用生態系統觀，包括理解受系統環境影響之個案、看見在系統中工作的專輔、覺察督導者個人所處之系統，以及善用系統思維進行督導。最後根據上述研究結果進行討論，並針對實務與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the supervisory experiences of school counseling supervisors and the perspectives of the construction of a school counseling supervisory system. This study aimed to understand the supervisory experiences of school counseling supervisors and how said experiences developed. The construction of a school counseling supervisory system involved the requirements of qualified supervisors, training courses for cultivating supervisors, and the present situation of supervision, which was organized by the Supervision Agency. Ten school counseling supervisors participated in the study. Their average age was 49 years. They all had Ph.D. degrees in guidance and counseling psychology. Eight supervisors had teacher certifications, and 10 supervisors had counseling psychologist licenses. They were interviewed using semistructured in-depth interviews. After analyzing the transcripts by using the principle of grounded theory, this study found that supervisory experiences were a dynamic system circulating process. A professional map comprising supervisory beliefs and school counseling competencies guided supervisory dimensions, and reflections were generated from the practice of supervisory dimensions. After this step, the reflections provided feedback for the professional map. Through reintegrating the professional map, the same process was cycled again. The supervisory experiences were unfolded in the context of the school field; for example, if the supervisor had the knowledge that the role of a school counselor was to collaborate, he/she would set the goal of enhancing the ability of collaboration. From the practice of the supervisory process, the supervisor might be aware that the comprehension of the school counseling specialty would affect the supervisory process. By rearranging personal knowledge on school counseling, supervisors prepared themselves to supervise school counselors. The supervisory experience consisted of the professional map, supervisory dimensions, and supervisory reflections. The definitions are as follows: (1) The professional map included supervisory beliefs and school counseling competencies. Supervisory beliefs reflected the sense of mission and identification with the school counseling specialty. School counseling competencies highlighted the importance of the ecological system perspective. (2) The supervisory dimensions involved supervision goals, supervision functions, the supervisory relationship, the supervisory process, and supervision methods. In addition to intervention, conceptualization, and personalization, supervision goals placed greater emphasis on strengthening the collaboration ability, advocacy, self-confidence, and efficacy. Supervision functions included evaluating, modeling, instructing, consulting, supporting, and backing. The backing function refers to the supervisor entering the school counselor's school when required, rescheduling the role of professional personnel, and communicating resource integration. The supervisory relationship stressed involving, nurturing the learning process, and attending to individual differences. The supervisory process took the form of group supervision and could make good use of group dynamics. The strategies included experiential, cognitive, and micro strategies. (3) The supervisory reflections were divided into self-awareness and self-expectation. This reminded supervisors that it was necessary to review personal professional knowledge and positions, avoid judging the school counseling specialty according to the mainstream value of counseling psychology, and think about how to relate the supervisory process with the value and accountability of school counseling. Perspectives on the supervisory system's construction included the following: (1) The requirements of qualified supervisors meant that the supervisor would meet essential criteria, accomplish advanced standards, and acquire school counseling competencies. The fundamental criteria were having a working experience of more than 3 years, school work experience, and supervision experience. The advanced standards were experiencing continuous direct service with clients, supervising continuously, absorbing new knowledge, and maintaining self-awareness. The school counseling competencies comprised child and adolescent development, counseling, ecological collaboration, supervision, group work, school counseling, ethics, and law. (2) Training courses for cultivating supervisors were required to balance theory and practicum in accordance with the principles of the multilevel structure and practicability. Moreover, the supervisor and supervisee could learn from each other, and training courses could be implemented by the specific unit or cross-unit. (3) The improvement of the supervisory system should enhance the evaluation of personnel quality, loosen group supervision limits, and promote diversified operations. Overall, it should strengthen the evaluation mechanism and offer the supervisee more learning opportunities. According to research results, a supervision horizon figure of school system thinking was formed. It illustrated that the core spirit was the fulfillment of professional subjectivity. Supervisors took ecological system perspectives to understand the client being affected by systems and the environment. The systems affecting the client were family and school, followed by the community. Supervisors also understood school counselors working in the systems. School counselors engaged in helping practice in the hierarchy of the school system and were affected by the working systems, which were workplace, professional resources, and educational administration. Supervisors also had to be aware of situated systems. Because the student counseling center organized the supervision arrangement, the first system around the supervisor was the student counseling center. Furthermore, because of the backing function, the supervisor might enter the school counselor's school or use administrative resources to help him or her. As a result, the systems that supervisors were involved with also included the school counselor's workplace and the outer network system. The client, supervisee, and supervisor all shared the same macrosystem, involving politics, law, culture, religion, customs, and economics. When the supervisor understood the aforementioned phenomenon, he or she could employ five types of systematic thinking to supervise the school counselor: (1) being familiar with resources, policies, and laws; (2) making relationships actively and building trust; (3) making use of perspective-taking to consider the overall situation; (4) putting down parochialism to head for mutualism; and (5) assessing and inventorying resources to start the change. Based on the results, this study suggested that the supervisor should organize personal school counseling beliefs and competencies. Simultaneously, the supervisor can develop professional identification. How the supervisor identifies with school counseling would convey and affect the school counselor's identification. The research results revealed that the supervisor who had served as the school counselor exhibited the thinking feature of leading resource integration. They paid attention to the process of system collaboration as an insider in the system instead of engaging in the collaborative relationship passively. In Chinese culture, if we must collaborate with others efficiently, we should put down parochialism and put others first. Therefore, it would be better for the supervisor to hold the perspective of the ecological system. When the supervisor used the school counseling supervision model, the ecological uniqueness of the school might have been considered. The supervisor not only explored the client's inner dynamic but also comprehended the client's situation from a contextual view. In addition to forming comprehensive supervision goals, enhancing collaboration, advocacy, self-confidence, and efficacy abilities was taken into consideration in particular. It was crucial for the supervisor to fulfill functions fully, especially the backing function. The supervisors' coordination with each other through collaboration and introducing higher-level administrative resources could help school counselors resolve challenges. Regarding the construction of the integrated school counseling supervision system, it can be divided into three parts. First, in the personnel part, competencies and requirements should be strengthened. Basically, fundamental criteria have existed until now, and the advanced standards might be considered when applying for continuous education and reinstating credentials. School counseling competencies are worthy of future research. Second, regarding training courses, the supervisor, supervisee, and training unit could work together to plan ideal training courses. The supervisor and supervisee could establish a strong learning relationship. Furthermore, the supervisor can understand the practical work experience of school counselors more. The professional association and student counseling center offered training courses. Finally, regarding the applied model, supervisors needed the right of evaluation. Participation in the supervision of school counselors was listed as accountability and evaluation. In addition to group supervision, multiple learning choices and more opportunities were delivered to supervisees.起始頁-結束頁：311-335資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).00045篇名：遭遇性侵害經驗、強暴迷思、與性別偏見對男同志做出性侵害行為的影響並列篇名：Effects of Experiences of Sexual Assault, Rape Myths, and Gender Biases on Sexual Assault Perpetrated by Homosexual Men in Taiwan作者：黃軍義(Jiun-Yih Huang);許得洋(Te-Yang Hsu)關鍵字：男同志;性別偏見;男性強暴迷思;性侵害;遭遇性侵害;homosexual men;gender biases;rape myths;sexual assault;sexually assaulted期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：過去研究甚少對男同志做出性侵害行為進行探討，本研究嘗試彌補此一研究缺口。在性侵害整合理論觀點與考量風險因子的可改變性下，提出遭遇性侵害、強暴迷思、與性別偏見三類影響男同志從事性侵害行為的因子；同時假設男同志性侵害的對象以男性居多、男性強暴迷思對其做出性侵害行為的影響大於女性強暴迷思。本研究採取無記名自陳式問卷調查法在線上蒐集資料，招募男同志具有性侵害他人或曾遭遇性侵害者參與，有效樣本414位。本研究設計A、B兩式問卷，B卷獨變項的題目置於依變項題目前，A卷相反，檢驗不同題項安排是否皆支持研究假設，以及題項安排對參與者作答的影響。結果發現，無論A或B卷，男同志做出性侵害行為與發生次數，皆受到遭遇性侵害經驗、強暴迷思接受度與性別偏見的影響。此外，B卷較A卷的預測力更高，顯示獨變項安排在依變項前更能突顯本研究假設。男同志性侵害對象多數為男性，男性強暴迷思對其做出性侵害行為的影響大於女性強暴迷思。至於A、B兩卷樣本在人口變項上並無顯著差異，但B卷在強暴迷思與性別偏見上的平均得分皆高於A卷，顯示變項順序安排會影響參與者的作答。文末就研究結果的理論意涵、實務應用、研究限制與未來研究方向提出討論。英文摘要：Discussions concerning homosexual men currently focus on topics such as public health (e.g., AIDS and its transmission and prevention), identification processes, oppression and stigma, and the high prevalence of sexual abuse (Li Fangying et al., 2014; Liu Pei-Ling et al., 2016; Chuang & Lacombe-Duncan, 2016; Hall, 2018; Smit et al., 2012; Wohl et al., 2013; Wolitski & Fenton, 2011). In the past, homosexuality was unacceptable in mainstream society, and same-sex relationships underwent discrimination (Elipe et al., 2018). Perhaps because of this social context and the fact that sexual assault signifies conquest and power (Brownmiller, 1975), which is inconsistent with the image of homosexual men, research on the perpetration of sexual assault by homosexuals is limited. Homosexual men's perpetration of sexual assault is not the same as male sexual assault on men. The latter perpetrators are not necessarily homosexuals, whereas a few of the former perpetrators may be able to assault women. Some studies have explored male sexual assault on men (Abdullah-Khan, 2008), such as male-on-male sexual assault in prisons; however, research is yet to be conducted on sexual assault perpetrated by homosexual men. Hirschi (1969) indicated that committing crimes is part of human nature. Under this point of view, it is understandable that gay men commit sexual assault. Studies have failed to investigate this issue; however, we believed this issue is worthy of research attention. Because the majority of sexual assaults are currently still performed by men (Police Administration of the Ministry of the Interior, 2017), this study explored sexual assaults perpetrated by homosexual men. Scholars such as Marshall and Barbaree (1990), Hall and Hirschman (1991), Ward and Beech (2006), and Seto (2019) have presented the integrated theory of sexual assault, which means that regardless of the subject (male or female) or object (child, adult, male, or female), sexual assault is within the explanatory scope of their theory. In other words, irrespective of the sex offender's sexual orientation, causes behind the offence can be explained by high-level constructs. Accordingly, this study proposed the following three risk factors that partly explain reasons for sexual assault by homosexual men: experiences of sexual abuse, acceptance of rape myths, and gender biases. Experiences of sexual abuse constitute the social learning factor (undergoing sexual assault and then following the example), whereas rape myths and gender biases are cognitive factors. All the three factors are emphasized by the integrated theory of sexual assault. These factors are more instructive and cognitive in nature and therefore more changeable (compared with factors that are biological in nature). Hence, we chose them as the subject of our investigation to facilitate subsequent suggestions on sexual assault prevention. We assumed the following: (a) The experiences of sexual abuse, degree of rape myth acceptance, and gender biases affect homosexual men's perpetration of sexual assault. (b) The age at which sexual abuse was first encountered, degree of rape myth acceptance, and gender biases affect the frequency of sexual assault perpetration by homosexual men. (c) According to Ellis (1991) and Seto (2019), targets chosen by sexual assault offenders are determined by their sexual preferences. On the basis of sexual preferences, we hypothesized that men are mostly the target of homosexual men's sexual assault. (d) If homosexual men's targets are mostly men, we hypothesized that the influence of male rape myths on homosexual men's sexual assault is stronger than that of female rape myths. This is because male rape myths comprise a set of prejudices, distorted thinking, or stereotypes against male rape. We followed the research design of Bohner et al. (2005). Two types of questionnaire were developed to collect data online. In Questionnaire B, we placed independent variables (experiences of sexual abuse, two types of rape myths, and gender biases) before dependent variables (sexual assault and frequency of occurrence). The opposite was true for Questionnaire A. Because questions arranged first can trigger participants' thinking and enhance their cognitive accessibility (heightened temporary accessibility), the stimulation (priming) may affect their answers to the following questions. Therefore, we expected that the association between the independent and dependent variables in the Questionnaire B sample would be higher than that in the Questionnaire A sample, in turn indirectly evidencing the causal relationship between the variables. Additionally, the impact of the order of questions and whether the results were the same in both the samples were also examined. Because Questionnaire A first asked participants about their engagement in sexual assault and frequency, the sensitive nature of the topic might have led to defensiveness; therefore, we predicted that the recognition of rape myth acceptance and gender biases in Questionnaire A would be lower than that in Questionnaire B. We recruited participants who identified as homosexual men and had experiences of undergoing sexual abuse or sexually assaulting others. A total of 414 valid responses were obtained (194 from Questionnaire A and 220 from Questionnaire B). Participants' background information was as follows: (a) The participants' average age was 28.28 years, the standard deviation was 6.57 years, the youngest participant was aged 16 years, and the oldest participant was aged 45 years; (b) Educational level: a majority of the participants were at the college level (250, 60.4%), followed by the graduate school level (109, 26.3%); (c) Primary caregiver: parents (307, 74.2%) and grandparents (39, 9.4%); (d) Experience of committing sexual assault: yes (47.3%) and no (52.7%); and (e) Experience of being sexually assaulted: yes (89.4%) and no (10.6%). The t test and chi-square test were used to determine the impact of the three types of risk factors on homosexual men's sexual assault. Binary logistic regression analysis was performed to examine the impact of the independent variables on the dependent variable, and the amount of variance was explained. Additionally, all the independent variables were placed in the model to examine the effect of the exclusion of overlapping. Pearson correlation analysis and structural equation modeling were used to verify the model on homosexual men's engagement with sexual assault and its frequency. The results of the study suggested that experiences of sexual abuse, acceptance of rape myths, and gender biases all exert a significant impact and explanatory power on homosexual men's perpetration of sexual assault. A comparison of the samples of Questionnaires A and B revealed that Questionnaire B had a higher explanatory power for sexual assault perpetrated by homosexual men compared with Questionnaire A (27.1%-36.2% vs. 22.6%-30.3%). This result suggests that regardless of the order of questionnaire items, this study's hypotheses were supported. Additionally, the result suggested that the independent variables arranged in front of the dependent variables presented a more effective design for confirming our hypotheses compared with vice versa. The average scores of gender biases and rape myths in Questionnaire A were lower than those in Questionnaire B, indicating that sensitive topics presented earlier made participants more cautious or defensive while answering subsequent questions. Furthermore, experiences of sexual abuse, rape myth acceptance, and gender biases influenced not only sexual assault by homosexual men but also their persistence in perpetrating the same. This study confirmed that the majority of homosexual men's sexual assault targets were men, and regarding myths, male rape myths had more influence on their sexual assaults than did female rape myths. The results of this study revealed that both gender biases and the degree of recognition of rape myths influence sexual assault behavior among homosexual men. Therefore, the sexual aggression behavior signifying the implications of gender bias and power display discussed in past theories can also be observed in homosexual men. The various prevention and publicity measures against sexual assault in our society today are relatively designed from the perspective of viewing women as victims, and myths involving male rape are ignored. However, the impact of male rape myths on sexual assaults by homosexual men is even greater than that exerted by female rape myths, highlighting that male rape myths must be urgently understood and publicized to be eliminated. This may reduce the stigma male victims undergo (McMullen, 1990; Scarce, 1997), which in turn will increase their willingness to report and receive treatment. The perpetrators will have the fear that the victim will come forward, which might help reduce the rate of sexual assault. From a deeper perspective, providing societal acceptance of homosexuality and eliminating myths of male rape will not only reduce the rate of sexual assault, which is extremely underestimated (Coxell et al., 2000), but also aid the addressal of homosexual men's sexual assault issues. This study recruited homosexual men who had experiences of sexual abuse or sexual assault as participants. Thus, the condition of sexual assault and victimization was widespread. We suggest that future research should include large and representative samples of homosexual men with no restrictions on sexual assault or experiences of being sexually assaulted. This will not only help estimate the prevalence of sexual assault and being sexually assaulted among homosexual men in Taiwan but also further confirm the external validity of the research results.起始頁-結束頁：337-364資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).00056篇名：望子成龍女成鳳？教養信念在社經地位與家庭學習環境間的中介效果並列篇名：Parents' High Expectations of Children to Become Successful? The Parenting Belief Mediating Effect between Socioeconomic Status and Home Learning Environment作者：陳美姿(Mei-Tzu Chen);周麗端(Li-Tuan Chou)關鍵字：家庭學習環境;教養信念;華人教養;home learning environment;parenting belief;chinese cultural parenting期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討臺灣社會在傳統華人文化及西方思想涵融下，幼兒父母的教養信念，及實際提供的家庭學習環境之情形。本研究主要目的有三，其一為瞭解父母的教養信念及實際所提供的家庭學習環境，其二為社經地位與教養信念及家庭學習環境之關係。其三為教養信念在社經地位與家庭學習環境中介之效果。研究樣本取自張鑑如（2019）幼兒發展調查資料庫建置計畫：36月齡組第一波【原始數據】，102年4月1日至103年3月31日出生嬰兒之父或母共2,099人。資料分析採SAS9.4進行變項與量表中間值檢定，以及變項之間的相關分析；並以Mplus8.0統計軟體結構方程模式（SEM）分析教養信念中介於社經地位與家庭學習環境間之效果。研究結果顯示（1）教養信念及家庭學習環境各構面均與量表中間值有顯著差異；（2）社經地位與「教」未達顯著相關外，與教養信念及家庭學習環境各構面皆達顯著相關；（3）教養信念之「管」及「成就期待」中介於社經地位與學習材料、父母回應及條件式管教。本研究發現臺灣幼兒的父母對子女提供良好的家庭學習環境，但不再持有強烈的望子成龍女成鳳的觀念。教養信念之「管」及「成就期待」中介於社經地位及家庭學習環境，社經地位愈高的父母，「管」及「成就期待」愈傾向不嚴格，愈能提供較佳的學習材料、父母回應，以及較低的條件式管教。英文摘要：Family is the first environment in which individuals come into contact with the process of socialization; said process is a crucial part of children's lives and considerably influences them thereafter. Different parenting beliefs lead to parents exhibiting different parenting values and hence offering different learning environments for their children; this in turn can influence their parenting behavior. This study discussed the confluence of traditional Chinese culture and Western thought as well as parenting beliefs held by Taiwanese parents with young children. The actual circumstances of the home learning environment were considered. This research had three purposes: to understand parenting beliefs and the home learning environment that parents provide; to understand the relationship among socioeconomic status, parenting beliefs, and the home learning environment; and to determine whether the mediating effect of the model fit of parenting beliefs on the home learning environment is affected by socioeconomic status. The literature review focused on parenting beliefs, the home learning environment, and factors related to the aforementioned concepts. First, meanings, contents, and Chinese parents' parenting beliefs were discussed. Second, the meanings and contents were discussed. Third, factors influencing parenting beliefs and the home learning environment were analyzed, including the relationship between home socioeconomic status and parenting beliefs, the effect of home socioeconomic status on the home learning environment, and the relationship between parenting beliefs and the home learning environment. Samples were retrieved from a database established by Chien-Ju Chang (2019), and the database called Kids in Taiwan: National Longitudinal Study of Child Development and Care (KIT): KIT-M36 at 36 months old [Data file]. The sample comprised fathers or mothers of babies born between April 1, 2013, and March 31, 2014, including a total of 2,099 research participants. The research instrument was the Kids in Taiwan: National Longitudinal Study of Child Development and Care (KIT) questionnaire, which was planned and prepared from August 2011 to March 2016 by the Center for Educational Research and Evaluation, National Taiwan Normal University (NTNU) and the Department of Human Development and Family Studies, NTNU, both commissioned by the Ministry of Science and Technology. This study used SAS 9.4 to test the median of the questionnaire scale for variables and perform correlation analysis. Furthermore, the study used structural equation modeling in Mplus 8.0 to analyze whether the mediating effect of the model fit of parenting beliefs on the home learning environment is affected by socioeconomic status. The independent variable of this research was socioeconomic status. Based on the formula revised by Lin (2005) from Hollingshead's Two-Factor Index of Social Position (1957), the scores of respondents' socioeconomic status were calculated as follows: socioeconomic status education level job type . The mediator variable was parenting belief, which consists of three constructs: guan, teaching, and achievement expectations. The word ”guan” means ”caring” or even ”love” as well as ”ruling” in Asian countries. There were three questions for guan, two questions for teaching, and three questions for achievement expectations; on a 4-point scale, interviewees' correspondence levels were collected, and the median value of the scale was found to be 2.5. The home learning environment consisted of five constructs: environmental diversity, learning materials, learning stimulus, parental responsivity, and conditional discipline. There were four questions for environmental diversity, five for learning materials, five for learning stimulus, three for parental responsivity, and three for conditional discipline. On a 4-point scale, interviewees' correspondence levels were collected, and the median value of the scale was found to be 2.5. To determine the validity of the research instrument, through factor analyses, three constructs of parenting beliefs were independently attributed to one factor. The cumulative explanatory variation reached 68.55%, and five constructs in the home learning environment were independently attributed to one factor; the cumulative explanatory variation reached 62.00%. Regarding the reliability test, the internal consistency measured by Cronbach's α was .72 for total parenting beliefs, and Cronbach's α was between .64 and .66 for each construct; the Cronbach's α coefficient was .89 for the internal consistency of the total home learning environment and between .65 and .83 for each construct. The factor analysis and Cronbach's α revealed that the research instrument reached acceptable levels of validity and reliability. This research discussed the parenting beliefs of parents with young children, the home learning environment that parents provide, and the mediating effect of parenting beliefs on the relationship between socioeconomic status and the home learning environment under the confluence of traditional Chinese culture and Western thoughts. The main findings and conclusions are as follows: 1. In Taiwan, parents with young children still hold strict parenting beliefs. In Taiwan, parents of younger generations still hold a high level of guan and a ”teaching” attitude toward their children; however, compared with parents in the past, they are seemingly not as strict. The results revealed that changes in parenting beliefs seem to have occurred; however, the research participants were parents with children under 36 months of age, and their expectations regarding their children's achievements may thus have not clearly manifested. Therefore, long-term studies are required to follow the trend. 2. In Taiwan, parents with young children provide a good home learning environment for their children. Today, most parents with young children tend to provide a good home learning environment for their children; especially in the constructs of a home learning environment, a positive relationship exists between conditional parenting and the home learning environment. However, whether conditional parenting does good or harms the development of young children requires further exploration. 3. The higher the socioeconomic status of parents, the less strict the discipline and lower the expectation of parents. In Taiwan, parents with higher socioeconomic status tend to be less strict with discipline and hold lower achievement expectations for their children compared with those on themselves; however, a relationship does not exist between parents' socioeconomic status and teaching beliefs. In addition, parents of a higher socioeconomic status provide a superior home learning environment for their children. Whether the introduction of Western parenting beliefs has influenced Taiwanese parents' parenting beliefs requires further discussion. 4. Although teaching does not exert a mediating effect on the relationship between socioeconomic status and the home learning environment, parents of all socioeconomic statuses place emphasis on teaching. Observed from the construct formula of this research, no significant relationship existed between home socioeconomic status and teaching; however, from the average analysis of teaching, parents of all socioeconomic statuses emphasize teaching. Furthermore, parents' focus on teaching contributes to the provision of a good home learning environment for children. 5. Guan and achievement expectation exert mediating effects on the relationship between socioeconomic status and the home learning environment. This research indicated that socioeconomic status influenced the aspects of learning materials, parental responsivity, and conditional parenting in the home learning environment through guan and achievement expectation. Parents with higher socioeconomic status tend not to hold overly high expectations for their children and know to assist their children's learning with an environment more conducive to learning. Parents with lower socioeconomic status tend to possess higher achievement expectations for their children; however, they may not know effective parenting methods and tend to rely on stricter discipline when parenting. Hence, parenting education may provide parents with lower socioeconomic status with appropriate parenting methods related to guan and achievement expectation and also help their young children's development with a positive and abundant home learning environment.起始頁-結束頁：365-388資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).00067篇名：親子共讀對新住民孩童心理社會發展困境之緩衝效果並列篇名：Buffering Effects of Parent-Child Reading on Young Child Development in Families With Immigrant Mothers作者：陳孟筳(Meng-Ting Chen);林以正(Yi-Cheng Lin);張硯評(Yen-Ping Chang);黃金蘭(Chin-Lan Huang)關鍵字：社會發展;移民;情緒發展;語言發展;認知發展;social development;immigrants;emotional development;language development;cognitive development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：臺灣近年生育率持續降低，但新住民家庭子女學生數卻逆向成長，目前約每十位孩童就有一位來自新住民家庭。多個研究結果顯示新住民家庭的孩童，於多方面的發展上較為不利。親子共讀乃為國內外許多研究支持可促進幼兒發展的因子之一，本研究欲針對新住民的親子共讀效果加以探討。本研究使用幼兒發展調查資料庫中的大型資料，研究對象為36月齡組幼兒。研究者從2,164案的資料庫中，母親國籍為非本國籍、父親國籍為本國籍之145位孩童作為本研究之新住民樣本。相應的對照組則為1,959位父、母皆為本國籍之孩童。結果顯示在發展指標上面，相較於非新住民家庭中的幼兒，新住民家庭中的幼兒在認知、語言、社會與情緒四項指標上發展皆較為落後。在控制父母的年齡、教育程度、親職參與程度、以及家庭總收入後，發現在低親子共讀經驗情況下，新住民幼兒的認知、語言、社會與情緒發展皆顯著低於非新住民幼兒的認知發展；但相反的，在高親子共讀經驗情況下，新住民家庭幼兒的各層面的發展則與非新住民家庭中的幼兒無異。據作者所知，此為國內第一篇具體指出親子共讀可能可有效促進新住民家庭中的幼兒各方面發展的研究，對未來持續探討新住民家庭動力以及親子共讀的重要性與歷程等都有重要的意義。英文摘要：As Taiwan's birth rate plunges, the number of children with an immigrant family background in schools continues to rise. Simultaneously, evidence is accumulating for various obstacles encountered by these families and children, including measurable financial and educational disadvantages, as well as immeasurable challenges caused by language and cultural differences. The literature has shown that children of immigrant families largely fall behind their nonimmigrant-family peers in several domains of development. Inconsistent findings have been documented in recent years. Chen (2010) as well as Ho and colleagues (2011) have reported no significant difference in academic performance between nonimmigrant- and immigrant-family students. Focusing on children whose mothers were from South-East Asian countries, who generally are of lower socioeconomic status (SES) compared with their Taiwanese-native counterparts, Wu and Tsai (2014) also found no significant difference in school performance between nonimmigrant- and immigrant-family children. Finally, emerging research pointed to the possibility that immigrant-family children can even develop stronger creativity than their nonimmigrant-family counterparts (Chang et al., 2014). Observing the inconsistency, we proposed that the relationship between child development and family backgrounds- specifically, growing up in an immigrant or nonimmigrant family-may be contextually conditioned and therefore moderated and potentially relived. Acknowledging other possibilities in the literature (e.g., parental involvement; Lahaie, 2008), we focused on one novel, potential moderating factor in the immigration context: the familial tendency of parent-child shared reading. Parent-child shared reading is believed to facilitate young children's language and cognitive development. Studies have indicated that 12-16-month-olds' language ability is correlated with whether they received shared reading with parents when they were aged 8 months. Research conducted in different cultures has also supported that shared reading strengthens older children's language development (Chow & McBride-Chang, 2003; Farrant & Zubrick, 2011) and long-term learning efficacy (Blewitt et al., 2009). Given the central role of language in social life, it is anticipated that the benefits of parent-child shared reading extend into the socioemotional domain of development. Supporting this idea, Baker (2013) found that preschoolers' reading ability is associated with the degree to which their parents were involved in their reading and writing activities at the age of 24 months; the effect of such shared reading in the early days is generalized to children's later mathematic ability as well as attentional and socioemotional regulation. Critically, the effects cannot be explained away by the possibility that parents' socioeconomic resources contribute coincidentally to both their reading time with their children and their children's development (Hutton et al., 2015). The effects even seem to be stronger among disadvantaged children-such as those of low SES (Shahaeian et al., 2018), which most immigrant families in Taiwan experience-compared with among advantaged ones. To help close gaps between immigrant- and nonimmigrant children in Taiwan, the present research compared the effects of parent-child shared reading on key domains of child development between the two groups. Based on the literature, we argued that shared reading may reduce disparities between children from immigrant and nonimmigrant families. Specifically, our hypotheses were as follows: Developmental gaps. Because of obstacles they face, children with an immigrant-family background exhibit lower development compared with their nonimmigrant-family counterparts. The lack of development was expected to appear in all four domains of cognitive, language, social, and emotional. Shared-reading effects. However, these developmental disparities would be narrowed as the amount of parent-child shared reading in families increases. We expected this buffering effect on the cognitive, language, social, and emotional domains. Parental involvement. Given the significance of parental involvement in the child-developmental literature, that parent- child shared reading can be a mere instantiation of parental involvement, as well as anonymous reviewers' suggestions, we considered and controlled for the effects of general parental involvement in the current study to explore the unique contributions of shared reading to child development. We used the open dataset of ”Kids in Taiwan: National Longitudinal Study of Child Development and Care” in the Survey Research Data Archive of Academic Sinica, Taiwan, to test the hypotheses. The sample was nationally representative, and 2164 participants surveyed were 36-month-old Taiwanese children (Chang, 2019); their adult caregivers answered the survey. Furthermore, we focused on 1959 participants whose fathers and mothers were both native Taiwanese as the nonimmigrant-family group of the present study, and the remaining 145 participants whose fathers were Taiwanese and mothers were of a foreign-country origin as the immigrant-family group. We excluded those whose fathers were immigrants because there were merely 28 of them. Behavioral Rating Inventory of Cognitive Development for 2-5 Year Olds (Wang et al., 2015). This Likert-type questionnaire, included in the source data and used to assess children's cognitive development, consists of 18 items for children's memory ability and six for their executive functioning. Inventory of Language Development for 0-6-Year-Old Children (Liu et al., 2018). This Likert-type questionnaire, included in the source data and used to assess children's language development, consists of three items for language comprehension, nine for language expression, and six more for emergent literacy. Inventory of Social and Emotional Development for Children (Chang, 2019). The Likert-type questionnaire, which was developed in the Kids in Taiwan project and included in the source data, consists of 13 items for children's social regulation and 15 for their emotion regulation. The two subscales were used to assess children's social and emotional development, respectively. Parent-child shared reading index. We averaged across three Likert-type-scaled questions in the source dataset to assess shared reading: (1) Number of books at home that are suitable for the child to read (including books purchased, given, and borrowed)? (2) On average, how many times a week do you read a book to the child? and (3) On average, how much time do you spend reading a book to the child each time? Parental involvement index. Once for the mother and a second time for the father, we averaged across the frequencies (four-point Likert-type scale) of five activities that caregivers can do with the surveyed children in the source dataset to assess parental involvement: (1) taking care of the child's basic needs such as food and clothing; (2) teaching the child routine rules; (3) helping the child with his/her learning activities; (4) caring about and responding positively to the child; and (5) playing with the child. Following coding schemes detailed in the main text of the paper, the results indicated that immigrant-family children had significantly older, lower-educated, and less-involved fathers; younger, lower-educated, and less involved mothers; and lived in lower-income households compared with their nonimmigrant-family counterparts. We thus controlled for these potential confounders in the later analysis of shared reading. In terms of development, we found that immigrant-family children had significantly weaker cognitive, language, social, and emotional abilities compared with their nonimmigrant-family counterparts. These findings replicated past research, supported our hypotheses, and justified the current investigation into the possible benefits of parent-child shared reading. We dummy coded children from immigrant families as 1 and those from nonimmigrant families as 0 to study the moderating effects of shared reading on this code of family status. In a regression wherein a domain of child development was predicted by the family-status code, mean-centered shared reading, the interaction of the two, and the aforementioned controls, the results (Figure 1) revealed that parent-child shared reading significantly buffers the detrimental effects of young children's immigrant-family status (versus nonimmigrant) in the cognitive, language, social, and emotional development domains. Upon closer examination, simple-main-effect analysis further indicated that nonimmigrant-family children only surpassed their immigrant-family counterparts in all domains when shared reading in the families was low (i.e., at +1 SD). However, when shared reading was abundant (i.e., at + 1 SD compared with the whole sample, or at + 0.18 SD if compared with other immigrant-family children only, as the value is their ”within-group” + 1 SD), we observed no relative obstacles for immigrant-family children, and their cognitive and emotional abilities were trending in the direction of exceeding those of nonimmigrant-family children. Using a nationally representative sample, we reported high-powered evidence that parent-child shared reading, such as reading bedtime stories together, reduces and sometimes neutralizes developmental disparities encountered by 3-year-old children from immigrant families compared with those from nonimmigrant families. This beneficial effect generalizes across the cognitive, language, social, and emotional domains. When shared reading is strong, there is even an indication that immigrant-family children may perform better than their nonimmigrant-family counterparts in cognitive and emotional domains. This suggestion, nonetheless, requires scrutiny in future research that considers the contextual limitations of our present work, such as that we only considered immigrant mothers but not fathers and that immigrant families are generally disadvantaged.起始頁-結束頁：389-414資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).00078篇名：從多層面Rasch模式來檢視不同的評分者等化連結設計對參數估計的影響並列篇名：Investigating the Effects of Rater Equating Designs on Parameter Estimates in the Context of Preservice Principal Oral Performance作者：謝名娟(Ming-Chuan Hsieh)關鍵字：多層面Rasch模式（MFRM）;校長口語評量;等化連結設計;評分嚴厲度;Many-Facet Rasch model (MFRM);preservice principal oral performance;rater equating design;rater severity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：牽涉到評分的情境下，常見三種評分資料蒐集的方式，第一種為完全評分網絡設計，在此設計下所有的層面的成分（components）有完整的觀測值。第二種為不完全評分網絡設計，成分間有部份程度系統性連結，第三種為不連接評分網絡設計，各成分之間沒有任何系統性的連結，即使這種評分網絡設計具有潛在性的問題，在台灣許多重要考試在成本考量下仍使用這樣的設計。本研究以儲訓校長的口語表現評分資料為實證數據，藉由多層面Rasch模式（many faceted rasch model，簡稱MFRM）的分析模式來進行參數的等化估計，探討這三種不同評分者資料蒐集設計對於各層面參數估計的影響，其研究發現評分者連結性越小，參數估計的穩定性越差，尤其在不連接評分網絡設計，雖然使用MFRM進行校正，其相關參數估計與受試者的能力排序存在很大的誤差，考試單位應避免使用此設計進行評分者的分數評閱。建議未來重要的考試，應至少採用不完全評分網絡設計，並以統計模型（如MFRM）的方式進行評分者嚴厲度的校正。英文摘要：A problem in performance assessments is the degree to which rater severity and leniency can affect the examinee's scores. In particular, fairness concerns related to performance systems include the exchangeability of raters. A possible resolution for addressing rater severity is for each rater to score each examinee's performance; thus, the difference in rater severity would affect each student at the same level. However, this is not always feasible in practice for fully crossed rating designs. In the context of performance assessments, equating procedures create links between raters when performing transformation with a fully crossed rating design is not feasible and could control for differences in rater severity. An effective equating procedure involves a strong statistical model and a systematic data collection approach. The Many- Facet Rasch model (MFRM) is a commonly used approach for adjusting rater differences. Although the use of the MFRM model has gained popularity as an equating approach for rater severity, several key considerations related to data collection designs and model data fit are also crucial. In particular, it is vital to ensure a sufficient level of connectivity in the rating design; that is, the raters can be linked to other assessment components, such as other raters, examinees, or tasks. Three types of data collection design are commonly used for equating. The first type is a complete network design, in which the data consist of complete designs with subjects of all assessment components. This is an ideal design for a rating system. The second type is an incomplete network design. Under an incomplete network design, examinees do not have scores on all assessment components, but a partial and systematic degree of connectivity exists for raters and tasks to produce a connected network of assessment components. The third type is a nonlinked network design, where no systematic linkage exists in the components of facets. Even if the unlinked scoring network has some potential problems, many important exams in Taiwan still use this rater design. The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of differences in data collection designs that could affect parameter estimation in the performance assessment. Using empirical data, this study explicitly related the central role of consideration to data collection designs for the interpretation of results when the MFRM is applied. The study had two main research objectives: (1) To examine the impact of different data collection designs on parameter estimates for examinees' ability, raters' severity, and the difficulty of scoring criteria. The indices included infit, outfit, separation index, reliability, and the chi-square test. (2) To evaluate the correlations of ability estimates between different designs and the magnitude of their impact on the ranking of the examinees' performance level. Examinees for the top 10, middle 10, and last 10 examinees in the complete network design were selected to evaluate their ranking differences for other designs. This study used the MFRM and oral performance score data of preservice principals to explore the effects of the three data collection designs. A total of four raters and 85 preservice principals participated. The raters scored seven criteria for each preservice principal's oral performance: content, structure, word usage, attitude, pronunciation, intonation, and time control. Each criterion was assigned a grade of 1-3, of which 1 represents the basic level, 2 represents a proficient level, and 3 represents an advanced level. The raters were trained before the actual rating was conducted. The specification of each grading level and the standards were explained; raters were also required to complete rating exercises before conducting the official rating. The anchored videos at various levels for the raters were discussed. Through these anchored videos, the raters could better understand the standards. Four equating designs were considered in this study. Design 1 was the complete network design; four raters rated all preservice principals in this design. Designs 2 and 3 were incomplete network designs. In these two designs, some rating scores overlapped to construct the connectivity of scoring components. In design 2, each student received scores from three raters, whereas in design 3, each student received scores from two raters. Design 4 was a nonlinked network design, in which each rater only reviewed his or her assigned class; there was no connection between raters' scores. The MFRM, a statistics model of the Rasch family, was employed to perform the four equating designs. When estimating the examinee's ability level, raters' severity and scoring criteria were simultaneously considered in the model. This study had two main findings: (1) For the incomplete and nonlinked network designs, some minor problems were related to the model fit, but overall, the infit and outfit indices were close to 1, which indicated that the use of the MFRM was feasible for analyzing the data used in this study. However, the reliability and separation indices for the nonlinked network design were low, and some chi-square tests did not reach significance-results that were quite different from the complete network design. (2) The lower the linkage between assessment components, the more biased the estimated stability of parameters. The fully connected network design provided the strongest connectivity at all levels (subjects, raters, and criteria), and this design was also the most ideal scenario for the data collection design. However, this design costs much in terms of rating time and money; thus, it is difficult to implement such a design in a large-scale test. By contrast, incomplete network designs are more feasible in large-scale tests, namely for establishing overlaps of the evaluation of some subjects of raters. The correlation between the complete network design and nonlinked network design was only 0.69, but the correlation between the complete network design and incomplete network design rose to 0.79-0.94. Moreover, a clear gap existed in participants' rankings between the ideal fully connected network design and nonlinked network design. For example, student #59 ranked 79th in the complete network design but 21st in the nonlinked network design, equaling a ranking difference gap of 58. The results revealed that even if the MFRM is used for correction, large errors will still exist in the estimation of ability values and the ranking results of examinees for a nonlinked network design. This study provided two suggestions: (1) Examination institutions should avoid using the nonlinked network rater design. Carefully constructed network assessment designs based on effective data collection designs have the chance of obtaining objective and fair measurements within systems with multiple facets. Regarding current large-scale tests, many do not use any statistical models for rater severity correction; furthermore, they use the nonlinked rater design. It is possible that examinees can experience bad luck and encounter a severe grader, resulting in them receiving a low score. Therefore, this study recommended that important examinations in the future should adopt a more complete rating plan. (2) This study used empirical data. A simulation study can be considered to further examine the impact of different designs of component connectivity on parameter estimates. In addition, different experimental designs are worth discussing; for example, if examinees are nested within tasks, would this nested relationship affect the parameter estimates of ability and rater severity levels? The impact of more complex data collection designs are worthy of future research.起始頁-結束頁：415-436資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).00089篇名：科學競賽選手的合作態度、知識分享與持續分享意願之關係分析並列篇名：Analysis of Relationships Among Science Contestants' Cooperation Attitude, Knowledge Sharing, and Continuous Sharing Intention作者：洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hon);葉建宏(Jian-Hong Ye);何雅娟(Ya-Jiuan Ho);林逸茜(I-Chien Lin)關鍵字：持續意願;合作態度;知識分享;動手做科學競賽;continuous intention;cooperative attitude;knowledge sharing;hands-on science competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：時值國際教育發展趨勢及國內進行108十二年國民基本教育課程綱要之興革，其重視學生探究與實作、培養主動探索與團隊合作之際，經由競賽活動最能激勵團隊探究，而在團隊探究中成員的成功與有效的知識分享，可以直接促進知識的創造，進而幫助團體維持競爭優勢。以科學競賽而言，知識分享是可提升學習者科學探究與實踐能力。然而，在科學競賽中對於學習者的知識分享行為相關研究之比例相對較少，故本研究特基於Kahneman（2003）的思考雙重歷程理論（自動回饋及反思回饋兩個歷程）的基礎下，建構一個三種不同推理類型（快速回饋、認知反思、情感反思）的知識分享行為，以特質活化理論來探討在科學競賽中參與者合作態度的特質、知識分享與持續分享意願之關係。本研究屬於一項驗證性研究，以立意抽樣方式，邀請所有參與2018年點子科學競賽參賽者進行問卷填寫，並刪除無效樣本及填答不完整的數據資料。本研究共收集169份有效問卷，有效回收率為77.2%，其中男性計有102人（60.4%），女性計有67人（39.6%），平均年齡為12.189歲（標準差為1.554歲）。本研究採驗證性分析，數據資料經由研究工具的信度與效度及整體適配度檢驗後。最後以結構方程模型方法進行路徑分析。研究結果顯示，合作態度與三種類型的知識分享（快速回饋、認知反思、情感反思）呈現正相關；但僅有認知反思與持續分享意願呈現正相關，而快速回饋與持續分享意願呈現無相關，且情感反思與持續分享意願呈現負相關。同時本研究更進一步，應用四個理論來解釋分析結果，分別從期望價值理論解析，快速回饋的知識分享類型與持續分享意願呈現無相關之因素；從思考雙重歷程理論、特質活化理論及社會動機理論，說明認知反思與持續分享意願呈現正相關之因素；從焦慮不確定感管理理論及社會相互依賴理論探討，情感反思與持續分享意願呈現負相關的因素。而本研究貢獻在於理解知識分享的型態與持續意願，將有助於科學競賽中團隊探究中轉化情感反思及快速回饋為認知反思的知識分享型態，增進持續分享意願；進而提升競爭優勢。英文摘要：With science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics (STEAM) education in full swing worldwide, several science competitions based on STEAM have sprung up. One is Maker-Highlight-STEM&A, a competition sponsored by the Department of Education of the Taipei City Government, which involves STEAM learning and creativity through hands-on skills. In Maker- Highlight-STEM&A project making, knowledge sharing is crucial for seeking approaches to solve problems. Participants must know how to collaborate with each other and have a positive collective attitude to knowledge sharing to achieve the team's goals. In particular, in the competition, the project topic is given on the spot, which encourages participants to share their knowledge and discover new ideas while creating project functions and improving their project quality, thereby helping them win the competition. Extending Kahneman's (2003) dual process system, which states that automatic and reflective responses exist in knowledge sharing, we divided reflective responses into rational and emotional responses based on the cognition-affection model. To analyze the role of the three types of knowledge sharing, this study explored cooperative attitude as their antecedent and continuous intention as their predictor. In the highly competitive environment of Maker-Highlight-STEM&A, knowledge sharing in teamwork is crucial to win the competition; however, few studies have examined the correlation among cooperative attitude, knowledge sharing, and continuous intention to share knowledge. Because self-identity can foster attitudes toward a behavior in relation to the intention to perform that behavior, the present study considered the self-identity of participants in three types of knowledge sharing to predict their continuous intention to share knowledge in the competition. Group interactions can affect people's motivation to share their knowledge. Thus, this research built a research model extended from trait activation theory and social sharing motivation theory. With cooperative attitude as an independent variable, knowledge sharing as an intervening variable, and continuous sharing intention as a dependent variable, we proposed the following six research hypotheses: H1: Cooperative attitude is positively associated with autonomous response. H2: Cooperative attitude is positively associated with rational reflection. H3: Cooperative attitude is positively associated with emotional reflection. H4: Autonomous response is positively associated with continuous sharing intention. H5: Rational reflection is positively associated with continuous intention to share knowledge. H6: Emotional reflection is negatively associated with continuous sharing intention. The purposive sampling technique was used in this research wherein all participants in the 2018 Maker-Highlight- STEM&A were invited to fill out a questionnaire survey. A total of 219 questionnaires were collected, of which 50 invalid questionnaires (with incomplete data) were excluded, leaving 169 effective samples for an effective rate of 77.2% and including 102 male (60.4%) and 67 female (39.6%) respondents. By performing the first-order confirmatory factor analysis, questionnaire items with lower factor loadings were deleted. Then, the reliability and validity of the questionnaire constructs were tested to ensure they met the thresholds of statistical standards. Model fit and path analyses were performed to verify the research model. When performing the first-order confirmatory factor analysis to evaluate the internal validity of items in each construct, items with residual values over 0.5 should be removed from the original questionnaire (Hair et al., 2018). In the original questionnaire, there were 11 items for cooperative attitude; five each for autonomous response, rational reflection, and emotional reflection; and five for the continuous sharing intention construct. Of the remaining items, those for cooperative attitude were reduced from 11 to six; those for autonomous response, rational reflection, and emotional reflection were reduced from five to four each; and those for continuous sharing intention were reduced from five to four. Exemplary items included ”If my teammates have trouble shooting, I will help him or her right away” for measuring the cooperative attitude construct, with CR = .89 and Cronbach's α = .90; ”If any idea comes to my mind, I speak out right away” for measuring the automatic response construct, with CR = .84 and Cronbach's α = .83; ”If any idea comes to my mind, I determine whether it is rational before speaking out” for measuring the rational reflection response construct, with CR = .89 and Cronbach's α = .89; ”If any idea comes to my mind, I think about whether it will be rejected before I speak out” for measuring emotional reflection, with CR = .86 and Cronbach's α = .86; and ”I would like to continuously share knowledge in this type of contest in the future” for measuring continuous sharing intention, with CR = .94 and Cronbach's α = .94. The CR and Cronbach's α values were above the threshold suggested by Hair et al. (2018), indicating that the composite reliability and internal consistency of the questionnaire were acceptable. In this research, having a cooperative attitude was the independent variable, the three different types of knowledge sharing were mediating variables, and continuous sharing intention was the dependent variable. Data were analyzed and tested using structural equation modeling with AMOS 20.0. The results of the data analysis revealed that cooperative attitude was positively associated with autonomous response, rational reflection, and emotional reflection. Moreover, autonomous response was negatively associated with continuous sharing intention; rational reflection was positively associated with continuous sharing intention; and emotional reflection was negatively associated with continuous sharing intention. Throughout the competition, there were numerous benefits for participants apart from the purpose of the competition itself, including teamwork and knowledge sharing. Despite the fact that it is important to know how to effectively improve students' knowledge sharing through such events, it has seldom been mentioned in research related to science competitions; hence, we conducted an empirical study targeting the 2018 science competition. The research results revealed that all three knowledge sharing types, namely autonomous response, rational reflection, and emotional reflection, played a positive predictive role in cooperative attitude. Emotional response and automatic reaction played a negative antecedent role in continuous intention to share knowledge. In line with the Chinese saying ”thinking three times before taking action,” we should focus on knowledge sharing from rational reflection and deactivate knowledge sharing from emotional reflection and automatic response to improve knowledge transmission effects for participants to experience a more meaningful STEAM process. Remarkably little research has been conducted on learners' knowledge sharing behavior in school and even less on such behavior in competitions. This research revealed that a competition involving teamwork, the behavioral model of knowledge sharing, and the intention of continuous sharing can be expanded to understand cooperative learning in any other STEAM-related contests. In addition, this study proposed three different types of knowledge sharing (i.e., autonomous response, rational reflection, and emotional reflection) extended from Kahneman's dual-process theory (intuitive feedback and reflective feedback) to review continuous sharing intention. These three knowledge sharing types could be a reference for future research teams to improve knowledge-sharing effects in other cooperative settings. Onsite team competitions promote cooperative opportunities for participants to develop their attitude to collaborative work and knowledge sharing in rational reflection. Cooperative attitude development is essential for meeting the requirement of new 108 curricula. In line with this, other types of science or STEAM contests can integrate onsite activities to ensure that participants must work collaboratively to win the contest. In particular, National Science Fair or Science Olympic contests can be implemented with trouble shooting onsite, in which effective knowledge sharing can be embedded along with project making.起始頁-結束頁：437-458資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).000910篇名：語音轉碼對臺灣大學生閱讀歷程的影響：來自眼動實驗的證據並列篇名：The Effects of Phonological Recoding on Taiwanese Students' Reading Processes: Evidence from Eye-Tracking Experiments作者：官英華(Ying-Hua Guan)關鍵字：中文閱讀;眼動實驗;語音轉碼;Chinese reading;eye-movement experiments;phonological recoding期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：語音在中文閱讀中的角色長久以來是心理語言學界爭論的話題。雖然一些證據顯示中文母語者閱讀中文時，語音可以在字詞辨識早期被激活，語音在字詞辨識和閱讀理解中的角色仍有爭議。本研究進行了兩個眼動實驗，探討是否中文成人的讀者需要依賴語音轉碼來理解短篇論說文，以及是否當讀者沒有與特定領域文章內容相關的背景知識時，更需要依賴語音轉碼來理解文意。實驗一請30位大學生在5個閱讀條件（語音抑制、逐字朗讀、聽不相干語音、聽文章語音以及安靜閱讀）下閱讀20篇短篇論說文。受試者在每篇文章後的閱讀測驗分數以及他們的眼動行為都被記錄下來，之後針對每個依變項進行數個（廣義）線性混合模型分析，以找出最佳配適度的模型。結果顯示語音抑制明顯的降低閱讀理解且造成較大的回視率和目標詞的重讀率，表示語音轉碼在中文閱讀理解和字詞辨識的重要性。實驗二沿用同樣的實驗法另請30位大學生在上述5個閱讀條件下閱讀15篇物理學專業的短文，其中15位主修人文社會科學，15位主修自然科學。實驗結果顯示只有背景知識對閱讀理解有顯著效果，但閱讀條件以及它與背景知識的交互作用都不顯著。背景知識無法調節受試者閱讀理解時對語音轉碼的依賴程度。整體來說，語音轉碼對特定知識領域短文的理解並不那麼重要。語音抑制並未顯著降低物理學專業短文的閱讀理解表現。逐字朗讀會使閱讀變慢並降低回視率，但不能提升閱讀理解。聽文章語音會增加閱讀短篇論說文中目標詞的重讀率，也會增加閱讀物理學專業短文的閱讀時間和平均凝視時間。聽不相干語音不影響閱讀理解表現，只增加物理學專有名詞的重讀率以及延長沒有背景知識受試者的首次凝視時間。英文摘要：Phonological recoding is a psychological process in which readers convert printed words into sounds (i.e., phonological codes) during silent reading. The role of phonological recoding in reading has long been debated in the field of psycholinguistics. Most relevant studies have mainly focused on examining the role of phonological recoding in word recognition. Three major theoretical approaches have been proposed for lexical access. First, the phonological mediation model assumes that the meaning of a word is accessed through its phonology; that is, the sequence of the word recognition process is orthography phonology semantics. Phonological recoding of a word occurs prior to the access of its meaning (Lukatela & Turvey, 1994; Rayner, Pollatsek, & Binder, 1998; Van Orden, Johnston, & Hale, 1988). Second, the direct access route model assumes that the meaning of a word can be directly accessed through the transition from orthography to semantics without the mediation of phonology (M. Coltheart & Coltheart, 1997; Taft & Van Graan, 1998). The model, however, does not deny the possibility of phonological activation. Rather, it assumes that phonological recoding occurs concurrently to or later than the access of the word's meaning. Third, the dual route model suggests that two parallel running routes can achieve lexical access: one is the phonologically mediated route, and the other is the direct access route (M. Coltheart, 2000). The route that achieves lexical access depends on the route that runs the fastest (Barron, 1986; Paap, Noel, & Johansen, 1992). McCusker, Hillinger, and Bias (1981) indicated that the difficulty of material, subjects' reading fluency, the frequency of occurrence of items, and task demands can determine the use of phonological recoding. Chinese is a logographic language and is also regarded as a phonologically opaque one. Nevertheless, studies investigating the time course of phonological activation in Chinese word recognition have yielded inconsistent results. Although some evidence has suggested that phonology can be activated very early in the word recognition process when Chinese readers read Chinese words or sentences (Guo, Peng, & Liu, 2005; Tan, Hoosain, & Peng, 1995; Zhang & Perfetti, 1993), it remains controversial whether phonological recoding plays a crucial role in word recognition and text comprehension. Few studies have measured Chinese subjects' reading comprehension under the condition of articulatory suppression, which has been proven to interfere with phonological recoding (Lu & Zhang, 2007; Ding & Wang, 2006). However, the results of such studies have been inconsistent, and whether phonological recoding is important for Chinese text comprehension remains unclear. This study conducted two eye-tracking experiments by using the same experimental paradigm implemented by Guan (2015, 2020) to investigate whether adult Chinese readers need to rely on phonological recoding to understand short expository texts and also whether readers without the background knowledge relevant to domain-specific texts must rely more on phonological recoding to comprehend them. In Experiment 1, 30 university students in Taipei were recruited whose mother tongue was Mandarin Chinese. They were asked to read 20 short expository texts (each one was 350 characters in length) under five different reading conditions: articulatory suppression, reading aloud, concurrent reading and listening to an irrelevant text (IRS), reading while listening to the same text (RWL), and silent reading. The topics of the texts included, for example, ”advice for new graduates when entering workforce,” ”the impact of 3C products on human cognition,” ”water pollution,” ”the color of eggs,” ”the crisis of water resources,” ”the function of sun light,” ”the philosopher and the frog,” ”Mr. thought,” ”experiment with monkeys,” ”the stereotypes of teachers in Taiwan,” and ”the influences of watching TV on small children.” Subjects' reading time and comprehension score for each text as well as their eye movements were recorded, which were then analyzed by several linear or generalized linear mixed models to find the best fitting model for each dependent variable. The results revealed that articulatory suppression significantly impaired reading comprehension and caused a larger regression ratio in text reading as well as a higher rereading rate on target words, whereas the effects of the other reading conditions on comprehension did not differ from each other. These results suggest that phonological recoding is essential for Chinese expository text comprehension and word recognition. Reading aloud, compared with silent reading, significantly increased the overall reading time, mean fixation duration, and number of fixations in a text but substantially reduced the mean saccade length and regression ratio. In word-level processing, reading aloud led to a much longer first fixation duration, gaze duration, rereading time, and total reading time on target words selected in the texts. Through word-by-word reading, reading aloud seemed to facilitate integrated sentence meaning, but it failed to significantly enhance overall reading comprehension. Moreover, RWL caused higher rereading rates on target words than did silent reading, and it did not improve reading comprehension. In line with results found under the reading aloud condition, the null effects of reading aloud and RWL on reading comprehension could indicate that both reading conditions make the covert phonological recoding during silent reading overt and therefore imposed similar effects on reading comprehension to those exerted by the phonological recoding in silent reading. Experiment 2 was conducted to further examine whether subjects' background knowledge regarding the text content would moderate their reliance on phonological recoding in understanding domain-specific texts, such that subjects without much background knowledge would rely more on phonological recoding in the processing of unfamiliar terms and text content. To this end, 15 excerpts from journal articles in Scientific American were used as experimental materials. The topics of these texts were all about physics, such as the Higgs boson, quantum computing, loop quantum gravity, antimatter, charge-coupled devices, and 3He superfluid. The same experimental paradigm as in Experiment 1 was used in Experiment 2, and a different sample of 30 university students in Taipei were recruited as participants. Half majored in humanities and social sciences and had no background knowledge in physics. The other half of the students majored in natural sciences, such as physics, atmospheric physics, and materials science; therefore, they had background knowledge in physics. Participants were asked to read the texts and answer four comprehension questions after reading each text. The results revealed that only background knowledge had a significant effect on reading comprehension, whereas reading conditions and their interaction with background knowledge did not exhibit any significant effects. Participants with relevant background knowledge performed significantly better than did their counterparts. However, background knowledge did not moderate participants' dependency on phonological recoding in reading comprehension. It seems that phonological recoding did not play a crucial role in understanding short domain-specific texts. Analysis of participants' eye movements indicated that reading aloud could slow their reading speed and reduce their regression ratio, but it did not enhance reading comprehension. RWL increased the rereading rate on target words in short expository texts, and it increased reading time and the mean fixation duration in domain specific texts. IRS did not affect comprehension performance; it only increased the rereading rate on domain-specific target words and prolonged the first fixation duration for participants without relevant background knowledge. In sum, the results of this study suggest that phonological recoding provides critical support for Chinese adult readers to comprehend short expository texts, but it only plays a minor role in understanding domain-specific texts. When participants read domain-specific texts, it was their background knowledge that dominated their reading comprehension performance.起始頁-結束頁：459-488資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202012_52(2).001011篇名：性雜亂的形成與對性侵害的影響並列篇名：Development of Promiscuous and Impersonal Sex and its Consequences on Sexual Assault作者：黃軍義(Jiun-Yih Huang);林耀盛(Yaw-Sheng Lin);李嘉豐(Ka-Fong Lei)關鍵字：早年性經驗;性雜亂;追求感官刺激特質;性侵害;early sexual experiences;promiscuous and impersonal sex;sensation seeking;sexual assault期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：國內在性雜亂形成與影響方面的研究甚少。本研究提出性雜亂形成與影響的模型。此一模型指出：早年性經驗與追求感官刺激特質相關，皆影響性雜亂的形成；而早年性經驗、追求感官刺激特質、與性雜亂，皆影響性侵害行為與次數。本研究以無記名自陳式問卷在線上蒐集資料，透過網路平台宣傳，調查年滿二十歲的男性，共計有998位參與，平均年齡23.01歲，教育程度以大學居多。研究結果顯示，早年性經驗與追求感官刺激特質相關，皆可預測性雜亂；而早年性經驗、追求感官刺激特質、與性雜亂皆可預測性侵害行為；早年性經驗與性雜亂可預測性侵害行為次數。研究結果支持本研究模型。此外，13%的參與者自陳在近一年內曾從事性侵害行為。文末就研究結果的意涵、實務應用、研究限制與後續研究方向進行討論。英文摘要：The prevalence of male sexual assault on women is alarmingly high worldwide (Axinn et al., 2018; Carey et al., 2015; Kamdar et al., 2017; Koss et al., 1987; Walsh et al., 2014). Researchers have critically and widely discussed the social issue (Kuo et al., 2018) concerning the adverse effects of sexual assault on the psychological, physiological, and sexual well-being of victims (Dworkin et al., 2017; Rothman et al., 2019). Samples of convicted sex offenders and nonoffenders (Davis et al., 2018; Widman et al., 2013) have confirmed that promiscuous and impersonal sex is a major predictor of male sexual assault (Abbey et al., 2011; Casey et al., 2017; Malamuth, et al., 1995; Widman et al., 2013). Considering that sexual assault is a pertinent social issue, the causal factors of promiscuous and impersonal sex should be essentially explored. However, only a few studies have focused on promiscuous and impersonal sex in Taiwan. Particularly, studies focusing on the effect of promiscuous and impersonal sex on sexual assault have been inadequate. Male sexual assault on women constitutes more than 90% of all sexual assault cases in Taiwan (National Police Agency, Ministry of the Interior, 2017). This study bridges a critical research gap concerning male sexual assault in Taiwan and contributes to the international literature on this topic. This study particularly focuses on two aspects. Early sexual experiences pertain to one's surroundings and life experiences (Dishion et al., 2012). Sensation seeking (a personality trait) pertains to biological factors from the perspective of trait theory and biological theory (Barenbaum & Winter, 2008; McCrae & Costa, 2008). These two aspects can help understand mechanisms underlying the development of promiscuous and impersonal sex. Accordingly, this study establishes a model to explain the development of promiscuous and impersonal sex and its effect on sexual assault. The following assumptions are made: (a) Early sexual experiences relate to sensation seeking, and both aspects predict promiscuous and impersonal sex. (b) Early sexual experiences, sensation seeking, and promiscuous and impersonal sex can predict sexual assault behavior and frequency. (c) Early sexual experiences and domestic violence relate to each other and can predict promiscuous and impersonal sex. However, the effect of domestic violence as a predictor of promiscuous and impersonal sex is often overlooked due to the high correspondence between early sexual experiences and promiscuous and impersonal sex. This study has verified the preceding assumptions. An anonymous self-report online questionnaire was used for data collection. The surveyed population comprised 998 men aged ＞20 years. The participants were aged between 20 and 55 years, with the average age and standard deviation being 23.01 and 4.38 years, respectively. Furthermore, 1.00%, 3.50%, 84.20%, and 11.30% of the participants had elementary school and junior high school, high school (vocational), university (college), and postgraduate education, respectively. With regard to caregivers, 87.10%, 2.30%, 6.10%, 3.30%, 0.40%, and 0.90% of the participants were raised by their parents, fathers, mothers, grandparents, relatives, and without family support, respectively. Participants were recruited through websites, and research questionnaires were administered through online platforms. Participants provided consent, and this study was approved by a research ethics review committee (REC number: 10503ES009). Variables were measured using self-developed tools or established scales with reliability and validity. The measurement tools were verified as having acceptable reliability and validity. This study used structural equation modeling to examine the effects of early sexual experiences, family violence, and sensation seeking on promiscuous and impersonal sex. In addition, binary logistic regression analysis was performed to examine the effects of early sexual experiences, sensation seeking, and promiscuous and impersonal sex on sexual assault. A structural equation model was used to examine the effects of early sexual experiences, sensation seeking, and promiscuous and impersonal sex on the sexual assault frequency. The results revealed that early sexual experiences were associated with sensation seeking. Furthermore, both the aspects predicted 16% of the variance of promiscuous and impersonal sex. Under the influence of early sexual experiences, the effect of family violence on promiscuous and impersonal sex became nonsignificant. In addition, the results indicated the following: (1) Early sexual experiences, sensation seeking, and promiscuous and impersonal sex significantly predicted sexual assault. (2) Early sexual experiences and promiscuous and impersonal sex had significant predictive effects on the sexual assault frequency. (3) Sensation seeking no longer had significant predictive power under the overlapping influence of the aforementioned variables. The study findings confirm the results of previous studies concerning the effect of early sexual experiences on sexual assault. The family environment plays a major role in sexual assault. This finding is consistent with Marshall and Barbaree's (1990) assertion that sexual assault behaviors originate from abusive families. In addition, this study confirmed the effect of promiscuous and impersonal sex on sexual assault, consistent with the findings in the literature (Davis et al., 2018; Mann et al., 2010; Widman et al., 2013). Malamuth et al. (1995) asserted that early risk factors affect promiscuous and impersonal sex through the mediation of adolescent delinquency. However, this study demonstrated the direct relationship between early sexual experiences and promiscuous and impersonal sex. The study confirmed the effect of early sexual experiences, sensation seeking, and promiscuous and impersonal sex on the sexual assault frequency, which has been rarely discussed in previous studies. Additionally, this study clarified the role of early sexual experiences and family violence in promiscuous and impersonal sex. Early sexual experiences influence promiscuous and impersonal sex as well as predict the sexual assault behavior and frequency. As observed, early sexual experiences have more explanatory power than sensation seeking, thereby contributing to the development of sexual assault tendencies (Huang, 2000; Groth & Birnbaum, 1979; Seto & Lalumiere, 2010). Accordingly, early intervention in high-risk families (social workers, psychologists, probation officers, prosecutors, teachers, or researchers) and cooperation of professionals (Tien et al., 2017) can effectively prevent sexual assault behaviors. Factors such as adolescent delinquency, psychopathy, severe drinking, and false perception of women's sexual intention (Abbey et al., 2011; Dishion et al., 2012; Malamuth et al., 1995) can be incorporated into the model of promiscuous and impersonal sex in future studies. This is because early sexual experiences and sensation seeking explain only 16% of the variance of promiscuous and impersonal sex. The confluence model proposed by Malamuth et al. (1995) indicates that early risk factors influence promiscuous and impersonal sex through adolescent delinquency. Subsequent studies can address this association and compare it with the results of this study (i.e., early sexual experiences directly predicts promiscuous and impersonal sex). In addition, sex offenders who are arrested and those who escape arrest demonstrate differences in terms of life adjustment, self-esteem, and causes of sexual assault (Smithyman, 1978). Accordingly, future research should focus on incarcerated sex offenders to explore and verify the hypotheses presented herein.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202009_52(1).000112篇名：正念教育課程對國小高年級學童情緒調適能力及人際關係之影響並列篇名：The Effects of a Mindfulness Curriculum on the Emotional Regulation and Interpersonal Relationships of Fifth-grade Children作者：謝宜華(Yi-Hua Hsieh);黃鳳英(Feng-Ying Huang)關鍵字：正念;兒童正念教育;情緒調適;人際關係;mindfulness;children's mindfulness curriculum;emotional regulation;interpersonal relationships期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：兒童時期是情緒調適策略及人際技巧發展的重要階段，情緒調適能力不佳，對兒童產生的影響既廣泛且長遠。根據相關研究，正念對情緒調適、專注力與人際關係促進有正向效益。但國內以系統性正念教育課程作為國小學童介入之方案，仍在初始階段。本研究以國小五年級學童為研究對象，以班級為單位分派為實驗組及對照組。實驗組接受為期十二週，每週四十分鐘之「兒童正念教育課程」，對照組學童維持原時段教學活動，研究結果融合量化評量與質性訪談以了解正念教育介入效益與兒童正念學習經驗。評量工具包括：情緒智能量表青少年版、情緒調整量表、國小學童正向情緒量表，所得資料以獨立樣本單因子共變數進行分析，另輔以課程回饋單及師生個別訪談資料做介入效益及兒童正念學習經驗之探究。研究結果發現，接受正念教育課程的實驗組，其在情緒智能量表總分及內省分量表、人際分量表，與對照組間達到顯著差異；另在情緒調整總量表、調整策略分量表及情緒效能分量表分數，實驗組顯著優於對照組。但在國小學童正向情緒量表部分，兩組間未達顯著差異。此外，根據質性訪談資料顯示，學童普遍能夠將正念技巧應用於學習及生活層面，自我情緒覺察及情緒表達之能力增加，促成整體情緒調適能力與情緒智能提升，並改善人際關係與互動品質。總而言之，「兒童正念教育課程」在目前臺灣的國民教育體制下，具有高度的可行性，根據本研究結果顯示正念教育對於國小高年級學童具有促進情緒智能、情緒覺察、情緒調適策略、與改善人際關係之效果，或可做為國民教育學童「情緒調適與人際關係促進」的課程方案。英文摘要：The development of emotion regulation and interpersonal skills is an important task for schoolchildren, and learning and developing such tasks while of elementary school age is critical for individuals' later life. The difficulty associated with emotion regulation in schoolchildren can exert huge, long-lasting impacts on children. The vast majority of mental illnesses are associated with difficulty regarding emotion regulation. The brain science research on emotion regulation has also found that emotional adjustment and the cognitive brain regions overlap each other in many brain areas and that emotional responses and cognitive function interact. Moreover, difficulty regarding emotion regulation is closely related to depression and also inhibits executive functions such as working memory and inhibition control, often leading to subsequent substance abuse. For example, previous studies have found that difficulties associated with emotion regulation in childhood are closed related to attention deficit, hyperactivity, and other types of psychological disorders. The research on mindfulness-based interventions for adults has shown that these can benefit emotion regulation, reduce pain and physical symptoms, reduce negative emotions such as anxiety, depression, and rumination, and improve self-awareness and psychological flexibility. Mindfulness education for children is receiving increasing attention due to its potential to increase children's attention, cognitive function and emotion regulation as well as promote proactive interpersonal relationships for this group. However, the purpose of mindfulness education for children is not simply to reduce their behavioral problems and physic-psychosocial symptoms, as its primary goal is to enhance children's ability to relate to the self, both physically and psychosocially, and learn how to apply mindfulness activities and skills to their daily life. Therefore, children can foster their self-regulation ability, whatever situation they encounter. In order to fulfill this purpose, mindfulness education should follow the whole structural format of the mindfulness-based interventional programs (MBIPs) as well as brain-focused strategies to understand what sparks our instinctive, autonomic reflexes and how. However, implementing a children's mindfulness education program in educational settings in Taiwan is still in the initial stage. To test the benefits of a children's mindfulness education program containing brain-focused strategies on children's emotion regulation and interpersonal relationship promotion, and the feasibility of its implementation in elementary schools in Taiwan, this study employs a mixed quantitative and qualitative research design. Additionally, considering the actual teaching situation, a total of 51 grade five elementary schoolchildren from two classes were recruited from a New Taipei City elementary school and were randomly assigned on a class-basis to a mindfulness education group and a waiting-list control group. The children in the experimental mindfulness group attended a 12-week ”Children's mindfulness education program”, which entailed 40-minutes per week of mindfulness teaching. The content of the mindfulness education program met the requirements of the mindfulness-based intervention program format and Mind Up curriculum architecture. At the same time, the children in the control group attended their usual classes. Both self-reported questionnaires and qualitative interview data were obtained before and after the intervention. The self-reported questionnaires, including the Youth Version of the Emotional Quotient Inventory, the Emotion Regulation Scale, and the Positive Emotion Scale, were used to evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention. Qualitative interviews with both the participants in the mindfulness group and their school teachers were included to reveal the experience of learning mindfulness in context. A one-way ANCOVA was applied to analyze the quantitative data, and a semantic analysis was used to analyze the verbatim transcripts of the interviews. The quantitative result shows that statistically significant differences were found between the groups in terms of their total scores for the Emotional Quotient Inventory and the Emotion Regulation Scale. The scores of the interpersonal subscale in the Emotional Quotient Inventory and the emotional efficacy subscale scores on the Emotion Regulation Scale differed significantly between the two groups, although the scores for the Positive Emotion Scale did not. We assume that the reason why the score for the Positive Emotion Scale of the experimental group children did not change significantly may be related to the scale itself, since the questionnaire is based on positive psychology and cognitive theory, emphasizing the strategy of replacing negative emotions and thoughts with positive ones. The cognitive method of emotion regulation strategies emphasized the ability to re-appraise emotional and cognitive messages and change their content from negative to positive, but mindfulness emotion regulation strategies focus only on practiced acceptance and non-response to these emotions and cognitive content that are not based on the reality, which statement of the items of the Positive Emotion Scale may confuse the young students. What echoes our assumption is that the qualitative data demonstrated that the emotional adjustment-related benefits perceived by the students in the experimental group after receiving mindfulness education courses include the following main themes: increased emotional awareness, decreased frequency of strong emotional responses, improved automated responses, changes in emotional response strategies and behavior, and decreased emotional behavior, which are also consistent with their teachers' reports. Moreover, the students in the experimental group also stated that they felt happier, calmer, cheerful, relaxed and other pleasant emotions after attending the mindfulness courses, as well as having a positive attitude toward knowing gratitude, self-confidence, a willingness to try, a willingness to share, and the courage to admit mistakes, which are consistent with the changes observed by the teachers, according to the teachers' interview data. Nevertheless, there are some limitations to this study, including the failure to include an active control group as a comparison, so it is impossible to determine whether the overall effectiveness of the intervention was influenced by other factors, such as the leader of the mindfulness teacher and group dynamics. Moreover, being limited by the availability of valid mindfulness-based emotional measurements and scales in Taiwan for youth, this study cannot explain fully the mechanism whereby students manage their emotional impacts after receiving mindfulness education. Furthermore, although the study combines qualitative and quantitative research measurements, it is essentially self-reported data, so future research might include more objective measurement tools and methods, such as physiological biofeedback or neuropsychological testing. This study did not conduct a follow-up assessment, so it is impossible to speculate whether the children's mindfulness education curriculum extends over time once the courses have finished. In sum, based on the quantitative and qualitative results, children who received mindfulness education are generally able to apply mindfulness skills to their learning situations and daily life and can enhance their self-awareness regarding their emotions through the facilitation of emotional expression objectively. The children's increased ability to perceive and accept their emotions and express their emotions led to improved overall emotion regulation and emotional intelligence as well as more satisfying interpersonal relationships and interactions among this group. The current study echoes the previous studies on mindfulness education that demonstrate that a children's mindfulness education program can effectively promote children's emotion regulation and promote proactive interpersonal relationships. In addition to the interview data, it suggests that a children's mindfulness education program is highly feasible within Taiwan's current national education system, as it will constitute an important ”emotion regulation and social-interpersonal promotion” course for elementary schoolchildren.起始頁-結束頁：25-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202009_52(1).000213篇名：父母與其五歲子女談論過去情緒經驗用語的差異並列篇名：Conversations Between Parents and Their 5-Year-Old Children on Emotional Experience作者：王珮玲(Pei-Ling Wang)關鍵字：性別差異;敘說方式;敘說內容;親子談話;gender difference;narrative style;narrative content;parent-child conversations期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：父母與其子女的談話是幼兒早期情緒社會化重要途徑。談話中，父母分別扮演不同的情緒角色，讓子女重新建構對於情緒的意義，並學習文化脈絡下所重視的情緒價值，互動中，幼兒性別似乎也影響著父母情緒經驗的用語，因此本研究主要目的是探究父母與其子女談論過去情緒經驗用語的差異，關注的面向是詞彙量／情緒詞彙量、敘說方式和敘說內容。本研究對象分別各為30位5歲男孩和女孩與其父母，幼兒的語文能力中上。在家長同意下，至家中蒐集親子在快樂、難過、生氣和害怕情緒的談話及幼兒的語言能力。並參考Wang與Fivush等人（2005）的研究進行語料的編碼，以t考驗、卡方及二因子混合設計變異數分析資料。結果發現，在詞彙和情緒詞彙上，父母之間無差異；但是父親對於男孩的情緒詞彙總量是高於女孩，母親則在男孩害怕的情緒詞彙量高於女孩。在敘說方式上，母親比父親較常出現重述方式，父親則比母親更常出現延展方式。與其子女談話中，母親比較會延展男孩的難過情緒，父親則是延展男孩的害怕情緒。在敘說內容上，當情緒事件以快樂和害怕為主題時，幼兒多描述情緒的引起是個人的感受，當情緒事件以難過和生氣為主題時，幼兒則多表示情緒是因人際互動而衍生的。至於情緒問題解決方法上，父母比較重視幼兒的生氣情緒，提供較多的解決方法，但多數父母都未能提供情緒的處理方法。依研究結果，建議父母、親職教育工作者和研究者應重視父親對於男孩情緒發展的獨特性、深入分析父母詞彙和情緒詞彙內涵的差異、探究父母與其子女延展方式的差異，以及提供幼兒情緒調節的方法。英文摘要：Conversations between parents and their children are a key pathway for the socialization of emotions in young children. Emotions displayed through parental conversations enable children to reconstruct the meaning of emotion and learn emotional values in cultural contexts. Gender influences parent-child interactions behaviorally and verbally. This study mainly aims to explore differences in parents' use of emotional words and words in general, in addition to narrative styles and content, when conversing with their children regarding past emotional experiences. Accordingly, this study selected 30 boys and girls aged 5 years with medium-high language proficiencies with their parents; the average age of the children was 63 months (with an age range of 52-64 months). The researchers obtained parental consent to collect data on the young children's language skills and conversations through four emotions of happiness, sadness, anger, and fear. The parents received three instructions from the researchers before parent-child conversations: (1) limit the four emotional experiences to those jointly shared by parents and child, (2) avoid story narratives, and (3) discuss events that occurred within the previous two months. The goal was to ensure fresh parent-child memories to prevent emotional experiences deviating from the emotional theme (Wang, 2001; Fivush & Wang, 2005, Wang & Fivush, 2005). The researchers recorded emotional conversations between the parents and children after confirming that the parents had understood the instructions. The parents randomly determined the order of emotional events. After data collection, researchers gifted the parents with a preschool education magazine, picture books, and an NT$300 gift certificate. After the data were converted into verbatim transcripts, the corpus was coded using the coding of Wang and Fivush based on three criteria. The first criterion was words and emotion words. Academia Sinica's online word segmentation system was used to calculate the vocabulary size. Emotion words were calculated on the basis of (1) descriptive language that demonstrates understanding of the emotional state described, (2) emotional assessment of events, and (3) interjections that express emotions. The second criterion, narrative styles, included the following: (1) repetition, when parents repeat the child's words without contributing any additional information but implying their understanding of the child's emotions; (2) elaboration, when parents introduce a topic and revisit an event from a new perspective or provide new information based on a specific event, expressed through at least three consecutive parent-child conversations on emotional topics; and (3) clarification, when a parent and child have inconsistent understandings of an emotional event and engage in at least three elaborative conversations. The third criterion, narrative content, involved (1) emotional theme, when a child describes the origins of an emotional experience as personal feelings or interpersonal interactions, and (2) emotional regulation, when parents provide their child with concrete approaches for processing negative emotions. Furthermore, t tests, chi-squared tests, and two-way mixed analysis of variance were used to analyze the data. No difference was observed between the fathers and mothers in terms of the quantity of words and emotional words used. This result suggests that fathers play an essential role in the emotional development process during early childhood and that we have underestimated fathers' daily influence on children's emotional development. In this study, the fathers were more emotionally expressive and fully discussed emotions during an emotional conversation with their children. This contradicts the stereotypical image of an untalkative father. Furthermore, the mothers used more emotion words with boys than with girls in emotional experiences involving fear. This was probably because the mothers believed that boys should learn to perceive the emotion of fear and express their feelings through words instead of suppressing the emotion of fear. The results on narrative styles revealed that the mothers were more repetitive than the fathers when discussing emotional experiences involving happiness. Accordingly, the mothers effectively understood their children's feelings of joy, and the children perceived that their mothers understood their feelings in their words. Compared with the mothers, the fathers more likely wanted to mold their children according to traditional gender roles and preserve the advantage of men in power and social status (Eagly, Wood, & Diekman, 2000); thus, the fathers more likely used elaborative styles to converse with their children in independent conversations. Denham et al. (2010) argued that fathers more likely respond to boys' and girls' emotions from the perspective of stereotypical gender roles. In this study, the fathers more often elaborated on boys' fear, whereas the mothers elaborated more on boys' sadness. This was because society expects boys to be brave and considers fear as inappropriate (Brody, 1999; Fischer & Mastead, 2000). Therefore, the fathers considered themselves as their son's gender role models during independent conversations and believed that the boys must be fearless to take on great responsibilities when they grow up. By contrast, the mothers elaborated on their sons' sadness possibly because they believed that boys might experience sadness when subjected to pressure in the future. Accordingly, elaborating on boys' feelings of sadness during childhood enables them to observe, understand, and express the feelings in question at an early age. The results on the narrative content demonstrated that when emotional experiences involved either happiness (e.g., joy from going out, getting food, and eating) or fear (e.g., fear of being lost, the dark, nightmares, and sleeping alone), the children mostly described emotions caused by personal feelings. When the emotional themes were sadness or anger, the children more likely expressed emotions caused by interpersonal interactions, such as ”being separated from family,” ”being punished by the grownups,” and ”being bullied by siblings or toys being taken away.” The parents provided more methods of emotional regulation in response to a child's feelings of anger; however, most parents did not provide a means of processing negative emotions. The study findings suggest that parents and parenting educators should particularly focus on the unique influence of fathers on boys' emotional development. They should affirm the special status of fathers in the socialization of emotions in young children and realize the pivotal role of fathers in the socialization of emotions in boys. Parents should provide concrete methods of emotional regulation during emotional conversations to teach children ways to regulate their negative emotions. Future studies should further analyze differences in parents' meanings of words and emotion words to understand the implications of vocabulary sizes. Future studies should investigate the percentage at which specific vocabulary or language forms are used by parents as well as the extent to which parents elaborate on the four emotions and children's possible responses. This study concludes that mothers and fathers play key roles in emotional development during early childhood. However, the limited nature of the sample, comprising parents predominantly belonging to the upper middle class, affected further inferences. Only a few Taiwanese studies have been conducted on the topic in question. Our initial findings may serve as a reference for researchers interested in the further investigation of parent-child emotional conversations. Subsequent studies are thereby prompted to create a more comprehensive image of Taiwanese parent-child emotional conversations.起始頁-結束頁：51-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202009_52(1).000314篇名：高齡者之感恩性情對主觀幸福感的影響：情緒與認知之雙元中介機制並列篇名：Effects of the Elderly's Gratitude Deposition on Subjective Well-being: A Dual Mediating Mechanism of Emotion and Cognition作者：陳貽照(Yi-Chao Chen);簡晉龍(Chin-Lung Chien);許詩淇(Shih-Chi Hsu)關鍵字：高齡化;感恩性情;正向回憶;心理資源;幸福感;aging;gratitude disposition;positive reminiscence;psychological resources;well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究從正向心理資源的角度切入，探究符合高齡發展且具可塑性的「感恩」與高齡者主觀幸福感之關聯，並探究其間的中介機制。研究假設：在控制一些隨著老化而改變的生活狀況變項（生病次數、運動情形）後，高齡者的感恩性情對主觀幸福感（生活滿意、正／負向情緒）仍有顯著正向效果，此效果係透過情緒面的感恩情緒與認知面的生命回憶之中介。本研究以問卷調查法，搜集到355名55歲以上的高齡者資料。透過結構方程式模型的檢驗，在控制年齡、性別、生病次數、運動變項的效果之下，路徑模式的結果顯示：（1）感恩性情對感恩情緒與正向生命回憶有正向助益；（2）感恩情緒會增加正向情緒，但也會帶來負向情緒；（3）正向生命回憶會增加生活滿意與正向情緒，也會減少負向情緒；（4）感恩情緒可中介感恩性情對正向情緒與負向情緒之效果；（5）正向生命回憶可中介感恩性情對生活滿意、正向情緒、及負向情緒之效果。總結來說，感恩性情可透過認知面的生命回憶與情緒面的感恩情緒兩個不同的中介機制來影響主觀幸福感三成分，其中，又以生命回憶具有較大的正面效果。比起生命回憶，感恩情緒不但效果較弱，甚至可能帶來負向情緒。因此，比起感恩情緒，生命回憶似乎更是高齡者幸福感的重要機制。最後，本文也提出本研究的限制、未來的研究方向，及提升高齡者幸福感的可行方案，希冀這些方案，能拋磚引玉，讓更多心理學者能對台灣的高齡社會做出更實質的貢獻。英文摘要：From the perspective of positive psychological resources, ”gratitude” not only possesses plasticity, but is also an important psychological characteristic in elderly development. This study explored the connection between the ”gratitude” of elders and their subjective wellbeing and probed into the mediating mechanism between them. Although aging is an inevitable part of life, elders are faced with many losses and restrictions that make elderly life difficult. Therefore, how to enable elders to ”age positively” has become an issue of common concern for many scholars. In the past, multi-faceted successful aging indicators have often been adopted to reflect positive aging. However, this study used streamlined wellbeing of concern in psychology instead and employed basic conditions such as ”reasonable physical health”, ”low-risk disease or disability” as the control variables. This study that the emotional characteristic (gratitude disposition), a positive psychological resource elders possess, produces significant effects on the wellbeing of elders. Even behind the background variables of controlled population (age, gender) and living status (frequency of falling into illness, exercise status), gratitude disposition still plays an influential role on the three constituents of wellbeing. Additionally, gratitude disposition mediates the effects of gratitude disposition on the constituents of wellbeing through emotion (gratitude emotion) or cognition (positive life memory). In other words, psychological resources play a certain role on the wellbeing of elders. This study especially selected gratitude because it is a psychological resource with plasticity. At the same time, it is also in line with reachability in elderly development and is an emotional state often experienced by elders. These two characteristics enable psychologists to focus on changing the situation of elders in order for them to age more positively. Based on the research question and literature review, this study hypothesized that after controlling some life status variables that change with aging (frequency of falling into illness, exercise status), the gratitude disposition of elders still has significant positive effects on the three subjective well-being (SWB) components (including life satisfaction, positive affect, and negative affect). Besides, it was hypothesized that the effects of gratitude disposition on the three SWB components are mediated by the grateful emotion under the emotional aspect and the life reminiscence under the cognitive aspect. This study collected the information of 335 elders aged above 55 in Taiwan through the questionnaire survey method. The questionnaire contents include grateful disposition scale, positive/negative life reminiscence scale, life satisfaction scale, positive/negative emotion scale, grateful emotion scale, and control variables such as age, gender, frequency of falling into illness, exercise status et al. The above scales were mainly designed with the self-report measurement method. They were evaluated by the Likert 4 or 6-point scale and adjusted to suit the elderly. Please ask the elderly to circle the appropriate answer in accordance with their own condition. Initially, the descriptive statistics and correlations among the main variables were analyzed. Subsequently, the structural equation modeling (SEM) was adopted to examine the ”dual mediating model of the elderly's gratitude deposition on subjective well-being” to test the overall model fit and the path coefficients. The Sobel test was used to test the significance of the mediating effects, and the bootstrapping method was also used to compute the 95% confidence intervals for the mediating effects. In the model, with grateful deposition as the independent variable, grateful emotion and life reminiscence as the mediating variables, and life satisfaction, positive emotions, and negative emotions as the criterion variables, this study hypothesized that gratitude disposition can affect the three constituents of wellbeing (life satisfaction, positive emotion, negative emotion) through two completely different mediating variables, namely, emotion and cognition. The initial correlation analysis shows that the correlations among gratitude disposition, two mediating variables, and wellbeing generally support our predictions. Through the SEM analysis, the result shows that the proposed model has an adequate model fit, CFI = .94, RNI = .94, RMSEA = .06, SRMR = .04, χ^2(113) = 256.281 (p ＜ .001), and has no offending estimates. Under the condition of controlling the effects of age, gender, frequency of falling into illness, and exercise status, the results show: (1) gratitude disposition has a positive effect on gratitude emotion and positive life reminiscence; (2) gratitude emotion has a positive effect on positive emotion, but it also produces negative emotion; (3) positive life reminiscence has a positive effect on life satisfaction and positive emotion and it also reduces negative emotion; (4) gratitude emotion can mediate the effects of gratitude disposition on positive emotion and negative emotion; (5) positive life reminiscence can mediate the effects of gratitude disposition on life satisfaction, positive emotion, and negative emotion. In summary, gratitude disposition can affect the three constituents of subjective wellbeing through two different mediating mechanisms, namely, the life reminiscence under the cognitive aspect and gratitude emotion under the emotional aspect. In particular, life reminiscence produces greater positive effects. Compared to life memory, gratitude emotion not only produces weaker effects, but it also possibly brings about negative emotions. Therefore, compared to gratitude emotion, life reminiscence seems to be a more important mechanism contributing to the wellbeing of elders. In the face of the rapidly increasing elderly population, the government has vigorously set up local aging community-based care systems, such as elderly care stations. In addition, targeting elders requiring long-term care, long-term care institutions, lane/alley long-term care stations, and so on have been set up. At present, the service momentum of these systems is a totally inadequate measure, and the quality demands strengthening. While the long-term care systems are being set up by the government, it is also reflected that delaying elderly aging is perhaps the fundamental solution. Hence, a greater emphasis is given to front-end aging prevention. From a more positive perspective, aging prevention is about promoting positive aging. This study reveals that: Psychological resources ”gratitude disposition” and ”positive life reminiscence operations” concerning life integration that meet the reachability and plasticity of the aging development stage can promote positive aging and make elders happier, which are said to be in line with the government's policy direction. In any of the above-mentioned elderly institutions, gratitude and positive life reminiscence intervention programs can be easily and conveniently implemented. Through frequent practice, the psychological resources in these two aspects can naturally be enhanced, making elders happier and age more positively. Although there are already some intervention programs that enable elders to age more positively, these intervention programs have not explored the internal mechanism. The results revealed in this study can be further applied in programs intended to enhance the wellbeing of elders. With a more refined and more appropriate intervention program design, it can be applied in various elderly institution activities and courses, enabling elders to more positively take purposeful actions on their own to make themselves happier and lessen the financial burden on the nation and society and the load on the children. Finally, this study incidentally found the part where gratitude disposition is inconsistent with previous research (such as gratitude disposition in the model directly and negative affect positive emotions). This study especially provided an explanation on this part. Furthermore, the research limitations, future research direction, and feasible programs were put forward, hoping that the solution formulated can serve as a stimulus for more psychologists to make substantive contributions to Taiwan's aging society.起始頁-結束頁：81-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202009_52(1).000415篇名：以人際歷程理論分析教師接受諮詢之人際經驗並列篇名：The Teacher's Interpersonal Experience of Receiving consultation from the Perspectives of Interpersonal Process Theory作者：曾雅蘋(Ya-Ping Tseng);杜淑芬(Su-Fen Tu)關鍵字：人際歷程理論;教師諮詢;專任輔導教師;學校諮詢;諮商心理師;interpersonal process theory;teacher consultation;school counselor;school consultation;counseling psychologist期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究是旨在探究教師參加與諮詢師合作諮詢之人際經驗，並以人際歷程理論的角度分析此項經驗。研究參與者是5位女性與1位男性教師，服務年資1到21年，他們均因學生在班級中的行為管教問題自願接受5次為期十週的教師諮詢。研究方法採現象學取向，透過半結構式的深度訪談，瞭解教師在諮詢歷程中與諮詢師的互動經驗與應用諮詢所學於學校現場的師生互動經驗，並以「整體－部分－整體」的分析法進行資料分析，以了解「教師－諮詢師」以及「教師－學生」等兩段人際經驗的經驗內涵。研究結果歸納統整教師接受諮詢歷程中的人際經驗內涵，包含了：（一）教師與諮詢師的互動歷程經驗。教師在此歷程中的經驗包括：1.安全與正向支持環境有助於消弭抗拒，增進合作。2.諮詢回饋啟動教師對師生互動模式與自身內在衝突的反思覺察，進而跨越衝突、改變信念與行動。3.諮詢協助教師深入理解學生問題脈絡，深化同理與更多互動策略。4.教師從諮詢中發展教學或輔導的新觀點，在「做中學」中讓改變得到驗證。以及（二）教師在教學現場中與學生的互動歷程經驗。諮詢過後，教師轉化自身內在資源並實踐在教學現場上的經驗包括了：1.教師更能傾聽與欣賞孩子和自己，師生關係品質更好。2.教師能運用正向語言，創造教室中的正向互動循環。3.教師開啟教學新境，找到實踐自己教育理念的道路。研究者在討論中運用人際歷程理論概念化和詮釋教師與諮詢師以及與學生的人際經驗，並在結論中針對教師諮詢的研究與實務工作提出建議。英文摘要：This study was part of a teacher-counselor collaborative consultation project (MOST103-2410-H33-029) hosted by Dr. Tu and sponsored by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan. The project aimed to develop positive counseling strategies through collaborative consultation with teachers to solve teachers' difficulties in managing students' problematic behaviors in classrooms. Participants included six teachers and five school counselors. The six teachers included five women and one man aged between 26 and 51 years, with 1 to 21 years of teaching experience. The participants were required to take 10 weeks' videotaping of their classes and participate in five sessions of face-to-face consultation. The corresponding author, who was a senior counseling psychologist with a 15-year experience of working with teenagers and their families, served as the consultant. In this study, a follow-up was conducted one month after the completion of the aforementioned project to collect the teachers' consultation experiences. This study explored the teachers' interpersonal experiences of participating in collaborative consultation with a counseling psychologist from the perspective of interpersonal process theory. A purposive sampling method was adopted such that all the teachers who completed the project were invited. All the teachers agreed to voluntarily participate in this study. A semi-structured interview was designed to collect in-depth data on the teachers' interpersonal experiences of working with a consultant in a consultation room and their students in classroom settings. The participants were interviewed 1-3 times per person and 1.5 hours per time in average. With regard to data analysis, the researchers followed a four-step circulative procedure of phenomenological analysis developed by Lee & Lai (2009). The four steps were gaining the whole picture, breaking into parts, meaning transforming, and organizing. The results summarized two major themes: teacher-consultant interpersonal process and teacher-student interpersonal process. In the teacher-consultant interpersonal process, the teachers' experiences were categorized into four subthemes: (1) A safe, positive, and supportive consulting environment eliminated resistance and enhanced cooperation. The teachers felt a sense of security and trust when they perceived the consultant to be understanding, nonjudgmental, and hospitable. Thus, the teachers were more willing to explore their issues in teaching and disciplining the students when they received support from the consultant. (2) Interpersonal feedback from the consultant enhanced teachers' awareness and reflections on their interactive patterns and internal conflicts with the students; furthermore, conflict resolution, belief transformation, and new actions became possible. The consultant's interpersonal feedback and empathetic understanding helped the teachers realize the effects of their interpersonal patterns on their interactions with students. Thereafter, the teachers could stride across their internal conflicts through continuous self-reflections. (3) The consultant helped teachers understand the context of student problems, deepened their empathies toward students, and initiated more positive interactive strategies with students. Through reinterpretation of students' inner world by the consultant, the teachers comprehensively understood students' problems, thereby changing their feelings toward students. Moreover, the teachers developed different perspectives toward students and new guiding strategies for the students' problem behaviors. (4) The teachers could ”learn by doing”-trying out their new teaching and guidance strategies through multiple sessions of consultation. Through learning by doing, the teachers' improvements were verified by the consultant and their own actions, further consolidating their changes. The teachers applied new positive behavior support strategies jointly developed with the consultant to their classrooms and refined the strategies according to the outcome. Next, in the teacher-student interpersonal process, the teachers reported three interpersonal subthemes experienced with their students: (1) the teachers reported positive changes between students and themselves, thereby creating effective teacher-student relationships. The teachers could listen and understand students' needs better, acquired students' trust, and experienced more sincere relationships with students. (2) The teachers used positive languages to create a positive teacher-student interaction cycle in the classroom. The teachers duplicated the positive experience in the consultation process with the consultant to the teaching practice site with students. They used more positive and supportive languages and gave more positive appraisals to their students, thereby increasing positive responses from the students; therefore, teacher-student interaction qualities were enhanced, and positive interaction cycles were created. (3) Teachers provided new possibilities of working with students and new ways of fulfilling their educational philosophies. When the teachers found new guiding strategies for students' old problems through consultation, they transferred the learning experience to other life situations; in this manner, they met their own educational philosophies. Consistent with the literature, the study results indicated that the strong relationship between the consultant and teachers encouraged the teachers to join the consultation. The consultant helped the teachers learn student psychology as well as the teacher-student interaction. Furthermore, the consultant expanded the teachers' repertories of positive strategies in managing students' problematic behaviors in classrooms. Moreover, the positive teacher-consultant relationship ensured positive teacher-student relationships in a classroom setting. Further, the author discussed the transformation experience of teachers from the perspective of interpersonal process theory. According to the theory, the teachers' interpersonal experiences could be conceptualized into two stages: consultant-teacher interpersonal experience and teacher-student interpersonal experience. First, a trusted working alliance was formed between the consultant and teacher. For the teachers, seeking help and showing their weakness were stressful. The consultant was perceived to be understanding and nonjudgmental. Moreover, the consultant provided emotional support and interpersonal appraisal, resulting in new and differential experiences that helped the teachers relieve from their own frustrations. Second, the consultant helped the teachers identify their rigid interactive patterns and core conflicts under the patterns, thereby helping the teachers self-introspect and creating awareness of their role in managing students' problematic behaviors in classrooms. Third, empowerment feedback from the consultant through multiple sessions of consultation and students' feedback enabled the teachers to effectively transfer their learning to classroom situations and to develop newer and positive interpersonal interaction styles with their students. Accordingly, this study concludes that collaborative consultation with teachers facilitates teachers' professional development and positive teacher-student interactions. Thus, counselors can improve the effectiveness of their work through collaborative consultation with teachers. In addition, pre-service trainings in consultation should be included in the school counseling profession. Finally, future studies should explore interpersonal processes and factors determining the transformation experiences of teachers from the perspectives of interpersonal processing theory.起始頁-結束頁：113-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202009_52(1).000516篇名：焦點解決團體諮商對未婚成年女性愛情分手失落調適之輔導效果並列篇名：The Effects of Solution-Focused Group Counseling on Break-up Adjustment of Unmarried Adult Females作者：陳湘芸(Hsiang-Yun Chen);許維素(Wei-Su Hsu)關鍵字：分手調適;焦點解決短期治療;焦點解決團體諮商;團體輔導效果;break-up adjustment;solution-focused brief therapy;solution-focused group counseling;group effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討焦點解決團體諮商（SFGC）運用於未婚成年女性分手調適之輔導效果。共有6位遭逢分手失落的未婚成年女性，參與為期8次、每次2小時之結構性焦點解決團體諮商。成員們分別於團體前、團體結束時以及團體結束後四周，各接受一至兩小時的半結構式個別訪談，共獲得18份訪談稿，並依主題分析法進行資料分析。研究結果發現，團體成員在不同階段面對分手調適有所改變的向度包括：對分手的態度與因應、分手對自我的影響、對原親密關係的態度、對未來感情的態度，以及對人我關係的態度與影響；同時，團體成員認為參與團體的經驗對其分手調適的影響包括：（1）團體溫暖信任的正向環境，提供安全檢視經驗的機會；（2）成員的優勢與進展，激發人際學習與正向激勵；以及（3）SFGC解決導向活動，發揮賦能效益。本研究結果支持SFGC催化成員分手調適歷程的各方發展，帶出接納與重新建構的契機，而SFGC歷程對成員分手調適的影響與療效因素的發揮有其獨道之處，包括：分手調適可為一建構解決之道的歷程、目標與未來導向帶來穩定與方向感、賦能與改變導向帶來高度正向激勵以及團體支持與學習等。最後，依據本研究結果對未來相關實務與研究提出具體建議。英文摘要：Dealing with intimacy is one of the essential life tasks in early adulthood. Ending an intimate relationship results in a loss of social networks, emotional support, role positioning, future expectations, and self-identity associated with the relationship. Therefore, breakup distress may cause negative impacts on the establishment of new intimacy and the choice of future marriage. Group counseling combined with short-term treatment has gained increasing popularity. The solution-focused approach, which with the characteristics of a short-term treatment, considers clients' goals as well as their strengths and competence and clarifies steps toward the clients' future vision or desired solution. The solution-focused approach has unique insights in dealing with the grieving process: (1) loss is not a problem in itself, but the real problem is coping with a life that has experienced loss; (2) through the perception shift, the future still has space for negotiation after experiencing loss; (3) understanding people's negative emotions that accompany the loss and respecting the uniqueness of their emotion in the social context of the person concerned are crucial; (4) when forming a solution, considering the normality and individuality of each person and valuing the individualized goals and healing process of the loss are essential; (5) a belief exists that the grieving and healing processes can coexist; accordingly, learning self-care is vital when encountering a loss; and (6) it is meaningful to focus on the importance of meaning reconstruction during the adjustment process. Numerous studies have confirmed the effects of solution-focused group counseling on multiple topics, such as substance abuse, behavior problem, and mental illness. However, studies on the effects of solution-focused group counseling on break-up adjustment in Taiwan have been inadequate. This study explored the effects of solution-focused group counseling on break-up adjustment for unmarried adult females. Participants' selection criteria were as follows: (1) single, young, unmarried adult women aged between 22 and 33 years and (2) those who experienced a specific and profound breakup in the past year and felt that they had not yet worked through the breakup. After recruiting and individual interviewing, six unmarried adult females, including two who proposed to actively breakup, were invited to attend the solution-focused group counseling. Participants' intimate relationships lasted from half a year to 10 years. The solution-focused group counseling was led by a female leader who was a qualified counselor with 10 years of training in the solution-focused approach. The group's co-leader was another female counselor who had acquired basic training in the solution-focused approach. All the group members of this solution-focused group counseling accepted an individual semi-structured interview for one to two hours before the group counseling, at the end of the group counseling, and four weeks after the group counseling. These three interviews mainly focused on understanding the current situation of group members' breakup experience and adjustment process, including their current thoughts, feelings, and corresponding behaviors of breakup; their current ability and confidence in the adjustment process; and their thoughts about this past relationship and their own future. Furthermore, the interview aimed to understand their experience and gains of participating in this group counseling. The interviewing data were analyzed according to the principles of thematic analysis in qualitative research. After an overall understanding of the interview text, sentence segmentation and coding were performed according to the minimum ”meaning units” of each sentence of the interviewees. The units with similar meanings were then assembled to initially summarize and develop subtopics. Thereafter, the related subtopics were further compared and summarized into subthemes through repeated comparison and induction for classification and filing. Accordingly, the ”theme” was gradually formed. Finally, data analysis was conducted across six interviewees. The research team continued to discuss during data analysis. The solution-focused group counseling comprised 8 sessions of 120 minutes each once a week. Each session began with a warm-up activity to elicit group members' exceptional moments last week and recall small changes in their daily life. Each session included one or two main solution-focused activities and a 15-minute break after the main activities. The leader and co-leader discussed during the break and returned to the group for a set of compliments to all members. Before ending each session, group members were assigned homework. The group session had the following objectives: (1) positive opening and finding pre-session changes, (2) looking for coping strategies and exceptional moments, (3) reframing the meaning of breakup experience and concretizing the changes, (4) using a miracle question to picture the preferred future and goals, (5) amplifying strengths and setting the first steps, (6) amplifying useful coping strategies and prompting actions by relationship questions, (7) using scaling questions to concretize the progress and elements of changes, and (8) exploring positive experience and effective strategies for maintaining changes in the future. Although the main activities were pre-designed, this group still retained flexibility, enabling group members to spontaneously share important topics. Two group leaders applied specific techniques of the solution-focused approach when responding to group members' reactions. The study results supported that solution-focused group counseling can enhance the group participants' positive adjustments on breakup experience. The dimensions of changes subjectively perceived by these group members at different group stages included the following: (1) group members developed positive personal meanings and effective coping methods; (2) breakup experience became an opportunity to increase group members' self-awareness and self-efficiency; (3) with regard to facing an original intimate relationship, group members' situation changed from being confused to re-examining the relationship; (4) group members' attitudes toward their future relationships became positive; and (5) group members began engaging in positive interpersonal interactions. Furthermore, group members' experience of participating in solution-focused group counseling included the following: (1) the trust in the group provides a safe environment for members to re-examine and reflect on the breakup experience; (2) the strengths and advancement of each group member facilitated interpersonal learning, support, and positive encouragements; and (3) solution-focused group counseling activities empowered group members to take actions and improve their confidence and sense of hope. This study discussed the effect of group therapeutic factors of solution-focused group counseling on breakup adjustment. (1) Break-up adjustment in the solution-focused group counseling can be treated as a solution-building process, (2) future-oriented and goal-oriented characters of solution-focused group counseling can ensure a sense of stability among group members, (3) empowerment- and change-oriented characters of solution-focused group counseling can facilitate high positive incentives for group members, and (4) group interactions in solution-focused group counseling can create opportunities for mutual learning, help, and encouragement. Based on the research results, some suggestions were proposed for future research and counseling practice. Future studies can adopt the quantitative design, including a control group and the measuring scales of group counseling effect, to expand the effect of solution-focused group counseling. Future studies should explore the therapeutic factors and effects of group activities in solution-focused group counseling with different member backgrounds, including factors such as the duration of an intimate relationship, the length of breakup, gender, and age.起始頁-結束頁：139-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202009_52(1).000617篇名：焦點解決短期諮商對青少年身體意象諮商成效之相關研究並列篇名：Effectiveness of Solution-Focused Brief Counseling in Promoting Body Image of Adolescents作者：蘇于珊(Yu-Shan Su);許維素(Wei- Su Hsu)關鍵字：身體意象;青少年;焦點解決短期諮商;adolescent;body image;Solution-focused brief counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究目的為探討焦點解決短期諮商（SFBC）對青少年身體意象之諮商成效及其影響因素。本研究邀請十位14-16歲具負向身體意象的青少年分別參與實驗組與控制組，於諮商前、結束時以及結束後一個月，所有研究對象需填寫「身體意象量表」（MBSRQ）；實驗組則接受共4-6次SFBC，並在諮商前、後及結束後一個月，各接受一次參酌MBSRQ向度設計的半結構式訪談。研究中的量化資料採Wilcoxon配對組符號等級檢定進行分析，訪談資料則依開放式編碼原則執行分析。研究結果發現，SFBC對實驗組在MBSRQ之外表自我評估與體能重視程度上具立即輔導效果，且實驗組知覺SFBC對其提昇身體意象的影響因素為：（1）諮商師堅定鼓勵的激發；（2）過去成功經驗加速改變意願與目標形成；（3）具體步驟地朝向個人目標，激發與維持改變動力；（4）自我激勵與效能，增強改變動機；（5）組合新舊方法以增加成效；（6）探究具體微小改變，提昇自我監控的自主能力；（7）推進身體意象悅納，帶動漣漪效應；以及（8）未來期望與有效策略為續航基石等。最後，依據研究結果，本研究進行討論相關與建議。英文摘要：Body image is one of the crucial components of adolescents' self-development and social interaction in a critical period of seeking self-identity. In the process of physical and mental development, the influence of negative body image cannot be underestimated. Numerous studies have explored the negative influence of adolescents' body image; however, only a few studies have focused on positive body image and ways to improve it. Personal subjective perception affects adolescents' body image. One of the essential research directions is identifying ways to assist adolescents in clarifying their subjective feelings and beliefs regarding their body image and promoting its positive development. Although solution-focused brief counseling (SFBC) is suitable in assisting adolescents, this approach has rarely been used in research on body image. Accordingly, the question posed is as follows: Can SFBC improve adolescents' body image? Will the counseling effect of SFBC persist? This study aimed to (a) investigate the immediate and follow-up effect of SFBC on adolescents' body image and (b) understand the effective factors of SFBC in enhancing adolescents' body image. This study adopted the embedded mixed method research design, embedding the ”quasi-experimental design of pretest, protest, and follow tests”into” qualitative data on the interviews conducted immediately after the SFBC session and one month later.” The counselor was a junior high school counselor for 10 years and was trained and supervised under SFBC for almost six years. Purposive sampling was used to select adolescents with the following conditions: (1) Those who had a negative perception of their body image and used methods, such as weight loss and dieting, to improve their body image but still failed; (2) those who consciously felt bothered in interpersonal, emotional, or life adaptation due to their body image; and (3) those who were willing to participate in the research process and obtained the consent of their guardians. After screening, 10 adolescents aged 14 to 16 years were invited to participate in this study. After conducting research explanatory meeting, those clients with a high willingness to accept counseling every week and they were invited to be a part of the experimental group. Accordingly, five adolescents each were included in the experimental and control groups. Both groups had two males and three females. The experimental group received SFBC once a week for approximately 4 to 6 times according to their decisions. Since the SFBC sessions were conducted on a school campus, the structure of the interviews was changed to approximately 45 minutes for each session to match the schedule of this middle school. The three phases of the SFBC were revised to (1) ”building relationship and developing a solution-talk” phase for approximately 30 minutes; (2) break phase for 5 minutes; and (3) positive feedback phase for approximately 10 minutes, providing positive feedback with compliments, bridge, and suggestions. The Multidimensional Body-Self Relations Questionnaire (MBSRQ) was the key research instrument, a well-validated self-report inventory for assessing body image. The MBSRQ included eight subscales: appearance emphasis (9 questions), appearance evaluation (9 questions), weight emphasis (2 questions), weight evaluation (3 questions), physical fitness emphasis (6 questions), physical fitness evaluation (7 questions), health emphasis (3 questions), and health evaluation (4 questions). As attitudes, these dispositions included evaluative, cognitive, and behavioral components. The reliability analysis results indicated that the Cronbach's α value of the eight subscales was between .7 and .82. This result suggested that the internal consistency of each subscale was good. The participants were required to complete the MBSRQ before the SFBC sessions, immediately after termination, and one month later. The Wilcoxon matched-pair signed-rank test was used to analyze quantitative data as well as the descriptive statistics. Meanwhile, the experimental group underwent one 30 to 60-minute semi-structured interview before the SFBC sessions, right after the termination of SFBC sessions, and one month later. The outline of the interviews referred to the eight subscales of the MBSRQ, including the following: (1) The understanding and evaluation of their current body image as a whole and its dimensions (such as their evaluation and emphasis on appearance, physical fitness, health, and weight); (2) after accepting SFBC, their perception for their changes in body image (such as their evaluation and emphasis on appearance, physical fitness, health, and weight) and others (such as interpersonal, family, emotional, self-confidence, or future expectations); and (3) their subjective perception of the benefits from SFBC and the effective factors during the counseling process. These qualitative data were analyzed according to open-coding principles, with continuous research team discussion. The study indicated a significant immediate counseling effect in enhancing the appearance evaluation and physical fitness emphasis of the MBSRQ in the experimental group. The average scores of the MBSRQ and other dimensions did not reach statistical significance among the pretest, protest, and follow-up tests. However, the scores were slightly higher at the end of the counseling session than those before the counseling and slightly decreased one month after the counseling but continued to be higher when compared with the scores before counseling. The experimental group in the interviews shared their perception regarding the benefits after receiving SFBC: being more affirmative with regard to their efforts on body image, having increased self-confidence and self-efficacy, learning the abilities of self-motivation and self-monitoring, willing to continue to change, placing more emphasis on health and physical fitness gradually, and producing a positive feeling of ”accepting their own body image.” Meanwhile, these benefits reduced the emphasis on weight and appearance, and gave the client more sense of control. The effective factors of SFBC in enhancing body image perceived by adolescents included the following: (1) counselors' encouragement; (2) successful past experiences, willingness, and goal formation; (3) discussions for specific steps toward personal goals; (4) self-encouragement, self-efficacy, and self-motivation ability; (5) combinations of old and new effective methods; (6) explorations of specific small changes and self-monitoring; (7) acceptance of body image ; and (8) future expectations and effective strategies. The effective factors described above would influence each other in SFBC counseling process. Meanwhile, the effective factors, such as counselor's encouragements, self-motivation ability, goal formation and planning, and past successful experience emerged in the earlier stage of SFBC process; combinations of new and old effective strategies, discussion on specific steps, self-encouragement, self-efficacy, and self-monitoring, confirmation of small changes, acceptance of body image, and expectations and confidence for the future change emerged at a later stage of SFBC process. Particularly, willingness, motivation, and confidence of clients involved throughout the counseling process were core effective factors for these clients' changes. These effective factors were related to principles mentioned in the literature on helping adolescents improve body image and clearly echoed the therapeutic concepts of SFBC. In short, the SFBC presented its counseling effect and reflected the influence of social and cultural factors (such as the media). Based on the results and discussion of this study, future studies should consider the following: use effective factors of SFBC to help adolescents in improving their body image; expand research sample numbers and their backgrounds; analyze the process of SFBC in detail and examine how its interventions create counseling effects; and explore more about the influence of media, gender, weight, or sports on adolescents' body images when doing their counseling work.起始頁-結束頁：163-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202009_52(1).000718篇名：依附、憂鬱和積極因應對青少年學校生活困擾之影響性研究並列篇名：Impacts of Attachment, Depression, and Active Coping on Adolescent School Life Disturbance作者：王櫻芬(Ying-Fen Wang)關鍵字：父母依附;同儕關係;因應策略;憂鬱;學校適應;parental attachment;peer relationship;coping;depression;school adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討青少年父母依附和同儕依附的關聯，以及依附、憂鬱和積極因應對於青少年學校生活困擾的預測力。研究者採用追蹤調查研究設計，以229名青少年為對象，以其九年級時的母親依附、父親依附和憂鬱情緒，以及十年級時的好友依附和積極因應策略使用等自變項，預測他們十年級時的學校生活困擾程度。Pearson積差相關分析和多元逐步迴歸分析結果顯示：（1）九年級時的母親依附焦慮和父親依附焦慮，與十年級的好友依附焦慮和好友依附逃避，存有顯著正相關；（2）九年級時的母親依附逃避和父親依附逃避，與十年級的好友依附焦慮、好友依附逃避皆無顯著關聯；（3）九年級時的母親和父親依附逃避和依附焦慮愈高，其憂鬱情緒愈高；（4）九年級時的憂鬱情緒、十年級時的好友依附焦慮和積極因應策略使用，可以顯著預測十年級時的學校生活困擾。三個變項的累積可解釋變異量為29%。然而，九年級時的母親和父親依附逃避和依附焦慮，未能成功預測十年級的學校生活困擾。由於九年級進入十年級是一個重要學習轉換階段，學生剛進入新的校園環境，格外需要教育輔導人員的協助，以適應學校生活；根據研究發現，研究者建議高中職五專的學校輔導人員，提供十年級青少年積極因應策略介入方案和同儕關係促進輔導方案。此外，國中輔導人員應針對九年級的青少年，設計適當的憂鬱防治情緒管理方案。透過學校輔導人員的攜手努力，促進青少年學校階段轉換時的適應。英文摘要：The transition from the 9th grade to the 10th grade0 in Taiwan could be one of the most stressful times for many Taiwanese adolescents. This involves leaving the junior high school that they were familiar with and entering a new school environment (i.e., a senior high school, a vocational school, or a junior college). Adolescents face various academic and social challenges in the new environment (e.g., learning new curriculums, getting to know new teachers, and establishing new friendship network). Findings of previous studies have revealed that school-related concerns have troubled many Taiwanese adolescents (Chen, 2006; Liu, 2004; Ou, 2012; Tung, 2018; Wang, 2007). The ability to adjust in the new school environment increases the chance of successfully entering the emerging adulthood. Furthermore, school maladjustment increases the risk of dropout, mental health problems, and/or misbehaviors (King, 2003; Henry et al., 2009; Maynard et al., 2015). Studies have revealed that parental and peer attachment (Al-Yagon et al., 2016; Laible et al., 2000; Lim & Lee, 2017), active coping (Lu, 2014; Merlo & Lakey, 2007), and the level of mental health in the past (Bond et al., 2007; Duchesne & Ratelle, 2014) significantly contribute to adolescent school adjustment. However, most previous studies have adopted a cross-sectional design and have overlooked variables when considering the effect of time on adjustment. This study adopted a longitudinal panel design approach. The author intended to examine the predicting effects of parental attachment and depression at 9^(th) grade as well as the effects of peer attachment and active coping strategies at 10^(th) grade on adolescents' school adjustment. Specifically, this study aimed to (1) examine the relationship between parental attachment and peer attachment and (2) explore predicting factors for adolescent school adjustment during their transition from a junior high school to a senior high school, a vocational school, or a junior college. Of the sample of 229 adolescents, 161 (70.3%) were girls and 68 (29.7%) were boys. Except 11 participants who did not report their age, the mean age of the rest of the participants was 16.38 years (range = 15.75-17.75 years, SD = 0.33). Furthermore, 104 (45.4%) participants attended a senior high school, 82 (35.8%) were from a vocational school, and 42 (18.3%) were from a junior college, a comprehensive high school, or other types of schools. The Relationship Structure Questionnaire-Chinese (RSQ-C; Wang & Neville, 2006), Coping Strategies Scale-Chinese (CSS-C; Ji, 2002), Adolescents' Behavioral Disturbance Scale-Chinese (ABDS-C; Lin, 2002), Adolescent Depression Scale (ADS; John Tung Foundation, n.d.), and a demographic questionnaire were administered. The Cronbach's alpha coefficients of these scales were above .73. Participants completed the surveys twice. Participants' levels of attachment anxiety and attachment avoidance toward their mother and toward their father as well as levels of depression were assessed when they were in the 9th grade. Thereafter, participants' levels of attachment anxiety and attachment avoidance toward their best friend and levels of using active coping strategies were assessed one year later when they entered the 10th grade. These eight variables served as predictors, and participants' levels of school life disturbance in the 10th grade served as the criterion variable. Furthermore, the Pearson product-moment correlation and the stepwise multiple regression analysis were performed to test the research hypotheses. The study findings indicated that adolescents' levels of attachment anxiety toward mother and father (Time 1) significantly related to attachment anxiety toward the best friends (Time 2) (r = .39, .32, p ＜ .01) and attachment avoidance toward the best friends (Time 2) (r = .15, .14, p ＜ .05). Moreover, higher levels of attachment avoidance and attachment anxiety toward parents were associated with higher levels of depression (Time 1) (r = .33, .17, .35, .20, p ＜ .01). In addition, depression (Time 1), attachment anxiety toward the best friend (Time 2), and use of active coping strategies (Time 2) significantly predicted adolescents' school life disturbance (Time 2) (β = .21, .22, -.34, p ＜ .001) (F = 29.86, p ＜ .001). The cumulative explained variance of these three variables on adolescents' school life disturbance was 29%. Surprisingly, two dimensions of attachment toward mother and father (Time 1) were not significant predictors of school life disturbance (Time 2). Furthermore, attachment avoidance toward both parents (Time 1) was not related to two dimensions of attachment toward the best friends (Time 2). Consistent with the literature, this study supports that prior mental health status significantly predicts adolescent school adjustment. It is hypothesized that adolescents with high levels of depressive mood in 9th grade may show deficits in executive function and attention. They may also become socially withdrawing. These cognitive and interpersonal difficulties hinder their abilities of handling academic challenges and seeking social support in the new school environment, thereby leading to school life disturbance. Additionally, the findings support the differential effects of two dimensions of peer attachment on adolescent school adjustment. Although attachment anxiety toward the best friend significantly predicts school life disturbance, attachment avoidance toward the best friend does not. Earlier studies have mostly examined the effects of peer attachment on adolescents' negative emotion. Studies exploring the influences of peer attachment on adolescents' school adjustment have been inadequate. Accordingly, this study added evidence to the current literature concerning impacts of peer attachment on adolescent school adjustment. This study did not find attachment avoidance toward the best friend to significantly predict school adjustment. This may be because Taiwanese adolescents' interpersonal interactions with others are guided by cultural rules and based on types of interpersonal relationship. Therefore, although adolescents may request assistance from friends, when encountering real difficulties, they still seek help from parents and siblings instead of friends as kinship is stronger than friendship. The author assumed that restraining from requesting support from friends reduces the influence of attachment avoidance toward the best friend on adolescents' school life disturbance. Finally, the most significant predictor is active coping strategy. This result echoes the findings of previous studies regarding the influence of coping on individual adjustment. When adolescents actively adopt a problem-focused coping strategy to address issues arising during the process of adjusting to the new school environment, their levels of school life disturbance are expected to be low. Unexpectedly, two dimensions of parental attachment in the 9th grade did not significantly predict adolescents' school maladjustment in the 10th grade. As adolescents get older, peer attachment plays a more important role in individuals' adjustment than parental attachment. Furthermore, peer attachment exerts higher levels of influences than parental attachment. The reason may be that parental attachment was measured in the 9th grade and was significantly related to depressive mood, attachment anxiety toward the best friends, and active coping. These three variables significantly predicted adolescent school life disturbance. In stepwise multiple regression, the variable was excluded from the final prediction model for not adding more explained variance to the criterion variable. Further studies are required to provide evidences on these postulations. The study findings highlight the influence of prior depressive mood, attachment anxiety toward the best friend, and active coping on adolescent school adjustment. Based on these findings, the researcher recommends intervention programs for teaching active coping strategy and for facilitating peer relationships for 10th graders. In addition, an emotion management program is essential to prevent depression among 9th graders. These measures may alleviate adolescents' distress caused by the transition to a new school environment.起始頁-結束頁：191-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202009_52(1).000819篇名：正念、正念訓練與心理健康：預設模式網絡之觀點並列篇名：Mindfulness, Mindfulness Training and Mental Health from the Perspective of Default Mode Network作者：粘瑞狄(Jui-Ti Nien);吳治翰(Chih-Han Wu);吳聰義(Tsung-Yi Wu);楊高騰(Kao-Teng Yang);念裕祥(Yu-Hsiang Nien);張育愷(Yu-Kai Chang)關鍵字：正念;功能性磁共振造影;思緒漫遊;預設模式網絡;腦電圖;mindfulness;functional magnetic resonance imaging;mind-wandering;default mode network;electroencephalography期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：正念為一種特殊形式之察覺能力，其與諸多心理健康有所連結，近年正念研究亦以神經科學取向進行探究，其中預設模式網絡則是討論關於大腦功能相關議題時相對較新的觀點。本回顧旨在以大腦預設模式網絡觀點探討正念對心理健康影響的大腦神經機制，並著重於功能性磁共振造影與腦電圖等取向在橫斷式、縱貫式和介入性實證研究的角度來進行討論。經文獻回顧後發現，過去正念相關研究指出，正念對心理健康與大腦結構或功能具正向影響；而預設模式網絡和憂鬱症與阿茲海默症等疾病有所關聯。而在功能性磁共振造影方面，正念傾向與正念訓練對預設模式網絡腦區之活化程度有其關聯性存在，並可能增加注意力相關的腦網絡與邊緣系統之間的連結性，藉此對個體的心理健康產生正向影響。此外，在腦電圖方面， 正念傾向與正念訓練造成的預設模式網絡腦區之活化差異與gamma與theta波變化有關。整體而言，正念傾向與正念訓練可促使個體從預設模式網絡驅使的思緒漫遊中脫離，並對大腦功能產生正向影響。本文提供國內對該議題有興趣的研究者瞭解其研究發展趨勢，並建議可朝向更嚴謹的實驗設計、樣本普遍性、正念訓練型態影響之差異、預設模式網絡在正念與行為表現間所扮演的中介角色等進行後續研究。英文摘要：Dispositional mindfulness has been defined as a focused mental process achieved through intentionally focusing on aspects of the self and being non-judgmental while connecting to one's present moment of experience. Dispositional mindfulness has been linked to mental health outcomes such as stress, emotion, rumination, and executive function. More information on the effectiveness of current mindfulness-based interventions may have indicated improved mental health outcomes owing to attentional control, emotional regulation, and heightened self-awareness. Designs of previous clinical studies have demonstrated an amelioration of psychiatric symptoms through exposure to mindfulness training. Furthermore, they have indicated that the effects of mindfulness training are noticeable, such as changing the structure and functions of the brain. Evidence for the benefits of dispositional mindfulness or mindfulness training has been illustrated in relation to the neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the brain. Recently, imaging and neuroelectric studies targeting mindfulness conditions have been employed to investigate the potential neuroscience mechanisms associated with mindfulness. The accumulating evidence suggests that mindfulness is associated with brain activation and connectivity. The default mode network (DMN) is a relative new discovery among brain networks that provides a viewpoint useful for discussing operations of brain functions and networks. DMN helps us understand the individual processes of internal psychological states, cognition, the causes of mental diseases, and behavioral affected performance. The DMN is a set of brain regions including the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), and precorneal cortices. These regions are those typically deactivated regions during cognitively demanding tasks. Conversely, the increase of activity among these brain regions reflects the individual's mental states as mind wandering and experiencing thoughts unrelated to the current task. The available evidence indicates the important role of DMN in daily life. This is because of DMN involving self-referential mental activity and manifesting experience with prior recalls, associated with psychiatric diseases and negative mental states. Specifically, few studies have explored the effects of mindfulness on the DMN. However, studies have yet to specify the characteristics of mindfulness training that benefit brain outcomes. This review investigates the manner in which neuroscience mechanisms of mindfulness are based on the perspectives of DMN to determine whether dispositional mindfulness or mindfulness training is consequential to the brain functions. The functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) technology appears to be most suitable for observing functional connectivity in the DMN. Furthermore, electroencephalography (EEG) explores functional connectivity in the DMN and can complement the limitations of temporal resolution in an fMRI. Consequently, we focused on cross-sectional, longitudinal, and interventional empirical studies using an fMRI and an EEG to further understand the relation between mindfulness and mental health and their influence on brain mechanisms. The literature reviews were carried out in the following way: The first section briefly describes the definition of mindfulness and DMN, then introduces the recent trends of researchers. The second section reports cross-sectional, longitudinal, and interventional empirical studies. Finally, the third section summarizes information regarding the relations between mindfulness and DMN, explores the potential contributions of how mindfulness may apply to an educational context, and offers recommendations for future research directions. We searched in the official home pages of the PubMed database using keyword search terms ”mindfulness,” ”meditation,” ”default mode network,” ”mind wandering,” ”fMRI” or ”EEG.” Titles and abstracts were selected for initial screening of articles for narrative review, whereas other studies on protocol that did not use fMRI and EEG were excluded. The previous studies on mindfulness have indicated that dispositional mindfulness levels are associated with mental health and alternations of brain structures or functions. Mindfulness training positively impacted mental health outcomes and ameliorated the symptoms of psychiatric diseases. Diseases such as depression and Alzheimer's might be caused by inappropriate or aberrant activation of the DMN. This further leads to the internalizing of such disorders while negatively affecting mental health-related quality of life. Furthermore, fMRI studies have indicated the association between dispositional mindfulness or mindfulness training and decreased brain function activity. These include the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), PCC, and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) for functional connectivity in the DMN region as well as increased connections between the brain network relevant to executive control or attention and the limbic system. That is, functional connections between the hippocampus and amygdala positively influenced the emotional and cognitive processing of the individual. Thus, mindfulness-based interventions contributed to greater mental health. Few studies have used EEG measurements. EEG studies have revealed that dispositional mindfulness or mindfulness training was associated with DMN network activity in the gamma and theta frequency bands. Therefore, mindfulness is associated with reduced activation of DMN. Collectively, the effectiveness of mindfulness for mental health is affected by changes in DMN, thereby improving normal functioning of the brain and behavioral performance. In addition, mindfulness training promotes the development of DMN core regions. Dispositional mindfulness or mindfulness training may promote moving away from mind wandering driven by DMN, thereby contributing to beneficial effects on brain functions. The current evidence thus may provide information about the potential benefits of mindfulness for people with mental health issues. Thus, meaningful mindfulness training could help individuals reset their habitually interfering or automatically distracting thoughts to become capable of keeping away from self-related ruminations and engaging in more focused awareness of the present moment. The research also proposed the potential effectiveness of mindfulness in child and adolescent development research in the field of education. Although previous studies have indicated the roles of DMN in mindfulness and mental health, these findings must be interpreted cautiously because of conceptual and methodological issues (e.g., lower bounds on sample size, lack of active controls, limited use in measurements and methods) in recent research on mindfulness. Therefore, methodological challenges should be addressed to improve the research design. Overall, these reviews provide significant research development trends with regard to neuroscience studies on mindfulness and DMN. The evidence suggests the following research method improvements: using more rigid research designs that adopt randomized controlled trials while including adequate sample sizes and using active control groups; factoring sample generalizability that includes accumulated knowledge derived from these results, which then should be applied for investigating the emerging field of neuroscience of mindfulness in a variety of populations; measuring the effects of mindfulness training and their applications since the impact of mindfulness training will be enhanced if there are relative emphasis assessments given to different components; and improved reviews of the extant literature of mindfulness and mental health associated with DMN functional connectivity, which is still not well understood. Future studies should focus on the mediation effects of DMN on mindfulness and behavioral performance outcomes as well as DMN and its role in individual behavior performance. Importantly, current evidence remains limited due to few studies being applied to different populations. Accordingly, future research should clarify the unacknowledged effects of mindfulness training on DMN.起始頁-結束頁：219-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202009_52(1).000920篇名：簡版社交技巧提升系統青少年評量表的信度與效度研究並列篇名：Reliability and Validity of the Short-form Chinese-version Social Skills Improvement System Rating Scales for Adolescent Students作者：謝曼盈(Manying Hsieh)關鍵字：社交技巧;信度;效度;驗證性因素分析;social skills;reliability;validity;confirmatory factor analysis (CFA)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究主要目的在檢驗簡版社交技巧提升系統青少年學生評量表的信度與效度，該評量表包含社交技巧測驗與行為問題兩項測驗，共40道問題。研究樣本為1031名七年級至十二年級學生（男生515人，女生516人，平均年齡為15.58歲，標準差1.75歲），以青少年社會行為評量表學生版為研究工具，使用AMOS 20.0統計軟體進行驗證性因素分析。研究結果顯示本研究簡版量表具有信度與效度，在信度方面，社交技巧各分測驗的α值介於 .74至 .84，重測信度則介於 .67至 .85；行為問題各分測驗的α值介於 .70至 .74，重測信度則介於 .70至 .76；驗證性因素分析結果顯示假設模式有良好的適配度，意謂社交技巧測驗與行為問題測驗的理論架構受到實證資料的支持；此外，社交技巧測驗得分與青少年社會行為評量表的適應性行為測驗得分有顯著正相關，行為問題測驗得分與青少年社會行為評量表的不適應行為測驗得分也有顯著正相關；比較簡版和原版在高風險學生分類的結果，兩者間的一致性也很高。英文摘要：This study examined the reliability and validity of the short-form Chinese version of the Social Skills Improvement System-Rating Scales (SSIS-RS) for adolescent students; SSIS-RS comprises two scales, each assessing social skills and problem behaviors. The research sample consisted of 1031 grade 7-12 students [515 boys and 516 girls; mean (standard deviation) age = 15.58 (1.75) years]. The Adolescent Social Behavior Scale Student Form was also applied; moreover, AMOS (version 20.0) was used for confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). The Cronbach's alpha and test-retest reliability values were respectively .74- .84 and .67- .85 for the social skill subscales and .70- .74 and .70- .76 for the problem behavior subscales. The CFA results revealed that the theoretical models presented good model fit, suggesting that the empirical data supported the hypothesized theoretical frameworks of the social skill and problem behavior scales. The social skills and problem behavior scale scores strongly correlated with the scores of the adaptive and maladaptive behavior scales of the Adolescent Social Behavior Scale Student Form, respectively. Moreover, the observed classification consistency was high between the original and the short-form version of the Chinese SSIS-RS for the current adolescent students. Taken together, the current results demonstrate good reliability and validity of the short-form Chinese version of SSIS-RS in adolescent students.起始頁-結束頁：505-529資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202006_51(4).000101篇名：探究想像力帶動美感知覺與經驗發展的學習方案設計與實踐研究並列篇名：A Practical Study on Exploring the Learning Program of Inspiring Imagination Capacity to Promote the Development of Aesthetic Perception and Experience作者：許育齡(Yuling Hsu)關鍵字：美感知覺;美感經驗;想像力;學習方案;aesthetic perception;aesthetic experience;imaginative capacity;learning program期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:4期出版年：2020中文摘要：因應當代大學生面對風險社會挑戰的身心需求，本研究運用行動研究，經由理論與實務交互淬鍊，開發以學習者為主體，可於教學現場實踐，能涵養個體美感知覺與經驗的學習方案。此方案包含「知覺破與立－善用落差激發想像力」、「釋放想像力－連結既有經驗與新知」、「探索一個經驗－開啟改變的起點」、「涵養創造性心智－建構主體性學習」等四個主題單元，各單元由三到四個次主題組成，並各具學習重點。教學者可參考此方案引導學習者；學習者則可透過四個歷程的往復循環逐步深化，進而初步體驗「一個完整的美感經驗」，即活化美感知覺、接觸經典開展想像力、探索經驗開啟改變及運用微型創作尋找自屬創作語言，進而發展主體性。研究亦發現，鬆動僵固知覺探索美感的旅程具有深化知性、涵容感性以及激發主體成長的潛力，值得持續深化理論建構，並於教學實踐落實與開展。英文摘要：This study aims to echo the aesthetic needs of college students who face the challenges of entering the risk society. Through teaching practices, combining with the action research method, this study proposed a learning program that drives students to release their imagination to nurture aesthetic perception and experience. This learning program was divided into four units, including ”destruct and construct perception - use the gaps to stimulate imagination,” ”release imagination - link existing experience to new knowledge,” ”explore an experience - the starting point for change,” and ”conceive creative mindset - construct individual learning way.” Each of the four units consists of three or four themes. Instructors can guide learners with this program; meanwhile, learners are be able to fathom the depth of their aesthetic exploration through the recurring cycle to initially experience ”a complete aesthetic experience.” That is, activating the sense of aesthetic, contacting the classics to develop the imagination, exploring the experience to start change, and using miniature creation activities to find the language of creation and develop individualization. To summarize the results, the journey of practical aesthetic exploration has the potential to deepen intellectuality, heal sensibility, and develop individualization.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820201266040012篇名：社會建構教育學之在地實踐：自我覺察督導模式應用於大學層級諮商實習課程並列篇名：Social Construction Pedagogical Practice in Taiwan: An Application of Self-awareness Supervision Model to Counseling and Guidance Practicum Course at Undergraduate Level作者：姜兆眉(Chao-Mei Chiang);繆妮晏(Ni-Yen Miao);蘇盈儀(Ying-Yi Su)關鍵字：反思對話;在地知識;自我覺察督導模式;社會建構教育學;諮商員教育;reflection and dialogue;local knowledge;Self-awareness Supervision Model;social construction pedagogy;counselor education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本行動研究以社會建構論為教育學立場，結合在地發展之「自我覺察督導模式」進行課程個別／團體督導，藉由督導歷程之提問與對話，以提升大學層級輔導與諮商實習課程修課學生之自我覺察與反思能力。本研究遵循質性研究典範與行動研究取向，期許為具反思性之教學者立基社會建構理論作為教學理論觀點，並以「關係、對話、建構、知識」四主軸進行教學創新行動方案，檢核學習者之課程經驗與教師之教育學實踐。本研究重要發現有二：一、社會建構教育學諮商訓練以對話、覺察為主軸，師生互動得以跳脫過往單一教學型態；二、課堂引導對話，將專業學習遷移拓展至諮商晤談情境與日常生活。期許此次教學創新行動得以提供大專校院輔導諮商相關科系實習課程教學訓練之參考。英文摘要：This action research is based on Social construction pedagogy (SCM), combined with utilization of the Self-awareness Supervision Model (SASM) was developed by Taiwanese scholar, Dr. Chin-Yen Chen. The researcher employed SCM and utilize the SASM to provide supervision with the trainees, who will be taking the undergraduate course of Counseling and Guidance Practicum. This study aims to investigate trainees' learning experiences and sensitivity of self-awareness based on Social Constructionism pedagogical perspectives with combination of SASM. The researcher considers herself as a reflective practitioner/instructor while designing the course and providing supervision/instruction, which was investigated in this study. On the basis of SCM position and SASM, four axes, ”Relationship, Dialogue, Construction, Knowledge” serve the main rationale for this action research. Students' learning experiences were investigated and functioned as feedback for the instructor's teaching. Essential findings included SCM focusing on dialogue and awareness brought bidirectional interaction between teachers and students; students were able to transfer their learning from dialogues in class to counseling sessions and daily life. Implications and recommendations for counselor training, especially teaching and training in counseling practicum course were presented.起始頁-結束頁：39-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820201266040023篇名：應用連結論於全球導航衛星系統課程的教學設計並列篇名：Using Connectivism for the Instructional Design in a GNSS Course作者：陳哲銘(Che-Ming Chen)關鍵字：全球導航衛星系統;素養;連結論;Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS);competence;connectivism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:4期出版年：2020中文摘要：全球導航衛星系統是空間資訊技術的核心之一，為因應專業人才的需求，國內各大學相關科系多在大學部開設「全球導航衛星系統」課程。過去課程的重點偏重在瞭解基礎原理和訓練軟、硬體操作技能，但鑑於未來就業市場對於核心素養的需要，有必要將課程的重點從訓練技能提升到培養素養。本研究應用新興的學習理論「連結論」來進行課程的教學設計，期望透過在學習環境中強化「人機」、「人際」與「人地」的連結來達成培養素養的目標。研究結果顯示，應用連結論的教學可以增進學生在「專業知識」與「專業技能」方面的科學素養，但若要培養「科學態度」，則有賴更進階的探究式課程。而地理學科所重視的「人地」連結，可帶動更深、更廣的「人機」和「人際」連結，有助於素養學習成效的提升。英文摘要：Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) are one of the cores in geospatial technologies. In order to respond to the needs of geospatial professionals, many university departments in Taiwan have provided undergraduate GNSS courses. The introductory courses of GNSS usually focus on the understanding of basic principles and the training of hardware and software operating skills. In view of the future employment markets for key competence needs, the introductory courses need to be extend from training skills to developing competencies. In this study, we adopted a new learning theory ”Connectivism” for instructional design. To achieve the goal of developing competencies, we proposed a teaching strategy by strengthening the connections among ”human-device,” ”human-human” and ”human-environment” in the learning environment. The research results showed that the application of connectivism could improve students' scientific competencies in ”professional knowledge” and ”professional skills,” but more advanced inquiry-based courses were required to develop ”scientific attitude.” Moreover, the ”human-environment” connection that geography emphasizes could drive deeper and broader ”human-device” and ”human-human” connections. It improved the effectiveness of developing competencies.起始頁-結束頁：79-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820201266040034篇名：跨越邊界：成為高等教育文化回應教師的歷程並列篇名：Border Crossing: A Journey of Becoming a Culturally Responsive Teacher in Higher Education作者：李雪菱(Shiue-Ling Lee)關鍵字：文化回應教師;文化回應教學;高等教育;跨越邊界;課程與教學;culturally responsive teacher;culturally responsive instruction;higher education;border crossing;curriculum and instruction期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:4期出版年：2020中文摘要：為了發展能敏覺、因應與突破大學生異質的文化背景所潛藏的種種教學難題，研究者透過教師自我研究的行動研究，坦誠地反思與揭露一位大學教師在課程發展中致力成為文化回應教學者「跨越邊界」的歷程。研究結果顯示，高等教育的文化回應教師需要在教師準備、師生關係經營，與文化回應教學融入課程<U+22EF><U+22EF>等層面經歷「跨越邊界」的三個歷程：一是自我批判、學習與轉化學生文化差異為教學資源，並發展社會政治意識。二是營造關懷、信任、文化溝通、權力共享的教室。三是發展屬於自己專業課程適用的文化回應教學。本研究提出閱讀理解、田野工作、反思、書寫及學習者行動研究等「五位一體」的課程與教學，並認為文化回應教學雖具獨特性、靈活性，理念與方法卻是可被複製的。英文摘要：In order to be aware of, cope with, and overcome all potential difficulties in instructions brought about by university students' diverse backgrounds, the researcher, as a university teacher, frankly reflected and disclosed a ”border-crossing” journey when striving to be a culturally responsive teacher through ”self-study action research”. The results showed that in higher education, a culturally responsive teacher must experience three parts of ”border-crossing” journey in terms of teacher's preparation, the management of teacher-student relations, and the integration of culturally responsive instruction into curriculum. The first part of the journey is self-criticizing, learning about students' cultural differences and transforming them into resources for instruction, and developing socio-political awareness. The second is constructing a classroom that is caring, trusting, culturally communicable, and power-sharing. The third is developing a culturally responsive instruction suitable for one's own professional curriculum. The research proposed a ”five in one” curriculum and instruction (reading comprehension, field work, reflection, writing, and student action research) and suggested that though culturally responsive instruction is unique and flexible, its idea and methodology are duplicable.起始頁-結束頁：119-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820201266040045篇名：Scholarship of Educational Development: Scaffolding SoTL through Evidence-based Educational Development並列篇名：以證據為本的教育發展實務促進教與學的研究作者：李冠穎(Guan-Ying Li);符碧真(Bih-Jen Fwu)關鍵字：higher education;educational development;scholarship of educational development;scholarship of teaching and learning;teaching practice research program;高等教育;教育發展;教育發展的研究;教與學的研究;教學實踐研究計畫期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:4期出版年：2020中文摘要：The year 2020 marks the 30th anniversary of the publication of Boyer's (1990) seminal work- Scholarship Reconsidered Priorities of the Professoriate which has stimulated a burgeoning literature on the scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) in higher education. In Taiwan, the Ministry of Education has implemented Teaching Practice Research Program (TPRP) since 2017 to engage academics in SoTL. Carried out in a research-intensive university, this study analyzed the proposals submitted for the 2020 TPRP to uncover challenges that academics encountered when embarking on SoTL. Academics and professionals of educational development (ED) were interviewed to explore possible solutions to the challenges. The results suggest that academics' attempts to undertake SoTL would involve a steep learning curve regarding identification of a research question, review of literature, instructional design, and criteria for assessment, as a result of the transdisciplinary characteristic of SoTL. These challenges emerged in the early stage of proposal preparations. To help academics sail through the challenges, ED professionals need to develop research skills to integrate scholarship of educational development (SoED) into ED. This emerging evidence-based research field would inform prioritization of ED programs in response to academics' needs and align ED agendas with institutional goals to enhance the capacity of ED to facilitate SoTL development.英文摘要：Boyer於1990年發表了〈學術的再思考〉一文，迄今邁入第30年，該文帶動了高等教育教與學的研究（Scholarship of Teaching and Learning，簡稱SoTL）之興起。為提升高等教育的教學品質，教育部自2017年起推動教學實踐研究計畫，鼓勵教師從事SoTL。本文以一所研究型大學為例，分析該校教師2020年之教學實踐研究計畫書，探究教師在撰寫計畫時遇到的困難。本文也訪談了教師與教育發展（Educational Development, ED）專業人員，探討教育發展實務該如何協助教師解決困難。結果顯示，SoTL跨領域的特性使得教師在計畫撰寫階段即面臨了界定研究問題、選擇教育文獻、規劃教學設計與確立評量規準等困難。為因應上述困難，教育發展專業人員需具備研究能力，從事「教育發展的研究」（Scholarship of Educational Development, SoED），此一證據為本的新興研究領域，有助於確立教育發展實務應聚焦的重點，同時策略性地與大學願景結合，以提升教育發展實務的效能並促進SoTL之發展。起始頁-結束頁：163-195資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820201266040056篇名：做勞工？做公民？一所私立高職汽車科學生的公民養成探究並列篇名：Learning to ”Labor”? Learning to ”Citizen”? A Case Study on the Citizenship Cultivation of Auto Mechanics Students at a Private Vocational High School作者：陳素秋(Su-Chiu Chen)關鍵字：公民養成;師徒文化;諷謔型公民;職業教育;citizen cultivation;master-apprentice culture;cynical citizen;vocational education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:3期出版年：2020中文摘要：許多研究指出，高職教育重視工作者培育，因此相對忽略民主公民之養成。另外，研究亦顯示，職業教育學生畢業後的公民參與行為偏低。有鑑於此，本研究嘗試探究高職學生在學校的公民教育經驗，以及理解學生的公民身分實踐。透過參與觀察和深度訪談，本研究發現，學生公民養成教育成效不彰，主要原因有三：一、學生將自己視為升學主義體系中的他者，此他者認同引領其對高職課程中的公民養成科目採取疏離態度；二、師徒文化下的工作者養成教育，相對不利於現代公民養成；三、學校雖有學生自治組織，但缺乏運作參與技能的訓練，因此成效有限。綜合言之，以上不利因素使得學生未能實踐參與型公民，但學生亦未認同實踐遵守規範的公民身分內涵。學生所開展的是持續發展抗拒權力之策略，但卻未嘗試批判性挑戰規範權力結構的諷謔型公民。英文摘要：Current literature indicates that vocational high school places primary importance on cultivating workers at the expense of cultivating citizenship. The literature on political participation additionally shows that vocational high school students engage less in civic participation than those at academic schools. This article examines students' experiences of citizenship education at vocational high schools and explore how students at these schools practice citizenship. Through participant observation and in-depth interviews, three determinants are identified as contributing to current low performance in citizenship education at vocational high schools. First, students at vocational high schools are perceived as ”others” as opposed to mainstream advancement culture in education, alienating themselves from citizenship education curricula. Second, a master apprentice culture at vocational high schools put more emphasis on the process of worker cultivation more than on democratic citizen cultivation. Third, student self-governance organizations are lack of appropriate training in civic participation skills, which fails to develop students' competency in democratic participation. These three factors are argued to be responsible for students failing to fully engage as democratic participatory citizens. This does not mean, however, that students practice submissive citizenship, constantly complying with community norms. By contrast, students practice citizenship as cynical citizens, who aim to resist and elude governing power while failing to critically challenge power structures.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820200966030017篇名：支持教改實踐的教科書設計：以日本中學校理科教科書中生物單元之論述分析為例並列篇名：Textbook Design to Support the Enactment of Educational Reform: Discourse Analysis of a Biology Unit in a Japanese Junior High School Science Textbook作者：林君憶(Chun-Yi Lin)關鍵字：科學探究;素養;教科書設計;語料庫輔助論述分析;課程改革實踐;scientific inquiry;competencies;textbook design;corpus-assisted discourse analysis;curriculum reform enactment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究採語料庫輔助論述分析，主要探究日本中學校（即國中）三年級理科教科書「生命的延續性」單元設計，部分參照臺灣教科書內容，探討教科書設計於教改脈絡下之意涵。研究發現，日本單元課程設計融合了目標與歷程模式，由日常現象引介學生能探究的問題，圖文版式採大幅攝影供觀察討論、以角色插畫及比臺灣單元使用更少的專有名詞與更多驅動學習表現的動詞，鼓勵學生投入探究活動，以獲得概念理解，並活用理解來思考新問題。其意涵包括教科書創造活用科學概念與探究的情境，以解決問題、適應社會作為學習的脈絡；視學生為探究社群裡知識的建構者與問題解決者，經教師從旁協助運用科學探究方法習得概念、知識與技術，學生再進行小型自由研究。教材提供支持課程改革實踐之完整、穩定且普及的教學鷹架，有利於師生持續投入創造課堂探究社群的新學習經驗。英文摘要：Using corpus-assisted discourse analysis, this study primarily analyzed the design of a unit titled ”Continuation of Life” in a Japanese science textbook for third-year junior high schoolers with reference to a Taiwanese unit. The study also examined textbook design implications in the context of educational reform. The unit in the Japanese textbook integrates the objective and process curriculum models. To encourage learners to inquire and apply their understanding to manage new problems, the unit introduces inquiry questions through natural phenomena, presents large photographs for observation and discussion, and uses more character illustrations, less terminology, and more verbs that drive learning performance than Taiwanese counterparts do. The findings have the following implications. Textbooks can create learning contexts in which students use science concepts and inquiry to solve problems and adapt to the society. Students are regarded as problem solvers and knowledge constructors in a community of inquiry; with teachers' facilitation, students use scientific inquiry methods to acquire concepts, knowledge, and skills, and then conduct small projects for independent inquiry. Textbooks can serve as comprehensive, stable, and pervasive scaffolds to support the enactment of curriculum reform; they may help teachers and learners co-create new learning experiences in developing inquiry communities in classrooms.起始頁-結束頁：37-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820200966030028篇名：晚清林樂知在華教育事業與美國教育的引介並列篇名：Young J. Allen's Educational Enterprise and His Introduction of American Education System in Late Ch'ing China作者：周愚文(Yu-Wen Chou)關鍵字：中西書院;林樂知;美國教育制度;教會學校;監理會;Anglo-Chinese College;John Allen;The Methodist Episcopal Church (South);mission school;American education system期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:3期出版年：2020中文摘要：中國近代教育的西化可視為教育革命，始於晚清，教會學校是主要途徑之一，而美國在華差會扮演重要角色。本文旨在探討美國監理會林樂知在華47年的教育事業和其引介美國教育的貢獻，及其對中國教育西化的影響。本文採史學方法，使用晚清中英文報刊及史料彙編等資料。研究發現，林樂知因傳教經驗，體認教育手段的重要性而採「設學輔教」策略，先後設立初等學塾、中西書院及中西女塾，並倡議設大書院，進而促成該會的三級教會學校體系與東吳大學堂的建立。甲午戰爭後林樂知提倡「文學興國」理念，透過書刊引介美國教育制度，並提出改革中國教育的建議，戊戌維新時有類似的措施，故其對引介美國教育制度及中國教育西化的影響不宜忽略。最後，本文提出對現代教育移轉及教會學校與國家教育體制關係的啟示。英文摘要：In the process of westernization of education in late Ch'ing China, the establishment of the American protestant mission schools, seen as an education revolution, was one of the important strategies to evangelism. The main aim of this article is to explore Young J. Allen's educational enterprise and his devotion to introducing the American education system into China. Historical method is undertaken. Due to personal experiences, education in Allen's view became a vehicle for attaining the mission's goal, so he established day schools, Anglo-Chinese School and the Mctyeire School for Girls, and then initiated the plan of university. Later, mission school system and Soochow University were established. After 1894 he advocated education as important means of state formation, introduced the American educational system and initiated programs for reforming Chinese educational system. Therefore, his impacts cannot and should not be ignored. Implications to educational transfer as well as mission schools and its relation to the state education today are also discussed.起始頁-結束頁：77-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820200966030039篇名：書評：學而時習之，不亦說乎？有朋自遠方來，不亦樂乎？並列篇名：Book Review: Manabi and Japanese Schooling: Beyond Learning in the Era of Globalisation作者：洪如玉期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：123-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708202009660300410篇名：蔡元培的南洋跨境經歷與華僑文化教育語境之探討並列篇名：Cai Yuanpei's Cross-Border Experience in Nanyang and Overseas Chinese Educational Context作者：許德發(Teik-Huat Khor);張惠思(Hooi-See Teoh)關鍵字：互動;南洋;華僑教育;過境;演講;interaction;Nanyang;overseas Chinese education;cross-borders;speech期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:2期出版年：2020中文摘要：蔡元培於辛亥革命與五四運動前後，曾多次越洋留學與考察。他留學與考察歐美之經歷已有不少研究，然學界對於他在往返中西之時停泊於南洋的經歷卻缺乏關注，連其《日記》與《自述》的相關記載也多有不詳，他對華僑教育的影響亦未被探析。實際上，南洋馬來亞的新加坡與檳榔嶼是當時的主要港口，是亞洲大陸與西方世界之間水路交通的必經之地，蔡元培數次訪問歐美皆途經此地。本文追溯蔡元培五次過境與逗留馬來亞之過程及其步履之處，梳理其行程、活動、演講及與當地華僑互動之事跡，進而從流寓於外的華僑社會之視角探析他的過境與活動的意義，以對相關研究略做補闕。本文將追問，南洋華人如何對待這位「民國大教育家」、「前教育總長」、「北大校長」的來訪？蔡元培又如何回應華僑所急切關心的僑教問題？本文將藉著當地華人對他的反應揭示其在華僑社會中的崇高地位。英文摘要：Cai Yuanpei had conducted many overseas studies and investigations before and after the Revolution of 1911 and the May Fourth Movement. Despite many studies on his experience of studying in Europe and the States, the academic circles lacked attention to his experience of staying in Nanyang while he traveled between China and the West. In fact, Singapore and Penang of Nanyang were the main ports at the time, they were the essential waterway between the Asian continent and the western world. Cai Yuanpei passed through the region for a few times during his visitations to Europe and the States. This article traced back a number of transits and entries of Cai Yuanpei to Malaya and his footsteps including his schedule, activity, speech and his interactions with local Chinese people, and then analyzes the significance of his transit and activities from the perspective of overseas Chinese society. The article answers the questions such as how do Nanyang Chinese treated the visitations of this great educationist of the republican era, the ex-education minister, the Peking University principal. Did his thinking conform to the developing overseas Chinese education and their culture? This paper exposes the responses and comments of local Chinese community to reveal his lofty position in local Chinese society from his spatial and temporal transmigration in his Nanyang voyage.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708202006660200101篇名：臺灣高等教育學程證書薪資效果之研究並列篇名：The Wage Premium of the Credits Program in Higher Education in Taiwan作者：徐昌祺(Chang-Chi Hsu);黃麗璇(Li-Hsuan Huang)關鍵字：學程;跨領域教育;雙主修;薪資溢酬;人力資本;credits program;interdisciplinary education;double major;wage premium;human capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：專業學程之設計為我國高教機構培育多元人才的重要方式，本文利用「臺灣教育長期追蹤資料庫後續調查：教育與勞力市場的連結」，以追蹤資料隨機效果模型研究各不同種類學程證書與薪資之關係。為維持追蹤資料的樣本數，迴歸模型未包含家庭背景與能力之衡量變數但控制個人效果。結果發現，不論發證的高教機構類別、就業初期或較長期，雙主修學位證書與薪資均具有顯著正向關係；與其他條件相同者相較，擁有雙主修學位者平均高出24%的薪資。不過，薪資水準與雙主修正相關之程度，視發證機構、就職之產業及公司規模而不同—公立大專校院高於私立學校、公部門就業者高於私部門、製造業高於服務業、中小型企業高於大型企業。教育學程證書的薪資溢酬在初就業較明顯；就業時間稍長後，輔系證書與薪資亦呈正相關。但無證據顯示，其他的學分學程證書與薪資具正向關係。根據研究結果，本研究針對學程規劃方向提出具體建議，作為相關制度設計之參考。推廣與協助青年學子選讀並順利完成雙主修學位，可能是跨領域技能培養制度值得強調的方向。凸顯不同種類學程證書的特點，以及針對不同學程證書進行學習成效多面向評估，審視其與市場需求之關聯，可能亦是值得思考的問題。英文摘要：In recent years, higher education institutions in Taiwan have enthusiastically engaged in offering various credits programs to the youngsters in response to labor market needs, such as the needs for professional and/or interdisciplinary skills. This paper employs the panel data from Taiwan Education Panel Survey and Beyond and uses the panel data regression for study, aiming to investigate the relationship between credits program and wages. Although variables measuring family backgrounds and personal abilities are not included in the model for the sake of larger samples for analysis, the panel random effect model controls individual-specific effect. A positive relationship between wages and double major degrees is found. The result is quite robust, in spite of the types of institution issuing the certificate and labor market experience. The estimated wage premium for a double major degree is about 24%, being higher if the degree is offered by public school. People with double major degrees working at medium- and small-sized firms, manufacturing, and public sectors are paid higher than otherwise similar workers. The relationship between wages and a teacher-education certification is positive when people just entering the labor markets. Wages and a minor degree becomes positively related if people are of certain employment experiences. However, no exact relationship has been found for the rest of the credits programs. As a consequence, promoting and assisting college students to successfully complete a dual major degree may be a direction worthy of attention in the cross-field skills training system. Highlighting the characteristics of different types of credits program certificates, conducting multifaceted assessments, and examining their relevance to market demand may also be worth considering.起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202012_16(4).00012篇名：品德教育實施成效及其調節變項之統合分析並列篇名：The Meta-Analysis of Implementation Effectiveness and Moderator Variables of Character Education作者：黃寶園(Bao-Yuan Huang)關鍵字：品德教育;統合分析;效果量;調節變項;character education;meta-analysis;effect size;moderator variables期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在使用統合分析法，分析國內品德教育之實施成效，並分析影響品德教育實施成效的調節變項。本研究共納入51篇研究報告進行分析，總樣本數為5,202人。研究結果顯示：整體品德教育實施成效之加權平均效果量為0.67，此為一個中等偏高程度的有效效果量，表示於學校實施品德教育後，確實能對學生的品德行為表現產生正向的影響；本研究所設定之教育階段、學校位置與研究區域均為品德教育實施成效的調節變項，此外尚有第二階段與第三階段之調節變項，交互影響品德教育之實施成效。正因為有調節變項，即表示品德教育實施成效的高低，將因於調節變項的不同類別而有所不同，因此需以較謹慎的態度看待整體品德教育實施成效，這也是本研究的限制。藉由本研究結果可知於學校中實施品德教育是有效的，此結果可供各級學校實施品德教育之參考。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to analyze the effectiveness of character education in Taiwan through the Meta-analysis method, and to analyze the moderators that influence the effectiveness of character education. A total of 51 research reports were collected in this study for analysis, with a total sample size of 5,202 people. The results showed that the weighted average effect size of the overall character education teaching effect was 0.67 after the hetero research was deleted and the publication bias was simulated, which is a moderately high effective effect size, indicating that the implementation of character education teaching in schools can indeed have a positive impact on students' character behavior. The educational stage, school location and study area are all set as moderators that affect the effectiveness of character education. In addition, there are second and third stages of moderators that interactively affect the teaching effectiveness of character education. Because there are moderator variable means the implementation effectiveness of moral education will be different with different types of moderator variable. Therefore, we should take a cautious attitude towards the overall implement effectiveness of moral education. This is also the limitation of this study. Based on the analysis of this study, it can be known that the implementation of character education in schools is effective, the results can be used as reference for the implementation of character education in schools at all levels.起始頁-結束頁：33-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202012_16(4).00023篇名：IPMA-RG在教育研究之應用並列篇名：Using IPMA-RG in Educational Research作者：葉連祺(Lain-Chyi Yeh)關鍵字：教育領導;教育管理;重要－表現圖示分析;重要－表現矩陣分析;educational leadership;educational management;importance-performance map analysis;importance-performance matrix analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：重要－表現圖示分析（IPMA）可依據設定的變項間因果關係去分類變項，利於教育領導和管理決策參考，但限制為IPMA有賴應用特定軟體和具備高階統計方法知能。對此，採擷IPMA理念，提出IPMA-RGc和IPMA-RGi，其應用多元迴歸分析和一般統計軟體，堪稱簡便使用。本文說明其分析理念、相關課題和分析流程，也提出使用IPA、IPGA、IPMA-SEM和IPMA-RG的整合決策流程。另應用教育領導研究實例資料進行分析，顯示IPMA-RGc和IPMA-RGi分析品質良好。英文摘要：Importance-performance map analysis (IPMA) can classify variables based on the casual relationship between variables, are useful for decision making in educational leadership and management. But its limits are rely on using specific software and need knowledge and capabilities of advance statistical methods. So the study adopted the idea of IPMA, proposed IPMA-RGc and IPMA-RGi which using multiple regression analysis and general statistical software are easy to use. This study illustrated analytic ideas, related topics, and analytic procedures about IPMA-RG, and also showed an integrated decision-making procedure for conducting IPA, IPGA, IPMA-SEM and IPMA-RG. Moreover a practical research data of educational leadership was used to test IPMA-RG, results showed both IPMA-RGc and IPMA-RGi are good.起始頁-結束頁：71-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202012_16(4).00034篇名：臺灣高等教育實施績效責任制度的困境與突破：代理人理論的應用並列篇名：The Dilemma and Opportunity in the Accountability System of Taiwan Higher Education: The Application of Agency Theory作者：傅遠智(Yuan-Chih Fu);秦夢群(Joseph Meng-Chun Chin)關鍵字：高等教育績效責任;社會階層流動率;代理人理論;higher education accountability;social mobility rate;agency theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：二十一世紀初臺灣高等教育政策受到新自由主義思潮的影響，令高等教育治理結構產生根本性的轉變。其中政府與大學之間的治理關係便是從原先的政府管制朝向契約關係，而在此基礎上建立的高等教育績效責任制度，企圖經由同時提升大學機構自主及促進校際競爭的策略，從成果端確保大學運作效率，提升整體公共服務品質。然而，近年來臺灣高等教育體系為了監管大學績效責任所發展的各項措施，卻逐漸脫離原先成果導向的管理精神，並出現妨害大學機構自主的問題。針對我國績效責任制度影響高等教育發展的討論，國內研究未曾以代理人理論觀點加以分析。基於此，本研究從近來英美高等教育領域倡議的「社會階層流動率」概念出發，提出當政府以競爭方式分配計畫預算，並作為委託人時應如何公正且客觀的評價大學社會績效責任。本研究在代理人理論的框架下，說明「資訊不對稱」與「誘因結構失衡」兩項導致代理兩難的原因，提出以大學貢獻社會階層流動率的程度，作為高等教育資源分配的基礎。最後建議政府主管機關改變行政數據應用的思維，重建大學誘因結構與績效責任制度。英文摘要：In the early 21st century, Taiwan was affected by the popularity of neoliberalism and shifted higher education policy from governmental control to institutional autonomy. The current higher education accountability system, including university evaluation, performance-based funding and college ranking, have all aimed at granting more institutional autonomy to the higher education institution. However, the implementation of these instruments has intervened with the university's operation and goes against its original design. Although a lot of discussions have raised issues and questions about their side effects on the higher education mission, and only very few actions have been taken to replace the current evaluation system. The social mobility rate advocated in U.K. and U.S. proposed a new direction for the government to consider how to fairly and objectively evaluate the performance of the higher education institution in line with its mission. With the latter in mind, this paper refers to the agent theory, highlighting the informational asymmetric and goal conflicts which cause the agent-dilemma. This paper argues that the new resource allocation system based on the social mobility rate each higher education institution contributes could efficiently hold higher education institutions accountable while at the same time releasing them from unnecessary administrative intervention.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202009_16(3).00015篇名：學校知識治理對教師知識分享與知識轉移之影響：社會資本的中介效果分析並列篇名：The Impact of School Knowledge Governance on Teachers' Knowledge Sharing and Knowledge Transfer: The Mediating Effect of Social Capital作者：吳政達(Cheng-Ta Wu)關鍵字：知識治理;知識分享;知識轉移;社會資本;knowledge governance;knowledge sharing;knowledge transfer;social capital期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討學校知識治理對教師知識分享及知識轉移的影響，並分析教師社會資本的中介效果。本研究之對象為臺灣地區公私立國民中學教師，以分層隨機抽樣的方式選取受試者。研究工具之問卷內容包括兩部份，第一部份內容為前置變項（學校知識治理）及中介變項（教師社會資本）；第二部份內容則為結果變項（教師知識分享、教師知識轉移）。研究方法上，先透過驗證性因素分析學校知識治理、教師知識分享、教師知識轉移、教師社會資本等各變項問卷資料，確定量表的統計適配度。接著採用跨層次中介效果模型探討知識治理是如何在組織脈絡下對個體層次之知識分享及知識轉移產生跨層次效果，並檢驗教師社會資本的中介影響。經過分析所得的結論共有四點：（一）學校知識治理對教師知識分享具有正向影響，當學校的知識治理愈佳時愈能促進教師知識分享行為；（二）學校知識治理對教師知識轉移具有正向影響，當學校的知識治理愈佳時愈能促進教師知識轉移行為；（三）教師社會資本對學校知識治理對教師知識分享具有中介效果；（四）教師社會資本對學校知識治理對教師知識轉移具有中介效果。本研究之貢獻在於同時探究教師社會資本對學校知識治理、教師知識分享和教師知識轉移之中介效果，預期對學校知識治理建構一完整的實證模型架構；在研究方法上，應用跨層次潛在變項分析技術衡量各層次變項間相互關係。最後，在研究結果上，可以作為有關學校知識治理、教師增進知識分享及知識轉移行為的實務工作參考。英文摘要：This study advances the research on teachers' knowledge-sharing and knowledge-transfer by looking at social capital as a mediator of school knowledge-governance. A survey will be conducted using a sample of junior high school teachers in Taiwan. The data will be collected from selected raters via stratified random sampling. The questionnaire has 2 sections: the first half comprises antecedent-related items (school knowledge governance) and mediator variables (teachers' social capital); the second half comprises outcome variable-related items (knowledge sharing and knowledge transfer among teachers). To analyze the data thoroughly, we examined the validity of the measurements for school knowledge governance, teachers' social capital, knowledge-sharing among teachers, and knowledge-transfer among teachers via confirmatory factor analysis. School knowledge governance within organizational contexts had a cross-level effect at the individual level on knowledge-sharing and knowledge-transfer among teachers. To further understand this, we adopted multilevel mediation analysis to examine the relationship between and among variables as well as the mediating effect of teachers' social capital. The conclusions of this study are as follows: (1) School knowledge-governance positively affects knowledge-sharing among teachers. (2) School knowledge-governance positively affects knowledge-transfer among teachers. (3) Teachers' social capital has a mediating effect on school knowledge-governance and knowledge-sharing among teachers. (4) Teachers' social capital has a mediating effect on school knowledge-governance and knowledge-transfer among teachers. The contributions of this study include the further exploration of the mediating effects exerted by teachers' social capital on knowledge-sharing and knowledge-transfer among teachers; the study provides a comprehensive empirical model of school knowledge-governance. Methodologically, hierarchical linear models have been applied to analyze the relationship between and among variables across various levels.起始頁-結束頁：31-65資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202009_16(3).00026篇名：影響大學生對代間服務老人意願之結構性因素探究：社會生態學模式之應用並列篇名：Structural Factors Affecting College Students' Willingness to Intergenerational Serve the Elderly: Applications of a Social-Ecological Model作者：陳雪芬(Shueh-Fen Chen)關鍵字：代間服務;社會生態學模式;服務老人意願;世代融合;Intergenerational service;Social Ecological model;willingness to serve the elderly;intergenerational fusion期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究為應用社會生態學模式（Social Ecological Model, SEM）來分析大學生代間服務老人意願之影響因素，並以結構方程模式來探討影響因素間之關係。問卷調查對象為臺灣北部地區某技術學院初次參與代間服務課程之大學生，共回收有效問卷274份進行研究分析。研究結果顯示：1.社會生態學模式可以有效的預測大學生代間服務老人意願，整體模式之解釋力為66.1%；2.個人因素是影響服務老人意願的最主要因素，其次為人際因素；3.社會環境因素則可透過個人因素、人際因素之中介作用而間接影響服務老人意願。根據上述結果建議未來在大學生代間服務學習課程之設計規劃時，可先加強學生個人的服務技能、學習機會及價值認同，並增強來自人際中同學、朋友及老師對服務老人之正向肯定與鼓勵，同時學校、社區及老人機構也需提供適切的接觸學習，以使大學代間服務學習課程能有效促進世代融合。英文摘要：This study applied a Social Ecological Model to analyze the factors influencing college students' willingness to engage in intergenerational interactions in their serving of the elderly. The structural-equation model was further used to determine the relationships among factors. The questionnaire was given to college students at a technological institute in northern Taiwan who had participated in intergenerational service courses. 274 valid questionnaires were collected for analysis. The results revealed three significant findings: first, the social-ecology model could effectively predict the willingness of college students to serve the elderly, with 66.1% of the explanatory power of the overall model; second, personal factors were the clearest factors affecting these students' willingness to serve the elderly, followed by interpersonal factors; third, social-environmental factors could indirectly influence the students’ willingness to serve the elderly through the mediation between personal and interpersonal factors. The above-mentioned results suggested that strengthening students' personal service skills, learning opportunities and willingness to serve the elderly should be prioritized when designing an inter-generational service learning course. Furthermore, positive feedback and the encouragement of elderly care service should be frequently provided by classmates, friends and teachers. Moreover, school authorities, the community, and institutions for the elderly should be encouraged to employ the appropriate contact learning methods, so that a university-level intergenerational service learning program can effectively promote intergenerational fusion.起始頁-結束頁：67-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202009_16(3).00037篇名：Exploring High-School Readiness for Change in Taiwan from a Lens of Policy Design並列篇名：從政策設計視窗探究臺灣學校之變革準備度作者：陳佩英(Peiying Chen);楊巧玲(Chiao-Ling Yang);洪詠善(Yung-Shan Hung);洪雯柔(Wen-Jou Hung);陳美如(Mei-Ju Chen)關鍵字：schools' readiness for change;policy design;policy tools;學校變革準備度;政策設計;政策工具期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Since 2007, Taiwan's Ministry of Education has been using the School Actualization Program (SAP), a government-funded grant program, to promote systemic change at the high-school level. This study explores the relationship between the SAP's policy design and resulting implementation of tools during the school-improvement process. The aim of the program's tools was to promote, at the school level, the expected behavioral changes in targeted groups. Specifically, one of the expected behavioral outcomes of the SAP's policy design was the promotion of school readiness for change, which could help schools to develop their adaptability in the face of constantly changing circumstances. Six high schools were chosen for this multi-case study, in order to accommodate a diversity of school profiles and various lengths of engagement in a six- to ten-year improvement process. The data came mainly from interviews with school members. Relevant documents relating to school performance, program policy, and government regulations were also included in order to improve our understanding of the school improvement process. The research findings show that shared vision, collaborative capacity-building, and a proactive school climate were essential to the school improvement process, and to schools' adaptability to change.英文摘要：教育部於2007年起以經費補助的高中優質化輔助方案促進高中階段的系統變革。本研究旨在探討該方案的政策設計和政策工具的相互開展如何影響學校改進的過程。方案的政策工具包含引發學校變革標的群體之預期行為改變，學校變革的準備度與政府期待學校提升組織調適力以回應持續改變的大環境之政策目標息息相關。本研究採取立意取樣，選擇六所參與學校高中優質化輔助方案6至10年不等經驗的高中進行多重個案分析；資料搜集方法主要為學校成員的訪談，輔以相關學校檔案、政策方案資料、政府相關規範等文件分析以理解學校的改進歷程。本研究發現以描述、分析、與詮釋政策設計所創發的政策工具與學校變革準備度之關係，跨個案研究讓我們看見學校建構共享願景、協作動能、與激勵改變的學校組織氛圍是學校改進與組織準備度發揮有效變革的要素。起始頁-結束頁：93-127資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202009_16(3).00048篇名：臺灣師資培育公費制度（乙案）之利害關係人取向政策評估並列篇名：A Stakeholder-Oriented Policy Evaluation of the Government-Funded System for Teacher Preparation (Program B) in Taiwan作者：湯家偉(Chia-Wei Tang);王俐淳(Li-Chun Wang)關鍵字：師資公費生;中等學校師資培育;利害關係人取向政策評估;回應性評估;state-financed students;secondary school teachers' education;stakeholder-oriented policy evaluations;responsive evaluations期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：我國師資公費生培育的管道以甲、乙、丙三種方案為主。學者指出乙案制度的作業流程較複雜且涉及的對象最為廣泛，於執行的過程中更容易產生衝突與爭議；且目前相關研究仍較缺乏。因此，本研究以Dunn提出的六項政策評估標準為基礎，採文獻分析及深度訪談61位利害關係人的方式，以探究乙案公費生制度執行的現況及所面臨的問題。研究結果發現，各師培中心在落實乙案公費生制度之具體作法頗有差異；在評估結果的部分，利害關係人一致認為在「回應性」、「公平性」方面仍有改善空間；而在「效能性」、「效率性」、「充分性」、「適當性」方面則有意見分歧的現象。綜言之，目前該制度亟待改善之問題有：（1）部分師培單位制度設計中仍存在模糊與不確定性，易造成利害關係人產生不公平的主觀感受；（2）當前部分師培單位制度的設定強調「績優」、「卓越」的邏輯，但較忽略「回應性」之考量；（3）部分縣市用人學校端以及地方政府在制度實際執行過程中的參與不足；（4）需有其他配套措施方能確實達成制度目標等。最後，本研究提出對應之建議供未來制度修訂之參考。英文摘要：The Government-Funded System for Teacher Preparation consists of three programs (A, B, C). While the procedures and stakeholders of and for program B are more complex, leading to more conflicts and debates regarding the system, not so much research has been conducted concerning program B. In response, through a literature review and 61 in-depth interviews, this study explores the problems regarding the implementation of this system. The results show that policy stakeholders generally believe there is still room for improvement regarding the equity and responsiveness of this system. However, different stakeholders' opinions may contradict one another in terms of the effectiveness, adequacy, and efficiency of the system. The issues which need the most immediate attention are these: (1) there is still some uncertainty with regard to some of the related regulations; (2) at the institutional level, some schools' regulations reflect both the ideal of academic excellence and a lack of concern about responsiveness; (3) there should be more involvement by junior high and high schools as well as by local governments' involvements; (4) there is still a lack of supplementary measures. More suggestions are needed with regard to how to further refine the system in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202006_16(2).00019篇名：批判教育學視角下實習教師的實習困境與因應策略並列篇名：A Critical Pedagogy Perspective on Preservice Teachers' Central Concerns and Coping Strategies during Internship作者：楊琬琳(Wan-Lin Yang);鍾宜君(Yi-Jin Chung)關鍵字：實習教師;實習困境;因應策略;批判教育學;preservice teacher;central concerns;coping strategies;Critical Pedagogy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以批判教育學為研究理論架構，並透過質性研究之個案研究以了解實習教師的實習情境脈絡、實習困境、因應策略及這三者間的相互關係。研究對象為六位一般公立大學中等師資培育機構畢業之實習老師，透過半結構式訪談、省思札記、教學資料的蒐集後進行深入的跨個案分析。歸納出六位受訪者知覺到以下現象：（1）實習教師置身在具有科層制度、位階文化的實習場域中，權力不對等；（2）實習教師面臨角色定位模糊、缺乏實權；（3）師徒制隨機分派加上彼此對於教育改革思潮的不同步衍生師徒之間教學理念不合；（4）實習場域中蘊含的「潛在課程」使學校成為階級再製的場域；（5）實習教師在不對等的權力結構壓迫中傾向以保守的方式順應政策，但順應背後也呈現被宰制下的反霸權意識。透過六位實習教師的視角，本研究之發現期望能從批判教育學角度，提供實習機構、師資培育單位及教育當局在調整師資培育制度與培訓課程規劃上之參考。英文摘要：Using Critical Pedagogy as a theoretical framework, this multiple case study aims at exploring secondary preservice teachers' central concerns and coping strategies, their larger contexts, and how these are interrelated during internship. Six preservice teachers who graduated from the same teacher education program in southern Taiwan were recruited for this study. The data was collected through semi-structured interviews, preservice teachers' reflection notes, and other documents. The data was then analyzed for each individual case, and a thematic cross-case analysis was done. The findings suggest that: (1) preservice teachers were situated in contexts with a hierarchical structure and unequal power relationships; (2) the ambiguity of roles, lack of autonomy and ”ownership” of a class were the major frustrations experienced by preservice teachers during internship; (3) the randomly-assigned mentorship roles and divergent attitudes toward educational reform led to conflicts and tensions between and among mentors and mentees; (4) the ”hidden curriculum” embedded within internship resulted in reproducing hegemony in the schools; (5) the oppressed preservice teachers tended to adopt passive coping strategies in order to comply with the policies, but their actions also reflected their attempts to dismantle hegemonic power. Their determination to become teachers wavered when they experienced frustrations during internship. Related recommendations for teacher education programs are also provided.起始頁-結束頁：31-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202006_16(2).000210篇名：高中歷史教科書爭議議題教學的挑戰：教師的課程覺知與教學詮釋並列篇名：The Challenge of Teaching High School History Textbooks Concerned with Controversial Historical Issues: Teachers' Awareness and Interpretation of the Curriculum作者：詹美華(Mei-Hua Chan)關鍵字：爭議歷史議題;高中歷史教科書;歷史教學;歷史教師;controversial historical issue;high school history textbook;history teaching;history teacher期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：當今學校的歷史課程與教學，越來越需要正視學生的多元差異，及其帶來不同觀點的歷史認知和解釋，以及處理一些源於過去卻持續到現代的爭辯衝突。如何幫助學生認識歷史的性質，並能帶著更具歷史觀點的批判思考力，來積極參與民主社會的發展，讓歷史爭議議題教學成為值得探討的課題。本研究以9個高中歷史教科書爭議議題，採半結構方式深度訪談13位高中歷史教師，探討教師眼中什麼是歷史爭議議題？引起爭議的可能原因是什麼？議題的爭議焦點有哪些？教師的教學態度和立場是什麼？採用什麼教學方法及對成效的評估為何？研究結果顯示：歷史教科書議題的爭議敏感與臺灣的政治氣候、國際處境息息相關；歷史教科書爭議議題具當代史特性、反映歷史之變、潛藏對立的論述思維和價值觀；多數教師的教學態度與立場，盡量迴避政治認同的議題和不表達敏感的立場；爭議議題教學成效受制於考試要求標準答案的限制。整體而言，教師對歷史爭議議題的認知，受到當前社會政治困境、教科書書寫和教師信念的多重因素影響，而教師的歷史爭議議題教學，是專業知識、情境感知和教師身分認同的交互作用。英文摘要：In today's schools, it is very important that the History curriculum and the teaching of History are suitable for the students, given their heterogeneity when it comes to their level of interest in and understanding of history, and given the fact that historical issues keep emerging into our present-day society in various ways. How can we best help students to understand the nature of history, and to participate in our democratic society while exercising their critical historical thinking, where the latter makes controversial historical issues worth exploring. Based on interviews with thirteen high school history teachers, in which nine controversial issues that can be found in high school history textbooks were discussed, this study explores the following questions: What are the most important historical controversies from the teachers' point of view? What are the possible causes and the central foci of these controversies? What are the teachers' attitudes and positions regarding them? What teaching methods may be most effectively employed in this context? In fact, it becomes clear that the controversies that we find in history textbooks are closely related to Taiwan's own political atmosphere and her own relationship to the current international situation. In terms of their attitudes and positions, most History teachers may attempt to avoid the issues of ”political identity”, especially insofar as this may set within historical context. On the whole, teachers' perceptions of controversial historical issues are influenced by multiple factors including current sociopolitical dilemmas, the need for textbook writing and the general framework of teachers' beliefs. Thus the teaching of controversial historical issues involves the interaction of professional knowledge, situational awareness and the teacher's sense of self-identity.起始頁-結束頁：63-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202006_16(2).000301篇名：科系認同對管理學院大學生創業意圖的調節作用並列篇名：Entrepreneurial Intentions of Management Students: Moderating Effects of Department Identification作者：王淑美(Shu-Mei Wang);岳修平(Hsiu-Ping Yueh);黃昱凱(Yu-Kai Huang);康維真(Wei-Chen Kang)關鍵字：計畫行為理論;科系認同;創業意圖;管理教育;theory of planned behavior;department identification;entrepreneurial intentions;management education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以計畫行為理論為研究架構，並以科系認同作為調節變項，探索管理學院科系認同對管理學院大學生創業意圖形成的機制中所擔任的角色。研究結果發現科系認同較高的群組，其創業意圖受到創業態度與創業自我效能之影響，而科系認同較低的群組，其創業意圖則會受到創業態度與創業環境支持所影響。至於科系認同在創業自我效能對創業意圖的影響關係中會有調節效果，進一步分析發現科系認同高低的兩個群組分別形成兩套不同的運作機制。此外，在比較科系間的差異後，發現工商管理學系學生的創業意圖顯著高於其他科系的學生，但科系認同卻顯著較低。經檢視系所核心能力與課程配置後發現，系所核心能力培養目標的差異可能是影響學生科系認同、創業自我效能與創業意圖的背後因素，但這是否就是科系認同對創業意圖造成調節效果的原因，則需後續更多研究投入。英文摘要：This study employed theory of planned behavior as the research framework and utilized department identification as a modulating variable to explore the role of department identity in the formation of college students' entrepreneurial intentions. After a comparative analysis of the models, the entrepreneurial intent of the higher-level department identification group was found to be affected by attitude and self-efficacy, whereas the lower-level department identification group was affected by attitude and social support. Students with different levels of department identification adopted different mechanisms to develop their entrepreneurial intentions. This finding was conducive to the improvement of entrepreneurship education in management schools. A further comparison between departments revealed that the entrepreneurship intentions of students from the business administration department were significantly higher than those of students in other departments; however, department identification was significantly lower than that of other departments. The results show that the differences in the core competence of the department may be the background factors that affect students' department identification, entrepreneurial efficacy and entrepreneurial intention. However, whether departmental core competence is the reason why department identification has a moderating effect on entrepreneurial intentions warrants further research.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202012_65(4).00012篇名：以教育大數據分析驅動入學管理機制開設新生銜接課程提升就學穩定度之研究並列篇名：Improving Retention Rate Through Educational Data Mining: The Design of Placement Program for Newly Enrolled Students作者：胡詠翔(Yung-Hsiang Hu);俞慧芸(Hui-Yun Yu)關鍵字：入學管理機制;教育大數據分析;就學穩定度;銜接課程;enrollment management;educational data mining;retention rate;pathway courses期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：不該只看註冊率，在少子女化衝擊下，維持學生入學後的就學穩定度是學校永續經營須重視的關鍵；尤其，新生必須面對與《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要》和高中學習經驗截然不同的院系本位課程與教材內容，大學端該如何提高大一學習經驗，找出影響新生改變學習旅程規劃的關鍵學科，透過入學管理機制開設銜接課程，以維持就學穩定度，成為未來高等教育的重要命題。近年，有大學嘗試自辦暑期銜接課程以解決問題。本研究首先分析個案學校104至106學年某學院2,135位新生，計22,750筆教育大數據資料，透過決策樹分析找出影響新鮮人休學、退學或轉系之關鍵的大一上學期課程，再辦理暑期小規模非公開遠距課程（含補救教學與讀書會），追蹤效果進行機制評估。結果發現：一、物理（I）與微積分（I）這兩門院必修是關鍵課程，且兩門皆不及格學生的休學、退學或轉系機率是原母體的5.5倍；二、未觀看銜接課程教材者開學後的關鍵課程及格率介於50%∼63%間，遠低於其他落在83%∼94%，且又以微積分的銜接課程具統計上顯著提升學習準備度效果；三、線上補救教學有助於物理（I）的學業表現，讀書會則有助於微積分（I）的學業表現；四、個案學院就學穩定度較前一年提升48.07%。最後，本研究提出具體建議供後續研究與規劃課程參考。英文摘要：Retention rate is a key indicator of university governance. However, identifying key courses that influence first-year students' termination of learning and improve their performance during the first semester is critical. In recent years, offering pathway courses during the summer semester has become a common practice for universities. Therefore, this institutional research employed educational data mining analysis and pathway courses to improve retention rate and student success. The data analyses comprised classification and regression trees, the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, k-means clustering, and descriptive statistics. This study first analyzed 22,750 educational big data points from 2,135 freshmen in the sample college from the academic year of 2015 to 2017. Subsequently, decision tree analysis was employed to identify key courses that predicted student suspension, dropping out, or transfer. Thereafter, two pathway courses and remedial teaching were offered to freshmen in the summer to learn online. Finally, this study tracked the success of freshmen and evaluated the effects of the two pathway courses. The major findings suggested the following: (1) Physics (I) and Calculus (I) are key courses, and students who failed both courses were 5.5 times more likely to suspend their studies, drop out, or transfer than was the total student population; (2) The pass rate of formal courses for students who had not watched the audiovisual course was between 50% and 63%, much lower than the total student population rate of 83% to 94%, and only the Calculus (I) gateway course could improve learning readiness; (3) Online supplementary teaching was found to promote the academic performance of freshmen in Physics (I); however, no significant differences were observed in Calculus (I). Moreover, the study group improved students' academic performance in Calculus (I); however, no significant differences were observed in Physics (I); (4) Compared with the previous year, the retention rate of the sample college increased by 48.07%. Finally, the researchers proposed suggestions for the gateway course's follow-up application. To conclude, this study may be of importance in explaining the effectiveness of gateway courses, in addition to providing university authorities with a better understanding of how retention rate can be improved through educational data mining and institutional research.起始頁-結束頁：31-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202012_65(4).00023篇名：攻讀跨國雙聯博士學制之國際移動體驗與意涵：以比利時臺灣雙聯博士學位學生為例並列篇名：Multidimensional Meanings of Studying Abroad: International Mobility Experiences of Taiwanese Joint Dual Doctoral Program Students in Belgium作者：林顯明(Hsien-Ming Lin);宋宥賢(Yu-Hsien Sung);王俐淳(Li-Chun Wang)關鍵字：比利時;博士培育;臺灣高等教育;學生國際移動;雙聯博士學位;Belgium;doctoral training;Taiwanese higher education;international student mobility;joint dual doctoral program期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：推動雙聯博士學制是近年來臺灣高等教育機構推動國際化及提升博士班招生吸引力的重要策略。然而，關於臺灣學生赴海外攻讀雙聯博士學位之相關研究則尚未可見。對此，本研究藉由質性研究途徑之自我民族誌和半結構式訪談法，探究學生赴海外攻讀雙聯博士學位之國際移動體驗與意涵，共七位參與臺灣和比利時雙聯博士學制計畫（跨機構聯合雙學位）的學生及教授參與本研究。本研究發現，這些學生原有赴海外攻讀博士學位的規劃，而時間、經費等成本效益計算，以及創造在學術環境中的差異性與獨特性等考量，皆是促使其參與雙聯博士學制之重要因素。而在赴海外學習的過程中，跨文化溝通、兩國培育機制、東西方文化與教授指導方式之差異等，都對學生產生學習和適應上的挑戰，然其在過程中亦發展出調適策略，並逐漸找到自身價值、學術定位與認同感。但由於相關規定對海外修業時間的限制，使得這些學生在參與當地社會及拓展當地人際關係網絡產生侷限；此外，社會對此學制的理解有限與誤解，亦可能負向影響雙聯博士學位畢業生在學術就業職場上的移動能力，以及未來學生參與此學制之意願。就此，本研究亦提出相關實務與研究建議，以促進未來雙聯博士學制之推動。英文摘要：Promoting dual doctoral degree programs is a critical strategy adopted to not only internationalize Taiwan's higher education system but also improve the low enrollment rates in doctoral programs in the country. However, limited research attention has been paid to the experiences of Taiwanese students enrolled in dual degree programs. Therefore, the present study adopted a qualitative approach to explore the experiences of Taiwanese students enrolled in a Taiwanese-Belgian joint dual doctoral program. A total of seven Taiwanese students and Belgian scholars participated in this study. The findings indicated that all student informants intended to study abroad before deciding to participate in the joint dual doctoral program; however, due to time and money restrictions, they participated in the joint dual doctoral programs established by their home universities in Taiwan. This study highlighted that students were motivated to participate in international, cooperative doctoral programs because obtaining dual learning experiences at both domestic and overseas universities differentiated them from purely domestic doctoral students. In this manner, the experience of studying abroad enhances their unique value in the academic market. While studying abroad, intercultural communication, in addition to differences in doctoral training schemes and supervision styles, were vital challenges that affected student informants' learning experiences and adaptation to life. During this process, the students constructed their adaptation and negotiation strategies to address those challenges. These strategies made them (re)define and (re)confirm their academic positions and identities. However, the limited period for studying abroad reduced students' motivation to participate and engage in local activities and establish social networks with local residents and friends in the host society. Moreover, the public and academic colleagues' limited understanding of the joint dual doctoral program may not only negatively affect students' academic mobility in terms of obtaining positions in the academic market but also influence prospective students' willingness to participate in such programs. Moreover, this study provides constructive suggestions for the development of joint dual doctoral programs on the basis of students' own practical experiences. Finally, the study's limitations and suggestions for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：65-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202012_65(4).00034篇名：建立高等教育「教與學的學術」文化：借鏡國際經驗展望臺灣教學實踐研究的推動並列篇名：Establishment of Scholarship of Teaching and Learning Culture in Higher Education: Using International Experience to Examine the Promotion and Development of Taiwan's Teaching Practice Research作者：符碧真(Bih-Jen Fwu);李紋霞(Jennifer Wen-Shya Lee)關鍵字：SoTL發展分析架構;教與學的學術;教學實踐研究;教育研究;微觀－中觀－宏觀－巨觀四層級架構;contextual framework for SoTL;scholarship of teaching and learning;teaching practice research;educational research;micro-meso-macro-mega framework期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：自從1990年Boyer大聲疾呼教學的學術起，北美推展「教與學的學術」（Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, SoTL）迄今剛好滿30年。相對而言，臺灣推動教學實踐研究才剛起步，他山之石對我國發展SoTL校園文化頗具參考價值。本研究探討三個問題：一、SoTL的本質為何？二、SoTL有哪些相關的論辯？三、我國SoTL的推動與發展情形如何？文獻綜合指出，SoTL的本質是教師從教學實務中找到問題意識，系統性地蒐集課程教學改進的資料，經學術社群嚴格檢驗後，公開發表研究結果的探究活動。在推動SoTL過程中，產生了SoTL的目的、SoTL在教師升等機制中的定位、SoTL與教育研究的差別等論辯。本研究提出一個SoTL校園發展狀況整合性分析框架，並對三所大學進行實徵研究。研究結果發現，各校園大部分的SoTL文化發展處於教師微觀文化剛萌芽、機構支持建置成熟的階段，且在微觀－中觀－宏觀－巨觀等四層級的推動上有共通之處。最後針對發展SoTL校園文化、推動教學實踐研究計畫等核心議題提出評析與建議。英文摘要：Since Boyer's original call to recognize the scholarship of teaching, the scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) movement has been popular in North American higher education for the last 30 years. Taiwan's promotion of research on teaching and learning practice is in its infancy. The lessons learned from North America are critical for the development of SoTL culture on university campuses in Taiwan. This article explored three questions: (1) What is the nature of SoTL? (2) What are the major issues in the development of SoTL? (3) How can SoTL be promoted and developed in Taiwan's higher education? SoTL refers to systematic inquiry activities such as identifying problems in teaching practices, collecting data to evaluate the results of teaching interventions, and publishing the results after peer review. The process of establishing SoTL has attracted several heated debates concerning aspects such as the purpose of SoTL research, the positioning of SoTL in faculty reward mechanisms such as tenure extension and promotion, and the differences between SoTL research and educational research. To investigate the current development of SoTL in Taiwan, this paper first proposed an integrated framework for analyzing the SoTL campus culture, after which an empirical study was conducted at three Taiwanese universities. The results indicated that the development of SoTL culture in the sample university campuses is at the stage of emerging microcultures with well-established institutional support. Moreover, the three universities shared some commonalities in the promotion of SoTL culture at the micro, meso, macro, and mega levels. On the basis of the empirical findings, the paper comments on the current development of SoTL and offers suggestions for further promotion of teaching practice research projects in Taiwan's higher education.起始頁-結束頁：105-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202012_65(4).00045篇名：人格特質、過度自信預測學術拖延行為、尋求指導頻率與修業學期數之研究並列篇名：Personalities and Overconfidence Predict Academic Procrastination and Frequency of Seeking Research Advice that Influence Graduate Study作者：何雅娟(Ya-Jiuan Ho);葉建宏(Jian-Hong Ye);王志美(Chih-Mei Wang);葉貞妮(Jhen-Ni Ye)關鍵字：人格特質;修業學期數;尋求指導頻率;過度自信;學術拖延行為;personality;study duration;frequency of seeking research advice;overconfidence;academic procrastination期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究所學生延遲畢業，不僅有教育、經濟、社會發展等問題，也會影響個人身心發展。目前從個人層面探討影響延遲畢業的因素尚未有太多研究關注，因而本研究將就人格特質、過度自信預測學術拖延行為、尋求指導頻率與修業學期數之關係進行分析。本研究邀請碩士畢業生填寫問卷，共蒐集236份有效數據，經由信度與效度檢驗後，再進行驗證性因素分析及結構方程模式做假設驗證。研究結果顯示：一、外向型人格特質與過度自信及學術拖延行為具正相關；二、神經質型人格特質與過度自信及學術拖延行為具負相關；三、過度自信及學術拖延行為與尋求指導頻率具負相關；四、尋求指導頻率與修業學期數具負相關。依據本研究結果建議指導教授在進行論文指導時，應考慮到不同人格特質學生之特性，給予適度的輔導，以降低學術拖延的情形。同時亦應提升論文指導會議或面談的頻率，以幫助學習者可以在較短的修業時間內取得學位。英文摘要：Delayed graduation among graduate students constitutes an educational issue that influences individual career development; however, the severity of this issue has increased over time. To understand the effect of delayed graduation from the student perspective, this study adopted the theory of belief-action-outcome to examine the correlations among personalities, overconfidence, academic procrastination, and frequency of seeking advice-all of which influence graduate students' study duration. Therefore, this study adopted convenience sampling to administer questionnaires, to which 236 valid responses were collected. After the reliability and validity test, confirmatory factor analysis with structural equation modeling was performed. The results suggested that extraversion is positively related to overconfidence and academic procrastination, neuroticism is negatively related to overconfidence and academic procrastination, overconfidence and procrastination are negatively related to the frequency of seeking research advice, and the frequency of advice seeking was negatively related to study duration. According to this study, professors guiding graduate students with their thesis should consider their different personalities and offer more frequent seminars for counseling.起始頁-結束頁：139-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202012_65(4).00056篇名：國內大學學習預警資訊系統研究：發展現況與侷限並列篇名：Students' Early Alert Systems in Taiwanese Universities: A Study of Current Uses and Restrictions作者：謝佩珊(Pei-Shan Hsieh);石美倫(Meilun Shih)關鍵字：高危險群學生;學習預警;學習預警資訊系統;學習輔導;at-risk student group;academic alert;early alert system;intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：學生學習預警資訊系統被認為是評量學生學習成效、預測學習困擾、輔導高危險群學生的有力機制，尤其近年來新興資訊技術的進步，使學習預警資訊系統在規模和作法上都有所突破。國內各大學發展學習預警資訊系統已超過10年，普及率也相當高，但是相較於國外既有的深入性和檢討性研究，目前針對國內現有學習預警機制與系統運作的著述仍然頗為零散，而該系統在功能上的敏感性及資料上的隱密性，也讓各校之間缺乏相關資訊交流。因此，本研究主要透過文獻探討、訪察和訪談等方法，針對國內目前56所公私立一般大學學習預警資訊系統的現行運作情況進行概括性調查。研究發現，目前各校多已建立了學期間、即時和特殊預警等不同機制，系統使用率在許多大學也都達到半數課程以上，但在實際使用上常面臨教師反彈和後續追蹤不易等問題。建議未來各校應以加強跨單位合作、提升系統使用成效評估，以及提供更多元的預警指標為方向，進一步落實學習預警資訊系統之功能及使用效益。英文摘要：The development of students' early alert systems (EAS), or students' learning alarm systems, has long been discussed by administrators and researchers in higher education. They are considered a powerful mechanism for evaluating students' learning effectiveness, predicting potential learning difficulties, and identifying academically at-risk students. The rapid growth of information technology has made the EAS advanced in scale and practice. However, although most universities in Taiwan have established similar preventive systems or mechanisms, few studies have focused on exploring actual uses of and possible restrictions on existing EAS. Therefore, the main purpose of this study was to outline the current situation of EAS in Taiwanese universities. We explored the following questions: (1) What types of EAS have been established in universities in Taiwan? (2) What are the main functions and mechanisms of the current EAS? (3) What are the actual uses of EAS in universities? (4) What are the possible restrictions on and solutions for using EAS? Data were gathered from 56 public and private universities in Taiwan. Experts familiar with or in charge of EAS design, development, and use in these universities were interviewed by telephone or face-to-face. We found that although the utility rate of EAS in most universities tended to be high, faculty resistance and difficulty in follow-up assessments on EAS utilization were the two common restrictions that occurred across campuses. To enhance the use effectiveness of EAS, faculty and administrators from both departmental and institutional levels should be involved. In addition, this study suggested that in the future, universities must attempt to strengthen collaboration among units related to EAS, improve the evaluation of EAS effectiveness, and provide additional early alert indicators of students' academic performance.起始頁-結束頁：171-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202012_65(4).00067篇名：技術型高中工業類科學生科學素養內涵之建構並列篇名：Development of Scientific Literacy Indicators for Students in the Industrial Sector of Vocational Senior High Schools作者：許綺婷(Chi-Ting Hsu);譚克平(Hak-Ping Tam)關鍵字：工業類科;技術型高中;科學素養;德菲調查法;industrial sector;vocational senior high school;scientific literacy;Delphi survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：科學素養研究歷時已久，惟缺針對技術型高中學生所需科學素養之相關探討。有鑑於此，本研究之目的為發展技術型高中工業類科學生科學素養的向度與指標。透過文獻探討與專家諮詢，初步提出適合技術型高中工業類科學生的科學素養內涵架構，再透過兩回合的德菲（Delphi）調查法，徵詢28位學者及41位技術型高中教師對該架構的意見。經統計分析德菲調查的結果，再配合專家會議後達成共識，修正並確立該技術型高中工業類科學生的科學素養架構。此架構共有五個向度，包括具備基本的科學知識、運用基本科學探究與溝通的能力以解決問題、運用科學思考的能力於日常生活中、應用科學知識與方法於所在職域中、具備對科學的適當態度與行為意向。文末基於研究結果提出了關於技術型高中課程內容設計的建議。英文摘要：Scientific literacy has been a topic of research for several decades. However, very few studies have directly focused on clarifying the content of scientific literacy for students in vocational senior high schools. To fill this research gap, in this study, a comprehensive set of scientific literacy indicators was developed for students from the industrial sector of vocational senior high schools in Taiwan. This objective was achieved through an extensive literature review and consultation with science educators who are experts of scientific literacy. Subsequently, the study presented a tentative framework suitable for students in the industrial sector. Comments on the appropriateness of the framework were collected from 28 scholars and 41 vocational high school teachers through two rounds of Delphi survey. Subsequently, statistics were compiled, and the framework was finalized through two rounds of consensus meetings with experts familiar with science education and vocational education. The following five dimensions were identified: possessing basic scientific knowledge, engaging in basic scientific inquiry and communicating in order to solve problems, applying scientific thinking to solve problems encountered in daily life, applying scientific knowledge and methods at the workplace, as well as holding an appropriate attitude and behavioral disposition towards sciences. On the basis of our findings, several suggestions concerning the development of suitable curricula for students in the industrial sector of vocational senior high schools are presented.起始頁-結束頁：203-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202012_65(4).00078篇名：技職教師生涯素養量表之編製並列篇名：Development of a Career Competencies Scale for Technological and Vocational Teachers作者：吳淑禎(Shu-Chen Wu)關鍵字：生涯素養;技職教育;教師生涯素養量表;career competency;technological and vocational education;Career Competencies Scale for teachers期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究目的在發展技職教師生涯素養量表，期望提供教師一個生（職）涯服務表現的自我檢視工具。本研究參考生涯素養相關理論及測量文獻並輔以質性訪談，建立量表編製架構與題目編寫依據。在預試階段，以315位教師為對象，經項目分析與探索性因素分析，確立正式量表，共包含九個因素：「協助自我瞭解」、「指導科系出路」、「引導目標選擇」、「提供就業資訊」、「實施職能培育」、「進行親師溝通」、「連結資源運用」、「關心學生生涯」及「教師專業成長」，計有44題，量表以五點量表方式填答，分數愈高表示該向度的生涯素養表現愈佳。正式施測以北、中、南、東及離島四區進行分層叢集抽樣，以1,098位教師為對象，進行經驗證性因素分析，結果指出量表具有良好的模式適配，信度與效度良好。另外，量表與自我效能及教師認同兩個效標具有顯著正相關，代表三者關係密切。背景變項的分析顯示，技職教師的生涯素養表現，因學校屬性、學校區域、學校類型、年資及年齡的不同而有顯著差異。研究者歸納研究結論，並提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to develop a Career Competencies Scale (CCS) for technological and vocational teachers to facilitate their career education and guidance. The pilot questionnaire was administered to a sample of 315 technological and vocational teachers from different schools who volunteered to participate in our study. Each statement was rated on a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from ”strongly disagree” to ”strongly agree,” and the higher the score, the greater the participant's career competency performance. After an item analysis and exploratory factor analysis, a total of 44 items were retained and distributed into nine categories as follows: ”improve students' self-understanding,” ”understand occupation outcomes by major,” ”goal setting and decision making,” ”provide job information,” ”skill training,” ”teacher-parent communication,” ”make use of networking resources,” ”pay attention to students' career planning,” and ”teacher's professional growth.” In the formal-test stage, 1,098 technological and vocational teachers were recruited to determine the scale's reliability and validity. The results of confirmatory factor analysis indicated the construct validity of the CCS. This study also found that all factors of the CCS were significantly and positively correlated with two criteria, namely ”career self-efficacy” and ”teacher identity,” revealing favorable criterion-related validity. In the demographic background analysis, significant differences were revealed in schools' attributes, locations, and types as well as in vocational teachers' teaching fields, length of service, and age. On the basis of these results, conclusions and suggestions for future research and practical applications were provided.起始頁-結束頁：241-273資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202012_65(4).00089篇名：「記憶－抑制控制」活動融入語文教學對幼兒在執行功能與口語理解表現的效果研究並列篇名：Effects of Memory-Inhibitory Control Activity with Embedded Repeated Read-aloud Programs on Executive Function and Oral Comprehension Ability of Preschoolers作者：簡馨瑩(Hsin-Ying Chien)關鍵字：工作記憶;口語理解;抑制控制;執行功能;詞彙;working memory;oral comprehension;inhibitory control;executive function;vocabulary期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討「記憶－抑制控制」活動融入語文教學對幼兒執行功能與口語理解能力的影響。本研究採準實驗前後測設計，以臺灣東部某公立國小附幼一班及私立幼兒園55名4.8∼6歲中大班幼兒為研究對象，依參與幼兒的年齡及畢保德圖畫詞彙測驗百分等級分數，平均分配至實驗組與對照組。教學實驗前後，兩組幼兒均接受課程本位詞彙理解測驗、口語理解測驗、幼兒語文工作記憶測驗與抑制控制評量（「頭－肩膀－膝－腳趾」評量作業）等四項測驗。實驗組幼兒接受「記憶－抑制控制」活動融入重複朗讀教學，對照組幼兒則接受重複朗讀方式講述故事。實驗課程每週進行四次，每次30分鐘教學，總共實施九週共36次。研究結果顯示，實驗組的幼兒在屬於執行功能能力的工作記憶能力、抑制控制能力與語文理解的聽覺理解能力有顯著的效果，在課程本位評量的檢驗結果也達良好的教學效果。最後綜合研究結果，提出結論與討論，並對幼兒語文教學及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：Executive function develops rapidly among preschoolers and is critical for early cognitive development. This study investigated the impact of teaching strategies on preschoolers' oral language skills, specifically repeated read-aloud programs with memory-inhibitory activities embedded. This study employed a quasi-experimental pretest-posttest design. Children aged from 4 years 8 months to 6 years participated in the study (N = 55). They were recruited from preschools in Taitung County. A total of 27 children were assigned to one experimental group (executive function group), and the remaining 28 were assigned to the control group. Preservice teachers were recruited and trained to teach both groups. The intervention spanned 9 weeks. Oral language tests (curriculum-based receptive vocabulary and oral comprehension) and executive function tests (verbal working memory and inhibitory control) were administered before and after the intervention. The findings revealed that the experimental group had a significant positive impact on participants' oral language comprehension and executive function abilities compared with the control group. The implications of the study findings are discussed, and potential topics for future research are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：275-304資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202012_65(4).000910篇名：臺灣國民中小學東南亞母語傳承課程與教學困境：支援人員的感知分析並列篇名：Challenges in the Teaching of Native Southeast Asian Languages in Taiwanese Junior High and Elementary Schools: Analysis of Supporting Instructors' Perception作者：楊蕙芬(Hui-Fen Yang);張德永(Te-Yung Chang)關鍵字：母語傳承課程教學支援人員;培訓政策;職業能力;supporting instructors fluent in native languages;training policy;professional skills期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：臺灣於2018年實施的《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要總綱》正式納入新住民語文課程，規劃採由政府培訓、中小學負責聘用的方式，聘請東南亞新住民作為教學支援人員，從事母語教學。本研究以臺灣國民中小學東南亞母語傳承課程教學支援人員職能培訓政策為題，透過質性研究立意取樣方式，採取深度訪談之方法，訪談已有實際教學經驗之教學支援人員7人及參與培訓中之尚未有教學經驗之教學支援人員7人，共計14人，以瞭解支援人員在教學中對於困境的感知分析。提出研究結論為：一、支援人員職能培訓政策的感受困境，在於基本語文能力欠缺與專業能力之不足；二、政策實施感知之困境，在於肯定政策立意良善、缺額缺乏透明化，以及工作保障政策不足；三、教學內容與實施時所面臨的困境在於身分角色無法充分展現班級管理、學校設備與經費資源不足、教師缺少同儕協助與專業成長、學生選課動機影響學習態度等。本研究建議行政機關應確保具備職能培訓前基本語言能力程度、加強職能培訓課程教案設計與電腦創新教學能力、研擬身分法源及相關配套措施、建立公開透明之缺額資源平台，學校應增加課程教室相關教學設備與經費資源的提供，營造一個多元尊重友善對待的校園環境。英文摘要：The new immigrant language curriculum has been officially included in Taiwan's education system following the 12-Year Basic Education Curriculum guidelines enforced in 2018. Accordingly, the government plans to train immigrants from Southeast Asia to teach their mother tongue. The trained immigrants will then be hired by junior high and elementary schools as supporting instructors. This study evaluated the occupational training policy for supporting instructors of Southeast Asian languages in Taiwanese junior high and elementary schools; this study employed a qualitative research design and performed purposive sampling to conduct in-depth interviews with 14 participants (seven supporting instructors experienced in language teaching and seven supporting instructors who were receiving training and had no experience in language teaching). Subsequently, these supporting instructors' perception of challenges in teaching were analyzed. This study concluded that although supporting instructors recognized that the occupational training policy was established with good intentions, their perceived challenges concerning the policy included their deficient basic language ability and professional capacity and the lack of job recruitment transparency and job opportunities. Moreover, the following challenges concerning teaching content and practice were identified: the instructors were not vested with adequate authority for comprehensive classroom management, schools had insufficient facilities and funds, teachers lacked peer support and avenues for professional growth, and students' learning attitude in a course was affected by their motivation to enroll in the course. Accordingly, administrative agencies should emphasize professional training for acquiring basic language abilities, improve the design of instructor training, enhance instructors' ability to innovate their teaching by utilizing computers, establish a legal framework and relevant supplementary measures for consolidating the identity of these immigrants, and construct an open and transparent resource-raising platform. Schools are advised to improve their classroom teaching facilities and increase their financial support to such courses, thereby creating a diverse, respectful, and friendly learning environment.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202009_65(3).000101篇名：人工智慧的實踐：對話式日語學習智慧家教系統進行日語補救教學之研究並列篇名：Artificial Intelligence in Practice: Conversation-Based Intelligent Tutoring System Conducts Research on Japanese Remedial Teaching作者：賈志琳(Chih-Ling Chia);李政軒(Cheng-Hsuan Li)關鍵字：JF Standard日語學習評量指標;知識地圖;智慧家教系統;電腦輔助教學;Computer-Assisted Teaching;ITS;Knowledge Map;JF Standard期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：33卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究的主要目的是為日語學習者建立以對話為主的智慧家教系統CITS-JL，以期提升臺灣學生在日語學習中的學習效果。本研究以JF Standard日語學習標準為基礎，提出了初級日語學習的知識結構地圖，根據此知識地圖，臺灣學生可以按照22個學習場景以及86個設計的學習單元逐步學習日語。在這項研究中，CITS-JL首先診斷學生的錯誤模式，然後導入適當的認知失衡教學策略來設計對應的問題和對話，藉以釐清學生在學習上可能存在的語詞誤用。此外，CITS-JL考慮了學習系統、研究目標、研究現況這3個向度內容，讓智慧家教系統發展出更豐富的層次，也能夠更完整的協助學生學習與老師教學。根據研究結果表示，CITS-JL可以立即釐清學生的語詞誤用、培養自學的習慣、藉由反覆練習以提高學習效率。此外，此系統可以應用於個人化學習，學生可以在教室外隨時隨地學習日語，可以節省更多的時間和金錢。本研究的貢獻，不僅是為日語學習者建立一個學習工具，而且為教師提供了適當的指導方法。英文摘要：The objective of this study is to construct a conversation-based intelligent tutoring system for Japanese learning (CITS-JL), and it is expected to improve students' Japanese learning effects. Based on the Japanese learning standards in the Japanese Foundation Standard, this study proposes a knowledge map for primary Japanese learning; students can learn Japanese step-by-step by following 22 learning scenarios and 86 designed learning units. CITS-JL first diagnosed students' error patterns and then used appropriate cognitive conflict teaching strategies to design corresponding problems and conversations to clarify possible misuse of words in learning. In addition, CITS-JL considers the learning system, research objectives, research status of three orientation content, so that the intelligent tutoring system develop a richer level, but also to more complete to assist students to learn. The results show that CITS-JL can immediately clarify the misuse of students' words, cultivate self-study habits, and improve learning efficiency through repeated exercises. In addition, CITS-JL can be applied to personalized learning. Students can learn Japanese anywhere outside the classroom, saving more time and money. This study contributes to research by building a learning tool for Japanese learners, providing teachers with appropriate guidelines for remedial teaching.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學2篇名：教育、土地、資本、勞動力與失業率對經濟發展影響的跨國研究並列篇名：A Transnational Study on the Contribution of the Education, Land, Physical Capital, Labor, and Unemployment Ratio to Economic Development作者：張芳全(Fang-Chung Chang)關鍵字：人力資本;失業率;高等教育在學率;經濟發展;Economic Development;Higher Education Enrolment Rate;Human Capital;Unemployment Rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：33卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：人力資本、土地資源、資本、勞動力，失業率與經濟發展有密切關係。上述生產因素與失業率，哪一項對經濟發展最重要呢？本研究以2010、2015、2016年各國的土地資源、資本、勞動力、高等教育在學率與失業率對國民生產毛額分析。結論顯示：土地資源、資本、勞動力與高等教育在學率對經濟發展都有正向影響，其中高等教育在學率對經濟發展的貢獻解釋力在29.4%至31.1%，在生產要素中最重要；其他三要素在三個年度不僅重要性都在它之後，且隨著年度推移對經濟發展貢獻僅在2.2%至10.5%。各國在三個年度的失業率對經濟發展具有負向影響，對經濟發展解釋力各為2.2%、2.8%、5.2%。代表各國經濟發展過程，除了生產要素重視，高等教育在學率具有關鍵影響之外，失業率也是不可以忽略因素。針對結論建議各國應持續人力資本投資、降低失業做為國家發展策略。本研究應證人力資本理論，並對各國發展有實務啟發、創新與貢獻。英文摘要：Human capital, land resources, capital, labor, and unemployment rates is closely related to national development. However, among these production factors and the unemployment rate, which is the most important to economic development? The aim of this study was to analyze the contribution of these factors to gross domestic per capita in 2010, 2015, and 2016, respectively. The results were as follows: The land resource, capital, labor, and the higher education enrolment rate have a significant and positive impact on development. Specifically the explanatory power of higher education enrolment rate to development was between 29.4% and 31.1%, which was the most important among the production factors. The other factors were important behind the higher education enrolment rate in the three years, but these factors also significantly contributed to the development between 2.2% and 10.5%. In the three years, the unemployment rate had significantly and negatively affected development, and its explanatory power for the development was 2.2%, 2.8%, and 5.2%, respectively. These meant that in the process of development, besides higher education enrolment rate being the key factor that impacts development, the unemployment rate also played a significant role which cannot be ignored. Thus countries continue investing in human capital, and reducing unemployment are important strategies for development. Human capital theory was proven to have practical inspiration, innovation and contribution beyond the development.起始頁-結束頁：43-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學3篇名：德國職業教育師資培育模式之辯證性回歸並列篇名：The Dialectical Return of Vocational Teacher Education Model in Germany作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：高等教育;師資培育;德國職業教育;German Vocational Education;Higher Education;Teacher Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：33卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文透過文件分析法探究德國職業教育師培模式之發展趨勢，並聚焦於職業學校之理論型教師。初階時期學徒制是職業教育的主要方式，由師傅在實務操作中傳授技能，此時期的師培即為師傅養成，其歷程為學徒→工匠→師傅。工業革命後大量興建職業學校，進而開啟中階時期3種師培模式：職業實踐導向、工程師導向與教學法專家導向，並逐漸趨向系統化「學科導向」。該導向在進階時期受到猛烈抨擊，並以「職業性專業」為新理念，建構「工作過程導向」模式，摒棄學科導向，而以教師職業行動能力為培育核心，重新組織建構「職業教學論」之課程／教學，這種更聚焦於真實工作過程之培育，是初階時期理念之「回歸」，但前者在教學組織「結構化」、課程內容則奠基於現代科學基礎，將職業實踐－工作過程進行教學論之模式化處理，而與後者各異其趣，因而從初階至進階時期的發展，呈現為辯證性回歸；且德國師培廣納眾多機構協力合作，此能為臺灣職業教育師培改革提供很好的啟示。英文摘要：This paper explores the development trend of the German vocational teacher education model through document analysis, and focuses on the theoretical teachers of vocational schools. In the early stage, training was mainly conducted in the context of an apprentice-master relationship, in which the master craftsman personally imparted the knowledge and skills which would enable the apprentice to advance to the stage of craftsmanship and become a master craftsman. In the middle stage, ushered in by the industrial revolution and the resulting establishment of a large number of vocational schools, vocational teacher education was divided into three areas: practical skills, engineering, and pedagogy, and gradually tended to be systematic ”discipline-oriented”. In the advanced stage, the increasing emphasis on professional specialization led to far-reaching changes and the adoption of a ”work process” orientation, which discarded the concept of a systematized branch of learning in favor of professional competence, and revived the emphasis on hands-on work of the early stage. However, in the advanced stage the structure and content of vocational teacher education are based on the needs and outlook of modern science, whereas in the early stage more importance was given to the apprentice's individual interests. Thus, the development of vocational teacher education can be said to exhibit a dialectical return. German teacher education includes the cooperation of many institutions, which provides a good reference for Taiwan's vocational education teacher education reform.起始頁-結束頁：89-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學4篇名：德國二所另類學校－耶拿計畫學校與蒙特梭利學校－參訪記要與思考並列篇名：Interview Notes and Reflections on Visits of Two Alternative Schools in Germany - a Jenaplan School and a Montessori School作者：余曉雯(Hsiao-Wen Yu)關鍵字：另類教育;耶拿計畫學校;蒙特梭利學校;德國教育;Alternative Education;German Education;Jenaplan School;Montessori School期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：33卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：德國自普魯士王國時期至今，經歷幾番教育改革風潮，是全球另類教育的重要發源地。本研究主要針對德國二所具有代表性的另類學校進行探查，包括概念起源於古典改革教育階段，但在兩德統一後重起爐灶的耶拿計畫學校和蒙特梭利學校。此研究一方面藉由相關文獻、學校文件之閱讀，藉此初步掌握此兩所學校類型的核心精神與學校概況；另一方面則透過在校的實地觀察，以及與學校校長、教師、學生的對話，進一步分析兩校特色；最後則強調，一方面，學校作為生活與學習共同體，可以透過學校氣氛的營造、空間的佈置、節日和慶祝活動的進行、教育關係的建立，以及混齡的學習組織形式等加以建構；另一方面，學校中的學習應以學生為主體。學校可以透過開放性課程的設計、自我導向的學習過程，以及學生對學習結果的自我監控等方式，積極促成學生對自我學習的覺察與掌控。本研究透過這兩所學校的實例介紹，除了提供各種相關的具體設計供學校參考外，也鼓勵實務工作者深思表象之後實質的教育意涵，而在各自的條件下創造新的另類教育之可能性。英文摘要：Since the Kingdom of Prussia, Germany has experienced several educational reforms and is an important source of alternative education in the world. This study focuses on two representative alternative schools in Germany, including the Jenaplan School and the Montessori School, which originated in the classical education reform stage but re-started after the reunification of the two Germanys. On the one hand, this study captures the core spirit and school profiles of the two schools through analyzing relevant literature and school documents; on the other hand, the study also tries to apprehend the characteristics of the two schools through field observations in schools, and dialogues with school principals, teachers, and students. Finally, the study emphasizes that, schools should be a community of life and learning which is constructed through the creation of the school atmosphere, space layout, festivals and celebrations, and through the establishment of educational relationships, and mixed-age learning form. Besides, student should be the real subject of his learning. School can actively promote students' awareness and control over self-learning through open curriculum designs, self-directed learning processes, and self-monitoring of learning results. This study aims to provide various related designs for schools to reference. It also encourages practitioners to think deeply about the actual educational implications, and create new alternative education possibilities under their respective conditions.起始頁-結束頁：131-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學5篇名：大學系所主管圖像、挑戰與培訓－以一所國立大學為例並列篇名：Academic Leadership in Public Universities - The Case of a National University作者：許添明(Tian-Ming Sheu);陳玉娟(Yu-Chuan Chen);余穎麒(Patricia Yu);商雅雯(Ya-Wen Shang)關鍵字：系所主管;高等教育;領導發展;department head and director;higher education;leadership development program期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：33卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：高等教育機構迎接革新挑戰之際，研究顯示系所主管效能牽動大學整體表現。在臺灣領導研究多以中小學為主，大學系所主管因應環境變遷的研究卻付之闕如，又國立大學系所主管選薦制度未臻完善，相關議題探索已是無可迴避的責任。本研究透過訪談一所國立綜合型大學系所主管與行政主管，勾勒系所主管角色職責與期待，工作歷程面臨的問題與挑戰，影響其行政效能的因素，並探究系所主管因應問題與挑戰所需的支持與培訓方案。研究結果發現，理想的大學系所主管應具備工作熱忱、同理心、公平公開及人際溝通能力，當前面臨經費、招生、教師權益及師生關係衝突等問題，同時須因應環境變遷迎來師資規劃、學生發展與學校轉型等挑戰，又受限於個人與制度層面因素影響其行政效能，並依據結果對系所主管選薦制度及培訓方案提出建議。本研究之貢獻在於補足我國大學系所主管配合目前高教革新的領導研究的缺口，特別是系所主管由傳統學術角色逐漸過渡到行政領導角色所面臨的問題與挑戰，以及為提升系所主管重視自身的角色職責、凝聚系所主管對校務發展方向的認同所需要的支持與培訓方案。英文摘要：As higher education faces challenges in driving innovation, the effectiveness of academic leaders affects an institution's overall performance. In Taiwan, most of the leading research focuses on leadership in primary and secondary schools. In this study, we interviewed a public university's academic and administrative directors to outline the responsibilities and expectations of academic leaders, and investigated the problems and challenges that they faced during their work process to propose the support and leadership development needed for them to navigate through the obstacles and challenges. The results illustrate that an ideal academic leader should possess the following essential qualities and skills: enthusiasm, empathy, fairness and openness, and interpersonal communication skills. Academic leaders are faced with problems including budget, student enrollment, professors' rights, and conflicts between professors and students, and challenges resulting from social change, such as faculty recruitment, student career development, university transformation and self-efficacy in administration. According to these findings, we propose suggestions for revising election procedures of institutional leaders and a leadership development program. The study contributes to this research field by offering insights of the problems and challenges of transiting from a faculty member to an administrator and by proposing a support system to enhance department leaders' awareness of the importance of their roles and responsibilities in building consensus toward university development direction.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學6篇名：國民小學校長與教師領導者的協作教學領導個案研究並列篇名：Collaborative Instructional Leadership: A Case study of Elementary School Principal and Teacher Leaders作者：劉鎮寧(Jen-Ning Liou)關鍵字：協作教學領導;教師領導;教學領導;collaborative instructional leadership;instructional leadership;teacher leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：33卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討校長與教師領導者所組成的協作教學領導團隊的運作歷程，並探討其成效。本研究採個案研究，以東臺灣一所國民小學為對象，研究參與者包括校長、3位教師領導者、3位學校教師，共計7位。本研究先探討校長與教師領導者所組成的協作教學領導團隊的內部運作，再了解團隊成員與校內教師的互動情形，最後探討在專業上所獲得的成長。本研究藉由訪談文本進行研究資料的分析，研究發現：（1）協作教學領導團隊透過專業共學、共作與任務取向，建立有效的學習機制；（2）不受原職務角色的束縛，係協作教學領導團隊內部運作成功的關鍵因素；（3）角色功能的轉換與發揮並搭配實務導向的推動，係協作教學領導團隊的重要策略；（4）營造公平、真誠、務實的言談情境，能為協作教學領導團隊和校內教師搭建有效的溝通平台；（5）協作教學領導團隊的運作，能同時提升團隊成員及學校教師的專業知能和領導意願。本研究結果可作為校長教學領導實務，校長與教師領導者的協作領導以及提升教師專業發展成效時之參考。英文摘要：The study investigates the operating process of a collaborative instructional leadership team composed of principal and teacher leaders, and the professional growth of team members and school teachers during this process. This study presents a case study of a public elementary school in Eastern Taiwan. Seven participants from the school were interviewed including the principal, three teacher leaders, and three school teachers and the interview transcriptions were analyzed. This study reached five conclusions: 1) the collaborative instructional leadership team develops an effective learning through professional co-learning, collaboration and task orientation; 2) being non-restricted by the original role is crucial for the success of the collaborative instructional leadership team's internal operation ; 3) the conversion and fulfillment of role functions and the promotion of practice orientation are essential strategies for collaborative instructional leadership teams; 4) creating fair, sincere, and pragmatic conversation situations can build an effective communication platform for collaborative instructional leadership teams and school teachers; 5) the collaborative instructional leadership team's operation can simultaneously improve the professional knowledge and leadership willingness of team members and school teachers. Lastly, this study further proposed suggestions for practical application and future research.起始頁-結束頁：33-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學7篇名：醫院床邊巡迴教師於癌症病童教學之跨領域合作與專業認同經驗並列篇名：Bedside Itinerant Teachers' Experience in Interdisciplinary Collaboration and Their Professional Identity作者：鄧文章(Wen-Chang Teng);顏瑞隆(Rui-Long Yan)關鍵字：床邊巡迴教師;專業認同;跨領域合作;bedside itinerant teacher;interdisciplinary collaboration;professional identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：33卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：為重症學童的受教權，特教老師踏入醫院，成為床邊教師，也成為教育與醫療合作的橋接者。因橫跨不同專業，床邊教師需面對異於學校的挑戰，也影響專業認同。本研究目的為理解床邊教師在此跨領域合作的經驗及其專業認同發展。研究採質性研究，共邀請9位床邊教師，進行1－3次、每次1－2小時的深度訪談，以歸納式質性內容分析進行文本分析。結果顯示跨領域合作經驗面臨四項挑戰：（1）跨越專業的疆界，彼此面對無法預知的變動，而經歷相互摸索與適應；（2）跨越教育的疆界，難以依循傳統教學型態與親師生關係，而需重新建構；（3）親臨生死的疆界，衝擊教師角色定位與人性情感；（4）跨出領域，使床邊教師無法依循既有專業領域建構自身定位。為此，床邊教師：（1）在變動混亂中，反思教育本質，而跨越原有角色框架，重啟非角色化的人性連結；（2）奠基於人性連結，床邊教師轉化混亂為創造，重構專業定位。本研究提供專業者於跨領域合作的經驗歷程，以及在跨領域合作的環境中，專業認同的變動與建構，並提出跨領域合作的專業認同發展架構與反思專業界線與權力，做為未來研究發展與實務參考。英文摘要：In order to protect the right to education for children with severe diseases, special education teachers have stepped into the hospitals to become hospital bedside itinerant teachers and have served as the bridge between education and healthcare professions. The job of bedside teachers differs from that of school teachers in that it spanned two different professional fields, which in turn affects the perception of professional identity. This study attempts to understand the interdisciplinary collaborative experience of bedside teachers and their professional identity. This study adopts the qualitative research approach. After acquiring consent from the institution, nine bedside itinerant teachers were recruited. One to two-hour in-depth semi-structured interviews were conducted one to three times for each subject. Inductive content qualitative analysis was used to further understand the bedside teaching experience. The challenges in interdisciplinary collaboration were found: (1) interdisciplinary collaboration requires mutual exploration; (2) teaching in the hospital requires reshaping of pedagogical structure; (3) struggling with facing life and death issues; (4) crossing fields challenges the perception of professional identity. With these challenges, the bedside teachers' experiences of identity were: (1) using self as research material to decipher chaos; (2) regrouping and re-fusion of identity. Based on the results, issues surrounding interdisciplinary collaboration and professional identity were discussed and recommendations were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：71-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學8篇名：認識、評估與回應幼兒人際性行為並列篇名：Recognizing, Assessing, and Responding to Children's Interpersonal Sexual Behavior作者：郭葉珍(Yeh-chen Kuo)關鍵字：人際性行為;幼兒;回應;評估;assessment;interpersonal sexual behavior;responding;young children期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：33卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：專業工作者知悉疑似性侵害犯罪情事應依法通報相關單位，再加上其身負教育者及保護幼兒與早期預防幼兒發展性虐待模式的責任，因此，在其觀察到幼兒人際性行為時的評估與回應具有重要且深遠的影響。本文第一個部分是有關幼兒人際性行為的定義與普遍情形；第二個部分回顧了實證研究中專業工作者對於幼兒人際性行為的評估與回應；第三個部分則是有關如何評估幼兒人際性行為，並針對幼兒正常人際性行為，如身體接觸與觸摸身體、暴露或窺視、性語言及性遊戲提出回應的建議，以幫助幼兒擁有健康的性發展，預防受到性虐待。在幼兒非正常人際性行為的回應上，則依據Gail Ryan所發展出來的三個目標：促進溝通、發展同理心與願意負責任來提出回應建議，以降低幼兒發展性虐待行為模式的風險。本文建議應提供訓練予專業工作者，並進行本土研究以了解臺灣幼兒人際性行為的普遍情形，及專業工作者對該行為之評估與回應情形。本文之貢獻在提供一個架構讓專業工作者認識幼兒人際性行為並了解如何評估與回應，藉著教育與干預的過程，幼兒能夠擁有健康的性發展，也能夠降低現在或未來受他人性剝削或性剝削他人的可能性。英文摘要：The assessments and responses of early childhood workers (ECWs) to children's interpersonal sexual behaviors (ISBs) are especially crucial in the early childhood stage du to their roles. They are not only educators and protectors but also mandated to report suspected cases of child sexual abuse and are expected to reduce the chances that children develop offender's behaviors. In the first part of this article, normative data about children's ISBs to delineate the boundaries of typical and atypical ISB in young children is presented. In the second part, literature about how ECWs responded to children's ISBs and the factors that influenced their responses are reviewed. Assessment and suggestions for ECW regarding how to respond to children's ISBs are discussed in the third part of the article. The three dimensions developed by Gail Ryan - lack of consent, lack of equality, or coercion in the interaction -were proposed to explain to children why their behaviors would be perceived as problematic. In the last part of this article, implications of this overview for ECW's training and future research were proposed. This article benefits ECWs by providing a comprehensive framework for recognizing, assessing, and responding to children's ISBs. Informed by this article, ECWs will be able to protect young children and promote their healthy sexuality development.起始頁-結束頁：107-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學01篇名：台灣家長選擇在家自行教育之省思─以兩個家庭為例並列篇名：Reflection on Homeschooling in Taiwan-A Case Study of Two Families作者：陳俐淇(Li-Chi CHEN);王子華(Tzu-Hua WANG);孫魚秝(Yu-Li SUN)關鍵字：實驗教育;非學校型態實驗教育;在家自行教育;experimental education;non-school type experimental education;homeschooling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以質性研究的焦點訪談方式，訪談新竹地區2個對學校教育態度不同的在家自行教育家庭，受訪者共6位成員，包括2位家長、2位國小學生和2位國中學生，最後以內容分析法分析其在家自行教育的經驗，並據此提出具體建議。研究發現，選擇在家自行教育的父母是因為對現行教育體制有疑慮，藉<U+7740>在家自行教育，培養孩子的品格和自主學習能力等。目前，台灣有關在家自行教育的申請過程要更有效率，學校的協助和政府的支持都需要加強。從學習效益和優勢的觀點而論，在家自行教育能跳脫制式化教育的模式，量身訂做課程，使教育選擇多元化，養成自學自習的習慣，對於未來所面臨的挑戰或困境亦較能迎刃而解。本研究建議政府透過建立在家自行教育師資資料庫、在家自學的課程資源系統、家長支持系統、學生學習資源系統和學生回歸學習支援機制，使在家自行教育的制度更完善。英文摘要：Focus group interviews were conducted with six participants-two parents, two elementary school students, and two junior high school students-from two households in Hsinchu with different attitudes towards school, respectively, to investigate their homeschooling experience. Interview results were analyzed using a content analysis method. The findings revealed that the reason for homeschooling lied in parents' doubts on the existing education system. Homeschooling enabled them to cultivate character development and self-directed learning abilities in children. At present, the application procedure for homeschooling in Taiwan needs to be simplified, and school assistance and government support should be further enhanced. With respect to the effectiveness and advantages of learning, homeschooling transcends the standardized education framework to encompass personalized courses. Such diversified education facilitates development of self-learning and self-studying habit in students, equipping them with problem-solving abilities to overcome future challenges and predicaments. The government is suggested to improve the homeschooling system by establishing a homeschooling teacher database, homeschooling curriculum resource system, parents' support system, learning resource system for students, and a support mechanism for student's return to school.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：Integrating Social Networks and Cluster Analysis to Discuss the Relationship Between College Students' Learning Cliques and Course Selection Decision-making並列篇名：整合社會網絡和集群分析探討大學生學習派系與選課決策的關係作者：林耕宇(Keng-Yu LIN);陳隆輝(Long-Hui CHEN);陳慶文(Ching-Wen CHEN);張桂琥(Kuei-Hu CHANG)關鍵字：social networks;cluster analysis;learning cliques;course selection decision-making;decision trees;社會網絡;集群分析;學習派系;選課決策;決策樹期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Course selection behavior is a decision-making process. In the past, it was pointed out that many factors affect students' selection of course, but their relationship with course selection decision-making has not been explored from the perspective of learning cliques. In a class, there are often several small groups of students with good learning relationships who form learning cliques. Therefore, whether the members of each learning clique will form similar behavior groups, whether the course selection process will produce a conformity effect, and whether they will choose the same courses as like-minded members are topics worth exploring. This article thus integrated the methods of social network analysis (SNA) and cluster analysis to explore the correlation between learning cliques and course selection decisions, and further developed prediction models through decision trees to speculate whether members of clique will form a similar behavior group of course selection decision-making in the learning network. This research used the methods of questionnaire survey and secondary data analysis; the research participants were 23 students in a class of the military academy in Taiwan. The research found that: (a) in the overall learning network, there were several large and small cliques in the class, and some members were not affiliated with any clique; (b) compared with the members who were not affiliated with any clique, the behavior of course selection decision-making of members in the learning clique were more consistent.英文摘要：選課行為是一種決策過程。過去研究指出，有諸多因素會影響學生選課的結果，然而卻鮮少以學習派系的角度來探討與選課決策之間的關係。在一個班級之中，往往存在<U+7740>學習關係較良好的數個小團體，進而組成學習派系。每個學習派系的成員是否會形成相似的行為群組，選擇課程的過程是否會產生從眾效應，以及他們是否會與志趣相投的成員選擇相同的課程，都是值得探討的主題。因此，本研究整合應用社會網絡分析和集群分析方法，探討學習派系與選課決策的關聯，進一步透過決策樹發展預測模式，由學生在學習網絡中所隸屬的派系，推測各派系成員是否會組成相似的選課決策行為群組。本研究採用問卷調查法和次級資料分析法，研究對象為台灣某軍事院校的23名學生。研究結果如下：（1）在班級之中存在<U+7740>數個大、小派系，以及不隸屬任何派系的成員；（2）相較於不隸屬任何派系的成員，學習派系內的成員選課決策行為較為一致。起始頁-結束頁：21-46資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：想像未來充滿學習的教室─以社會建構學習談有效教學並列篇名：Imagining the Classroom Full of Learning in the Future - Effective Teaching With Social Constructive Learning作者：洪瑜珮(Yu-Pei HUNG)關鍵字：有效教學;鷹架理論;社會建構學習;課堂觀察;effective teaching;instructional scaffolding;social constructive learning;classroom observation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文採用觀察量表分析，透過文獻探討和影片觀察，提出未來課堂教室的想像。從文獻中發現建構主義的教學是透過連結新知識與舊知識，幫助學生獲得新知、發展認知，而社會建構主義的教學則認為學習是與社會、文化互動所得的結果。本文目的是探究社會建構主義的教學情境建構，觀察教師的課程安排有哪些該注意的面向和內涵。研究者從Good & Lavigne（2018）設計的觀察量表修正成一份由提出問題、協作建議、評估討論、應用情境、總結知識五步驟的量表，看待教師的社會建構主義教學，發現以下特徵：（1）將學習責任逐步交還給學生；（2）教師須具備良好的提問與引導技巧；（3）將學習加入生活情境脈絡之中；（4）必須時時刻刻檢視學生的認知。研究者認為充滿學習的教室並非想像，現場教師已有能力建構有效教學的教室，應將學習主體還給學生。英文摘要：This article used an observation scale, together with literature exploration and film observation, to imagine the future classroom. From literature review, it was found that constructivist teaching helps students acquire new knowledge and develop cognition through connecting new and old knowledge. Teaching with the social constructivism approach regards learning as the result of interaction with society and culture. This article aimed to explore the social constructivist teaching context, as well as to observe which aspects and connotations teachers should pay attention to in curriculum arrangement. The researcher amended the observation scale designed by Good & Lavigne (2018) with five steps: (a) raising questions; (b) collaboration and suggestions; (c) assessment and discussions; (d) application to scenarios; and (e) summarizing knowledge. Teachers' teaching was observed and assessed based on the five steps. The following results were found: (a) students should have the responsibilities of learning; (b) teachers must have good questioning and guidance skills; (c) teachers need to incorporate learning into real-life situations; (d) students' cognition must be reviewed and monitored frequently. The researcher believes that a classroom full of learning is not imaginary. Teachers already have the ability to construct effective classrooms and should treat students as the learning agent.起始頁-結束頁：47-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：The Influences of Integrating Information Technology into Discussion-based Concept Cartoons on 5th Graders' Mathematics Learning並列篇名：資訊科技融入討論式概念卡通對國小五年級學生數學學習的影響作者：黃思華(Tzu-Hua HUANG);李姿瑩(Tzu-Ying LI)關鍵字：concept cartoon;discussion-based learning;mathematics achievement;computer-assisted instruction;概念卡通;討論式學習;數學成就;電腦輔助教學期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study established a cartoon-based mathematics concept learning system. It examined the effect of three different teaching modules, discussion-based concept cartoons (n = 29), teacher-oriented concept cartoons (n = 26), and worksheet teaching (n = 23), on the mathematics achievement of fifth graders in Taiwan. Two groups of students used computers to learn mathematics with concept cartoons, and the other one used a worksheet. It was found that the group using discussion-based concept cartoons performed significantly better than the other two groups, and students taught with discussion-based concept cartoons with computers achieved better performance than those taught with the conventional method.英文摘要：本研究建置了一套討論式概念卡通的數學概念學習系統，探討三種不同教學模組，即討論式概念卡通教學（n = 29）、教師導向式概念卡通教學（n = 26）和學習單教學（n = 23），對台灣五年級學生數學學習成效的影響。兩組使用電腦操作概念卡通學習教學，另一組使用學習單教學。研究結果顯示，使用討論式概念卡通的組別，其數學學習成效顯著優於另外兩組；而且，使用電腦進行概念卡通教學的學生，其表現顯著優於傳統教學。起始頁-結束頁：61-81資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：大學創業教育與創業意圖：情感與認知觀點並列篇名：Entrepreneurship Education at University Level and Entrepreneurial Intention: Affective and Cognitive Perspectives作者：鄭伶如(Lin-Ju CHENG);廖俊杰(Chun-Chieh LIAO)關鍵字：創業意圖;創業教育;創業熱情;創業自我效能;樂觀主義;entrepreneurial intention;entrepreneurship education;entrepreneurial passion;entrepreneurial self-efficacy;optimism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：由於知識生產與知識應用間存在學用落差，「創業精神」成為連結兩者的橋樑；高等教育扮演促進創業精神的重要角色，全球創業教育亦因而蓬勃發展。本研究建立創業意圖模型，以創業教育、創業熱情、創業自我效能、樂觀主義與創業意圖為架構，探討各構面間的因果關係，並針對兩組學生在四個構面的差異進行討論。本研究向台灣某私立大學學生發放問卷，有效問卷共276份。實證結果顯示：（1）創業自我效能、樂觀主義對創業意圖有正向影響，有修習創業教育課程的學生，其路徑係數高於未修習創業教育課程的學生；（2）創業教育對創業意圖、創業自我效能有差異；（3）創業教育、創業熱情、創業自我效能和樂觀主義皆可促進創業意圖。英文摘要：There exists a great gap between knowledge production and application; entrepreneurship can successfully fill the gap. Fostering entrepreneurship is needed, and therefore entrepreneurship education has expanded rapidly in higher education institutions around the world. This study formulated an entrepreneurial intention model, which included entrepreneurship education, entrepreneurial passion, entrepreneurial self-efficacy, optimism, and entrepreneurial intention. The authors discussed the cause-effect relationships of the four constructs and compared the differences between the two groups of students in the constructs. Data were collected from a Taiwanese university, and 276 valid questionnaires were obtained. Results showed that: (a) entrepreneurial self-efficacy and optimism had a positive impact on entrepreneurial intention separately; students who had attended entrepreneurship courses had higher path coefficients than students who had not; (b) differences were found between the two groups of students in entrepreneurial intention and entrepreneurial self-efficacy; (c) entrepreneurship education, entrepreneurial passion, entrepreneurial self-efficacy, and optimism could ignite entrepreneurial intention.起始頁-結束頁：83-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：Using the Case Method of Instruction in a University Child Care Entrepreneurship Course in Taiwan並列篇名：案例教學法於大學兒童托育創業課程之教學實踐作者：段慧瑩(Hui-Ying DUAN)關鍵字：child care;case method of instruction (CMI);entrepreneurship education;cooperative teaching;兒童托育;案例教學法;創業教育;合作教學期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study assessed the effectiveness of applying the case method of instruction (CMI) to an undergraduate course concerning child care management. As a collaborative action research project investigating child care entrepreneurship education and CMI pedagogy, its participants consisted of 4 experts from the field of child care, and 39 university students taking the course on child care management, which was taught by the author. The participants were divided into 8 entrepreneurship teams, each containing 4-5 students and an expert. The teams participated in a national competition in creative marketing planning. They discussed and made planning on administrative organization, business marketing, and public relations. The study collected data through a workshop, observation, interview, and documents, and performed qualitative and quantitative analysis. Results indicated that the use of the blended CMI has potential influence on the child care entrepreneurship. It can effectively guide students to actively learn and be more expressive in the discussion. It also encourages students to engage in diversity thinking and adopt a problem-solving attitude to support cooperative teamwork-capacities that help students develop competency of child care professional management.英文摘要：本研究旨在探討案例教學法實踐於大學幼保系兒童托育經營課程的教學影響。研究者亦是課程教學者，和4位兒童托育機構主管專家合作教學，39位修課大學生為研究對象，分成8組創業合作團隊，每組4-5名學生和1位專家，以行動研究方法，實際參與全國性創業競賽。教學實踐歷程融入經營理論與創業案例，進而形成各類兒童托育服務主題的創業企劃書。研究工具以兒童托育創業檔案作形成性評量，參與創業競賽、企劃書編撰和個人省思作總結性評量；創業小組討論、觀察與紀錄文件、教師教學評量等為分析資料。研究結果發現：結合案例與合作教學組成創業小組方式，實際參與創業企劃競賽的實作歷程，對引導學生主動學習、參與討論有影響；同時，能發揮多元思考解決問題和支援團隊合作等態度，有助養成兒童托育服務經營與管理專業的創業能力。研究建議未來能擴及其他課程，並追蹤學生畢業後的就業影響。起始頁-結束頁：107-134資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所7篇名：家庭與學校依附脈絡因子對台灣青少年憂鬱症狀發展之縱貫研究並列篇名：A Longitudinal Study on Family and School Attachment Factors on Trajectories of Adolescent Depressive Symptom作者：劉宗幸(Tsung-Hsing LIU);江守峻(Shou-Chun CHIANG)關鍵字：青少年;依附;潛在成長模式;憂鬱;adolescent;attachment relationship;latent growth curve model;depression期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討青少年國三至高二憂鬱症狀的長期發展變化，並釐清不同依附關係（父母依附、同儕依附、學校依附）對於青少年憂鬱症狀發展的影響。研究對象為台灣青少年成長歷程研究（Taiwan Youth Project, TYP）中2002年國中三年級青少年，並持續追縱之後兩年的憂鬱症狀發展情形。資料分析以潛在成長曲線模式為主。研究結果發現，青少年的憂鬱症狀起始值和成長變化情形存在個別差異。其次，國三時憂鬱症狀程度較高的青少年，整體憂鬱症狀成長速率較慢；而國三時憂鬱症狀程度較低的青少年，隨後時間內憂鬱症狀成長速率較快。最後，青少年的憂鬱症狀在高一時急遽成長，持續上升至高二。在依附關係上，同儕依附和學校依附對青少年憂鬱症狀較具影響力，同時影響憂鬱症狀起始狀態和成長速率，而父親依附只影響憂鬱症狀起始狀態、母親依附則對憂鬱症狀沒有顯著影響。基於研究結果，本研究對教育工作和未來研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to: (a) establish model of the trajectory of adolescents' depressive symptoms over time with the latent growth curve model; (b) identify the impact of different types of attachment relationships on changes of depressive symptoms. Research data were retrieved from the Taiwan Youth Project (TYP). The participants were 2,690 9th, 10th and 11th grade students in three waves (2002, 2003, and 2004). Results indicated that: (a) there were individual differences in the initial status and trajectory of adolescents' depressive symptoms; (b) the changing rate of trajectory of depressive symptoms were slower in adolescents of more severe depressive symptoms at 9th grade compared to those of less severe symptoms at 9th grade; (c) there was an elevation of depressive symptoms in adolescents from 10th grade to 11th grade; (d) adolescents' attachment with peers and school were more influential than attachment with parents in regard to the initial status and changing trajectory of their depressive symptoms; (e) father attachment only impacted the initial status of adolescents' depressive symptoms while mother attachment showed no significant impact on both the initial status and changing trajectory of adolescents' depressive symptoms. Suggestions for education and future research were provided.起始頁-結束頁：135-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所8篇名：緊張因素、利社會行為與青少年偏差行為之研究並列篇名：Strain Factors, Prosocial Behaviors and Deviant Behaviors作者：郭玲玲(Ling-Ling KUEH);董旭英(Yuk-Ying TUNG)關鍵字：青少年偏差行為;緊張因素;利社會行為;零膨脹負二項迴歸模式;deviant behavior;strain factors;prosocial behavior;zero-inflated negative binomial model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究探討青少年偏差行為發生的影響因素，具體目的包括：（1）探討偏差行為作為青少年面對緊張和壓力時的對應方式，是否在考量個人利社會行為效應後而有所改變，藉此回應一般化緊張理論所提出緊張因素對偏差行為的影響必須考慮其他社會因素；（2）透過零膨脹負二項迴歸模式，釐清緊張因素和利社會行為在解釋青少年偏差行為「發生」機率和「發展」頻率的角色。研究對象為台南市中學生，有效樣本1,058人。研究發現：一旦考量了利社會行為後，負面生活事件對偏差行為有具體的影響，愈多負面生活事件發生，偏差行為的頻率愈高。當青少年偏差行為受到緊張因素所引起的負面情境影響時，不同的利社會行為則於其中分別扮演抑制與觸發、降低與增強偏差行為的關鍵角色，即從事愈多志願服務，愈能抑制偏差行為的發生，愈多助人行為，卻愈能觸發偏差行為發生；合作行為的程度愈高，愈降低偏差行為，愈多關懷行為，則愈增強偏差行為的頻率。本研究根據研究目的和實徵證據支持的結果，提供相關的教育輔導實務和未來研究上的建議。英文摘要：This study aimed to examine the relations between strain factors, prosocial behaviors and deviant behaviors. The objectives included: (a) considering the effects of prosocial behaviors, adolescents experiencing strains might engage in less deviant behaviors; (2) zero-inflation negative binomial regression is used to analyze factors that influence the likelihood and frequency of deviant behaviors. Research participants were 1,058 students in Tainan. The findings showed that negative life events increased the likelihood of deviant behaviors. Helping and voluntary service influenced the likelihood of deviant behaviors. Cooperation and caring impacted the frequency of deviant behaviors. The implications of these findings, including counselling and analyzing methods, were discussed, and future research directions were suggested.起始頁-結束頁：157-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所9篇名：香港課改二十年的現狀與展望：中學教師和校長的看法並列篇名：The Current State and Prospect of Curriculum Reform in Hong Kong Since 2001: The Views of Secondary School Teachers and Principals作者：林智中(Chi-Chung LAM);何瑞珠(Esther Sui-Chu HO);曾榮光(Wing-Kwong TSANG)關鍵字：教育改革;課程實施;新高中課程;education reform;curriculum implementation;New Senior Secondary curriculum期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：自2001年起，香港特別行政區政府推出一系列大型課程改革，至今已近二十年。現在正是適切時間檢討，以尋找未來的改革方向。校長和教師是重要的持份者，他們同時掌握具體的前線情況，因此了解他們對課程改革現狀及未來發展的看法非常重要。本研究採用聚焦訪談及問卷調查方法，收集了超過1,000名教師和校長的觀感及看法。研究發現，課程改革帶來了教學法、學校自評文化和觀課文化的改變，但未能全面達致改革的大部分目標。改革亦帶來了一系列問題，例如教師工作量增加和學習差異擴闊等。如要為將來尋找更好的發展方向和策略，教育當局必須進行更全面、更有系統及深入的研究，而本研究展示的數據和理據可作這全面檢討的起點。英文摘要：It has been nearly two decades since the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Government launched a large-scale curriculum reform in 2001. It is timely to review the current state of curriculum delivery and explore how to move forward. As principals and teachers are important stakeholders and they have first-hand knowledge of current state on the ground, it is very important to understand how they perceive the current state and the ways of moving forward. This article reports the findings of a study which adopted focus group interview and questionnaire survey of over 1,000 teachers and principals. The study finds that the curriculum reform has brought about some changes in teaching methods, self-evaluation, and lesson observation culture in schools. However, a majority of the aims of the curriculum reform have not been achieved and quite a number of problems, such as worsening of teacher workload and widening of learning diversity, have surfaced. It is recommended that more comprehensive, systematic and in-depth evaluative work should be done so as to inform the development and planning of future curriculum. The evidences and rationales provided in the present study could be seen as a starting point for such a holistic review of curriculum reform.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所10篇名：人文向度的科學通識教育：理念與議題並列篇名：On Humanist Science General Education: Ideas and Issues作者：梁卓(Cheuk-Hang LEUNG);李明(Ming LI)關鍵字：通識教育;核心課程;核心文本;科學經典教育;自然知識的文化向度;General Education;core curriculum;core texts;science classics education;cultural dimension of natural knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文探討以經典為本的大學通識教育新嘗試，透過檢視香港中文大學於2012年新學制改革後的通識教育模式，從應然性（normative）的角度討論以科學經典為本的通識教育的教學目標和課程綱領。文中剖析以經典為本的通識教育核心課程所需的課程論證與學習主題設計，不僅用以回應選取特定範疇知識或典籍的相關爭議，更在於展示出一所大學所嚮往的文化素質和理想人格。故此，科學經典為本的核心課程並不是將學院科學轉移至通識教育課堂，亦不是從事普及科學教育，而是透過研讀經典，令學生明白人類、自然與知識的共構關係，從而思考科學探究的特徵與局限、現代科技的倫理應用，以及自然知識的文化面向等議題。本文就課程理念和教學議題設計，說明香港中文大學的「與自然對話」一課，如何將科學經典中的知識連結至人類的文化處境，以培養學生具備文化批判的科學素養，反思自然知識探究所引發的社會和價值變革。英文摘要：This article explicates a new attempt of using classics as the basis for the General Education curriculum of a university. Through reviewing the General Education model adopted by The Chinese University of Hong Kong after the 2012 new education reform, we evaluate the aims of the curriculum and designs of ”In Dialogue with Nature” - a newly launched science classics General Education course. The article, from a normative perspective, analyzes the course’s justifications and curriculum designs required by a core-text curriculum. It does not only respond to relevant controversies of choosing specific branch of knowledge and the selection of classics, but more importantly reflect the cultural literacy and ideal personality aspired by a university through the design of the core curriculum. Thus, the science classics course neither aims at transferring hard-core scientific knowledge to General Education course, nor engages in teaching popular science. Rather, it enables students to understand the co-existential relationship between humans, nature and knowledge through studying classics, in order to reflect on issues such as the characteristics and limitations of scientific inquiries, the ethical dilemma of modern technologies, as well as the cultural dimension of natural knowledge, and so on. Through evaluating the aims and design of curriculum, this article illustrates how this course could bridge the knowledge in science classics with human conditions, thereby equipping students with a sense of scientific literacy that empowers them to engage in the cultural critique about social and value changes arising from the course of scientific inquiry.起始頁-結束頁：23-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所11篇名：理性情緒教育對改善初中生學業情緒的成效研究並列篇名：The Effects of Rational Emotive Education on Improving the Academic Emotion of Junior High School Students作者：陳羿君(I-Jun CHEN);楊夢萍(Meng-Ping YANG);呂京京(Jing-Jing LV);趙偉偉(Wei-Wei ZHAO)關鍵字：理性情緒教育;學業情緒;初中生;干預;rational emotive education;academic emotion;junior high school students;intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：學業情緒強烈影響學生的學習表現，對學生的認知加工、應試、學業成就等起<U+7740>重要的作用。本研究<U+7740>眼於檢驗理性情緒教育（rational emotive education）對改善初中學生學業情緒的效果，編制干預課程方案，採用準實驗設計，以中國蘇州市某中學初中一年級學生為研究對象，一班為實驗組（n=37），開展為期18週的初中生「理性情緒教育課程」教學實驗，另一班為對照組（n=37），保持常態教學。結果發現：（1）教學實驗後，除積極低喚醒學業情緒外，實驗組學業情緒各維度得分均顯著高於對照組；（2）實驗組在實驗後，除積極低喚醒學業情緒外，學業情緒各維度得分均顯著高於教學實驗前；（3）實驗組學生認可且喜歡課程活動；（4）實驗組學生學業情緒、學習狀態及班級氛圍均得到改善。初中生「理性情緒教育課程」對促進初中生學業情緒的良性發展具有可行性和一定效用。英文摘要：Academic emotion strongly influences students' learning performance. It plays an important role in students' cognitive processing, exam-taking and academic achievement. In this study, an intervention program was designed based on the theory of rational emotive therapy, using a quasi-experimental design to explore the improvement of rational emotive education on the academic emotion of junior high school students. Grade seven students of a middle school in Suzhou participated in this study. An experimental group of 37 students received an 18-week teaching experiment on ”rational emotive education course” whereas another class of 37 students served as the control group. Results showed that: (1) significant differences existed between the experimental group and the control group in all dimensions except for the positive-low arousal emotion; (2) students' academic emotion scores in the experimental group significantly increased except for the positive-low arousal emotion; (3) students in the experimental group recognized and liked the course; (4) the academic emotion, learning state and classroom atmosphere of the experimental group were improved. The ”rational emotive education course” for junior high school students is feasible and effective in promoting the beneficial development of students' academic emotion.起始頁-結束頁：47-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所12篇名：台灣國小高年級學童利用虛擬實境網頁學習資訊課程之學習成效並列篇名：Learning Outcomes of Fifth and Sixth Graders in a Computer Course Using a Virtual Reality Website for Learning作者：曹永慶(Yung-Chin TSAO);林佳禾(Chia-Ho LIN)關鍵字：5C關鍵能力;高年級學童;虛擬實境;學習成效;5C key competency;fifth and sixth graders;virtual reality;learning outcome期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年日益興起在遊戲和教學上運用「虛擬實境」（virtual reality, VR）。在虛擬實境中，基於網路無界限和多媒體的特殊性，大大增強了網頁中同儕間和學習者與虛擬物件的互動。國小學童會因為網頁的導覽介面設計而影響對網頁的使用習慣，因此了解學童在網頁視覺互動成效的情況，將有助於把虛擬實境建構在兒童網頁的視覺互動上。本實驗針對台灣60位高年級學童，探討他們在利用虛擬實境網頁的資訊課程中的學習成效。實驗要求學生於CoSpaces EDU虛擬實境網頁平台所設定學習任務中學習，並比較實驗前、後學生在「溝通協調能力」、「團隊合作能力」、「問題解決能力」、「獨立思辨能力」和「創造力」等「5C關鍵能力」中的學習成效差異。本實驗由專家評鑑結果和學生自評結果，進行成對樣本t檢定，比較虛擬實境教學前、後的學習成效。結果顯示，進行學習任務課程後，高年級學生在「5C關鍵能力」上均達到良好的學習成效。英文摘要：In recent years, the use of virtual reality (VR) in games and teaching has become increasingly popular. The boundless nature of the Web and the uniqueness of multimedia in VR greatly enhance peer interaction as well as the interaction between learners and virtual objects on Webpages. Elementary schoolchildren's habits of using Webpages depends upon the navigation interface design of the Webpages. Therefore, understanding the effectiveness of schoolchildren's visual interaction with Webpages will help implement VR into Websites for schoolchildren. The purpose of this experiment was to explore the learning outcomes of 60 Taiwanese fifth and sixth graders in a computer course using VR Webpages. The experiment involved students learning through the tasks set on the VR Web platform ”CoSpaces EDU.” The differences in their learning outcomes on the ”5C key competencies” (i.e., communication and coordination skills, teamwork capabilities, problem-solving skills, independent thinking capabilities, and creativity) before and after the experiment were compared. Based on the results of expert assessment and students' self-evaluation, paired-samples t test was conducted to compare the learning outcomes before and after implementing the VR teaching. Results show that the fifth and sixth graders were found to exhibit excellent 5C competencies after the experiment.起始頁-結束頁：67-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所13篇名：兩歲特殊幼兒上學了：親師合作實施個別化教育計畫之研究並列篇名：Two-year-old Children With Special Needs Going to School: Implementing Individualized Education Program Through Parent-Teacher Collaboration作者：柯秋雪(Chiou-Shiue KO)關鍵字：兩歲特殊幼兒;個別化教育計畫;親師合作;two-year-old children with special needs;individualized education program;parent-teacher collaboration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究採質性研究，考量以家庭為中心的原則與Bronfenbrenner生態系統理論的中系統觀點，以立意取樣探討兩位學前特殊教育（下稱特教）班教師與四位兩歲特殊幼兒家長合作實施個別化教育計畫（individualized education program, IEP）的過程，以及雙方合作對特殊幼兒、家長和學前特教教師的影響。研究者使用個別訪談、親師與團隊會議、專家諮詢、家訪、觀察、日常作息訪談表、家庭優勢和需求調查表、相關文件（如IEP、IEP月紀錄表）、IEP期末目標達成率、省思札記等方法蒐集研究資料。研究結果顯示，經過一年多的合作，家長多能在家執行IEP目標，提升自己的教養能力；四位幼兒的學習皆有進步，期末目標達成率多有提升。親師合作所形成生態系統理論中系統的支持連結愈好，幼兒進步愈多。學前特教教師透過親師合作IEP能獲得專業的成長，逐漸能了解家庭的優勢，並對家長需求有同理心。不過，在合作過程中，教師看到幼兒的需要與家長的期待有落差，親師彼此須達到共識並不容易。參與家長的親職教養能力已有提升，但需老師支持獲得IEP與兒童發展的知能。依據研究結果，研究者提出相關建議。英文摘要：In this qualitative study, family-centered principles and mesosytem of the ecological systems theory from Bronfenbrenner were considered. This study explored parent–teacher collaboration through implementing individualized education program (IEP) involving two early childhood special education (ECSE) teachers and four parents of two-year-old children with special needs, as well as the influence on the children, parents, and ECSE teachers. Data were collected from individual in-depth interviews of parents of children with special needs, observations, IEP meetings, team meetings, IEP documents, monthly records for IEP, achievement rates of IEP goals, family strengths and needs form, routines-based interview form, and the researcher diary. Data triangulation was used to establish the trustworthiness of the study. Research results show that after more than a year of collaboration, parents could implement IEP goals at home and their parenting skills were improved. The learning of all four children has progressed, and achievement rates of IEP goals were enhanced. The better the support link in the mesosystem formed by parent–teacher collaboration, the more progress the children made. ECSE teachers could also achieve professional growth, and gradually understood the strengths of families and the needs of parents. This article also provided insightful suggestions according to the research results.起始頁-結束頁：87-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所14篇名：幼兒教保服務人員工作壓力與工作壓力因應策略量表信、效度及潛在影響關係之檢驗並列篇名：Examining the Reliability and Validity of Scales of Job Stress and Stress-coping Strategies for Early Childhood Education and Care Staff and Their Latent Effects作者：彭佩貞(Pei-Chen PENG);吳中勤(Chung-Chin WU)關鍵字：工作壓力;工作壓力因應策略;幼兒教保服務人員;師生比;潛在調節效果;job stress;job stress-coping strategies;early childhood education and care staff;teacher-student ratio;latent moderation effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：回顧工作壓力與工作壓力因應策略的相關研究，可發現當前相關研究存在的四個主要問題：測量的精簡性與效度不足，忽略工作壓力對工作壓力因應各向度間不一致的影響關係，較少檢視幼兒園師生比對工作壓力與工作壓力因應間關係的影響，以及在運用統計分析方法上的限制。有鑑於此，本研究分別以192位和208位幼兒教保服務人員為預試和正式研究對象，採用驗證性因素分析與結構方程模式取向的潛在調節效果分析，主要目的在於修訂工作壓力與工作壓力因應策略量表，提供建構效度證據，並進一步探究班級師生比對幼兒教保服務人員工作壓力與工作壓力因應策略間關係的影響。本研究發現：（1）10題精簡版四向度工作壓力量表與9題精簡版三向度工作壓力因應策略量表，能以少於過去相關測量一半以上的題項，提供良好的信度和建構效度；（2）不同工作壓力來源對不同因應策略具有不一致的影響；（3）低師生比反而會加劇部分工作壓力對因應策略的負向影響，與過去研究發現大相逕庭。本研究於文末根據研究結果，針對未來研究與教學實務，分別提出相應建議。英文摘要：After reviewing the literature related to job stress and stress-coping strategies, four problems were found: (a) low parsimony and validity of their measurements; (b) ignoring inconsistent relationships among different dimensions of job stress and stress-coping strategies; (c) few researches examining the effect of teacher-student ratio on these relationships; (d) the limitations of statistical analysis methods. As a result, this study recruited 192 and 208 early childhood education and care staff as pre-survey and formal survey subjects respectively. Confirmatory factor analysis and latent moderation analysis were conducted. The main purposes of this study were twofold: (a) to revise the scales of job stress and stress-coping strategies for early childhood education and care staff, and to provide evidences for reliability and validity; (b) to investigate the effect of teacher-student ratio on the relationships among job stress and stress-coping strategies. Results showed that: (a) ten-item and nine-item short version of four dimensional job stress scale and three dimensional stress-coping strategies scale provided good reliability and validity, with more than half items fewer than former measurements; (b) inconsistent effects of job stress on stress-coping strategies were found; (c) contradictory to former findings, teacher-student ratio accelerated the negative effect of job stress on stress-coping strategies. This article also gave suggestions for further research and practices.起始頁-結束頁：109-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：中文版「國小學童恆毅力量表」之編製與驗證並列篇名：The Development and Validation of Traditional Chinese Version of Grit Scale (GS-TC) for Elementary School Students作者：蔡秉勳(Ping-Hsun Tsai);林雅芬(Ya-Fen Lin);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);林小慧(Hsiao-Hui Lin);蔡孟寧(Meng-Ning Tsai)關鍵字：人格;恆毅力;國小學童;學業成就;academic achievement;elementary students;grit;personality期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：恆毅力意指個人對長期目標保持毅力與熱情的特質，被視為預測個人未來成就的重要指標之一，然而，目前國內尚未有一套可用以測量個人恆毅力的正式量表，同時也較少以兒童為對象進行研究。因此，本研究旨在編製一份中文版「恆毅力量表」（Traditional Chinese version of Grit Scale，簡稱GS-TC），並將語句調整為適合國小學童使用。本量表編譯自Duckworth、Peterson、Matthews與Kelly（2007）的「恆毅力量表」，包含「努力持續性」和「興趣穩定性」兩個分量表，參與者首先以立意抽樣，抽取預試樣本225位國小學童進行項目分析及探索性因素分析，並針對預試結果進行題目修訂；接著再另以分層抽樣抽取407位國小學童作為正式樣本進行信度和效度分析。結果顯示GS-TC具有穩定的二因素結構，兩分量表具有良好的內部一致性，亦具有良好的再測信度。效度方面，本量表整體適配度指標均達標準，顯示具有合理適配的建構效度；以「短式大五人格量表」、「自我控制量表」與「努力自我調節量表」為效標，亦具有良好之聚斂及區辨效度，並與其學業成績有正向的關聯。綜合上述研究結果，GS-TC具有良好的信度與效度，適用於測量國內國小學童之恆毅力，有助於探索恆毅力的內涵及進行跨文化比較。英文摘要：Grit is defined as an individual having the perseverance and passion for long-term goals, and is an important indicator of personal future accomplishments. There were many past studies of grit for adults but few for children. In order to address this gap, the present study aimed at developing a Traditional Chinese version of Grit Scale (GS-TC) with modifying the sentences based on the level of language skills of elementary school students. GS-TC was translated from the grit scale by Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews and Kelly (2007), it contained two sub-scales which were consistency of interest and perseverance of effort. This study used stratified purposive sampling, pilot test had 225 elementary school students as participants; the results included an item analysis and exploratory factor analysis to revise the descriptions of items accordingly. Then the present study conducted the formal test, reliability analysis and validity analysis on a sample of 407 elementary school students. Results showed that GS-TC h ad a stable two-factor structure, both sub-scales had the internal consistencies, and also had good retest reliabilities. As for validity, the goodness-of-fit indices showed that GS-TC had a good overall model fit and a construct validity. Taking the scores of ”Ten Item Personality Inventory”, ”Self-Control Scale” and ”Effort Regulation Scale” as criteria, the result showed that GS-TC not only has a good concurrent validity and was positively correlated to the academic achievement. In general, GS-TC had good reliabilities and validities but also will be applicably provided for the grit research of elementary school students. This study contributes to research of grit and cross-cultural comparison.起始頁-結束頁：237-269資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：中文版簡式「五大人格量表」BFI的發展並列篇名：The Development of A Chinese Shortened Version of the Big Five Inventory (BFI)作者：李仁豪(Ren-Hau Li);鍾芯瑜(Hsin-Yu Chung)關鍵字：BFI五大人格量表;信效度;簡式版本;Big Five Inventory;Reliability and Validity;Shortened Version期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：為了在有限時間內完成多種測驗，並增加受試者的合作意願，簡式量表的需求乃逐漸升高。本研究針對44題的「五大人格量表」（Big Five Inventory, BFI）（簡稱BFI-44）進行中文翻譯及其簡式版發展，並以生活滿意度、心理幸福感、正負向情感及自尊作為效標。以兩群臺灣大學生為樣本，第一群樣本730人用來看BFI-44的信效度及進行簡式版的選題，並提供內部一致性信度、建構效度、聚合效度、區辨相關以及效標關聯效度等訊息，第二群樣本732人用來驗證BFI-15簡式版的模型適配度，以及獲得BFI-44及簡式版的另一部分效標關聯效度訊息。簡式版BFI-15是在結構方程式模型的測量模型架構下，參考五項選題規則所選出的，每一種人格向度各3題，共15題。研究結果發現：（1）BFI-15與BFI-44在對應的五大人格上之相關介於.80∼.90，顯示BFI-15 的試題內涵在一定程度上可代表BFI-44；（2）BFI-15的驗證性因素分析模型適配度佳，因素負荷量除兩題為.44 及.48外，其餘在.64∼.87之間，聚合效度佳，因素間經檢定後也具區辨性；（3）BFI-44及BFI-15與各效標的相關組型一致，也與文獻結果相似；（4）BFI-44及BFI-15皆與TDA「五大人格量表」在對應人格上有中高度相關，聚合效度佳；（5）BFI-44各人格向度之內部一致性信度α介於.73∼.83，而BFI-15介於.67∼.81。此外，BFI-15的組合信度介於.69∼.81。英文摘要：In order to administrate many scales in a short time and to increase willing of participants to fill in them, a need of short scales is increasing. This study aimed to develop a Chinese translation version of 44-item BFI (Big Five Inventory), named BFI-44, and then to make its shortened version BFI-15 with criteria, such as satisfaction of life, psychological well-being, positive and negative emotion, and self-esteem. Two university student samples were collected in Taiwan. One sample with 730 students data was used to obtain reliability and validity of the translated BFI-44 Chinese version, and to make item selection for BFI-15 with internal consistency reliability, construct validity, convergent validity, discriminant validity, and criterion-related validity. The other sample with 732 students data was used to confirm model-fit of BFI-15 and to offer the other criterion-related validities of BFI-44 and BFI-15. Items in the BFI-15 were selected according to five rules under measurement model of the structural equation model. 3 items in each personality subscale were selected, and totally 15 items were included in the shortened version. The results showed that (1) Correlation coefficients were .80-.90 in the corresponding personality between BFI-44 and BFI-15, indicating BFI-15 a good representative of BFI-44; (2) Good model-fits and good convergent validities with .64- .87 factor loadings except for two items with .44 and .48. Discrimination was also among five personality traits; (3) Correlation patterns for BFI-44 and BFI-15 with criteria were consistent and also similar to past studies; (4) BFI-44 and BFI-15 both had high correlation coefficients with TDA big five personality scale, showing good convergent validities; (5) Internal consistent reliability s were .73-.83 for BFI-44, and .67-.81 for BFI-15. Besides, composite reliabilities were .69-.81 for BFI-15.起始頁-結束頁：271-299資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：三∼八年級資料與可能性能力測驗的發展及信效度分析並列篇名：The Development and Evaluation of Data and Chance Ability Test for Third to Eighth Grade Students作者：曾建銘(Chien-Ming Cheng)關鍵字：統計素養;資料與可能性;能力測驗工具;statistical literacy;data and chance;ability assessment tool期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：在國中小學生資料的處理、詮釋與事件可能發生的推測與判斷能力的養成，是培養學生統計素養的先備知識。本研究旨在編擬一套跨年段具信效度，適合評量學生資料與可能性能力與其複本常模測驗的工具。參考PISA、TIMSS、TASA與本國統計與機率數學課程內容，建立資料與可能性測驗架構，經命題與嚴謹的修審試題過程，取得良好之專家效度。再經前預試、預試，及正式施測，共計6,065名學生受測。主要結果如下：首先，Rasch模式適配度分析結果顯示絕大部分試題的適配度良好。其次，三年段各三個複本在三個數學主題內容、三個認知層次、試題難度分布，以及測驗訊息量大致相當。本研究以同時估計法進行垂直等化，並分別將各年段組受試者設為參照組來校準試題難度，雖然施測題目不同，但所得到的能力估計值是可以相互比較的。三至八年級的常模是以正式施測2,607名學生來建立，可提供不同年段及不同版本的數學資料與可能性能力成長變化情形。英文摘要：To cultivate the ability of data analysis, interpretation, and the prediction and judgment of event probably occurring is the prior knowledge of statistical literacy in elementary and junior high school. The purpose of this research was to compile a set of credible and valid tools and their parallel norm tests suitable for evaluating students' data and chance ability. Refer to PISA, TIMSS, TASA and the content of national statistics and probability mathematics courses to establish a data and chance test framework. The test demonstrated favorable construct validity after designed items and rigorous revision process. Small-scale trial, pilot-test, and final test were conducted, in which about 6,065 students participated. The major findings could be summarized as follows. First, most of our test items demonstrated good model fit. Second, the three parallel forms of each level among the three kinds of mathematic topics content and three kinds of cognitive level, distribution of difficulty, and item information showed approximately equivalent proportion. Third, the study used concurrent estimation to achieve vertical scaling and rescaled the performance of each level group with one other level group as reference alternately. As such, it is possible to compare the estimates of their abilities with vertical scaling. The norm of 3rd through 8th grades had been established by 2,607 students in the final test. This study provided the growth of students' data and chance ability in different levels and parallel forms.起始頁-結束頁：301-331資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：小六數學素養表現分析之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Mathematical Literacy of Grade 6 Students作者：曾建銘(Chien-Ming Cheng);曾招文(Chao-Wen Tseng);趙珮晴(Pei-Ching Chao)關鍵字：地區;性別;國小六年級;國際學生能力評量計畫;數學素養;area;gender;6th-grade;PISA (the Programme for International Student Assessment);mathematical literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：過去教學相當重視知識和能力，如今數學學習領域和PISA數學素養均強調數學知識與生活要能連結、實踐，讓「素養」落實教育現場，強化學生應用所學於日常生活中，因此本研究即設計一份國小六年級測試的數學素養試題，以了解小六學生數學素養表現、錯誤類型和相關背景表現差異。本文經專家會議從PISA 2012所公告之數學素養題本中，選取適合國小六年級的試題，並自編符合九年一貫課程綱要能力指標的A、B卷數學素養試題，採方便取樣27校56班國小六年級學生1,258名為正式施測對象，發現數學素養開放問答題的空白比例高，從錯誤類型可知計算不難，答題關鍵會落在題意的理解，對低分組學生易造成不了解、任意作答或猜測。背景變項方面，北區數學素養試題作答優於南區學生，而性別則是男性顯著優於女性學生。根據上述研究結果，提出結論和建議以供參考。英文摘要：In the past, mathematics education focused on knowledge and skills. Now, both the Mathematical Curriculum and the PISA (the Programme for International Student Assessment) have hoped to promote a more practical usage of mathematical knowledge. The current study selected some items from the 2012 PISA mathematical literacy released items that were suitable for Grade 6 students as suggested by a group of experts. These were then combined together with two self-made assessments A and B, which were based on the Mathematical Curriculum Guidelines. A total of 1,258 grade 6 students from 27 schools and 56 classes were purposively sampled. Results showed that open-ended questions had higher ratio of blank answer. Further analysis of the error items showed that the assessment was actually not difficult to compute, but the problem lies with the understanding of the question itself. More so, with the low-scores group; students tend to have no idea about the question, which resulted in guessing an d randomly selecting the answers. As for the students' background, students from the Northern region of Taiwan performed significantly better than the students from the Southern region. In addition, male students performed better than their female counterparts. According to these results, some conclusions and suggestions were proposed for practical application and future research.起始頁-結束頁：333-353資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：青少年封閉式創造力潛能測量：「青少年版中文詞彙遠距聯想測驗」之編製及信、效度研究並列篇名：Assessing Adolescent's Closed-Ended Creative Potential: The Development of Chinese Word Remote Associates Test for Adolescent作者：陳姵臻(Pei-Zhen Chen);黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);林緯倫(Wei-Lun Lin)關鍵字：中文詞彙;青少年;封閉式創造力;遠距聯想測驗;adolescent;Chinese words;closed-ended creativity;remote associates test期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：創造力為二十一世紀中不可或缺的關鍵技能之一，世界各國逐漸重視學校教育中的創造力潛能測量與培養。然而，創造力測量具多面向特性，國內開放式創造力測驗雖已完整發展適合所有年齡層的題目與常模，但封閉式創造力測驗僅限於成人與兒童。本研究即根據Mednick所提出創造力連結理論的觀點，以「中文詞彙遠距聯想測驗」為基礎，擬發展一套具有良好心理計量特性、適合國內青少年之封閉式創造力測驗──「青少年版中文詞彙遠距聯想測驗」（Chinese Word Remote Associates Test-Adolescent version, CWRAT-A）。研究中經過對93題預試量表之前測與項目分析，挑選出50題作為CWRAT-A正式量表，分為難易度相同的甲、乙式（各25題），於北部、中部、南部、東部的國中與高中蒐集六個年級共1,649名參與者資料，進行信、效度之檢驗。結果顯示，在信度方面，甲、乙式的內部一致性分別為.80與.81，複本信度為.60。在效度方面，以「頓悟問題作業」作為效標關聯效度，有顯著正相關，相關係數分別為.17 與.25（ps ＜ .05）；以「竹筷子的不尋常用途」作為區辨效度，結果顯示與各指標皆無顯著相關，相關係數介於.00∼.13。上述結果說明CWRAT-A具有良好的信、效度，是適合作為青少年封閉式創造力潛能測量之工具。英文摘要：Creativity is one of the crucial skills in the 21st century. Many countries start focusing on the measurement and cultivation of creativity potential in school education. Nevertheless, creativity measurement should be multidimensional. The open-ended creativity test has been well developed and set up norms for all ages. However, the closed-ended creativity test is still limited to measurements for only adults and children. Based on Mednick's associative theory for creativity and the adult's version on Chinese Word Remote Associates Test, the present study develops a closed-ended creativity test for adolescent-the Chinese Word Remote Associates Test-Adolescent version (CWRAT-A)-and inspect its psychometric characteristics. According to the item analysis results of the pretest, 50 items were chosen from 93 items and were divided into Form A and Form B, which were equal in difficulty level. 1,649 participants in six grades (Grade 7 to Grade 12) were recruited from different areas in Taiwan to exam the reliability and validity of this test. In the reliability, the Cronbach's of Form A and Form B was .80 and .81, indicating a great internal consistency. The correlation coefficient between Form A and Form B was .60, indicating a good alternate from reliability. In the criterion-related validity, the correlations between two Forms and the insight problem task were .17 and .25 (ps ＜ .05). In the discriminant validity, there were no significant correlations between two Forms and the Unusual Uses of the Chopsticks Test (rs between .00~.13, ps ＞ .05). In conclusion, CWRAT-A has good reliability and validity and could be an effective measurement for assessing adolescent's closed- ended creative potential.起始頁-結束頁：167-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：「兒童五大人格特質量表」之信效度及測量不變性：探索性結構方程模式取向並列篇名：Reliability, Validity, and Measurement Invariance of Children's Five-Factor Personality Scale: An Exploratory Structural Equation Modeling Approach作者：張存真(Tsung-Jen Chang);游錦雲(Ching-Yun Yu)關鍵字：人格特質;五因素模式;探索性結構方程模式;測量不變性;exploratory structural equation modeling;five-factor model;measurement invariance;personality traits期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在編製適用於國小五年級學童之「兒童五大人格特質量表」，比較驗證性因素分析（CFA）與探索性結構方程模式（ESEM）的模式適配度、檢視量表之因素結構，並檢驗量表的跨性別測量不變性。本研究依據人格五因素理論編製「兒童五大人格特質量表」，在預試方面，以290名國小五年級學童為對象，經項目分析篩選題目；在正式樣本方面，採分層隨機叢集抽樣，抽取全臺灣28所學校共2,056位國小五年級學童為受試對象，隨機平分為2組樣本，以樣本一比較ESEM與CFA模式的適配度，檢視量表的因素結構，據此修正模式與篩選試題，再以樣本二交叉驗證此修正模式的適配性，並進行跨性別的測量不變性檢定。研究結果顯示，「兒童五大人格特質量表」56題修正模式的因素結構符合理論假設，ESEM模式具有良好的信效度，且多群組ESEM分析結果亦顯示量表具跨性別測量不變性。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to develop the Children's Five-Factor Personality Scale and to test its reliability, validity and measurement invariance across gender. Due to the overly restrictive assumptions, confirmatory factor analyses (CFA) typically fail to support the five-factor structure of personality. We show that an approach of the exploratory structural equation modeling (ESEM), an integration of CFA and exploratory factor analysis (EFA), can overcome these problems. The items were originally developed based on the five-factor theory of personality and related literature, and were revised according to experts' comments. A pilot study with item analyses was conducted to evaluate psychometric quality of items and to select items. Later, using stratified cluster sampling method, a sample of 2,056 5th graders was collected from 28 elementary schools in Taiwan. An ESEM was conducted to exam the factor structures and compared with the CFA model. The final version of the scale includes 56 items. The construct validity, convergent validity and measurement invariance across gender were examined and discussed in the study. The results show the scale exert good reliability and validity with measurement invariance across gender.起始頁-結束頁：191-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：「臺灣簡明版世界衛生組織生活品質問卷」之信度概化研究並列篇名：Reliability Generalization Study on the Taiwan Version of the WHOQOL-BREF作者：林立中(Li-Chung Lin);蘇意晴(Yi-Ching Su);姚開屏(Grace Yao)關鍵字：信度概化;臺灣版WHOQOL-BREF;reliability generalization;Taiwan version of WHOQOL-BREF期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：與「簡明版世界衛生組織生活品質問卷」（WHOQOL-BREF）相同，「臺灣簡明版世界衛生組織生活品質問卷」已廣泛應用至國內各研究領域。雖分數信度為效度係數、效果量等統計量的基礎，然文獻上缺乏該量表之分數信度的研究。信度概化法（reliability generalization, RG）採用後設分析方法，以探討某一測量工具之跨研究分數信度的心理計量特徵，及其分數信度與研究特徵的關係，為檢驗分數信度的重要工具。因此，本研究採用RG以探討「臺灣版WHOQOL-BREF」之四範疇分數信度的心理計量表現。本研究從「臺灣博碩士論文知識加值系統」與「華藝線上圖書館」兩個資料庫，以「WHOQOL」或「世界衛生組織生活品質」作為關鍵字蒐集2000年至2015年8月使用「臺灣版WHOQOL-BREF」的博碩士論文，刪除不符合研究目的之論文後，共納入248篇。除分析其分數信度的描述統計，並採用多重方法如迴歸分析、相關分析、t考驗、變異數分析，以檢驗分數信度與研究特徵的關係。研究結果顯示，四範疇之跨研究的平均分數信度高於.70，且其標準差低於.09，顯示此四範疇的分數信度具跨研究穩定性。四範疇之量表分數標準差可顯著預測該範疇之分數信度，且部分範疇之分數信度受教育程度、宗教信仰、樣本年齡的影響。建議未來在評估是否使用「臺灣版WHOQOL-BREF」時，需考量這些研究變項，尤其是在生理健康與環境範疇上。英文摘要：As the short version of the World Health Organization Quality of Life questionnaire (WHOQOL- BREF), Taiwan version of WHOQOL-BREF is widely used in various research fields. Although the score reliability is the foundation of statistics, such as validity coefficient and effect size, the study about score reliability of WHOQOL-BREF Taiwan version is rare. By using meta-analysis method, reliability generalization (RG) is a powerful approach for examining the psychometric properties of score reliability and assessing the study characteristics associated with score reliability. The present study therefore utilized RG to examine psychometric performance of the score reliability from four domains of the Taiwan version of the WHOQOL-BREF. This study used the keywords, WHOQOL and World Health Organization Quality of Life, to collect doctoral and master dissertations (from 1998 to the May 2019) which used the WHOQOL-BREF Taiwan version from two databases: National Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations in Taiwan and Airiti Library. After deleted dissertations which were incompatible with the purpose of this study, 248 dissertations were included. In addition to analyzing descriptive statistics of score reliability from these dissertations, variety of statistic methods (such as regression analysis, correlation analysis, t-test, and analysis of variance) were conducted to examine the relationship between score reliability and study characteristics. The findings showed that the mean score reliability of four domains of WHOQOL-BREF Taiwan version were higher than .70 and their standard deviations were lower than .09, indicating that WHOQOL- BREF Taiwan revealed consistency across studies. Moreover, the standard deviations of scores from these four domains could significantly predict their score reliability, as well as parts of their score reliability were influenced by study characteristics such as education level, religious beliefs, and age of study participants.We suggested that when assessing whether to use WHOQOL-BREF Taiwan version or not, researchers need to consider the influence of these study characteristics, especially for physical health and environmental domains.起始頁-結束頁：215-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：「大學生學習責任感量表」的發展與效度分析之研究並列篇名：The Scale Development and Validation of the College Student Learning Responsibility作者：邱紹一(Shao-I Chiu);洪福源(Fu-Yuan Hong);黃志<U+706F>(Chih-Teng Huang)關鍵字：效標關聯效度;學習責任感;驗證性因素分析;confirmatory factor analysis;criterion-related validity;learning responsibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：培育學生的學習責任感，不但是教育發展的重要課題，更是學生未來成功就業所必備的指標。本研究根據學習責任感的定義與內涵，邀請六位教育心理專家進行量表之效度審查，經探索性因素分析、驗證性因素分析與效標關聯效度分析，編製「大學生學習責任感量表」，以臺灣964位大學生為樣本進行探究。研究結果顯示：（1）經因素分析歸納出大學生學習責任感的三個因素：「良好的學習態度」、「嘗試學習與遵守規則」、「課堂間的學習行為」。其中，以「嘗試學習與遵守規則」最具解釋力，同時也是現況最佳者，突顯了這種學習責任感在大學生學習經驗上的重要地位，且這三個因素所構成的量表具有良好的信效度；（2）本研究進一步以「學生自我效能」、「內控信念」等二個層面來考驗本量表的效標關聯效度，結果也發現本量表有不錯的效度，其中以「學生自我效能」的效標關聯效度最高。最後，本研究進行討論，並對未來研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：Cultivating students' sense of learning responsibility is not only the most important issue in educational development but it is essential indicators of the future success of students for employment. According to the definition and contents of learning responsibility, and inviting six educational psychologist for the validity of the scale review, this study developed university students' learning responsibility scale. There were 964 university students participated in this study and found that: (a) three latent variables containing ”good learning attitude”, ”trying to learn and abide by the rules” and ”learning behavior in the classroom”. These three factors constitute the scale has good reliability and validity; (b) the study further analyze criterion-related validity of this scale by student self-efficacy and internal locus of control. The results also found that this scale has good validity, with ”student self-efficacy” was the highest. Based on the findings of this study, discussion and suggestions were made for practical work for the school and for future research.起始頁-結束頁：95-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：Taiwanese Traditional-Chinese Childhood Executive Functioning Inventory: Revision, Investigation of Psychometric Properties, and Establishing of Norms並列篇名：「繁體中文兒童執行功能量表」（TC-CHEXI）：編修、心理計量特質檢驗與常模建立作者：蔡青霖(Ching-Lin Tsai);Lisa B. Thorell;Angela F. Y. Siu;許育軒(Yu-Hsuan Hsu);林慧麗(Hui-Li Lin)關鍵字：CHEXI;children;developmental norms;executive functioning;Taiwanese traditional-Chinese version;兒童;兒童執行功能量表;執行功能;發展常模;繁體中文版期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study aimed to create a Taiwanese version of the Childhood Executive Functioning Inventory, examine the psychometric properties of the Taiwanese CHEXI (TC-CHEXI), and establish developmental norms of the TC-CHEXI. The original CHEXI is an open-access multilinguistic scale for measuring children's executive functioning (EF) comprising four subscales: working memory, planning, inhibition, and regulation. The responses of parents and teachers on the CHEXI can be used for primary screening of EF deficits. Our study consisted of three phases. (i) Phase One: After rewording the 26-item Hong Kong version of the CHEXI into Mandarin, a 24-item TC-CHEXI was established based on factor analyses of data from 130 children. (ii) Phase Two: more than 320 schools were randomly sampled and invited to join the study. A total of 2,821 parent ratings and 92 teacher ratings of children aged 4-12 years old were collected. The psychometric properties of this representative sample were examined and developmental norms were established. (iii) Phase Three: the TC-CHEXI and SNAP-IV of a separate sample (n = 133) of fifth and sixth graders were collected to investigate how the two correlate. A 4-factor model with working memory, planning, inhibition and regulation constituting separate subscales demonstrated the best overall fit, except in the 4-year-old group. The TC-CHEXI and SNAP-IV were correlated. The TC-CHEXI is a valid tool that parents and teachers can use to evaluate the EF of Taiwanese children and may be used as a primary screening tool for educational and medical purposes.英文摘要：本研究旨在編修適合臺灣本地使用的「繁體中文兒童執行功能量表」（Taiwanese Traditional Chinese Childhood Executive Functioning Inventory, TC-CHEXI），並檢驗信效度與建立分齡本地4至12歲常模，做為初步篩檢執行功能缺損的參考。原量表有多種語言版本，包含四個次量表：工作記憶（WM）、計畫（PLAN）、調適（REG）與抑制（INHIB）。TC-CHEXI改編自香港繁體中文版本（原26題），考慮臺灣中文使用習慣，逐字編修。本研究有三個階段：階段一初步研究使用編修後26題版本，以130名本地兒童為樣本，根據驗證性因素分析結果保留其中24題，並接著以探索性因素分析檢視四個次量表下的題項，進行微調。第二階段研究重新隨機抽樣，以複核驗證此一新四因子模式，並建立本地常模，全臺隨機抽出超過320所小學與幼兒園，全數發出邀請函，最後收回2,821位家長與92位教師填寫之有效問卷。家長的部分以驗證性因素分析重新檢視新的四因子模式，結果顯示四因子模式適配度最佳。本研究最後階段另以獨立抽樣的國小高年級學生樣本，檢驗共時效標效度。本研究結果支持TC-CHEXI各項心理計量指標皆顯示可做為工作記憶、計畫、調適與抑制等面向執行功能的初步篩選。本研究結果提供4至12歲分齡TC-CHEXI總分與次量表常模，除可供未來本地醫療臨床與教育實務／研究者使用之外，因CHEXI有多種語言版本，有利於跨國合作研究。起始頁-結束頁：119-143資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會10篇名：適用於小班教學現場之部分連結神經網路認知診斷模式並列篇名：A Cognitive Diagnosis Model Based on Partially Connected Neural Network and Its Application on Small-Class Teaching作者：李政軒(Cheng-Hsuan Li);謝佩鈞(Pei-Jyun Hsieh);劉志勇(Zhi-Young Liu)關鍵字：DBV;DINA;GDINA;深度學習;部分連結神經網路;認知診斷模式;Cognitive diagnosis models;DINA;GDINA;Partially connected neural network;deep learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：認知診斷模式已經被應用到不同學科領域中，以細部了解學生在技能概念的精熟與否。然而，常見的參數型認知診斷模式，如DINA（Deterministic Input, Noisy ”And” Gate）模式和廣義DINA（Generalized DINA, GDINA）模式，都需要一定數量的訓練樣本，才能有好的預測效果，故DINA與GDINA不太適用於目前小班制的教學現場。本研究提出一個部分連結的神經網路模式，不同於傳統的全連結神經網路模式，透過試題與技能對應的Q矩陣，來決定試題與概念之間的連結。也就是說，學生的特定技能概念具備與否，應該只與需要使用到該技能概念的試題對錯有關。最後再利用理想作答反應來訓練網路連結的權重，這種訓練方式不需要使用到學生的真實作答反應，只要在命題時，設計好該試卷的Q矩陣，便可以透過Q矩陣推得的理想作答反應來求得網路連結權重。由模擬資料和「分數乘法」實證資料實驗結果顯示，部分連結神經網路認知診斷模式在小樣本的情況下，分類一致性優於DINA模式與GDINA模式。因此，此模式可以適用於目前小班教學現場，甚至可以搭配網路教學平臺進行個人化診斷評量，即在單一學生情況下，也可以進行概念精熟診斷。英文摘要：Cognitive diagnosis models (CDMs) classify examinees' mastery skill profiles according to their test performance and Q matrix, the mapping between items and skills. They have been applied to many but different research areas such as language assessment, psychology, and international testing. Moreover, they are also be applied to adaptive learning or personalized learning. DINA (Deterministic Input, Noisy ”And” Gate Model) and its generalized version, GDINA (Generalized DINA) are two well-known models in CDMs. However, both of them need a certain amount of examinees' responses to train and pre-determine appropriate models' parameters. Hence, they are not suitable for small-class teaching. In this study, a partially connected neural network for cognitive diagnostic (PNNCD) was proposed. The connections between nodes in the input layer and nodes in the output layer are determined by the Q matrix. The reason is that only items required specific skill can influence the mastery level of the skill. Moreover, the ideal responses, directly determined by the Q matrix of the test, are used to train the model weights. That is, the proposed model is not trained by examinees' responses, and, hence, it can be directly applied to only one examinee situation. According to experiments on both simulated data sets and a real data set, the proposed PNNCD outperforms than DINA and GDINA in small sample size. Therefore, PNNCD is more appropriate to apply in the small-class teaching.起始頁-結束頁：145-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：書評：把知識帶回來：從社會建構主義到社會實在主義的教育社會學並列篇名：Book Review: "Bring Knowledge Back in: From Social Constructivism to Social Realism in the Sociology of Education"作者：卯靜儒(Chin-Ju Mao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：211-221資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2201.0601篇名：圖書館支持行動學習的研究趨勢：2009∼2018年學術期刊文獻回顧並列篇名：Trends of Library-Supported Mobile Learning: A Review of 2009-2018 Journal Publications作者：涂芸芳(Yun-Fang Tu);黃國禎(Gwo-Jen Hwang);陳俊魁(Chun-Kuei Chen)關鍵字：行動學習;研究議題;圖書館支持行動學習;學習設計策略;mobile learning;research issues;library-supported mobile learning;learning design strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：圖書館擁有豐富的館藏資源，具有支持研究、教學與學習等方面的重要任務。本研究以活動設計策略、應用領域、圖書館類型和研究議題的角度，針對Scopus資料庫中，2009<U+223C>2018年圖書館支持行動學習的文獻進行回顧與分析。研究結果得知，圖書館支持行動學習的研究，以採用探究學習模式為最多，其次為情境式行動學習。與學術圖書館相關的研究，最常採用行動學習活動的設計策略為直接引導學習法；在專門圖書館方面，以探究學習模式最常被採用；數位圖書館則是結合實際場域的學習活動，配合探究學習模式。圖書館支持行動學習在應用領域的部分，以未涉及應用領域（如探討學習者對圖書館支持行動學習的使用感受、經驗等）最多，其次為科學，再次為歷史文化。這些研究討論的議題側重於學習者的學習感受、動機與知識的學習，而在培養學習者的高層次思考及合作學習傾向的討論較少。根據本研究結果提出一些研究議題和對未來圖書館支持行動學習的建議。英文摘要：Libraries, with a large amount of resources, play the role of supporting people in various aspects, such as research, teaching and learning. This study reviews and analyzes the library-supported mobile learning studies published in the Scopus database from 2009 to 2018 from the perspectives of library types, learning strategies adopted, application domains, and research issues. According to the analysis results, most of the studies of library-supported mobile learning studies focused on inquiry-based learning, followed by contextual mobile learning. Academic libraries have the most commonly used action learning design strategies are direct-guided learning methods; special libraries are most commonly used in inquiry-based learning models; digital libraries are based on actual fields. Learning activities, the most commonly used inquiry learning mode. The library supports the part of action learning in the field of application, with the largest number of unbound learning areas, the second is science, and the third is history and culture. The topics discussed in these studies focus on learners' learning, motivation, and knowledge learning, while there is less discussion in cultivating learners' high-level thinking and cooperative learning tendencies. As well, based on the results of this study, some research topics and suggestions for future library support action learning are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20201012040012篇名：行動學習在醫學教育的應用趨勢：1998∼2019年的文獻分析並列篇名：Mobile Learning in Medical Education: Trends Analysis from 1998 to 2019作者：蘇文崧(Wen-Song Su);黃仁勇(Ren-Yeong Huang);張靜宜(Ching-Yi Chang)關鍵字：行動學習;教學議題;學習策略;醫學教育;mobile learning;teaching issues;learning strategies;medical education期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：在過去幾十年中，全球廣泛討論及探討與行動學習有關的議題。然而，行動學習在醫學教育中的應用發展趨勢仍缺乏系統分析。本研究針對1998<U+223C>2019年發表在國際期刊的行動學習於醫學教育的研究論文進行系統回顧，分析其應用領域、科目、採用的學習策略及探討的議題。從回顧研究結果發現，行動科技的進步使得在醫學教育中行動學習研究的數量不斷增加，研究議題也愈來愈多樣性；同時，行動學習主要應用於培養基礎醫學知識與技能的學習，以及輔助醫療決策。此外，本研究亦發現，醫學教育中很少廣泛採用行動學習策略，如探索式學習、情境行動學習、電腦心智圖、遊戲學習和同步分享。此亦反映大多數研究集中在技能培訓和基礎知識理解上，而在培養學習者的高層次思考能力的領域卻很少；另一方面，發現近年來使用問卷調查的研究數量有所增加，大多數研究報告以問卷調查分析學習者的認知表現和觀念，而學習行為很少被分析。因此，本研究提出的行動學習在醫學教育現階段的研究趨勢和潛在研究問題發現，可作為研究人員、醫學教育教師和研究者結合臨床實務培訓的參考。英文摘要：In the past decade, mobile learning (ML) has been a widely discussed issue in the globe. However, the ML there is a lack of systematic review on the trend of mobile learning in medical education (ME). In this paper, a systematic review was conducted to analyze the ML in ME articles published in international journals from 1998 to 2019 from the aspects of application domains, subjects, adopted learning strategies and research foci. The review results reveal that the advancement of mobile technology has led to the increment of ML in ME studies; moreover, the research foci of the studies have become more and more diverse. It is also found that ML is mainly used for basic medical knowledge and skill training as well as supporting medical decision making. In addition, several ML strategies, such as inquiry-based learning, situated mobile learning, computers as Mindtools, game-based learning, and synchronized knowledge sharing, are rarely adopted in ME. This implies that most research focused on skills training and basic knowledge delivering, while learners' high-order thinking skills were not sufficiently taken into account. On the other hand, it is found that the number of studies using questionnaires for issue investigating is increased in recent years. Furthermore, most studies reported learners' cognitive performances and learning perceptions, while their learning behaviors were rarely investigated. Accordingly, this study proposes the research trends and potential research issues of ML in ME, which can be a reference of researchers, instructors, and policy makers of ME.起始頁-結束頁：23-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20201012040023篇名：科技支持原住民語言學習的研究趨勢與議題：1997∼2019年期刊文獻分析並列篇名：Research Trends and Issues of Technology-Supported Indigenous Language Learning: A Review of 1997-2019 Journal Publications作者：阿將伊崮喜瀾(Aciang Iku-Silan)關鍵字：文獻分析;行為發展或改變;原住民語言;高階思考或能力;傳統知識;literature review;behavior development or change;indigenous language;high-order thinking or competence;traditional knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：原住民語言具備文化保存性、多樣化、稀少和口傳等特性，在學習語言的過程中，原住民學習者除了瞭解單字及語法，更需要伴隨文化和傳統知識學習。本研究為近30年以來的第一份與國際原住民語言有關科技文獻探討的研究，針對1997<U+223C>2019年目標期刊以數位科技進行原住民語言相關的55篇文獻，進行質性編碼和內容分析。研究結果顯示，影響目標語言、課程或內容知識和資訊與通訊科技的學習結果主要有「高階思考或能力」、「行為發展或改變」及「情意或心理狀態」。許多L1母語為瀕危語言，與「詞彙」有關的「創意能力」也成為最具成長的「高階思考或能力」。「科技支持語言互動」為「行為發展或改變」數量最多的次項目；「相關同理心」為文獻最常提及的次項目，「一般認知或態度」和「科技接受度／評估」並列第二。第二階段以「協作能力」數量居冠，其次為「溝通能力」。就正規和非正規課程而言，結合課內外學習、強調傳統知識的「跨階層」文獻數量最多，專注語言學習的「國小」階段次之；「鷹架」為最常運用的教學策略，其次為「雙語雙文化」。因此，強調傳統知識和非西方科學差異、運用創意學習母語、採用鷹架等策略於雙向學習課程，以及重視認同感和意識形態的教學認知等，皆為本研究的重要貢獻。英文摘要：Indigenous language has the characteristics of cultural preservation, diversity, scarcity and oral communication in heritage, in the language learning process, indigenous learners need to learn along with culture and traditional knowledge in addition to understanding vocabularies and grammars. The present study is the first review study related to technology-supported indigenous language learning. There are totally 55 articles published from 1997 to 2019 in the target journals. The researchers of the present study conducted analyzed the publications using qualitative coding for content analysis. The learning results that affect the ”target language”, ”curriculum or content learning”, information and communication technology mainly include ”higher-order thinking or competence”, ”behavior development or change” and ”affective or psychological state”. Owing to the fact that many L1 languages are ”endangered language”, ”vocabulary” related to creative learning methods causing ”creativity” has the most increasing growth on ”high-order thinking or competence”. ”Tech-supported linguistic interaction” of ”behavior development or change” accounted for the greatest number. ”empathy related” is the most often mentioned sub-item in the studies, followed by ”general perceptions or attitudes” and ”technology acceptance/evaluation.” As far as each item of the second stage is concerned, the literature number of ”collaborative competence” research ranks first, followed by ”communicative competence”. In terms of formal and informal curriculum, the ”cross-level” consists of integrating in and out of class learning with emphasis on traditional knowledge accounted for the greatest number, the subsequent part falls on the ”elementary school” stage, focusing on various language acquisition methods. ”scaffolding” of ”teaching strategy” is the most commonly used strategy, followed by ”bilingual-bicultural”. Therefore, emphasizing the differences between indigenous traditional knowledge and non-western sciences; using creativity to learn mother tongue; adopting strategies such as scaffolding in two-way learning courses; and teaching cognition that values identity and ideology are important contributions to this research.起始頁-結束頁：51-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20201012040034篇名：科學教育的翻轉學習研究趨勢：2012∼2019年學術期刊文獻回顧並列篇名：Research Trends of Flipped Science Learning: A Review of Journal Publications from 2012-2019作者：郭彥谷(Yen-Ku Kuo);陳俊魁(Chun-Kuei Chen);黃能堂(Neng-Tang Norman Huang)關鍵字：研究議題;科學;學習策略;翻轉學習;research issues;science;learning strategies;flipped learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以翻轉教室的科技學習模型為基礎，回顧Web of Science資料庫進行SSCI文獻分析。以2012<U+223C>2019年翻轉教室應用於科學教育為主題，探討及分析文獻之作者國籍、應用領域、研究方法、研究對象、學習策略及研究議題等。從回顧結果觀之，科學教育翻轉教室的研究，自2015年起即大量提出；此領域的研究有近半數來自美國；應用的學科領域主要為化學、物理、自然科學與生態學及生物；研究方法大多採用量化研究法；研究對象以高等教育學生占大部分；而在科學教育應用翻轉教室研究之課前階段，主要使用教學影片作為教材，並以網路學習平臺為播放及線上討論媒介；在課中階段的教學策略，最主要的是問題導向學習活動，且少數研究有使用教學科技；在課後階段，大多數研究會採用測驗來檢視學習成效。此外，也有許多研究以學習成就、學習者意見／學習經驗、態度及動機、滿意度／興趣、高層次思考，以及合作溝通等議題進行探討。藉由文獻分析結果，本研究提出翻轉教室應用於科學教育之研究趨勢，並提出未來可再探討之議題，作為後續相關研究的參考。英文摘要：Using the WOS (Web of Science) database, this study identified the SSCI (Social Sciences Citation Index) literature on the application of the technology-based learning model for flipped classrooms in science education from 2012 to 2019. We discuss and analyze authors' nationalities, application fields, study methods, participants, learning strategies and research issues. According to the results of the review, studies on flipped classrooms have grown dramatically since 2015; more than half of the related studies came from the United States, and were mostly in the fields of chemistry, physics, natural science, ecology, and biology. Study methods were quantitative, and participants were mostly students in higher education. In the before-class stage of the flipped classrooms, teaching videos were used as the main material, and Internet-based learning platforms were used for watching and discussing online. Teaching strategies during the class focused on problem-based learning activities, with several studies applying teaching technology. In the after-class stage, most studies viewed the learning effectiveness via examinations. Most studies conducted discussions on issues such as learning effectiveness, learners' opinions/experiences, attitude and motives, level of satisfaction/interest, higher order skills, and collaboration or communication. According to the results of the literature analysis, this study identified a trend in the application of flipped classrooms in science education. It also provides possible future discussions for reference.起始頁-結束頁：85-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20201012040045篇名：導入頭戴式虛擬實境於學習成效、心流體驗與認知負荷之探究：以昆蟲課程為例並列篇名：Effects of Applying Head-Mounted Virtual Reality in Insect Education on Achievement, Flow Experience, and Cognitive Load作者：陳又菁(Yu-Ching Chen)關鍵字：三階段學習環;心流體驗;認知負荷;頭戴式虛擬實境;three-phase learning cycle;flow experience;cognitive load;head-mounted virtual reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：在目前的昆蟲課程中，由於昆蟲本身體型、活動力及地點與季節的限制，阻礙了學生能夠近距離觀察的機會，致使學生在昆蟲的成長歷程與外型構造上經常產生混淆，而虛擬實境可打破時間與空間的限制，讓學習者能以強調互動與探索的方式進行學習，頭戴式裝置的普及更能貼近真實的情境，讓學習者能沉浸在學習的環境中並提高學習興趣。但研究發現，虛擬實境可能會帶來較高的認知負荷而無法確保產生較佳的學習成效，而探究式教學著重以學生進行探究活動為中心，並透過引導的過程幫助降低認知負荷，與虛擬實境著重沉浸式的探索環境相輔相成，因此，本研究目的即為運用探究式教學的三階段學習環結合頭戴式虛擬實境，期望提供適合學習者進行探索的昆蟲學習系統，藉以提升國小學生的昆蟲教育成效，並進一步探究其心流經驗、認知負荷的差異與學習經驗。本研究結果發現，運用頭戴式虛擬實境融入三階段學習環可幫助提升學習成效，並帶來較高的心流體驗及有效認知負荷，且能降低學習者之外在認知負荷，此結果可提供未來設計頭戴式虛擬實境融入教學之參考。英文摘要：In the current curriculum, the limitation of location, season, and appearance of insects eliminate students to observe the insects closely. The students usually are confused with insects appearance and growing process. Virtual reality removes the limitation of time and space and facilitates students to learn and explore more actively. The head-mounted devices provide a more immersive environment for students to enhance their learning motivation. Studies found virtual reality may result in higher cognitive load and hinder learning. Inquiry-based learning emphasizes students exploration and provides guidance to decrease students cognitive load. The learning strategy could be suitable in virtual reality. In this study, the three-phase learning cycle model and head-mounted virtual reality were combined to improve insect education. The students flow experience, cognitive load, and learning experiences were also compared and discussed. The results showed that the proposed learning environment improved learning outcome, flow experience, and germane cognitive load. Moreover, students had lower extrinsic cognitive load than the control group. The results would be valuable for instructional designers when integrating head-mounted virtual reality into insect education in the future.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20200712030016篇名：STEM模式整合穿戴式擴增實境和穿戴式虛擬實境應用於科學教育：探討科學學習自我效能來源對高中生科學學習自我效能和學習成效之影響並列篇名：Application of the STEM Model Integrated with the Wearable Augmented Reality and Wearable Virtual Reality in Science Education: Effect of the Sources of Science Learning Self-Efficacy on High School Students' Science Learning Self-Efficacy and Performance作者：游師柔(Shih-Jou Yu);葉宣靈(Syuan-Ling Ye);孫之元(Jerry Chih-Yuan Sun)關鍵字：STEM;科學學習自我效能;科學學習自我效能來源;穿戴式虛擬實境;穿戴式擴增實境;STEM;science learning self-efficacy;sources of science learning self-efficacy;wearable virtual reality;wearable augmented reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究將穿戴式擴增實境與穿戴式虛擬實境融入STEM教育模式，探討高中生使用穿戴式擴增實境與穿戴式虛擬實境進行科學學習的科學學習自我效能來源對科學學習自我效能與學習成效之影響。研究對象為修習基礎物理實驗課程的三個班級，共98位高中一年級學生，分為傳統教學組、穿戴式擴增實境組與穿戴式擴增實境混合穿戴式虛擬實境組，三組於學習後，皆需完成科學學習自我效能來源量表、科學學習自我效能量表及學習成效測驗。根據多元迴歸分析結果顯示，在傳統教學組中，掌握經驗顯著正向預測科學學習自我效能，在穿戴式擴增實境混合穿戴式虛擬實境組，則是替代經驗顯著正向預測科學學習自我效能，以及生理與情感狀態顯著負向預測學習成效。研究結果證實，傳統教學仍存有透過掌握經驗預測科學學習自我效能的優勢，和傳統教學相較，穿戴式擴增實境混合穿戴式虛擬實境學習情境除了具有透過替代經驗預測科學學習自我效能外，還能透過生理與情感狀態預測學習成效。換言之，穿戴式擴增實境混合穿戴式虛擬實境學習情境能預測兩種面向。本研究建議教學者結合穿戴式擴增實境混合穿戴式虛擬實境與替代經驗和生理與情感狀態的教學策略，輔助學習者學習科學實驗，可有效改善學習者的科學學習自我效能與學習成效。英文摘要：This study integrates wearable augmented reality and wearable virtual reality into the STEM model and examines the effect of the sources of science learning self-efficacy on high school students' science learning self-efficacy and performance. A total of 98 high school students from three basic physical experiment courses participated in this study. They were divided into a traditional teaching group, a wearable augmented reality group, and a mixed group with both wearable augmented reality and virtual reality. After learning, participants completed a sources of science learning self-efficacy instrument, a science learning self-efficacy scale, and a learning performance test. The results of the multiple regression analysis indicated that mastery experience positively predicted science learning self-efficacy in the traditional group. As for the mixed group, the vicarious experience positively predicted science learning self-efficacy; the somatic and emotional states negatively predicted learning performance. The results showed that traditional teaching still has benefits for predicting learners' science learning self-efficacy by mastery experience. In comparison to traditional teaching, wearable augmented reality mixed with wearable virtual reality can predict not only science learning self-efficacy by vicarious experience but also learning performance by somatic and emotional states. In other words, wearable augmented reality mixed with wearable virtual reality can predict two directions. The study suggests that instructors can use the strategies of vicarious experience as well as somatic and emotional states with wearable augmented reality mix wearable virtual reality to help learners in the science experiment courses, which improves learners' science learning self-efficacy and performance.起始頁-結束頁：25-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20200712030027篇名：探索擴增實境科學小說閱讀對大專院校學生的科學知識觀之影響及認知負荷感受並列篇名：Exploring Higher Education Students' Scientific Epistemic Change and Their Cognitive Load Through Augmented Reality Science Novel Reading作者：鄭琨鴻(Kun-Hung Cheng)關鍵字：科學小說;科學知識觀;認知負荷;擴增實境;science novel;scientific epistemic belief;cognitive load;augmented reality期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：過去研究指出，閱讀多元或具衝突觀點文章對於學生的知識觀改變有正面影響，且對於擴增實境科技輔助知識觀改變的研究探索有限，因此，本研究採用結合擴增實境技術的科學小說系統，期望藉由閱讀以衝突科學理論觀點為文本基礎的短篇小說，探討導入擴增實境的科學小說對學習者的科學知識觀之影響及其認知負荷感受。本研究共邀請65位大學生與研究生參與擴增實境科學小說的閱讀活動，科學知識觀前後測的結果發現，擴增實境科學小說可促進高等教育學生的絕對觀點取向之科學知識觀改變，且進一步的性別與學科背景差異分析發現，擴增實境科學小說的呈現形式對於女性或具社會科學背景的學生較有幫助。雖然學生的認知負荷感受沒有顯著的性別與學科背景差異，但本研究透過集群分析將學生的認知負荷感受分為三種類別：「高內在認知負荷組」、「高外在認知負荷組」及「適量整體認知負荷組」，發現「高外在認知負荷組」的學生較無法從本閱讀活動中獲益。雖然本研究結果無法證實擴增實境科學小說閱讀對於成熟科學知識觀信念的正面影響，但基於更進一步的教學策略及系統設計提議，本研究提出以擴增實境科學小說閱讀策略來增進科學知識觀發展的想法可供未來研究參考。英文摘要：Previous studies have indicated that reading text with information of conflicting viewpoints may positively foster changes of learners' epistemic beliefs. Research on the exploration of facilitating epistemic change with the aid of augmented reality (AR) technology was also limited. Therefore, this study was conducted to examine students' scientific epistemic change and their perceived cognitive load when involving in reading a scientific novel with controversial science theory by AR technology. This study invited 65 undergraduate and graduate students to participate in the AR science novel reading activity. The results of pretest-posttest for scientific epistemic change showed that the AR science novel in this study could significantly facilitate the absolutist scientific epistemic change of the students in higher education. Further analyses for gender and major background differences addressed that the AR science novel may be helpful for females and the ones majoring in social science. There were no gender and major background differences in the students' perceived cognitive load found in this study. A series of cluster analysis to generate three types of cognitive load including (1) cluster 1: ”high intrinsic cognitive load group,” (2) cluster 2: ”high extraneous cognitive load group,” and (3) cluster 3: ”balanced cognitive load group” was further conducted. The results showed that the students in the ”high extraneous cognitive load group” may not be benefited through the AR science novel reading. Despite the fact that the sophisticated epistemic beliefs could not be facilitated in this study, we proposed some instructional approaches and suggestions for AR book system design to reinforce students' development of sophisticated scientific epistemic beliefs for future work.起始頁-結束頁：59-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20200712030038篇名：行動式擴增實境學習系統對情境興趣與學習成效之影響性：以戶外古蹟導覽教育課程為例並列篇名：The Impact of Mobile Augmented Reality Learning System on Situational Interest and Learning Effectiveness: A Case Study of Outdoor Heritage Guide Education Course作者：金凱儀(Kai-Yi Chin);張懷綾(Huai-Ling Chang)關鍵字：戶外教學活動;行動式學習系統;情境興趣;擴增實境技術;outdoor guide education course;mobile augmented reality learning system;situational interest;augmented reality technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究提出一套以擴增實境技術為基礎的行動式擴增實境學習系統，用以探討相較於傳統的行動式學習系統，透過擴增實境技術支援學習者於從事戶外古蹟考察與教學活動時，是否可刺激學習者產生暫時性的情境興趣，並進而影響他們的學習成效與興趣之表現。因此，本研究採用淡水發展史中的馬偕文化為主要教學內容，並以淡水區附近的六棟文物博物館為主，將82位大學生分為實驗組（使用行動式擴增實境學習系統）與對照組（使用傳統的行動式學習系統），以各自完成所規劃的戶外導覽與學習活動；實驗過程中，兩組學生亦需參與學習成效評估的前、後測考試，以及情境興趣量表調查，以衡量學生的學習成效與情境興趣之差異性。最後，透過本研究的實驗結果可證實，學生使用本研究所提供的行動式擴增實境學習系統，相較於沒有擴增實境功能的傳統式行動學習系統，無論是在學習成效和提升興趣的表現上，都呈現出較優異的成果，尤其是在學習成效上的記憶力表現，以及情境興趣裡的潛在興趣、文本興趣與任務興趣之表現，皆有差異化的顯著成果。故本研究認為，即使是在具有豐富學習資源的實體環境中，只要能適當地將擴增實境技術導入於戶外教學活動，並搭配實體物件協助學習者掌握或複習學習重點，可有效地促進學生的學習成效，並刺激其情境興趣與學習動機。英文摘要：This study proposes a set of mobile augmented reality learning system based on the augmented reality (AR) technology. The purpose is to explore that compared with the traditional mobile learning systems, whether the application of AR technology to support learners' outdoor heritage investigation and teaching activities can stimulate learners' temporary situational interest and then affect their learning effectiveness and performance of interest. Therefore, this study uses the Mackay Culture in the development history of Tamsui District as the main teaching content, and focuses on six heritage museums near Tamsui District. A total of 82 college students are divided into the experimental group (using mobile AR learning system) and the control group (using traditional mobile learning system). They need to complete the planned outdoor guide and learning activities respectively. In the process of the experiment, students in both groups need to participate in the pre-test and post-test on their learning effectiveness, as well as the investigation of the situational interest scale in order to measure the difference between the two groups in their learning effectiveness and situational interest. Finally, the experimental results of this study verifies that compared with the traditional learning systems without the AR function, students who use the mobile AR learning system provided by this study performed outstanding results no matter in the learning effectiveness and the improvement of interest, especially in the performance of memory in the aspect of learning effectiveness, and in the performance of potential interest, text interest and task interest in the aspect of situational interest. Therefore, this study believes that even in the physical environment with rich learning resources, as long as the AR technology can be appropriately applied in outdoor teaching activities, combined with the physical objects, to help learners grasp or review learning points, it can absolutely have the potential to promote students' learning effectiveness and stimulate their situational interest and learning motivation.起始頁-結束頁：89-115資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20200712030049篇名：行動社群應用軟體融入美感教育活動對大學生的美感經驗與情境興趣之影響：以Instagram為例並列篇名：The Effect of Integrating Social Media Mobile Application with Aesthetic Education Activities on University Students' Aesthetic Experience and Situational Interest: The Case of Instagram作者：陳又菱(Yu-Ling Chen);孫之元(Jerry Chih-Yuan Sun);陳薇暄(Wei-Hsuan Chen)關鍵字：STEAM教育;社群媒體;美感教育;美感經驗;情境興趣;STEAM education;social media;aesthetic education;aesthetic experience;situational interest期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：2011年美國推廣STEAM教育，特別提出美感教育，而臺灣的十二年國民教育亦將美感教育特別納入為核心素養之一，由此可見美感教育的重要性。因此，本研究將探討以行動社群應用軟體Instagram結合美感教育活動對大學生之美感經驗與情境興趣的影響。本研究採準實驗研究法，以量化資料分析，所招募之受試者分為控制組與實驗組，控制組以個人非公開紀錄的方式進行美感教育活動，實驗組則是使用Instagram的分享功能分享作品與紀錄。研究結果顯示，在美感教育活動中，實驗組在情境興趣之探索性與愉悅感構面顯著高於控制組，而於美感教育活動實施前後，控制組與實驗組的美感經驗皆無差異，可由此推論，利用社群情境與行動載具融入美感教育學習活動對學習者的情境興趣有正向的影響，但有無使用Instagram培養學習者美感經驗其差異程度不大。英文摘要：The STEAM education was promoted in the U.S. in 2011. In Taiwan, the aesthetic education is included as one of the core competencies in the 12-Year Basic Education, indicating the importance of aesthetic education. Therefore, this study investigates the effect of integrating social media mobile application, Instagram, with aesthetic education activities on university students' aesthetic experience and situational interest. The research design adopted a quasi-experimental research method with quantitative data analysis. Participants were assigned into a control group and an experimental group, which consisted of 32 and 34 participants, respectively. The control group used personal recording methods to complete the aesthetic photography activities, while the experimental group used the social media functionality of Instagram to share and record the work. Results showed that exploration intention and instant enjoyment of participants in the experimental group during the aesthetic education activities were higher than those of the control group. In addition, both the control and experimental groups showed no significant differences in their aesthetic experience after the activities. This study suggests that the integration of social media and mobile devices into learning activities has a positive effect on students' situational interest. However, there is no difference in cultivating learners' aesthetic experience.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X202004120200110篇名：電腦輔助環境融入科學建模教學對學生模型建立之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Integrating Computer-Supported Environments into Science Modeling-Based Instructions on Students' Model Construction作者：徐瑛黛(Ying-Tai Hsu);李文瑜(Silvia Wen-Yu Lee)關鍵字：建模教學;概念圖;電腦輔助建模工具;模擬遊戲;modeling-based instruction;concept map;computer-based modeling tool;simulated game期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究將模擬遊戲及電腦建模工具融入「海洋永續」單元，以輔助科學建模的歷程。學生在使用了兩個電腦輔助的學習環境之後，建構概念圖。本研究實施於中臺灣七年級的兩個班級，共50位學生。資料蒐集包括概念圖和學生的生物科學業成績。概念圖的評分是基於三個向度，即「要素數量」、「動態關係」和「複雜性」。研究結果發現，在完成模擬遊戲後，學生在要素數量和複雜性的表現上，均是以等級一的人數居多；之後經過電腦建模工具後，則有大幅的進步。但在動態關係向度上，在完成模擬遊戲後，即有74%的學生可以做到「條件式增加或減少」的最高等級，即使經過電腦建模工具後，亦僅有6%的小幅增加，表示模擬遊戲對動態關係的理解是有幫助的，但若欲增加概念間的要素數量與複雜性，就必須藉由電腦建模工具來輔助，才能建立較完整的概念圖。進而分析高成就和低成就學生在概念圖上的表現，結果顯示使用電腦建模工具後，兩組的要素數量、動態關係和複雜性三個向度的最高級別均有增加。換言之，使用電腦建模工具可縮小高成就和低成就學生之間的學習差距。本研究亦針對電腦輔助環境融入科學建模的教學與評量方式提出建議。英文摘要：In this study, we integrated a simulated game and a computer-based modeling tool into the Sustainable Marine Unit to assist the scientific modeling process. Students constructed concept maps after using the two computer-supported learning environments. The study was conducted in central Taiwan, with 50 students in two seventh-grade classes. Data collection included concept maps and the students' biology school achievement. The concept maps were scored based on three dimensions, namely ”number of elements,” ”dynamic relationship” and ”complexity.” The study found that after completing the simulated game, the students were mostly at level 1 in terms of ”number of elements” and ”complexity,” and after using the computer-based modeling tool, they had large gains in these two dimensions. Nonetheless, in the ”dynamic relationship” dimension, 74% of students achieved the highest level of ”conditional increase or decrease” at the completion of the simulated game. After the use of the computer-based modeling tool, a small increase of 6% existed. The simulated game could support the understanding of the ”dynamic relationship,” while the computer-based modeling tool could improve the ”number of elements” and ”complexity” further. The performance of the high-achieving and low-achieving students on the concept map was also analyzed. Results showed that after using the computer-based modeling tool, the highest level of the three dimensions of ”number of elements,” ”dynamic relationship” and ”complexity” increased for both groups. In other words, the computer-based modeling tool could narrow the learning gap between high-achieving and low-achieving students. This study also provides suggestions for integrating computer-supported learning environments into scientific modeling-based instruction and the relevant assessment.起始頁-結束頁：25-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X202004120200201篇名：選舉制度與族群政治：以新竹縣立法委員選區劃分為例並列篇名：The Electoral System and Ethnic Politics: The Case of Legislative Redistricting in Hsinchu County作者：王保鍵(Wang, Pao-Chien)關鍵字：單一選區多數決;選區檢討劃分;族群政治;立法委員選舉;first-past-the-post;redistricting;ethnic politics;legislative elections期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：選舉制度之設計，涉及應選名額、投票制度、選區劃分等面向。我國立法委員自第7屆起改採單一選區兩票制，依《公職人員選舉罷免法》第35條所定「每10年重新檢討一次」，第10屆區域立法委員新竹縣應選名額由1席增加為2席。本文以文獻分析法，檢視投票制度、選區劃分相關制度設計，並運用投票行為理論，探討第10屆新竹縣立法委員選區劃分，獲致研究發現為：（1）新竹縣立法委員選區，劃分為「閩客混合選區」、「客家選區」，依苗栗縣選區劃分實作經驗，未來可能發展為閩南、客家各1席立法委員之族群政治平衡。（2）民進黨在新竹縣、苗栗縣之「閩客混合選區」，皆提名客家籍候選人，以「政黨及族群雙元認同」模式，爭取勝選。英文摘要：The design of the electoral system includes seats, voting, and electoral districts. From the Seventh Legislative Yuan, the single electoral district and the two-vote system have been adopted. According to Article 35 of the ”Civil Servants Election and Recall Act,” seat distribution in the Legislative Yuan is reconsidered every 10 years to account for changes in the population. In 2020, the number of lawmakers' seats increased from 1 to 2 in Hsinchu County. This study employs a literature review to explore the voting system and legislative redistricting, as well as voting-behavior theory to discuss the issue of redrawing electoral districts in Hsinchu County. The findings include: (1) The legislators' electoral districts of Hsinchu County are divided into a ”Minnan-Hakka mixed constituency” and a ”Hakka constituency”. Learning from Miaoli's experience, Hsinchu may have one Minnan lawmaker and one Hakka lawmaker. (2) In order to win the 2020 legislative election, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) is employing a new campaign strategy, namely, the ”dual identity of political parties and ethnic groups” model, via nominating Hakka candidates in Hsinchu and Miaoli.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202011_27(2).00012篇名：非核家園的民<U+8846>意向：網路輿論的大數據分析並列篇名：Public Orientation on the Nuclear-free Homeland Issue: A Big-Data Analysis of Online Comments作者：殷志偉(Chee Wei Ying);劉正(Jeng Liu)關鍵字：蔡英文;民進黨;以核養綠;政治情緒;Tsai Ing-wen;Democratic Progressive Party;go green with nuclear;political emotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：2018年11月，以核養綠公投通過，否決2025非核家園政策。作者好奇人民做能源抉擇時，是只考量不同能源利弊嗎，或可能也受政治情緒影響？本研究先做網路輿論分析，再把結果跟民調比較，以試檢驗「越不認同民進黨和蔡英文，越不認同非核家園」的正向關係是否存在。網路輿論分析結果顯示，比較2016年跟2018年，蔡英文、民進黨和非核家園的網路負面情緒輿論皆增，三者呈正向關係。此結果基本跟民調相符，只是變化幅度沒民調來得高，除了有顯著提升的非核家園議題。分析結果可支持「越不認同民進黨和蔡英文，越不認同非核家園」的推論。至少在部分程度上，此現象可能導因自政治情緒的影響－大眾把對蔡英文和民進黨的不滿，擴散到跟民進黨相關事物身上，如民進黨力推的非核家園政策。本研究透過網路輿論分析和統計檢定，發現在負面情緒輿論方面，比起蔡英文議題，民進黨議題對非核家園議題有更大影響力，反之亦然。換言之，民進黨議題負面情緒輿論的增加，將可能提升非核家園議題的負面情緒輿論。英文摘要：In November 2018, a nuclear-free homeland issue in Taiwan was rejected by voters in a nuclear referendum. A question thus arises: When voters are making a choice over a type of energy source, do they consider only the pros and cons of the issue, or do political emotions underlie their decision? Our study aims to answer this through a big-data analysis. Compared to 2016, we find that negative online comments concerning Tsai Ing-wen, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), and a nuclear-free homeland increased during 2018, basically matching various polls with a relatively small amplitude of variation. The inference of ”when the public is more dissatisfied with Tsai and the DPP administration, they become more opposed to a nuclear-free homeland issue” supports this finding. One potential reason could, in part, be the influence of political emotions. Dissatisfaction toward Tsai and the DPP administration by the public appears to have extended to DPP-related issues such as the nuclear-free homeland issue. In terms of negative online comments, compared with the topic of Tsai, the topic of the DPP greatly influences the topic of a nuclear-free homeland and vice versa. In others words, negative online comments of a nuclear-free homeland are more likely to increase if negative online comments of the DPP increase.起始頁-結束頁：49-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202011_27(2).00023篇名：「西岸效應」與策略性投票？2018年臺北市市長選舉的空間分析並列篇名：”West Coast Effect” and Strategic Voting? Spatial Analysis of the 2018 Taipei City Mayoral Election作者：鄧志松(Chih-sung Teng);周嘉辰(Chelsea C. Chou)關鍵字：策略性投票;西岸效應;臺北市市長選舉;空間分析;地理加權迴歸;Strategic Voting;West Coast effect;Taipei City Mayoral Election;Spatial Analysis;Geographic Weighted Regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究探討2018年臺北市市長選舉因為延遲投票而造成的投票轉向。在選舉過程中，現任市長柯文哲面臨來自丁守中（國民黨）與姚文智（民進黨）的嚴峻挑戰。在投票當天，當投票所於下午四點開始記票時，大多數的新聞媒體都報導了柯與丁之間的激烈競爭。最終選舉結果柯文哲以些微票數擊敗對手。對丁守中來說，這個選舉結果相當具有爭議。由於此次選舉與公民投票同時進行，導致投票時間嚴重延遲，相當一部分的選民在下午四點以後才開始投票，那時已經可以同時從新聞報導中瞭解到其他投票所的開票結果。這個開票訊息可能導致選民投票發生轉向，造成進一步的策略性棄保，影響最後的選舉結果。為檢驗丁守中的論據，本文蒐集中央選舉委員會發布的各投開票所選舉結果與完成登錄時間。透過空間迴歸（SLM和SEM）與地理加權回歸（GWR）的方法，我們發現，在村里層次，確實有些選票流動的現象，但是在整體層次，丁守中的擔憂並沒有經驗證據的支持，延遲投票對三位候選人的整體影響並不顯著。英文摘要：This study explores the changes in voters' choices due to the delayed voting in the 2018 Taipei City mayoral election. During the election, the incumbent mayor, Wen-je Ko, faced strong challenges from Shou-chung Ting (Kuomintang) and Pasuya Yao (Democratic Progressive Party). When voting stations started to count votes at 4 pm, most news channels reported an extremely tight race between Ko and Ting. The final election outcome was a narrow-margined win for Ko. For Shou-chung Ting, the outcome was very controversial, as this election was held concurrently with a referendum and hence the voting time was seriously delayed. A substantial proportion of voters cast their votes after 4 pm, already aware of the results of other voting stations from news reports. This information was likely to lead to changes in voters' choices, resulting in further strategic voting and changes in the final outcome of the election. In order to examine Ting's argument, this paper collects the election results of each voting station and the registration time after the counting was completed and published by the Central Election Commission. Through spatial regressions (SLM and SEM) and geographic weighted regression (GWR), we find that at the village level, some votes indeed flowed. However, at the city level, Shou-chung Ting's concern has no empirical support. The overall impact of the delayed voting on the three candidates was insignificant.起始頁-結束頁：93-125資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202011_27(2).00034篇名：臺灣閒置空間與執政黨連任得票率關係研究－以2004和2012總統選舉為例並列篇名：A Study of the Association between the Idle Space and the Voting Rate of the Re-election of the Ruling Party in Taiwan-Examples from the 2004 and 2012 Presidential Elections作者：吳文彥(Wen-Yen Wu)關鍵字：閒置空間;公共投資;結構化理論;空間分析;選舉文化;Idle Space;Public Investment;Structuration;Spatial Analysis;Electoral Culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：27卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文研究目的在檢討基礎設施公共投資成為閒置空間成因和公共投資與總統選舉得票率關係。研究應用結構化理論，篩選公共工程委員會閒置空間資料440筆，取用政府開放資訊經社屬性資料。使用空間分析方法建立2004年，2012年二次總統選舉得票率解釋模型進行分析。研究發現，公共投資與總統選舉得票率關係顯著且為正向關係。依照結構化理論解釋，在分配政治下，公共投資成為剪綵政治媒介與盲目投資。選舉政治考量優於市場評估，選舉動員「儀式」和消耗預算制度慣性，解釋閒置空間成因所在。亟待建立專業理性評估、社區參與、資訊揭露、公共監督與課責機制，改善選舉政治干預公共投資現象。英文摘要：This study aims to review the causes of infrastructure becoming an idle space and the relationship between public investment and the voting rate in presidential elections. The research applied structuration theory as an analysis framework, and screened 440 items of idle space data of the Public Works Committee, and used the socio-economic statistical data of the important indicators of the Open Data in Government networks. The spatial analysis method is used to establish the vote-rate model in 2004 and 2012 for analysis. The research results show that there is a significant and positive relationship between public investment and vote rate in presidential campaigns. According to the structuration theoretical explanation, under distribution politics, public investment has become a form of ribbon-cutting media and blind investment. Electoral political considerations are better than market assessments. The ”ritual” of election mobilization and the habitus of the system that consumes budgets explain the cause of idle space. There is an urgent need to establish professional rational assessment, community participation, information disclosure, public supervision, and accountability mechanisms to improve the phenomenon of political interference in elections and public investment.起始頁-結束頁：127-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202011_27(2).00045篇名：議題重要性的認知與對施政評價的影響並列篇名：The Perception of Issue Salience and Its Influence on the Evaluation of Government Performance作者：蕭怡靖(Yi-ching Hsiao)關鍵字：議題重要性;議題立場;施政評價;issue salience;issue position;evaluation of government performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：27卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：從理性抉擇途徑探討民眾的政治態度或行為，議題立場無疑是一項重要的解釋變數，但過去研究卻都忽略了，民眾對議題的重要性認知可能存在的中介影響效果。本文假設，當民眾認為該議題相對重要時，較容易確立自己及政黨在該議題上的位置，同時拉大主要政黨的立場差距，進而影響其政治態度的形塑。對此，本文利用民意調查資料，探詢台灣民眾對「兩岸統獨」及「核能發電」兩項議題重要性認知的影響，並檢證其對形塑政府施政評價的中介效果。整體而言，本文資料分析的結果支持前述假設。不過，假設成立與否，仍須視議題屬性而定，當議題屬於長期僵化且難以解決時，將會削弱議題重要性對政治態度形塑的中介影響力。英文摘要：Issue position is undoubtedly an important factor in accounting for individuals' political attitudes and behaviors from the approach of rational choice. But the possibility that the perception of issue salience plays a moderating variable has been neglected in the literature. It is hypothesized in this study that people are more likely to be aware of their and the parties' positions on a particular issue when they consider the issue important. Meanwhile, people tend to exaggerate the distance between major parties' positions on such an issue. People's perception of issue salience, therefore, shapes their political attitudes. Survey data are used in this study to analyze people's perception of salience regarding ”unification-independent ”and ”nuclear power” in order to examine their hypothesized role of moderating variables shaping people's evaluation of government performance. It is found that the results of data analysis support the above hypotheses. However, such results depend on the nature of the issues. If people hold rigid attitudes toward an issue over the long term, its moderating effects on shaping people's political attitudes are reduced.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202005_27(1).00016篇名：再探臺灣的「批判性公民」：2008-2016並列篇名：Critical Citizens in Taiwan Revisited: 2008-2016作者：黃信豪(Hsin-hao Huang)關鍵字：批判性公民;現代化典範;選舉輸家;民主正當性;臺灣選舉與民主化調查;critical citizens;modernization paradigm;election losers;democratic legitimacy;TEDS期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：27卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文從類型學的視角分析二次政黨輪替後臺灣民眾民主態度的變動，並結合現代化典範的「批判性傾向」、「選舉輸家」解釋以釐清「批判性公民」的態度來源。本文以TEDS在2008至2016年三次總統選後的調查為經驗基礎，實證研究發現如下：首先，民主批評者的比例在不同年度皆相當穩定，其他類型分佈則隨選舉結果而變動。其次，不同類型的比較證實臺灣的批判性公民確實出現部分批判性傾向的特徵，但這些特徵並不如預期地集中在年輕人身上，反而是年紀較長的民眾。再者，「選舉輸家傾向是批判性公民」的解釋僅在綠營選民面對敗選的脈絡下才成立；當藍營選民敗選時，則選舉輸家將傾向成為對民主正當性有負面意涵的民主離異者。總的來說，臺灣批判性公民的態度來源揉合了批判性傾向、選舉輸家的解釋。本文的發現反映了臺灣二次政黨輪替後的民主正當性持續往深化方向發展，但年輕公民的態度與選舉競爭的作用，卻也為我國的民主正當性前景帶來隱憂。英文摘要：From a typological perspective, this paper addresses Taiwanese citizens' attitudes to democracy and applies the modernization paradigm and the 'election losers' explanation to clarify the origins of critical citizens. By examining the TEDS survey data conducted after the three presidential elections held from 2008 to 2016, we find that, first, the proportion of critical citizens remained stable over time, while those of the other types changed along with the election results. Second, the comparison across different types of democratic attitudes suggests that critical citizens in Taiwan hold some critical traits, but they are older citizens rather than representatives of the young generation as expected. Also, the explanation that 'election losers tend to be critical citizens' can be confirmed only when the green camp of voters is on the losing side; when the blue camp loses the election, voters on the losing side are inclined to be democratic alienators, carrying negative implications for democratic legitimacy. Overall, the critical citizens in Taiwan originate from the combination of the modernization paradigm and the election-losers explanation. The findings of this paper imply that democratic legitimacy in Taiwan continues to deepen after two elections resulting in a change in the ruling party; however, the young generation's view and electoral competition, as shown, may result in different meanings.起始頁-結束頁：39-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202005_27(1).00027篇名：臺灣認同的世代差異與投票抉擇－以2016年總統選舉為例並列篇名：Generational Difference of Taiwan Identity - the Effects on Vote Choice in the 2016 Presidential Election作者：林珮婷(Pei-ting Lin);鄭夙芬(Su-feng Cheng);王德育(T.Y. Wang)關鍵字：政治世代;臺灣認同;投票抉擇;政黨認同;political generation;national identity;vote choice;party identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：27卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：隨著臺灣認同意識日益高漲，近年來多起由年青學子主導的社會運動，似乎反映著強烈的臺灣認同。本研究探討臺灣認同的世代差異及其對2016年總統大選投票抉擇的可能影響。研究發現，民意往高度臺灣認同意識傾斜，尤其是年輕世代有著強烈且高度的臺灣認同。然而，認同因素對於年輕選民的投票抉擇影響較小，反之，年長選民的認同對投票有著顯著的影響力。簡言之，臺灣認同不僅存在世代差異，亦在不同世代的投票抉擇考量中扮演不同的角色。英文摘要：Recent political protests led by young people in Taiwan appear to reflect a strong sense of attachment to their identity as Taiwanese. Employing survey data collected for the 2016 presidential election, this study confirms that Taiwanese identity continues to grow among the island citizens, particularly among the younger generations. While identity exerts a powerful effect on how people vote, there is also a visible generational gap. Members of the younger generations are less likely to be affected by their Taiwanese identity than older ones.起始頁-結束頁：85-124資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202005_27(1).000301篇名：國小輔導教師接受藝術治療培訓方案期間運用藝術媒材於兒童輔導之經驗探究並列篇名：The Experience of Elementary School Counselors Using Art Materials in Child Counseling during the Art Therapy Training Program Training作者：郭淑惠(Shu-Hui Kuo);陳雁白(Yen-Pai Chen);黃傳永(Chuan-Yung Huang)關鍵字：兒童諮商與輔導;輔導教師;學校輔導;藝術治療;Art therapy;child counseling and guidance;school counseling;school counselor期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：57期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探究國小輔導教師運用藝術媒材於兒童輔導之經驗。研究對象為十五位國小專任輔導教師，在培訓期間將其所學習之藝術治療知能運用於輔導工作。本研究採用質性研究內容分析法，以焦點團體訪談蒐集資料。研究結果包含六大主題、十七類概念：（1）透過創作歷程擴展助人者對兒童的理解：（a）提升對兒童的深度理解與包容、（b）著重當下互動，適時地給兒童回饋；（2）同在並見證兒童在創作歷程的轉變：（a）尊重兒童的自主性給予發展空間、（b）營造正向的氛圍、（c）陪伴修復傷痛、（d）協助發展問題解決能力；（3）藝術提供兒童心靈涵容處所：（a）突破口語表達的限制，透過藝術創作將內心世界投射出來、（b）提供表達和釋放情緒的安全空間、（c）與媒材接觸連結感官感受，觸碰情緒；（4）藝術創作作品正向賦能：（a）作品回顧提升自我意象、（b）作品象徵意義的內化；（5）創作歷程促進正向輔導關係：（a）提供機會建立關係、（b）增加此時此地對話、（c）非語言方式貼近兒童內在世界；（6）藝術媒材於兒童輔導實務進行之困境：（a）有些兒童不喜愛藝術創作、（b）學校時間的限制、（c）媒材便利性影響運用意願。最後根據研究結果進行討論及說明本研究之限制，並對國小輔導教師相關培育機構、在職專業增能以及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：In recent years, elementary school mental health needs have been in the spotlight. As demands for student counseling increase, the use of art therapy can be an expandable and flexible approach to child counseling for elementary school counselors. The aim of this study was to explore the experiences of using art materials in child counseling by elementary school counselors. The subjects were 15 experienced school counselors who participated in a three-hour art therapy professional training program for eight weeks. The approach adopted in this training program included basic concepts of art therapy, art materials applications and experiences, group discussions, practical work demonstrations, and sharing experiences. The concept of art therapy was learned during the training process, and the trainees returned to their schools to verify the effectiveness of art therapy in child counseling. This study was an explorative, descriptive, and qualitative study. Data was collected from 15 subjects by two focus group interviews after the training program and analyzed using qualitative content. The results of the study showed that art therapy applied to child counseling revealed six major themes and seventeen concepts: (1) Expand the trainee's understanding of children through the creative art process: (a) Enhance trainee's deeper understanding and patience with children, (b) Focus on the present interaction with children while giving feedback; (2) Be present and witness children making changes during the creative art process: (a) Respect the autonomy of children by providing space as needed, (b) Create a positive atmosphere, (c) Accompany children to recover from emotional pain, (d) Develop problem-solving skills; (3) Provide children a safe place to comfort their minds: (a) Break through the limitations of verbal expression and project one's inner world while processing artwork. (b) Provide children a safe space to express and release emotions, (c) Use art materials to connect with one's sensory feelings and emotions; (4) Empower children through art products: (a) Review art products to enhance self-image, (b) Internalize the symbolic meaning of art products; (5) Promote positive therapeutic relationships through the creative art process: (a) Provide opportunities to build relationships, (b) Increase here and now conversations, (c) Gain a closer view into children's inner world with non-verbal approaches; (6) Understand limitations of incorporating art into child counseling: (a) Some children do not like art making, (b) Restrictions of class time affect the arrangement of activities, (c) Art materials may not always be readily accessible. The following were discussed based on the results of the study: (1) Art therapy assists school counselors to enhance their understanding and patience with children, (2) Children have a sense of mastery in the art therapy process, (3) Art therapy is an avenue to self-exploration and empowerment of children through art therapy activity and the use of art materials, (4) Art therapy provides opportunities to promote therapeutic relationships and increase conversations here and now, (5) There are limitations of using art materials in child counseling. The results were compared and contrasted extensively with existing literature, and this study showed that the use of art materials in school counseling provided counselors a way to promote the treatment process and counseling relationships. Finally, based on the research results, this study suggested that multiple methods can be used in researching the experiences of school counselors and using art materials in child counseling for offering complementary insights. Moreover, the applications and suggestions of training institutions and professional development are discussed and proposed in the study.起始頁-結束頁：51-83資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200100570032篇名：探究國小輔導實務工作中之教師諮詢執行經驗－雙向現象場視框之觀照並列篇名：Implementation of Teacher Consultations in Elementary School Counseling: Comparison of a Dual Framework Phenomenal Field作者：劉麗娟(Li-Chuan Liu);高淑貞(Shu-Chen Kao)關鍵字：國小輔導;教師諮詢;雙向視框;Dual framework;elementary school counseling;teacher consultation期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：57期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究主要以輔導實務工作中教師諮詢者與教師求詢者的雙向視框，探究國小輔導實務工作中之教師諮詢執行經驗。研究參與者包括8位具專業背景與實務經驗之教師諮詢者與7位曾參與諮詢經驗之教師求詢者，採質性研究中之紮根理論為方法依據，以探究國小輔導實務工作中教師諮詢現況，增加雙方觀點的理解以促進合作的開展，並從雙方可對照經驗中探究提升教師諮詢效能的可行方式。研究發現如下：（1）教師諮詢影響因子：其主要內涵有（a）諮詢者的專業承諾有助於自我專業角色的定位與困境的轉化；（b）諮詢前先評估教師準備度、特質與信念，不過早進入工作階段；（c）互有主體性是教師諮詢關係的重要體現；（d）不要忽略行政領導與組織氛圍對教師諮詢的影響。（2）輔導人員與教師諮詢經驗之對照：其主要內涵有（a）角色定位不同顯現關注立場的根本差異；（b）輔導人員須要更多家長諮詢的能力以協助親師溝通；（c）教師須要更多具體示範來協助諮詢目標的達成；（d）雙方抱持彈性與開放，利於促成諮詢合作關係；（e）頻繁而短時間的機動性諮詢切合實務現場的需要。研究者依據上述研究結果，進行綜合討論提升教師諮詢效能的可行方式，並據此對教師諮詢者、學校及相關系統提出建議。英文摘要：With the increase in the number of and diversity in student issues and the recent policy of hiring full-time school counselors in elementary schools, the importance and feasibility of teacher consultation deserves to be explored in depth. Teacher consultation can not only solve students' problems but also improve teachers' abilities to solve students' problems, resulting in primary prevention of school-related problems. The importance of teacher consultation is highlighted by the efficiency and influence of counseling interventions and their ability to prevent future problems. Although counseling practitioners and teachers focus on assisting students' adaptation to school life, it is not easy to successfully conduct teacher consultations. Teacher and counseling practitioners have their own role and position, which further alters the demands and expectations. This in turn widens the gap, making it increasingly difficult to establish cooperation. This study attempts to explore the experiences of both practitioners and teachers in teacher consultation in an attempt to improve their practical knowledge base and establish a clear, feasible path towards teacher consultation. Channeling knowledge will increase the possibility of cooperation and dialogue between teachers and counseling practitioners. Student counseling often works because of students' willingness to cooperate and create a win-win situation for their well-being and others involved in the case. This study is based on grounded theory and primarily focused on the dual framework of counseling practitioners and teachers to investigate the implementation and current status of teacher consultations in elementary schools. Participants included eight professional and experienced teacher consultants as well as seven teacher consultees who had participated in the consultation process. This study employed a qualitative research design. The findings of this study will enhance the understanding of the importance of teacher consultation from the perspectives of both practitioners and teachers to promote cooperation and increase the effectiveness of teacher consultations by examining overlapping experiences. In terms of the factors influencing the teacher consultation process, the study found that the professional commitment of the consultant not only helped the positioning of the self-professional role but also the resolution of the counseling dilemma. However, before conducting a teacher consultation, it was necessary to evaluate the teacher's readiness to consult, traits, and educational beliefs. In addition, teacher consultation involved professional cooperation; thus, mutual subjectivity was an important manifestation of the consulting relationship and also a key factor in maintaining a smooth relationship. Finally, school counseling often needed to be combined with student services provided by other administrative units, in order to not overlook the impact of executive leadership and organizational climate on teacher consultations. There were differences between the counselors' and teachers' consulting experiences. First, the roles of the teachers and counselors were different in terms of their concerns and the assistance they provided. Second, the students' problems were mostly family related, and counselors need to have capacities for consultation with parents in order to assist teachers in their communication with their students' parents. Third, teachers need more specific demonstrations to effectively achieve the consulting objectives. Fourth, both counselors and teachers need to be flexible and open to encourage consultation and cooperation. Finally, in teacher consultations, frequent, flexible, and short-term consultations are more in line with the needs of the situation. Based on the above-mentioned findings, the researchers conducted a comprehensive discussion on the possible ways to improve the effectiveness of teacher consultation and ensure that there are trained and supervised practitioners and school counselors who can handle school and system related issues.起始頁-結束頁：85-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620200100570043篇名：與心理師跨專業合作在輔導教師角色壓力與工作滿意度的中介角色並列篇名：Psychologist's Interdisciplinary Collaborations as a Mediator between Role Stress and Job Satisfaction in School Counselors作者：江守峻(Shou-Chun Chiang);陳婉真(Wan-Chen Chen);陳羽柔(Yu-Jou Chen);洪逸珊(Yi-Shan Hung);彭秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Peng)關鍵字：工作滿意度;心理師;角色壓力;跨專業合作;輔導教師;Interdisciplinary collaborations;job satisfaction;psychologist;role stress;school counselors期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：57期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年來隨著學生心理困擾複雜度逐年增高的趨勢，學校輔導的重要性備受關注，雖校園心理服務在制度上已引進心理師，形成輔導教師與心理師的跨專業合作模式，但輔導教師本身的角色壓力仍重，其工作滿意度更是學生輔導工作穩定發展的重要因素。因此，本研究旨在探討輔導教師的角色壓力、工作滿意度與跨專業合作的關係，除了輔導教師原有的角色壓力會直接影響工作滿意度之外，當校園心理服務增加了跨專業合作後，是否在角色壓力與工作滿意度間扮演中介角色。本研究針對曾與心理師合作至少半年以上的國中專任輔導教師進行調查研究，依據台灣北中南東四區之各縣市國民中學進行分層叢集抽樣，去除無效樣本後共485人，之後採用結構方程模式進行模式檢驗，並用拔靴法（bootstrapping）檢驗中介效果。研究結果發現：（1）輔導教師的角色壓力對跨專業合作有顯著地直接負向效果，且跨專業合作對工作滿意度有顯著地直接正向效果。（2）跨專業合作在角色壓力與工作滿意度之間扮演著部分中介變項的角色，角色壓力一部分會直接降低工作滿意度，另一部分則會先透過降低與心理師的跨專業合作，再影響其工作滿意度。最後，依據研究結果，針對學校輔導現場與未來研究方向提出相關建議。英文摘要：With the complexity of students' mental issues increasing rapidly during recent years, school guidance counselors are increasingly important and emphasized. However, we still have no research that explores the impact that having psychologists in schools has on school counselors. In this study, we explored the impact of having psychologists in schools on the level of job satisfaction of school counselors. Our research examined the relationships between role stress and job satisfaction of school counselors as well as the mediator role of interdisciplinary collaboration among school counselors and psychologists derived from the 2011 policy that brought psychologists into schools. In the analysis, we applied cluster-stratified sampling to divide Taiwan into four areas: Northern, Middle, Southern, and Eastern areas. We then conducted surveys according to the proportion of the number of schools in the four areas. The first class is county, and the second class is administration area. The participants were junior high school counselors who had worked with psychologists before, and we surveyed 485 school counselors in total. The data analysis included primary and advanced levels - in the primary level, we used descriptive statistics and Pearson's correlation analysis. In the advanced level, we applied structural equation modeling to examine measurement model and structural model. After the model fit was confirmed, we conducted the mediation effects by using the bootstrapping method. This study showed the following results: (1) Among factors in role stress, the score of the score of role conflict was the highest impacting factor, followed by role overload (quality), with role overload (quantity) being the least impacting factor; among factors in interdisciplinary collaboration, the score of professional assistance was the highest impacting factor, followed by collaborative support, with school immersion being the least impacting factor; among factors in job satisfaction, the score of achievement development was the highest impacting factor, followed by professional growth, with interpersonal relationship being the least impacting factor. (2) On the measurement model, the results indicated that the research model fit our data, RMSEA = .064, SRMR = .04, GFI = .97, CFI = .98, IFI = .98, NFI = .96, PCFI = .65, and PNFI = .64. (3) The role stress of school counselors had a significantly negative effect on interdisciplinary collaboration. Also, interdisciplinary collaboration had a significantly positive effect on job satisfaction. (4) interdisciplinary collaboration plays a mediator role between role stress and job satisfaction. On one hand, role stress directly decreases job satisfaction. On the other hand, role stress first negatively associated with interdisciplinary collaboration, which in turn positively associated with job satisfaction. Finally, we suggested that schools should pay more attention to school counselors' role stress and the potential negative impact of interdisciplinary collaboration on their job satisfaction. When school counselors are already under heavy role stress, working with psychologists could turn out to be a negative collaboration, instead of helping school counselors increase their job satisfaction. Additionally, we found out that psychologists tend to provide professional assistance but the level of immersion in schools scored the lowest in regards to collaboration. Thus, we believe that school immersion is important for psychologists who wish to work in the area of school guidance. Future research could add other independent measures into the model to examine the influence of interdisciplinary collaboration between school counselors and psychologists, such as work efficiency, guidance efficiency, or student guidance outcomes. In addition, researchers can also discuss the negative sides of interdisciplinary collaboration, including lack of collaboration awareness, role difference, or school system limitations. Finally, future research could benefit from applying the interdisciplinary collaboration scale on different professionals, particularly social workers, psychiatrists, homeroom teachers, or even administrative officers in order to understand their collaboration impact with school counselors.起始頁-結束頁：121-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186202001005700501篇名：協力治理如何使得公部門創新？作者：黃建實期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：58期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：149-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202003_(58).000601篇名：美國民眾對新冠病毒的防疫偏好與行為－情感極化與資訊來源的解釋並列篇名：Americans' Attitudes and Behaviors in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic: An Explanation Based on Affective Polarization and Information Source作者：黃芳誼(Fang-yi Huang);林竣達(Jiun-da Lin)關鍵字：新型冠狀病毒;情感極化;社交距離;封鎖措施;中介效應分析;COVID-19;affective polarization;social distancing;lockdown;mediation analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：當新型冠狀病毒開始在美國擴大流行時，為何有些美國民眾不願意採取居家避疫，也不支持政府實施嚴格的封鎖措施？本文認為在情感極化的脈絡下，民眾的防疫行為及政策偏好會受到政黨認同影響，且黨派化的資訊來源會產生中介效果。本文以美國凱澤家庭基金會於2020年3月25－30日所實施的民意調查資料，來檢驗上述假設。經過卡方考驗、T檢定，以及ANOVA檢定，本文發現政黨認同確實影響了民眾的居家避疫行為與對嚴格封鎖政策的態度。本文進一步透過羅吉斯迴歸模型、多類別羅吉斯迴歸模型與因果中介效應分析發現，民眾對黨派化資訊來源的信任程度，會在政黨認同及個人防疫行為和政策偏好之間產生中介效應。本文發現，由於信任川普總統作為可信的疫情資訊來源，共和黨民眾便較不願採取居家避疫，也較不支持政府嚴格的封鎖措施。英文摘要：Why do some Americans oppose social distancing and lockdown policies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic? This study argues that, given the current trends in affective polarization, partisanship is a factor that could influence individuals' attitudes and behaviors toward social distancing and lockdown policies. Moreover, the effect of partisanship on individuals' attitudes and behaviors toward social distancing and lockdown policies can be mediated by their level of trust in partisan leadership's information. By conducting chi-square tests, t tests, and ANOVA tests on a public opinion survey implemented by the Kaiser Family Foundation during March 25th-30th, 2020, we find that being a Republican is strongly related to holding negative behaviors and attitudes toward social distancing and lockdown policies. Furthermore, by employing logistic regression, multinomial logistic regression, and causal mediation analysis, we find that Republicans have a higher likelihood of opposing social distancing and lockdown policies because they trust president Trump to provide them with reliable information on the coronavirus.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：威權憲制－解釋蔣介石三連任總統的決策過程與國民黨威權政體的制度化並列篇名：Authoritarian Constitutional Institutions: Explaining the Decision-making Process toward Chiang Kai-shek's Third Presidential Term and the Institutionalization of the Kuomintang's Authoritarian Regime作者：蘇慶軒(Ching-hsuan Su)關鍵字：憲法;威權政體;蔣介石;合法性;constitution;authoritarian regime;Chiang Kai-shek;legality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：威權政體並未落實憲法人權保障條款與權力制衡原則，憲法也難以約束威權統治者，因此既有研究較少關注憲法在威權統治中的作用。然而，憲法不只可以提供威權統治合法性，威權統治者與政治菁英也能將憲法的權力制衡原則轉化為權力分配，並據此相互合作與運作政府。由於威權政府未曾落實人權保障，也不接受社會的課責，因此本文將之稱為「威權憲制」。本文以1960年的蔣介石為例，說明蔣介石為了三連任總統，而依循憲政規範修改《動員戡亂時期臨時條款》，合法持續執政。政治菁英則是運用蔣介石維繫統治地位合法性的需求，一方面與蔣介石議價而獲益，另一方面以憲政規範約束蔣介石。當政治菁英與威權統治者長期依循威權憲制進行政治互動、權力分享與利益交換，不只能鞏固威權憲制的約束能力，也能促使威權政體制度化。因此本文也將指出蔣介石三連任總統後，國民黨威權政體進一步藉由《臨時條款》制度化。英文摘要：Authoritarian regimes rarely, if ever, implement human rights protection clauses inscribed in constitutions or follow the principle of checks and balances. Authoritarian rulers are also rarely constrained by their respective countries' constitutions. For these reasons, existing studies have paid little attention to the role of the constitution in authoritarian countries. Constitutions, nonetheless, can provide legality to authoritarian rule. Furthermore, the authoritarian ruler and political elites can transform the constitution's checks-and-balances principle into a legal basis for the distribution of power, according to which the ruler and the elites cooperate in running the government. Because authoritarian governments neither protect human rights nor are not held accountable, the article refers to this practice as ”authoritarian constitutional institutions.” This article takes the case of Chiang Kai-shek in 1960 as an example to illustrate that he, in order to be re-elected for a third presidential term ”legally,” followed constitutional norms to amend ”the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of National Mobilization for Suppression of the Communist Rebellion.” Taking advantage of Chiang's need to maintain the legality of his rule, political elites not only bargained with the strongman to further their own interests but also used constitutional norms to restrain Chiang's power. When political elites and the authoritarian ruler strictly adhered to authoritarian constitutional institutions in their political interactions, for power-sharing purposes, and during interest exchanges, not only was the restraining capacity of authoritarian constitutional institutions consolidated, but the authoritarian regime was also thereby institutionalized. This article shows that after Chiang Kai-shek was elected for a third time, the Kuomintang's authoritarian regime was further institutionalized by the amended ”Temporary Provisions.”起始頁-結束頁：51-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：網路與地方經濟社會因素對選舉的衝擊－以馬來西亞的柔南選區為例（2008－2018）並列篇名：The Effects of the Internet and Local Socio-economic Issues on Elections: A Case Study of Southern Johor, Malaysia (2008-2018)作者：莊仁傑(Henry Ren-jie Chong)關鍵字：柔南;馬來西亞選舉;網路;地方議題;新加坡;Southern Johor;Malaysian general election;internet;local issue;Singapore期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以筆者長居新山的觀察、筆者個人在選舉期間的參與和觀察（參與式田野），以及與相關人士的個人口述紀錄作為素材，以馬來西亞柔佛州南部（以下簡稱「柔南」）在2008到2018年之間的第十二到第十四屆國會與州議會選舉為討論個案，指出除了全國性課題，地方的社會與經濟議題－柔南當地的治安等社會問題，以及新加坡對柔南的經濟與社會影響－如何在這三場選舉中逐漸成為焦點；以及網路自二十一世紀初期如何在柔南地區普及化，網路平台逐漸取代傳統媒介成為選舉的重要宣傳平台，進而改變選舉方式。這些地方的社會－經濟因素和網路因素的長期影響，最終如何促成馬來西亞2018年的政黨輪替。最後指出，希盟勝選並非只依賴政黨菁英的合作，地方和網路因素是促成希盟勝選不可或缺的因素。同時提出下層結構的改變（社會、經濟與網路因素）將導致上層（政治）的權力轉移的假說。這假說不但可用於馬來西亞柔南地區，並且可用於其他地方如台灣。英文摘要：Based on the author's continuous observation, fieldwork, and oral interviews carried out in the Southern part of Johor, Malaysia, the article highlights how local socio-economic issues-including public safety and the impact of Singapore on the economy and society of Southern Johor-have gradually become the main electoral focal points during the 12th, 13th and 14th Malaysian general elections (GE12, GE13, GE14) held from 2008 to 2018. The article also investigates how access to the Internet has become universal in Southern Johor since the beginning of the 21st century. Online platforms gradually replaced traditional media as critical platforms during elections, thereby changing the way campaigns were run. The long-term impacts of these two factors-local issues and the Internet-have ultimately contributed to the first regime change in Malaysian history in 2018. Lastly, the article argues that Pakatan Harapan's (PH) victory did not solely rest on the cooperation of political party elites; the role of local issues and the impact of online platforms were also indispensable. A proposed hypothesis states that these structural changes (local socio-economic issues and the Internet factor) at lower levels have led to power transition at the top level (politics). This hypothesis does not only apply in Southern Johor, Malaysia, but also in other places such as Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：101-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：從國會到地方議會監督並列篇名：Strengthening Legislative Body Accountability in Taiwan: From Legislative Yuan to City / County Councils作者：張宏林(Hung-lin Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：153-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：書評：Spending to Win: Political Institutions, Economic Geography, and Government Subsidies〔勝選支出－政治制度、經濟地理與政府補貼〕by Stephanie J. Rickard〔史蒂芬妮．J．里卡德〕並列篇名：A review of Spending to Win: Political Institutions, Economic Geography, and Government Subsidies by Stephanie J. Rickard作者：林偉修(Wei-hsiu Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：159-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：世界民主大事紀：2020年4－6月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: April-June 2020期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：169-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：正義穩定性、道德情感與共同生活－一個平等主義未來生活的想像並列篇名：Stability of Justice, Moral Sentiments and Common Life: Envisioning an Egalitarian Future Life作者：陳嘉銘(Chia-ming Chen);葉明叡(Ming-jui Yeh)關鍵字：羅爾斯;正義感;道德情感;穩定性;社會關係;Rawls;sense of justice;moral sentiments;stability;social relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：約翰．羅爾斯在《正義論》中提出了一個常被忽略，但是值得深入探究的問題：如何維持正義價值的穩定性？羅爾斯很有說服力地指出，道德情感是維持正義價值穩定性的關鍵力量。可惜羅爾斯主張支持正義穩定性的道德情感只有康德意義的正義感。這樣的正義感不會被任何偶然的社會關係影響。他忽略了其他道德情感也是支持正義穩定性的重要力量，而且這些情感的維繫需要依賴社會關係。我們的論文因此試著回應這個問題：如果我們對平等主義的分配理念有大致的共識，一個平等主義社會可以透過什麼社會關係產生什麼道德情感，維持平等主義理念的穩定性？我們將先說明我們對道德情感的一些基本想法，然後將藉由分析、評論和利用羅爾斯的正義穩定性論述，發展我們稱之為「關係依賴的道德情感論」。接下來，我們將從我們的理論評估兩個社會道德情感論，一是大衛．米勒的民族主義，二是我們提出的共同生活。我們主張平等主義的公共服務構成的共同生活，蘊含了平等主義理念以及豐富的相互依賴關係，提供了成員重要的道德情感去支持平等理念。英文摘要：In A Theory of Justice, John Rawls raises a question which deserves our close attention: How to maintain the stability of the conception of justice in a well-ordered society? He insightfully argues that moral sentiments, instead of self-interest, play a critical role in maintaining that stability. However, the only moral sentiment he endorses is the sense of justice, which is shaped and determined by a rational conception of justice. Its content and forces, once shaped, are beyond the influences of contingencies of social relations. Rawls curiously ignores that other moral sentiments are also significant in maintaining the stability of justice. And he also overlooks that social relations are crucial to reproduce and maintain such moral sentiments. Therefore, this essays purports to answer this question: Suppose we have a consensus on an egalitarian idea of just distribution, what moral sentiments can maintain the stability of such idea in an ideally egalitarian society? We will first clarify our concept of moral sentiments. We then analyze and criticize Rawls's theory of stability of justice. We adapt his theory and develop what we call a theory of relation-dependent moral sentiments. Two discourses will then be evaluated, David Miller's nationalism and our proposal of an egalitarian common life. We argue that an egalitarian common life, brought about by egalitarian public services offered or regulated by the modern state, will provide the proper moral sentiments to support the stability of the egalitarian idea of justice in an egalitarian society.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：論大規模政府監控之資訊隱私保障－評析美國聯邦法院相關裁判並列篇名：Reclaiming Informational Privacy under Government Mass Surveillance: An Assessment of the U.S. Federal Courts Cases作者：林昕璇(Hsin-hsuan Lin)關鍵字：大規模政府監控;大數據;資訊隱私權;美國聯邦憲法增修條文第四條;第三人理論;馬賽克理論;government mass surveillance;big data;informational privacy;the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution;the third-party doctrine;the mosaic theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文旨在探討當國家嫻熟地結合大數據應用與公權力措施，形成非以特定人為標的、未連結到明確終端目的之大規模監控時，對於個人資訊隱私權的衝擊影響。本文以憲法學及比較法學做為論述基礎，提出概念類分「大規模政府監控」的數項要素，繼之以美國聯邦法院相關指標性判決之理論發展與實踐經驗作為索解癥結的他山之石，反思資訊隱私在數位時代下的概念內涵與保障架構是否有重構之必要及如何成為可能。本文耙梳美國聯邦法院近年關於政府電信監控訴訟後發現，儘管巨量數據監控已大幅度改變人民對於隱私的認知與預設，2013年爆發的史諾登揭密案深刻呈現出美國聯邦法院於八十年代奠基於公／私領域二分邏輯所確立之「合理隱私期待」與「第三人理論」理論框架的缺陷。本文進一步引介「馬賽克理論」作為補充式的解釋取徑並予以評價。本文的結論是，美國聯邦司法權眾聲喧嘩的訴訟爭議與理論辯難，不僅勾勒大數據時代保障資訊隱私的迫切性，更催生資訊隱私權的典範轉移，朝向更彈性且適應社會真實脈絡的範式轉變。其活絡豐富之司法經驗對於建構一個更符合資訊隱私保障的法律機制尤具參考價值，足堪提供我國若干啟發性意義。英文摘要：This article seeks to discuss the impact on privacy of personal information when the state couple big data technology with public measures to conduct massive metadata surveillance without targeting specific persons or having a specific purpose to surveil. Methodologically, this article employs constitutional law and comparative legal analysis to critically examine litigation in the U.S. triggered by government mass surveillance and establishes a conceptual category of ”government mass surveillance,” which exhibit several elements. This is followed by an examination of the theoretical development and practical experience drawn from several seminal cases of the U.S. Federal Courts. This article found that the treasure trove of litigation in the U.S. Federal Courts have significantly changed people's perceptions and presumptions of privacy. The 2013 Snowden disclosures profoundly revealed that the federal judiciary of the U.S. is confronted by the inherent defects and deficiencies embedded in the theoretical framework of ”reasonable expectations of privacy” and ”third-party doctrine,” which was established in the 1980s and based on the dichotomy of the public / private domain. This article further introduces the ”mosaic theory” as a supplementary interpretative approach and evaluates its enlightening significance. This article concludes that the rigorous debate between the U.S. federal court's judgment and American legal scholarship not only outlines the difficulty and urgency of reclaiming informational privacy in the era of big data, but also dictates a paradigm shift in our expectation of informational privacy toward a less standardized and more flexible interpretation. These insightful lessons should inform Taiwanese courts as they respond to prevailing issues presented by government mass surveillance.起始頁-結束頁：43-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：誰代表障礙者？障礙者代表的政府參與及其在公民權上的意義並列篇名：Who Represents ”Disabled People”? An Analysis of the Governmental Disability Committee and Its Implications for the Political Participation of Disabled People in Taiwan作者：張睇(Heng-hao Chang);周月清(Yueh-ching Chou);陳俊賢(Chun-hsien Chen);陳重安(Chong-an Chen)關鍵字：《身心障礙者人權公約》;政治參與;無障礙／可及性;障礙者團體;政治與公共生活;Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;political participation;accessibility;disabled people's organization;political and public life期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：障礙者如何在政治體制中取得代表與發聲，是障礙者政治參與的重要議題。本研究討論臺灣各級政府身心障礙委員會的制度運作、障礙者代表比例與產生方式。研究方法包括文件分析、焦點團體與深入訪談。本研究指出，過去臺灣中央與地方政府的身心障礙相關委員會，障礙者本人代表的比例非常低，且代表者多為肢體障礙者，遴選的標準不明。公部門在障礙者參與上，並沒有強調障礙者參與公共事務，所應該提供的無障礙／可及性與支持。臺北市的障礙者代表直選模式，透過增加名額與直選讓障礙者本人的代表比例增加，並強化選舉機制的公平性。然而，直選的執行方式仍被障礙者質疑。本研究認為，要落實身心障礙人權公約的精神，應該強化相關委員會遴選機制的公正性，增加障礙者代表的比例，培力障礙者本人主導的倡導團體，並落實障礙者參與公共事務的無障礙／可及性。一個民主、多元，且能無障礙／可及的政府委員會將有助於障礙者公民權的保障。英文摘要：Participation in the public sector is an important element of disabled people's political rights. This paper explores the composition and practices of governmental disability-related advisory committees in Taiwan's central and local governments. We used documentary analysis, focus groups, and in-depth interviews in our research, finding that the percentage of disabled people in governmental disability-related advisory committees is very low; usually there are only one or two disabled committee members, in most instances with physical disabilities. Furthermore, there are no transparent criteria for the selection of disabled committee members. Accessibility and support are also rarely taken into account in these committees. In Taipei's new direct election system, the Taipei city government has increased the number of disabled committee members and broadened coverage of different types of disabilities. However, many disabled persons still question the practices of direct election. Finally, this paper suggests that to further promote the civic participation of disabled persons in public policy, the government should increase the number of disabled people in governmental disability-related advisory committees, ensure a democratic selection mechanism, empower disabled people's organizations, and provide accessibility and support for the participation of disabled people in public policies. A democratic, diverse, and accessible governmental committee will further support and protect the rights of persons with disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：95-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：政治知識的面向與政治參與的類型並列篇名：Dimensions of Political Knowledge and Types of Political Participation作者：黃秀端(Shiow-duan Hawang);吳俊德(Jun-deh Wu);張一彬(Yi-bin Chang);林瓊珠(Chiung-chu Lin)關鍵字：政治知識;政治參與;政治知識面向;非常態性政治參與;Political Knowledge;Political Participation;Dimensions of Political Knowledge;Unconventional Political Participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：84期出版年：2020中文摘要：政治知識是影響政治參與的重要因素，當民眾擁有越高的政治知識，就越有可能參與政治活動。然而，政治知識有不同的面向，政治參與也有不同的類型，同一個面向的政治知識對於不同類型的政治參與的影響都一樣嗎？不同面向的政治知識對於同一種類型的政治參與是否會產生不同的影響？這個謎團少有學者回答，也是本文想要探討的問題。本文將政治知識區分<U+7232>三個面向：人物、制度及政策與議題；再將政治參與區分<U+7232>投票、競選相關活動以及非常態性參與（陳情請願、靜坐抗議、示威遊行等）等三種類型。本文根據過去文獻以及理論推演建立三個研究假說（hypotheses）：第一，在投票參與中，人物面向的政治知識有較高的影響力。第二，在競選相關活動的參與中，制度面向的政治知識有較高的影響力。第三，在非常態性政治參與中，政策與議題面向的政治知識有較高的影響力。本文作者在2016年總統大選後進行電訪問卷調查，資料分析結果顯示：第一，三個面向對於投票參與皆無影響力。第二，人物面向、制度面向以及政策與議題面向都會影響競選相關活動的參與，其中以制度面向的影響力最大。第三，制度面向以及政策與議題面向都會影響非常態性政治參與，但以制度面向的影響力較大。總結而言，不同面向的政治知識在不同類型的政治參與中，確實會產生效果各異的影響。英文摘要：Political knowledge is an important factor influencing political participation. When people have higher political knowledge, they are more likely to participate in political activities. However, political knowledge has different dimensions, and political participation also has different types. Does the same dimension of political knowledge have the same influence on different types of political participation? Do different dimensions of political knowledge have different effects on the same type of political participation? Few scholars have answered these questions so far. This paper distinguishes between three dimensions of political knowledge: people, institutions, and policies and issues. Political participation is also classified into three categories: voting, election-related activities, and unconventional participation (deliberate petitions, sit-in protests, or demonstrations). Based on the literature and theoretical deductions, this paper develops three hypotheses. First, in voting participation, knowledge of politicians has a higher influence. Second, in the participation of election-related activities, knowledge of institutions has a higher influence. Third, in unconventional political participation, knowledge of policies and issues has a higher influence. This paper analyzes data collected from a telephone survey conducted after the Taiwanese 2016 presidential election. The results show that, first, none of the dimensions of political knowledge have influence on voting participation. Second, all three of the dimensions affect the participation of campaign-related activities. Among them, the institution dimension has the greatest influence. Third, the institution dimension and the policy dimension both have influence on unconventional political participation, with the former being greater. To sum up, different dimensions of political knowledge do have different effects on each type of political participation.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202006_(84).00012篇名：後蘇聯國家對外經貿關係選擇的研究：以烏克蘭為例並列篇名：A Study on the Choices of Foreign Economic and Trade Relations in Post-Soviet Countries: The Case of Ukraine作者：況正吉(Cheng-chi Kuang)關鍵字：避險策略;歐亞經濟聯盟;歐盟;澤倫斯基;Hedging Strategy;Eurasian Economic Union;European Union;Zelensky期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：84期出版年：2020中文摘要：蘇聯解體之後，原蘇聯地區內出現了獨立國協、歐亞經濟共同體、歐亞經濟聯盟等多個整合組織，但各成員國立場分歧，使得統合進程緩慢。獨立國協國家作<U+7232>俄羅斯的傳統勢力範圍與緩衝地區，對於俄羅斯的地區安全穩定和經濟發展有著重要意義。另一方面，隨著歐洲聯盟向東擴大，推出東部夥伴計畫，歐盟企圖影響後蘇聯國家，並且擠壓到俄羅斯的地緣戰略空間。烏克蘭危機之後，親歐派的政治力量處於壓倒性的地位，烏克蘭選擇歐盟並與俄國對抗，但受制於俄羅斯，國內經濟未有好轉，加入歐盟也沒重大進展。2019年烏克蘭新總統澤倫斯基（<U+0412><U+043E><U+043B><U+043E><U+0434><U+0438><U+043C><U+0438><U+0440> <U+0417><U+0435><U+043B><U+0435><U+043D><U+0441><U+044C><U+043A><U+0438><U+0439>）的崛起，即是烏國民眾對於傳統政治人物的不滿。本文經由烏克蘭的個案研究發現，烏國在面臨俄羅斯與歐盟兩強的格局下，同時身處於利害交錯不定的國際情勢時，會實施避險策略。但大國（俄羅斯）若是無法容忍，且要求選邊站的情況下，小國（烏克蘭）便只能在親歐和親俄間擇一，避險的對外政策則無法持續進行。英文摘要：After the collapse of the Soviet Union, many integration organizations, such as the Commonwealth of Independence States (CIS), the Eurasian Economic Community, and the Eurasian Economic Union appeared in the former Soviet territory. However, because there are serious differences in the positions of member states, integration has been slow. CIS countries, which are within the traditional sphere of influence and serve as a natural buffer zone for Russia, are of great significance to Russian regional security, stability and economic development. On the other hand, as the EU expands eastward, the Eastern Partner Program was launched in an attempt to influence the countries of the former Soviet Union and squeeze into Russia's geostrategic space. After the Ukrainian crisis, the political power of the pro-European faction was in an overwhelmingly superior position. Ukraine chose to side with the EU and confronted Russia. However, due to pressure from Russia, the domestic economy of Ukraine has not improved and there has been no significant progress in joining the EU. The rise of the new Ukrainian President Zelensky in 2019 represents the dissatisfaction of the Ukrainian people with traditional political figures. This paper finds through a case study in Ukraine that when facing the situation with Russia and the EU, and at the same time finding itself in a staggered international situation, the Ukrainian government implements a hedging strategy. However, if the big power (Russia) cannot tolerate this and asks for it to choose a side, the small power (Ukraine) can only choose between being pro-Europe or pro-Russia, and the hedging foreign policy strategy cannot continue.起始頁-結束頁：39-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202006_(84).00023篇名：邁向循證基礎的公共政策宣導：一個以臺灣酒駕防制廣告類型有效性為核心的準實驗研究並列篇名：Toward an Evidence-based Public Policy Campaign: A Quasi-experimental Analysis of the Effectiveness of Types of Advertisements on the Drunk Driving Prevention Campaign in Taiwan作者：許弘毅(Hung-yi Hsu);劉俐良(Li-liang Liu);陳敦源(Don-yun Chen)關鍵字：酒駕防制;政策宣導;準實驗設計;循證基礎的公共政策;動機保護理論;Drunk Driving Prevention;Policy Campaign;Quasi-Experimental Design;Evidence-based Public Policy;Protection Motivation Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：84期出版年：2020中文摘要：「何種政策宣導內容比較有效？」一直是政策管理者關切的核心議題。奠基於循證的公共政策精神，本研究以酒駕防制宣導來回答這問題意識。參考保護動機理論（Protection Motivation Theory，PMT）將酒駕防制廣告分成威脅（threat）取向、因應（coping）取向以及結合威脅與因應取向的三種影片類型，以準實驗設計對臺北市區監理所及臺北區監理所之酒駕道安違規講習班學員，三組實驗組分別播放三種不同類型的酒駕防制宣導影片，控制組則未播放宣導影片，透過前後測問卷調<U+67FB>（有效樣本<U+7232>625份），以確定不同類型宣導影片對避免酒駕行<U+7232>意圖的影響。研究結果顯示，四組受試者的避免酒駕行<U+7232>意圖並無顯著差異。然而，結合威脅與因應取向的宣導影片對不同程度的酒精依賴者有不同效果。相較於未觀看任何宣導影片的控制組，高酒精依賴者觀看完威脅與因應取向的宣導影片後，其避免酒駕的行<U+7232>意圖高於低酒精依賴者，顯示符合PMT設計的宣導影片內容，更有可能對高酒精成癮者發揮正面宣導作用。本研究建議未來政府設計宣導內容應引入更多的循證基礎，以精準掌握宣導的效果。英文摘要：”What kinds of policy campaign content should be the most effective?” This question has been a core issue among policymakers. Following the spirit of evidence-based policy, this study has used the case of the drunk driving prevention campaign in Taiwan to answer this essential question. Based on protection motivation theory (PMT), this study has categorized drunk driving prevention advertisements into three types: threat orientation, coping orientation, and threat-coping orientation. Participants (n=625) were drunk drivers sampled from traffic education programs which were provided by the Taipei City Motor Vehicles Office and the New Taipei City Motor Vehicles Office. The quasi-experiment took place in the two aforementioned offices, where the three types of advertisements were shown respectively to three experiment groups while no ads were displayed to the control group. By using the pre-test and post-test questionnaires, this study measured the behavioral intention of avoiding drunk driving as the treatment effect. The result showed that the behavioral intention of avoiding drunk driving was not significantly different among the four groups. However, the threat-coping orientated advertisement had divergent effects on lighter drinkers and heavier drinkers. Compared to the control group where no ad was viewed, in the experiment group where the threat-coping orientated ad was viewed, heavier drinkers had a higher behavioral intention of avoiding drunk driving than lighter drinkers did, which implied that the drunk driving prevention advertisement based on PMT was more likely to exert a positive campaign effect on heavier drinkers. In the light of the research findings, this study suggests that more evidence-based designs should be incorporated into government campaign advertisements to leverage the policy campaign more precisely.起始頁-結束頁：71-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202006_(84).00034篇名：大國崛起與絲路烽煙：從隋唐經營西域看權力轉移下崛起國對小國的政策並列篇名：The Rise of a Great Power and the Silk Road Wars: The Strategic Choice of a Rising China towards the Serindia City-States during the Turks vs. Sui-Tang Power Transition Period作者：萬曉(Wan Xiao)關鍵字：權力轉移;不對稱關係;東亞體系;隋唐;西域;Power Transition;Asymmetric Relations;East Asia System;Sui-Tang;Serindia期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：83期出版年：2020中文摘要：在美中權力轉移的時代關口，崛起國行為具有重要的理論與實務意義。本文將權力與文化的解釋共同納入理論框架，用突厥－隋唐時期的不對稱關係檢驗假說，探討在權力轉移背景下崛起國會對不同的小國採行何種政策，什麼因素決定了它對小國的政策。隋唐對西域綠洲國家的政策證實了基於權力的核心邏輯：兩大國權力對比決定崛起國的攻守傾向，從而產生它對小國的政策基調。塔里木城邦與高昌這組最相似案例否證了文化親和度的作用。以歷史啟示審視今日世局，在實力超越美國之前，中國將保持對美國的守勢與對小國的和緩政策。英文摘要：In a world suffering from the incremental pressure caused by the transition of power between the United States and China, the behaviour of the rising power is becoming a significant issue both theoretically and practically. This paper attempts to explain what policies the rising power chooses to have towards different small countries and why it adopts them. We organize the factors based on the competitive perspectives of power and culture into one framework, and then test the hypotheses by analyzing the asymmetric interactions that happened during the power transition period between the Turkic Khanates vs. Sui-Tang China. The policies of Sui-Tang China implemented on the oasis city-states in Serindia (Xiyu) confirm the material logic: the power balance between the two giants determined the rising power's strategic tendency when facing the hegemon, which then generated the keynote of its policies for treating the small countries. However, the hypothesis involving cultural affinity is denied by the most-similar sub-cases of the Tarim states and Gaochang. Our findings suggest that, before China overtakes the US, it will keep a defensive strategic posture towards the US and adopt moderate policies towards lesser powers.起始頁-結束頁：1-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202003_(83).00015篇名：伊拉克的「衝突韌性」分析：2018年國會選舉、庫區議會選舉與宗派主義的影響並列篇名：Analysis on Conflict Resilience in Iraq: The 2018 Parliamentary Elections in the Central Government and Kurdish Regional Governments, and Sectarianism作者：王順文(Shun-wen Wang)關鍵字：衝突韌性;2018年伊拉克國會選舉;2018年庫區議會選舉;阿巴音節;宗派主義;庫區獨立公投;Conflict Resilience;2018 Iraq Parliamentary Election;Kurdish Independence Referendum;2018 KRG Parliamentary Election;Sectarianism;Arba'een Pilgrimage期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：83期出版年：2020中文摘要：伊拉克的衝突情形有許多的面向，包括政府的失能、嚴重的貪腐，甚至包括宗派的對立等問題。但研究焦點多在「制度」面上探討重建的成敗，較少著眼於領導菁英的角色。「衝突韌性」的概念即是強調「和平建立」的過程應該投資在「由下而上」的建制上，以因應可能的衝突，並探討實地處理系統性危機的在地行為者如何從「建制」、「過程能力」與「結果」等三個層次來化解衝突。因此，本文將分為四個部分進行分析，第一部分將針對伊拉克的衝突根源與衝突韌性概念進行文獻回顧，並探討關於衝突韌性的相關文獻。第二個部分則主要探討2018年伊拉克國會選舉後的衝突韌性，第三個部分主要探討2017年庫區政府獨立公投後與中央政府之間，以及2018年庫區議會選後組建內閣的衝突與妥協過程，宗派主義也在伊拉克的衝突中扮演重要的角色，其中什葉派的朝聖活動「阿巴音節」（Arba'een Pilgrimage）所代表的是由宗教團體與地方政府協力，達到預防衝突與暴力並成功的案例，因此，本文將探討阿巴音節的解決衝突機制，並探討宗派主義與衝突韌性間的關聯性。最後，本文將根據衝突韌性概念下的建制、過程與結果層面，來分析伊拉克的衝突形式與結果，並作出結論。英文摘要：Conflicts in Iraq are rooted in failures of governance, corruption, sectarianism and many other variables. This paper, however, focuses on the idea of ”conflict resilience” which leads to an analysis of the depth of peace under the peace-building process in three major aspects: regimes, process capabilities and outcomes. This paper takes conflicts after Iraq's parliamentary election and the KRG's parliamentary election as examples, and it also deals with the sectarian leaders' role for Iraqis and the security mechanism during the Arba'een pilgrimage. This paper is divided into four parts: 1. The roots of conflict in Iraq and a review of papers on ”conflict resilience”; 2. Conflict resilience after the 2018 parliamentary election; 3. Conflict resilience after the 2017 KRG independence referendum and the 2018 KRG parliamentary election; 4. Sectarianism and the Arba'een pilgrimage. Finally, it analyzes conflict resilience in Iraq in the three aspects of the regime, process capabilities and outcomes in order to make a conclusion.起始頁-結束頁：55-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202003_(83).00026篇名：社群媒體時代下政策企業家促進政策變遷之策略研析：臺灣的以核養綠公投為例並列篇名：Strategies Employed by Policy Entrepreneurs to Promote Policy Change in the Era of Social Media: A Case Study of the ”Go Green With Nuclear” Referendum in Taiwan作者：徐幸瑜(Hsin-yu Hsu)關鍵字：政策企業家;政策變遷;公民投票;以核養綠;社群媒體;Policy Entrepreneurs;Policy Change;”Go Green with Nuclear”;Referendum;Social Media期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：83期出版年：2020中文摘要：政策企業家在政策變遷中的角色與重要性已獲得許多研究證實，但對於社群媒體時代的政策企業家如何推動政策變遷，常採取的策略為何？國內在此方面之研究仍有所不足。本文基於過去相關文獻，加以整理及簡化，建構一個簡潔明瞭的分類架構，將政策企業家常使用的策略分為四類，分別是：概念發展、展示與宣傳、建立聯盟及關係管理。本文以2018年臺灣以核養綠公投案作為研究案例，透過次級資料分析及深度訪談法，描繪政策企業家推動公投採取之策略，藉以檢視本架構之適用性。研究結果顯示，缺乏組織性人力與經費資源支持的公民個體政策企業家，在社群媒體發達的時代中，具有更多元的策略工具選擇，以推動政策改變；而政策企業家採取的策略類型，也確實符合本研究提出的策略架構。英文摘要：The importance of policy entrepreneurs on policy change has been confirmed by many studies. However, domestic research is insufficient regarding what strategies are adopted by policy entrepreneurs to promote policy change. Based upon related literature and references, this article organizes, simplifies, and constructs a clear and concise scheme to classify the strategies employed by policy entrepreneurs into four categories: idea development, demonstration and marketing, coalition building, and relationship management. Using the ”Go Green with Nuclear Referendum in 2018” as a case study, this article analyzes these local policy entrepreneurs' strategies in Taiwan. Via secondary data analysis and in-depth interviews, this article describes strategies employed by local policy entrepreneurs who successfully promoted the referendum, and it examines the applicability of the above-mentioned scheme. The results show that in this peculiar era of social media, individual policy entrepreneurs without political power and resources can still effectively facilitate policy changes by employing diverse strategies, which are also consistent with the classification scheme proposed in this article.起始頁-結束頁：101-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202003_(83).000301篇名：以希望感為核心之高中氣候變遷課程評量研究並列篇名：An Evaluation Research on Hope-Oriented Climate Change Curriculum at Senior-High School作者：梁格寧(Ko-Ning Liang);曾鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tseng)關鍵字：二因子混合設計變異數分析;希望感;氣候變遷;Two-Way Mixed ANOVA;Hope;Climate Change期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：隨著氣候變遷成為全球環境挑戰，氣候行動不但成為聯合國教科文組織在2017年提出的全球17項永續發展目標的重要學習內容之一，亦為目前臺灣環境教育議題中的重要學習主題。但氣候變遷是個以全球為尺度、跨領域、充滿複雜性和不確定性的環境議題，容易讓青少年在學習時感到絕望而不利採取氣候行動。因此如何設計1套能有效提升希望感、又能促進氣候素養和環境行為的課程，是本研究的主要目標。本文運用Snyder的希望感理論設計1套以氣候行動為主題的高中多元選修課程，採用Li與Monroe的氣候變遷希望感量表評量課程成效，以便利抽樣邀請臺北市一所公立高中合作教學，並以不等控制組之準實驗設計進行資料收集，共有實驗組40名及控制組61名學生參與研究，最後以二因子變異數分析課程效果。研究結果發現一學期共3個模組的課程能顯著提升實驗組學生的氣候變遷希望感、技能與行為。本研究雖未能增加氣候變遷知識，但課程介入能減緩實驗組學生的知識退步程度。此外，本研究也發現初次用於臺灣女性高中生群體的氣候變遷希望感量表具有良好的信效度。依據前述結果，本研究亦提出未來的研究和教學建議。英文摘要：As climate change has become a serious environmental challenge for global sustainable development. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) proposed climate action as one of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in 2017. Climate change was also designated as an important learning topic by Taiwanese government. However, climate change is a global-scale, cross-disciplinary, complex, and uncertain environmental issue. Therefore, adolescent learners easily feel too hopeless to take action to address issues associated with climate change. The purpose of this research is to design and evaluate a curriculum that aims to promote adolescent's sense of hope, knowledge, skills, and behavior regarding climate change. We transformed Snyder's hope theory into an instructional strategy and designed a semester-long course for senior-high-school students. Through convenience sampling, we invited four teachers and 161 students at one public senior high school to join this research. We adopted Li and Monroe's Climate Change Hope Scale (CCHS) to evaluate learning outcomes through the quasi-experimental design. Result from a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) analysis showed that after learning three modules, students' sense of hope, environmental skills, and behavior significantly increased at the end of semester. Results also showed a decline of students' knowledge loss in treatment group. In addition, we found that CCHS had good reliability and validity in Taiwanese adolescent population. According to the findings of this study, we propose continued research and the development of educational strategies which promote student engagement in learning climate change.起始頁-結束頁：75-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202003_28(1).000401篇名：臺灣懷孕婦女身心健康適應問卷之發展研究並列篇名：Development of Taiwanese Pregnant Women Adjustment Scale作者：劉彥君(Yen-Chun Liu);陳燕諭(Yen-Yu Chen)關鍵字：生活品質;臺灣懷孕婦女身心健康適應問卷;憂鬱;驗證性因素分析;quality of life;Taiwanese Pregnant Women Adjustment Scale;depression;confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在編製適用於評估臺灣懷孕婦女在懷孕期間之身心適應問卷，檢視懷孕為婦女的生活帶來的身心變化，作為提供懷孕婦女適切的心理健康服務之依據。本研究基於研究者過去的研究與實務經驗、文獻回顧以及專家學者之意見，發展出58題孕期身心適應問卷初稿，包含「生理變化」、「心理壓力」、「負向情緒」、「正向情緒」、「婚姻品質」以及「社會支持」等六個向度。問卷發展共計分成三個階段，第一階段，以166位懷孕婦女為預試對象，經探索性因素分析以及內部一致性分析之結果刪除題項，形成38題正式問卷。第二階段，以653位懷孕婦女為研究對象（A樣本），進行二次的探索性因素分析，刪除7題，形成31題最終問卷。第三階段，以656位懷孕婦女為研究對象（B樣本），進行驗證性因素分析。全量表與六因素之內部一致性Cronbach's α為 .76 ∼ .94，驗證性因素分析整體模型適配度指標亦在合理範圍，臺灣懷孕婦女身心適應問卷各項分數與孕期憂鬱、不同層面生活品質皆有顯著相關。本研究自編的臺灣懷孕婦女身心適應問卷具有良好的信效度，應是適用於評估臺灣孕期婦女身心適應情況的工具。英文摘要：Pregnant women undergo considerable changes in terms of their bodies, emotions, and social roles and are at risk of stress and low quality of life. This study developed an adjustment scale for assessing Taiwanese pregnant women and examined the physical and psychological changes that occur during pregnancy to provide them with appropriate mental health services. On the basis of our literature review and practical experience as well as expert opinion, this study developed the first draft of Taiwanese Pregnant Women Adjustment Scale, comprising 58 items pertaining to the following six dimensions: physiological changes, psychological stress, negative emotions, positive emotions, quality of marriage, and social support. The scales' development was divided into three stages: In the first stage, 166 pregnant women were recruited in the pilot study, and the collected data were analyzed through exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and internal consistency analysis to develop a 38-item questionnaire. In the second stage, a valid sample comprising 653 pregnant women (sample A) was used to conduct a second EFA to develop the final 31-itme questionnaire. In the third stage, a valid sample comprising 656 pregnant women (sample B) was employed for confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). The internal consistency coefficient Cronbach's alpha for the whole scale and the six subscales ranged between .76 and .94, indicating their reliability. The CFA results also indicated that the model was supported by observed data, and the model's stability was confirmed. The results supported the six-dimension model. Moreover, prenatal depression, three dimensions of quality of life, and adjustment during pregnancy were found to be strongly correlated, indicating criterion validities-consistent with previous results. Thus, the Taiwanese Pregnant Women Adjustment Scale has adequate reliability and validity and could be used to evaluate the degree of adjustment Taiwanese women undergo during pregnancy.起始頁-結束頁：531-560資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202006_51(4).00022篇名：多面向道德情意量表之發展與信效度考驗並列篇名：Multidimensional Affective Morality Scale: Development and Reliability and Validity Evaluation作者：李琪明(Angela Chi-Ming Lee)關鍵字：多面向道德情意量表;信效度;探索性因素分析;複核效化;驗證性因素分析;multidimensional affective morality (MAM) scale;reliability and validity;exploratory factor analysis (EFA);cross-validation;confirmatory factor analysis (CFA)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究目的在發展「多面向道德情意量表」（multidimensional affective morality scale,簡稱MAM scale），並考驗其信效度。研究者汲取國內外道德學界既有經驗與成果，針對國中至研究所學生為對象，並奠基臺灣的在地脈絡，以作為情意層面道德範疇概況或成效展現的具體指標，希冀對於國內外道德教育理論與實踐有所助益。本研究方法與歷程包括先行探究理念架構以擬定量表初稿、繼而針對初稿評定其內容效度、再經修改後進行量表預試與正式施測。研究者區分四個階段進行統計分析，並採用IBM SPSS Statistics 23與Amos 25 Graphics為分析軟體：一是將預試樣本（N=585）進行項目分析，計算其內部一致性信度；二是將預試樣本區分為二群，以樣本_1（N=283）進行探索性因素分析；三是以樣本_2（N=302）進行驗證性因素分析；四是以正式施測樣本（N=708）進行複核效化檢驗。本研究發展完成的MAM量表包括詳版與簡版，詳版通過內容效度與內部一致性考驗，包括四則道德故事與四個構面，計有44個題項；簡版則是奠基詳版，並具有良好的模式適配度（二階單因子驗證性分析模式），以及理想的組合信度、建構效度與複核效化檢驗，其內容包括三則道德故事與三個構面，計有12個題項。詳版可顯示道德情意量表的脈絡性與豐富性，簡版則可展現結構性與精簡性。藉此量表的發展，本文綜整結論以彰顯MAM量表的特點：一是本量表凸顯情意層面道德範疇，豐富且具深度的多面向意涵；二是本量表與文獻所探討的量表，有其相似度均凸顯道德情意內涵，亦有其故事所關注道德議題的獨創性與在地關聯；三是本研究嘗試以多種類的信效度，對於道德情意量表進行堅實的考驗。最後，本研究基於道德教育的角度，提供在量表運用與後續研究的建議，以期增進各教育階段學生的多面向道德情意發展。英文摘要：This study developed the Multidimensional affective morality (MAM) scale by testing its reliabilities and validity. On the basis of both national and global academic experiences and research achievements, this study selected students from junior high school to graduate school in Taiwan as subjects to construct a concrete indicator for affective morality and enhance the theory and practice of moral education. This study first explored the rationale underlying the scale's draft. The researcher then examined the content validity and conducted the pretest and formal survey. Statistical analysis was performed utilizing the IBM SPSS Statistics (version 23) and AMOS Graphics (version 25). In Stage 1, an item analysis was performed and the internal reliability was computed for the pretest group sample (N = 585). Stage 2 comprised an exploratory factor analysis (EFA) for pretest_1 group (N = 283). Stage 3 comprised a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) for pretest_2 group (N = 302). In Stage 4, the cross-validation for the formal survey_ group was assessed (N = 708). The researcher developed two versions of the MAM scale. The long version, comprising 4 moral stories, 4 constructs, and 44 items, passed the test for content validity and internal consistency. The short version, comprising 3 moral stories, 3 constructs, and 12 items, demonstrated goodness of fit (a one-factor second-order CFA model) and good composite/component/construct reliability, construct validity, and cross-validity. The long version of the MAM scale demonstrated contextualization and richness, whereas the short one demonstrated structure and refinement. Thus, the MAM scale has the following characteristics: (1) The MAM scale has good richness and offered an in-depth understanding of the multiple dimensions of affective morality. (2) Similar to other related scales, the MAM scale demonstrated the concepts of affective morality. In addition, the scale encompassed localization and creativity pertaining to moral issues. (3) The MAM scale's reliability and validity could be tested using various evaluation methods. Finally, the researcher offered several suggestions for the scale's application and further research to improve the development of affective morality among students in different educational levels.起始頁-結束頁：561-583資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202006_51(4).00033篇名：從校園輔導工作初探拒學議題之生態指標並列篇名：Preliminary Research on Ecological Characteristic Index of School Refusal from School Guidance Perspective作者：洪美鈴(Mei-Ling Hung);王麗斐(Li-Fei Wang);林正昌(Cheng-Chang Lin);張在蓓(Tsai-Pei Chang)關鍵字：生態指標;拒學;維持因子;ecological index;school refusal;maintaining factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在從校園輔導工作進行國內拒學現象在個人、家庭、學校三層面之生態特徵及維持因子初探。研究方法採取混合研究先質後量的探索性設計；首先，進行四位國中輔導實務工作者之質性訪談，並進行類別－內容分析，據以理解拒學現象在個人、家庭、學校三層面之生態特性；其次，依據質性研究結果，發展「拒學觀察處遇調查問卷」以進行量化研究，研究參與者為239位國內高中、國中、國小之輔導實務工作者，採用描述統計、主成份分析等統計方法。研究結果發現：在質性研究部分，拒學生態因子的個人層面為內在情緒特質、外顯行為表現、生理症狀、伴隨心理疾病與特教需求；在家庭層面為夫妻關係、家庭關係與期待、教養方式與規範、經濟資源；在學校層面為課程學習狀態、師生關係、同儕關係、學校規則。在量化研究部分，拒學生態特徵之指標包括：1.個人焦慮逃避；2.家庭保護與衝突糾結；3.個人家庭高期待；4.個人叛逆避苦；5.個人倦怠無動力；6.學校壓力與個人疼痛。而拒學維持因子之指標包括：1.班級老師處理困境；2.校內合作困難；3.個人作息與網路問題；4.家庭焦慮而保護學生；5.家長無力回應孩子攻擊；6.家庭缺乏拒學知能。最後，本研究依據上述拒學行為的生態特徵與維持因子提出討論，以提供後續拒學實務介入與未來相關研究之基礎。英文摘要：This study explored the ecological characteristics and maintaining factors of Taiwan's school refusal issues from the viewpoint of ecological systems, examining individual, family, and school aspects. An exploratory sequential mixed method research design was utilized in this study. First, qualitative interviews were conducted with four guidance teachers from Taiwan's junior high schools. The qualitative data were analyzed using the categorical-content method to explore the ecological characteristics of school refusal phenomenon through individual, family, and school aspects. Thereafter, on the basis of the qualitative analysis results, a questionnaire was developed and administered among 239 guidance teachers from Taiwanese primary, junior high, and high schools. Descriptive statistics and principal component analysis were applied to analyze the quantitative data. The qualitative results highlighted the following ecological characteristics of Taiwan's school refusal phenomenon: (1) the individual aspects entailed internal emotional states, external behaviors, physical symptoms, and need for psychological medication or special education; (2) the family aspects comprised relationship between parents, family relationships and expectations, parenting styles and regulations, and economic status and resources; and (3) the school aspect constituted student learning conditions, relationships with teachers, relationships with peers, and rules of a school system. The quantitative research results indicated the following ecological characteristics index of school refusal: (1) personal anxious avoidance, (2) familial overprotection and conflicts, (3) personal and familial over-expectations, (4) personal opposition and indolence, (5) inactivity and lack of motivation, and (6) school pressure and personal physical discomfort. Moreover, the quantitative research results demonstrated that the maintaining factors index of school refusal comprised the following: (1) class management challenges, (2) problems with cooperation within school system, (3) issues of personal daily routine and Internet management, (4) family anxiety toward school systems, (5) insufficient parental intervention against attacks from child, and (6) family lacking knowledge on school refusal. Finally, the results were discussed in more details and provided suggestions for practice and further studies.起始頁-結束頁：585-612資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202006_51(4).00044篇名：學前兒童至老年階段言語功能指標數值的變化並列篇名：Changes in Indicator Values of Speech Function Across Lifespan作者：鄭靜宜(Jing-Yi Jeng)關鍵字：口腔輪替運動速率;自發性言語速率;言語功能;基頻;最長發聲時長;oral diadochokinetic (DDK) rate;spontaneous speech rate;speech function;fundamental frequency (F0);maximum phonation time (MPT)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究探討華語說話者由兒童至老年的四項言語功能指標數值的變化，包括最長發聲時長（MPT）、發聲基頻（F0）、口腔輪替運動（DDK）速率以及自發性言語速率，跨年齡層的比較這些言語功能指標數值的差異。研究採橫斷法設計，年齡範圍由4歲至83歲，取樣八個年齡組群，分4歲組、5歲組、6歲組、7歲組、9歲組、12歲組、成人組、老年組，共8組，一組有40至60位不等的參與者，各組男女人數約各半，全部參與者共350位。分析結果顯示由兒童至成人隨著年齡的增長，這些言語功能指標數值呈增進趨勢，但由成人至老年，言語功能指標數值則呈衰退趨勢。在MPT方面，除了老年組外，隨著年齡增加，MPT隨之增長，由四歲組平均5秒開始逐漸增加，增長至成人最長，成年男性平均21秒。老年組則MPT減少，平均15秒。在F0方面，在學齡前階段無性別差異，而由9歲開始出現顯著的性別差異，女性F0顯著地高於男性。由兒童至成人，男女性皆隨著年齡的增長F0下降，但由成人至老人的F0變化趨勢是女性長者持續下降，而男性長者的F0則略升高。DDK的速率隨著兒童年齡的增長而變快，由四歲（平均3.25音節／秒）至成人達最高（平均5.28音節／秒），老年組DDK速率（平均4.70音節／秒）則顯著低於成人組。自發言語速率和DDK速率隨年齡變化的趨勢相近似，亦隨著兒童年齡增長而變快，由四歲（平均2.35音節／秒），至成人達最高（平均4.37音節／秒）。自發言語速率與各項DDK速率呈中度正相關，顯現兩者間在構音動作控制的關連性。四個言語功能指標數值隨著年齡而變化的趨勢顯示言語功能在發聲呼吸效能、聲帶質量、構音動作速度與協調性的變化，由兒童期至成人階段大致呈現增長趨勢，由成年至老年言語功能則呈衰退趨勢。英文摘要：This study investigated the differences on the indicator values related with four speech functions among eight age groups of Mandarin speakers, and explored the changes in speech functions across lifespan. This cross-sectional study explored the changes in speech functions with age. The following four functional indicators of speech were measured: maximum phonation time (MPT), fundamental frequency (F0), oral diadochokinetic (DDK) rates, and spontaneous speech rates. The study recruited 350 participants, comprising of eight age groups, including 4-, 5-, 6-, 7-, 9-, 12-year-old children, young adults and older adults. The participant age ranged from 4 to 83 years. The results demonstrated that MPT increased with age-from an average of 5 seconds in 4-year-old children to an average of 21 seconds in adult male group. The MPTs of the older adults were shorter, at an average of approximately 15 seconds. The F0 values of preschool and 7-year-old children demonstrated no significant gender difference; however, gender difference appeared in 9-year-old children. The results showed that the F0s of adult females were significantly higher than those of adult males. For both genders, the F0s decreased with age, except for the older adults. The F0s of older women continued to decline, whereas those of older males increased slightly. The DDK rates increased with age, with a mean of 3.25 syllable/s, and it was fastest among all groups (mean: 5.28 syllable/s); however, the DDK rates in older adults tended to decrease (mean: 4.70 syllable/s). Although the spontaneous speech rates were slightly slower than the DDK rates, the tendency of changing with age was common for both indicators. The speech rates were moderately correlated with the DDK rates, suggesting that both of them may share the same articulatory motor control mechanism. The change of these indicators suggests that speech function generally improves with age, in terms of phonatory-respiratory efficacy, mass of vocal folds, articulatory agility, and coordination; however, the speech functions were observed to decline for older adults.起始頁-結束頁：613-637資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202006_51(4).00055篇名：優良醫學教師特質量表編製暨差異研究並列篇名：Development of Quality Scale for Outstanding Medical Educators and Analysis of Differences in Background Variables作者：朱紹盈(Shao-Yin Chu);黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang);張景媛(Ching-Yuan Chang);易烈瑜(Lieh-Yu Yi)關鍵字：教學;優良醫學教學教師;醫學教育;teaching;outstanding medical educator;medical education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：有鑑於臺灣醫學教育領域缺乏有效評估優良教師教學特質的工具。故此，本研究主要目的在編製一份醫學教師特質量表，並考驗其信、效度，以做為後續醫學教育評估優良教學教師的參考依據。本研究共編製了36道試題，分別包含教學計劃、教學活動、教學熱忱、學習輔導、教師支持、多元評量六大教學面向，請162位醫學院學生針對其醫學教師的特質，進行知覺重要性評量。藉由探索性因素分析與鑑別力分析之結果，最後共保留了26道作為正式量表試題。於信、效度的證據上，醫學教師特質量表之內部一致性係數介於 .79 ∼ .89之間，同時二階驗證性因素分析亦具有可接受之整體適配度與內在品質，顯示本量表具有適當之信度與效度。此外，研究結果亦發現，（1）臺灣醫學生所知覺重要之教師教學特質，首要為教學熱忱、教學活動，其次為教學計劃、多元評量，之後才是學習輔導、教師支持。（2）不同性別醫學生對於各向度教學特質的知覺重要性無顯著差異。（3）高年級或繁星推薦等入學管道的醫學生，對於教師支持向度的知覺重要性，會顯著高於低年級或個人申請入學之醫學生。（4）未重考之醫學生對於教師的教學活動、教學熱忱、教師支持的知覺重要性，會顯著高於重考者。最後，針對研究結果之意涵進行討論。英文摘要：Training by competent doctors is essential in medical education. Being taught by an outstanding medical educator not only provides medical students with access to clinical knowledge but also presents them with a role model for caring about patients and cooperating with other professionals, thus in turn facilitating the development of medical students into excellent doctors. Therefore, identifying the teaching qualities an outstanding medical educator should possess is integral to establishing an assessment criteria for evaluating outstanding teachers. A good medical educator can be evaluated as a physician, human, and teacher. As a physician, a good medical educator should have sufficient medical and clinical knowledge, enthusiasm for medicine, skills for treating patients, ability to maintain positive doctor-patient relationships, and academic research abilities, among other qualities. As a human, a good medical educator should prioritize the welfare of human beings and should be friendly, approachable, honest, respectful, humorous, empathetic, communicative, and reflective. As a teacher, a good medical educator should establish a learner-friendly teaching environment, show enthusiasm toward teaching, have good teaching skills, encourage students to actively participate in the learning process, carefully observe students and identify individual differences between them, have good relations with students, respond to students promptly, stimulate students' interest in learning, monitor students' progress, and make good use of constructive assessment and feedback. Kilukawa et al, (2013) adopted a focus group method to interview Japanese physicians on their perception of the characteristics of a good clinical educator. Of the 30 themes identified in the responses, 24 were categorized under the teacher perspective, including providing students with sufficient support, opportunities for thinking, feedback, indicators of required progress, and practice opportunities. The other six were categorized under the physician perspective, including enthusiasm for patient care, patience with patients, and emphasis on pathological reasoning. However, characteristics pertaining to the human perspective were not found. Studies have indicated that medical students in Eastern and Western countries may have varying perceptions of a good medical educator's characteristics. Medical students in Western countries emphasize on the physician and human characteristics of medical educators; however, medical students in Eastern countries are more likely to emphasize on the teaching practice of medical educators. Cultural differences heavily influence medical students' perception of the qualities medical educators should possess; hence, identifying the qualities recommended by different cultures is critical. In Taiwan, the lack of effective quantitative tools for assessing medical educators' qualities presents an obstacle. Therefore, development of the said tools is warranted. This study developed a quality scale for outstanding medical educators to serve as reference for medical education quality assessment. The reliability and validity of the scale were verified. The scale also investigated the possible difference in how medical students from different backgrounds perceive the qualities of good teachers. On the basis of the literature review on good teacher qualities in the general and medical domain, the authors identified six teaching dimensions to use as measuring items. The original scale comprised 36 items, encompassing six major teaching dimensions, namely teaching planning (five items, including curriculum planning and course organization), teaching activities (eight items, including learning activities and resource development), teaching passion (six items), learning guidance (six items, including student coaching, mentoring, and providing constructive feedback), teacher support (five items, including teaching support and professional development), and multiple assessment (six items). In total, 162 medical students (79 men, 82 women, and 1 gender unknown) in Eastern Taiwan were invited to rate the perceived importance of the six items in reference to their teachers' qualities. According to the results of the exploratory factor analysis and discrimination analysis [indicators of corrected item-total correlation and critical ratio (CR)], the authors removed the items in which factor loading and corrected item-total correlation were ＜.40 and those with a CR of ＜3. Finally, 26 items were retained for the final scale. Five, six, four, five, three, and three items were assigned to each teaching dimension, respectively. Furthermore, reliability testing demonstrated that the internal consistency coefficients of teaching planning, teaching activities, teaching enthusiasm, learning guidance, teacher support, and multiple assessment subscales were .877, .887, .853, .892, .818, and .794, respectively. During validity testing, a second-order confirmatory factor analysis revealed that the scale exhibited acceptable statistical fit and internal quality. This indicated the proposed scale's validity and reliability. Moreover, the study results suggested the following: (1) Medical students perceived teaching passion and teaching activities as the most important dimensions, followed by teaching planning, multiple assessment, learning guidance, and teacher support, F(5, 805) = 31.98, p ＜ .05, <U+0273>^2 = .166. The authors speculated that the differences in perceived importance between different dimensions could be attributed to the learning environment and expectations of medical educators. Medical students in Taiwan believe that it is difficult for educators to provide additional assistance to facilitate students' learning and guidance when they have to be a teacher and a clinician simultaneously. Therefore, medical students perceived learning guidance and teacher support as less important. Instead, they placed more importance on educators providing good teaching quality in their teaching process. (2) Male and female medical students differed nonsignificantly in terms of their perceived importance of the six teaching dimensions, ts (159) ＜ 1.12, ps ＞ .05. (3) Medical students who were admitted through the Star Plan [t (160) = 2.45, p ＜ .05] and those in higher grade levels [F(3, 158) = 3.00, p ＜ .05, <U+0273>^2 = .054] perceived teacher support to be significantly more important compared with medical students who were admitted through personal applications or those in lower grade levels. The authors speculated that the difference between grades could be attributed to the medical curriculum planning. Senior medical students acquire more medical knowledge and require more practical clinical experience. Hence, teacher support is more critical to the learning process of higher grade students than that of lower grade students. Moreover, medical students who are enrolled through the Star Plan have a clear path for their medical career. They are more eager to obtain resources provided by educators and gain advanced medical knowledge and clinical technology than those enrolled through personal applications. Therefore, teacher support is essential for them. (4) Medical students who did not retake the entrance examination perceived teaching activities, teaching passion, and teacher support to be significantly more important compared with those who retook the entrance examination, ts (160) = 2.78, 2.54, and 2.55, respectively; all ps ＜ .05. The authors speculated that previous unsuccessful experience of re-examination could be responsible for this. These students may attribute their learning success or failure in medical courses to their own ability or lack of effort instead of viewing it as a reflection of the educators' qualities. Therefore, students who retook the entrance examination placed less emphasis on teaching activities, teaching passion, and teacher support. Finally, the implications and limitations of the study results were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：639-661資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202006_51(4).00066篇名：「家庭社經地位」與母親教養效能、幼兒適應行為及詞彙理解能力之關係並列篇名：Relationship Among Family Socioeconomic Status and Maternal Parenting Efficacy, Preschoolers' Adjustment, and Receptive Vocabulary Ability作者：鄧蔭萍(Yin-Ping Teresa Teng)關鍵字：母職效能;幼兒適應行為;社經地位;教養因素;詞彙理解能力;maternal self-efficacy;preschooler's adjustment;socioeconomic status;parenting factors;receptive vocabulary期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：許多研究顯示家庭社經地位與幼兒的發展有所關連，而母親教養效能則似乎會調節這些關聯，故，本研究的目的在於了解家庭社經地位與母親之教養效能（母職效能及教養因素）、幼兒適應行為與詞彙理解之概況及變項間的關係。研究對象是就讀於台北市及台東縣幼兒園的3-5歲幼兒們，研究以分層隨機抽樣方式蒐集資料，共計有效樣本為511份之幼兒及其母親和老師的資料。母親填寫家庭背景、母職效能量表及母親教養因素量表；幼兒母親及老師填寫幼兒適應行為量表，並由助理對各別幼兒進行畢保德圖畫詞彙測驗以評估幼兒詞彙理解能力。統計方法為：描述性統計、皮爾森積差相關及迴歸取向之路徑分析。研究結果為：家庭社經地位較高、母親有工作者、家中孩童數較少、母職效能較佳、教養多以反應層面者，其幼兒之適應行為（母評）及詞彙理解能力較佳。在控制了本模型的所有變項後，家庭社經地位對幼兒之詞彙理解能力有直接的正向影響，且教養之反應及要求之共同層面下對幼兒詞彙理解能力亦有正向影響。另外，家庭社經地位對幼兒適應行為問題並沒有直接影響，但是，卻是透過母職效能之中介而對幼兒適應行為問題有負向影響，而教養－要求層面者，則與幼兒適應行為問題有正向影響（母評）。總結來說，家庭社經地位對於母職效能、教養因素、幼兒適應行為及詞彙理解能力透過不同的過程均有影響。本研究之結果可作為其他研究母親教養效能、教養因素、幼兒適應行為及詞彙理解能力之參考。英文摘要：Numerous studies have shown that a family's SES is related to young children's development, and mothers' parenting effectiveness may mediate this relationship. This current study was part of the National Science Council (NSC) project, The Study of Mother's Parenting Self-Efficacy, Parenting Practices, and Child's Social-Emotional Behaviors (I) (II) (NSC 102410-H-158-008-MY2), managed by Dr. Teresa Yin Ping Teng as the principal investigator and sponsored by The Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan. To examine the concurrent relationship among SES, maternal parenting efficacy (e.g., maternal self-efficacy [MSE] and parenting factor), preschoolers' adjustment, and their receptive vocabulary ability. This study targeted children, aged 3-5 years, enrolled in the preschools of Taipei City and Taitung County. The sample population comprised 511 preschoolers, their mothers, and teachers, and data collection was performed through stratified cluster random sampling. Mothers reported their family characteristics and MSE, when responding to the parenting factor questionnaire. Mothers and teachers rated preschoolers' adjustment. Each preschooler's receptive vocabulary ability was evaluated by the research assistant individually. The research investigation was conducted through descriptive statistics, Pearson correlation, and path analysis of regression. Discussion: (1) The study showed that in families with higher SES, mothers of young children were mostly employed, had nuclear families, mostly lived in cities (Taipei), and raised fewer children. This result was consistent with the 2018 survey conducted by the National Statistics, R.O.C. Among married women with different educational levels, those with a college degree and above raised fewer children than married women with an elementary school diploma or below did. These women mainly came from nuclear families. Compared with mothers from lower SES families, mothers from higher SES families had nuclear families, raised fewer children, and exhibited higher maternal parenting efficacy. Moreover, employed mothers exhibited more responsiveness in their parenting style. However, mothers from lower SES families exhibited more demandingness when interacting with their children, suggesting that families' economic problems may have a negative impact on parents and children, which was consistent with the Family Stress Model. Economic pressure can cause parents to exhibit problematic emotions and behaviors, causing parenting troubles and poor parenting efficiency. The parenting of mothers from higher SES families was characterized by responsiveness, that is, they showed love when interacting with children. Interestingly, employed mothers exhibited high demandingness and responsiveness, as they followed what Maccoby and Martin (1983) defined as the democratic-authoritative parenting style, characterized by high responsiveness and high demandingness. Mother being employed was regarded as the main cause of conflicts between work and family. Work-family conflicts were also observed in the current study, indicating that mothers have to juggle conflicting family and work roles when employed. In Taiwan, balancing work and family responsibilities is a parenting challenge faced by many employed mothers who have children aged ＜6 years. (2) This study also found that compared with mothers from lower SES families, mothers from higher SES families, who were living in cities, had nuclear families, were employed, and older, presented better maternal parenting efficacy. Their children exhibited less maladjustment (mothers' report), and good receptive vocabulary ability. In addition, the mothers' parenting styles exhibited more responsiveness and less demandingness. Boys exhibited more maladjusted behavior than girls did (mothers' and teachers' report). Moreover, children from urban areas exhibited more maladjustment than those from rural areas did (teacher's report). (3) Path analysis and controlling the variables of age and gender of young children indicated that mothers from higher SES families exhibited higher maternal parenting efficacy than those from lower SES families did. Mothers with higher maternal parenting efficacy were associated with better child adjustment (mothers' report), whereas demanding parenting was associated with poorer child adjustment (mother' report). This result suggested that maternal parenting efficacy was an important meditation variable. Fewer maladjustment problems were reported for young children with mothers who played maternal roles. This study found that families' SES significantly influenced the social-emotional development of young children. Moreover, children's maladjustment was not necessarily influenced by mothers observing responsive parenting style; however, mothers observing demanding parenting style counterproductively increased children's maladjustment. The number of young children in a family was also found to affect mothers' parenting styles. Employed mothers often practiced responsive parenting style when the number of young children was fewer. On the contrary, employed mothers practiced demanding parenting style if there were more young children in a family, which likely increased children's maladjustment. (4) In addition to influencing children's maladjustment, a family's SES also exerted a significant direct impact on preschoolers' receptive vocabulary ability. Both parenting factors of responsiveness and demandingness had a positive impact on the children's receptive vocabulary ability. Furthermore, children who lived in the cities had a higher receptive vocabulary ability. (5) Mothers' and teachers' reports on children's maladjustment were positively correlated. Boys exhibited more maladjustment than girls, and children in urban areas were more maladjusted than those in rural areas, according to teachers' reports. In addition, maternal parenting efficacy and parenting factors were found to have an impact on children's maladjustment according to mothers' reports. (6) Employed mothers exhibited lower maternal parenting efficacy, and their children had higher maladjustment. However, employed mothers increased the total income of the family, in turn improving the family's SES. To improve maternal parenting efficacy, mothers adopted more responsiveness than demandingness in their parenting practice. Mothers of young children who needed to work had more diversified parental roles and needed to pay more effort. Working mothers were associated with lower maternal parenting efficacy and higher children maladjustment. Thus, providing supportive services to employed mothers raising young children is an important issue. Results showed that mothers from families with higher SES were more likely to be employed, raise fewer children, exhibit higher maternal parenting efficacy, and follow responsive parenting style. Moreover, their children presented better adjustment (mothers' report) and receptive vocabulary ability. After all variables of this model were controlled for, family SES was found to have a direct positive impact on children's receptive vocabulary ability, and the integrated responsive and demanding parenting style had a positive influence on children's language ability. Furthermore, SES exhibited no significant relationship with children's maladjustment. However, through the mediation of parenting efficacy, SES had a negative impact on children's maladjustment. In addition, demanding parenting practices had a positive impact on children's maladjustment (mothers' report). In summary, SES was found to be intricately associated with maternal parenting efficacy, preschoolers' adjustment, and receptive vocabulary ability in different processes. The current study's results can provide a reference for future studies on maternal parenting efficacy, parenting factors, preschoolers' adjustment, and receptive vocabulary ability.起始頁-結束頁：663-686資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202006_51(4).00077篇名：Effects of a Remedial Program on Beginner-Level, Low-Achieving EFL Learners並列篇名：補救教學計畫對以英語為外語的低成就初階學習者之成效作者：胡翠君(Tsui-Chun Hu);許<U+5A96>茹(Ying-Ju Hsu)關鍵字：achievement gap;low-achieving English learners;English intervention;remedial instruction;remedial program;成就落差;低成就英語學習者;英語教學介入;補救教學;補救教學計畫期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Bridging the achievement gap among learners and maximizing the effectiveness of instruction have attracted significant research attention; however, very few studies have focused on developing a systematic remedial program, particularly for beginner-level EFL learners. Hence, this study first proposed a remedial program to develop the language component skills of low-achieving beginner-level EFL learners. Subsequently, the program's effect on low-achieving learners' vocabulary and grammar was measured. Finally, the study provided an overview of the remedial program's characteristics, highlighting its instructional methods and materials, teaching procedures, activity designs, and approaches for enhancing learner engagement. This study recruited 11 teachers and 567 grade 7 students from six junior high schools in Taiwan. Two subtests, DCEC-Vocabulary Size and DCEC-Grammar of the Diagnosis and Certification of English Competency (DCEC) system, were conducted on all 567 seventh-graders. In total, 117 grade 7 students who failed to reach the grade 4 level were assigned into an experimental and a control group. The experimental group (N = 56) received experimental instruction, whereas the control group (N = 61) received traditional instruction. The study results indicated that the seventh-graders who received experimental remedial instruction demonstrated better English component skills, including better vocabulary and familiarity with grammatical sentence patterns, compared with students who received traditional instruction for remediation. The current study provided a model remedial program by delineating the implementation of remedial instruction for low-achieving beginner-level EFL learners. The proposed remedial program can serve as a model to facilitate the work of practitioners, researchers, curriculum designers, and policymakers.英文摘要：縮小學習成就落差，以及如何最大化教學效能一直是廣泛討論的議題。然而，針對以英語為外語（EFL）的低成就初階學習者，所需擬定系統化補救教學的組成要素及其成效之相關研究卻很有限。有鑑於此，本研究提出一補救教學計畫，針對EFL低成就學習者的詞彙和文法句型做教學介入，並提供此教學介入在教材教法、教學流程、教學活動設計以及促進學習者參與等方面的特色做法。本研究參與者為來自臺灣6所國中的11位教師和567位七年級學生，567名學生皆接受英語文能力認證及診斷系統（DCEC）的詞彙量和文法句型測驗作為前測，根據測試結果，將117名在兩子測驗中皆未達到國小四年級程度的學生分為實驗組和對照組，實驗組（N=56）接受實驗教學模組，而對照組（N=61）則接受傳統教學。本研究結果顯示，接受補救教學配套的實驗組學生在詞彙和文法句型的表現較佳。本研究為EFL低成就學習者所需之補救教學配套，提供一示範模組，此模組可供研究者、課程設計者，以及政策擬定者做為參考。起始頁-結束頁：687-711資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202006_51(4).00088篇名：科學想像力圖形測驗之驗證並列篇名：Validation of the Scientific Imagination Test-Figural作者：王佳琪(Chia-Chi Wang)關鍵字：心像;科學想像力;科學想像力圖形測驗;Rasch部分給分模式;Mental Imagery;Rasch Partial Credit Model;Scientific Imagination;Scientific Imagination Test-Figural期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在以Rasch模式重新驗證科學想像力圖形測驗（Scientific Imagination Test-Figural, SIT-Figural），以提供內容、結構、類推、本質、解釋、以及外在效度面向的效度證據，並探討科學想像力、心像與不同背景變項（例如性別、年級與學院別）之間的關係。研究對象共616位大學生。本測驗共有A、B、C、D四項作業，每項作業均包含科學想像力歷程中的漫想力、聯想力、奇想力等三個向度，用以測量學生之科學想像力。經以Rasch部分給分模式分析，三向度的測驗具有良好的模式資料適配度。大部分的作業在性別、年級與學院別上並無明顯的差異試題功能（differential item functioning, DIF），且漫想力、聯想力、奇想力之信度分別是.85、.84以及.83，科學想像力與心像能力具有中低度相關。在差異分析上，研究指出科學想像力在性別、年級與學院別上有顯著差異，其中，女學生在科學想像力圖形測驗上的能力表現顯著高於男生，大三學生的科學想像力顯著優於大一與大二學生，人文社會學院與數位設計學院學生的表現比工學院與商管學院的學生好。最後，本研究針對「科學想像力圖形測驗」的發展與應用，提出未來研究之建議。英文摘要：The present study aimed to validate the Scientific Imagination Test-Figural (SIT-Figural; Wang, Ho, & Cheng, 2016) for undergraduates using Rasch measurement. Furthermore, this study not only provided validating evidence concerning content validity, structural validity, generalizability, substantive validity, interpretation, and external validity (Wolfe & Smith, 2007) but also explored the relationship among scientific imagination, mental imagery, and other background variables (e.g., gender, grade, and college). Quantitative data were collected from 616 participants using the questionnaire, which was extracted from the SIT-Figural model. The SIT-Figural was designed to measure students' scientific imagination through four types of tasks: A, B, C, and D. Additionally, these assignments in the scientific imaginative process comprised three dimensions: brainstorming, association, and transformation/elaboration. The Rasch partial credit model was used to assess the model–data fit; differential item functioning (DIF) analysis was conducted to examine the consistency of the ratings by gender and college. The results of DIF demonstrated that some items in the SIT-Figural showed a significant difference. Moreover, the three dimensions in the SIT-Figural indicated a positive model-data fit. The reliabilities of three subtests were 0.85, 0.84, and 0.83. The correlation coefficients between scientific imagination and mental imagery ranged from low to medium. Furthermore, a significant difference was found between scientific imagination and gender, grade, and college. In terms of scientific imagination, female students performed better than male students. Third-year students displayed better scientific imagination than freshmen and sophomores. Students from the College of Humanities and Social Sciences and the College of Digital Design possessed better abilities than those from the College of Engineering and the College of Business. Finally, suggestions for revising and applying the SIT-Figural were proposed for future research.起始頁-結束頁：341-367資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202003_51(3).00019篇名：兒童局部與整體連貫性推論能力發展研究並列篇名：A developmental study of children's local and global coherence inference abilities作者：張菀芯(Wan-Shin Chang);曾玉村(Yuh-Tsuen Tzeng)關鍵字：局部連貫性;推論;整體連貫性;Global coherence;Inference;Local coherence期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：理解並非一個單一的歷程，相反的，理解需要許多種推論能力以建構情境表徵。推論的發展差異在閱讀研究中是重要議題，然而現階段對於局部與整體連貫性推論的發展順序尚待釐清。局部連貫性推論需要建立字詞與句之間的連結（例如代名詞），整體連貫性推論需要讀者超過文本並結合自身知識已填補文章中缺失的細節。本研究針對局部與整體連貫性推論進行年級間的差異分析，也進一步以群聚分析探討跨年級資料合併後的潛在型態。研究採用六篇各約200字的短篇故事，每篇有1題字面題，2題局部連貫性推論題及1題整體連貫性推論問題，皆為選擇題形式。結果發現，四、五年級學童在兩種推論類型表現都優於三年級學童，且五年級學童在局部連貫性推論的表現優於三、四年級學童；然而此差距並不必然是年紀的影響，跨年級的學童也可能存在有共同的反應型態：即使年齡、能力相當的學童中，仍在局部與整體連貫性的推論有不同的表現。群聚分析得出四種不同的反應型態，顯示理解所需的推論技能並非都同步發展。對能夠做整體連貫性推論的學童來說，並非皆具有高局部連貫性推論能力。本研究結果顯示出學童在推論發展順序上存在個別差異，應針對學童所欠缺的推論能力進行教學，給予更合適的推論課程。英文摘要：Comprehension is not a unitary process. Instead, in addition to many other cognitive skills, several types of inference abilities are required to construct a situation model from the text. Despite knowing developmental differences in students' inference abilities for reading comprehension, definite conclusions on the relative developmental sequence of local and global coherence inference cannot be reached. For reading comprehension, local coherence inferences are needed to establish links between words and sentences (e.g., anaphor). Global coherence inferences are required for readers to go beyond the text and integrate it with their general knowledge to fill the missing details and understand the text as a whole. In this study, we examined the development of both local and global inferences between and across grade levels. In this study, six short narrative passages were selected, each constituting approximately 200 Chinese characters. We devised one literal, two local, and one global coherence inference questions for each text in the multiple-choice format. The results clearly showed that both fourth and fifth grade students performed better than third grade students for both types of inferences. Additionally, fifth grade students had higher scores than third and fourth grade students for local and global coherence inferences. Cluster analysis of the inferences across grades indicated that students' performance was not solely determined by their grade. Individual differences within grades and similar patterns across grades were observed. Cluster analysis results showed the existence of four groups. The results confirmed that comprehension is a complex process and that not all subskills can be developed simultaneously. Not all students with high global inference ability are good at making local coherence inferences. Individual differences in the patterns of inference abilities are revealing and call for more research attention. The patterns revealed in this study can also serve as good foundations for reading instructions that emphasize individual differences.起始頁-結束頁：369-386資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202003_51(3).000210篇名：學生為何作弊？以條件化間接效果考驗課室目標結構、個人成就目標、無聊與作弊之關係並列篇名：Why do students cheat? The conditional indirect effect of perceived classroom goal structures, personal achievement goals, and boredom on cheating作者：彭淑玲(Shu-Ling Peng);程炳林(Biing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：作弊;個人成就目標;條件間接化效果;無聊;課室目標結構;Boredom;Cheating;Classroom goal structures;Conditional indirect effect;Personal achievement goals期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究統整成就目標理論與學業情緒理論，並兼顧成就目標理論之個人與情境層面，解釋課室目標結構（classroom goal structure, CGS）、個人成就目標、無聊如何共同預測作弊。據此，本研究目的為：（1）考驗個人成就目標是否透過無聊對作弊產生中介效果，即無聊是否為個人成就目標與作弊之中介變項。（2）考驗學生知覺的兩種CGS（精熟、表現目標結構）是否調節上述中介效果。本研究以626位七至九年級學生為對象，特定數學領域，並以結構方程模式（structural equational modeling, SEM）進行條件化間接效果分析。結果顯示：（1）精熟與表現目標均會透過無聊對作弊產生負向效果，其中以「精熟目標→無聊→作弊」的負向間接效果較強。（2）學生知覺的CGS會調節「個人成就目標→無聊→作弊」之間接效果。首先，當個人與情境目標一致時，個人成就目標透過無聊對作弊的抑制效果會隨著CGS分數提升而變強（即隨著精熟目標結構分數提升，精熟目標透過無聊而抑制作弊的效果逐漸增強；隨表現目標結構分數提升，表現目標透過無聊降低作弊的效果逐漸增強）。其次，當個人與情境目標不一致時，會隨不同CGS類型與得分程度對中介模式產生不同調節效果。當學生知覺高精熟目標結構時，隨著精熟目標結構分數的增加，會強化表現目標透過無聊而誘發作弊的效果；當學生知覺低表現目標結構時，個人精熟目標透過無聊對作弊的抑制效果才可能存在。本研究依據研究結果提出建議，以作為國中教學輔導與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：Based on an integration of achievement goal theory and academic emotions theory, the present study explored personal and contextual aspects of the achievement goal theory for disclosing how the perceived classroom goal structures (CGS), personal achievement goals, and boredom jointly have an impact on cheating. Accordingly, the aims of this study were twofold: first, to test whether personal achievement goals have a mediating effect on cheating through boredom (i.e., to validate the mediation role of boredom between personal achievement goals and cheating); second, to test whether the above mediation relationship can be moderated by the two types of perceived classroom goal structures (i.e., mastery and performance goal structures). Methodologically, one large-scale survey in the subject of mathematics was administered to a sample of 626 7th~9th grade Taiwanese students, and the collected data were analyzed using the technique of structural equational modeling (SEM) for validating the conditional indirect effect. The results showed that both the mastery and performance goals have a negative effect on cheating through boredom, but the negative indirect effect of ”mastery goals → boredom → cheating” is relatively strong. Also, it was revealed that the perceived classroom goal structures well moderate the indirect effect of ”personal achievement goals → boredom → cheating.” When the adopted personal goals are consistent with the perceived contextual goals, the negative inhibition effect of the personal achievement goals on cheating through boredom will become stronger as the perceived CGS score increases. That is, as the score of mastery goal structures increases, the effect of the mastery goals on cheating through boredom is gradually enhanced; as the score of performance goal structures increases, the effect of the performance goals on cheating through boredom is gradually enhanced. However, when the adopted personal goals are inconsistent with the perceived contextual goals, different moderating effects will occur as a result of diverse CGS types and the level of CGS scores. That is, when students perceive a high level of mastery goal structure, as the score of mastery goal structure increases, the effect of performance goal on cheating through boredom will be produced. When students perceive a low level of performance goal structure, as the score of mastery goal structures increases, the effect of mastery goal on cheating through boredom is likely to occur. Based on the reported results, several suggestions were proposed to not only inform the instruction and counseling practice of junior high school education, but also shed valuable light for future research.起始頁-結束頁：387-413資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202003_51(3).000311篇名：臺灣中小學資優教育銜接與資優學生學習適應研究並列篇名：The Connection of Gifted Education Services and Learning Adaptation of Gifted Students at Primary and Secondary Schools作者：郭靜姿(Ching-Chih Kuo);張書豪(Shu-Hau Jang);廖釗君(Chao-Chun Liao);陳錦雪(Chin-Hsueh Chen);林燁虹(Yeh-Hung Lin);于曉平(Hsiao-Ping Yu);蔡明富(Ming-Fu Tsai)關鍵字：未來生涯;生活適應;資優教育銜接;資優學生;學習發展;Connection of gifted education;Future career;Gifted students;Life adaptation;Learning development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究透過「特殊教育通報網」、「臺灣資優學生追蹤與支持平臺」與「資優生學習問卷」編製，探討資優學生教育銜接與其對學習適應的看法。本研究先協商特殊教育通報網增置通報欄位，將資優學生畢業升高一級教育階段接受資優教育服務的情形納入通報；其次邀集相關專家學者等進行焦點座談後，規劃「臺灣資優學生追蹤與支持平臺」，並編製線上版「資優生學習問卷」，以便蒐集資優學生學習適應資料。「資優生學習問卷」包含國小、國中與高中共三份調查問卷，預試結果具有良好的信度與效度。問卷另編有12個核心題目，以進行跨教育階段之比較。另外，基於關懷弱勢學生接受資優教育服務的情形，本研究亦調查雙重殊異學生占資優學生總數的比率。本研究有如下發現：1.國小資優學生銜接國中資優教育服務的比率僅35.2%，國中資優學生銜接高中資優教育服務的比率僅24.0%。整體言之，資優學生銜接至高一個教育階段接受資優教育服務的比率偏低。2.由高中資優班學生升大學之學門統計發現，數理資優班學生進入理工醫相關學門之人數占85.2%；語文及人社資優班升學語文及人社相關學門之人數占86.8%，顯示高中資優班學生之學術專長與大學就讀科系相符。3.各教育階段雙重殊異學生人數平均僅占全體資優學生人數1%，此項比率較他國雙重殊異學生占全體資優或身心障礙學生比率偏低。4.各教育階段資優學生對於在資優班之「學習發展」、「生活適應」與「未來生涯」的看法在四等量表中，介於2.92∼3.56，態度傾向正向。5.不同性別之資優學生的各項學習適應比較發現，國小女性資優生較男性資優生的生活適應佳；但高中階段的生活適應與未來生涯等態度卻較男性資優學生低。6.國小資優學生普遍在學習發展、生活適應與未來生涯等態度優於國中資優學生與高中資優學生；國中資優學生亦優於高中資優學生。根據研究結果，本研究在最後提出相關建議供教育主管機關決策參考。英文摘要：This study investigated the educational connection, learning development, life adaption, and future career of gifted students in primary and secondary schools in Taiwan. Data were collected through the national Special Education Transmit Net, a collection of special education information in Taiwan, and the self-designed Taiwan Longitudinal Study and Gifted Support Network website after focus discussions with experts. Data of the connection between gifted education services and perspectives on learning adaptation of the gifted students in primary and secondary schools were also collected using an online survey questionnaire. Each subquestionnaire encompassed 12 core topics to track the students' cross-stage development. It had good reliability and validity. Additionally, based on the care for disadvantaged students to receive gifted education services, this study investigated the ratio of twice-exceptional students to the total number of gifted students. The results of the questionnaire and analysis of variance (ANOVA) are presented as follows: 1. A lower rate of educational connection was found: 35.2% of primary school gifted students attended gifted programs in junior high schools, but the educational connection rate for the junior high school gifted students who attended to the senior high school gifted programs decreased to 24.0%. 2. Educational services helped the gifted students select their university major: 85.2% of mathematically and scientifically gifted students chose majors in the relevant fields of science and engineering; 86.8% of gifted students in the language art areas chose majors in the relevant fields of language and humanities. 3. Only 1% of all gifted students were identified as being gifted and having a disability in each of the education stages, which is lower than that identified in other countries. 4. The gifted respondents, irrespective of their learning stage, indicated that the program had a positive impact on their learning development, life adaption, and attitude toward future career. 5. Many differences were found in gifted student’s educational adaption in terms of gender and domains of giftedness, indicating different achievements among the students. Female gifted primary school students performed better than their male counterparts in terms of life adaption﹐ unlike the senior high school gifted students. Additionally, mathematically and scientifically gifted senior high school students were better adjusted to life than those gifted in language and social sciences. 6. In general, primary school gifted students maintained a positive attitude toward learning development, life adaptation, and future career compared with junior and senior high school gifted students. Suggestions are proposed based on the study results for managing and tracking gifted students' education.起始頁-結束頁：415-442資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202003_51(3).000412篇名：數理資優能力、智力與大腦區域同質性之相關研究並列篇名：Regional Homogeneity Correlates with Mathematical and Scientific Talent and Intelligence Quotient作者：吳清麟(Ching-Lin Wu);郭靜姿(Ching-Chih Kuo)關鍵字：區域同質性;智力;數理資優;靜息態腦影像;Regional homogeneity;Intelligence;Mathematical and scientific talent;Resting-state期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：數理資優往往意味著高智力，但兩者並非同一概念。近期研究指出數理資優個體的大腦結構與常人不同，更發現數理資優與智力在大腦白質結構連結之差異。然而，卻鮮少研究從大腦區域同質性觀點探討數理資優、智力與大腦灰質結構的關係。是以，本研究招募16位數理資優大學生，平均年齡為20.91歲（SD=1.75）為實驗組；以及招募14位平均年齡為21.72歲（SD=0.92）的大學生為控制組。使用魏氏成人智力量表第三版評估個體智力，並以靜息態大腦取向分析數理資優個體與一般人的智力與其大腦區域同質性之相關。本研究通過臺北醫學大學行為與社會科學研究倫理委員會之審查。所有參與者皆在瞭解研究內容並簽署知情同意書之後才進行研究。研究結果發現，在包含數理資優與一般樣本中，智力與雙側額中<U+5EFB>、右側前扣帶<U+5EFB>、左側視丘之區域同質性皆為正相關。另一方面，排除年齡與智力影響後，數理資優個體在雙側中央前迴、頂上葉、額上<U+5EFB>、海馬旁<U+5EFB>、顳中<U+5EFB>與舌狀<U+5EFB>與一般人運作不同。此項結果驗證數理資優與智力資優在生理特質有同有異，靜息態大腦研究可增進教育工作者對這兩群學生的特質有更進一步瞭解。另外，在鑑定與發掘高智商及數理資優學生時，教育工作者更要思考如何運用不同的工具評量不同類別的資優。英文摘要：Mathematical and scientific talented (MST) students are often to thought to those who have high intelligence (IQ). Recently, many studies evaluating the neurological mechanism underlying mathematical and scientific talent indicate that certain talents are associated with different brain structures. Furthermore, white matter microstructure is connected differently in cases of mathematical and scientific talent and intelligence. However, research evaluating the relationship between MST, IQ, and gray matter microstructure using the method of regional homogeneity is rare. To address this issue, sixteen MST individuals with average age 20.91 (SD = 1.75) and 14 typically developed undergraduate with average age 21.72 (SD = 0.92) were recruited to participate this research. Participants were recruited from the Departments of Science, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine, and Life Science and the Department of Bio-resources and Agriculture of Taiwanese universities. The participants were assessed intelligence using the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III and a resting-state brain approach. The present study was reviewed and approved by the Research Ethics Center of Taipei Medical University of Taiwan. All the participants signed an informed consent before the experiment began. The results demonstrated that for both the MST and control groups, intelligence and regional homogeneity were positively correlated with the middle frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate, and thalamus. After controlling for the influence of age and IQ, the local efficiencies of the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes, cingulate cortex, insula, and thalamus were higher in the MST group than those in the control group. These results are consistent with portions of the parieto-frontal integration theory that postulate that math-and science and intelligence work together in some brain regions, but operate independently in others. The findings of the present study contribute to a further understanding of the different traits between high IQ and math- and science as well as way to identify different kinds of talents.起始頁-結束頁：443-456資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202003_51(3).000513篇名：青少年創意自我效能、競賽投入與參加競賽的價值之關係－以IEYI世界青少年創客發明展選拔賽為例並列篇名：The Relationship between Adolescents' Creative Self-efficacy, Competition Engagements and the Value of Participating in Competition-aking the IEYI International Exhibition for Young Inventors as an Example作者：洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);陳美蓮(Mei-Lien Chen);葉建宏(Jian-Hong Ye);陳柏熹(Po-Hsi Chen)關鍵字：青少年創客發明展;創意自我效能;競賽投入;競賽價值;Competition engagements;Competition value;Creative self-efficacy;International Exhibition for Young Inventors期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：創新是將創意轉換成價值，創新能力日益重要，在當前的教育環境中特別需被重視和提倡。目前少有的研究多集中在學生參與激烈賽事中的態度和相關信念，因此本研究旨在了解學生如何克服發明展中出現的挑戰，能持續投入及肯定參加競賽的價值。研究從成就感控制價值理論的角度出發，提出相關研究問題，以理解學生的創意自我效能在實踐競賽中的作用，並探討其與學生積極競賽投入構面間的相關性以及參加世界青少年創客發明展選拔賽的競賽價值相關性。參賽者選擇附予價值的作品類別，並於作品與所選擇的類別間產生創意，透過自我效能和學習投入，肯定競賽的價值。本研究收集來自254位學生的數據，並通過AMOS 20進行驗證性因子分析和結構方程模型。結果顯示青少年創意自我效能、競賽投入與參加競賽的價值間具有良好的適配度與信效度，驗證此研究模式可使用性。這項研究的含義表明，學生的創意自我效能可以在參與競爭的動手製作過程中引起。本研究通過顯示三類的競賽投入可以促進或抑制參與者的競賽價值，進一步增加了我們對關係動力學的理解。與先前的研究相比，這項研究的結果似乎對參與競賽的價值產生更有意義的組合影響。綜合言之，本研究突破過去的研究成果，而對創造研究相關領域做出理論與實務性的貢獻，其主要貢獻有：一、本研究所建構模式適配度良好，且各構面之信度與效度俱佳，可解釋發明創作的競賽價值；二、研究驗證創意自我效能這項重要的特質，可分別增強對競賽的認知、情感與行為的投入，並且也能提升參加競賽的價值。英文摘要：Innovation entails the transformation of creativity into value. Innovation abilities are increasingly important and need to be valued and promoted in the current educational environment. To understand the role of students' creative self-efficacy in practical competitions, this study explored the relevance of students' participation in active competition and participation in the International Exhibition for Young Inventors (IEYI). Participants chose the work category attached to the value and created ideas between the work and the selected category, affirming the competition's value through self-efficacy and engagements. This study collected data from 254 students and performed confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) and structural equation modeling (SEM) through AMOS 20. All items in this study were different, that is, they could be used to investigate the response of the study sample. The average variation extraction ranged from 0.57 to 0.66, which was greater than 0.50; the factor load of each item ranged from 0.65 to 0.87, which was greater than 0.50. Therefore, the study data all met the test criteria of convergence validity and construct validity. In the study data, the combined reliability of each facet was above 0.899, which was greater than 0.70; the Cronbach's α value of each facet ranged from 0.896 to 0.923, which met the criteria of internal consistency reliability. The acceptability model constructed in this study had statistically obtained indicators of X^2 = 497.1, df = 246, X^2/df = 2.02, RMSEA = 0.06, GFI = 0.86, AGF I= 0.83, NFI = 0.91, CFI = 0.94, IFI = 0.94, RFI = 0.91, PNFI = 0.79, PGFI = 0.71. The aforementioned indicators were in line with the verification criteria, showing that this model is suitable for analyzing all paths of this data construction. The hypotheses established in this study were all accepted; the creative self-efficacy was positively correlated with three types of competition engagement, comprising cognition, emotion, and behavior. Additionally, the three types of competition engagement were positively correlated with competition value. The cognitive input explanatory power was 62%, the emotional input explanatory power was 73%, the behavior input explanatory power was 79%, and the value explanatory power of participating in IEYI was 76%. The results showed that young peoples' creative self-efficacy, competition engagements, and the value of competition participation had a good fit and intrinsic quality, which verified the relevant acceptance model. The study findings suggest that students' creative self-efficacy can be caused by the hands-on process of competition participation, such as participation in IEYI. This study further improves our understanding of relationship dynamics by showing that three types of competition engagement can promote or inhibit participants' competition value. Compared with previous studies, this study's results seem to have a more meaningful combined impact on the value of competition participation. The study results have two main contributions: first, the research proposes that creative self-efficacy of invention creation is an important trait; second, previous research has confirmed that creative self-efficacy can improve cognitive, emotional, and behavioral engagement of competition and enhance the value of competition participation.起始頁-結束頁：457-481資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202003_51(3).000614篇名：Exploring the Effects of Phonological Processing on Foreign-Language Reading: An Eye-Tracking Study for Chinese Learners of Japanese-as-a-Foreign-Language並列篇名：探索語音處理對外語閱讀的影響：一個針對中文母語者閱讀日語為外語的眼動研究作者：官英華(Ying-Hua Guan)關鍵字：Eye-tracking;Foreign language reading;Linear mixed models;Phonological processing;外語閱讀;眼動追蹤;語音處理;線性混合模型期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：51卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study explored the effects of phonological processing on text comprehension and word processing in a group of advanced Chinese students learning Japanese-as-a-foreign-language (JFL). Participants' reading performance and global- and word-level eye-movement patterns were compared under five reading conditions: articulatory suppression, read-aloud, concurrent reading while listening to the text or to an irrelevant speech, and silent reading. In addition, the study examined whether text complexity moderates participants' phonological processing when reading Japanese text. Finally, how participants' Chinese knowledge affects their processing of Japanese words written in different script types was investigated through analysis of their word-level eye-movement behavior. The results indicated that participants could comprehend short Japanese texts without relying much on phonological recoding: Articulatory suppression and reading while listening to an irrelevant speech did not significantly impair reading comprehension nor did read-aloud and reading while listening to the text enhance text comprehension. Text complexity did not reliably moderate participants' phonological processing under the reading conditions. The word processing results showed that participants' Chinese knowledge facilitated their processing of Chinese-Japanese cognates (i.e., kanji existing both in Chinese and Japanese with the same meanings) but not the processing of Chinese-Japanese homographs or Japanese-coined kanji words. The fact that reading while listening to the text tended to only facilitate the processing of kana words but not the Chinese-Japanese cognates suggests that phonological recoding might not be necessary for accessing the Chinese-Japanese cognates' meanings but is essential for the processing of words written in kana.英文摘要：本研究以中文母語的高階日語學習者為研究對象，探索語音處理對文章理解和字詞辨識的影響。透過實驗在5個閱讀條件下（語音抑制、逐字朗讀、聽不相干語音、聽文章語音以及安靜閱讀）比較了受試者的閱讀表現、整體性和詞層次的眼動模式。此外，研究也檢視文章難度是否影響受試者在閱讀日文文章時處理語音的傾向。藉由分析受試者在詞層次的眼動行為來檢視中文知識如何影響他們處理以不同字體書寫的日語詞彙。實驗結果顯示受試者不太需要依賴語音轉碼即可理解日文短文：語音抑制和聽不相干語音並未妨礙閱讀理解，而逐字朗讀以及聽文章語音並不能提升閱讀理解。除了在逐字朗讀的情況下，文章難度並不影響受試者在其他閱讀條件下語音處理的傾向。在字詞處理方面，受試者的中文知識僅促進他們處理中日同源詞，並無法促進他們處理中日文間的同形異義詞或僅在日語裡使用的漢字詞。聽文章語音傾向只有利於處理平假名或片假名的字詞，但會延長對中日同源詞的注視時間，此結果指向語音轉碼在提取中日同源詞的意義時，可能並非必要的過程，但對處理以平假名或片假名書寫的字詞較為重要。起始頁-結束頁：483-504資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202003_51(3).000701篇名：Egon Schutz普通教育學之探究並列篇名：Inquiry into Egon Schutz's General Pedagogy作者：梁福鎮(Frank Liang)關鍵字：Egon Schutz;存在批判教育學;現象學教育學;普通教育學;Egon Schutz;existential critical pedagogy;phenomenological pedagogy;general pedagogy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文採用教育詮釋學方法，進行E. Schutz普通教育學的探究。首先探討其思想淵源；其次闡明其主要內涵；接著評價其優劣得失；最後提出其重要啟示，以提供我國作為建立教育理論和解決教育問題的參考。Schutz普通教育學的思想淵源來自F. Nietzsche的批判哲學、E. Husserl的現象學、M. Heidegger的現象學、E. Fink的教育學和M. Foucault的後現代主義。主要內涵包括教育理論、陶冶理論、研究方法論、學術理論和教育學未來的課題。Schutz的普通教育學具有提出教育理論、陶冶理論、研究方法論、學術理論和教育學未來課題的新方向等優點，但是其普通教育學也存在著一些問題。儘管如此，Schutz的普通教育學仍然相當重要，可以補充傳統教學理論的不足、改善教育實踐偏頗的缺失、開啟研究方法論的新視野、闡明教育學學術的獨特性和提供教育學未來發展方向等重要啟示，因此相當值得我們加以重視。英文摘要：This article used the method of educational hermeneutics to investigate E. Schutz's general pedagogy. First, to discuss its origin of thought. Second, to explain its main contents. Third, to evaluate its advantages and disadvantages. Fourth, to address missions of the future pedagogy, in order to offer our country as a reference to establish educational theory and to improve of educational practice. The origin of thought about Schutz's general pedagogy comes from F. Nietzsche's critical philosophy, E. Husserl's phenomenology, M. Heidegger's phenomenology, E. Fink's pedagogy and M. Foucault's postmodernism. Its main contents include educational theory, Bildung theory, research methodology, academic theory and future missions of pedagogy. Schutz's general pedagogy has some advantages, it proposes new directions of educational theory, Bildung theory, research methodology, academic theory and pedagogical mission. Certainly Schutz's general pedagogy has some problems. Even though, Schutz's general pedagogy is still very important. It can compensate the shortages of traditional instruction theory, improve the biases of educational practice, open the new horizon of research methodology, explain the unique academic character of pedagogy and offer the future development direction of pedagogy. Therefore, it deserves us to pay attention to Schutz's general pedagogy.起始頁-結束頁：37-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820200666020022篇名：人之異於禽獸幾希？Derrida動物倫理探討與教育深義並列篇名：The Rare Difference Between Animals and Humans? On Derrida's Animal Ethics and Its Educational Significance作者：洪如玉(Ruyu Hung)關鍵字：人本主義;人類中心主義;列維納斯;海德格;德里達;humanism;anthropocentrism;Levinas;Heidegger;Derrida期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文主旨在於探討解構哲學家Derrida的動物倫理思想，以及內含深刻的教育哲學蘊義。Derrida的動物哲學起點在於質疑Heidegger與Levinas的人本主義，然而Heidegger與Levinas哲學重點之一在於批判傳統人本主義，換言之，Derrida認為Heidegger與Levinas雖批判傳統人本主義，但仍然保有人類中心主義的內核。Derrida的批判包含著對人性本質之深刻反思，顯示出對於人與動物關係的另類思考，此解構取向的動物思想並非只是個純概念遊戲，在教育與倫理政治學上有相當程度的回應，整體而言，本文共分為五節，第一節為前言；第二節探討Derrida對於Heidegger存有論人類中心主義的批判；第三節為Derrida對於Levinas倫理學之人類中心主義的批判；第四節探討Derrida動物倫理之教育反思及其在倫理政治面向的意義；第五節以「跟隨（動物）倫理為尊重他者教育之起點」作為Derrida動物倫理之結語。英文摘要：This paper aims to discuss Derrida's animal ethics and its profound educational implications. Derrida's philosophy of animality begins at questioning humanism or anthropocentrism in Heidegger and Levinas. Although the critique of humanism plays an important part in Heidegger and Levinas, Derrida sees the profound humanism hidden in both of them. Derrida shows seminal ideas on humanity and the relationship between humans and animals in his philosophy of animality, which is not merely conceptual but also practical regarding education and ethico-political reality. This paper consists of five sections: section one is the introduction; section two discusses Heidegger's view about humanism and Derrida's challenge; section three explores Levinas' ethics and Derrida's critical extension; section four turns to the aspects of education and ethico-politics by using Derrida' view of animality; and the final section concludes Derrida's animal ethics with the idea of following animals as the starting point of the ethics of respect for the other.起始頁-結束頁：69-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820200666020033篇名：書評：評S. J. Ball的《教育論辯》並列篇名：Book Review: The Education Debate作者：陳宏彰期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：101-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820200666020044篇名：自主性作為教育目的之哲學省察：倫敦路線的相關論辯並列篇名：Philosophical Reflections on Autonomy as an Educational Aim: Some Debates on London Line作者：簡成熙(Cheng-Hsi Chien)關鍵字：公民教育;個人自主;理性自主;教育目的;civic education;personal autonomy;rational autonomy;aims of education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:1期出版年：2020中文摘要：R. S. Peters、R. F. Dearden、R. Barrow、J. White等在1960年代，開創倫敦學派教育理念，強調個人建立在自主性下的理性反思，規劃其美好生活的能力，是教育目的之所在。本文首先交代其理念概要，第二節敘述1980年代以後，其他學者的質疑。如C. M. Stone挑戰Dearden的看法，指其只重視理性，忽略了感性、 欲求及其他層面。S. E. Cuypers認為，自主的過程其實是表現在自我認同、自我評估之上，提出關懷才是教育之重點。第三節主要介紹E. Callan，他在自由主義 的立場上，較倫敦路線更為強調興趣導向的課程，並將社群主義之理念融入自主性概念中。第四節則提出倫敦路線立場學者們的回應。筆者最後的結論是，當年倫敦路線自主性的主張，容或有過於重視理性的限制，不過，諸反對者並未能全盤否定自主性的訴求，自主性也能吸納情感、意願、認同等因子。易言之，重構後的自主性概念仍不失為臺灣當下民主氛圍中應有的核心教育目的。英文摘要：Based on the liberal tradition of the age of Enlightenment, the scholars of London Line, including R. S. Peters, R. F. Dearden, among others, had advocated autonomy as an educational aim since the 1960s. The core claims of London Line are provided in the first section. The second section discusses numerous criticisms, which had risen since the 1980s, including C. M. Stone's and S. E. Cuypers' criticisms to autonomy as educational aim. The third section expresses the perspectives of E. Callan, who integrated the spirit of communitarianism to the liberal concepts of autonomy, and put much more emphasis on interest-oriented curriculum than White did. Despite some criticisms, London Line scholars still defended autonomy as an aim of education, and this is discussed in the fourth section. Finally, the author concludes that rationality might be overvalued with regard to the role autonomy had played in London Line. Nevertheless, we can reconstruct the concept of autonomy as it encompasses emotion, volition, recognition, etc. In general, the idea of reconstructed autonomy should be the core educational aim embodied in Taiwanese democratic spirit nowadays.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820200366010025篇名：「大學生感恩課程」之教學歷程研究並列篇名：Teaching Process of ”Gratitude Program for College Students”作者：吳相儀(Hsiang-Yi Wu);陳琬云(Wan-Yun Chen);黃雅新(Ya-Hsin Huang);林秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Lin)關鍵字：教學歷程;感恩;課程;teaching process;gratitude;program期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:1期出版年：2020中文摘要：過去介入研究多為單一教學者的前、後測效果，本研究企圖控制教學者因素，分析某一正向心理學中心通過培訓的四位教學者，實施同一課程的教學歷程，為未來推廣課程鋪路。四位教學者各進行為期四週共12小時同一套大學生感恩課程，參與學員分別為9人、10人、8人、6人，另有等候控制組15人。採混合研究法，以大學生感恩量表進行前後測，並將教學者教學前後訪談進行內容分析。結果發現：一、課程對四個實驗組的感恩均有提升，輔以學員作業佐證，表示教學者們使用感恩課程均有提升效果；二、四位教學者訪談內容編碼成五個主類目，分別為：（一）接受培訓理解感恩內涵；（二）微調活動符合客群；（三）將感恩知識生活化；（四）互動中反思調整教學技巧；（五）教學相長深化自身的感恩理解。最後整理大學生感恩課程之教學歷程圖，以及未來建議供參。英文摘要：Given that previous intervention studies have only been conducted with single-teacher programs, this study attempts to control teacher factors by identifying similarities in the teaching process between four teachers, implementing the same program. The four teachers were trained by the Positive Psychology Center in Taiwan, and have taught a 12-hour gratitude program over a span of 4 weeks. The number of participants in the four classes are nine, ten, eight and six participants respectively, and that of the waiting control group is fifteen. Mixed-methods were adopted. The effects of the program were analyzed in pretest-posttest of the ”Inventory of Undergraduates' Gratitude”, and a content analysis of four teachers' interview was conducted. The results show that: (1) Participants in the four classes were more grateful, which was also supported by their homework, meaning that each program is effective, (2) Five categories were found in teachers' teaching process: A. Receive training and understand the meaning of gratitude; B. Customize activities for different groups; C. Bring knowledge of gratitude into life; D. Reflect and adjust teaching skills during classes; E. Teach and deepen teachers' understanding of gratitude. Finally, a flowchart of the teaching process was created, which could be applied to future research.起始頁-結束頁：35-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820200366010016篇名：十二年國教資訊科技科目學習次概念之探究並列篇名：Identifying Learning Concepts for the New 12-Year Basic Education ICT Curriculum: A Delphi Survey作者：胡秋帆(Chiu-Fan Hu);王恩慈(An-Tsu Wang);吳正己(Cheng-Chih Wu);林育慈(Yu-Tzu Lin)關鍵字：資訊科技課綱;德懷術;學習概念;ICT curriculum;Delphi survey;learning concepts期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:1期出版年：2020中文摘要：十二年國教課綱增設科技領域資訊科技科目，該科學習內容包括「演算法」、「程式設計」、「系統平台」、「資料表示、處理及分析」、「資訊科技應用」及「資訊科技與人類社會」等類別，各類別下分別列出相關之學習概念，但所列出之學習概念範圍較大，致教師或學者常有不同解讀。本研究以德懷術探究學習概念下應包含之次概念，先邀請專家針對課綱草案41項學習概念草擬共117項次概念，經三回合調查後，達共識之次概念共92項，未達共識者有26項，惟其中15項已於課綱學習概念中明訂，故本研究最後提出107項建議學習之次概念。本研究所得結果獲課綱參採，納入於課綱附錄的學習概念補充說明中。建議未來課綱修訂應以本研究方式進行學習次概念之調查，未來研究應增加國中資訊教師人數以提升代表性，並提供大學教授更多教學現場之背景資料及經驗。英文摘要：The new Information and Communication Technology (ICT) curriculum for the new 12-Year Basic Education in Taiwan consists of seven categories of knowledge: algorithms, programming, system platform, data representation and process, ICT application, and ICT & human society. The draft curriculum only outlined broader learning concepts under each category. This may be a flexible way but it might cause confusion when schools and teachers implement the curriculum. This study employed Delphi technique to identify sub-concepts under each learning concept of the curriculum. Twenty-one computer science educators from schools and universities served as the Delphi expert panel. After three rounds of questionnaire survey, 107 sub-concepts were identified and recommended for students to learn. The results were adopted in the appendix of the final released version of the ICT curriculum. This study recommended that the secondary ICT curriculum or teaching guidelines should include sub-concepts; the number of junior high school computer teachers should be increased to match the expert representation; finally, more information and ICT course planning experience should be provided to professors.起始頁-結束頁：77-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820200366010037篇名：書評：評Reign of Error: The Hoax of the Privatization Movement and the Danger to the America's Public Schools (Vintage, 2014)並列篇名：Book Review: Reign of Error: The Hoax of the Privatization Movement and the Danger to the America's Public Schools (Vintage, 2014)作者：黃庭康期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：66:1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：103-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708202003660100401篇名：Technology Acceptance, Growth Needs, and Pedagogical Usability as Factors Influencing Teachers' Perception and Use of the Geometer's Sketchpad Software並列篇名：教師運用動態幾何軟體之研究：以科技接受、成長需求與教學優使性為探究因素作者：黃仲楷(Chung-Kai Huang);鄭章華(Chang-Hua Chen);張景媛(Ching-Yuan Chang);林俊佑(Chun-Yu Lin)關鍵字：geometry sketchpad software;pedagogical usability;technology acceptance;growth needs;動態幾何軟體;教學優使性;科技接受;成長需求期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：In this study, teachers' level of acceptance of current technology, and the pedagogical usability of the dynamic geometry sketchpad (GSP) software, were evaluated for their utility in the teaching of secondary geometry in Taiwan. Here the incorporation of multi-faceted technological factors was considered along with teachers' growth needs. Relevant instructional designs and usability testing theories were used to develop a survey and a series of tasks, in order to elicit follow-up responses from Taiwanese mathematics teachers. This generic, technology-acceptance-based survey was completed by 124 secondary school mathematics teachers, and 24 secondary school mathematics teachers were invited to participate in the testing of specific context- and task-based pedagogical usability. The findings naturally led to further questions regarding the user-centered design of the GSP software's functions, as well as mathematics teachers' growth needs in terms of their professional development.英文摘要：本研究主要探討臺灣中學數學科教師使用動態幾何軟體的影響因素，針對科技接受程度與教學優使性進行評量，除了科技相關的因素考量之外，我們亦將教師的成長需求納入研究架構中。在回顧相關教學設計與優化理論之後，我們使用了問卷填答與一系列的任務活動，測量數學教師對動態幾何軟體的使用回饋。共有124位中學數學科教師填答了科技接受調查問卷，另有24位教師參與了情境與任務導向的優化性測試。根據研究問題與結果，本研究之發現不僅可提供數學教學實務者參考，並且針對強化使用者為中心的設計功能進行建議，亦對教師專業成長需求進行相關探討。起始頁-結束頁：95-133資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202006_16(2).00042篇名：臺灣教師專業學習社群實徵研究之分析與展望並列篇名：The Analysis and Prospect for Empirical Research of the Teachers' Professional Learning Community in Taiwan作者：丁一顧(Yi-Ku Ting);江姮姬(Heng-Chi Chiang)關鍵字：教師專業學習社群;實徵研究;文獻分析法;teachers' professional learning community;empirical research;literature review期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：教師專業學習社群乃是學校文化革新與教學改善的重要機制之一。本研究以教師專業學習社群為主題之期刊論文86篇、博士論文30篇、合計116篇實徵研究為分析對象，研究方法採文獻分析法，並以研究時間、研究對象、研究方法、研究主題、研究成果五個面向作為分析架構，針對此116篇教師專業學習社群實徵研究之研究發現進行分析，並進而提出教師專業學習社群未來實徵研究之展望：（1）賡續探究學生學習，落實社群目的之關注；（2）分析領導作為功能，發展運作支持之模式；（3）探析數位社群運作，引導多元型態之發展；（4）探討社群轉型發展，理解深化與改變歷程；（5）調查社群之永續性，瞭解規劃評估與成效；（6）擴展不同研究對象，整全理解社群之實施；（7）持續探究社群困境，分析真正衍生之因素；（8）混合適當研究方法，落實三角驗證之效益；（9）善用多變量之分析，驗證比較結果之異同；（10）進行長期縱貫研究，深入瞭解發展之成效。英文摘要：The Teachers' Professional Learning Community (TPLC) is very important both for a ”school culture revolution” and the overall improvement of instruction. The purpose of this paper was to analyze the research findings of 116 treatises of empirical research on the TPLC, including 86 journal articles and 30 dissertations. The literature review was focused on 5 elements of the analysis structure, including research time, research objects, research methods, research topics, and research results. Based on an analysis of the findings, this paper suggests ten directions for the development of TPLC research: (1) analyzing the impact of the TPLC on student learning, (2) examining the influence of, and relationship between, leadership and the TPLC, (3) studying the various digital types of the TPLC, (4) exploring the transformation of the TPLC, (5) probing the sustainability of the TPLC, (6) broadening the research object, (7) exploring the dilemma and differentiating the category of the TPLC, (8) using mixed-methods research with regard to the TPLC, (9) applying multivariate statistical analysis, and (10) pursuing long-term longitudinal research on and for the TPLC.起始頁-結束頁：135-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202006_16(2).00053篇名：當「大學選才」遇見「高中育才」：大學多元入學考招改革的批判論述分析並列篇名：Selection or Cultivation? A Critical Discourse Analysis of Reforming the Multiple Pathways of the College Admissions Program作者：江宜芷(Yi-Chih Chiang);林子斌(Tzu-Bin Lin)關鍵字：十二年國民基本教育;大學多元入學;批判論述分析;教育政策;12-year basic education;critical discourse analysis;education policy;multiple pathways of the college admission program期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：十二年國民基本教育於108學年度全面實施，配合課程綱要改革時程，大學入學政策也於111學年度調整。本文將大學多元入學政策的改革視為一論述場域，將本次改革歷程作為個案，探究大學端、高中端與教育團體等利益關係人對改革目標的論述，資料蒐集範圍包含政策文本與媒體報導，採Fairclough的批判論述分析方法，以文本分析和論述實踐分析為主。研究結果顯示，大學考招論述在傳統人力資本論的影響下，分化為個人層次的「以功績主義分配大學教育機會」和國家層次的「保障國家人才素質」兩種主流論述，本研究闡明利益關係人如何利用不同媒體管道和政策文本建構相對應的論述。英文摘要：This study looks at how various stakeholders such as university representatives, senior high school teachers, and educational groups construct their own discourses on the issue of reforming of the College Admissions Process (CAP). The context is the implementation in 2019 of the 12-year Basic Education Curriculum. A crucial part of this curriculum reform concerns the selection process with regard to students’ admission to universities, which needs to be changed in 2022. Here Fairclough's critical discourse analysis is applied as the means of inquiry, and the data are drawn from policy texts and news reports. In this study, our analysis focuses on the texts and discursive practices related to the CAP. Our findings indicate that the discourses related to the CAP fall into two major categories: that of meritocracy at the personal level and that of human capital at the state level. How stakeholders utilize various channels including print and visual media, as well as policy documents, to construct their preferred discourses is discussed in depth in this study.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202003_16(1).00014篇名：國際卓越校長計畫（ISSPP）領導模式之研究：澳大利亞、新加坡、印尼及賽浦路斯為個案並列篇名：The International Successful School Principalship Project (ISSPP): The Cases of Australia, Singapore, Indonesia and Cyprus作者：謝傳崇(Chuan-Chung Hsieh);王潔真(Chieh-Chen Wang)關鍵字：國際卓越校長計畫;校長領導;卓越校長;卓越學校;International Successful School Principalship Project;ISSPP;principal's leadership;excellent principals;excellent schools期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：校長領導一直受到全球的關注，校長是學校邁向卓越的關鍵人物，在促進學校改善過程中佔有舉足輕重的地位，但對於卓越校長領導內涵，仍無法完全解釋。有鑑於此，國際卓越校長計畫（The International Successful School Principalship Project, ISSPP）自2001年開始針對國際間卓越校長的領導進行研究，陸續建構出各國的卓越校長領導模式。在此臺灣教改變動時代，其研究成果是極具借鏡價值的。基此，本研究採用文件分析法，針對國際卓越校長計畫各時期計畫及其後續追蹤研究資料，探究國際卓越校長領導模式意涵及發展，並分析比較澳大利亞、新加坡、印尼與賽浦路斯四國之卓越校長領導模式及實踐內涵。研究發現卓越校長領導會影響學校成果展現，其個人特質影響學校變革或轉型成功，且卓越學校來自於校長能引領成員共創願景，發展組織成員的專業以提升學校能量，並與利害關係人建立良好夥伴關係，且能敏覺環境影響以助於學校變革等。英文摘要：The principal's leadership has become a critical issue in the wider field of educational leadership. Research indicates that the principal's leadership qualities play a pivotal role in the success of school reform. However, the essential qualities of outstanding leadership have still not been fully explained. The International Successful School Principalship Project (ISSPP) started in 2001, and was established in order to address the need to better understand how principals contribute to their schools' success. In this regard the findings of the ISSPP are extremely valuable. This study aims to explore more broadly these findings, by comparing through document analysis the different models of successful school leadership found in Australia, Singapore, Indonesia and Cyprus. Our findings were as follows: successful school principalship influences a school's achievements; a principal's personal traits affect a school's transformation; a successful school depends on a principal who can lead faculty members to build and share a vision, thereby encouraging the members' professional development, building a solid partnership with stakeholders, and being sensitive to environmental impacts that could promote school changes.起始頁-結束頁：35-64資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202003_16(1).00025篇名：學校準備好了嗎？國高中教育人員實施108課綱的變革準備度並列篇名：Are Schools Ready? School Practitioners' Change Readiness for the Curriculum Guidelines of 12-year Basic Education作者：潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Wendy Pan);黃曬莉(Li-Li Huang);陳文彥(Wen-Yan Chen);鄭淑惠(Shu-Huei Cheng)關鍵字：十二年國教;課程綱要;變革準備度;12-year basic education;curriculum guidelines;change readiness期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：十二年國教課綱對於學校現場而言是一項新的變革，而新課程能否落實及產生預期成效，學校人員之變革準備度乃是重要關鍵。為了深入了解新課綱實施的初始階段學校人員對此變革的準備度，本研究在理論架構上整合認知、情意與行為意向等面向，並以國、高中校長及教師為對象，運用問卷調查法進行探討，共計回收1,266份有效問卷。結果發現學校人員均有中高程度以上的認知準備度（得分介於中高標與高標），認知準備度最佳的是領導觀，最弱的則為評鑑觀；在情意與行為意向準備度上，得分皆達中高標，但對變革的喜好度高於行為意向；在不同屬性的人員身上，最具系統性變革準備度差異的是校長、主任與獲博士學位者，這兩類屬性的人，其變革準備度較高。另在進行認知、情意、行為意向得分之組合分析後，發現學校行動者包含「知易行難型」、「順應配合型」與「意興闌珊型」等三類樣態，其中較高認知、較低情意與行為意向者佔多數。後續政策之推動，若能掌握上述之發現，將有助於研訂更為有效的政策工具。英文摘要：The Curriculum Guidelines of 12-year Basic Education are a new policy for schools. To decide on the implementation process and effectiveness, school practitioners' readiness to change is critical. In this context, the study used a survey designed to examine high school principals and teachers' change readiness with regard to cognition, affection and behavior intention. A total of 1,266 valid questionnaires were collected. The findings indicated that school practitioners had reached a high-intermediate to high level of cognitive readiness for change. Among the four dimensions of cognitive readiness, the conception of leadership was ranked highest while that of evaluation was ranked lowest. Readiness of affection and behavior intention were both at a high-intermediate level. But the score for affective readiness was significantly higher than that for behavior intention readiness. There was a significant difference in the readiness scores among school practitioners. Principals, office directors and practitioners with doctoral degree displayed the highest level of readiness. Moreover, based on the combination of cognitive, affective and behavior intention scores, school practitioners were clustered into three groups. The majority of practitioners had higher levels of cognitive readiness and lower levels of readiness of affection and behavior intension. These research findings provide very useful insights for the design of new policy tools.起始頁-結束頁：65-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202003_16(1).00036篇名：我國教師領導研究成果分析與發展方向並列篇名：The Result Analysis and Developing the Directions of Teacher Leadership Research in Taiwan, ROC作者：張德銳(Derray Chang)關鍵字：教師領導;研究;結果分析;發展方向;teacher leadership;research;result analysis;developing directions期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：16卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：教師領導係當代學校革新與領導理論的主要發展趨勢之一。教師領導的研究在國內近十餘年來已累積不少研究成果，為利國內教育研究的發展，有必要釐清國內現有研究成果，並建議未來的發展方向，以做為進一步研究的參考。本文搜錄了73篇國內有關教師領導的實徵研究，並從研究對象與研究方法、以及教師領導實施狀況、實施成效、實施困境與影響因素等五個面向，加以探討分析既有研究發現，然後提出：建構本土化的概念架構、擴大研究範圍與對象、運用多元的研究方法、擴展研究主題、進行各種職位教師領導狀況的研究、擴大研究變項來建構更完整的知識架構、加強中介變項與調節變項的研究等七個發展方向。英文摘要：Teacher leadership is one of the developing trends in contemporary school innovations and leadership theories. There have been a lot of new research results in Taiwan in recent years. In order to facilitate the development of teacher leadership research, this paper has analyzed 73 empirical research studies and suggests the likely new and developing directions for research in teacher leadership in Taiwan, ROC. The paper analyzes the empirical studies from five dimensions: research subjects and methods, implementation conditions, effects, difficulties, and the contributing factors with regard to teacher leadership. Based on an analysis of the findings, this paper suggests seven developing directions for teacher leadership research: (1) constructing a localized concept framework, (2) broadening the research scope and subjects, (3) adopting multiple research methods, (4) varying research topics, (5) studying various positions regarding teacher leadership, (6) enlarging the research variables, (7) enhancing the research on intermediary variables and moderating variables.起始頁-結束頁：101-153資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202003_16(1).000401篇名：東南亞區域高等教育發展對我國人才交流政策之啟示並列篇名：Influence of Southeast Asia's Higher Education Development on Taiwan's Talent Exchange Policy作者：林芳<U+4F03>(Fang-Yu Lin);陳榮政(Jung-Cheng Chen)關鍵字：人才流動;東南亞區域;國際學生;新南向政策;臺灣;talent flow;Southeast Asia region;international student;New Southbound Policy;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：為積極拓展臺灣與東南亞區域之連結，2016年蔡英文總統在就任後提出新南向政策，希望重新定位臺灣的區域角色，並與區域國家共享資源、人才及市場，建立新興合作模式。本研究以為在人才為國家競爭力重要指標之二十一世紀，如何有效延攬人才成為各國的重要課題，尤其是具備各項流動優勢之國際學生，不僅被視為二十一世紀的重要勞動力來源，更是國際間積極網羅的人才。因此，本研究以東南亞國家協會所領頭的東南亞區域為研究範疇，探討區域國際學生流動情況，同時透過文件分析與深度訪談，試歸結東南亞區域國家延攬國際人才之具體策略供我國參考運用，並以此檢視我國現行新南向人才交流政策之作為與利基。本研究發現，有鑑於區域經濟崛起，部分東南亞國家正以經濟潛能翻轉國際學生流動市場之地位，猶如世界體系理論中所論：「核心─半邊陲─邊陲」的國家關係為相對且會變動的，在區域尺度流動變革之際，東南亞區域國家積極以政府作為主導力量推行相關措施，此點為我國推行人才交流政策可參照學習之處。尤其在區域國家興起之際，我國更應積極瞭解區域國家需求，提供區域國家發展協助及學生流動所需，方能在區域興起之趨勢下，掌握機會並奠定我國在國際學生市場之優勢與地位。英文摘要：To actively strengthen the relationship between Taiwan and Southeast Asia, Taiwan launched the New Southbound Policy after the inauguration of President Tsai Ing-Wen's administration in 2016. The policy aims to reposition Taiwan's critical role in Southeast Asia and share regional resources, talents, and markets with regional countries and establish a new cooperation mode. Especially when talent has become a primary indicator of national competitiveness in the 21st century, attracting talent has become an important issue for all countries. With knowledge and high mobility capabilities, since the 21st century, international students are regarded not only as key labor but also an important talent source in the global market. This study adopted Southeast Asia as the research area to explore the current changes and trends in international student mobility. Through documentary analysis and in-depth interviews, this study examined the current role and foundation of Taiwan's New Southbound Policy and identified specific strategies and recommendations that can be employed by Southeast Asian countries to recruit international talent. The study discovered that in response to economic rising, some Southeast Asian countries have changed their position in the global international student market. As world-system theory highlights, the relationships between core, semi-periphery, and periphery countries are relative and changeable. Notably, Southeast Asian countries have actively implemented relevant measures, with the government as the leading force; this can serve as a reference for Taiwan to promote talent exchange policies. At a time when regional countries are emerging, Taiwan should actively meet their needs and provide assistance to utilize this opportunity to reposition Taiwan in the international student market in response to regional countries rising to prominence.起始頁-結束頁：29-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202009_65(3).00022篇名：臺灣華語師資在新南向國家之競爭優劣勢：菲律賓華校觀點並列篇名：Competitive Advantages and Weaknesses of Taiwanese Teachers Teaching Chinese As a Foreign Language in New Southbound Countries: Philippines Chinese Schools' Perspectives作者：湯家偉(Chia-Wei Tang);莊俊儒(Chun-Ju Chuang);張其祿(Chyi-Lu Jang);洪雅琪(Ya-Chi Hung)關鍵字：海外華語教師;華語教學;菲律賓;overseas Chinese teacher;teaching Chinese as a foreign language;Philippines期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究目的在探究臺灣華語師資在菲律賓的競爭優劣勢，以及臺灣華語師培教育在師資輸出海外應加強的面向。本研究採用深度訪談法，訪談七位任職於不同菲律賓華校的教學或行政主任，以菲律賓華校觀點對臺灣在當地服務之華語教師和臺灣推行之華語輸出政策，提供反饋。本研究主要研究發現為：一、目前菲律賓對華語師資的需求甚殷；二、臺灣華語師資在菲律賓華語市場的優劣勢體現在與中國華語師資的競爭上；三、臺灣華語教育輸出需要在師培課程和華語資源規劃統籌進行再思考或加強。英文摘要：This study had twofold objectives. The first was to identify the strengths and weaknesses of Taiwanese Teachers Teaching Chinese as a Foreign Language (TCFL) in the Philippines, and the second was to identify areas for improvement in Taiwan's TCFL education. The authors conducted in-depth interviews with seven directors of academic affairs or administration in Chinese schools in the Philippines. The main findings can be summarized as follows: (1) TCFL teachers are in high demand in the Philippines; (2) The advantages and weaknesses of Taiwan's TCFL teachers are mainly identified in comparison with TCFL teachers from China; (3) TCFL education can be improved by implementing the suggestions of adding different cultural pieces to the TCFL curriculum and reallocating Taiwan's TCFL budget and resources.起始頁-結束頁：55-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202009_65(3).00033篇名：Experiences of International Students from the New Southbound Policy Countries in Taiwan: Their Motivations and Negotiations of Cultural Differences並列篇名：新南向政策國家學生赴臺留學動機、生活適應情形及跨文化調適策略之研究作者：林顯明(Hsien-Ming Lin);宋宥賢(Yu-Hsien Sung)關鍵字：boundary negotiation;intercultural communication;life adaptation;New Southbound Policy;motivations for studying abroad;邊界協商;跨文化溝通;生活適應;新南向政策;出國留學動機期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study investigated international students from countries involved in the New Southbound Policy. We explored the motivations for why they chose to come to Taiwan and their strategies in adapting to a new culture. We recruited 23 students using purposive and snowball sampling. Data were collected using the qualitative approach of semi-structured interviews. Academic and economic considerations were the largest pull factors. Specifically, academic considerations constituted a large pull factor among students from developing countries in South and Southeast Asia. However, for students from developed countries such as Australia, New Zealand, and Singapore, the academic environment in Taiwanese institutions of higher education was not the most attractive factor. Compared with students from other regions, social factors and the influence of alumni networks had a larger influence on students from Southeast Asian countries (especially Malaysian students, but not Singaporean students). The influence of cultural factors varied widely depending on whether the student was a degree-seeking student or was of Chinese ethnicity. For degree-seeking students, too many cultural and language differences may have a negative influence on their decision to study in Taiwan. For non-degree-seeking students, such differences engender a perception of Taiwan as exotic and represent a learning opportunity, thus constituting a pull factor. Moreover, because overseas Chinese students are, on average, more conversant in Chinese, cultural similarity is a pull factor. For non-Chinese students, their Chinese language proficiency is a major consideration. With regard to adapting to life in Taiwan, most students reported adapting well. However, differences in culture, dietary habits, and language were challenges for some students. This study also discovered that students establish individualized adaptation strategies for dealing with challenges during study in Taiwan. These strategies facilitate cultural exchange by blurring cultural boundaries, thereby enhancing their learning competence and acceptance of cultural differences.英文摘要：本研究以在臺攻讀學位和短期留學之新南向國家學生為研究對象，藉以探究其赴臺留學動機、在臺生活適應情形，以及跨文化和生活調適策略之建構經驗。本研究成功地訪問了23位在臺攻讀學位的新南向國家學生。研究結果發現，學術因素與經濟因素為新南向國家學生考量是否來臺就讀時最重要的兩個考量因素，但本研究亦發現，學術因素對於來自發展中國家的學生有較大的吸引力，對於來自澳洲、紐西蘭和新加坡的學生而言，臺灣高等教育的學術因素並非吸引其前來臺灣就讀的最重要考量因素。社會因素方面，本研究發現，社會因素及校友網絡的影響力對於來自東南亞（特別是馬來西亞）的學生有著較大的影響力，而這樣的影響力對於來自澳洲、紐西蘭與新加坡的學生則較小。文化因素方面，其對於學位生和非學位生、外籍生和僑生有著不一樣的影響。對於學位生而言，過大的文化與語言使用習慣差異反而會使得學位生對於來臺攻讀學位感到卻步，但對於非學位生而言，不一樣的文化環境與語言學習機會，反而會吸引非學位生來臺進行短期之文化體驗和語言學習。另外，由於僑生具有較高的中文語言使用能力，因此臺灣的文化因素是吸引其來臺的因素之一，但文化因素對於外籍生的吸引力和影響力則會受到中文能力之差異而有所不同。生活適應方面，大多數受訪學生表示其在臺留學生活之生活適應情形良好；但文化、飲食習慣及語言使用等差異，對於部分來自新南向國家的學生而言，確實是生活中必須面對的適應問題。而本研究亦進一步發現，面對在臺生活相關的生活適應問題與挑戰，新南向國家學生在日常生活中亦會建立各自多元的生活與文化調適策略，而這些策略促進了學生在跨文化生活經驗中展現文化邊界模糊（boundary blurring）的跨文化學習和生活適應能力。起始頁-結束頁：81-122資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202009_65(3).00044篇名：Exploring Effective Leadership Practices of Private School Principals to Improve Teachers' Academic Excellence and Students' Learning Achievement並列篇名：探討馬來西亞吉隆坡市私立學校校長提升教師學術專業與學生學業成就的有效領導作為作者：Simin Ghavifekr;Mohammad Ismath Ramzy關鍵字：educational leadership;learning achievement;principal practices;private education;teacher academic excellence;教育領導力;學業成就;校長領導作為;私立教育;教師學術專業期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：This paper explored the factors influencing principals' practices in private schools. Additionally, this study identified the effective leadership practices of school principals that contribute toward teachers' academic excellence and students' learning achievement. This study adopted a qualitative research design, wherein data were collected through interviews and observations using purposeful sampling. A total of 15 interviewees comprising principals, vice principals, and head teachers from five private secondary schools in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, were interviewed. Transcriptions of the interviews and field notes were made available immediately after each interview and observation, and NVivo software was used to manage the data more systemically. The data analysis identified the following four main effective practices of principals to enhance school outcomes: planning for shared vision, mission and goals; organising professional development programs; promoting the culture of innovation, collaboration and teamwork; and supervising a dynamic and proactive teaching and learning environment. Among these practices, principals should emphasize leadership functions, particularly teacher's professional development and instructional supervision. The mentioned main themes are further discussed in this paper.英文摘要：本論文探討私立學校校長領導作為的影響因素，並確認學校校長有效的領導作為與提升教師的學術專業和學生的學業成就間的關係。本研究採用質性研究法，透過訪談和觀察法蒐集資料，研究對象為馬來西亞吉隆坡五所私立中學的15位校長、副校長和學年主任。採訪和觀察所得的文本資料運用NVivo軟體進行有系統的分析。資料分析結果顯示，校長主要採用四種有效的領導作為以提升學校的辦學績效：一、規劃具有共識的願景、使命和目標；二、組織專業發展專案計畫；三、促進創新、合作和團隊合作的文化；四、督導動態和主動的教與學環境。在這些領導作為中，校長應強調教師的學術專業發展和督導教學。這四個主題會在本文中更進一步探討。起始頁-結束頁：123-156資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202009_65(3).00055篇名：晚清美部會華北教會學校系統的形成並列篇名：The Formation of Mission School System of the A.B.C.F.M. in North China in Late Ch'ing作者：周愚文(Yu-Wen Chou)關鍵字：美部會;美國教育;晚清;教會學校;潞河書院;A.B.C.F.M.;American education;late Ch'ing;mission schools;North China College期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：晚清中國近代教育西化過程中，教會興辦學校是影響因素之一，本研究以最早派員抵華傳教的美部會為例，探討1860年後其以直隸通州傳教站學校為據點，漸發展成華北教育中心，再建立教會學校系統，引入美式教育。本研究屬歷史研究，使用該教會年報、名冊、報刊、書籍及傳記等一手史料。研究發現，該會華北差會1867年至通州設立初等學塾，後學校數量日增、分布日廣及程度日高。1889年通州中學升格為潞河書院，1893年更建構以各傳教站蒙館、潞河中齋及潞河書院的教會學校系統。庚子事變後，美部會與三個差會共組華北教育聯盟，聯合辦學，潞河書院改為華北協和學院。民國初更邁向併校，1918年合三校為燕京大學。由通州潞河書院發展之例，可見晚清美國教育如何由教會而引入中國的軌跡。英文摘要：Protestant mission schools were instrumental in the westernization of education in late Ch'ing China and the subsequent borrowing of educational ideas and practices from American education. This article explored mission schools at Tung-chou Chili, established by American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (A.B.C.F.M.) - the first American protestant mission in China in the early 19th century. First-hand sources, such as annual reports, pamphlets, journals, biographies, and books were reviewed in this article. A mission station was established at Tung-chou in 1867, followed by a boys' school. The number of schools was increasing at the time, and their levels were also being elevated. Tung-chou High School was upgraded to North China College at Tung-chou in 1889. Additionally, an American mission school system was established, comprising day and boarding schools in addition to academies and colleges. After the Boxer incident, the North China Education Union was established by four protestant missions, and North China College was transformed into North China Union College. After its merger with Peking Methodist University and North China Union College for Women, North China College turned into a new university, Yenching University, in 1918. A case study of the development of North China College demonstrated the process of American education being transferred into late Ch’ing China.起始頁-結束頁：157-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202009_65(3).00066篇名：探討高雄市青少年健康知識、態度及行為素養並列篇名：Exploration of Kaohsiung City Adolescents' Health Knowledge, Attitudes, and Behavioral Literacy作者：吳枚瑛(Mei-Ying Wu);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong)關鍵字：青少年;健康素養;情境試題;階層迴歸分析;調節變項;adolescents;health literacy;situational test items;hierarchical regression analysis;moderator variables期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在發展青少年健康素養量表，再以此量表探討量表之健康知識、健康態度與健康行為的相關及預測因素。首先進行青少年健康素養量表之編製，由206位學生的預試及1,005位學生的正式施測，三個分量表之內部一致性信度係數Cronbach's α分別為.85、.73及.91，總量表信度為.90。接著以探索式因素分析及驗證性因素分析研究工具之效度，再以卡方檢定、獨立樣本t檢定、單因子變異數分析比較不同背景青少年的健康素養之差異，最後使用階層迴歸分析釐清青少年健康素養三個層面「健康知識」、「健康態度」及「健康行為」的相關性，並以「健康知識」為調節變項區辨對「健康態度」與「健康行為」的關係。本研究發現青少年隨著年齡及年級增加而健康態度逐漸低落，大學生健康態度分數顯著低於國中學生，而女學生的健康行動分數顯著高於男學生；健康知識與健康態度對於健康行動具有顯著預測力。本研究提供青少年的健康素養現況及其預測因素作為各級學校及相關研究之參考，建議各級學校重視學生的健康素養並研發符合青少年生活情境的課程、教學及相關活動，以提升學生的健康素養，而如何提升女學生的健康知識及男學生的健康行為有待進一步探究與討論。英文摘要：This study validated instruments for assessing the health awareness and health literacy of adolescents and explored the related and protective factors of adolescents' health literacy in Taiwan. A total of 1,005 representative adolescents were stratified randomly selected from Kaohsiung City, and they completed two well-structured instruments for measuring their health awareness and health literacy. First, exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses and internal consistency were used to examine the instruments' validities and reliabilities. Second, chi-square test, independent t-test, and one-way analysis of variance were conducted to compare the health awareness and health literacy levels of adolescents from different backgrounds. Finally, hierarchical regression analysis was employed to identify the relations between health knowledge, attitudes toward health, and healthy behaviors and their predictors. The initial results indicated that adolescents' means of health attitude decreased with increasing age and improvement in grades. University students' means of attitude toward health and health literacy were significantly lower than those of junior high school students. Male adolescents' scores for health awareness and health knowledge were significantly higher than those of their female counterparts. On the other hand, female adolescents' means of health actions were significantly higher than those of their male counterparts'. Additionally, adolescents' means of health knowledge and attitudes toward health had significant and adjusted predictive power on their health behaviors. This study demonstrated the importance of developing and implementing situational tests and curricula and activities related to students' everyday lives to improve their health literacy. Finally, further discussion on methods to improve adolescents' health actions and female adolescents' health knowledge is warranted.起始頁-結束頁：187-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202009_65(3).00077篇名：遊戲自我效能、遊戲興趣、認知負荷與地理桌遊的遊玩自信心提升之相關研究並列篇名：The Relationship Among Gameplay Self-Efficacy, Gameplay Interest, Cognitive Load, and Self-Confidence Enhancement in Geography Board Games作者：洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);王志美(Chih-Mei Wang);葉貞妮(Jhen-Ni Ye);吳鳳姝(Feng-Shu Wu)關鍵字：自信心提升;地理桌遊;遊戲興趣;認知負荷;self-confidence enhancement;geography board game;gameplay interest;cognitive load期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究目的是探討透過使用本研究所設計的地理桌遊牌卡遊戲融入世界地理課程時，遊戲中學生的遊戲自我效能、遊戲興趣、認知負荷與地理桌遊的遊玩自信心提升之相關性為何。為達本研究目的，本研究從新北市國中蒐集149份有效資料，經由信度及效度檢驗後，使用VirtualPLS統計軟體進行研究模型驗證。研究結果顯示：在地理桌遊活動的情境中，遊戲自我效能對於遊戲興趣呈現正影響，遊戲自我效能與認知負荷呈現負影響；最後，遊戲興趣能有效地幫助地理桌遊的遊玩自信心提升，而認知負荷則會負向影響地理桌遊的遊玩自信心提升。由此可見，牌卡桌遊活動是可以融入地理課程的一種良好教學方式，如果學習內容設計得宜，透過玩中學的過程中，讓學習者獲得知識並進行複習。英文摘要：This study explored the integration of geography board games into a world geography curriculum. Through this game, students' gameplay self-efficacy, gameplay interest, cognitive load, and self-confidence were evaluated. This study collected 149 valid data to test the reliability and validity, and VirtualPLS statistical software was employed. The study results demonstrated that in the context of geography board games, gameplay self-efficacy were positively correlated with gameplay interest and negatively correlated with cognitive load. Additionally, gameplay interest in geography board games was found to effectively improve self-confidence. The study results indicate that well-designed learning content enables learners' knowledge gains and gives them the chance to review the content during the process of playing.起始頁-結束頁：225-250資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202009_65(3).00088篇名：學生認知歷程與背景變數對於學生評鑑教師的影響：潛在類別偏差校正與混合迴歸分析並列篇名：Influences of Different Background Variables on Student Ratings of Instruction: Bias-Adjusted Three-Step Mixture Regression Analysis作者：曾明基(Ming-Chi Tseng)關鍵字：學生評鑑教師教學;認知歷程;偏差校正三步驟混合迴歸;student ratings of instruction;cognitive process;bias-adjusted three-step mixture regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：在潛在類別模型中加入共變項時，如果沒有經過偏差校正，共變項與潛在類別之間的估計參數將產生偏誤。基於此，本研究在探討學生層次變項對學生評鑑教師教學影響時，除了加入與學生學習有關的認知歷程變項外，並進行潛在類別偏差校正與混合迴歸分析。研究對象為東部某大學大學部學生，總樣本數為6,111人。研究發現，學生學習的認知歷程改變可以分為五個潛在類別群組，當學生在該科目所保留或遷移的認知歷程最多時，給教師的分數最高。此外，當學生認知歷程存在潛在異質差異時，在學生層次不同背景變項上對學生評鑑教師教學的影響不同。針對上述結果，本研究對學生評鑑教師教學的議題發展及模型建構提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study used a bias-adjusted three-step mixture regression model to evaluate the influences of students' cognitive process on their ratings of instruction. Data were collected from 6,111 students enrolled at a university in Taiwan. The results indicated that students' gender, year in the university, course, department, and learning interest had a significant impact on student ratings, and students' cognitive process demonstrated a moderating effect. Furthermore, the implications of these findings for student ratings policies and theirs effects on university faculty and students are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：251-276資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202009_65(3).00099篇名：師資職前教師專業素養與課程基準之建構及其運用並列篇名：Construction and Application of Teacher Professional Standards and Curriculum Baseline for Preservice Teacher Education作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen);王俊斌(Chun-Ping Wang);洪仁進(Jen-Chin Hung)關鍵字：師資培育課程;師資職前階段;教師專業素養;課程基準;teacher education curriculum;preservice teacher education;teacher professional standards;curriculum baseline期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在建構教師專業素養與課程基準，並探究其後續之運用，以作為兼顧大學自主發展師資培育課程及國家管制之機制。為達研究目的，本研究透過文獻分析、文件分析、專家焦點座談、關鍵詞擷取系統等方式，建構具有共識的教師專業素養與課程基準之內涵，並提供後續運用之建議，以配合2017年《師資培育法》的修法。本研究結果建構五項教師專業素養及十項素養指標，以及課程基準的課程類型、學分架構、共同內容與課程條件等內涵。除此之外，本研究也提出師資培育機構後續運用之建議，包括發展師資培育理念以引領課程設計、模組化課程共同內容、系統性設計實踐課程、發展真實評量表現的方法與工具、整體性師資培育系統設計等。英文摘要：Based on the amendment of the Teacher Education Act 2017, this study determined professional standards for teachers and a curriculum baseline for preservice teacher education. Additionally, it provides the principles for designing teacher education curriculum through literature and document analysis, focus meetings, and keyword extraction. This study proposed 5 professional standards for teachers and 10 indicators and curriculum baselines with categories, credits framework, core curriculum, and conditions. Moreover, suggestions were presented for designing teacher education curriculum, such as utilizing the concept of teacher education to direct the following: curriculum designing, correspondence of the core curriculum toward modularization, practice designs from the perspective of teaching students' learning, assessment methods and tools to evaluate teaching students' performance, and systemic design of teacher education curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).000110篇名：初任教師工作困擾、教學效能與專業表現之研究並列篇名：Beginning Teachers' Job Problems, Teaching Effectiveness, and Professional Performance作者：羅寶鳳(Pao-Feng Lo);陳麒(Qi Chen)關鍵字：工作困擾;初任教師;專業表現;教學效能;job problems;beginning teachers;professional performance;teaching effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解我國初任教師在工作困擾、教學效能與專業表現的狀況，並分析在不同教學階段及任教區域的初任教師之差異。本研究使用教育部「師資培育長期追蹤資料庫整合型調查計畫」之「104學年度初任教師調查」，該資料庫對我國104學年度初任教師進行普查，回收樣本共3,271筆，其中有效樣本為1,621筆。本研究根據研究結果進行分析與討論，獲致以下結論：一、初任教師在教學上所面對的挑戰，以學生程度差異大及如何促進學生學習為主；二、不同教育階段與任教區域的初任教師在工作困擾、教學效能與專業表現上存在差異；三、初任教師的工作困擾與教學效能可以預測其專業表現。英文摘要：This study explored the current job-related problems faced by beginning teachers, their teaching effectiveness, and professional performance in Taiwan. Additionally, it analyzes the difference between teachers at different teaching stages and in different teaching areas. This study used the Ministry of Education's database of 104 school year beginning teacher survey. The sample population included 1,621 Taiwanese beginning teachers. The major results present the following: First, the main challenges faced by beginning teachers in teaching are the differentiation of student levels and how to facilitate student learning. Second, beginning teachers in different education stages and teaching areas show significant differences in terms of job problems, teaching effectiveness, and professional performance. Third, the job problems and teaching effectiveness of beginning teachers can predict their professional performance.起始頁-結束頁：37-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).000201篇名：病患觀點之門診照護連續性與照護協調性的測量工具：臺灣版問卷發展與信效度分析並列篇名：Outpatient Care Continuity and Coordination Assessment Questionnaire from Patient Perspective in Taiwan: Development and Testing of Reliability and Validity作者：林怡潔(Yi-Chieh Lin);陳啟禎(Chi-Chen Chen);江宜珍(Yi-Chen Chiang);鄭守夏(Shou-Hsia Cheng)關鍵字：門診;信度與效度;測量工具;照護協調性;照護連續性;outpatient setting;reliability and validity;questionnaire;care coordination;care continuity期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：發展一套適用於臺灣，從病患觀點來評估門診照護連續性與照護協調性的測量工具（Outpatient Care Continuity and Coordination Assessment, OCCCA），並蒐集信效度證據。方法：以臺灣社區50歲以上民眾為母體，進行分層多階段等比例抽樣選出樣本，以面訪方式進行調查，共計有179位民眾完成調查，回收率41.15%。以項目、信度及效度的分析結果選取題目，並蒐集信效度證據。信度分析採用Cronbach's α值驗證量表之內部一致性；效度採用驗證性因素分析與區辨效度進行驗證。結果：此核心測量工具計有15題。分析發現照護連續性與照護協調性兩個概念為中度相關，照護連續性包含醫病長期關係、資訊流通與人際互動三面向，而照護協調性包含醫生間資訊流通與溝通合作兩面向。信度方面，照護連續性和照護協調性面向的Cronbach's α值介於0.64∼0.83之間，尚屬適切。效度方面，照護連續性之三因素模型或協調性的兩因素模型，均通過模型的適配度檢定，顯示效度良好。結論：本研究發展之民眾觀點門診照護連續性與照護協調性的測量工具，具有適切的信度與效度，未來可作為評估此兩項概念的工具。英文摘要：Objective. To develop and test the reliability and validity of the Outpatient Care Continuity and Coordination Assessment (OCCCA) Questionnaire in Taiwan. Method. A nationwide fifty-year-old people face-to-face interview was conducted for community-dwelling subjects selected via a stratified multistage proportional to the sizes sampling process. A total of 179 subjects completed the questionnaire with a response rate of 41.15%. The core items of the OCCCA questionnaire were selected via the process of item analysis, reliability and validity testing. Reliability was assessed by Cronbach's α to measure the internal consistency. Validity was examined by confirmatory factor analysis and discriminant validity measures. Results. A total of 15 core items were selected and finalized. The results revealed that the concept of care continuity was moderately correlated with the concept of care coordination. The care continuity included three dimensions: longitudinal relationship, information transfer and interpersonal relationship between patient and their doctor; while care coordination included two dimensions: information transfer and communication/cooperation among physicians. The value of Cronbach'sα for each dimension of the care continuity and care coordination ranged from 0.64 to 0.83 which indicated acceptable reliability. Results of confirmatory factor analysis showed that the dimensions of both care continuity and care coordination fitted the data well which indicated good validity. Conclusions. The OCCCA questionnaire seemed to be a comprehensive, reliable and valid instrument which can be applied to measure care continuity and care coordination in outpatient settings from patient perspective.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：「國中輔導教師輔導倫理困境量表」編製之研究並列篇名：The Development of Counseling Ethical Dilemmas Scale among School Counselors in Junior High Schools作者：陳婉真(Wan-Chen Chen);余穎柔(Ying-Jou Yu);吳柏瑩(Po-Ying Wu);江守峻(Shou-Chun Chiang);洪雅鳳(Ya-Feng Hung);彭秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Peng)關鍵字：倫理困境;輔導倫理;國中輔導教師;ethical dilemma;junior high school counselors;school counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在建立國中輔導教師輔導倫理困境之量化工具，以了解輔導教師於輔導倫理困境之為難程度，並探究不同背景變項的輔導教師為難程度之差異。本研究以輔導教師的訪談分析結果作為編寫量表題目之依據，並在預試與分析後，決定「國中輔導教師輔導倫理困境量表」正式版本，包含三個分量表：「個案權益優先之為難」、「雙重角色立場之顧慮」、「跨專業合作之困境」，最後以317位國中輔導教師作為正式研究對象。研究結果顯示：「國中輔導教師輔導倫理困境量表」具有可接受的信效度。輔導教師對於輔導倫理困境的為難程度，由高至低的構面分別為「跨專業合作之困境」、「雙重角色立場之顧慮」、「個案權益優先之為難」；在背景變項部分，不同生理性別的國中輔導教師在輔導倫理困境為難程度上無顯著差異，但不同年齡之國中輔導教師的為難程度具有顯著差異，在總量表及三個分量表，均顯示21至40歲的國中輔導教師比起41至50歲者感到更加為難；另外，不了解「學生輔導工作倫理守則」的國中輔導教師，在「個案權益優先之為難」方面的輔導倫理困境為難程度也顯著高於了解守則者。整體而言，本研究藉由發展「國中輔導教師輔導倫理困境量表」，提供針對輔導倫理困境現況調查之量化工具。根據研究結果，並提出相關之建議，提供學校輔導、輔導倫理教育及未來研究作為參考。英文摘要：The study aimed to develop a quantitative measure to explore junior high school counseling teacher's ethical dilemmas and assess the difference level of dilemma they felt with different background. The development of scale was based on the qualitative interviews with 5 counseling teachers. After content analysis, the retained items were further tested with item analysis, reliability, and validity in 100 counseling teachers. The developed ”Counseling Ethical Dilemmas Scale among School Counselors in Junior High Schools” contains 16 items and 3 subscales, which are priority of student welfare, concerns of dual roles, and dilemmas of systemic collaboration. 317 junior high school counseling teachers were recruited as the formal sample of questionnaires. The reliability and validity of the scale were supported. The results showed that the average score of dilemmas of systemic collaboration is the highest, followed by concerns of dual roles, with priority of student welfare being the lowest. As for the background variables, there is no difference in counseling ethical dilemmas between genders; younger counseling teachers have greater difficulty in counseling ethical dilemmas than older counseling teachers; the counseling teachers with less understanding of ”Codes of Ethics in Student Counseling” found priority of student welfare more difficult than teachers with more understanding. Based on the above findings, we offer suggestions for school counseling, school counseling education, and future related research.起始頁-結束頁：31-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：社群網站網路霸凌和網路攻擊辨識量表之發展並列篇名：The Development of an Identification Scale to Gauge Cyberbullying and Cyber Aggression on Social Media Sites作者：王承諺(Cheng-Yan Wang);李明憲(Ming-Shinn Lee)關鍵字：量表發展;網路攻擊;網路霸凌;cyberbullying;cyber aggression;scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：67卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在發展能在社群網站中辨識網路霸凌和網路攻擊的加害者與受害者之量表。量表發展程序分為建立初稿、預試分析和正式施測，以專家效度與表面效度建立初稿；313位臉書（Facebook）使用者為預試樣本，以探索性因素分析和內部一致性信度進行預試問卷分析；正式施測的樣本6,393位來自於臉書、批踢踢實業坊、巴哈姆特電玩資訊站和Dcard使用者，以驗證性因素分析、重測信度和內部一致性信度建立正式問卷。研究結果顯示量表皆擁有良好的信度與效度。「網路霸凌和網路攻擊加害者辨識量表」和「網路霸凌和網路攻擊受害者辨識量表」的因素構面和分量表皆為網路言語行為、網路影像行為和網路關係行為，驗證性因素分析皆顯示擁有良好的模型適配度、收斂效度和區別效度。「網路霸凌和網路攻擊加害者辨識量表」的係數為.802，分量表係數介於.930至.937之間；「網路霸凌和網路攻擊受害者辨識量表」的係數為.787，分量表係數介於.924至.948之間。「網路霸凌和網路攻擊加害者辨識量表」和「網路霸凌和網路攻擊受害者辨識量表」的重測信度皆大於.70以上。此外，研究結果顯示，有1.8%的受測者是網絡霸凌受害者；1.0%的受測者是網絡霸凌加害者；9.2%的受測者是網路攻擊受害者；3.9%的受測者是網路攻擊加害者。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to develop a scale for identifying the perpetrators and victims of cyberbullying and cyber aggression on social media sites. The order of the development of the scale is: creating the first prototype, a pretest analysis, and lastly, a formal testing. The main purpose of creating the first prototype is in order to establish expert validity and face validity. The sample size for the pretest analysis was 313 Facebook users. The data collected was used to conduct explorative factor analysis and internal consistency reliability. For the formal testing, the sample size was 6,393 Facebook users, PTT Bulletin Board System users, gamers and Dcard users. The data collected was used to conduct confirmatory factor analysis, retest reliability and to test internal consistency reliability. The results of the research showed that the scale has a good level of reliability and validity. The factor determinants and subscale of ”the identification scale for perpetrators of cyberbullying and cyber aggression” and ”the identification scale for victims of cyberbullying and cyber aggression” were all split into language conduct online, conduct of images online and conduct of relationships online. Confirmatory factor analysis showed a favorable goodness- of-fit, convergent validity as well as discriminant validity. The Cronbach'sα of the identification scale for cyberbullying and cyber aggression perpetrators was .802; the Cronbach's α of the differential scale was between .930 and .937. The Cronbach's α of the identification scale for cyberbullying and cyber aggression victims was .787; the Cronbach'sα of the differential scale was between .924 and .948. The retest reliability of ”the identification scale for perpetrators of cyberbullying and cyber aggression” and ”the identification scale for victims of cyberbullying and cyber aggression” was higher than .70. Moreover, the results indicated that 1.8% of the participants reported being a cyberbullying victim; 1.0% reported being a cyberbullying perpetrator; 9.2% reported being a cyberaggression victim; and 3.9% reported being a cyberaggression perpetrator.起始頁-結束頁：61-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：教師專業學習社群於我國高等教育實施現況之探討並列篇名：The Study of the Current Condition for Implementing Faculty Professional Learning Community in Higher Education in Taiwan作者：陳琦媛(Chi-Yuan Chen)關鍵字：高等教育;教師專業學習社群;教師專業發展;higher education;faculty professional learning community;teacher professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討國內大學運用教師專業學習社群做為教師專業發展策略之作法及實施現況。為達此研究目的，本研究採用文件分析法蒐集國內118所大學推動教師專業學習社群之作法及相關辦法，以瞭解我國大學推動教師專業學習社群之情形，並訪談4位大學教學發展單位主管及5位教學專業社群召集人以瞭解推動教師專業學習社群之實際經驗。研究結果發現我國大學從2005年開始實施教師專業社群制度，至今約有67%的大學實施有教師專業學習社群，其設置之目的在提供教師專業互動交流的機會及提升教師專業知能。社群的組成以校內專兼任教師為主要成員，以3至15人為最常採用的社群規模。約87%的學校提供社群運作經費，經費來源主要為教育部計畫經費。我國大學教師專業學習社團的主題和型態多元，能配合教師需求和學 校目標彈性調整。教師專業學習社群的活動確實可協助大學教師，但需設法解決教師工作繁忙而無暇參加專業社群活動的現況。教師因課程規劃及評量設計等正式任務結合而自然形成的教師專業學習社群通常具有良好的效果，活動符合教師需求且成員相處愉快為專業社群運作成功的主因。基於上述研究結果提出我國大學未來發展教師專業學習社群之建議以供參考。英文摘要：The purpose of the study is to explore the experience of implementing faculty professional learning communities in higher education institutions in Taiwan. To achieve this goal, 118 university websites in the sample group were searched and the faculty learning community documents were collected and analyzed. The directors of four different centers for professional development in universities in Taiwan and five leaders of faculty learning communities were interviewed. The results show that the universities started the faculty learning community in 2005 and that 67% of these 118 universities offered the faculty learning community service for their teachers in 2012. The universities use these services to create opportunities for professional communication and to improve effectiveness. The community is composed of three to fifteen members, and most members come from the same university; 87% of the community funding from each university is supported by Ministry of Education (MOE) projects. The activities of the faculty learning community are flexible and varied and their topics could be modified according to the teachers' needs and the school's objectives The community does indeed enhance the professional ability of the faculty members, but many of them are too busy to attend the community; this problem needs to be solved. One way to promote the faculty learning community is through the use of formal assignments like curriculum design, which can produce good results. The activities correspond to the teachers' needs and the good relationship between members is the key to the success of the community. Some suggestions are proposed based on the results.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2202.012篇名：以學習策略觀點建構科學教育網站評鑑指標之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Construction of Science Education Website Evaluation Indicators from the Perspective of Learning Strategy作者：張琬翔(Wan-Shinang Chang);尹玫君(Mei-Chun Yin)關鍵字：網站評鑑指標;學習策略;科學教育網站;模糊德懷術;模糊層級分析法;website evaluation indicators;learning strategy;science education website;fuzzy delphi method;fuzzy analytic hierarchy process期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在以學習策略觀點建構科學教育網站評鑑指標。先從文獻分析提出指標雛形架構。再以專家問卷與模糊德懷術問卷，確定指標層級架構與內涵。最後由模糊層級分析法驗證層級結構性並賦予各指標相對權重值。研究發現：一、科學教育網站評鑑指標權重體系具整體一致性、適切可行，包含3項第一級指標、11個第二級指標與37項第三級指標；二、第一級指標有認知策略、後設認知策略、資源管理策略，其中認知策略的權重值最高；三、第二級指標有複誦與選擇策略、精緻化策略、組織策略、演練策略、計畫策略、監控策略、調整策略、時間管理、努力管理、環境管理、回饋支持指標等，其中回饋支持、演練策略、複誦與選擇策略三項的權重值較高。英文摘要：This study aimed to construct the Science Education Website Evaluation Indicators (SEWEI) from the perspective of learning strategy. The study applied the expert questionnaire, fuzzy Delphi method, and fuzzy analytic hierarchy process as the main methods. After systematic literature reviews with regard to learning strategy and website evaluation, the first frame of indicators was established. The expert questionnaire was to modify the first frame of indicators and form the fuzzy Delphi questionnaire; the fuzzy Delphi method was to assess the quality and the suitable degree of the indicators; the fuzzy analytic hierarchy process was to estimate the indicators weight. The major conclusions of this study were listed as below: (1) There were 3 first-level indicators, 11 second-level indicators and 37 third-level indicators of the SEWEI, which contained an overall consistency and measurable value. (2) The first-level indicators included cognitive strategy, metacognition strategy and resource management strategy. The weight of cognitive strategy was the highest among all first-level indicators. (3) The second-level indicators included rehearsal & selection strategy, elaboration strategy, organizational strategy, practice strategy, planning strategy, monitoring strategy, regulating strategy, time management, effort management, environmental management and feedback & support. The weights of feedback & support, practice strategy, and rehearsal & selection strategy were the highest among those second-level indicators.起始頁-結束頁：47-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2202.023篇名：中國的公民教育與威權韌性：教科書的政治社會化並列篇名：The Chinese Citizenship Education and Authoritarian Resilience: Political Socialization of the Textbooks作者：宋佩芬(Pei-Fen Sung)關鍵字：中國公民教育;制度化;中國民族主義;威權韌性;教科書分析;Chinese citizenship education;institutionalization;Chinese nationalism;authoritarian resilience;textbook analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：2001年中國進行了基礎教育課程改革，而使其政治課及道德課程有了大幅度的轉變，然而其內涵為何，目前的研究仍十分有限。本研究透過詮釋性的文本分析檢視現行中國的初中及小學公民教科書，並從政治學的觀點發現「制度化」及「中國民族主義」對這些教科書的影響，其效果可使中共之「威權韌性」得以強化。從政治社會化的角度觀之，教科書透過現代化的公民教育課程內容及方法使中共執政的說服力加強；教科書在進步的課程中包裝愛國等於愛中華民族，又等於愛黨的觀念，激發中國民族主義，使新一代的中國人民相信必須支持中共政權才能促使國家富強與統一。本文認為中共政權的韌性代表中國的公民培養在一些重要的價值觀點上－非賦權的自由民主觀念、犧牲個人完成集體的價值、國家民族至上的觀念、愛中國共產黨的思想等，仍與臺灣的公民教育具有本質上的差異。而臺灣政府及民眾必須瞭解中國在開放政策下的公民教育本質，以思考如何與其交流，尋求兩岸的和平與自由。英文摘要：China launched its Basic Education Reform in 2001, which made great changes in its political and moral education. Using the interpretive text analysis method, this study examines current Chinese elementary and junior-high school civics textbooks, and explains how ”institutionalization” and ”Chinese nationalism” have significant effects on the textbooks that strengthen the authoritarian resilience of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). From the political socialization point of view, the textbooks not only legitimize the CCP rule by the modernized and progressive civics curricula and methods, but serve to equate ideas of loving the state, loving the Chinese nation, and loving the CCP for the purpose of promoting Chinese nationalism, so that the new generation may believe that they should support the regime in order to be wealthy, strong and unified. This paper argues that the authoritarian resilience of CCP implies that China’s citizenship education will continue to be different from Taiwan’s in significant ways: the non-empowering ideas of democracy, the value of self-sacrifice for the collective, the notion of upholding the nation-state above the individual, and the idea of loving CCP. I believe that Taiwan needs to know the nature of China’s citizenship education in its open policy, and think about how to interact with it for peace and freedom across the Taiwan Strait.起始頁-結束頁：93-131資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2202.034篇名：數學教師教科書使用之個案分析：以多面體單元教學活動調整為例並列篇名：A Case Study of a Mathematics Teacher's Use of the Textbook: Adapting the Teaching Activity on Polyhedron作者：張淑怡(Shu-I Chang)關鍵字：教科書使用;幾何;數學教學;geometry;mathematics instruction;textbook use期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究目的在於探究個案教師課堂上對教科書多面體單元之教學活動調整類型，及影響調整之因素。以一位任教二十多年且有長期教科書編寫經驗的國小教師為對象，透過教學觀察、深度晤談與焦點座談以蒐集資料。結果發現，個案教師對教科書多面體單元之活動與佈題的調整類型包括：新增、取代、省略，以及重組等四類。影響調整之因素主要源自下述三個層面：（一）教科書的表徵，包括具體物表徵、任務表徵、概念表徵。（二）教師的個人知識與習慣，包括數學知識、學生學習數學之知識、數學教學知識、個人習慣與觀點。（三）情境脈絡，包括時間、教具數量、專家支持。最後，針對教科書設計、師資培育，及未來研究方向三方面做出建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore how a teacher adapts the textbook activity on polyhedron and what factors affect the adaptation. The data of this study was collected from a primary school teacher, also an experienced textbook editor, who has been teaching for twenty years; the method used includes classroom observation, in-depth interview, and focus group discussion. The teacher uses four types of textbook adaptation for activities and questions when she teaches students about polyhedron: addition, replacement, omission, and reorganization. Three factors may affect the adaptation. The first one is the representation of the textbook, which includes the physical objects, tasks, and concepts. The second factor is teacher's personal knowledge and habit which includes mathematics knowledge, knowledge of students' mathematical learning, mathematics pedagogical content knowledge, and personal habit and perspective. The last one is the context which includes time, quantity of teaching aids, and support from the experts. Last but not the least, this study makes suggestions on the design of the textbook, teacher training and important aspects of further study.起始頁-結束頁：133-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2202.045篇名：書評：教育資料的多層次模式分析並列篇名：Book Reviews: Multilevel Modeling for Educational Data作者：<U+6E29>福星(Fur-Hsing Wen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷2期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：177-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2202.056篇名：校長轉型領導、教師對組織變革接受度與學校競爭優勢關係之研究並列篇名：A Study of the Relationships among Principal's Transformational Leadership, Teacher's Acceptance of Organizational Change and School Competitive Advantage作者：鄭彩鳳(Tsai-Feng Cheng);鄭玉菁(Yu-Ching Cheng)關鍵字：轉型領導;組織變革接受度;競爭優勢;transformational leadership;acceptance of organizational change;competitive advantage期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探討校長轉型領導、教師對組織變革接受度與學校競爭優勢關係。本研究採用問卷調查法，以高雄地區國中教育人員為對象，依學校規模分層取樣抽取25所，共590位教師進行調查，共得到有效問卷為557份，問卷可用率96.1%。所得資料以平均數、標準差、t考驗、單因子變異數分析、皮爾遜積差相關、逐步多元迴歸及結構方程模式，進行統計分析處理。本研究所獲致之結論歸納如下：一、校長轉型領導、教師對組織變革接受度與學校競爭優勢的現況良好。二、校長轉型領導表現愈積極，則教師對組織變革接受度愈高；校長轉型領導愈積極及教師對組織變革接受度愈高，則學校競爭優勢愈高。三、校長轉型領導、教師對組織變革接受度對學校競爭優勢有顯著預測力，以「組織生態變革接受度」最能預測學校競爭優勢。四、校長轉型領導可間接透過教師對組織變革接受度的中介作用，對學校競爭優勢造成正向顯著影響。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to investigate the relationships among principal's transformational leadership, teacher's acceptance of organizational change, and school competitive advantage. Questionnaire survey was adopted, and subjects are the faculty of junior high schools of Kaohsiung area. 590 teachers of 25 junior high schools were selected by Stratified Random Sampling according to the school size. 567 questionnaires were responded, and 557 were valid. The response rate was 96.1%. The collected data were analyzed by means of average, standard deviation, t-test, one-way ANOVA, Pearson's product correlation, stepwise multiple regression and structural equation modeling.The main findings of this research are summed up as follows: 1. The statuses of principal's transformational leadership, teacher's acceptance of organizational change, and school competitive advantage are in good condition. 2. Higher principal's transformational leadership would result in better teacher's acceptance of organizational change. Higher principal's transformational leadership and higher teacher's acceptance of organizational change would result in better school competitive advantage. 3. Principal's transformational leadership and teacher's acceptance of organizational change can apparently predict school competitive advantage, of which the ”acceptance of organizational ecology change” can best predict school competitive advantage. 4. An intermediate effect via teacher's acceptance of organizational change was found between principal's transformational leadership and school competitive advantage.起始頁-結束頁：1-46資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2201.017篇名：中小學教師專業發展評鑑方案之影響評估並列篇名：Impact Assessment on the Program of Teacher Evaluation for Professional Development作者：潘慧玲(Wendy Hui-Ling Pan)關鍵字：教師專業發展評鑑;教師評鑑;影響評估;理論導向評鑑;teacher evaluation for professional development;teacher evaluation;impact assessment;theory-driven evaluation期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以中小學教師專業發展評鑑試辦方案為客體，運用統計控制及理論導向評鑑（theory-driven evaluation）進行方案影響評估（impact assessment）。針對全國參與試辦之高中職與國民中小學行政人員與教師進行問卷調查，並以方案要素（支持系統、方案活動）及方案成果進行資料分析。結果顯示，在支持系統與方案活動的介入要素中，宣導溝通落實情形優於教師研討與自評、教師他評與成長、及諮詢輔導，而在方案成果上，以教師教學能力提升之成果最顯著，其次是評鑑認知的增進、及學校生態的改變。此外，為確認方案介入所產生之影響，首以統計控制將支持系統與方案活動依落實程度分為高、中、低三組，結果得到三組之方案成果具顯著差異；次以理論導向評鑑方法進行檢視，發現支持系統與方案活動對於方案成果，皆具顯著之解釋力。總結本研究之實施，一方面呈現了有別於傳統實驗設計的影響評估方法，另一方面則提供了具體數據，指陳需要有效落實以達成教師專業發展評鑑目標的方案要素。英文摘要：Using the pilot program of teacher evaluation for professional development (TEPD) as an object, this study employed statistical control technique and theory-driven evaluation to assess the program impact. Administrators and teachers in primary and secondary schools attending the program were surveyed. Program components, including program supporting system and program activities, as well as program outcome, were covered in the data analysis. It was found that ”training and communication” was the highly implemented program component, better than the other three components: ”teacher discussions and self-assessment,” ”peer assessment and teacher growth,” and ”consultation and guidance.” And the enhancement of teaching was the most obvious outcome observed, the score of which was higher than the advancement of evaluation cognition and the change of school ecology. In addition, in order to examine the program impact, three groups reflecting different degrees of program implementation were classified firstly using statistical control technique. Significant differences of program outcomes were found among the three groups. Secondly, it was revealed from the theory-driven evaluation analysis that both the supporting system and program activities significantly predicted program effects. In conclusion, this study not only used a new method of impact assessment distinguishing its features from the traditional experimental design but also identified the program components which are essential to effectively achieve the goal of TEPD program.起始頁-結束頁：47-86資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2201.028篇名：美國多層次補救教學鑑定模式之評析並列篇名：A Critical Commentary on Response-to-Intervention作者：呂偉白(Wei-Pai Lu)關鍵字：學習障礙;多層次補救教學鑑定模式;介入反應;特殊教育;learning disabilities;multi-tiered instructional model;response-to-intervention;RTI;special education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：多層次補救教學的鑑定模式（Response-To-Intervention, RTI）近年來在美國教育界廣受討論。美國於2004年開始正式立法將RTI列為特殊教育評估的一部份，以協助決定學生是否符合學習障礙的分類標準。RTI之所以受到重視，主要是因為學習障礙的鑑定一直存在著很大的爭議。傳統以「智商－成就」之間的差距來學習障礙鑑定模式受到批評，因為這種模式無法將學習障礙學生從一般低成就學生中區分出來；此外，這樣的模式也讓無法達到鑑定標準的低成就學生坐等失敗。在RTI的鑑定模式中，普通教育教師與特殊教育教師攜手合作，使用研究證實有效的教學法來定期監督學生的進步情形；如果學生經過多個階段還是無法達到預定目標的，則認定其為需要特殊教育服務的學習障礙學生。然而RTI是否真的解決了所有傳統學習障礙鑑定模式的舊問題，答案仍然十分模糊，學者之間對於RTI模式的成效也有不同 看法，有些學者認為應該審慎的且全面性的評估不同RTI模式的成效。本文回顧有關RTI出現的歷史背景、不同模式間的異同以及其在學習障礙鑑定上所扮演的角色和所產生的一些新的問題，希冀能經由美國的他山之石，對於我國未來實施RTI的可能性，提供更深入、更多元的省思。英文摘要：In 2004, the United States revised the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, allowing schools to use a new educational model, Response to Intervention (RTI), to identify students with learning disabilities eligible for special education. Since then, there has been much discussion in the American educational field about this model.The RTI model requires general education teachers and special education teachers to cooperate with each other and to deliver evidence-based instruction to students while systematically monitoring students' progress. Only those students who cannot meet particular goals can receive special education services.Many see the RTI model as a response to long-lasting controversy regarding the identification of learning disabilities; it is viewed as an improvement over the previous model, the discrepancy model. One group of researchers has argued that the discrepancy model is not capable of distinguishing students with learning disabilities from those with low achievement. The discrepancy model has also been criticized as a ”wait-to-fail” model because schools must wait until students' performances are low enough before they can provide intervention.The introduction of RTI has led to significant changes in the American educational system. For example, it requires all educators to focus on students' performance. The model has potential to provide every child the opportunity to successfully learn in school. However, it has not yet been demonstrated that it can solve all problems related to the identification of learning disabilities.This article first reviews the fundamentals of RTI, then goes on to evaluate various effects of the model, and finally discusses potential challenges in RTI implementation. It is hoped that this article can help educators in Taiwan to use the experiences in the United States to rethink the Taiwanese model of identification and remediation for students with learning disabilities.起始頁-結束頁：87-126資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2201.039篇名：金門大學學生生活與學習網絡特性研究並列篇名：A Study of the Characteristics of NQU Students' Social and Learning Networks作者：林世強(Shyh-Chyang Lin)關鍵字：大學生;次團體;金門;網絡;college students;subgroup;Kinmen;network期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：國立金門大學學生約80%來自臺灣各縣市，學生組成型態是一種地域之熔爐，且在金門無其他大學可資交流，學生活動範圍多受限於島內，是極適於研究社群網絡之獨立群體。本研究針對國立金門大學土木與工程管理學系四個年級共四班179位同學進行生活與學習網絡之問卷調查，利用網絡分析技術，探討同學社群網絡成形之原因，以及網絡特性與學生成績及行為之關係。研究發現學生生活網絡未隨著年級而鬆散，但次團體數卻減少，可能因高年級學生獨立性已提高。又因學生投入學習時間較少、多數同學習慣獨自讀書、系上亦未鼓勵集體學習等因素，導致學習網絡較生活網路疏離而出現碎裂現象。生活次團體形成之主因則在於同宿，尤其大一同宿經常決定未來三年學生之社群網絡，另社團與性別也是組成次團體的重要因素，次團體在學業成績與出席率相較於全班同學具有較高之一致性，顯示同儕之影響不可忽視。本文為國內首次利用網絡理論探討學生網絡特性與意涵，研究結果可應用於學生輔導之規劃與教學之改善等工作。英文摘要：The features of the geological background of the National Quemoy University students, 80% of them from Taiwan, create morphology similar to that of a melting pot. Since NQU students have fewer chances to interact with university students in Taiwan, their social life can only be confined on Kinmen, and therefore, they form an ideal isolated population for social network study. This research explores the relationship between the academic performances and the social behaviors as well as the social and learning networks of 179 students of the Department of Civil and Engineering Management at NQU. What is found is that their social interaction is as frequent as before, but the number of social subgroups decreases for senior classes. On the other hand, learning networks, in contrast with the social networks, tend to be more fragmentary. The main causes may be threefold: (1) senior students spend less time studying, (2) many students prefer to study by their own, (3) the department does not provide courses that encourage group learning. This research depicts that living together during freshman year can be the most decisive factor, followed by club participating and gender identification, in shaping students' social lives within the next 3 years. In comparison with the entire class, students of a subgroup have more consistent academic performances and higher attendance rates. This confirms the positive peer influence exerted by the subgroup. This research is a pilot study which applies network theorems to analyze student social networks, and the result can be used to devise student counseling and to improve the quality of teaching.起始頁-結束頁：127-168資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2201.0410篇名：從大學的法律地位探討大學自治的落實：以大學法人化為核心並列篇名：A Review of the Implementation of University Autonomy from the Perspective of the Legal Status of Universities: Focusing on the Legal Personalization of Universities作者：許育典(Yue-Dian Hsu);李佳育(Jia-Yu Li)關鍵字：大學法人化;大學自治;行政法人;公法社團法人;公法財團法人;legal personalization of universities;university autonomy;administrative legal person;public law juridical association;public law juridical foundation期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷1期出版年：2014中文摘要：大學法人化的爭議已存在許久。2005年5月行政院移送立法院審議的「大學法新修正條文草案」中訂定了大學法人化的法律依據，雖未通過，但大學法人化的爭議並沒有結束。當時教育部長更以「大學法人化為世界局勢」，展望我國未來組織改制的推動。目前政策上乃以行政法人作為大學法人化的目標，在比較法上主要是以日本的獨立行政法人為參考。然而大學法人化事實上可能包含數種各具不同性質的組織態樣，對於大學的組織、人事、財務和學術自治，均可能有不同的影響。本文焦點在於釐清法人化後可能的各種組織型態，類型化為公法社團法人、公法財團法人與行政法人三種模式，並佐以比較法的例子說明其組織的特性。在進一步確立憲法上大學自治的保障作為大學法人化的目標之後，分別就不同的組織類型討論它們對大學自治的影響和可能涉及的問題。本文目的在於從組織功能角度，重新整理大學法人化的爭議內容，提供一個明確的思考方向與論理脈絡，希望助於未來大學法人化爭議的解決。英文摘要：The issues of legal personalization of universities have long been disputed. The newly revised draft amendments to the University Act, which are brought up by the Executive Yuan on May, 2005 to the Legislative Yuan for consideration of enactment, stipulate the legal basis for the legal personalization of universities. Although the draft amendments have not yet come into law, the disputes do not cease. The Minister of the Ministry of Education claimed that ”legal personalization of universities is the trend of the world,” when he sketched the prospectus of governmental organization reforms. At present, while referring to the Japanese experience of independent administrative legal person from a comparative law approach, the governmental policy still prefers the form of administrative legal person as the goal of legal personalization of universities. However the form of legal personalization of universities shall not be limited to the form of administrative legal person alone and may be varied. There are several different types of organizations to be chosen from and may render different impacts on the organizations, personnel affairs, finance, and autonomy of universities.This Article focuses on the clarification of all three possible forms of organizations after the legal personalization of universities. The three possible forms are public law juridical association, public law juridical foundation and administrative legal person. Different characteristics of each of these three forms will be analyzed from comparative law perspectives and case studies will also be discussed to better illustrate the analysis. After further ascertaining the constitutional guarantee of university autonomy as the goal of the legal personalization of universities, this Article will go on to discuss the possible influences and relevant issues of adopting different forms of organizations respectively. The purpose of this Article is to provide a certain and clear thought and theoretical basis of the issues of legal personalization of universities after reorganizing and categorizing them from the angle of organizational functions and hope to be useful to resolve the issues of legal personalization of universities in the future.起始頁-結束頁：169-209資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2201.0501篇名：數位教學效能與使用意向的關係：專業信心和知識分享的中介作用並列篇名：The Impacts of Digital Teaching Efficiency on Behavioral Intention of Use: The Mediations of Professional Confidence and Knowledge Sharing作者：張義雄(I-Hsiung Chang);陳儒晰(Ru-Si Chen)關鍵字：中介;使用意向;知識分享;專業信心;數位教學效能;mediation;behavioral intention of use;knowledge sharing;professional confidence;digital teaching efficiency期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究之目的在於探究幼兒教師對數位教學活動的數位教學效能、使用意向及影響因素，檢定專業信心和知識分享在此關係的中介作用。研究者經由文獻探討建立數位教學效能、使用意向、專業信心與知識分享等潛在構面，透過問卷調查蒐集樣本資料，利用結構方程模式考驗專業信心和知識分享在數位教學效能對使用意向關係的中介效果。研究結果指出，二因子中介模型具有不完全中介效果，顯示幼兒教師對數位教學活動的使用行為意圖，主要是受到數位教學效能與專業素養之形塑、幼兒教師對資訊科技專業應用信心，以及透過網路社群進行知識分享和資訊交流之態度，亦會影響其持續實踐幼兒數位教學活動的使用意向。英文摘要：This study explores on the attitudes and influencing factors of preschool teachers' digital teaching efficiency and their behavioral intention of use with digital teaching activities. The researchers tested the mediating variables of digital professional practical confidence and knowledge sharing of online interaction in this relationship. The study concerns about the latent factors of digital teaching efficiency, behavioral intention of use, professional confidence, and knowledge sharing from the basis of literature analysis. Through the employment of survey and structural equation model, the study tested hypothesis about the mediations of professional confidence and knowledge sharing on the relationship between digital teaching efficiency and behavioral intention of use for preschool teachers. The results indicated the two mediating constructs partial mediated in this relationship. Preschool teachers' attitudes towards digital teaching efficiency and professional literacy played the important impacting role of their behavioral intention of use in digital teaching activities. Their perceptions of professional confidence of digital applications and knowledge sharing of communicative exchanging via online community partial influenced the behavioral intention of digital teaching activities for young children.起始頁-結束頁：55-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20200412020032篇名：中小學教師將機器人融入教學的態度、信念、動機及與機器人教學內容知識間的關係並列篇名：Elementary and Middle School Teachers' Teaching Attitude, Belief, Motivation and Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge of Robotics-Based Instruction作者：朱元楷(Yuan-Kai Chu);梁至中(Jyh-Chong Liang);蔡孟蓉(Meng-Jung Tsai)關鍵字：科技教學內容知識;教學信念;教學動機;教學態度;機器人教育;technological pedagogical content knowledge;teaching belief;teaching motivation;teaching attitude;robotics education期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在探討中、小學在職教師對於將機器人科技融入教學之看法，尤其是針對教師將機器人科技融入教學之態度、信念和動機，及對其機器人教學內容知識進行問卷調查，並分析上述各變項間的關係。為檢測上述變項，本研究開發教師機器人態度信念和動機量表，以及教師機器人教學內容知識量表，研究樣本為115位自願參加機器人統整課程設計工作坊的中、小學在職教師。所有問卷資料透過因素分析、信效度分析、相關分析及結構方程模式進行分析。研究結果顯示，兩個量表均呈現良好的信度與效度，適合作為評量教師將機器人融入教學之情意與知能的研究工具。此外，從結構方程模式的路徑模型中發現，教師機器人教學態度可直接預測其在所有的機器人教學內容知識的各項表現，且透過教師的機器人知識和機器人教學知識的互補中介作用間接預測教師機器人教學內容知識；教師機器人教學信念可直接預測其在機器人教學內容知識；教師機器人教學動機則可直接預測其機器人知識。因此，本研究建議應提升中、小學在職教師對於運用機器人進行教學的態度，以促進其機器人教學內容知識，並進一步探討如何提升其教學態度，以及其他可能影響教師將機器人科技融入教學的相關因素。英文摘要：This study aims to explore Taiwan in-service elementary and high school teachers' views on the integration of robotics into teaching. This study focuses on the teachers' self-evaluation on their willingness and knowledge to use robots in their classrooms. A total of 115 in-service teachers who participated in a teachers' professional development workshop for robotics-integrated teaching designs were the sample of the study. Factor analyses, reliability analyses and partial least squares - structural equation modeling (PLSSEM) analyses are used to analyze the data collected in this study. The PLS-SEM analysis found teachers' attitudes of robotics teaching can directly predict all dimensions of technological pedagogical content knowledge - robotics and teachers' beliefs of robotics teaching can directly predict the robotics pedagogical content knowledge. Furthermore, teachers' motivations of robotics teaching can directly predict robotics knowledge. Future studies are suggested to explore approaches for improving teachers' attitudes about integrating robotics into teaching and to investigate other factors that may affect teachers' decision making.起始頁-結束頁：75-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20200412020043篇名：An Exploration of Proper Multimedia Arrangement for Chinese Character Learning Based on Cognitive Load Theory: An Example with Preschool Students並列篇名：以認知負荷理論為基礎的漢字學習多媒體排版組合之探究：以幼兒園幼生為例作者：林建亨(Chien-Heng Lin)關鍵字：Chinese character literacy;cognitive load theory;instructional auxiliaries;multimedia arrangement;中文字學習;認知輔助;教學輔助;多媒體組合期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Although the integration of multimedia into learning is common, research focusing on the effective arrangement of multimedia in children's literacy learning is limited. Therefore, this study aims to explore what types of arrangements of multimedia, based on cognitive load theory, are functional in leading young children to achieve the best learning effect in their learning of Chinese characters. Based on experimental designs, this study investigates the effectiveness of Chinese character learning and intends to discover the best instructional arrangement of multimedia elements. The results suggest that in learning Chinese characters, when the goal is only to read the words, multimedia presentation does not need to include still images as aides, but when the goal is to comprehend the meaning of the characters, it is strongly recommended that auxiliary visual images be added to the characters so that the young learners can achieve the best learning outcomes. Furthermore, these auxiliary images and characters must be presented simultaneously and be located next to the characters. As for cueing signs, such signs are not necessary in a simple case of character presentation.英文摘要：儘管多媒體的教學設備在幼兒教室隨處可見，將多媒體融入幼兒的語言學習上亦不少，然而，如何將多媒體融入認字學習的研究並不多，且針對幼兒認字學習的多媒體設計之研究亦非常少見。因此，本研究主要以認知負荷理論為基礎，探討何種類型的多媒體組合於協助幼兒學習中文字時可達到最佳的學習成效。藉由實驗性研究設計，測試在不同多媒體元素的安排下探討其中文字學習的成效，企圖找出最佳的多媒體教學設計。本研究建議，學習認識中文字若只是學習如何讀字，多媒體的呈現可不用加圖示，若要學習理解中文字的意思，則需加上圖片的輔助才能達到最佳的學習成效。起始頁-結束頁：1-22資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20200112010014篇名：以資訊科技融入eduScrum教學模式之課程設計及實施並列篇名：Curriculum Design and Implementation of Integrating Information Technology into eduScrum Teaching Method作者：劉冠辰(Guan-Chen Liu);柯志祥(Chih-Hsiang Ko)關鍵字：eduScrum教學模式;合作教學法;資訊科技融入教學;eduScrum teaching method;cooperative learning;information technology integrated education期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：在蓬勃發展的資訊科技及強調以學生為中心的環境下，教師於課程設計過程中也逐漸著重如何讓學生在團隊合作下相互溝通，並在互動過程中藉由資訊科技的融入來達到教師設立的學習目標，進而符合十二年國民教育著重以人為本的終身學習者的精神。因此，研究者將符合上述願景的eduScrum教學模式，融入專案管理工具Trello與Google表單等資訊科技工具，在為期四週的時間，由原先著重合作教學法的立體造型課程中探討導入eduScrum教學模式後所帶來的效益。本研究針對55位修習立體造型課程的大專校院學生進行分組，經由問卷分析後，最終獲得本研究結果為：一、資訊科技融入eduScrum教學模式提升合作效率與師生連結；二、資訊科技融入eduScrum教學模式可提升低分組學生小組合作的趣味性。另外，於文末針對將來欲運用eduScrum教學模式的設計領域教師提出實施建議，讓師生得以借助資訊科技的融入，結合eduScrum教學模式，靈活運用於合作教學法的教學現場。英文摘要：Being in the student-centered and technological environment, teachers have to focus on how to enable students to communicate with each other by integrating information technology during teaching-learning process. With the spirit of lifelong learners from 12-years Basic Education, researchers integrate the project management tools such as Trello and Google forms into eduScrum teaching method and explore the benefits. Researchers make 55 undergraduate students who are taking three-dimensional contouring course into 9 groups. After analyzing, the results of this study are as follows: (1) Integrated information technology into the eduScrum teaching method can improve the efficiency of the cooperation and enhance students' relationship with teachers. (2) eduScrum teaching method can make the lower grade group's cooperative learning more interesting. By combining information technology with eduScrum teaching method, this will allow students and teachers implement cooperative learning teaching method more flexible.起始頁-結束頁：23-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20200112010025篇名：角色扮演遊戲融入STS教學中對國中生環境素養的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Integrating Role-Playing Game into STS Instruction on Junior High School Student's Environment Literacy作者：蔡聿庭(Yu-Ting Tsai);鄭夢慈(Meng-Tzu Cheng)關鍵字：STS教學;角色扮演遊戲;角色認同;環境素養;STS instruction;role-playing game;role identity;environmental literacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究主旨在開發一款以環境素養為故事情節的數位角色扮演遊戲融入「科技與社會」課程當中，探討實驗組（遊戲組，52人）與對照組（非遊戲組，50人）的環境素養成效與遊戲中角色認同的影響。研究樣本選自中部某兩所國中七年級各兩個班級為研究對象，研究方法以量化的單因子共變數、皮爾森相關係數分析環境素養前、後測與延宕測驗的差異，以及角色認同與環境素養的相關，再將質性的「節能減碳學習單」轉成量化評分，並以獨立樣本t檢定檢驗兩組學生在節能減碳表現的差異。研究結果發現，實驗組延宕測驗在「環境概念知識」與「環境倫理價值觀」的表現顯著優於對照組；實驗組在「節能減碳」的表現顯著優於對照組；遊戲時的角色認同與「環境覺知敏感度」、「環境行動技能」、「環境行動經驗」呈現顯著正相關。本研究結果顯示，透過遊戲融入環境概念知識，能讓學生維持長久的學習成效，而利用遊戲中角色的設定，也能有效傳達對於環境正面積極的態度；另外，將環境行動與遊戲結合，也能有效提升學生將環境知識與理念付諸於行動的動機；而學生在遊戲中對於角色高度的認同，對於環境素養也有正向的影響，故本研究自製的「綠魔法鎮」遊戲搭配合適的「科技與社會」課程對於學生環境素養的培養的確能有所助益。英文摘要：This study developed a digital role-playing game (RPG) that employs the environmental literacy as the story scenarios to integrate into STS instruction. The purpose was to explore its impact on student environmental literacy and how the environmental literacy relates to role identity. A total of 102 students were took part. They were divided into two groups, experimental (n = 52) and control (n = 50). Students in the experimental group received STS instruction integrated with digital RPG, while those in the control group received STS-only instruction. This study collected both quantitative and qualitative data. For quantitative data, one-way ANCOVAs and Pearson's correlation coefficients were used to test the differences in the environmental literacy between pre-, post-, and delayed posttest and the relationship between environmental literacy and in-game role identity. For qualitative data, energy saving and carbon reduction learning sheet were converted to quantitative scores according to the developed coding rubrics, then paired t tests were run to examine the differences in student energy saving and carbon reduction between experimental and control group. 1. Some significant findings were revealed: Students in the experimental group had a significantly better performance on the delayed test than those in the control group in terms of the dimensions of knowledge of environmental concepts and environmental ethics and values of environmental literacy. 2. Students in the experimental group significantly outperformed those in the control group in terms of energy saving and carbon reduction behaviors. 3. Student in-game role identity was significantly and positively related with the dimensions of environmental perception and sensitivity, capacity to take environmental actions and experience of taking environmental actions of environmental literacy.起始頁-結束頁：55-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20200112010036篇名：體育教師教學自我效能與科技教學內容知識關係之探討並列篇名：An Investigation of Taiwanese Physical Education Teachers' Teaching Self-Efficacy and Their Technological Pedagogical and Content Knowledge (TPACK)作者：黃品齊(Pin-Chi Huang);葉錦樹(Chin-Shu Yeh);簡桂彬(Kuei-Pin Chien);梁至中(Jyh-Chong Liang)關鍵字：教學成效預期;教學知識效能;結構方程模式;資訊科技;運動技術效能;teaching outcome expectancy;knowledge efficacy;structural equation modeling;information technology;motor skill efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：12卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：過往關於科技融入教學的研究大多以認知類的學科為研究對象，較少針對技能為主的學科進行探討，因此，本研究目的在於探討體育教師教學自我效能，以及科技教學內容知識之間的關係，並運用結構方程模式進行資料分析。以359位國中體育教師為研究對象，調查其教學自我效能及科技教學內容知識的認知，並進一步了解兩者之間的關聯性。研究結果顯示，問卷工具之驗證性因素分析及路徑分析的各項配適度指標皆屬良好，同時也發現體育教師的教學知識效能可正向預測其科技教學知識與科技內容知識；而體育教師的運動技術效能則可直接正向預測其科技教學內容知識。值得一提的是，體育教師的教學成效預期皆無法顯著預測其科技教學內容知識的所有面向。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the relationships among physical education (PE) teachers' teaching self-efficacy and their technological pedagogical and content knowledge (TPACK) by adopting the structural equation modeling technique. A total of 359 Taiwanese in-service PE teachers in junior high schools participated in this study. This study used two questionnaires, namely the teaching self-efficacy survey (containing teaching outcome expectancy, knowledge efficacy, and motor skill efficacy) to assess PE teachers' perceptions of teaching self-efficacy, and the TPACK survey (including technological pedagogical knowledge, technological content knowledge and technological pedagogical content knowledge) to investigate their confidence in their TPACK. The results showed that both instruments exhibit satisfactory validity and reliability by confirmatory factor analysis. Structural equation modeling was used to evaluate the fit of the hypothetical model and the results indicated that all of the goodness-of-fit indexes reached acceptable values in path analysis. In this study, PE teachers' knowledge efficacy could positively predict both of their technological pedagogical knowledge (TPK) and technological content knowledge (TCK). Moreover, PE teachers' technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPCK) was positively predicted by their TPK and TCK. Furthermore, PE teachers' motor skill efficacy has a positive prediction on TPCK. However, PE teachers' teaching outcome expectancy could not predict their TPK, TCK and TPCK in a significant way.起始頁-結束頁：83-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X202001120100401篇名：從公投元年到同婚元年－婚姻平權運動的民主實驗與實踐並列篇名：An Experiment of Democracy: The Winding Path of Marriage Equality Movement in Taiwan作者：鄧筑媛(Joyce Teng);陳乃嘉(Nai-chia Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：137-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：書評：What is Populism?〔解讀民粹主義〕by Jan-Werner Muller〔楊－威爾納．穆勒〕並列篇名：A review of What is Populism? by Jan-Werner Muller作者：鄭楷立(Kai-li Cheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：149-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：世界民主大事紀：2020年1-3月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: January-March 2020期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：157-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：半總統制民主國家的總理選擇並列篇名：Prime Ministerial Selection in Semi-presidential Democracies作者：顏煌庭(Huang-ting Yan)關鍵字：代理損失;政治生涯;總理;半總統制;agency loss;political career;prime minister;semi-presidentialism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文探討什麼因素決定半總統制民主國家的總理選擇，並提出憲法異質性和策略環境決定政治（或官僚）型總理是否被任命。首先，本文提出一種區別總理類型的二分法：政治和官僚型總理，而總理的政治生涯與可以獲得的政治資源有關，因而反映代理損失範圍。其次，憲法異質性決定總理主要的委託人是總統或國會。最後，四個策略環境（單一政黨主導、聯盟主導、雙極對抗和多極分裂）影響總統或國會是否願意承擔代理損失風險，以換取其政黨選舉前景的改善。總結來說，本文認為無論誰負責總理任命，比起雙極對抗，官僚型總理很可能在單一政黨主導下被任命。此外，多極分裂下，當總統而不是國會有權任命總理時，官僚型總理很可能被任命。本文蒐集385個半總統制民主國家內閣的資料，並採用邏輯回歸來檢驗這些論點。英文摘要：This article examines the factors structuring prime ministerial selection in semi-presidential democracies, and proposes that constitutional heterogeneity and strategic environments determine whether a political (or bureaucratic) prime minister is chosen. First, political and bureaucratic prime ministers are identified based on their political careers, which relate to political resources they can acquire and, thus, mirror the scope of agency loss. Second, constitutional heterogeneity determines the primary principal, that is, a president or a parliament. Finally, four strategic environments-single party dominance, coalition dominance, bipolar antagonism, and multipolar fragmentation-are differentiated, and influence if principals are willing to run the risk of agency loss in exchange for improved electoral prospects. In combination, this paper argues that a political prime minister is less likely to emerge under single party dominance than under bipolar antagonism, regardless of who is in charge of naming prime ministers. Further, under multipolar fragmentation, a bureaucratic prime minister is chosen when presidents, instead of parliaments, have the power to appoint prime ministers. This article tests these arguments using data from 385 cabinets of semi-presidential democracies and employing logistic regression.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：憲政體制、選舉制度、選舉時程與政府型態－台灣的個案分析並列篇名：Constitutional System, Electoral System, Election Timing, and Government Type: A Case Analysis of Taiwan作者：蘇子喬(Tzu-chiao Su)關鍵字：憲政體制;選舉制度;選舉時程;政黨體系;政府型態;constitutional system;electoral system;election timing;party system;government type期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以憲政體制、選舉制度（包括總統選制與國會選制）、選舉時程等變項所構成的分析架構，探討我國的憲政運作。2008年之前，我國國會選制為SNTV，總統選制為相對多數制，選舉時程為期中選舉，這三項制度因素將我國國會政黨體系塑造為兩大陣營的多黨制；SNTV的國會選制則將我國當時定位未明的半總統制確立為總統議會制；而在總統議會制與兩大陣營多黨制相互組合，以及期中選舉的影響下，政府型態遂形成「分立政府／少數內閣」。2008年之後，我國國會選制改為並立制，總統選制仍維持相對多數制，選舉期程改為反蜜月期與同時選舉，這三項制度因素將我國國會政黨體系塑造為兩黨制；而在總統議會制與兩黨制相互組合，以及反蜜月期／同時選舉的影響下，我國遂形成「一致政府／一黨內閣」的政府型態。若要建構我國憲政體制、選舉制度與選舉時程更為妥適的制度組合，本文認為，就國會選制而言，我國目前的並立制應該維持，但應提高比例代表制部分的席次比例，並降低政黨門檻；就總統選制而言，應考慮將我國目前採行的相對多數制改為兩輪決選制；就選舉時程而言，我國目前總統與國會同時選舉的安排應該維持，但應進一步將總統與國會調整為同時上任；就憲政體制而言，則應考慮將我國目前的總統議會制調整為總理總統制。英文摘要：In this paper, the analytical framework constituted by the constitutional system, electoral system, and election timing is used to explore Taiwan's constitutional operations. Before 2008, Taiwan's parliamentary electoral system was SNTV, the presidential electoral system was plurality system, and the election timing was midterm election. These three institutional factors changed Taiwan's parliamentary party system into a multi-party system with two-distinct coalition. The SNTV transformed the constitutional system from vague semi-presidential system back then into presidential parliamentary system. Meanwhile, with the combination of president-parliamentary system and multi-party system with two-distinct coalition, as well as the influence of the midterm elections, the divided government/minority cabinet was formed. After 2008, Taiwan's parliamentary electoral system was changed to the mixed-member majoritarian system, the presidential electoral system was still plurality system, and the election timing changed into counter-honeymoon and simultaneous elections. These three factors have transformed Taiwan's parliamentary party system into a two-party system. With the combination of presidential parliamentarism and two-party system, as well as the influence of the counter-honeymoon and simultaneous elections, the consistent government/one-party cabinet has been formed. To construct a more appropriate institutional combination of Taiwan's constitutional system, electoral system, and election timing, this paper deems it necessary to maintain Taiwan's current mixed-member majoritarian system, but the proportion of seats in the proportional representation should be increased, while the party threshold should be lowered. As far as the presidential electoral system is concerned, changing Taiwan's current plurality system into majority system may be considered. Concerning the election timing, the simultaneous election should be maintained, but the president and the parliament should also take office simultaneously. With regard to the constitutional system, it's necessary to transform Taiwan's current presidential parliamentarism into premier-presidentialism.起始頁-結束頁：45-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：亞洲第一個半總統制－斯里蘭卡憲政體制的變遷與挑戰並列篇名：Asia's First Semi-presidentialism: The Transformations and Challenges of the Constitutional System in Sri Lanka作者：陳宏銘(Hongming Chen)關鍵字：半總統制;斯里蘭卡;行政總統;總統議會制;總理總統制;semi-presidentialism;Sri Lanka;executive presidency;president-parliamentary;premier-presidentialism期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：斯里蘭卡是亞洲最先採行半總統制的國家，同時也是歐洲以外第一個實施半總統制的國家，但迄今中文學術文獻中似未見相關專門著作，因此本文嘗試以憲政選擇和變遷之理論探討其經驗。斯里蘭卡的個案具有重要的理論意義，其憲政體制的變遷，經歷了由第一共和內閣制轉型為第二共和半總統制的跨體制完全轉型，以及維持在半總統制下，從總統議會制演化成為總理總統制之次類型局部轉型。比較半總統制各國經驗，罕見與其相似之模式。研究發現，外部體制的示範作用與優勢政治行動者的偏好，是促成制度選擇與變遷的主要因素。研究結果並顯示，雖然該國存在著廢除「行政總統」和弱化總統權力的主張，且新一波憲政改革於2016年啟動，但目前還未看到憲改共識的形成。由於之前才經歷總統和總理衝突的憲政危機，新任總統甫於2019年年底就職，使得斯里蘭卡半總統制的發展前景充滿變數和挑戰。英文摘要：Sri Lanka was the first country in Asia to adopt a semi-presidential system, and it was also the first country outside Europe to implement a semi-presidential system. So far, there seems to be no work on this topic in Chinese academic literature. This article attempts to explore the case of Sri Lanka with the theory of constitutional choice and change. The case of Sri Lanka has important theoretical significance. Its constitutional system has undergone a transformation from the cabinet system of the first republic to the semi-presidential system of the second republic.It has undergone a fully transformation from the First Republican's parliamentarism to the Second Republican's semi-presidentialism, and under the semi-presidential system, from the president-parliamentary system to the premier-presidential system, that is the transformation between sub-types. Comparing the experience of semi-presidentialism, we rarely see similar development models. The study found that the exemplary role of foreign institutional model and the preferences of dominant political actors are the main factors contributing to institutional change. The results of the study show that although there are claims to abolish the ”executive president” and weaken the power of the president, and a new wave of constitutional reform was launched in 2016, however, there is no consensus on the constitutional reform. Due to the recent constitutional crisis between the president and the prime minister, and the new president taking office at the end of 2019, the prospects for the development of the country's semi-presidentialism are full of variables and challenges.起始頁-結束頁：83-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：數位時代下的民主現場－開放科技和開放文化並列篇名：Digital Democracy in Action: Open Technology and Open Culture作者：鄭婷宇(Claire);耿璐(Lulu);李柏鋒(Pofeng Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：121-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：書評：The Will of the People: A Modern Myth〔人民意志－一則現代迷思〕by Albert Weale〔阿爾伯特．韋爾〕並列篇名：A review of The Will of the People: A Modern Myth by Albert Weale作者：杜坤峰(Kun-feng Tu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：131-138資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：世界民主大事紀：2019年10-12月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: October-December 2019期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：139-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：標準本位政策脈絡下師資培育改革成效之評估：應用「行動模式／改變模式圖式」分析師資培育學程並列篇名：Effects of Teacher Education Reform in the Standard-Based Policy Context: Analysis of a Teacher Education Program by Applying the Action Model/Change Model Schema作者：潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Wendy Pan);洪秋瑋(Chiu-Wei Hung)關鍵字：方案理論評鑑;行動模式;改變模式;教師專業碩士學位學程;標準本位師資培育;program theory evaluation;action model;change model;teacher professional master degree program;standard-based teacher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：國立臺中教育大學的「教師專業碩士學位學程」可說是臺灣近年來一項重大的師資培育改革方案，其在教育部倡議專業標準本位的脈絡下形成。為瞭解此一變革之成效，以及影響成效的中介機制，本研究以「行動模式／改變模式圖式」作為評鑑取徑。在前置作業中，採取文獻分析、文件分析與訪談方法，建立「教師專業碩士學位學程」之「行動模式／改變模式圖式」，本研究進而採問卷調查與訪談，檢視圖式中「改變模式」三個要素（課程實施、實踐反思、專業表現）之落實情形，以及該學程的課程實施成效（專業表現）受到實踐反思的中介情形。研究結果顯示，學程之課程實施、師資生之實踐反思與專業表現，均達中高標程度。另課程實施對於實踐反思與專業表現均有直接效果，惟實踐反思中的創新教學，不論對於整體的專業表現或專業表現的構面（專業實踐與專業責任）均產生顯著的部分中介作用；而實踐反思中的觀察反省，則對專業知能產生部分的中介作用。此意謂要造就一位專業表現良好的師資生，除了要有統整的課程設計外，尚須致力於提升師資生創新教學與觀察反省能力，方有助於專業表現效果的強化。上述的研究結果點出創新教學、觀察反省是師培方案要產生預期成果所需的中介機制，而此提供了師資培育改進之重要參考方向。英文摘要：The Teacher Professional Master Degree Program launched by the National Taichung University of Education has drastically reformed Taiwanese teacher education in recent years. The Ministry of Education promoted this program in a standard-based policy context. To evaluate its effects, this study used the evaluation approach of action model/change model schema. In the preliminary stage, the program's action model/change model schema was constructed through literature analysis, document analysis, and interviews. Furthermore, the survey and interview data were collected to evaluate the schema's change model. Specifically, the implementation of the program and how students' practical reflection mediated the relationship between curriculum implementation and students' professional performance were explored. The findings revealed that the scores of curriculum implementation, students' practical reflection, and professional performance were all at a moderately high level. Additionally, it was found that curriculum implementation exerted main effects on students' practical reflection and professional performance. However, innovative teaching, as a dimension of practical reflection, partially mediated the effects of curriculum implementation either on professional performance or on its two dimensions (professional practice and professional responsibility). Observation and reflection, another dimension of practical reflection, also had mediated effect but only on professional knowledge. The study suggested that integrated curriculum design is crucial for cultivating students' professional competence and that skills of innovative teaching, and observation and reflection strengthen the program's effect on student performance. Those two skills are significant intervening mechanisms that enable teacher education programs to achieve anticipated outcomes, in turn providing a direction for improving teacher education.起始頁-結束頁：73-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).00032篇名：師資培育國際化－國際文憑教師（IBEC）學程中的師資生特質與想法並列篇名：Globalization of Teacher Education Program: Characteristics and Voices of Student Teachers in IBEC Program作者：葉怡芬(Yi-Fen Yeh);劉美慧(Mei-Hui Liu)關鍵字：教師培育;國際文憑教育;國際教育;期望價值動機理論;teacher education;IB education;international education;expectancy-value motivation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：國際文憑教育為世界認可的國際教育系統，其特色包含結構性的課程架構、與時俱進的教與學理論及實務、學校品質保證機制、教師專業發展等。有鑑於十二年國民基本教育對於高品質教師的需求，但同時又面臨少子化對教師缺額的縮減，國立臺灣師範大學就其多年於師資培育的專業再發展國際文憑教師證照學程，並於2018年完成官方認證且於同年開始招生。為瞭解師資生對於國際文憑教師證照學程的看法並進而選擇修習者的特質，本研究以兩份自陳問卷，包含探討師資生教師核心能力、修習教育專業課程後的態度與信念，以及對於國際教師學分學程看法的問卷，調查該校選擇修習國際文憑教師證照學程（n＝51）與未選擇修習的師資生（n＝120）；並藉由訪問5位國際文憑教育者，瞭解師資生對於成為國際文憑教師想法是否符合國際文憑學校師資需求。結果顯示選擇修習國際文憑教師證照學程的師資生在以教師為志業的內在動機及核心能力上（特別是熱愛教育與反省增能）顯著高於未申請者。本研究的目的在於藉由分析師資生對於修習國際文憑教師證照學程的想法與特質，探討師資職前教育課程的可能發展方向，包括培養明日教師的國際思維與雙語教學能力，以提升臺灣教育的水準。英文摘要：International Baccalaureate (IB) is a world-recognized international education system that has structured curriculum frameworks, up-to-date teaching and learning theories and practices, a school quality assurance mechanism, and a teacher professional development system, among other notable features. Considering the demands of high-quality teachers from the 12-year educational reform and in light of the threat of reductions in teaching jobs, National Taiwan Normal University (NTNU), based on its long-term endeavors in promoting teacher education, implemented the IB Educator Certificate (IBEC) Program, which was officially recognized and launched in 2018. To better understand the characteristics of contemporary student teachers, this study surveyed cohorts of IBEC program applicants (n = 51) and individuals who did not apply (n = 120) through two self-reported questionnaires. Five experienced IB educators were also interviewed to acquire information on the type of teachers IB schools were expecting to hire. Results showed that the cohort that applied to the IBEC Program had significantly higher intrinsic motivation for becoming teachers, education passion, and reflective empowerment, which explained their willingness to invest time into taking the IBEC Program. After updated information was collected from student teachers on teacher education programs, this study explored possible next steps for teacher education, such as inclusion of international education and bilingual education elements to meet the needs of the upcoming generation.起始頁-結束頁：105-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).00043篇名：美、英、澳、星四國中小學師資生遴選標準及對我國啟示之探討並列篇名：Selection Criteria for Primary and Secondary Preservice Teachers in the United States, Britain, Australia, and Singapore and the Enlightenment to Taiwan作者：蘇容梅(Jung-Mei Su)關鍵字：師資生遴選;師資培育;遴選標準;preservice teacher selection;teacher education;selection criteria期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：教師素質是奠定學生成就的重要基礎，如何吸引、遴選、培訓和留住優秀教師，為國際逐漸重視之議題。本研究以師資生遴選為主題，旨在瞭解美國、英國、澳洲與新加坡強化師資生遴選的背景緣由，以及當前採用的師資生遴選作法。研究結果發現，美、英、澳、星四個國家皆設有專責單位訂定師資生遴選標準，重視申請人的基本讀寫算能力，並以認知為主要遴選測驗內容。依據四個國家之經驗，提供國內制定師資生入學制度之啟示，包括：一、加入基本能力檢核，確保師資生學術基礎；二、依據師資專長特性，訂定合適的遴選標準；三、結合多樣性的非認知類檢測，並提供周全的輔導及獎勵，增進師資生遴選效能。英文摘要：The quality of teachers is an important predictor of student achievement. The methods to attract, select, train, and retain outstanding teachers have been attracting considerable attention the field of Taiwanese education. This article explores the selection of preservice teachers, aiming to understand the background of reasons for teacher selection in the United States, Britain, Australia and Singapore and the current selection criteria and practices. The study results found that these four countries control teacher education quality through dedicated units. The selection tests focus on basic reading and writing skills, and the selection method is mainly based on cognitive tests. This study of preservice teacher selection in four countries provides inspiration for developing basic ability tests to ensure that preservice teachers have the necessary academic foundation and establishing appropriate selection criteria combined with diversity non-cognitive testing.起始頁-結束頁：135-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).00054篇名：中等學校師資生任教學科專門知識檢測機制之探討並列篇名：Inspection and Proposal for Evaluating Secondary School Teacher Students' Content Knowledge and Pedagogical Content Knowledge作者：劉怡薰(I-Hsun Liu);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung)關鍵字：師資培育;專門知識;教師資格檢定考試;teacher education;content knowledge/pedagogical content knowledge;teacher certification exam期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：我國中等學校師資生教師專業檢核機制，在教育專業知識上，主要由教師資格檢定考試檢核；在任教學科專門知識上，則採「書面文件檢覈」制度。2017年之《師資培育法》實行後，各大學自行規劃師培課程，無外部第三方檢核歷程，送部備查即可實施，且自行核發修畢師資職前教育證明書。此措施即取消現行師資生任教學科專門知識之「書面文件檢覈」制度，使其具備該知識之品保問題更形嚴重。因此，本研究以「國家整體師資培育品管機制」、「市場競爭機制與學校教甄把關之效應」、「教師任教學科知能需求」、「教師證照之專業信用」等面向，評估由政府檢測師資生任教學科專門知識之必要性，並參考國外教師資格考試，針對我國檢測中等學校師資生專門知識之測驗技術問題，建議可行之檢測方式。英文摘要：In Taiwan, two methods are adopted to measure secondary school teacher students' knowledge about teaching. First, teacher students' knowledge of education gained from their teacher education is examined through the Teacher Certification examination. Second, their content knowledge (CK) and pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) are evaluated through a written inspection procedure. However, since the implementation of the Teacher Education Act 2017, each university designs and uses its own teacher education curriculum without any third party inspection. The university also issues a certificate document upon completion of the teacher education program. These series of procedures have replaced the written document inspection by a third party, resulting in the problem of monitoring the quality of teacher students' CK and PCK. Therefore, this study approached this problem by highlighting the necessity for the Taiwanese government to intervene and examine secondary school teacher students' CK and PCK from the following perspectives: (1) Quality assurance in teacher education through a national management system. (2) The effects of market competition and teacher selection. (3) The requirement for teachers' CK and PCK, and (4) teacher credentials. Moreover, after considering the existing assessment technology and the teacher certification exams in other countries, we provided appropriate methods to examine secondary school teacher students' CK and PCK.起始頁-結束頁：167-194資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).00065篇名：從十二年國教核心素養探究中小學體育類科師資合流培育之可能並列篇名：Physical Education Teacher Cultivating System and Curriculum Planning for the 12-Year Basic Education in Taiwan作者：林玫君(Mei-Chun Lin);蔡明學(Ming-Hsueh Tsai);范信賢(Hsin-Hsien Fan);陳儷今(Li-Chin Chen)關鍵字：十二年國教課綱;中小學師資合流培育;素養導向;體育師資培育;12-year basic education curriculum;cultivating a system of teachers in primary and secondary schools;literacy orientation;physical education teachers training期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在評估臺灣中小學體育師資合流培育政策之可行性，並以《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要》為核心，探究中小學體育類科師資培育課程規劃。本研究以問卷調查進行，調查對象為全國中小學各校體育組長，共3,407份有效問卷，並輔以五場次22人次的焦點訪談等方式，質量並進的方式分析。本研究認為：一、我國中小學體育師資合流培育機構單位足以因應現場需求，然就制度面應從學生修課學分數進行調整；二、教育專門課程應結合素養的發展方向，特別在溝通互動素養相關能力如何轉化至體育教學層面仍需努力；三、中小學體育教師在課程實踐方展方向上有若干差異；四、師培機構在體育專門課程設計與課程實施有其調整之空間。最後，研究者依據研究結論提出相關建議，以作為《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要總綱》實施後，中央教育主管機關對於中小學體育類科教師合流培育政策實施之參考依據。英文摘要：This study evaluated the feasibility of the policy of merging the faculty of physical education into primary and secondary schools in Taiwan. Additionally, it explored the curriculum planning for training physical education teachers in primary and secondary schools following the recommendations of the 12-year basic education curriculum. The study was conducted through a questionnaire survey, with a total of 3,407 valid responses. The survey respondents were the heads of the sports teams of their schools. The survey was supplemented by 22 focus interviews conducted during five different occasions, and the quality was analyzed following a consistent method. The study presented the following ideas: (1) Taiwan's primary and secondary school's physical education faculty cultivation institutions are sufficient to meet the needs of the current education system; however, the system should be adjusted according to the student's course scores. (2) The specialized curriculum should be combined with literacy's development direction, especially in the field of communication. A method to integrate interpersonal literacy-related abilities into the physical education level is still required. (3) There are some differences between the direction of curriculum practices of primary and secondary school physical education teachers. (4) The training institutions should adjust their curriculum design and curriculum implementation.起始頁-結束頁：195-222資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).00076篇名：Exploring Policy Intervention for Demand-driven Teacher Preparation: A Case Study in Changing Elementary Education並列篇名：探索需求導向師資培育的政策干預：以變遷中的國民小學教育為例作者：張鈿富(Dian-Fu Chang);張曉琪(Angel Chang)關鍵字：ARIMA;education policy;supply and demand;teacher education;transfer function;自我迴歸平均移動統整模式;教育政策;供給與需求;師資培育;轉換模式期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study aims to explore teacher preparation education over the next decade in Taiwan by reviewing previous policy and praxis. Due to the declining birth rate and teacher retirement, balancing teacher supply and demand has become a crucial issue in elementary education. Based on teacher supply and demand models, we selected elementary education as a case example to tackle this issue. Grounded in the notion of balancing supply-demand, this study demonstrates the process of strategy selection in the designed models. The supply side includes enrollment in teacher training programs in terms of capacity of teacher preparations in elementary schools. The demand side includes elementary schools' capacity, which can reflect if the demand for teachers is decreasing or increasing. Autoregressive integrated moving average and transfer functions were used to build the fittest models to predict the capacities of teachers and teacher preparation programs for elementary education. The results reveal that the teacher preparation programs should be remodeled to take account of the declining birthrate. Even so, the preparation system will still have an oversupply of teachers due to the shrinking requirement for elementary education. This study proposes adjusting the student-teacher ratio following our predicted values, as a tool for policy intervention, to provide more reasonable balancing logics of teacher supply and demand for elementary education. The proposed models may provide examples for exploring the complicated issue of future teacher supply and demand.英文摘要：透過政策與實務的檢視，本研究目的在探討邁向未來的臺灣師資培育。由於出生率下降與教師的退休，師資供需的平衡已成為國民小學教育主要的問題。根據師資的供需模式，本研究選定國民小學階段作為案例探討此一問題。居於供需平衡的概念，本研究以設計的模式來呈現策略選擇的過程。供給面包括師資培育機構的就學人數即國民小學師資培育機構的容納量。需求面包括國民小學的容納量，用以反映此一系統內教師需求的減少或增加。自我迴歸平均移動統整模式與轉換模式用於建立預測國小師資及師資培育機構未來的容納量。研究結果顯示，師資培育機構需要考量少子化而重新調整，然而，國小教育規模的縮小師資培育機構未來仍受困於師資的過度供給。本研究建議根據預測的數值來調整生師比，此為政策干預的一個選項，可以提供國小教育階段師資供需更合理的平衡邏輯。本研究建議的模式可提供一個模擬範例，以探討未來師資供需複雜的問題。起始頁-結束頁：223-250資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).00087篇名：師資生教師信念之縱貫性研究：以任教意願為調節變項並列篇名：Teaching Willingness as a Moderator: A Longitudinal Study on Preservice Teachers' Teacher Belief作者：蕭佳純(Chia-Chun Hsiao)關鍵字：任教意願;教師信念;師資生;縱貫性研究;teaching willingness;teacher belief;preservice teachers;longitudinal study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：在師資的養成教育過程中，對於教師信念的發展極為重要，因此，採用縱貫性研究的角度瞭解師資生的教師信念變化有其必要性。本研究以232位師資生為對象，分析教師信念的成長趨勢，以及實習時的任教意願對於教師信念的初始狀態和成長趨勢的影響。本研究在1年半期間一共進行三次調查，利用階層線性模式的統計技術，分析結果顯示：一、師資生教師信念一共有學生的管教、課程教學計畫、教學評量及學生的學習四個構面，以四個構面來看，都是呈現一線性向下的成長趨勢圖形；二、任教意願對教師信念的初始狀態具有影響；三、任教意願對於課程教學計畫、教學評量的成長趨勢有負向調節的影響，也就是說，任教意願愈高的師資生，其課程教學計畫、教學評量的下降趨勢會較緩。依據上述分析結果，本研究提出相關建議及未來研究的建議。英文摘要：With 232 preservice teachers as research subjects, the present study analyzed the growth trend of teacher belief and the effect of teaching willingness on the initial state and growth trend of teacher belief during practical training. The research survey was conducted three times in one and a half years. An analysis of the hierarchical statistics revealed the following: (1) Preservice teachers' teacher belief comprises four dimensions, namely student discipline, curriculum and teaching planning, teaching and evaluation, and student learning, all of which present a linear downward growth trend. (2) Teaching willingness exerts effects on the initial state of teacher belief. (3) Teaching willingness appears to negatively moderate the growth trend of curriculum and teaching planning and teaching and evaluation. In other words, preservice teachers with higher teaching willingness exhibit a slow declining trend of curriculum and teaching planning and teaching and evaluation. According to the analysis results, the paper propose relevant suggestions for education institutes/teaching practitioners and suggestions for future research.起始頁-結束頁：251-276資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).00098篇名：大學生選課後悔與動機干擾研究：檢驗後悔因應策略的中介效果與社會支持的調節效果並列篇名：Effect of Regret on Motivational Interference Among College Students: Regret Coping Strategy as a Mediator and Social Support as a Moderator作者：陳慧娟(Huey-Jiuan Chen);簡洧晴(Wei-Ching Chien)關鍵字：大學生;社會支持;後悔;後悔因應策略;動機干擾;college students;social support;regret;regret coping strategy;motivational interference期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解大學生選課後悔、因應策略、社會支持與已選擇課程動機干擾的關係，並探討後悔因應策略的中介效果，以及社會支持的調節效果。本研究的參與者為516位就讀臺灣各公私立大學的學生，其中男生241人，女生275人，經立意取樣方式邀請其填答問卷。研究工具包括研究者自編之「後悔量表」、「動機干擾量表」、「後悔因應策略量表」與「社會支持量表」。所得資料以描述性統計、變異數分析、相關與迴歸分析進行統計考驗。主要研究結果如下：一、「後悔」與「動機干擾」有顯著正相關；二、「反芻思考」策略可正向中介後悔對動機干擾的影響；三、「聚焦現在」的認知重新評估策略無法中介後悔對動機干擾的影響；四、「聚焦未來」的認知重新評估策略可負向中介後悔對動機干擾的影響；五、社會支持對後悔與動機干擾間的關係沒有顯著調節效果，但較高水平的情感支持可緩解後悔與動機干擾的正向關聯強度。本研究針對以上結果進行討論與研擬具體建議，以提供教育實務與未來研究之參考。英文摘要：The study explored the relationships among regret, regret coping strategy, perceived social support, and motivational interference during the elective courses; additionally, it examined the mediating and moderating effects of both regret coping strategy and social support on college students. The survey was conducted through purposeful sampling, and 516 college students studying in Taiwan's public and private universities (241 male and 275 female students) were invited to respond to the questionnaires. The research instruments comprised a self-designed regret scale, motivational interference scale, regret coping strategy scale, and social support scale. The data analysis was performed using descriptive statistics, t tests, and regression analysis. The main findings were as follows: (1) A significant positive correlation was noted between regret and motivational interference. (2) The regret coping strategy of rumination fully negatively mediated the relationship between regret and motivational interference. (3) The present-focused reappraisal strategy did not mediate the effect of regret on motivational interference. (4) The future-focused reappraisal strategy negatively mediated the effect of regret on motivational interference. (5) Perceived overall social support did not moderate the effect of regret on motivational interference; however, higher the level of emotional support, stronger the positive correlation between regret and motivational interference. According to the study findings, suggestions were provided to high school teachers, counselors, parents, and future researchers.起始頁-結束頁：277-312資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202006_65(2).00109篇名：東北亞四國英語教育政策之比較並列篇名：Comparison of English Education Policies in East Asian Countries作者：陳浩然(Hao-Jan Chen);鄭雅<U+53CC>(Ya-Shuang Cheng);郭亭吟(Ting-Ying Kuo);林欣儀(Hsin-Yi Lin)關鍵字：英語教育政策;英語教學法;雙語國家;English education policy;English teaching methodology;bilingual nation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究主旨為分析臺、中、日、韓四國之國中小英語政策，解析臺灣2030年雙語國家政策之可行性。透過文獻整理，爬梳四國之國中小英語課程之起始年齡、授課時數、教學方法、單字量、本國籍英語教師與外籍師資、教科書與未來英語教育政策等八大面向，經由比較四國英語政策之相似處與相異處，提供意見供相關政策參酌。研究發現，除了日本於2020年起從國小五年級開始上英語課，臺、中、韓三國之英語政策皆將英語課的起始年齡調整為國小三年級，英語課的教學法皆改為使用以溝通為導向之教學法為教學的核心理念。本研究針對臺灣現行國小英語政策提出五點建議：一、臺灣在國小階段的單字量可再斟酌增加；二、臺灣在國中階段的英語課總時數可調整；三、運用AI人工智慧科技於英語教學中；四、建立更健全的英語師資培訓系統；五、需建立謹慎的外籍師資遴選制度與配套措施。英文摘要：This study examined the English education policies for elementary and junior high schools in Taiwan, China, Japan, and South Korea to evaluate the feasibility of practicing the ”Bilingual Nation by 2030” policy in Taiwan, and the English education policies in these countries were compared. This study focuses on the following eight aspects: the starting age of English education, total English lesson hours, English teaching methodology, assigned English vocabulary, English teacher training, native-English-speaking teacher recruitment, textbooks and teaching materials, and future policy. This study provides two major observations: First, three of the aforementioned countries begin English lessons in Grade 3. However, Japan begins in Grade 5. Second, all of the countries currently employ a communicative approach as their English teaching method. This study further provides five suggestions for future policy: First, more advanced English vocabulary should be taught at the elementary school level. Second, the number of English lesson hours for students should be increased. Third, English teachers in Taiwan should utilize artificial intelligence in their teaching of English. Fourth, training courses for English teachers should be improved. Finally, the processes of recruiting and supporting English teachers from foreign countries should be planned appropriately.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).000110篇名：中華民國華語文政策芻議並列篇名：Towards a Language Policy on Chinese as an Alternative Language in Taiwan, the Republic of China作者：陳振宇(Jenn-Yeu Chen)關鍵字：二語教育;華代語;華語文教育;對外漢語;語言政策;second language education;Chinese as an alternative language;Chinese language education;Chinese as a second language;language policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文檢視中華民國現行的華語文政策，指出一些侷限，並提出幾點政策上的原則及具體的建議。在原則上，本文認為華語文教育應以華語非其目前生活主導語（Chinese as a non-dominant language）的所有學習者為服務對象，以華人的社會文化與生活經驗為政策推廣的重點，透過廣泛多元的生活內容，帶動因地制宜多樣多重標準的華語學習，讓文化走出去、華生走進來。在具體的政策上，本文建議以「華代語」（Chinese as an Alternative Language, CAL）為名，制定「促進國際社會使用華代語」之政策，長期推動華語文成為未來知識儲存與資訊交流的重要載體與媒介，是國際上許多人會想要擁有的語言之一。在此政策方向的引導下，應：一、研議訂定符合語言教育趨勢的華代語語言教育目標；二、強化華語文內容的多樣性（主題與專業）、多元性（年齡與社群）、與廣泛性（多媒體）；三、培育多元多樣的華語文傳播人才；四、發展符合語言教育趨勢及語言教育目標的多樣華語文語言測驗。英文摘要：The present paper examines the current policy of Taiwan, the Republic of China for Chinese as a second language, points out a number of limitations and makes several suggestions on the theoretical/principle level as well as on the concrete policy level. Specifically, we believe that a culturally responsive policy should target all learners/users whose current dominant language is not Chinese but who have the need to make Chinese their dominant language for daily use. The policy should focus on the diverse cultural contents that represent the broad Chinese community and encourage the learning and use of different varieties of Chinese. The goal of the policy is to take the Chinese cultures abroad and bring the Chinese learners in. The specific tasks include writing the National Policy for Promoting Chinese as an Alternative Language (CAL) in the International Community, with the goals of making Chinese the essential vehicle and media of information and knowledge in the future and of making Chinese a language of valuable possession. To achieve the goals, the government need to formulate the educational objectives of CAL that are in line with the trend of international language education, to enrich the contents of the Chinese language with respect to diversity, variability, and comprehensiveness, to prepare a task force with diverse talents and expertise, and to develop tests of CAL that meet the educational objectives and can support the learning of CAL.起始頁-結束頁：27-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).000201篇名：從教師認知、教學資源與教學實踐論國語文教育政策之困境與契機並列篇名：Dilemmas and Opportunities in Mandarin Education Policy Implementation from the Perspectives of Teacher Acknowledgment, Resources, and Practice作者：陳茹玲(Ju-Ling Chen);柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko);蔡佩<U+771E>(Pei-Chen Tsai)關鍵字：教師認知;教學資源;教學實踐;語文教育政策;課程綱要;teacher acknowledgement;teaching resources;teaching practice;mandarin education policy;language curricula期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以12名中學國語文教師為研究對象，就教師認知、教學資源與教學實踐三個面向，進行結構化深度訪談，將所得資料轉譯為口語報告，再進行編碼與歸類分析。期透過教育理想與教育現場兩方對話，對語文教育政策之落實現況更深入理解，並據此提出國語文教育的政策建議。本研究結果顯示：一、教師最關注教師專業，具備高省思與評鑑能力，期待專業成長，盼望將所學轉化運用於課室。不過，教育單位提供的精進課程未能符合需求，在進行時也欠缺適當配套措施，且未能有足夠時間讓教師轉化所學，影響落實的成效。二、國語文課綱揭示的素養有關概念已內化為教師認知，但高層次概念較少被提及。三、各校硬體資源分配不平均，教學運用上仍可再精進。教學文本趨精美多元，但選文未符整體性、脈絡化與多元化，且教師對教材有較大依賴性，少數自編教材亦較少納入核心素養。四、現場教學活動多元，趨向學習者中心。但學生能力、評量與家長期待等因素，影響新式教學的落實。綜上，本研究對國語文教育建議如下：一、植基於教師專業知能與專業成長期待，規劃精進課程，提供課務協助有關配套措施，並培養轉化能力。二、將教師教學想像與更高層次的課綱目標連結，以有效落實課綱精神。三、善用教師的專業與教學經驗，改善教科書選文，同時鼓勵教師教材編撰，使其更系統、多元，符合學生經驗與課綱精神。四、將課綱揭示的高層次能力與評量結合，使教學朝向政策目標，同時增加素養教學意義之社會宣導，以協助教師更順利達成素養教學的目標。英文摘要：Structured in-depth interviews were conducted with 12 junior-high school Mandarin teachers to explore their opinions regarding three dimensions of Mandarin Education Policy-teacher acknowledgment, resources, and practices. The obtained data were first transcribed into verbal protocol, and classification and analysis were subsequently conducted according to a coding schema. Through discussion of the concepts and situation of Mandarin education, in-depth insight was obtained about the policy's implementation. Based on the obtained insights, recommendations are proposed for the future Mandarin Education Policy. The study results revealed the following: First, teachers were most concerned about their professional development, demonstrating their strong abilities of reflection and evaluation, anticipation of professional growth, and goal of translating theory into practice. However, according to teachers, the in-service training provided by existing educational institutes is unsatisfactory, involves inadequate follow-up evaluations, and provides insufficient time for practice. These factors influence the policy's effectiveness. Second, the concepts related to literacy presented in the Mandarin curricula were internalized within teachers' schema, but high-level literacy concepts were rarely mentioned in their reports. Third, the distribution of hardware among schools was reported to be unequal and thus can be improved. Teachers reported that the curriculum textbooks are refined and diverse but fail to form a systematic framework. Finally, teachers claimed that teaching activities are diverse and oriented toward a learner-centered teaching method. However, differences in the abilities of students, assessments, expectations of parents influence their teaching. Based on the above observations, suggestions are presented for framing future policies pertaining to Mandarin education: First, in-service training courses should be based on the professional knowledge and growth expectations of teachers. Moreover, a habit of implementing theory into practical scenarios should be cultivated. Second, teachers should be encouraged to be more creative and undertake courses more closely related to the high level objectives of the curricula. Third, the Mandarin literature expertise and teaching experience of teachers should be utilized to improve textbook selection and compiling. Thus, the texts could be more relevant, diverse, and appropriate for students' experiences. Finally, the high-level literacy abilities that are aims of the curricula should be incorporated into teaching materials and assessment, and promoted among parents to gain more support.起始頁-結束頁：47-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).00032篇名：臺灣閱讀策略教學政策與執行並列篇名：Reading Policy and Reading Instruction in Taiwan作者：柯華葳(Hwa-Wei Ko)關鍵字：悅讀101;課文本位閱讀理解策略教學;國際閱讀素養研究;Reading 101 (MOE);textbook-based approach to reading instruction;progress in international reading literacy study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：基於臺灣學生在PIRLS 2006和PISA 2006的閱讀表現以及當時學校語文教學和閱讀教育狀況，教育部（2008）推出「悅讀101－國民中小學提升閱讀計畫」，計畫期程為2008-2017年，主要工作項目有增加學校圖書量、設置圖書教師、推動閱讀策略教學等。本文將以推動閱讀策略教學為主，透過歷屆PIRLS資料與觀課，檢視10年間以經費補助研發、教師培訓等方式，學校落實閱讀理解教學的狀況。在閱讀策略教學推展上，經由教學實驗成果出版《閱讀理解策略教學手冊》加上專家學者提出「閱讀理解策略成分雙向表」，兩者作為師資培育教材編寫依據，並建立「課文本位閱讀理解教學模式」，設計教案供教師參考。在教師專業成長方面，除在臺灣設立四區閱讀教學研發中心，各自擔起責任縣市師培工作，亦辦理線上初階研習課程，使更多教師認識閱讀理解策略及其教學。推動閱讀策略教學的成果，包括國語科教學時間和跨科閱讀指導時間比例增加、教師每天教導閱讀策略比例增加。然學生在學校獨立閱讀時間並未增加，閱讀範疇的寬廣度則增加不多。透過觀課，研究者發現使用閱讀策略教學的教師，有人用之於無形，有人按部就班，亦不乏有教師只教策略步驟，甚至要求學生有標準答案，忽略使用閱讀策略的目的是為加深文本的理解。這顯示有部分教師對於閱讀理解以及透過閱讀學習和獨立閱讀的信念有再澄清的必要。這也是下一階段推動閱讀策略教學須注意的地方。英文摘要：After the 2006 report of the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study was published in Taiwan, the Ministry of Education released a Reading 101 policy to encourage reading instruction in elementary schools. Few Chinese language arts teachers were familiar with reading strategies before 2006. To promote the teaching of reading and comprehension strategies in elementary classes, a textbook-based approach was initiated for reading instruction. A framework and guidelines were first developed for teaching reading and comprehension strategies in elementary schools. Example lesson plans were then compiled, and an in-service training program was provided or teachers. After implementing the Reading 101 policy for 10 years, teachers' ratings of their daily adoption of reading strategies in their classes increased. Yet, while conducting classroom observations, discussions with the teachers, and feedback analysis for the teachers, the teachers were categorized into the following three groups based on their mastery level of providing instructions on reading comprehension strategies: 1. The teacher demonstrates understanding of the strategy principle and uses appropriate teaching methods to convey the principle to students. 2. The teacher did not demonstrate a full understanding of the strategy principle but often mentioned the terminologies, which were not comprehensible to their students. 3. The teacher demonstrated their understanding of the strategy principle and used very complicated methods to teach their students. Thus, the students were confused about several topics. Some teachers had practical skills but did not understand why reading strategies should be incorporated in their teaching methodology. A follow-up design of professional development should be used to encourage teachers to conduct more discussions pertaining to the process and meaning of reading and practice a teaching methodology that involves reading instruction. Professional group interaction on the significance of reading can shape their teaching practice in the class.起始頁-結束頁：93-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).00043篇名：數位網路時代下媒體素養教育政策再思考並列篇名：Rethinking Media Literacy Policy in the Digital Internet Era作者：林玉鵬(Yu-Peng Lin);王維菁(Wei-Ching Wang);陳炳宏(Ping-Hung Chen)關鍵字：媒體素養;媒體素養教育政策;數位網路時代;media literacy;media literacy policy;digital internet era期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：教育部自2002年公布《媒體素養教育政策白皮書》以來，至今未再提出修正或新版的全國性媒體素養教育政策。然而，現今媒體環境已有相當大的改變，例如從社群媒體到自媒體，乃至新興的人工智慧科技，這些新科技的出現，意味著我們很難再用原有的框架去思考現今的媒體素養教育政策。因此，《媒體素養教育政策白皮書》實有必要修正及更新。本研究透過檢視媒體素養政策文獻和臺灣媒體素養政策回顧，對數位網路時代的媒體素養教育政策提出五個建議方向：一、重新思考「媒體素養」概念，解析新媒體環境生態；二、建立以「創用者」（prosumer）為主的媒體素養－符合現今數位脈絡，閱聽眾不只是被動的閱聽眾，已同時具備生產和接收的角色，因此在政策思維應朝此方向調整；三、建構數位網路時代的資訊判斷能力，以面對全球性的假新聞議題；四、人工智慧、演算法、大數據與傳播知能議題—同步培養防治面和積極面的相關媒體素養，避免再度落入保護主義式的媒體素養；五、建立一貫體系，培養完整師資與持續性的支持系統─政府各部門能通力合作，使媒體素養政策能更有效執行，同時從國家教育、高等教育和社會教育三方面著手，培育種子教師，以建立和培養強大的數位媒體素養教育網絡。英文摘要：A white paper on media literacy policy emphasizing two focal points-liberation and empowerment-was released in Taiwan in 2002. These points appropriately reflected the media environment at that time and indicated the measures that the government should undertake to improve media literacy. However, due to the drastic changes in the digital environment, such as the dissemination of fake news and the use of artificial intelligence, this white paper policy should be modified to address this new environment. The aim of this study was to propose a future direction for media literacy policy. A literature review on media literacy policy demonstrated that the policy approach should include digital innovation. Subsequently, this study reviewed the nationwide media literacy policies implemented in Taiwan since 2002. The review results indicated that these policies gradually shifted focus towards the digital evolution of media but lacked the complete planning required to realize a coherent system. Consequently, this study suggested the following five feasible future directions: (1) shifting the focus of media literacy in policies and understanding the new media environment, (2) developing a concept of a media literacy-based prosumer, (3) developing information judgment literacy in the digital internet era, (4) focusing on the topics of artificial intelligence, algorithms, and big data, and (5) establishing a coherent system that cultivates qualified teachers and is sustainably supported. Finally, this study called for a new white paper to be urgently released.起始頁-結束頁：115-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).00054篇名：英語作為外語的國小畢業生詞彙量、詞彙閾值與閱讀理解並列篇名：Vocabulary Size, Lexical Threshold, and Reading Comprehension of Elementary-School EFL Learners作者：胡翠君(Tsui-Chun Hu);許<U+5A96>茹(Ying-Ju Hsu);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung)關鍵字：英語文課綱;詞彙量;詞彙閾值;閱讀理解;English curriculum guidelines;vocabulary size;lexical threshold;reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究檢視臺灣國小畢業生英語詞彙量與閱讀理解之間的相關性，依此推估臺灣國小畢業生欲展現該學習年段閱讀理解程度所需要達到的詞彙閾值（lexical threshold），並探究臺灣國小畢業生英語詞彙量的分布狀況，以提供具體證據來評估當前國小英語詞彙學習目標（應用300個字詞）是否合理。本研究運用英語能力診斷及認證系統（Diagnosis and Certification of English Competency, DCEC），對1,903名國小畢業生進行詞彙和閱讀兩子測驗施測。本研究有三重貢獻：第一為瞭解臺灣小學生畢業時的詞彙量分布概況；其二為闡明設定詞彙量、詞彙閾值對於設計理想英語文課綱與課程的重要性；其三為彌補英語文課綱詞彙量設定時未採用實徵證據之不足。倡議詞彙量之設定，應從語言技能運用的觀點，先提出各階段所欲達成的語言技能層次，再探討獲致該語言技能層次所需的詞彙閾值（最小詞彙量），最後以該詞彙閾值作為課綱詞彙量設定之參考。英文摘要：In this study, we examined the relationship between the vocabulary size and reading comprehension of Taiwanese elementary-school graduates. We identified a lexical threshold that they need to cross to demonstrate adequate reading comprehension. We investigated the English vocabulary sizes of Taiwanese elementary-school graduates to provide solid evidence of whether the current English vocabulary-learning goal (300 words) is reasonable. We employed the Diagnosis and Certification of English Competency (DCEC) as the main assessment tool and administered the DCEC-Vocabulary Size (DCEC-VS) and DCEC-Reading Comprehension (DCEC-RC) subtests to 1903 elementary-school graduates. This study has three crucial contributions. The first contribution is evidence that explains the distribution of the vocabulary sizes of Taiwanese elementary-school graduates. The second contribution is proof of how crucial vocabulary size and lexical threshold are for an ideal curriculum. The third contribution compensates for a lack of empirical evidence regarding a lexical threshold at the elementary-school level. We propose that the application of language skills should be the main consideration when setting a lexical threshold. The degree to which specific language skills should be acquired at each level should first be proposed, followed by an exploration of the lexical threshold (minimum vocabulary size) required to match goals for specific language skills at each level. Finally, the lexical threshold proposed should be used as reference when determining the vocabulary size in the curriculum.起始頁-結束頁：137-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).00065篇名：母語優先的臺灣本土語言復振教育規劃並列篇名：Mother Tongues First: Planning Taiwanese Native Languages Education Policy for Language Revitalization作者：張學謙(Hak-Khiam Tiun)關鍵字：家庭語言政策;跨語言實踐;語言活力模式;語言教育政策;語言復振;family language policy;translanguaging;language vitality model;language education policy;language revitalization期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：華語挾其政治、經濟、傳播、教育等勢力，入侵本土語言的家庭領域，進而取代傳統本土語言在家庭和社區的地位與功能。本土語言教育實施多年，族群母語卻仍然有流失、轉向使用華語的現象。本土語言持續流失，有必要重新構想臺灣本土語言教育規劃，以邁向本土語言復振。過去的本土語言教育場域集中在學校，缺乏和家庭和社區結合，也欠缺語言復振的理論指導。本文主張本土語言復振需要建構母語優先的雙語政策，透過整合式的語言復振教育模式，規劃家庭、社區和學校的母語防護圈；運用語言活力模式，在意識啟發、學校教育、校外擴展及世代傳承四個復振階段中，進行發展能力、創造機會以及提升意願的工作。本土語言的世代相傳為語言復振的核心，學校為主之語言復振常忽略了家庭語言傳承的面向，因此，本文特別強調家長能夠自我培力的家庭語言政策模式，從語言的意識、管理及實踐等面向，規劃本土語言返家，達成母語的世代傳承。以母語優先、跨語言實踐為方法，將本土語言融入課程當中，使之成為教學語言，開創更為豐富多元的本土語言空間。英文摘要：The family domain as a base of native language has been invaded by Mandarin Chinese and its force in politics, the economy, communication and media, and education. Mandarin has replaced the traditional functions and positions of mother tongues in families and communities. Although mother tongue education has been implemented for years, a shift is occurring from mother tongues to Mandarin. Native language educational planning for language revitalization must therefore be reconsidered. In the past, mother tongue education was provided only in school and lacked support from families and communities and guidance from language revitalization theory. This article proposes that native language revitalization requires the inclusion of bilingual education that prioritizes mother tongues. A comprehensive language revitalization model is employed to establish a guarded section for mother tongues among families, communities, and schools. Applying a language vitality model into planning, developing language abilities, creating language opportunities, and increasing desires for language use can be practiced during each of the four steps of language revitalization-ideological awakening, school education, extension beyond school, and intergenerational language transmission. Bringing mother tongues home is the key to passing down languages throughout generations. It requires the application of family language policy and exploration of language ideology, management, and practice. The method of translanguaging can be adopted in school education so that the use of mother tongues as teaching languages can create additional spaces for mother tongue education.起始頁-結束頁：175-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).00076篇名：臺灣國民教育場域裡的新住民語言教育政策並列篇名：Language Education Policy for New Residents in the Context of Compulsory Education in Taiwan作者：鍾鎮城(Chen-Cheng Chun)關鍵字：108課綱;新住民;跨國銜轉學生;語言教育;語言習得規劃;108 curriculum;new residents;transnational students;language education;language acquisition planning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：新住民議題是近些年來臺灣社會的顯學，早期研究以新住民中的跨國婚姻類型為最，近期研究正逐漸轉向兒童及其多元類別。本研究目的在於探討國民教育場域裡的新住民語言教育發展及其現況。透過文獻探析，首先，發現新住民語言教育研究的重心已從新住民成人轉往新住民學童。次而，本研究將焦點轉向新住民學童語言教育，採宏觀及微觀之二元視角分析108課綱新住民語言教育政策及規劃，從中得出當前政策在語言意識、語言態度及語言認同層面之意涵，以及後續師資培育層面上的挑戰。最後，於文末歸結國民教育場域新住民語言教育之三類主要對象：長於臺灣的新住民二代、一般學童、跨國銜轉學生，同時提出未來在語言學及教育學跨領域研究、語言教育政策長期研究及語言習得規劃研究等三面向的可能走向。英文摘要：Issues related to new residents have become increasingly important in Taiwanese society. The majority of early research has focused on immigration due to international marriage, whereas current research focuses on language education for pupils as well as their diversity. This paper discusses developments in new-resident language education in the context of compulsory education in Taiwan. According to a literature review, studies on new-resident language education have shifted their focus from adults to pupils. In this study, a micro-macro methodological dichotomy was used to analyze new-resident language education policy and planning in Taiwan's 108 Curriculum. The policy's implications for language ideology, language attitude, and language identity were elucidated. Among the various challenges for policy implementation, teacher training is the most critical aspect. Three major groups of people were identified in present-day new-resident language education in the compulsory education context: regular pupils, transnational students, and second-generation new residents who grew up in Taiwan. In terms of future studies, longitudinal research on language education policy, language acquisition planning research, and interdisciplinary research involving the fields of education and linguistics should be conducted.起始頁-結束頁：201-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).00087篇名：設計自我效能、設計興趣和STEM學習表現之相關分析：以時尚設計為例並列篇名：Effectiveness of STEM Education for Design Self-Efficacy and Design Interest in Fashion Design作者：范靜媛(Jing-Yun Fan);葉建宏(Jian-Hong Ye)關鍵字：STEM;時尚設計;設計自我效能;設計興趣;STEM;fashion design;design self-efficacy;design interest期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年來，科學、科技、工程與數學（STEM）教育在世界各地擴展，其學習重點主要分為四個方面，不同教育領域透過不同活動與課程設計推動STEM科際整合教育，然而，鮮少看到STEM教育理念被時尚設計領域採用。本研究基於興趣動機理論，考察了設計自我效能感，設計興趣和學習效果之間的相關性。本研究參與者來自臺灣南部地區某科技大學時尚設計系的197位大學生。在四週共計8小時內（即2小時／週），透過教學的引導，參與者自主學習有關時尚設計領域的STEM知識，並將STEM概念應用至袋包設計實務中；研究者採用VirtualPLS統計軟體驗證研究模型。研究結果顯示，設計自我效能感知較高的參與者具有較高的設計興趣（喜歡、享受和投入），且設計興趣感受較高的學生在學習STEM方面呈現更好的表現。此外，設計自我效能感對STEM學習表現呈現間接正向影響，亦即參與者的設計自我效能感愈高，將學習到愈高水平的STEM知識。英文摘要：Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education is increasingly important. Its importance can be separated into four dimensions. In design education, especially fashion design, STEM education is rare. In accordance with interest theory, this study examined the correlation between design self-efficacy, design interest, and learning effectiveness. An experiment was conducted in a department of fashion design at a technology college in Taiwan. Over four weeks, participants spent two hours weekly learning STEM topics related to fashion design and how to apply them in design practice. Data from questionnaire responses of 197 participants were used to test our research model. Results indicate that participants with higher design self-efficacy had stronger design interest (e.g., enjoyment and engagement). Moreover, better STEM learning was correlated with stronger design interest. In addition, design self-efficacy was positively correlated with STEM knowledge and it is mediated by design interests. Therefore, this study suggests that among students, learning STEM subjects increases design self-efficacy.起始頁-結束頁：221-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).00098篇名：Proactivity Affects Triggered and Maintained Situational Interest and Relates to Perceived Learning Values of Attending a Hands-on Making Contest並列篇名：正向心態對初始興趣、維持興趣及動手做科學創作競賽學習價值之相關研究作者：陳育蒼(Yu-Tsang Chen);戴凱欣(Kai-Hsin Tai)關鍵字：hands-on making;maintained interest;perceived learning values;proactivity;triggered interest;動手做;維持興趣;學習價值;正向心態;初始興趣期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study explored how proactivity triggers and maintains the interest and perceived learning values of students. It surveyed students who participated in a science and technology hands-on making contest. This contest required students to make three miniatures and use them to compete in relay races and tug-of-war competitions. Data from 197 participants were collected analyzed using confirmatory factor analysis with structural equation modeling. Participants consisted of 135 (68.5%) male students and 62 (31.5%) female students. 91 participants were in the fifth grade (46.2%) and 106 were in the sixth grade (53.8%). Results identified positive correlations between proactivity, triggered interest, maintained interest, and perceived learning value. The coefficients were .64, .28, .59, .36, and .47, respectively, and the effect sizes were strong. These results indicated that although failure in miniature design is unavoidable, promoting students' proactivity can reduce failure, facilitate situational interest, and ultimately enhance perceived learning values.英文摘要：本研究旨在探討正向心態對初始興趣、維持興趣及動手做科學創作競賽學習價值之相關。本研究之研究樣本為動手做科技創作競賽之參與學生，該競賽要求學生須在早上設計及製作三隻仿生機械獸，並在下午進行接力與拔河競賽。本研究回收有效樣本197份，以結構方程模式進行驗證性因素分析與模型分析。研究對象有135位男學生（68.5%）和62位女學生（31.5%），九年級學生有91位（46.2%）和六年級學生有106 位（53.8%）。結果顯示正向心態對初始興趣、維持興趣及動手做科學創作競賽學習價值呈顯著正相關。路徑係數分別為.64、.28、.59、.36與.47，且具高效果量。研究結果指出，正向心態有助於個體初始興趣及維持興趣感受之產生，進而提升動手做科學創作競賽之學習價值。起始頁-結束頁：247-270資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).00109篇名：Learning for Duty or Enjoyment: Two Paths to Fulfillment in Learning for Taiwanese High School Students in the Confucian Cultural Context並列篇名：學習是為了義務或快樂：儒家文化脈絡下臺灣高中生學習滿足感的雙元取徑研究作者：王秀槐(Hsiou-Huai Wang);林政佑(Cheng-Yu Lin)關鍵字：Confucian culture;effort-making;learning for duty;learning for enjoyment;self-determination theory;儒家文化;努力投入;義務學習動機;興趣學習動機;自我決定理論期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：65卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：In the context of Self-Determination Theory (SDT), numerous published studies have argued that intrinsic motivation is the key to engaging students with their academic work, improving school performance, and acquiring psychological well-being. By contrast, an increasing body of research focusing on Eastern Asian Confucian societies, including Taiwan, has shed light on the salience of extrinsic motivation centered around role obligation and duty fulfillment. Scholars have argued that extrinsic motivation has a high value of encouraging students' effort making, enhancing their academic performance and providing them with psychological fulfillment. To help settle this theoretical dissonance, this research constructed and validated the two learning paths of Taiwanese students, the first, learning for duty, and the second, learning for enjoyment. A self-developed questionnaire on students' learning motivation, effort-making, academic performance, and acquired satisfaction was administered to 511 students in northern Taiwan. Structural equation modeling generated path analysis and model fit results that demonstrated that Taiwanese students possess two learning motivations followed by two types of psychological fulfillment. Specifically, intrinsic motivation based on personal interest predicted effort-making, with mediation of ”learning satisfaction.” Extrinsic motivation based on duty fulfillment directly predicted effort-making. Furthermore, ”obligation satisfaction” emerged as a result of effort-making, regardless of students' different motivations. These findings regarding different learning motivations and satisfaction are valuable in reshaping the theoretical conception of learning motivation in a Confucian cultural setting. Relevant implications and suggestions for parenting and teaching are discussed.英文摘要：過去許多根據自我決定理論的研究皆指出，內在動機是促使學生努力學習、提高學習表現以及獲得滿足感的關鍵。然而，研究指出，包括臺灣在內的東亞儒家文化圈的國家中，基於盡責的外在動機也是激發學生投入學習的重要因素。為檢視這項理論上的歧義，本研究針對內、外在動機如何促動學習投入並引發不同滿足感，建構並驗證雙元學習動機的取徑。本研究針對511名高中生進行問卷調查，瞭解其學習動機、學習投入、學業表現，以及學習滿足感。經由結構方程式進行路徑分析與整體測量模式的配適度檢驗，本研究發現學生具有雙元的學習動機，並擁有兩種不同的心理滿足感。具體而言，基於個人興趣的內在動機需要透過「學習滿足感」預測學習投入，而基於個人盡責的外在動機能直接預測學習投入。無論內在或外在動機，受試者皆會因為學習投入而產生「道德滿足感」。研究結果對瞭解東亞儒家社會中學生的學習動機深具價值，本研究也進一步針對家庭與學校教育提出建議。起始頁-結束頁：271-296資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202003_65(1).001101篇名：轉化型領導對群體成員企業社會責任價值觀的雙向影響：程序公正與領導者－部屬企業社會責任價值觀一致性的中介效果並列篇名：Dual Influence of Transformational Leadership on Group Members' Corporate Social Responsibility Values: Procedural Justice and Leader-Follower Congruence of Corporate Social Responsibility Values Functioning as Mediators作者：陳儀蓉(Yi-Jung Chen);劉韻僖(Yunshi Liu)關鍵字：企業社會責任;轉化型領導;公正;價值觀一致性;群體投入;corporate social responsibility;transformational leadership;justice;value congruence;group engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：一家企業是否落實社會責任，企業內員工的企業社會責任（corporate social responsibility, CSR）價值觀具有關鍵性的影響。本研究主要目的在於探討促進員工CSR價值觀的前因和機轉。透過整合雙向焦點轉化型領導與群體投入的觀點，本研究探討差異性和群體焦點兩種轉化型領導，對於群體成員CSR價值觀之影響，群體成員程序公正知覺以及群體內領導者—部屬CSR價值觀的一致性，兩者可能的中介效果。本研究以工作小組為單位發放問卷，共回收有效群體樣本136組。結果顯示，差異性轉化型領導對群體成員CSR價值觀的負向影響，群體內領導者—部屬CSR價值觀的一致性具有中介效果；然而，群體焦點轉化型領導對群體成員CSR價值觀的正向影響，群體成員對領導者的程序公正知覺，以及群體內領導者—部屬CSR價值觀的一致性，兩者具有序列的中介效果。英文摘要：Employees' corporate social responsibility (CSR) values within a company have a critical impact on whether that company incorporates CSR in its management. The study purpose is to explore the predictors and mechanisms of enhancing employees' CSR values. Integrating the models of dual-focused transformational leadership and group engagement, the present study investigates the mediating effects that group members' perceptions of their leaders' procedural justice and leader-follower congruence of CSR values within the group might have on the influence of dual-focus transformational leadership on group members' CSR values. By conducting a survey using questionnaires aimed at work groups, this study obtained 136 groups as valid samples. The results showed that differentiated transformational leadership decreased group members' CSR values by means of leader-follower congruence of CSR values within the group. However, group-focused transformational leadership contributed to group members' CSR values through the sequential mediating effects of group members' perceptions of their leaders' procedural justice and leader-follower congruence of CSR values within the group.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202012_20(2).00012篇名：探討指導他人對工作倦怠之影響：檢驗心理資本的中介效果及正念特質的調節效果並列篇名：The Influence of Mentoring Others on Burnout: Investigating the Mediating Role of Psychological Capital and the Moderating Role of Trait Mindfulness作者：高國揚(Kuo-Yang Kao);鄭瀛川(Yen-Chuan Cheng);王豫萱(Yu-Hsuan Wang);謝孟紋(Meng-Wen Hsieh);徐皓馨(Hao-Hsin Hsu);蘇威聞(Wei-Wen Su)關鍵字：指導他人;工作倦怠;心理資本;正念;mentoring others;burnout;psychological capital;mindfulness期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：過往師徒制研究多聚焦師徒關係對徒弟帶來的助益，較少研究探討師徒關係中師父的心理健康。本研究以資源保存理論為基礎，探討指導他人能否提升師父心理資本，進而降低工作倦怠，同時檢驗正念特質對前述關係是否有調節效果。本研究以目前職場角色為師父的全職員工為研究對象進行兩階段問卷調查，回收176筆資料。結果顯示：（1）指導他人對師父的心理資本有正向影響；（2）指導他人可透過心理資本減緩師父的工作倦怠；（3）當師父的正念特質程度較高時，相較於低者，其心理資本與工作倦怠的負向關係變得更強；（4）當師父的正念特質程度較高時，相較於低者，指導他人透過心理資本減緩工作倦怠的間接效果會變更強。最後根據本研究結果，提出實務與後續研究建議。英文摘要：Although accumulated research consistently indicates positive effects of mentoring received for proteges such as increased promotion opportunities and enhanced job satisfaction, relatively little research examines the impacts of the mentors' psychological health in the mentorship. The current study, in line with the conservation of resource (COR) theory, investigates whether mentoring others is related to psychological capital, which in turn impacts burnout. Moreover, the current study examined the moderating role of mindfulness on this indirect relationship. The two-wave data were collected, and 176 full-time employees who serve as mentors were participated in this study for examining our hypotheses. The results demonstrated that (1) mentoring others was positively related to psychological capital, (2) psychological capital mediated the relationship between mentoring others and burnout, (3) the relationship between psychological capital and burnout became more negative when trait mindfulness was high than when trait mindfulness was low, and (4) the indirect relationship between mentoring others and burnout (via psychological capital) became more negative when trait mindfulness was high than when trait mindfulness was low. Theoretical and practical implications were discussed in the current study.起始頁-結束頁：33-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202012_20(2).00023篇名：情緒在每一個服務瞬間：從情感事件理論探討人際公平對服務人員情緒及顧客導向的影響並列篇名：Emotion at the Service Encounter: Apply Affective Events Theory to Exploring the Relationship Among Interpersonal Injustice, Emotion, and Customer Orientation作者：蕭婉鎔(Wan-Jung Hsiao)關鍵字：情感事件理論;經驗取樣法;人際公平;負向情緒;情緒智力;affective events theory;experience sampling method (ESM);interpersonal justice;negative emotion;emotional intelligence期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以經驗取樣法驗證情感事件理論，探討服務人員在與顧客服務接觸時，人際公平、負向情緒以及服務導向行為的關係。本研究有效回收樣本共200位受試者，每位受試者在五個工作天內，共記錄20次服務接觸後的情緒以及行為反應。研究結果發現，每次的服務接觸皆是一次情感事件，服務人員所感受到人際公平皆會為其情緒產生影響，進而影響其服務導向行為。除此之外，本研究亦發現，情緒智力會調節情感事件與負向情緒的關係。英文摘要：Based on affective events theory, we used experience sampling method to explore the relationship among interpersonal justice, negative emotion, and customer orientation behavior in service encounter. Totally 200 samples are collected. Each subject recorded a total of 20 service encounters' emotional and behavioral responses within five working days. We found that every service encounter is an emotional event, and interpersonal justice felt by service providers will affect their emotions, which in turn affect their service oriented behavior. Moreover, emotional intelligence was the moderator in the relationship between event and negative emotion.起始頁-結束頁：63-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202012_20(2).00034篇名：喝了再上？手搖杯飲用量在每日初始負向心情與後續正向心情關係間的修復角色：員工情緒穩定性的干擾效果並列篇名：Getting Something to Drink at Work? The Role of Hand-Shaken Drinks Consumption in the Relationship Between Initial Daily Negative Moods and Subsequent Positive Moods: The Moderating Role of Emotional Stability作者：錢宛玲(Linna Wan-Ling Chien);紀乃文(Nai-Wen Chi);廖學華(Hsueh-Hua Liao)關鍵字：每日心情;手搖杯;情緒穩定性;心情修復;經驗抽樣法;daily mood;hand-shaken drinks;emotional stability;mood regulation;experience sampling method期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：20卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：上班時喝「手搖杯」已蔚為風潮，然過去並未深究員工上班時喝手搖飲的心情修復效果。本研究擬以心情調整理論（mood regulation theory），探討員工經歷負向心情時，可否藉由手搖杯飲用量修復與提升後續正向心情；亦試圖釐清個人情緒穩定性特質對前述手搖杯飲用量心情修復效果的干擾。本研究採經驗抽樣法（experience sampling method），於一週內連續施測五個工作天。每日上午收集員工初始心情資料，下午收集後續心情資料與手搖杯總飲用量，總計有效配對139人，共350筆每日有效樣本。經多層次路徑分析：（1）每日初始負向心情會提高手搖杯飲用量，並提升後續正向心情；（2）情緒穩定性較高的員工，會減弱每日初始負向心情對手搖杯飲用量的正向關係，亦會減弱手搖杯飲用量對後續正向心情的正向關係。英文摘要：”Hand-shaken drink” is trendy and common in Taiwan's workplace; however, studies that explore the correlation between hand-shaken drinks and work mood remain scarce. We explore whether hand-shaken drink consumption helps to elevate employees' mood and examine the moderating roles of emotional stability on the perspective of mood regulation theory. This study employed the experience sampling method to collect daily data twice a day (i.e., 10:00 a.m. and 16:00 p.m.) across five consecutive workdays. Finally, we obtained 350 valid daily data from 139 participants. The results of multilevel path analysis show that: (1) daily initial negative mood increases the consumption of hand-shaken drinks and further enhances daily subsequent positive mood; (2) when the employees' emotional stability is high, the positive correlation between initial negative mood and hand-shaken drink consumption is attenuated; (3) when the employees' emotional stability is high, the positive correlation between hand-shaken drink consumption and subsequent positive mood is attenuated. Theoretical and practical implications are further discussed.起始頁-結束頁：91-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202012_20(2).00045篇名：建言行為與員工創新行為績效：一個探討促進型建言、抑制型建言、領導與部屬交換關係與員工創新行為績效的三階交互作用模型並列篇名：Voice Behavior and Employees' Creative Performance: A Three-Way Interaction Model of Promotive Voice, Prohibitive Voice, LMX and Employees' Creative Performance作者：王議賢(Yi-Hsien Wang);周麗芳(Li-Fang Chou);李芸蘋(Amber Yun-Ping Lee);葉羿廷(Yi-Ting Yeh)關鍵字：促進型建言;抑制型建言;領導與部屬交換關係;員工創新行為績效;三階交互作用模型;promotive voice;prohibitive voice;LMX;employees' creative performance;moderated joint model期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：員工創新行為被認為是組織重要的競爭力之一，因此本研究著眼於建言行為對員工創新行為績效的影響，提出了一個三階交互作用模型（moderated joint model）來解釋其作用機制，即促進型建言與抑制型建言的交互作用與領導與部屬交換關係（leader-member exchange, LMX）對員工創新行為績效的影響。本研究以89組工作團隊共326人為樣本，結果發現促進型建言與抑制型建言兩者的交互作用與員工創新行為績效有負向關係；而LMX則可以正向調節促進型建言與抑制型建言的交互作用對員工創新行為績效的效果。本研究歸納得出，兩種建言型式在創新的歷程中應是相互依賴，利用三階交互作用的模型，將促進型建言、抑制型建言、LMX與員工創新行為績效的關係做出更清楚的理論貢獻，並提出實務上的建議。英文摘要：Employees' creative performance is considered as one of the critical competitiveness of an organization. Therefore, this study focuses on the impact of employees' voice behaviors on their creative performance and proposes a three-way interaction model (moderated joint model), i.e., the interaction between promotive and prohibitive voice and the impact of leader-member exchange (LMX) to explain its mechanism. A sample of 326 employees from 89 workgroups was used and the results showed that the interaction between promotive and prohibitive voice demonstrated a negative relationship with employees' creative performance, while LMX positively moderated the relationship between promotive/prohibitive voice and employees' creative performance. This study concludes that the two types of voice behaviors are interdependent and interacting with each other to have an influence on employees' creative performance. Overall, with the three-way moderated joint model, this study contributes to the existing literature by elaborating the relationship among promotive voice, prohibitive voice, LMX, and employees' creative performance. We also make some practical implications in the end.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202006_20(1).00016篇名：勉強出勤和員工創新行為之曲線關係：積極動機與消極動機之調節效果並列篇名：The Curvilinear Relationship Between Presenteeism and Employee Innovative Behavior: The Moderating Role of Approach and Avoidance Motives作者：樊學良(Hsueh-Liang Fan);陸洛(Luo Lu)關鍵字：勉強出勤;創新行為;積極動機;消極動機;presenteeism;innovative behavior;approach motive;avoidance motive期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：勉強出勤對員工行為表現的影響，逐漸在組織行為和人力資源管理領域被獲得重視；但是，迄今未有研究探究勉強出勤和員工創新行為的關係。本研究旨在探討及驗證勉強出勤和員工創新行為的曲線關係，以及不同動機類型（積極動機、消極動機）的調節效果。以320位職場人員進行兩個時間點研究之分析結果顯示，勉強出勤和員工創新行為呈現U型曲線效果，且兩類動機各以不同方式調節此一曲線關係。在高積極動機條件下，勉強出勤和創新行為呈現更陡峭的U型曲線關係；相對的，在高消極動機條件下，勉強出勤和創新行為則轉變為倒U型且較平坦的曲線關係。最後，本研究根據研究發現討論其理論與實務意涵。英文摘要：Although the impact of presenteeism (i.e., showing up for work when one is ill) on employees' work outcomes has attracted theoretical and empirical attention in the field of organizational behavior and human resource management, no study has explored its effect on employees' innovative behavior. The purpose of this study was to examine the curvilinear relationship between presenteeism and employees' innovative behavior, and the moderating role of approach and avoidance motives. Using data from 320 employees collected at two time points, we found a U-shaped relationship between presenteeism and innovative behavior. Moreover, approach and avoidance motives moderated the curvilinear relationship in different ways. The curvilinear U-shaped relationship is steeper among those with high approach motive; on the contrary, the curvilinear relationship became a flatter inverted U-shaped one under a high avoidance motive condition. The implications of this study and directions for future research are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：27-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202006_20(1).00027篇名：The Moderating Roles of Information Sources and Attributes on the Positive E-Information-Organizational Attraction Relationship並列篇名：訊息來源與訊息屬性於正向網路訊息及組織吸引力關係之調節角色探討作者：陳信宏(Forrence HsinHung Chen);陳建丞(Chien-Cheng Chen);陳靜諮(Ching-Tzu Chen)關鍵字：organizational attraction;e-information;information sources;information attributes;experimental design;組織吸引力;網路訊息;訊息來源;訊息屬性;實驗設計期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Attracting prospective job applicants in the initial phase of recruitment is important for employers. Past research has shown that job-relevant and organization-relevant information are determinants of perceived organizational attraction. This study adopts a between-subjects design by manipulating e-information valence (positive, negative, and normal), information source (a corporate website, a government website, and an Internet forum), and information attribute (instrumental and symbolic) to examine the boundaries of the effects of positive e-information on organizational attraction. Excluding the two scenarios of negative e-information from corporate websites (businesses do not normally reveal negative information on their own websites), 16 scenarios were tested using 164 participants. Results partially support the hypotheses: Positive e-information is positively related to organizational attraction. Furthermore, positive e-information on government websites most strongly influences organizational attraction, with company websites having the next strongest influence. This article concludes with a discussion of the practical implications, limitations, and directions for future research.英文摘要：招募初期吸引優秀求職者非常重要。過去研究證實，工作與組織相關的資訊對求職者而言，為組織吸引力形成的重要決定因子。本研究設計三種網路訊息（正向、負向與普通）×三種訊息來源（公司網頁、政府網頁與線上論壇）×兩種訊息屬性（工具性與象徵性）來探討網路訊息對求職者形成組織吸引力過程中的脈絡因子效果，同時為符合真實的公司情境（一般不會在自身網頁上揭露負向訊息），最後有16種實驗情境與164筆資料。研究結果顯示，正向網路訊息會促發正向組織吸引力，且該關係在政府網站上傳遞正向訊息時最強、公司網站次之，而透過線上論壇時最弱。本研究結論探討的相關研究發現對理論與實務的貢獻，並提出本研究相關限制與未來研究方向。起始頁-結束頁：51-73資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202006_20(1).00038篇名：深層演出與情緒耗竭的關係：關係能量及情緒智商之角色並列篇名：The Relationship Between Deep Acting and Emotional Exhaustion: The Roles of Relational Energy and Emotional Intelligence作者：林少龍(Shao-Lung Lin);繆敏志(Min-Chih Miao)關鍵字：情緒勞動;深層演出;情緒耗竭;關係能量;情緒智商;emotional labor;deep acting;emotional exhaustion;relational energy;emotional intelligence期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究探討及檢驗深層演出、關係能量、情緒耗竭以及情緒智商之關係，解釋深層演出如何與何時分別基於努力觀點及人際互動機制影響情緒耗竭。採用第一線員工為研究對象，透過網路問卷收集資料，共計回收有效問卷322份，研究結果顯示：（1）深層演出直接正向影響情緒耗竭（努力觀點）；（2）深層演出經由關係能量間接負向影響情緒耗竭（人際互動機制）；（3）情緒智商會增強深層演出經由關係能量負向影響情緒耗竭的間接關係。本研究討論理論與實務上之意涵，同時對於未來研究方向提出建議。英文摘要：The study explores and examines the relationships among deep acting, relational energy, emotional exhaustion and emotional intelligence that explain how and when deep acting affects emotional exhaustion, based on the effort perspective and interpersonal mechanisms separately. We administered surveys via the Internet to collect data from 322 front-line employees. The results reveal: (1) deep acting positively relates to emotional exhaustion directly (effort perspective); (2) deep acting negatively affects emotional exhaustion indirectly via relational energy (interpersonal mechanism); (3) the emotional intelligence enhances the negative effects of indirect relationship between deep acting and emotional exhaustion via relational energy. The study discusses theoretical and practical implications and provides suggestions for the future study.起始頁-結束頁：75-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202006_20(1).00049篇名：組織中的認定威脅與利社會行為：心理安全感與問題解決反芻之角色研究並列篇名：Identity Threat and Prosocial Behavior in Organization: The Role of Psychological Safety and Problem-Solving Rumination作者：郭建志(Chien-Chih Kuo)關鍵字：認定威脅;心理安全感;利社會行為;問題解決反芻;identity threat;psychological safety;prosocial behavior;problem-solving rumination期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：20卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究提出心理安全感的中介機制來鏈結組織中的認定威脅與利社會行為間的關係，並檢驗問題解決反芻在此中介歷程中的調節角色。本研究採用兩階段的資料搜集方式，以312位全職工作者為受試者，結果發現認定威脅會降低個體的心理安全感，進而阻礙其利同事或利組織社會行為的展現，顯示認定威脅會使個體主觀評估身處的組織環境難以自由地表達自我，並表徵在其後的工作行為面向上。再者，本研究也發現問題解決反芻可以減緩認定威脅的負向作用效果，因為個人經驗的再評估與問題解決策略的發展，皆有助個體用來因應認定威脅經驗，降低個人心理安全感與利社會行為的傷害。最後，本研究依據上述研究結果，進行理論面與實務面的探討。英文摘要：This study proposes a mediating mechanism of psychological safety to link the relationship between identity threat and prosocial behavior in the organization, and further to test the moderating role of problem-solving rumination in this mediating process. A two-wave data collection method was used and 312 fulltime workers were recruited. The results showed that identity threat reduced the individuals' psychological safety, which in turn hindered their pro-peer behavior or pro-organization behavior. Employees with higher identity threat experience would be difficult to express their self-concept freely, which further reflected on the behavioral representations. In addition, this study also found that problem-solving rumination mitigated the negative effects of identity threat, since the re-appraisal of past personal experience and the development of problem-solving tactics can help employees to cope with identity threat effectively. Finally, based on the above research results, this study provides in-depth theoretical and practical discussions.起始頁-結束頁：101-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202006_20(1).000501篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：楊文山;溫在弘期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：61期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press2篇名：高等教育的非金錢回報：論高等教育與非金錢收入工作特性、健康與福祉及成癮行為之關聯性並列篇名：The Non-Pecuniary Returns of Higher Education: The Associations Between Higher Education and Non-Pecuniary Related Job Characteristics, Health, Well-Beings, and Addictive Behaviors作者：劉家樺(Chia-Hua Liu)關鍵字：教育成就;教育非金錢報酬;職業聲望;健康;成癮行為;educational attainment;non-pecuniary returns of higher education;occupational prestige scores;health;addictive behaviors期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：61期出版年：2020中文摘要：理論上，教育可被視為一種投資。文獻在討論教育金錢報酬已累積豐盛的成果，但著墨在高等教育非金錢報酬仍然有限。目前國內文獻尚未有系統性檢視高等教育的非金錢報酬。本文使用「臺灣青少年成長歷程研究」資料，檢視學歷與非金錢收入工作特性、健康與福祉及成癮行為的關係。學歷分為專科以下、大學和碩博士。非金錢收入工作特性包括目前是否有工作、職業聲望、職業社經地位、工作福利、工作與所學的相關程度、工作滿意度；健康與福祉涵蓋健康、快樂、生活滿意度；成癮行為包括抽菸、喝酒。針對二元和連續型被解釋變數、多元類別被解釋變數，實證模型分別採用一般迴歸模型、多元邏輯迴歸模型。結果顯示，學歷為大學以上者目前有工作的比例高於專科以下者。相較專科以下，大學和碩博士者較可能從事職業聲望、職業社經地位和福利較佳的工作，其工作與所學的專長領域較為密切。其次，大學和碩博士者在健康評價較高，成癮行為的比例較低。雖然單獨來看，每一項實證結果無法直接證明高等教育非金錢報酬的存在，但結合所有實證結果來看，高等教育應有提供勞動市場內外非金錢收入的好處。這些結果有助於我們理解，即使高等教育的金錢報酬呈下降趨勢，人們對高等教育需求仍舊強烈。英文摘要：In economics theory, education is viewed as a financial investment. The financial returns on education are well documented, but attention to the non-pecuniary returns of higher education is still very limited in the literature. Moreover, this issue has not been systematically studied based on a Taiwanese sample. This paper uses the Taiwan Youth Project to examine the relationships between highest degree and non-pecuniary-related job characteristics, health, well-being, and addictive behaviors. Diplomas are classified into below college, bachelor's, master's and Ph.D. The non-pecuniary job characteristics considered in the paper are current job status, occupational prestige scores, occupational socioeconomic status scores, work benefits, to what degree one's job is related to one's major, and job satisfaction. The measures of well-being include being happy about one's life and satisfaction with life. The addictive behaviors are smoking and drinking. The paper uses an ordinary least squares regression model when the dependent variable is binary, but a multinomial logit model when the dependent variable has multiple categories. Results indicate that compared with those without a college degree, individuals with a college degree or above have a higher likelihood of having a job. They are likely to work in a job with a better occupational prestige score and occupational socioeconomic status score, and have more work benefits and a job more closely related to their field of expertise. In addition, their subjective health evaluation is better, and they are less likely to have addictive behaviors relative to those without a college diploma. Taken individually, each piece of the empirical results is not sufficient to prove the existence of non-pecuniary returns of higher education, but combined, all the results suggest that higher education brings non-pecuniary benefits both inside and outside of the labor market. These results help us understand one of the possible reasons behind the phenomenon that even though the pecuniary returns of higher education are declining, people's demand for higher education is still strong.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202012_(61).00013篇名：Intergenerational Influences, Educational Expectation, and Transition to Parenthood Among Young Taiwanese Adults並列篇名：晚生或不生？探討教育期望對生育年齡的影響作者：馬國勳(Josef Kuo-Hsun Ma);伊慶春(Chin-Chun Yi)關鍵字：transition to parenthood;first birth;educational expectation;intergenerational relationships;life course;由青年邁入成年;初生;教育期望;代間關係;生命歷程期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：61期出版年：2020中文摘要：Social scientists have long been interested in how an increase in educational status affects childbearing intentions and behavior, leading to the postponement of parenthood. What has been missing is information on whether attitudes toward education at earlier ages predict fertility outcomes, and on how parents' attitudes affect children during their transition to adulthood. Using longitudinal panel data from the Taiwan Youth Project (TYP) between 2000 and 2017, we examine the relationship between adolescents' educational expectations and the timing of their entry into parenthood. Aside from children's own attitudes, we also address how parents' attitudes with respect to a child's education influence this same timing. We find that higher educational expectations contribute to a delay in parenthood or a decision to have fewer children. In addition, parents' educational preferences for their child have an independent effect on the child’s timing of entry into parenthood. There are notable gender differences regarding the relationship between educational attitudes and the transition into parenthood. Specifically, parents' attitudes have greater bearing on men than women. Young adult men whose parents expect them to attend a graduate program and complete a post-bachelor's degree have the lowest rate of entering parenthood at a younger age. And young adult women with an expectation of receiving a bachelor's degree (but not a post-bachelor's degree) are more likely to postpone the timing of transition into parenthood. The implications of these findings are discussed in the conclusion.英文摘要：過去已有許多研究探討教育與生育兩者的關係，並提供豐富的研究成果。文獻指出，教育的擴張提升了個人教育地位，改變其生育意願與生育行為，延遲了「開始為人父母」（entry into parenthood）的年紀，形成「晚生或不生」的現象。然而至今尚未有足夠的實證研究，探討個人在早期（青少年）階段的教育態度與抱負如何影響其成年後的生育行為。同樣的，儘管文獻已指出父母的教育期望會影響子女的學業成就，但是否會進一步影響子女日後的生育抉擇與行為，相關的研究至今仍付之闕如。本研究合併臺灣青少年成長歷程研究2000-2017年的資料，探討青少年於國中階段的教育期望、是否會影響其成年後生第一胎的年齡（即初次為人父母的年紀），也同時檢視父母對國中子女的教育期望是否影響其成年後的初育年齡。在控制其他因素後，本文發現：一、教育期望愈高者愈有可能晚生或不生。二、父母親的影響效果對男性比較大，當父母親期待兒子大學畢業後繼續念研究所或深造，兒子愈可能晚生或不生。三、對女性來說，如果期望取得大學文憑，愈可能晚生或不生；但如果女性期望大學畢業後繼續念研究所或深造，對其生育未有影響。本文將從傳統與現代性別意識規範兩者的交織影響、高教擴張與職場性別階層化等層面來解釋這些差異。起始頁-結束頁：51-96資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202012_(61).00024篇名：從家務分工看性別平權的知行落差並列篇名：Attitude-Behavior Gap of Gender Equality in the Division of Household Labor作者：翁康容(Kang-Jung Weng);楊靜利(Ching-Li Yang);任軒立(Syuan-Li Renn)關鍵字：家務分工;性別角色態度;知行落差;division of housework;gender role attitude;attitude-behavior gap期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：61期出版年：2020中文摘要：雖然社會整體性別角色態度逐漸走向平權，女性的家務負擔仍明顯高於男性，兩種現象的背離，凸顯了性別角色態度的「知」與從事家務的「行」之間的落差。本研究以2002與2012年臺灣社會變遷基本調查資料回答三個問題：第一，家務分工與性別角色態度有何變化，從而帶出什麼家務知行樣態與變遷？第二，什麼因素影響家務的知行落差？第三，透過與家務分工影響因素的比較，對於家務分工可以帶來哪些更深入的認識。研究結果顯示：一、無論男女，性別角色態度都朝現代開放的方向發展；男性負擔的家務比例增加，但是主因來自於整體家務從事時間變少，而非男性家務時數的增加；從出生世代的的角度顯現出「知行落差」擴大，再從「知行落差」內部差異的變化來看，女性知行落差的現象更不樂觀。二、「時間可得論」與「相對資源論」對於男性與女性的家務知行樣態皆具解釋力，特別是相對資源論的證據更為明確。工作時間愈高、收入愈高時，已婚男性愈不容易、已婚女性愈容易成為「無知行落差─現代」者。三、家務分工與家務知行樣態影響因素的分析與比較顯示，教育雖被認為可促進家務分工的平權，但卻也可能帶來家務知行落差，而在檢視的所有變項中，唯提高女性收入才能同時帶來家務分工的平權也降低知行落差的出現。英文摘要：Past research has shown that gender role attitude plays an important part in the division of domestic work. However, as gender role attitudes become more egalitarian, the division of housework remains traditional, with women still doing most of the work. The two opposite trends signify the attitude-behavior gap of housework. Using data from the Taiwan Social Change Survey 2002 and 2012, we aim to answer three questions. First, how has the division of domestic work, gender role attitude, and the gap between them changed? Second, what are the factors influencing the attitude-behavior gap? Third, what can we learn through the comparison of the factors influencing the division of housework and the attitude-behavior gap? The results show that (1) gender role attitudes are becoming more egalitarian for both men and women. Men’s share of housework is rising due to a decrease in total housework time, not their increase time on housework. The attitude-behavior gap has worsened more for women than men, due to a higher increase of women possessing modern gender role attitudes and a higher share of housework. (2) Available time and relative resources theories, especially the latter, explain the attitude-behavior types both for men and women. Higher work time and income lead to a decrease and increase for men and women respectively in being the ”no attitude-behavior gap modern” type. (3) Although education has been recognized as bringing an egalitarian housework division, it also brings an attitude-behavior gap. Among all the factors examined, women's income shows a crucial influence on both bringing gender egalitarianism to housework and decreasing the attitude-behavior gap at the same time.起始頁-結束頁：97-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202012_(61).00035篇名：婚姻、家庭與生育倫理並列篇名：Marriage, Family, and the Ethics of Procreation作者：葉明叡(Ming-Jui Yeh);劉豐佾(Feng-Yi Liu)關鍵字：人口政策;生育政策;超低生育率;應用倫理;公共衛生倫理;population policy;pro-natalist policy;lowest-low fertility;applied ethics;public health ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：61期出版年：2020中文摘要：近期的人口學研究多已指出，臺灣生育率低落，主要因素乃為結婚率降低，而非已婚夫婦決定不生育所致。應對此問題之生育促進政策，可能基於兩種不同的倫理想像，分別是基於「婚姻—家庭」預設的「擁婚生育政策」及不需此預設的「非婚生育政策」。本文論證，「非婚生育政策」是較能夠降低生育障礙的倫理立場，它使生育更接近一種真正自由的選擇，讓更多想要生育但因為無法達成婚家門檻的人們選擇生育。英文摘要：Recent studies have shown that the low marriage rate, instead of the widely presumed unwillingness to procreate among married couples, is the major contributor to the low fertility rate in Taiwan. The policies addressing this issue may be grounded on two ethical imaginations, namely the ”pro-marriage account,” with the assumption that marriage, the formation of family, and procreation should be bonded together, and the ”non-marriage account,” without this assumption. This essay argues that the ”non-marriage account” is an ethically preferable alternative, as it could make procreation a more genuine and autonomous choice, facilitating procreation by more people who would not otherwise overcome the marriage-family barriers under the ”pro-marriage account.”起始頁-結束頁：141-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202012_(61).00046篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：章英華;溫在弘期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：60期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press7篇名：已婚女性相對收入與家庭滿意度並列篇名：Married Women's Relative Income and Family Satisfaction作者：于若蓉(Ruoh-Rong Yu);陳婉琪(Wan-Chi Chen)關鍵字：已婚女性相對收入;性別角色態度;家庭滿意度;家庭動態調查;married women's relative income;gender-role attitudes;family satisfaction;Panel Study of Family Dynamics期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：60期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文探討「夫妻相對收入」對已婚女性家庭滿意度的影響。具體提問為：在臺灣的雙薪家庭中，已婚女性是否會因工作收入相對於配偶的收入提高，而影響到她對家庭生活的滿意度？本文採用「家庭動態調查」多年期的追蹤資料，以年齡介於25-59歲的已婚女性為對象，探討已婚女性相對收入對家庭滿意度的影響。分析結果顯示，隨著已婚女性相對收入的提高，其家庭滿意度呈現先提升而後降低的倒U形影響效果，且家庭滿意度在已婚女性與配偶收入接近時達到最高。此外，前述倒U形影響僅存在於非傳統性別角色態度樣本；在傳統性別角色態度樣本中，已婚女性相對收入未見顯著影響。對於不同出生世代的分析則發現，對1970年之前出生的女性來說，已婚女性相對收入對家庭滿意度並無顯著影響。以上倒U形關係僅出現在1970年以後出生的世代身上，顯示已婚女性相對收入對家庭滿意度的影響已悄然改變。英文摘要：This paper focuses on the association between the married women's relative income and family satisfaction for married women in Taiwan. Using panel data collected from the Taiwan Panel Study of Family Dynamics survey, this study analyzes the effects of the married women's relative income on family satisfaction among women aged 25 to 59. The findings indicate that the married women's relative income exhibits an inverted U-shaped effect on her family satisfaction. When the married women's income is near her husband's, the married women's family satisfaction reaches the highest level. Further analysis reveals that the inverted U-shaped effect only exists in the younger cohort or subgroup with non-traditional gender-role attitudes. This paper contributes not only to the development of relevant research but also to our understanding of the effects of changes in the married women's relative income on her family satisfaction.起始頁-結束頁：1-41資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202006_(60).00018篇名：臺灣民<U+8846>幸福感變動趨勢：世代、年齡及人格的影響並列篇名：Change in Subjective Well-Being During Adulthood in Taiwan: The Impact of Cohort, Age, and Personality作者：劉蓉果(Rong-Kou Liu);朱瑞玲(Ruey-Ling Chu)關鍵字：大五人格特質;生命歷程觀點;主觀幸福感;多階層成長模式;華人家庭動態調查;Big Five;life course perspective;subjective well-being;hierarchical growth model;Panel Study of Family Dynamics期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：60期出版年：2020中文摘要：為瞭解臺灣民眾主觀幸福感的變動趨勢與相關影響因素，本研究利用華人家庭動態調查（Panel Study of Family Dynamics）於2007-2018年期間九個波次的追蹤資料（panel study），共5,994位受訪者（出生於1935-1989年），合計38,039筆資料，採取多階層成長模式（hierarchical growth model）分析，得到以下結果：一、當代臺灣民眾的幸福感與出生世代呈現U型曲線，即年輕世代與年長世代的幸福感較高，中年世代較低，而最低點出現於60歲左右；二、一般而言，每個人隨年齡增長，幸福感受也逐年提高。但是年輕世代和中年世代變化不大，高齡世代幸福感的增加更顯著；三、相關人口變項中，性別、教育程度、婚姻、工作及健康狀態分別與幸福感受有顯著關聯；四、人格特質可以解釋幸福感狀態的個別差異，但與幸福感的變動無顯著相關，顯示人格特質為幸福感穩定的基礎；五、控制人口變項與人格特質影響之下，幸福感的世代差異與年齡增進等效果仍顯著，可以呼應生命歷程觀點（life course perspective）。英文摘要：This study examined the change in subjective well-being (SWB) during adulthood among Taiwanese people. Using data from nine waves of ”Panel Study of Family Dynamics” from 2007-2018 (born 1935-1989, n = 5,994, 38,039 data points), hierarchical growth models were fitted to examine the age-cohort differences and individual aging effect on SWB, as well as factors that may account for the change in SWB. Results showed that older cohorts and younger cohorts had better SWB than middle-aged cohorts (a U-shaped pattern) with the minimal SWB at the age around 60. The individual aging effects on SWB were observed with improvement, especially more remarkable in older cohorts. Gender, education, marital status, work status, physical health, together with personality traits, were identified to be significantly associated with SWB. Specifically, traits contributed to the individual differences but not personal change on SWB. Moreover, controlling the demographic and trait variables, cohort and aging effects on SWB remained significant, reflecting the life course perspective.起始頁-結束頁：43-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202006_(60).00029篇名：Early Taiwanese-Chinese Immigrants in Hong Kong: Social and Cultural Adaptation並列篇名：早期香港臺灣移民的社會文化適應作者：姜蘭虹(Lan-Hung Nora Chiang)關鍵字：early Taiwanese immigrants;Hong Kong;economic integration;social-cultural adaptation;gender roles;早期香港臺灣人;香港;經濟融入;社會文化適應;性別角色期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：60期出版年：2020中文摘要：Despite burgeoning research on middle-class immigrants to developed countries, early immigrants from newly industrialized countries have not been well studied. This research takes a close look at 48 Taiwanese immigrants who moved to Hong Kong between 1965 and 2002 to study their reasons for immigration, their lived experiences (cultural and social dimensions, and the challenges they encountered), and their sense of belonging (identity, sense of home, and belonging). Absence of statistics required the author to conduct fieldwork to obtain background information and ethnographic data based on face-to-face interviews of immigrants from Taiwan to Hong Kong. Three major categories of immigrants are included in the sample: Taiwanese women married to Hong Kong men, highly skilled Taiwanese who entered Hong Kong with working visas, and those who lived in Hong Kong while conducting business in Mainland China. Difficulties with the local dialect (Cantonese), human relationships (renqingwei, 人情味) and cultural practices form major barriers to their adaptation. Over time, these early immigrants have settled down, developed successful careers, made Hong Kong their home, and contributed to the economic, social and cultural landscape of Hong Kong society, despite vast differences in culture.英文摘要：既有遷移研究中對於移民至已開發國家的中產階級移民有著大量的討論，而來自新興工業化國家的早期移民卻相對地缺乏關注。在缺乏官方統計資料的前提下，本研究採取質性方法蒐集第一手資料，作者深度訪談了1965-2002年間移居香港的48位臺灣人，目的是瞭解其移民原因、生活經歷（文化與社會層面、所遇到的挑戰），以及認同與歸屬感。訪談對象包括三大類移民：與香港男性結婚的臺灣女性、持工作簽證進入香港的臺灣技術工作者，以及住在香港但於中國內地經商的臺灣人。本研究發現，早期香港臺灣人在適應上的主要困難，包括：語言障礙、缺乏人情味的互動、文化習俗上的差異。儘管如此，隨著時間的流逝，這些早期臺灣移民大多已經在香港安定下來，發展了成功的事業，視香港為自己的家園，並對香港的經濟、社會和文化做出了一定貢獻。起始頁-結束頁：95-143資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202006_(60).000301篇名：編輯報告並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：衣若蘭期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：47期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：i-v資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室2篇名：神鬼殊途：「東澳石牌公」與「旗津淑女墓」的性別分析並列篇名：Becoming Gods or Ghosts? A Gender Analysis Comparing ”Dongao Shipai Gong” and ”Qijin Ladies' Tomb”作者：顧玉玲(Yu-Ling Ku)關鍵字：工殤碑;集體記憶;性別分工;石牌公;二十五淑女墓;鬼魂崇拜;labor memorials;collective memories;gender division of labor;Shipai Gong;Twenty-five Ladies' Tomb;ghosts worship期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：47期出版年：2020中文摘要：紀念碑作為集體記憶的物質化呈現，成為現在與過往溝通的重要載體。「東澳石牌公」及「旗津淑女墓」祭拜的都是因職業災害而死亡的工人，因哀悼工殤而立碑紀念。歷經數十年的社會經濟、文化流變，前者逐漸神格化成為司機拈香祈佑平安的對象，1998年由民眾集資設立「開路先鋒爺廟」，正式升級為神祇供人參拜；後者則遭妖魔化為勾引年輕男性的未婚女鬼，視為陰森墓地，2008年由婦女團體結合地方政府改建為「勞動女性公園」。舊碑新蓋，以現有的社會視框重新定義集體記憶。本文比較被神格化進而廟宇化的「東澳石牌公」，與遭妖魔化又除魔化的「旗津淑女墓」，以台灣民間信仰中的鬼魂崇拜觀點，探究祭祀中的性別差異，映照不同時代的價值投射。英文摘要：As the concrete representation of collective memory, monuments serve to communicate with the past. Both ”Dongao Shipai Gong” and ”Qijin Ladies' Tomb” were set up to mourn those who died some decades ago in the course of their work, the former men who died building the road along the mountainous east coast of Taiwan, and the latter 25 factory girls who died in a 1973 ferry capsizing in Kaohsiung. After decades of social and cultural change, the former gradually became worshipped by vehicle drivers, even officially treated as local gods in the Worker Pioneer Temple after 1998; the latter were demonized as unmarried female ghosts seducing young men, and their cemetery was grim and dark until it was rebuilt as the Women Workers' Memorial Park in 2008. The old monuments, newly rebuilt, redefine the collective memory of the past in the social frame of the present. This essay compares the deification of Dongao Shipai Gong with the demonization of Qijin Ladies' Tomb from the ambivalent perspective of ghost worship in Taiwanese folk religion, exploring the gender differences in devotional practices which might reflect the value projections of different eras.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.202012_(47).013篇名：政治意志與社會資本對性別平等機制的影響：以柯文哲市長與台北市女委會為例並列篇名：The Impact of Political Will and Social Capital: A Case Study of Mayor Ko Wen-je and the Taipei City Committee of Women's Rights作者：黃淑玲(Shu-Ling Hwang)關鍵字：性平會;性別平等政策機制;國家女性主義;婦女運動;同志運動;女性主義官僚;gender equality committee;gender equality policy mechanism;state feminism;women's movements;LGBT movements;femocrat期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：47期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以台北市柯文哲市長與第10、11屆（2015-2019）台北市女性權益促進委員會（女委會）為研究對象，提出一組分析政治意志與社會資本存在和強弱的指標，探討兩者之間的連結與變化如何影響女委會的運作效能，以及如何受到市議會、婦運／同志團體、反同志團體、相關法律與社會輿論等政治環境因素的影響。本文主要有三個發現：（1）柯市長在政治意志的四項指標低落，包括：缺乏性平進步價值，處理同志教育議題立場搖擺；大會出席率極低，不願意親自主持；沒有特別指示與獎懲措施，導致女委會難以推動跨局處性平政策；忽視性別平等辦公室（性平辦）人力需求與監督機制之建立。（2）這兩屆女委會的民間委員人數增多且團體成員多元，但無法建立較強的結合型社會資本，與性平辦、局處也發展不出橋接型社會資本，影響推動性平政策的成效。（3）個別民間委員發展出體制內外同步交攻的抗爭策略，企圖阻止修改性別平等教育委員會設置要點，聘任反同志家長團體擔任委員。本文最後提出理論發展與建立問責制度的建議。英文摘要：This article examines the operational effectiveness of the 10th and 11th Taipei City Committee of Women's Rights (TCCWR). The article elaborates an analytical framework that identifies a set of characteristics/ indicators of political will and social capital, and elaborates external political factors that influence the expression and intensity of Ko's political will. The conceptual model traces how the links between political will, social capital, and external factors have affected the TCCWR's efforts to promote gender equality policies. There are three main findings: (1) Ko's four indicators of political will were all very low: lack of progressive values of gender equality; extremely low attendance rate and reluctance to preside over the TCCWR's meetings; no special instructions, rewards and punishments, making it difficult for the TCCWR to initiate cross-departmental policies; and neglect of the need for manpower and an oversight mechanism for the Gender Equality Office (GEO). (2) The increase in the number and diversity of commissioners in these two terms prevented them from building stronger bonds and social capital among themselves. Ko's lack of attention also impeded the commissioners building social capital to liaison with the GEO and public agencies, which in turn undermined the TCCWR's effectiveness. (3) Several commissioners developed campaign strategies both inside and outside the establishment to try to bolster Ko's sagging political will. One effort was an attempt to prevent the Department of Education, under pressure from anti-gay city councilors, from amending the Establishment Directions for Gender Equity Education Committee to include anti-gay parent groups as members. The article concludes with recommendations on development of theory and institutionalization of accountability.起始頁-結束頁：41-92資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.202012_(47).024篇名：打造台灣酷兒敘事學：楊<U+53CC>子《花開時節》作為「鋩角」行動並列篇名：Fashioning A Taiwanese Queer Narratology: Yang Shuang-zi's Blooming Season as Me-kak Tactic作者：鄭芳婷(Fan-Ting Cheng)關鍵字：台灣酷兒敘事學;花開時節;歷史小說;日治台灣;鋩角;酷兒;Taiwanese queer narratology;Blooming Season;historical novel;Taiwan under Japanese rule;Me-kak;queer期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：47期出版年：2020中文摘要：近十年，以穿越作為敘事主體的中國影視與文學作品，一方面邁向產業高峰，另方面卻遭其政府的嚴密控管。市場需求與官方控管的並存和齟齬，揭示穿越結構所象徵的當代抵抗想像。由於大量進口中國作品，台灣亦同樣經驗著此抵抗想像的辯證。楊<U+53CC>子於2017年所出版之《花開時節》，作為首部以日治時期台灣作為穿越時空的作品，即以穿越敘事置疑了長期制霸的親中認同與意識形態，更促進國內文學獎項對於歷史小說定義的討論。由此，本文藉由文學、歷史學與性別研究取徑，細部分析《花開時節》在敘事發展、角色形構與日常描寫面向所組裝之在地酷兒抵抗。具體而言，本文首先爬梳敘事歷史學對於邏各斯中心主義的抵抗系譜，指出穿越行動作為當代社會改革實踐所揭示的台灣歷史酷兒化。透過異質性文化範式的相互衝撞，《花開時節》以自反性敘事結構挑戰線性史觀與官方詮釋，進而導向一組迥異於歐美主流酷兒論述的台灣酷兒敘事學。接著，本文轉而分析小說所採納的百合情誼與日常切片式的細部描寫，論證其中在地陰性力量的部署與運作，並進一步發展「鋩角」批判模型，以闡明從細節與縫隙來牽動大局勢的抵抗戰術。英文摘要：In the recent decade, the development of time-travel themed film, television and literary queerworks has, on the one hand, reached its productive peak and on the other hand, severely censored by the Chinese (PRC) government. The conflict between market demand and governmental control foregrounds the radical potential of time-travel narratives. Across the strait, Taiwan also participated in this wave of cultural production and shared its radical imaginations. Yang Shuang-zi's Blooming Season (2017) is the first novel that uses Japanese Taiwan as the setting for its time-travel narrative and a basis to critique pro-China ideology. Besides its political implications, the book has also aroused debates over the definition of historical fiction and the writings of history. Responding to these discussions, this current essay attempts to theorize how Blooming Season imagines a ”local queer resistance” through its time-travel narrative and descriptions of everyday life. The essay argues that time-travel could be seen as a resistance to the process of dominant history-making and a potential route to queer the political and cultural histories of Taiwan. Through juxtaposing conflicting modes of spatialities and temporalities, Blooming Season problematizes the linear structure of historical narrative and develops a ”Taiwanese queer narratology” different from that of the western paradigm. The essay then analyzes the novel's detailed descriptions of female same-sex love, a.k.a. ”yuri,” and argues that instead of being insignificant, these everyday details embody a local, feminine form of alliance that could potentially revise the grand narrative in Taiwanese historical writings.起始頁-結束頁：93-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.202012_(47).035篇名：科學與醫藥話語下的性重構：評After Eunuchs: Science, Medicine, and the Transformation of Sex in Modern China並列篇名：Restructuring Sex in Discourses on Science and Medicine: Book Review of After Eunuchs: Science, Medicine, and the Transformation of Sex in Modern China作者：曹育愷(Yu-Kai Tsao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：47期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：127-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.202012_(47).046篇名：編輯報告並列篇名：Words from the Editor作者：陳昭如期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：46期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：i-iii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室7篇名：姑姑的官司：分家析產與姓／性別政治並列篇名：The Aunt's Lawsuit: Family Property Settlement and the Gender Politics of the Lineage Name作者：張小虹(Hsiao-Hung Chang)關鍵字：張愛玲;姓氏;性別政治;宗祧繼承;遺產繼承;Eileen Chang;lineage name;gender politics;ancestor worship;property inheritance期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：46期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以發生在上海1930年代中期知名女作家張愛玲姑姑張茂淵的遺產訴訟官司作為出發點，嘗試探討傳統宗法家規男系女不系的「宗祧繼承」，如何過渡到標榜男女平等的「遺產繼承」，不僅只從歷史或法律的角度將此官司當成民國女性反抗「父系宗法」壓迫的具體行動實踐，更重要的是希冀從文化批判的角度析剔出「宗」法父權從律法到親族、從姓氏到性事盤根錯節的掌控，亦即「性別」與「姓別」的糾纏不清。本文先處理《大清現行刑律》到《民法》的法律變革，再以張愛玲小說〈金鎖記〉與《怨女》中所呈現的「分家析產」，來帶出更具華文文化殊異性的「房事情結」與「姓／性別政治」。最後則以台灣二十一世紀「蔡（英文）家姑姑的官司」做結，以凸顯即便自1930年代起法律早已保障女性平等繼承權，即便部分人士常以「去中國化」來強化台灣主體性，我們今日面對的恐怕依舊是宗法父權的陰魂不散與台海兩岸「一邊一國，都是『宗』國」的弔詭困境。英文摘要：This paper will start with the inheritance lawsuit filed by Mao-yuan Chang in Shanghai in the middle of the 1930s. Mao-yuan Chang was the aunt of the famous woman writer Eileen Chang. This lawsuit is taken as a point of departure to explore how the traditional inheritance of ancestor worship duties, strictly following the male line only, has been transformed by law into the modern property inheritance system that declares gender equality. This lawsuit will thus be read not merely from the historical or legal perspectives as a concrete action against the oppression of clan patriarchy taken by a particular woman in the Republican China period, but more importantly as a cultural critique. This is a critique of the dominance of clan patriarchy which extends kinship rights into law, as well as extending the family name strictures to sexuality. In all, there was traditionally an entwinement of gender, sexuality, and ancestral lineage name. The paper will first trace the legal changes from the Enacted Criminal Law of the Qing Dynasty to the Civil Code of the Republic of China. Two side scenes represented in ”The Golden Cangue” and The Rouge of the North written by Eileen Chang will also be taken as examples that demonstrate the specific characteristics of the Chinese lineage branch cultural complex and family name/gender politics. The paper will end with another inheritance lawsuit filed in Taiwan in the twenty-first century by an aunt in President Ing-wen Tsai's family. This second lawsuit highlights the continuing paradoxes of the political slogan ”one country on each side” while both retain a cultural heritage of clan patriarchy. That is, we still face persistent clan patriarchy both in Taiwan and China, even though women's equal rights to inherit property has been the law since the 1930s and even when an effort to distance from Chinese culture has been deployed by some in Taiwan as a way to differentiate and fortify the identity of Taiwan as separate from that of Mainland China.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.202006_(46).018篇名：空間越界與多重身分：當代台灣紀錄片中新移民女性的家庭實踐並列篇名：Boundary-Crossing and Multiple Identities: Female Marriage Migrants' Family Practices in Contemporary Taiwanese Documentaries作者：謝欣芩(Hsin-Chin Hsieh)關鍵字：紀錄片;東南亞新移民;女性;家;介入;documentary;Southeast Asian marriage migrants in Taiwan;woman;home;intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：46期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以「家」為核心母題，探究當代紀錄片如何再現東南亞新移民女性在「家」的空間內／外，跨越邊界所展演的多重身分，以及此類型的紀錄片如何介入台灣當代社會論述與文化生產，將「家」視為異文化接觸和社會關係實踐的雙重空間，以性別角度剖析阮金紅《失婚記》（2012），賴麗君、彭家如《神戲》（2016）和南洋台灣姊妹會《姊妹，賣冬瓜》（2010），就空間而言，三部紀錄片指向家庭內部、家內／外移動和跨越家庭進入公共空間等不同的階段、主體與認同的形塑過程，亦展演多重文化異質性與權力結構的角力。首先，以影像為研究文本，分別剖析三部紀錄片中「家」的符號與象徵意義，並檢視新移民女性與「家」的不同協商和抵抗策略。其次，透過再現策略與議題處理，思考紀錄片如何作為一種工具，得以藉由拍攝進而揭露或者介入社會與文化生產的實踐和行動。本文透過跨國女性主義理論與紀錄片分析，反思不同霸權於「家」的角力和動態建構，釐清紀錄片作為介入新移民論述的工具，對於東南亞新移民女性的主體性、性別角色與認同建構之影響。英文摘要：This paper investigates the motif of ”home” to examine the multiple identities of Southeast Asian marriage migrants in Taiwan, women who cross boundaries between the inner and outer realms of the domestic sphere. In particular, it explores how sociopolitical documentaries interact with the contemporary discourse and cultural production. Considering ”home” as a double social space, both a contact zone between different cultures and a practical space for daily life, this paper adopts a gender perspective to analyze three documentaries: Out/Marriage (2012), The Immortal's Play (2016), and Let's Not Be Afraid (2010). These documentaries distinctly demonstrate the different stages and processes of subject and identity construction, thus to reveal the multilayered cultural differences and power structures that wrestle with each other in the home space. Through the cinematic analysis of these documentaries, this paper analyzes the symbolic meanings of home and identifies marriage migrants' varied strategies for negotiation and resistance. Moreover, it addresses representational politics to explore the practical functions of documentary filmmaking. Adopting transnational feminism and documentary analysis, it demonstrates the dynamic construction of ”home” in relation to scattered hegemonies and investigates the interventional act of documentaries as they may affect the formation of subjectivity, gendered roles, and identities of Southeast Asian marriage migrants in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：41-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.202006_(46).029篇名：障礙與性別的交織：探討小兒麻痺女性母職經驗並列篇名：The Intersection of Gender and Disability: The Experiences of Motherhood among Taiwanese Women with Polio作者：郭惠瑜(Hui-Yu Kuo)關鍵字：小兒麻痺女性;女性主義;母職;交織性;多重壓迫;women with polio;feminism;motherhood;intersectionality;multiple oppression期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：46期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文旨在探討小兒麻痺女性的母職實踐經驗，透過生命史訪談法訪談十位年齡介於50至60歲的小兒麻痺症女性，研究結果發現小兒麻痺女性無法勝任母職並非因為身心功能缺陷，社會對於障礙女性母職角色的否定、制度缺失與環境限制才是阻礙母職實踐之主因。本文多數的受訪者是小孩的主要照顧者，她們在實踐母親角色的過程中遭受許多質疑，卻能夠發展出自己的母職實踐方式。主流的母職論述影響小兒麻痺女性對母親身分的認同，她們透過自己的育兒經驗重新定義母職的社會意涵，強調母職角色不僅只是滿足孩子的生理需求，關懷與陪伴也是母職實踐的方式之一。英文摘要：This article aims to explore the experiences of motherhood among women with polio in Taiwan. The methodology adopted is qualitative, with life history interviews being conducted with ten women with childhood-onset polio aged from 50 to 60 years. The article shows that women with polio face social barriers and environmental obstacles that limit them in fulfilling their motherly roles. Most of the participants are main caregivers, and they are able to develop creative strategies to look after their children. The dominant discourses of motherhood shape their identities as mothers. Some participants put great effort into caregiving activities to prove that they can be 'good mothers' despite their physical limitations. Other participants reframe the social norms of the roles of a mother and find their own ways to fulfill motherhood.起始頁-結束頁：79-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.202006_(46).0310篇名：評《工作的身體性》：從階級到性別的轉向並列篇名：A Review of Embodiment in Work: The Transition from Class to Gender作者：何明修(Ming-Sho Ho)期刊/會議論文集名稱：女學學誌：婦女與性別研究卷期：46期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：123-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學婦女研究室DOI：10.6255/JWGS.202006_(46).0401篇名：大學社區實踐在臺灣的實作初探：以Wulai地區的相關計畫為例並列篇名：University-Community Engagement in Taiwan: A Case Study of the University-Community Engagement Projects Implemented on the Wulai Area作者：蔡侑霖(You-Lin TSAI)關鍵字：大學社區實踐計畫;大學社會責任;社會實踐;產學合作;高等教育轉型;university-community engagement projects;university social responsibility;social engagement;industry-academia cooperation/collaboration;the transformation of higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020中文摘要：我們處於一個強調實踐大學社會責任的時代，這股風潮已沛然成勢，近年來包含主管國家科學研究與高等教育的科技部與教育部在內等政府部門紛紛以大型計畫補助大學教師成立團隊，進入社區或部落與在地組織協作，「產學合作」被認為是大學參與社會實踐與承擔社會責任重要的一環，並具備將傳統產學合作加以社會化的可能性。然而在上述的規範性關懷與期待下，具體實作究竟呈現何種面貌？其「產」與「學」的具體內涵是什麼？產學合作的樣態是什麼？產生什麼樣的社會效應？本文透過檢視在Wulai地區執行的相關計畫，指出當代計畫執行仍以市場化、創造產值的目標為優先、傾向去政治的技術性操作與不具備轉型性議程，既缺乏深入的在地研究亦忽視在地人群的異質性，並在計畫報告書寫上，學術研究團隊與在地社群呈現不對等的權力關係。同時也發現兩個變化中的趨勢：其一，大學試圖以與在地社群協作之名爭取與掌控更多公私部門經費來源，甚至嘗試在地方上扮演資源分配者的角色；其二，著重社群分享與互惠的另類經濟想像與實作空間似乎有所擴張。英文摘要：Members in academia are now working in an age of university social responsibility. In recent years, both Taiwan's highest administrative institutions of education and scientific research provide luxurious funding to promote university-community engagement projects. Among various goals of these projects, achieving ”industry-academia cooperation/collaboration” is deemed as an important mission. Moreover, this ”industry-academia cooperation/collaboration” is expected to socialize, in a different way, the traditional collaboration between university and industry. Despite this normative notion and expectation, however, the actual practices of university-community engagement projects are rarely examined. Questions such as what are the essentials of ”industry” and ”academia” of university-community engagement projects and what are their characteristic features and social impacts on local communities have not been explored. This paper aims to provide an analysis of these questions by dint of the investigation of the university-community engagement projects implemented on the Wulai area. The research findings show that current university-community engagement projects still prioritize the goal of expanding market and increasing output value. These projects tend to operate in a de-politicalized way without transformative agenda. They do not devolve themselves on conducting local research, and ignore the heterogeneity within local communities. Moreover, the written form of the project report displays the uneven power relations between academic research teams and their local partners. Meanwhile, this study also finds two emerging trends concerning current university-community engagement projects. First, universities strive to apply for more public and private funding sources in the name of their collaboration with local communities and are eager to play the role of resource distributor within local communities. Second, it seems that the space for alternative economic imagination and practices emphasizing on sharing and reciprocity have been expanded within current university-community engagement projects.起始頁-結束頁：1-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社2篇名：「去責任化」的司法責任制？論司法責任制話語構建中的斷裂並列篇名：Judicial Responsibility System without Accountability? On the Fracture in the Construction of Judicial Responsibility System Discourse作者：郭曉飛(XiaoFei GUO)關鍵字：司法責任制;錯案;闡釋爭奪;法律職業主義;「去責任化」;judicial responsibility system;misjudged cases;interpretation contest;legal professionalism;judicial responsibility system without accountability期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020中文摘要：圍繞著司法責任制中「責任」這個概念的界定，是強調審判獨立，還是對法官問責，在不同主體間形成了對於司法責任制重心的「闡釋爭奪」。政治家對於錯案終身問責的政治承諾和民眾對於糾正錯案後問責的呼聲是一致的，然而這卻與法律家所持「重獨立審判，輕法官問責」的豁免法官責任的傾向產生了斷裂，以至於法律人建構出一種「去責任化」的司法責任制。在對司法責任制的闡釋上，法律職業主義話語暴露了自身無法消除的矛盾。法學界不能只依賴法律職業主義話語，也要反思這套話語背後所追求的職業利益和職業特權，必須要認真對待司法責任制的政治性維度。英文摘要：Around the definition of the concept of ”responsibility” in the judicial responsibility system, whether it emphasizes the judicial independence or the accountability of judges has become a ”contested ground for interpretation”. The political commitment of politicians to life-long accountability of misjudged cases is in line with the public's call for accountability after correcting misjudged cases, which is at odds with the tendency displayed by lawyers who seek to exempt judges from their responsibilities by ”emphasizing independent trial while neglecting judges' accountability”. When it comes to the interpretation of the judicial responsibility system, legal professionalism discourse constructs a judicial responsibility system without accountability, which has its own contradictions that cannot be eliminated. Legal academia should not take the discourse of legal professionalism for granted: by rethinking the professional interests and privileges that this discourse entails, one takes seriously the political dimension of judicial responsibility system.起始頁-結束頁：53-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社3篇名：兼顧地主的幣制改革：臺灣三大商業銀行戰後擴張之前因後果（1904－1956）並列篇名：A Middle-of-the-Road Monetary Reform: Causes and Effects of Three Commercial Banks' Financial Expansion in Postwar Taiwan, 1904-1956作者：林子新(Zi-Xin LIN)關鍵字：三商銀;二二八事件;土地改革;新臺幣;發展型國家;three commercial banks;February 28 Incident;land reform;New Taiwan Dollar;developmental state期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文旨在探討第一、華南、彰化這三家商業銀行戰後擴張之前因後果。本文鑑於三商銀之戰後擴張勢必要以其戰前發展為基礎，故將考察期間向前延伸至彰銀籌設伊始之1904年。研究發現，三商銀皆係臺灣農村大地主階級在日本殖民政府金融開放政策之慫恿與鼓勵下所積極參與創立之現代銀行。日本戰敗後，三商銀雖有過半日人股份為國府接收為公股，但該階級在國府治下，不僅自始便握有三商銀之經營主導權，更使三商銀能在二二八事件隔天同時完成改組並重新開張營業。自此截至1948年底，儘管國府曾多次申令臺灣諸銀行收縮金融，但三商銀在該階級領導下，卻無論營業機構數還是存、放款餘額，皆爆發出未曾見諸於日本殖民期間的驚人增長。1949年臺幣改革後，臺灣物價因國府高估新臺幣匯價而迅速回穩，三商銀也隨之進入實質擴張階段，從而不只大幅強化了該階級對於農村剩餘的控制，也讓該階級得以將大量農村剩餘移轉到城市之中變成城市金融資本。過往研究由於忽略了三商銀戰後擴張之事實，才會得出該階級早在二二八與農村土改後已然喪失政策協商與資本控制能力的錯誤結論。反之，若將該事實納入考慮則可發現，國府在臺成功推動各項基進改革的前提，並非不存在能夠干預國府決策的農村大地主階級，而是國府總能在實施改革的同時也能兼顧地主利益。兼顧地主的臺幣與農地改革，才是戰後臺灣所以能快速工業化並發展經濟的前提條件。英文摘要：There were only six banks in postwar Taiwan until 1958, including three ”policy banks” and three ”commercial banks.” Although all six banks were state-owned, only three commercial banks experienced an unprecedented expansion in the first decade of postwar era. These commercial banks are First Bank, Hua Nan Bank, and Chang Hwa Bank. This paper examines the causes and effects of these commercial banks' postwar expansion by 1956. It finds that all these banks grew out of the Taiwanese rural landlords' ambition to strengthen their financial control over capital since 1904. It also finds that both the Japanese colonial government and the Nationalist government encouraged, actively or not, these landlords to do so. As a result of the encouragement, these banks' number of branches boomed right after the 228 Incident in 1947; their shares in the total amount of deposit and loan of Taiwan increased at an unprecedentedly rapid pace since the monetary reform in 1949. Despite the land reform during 1949-1953, these banks' real founders, the Taiwanese rural landlords, controlled an increasing amount of financial capital in rural and then urban areas during 1945-1956. These findings indicate that what features those above mentioned monetary and land reforms is precisely not a radical but a middle-of-the-road path where the Nationalist government also considered the landlord's interests. As a challenge to the argument that this landlord class has lost its control over major economic surplus and thoroughly collapsed with the implementation of the land reform, these findings also indicate that this series of middle-of-the-road reforms, rather than the landlord class's collapse, underpinned Taiwan's successful industrialization in the following decades.起始頁-結束頁：87-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社4篇名：臺灣鐵道基礎設施的文創轉生並列篇名：The Cultural-Creative Re-Incarnation of Railway Infrastructure in Taiwan作者：王志弘(Chih-Hung WANG);高郁婷(Yu-Ting KAO)關鍵字：鐵道文創園區;文化治理;歷史保存;地方發展;時空格局;railway cultural-creative parks;cultural governance;historic preservation;local development;spatio-temporal configuration期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020中文摘要：鐵道是社會變遷的象徵和推動力量，但也隨著社會變遷而轉變。本文關注臺灣鐵道設施轉作文創用途的社會脈絡、空間紋理及其與地方發展的關聯，藉此探討臺灣城市配置的持續移形換位。通過現地觀察及訪談，作者首先描述臺灣鐵路管理局及其設施的特質、營運困境及因應策略。接著，本文集中討論臺鐵局舊有設施的文創轉用，並以臺北、彰化、高雄及臺東為例，分析其轉用脈絡、物質部署、相關爭議及空間效應。作者主張，鐵道雖沾染懷舊色彩而捲入城市競爭的文化策略，但鐵道推動發展的動力並未停歇，只是以文化為媒介而移形換位。然而，面臨鐵道地下化、高架化、捷運化等由進步意象主導的再發展，具有「逆反」特質的文創轉生，卻不見得能夠在求新求變的精神下啟動對於發展的省思。英文摘要：The railway embodies social vicissitudes and facilitates many changes, but changes also happen to itself as the society is transformed. This paper will be focusing on the social contexts, spatial textures and the trajectories of local development that align with different cultural reuses of old railway facilities, and with it the re-configuration within cities that epitomizes the on-going development. Through on-field observation and interviews, the authors first illuminate the conundrum Taiwan Railways Administration has been facing and the strategies it takes, and will continue to delve into four cases highlighting Taipei, Kaohsiung, Changhua and Taitung respectively. In each of these cases, the contexts that bring out the reuse of railway facilities, the controversies thus generated, the material deployment and the spatial effects of reuse will be discussed. It is found that cultural strategies characterizing nostalgia has become railway's new fate, but its work on development never disappears. It is only transformed and takes on a cultural new look. Still, as visions to put railways into the underground, elevate it as skyline, or re-develop its regional services into local ones that are liken to the metro dominate, reflections on development that such changes might bring also become ambiguous.起始頁-結束頁：151-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社5篇名：大學社會責任的實踐與反思－編按並列篇名：University Social Responsibility Practices and Some Reflections-Editorial Introduction作者：陳信行(Hsin-hsing CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：201-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社6篇名：社會變遷下的大學社會責任：屏東大學USR「搖滾社會力」計畫的實踐經驗並列篇名：The University Social Responsibility in Social Transformation: The Experience of NTPU USR ”Rock the Society” Project作者：邱毓斌(Yubin CHIU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：205-216資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社7篇名：你是「在地人」還是「計畫人」？並列篇名：A Resident or a Project Manager?作者：管中祥(KUANG Chung-Hsiang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：217-228資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社8篇名：關於大學社會責任與實踐的幾點反思：台社閉幕論壇回應並列篇名：Some Reflections on University Social Responsibility and Engagement作者：蔡侑霖(You-Lin TSAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：229-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社9篇名：綜合討論並列篇名：Questions and Answers作者：何東洪;管中祥;蔡侑霖;邱毓斌;許寶強;陳美霞;陳美齡期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：235-247資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社10篇名：台灣青年的厭世情感政治－導言並列篇名：The Politics of Weariness of the Youth in Taiwan-Introduction作者：鄭<U+4E98>良(CHENG Keng-Liang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：249-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社11篇名：「厭世」：感覺、話語和政治並列篇名：”Tired of Life”: Feelings, Discourses, and Politics作者：王智明(WANG Chih-Ming)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：257-265資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社12篇名：小感傷與「大」拒斥：台灣年輕詩人的「廢鬱詩」並列篇名：”Melancholy Poems” of Taiwan's Young Poets作者：張智琦(Chih-Chi CHANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：267-290資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社13篇名：「喪」的現實與文化表徵之間：「90後」文化政治的可能性並列篇名：The Reality and the Cultural Representation of ”Sang”: The Possibility of the Cultural Politics of the Post-90s Generation作者：李許濤(LI Xutao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：291-304資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社14篇名：袖手未來：當代中國科幻小說中的青年設定並列篇名：Bystanders to the Future: Characterizing ”Youth” in Contemporary Chinese Science Fictions作者：羅小茗(LUO Xiaoming)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：116期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：305-318資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社15篇名：少數族群、國家治理與日常生活：以日本帝國殖民下的東臺灣阿美族人為例（1895-1945）並列篇名：Ethnic Minorities, National Governance and Everyday Life: The Case of Amis People in the East of Taiwan during the Japanese Colonial Empire (1895-1945)作者：楊士範(YANG Shi Fan);<U+6E29>榛榛(WEN Chen Chen)關鍵字：日本殖民帝國;國家治理;阿美族;社會教化;日常生活;Japanese colonial empire;national governance;Amis;social education;everyday life期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：115期出版年：2020中文摘要：日治以來，東臺灣被殖民官員規劃成為日本內地移民的天堂。施添福將日治時期的西臺灣的發展稱為「第一臺灣」，亦即「資本型的殖民地」特色。東臺灣的阿美族與卑南族的生活世界，則被稱為「第二臺灣」。殖民者意圖並施行內地移民東臺灣的「內地化東臺」計畫。所以「第二臺灣」，也就是以「移住型的殖民地」為其特色。日人的內地人口與東臺灣的圈地運動，無形壓迫到阿美族等平地原住民的生活空間。相對於第一及第二臺灣，山地原住民的生活世界被稱為「第三臺灣」。因著日本帝國對山地社會的封鎖政策，所以被稱為「封鎖型殖民地」。日治以降的社會發展，使得「第二臺灣」的阿美族與卑南族，與山地原住民（「第三臺灣」）漸行漸遠。本文試圖考察日本殖民帝國二個治理術之主要層面，去探討日治時代以來，殖民政策及其執行，對於阿美族人社會及文化產生的重大改變。第一個層面，日人政策展現於公共領域層面，其影響阿美族群體之公共生活秩序；另一私生活層面，日人透過社會教化手段，影響阿美族家屋空間安排及其生活作息。除此之外，本文亦將兼具由下而上的社會史學觀點，指出殖民文明化政策下阿美族人的聲音，尤其文化衝突下所觸發的不滿，以及因此引起的地方日常生活抵抗。英文摘要：Since the Japanese occupation, colonial officials have planned the east of Taiwan to be the immigration paradise for people from Japan. Tien-fu SHIH called the development of western Taiwan during the Japanese occupation as ”the First Taiwan”, with characteristics of ”capitalist colony”; the east of Taiwan, where Amis and Puyuma People live, is called ”the Second Taiwan”. The colonizer intended and implemented the project of ”Japanization in the east of Taiwan” for the immigrants settling in such area. Therefore, ”the Second Taiwan” is famous for its characteristics of ”settler colony”. The immigrant population from Japan and the enclosure movement in the east of Taiwan have imperceptibly make the Amis people and other lowland indigenous peoples experience oppression in their living space. Compared to ”the First Taiwan” and ”the Second Taiwan”, the realm of indigenous people living in mountains is called ”the Third Taiwan”. Because of the Japanese Empire's blockade policy against the mountain indigenous peoples, ”the Third Taiwan” is also known as ”blockaded colony”. The social development of Amis people in ”the Second Taiwan” has gradually drifted apart from that of indigenous peoples living in mountains after the Japanese occupation. This study analyzes two levels of governance by the Japanese Empire in order to understand the colonial policies, their implementation, as well as the great change for Amis people in their daily lives. The first level is the public sphere, which influenced the ordering of public life of the Amis people. The other level is the private sphere, which influenced the private lives of the Amis people. In addition, this study also utilizes the perspective of new social history, highlighting voices of Amis people about their experience of civilizing policies of the colonial authorities, especially their everyday resistance at the local level caused by the cultural conflict.起始頁-結束頁：1-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社16篇名：驅不走達悟惡靈的民主治理夢魘：蘭嶼核廢遷場僵局的政策史分析並列篇名：The Tao's Relentless Evil Spirits as the Nightmare of Democratic Governance: Examining the History of the Low-level Radwaste Disposal Policy in Taiwan作者：張國暉(Kuo-Hui CHANG);蔡友月(Yu-Yueh TSAI)關鍵字：低階核廢;低放貯存場;低階核廢處置政策;達悟惡靈;民主治理;low-level radwaste (LLW);LLW storage site;LLW disposal policy;Tao Anito;democratic governance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：115期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以科技民主治理的觀點，分析蘭嶼低階核廢遷不走的困境、遷場政策背後的政治脈絡，以及經歷三次政黨輪替的政策史變化。對照國際趨勢，本文認為我國近三十年的「低階核廢處置政策」大致符合從專業壟斷、政治介入、民主參與，再到龐大利誘等原則的趨勢，只是政府的專業壟斷企圖直到近年才實質減低，讓政治介入及民主參與獲得較為實質的抗衡空間。本文分析指出，台灣核廢處置政策在威權時代的管制科學治理型態，是由政府上對下單向決定，政策制定過程排除達悟族人參與，到了民主化後國家為回應達悟族人訴求，2006年立法院通過《低放射性廢棄物最終處置設施場址設置條例》（簡稱《選址條例》），以法制化作為解決策略，卻因為核廢政策無法有效處理不同利害關係者之間認識論的衝突，沒有強化科技溝通與信任的社會基礎，反而陷入條文無法實踐的治理僵局。我們認為後常態科學下的科技民主治理是一個不斷溝通、協商與審議的過程，必須將民意與專家的政策協調過程視為民主審議的過程，深化在地永續價值及實踐方法，才能有效回應後常態科學下的挑戰。英文摘要：This paper examines the development of Taiwan's policy of low-level radwaste (LLW) disposal through the lens of democratic technology governance and Taiwan's political context. Taiwan's policy evolution has largely paralleled that of other countries, having transited through the various stages of professional monopolization, political intervention, eventually toward democratic participation, and later financial incentivization. Before the lift of the Martial Law, a top-down approach was adopted by the authorities in shaping the policy, on the ostensible basis of regulatory science, with the space for decision-making only gradually opened up for greater democratic participation in recent years. Therefore, such hierarchical decision-making in the policy formation process during the authoritarian era persisted and bypassed the involvement of the Tao people - the inhabitants of the Orchid Island where the LLW was stored. Although the ”Act on Sites for Establishment of Low Level Radioactive Waste Final Disposal Facility” was passed in 2006 by the DPP government after Taiwan's democratization as a means to resolve the neglect of democratic participation, such regulatory amendments failed to account for the epistemological conflicts between different stakeholders nor did it strengthen the social foundation for technological communication and trust, resulting in further deadlock over the relocation of the LLW site through the late 2000s and 2010s. We argue in this paper that democratic technology governance under post-normal science involving a continuous process of democratic deliberation and consultation with the general public and experts is therefore central to the effective policymaking pertaining to LLW storage and disposal.起始頁-結束頁：77-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社17篇名：分析台灣主要報紙的兩岸新聞與言論：聚焦在《聯合報》（1951-2019）並列篇名：Analyzing Cross-strait News and Commentaries of Taiwan's Main Newspapers: Focusing on the United Daily News (1951-2019)作者：馮建三(Chien-San FENG)關鍵字：聯合報;兩岸關係;一國兩制;台灣獨立;邦聯;歐洲聯盟;the United Daily News;cross-strait relations;one-country-two-system;independent Taiwan;confederation;the European Union期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：115期出版年：2020中文摘要：解嚴以後，統獨作為支配兩岸關係的標籤走出地表，不再只是伏流，到了本世紀政黨輪替，《聯合報》在內的若干傳媒，更是遭致與其有競爭關係的同業，不正確地影射為統派報紙。分析《聯合報》六十餘年來的相關報導與評論，實可發現，該報有關兩岸的新聞與社論，並未固定不變，是反映了中華民國（台灣）國際政治地位的改變及其選舉政治民主化的增長。在1987年解嚴以前，所有主要傳媒包括《聯合報》，並沒有兩岸終將統一以外的立場，惟最早在1970年代，違反統一國策的兩德、邦聯與歐盟模式實已「靈光一閃」，至2000與2001年，由於民進黨初次執掌中央政府行政權，以及國民黨一度有意將邦聯列入黨綱，有關邦聯的言說因此在報端相對頻繁地出現，《聯合報》尤其是各報中，最為穩定與持續呈現該主張者，原因之一是該報社論在這段期間有了變化。以前，《聯合報》是消極地負面表述，不接受一國兩制，同時善勸台獨不可行不可欲，從2002年起至今，該報轉向積極，提出了正面的主張，以「屋頂中國」等不同的修辭，認為兩岸應該共建兩岸關係的第三種概念，亦即由中華民國與中華人民共和國共同構成類似邦聯或歐盟的一個中國。英文摘要：The dichotomic concepts of ”reunifying with the Mainland China” and ”getting Taiwan independent” has increasingly become dominant labels attached to future cross-strait relationships since the Martial Law was lifted in 1987. Some newspapers have alluded mistakenly that the United Daily News (UDN) is pro-Unification. This essay analyzes what the UDN, from its inception in 1951 to the present day, has reported and commented on the cross-strait relationships. Prior to 1988, the UDN was indeed pro-Unification which the state imposed and no media could disobey. However, as ROC on Taiwan suffered from diplomatic setbacks, coupled with domestic electoral democratization, the space was opened for proposing other options. Oversea scholars raised confederation and similar ideas in the 1970s and were amplified years later, particularly in 2000 and 2001 when the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won the Presidency and the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang, KMT) attempted to put a confederation article into its Party Platform. As its consequence, relatively more discourses on confederation appeared in the press, with the UDN standing out as an outlet providing more such contributions while making a notable change of emphasis. The UDN editorials used to argue by negating two positions. The Mainland China's call for reunification through ”one-country-two-system” has been firmly rejected, while in the meantime the UDN tries to convince people that an independent Taiwan state is neither feasible nor desirable. Commencing in 2002, the UDN has been asserting more frequently that a Chinese Confederation or Union should be the guiding principle that incorporates both ROC and PROC.起始頁-結束頁：151-235資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社18篇名：「左翼失語」，還是被消聲的抗爭主體？並列篇名：”Speechless of the Left”, or Silenced Subject of Resistance?作者：許寶強(HUI Po-keung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：115期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：237-258資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社19篇名：帝國的非物質遺留：論台灣與香港被占領經驗的異同並列篇名：The Legacies of the Empires: Comparing the Experiences of Taiwan and Hong Kong under Colonial Rules作者：鄭鴻生(ZHENG Hong-sheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：115期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：259-283資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社20篇名：走在政治歷史裡的婚姻路：以台藏婚配為例並列篇名：Marriage in the Political Context: A Case Study of Tibetan Spouses in Taiwan作者：龔尤倩(KUNG Yu Chien Lorna);鄭小塔(ZHENG Xiao Ta Zita);莊惠玲(CHUANG Hui Ling Linda)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣社會研究季刊卷期：115期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：285-309資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣社會研究雜誌社01篇名：從使用者角度探討短期供不特定人士使用之住房共享的財產權與外部效果問題：類Airbnb網路平臺帶來的住宅空間使用衝擊並列篇名：Space Users' Concern on Property Rights and Externalities while Hosting Short-Term Guests: the Impact from Airbnb-like Platforms on Existing Residents作者：游舜德(Tony Shun-Te You)關鍵字：共享經濟;共用財貨規範;區分所有建物;共用資源的悲劇;sharing economy;regulation of common goods;condominium building;the tragedy of the commons期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：29卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究提出住房共享的實體空間與權利義務複雜度，會使得住房分享的規範與管理機制，在釐清財產權與避免負向外部效果上，增添困難度。透過問卷分析的結果顯示：住房共享是一股勢不可擋的趨勢，而其規範與管理，應符合不同特性，來避免相關使用者之間的潛在疑慮，主要策略規範應從：一、住房共享財貨的本質特性，二、可能的負向環境外溢，三、有效防止短期不特定住客耗竭性使用共用資源，以及四、建置有效的即時監控與反應機制等方面著手。在危害生命財產與居住品質的因素均能有效控制下，方能充分享受空間彈性與使用上的自由度與方便性。英文摘要：Smart technology creates an innovative operating platform, readily improving the sharing economy. Nonetheless, home-sharing becomes complicated when it comes to the issue of shared ownership. This study presented the complexity of rights and responsibilities of the shared accommodation. The complexity that comes with residential form, the use of buildings, and the shared space makes it increasingly difficult manage home-sharing. Analyzing surveys taken by users, this paper suggests that the home-sharing concept is unstoppable in many aspects. Therefore, the regulation and management of the sharing goods are critical to the success of home-sharing. It should be based on various attributes to avoid possible misunderstandings among three groups: landlords, live-in travelers, and neighborhood residents. The essential management should be based on the following: 1: the characteristics of the sharing home; 2: the possible environmental spillover effects; 3: the possible sources of the tragedy of the commons; 4: the necessary monitoring and reflecting system. Once the threats to and the aspects of living quality are all under control, the flexibility of space and general convenience can finally be appreciated.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會2篇名：情緒會影響房市嗎？指數編制與驗證並列篇名：Will Sentiment Influence the Housing Market? Index Compilation and Verification作者：朱芳妮(Fang-Ni Chu);楊茜文(Chien-Wen Yang);蘇子涵(Tzu-Han Su);陳明吉(Ming-Chi Chen)關鍵字：情緒指數;房價;交易量;流動天數;議價空間;sentiment index;housing price;trading volume;time on the market;price concession期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：29卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：經濟理論假設人是理性，但實際市場上卻充滿非理性投資者所造成的異常現象，本研究檢驗情緒是否會影響不動產市場。我們編制了不同的不動產市場情緒指標，包括使用直接法（透過問卷調查）編制了當前與未來情緒指標，以及透過影響房市的基本因素來編制兩種間接情緒指標，據以驗證情緒是否對價格決定（房價）、進場買賣（交易量）、決策時間（流動天數），以及折讓能力（議價空間）有影響。本研究發現情緒對房市具有統計上顯著的影響，情緒對市場的影響，不僅是在價格上（房價與議價空間），對交易量與流動性之影響也相當顯著。英文摘要：Traditional economics assumes rational investors, whereas markets are full of irrational investors. The abnormal phenomena in asset markets may stem from irrational investors' sentiment. This study examines whether investor sentiment influences the real estate market, transaction prices, trading volumes, time on the market and price concessions. We compile different sentiment indicators, including the direct methods (through questionnaires) producing current and future sentiment indicators, and the indirect methods (through proxies in the real estate market). This study finds that sentiment has statistically significant effects on the real estate market. The impact of sentiment is not only on the price (transaction prices and price concessions) but also on the trading volumes and liquidity.起始頁-結束頁：35-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會3篇名：建商新推個案產品定位分析－從主力坪數及面積離散度觀點探討並列篇名：The Product Positioning Analysis of New Real Estate Development Projects: from the Perspectives of Primary Square Footage and Area Dispersion作者：李尚華(Shang-Hua Lee);張金鶚(Chin-Oh Chang)關鍵字：產品定位;主力坪數;面積離散度;多項式Logistic模型;product positioning;primary square footage;area dispersion;multinomial logistic model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：29卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：建商新推個案為增加報酬及降低風險，需考量推案前產品定位是否恰當。過去研究較少從主力坪數及面積離散度討論產品定位之報酬及風險。本文由多項式Logistic模型實證可知，影響建商產品定位變數以區位特徵及建案特徵為主，景氣時機及建商特徵則非主因；另外，市郊區及市中心大基地建案，為在景氣時期獲得較高報酬，較常規劃「大坪數單一產品低離散度」市場區隔策略，但若市場惡化，將造成經營風險。本文建議，建商應更重視房市景氣變化，當對景氣存有疑慮時，規劃市郊區或市中心大基地建案應以「中坪數中高低離散度」市場區隔策略分散經營風險。英文摘要：Real estate developers promote new projects to increase profit and lower risks. An important consideration before marketing units for sale is whether the product positioning is appropriate. Studies have not often investigated the rewards and risks of product positioning from the perspectives of primary square footage and area dispersion. This study employs a multinomial logistic model to verify that the primary variables affecting developers' product positioning are location traits and project traits rather than the status of the economy or builder traits. Developments that cover large sites in suburbs and urban centers see higher returns during economic upturns and tend to adopt a ”large square footage, single product, low dispersion” market segmentation strategy. However, when the market falls, this results in operational risks. This paper suggests that real estate developers should pay more attention to housing market changes - if the market seems suspect, city suburb or city center large-scale development projects should adopt a ”medium square footage, medium-high-to-low dispersion” market segment strategy to mitigate operational risks.起始頁-結束頁：69-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會4篇名：誰需要社會住宅？並列篇名：Who Needs Social Housing?作者：王南喻(Nan-Yu Wang);劉峰旗(Feng-Chi Liu);黃志仁(Chih-Jen Huang);張煜明(Yu-Ming Chang)關鍵字：全國住宅狀況抽樣調查;社會住宅;交叉分析;羅吉斯迴歸;national housing survey;social housing;cross-analysis;logistic regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：29卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文首次針對臺灣民眾對社會住宅的看法進行量化分析，在實務應用上提供了精確且廣泛的數據現況。採用內政部營建署104年全國住宅狀況抽樣調查結果，以交叉分析與羅吉斯迴歸討論不同背景之非自有住宅者對於社會住宅的看法。結果發現非自有住宅民眾中，近七成支持興建只租不售的社會住宅，51.5%表示願意承租。另外，每月經常性收入低於2萬的非自有住宅者，無意願承租比例達58.9%，其皆具有高齡、無業、目前低價租屋等個人特徵。建議在推廣上可針對高齡弱勢者多加著墨，並妥善規劃醫療、租金補貼、就業輔導等配套措施，將有助於提高政策推動的效率。英文摘要：This is a pioneering quantitative research study on Taiwan's social housing (SH), which provides precise, wide-range, and in-depth analyses on the demand side. Based on the National Housing Survey conducted by the Ministry of the Interior in 2015, we investigate the opinions of non-ownership Taiwanese on SH using cross-analysis and the odds ratio from logistic regression. The results show that nearly 70% of non-ownership respondents support the construction of SH, and 51.5% of them are willing to rent a unit. It is worth mentioning that 58.9% of non-ownership respondents with monthly income of less than 20 thousand have no willingness to rent an SH unit, and they are also characterized as being older, jobless, and currently paying a low rent. Accordingly, we suggest that the promotion of SH should place more emphasis on the elderly and vulnerable, in tandem with a better medical system, rental subsidies, and employment counseling to improve policy efficiency.起始頁-結束頁：99-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會5篇名：都市原住民居住品質之衡量－以台北市為例並列篇名：Housing Quality of Urban Aboriginal Households: The Case of Taipei City作者：林宜璇(Yi-Hsuan Lin)關鍵字：原住民;都市原住民家戶;居住品質;aboriginal people;urban aboriginal households;housing quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：29卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文透過住宅價格建立一個衡量居住品質的方法，據以估算台北市各行政區原住民與非原住民家戶的居住品質差異與其影響因素。實證結果發現，大多數行政區內原住民家戶的居住品質普遍較非原住民為低（4%∼55%間），且兩者居住品質差異在房價較高的行政區反而較小或未達顯著水準（如信義區與大安區）。其次，不同行政區間原住民家戶的居住品質差異較非原住民家戶為大。此外，教育程度與男性戶長對原住民家戶的居住品質有顯著正向影響，宅內人數則相反，至於經濟戶長的年齡與婚姻狀況對於原住民家戶的居住品質影響則不顯著，此與非原住民家戶明顯不同。英文摘要：In this study, we establish a method to measure the housing quality of aboriginal and non-aboriginal households in Taipei City. The empirical results show that the housing quality of aboriginal households is approximately 4~55% lower than that of non-aboriginal households in most districts, except the Xinyi and Daan Districts. The differences in housing quality between the two groups are smaller in districts with high housing prices. The housing quality difference in aboriginal households in 12 districts is approximately 17.32% higher than for non-aboriginal households. Furthermore, education and having a male household head are significantly positively associated, and the number of people in the house is significantly negatively associated with housing quality. However, the effects of the age of the household head and of marital status on housing quality are not significant, which is different from the case of non-aboriginal households.起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會6篇名：影響壽險業房貸違約因素之研究並列篇名：The Determinants on the Default of Residential Mortgages of the Life Insurance Industry作者：邱政憲(Cheng-Hsien Chiu);林左裕(Tso-yu Calvin Lin)關鍵字：壽險業;壽險契約;房貸;違約;財務會計準則第三十四號公報;life insurance industry;life insurance contracts;residential mortgage;default;Financial Accounting Standards No. 34 (FAS 34)期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：29卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以壽險業保戶為研究對象，採用公報之違約定義，探討過去研究房貸違約顯著因素在新違約定義下之顯著性；另增加壽險契約效力相關變數，以了解壽險契約效力對房貸違約行為的影響。採用羅吉特迴歸模型進行實證分析，結果發現一般影響銀行房貸違約因素在新違約定義下對於保戶房貸依然顯著外，壽險契約的停效或終止亦對房貸違約有顯著影響，此發現可做為壽險業房貸業務之預警指標，除有助於壽險業之資金運用外，亦可強化其風險控管能力。此外，壽險業可基於都會區與非都會區或各擔保品分區間不同的違約因素顯著性，採取差異化的徵信措施。英文摘要：To cope with the ”default” regulation in the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 34 (FAS 34), this study analyzes the significance of variables on residential mortgage default in the life insurance industry. We introduce variables associated with contract effectiveness to explore the impact of the termination of life insurance contracts on mortgage default. The empirical results from the logistic regression model indicate that the status of life insurance contracts, together with previous significant variables on mortgage default from the banking industry, are significant in determining the default behavior. We conclude that signals from the suspension or termination of life insurance contracts can serve as leading indicators for default on the mortgage loan portfolio in the life insurance industry. Furthermore, the life insurance industry could differentiate credit ratings between urban and rural areas or among different collateral regions according to various significant determinants.起始頁-結束頁：25-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會7篇名：不動產逆向抵押貸款與清償選擇權評價並列篇名：Reverse Mortgage and Prepayment Option Valuation作者：洪志興(Chih-Hsing Hung);郭佳政(Chia-Cheng Kuo);陳勤明(Chin-Ming Chen)關鍵字：不動產逆向抵押貸款;清償選擇權;年金;reverse mortgage;prepayment option;annuity期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：29卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：不動產逆向抵押貸款（reverse mortgage, RM）制度已引起各個國家重視並陸續推廣，文獻上對此之研究較多聚焦於貸款年金之評價，惟其評價內容多建構在「貸款契約未發生提前清償」的假設下為之。然而，各國實務上的RM契約並未禁止借方提前清償，此隱含了RM契約附加一清償選擇權予借款人。值此，本研究綜合考量利率、房價與死力等變動因素，來評價此一清償選擇權（prepayment option）。經數值模擬結果發現該清償選擇權的價值佔整體RM金額的比率為3.79%，該選擇權的價值反映了RM借方彈性處理房產的權益價值，同時也是RM貸方應重視之契約被提前終止風險成本。英文摘要：The real estate reverse mortgage (RM) system has been highly valued and widely accepted. However, while the valuation of the loanable annuity of RM has been previously discussed, the content of the valuations has mostly been established under the assumption of ”no occurrence of prepayment of the loan contract”. In reality, RM contracts in many countries do not prohibit the prepayment by the borrower, which thus implies that the lenders of the RM contract present a free prepayment option to borrowers. Therefore, in this study, variables such as the interest rate, housing price, and the force of mortality have comprehensively been taken into account to assess the prepayment option. The numerical simulation results show that the value of this prepayment option accounts for 3.79 percent of the total RM amount, which reflects the value of the rights and interests of the RM borrower's flexibility in dealing with the property, in addition to the risk cost of early termination of the contract, which may be of concern to RM lenders.起始頁-結束頁：47-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會8篇名：公佈降雨淹水模擬地圖對淹水區與其鄰近地區住宅價格之影響並列篇名：Impacts of the Announcement of the Rainfall-induced Flood Simulation Map on Flood Area and Neighborhood Housing Prices作者：李春長(Chung-Chang Lee);俞錚(Zheng Yu);梁志民(Chih-Min Liang)關鍵字：差異中之差異法;空間分量迴歸;淹水地區;淹水模擬地圖;住宅價格;difference-in-difference method;spatial quantile regression;flooded area;the rainfall-induced flood simulation map;housing prices期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：29卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究探討公佈降雨淹水模擬圖對淹水區與其鄰近地區住宅價格之影響。我們使用實價登錄網站2014年10月到2017年7月的住宅價格資料和水利處公佈的降雨淹水模擬地圖，運用分量迴歸和空間分量迴歸，並結合差異中之差異法進行估計。在考慮空間自我相關的情況下，公佈降雨淹水模擬地圖後，位於淹水區內之住宅價格會下降約13.5%。進一步考慮公告效果對不同價位住宅的影響，公佈後且位於淹水區內，於低價位、中低價位、中價位、中高價位和高價位住宅價格分別會下降約17.0%、8.9%、11.6%、17.0%和19.3%。公佈後且位於淹水區之鄰近地區，於高價位住宅價格則會下降約5.4%。英文摘要：This study aims to examine the impact of releasing the rainfall-induced flood simulation map on housing prices in locations deemed to be flood areas and their neighboring areas. Quantile and spatial quantile regressions, as well as the difference-in-differences method, were utilized to analyze the data from a real housing price website that spanned the period from October 2014 to July 2017 and the rainfall-induced flood simulation map released by the Hydraulic Engineering Office. After taking into account spatial autocorrelation, the release of the rainfall-induced flood simulation map was found to have led to a decline of approximately 13.5% in the housing prices of locations in flood areas. A further examination of the announcement’s effects across different housing price ranges revealed that housing prices in the low, mid-low, mid, mid-high, and high price ranges of locations in flood areas fell by 17.0%, 8.9%, 11.6%, 17.0%, and 19.3%, respectively. The release of the rainfall-induced flood simulation map was found to have led to a decline of approximately 5.4% in the high price range of housing in locations neighboring flood areas.起始頁-結束頁：63-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會01篇名：成年未婚單親母親的生育抉擇：依Beck個人化理論檢視並列篇名：The Decision of Unwed Childbirth of Taiwanese Never-married Single Mothers: Examining in the Framework of Beck's Individualisation Theory作者：賴紅汝(Hung-ju Lai)關鍵字：未婚單親媽媽;生育抉擇;個人化生活;never-married single mothers;unwed childbirth decision;individualisation期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：單親家庭的問題雖然在臺灣社會中逐漸被重視，但佔少數的未婚單親母親大多還是會面臨社會的批評和獨自養育子女的經濟後果，其中，成年未婚單親母親更是缺乏關注的一群人。目前少有研究嘗試理解她們選擇成為一位未婚單親背後的原因，因此本文以Beck個人化（individualisation）理論來了解臺灣未婚單親母親在一個婚姻與生育緊密連結的社會，如何成為一個「不婚但生育」的母親的過程。本研究以深度訪談方式蒐集30位成年未婚母親的親身經歷，藉此了解未婚母親在生育選擇中的結構（structure）和自我行動（agency）的相互影響。研究發現，這些未婚母親的生育決定具有外界因素影響（例如孩子的父親或家庭接受程度）和自身信念（例如責任感或渴望母職）的成分，一推一拉之間而形成生育獨養的抉擇，可見這群母親並不像社會大眾所批評的樣貌中那麼的無知和缺乏考量。而傳統的婚育觀念如何透過「制度化家庭主義」（Institutionalized Familism）在當中影響這群女性的選擇，充分表現出結構和自我行動之間的互動和連結，以及個人化理論在臺灣的可能樣貌呈現。針對發現，本研究也提出相關政策與方案服務可重新檢視的面向以做參考。英文摘要：Being only 6% of all single mothers, never-married single mothers in Taiwan are a group of mothers which have been neglected for long time. Public perception of these mothers has been harsh and they are associated with infanticide, abortion or welfare dependency. This research, therefore, aims to explore the underlying reasons for their decisions to be mothers in such circumstances. This research conducted in-depth interviews with 30 adult never-married single mothers in Taiwan. Through the lens of individualisation from Beck, the findings highlight that their decisions to become mothers and their marital expectations mirrored the gendered expectation from Confucianism when it emphasises the importance of motherhood. This on the one hand, has offered them a 'space' to justify themselves as a never-married single mother and, on the other, has shown that the sign of individualisation happening on the Taiwanese women are very much constrained and actually driven by the culture and gendered-relevant social norms.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202012_24(2).00012篇名：臺灣年金制度與OECD國家之比較初探：以OECD年金指標為基準並列篇名：Comparative Study of the Pension System in Taiwan and OECD: Using OECD Pension Indicators as Reference作者：陳琇惠(Hsiu-Hui Chen)關鍵字：年金制度;年金指標;公共年金;私人年金;pension system;pension indicators;public pension;private pension期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：年金制度為社會安全保障制度中最重要的一環，OECD（Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development）國家實施年金制度的情形，訂有年金指標（Pension Indicators），作為評比的依據，並定期公佈評比各國的指標值，用以勾繪出OECD國家年金制度的圖像。臺灣早於1950年起即陸續開辦包括勞工、公教人員、軍人及農民各項社會保險、福利津貼及退休金制度，2008年10月國民年金制度的實施及2009年1月勞保年金制度的開辦，保障對象由就業者擴及非就業者，老年給付由一次給付制逐步改為年金給付制，至此，臺灣老年經濟保障體系全面建構完成。臺灣年金制度在國際指標的評比呈現何種圖像？與OECD國家相較有哪些優勢、劣勢與共同的趨勢？年金制度推動成果的指標值為何？對進一步探索臺灣年金制度在國際評比的位置，具有其重要的意義。爰此，本文將以OECD年金指標測量方式為基準，運用臺灣現有社會保險相關統計及人口、經濟、社會等統計資料，進行臺灣年金指標值的設算。主要的研究方法為文件分析法（Document Analysis Method）、專家會議法（Specialist Conference Method）及比較分析法（Comparative Analysis Method），研究目的在比較分析臺灣與OECD國家年金制度，並進而描繪出臺灣年金制度在國際指標下呈現的圖像，最後，研究結果將提供政府日後年金改革方向之參考。英文摘要：Pension systems are primary economic security system for the elderly and the most crucial system of all social security systems around the world. For OECD member countries, pension indicators have been established to assess pension system and regularly announced to offer an overview of the pension system in each OECD member country. Taiwan establishes the first social insurance system in 1950. Since then, it has introduced social insurance system for labor workers, public servants and teachers, military, and farmers. After the national pension system, which was implement in October 2008 and, the labor pension system implemented in January 2009. Taiwan's elderly economic security systems are now fully complete. Both workers and non-workers are protected by such systems. It would be important to find out that ”what is Taiwan's pension system picture when assessed using international pension indicators?”, ”what are the similar trends between Taiwan's pension system and that of OECD member countries?” and ”what are the indicators of pension system outcome?”. Therefore, this study compared and analyzed Taiwan's pension system with that of OECD member countries using OECD pension indicators, with the Document Analysis Method, the Specialist Conference Method, and the Comparative Analysis Method. After detailed discussion on major findings, this paper also provides several suggestions for future pension reform.起始頁-結束頁：43-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202012_24(2).00023篇名：非營利老人福利機構的組織績效與困境：社會影響力觀點的分析並列篇名：Performance Contents and Predicaments of Nonprofit Long-Term Care Institutions for the Elderly: Perspective of Social Impacts作者：張玉龍(Yu-Lung Chang)關鍵字：非營利組織;績效管理;社會影響力;長期照顧;nonprofit organization;performance management;social impacts;long-term care期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：社會大眾對責信要求意識逐漸抬頭，非營利組織一方面須維護它的使命價值，另一方面又須面對資源有限及案主需求增加的壓力，各界對於績效的重視隨之水漲船高。為進一步瞭解非營利老人福利機構的績效目標與其所面臨的困境，以提出有助於促進組織績效推動的相關建議，本研究運用社會影響力觀點，以立意取樣方法，針對臺灣西部7間非營利老人福利機構，訪談24位核心經營管理者、基層主管／一般員工及長者。研究結果將非營利老人福利機構的績效目標歸納成三構面，並將其面臨的績效困境彙整成四個面向，在進行分析與檢視後，提出以下結論與建議：（1）鼓勵各界跳脫績效目標單向因果邏輯觀念，建構良性循環的非營利老人福利機構績效模式；（2）倡導從「服務使用者中心」到「以人為本」的思維轉變；（3）推動外籍看護工為「人力資源」而非僅是「勞力」的積極作為，重新檢視外籍看護工的勞動條件與運用策略；（4）檢視公私協力運作現況，建構非營利組織與政府對等的夥伴關係。英文摘要：The society keeps raising the requirement for accountability. The nonprofit organizations, on one hand, have to stand up for their missions and values; on the other hand, they are encountering many obstacles, such as limited resources and augmented stress because of increased needs. In addition, all walks of life ask higher requirement for performance. By using the perspective of social impacts to understand the performance contents and predicaments of nonprofit long-term care institutions for the elderly, we use the method of purposive sampling to conduct 24 interviews consisting of core administrators, first-line supervisors or ordinary employees and elders, which are from 7 nonprofit long-term care institutions in west of Taiwan. For the results of this research, we sum up the performance contents into three dimensions and performance predicaments into four aspects. After further analyzing, this research further come up with the following conclusions and suggestions: (1) to encourage people thinking out of the concept of one-way causality of performance objectives and constructing a virtuous cycle performance mode of nonprofit long-term care institutions for the elderly; (2) to advocate our thinking out of box from ”service users centred” to ”person centred”; (3) to treat foreign care workers as ”human resources” instead of ”manpower” , and to review the labor conditions and application strategies for them; (4) to review the current operations of public-private collaboration and to establish the collaborative partnership between the government and nonprofit organizations.起始頁-結束頁：95-141資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202012_24(2).00034篇名：建置社區巷弄長照站的培力與治理策略：水沙連區域的行動研究並列篇名：Strategies for Empowerment and Governance of Establishing the ”Alley Service Station”: An Action Research in the Shui Sha Lian Area作者：江大樹(Ta-Shu Chiang);詹弘廷(Hung-Ting Chan);張力亞(Li-Ya Chang);李希昌(His-Chang Li);梁鎧麟(Kai-Lin Liang)關鍵字：長期照顧;巷弄長照站;培力策略;long-term care;alley service station;empowerment strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：衛生福利部自2016年起積極推動長照2.0政策，其目的在於期望全臺各地建構出「以社區為基礎的整體照顧模式」。綜觀最近幾年的政策規劃，衛生福利部陸續推出許多政策方案，希望能逐步培力與厚植社區的照顧能量，但現實狀況卻是許多社區組織對於辦理長照據點意願不高；究其原因，主要在於辦理長照據點涉及醫護專業等服務能力，並非社區組織與志工們的既有設施及人力資源所能承擔。本行動研究團隊有鑑於此，乃規劃「培力社區組織建置巷弄長照站」等方案，並以南投縣埔里鎮、魚池鄉、國姓鄉、仁愛鄉等四鄉鎮作為主要行動場域，從2017年開始進行社區資源調查，循序推展在地化的社區培力與治理策略，期待提升社區辦理長照據點的意願與能力，厚植整體照顧能量。歸納本研究行動經驗，筆者認為推動社區組織的培力與治理策略，應可區分為：形成共識的願景目標、培力的教育學習、能力的建構與轉移、提升地方治理生態等四個階段來進行。英文摘要：Launched in 2016, Taiwan's Long-Term Care (LTC) plan involves organizing a community-based service network. The addition of ”Alley Service Station (Tire C)” is one of the primary elements of the LTC system 2.0 but not as expected eventually. It is augured that medical professionals, devices and equipment all are important for providing quality Alley Service Station in community, but the government do not ensure that all providers will have the capacity to offer professional medical resources sufficiently. To investigate how to assist community-capacity building or to offer substantial supports that enable community to bridge institution and supervising agency (Tier B and Tier A) in a unified system, we designed a series of demand-driven action projects according to previous LTC-demand survey results executed in 2017, and conducted an action research fieldwork from Shui Sha Lian area gathering the four Nantou townships of Puli, Yuchi, Guoxing, and Renai to determinate strategies for empowerment and governance of establishing the ”Alley Service Station”. The results of this study indicate that ”reaching a consensus”, ”empowering through education/training programs”, ”self-capacity building and self-transformation” and ”strengthening the dynamics and interactions within the local governance ecosystem” were crucial processes, which directly impact implementation relating to strategies for empowerment and governance of establishing the LTC service station in lanes and alleys.起始頁-結束頁：143-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202012_24(2).00045篇名：提升社會工作實習學生自主學習效能：增權取向實習教育並列篇名：Enhancing Social Work Practicum Students' Self-Learning Efficacy: Adopting Empowerment Approach in the Internship Program作者：白倩如(Chien-Ju Pai)關鍵字：自主學習效能;社會工作實習教育;增權取向;self-learning efficacy;social work internship program;empowerment approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：24卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：社會工作為實踐為本的專業，社會工作實習教育是培育知行合一專業人員之核心課程。隨著社會福利服務需求的急遽變遷，社會工作職業場域與專業核心能力內涵之複雜性亦持續增加。提升社會工作實習生的自主學習效能，將有助產生持續深化學習之行為。要能增強個人的自主學習效能，則必須使實習生產生意義感、勝任感與掌控感之內在激勵動機。當前國內社會工作實習教育面臨許多執行落差和瓶頸，不但影響實習成效，且缺乏一致性之教育目標。本文研析現有文獻與實務場域經驗，提出增權取向的實習教育取向，期待有助於實習生產生自主學習效能，並具體提出增權取向實習教育之二階段和六重點，以期能形成社工實習教育實施之導引。英文摘要：Social work is a practice-based profession, and the internship program is the core curriculum for cultivating professionals' unity of knowledge and action. With the dramatic changes of the social structure and welfare needs, the core competence of social work professional and workplace has become more and more complex. Enhancing the self-learning efficacy of social work practicum students could help them to develop continuous and deep learning. Meaningfulness, competency and mastery are the main sources of self-learning efficacy, which could also improve the intrinsic motivation of individuals' learning. As current social work internship program faces challenges of lacking of quality and consistent goals, this paper argues that applying empowerment approach in the internship program could enhance self-learning of social work practicum students. This paper also proposes two-stages and six-principles to guide the social work nternship program.起始頁-結束頁：183-218資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202012_24(2).00056篇名：部落職：朝向集體權利的原住民族社會工作並列篇名：Approaching Collective Rights for Indigenous Social Work in Taiwan: A View of Indigenous Community-hood作者：鄧湘漪(Hsiang-I Teng)關鍵字：部落職;文化照顧;原住民族社會工作;臺灣原住民族;Community-hood;Cultural Care;Indigenous Social Work;Indigenous in Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：當代臺灣原住民族社會工作論述和實務發展，從補償式的福利服務轉向權利觀的差異政治，同時，由個人權益觀點轉而重視集體權利。全球原住民族權利返還運動中，關於集體權利的討論則聚焦在文化權和環境權之實踐細節。根植於土地的原住民族集體權利和社會工作交會時，遇到了個體化福利政策設計、個人式服務資源輸送，和受國家統治、主流價值形塑的社會意識霸權影響，規訓了福利服務設計的意識形態。基於這三個原住民族社會工作實踐現況，本文嘗試在原住民族權利取得、思考族群差異的多元文化社會發展兩立論基礎之上，細究著重社會情境差異的福利服務，應積極回應族群人觀中的文化邏輯和集體價值。透過確認部落職的角色和任務，建立一個強調個體福利與集體權利相互鏈結的社會工作取向，實踐一個能夠彰顯族群主權的照顧倫理。英文摘要：The development of modern indigenous social work has shifted its approach to the politics of differences, emphasizing collective rights of the community rather than following the traditional compensational welfare model. Meanwhile, the concepts of collective culture right and environment right echo with the wave of global indigenous rights movements. With the rising awareness of and demand for collective rights, the practice of indigenous social work today has encountered three major challenges: the dated individualized welfare system; the individualized service delivery of resources; and the mentality of cultural hegemony when designing and delivering welfare services. This paper attempts to describe the current indigenous social work development in Taiwan to explicate the theoretical dilemmas as well as its practices. Based on the attainments of Indigenous Rights and the considerations of ethnic differences of a multicultural social structure, this study intends to explore the welfare services from different social situations. The study also aims to figure out a holistic care system covering indigenous everyday life and cultural practice habitus. We propose an approach to achieve such goals. It is vital to confirm the roles and missions of an indigenous community in practice. By doing so, we hope not only to address the indigenous sovereignty and cultures, but also to realize ethics of care in social work for indigenous communities.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202006_24(1).00017篇名：臺北市公立長照機構服務人員情緒勞務與離職傾向之研究：工作滿意度的中介效果並列篇名：The Impacts of Employees' Emotional Labor on Turnover Intention in Taipei Public Long-term Care Institutions: The Mediating Effect of Job Satisfaction作者：李俊達(Chun-ta Lee);洪基貴(Ji-guei Hong)關鍵字：情緒勞務;工作滿意度;離職傾向;長照安養機構;emotional labor;job satisfaction;turnover intention;long-term care institution期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：我國各地方政府長照機構人員的異動率逾兩成，而異動頻繁的結果造成服務經驗不能銜接，最後更將衝擊各縣市長期照顧服務品質。本研究以臺北市公共長照及安養機構之員工為研究對象，探討情緒勞務、工作滿意度以及離職傾向之間的關係。研究結果發現，情緒勞務對工作滿意度、離職傾向均有直接正向影響，而工作滿意度則對離職傾向有直接負向影響，工作滿意度在情緒勞務表層演出與離職傾向之間具有部分中介效果。就此而論，表層演出僅是隱藏或壓抑內心的真實感受，以符合組織情緒展現規則之要求。相對地，深層演出乃情緒勞務工作者必須致力於調整內心真實感受，以符合組織期望或達成組織目標。因此，情緒勞務的深層演出係員工在面對服務對象時，在情緒上發自內心的感同身受，將能夠提高工作滿意度，並降低離職傾向。英文摘要：Under aged society, the quality of service of long-term care institutions is very important. The high turnover rate of long-term care institution employees in Taiwan local governments decreases the service quality. The main purpose of the study is to explore the relationships among emotional labor, job satisfaction, and turnover intention of employees in the pubic long-term care institutions in Taipei City. General survey is conducted with 73% responsive rate and 315 respondents. The regression model results indicate that: (1) emotional labor has significantly positive effect on job satisfaction, (2) emotional labor has significantly positive effect on turnover intention, (3) job satisfaction has significantly negative effect on turnover intention, and (4) job satisfaction is a mediator between surface acting dimension of emotional labor and turnover intention.起始頁-結束頁：35-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202006_24(1).00028篇名：原住民女性社會工作者的充權經驗：以「原住民族家庭服務中心」為例並列篇名：Becoming Empowered: Indigenous Female Social Workers in Indigenous Family Service Centers作者：莊曉霞(Hiu-Ha Chong)關鍵字：原住民女性社工;原家中心;充權;敘說訪談;Indigenous female social workers;Indigenous Family Services Centre;empowerment;narrative interviews期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：24卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：目前原家中心女性社工的充權多聚焦於專業能力之提升，這種立基於自由主義思潮之充權方式忽略了原住民族社會工作的政治面向和文化特殊性，極需以原住民女性社工為主體再思充權議程。本文以敘說訪談向12位東部原家女性社工蒐集資料，企圖理解在種種結構限制下，這些社工如何充權以回應社工專業的多重要求。研究發現強化專業知能、善用苦難和女性的生命經驗、堅固宗教靈性信仰、追求族群認同和覺醒成為充權關鍵。當中她們藉由提升專業知能和在關係中取得權力進行自我充權，同時充權也是她們在部落時空下，從整體性、靈性和生活脈絡出發，透過部落女性和原住民社工的勞動疊影，將社會工作轉化成為對個人、家庭／族、族群和宗教的另一個實現責任的實踐場域。最後本文提出五點建議回應原家女性社工的充權。英文摘要：This paper argues that current empowerment programs for Indigenous social workers enormously focus on professional competence, but largely overlook political and socio-cultural aspects of Indigenous communities under the impact of neoliberalism. This requires to redeem empowerment agenda in Indigenous social contexts. In order to understand how Indigenous female social workers are empowered, the research collected data from twelve social workers of Indigenous Family Service Centers by using narrative interviews. The findings suggest that enhancing professional competence, integrating life experiences, strengthening spirituality and re-affirming ethnic identity are crucial to empowerment. Developing personal capabilities and gaining power by recognizing Indigenous epistemology, including a holistic approach, spirituality and the life space, empower Indigenous social workers and help to transform the field of social work into a field of responsibility for family, ethnic groups and religious beliefs. This paper ends by making five suggestions for Indigenous female social workers' empowerment.起始頁-結束頁：79-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202006_24(1).000301篇名：第三級差別定價是否應加禁止？並列篇名：Should Third-Degree Price Discrimination Be Banned Directly?作者：林啟智(Chi-Chih Lin)關鍵字：第三級差別定價;寡占;數量競爭;壟斷效果;需求彈性;市場規模;Third-Degree Price Discrimination;Oligopoly;Quantity Competition;Monopoly Effect;Elasticity of Demand;Market Size期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：56卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：第三級差別定價過往文獻的重點在於指出能提升福利的條件，以支持其正當性。本文則試圖以另種角度說明，即使第三級差別定價在某些參數區間內會損及經濟福利，也不表示其正當性就該受到質疑。如果廠商的競爭模式為數量競爭，相對於差別定價，均一定價不再是劣勢策略。當廠商採取均一定價時，必須加總所有市場的需求為單一的總需求，會使市場競爭產生結構性的改變，導致廠商的決策範圍不同於差別定價；同時，市場加總後，廠商可創造壟斷效果，將壟斷力延伸到不具獨占力的市場，使得均一定價有可能成為廠商極大化利潤下的選擇。如果廠商在各個參數區間內基於自利動機下的選擇，無論是差別定價或均一定價，相對於另種選擇，都不利於經濟福利，則差別定價就不見得不具正當性。英文摘要：In the vast literature of third-degree price discrimination, one focal point of analysis has been on the condition for it to improve social welfare. This research argues that even if price discrimination reduces welfare in some parameter ranges, its validity may still be defensible. When oligopoly firms engage in quantity competition, then relative to price discrimination, uniform pricing is no longer a dominated strategy, because when a firm employs uniform pricing, it aggregates its demand in two separate markets so as to choose its optimal uniform price. Thus, it is able to extend its monopoly power from the market where it is a monopoly to the other market where it faces Cournot competition. Consequently, uniform pricing may be preferred over price discrimination. If a profit-maximizing firm's choice, whether it is price discrimination or uniform pricing, always results in lower social welfare than the other pricing strategy that is not chosen, then price discrimination should not be less defensible than uniform pricing.起始頁-結束頁：163-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系2篇名：股票市場波動對國民身體健康的衝擊並列篇名：The Impact of Stock Market Volatility on Physical Health作者：郭志安(Zion Guo);孫子媛(Zi-Yuan Sun)關鍵字：金融市場;國民健康;醫療支出;Financial Market;Health Behavior;Medical Expenditure期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：56卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：財務領域中大部分的論文都著眼於投資人的心理因素如何影響股票價格，本研究反過來探討股票市場波動對醫療支出的影響。研究結果顯示，股票報酬率增加時醫療支出會減少，當成交量大時，醫療支出減少的幅度會更大；若當月之內的股票日報酬率呈現遞減趨勢時，股票月報酬率增加將導致該月份對醫療需求增加的幅度大過原本減少的幅度。股票波動度與醫療支出也呈現反向的關係，若當月之內的股票日報酬率呈現遞減趨勢時，會更進一步強化波動度與醫療支出之間的反向關係。此外，股票報酬率和波動度對醫療支出都具有領先與延遲的效果，而二月份和六月份的醫療支出則會顯著減少。英文摘要：Numerous papers in the finance literature have investigated how the psychological factors of investors influence stock prices. This research hence discusses the impact of stock market volatility on medical expenditures, showing that these expenditures decrease as stock returns increase, and decrease much more when the trading volume is larger. If the daily stock return in the current month exhibits a decreasing trend, then an increase in the monthly stock return results in a rise in monthly medical expenditures greater than the original reduction. The relationship between stock volatility and medical expenditures is also negative, and if the daily stock return in the current month has a decreasing trend, then it strengthens the inverse relationship between stock volatility and medical expenditures. Furthermore, stock return and volatility have leading and lagging effects on medical expenditures, and medical expenditures in February and June are significantly lower than those in other months.起始頁-結束頁：193-221資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系3篇名：A Revisit to Timing/Location Games with Directional Constraints並列篇名：再探方向性限制下的時點（區位）賽局作者：孫嘉宏(Chia-Hung Sun)關鍵字：Timing Game;Directional Constraint;Preemption Game;Precommitment Game;時點賽局;方向性限制;先發制人賽局;事先承諾賽局期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：56卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：The research purpose of this paper is to show that an equilibrium exists in the timing/location game with directional constraints, as based on Cancian et al. (1995), if firms are unable to precommit to their timing of entry at the beginning of the game. In equilibrium, all firms sequentially enter the market, while the timing differentiation between any two consecutive entry patterns and the payoffs of all firms are equalized.英文摘要：本文證明，若廠商無法在賽局期初，事先承諾其進入市場的時點，則Cancian et al.（1995）方向性限制下的時點（區位）賽局均衡存在。廠商均衡時依序進入市場，且任兩家依序進入市場的廠商之時點差異均等，而所有廠商均衡利潤相等。起始頁-結束頁：223-241資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系4篇名：Vertical Separation and Collusion並列篇名：垂直分割與勾結作者：高國<U+5CEF>(Kuo-Feng Kao);陳金盛(Chin-Sheng Chen)關鍵字：Vertical Separation;Trigger Strategy;Collusion;垂直分割;觸發策略;勾結期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：56卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This paper examines an integrated firm's incentive to undertake vertical separation with forward-looking behavior. In an infinitely repeated game we show that tacit collusion among firms in a final good market is more likely to be sustained under vertical separation than under vertical integration. The integrated firm tends to vertically separate its business if the discount factor is at a medium level and the input price is sufficiently low. Finally, an increase in the input price is socially beneficial if it prevents vertical separation.英文摘要：本文探討當廠商的行為具前瞻性時，整合廠商從事垂直分割的誘因。利用一無限期重複賽局，我們發現相較於垂直整合，最終財市場的勾結在垂直分割的市場結構下較容易達成。當廠商的折現因子適中且中間財價格夠低時，此整合廠商將進行垂直分割。此外，如中間財價格的提高能有效阻止廠商進行垂直分割，則社會福利將隨中間財價格上升而增加。起始頁-結束頁：243-266資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系5篇名：The Optimality of a Minimum Wage: A Central Planner's Perspective並列篇名：最適的最低工資：以社會規劃者的觀點來看作者：盧佳慧(Chia-Hui Lu)關鍵字：Minimum Wage;Search and Matching;Unemployment;Welfare;最低工資;勞動搜尋;失業;福利期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：56卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：If the government sets different minimum wages for different types of workers, then the minimum wage is not only binding for unskilled labor, but also for skilled labor, when workers' bargaining power is smaller than its elasticity in the matching function. Moreover, if we consider a tax, the government should tax the labor income of skilled labor and should set a minimum wage for unskilled labor when the workers' bargaining power is relatively low. In this situation, a binding minimum wage is optimal.英文摘要：如果政府對不同能力的勞工皆設有最低工資，當工人的議價能力較小的時候，不僅低技術的勞工適用最低工資，連高技術勞工也適用其最低工資。除此之外，若政府同時考慮課徵薪資所得稅與最低工資，當工人的議價能力較小的時候，政府應該對高技術勞工課徵薪資所得稅，並應為低技術的勞工設定最低工資。在這種情況下，我們可以得到低技術勞工最適的最低工資值。起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系6篇名：臺灣公股與民營銀行在景氣衰退與金融危機期間放款差異性之實證研究並列篇名：Bank Ownership and Lending Patterns over Business Cycles and Financial Crises: Evidence from Taiwan作者：黃朝熙(Chao-Hsi Huang);謝依珊(Yi-Shan Hsieh);林宜槿(Yi-Jin Lin)關鍵字：公股銀行;民營銀行;放款行為;景氣循環;金融危機;Government Banks;Private Banks;Bank Lending;Business Cycles;Financial Crises期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：56卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究利用1999年11月至2017年7月臺灣的銀行財務報表資料，實證探討公股與民營銀行在面對金融危機與景氣衰退時的放款型態是否有所差異，並探討公股銀行在這些時期是否具有穩定信用供給的作用。我們的實證結果發現，不同於民營銀行具有「晴天借傘，雨天收傘」的放款特性，公股銀行在景氣衰退或金融危機期間的收傘程度較小，或甚至持續增加放款，尤其是對中小企業的放款。整體而言，在金融危機與景氣衰退期間，公股銀行的放款對於整體資金供給具有穩定的作用。英文摘要：This study employs panel data of Taiwanese banks' balance sheets spanning the period from November 1999 to July 2017 in order to examine the possible differences in government banks' and private banks' lending practices over business cycles and financial crises. Our empirical results show that government banks' lending is less pro-cyclical than private banks' lending. Moreover, during economic downturns and financial crises, government banks tend to maintain or even increase their lending to businesses, especially small- and medium-sized enterprises. In general, government banks in Taiwan have played an important role in stabilizing credit supply during economic downturns and financial crises.起始頁-結束頁：29-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系7篇名：我國西醫醫療院所為何不願釋出門診處方箋？一個藥價差的解釋並列篇名：Why Do Hospitals and Clinics in Taiwan Not Release Prescriptions? An Explanation of the Pharmaceutical Price Gap作者：佘健源(Chien-Yuan Sher);陳明楨(Ming-Chen Chen)關鍵字：醫藥分業;處方箋;藥價差;全民健保研究資料庫;Separation of Dispensing and Prescribing;Prescription;Pharmaceutical Price Gap;National Health Insurance Research Database期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：56卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：我國政府雖自1990年代起已宣示推動醫藥分業，但卻一直未能立法強制要求醫療院所須釋出處方箋，以致多年來僅能依賴醫師的自願配合來落實此項政策；這也就使得「如何引導醫師釋出處方」成為藥政實務上的重要課題。本研究由診所醫師的行為出發，討論因藥價差而產生的藥品利潤，如何影響醫師的處方釋出行為。我們以全民健保資料庫為基礎，檢視2008年與2010年西醫的門診紀錄，並比對2009年與2011年第6次與第7次年度藥價調整資料，推算出各年各處方中藥價差總值的多寡。本研究證實，若某處方所開立的藥物，隔年遭調降藥價的總幅度越大，或依健保給付價所計算的總藥費越高，一般也將伴隨著醫師較低的處方釋出意願。此意味著醫師的處方釋出行為，確實會考慮到自藥品所得的利潤。這也意味著，一旦造成藥價差的藥價給付制度有所調整，醫藥分業將較易落實。英文摘要：Although the policy regarding the separation of dispensing and prescribing drugs has been in force since 1990s, the authorities in Taiwan have not yet enacted rules requiring hospitals or clinics to release prescriptions, which a patient can take to the pharmacy to get the filling, as for many years, the government has relied on only physicians' voluntary cooperation to realize this policy. In order to help motivate physicians to release more prescriptions, this study examines their behavior and discusses how the profit from the pharmaceutical price gap (whereby the pharmaceutical reimbursement by National Health Insurance is higher than the actual expenditure) affects physicians' willingness to release prescriptions. Based on the National Health Insurance Research Database, we analyze clinic records in 2008 and 2010, compare them with information of the 6^(th) and 7^(th) adjustments in the pharmaceutical reimbursement schedule, and estimate the profit from the pharmaceutical price gap in each clinic record. The findings show that physicians statistically significantly tend to keep prescriptions, including for drugs whose reimbursement prices have been reduced in the two adjustments or for prescriptions with higher drug reimbursement. This implies that physicians do consider pharmaceutical profit when prescribing. It also means that if the government can amend the reimbursement policy that is causing the pharmaceutical price gap, then physicians will release more prescriptions to pharmacists.起始頁-結束頁：79-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系8篇名：擔保對中國債券的信用評級與收益率差之影響並列篇名：Effects of Guarantees on the Relationship Between Credit Rating and Bond Yield Spread作者：黃玉麗(Yu-Li Huang);沈中華(Chung-Hua Shen)關鍵字：中國大陸;非金融信用債;信用評級;收益率差;擔保;China;Nonfinancial Bonds;Credit Rating;Bond Yield Spread;Guarantee期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：56卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以2007年至2015年間，獲得中國本土信評機構所發布評級的非金融信用債為研究對象，實證結果發現：第一，擔保在中國的債券市場扮演重要信用增強的效果；第二，雖然中國的債券市場被批評存在評級膨脹的現象，但中國的債項評級仍可以解釋收益率差；第三，投資人對因為獲得擔保而使債項評級提升的債券，要求較高的風險溢酬，且當擔保人為地方國有企業或專業的擔保機構時，此結論尤其獲得支持；第四，除了考慮債項評級以外，投資人也會考量擔保人的信用評級，擔保人的信用評級愈差，投資人要求的風險溢酬也愈高。英文摘要：This study uses non-financial bonds to investigate how the guarantees affect bond credit ratings and yield spreads in China. With our sample spanning from 2007 to 2015, the results are as follows. First, the guarantees enhance the effect of credit ratings. Second, credit ratings still explain bond yield spreads even though the rating inflation phenomenon is popular in China. Third, investors demand higher risk premiums for bonds with guarantees versus similar bonds without guarantees. This evidence is more pronounced when the guarantors are local state-owned enterprises (SOEs) or specialized guarantee corporations than other types of firms. Fourth, investors also consider the credit rating of the guarantor with the risk premium being higher for guarantors with lower credit ratings.起始頁-結束頁：115-161資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系01篇名：Impact of Training Based on Orem's Theory on Self-Care Agency and Quality of Life in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease作者：Fatma TOK YILDIZ;Ma<U+011F>firet KA<U+015E>IKCI關鍵字：training;coronary artery disease;Orem's self-care deficit nursing theory;self-care agency;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a primary cause of death worldwide. CAD negatively affects individuals because it reduces their functional skills and self-care abilities and disrupts quality of life. Purpose: This study was designed to assess the impact of a training program based on Orem's self-care deficit nursing theory (SCDNT) on self-care abilities and quality of life in patients with CAD. Methods: This study was conducted using a randomized, controlled, pretest/posttest experimental design. One hundred two patients with CAD were divided evenly into either the intervention or control group, with sample randomization based on gender, age, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level, and Self-Care Agency Scale scores. For both groups, interviews were conducted in two sessions held, respectively, at the hospital and at home. Study data were collected using the patient information form, Self-Care Agency Scale, MacNew Heart Disease Health-Related Quality of Life Questionnaire (MacNew), Quality of Life Questionnaire (15D), and training booklet. Results: A highly significant difference was found between the two groups in terms of the average posttest scores on the Self-Care Agency Scale, MacNew, and 15D. For the intervention group, the posttest scores on the Self-Care Agency Scale, MacNew, and 15D were significantly higher than the pretest scores, whereas average pretest and posttest scores on these measures were similar for the control group. Conclusions: The training program developed in this study based on Orem's SCDNT improved self-care agency as well as disease-specific and overall quality of life in patients with CAD. Nurses should pay attention to the CAD-related educational level of patients when teaching them how to live with their disease. Moreover, nurses should use Orem's SCDNT to strengthen the self-care agency of these patients to increase quality of life and the effectiveness of related education efforts. Finally, medical institutions and governments should develop appropriate education policies for patients at risk of CAD and for those with CAD.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004062篇名：A Study of Physical Activity, Frailty, and Health-Related Quality of Life Among Community-Dwelling Older Adults in Taiwan作者：Pei-Shan LI;Chia-Jung HSIEH;Nae-Fang MIAO關鍵字：community-dwelling older adults;physical activity;frailty status;health-related quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in community-dwelling older adults increases as physical activity improves, and age-related frailty has a negative effect on HRQoL. Research on these associations is lacking. Purpose: The aims of this study were to (a) analyze the effect of demographic characteristics on HRQoL, (b) explore the correlation between physical activity and HRQoL, (c) analyze the effect of frailty on HRQoL, and (d) investigate the potential predictors of HRQoL in community-dwelling older adults. Methods: In this cross-sectional study, a convenience sample of 150 older adults was recruited from community care sites in Shilin and Beitou Districts in Taipei City, Taiwan. Data were collected at baseline using a demographic characteristics datasheet, the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale, the Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly, and the 12-Item Short Form Health Survey. The Senior Fitness Test and hand-grip strength test were also performed. Student t test, chi-square test, analysis of variance, Pearson correlation coefficient, and hierarchical regression were applied to analyze the statistical results using IBM SPSS Statistics Version 22.0. Results: Being of older age, experiencing a higher number of falls, having more chronic diseases, and having a higher body mass index were identified as factors that significantly affect HRQoL. Moreover, HRQoL was found to be significantly affected by the performance of physical activity or status of frailty. Furthermore, the prefrail period was shown to be an important predictor of HRQoL after adjusting for demographic variables, history of chronic illness, history of falls, and physical activity. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: In this study, HRQoL was found to be significantly affected by upper limb dysfunction and the prefrail period. Community health promotion activities should focus greater attention on the physical functioning of older adults. Furthermore, providing information on age-related frailty and promoting active participation in community activities may increase the attention given by community-dwelling older adults to physical fitness and quality of life.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004023篇名：Questionnaire Development of a Good Nurse and Better Nursing From Korean Nurses' Perspective作者：Mihyun PARK;Eun-Jun PARK關鍵字：surveys and questionnaires;validation studies;nurses;nursing;nursing care期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The concepts of ”good nurse” and ”better nursing” have changed over time and should be investigated from the perspective of nurses. Purpose: The aim of this study was to develop and assess the psychometric properties of two questionnaires used to assess ”good nurse” and ”better nursing.” Methods: The interview data of 30 registered nurses (RNs) from a previous study were reviewed to develop the questionnaire items, and content validity was examined. One hundred seventeen RNs participated in a pilot survey for pretesting the constructs, 469 RNs participated in a main survey to explore these constructs using exploratory factor analysis (EFA), and 468 RNs participated in model refining and validation using confirmatory factor analysis. Results: After a critical review of RN interview data and content validity evaluation, 73 of 124 statements on ”good nurse” and 56 of 57 statements on ”better nursing” were selected. In the pilot survey, the number of items was reduced to 45 for both questionnaires using an EFA. In the main survey, EFA was used to load 34 items on the five factors of the good nurse questionnaire and 26 items on the three factors of the better nursing questionnaire. In the confirmatory factor analysis, to obtain better fitting models, the good nurse questionnaire consisted of 17 items on the five factors of collaboration, professional competency, self-efficacy, a sense of achievement, and compassion, whereas the better nursing questionnaire consisted of 16 items on the three factors of person-centered nursing, proactive nursing, and expertise in caring. The construct reliability, convergent validity, and discriminant validity of the questionnaires were achieved. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The concept of ”good nurse” from the perspectives of the nurses in this study was similar with those of patients in previous studies, while including individual traits such as sense of achievement. Better nursing is conceptualized with the exemplary performance of nursing focusing on the nature of nursing and leading excellence and power in clinical practice. The study findings inform what nursing education and workforce development should focus on for nursing to continuously progress. Furthermore, it is recommended that the concepts of a good nurse and better nursing be compared across different countries using the questionnaires.起始頁-結束頁：1-12資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003934篇名：The Conceptual Structure of the Management by Nurses of the Ego Integrity of Residents of Nursing Homes作者：Sun-Young LIM;Sung Ok CHANG關鍵字：ego integrity;hybrid model;nursing home期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The number of older people admitted to nursing homes has continued to rise with the recent expansion of the Republic of Korea's long-term care system. Maintaining ego integrity is a major task for older people approaching the end of life. As efforts to maintain ego integrity include the final stages of life, this concept is critically important for older people in nursing homes. This study was designed to assess issues related to ego integrity in the nursing home environment to determine how nurses should play a key role in managing this important life task. Purpose: The management by nurses of the ego integrity of residents of nursing homes is a new phenomenon that is central to promoting long-term, quality care. This study was designed to clarify and conceptualize this management phenomenon in the context of nursing homes. Methods: A hybrid model of concept development was used to analyze the ways in which nurses manage the ego integrity of residents of nursing homes. In the theoretical phase, a working definition of the management by nurses of residents' ego integrity is developed using a literature review. In the fieldwork phase, in-depth interviews are conducted with eight nurses from six nursing homes in Seoul and three other provinces. Finally, in the final analytical phase, the theoretical and fieldwork findings are interpreted and compared. Results: Two components, assessment and intervention, of the approach by nurses to managing the ego integrity of residents of nursing homes were identified. Assessment incorporates 10 attributes in the following three dimensions: ”identifying the extent to which residents' basic needs are being fulfilled,” ”determining how residents achieve friendly relationships with others,” and ”determining how each resident creates a harmonious view of his or her life.” Intervention incorporates nine attributes in the following two dimensions: ”helping residents develop a positive view of life” and ”helping residents make the best use of their remaining functional abilities.” Conclusions/Implications for Practice: By managing the ego integrity of residents, nurses have a significant influence on residents' sociopsychological adaptation, especially in the challenging environment of a nursing home. This study supports that managing the ego integrity of residents of nursing homes is an important and practical component of the role played by nurses and of the aid and care they provide. Furthermore, the findings verify the effectiveness of intervention studies in examining assessment tools and developing guidelines for ego-integrity management.起始頁-結束頁：1-12資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003945篇名：Psychometric Testing of an Indonesian-Version Diabetes Self-Management Instrument作者：Henik Tri RAHAYU;Ching-Min CHEN關鍵字：instrument development and validation;self-management;diabetes;primary healthcare期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Self-management is one of the vital elements in diabetes management for adults with Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Although the number of people with T2DM in Indonesia has risen, clinical understanding of the problems related to practicing diabetes self-management (DSM) is limited because of the lack of a valid measurement instrument. The 35-item Diabetes Self-Management Instrument (DSMI-35) is one instrument widely used in research to assess DSM-related behavior among patients with diabetes. Purpose: This study was designed to translate the psychometric properties of the Indonesian version of the DSMI-35 and evaluate the efficacy of this instrument in a sample of Indonesian adults with T2DM. Methods: Forward and backward translation processes were used to translate the DSMI-35 into Indonesian (IDN-DSMI). Then, the translation equivalence, content validity, face validity, construct validity, and internal consistency were assessed using a sample of 222 Indonesian adults with T2DMfrom eight public health centers. Confirmatory factor analysis was used to test the data. Results: The confirmatory factor analysis confirmed that the 35 items all had acceptable goodness of fit. Although the analysis supported removing several of the items, removal of these items was not theoretically justified. The average variance extracted was acceptable, and composite reliability was satisfied. The Cronbach's alphawas .96 for the IDN-DSMI and .84-.93 for the subscales. The significant interitem correlations between some items were consistent with the findings of other previous studies. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The IDN-DSMI is a valid and reliable instrument that may be used to measure DSM behavior in Indonesian patients with T2DM in primary healthcare settings.起始頁-結束頁：1-13資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004036篇名：A Path to Better Nursing: Fostering Person-Centered, Proactive Nursing Care作者：Shiow-Ching SHUN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷6期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004157篇名：Health Professionals' Perspectives on the Efficacy of Using Comprehensive Care to Improve Outcomes in Patients With Traumatic Injury作者：Hsing-Ju LU;Hsiu-Mei HUANG;Tsai-Yun HSIAO;Chang-Chiao HUNG;Wei-Ting LIN;Bih-O LEE關鍵字：focus groups;traumatic injury outcomes;health professionals期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Barriers related to comprehensive posttrauma care and health outcome monitoring exist. The insights and perspectives of health professionals on this issue may help integrate care experiences to provide continuous care to patients with traumatic injury. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore the perspectives of health professionals with regard to comprehensive care to improve the outcomes of patients with traumatic injury. Methods: Data were collected at two teaching hospitals in Taiwan. In total, 28 health professionals across various disciplines were interviewed in five focus groups. Results: Six themes were delineated, including ”wound care is a primary concern for patients,” ”ineffective health education during the hospital stay,” ”patients and families worry about postinjury conditions,” ”current continuity of care is not effective,” ”lack of standards for discharge planning,” and ”incorporation of interdisciplinary care to improve patient outcomes.” Conclusions: The experiences of health professionals are useful to the establishment of a foundation for trauma case management and interdisciplinary care for hospitals.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003968篇名：The Influence of Intrinsic Motivation on Pay Satisfaction Among Caregivers in Residential Home for the Elderly in China: The Mediating Role of Job Burnout作者：Enjian WANG;Hongwei HU;Hongting LIU;Shan MAO;Ruihua CHANG;Wei JIANG關鍵字：caregiver;intrinsic motivation;job burnout;pay satisfaction;China期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: According to the theory of compensating differentials, caregivers with high levels of intrinsic motivation should exhibit a higher-than-average satisfaction with their pay. Whereas studies conducted in Western countries have provided empirical evidence for the theory of compensating differentials in various care settings, few studies have been conducted in China that focus on caregivers employed in residential homes for the elderly (RHE). The sociodemographic characteristics of caregivers in China different significantly from their counterparts in Western countries. Purpose: This study was developed to analyze the mediating role of job burnout to assess the influence of intrinsic motivation on pay satisfaction among caregivers in RHE. Methods: Structural equation modeling was used to examine the influences of intrinsic motivation on pay satisfaction in a sample of 1,212 caregivers employed in RHE in China by analyzing the mediating role of job burnout. Results: Intrinsic motivation was found to relate positively to pay satisfaction (β = .11, p ＜ .05). Negative relationships were identified between intrinsic motivation and job burnout (β = <U+2212>.46, p ＜ .01) and between job burnout and pay satisfaction (β=<U+2212>.13, p＜.01). Job burn-out was found to have a significant mediating effect on the relationship between intrinsic motivation and pay satisfaction (β = .06, p ＜ .01). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: A significant relationship was found between intrinsic motivation and pay satisfaction, with job burnout playing a mediating role in caregivers employed in RHE in China. This research has profound implications for nursing education, practice, and research. First, greater efforts should be focused on instilling nursing values in nursing students to foster intrinsic motivation. Second, nonpecuniary rewards may be offered to caregivers to acknowledge the values of care work and strengthen intrinsic motivation. Third, a supportive working climate should be fostered to reduce job burnout. Fourth, caregivers should be informed of their rights to decent pay and their right to bargain collectively through unions. Fifth, appropriate public policies should be implemented to provide pay for caregivers at levels that recognize and appreciate their intrinsic motivation.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003999篇名：Disability Severity and Home-Based Care Quality in Older Adults: The Mediating Effects of Social Support and Caregiver Competence作者：Wei HUANG;Bin HE;Yu Huan WANG;Wen Juan MA;Jia ZHOU關鍵字：structural equation model;disability severity;home-based care quality;Kazakh older adults with disabilities;primary family caregiver期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The lack of adequate medical care, healthcare, and older adult care in remote, low-income, rural Kazakh areas of China is a particular concern that should be prioritized for improvement. Purpose: This study was designed to explore the relationship between the variables of disability severity, social support, and caregiver competence and the quality of home-based care in a population of Kazakh older adults with disabilities and to analyze the path between severity of disability and quality of home-based care in this population. Methods: A cross-sectional survey was conducted on 335 Kazakh older adults with disabilities living in Xinjiang, China, and their primary informal caregivers. Disability severity was assessed using the Activities of Daily Living Scale, caregiver competence was assessed using the Family Caregiver Task Inventory, social support was assessed using the Social Support Rating Scale, and home-based care quality was assessed using the Family Caregiving Consequences Inventory Scale. Path analysis was used to check the effects of other variables on the quality of home-based care. Results: Significant correlations were found among disability severity, caregiver competence, social support, and home-based care quality. Disability severity was shown to have a 29.28% direct effect on home-based care quality and a 70.72% indirect effect through social support and caregiver competence. Conclusions: The results of this study confirm that better social support and caregiver competence improves the quality of home-based care available to older adults with disabilities. Policymakers should give priority to improving the quality of care provided to community-dwelling older adults with severe disabilities. Furthermore, health management departments should provide informal caregiver training that teaches care and rehabilitation knowledge and skills to improve the competencies of caregivers.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000040510篇名：Facilitators of Self-Initiated HIV Testing Among Youths: A Qualitative Study作者：Oluwamuyiwa Winifred ADEBAYO;Joseph P. DE SANTIS;Karina A. GATTAMORTA;Natalia Andrea VILLEGAS關鍵字：self-initiated HIV testing;youth;HIV testing;qualitative descriptive期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Youth experience disparities in HIV infection but have significantly low rates of HIV testing that lead to late diagnoses, increased transmission rates, and adverse health outcomes. There is limited knowledge regarding self-initiated HIV testing, which is a promising strategy for improving testing rates among youth. Purpose: This study aimed to identify the facilitators of self-initiated HIV testing among youth. Method: Thirty youths aged 18-24 years were recruited to participate in a qualitative descriptive study. Potential participants were recruited from a combination of HIV testing sites, including community testing events, a community-based organization, an adolescent health clinic, and a college campus. A demographic and sexual history questionnaire and audio-recorded interviews were used to collect data. Transcribed interviews were analyzed using qualitative content analysis. Results: Salient themes and subthemes that explain the study findings are as follows: testing within the context of a sexual relationship (e.g., infidelity), support and influence from social relationships (e.g., family support), taking the initiative for health (e.g., signs and symptoms of infection), HIV testing preferences (e.g., free testing), and HIV testing experiences (e.g., provision of other health services). Conclusions: The findings of this study advance scholarly understanding regarding the predictors of self-initiated testing and provide critical information necessary to further improve evidence-based nursing clinical practice and develop public health nursing interventions that target self-initiated HIV testing. Encouraging self-initiated HIV testing is an effective approach to increasing testing rates and, consequently, preventing new HIV transmissions in this vulnerable population.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000039011篇名：Effects of an ActiveMusic Therapy Programon Functional Fitness in Community Older Adults作者：Shu-Ya CHAN;Chun-Fei CHEN關鍵字：active group music therapy;community older adults;functional fitness期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Health problems common among older adults living in community settings include a lack of functional fitness. Many studies have confirmed that exercises and static music therapy improve physical and psychological health problems. Exercise programs involving music have a higher frequency of attendance and motivation than other exercise programs. Active participation in active group music therapy results in better therapeutic effects. Purpose: This study was designed to test the effectiveness of a 3-month active group music therapy program on the functional fitness of community older adults in Taiwan. Methods: A quasi-experimental design with repeated measures was applied. A convenience cluster sample of older adults was drawn from seven senior-citizen activity centers in southern Taiwan. All participants were assigned to either an experimental group (n = 77) or a comparison group (n = 69) based on the requests of each senior center. The experimental group participated in the active group music therapy program for 3 months (twice per week and 60 minutes per session). The comparison group maintained their daily activities. Each participant's level of functional fitness was measured at baseline and at 1 and 3 months after the start of the intervention. Results: Seventy-one participants in the experimental group and 62 participants in the comparison group completed the 3-month study. At the 1-month measurement, the experimental group had greater improvements in cardiopulmonary fitness, upper body flexibility, lower body flexibility, upper limb muscle power, lower limb muscle endurance, and balance than the comparison group (all ps ＜ .05). These significant improvements persisted through the 3-month intervention (all ps ＜ .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Active group music therapy is an effective complementary and alternative therapy for improving six items of functional fitness in community-dwelling older adults. Healthcare professionals may incorporate this active group music therapy program as a health promotion activity for older adults living in community settings.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000039112篇名：Effects of Predischarge Patient Education Combined With Postdischarge Follow-Ups on Self-Care, Readmission, Sleep, and Depression in Patients With Heart Failure作者：Hsing-Mei CHEN;Shan-Tair WANG;Shyh-Jong WU;Chee-Siong LEE;Susan J. FETZER;Liang-Miin TSAI關鍵字：heart failure;predischarge patient education;postdischarge follow-up;self-care;readmission期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Patients with heart failure rarely engage in adequate self-care. Greater emphasis on self-care discharge readiness is needed. Purpose: This study examined the effects of a predischarge educational program combined with 1 year of postdischarge follow-up on self-care behaviors, readmission, sleep quality, and depression in patients with heart failure. Methods: A longitudinal, nonequivalent two-group pretest-posttest design was used. The intervention group received tailored education and follow-ups, whereas the control group received routine predischarge heart-failure education from direct care nurses only. Measurements included the self-care maintenance and self-care management subscales of the Self-Care of Heart Failure Index, Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index, Patient Health Questionnaire-9, and readmission rate. Data obtained at baseline and at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months postdischarge were analyzed using linear mixed models with both intention-to treat and per-protocol approaches. The propensity score was used to adjust for the confounding effects of the New York Heart Association functional class and left ventricular ejection fraction. Results: Of the 62 patients with heart failure (28 in the intervention group and 34 in the control group) who were sampled at baseline, 47 (n = 25 vs. n = 22) provided data over the entire course of this 1-year study (76% retention rate). The per-protocol analysis did not find significant differences for any variables. However, the intention-to-treat analysis showed that the intervention group significantly improved in self-care maintenance at 6 months and self-care management at 12 months after hospital discharge, with fewer, albeit not significantly fewer, first and subsequent hospital readmissions than the control group. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The effect of this intervention was not found to be substantial, indicating a need to design more efficacious and powerful interventions. Hospitalized patients must receive patient education before discharge to foster their self-care knowledge and skills regarding self-care at home. Strategies are needed to help nurses provide patient education in a time-efficient manner.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000039513篇名：Effects of Patient Activation Intervention on Chronic Diseases: A Meta-Analysis作者：Mei-Yu LIN;Wei-Shih WENG;Renny Wulan APRILIYASARI;Pham VAN TRUONG;Pei-Shan TSAI關鍵字：chronic disease;meta-analysis;depression;anxiety;self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Patient activation has been described as a potential strategy to improve chronic disease self-management. However, the effects of patient activation interventions on psychological and behavioral outcomes have not been systematically evaluated. Purpose: This study was designed to evaluate the effects of patient activation interventions on physiological, psychological, behavioral, and health-related quality of life outcomes in patients with chronic diseases. Methods: We systematically searched four databases (PubMed, Cochrane, CINAHL, and Embase) from inception to September 1, 2017. We identified English- and Chinese-language published reports of randomized controlled trials that evaluated the effects of patient activation interventions for adults with chronic diseases. Study selection, data extraction, and quality assessment were performed by two reviewers independently. We summarized the intervention effects with Hedges's g values and 95% confidence intervals using a random-effects model. We used the Cochrane Handbook to assess the methodological quality of the randomized controlled trials. Results: Twenty-six randomized controlled trials were included in the qualitative synthesis and meta-analysis. In terms of overall study quality, most of the included studies were affected by performance and detection bias. Patient activation interventions produced significant effects on outcomes related to physiological, psychological, behavioral, and health-related quality of life in the context of chronic diseases. The following effect sizes were obtained: (a) physiological, namely, glycated hemoglobin = -0.31 (p ＜ .01), systolic blood pressure = -0.20 (p ＜ .01), diastolic blood pressure = -0.80 (p = .02), body weight = -0.12 (p = .03), and low-density lipoprotein = -0.21 (p = .01); (b) psychological, namely, depression = -0.16 (p ＜ .01) and anxiety = -0.25 (p = .01); (c) behavioral, namely, patient activation = 0.33 (p ＜ .01) and self-efficacy = 0.57 (p ＜ .01); and (d) health-related quality of life = 0.25 (p = .01). Conclusions: Patient activation interventions significantly improve patients' physiological, psychosocial, and behavioral health statuses. Healthcare providers should implement patient activation interventions that tailor support to the individual patients' level of patient activation and strengthen the patients' role in managing their healthcare to improve chronic-disease-related health outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：1-16資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000038714篇名：Mobile-Application-Based Interventions for Patients With Hypertension and Ischemic Heart Disease: A Systematic Review作者：Jin Yi CHOI;Heejung CHOI;GyeongAe SEOMUN;Eun Jung KIM關鍵字：mobile applications;hypertension;myocardial ischemia;systematic review期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Hypertension and ischemic heart disease are major causes of adult mortality. Related interventions to manage these conditions are important to implement during long, symptom-free periods. The recent proliferation of smartphones has spawned numerous health interventions that rely on mobile applications. Purpose: This systematic review was designed to summarize and analyze research on interventions using mobile applications for patients with hypertension and ischemic heart disease. Methods: We searched for related studies published from January 2006 to August 2017 on MEDLINE,EMBASE, CINAHL, and three Korean databases. Seventeen studies were identified and evaluated against eligibility criteria that included a focus on patients with hypertension or ischemic heart disease and a discussion of the detailed effects of a mobile-app-based intervention. All of the identified studies were evaluated qualitatively using a methodology checklist. Results: Twelve of the 17 studies were deemed as of acceptable quality according to the Scottish Intercollegiate Guideline Network quality assessment. According to the National Institutes of Health quality assessment tool, one article was of fair quality and four articles were of poor quality. Monitoring, education, and reminders were identified as application interventions. The effects of the app interventions were analyzed according to physiological factors, cognitive and behavioral factors, and psychological factors. Of the seven studies that measured blood pressure in patients with hypertension, five studies reported that the app-based interventions reduced blood pressure. Two of three studies showed a significant decrease of body mass index in patients with ischemic heart disease after the app-based interventions compared to the control group. Five of seven studies reported a significant change in medication adherence. Several studies showed different outcomes according to the disease, but the limited number of eligible studies was insufficient to demonstrate a conclusive effect. Conclusions: To ensure the long-term effects of mobile-application-based interventions, healthcare professionals should consider the functions of mobile applications. Moreover, because the focus of these interventions may differ based on the nature of the disease, it is recommended that the composition of interventions be tailored to the specific disease.起始頁-結束頁：1-19資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000038215篇名：Emerging Role of Nurse Scientists in Precision Health作者：Hsiao-Yean CHIU期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷5期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000040416篇名：A Systematic Review of Behavioral Outcomes for Leadership Interventions Among Health Professionals作者：Michelle CLEARY;Rachel KORNHABER;Deependra Kaji THAPA;Sancia WEST;Denis VISENTIN關鍵字：health professionals;leadership;leadership interventions;program development;systematic review期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Healthcare requires effective leadership to improve patient outcomes, manage change, and achieve organizational goals. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate interventions aimed at improving leadership behavior in health professionals. Methods: Asystematic literature review of key databases (PubMed, CINAHL, Embase, and Scopus) was performed in September 2018. Data were extracted and synthesized. Results: Thirty-three articles from 31 studies met the inclusion criteria. Self-reported leadership behavior showed a significant postprogram improvement. Objective observations were more likely to show improved leadership behavior than subjective observations. Face-to-face delivery of leadership development was more effective than online delivery. Interventions incorporating the elements of personal development planning, self-directed learning, workplace-based learning, and reflection were more likely to develop leadership behavior. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Leadership interventions had a beneficial effect on the leadership behaviors of participants based on both subjective and objective changes in behavior. In addition to focusing on individual skill development, interventions that aim to develop leadership should consider the organizational, social, cultural, and political contexts in which behavioral change is expected. Workplace-based learning should be included in program development.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000039717篇名：The Experiences of Couples Affected by Stroke and Nurses Managing Patient Rehabilitation: A Descriptive Study in Singapore作者：Sheena RAMAZANU;Doris LEUNG;Vico Chung Lim CHIANG關鍵字：stroke;couples;rehabilitation;nurses;recovery;experiences期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Stroke in a family affects both patients and their spousal caregivers. Despite advances in the medical management of stroke, less is known about the social and cultural factors that impact couples regarding stroke recovery. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore the experiences of stroke from the perspectives of couples affected by stroke and the nurses managing patient rehabilitation. Methods: An interpretive descriptive study was conducted. Purposive sampling was used to enroll 17 participants, comprising eight nurses, five spousal caregivers, and four stroke survivors. Individual, in-depth interviews were performed at a rehabilitation hospital in Singapore in June 2018. Results: The primary theme was the diverse meanings of stroke recovery attributed to limited conversations about the care decisions made by couples and rehabilitation nurses. The second theme was the challenges in nursing responsibilities that hindered the recovery of patients with stroke. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The meaning of recovery differs between patients and their informal and formal care providers. This issue should be explored in patient-provider conversations, as these conversations highlight the values and preferences that affect the stroke recovery trajectory. Enhancing shared decision making by patients, spousal caregivers, and healthcare providers during the stroke trajectory may promote the alignment of values that are critical to the stroke recovery experience. Further research into whether and how to incorporate shared decision making in rehabilitation hospital settings as an interventional component is warranted to better support stroke survivors before discharge.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000039218篇名：Person-Centered Care, Job Stress, and Quality of Life Among Long-Term Care Nursing Staff作者：HeeKyung CHANG;Chorong GIL;Hyejin KIM;Hanju BEA關鍵字：job stress;long-term care facility;nurse;person-centered care;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Although it has been established that person-centered care is an essential aspect in long-term care facilities, the relationship between person-centered care and job stress among nursing staff and the effect of this relationship on their quality of life are not clear. Purpose: This study aims to investigate correlations among job stress, quality of life, and person-centered care of nurses as well as factors affecting the person-centered care abilities of nursing staff working at long-term care hospitals. Methods: Nursing staff (N= 183) in three long-term care hospitals in South Korea completed a questionnaire on job stress, quality of life, and person-centered care. Data were analyzed using the SPSS 22.0 program for descriptive statistics, using an independent t test, a one-way analysis of variance, Pearson's correlation coefficient, and multiple stepwise regression analyses. Results: Significant factors found to be associated with person-centered care included the quality of life (r = .411, p ＜ .001) and job stress (r = -.305, p ＜ .001) of the participant. The regression model with job stress and quality of life as predictor variables accounted for 29.2% of the variance in person-centered care. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Higher quality of life and lower job stress were found to increase the person-centered care abilities of nurses in long-term care facilities.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000039819篇名：Properties of the Early Symptom Measurement of Post-Stroke Depression: Concurrent Criterion Validity and Cutoff Scores作者：Jufang LI;Linda Denise OAKLEY;Roger L. BROWN;Yun LI;Yong LUO關鍵字：post-stroke depression (PSD);concurrent criterion validity;patients with acute stroke;cutoff scores期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Early-stage post-stroke depression (PSD) increases the risk of stroke-related disability and mortality in the first year of recovery. Presently available screening measures were developed to assess major depression, and none used a PSD screening criterion that was systematically developed and tested in populations of patients with acute stroke. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the concurrent criterion validity and cutoff scoring of the Early Symptom Measurement of Post-Stroke Depression (ESM-PSD) instrument in hospitalized patients with acute stroke. Methods: Purposive recruitment of newly admitted patients yielded a qualified sample of 139 nonaphasic participants who were 7-30 days post mild-to-moderate stroke confirmed by computed tomography and magnetic resonance images. Participants responded to the ESM-PSD and Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression-24 (HAMD-24). Results: The mean number of post-stroke days was 11.99 (SD = 7.68). Cronbach's alpha estimates of internal consistency were ESM-PSD = .90 and HAMD-24 = .76. ESM-PSD measurement sensitivity and specificity were superior. The following three ESM-PSD cutoff scores, determined by the receiver operating characteristic curve, were used to assess clinically relevant early-symptom levels: no PSD ＜ 14.5, low PSD = 14.5-25.5, moderate PSD = 25.5-45.5, high PSD <U+2265> 45.5. Conclusion/Implications for Practice: ESM-PSD cutoff scores show the expected correspondence with mild-moderate-severe HAMD-24 symptoms, which was evidenced by the high area under the receiver operating characteristic curve. Planned follow-up research will assess the efficacy of using ESM-PSD scores to detect increased risk of major depression onset in patients with acute stroke.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000038020篇名：The Effects of Shared Decision Making on Different Renal Replacement Therapy Decisions in Patients With Chronic Kidney Disease作者：Ya-Fang HO;Yu-Chi CHEN;Chiu-Chin HUANG;Wen-Yu HU;Kuan-Chia LIN;I-Chuan LI關鍵字：chronic kidney disease;renal replacement therapy;shared decision-making;decision self-efficacy;decisional conflict期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The prevalence and incidence of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in Taiwan are the highest of any country in the world. The different renal replacement therapies that are adopted by patients with ESRD significantly affect their social roles and daily life. However, because of the complexities of different renal replacement therapies, patients may be unsure of which to choose. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the effectiveness of a shared decision-making (SDM) program regarding different renal replacement therapies for patients with chronic kidney disease. Methods: A quasi-experimental design was conducted at two similar regional hospitals in Miaoli County, Taiwan. One hospital hosted the intervention group, and the other hospital hosted the control group. The 31 participants in the intervention group took part in a SDM program. The 36 control group participants took part in the pre-ESRD care program. Data collection included demographic and disease characteristics, decisional conflict scale, and decision self-efficacy scale. Results were analyzed using independent t test, Fisher's exact test, generalized estimating equation, and paired t tests. Results: The study results revealed that the intervention group experienced a significant increase in decision self-efficacy and a significant decrease in decisional conflict at 1 month after receiving the SDM intervention in comparison to before and immediately after receiving the intervention. Moreover, the intervention group had higher decision self-efficacy and lower decisional conflict than the control group. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The SDM program may be an effective intervention for complex decision-making processes, such as the process involved in making renal replacement treatment decisions. The SDM program group intervention improved decisional conflict and decision self-efficacy. Thus, to improve patients' decision-making processes, the application of an SDM program focused on the personal values and opinions of patients with ESRD will be necessary. Physicians and case managers of patients with ESRD should act in complementary and cooperative roles in SDM programs.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000038601篇名：Effects of Art and Reminiscence Therapy on Agitated Behaviors Among Older Adults With Dementia作者：Chiu-Yueh HSIAO;Shu-Li CHEN;Yu-Shuang HSIAO;Hsiu-Yun HUANG;Shu-Hui YEH關鍵字：agitated behavior;art therapy;reminiscence therapy;older adults;dementia期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Cognitive degeneration and agitated behavior symptoms of dementia in older adults are the main causes of disability and inability and increase the cost of medical care. Agitated behavior symptoms of dementia are the main causes of early institutionalization and make caregivers exhausted. Purpose: The aim of this study was to examine the effects of art therapy and reminiscence therapy on the alleviation of agitated behaviors in older adults with dementia. Methods: An experimental research design with two experimental groups and one comparison group was conducted to examine the effects for each group on agitated behaviors. Participants were recruited from two dementia care centers in central and northern Taiwan. The study included 54 older individuals who met the sampling criteria and completed the data collection process. The participants were randomly allocated into the art therapy group (n = 24), the reminiscence therapy group (n = 22), and the comparison group (n = 8). The intervention consisted of 50-minute sessions conducted weekly for 12 weeks. Regular activities were continued in the comparison group. The structured questionnaires were completed, and observations of agitated behaviors were collected before the intervention and at 1 and 6 weeks after the intervention. Results: Significant differences were found in agitated behavior symptoms at the three time points in the art therapy group, whereas reminiscence therapy was found to have had a clear and immediate effect on decreasing agitated behavior. The generalized estimating equation exchange model test revealed a significant and sustained, postintervention effect of art therapy on agitated behavior. In contrast, no significant and sustained effect on agitated behavior was observed in the reminiscence therapy group. Conclusions: The findings of this study support that art therapy may have a positive effect on dementia-associated agitated behaviors in institutionalized older adults. Reminiscence therapy activities conducted weekly for 50 minutes each session did not reach statistically significant implications. It is suggested that future studies consider conducting art and reminiscence therapies for a 16-week duration with two weekly sessions to evaluate the effectiveness of the therapy. The duration of follow-up should be extended as well in future studies.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003732篇名：Job Demands and the Effects on Quality of Life of Employed Family Caregivers of Older Adults With Dementia: A Cross-Sectional Study作者：Yu-Nu WANG;Wen-Chuin HSU;Yea-Ing Lotus SHYU關鍵字：dementia;family caregivers;job demands;older adults;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Employed family caregivers are affected by job demands, which can affect quality of care provided to recipients. However, it is important to understand how job demands and the ability to reconcile employment and caregiving influence family caregivers' quality of life. Purpose: The aim of this study was to examine the extent to which job demands influenced quality of life for employed family caregivers of older adults with dementia in Taiwan. Methods: This cross-sectional study analyzed secondary data from self-completed questionnaires collected from December 2010 to December 2011. Participants were 214 employed family caregivers of older adults with dementia in Taiwan. How job demands and caregiving influence quality of life was determined with hierarchical multiple regression analysis. Job demands included working hours, workplace inflexibility, work inefficiency, and difficulty in reconciling work and family caregiving. Results: After controlling for demographics, caregiving resources, and caregiving role demands, employed family caregivers of older adults with dementia with fewer working hours and greater work efficiency reported significantly better quality of life (β = <U+2212>.130, p = .049; β = <U+2212>.263, p ＜ .001) than those with more working hours and less work efficiency. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Employed family caregivers of older adults with dementia who had more working hours and less work efficiency had a greater likelihood of poorer quality of life than other employed family caregivers. Clinicians could use these findings to identify groups at high risk for poor quality of life. We suggest developing policies and interventions to help employed family caregivers of older adults with dementia to reduce working hours and improve work efficiency in order to improve quality of life, which could also improve quality of care for recipients.起始頁-結束頁：1-12資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003833篇名：Autonomy in Long-Term Care and Nurses' Participation in Health Policy作者：Shiow-Ru CHANG期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004004篇名：Functional Capacity and Life Satisfaction in Older Adult Residents Living in Long-Term Care Facilities: The Mediator of Autonomy作者：Li-Hsing LIU;Chia-Chan KAO;Jeremy C. YING關鍵字：life satisfaction;functional capacity;autonomy;elderly residents;long-term care facility期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Although relationships among functional capacity, autonomy, and life satisfaction have been identified, little is known about how the mechanism of autonomy mediates functional capacity and life satisfaction in older adult residents of long-term care (LTC) facilities. Purpose: The objectives of the study were to examine the relationship between functional capacity and life satisfaction in older adult residents living in LTC facilities and to test the extent to which autonomy mediated that relationship. Methods: A cross-sectional and correlational study was conducted with a convenience sample. Two hundred twenty-eight participants were recruited from 10 LTC facilities in Kaohsiung City. Four structured instruments were used to collect data: the life satisfaction questionnaire, the Chinese version of Perceived Enactment Autonomy Scale, the Barthel Activity Daily Living Index, and a personal profile datasheet. Descriptive statistics, t tests, analysis of variance, Pearson correlations, and both simple and hierarchical linear regression models were analyzed. Results: Positive associations between life satisfaction and functional capacity (r = .183, p = .003) and autonomy (r = .469, p ＜ .001) were identified. Autonomy and functional capacity were significantly correlated (r = .278, p ＜ .001). After controlling for autonomy, the beta values reduced from .193 (p = .003) to .08 (p ＞ .05), and the explained variance reduced from 3.7% to 0.1% between functional capacity and life satisfaction. The results indicate that autonomy is significant as a mediator. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: To improve the life satisfaction of older adult residents of LTC facilities, facility managers and staff should develop a self-support program that encourages older adult residents to participate in physical activities and maintain autonomy.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/JNR.00000000000003625篇名：The Relationship Between Positive Perceptions Toward Organizational Politics and the Work-Related Outcomes of Nurses作者：Ali MOVAHEDI;Mohammad BIDKHORI;Tajmohammad ARAZI;Mostafa KHALEGHIPOUR;Fatemeh AMINI關鍵字：organizational politics;job burnout;nurses' stress;nursing satisfaction;turnover intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Organizational politics (OP) exists to varying degrees in all organizations. OP plays an important role in creating synergy between employees and the goals of the organization. Purpose: We aimed to investigate the relationship between positive perceptions toward OP and work-related outcomes in nurses, including stress level, burnout level, turnover intention, and job satisfaction. Methods: This descriptive, analytical study was conducted from April to June 2018 on nurses at Neyshabur University of Medical Sciences Hospitals in Neyshabur, northeastern Iran. The study included 280 nurses working in two teaching hospitals. Five standardized tools were used, including the Perception of Organizational Politics Scale, the Nursing Stress Scale, the Burnout Measure Scale, the Turnover Intention Inventory Scale, and the Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire. Results: The results indicate that the participants did not hold positive perceptions toward OP. The mean Perception of Organizational Politics Scale score was 2.63 ± 0.55. Multiple linear regression analyses showed a significant and positive relationship between positive perception toward OP and job satisfaction and a negative relationship between positive perception toward OP and turnover intention, burnout, and job stress. Conclusions: Nurses who perceive the work environment to be political will experience greater levels of stress, turnover intention, and burnout and lower levels of job satisfaction. Politics is an issue that should be handled by all levels of management. Managers should use supportive, nonpolitical workplace strategies to improve the work-related outcomes of employees.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003816篇名：Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: Obstacles in Coping作者：Ozlem F<U+0130>DAN;<U+015E>enay TAKMAK;Arife <U+015E>anlialp ZEYREK;Asiye KARTAL關鍵字：affecting factors;nursing;obstacles encountered;patients;type 2 diabetes mellitus期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Diabetes mellitus is a major global threat to public health. Reducing the daily obstacles of coping with the disease for patients with diabetes may improve management. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate daily obstacles to coping with Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and related factors. Methods: A descriptive and cross-sectional design was used. Data were collected from 186 patients with T2DM who were hospitalized in an endocrinology clinic in Turkey. The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale and the Diabetes Obstacles Questionnaire were used to collect data. Multiple linear regression analysis was performed to explore the predictors of obstacles to coping in patients with T2DM. Results: The highest mean score was achieved on the obstacles to coping with diabetes (2.57 ± 3.78) among the subscales of the Diabetes Obstacles Questionnaire. After regression analysis, level of treatment compliance was identified as the most significant predictor (β = .289, p ＜ .001). Anxiety, depression, smoking status, and highest level of education were also identified as significant predictors. Conclusions: On the basis of these results, nurses should plan and implement interventions to improve treatment compliance and assist patients to overcome obstacles to disease management. Moreover, patient anxiety, depression, and lifestyle behaviors should be addressed.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003797篇名：The Effect of Semirecumbent and Right Lateral Positions on the Gastric Residual Volume of Mechanically Ventilated, Critically Ill Patients作者：Zahra FARSI;Maa'soumeh KAMALI;Samantha BUTLER;Armin ZAREIYAN關鍵字：gastric residual;positioning;right lateral;semirecumbent;supine;tube feeding期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Delay in stomach discharge is a challenge for patients who are tube fed and may result in serious side effects such as pneumonia and malnutrition. Purpose: This study was designed to determine the respective effects of the semirecumbent (SR) supine and right lateral (RL) with a flatbed positions on the gastric residual volume (GRV) of mechanically ventilated, critically ill adult patients. Methods: A randomized, crossover clinical trial design was used to investigate GRV in 36 critically ill, ventilated adult patients who were hospitalized in the intensive care unit. GRV was measured at 3 hours after three consecutive feedings. GRV was first measured in all of the participants in the supine position; after which, participants were randomly assigned into one of two therapeutic positioning groups (Group A: assessment in the SR position and then the RL position; Group B: assessment in the RL position and then the SR position). Results: GRV was significantly lower in both the SR and RL positions than in the supine position. GRV in the SR and RL positions did not vary significantly. The in-group measurements for GRV did not significantly differ for any of the three positions. In Group A, GRV was significantly lower at each subsequent measurement point. Conclusion/Implications for Practice: Positioning patients in the RL and SR positions rather than in the supine position is an effective strategy to reduce GRV. Furthermore, placing patients in either the RL or SR position is an effective intervention to promote faster digestion and feedings.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003778篇名：The Related Factors of Nurses' Participation and Perceived Benefits and Barriers in Health Policy Making作者：Masoumeh BARZEGAR SAFARI;Mohammadkarim BAHADORI;Khalil ALIMOHAMMADZADEH關鍵字：nurse;health policy;participation;barriers;benefits期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Nurses play a critical role in providing good health services. Purpose: The aim of this study was to examine the factors related to the participation of nurses in the provision of health services and the perceived benefits and barriers to their participation in health policy making. Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted in several hospitals affiliated with the Iran University of Medical Sciences during the first half of 2018 on a sample size of 220 people. A standard, self-management questionnaire was used to collect the data, and SPSS 21.0 software was used for data analysis. None of the demographic characteristics were found to be significantly associated with nurse participation in or the perceived barriers and benefits to health policy making. Results: The results of this study show that the participants were involved only moderately in health policy making. ”Providing written reports on problems or receiving consultation from a related official” was the performance item most frequently cited by the participants in terms of involvement, whereas ”Disappointment in work procedures” was the most frequently cited barrier item affecting involvement. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Despite the importance of the nursing role in health polices, this study indicates that nurses participate at only a moderate level in health policy-making activities. Providing more information to nurses regarding health policies, enhancing nurses' image of their job and their perceptions about the importance of their participation in the health policy, increasing partnerships with nurses at the upper levels of health services management, and supporting nursing professional organizations in the field of health policy are potential strategies for encouraging greater nursing participation in health policy making.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003859篇名：Effects of Auricular Acupressure in Patients on Hemodialysis作者：Eun Sook JUNG;Ae Kyung CHANG關鍵字：auricular acupressure;xerostomia;interdialytic weight gain;constipation;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Although studies on the effectiveness of self-management in limiting fluid intake in patients on hemodialysis have been conducted extensively, xerostomia, which is a powerful stimulus of fluid intake, has received scarce attention. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of a 4-week auricular acupressure treatment on xerostomia, salivary flow rate, interdialytic weight gain, constipation, and diet-related quality of life in patients on hemodialysis in Korea. Methods: This was a randomized controlled trial. Sixty patients on hemodialysis were randomly assigned to either the experimental group (n = 30) or the control group (n = 30). The experimental group received an auricular acupressure intervention, which included the application of skin tape with a Semen vaccariae seed on the five auricular acupoints, including the large intestine (CO7), San Jiao (CO17), middle triangular fossa (TF3), spleen (CO13), and upper tragus (TG1), for 4 weeks. The control group received only the application of skin tape without a seed on the same auricular acupoints for the same period. The outcome variables were as follows: xerostomia, measured using the visual analog scale; salivary flow rate, measured using the unstimulated whole saliva absorbed in oral cotton; interdialytic weight gain; the constipation assessment scale score; and the Quality of Life Related to Dietary Change Questionnaire results. Results: The experimental group scored significantly better than the control group in terms of xerostomia (p = .004), salivary flow rate (p = .010), constipation (p = .009), and diet-related quality of life (p ＜ .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Auricular acupressure may be an important tool for alleviating the negative symptoms of xerostomia and for improving quality of life in patients on hemodialysis. Nurses caring for patients on hemodialysis with both xerostomia and constipation may teach auricular acupressure to help patients self-manage their discomfort.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000037810篇名：Incidence and Risk Factors for Delirium in Older Patients Following Intensive Care Unit Admission: A Prospective Observational Study作者：Xiao LI;Lina ZHANG;Fang GONG;Yuhang AI關鍵字：aged;delirium;critical care;nursing;risk factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Both high prevalence and incidence rates of delirium occur frequently among patients aged 65 years or older in intensive care units (ICUs) and are accompanied by adverse outcomes. Because of lack of nursing staff resources and imperfect humanistic care, delirium is easily overlooked by both physicians and nurses in the ICU in Mainland China. Purpose: This study aimed to explore the incidence rate of delirium and to determine the risk factors among critically ill older patients. Methods: A prospective observational study was conducted on patients aged 65 years and older who were admitted consecutively to two ICUs of a university-affiliated hospital in China. The Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit and the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale were used to assess delirium status twice daily. Patient demographic, laboratory, medical, therapeutic, and prognostic data were collected. Results: One hundred fifteen patients were included as participants, with a median age of 70 years (range 65-93 years). Seventy-six (66.1%) patients presented with delirium. Half of the sample had a hypoactive subtype. Patients who developed delirium had a longer mean length of ICU stay, greater chance of physical restraints use, greater use of fentanyl, and poorer sleep quality. A logistic regression analysis revealed that poor sleep quality (OR = 10.74, 95% CI [1.59, 72.47]) and physical restraints (OR = 13.04, 95% CI [1.57, 107.94]) were significantly associated with delirium. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Delirium is a common aggravation in older patients following ICU admission. The factors found in this study to be independently associated with delirium include poor sleep quality and physical restraints. Both critical care physicians and nurses should pay greater attention to the quality of the ICU stay experienced by their older patients.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000038411篇名：Development and Psychometric Evaluation of a Fear of Dementia Scale for Community-Dwelling Older Adults作者：Minkyung LEE;Dukyoo JUNG關鍵字：dementia;fear;psychometrics;Rasch期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Negative attitudes toward dementia may pose an obstacle to the early diagnosis and treatment of this syndrome. However, because no scale has been designed to measure fear of dementia, a reliable and valid instrument that is able to measure accurately the multifaceted attributes of fear of dementia must be developed. Purpose: This study was designed to develop a scale to measure fear of dementia in community-dwelling older adults and to examine its validity and reliability. Methods: A preliminary version of the measurement scale was developed using a literature review and conceptual framework. Expert analysis of content validity, item analysis based on classic test theory and item response theory, factor analysis, reliability analysis, criterion validity test, and a Rasch model analysis were performed for the psychometric evaluation. Data were analyzed using SPSS 22.0, AMOS 22.0, and WINSTEPS 3.92.1. Results: The factor analysis revealed three dimensions, five factors, and 19 items that explain 78.44% of the total variance. The three dimensions are cognitive, social, and physical, and the five factors are (a) direct experience of precursor symptoms of dementia, (b) preliminary knowledge of dementia, (c) concerns about family burden, (d) shame, and (e) physical response. Conclusions: The Fear of Dementia Scale for older adults was shown to be valid and reliable. Therefore, this scale may be used to accurately measure the fear of dementia in elderly individuals. Using this scale to identify the level of fear of dementia will facilitate the early diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of dementia.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000037212篇名：The Effects of Aromatherapy on Postpartum Women: A Systematic Review作者：Shuo-Shin TSAI;Hsiu-Hung WANG;Fan-Hao CHOU關鍵字：aromatherapy;essential oils;postnatal;postpartum;systematic review期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The postpartum period is the most crucial but also the most fragile stage of most pregnancies. The health benefits of aromatherapy have recently become more widely accepted among medical experts. Although a number of studies have examined these health benefits, no systematic reviews have been conducted to assess the effects of aromatherapy on the psycho-physiological health of postpartum women. Purpose: This systematic review was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of aromatherapy interventions on the psycho-physiological health of postpartum women, to determine the methods that were used to measure intervention effectiveness, and to identify the types of interventions that were used. Methods: We searched for studies that evaluated the effects of aromatherapy on postpartum women published in the Chinese or English languages before March 2018.We used online databases such as the Taiwan Journal Index, Centre for European Policy Studies, Cumulative Index for Nursing and Allied Health Literature, Cochrane Library, PubMed, and Social Sciences Citation Index. The search keywords used were ”women,” AND ”postpartum,” OR ”postnatal” AND ”aromatherapy,” OR ”aroma,” OR ”essential oils.” Only randomized controlled trials including humans as study participants were included. The methodological quality of the trials was assessed using the modified Jadad scale. The quality of the full-text studies was assessed by three reviewers. Results: The 15 studies that were included in this systematic review were performed in Iran, England, and the United States and included 2,131 participants in total. The numbers of participants in each study ranged between 35 and 635. The review found that the effective duration of aromatherapy varied according to the essential oils that were selected. The visual analog scale was the most frequently used measure of postpartum pain. Most of the studies found that the aromatherapy intervention improved postpartum physiological and psychological health, with positive effects shown on anxiety, depression, distress, fatigue, mood, nipple fissure pain, physical pain, post-cesarean-delivery pain, post-cesarean-delivery nausea, postepisiotomy pain, postepisiotomy recovery, sleep quality, and stress. Most of the studies reported no serious intervention-related side effects. Conclusions: This systematic review may serve as a reference for healthcare workers in caring for postpartum women. Aromatherapy may be applied as a noninvasive complementary intervention to promote physio-psychological comfort in postpartum women.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000033113篇名：Changes in Health-Related Quality of Life for Older Persons With Cognitive Impairment After Hip Fracture Surgery: A Systematic Review作者：Wantonoro WANTONORO;Wen-Yu KUO;Yea-Ing Lotus SHYU關鍵字：health-related quality of life;cognitive impairment;hip fracture期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Hip fractures in persons with cognitive impairments represent a major public health issue in older populations that often results in poor health-related quality of life (HRQoL). Purpose: The aim of this systemic review was to examine the changes in HRQoL in older, cognitively impaired patients with hip fracture who had received surgical treatment. Methods: A literature search of PubMed, Scopus, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, and CINAHL (EBSCO) databases was conducted for studies published up to July 2018 that addressed the issue of HRQoL in cognitively impaired patients with hip fracture after surgery. Studies that met the following criteria were included: Patients with hip fracture were over 60 years old and had cognitive impairment or dementia, patients had undergone hip fracture repair surgery, HRQoL was determined using standardized questionnaires, a descriptive or interventional methodology was used, and the full-text article was available in English. Results: A primary search of databases yielded 1,528 studies, 621 duplicates were removed, and the remaining 907 abstracts were screened. Thirty-four full-text articles were deemed relevant for full review; of these, 10 articles met the criteria for inclusion in the review. Cognitive impairment was found to impact negatively on the patients' HRQoL after hip fracture surgery (n = 809). Severity of cognitive impairment was correlated with deterioration in HRQoL after hospital discharge. When compared with prefracture measures of HRQoL, the greatest deterioration in HRQoL post surgery occurred during the first 4 months after discharge. Impacts on HRQoL for patients with cognitive impairment at later time points differed depending on type of hip fracture and type of surgical treatment. However, for most of the patients, HRQoL remained relatively unchanged at 6, 12, and 24 months postdischarge. Conclusions: We recommend nursing care interventions for older persons with cognitive impairment be initiated immediately after surgery for hip fracture to prevent a significant decline in HRQoL. Further examination of interventions that are effective in maintaining HRQoL for these patients such as interdisciplinary care is necessary. In addition, the influences of hip fracture type and surgical approach on changes in HRQoL suggest a need for further investigations to determine what contributed to the observed inconsistencies in the outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：1-13資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000037114篇名：Gender Differences in Hypertension Treatment and Control in Young Adults作者：Ji-Soo KIM;Chul-Gyu KIM關鍵字：hypertension;treatment;control;young adult;gender期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Compared with older adults, young adults exhibit poor treatment and control of hypertension. However, little is known about the factors affecting the treatment and control of hypertension in young adults. Purpose: This study was aimed to identify the factors affecting the treatment and control of hypertension in early adulthood by gender in South Korea. Methods: This secondary data analysis study used a data set from the Korean National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. The inclusion criteria were as follows: (a) 19-44 years old and (b) having an indicator of hypertension (systolic blood pressure <U+2265> 140 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure <U+2265> 90 mmHg, or taking antihypertensive drugs). Seven hundred eighty participants were included in this study. The odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were derived using composite-sample multiple logistic regression. Results: In men, age, marital status, family history of hypertension, treatment of hyperlipidemia, abdominal obesity, high-sodium diet, cholesterol, and aerobic exercise were found to be associated with hypertension treatment and control. In women, age, employment status, cardiovascular risk factors, body mass index, high-sodium diet, and drinking were found to be associated with hypertension treatment and control. Conclusions: The factors affecting the treatment and control of hypertension differed between the two genders. Therefore, healthcare providers should consider the differences in the factors between the two genders in early adulthood. To improve the treatment and control of hypertension, the guidelines for treatment interventions and management should be gender-specific from early adulthood. Nurses should actively suggest health-related behavioral modifications such as performing aerobic exercise for young adult men and reducing alcohol consumption for women.起始頁-結束頁：1-14資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000035915篇名：Measurement of Nursing Outcomes From the Perspective of the Nursing Domain作者：Chich-Hsiu HUNG期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000038816篇名：Nursing Perspectives on the Impacts of COVID-19作者：Shu-Ching CHEN;Yeur-Hur LAI;Shiow-Luan TSAY期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000038917篇名：Development of a Simple and Practical Delirium Screening Tool for Use in Surgical Wards作者：Keisuke KUBOTA;Akihiro SUZUKI;Sachiko OHDE;Ui YAMADA;Ikumi FUJITANI;Aya KOITABASHI關鍵字：delirium;screening tool;surgical ward期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Delirium is an important and common medical condition, particularly in hospitalized patients, that is associated with adverse outcomes. The identification, prevention, and treatment of delirium are increasingly regarded as major public health priorities. Purpose: The aim of this study was to create a simple-to-use screening tool for delirium in hospitalized patients using clinical manifestations of delirium regularly observed by nurses. Methods: This study was conducted using data on 2,168 patients who had been admitted to the surgical ward between January 2011 and December 2014. Data were collected retrospectively from medical records. Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed, and a logistic regression model was constructed for the development of a predictive screening tool. After constructing a new screening tool for delirium, a receiver operating characteristic curve was drawn, the most appropriate cutoff value was decided, and the area under the curve was obtained. Bootstrapping was used for the internal model validation. Results: A screening tool for delirium(Subjective Delirium Screening Scale by Nurse) with a total score of 5 points was constructed as follows: 2 points for disorientation and 1 point each for restlessness, somnolence, and hallucination. The area under the curve for the Subjective Delirium Screening Scale by Nurse was 81.9% (95% CI [77.9%, 85.8%]), and the most appropriate cutoff value was determined to be 2 (sensitivity of 61.0% and specificity of 96.7%). Bootstrapped validation beta coefficients of the predictive factors were similar to the original cohort beta coefficients. Conclusions: We created a screening tool for delirium using factors that were regularly observed and recorded by nurses. This tool is simple and practical and has adequate diagnostic accuracy.起始頁-結束頁：1-5資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000036618篇名：Development of Fertility Preparedness Scale for Women Receiving Fertility Treatment作者：Sevcan FATA;Merlinda ALU<U+015E> TOKAT關鍵字：fertility;fertility preparedness;reliability;scale;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Stress has a negative impact on fertility by suppressing the secretion of fertility hormones. Although it is known that stress reduces the probability of conception and affects fertility negatively, scales that are now widely used to evaluate fertility preparedness include negative items. Positive statements are crucial to relieving stress in women. Using positive items in assessments of fertility preparedness in women may help reduce related stress. Purpose: This study was designed to develop the Fertility Preparedness Scale for women receiving fertility treatments. Methods: A methodological study was conducted in four fertility clinics between December 2015 and March 2016. Two hundred thirty women who had been diagnosed with primary or secondary infertility were enrolled as participants. A personal information form and the Fertility Preparedness Scale were used to collect data. Results: The Cronbach's alpha was .84 for the total scale and .76-.79 for the subscales. Factor analysis extracted three subscales that explained 52.93% of the total variance. The confirmatory factor analysis found a goodness of fit index of .80, a comparative fit index of .95, and a nonnormed fit index of .94. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This scale is valid and reliable for measuring the fertility preparedness of women who receive fertility treatment.起始頁-結束頁：1-6資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000036919篇名：Impacts of Fatigue, Stress, and Perceived Health Status on Women With Rheumatic Diseases: A Comparison Study作者：Hsuan-Man HUNG;Ming-Fu CHEN;Chung-Hey CHEN關鍵字：women's health;stress;fatigue;rheumatic diseases期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Rheumatic conditions, which increase in prevalence as populations age, are a growing public health problem that disproportionately affects women. Understanding the influences of rheumatic diseases (RDs) on fatigue, stress, and perceived health status is deemed important to the improvement of physical and mental health for women with RDs. Purpose: This study was designed to compare the fatigue, stress, and perceived physical and mental health status of women with RDs (RD group) with those of peers who did not have chronic illnesses (comparison group). Methods: A cross-sectional, purposive sample and comparative design was used. Four hundred forty-three women with a mean age of 46.2 years participated in this study. Those with physician-diagnosed RDs (n = 212) were enrolled in the RD group, and those without chronic disease were enrolled in the comparison group (n = 231). Measures used included a demographic datasheet, Fatigue Severity Scale, Perceived Stress Scale, and Short Form-12 Items Health Survey. Analysis of covariance was used to examine the intergroup differences for major variables based on demographic covariates. Results: The RD group reported significantly more fatigue and stress than the comparison group. Moreover, the RD group reported significantly poorer perceived physical health status, significantly poorer physical functioning and general health, and greater bodily pain compared with the comparison group. Conversely, the RD group reported significantly better perceived mental health status, significantly lower vitality, and better role emotional status than the comparison group. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings support the theory that RDs have a negative impact on perceived stress and fatigue in women. Physical function, bodily pain, and general health may be the most significantly affected domains of perceived physical health in women with RDs. Of note, with the exception of the vitality subscale, RDs did not adversely affect the perceived mental health of participants with RD in this study. Healthcare professionals should cooperate with clinical rheumatologists, psychologists, and physiotherapists to provide comprehensive care that includes long term education to help patients with RD self-manage stress, restore vitality, relieve pain, and increase physical function.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000035420篇名：Determinants of Workplace Bullying Types and Their Relationship With Depression Among Female Nurses作者：Ying-Ying KO;Yi LIU;Chi-Jane WANG;Hsiu-Yun LIAO;Yu-Mei LIAO;Hsing-Mei CHEN關鍵字：workplace bullying;depression;marital status;nurse期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Workplace bullying is commonly experienced by nurses worldwide. Purpose: This study was conducted to examine the determinants of different types of workplace bullying and their relationship to depression in female nurses. Methods: A cross-sectional correlational study was employed, and 484 female nurses from a large medical center in southern Taiwan completed the questionnaire. Data were analyzed using logistic regression analysis. Results: Being unmarried and working in medical/surgical units were found to be the major determinants of work-related bullying, whereas being unmarried was found to be the single determinant of person-related and physical-intimidation bullying. Moreover, work-related and person-related bullying were both found to be significant determinants of depression. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Nursing administrators should establish workplace-bullying prevention and management strategies by setting reasonable and equal workloads for nurses, assigning tasks equitably, and building depression-related support and consultation groups.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000036701篇名：Using Reflective Teaching Program to Explore Health-Promoting Behaviors in Nursing Students作者：Yi-Ya CHANG;Miao-Chuan CHEN關鍵字：nursing students;health promotion;reflective journal;reflective teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The attitudes of nurses toward health promotion affect patients. However, current classroom teaching does not provide nursing students with actual experiences. An experiential and reflective teaching design will help nursing students practice actual health behaviors and record their feelings. This will help nursing students better understand the difficulties and feelings experienced by nurses when encouraging patients to make behavioral changes in clinical settings. Purpose: This study aimed to explore the experiences and factors affecting health-promoting learning with reflective teaching in nursing students. Methods: This explorative study integrated the ”reflective assessment, engagement, and action-reflection” strategy of reflective teaching into the standard health-promotion teaching curriculum to understand the experiences of nursing students when executing health-promoting behaviors. Fifty-seven second year nursing students from a university in northern Taiwan participated in this course, which was conducted between September 2017 and January 2018. The data were collected from the contents of the reflective journals written by the nursing students and analyzed using thematic analysis. Results: The three health-promoting behaviors performed by most of the students were regular exercise, balanced and healthy diet, and adequate daily water intake. The feelings experienced by the nursing students during the execution of health-promoting behaviors included easier said than done, compromise and adjustment, and continuation of health behaviors. Accommodation, peer encouragement, and support were important, facilitating factors of health-promoting behaviors in this study. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this study may serve as a reference for nursing lecturers when employing reflective teaching in the classroom. Reflective teaching designs for actual experiences help nursing students experience the crucial factors and benefits of executing health-promoting behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003582篇名：Psychometric Evaluation of the Chinese Version of the Knowledge and Beliefs About Pain in Elderly Patients With Dementia Questionnaire作者：Pei-Chao LIN;Pi-Ling CHOU;Hui-Chen TSENG;Mei-Hui HSIEH;Li-Chan LIN關鍵字：belief;dementia;knowledge;pain;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The quality of pain management in hospitalized older adult patients with dementia is a crucial issue in healthcare. The knowledge and beliefs of nurses are known to predict their pain management intentions toward this particularly vulnerable patient population. Purpose: This study was designed to evaluate the reliability and validity of the Chinese version of the Knowledge and Beliefs About Pain in Elderly Patients With Dementia (KBPED-C) questionnaire using a sample of hospital nurses. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted. The 17-item KBPED-C was distributed between September 2013 and August 2014 to 350 nurses working at a hospital in northern Taiwan. Consistency assessment was conducted using Cronbach's alpha, and construct validity was examined using principal component analysis. Three hundred five nurses (19 men and 286 women) were enrolled using convenience sampling. Results: The mean age of the participants was 30.8 ± 5.8 years. The Cronbach's alpha for internal consistency was .86. The item-total correlation was acceptable. The observed content validity was strong, with a content validity index of .86. Construct validity testing revealed a four-factor structure that accounted for 55.2% of the total variance. The four factors of the KBPED-C questionnaire were ”general beliefs about pain and aging,” ”pain management in the workplace,” ”knowledge about pain management in older adult patients with dementia,” and ”beliefs about pain in older people.” Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This preliminary validation study showed the high acceptability, reliability, and validity of the KBPED-C for hospital nurses. Future studies may use this questionnaire to explore the beliefs and knowledge of nurses regarding pain in older adult patients with dementia.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003613篇名：Determining Factors That Influence Nurses' Perceptions of Quality Implementations Conducted in Hospitals in Turkey作者：Emel GUR;Dilek EKICI關鍵字：nurse;quality management;structural equation modeling;patient care;job satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Quality management program implementations in health services are team endeavors that involve all health service personnel. Because they are direct providers of care, nurses are best able to evaluate the influence of quality management program implementations on the health services and quality of care provided by hospitals. Purpose: The aim of this study was to develop an instrument to determine how nurses perceive the implementation of quality management programs in hospitals. Furthermore, the nurses' perceptions of the influence of these implementations on the quality of patient care and their job satisfaction were examined. Methods: A descriptive, comparative, cross-sectional online survey was conducted using a convenience sample (N = 388) of practicing nurses working at public and university hospitals where quality management programs were implemented. Nurses' perceptions of the implementations were analyzed using confirmatory factor analysis, whereas the influence of nurses' perceptions of quality management implementations on patient care and job satisfaction was measured using structural equation modeling approaches. Results: This study revealed that the instrument is valid and reliable for the measurement of participant perceptions of quality management program implementations. Nurses' perceptions were generally negative, and they exhibited negative attitudes toward the implementation of quality management in the institutions where they work. However, the quality management program implementations had little influence on perceptions of the quality of patient care. Participant job satisfaction was lower than average, and the quality management program implementations conducted in the hospitals negatively affected job satisfaction. On the other hand, participants who worked at university hospitals perceived quality management program implementations more affirmatively; patient care quality and job satisfaction were viewed more positively as well. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Because nurses do not participate effectively in quality management program implementations, they perceive these efforts as unnecessary and the responsibility of the quality control department. It is very important to ensure that all care-service providers participate to effectively implement quality management programs in hospitals and to encourage the adoption of a culture of patient safety in all institutions.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003684篇名：The Smartphone Addiction Levels and the Association With Communication Skills in Nursing and Medical School Students作者：Ulfiye CELIKKALP;Sebnem BILGIC;Munire TEMEL;Gamze VAROL關鍵字：academic;communication;smartphone addiction;students;university期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The use of smartphones among young people is quite common. However, smartphones are associated with negative effects when used excessively. It has been reported that smartphone use may adversely affect learning in the classroom, cause safety issues, and negatively affect interpersonal communications. Purpose: The aims of this study were to determine the level of smartphone addiction among nursing and medical school students and to examine the effect of smartphone addiction level on communication skills. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted with medical school and nursing students at a public university (502 participants). Data were collected using a personal information form, the Smartphone Addiction Scale-Short Version (SAS-SV), and the Communication Skills Assessment Scale. Results: All of the participants in the study owned smartphones. Most (70.9%) were female, and 58.2% were in the nursing program. The participants used smartphones for a mean time of 5.07 ± 3.32 hours a day, primarily for messaging. The mean total SAS-SV score for the participants was 31.89 ± 9.90, and a significant difference in SAS-SV mean scores was found with regard to the variables of department, gender, daily smartphone use duration, academic success, status regarding smartphone use in the classroom, participation in sports, easy communication with patients and relatives, preferred mode of communication, health problems tied to phone use, and injury status (p ＜ .05). In addition, a positive weak-to-moderate relationship was found between SAS-SV mean scores and the variables of daily smartphone use duration and years of smartphone use, whereas a negative weak relationship was found between SAS-SV mean scores and Communication Skills Assessment Scale scores. Daily smartphone use duration was found to be the most important predictor of smartphone addiction. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Higher SAS-SV scores have a negative impact on interpersonal communication and social life and reduce learning efficacy in students. Therefore, students and lecturers should be better informed regarding the benefits and risks of smartphone use in education, with precautions provided against excessive and needless use.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003705篇名：Characterization of Metabolic Syndrome Risk Factors and Health-Related Behaviors in Korean Patients With Breast Cancer by Abdominal Obesity Status作者：Hye-Jin KIM;Hee-Seung KIM;Hye-Ryoung KIM;Yang-Sook YOO;Byung Joo SONG關鍵字：breast cancer;abdominal obesity;metabolic syndrome;dietary habits;exercise期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Breast cancer is the second most prevalent malignancy among Korean women. Changes in lifestyle during and after remission of breast cancer tend to increase abdominal visceral fat, leading to increased risks of metabolic syndrome and chronic diseases. Purpose: This cross-sectional study examined the differences in metabolic syndrome risk factors and health-related behaviors between abdominally obese and nonabdominally obese groups of Korean patients with breast cancer. Methods: The participants were assigned to nonabdominal obesity (waist circumference ＜ 85 cm, n = 77) and abdominal obesity (waist circumference <U+2265> 85 cm, n = 59) groups, and a questionnaire was used to assess the prevalence of risk factors of metabolic syndrome and health-related behaviors in each. The chi-square test and t test were used to analyze the data. Results: The average age was 54.2 years in the abdominal obesity group and 51.3 years in the nonabdominal obesity group. The average blood pressure and fasting blood glucose levels were higher in the abdominal obesity than the nonabdominal obesity group (117.3/76.3 vs. 108.9/70.4 mmHg, respectively [p = .001]; 96.9 and 90.1 mg/dl, respectively [p = .007]). High-density lipoprotein cholesterol was lower in the abdominal obesity than the nonabdominal obesity group (55.4 and 62.5 mg/dl, respectively [p = .005]), whereas triglycerides were higher in the abdominal obesity than the nonabdominal obesity group (151.6 and 111.3 mg/dl, respectively [p = .006]). The prevalence of metabolic syndrome in the abdominal obesity and nonabdominal obesity groups were 42.4% and 9.1%, respectively (p = .001). Moreover, eating habits differed between the two groups, with the frequency of vegetable consumption lower in the abdominal obesity than the nonabdominal obesity group (p = .040) and the frequencies of salty and sweet food consumption and of overeating higher in the abdominal obesity than the nonabdominal obesity group. The percentage of participants who exercised for 30 minutes three times per week was 52.5% in the abdominal obesity group and 71.4% in the nonabdominal obesity group (p = .024). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This observational study found more metabolic syndrome risk factors in the abdominal obesity group than the nonabdominal obesity group. Consumption of sweet foods and overeating were higher and the frequencies of vegetable intake and exercise were lower in the abdominal obesity group. These findings suggest that female abdominally obese patients with breast cancer exhibit health-related behaviors that require improvement and better management. Interventional programs should be developed based on the findings of this study to reduce cancer recurrence and mortality in patients with breast cancer.起始頁-結束頁：1-10-003資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003456篇名：Relationship Between the Problem-Solving Skills and Empathy Skills of Operating Room Nurses作者：Fatma AY;<U+015E>ehrinaz POLAT;Tennur KASHIMI關鍵字：operating room;critical thinking;surgery;cognitive;emotional期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The use of empathy in problem solving and communication is a focus of nursing practice and is of great significance in raising the quality of patient care. Purpose: The purposes of this study are to investigate the relationship between problem solving and empathy among operating room nurses and to explore the factors that relate to these two competencies. Methods: This is a cross-sectional, descriptive study. Study data were gathered using a personal information form, the Interpersonal Problem Solving Inventory, and the Basic Empathy Scale (N = 80). Descriptive and comparative statistics were employed to evaluate the study data. Results: Age, marital status, and career length were not found to affect the subscale scores of cognitive empathy (p ＞ .05). A negative correlation was found between the subscale scores for ”diffidence” and ”cognitive empathy.” Moreover, the emotional empathy scores of the graduate nurses were higher than those of the master's/doctorate degree nurses to a degree that approached significance (p = .078). Furthermore, emotional empathy levels were found to decrease as the scores for insistent/ persistent approach, lack of self-confidence, and educational level increased (p ＜ .05). The descriptive characteristics of the participating nurses were found not to affect their problem-solving skills. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Problem solving is a focus of nursing practice and of great importance for raising the quality of patient care. Constructive problem-solving skills affect cognitive empathy skills. Educational level and career length were found to relate negatively and level of self-confidence was found to relate positively with level of cognitive empathy. Finally, lower empathy scores were associated with difficult working conditions in operating rooms, intense stress, and high levels of potential stress-driven conflicts between workers in work settings.起始頁-結束頁：1-10-004資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003577篇名：Satisfaction With the Quality Nursing Work Environment Among Psychiatric Nurses Working in Acute Care General Hospitals作者：Chiou-Fen LIN;Fu-Chih LAI;Way-Ren HUANG;Chung-I HUANG;Chia-Jung HSIEH關鍵字：job satisfaction;nursing work environment;psychiatric nurse;organizational support;teamwork期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The objective of this study was to investigate the impact on patient care quality of a positive, high-quality environment that is tailored to the practice of nursing. This study enabled nurses to show their professional skills and knowledge, which may help enhance job satisfaction. To date, little research has been done to assess the relationship between the nursing work environment and the job satisfaction of psychiatric nurses employed in acute wards of general hospitals. Purpose: This study was designed to explain the relationship between job satisfaction and the perceived indicators of a quality nursing work environment (QNWE) after adjusting for demographic characteristics and work characteristics. Methods: A cross-sectional correlational design was employed, and a stratified random sample of 185 psychiatric nurses (99% response rate) working in acute wards in Taiwan was surveyed in 2013. Nurses were asked to complete a self-administered questionnaire that included measures of perceived QNWE and job satisfaction and demographic variables. Results: A statistically significant, positive relationship was found between perceived indicators of QNWE and job satisfaction (r = .813, p ＜ .001). In the hierarchical multiple linear regression model, for the subdimensions of QNWE, the variables ”perceived indicators of professional specialization and teamwork” and ”support and caring” showed a significant and positive association with job satisfaction, after adjusting for personal demographic characteristics. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Job satisfaction is related to the perception of nurses regarding their work environment. Therefore, nursing managers should improve workplace satisfaction by supporting and caring for nurses and creating better career development and teamwork opportunities for nurses through job training and planning.起始頁-結束頁：1-10-005資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003508篇名：Caring for Others, and Ourselves as Well作者：Ting-Ting LEE期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：1-2-001資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003769篇名：Living With Diabetes: Perceived Barriers of Adolescents作者：Kubra P<U+0131>nar GURKAN;Zuhal BAHAR關鍵字：adolescent;Type 1 diabetes;home monitoring;health promotion;qualitative study期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Type 1 diabetes mellitus is the most common endocrine disease during infancy and adolescence. Diabetes causes serious coping problems during adolescence because of the need for continuous observation and because of diabetes-related complications. Thus, adolescents must adapt to and effectively manage their diabetes. Purpose: This study was designed to determine the perceived barriers to home care in adolescents with Type 1 diabetes using the Health Promotion Model. Methods: Eighteen adolescents were selected from the qualified patients who applied to a diabetes polyclinic at a training and research hospital in western Turkey. Interview questions were created based on the Health Promotion Model. A phenomenological analysis of the data was conducted using the content analysis method. Results: The barriers that participants identified as negatively impacting their ability to manage their disease effectively were categorized into the three themes of ”negative feelings about having diabetes,” ”personal barriers,” and ”environmental barriers.” The barriers identified included school, friends, family, fear of complications, lack of information, and personal characteristics, among others. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This qualitative study enables us to understand what patients feel because the participants explained their difficulties in managing their disease and in maintaining metabolic control. The findings provide an understanding of the subjective experiences of adolescent patients with diabetes. The findings of this study are intended to be helpful in restructuring training in clinics, raising diabetes awareness among teachers and students, socializing diabetic adolescents, and providing family-centered education.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-002資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000034910篇名：The Lived Experiences of Indonesian Nurses Who Worked as Care Workers in Taiwan作者：Nursalam NURSALAM;Ching-Min CHEN;Ferry EFENDI;Eka Misbahatul Mar'ah HAS;Laily HIDAYATI;Setho HADISUYATMANA關鍵字：lived experience;Indonesian nurses;foreign care workers;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Despite the large number of Indonesian nurses currently working as migrant care workers in Taiwan, no studies in the literature have been found that explore this phenomenon or assess the working situation of Indonesian nurses working in care facilities in Taiwan. Purpose: This study aimed to elicit and describe the lived experiences of Indonesian nurses serving as care workers in Taiwan. Methods: Phenomenological research was used to explore the experiences of Indonesian nurses working in long-term care facilities. The participants were recruited from care facilities in Taiwan. This study utilized semistructured interviews conducted with 16 Indonesian nurses in a suitable setting. All of the interviews were transcribed, and the work of Van Manen was used to analyze the data. Results: Four main themes were identified, including motives for working abroad, feelings of being trapped, experiencing a difficult journey, and the feeling of being supported. These themes reflect the lived experiences of Indonesian nurses who work in Taiwan's long-term care industry. Conclusions: Nurses from Indonesia choose to who work as nurses in Taiwan because of poor financial background and the chance of gaining a better life. However, the participants in this study felt stressed, challenged, and disappointed when faced with the unmet expectations of being employed as care workers without a clear career path. Furthermore, the need to communicate in an unfamiliar language was mentioned as a significant barrier to fulfilling their role. Better policies should be put in place to achieve improved outcomes for both countries.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-007資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000035511篇名：Validity and Reliability of the Korean Version of the Watson Caritas Patient Score作者：SookBin IM;MiKyoung CHO;MyoungLyun HEO關鍵字：caring;nurse;patient-centered care;patients' experience;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The increasing use of information technology in healthcare settings has reduced human contact with healthcare providers and is hampering human-centered intrinsic nursing work associated with patient discomfort, emotional distress, and desire. The caring attitude of nurses affects patient compliance with medication instructions as well as the promotion of health behaviors and patient satisfaction. Purpose: This study was designed to develop a Korean version of the Watson Caritas Patient Score (WCPS) developed by Watson and then verify its reliability and validity. Methods: This was a methodological study. Data were collected from 240 patients in wards of the departments of internal medicine and surgery of a general hospital with more than 500 beds in Kunsan City between May 1 and June 8, 2017. Exploratory factor analysis and confirmatory factor analysis were used to verify the construct validity and model fit. The Patient Perception of Hospital Experience with Nursing was used to confirm convergence validity. Data were analyzed using descriptive analysis, Cronbach's alpha, factor analysis, and Pearson's product-moment correlation analysis. Results: The internal consistency of the Korean version of the WCPS assessed using Cronbach's alpha was .94. The content validity index for each of the five items was 1.0. The communality ranged from .75 to .87, and the overall model fit was good. In addition, the average variance extracted was .61, the composite reliability was .89, and the convergent validity was .72 (p ＜ .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The original English version and the Korean version of the WCPS both address a single factor, which confirmed the reliability and good fit of the model and showed both convergent and criterion-related validity. The Korean version of the WCPS is expected to contribute to improving the quality of nursing care in Korea by providing a simple scale that assesses patient perceptions of nursing care easily and accurately.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-009資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000035112篇名：The Development and Evaluation of an Analytical Framework to Explore Student Nurses' Cultural Beliefs of Dementia作者：Omorogieva OJO;Joanne BROOKE;Camille CRONIN關鍵字：framework analysis;dementia;culture;student nurses;qualitative analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: People diagnosed with dementia need culturally sensitive, person-centered care to promote their health and well-being. Therefore, healthcare professionals should be able to provide culturally competent care, of which an element is the understanding of their own cultural heritage and how this impacts on their beliefs regarding dementia, as cultural norms and values provide meanings and understanding of chronic conditions such as dementia. This study used focus groups to explore the cultural beliefs of student nurses regarding dementia, generating a large set of qualitative data that required structure and a framework to analyze. Purpose: One purpose of this article was to present the methodological analysis, which encompasses the analytical framework. The second purpose was to apply the framework to elicit the cultural beliefs regarding dementia among student nurses from multiple national backgrounds. Methods: Focus groups with student nurses from five higher education institutes in England, the Philippines, Slovenia, and New Zealand were conducted, audiotaped, and transcribed verbatim. The qualitative data were analyzed using the framework method of analysis. Data from the focus groups conducted at the two higher education institutes in England were analyzed by encompassed synthesizing, refining, and agreeing on the codes, categories, and themes that were established separately by four researchers. The developed analytical framework was then tested on the qualitative data obtained from the focus groups conducted in Slovenia, the Philippines, and New Zealand. Results: The results were presented in three parts: the cultural analytical framework, the process of developing the initial categories/themes, and the final themes that emerged from the data obtained from the focus groups. Conclusions: An analytical framework was developed and applied to understand student nurses' cultural values and beliefs of dementia.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-010資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000034313篇名：Predictive Factors of Mortality in Older Adult Residents of Long-Term Care Facilities作者：SeolHwa MOON;Gwi-Ryung Son HONG關鍵字：death;longitudinal study;long-term care;older adults期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Various factors affect the mortality of older adult residents of long-term care facilities. To provide adequate nursing care for older adults, it is necessary to understand the factors that affect their risk of mortality. Purpose: This study was designed to (a) evaluate the 24-month survival rate and (b) identify the underlying cause of death in various dimensions, including cognitive, psychological, and physical function; nutritional status; and chronic disease. Methods: A longitudinal study was carried out between 2011 and 2013 at seven long-term care facilities. The participants comprised 276 residents who were all older than 65 years old. Baseline measurements included cognitive function (Mini-Mental State Examination for Dementia Screening), psychological function (Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia), physical function (Barthel Index), nutritional status (Mini Nutritional Assessment, mid-arm circumference, and calf circumference), and chronic disease status (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, chronic respiratory disease, heart disease, and urinary incontinence). Data analysis included univariate and multivariate logistic regression to identify the main factors affecting mortality. Results: In 2011 (baseline), the mean age of the participants was 80.46 years (SD = 7.08) and most were female (73.6%). At the 24-month follow-up, 94 (34.1%) of the participants had died. The major factors affecting mortality were as follows: cognitive dysfunction (OR = 3.12, 95% CI [1.41, 6.90]), mid-arm circumference (＜ 22.5 cm; OR = 2.32, 95% CI [1.35, 3.96]), and urinary incontinence (OR = 2.04, 95% CI [1.16, 3.61]). Conclusions: According to the findings, special attention is needed at the end of life to improve the quality of life of older adults with cognitive dysfunction, malnutrition (low mid-arm circumference), and urinary incontinence who reside in long-term care facilities.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-011資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000035614篇名：Effect of Life Review on Quality of Life in Terminal Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis作者：Mei-Hua HUANG;Ruey-Hsia WANG;Hsiu-Hung WANG關鍵字：life review;terminal-stage patients;end-of-life care;quality of life;meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Enhancing quality of life takes precedence in the terminal stage of a disease, when a cure is considered impossible and all alternative methods to prevent disease progression have been exhausted. Life review, involving appreciating accomplishments and resolving conflicts, is widely considered to be an effective approach to bringing peace to terminal patients. Purpose: This study was conducted to assess the effects of life review on quality of life in terminal patients. Methods: The Cochrane Library, PubMed, MEDLINE, CINAHL, CEPS, and ProQuest databases were searched for original studies published between 2007 and July 2018. Studies that used experimental designs to assess the effects of life review on quality of life in terminal patients, involved patients aged ＞18 years, and were published in English or Chinese were considered eligible for inclusion. Studies that measured quality of life in individuals other than patients as well as unpublished papers or data were excluded. The search terms used included ”life review,” ”end of life,” ”terminal or terminally ill,” ”advanced cancer,” ”palliative,” ”hospice,” and ”quality of life.” The quality of each included study was assessed using the Downs and Black checklist. Results: Six studies with 296 patients were included in the review. The participants in the included studies were from multiple countries. Life review was found to affect quality of life significantly (95% CI [0.147, 0.668], Z = 3.062, p ＜ .05). The selected studies exhibited moderate heterogeneity (I^2 = 42.407, p ＞ .1). Conclusions: Life review was found to affect quality of life significantly in the participants in the included studies. The feasibility and safety of applying life review interventions should be considered for terminal patients, and implementers of these interventions should be trained and qualified. Only a few studies in the literature have evaluated the effects of life review therapy in terminal patients. Further studies that use stricter selection criteria are necessary to evaluate the efficacy of the life review intervention before its adoption in clinical practice.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-012資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000033515篇名：Exploration of the Association Between Religious Affiliation and Attitude Toward Spiritual Care in Clinical Nurses作者：Yi-Chien CHIANG;Hsiang-Chun LEE;Tsung-Lan CHU;Chin-Yen HAN;Ya-Chu HSIAO關鍵字：religion;spirituality;nurse期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Religion is an important cultural asset that is known to affect the thoughts, behaviors, and lifestyles of individuals. However, the impact of religious affiliation, religious activities, and religious beliefs on the attitudes of nurses toward providing spiritual care to their patients is an issue that has been inadequately explored. Purposes: The aim of this study was to explore the relationship between religion (including religious affiliation, religious activities, and religious beliefs) and attitude toward spiritual care in clinical nurses. Methods: This study used a cross-sectional correlation study design. Six hundred nineteen nurses were included as participants. The measurements used included a questionnaire on religious affiliation, religious activities, and religious beliefs; the Spiritual Health Scale-Short Form; the Spiritual Care Attitude Scale; and a sociodemographic datasheet. The study employed hierarchical regression modeling to establish the relationships between the aspects and degrees of religious belief and practice as well as the attitudes of participants toward spiritual care. Results: Most of the participants participated infrequently in religious activities. After controlling for demographic variables and spiritual health, religious belief was found to be an important factor impacting participants' attitudes toward providing spiritual care. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings indicate that religious belief is an important factor impacting the attitudes of nurses toward providing spiritual care and that the religious/ spiritual beliefs of nurses may impact on their fitness to provide spiritual care to patients. Education on religion may be needed to improve the attitude of nurses toward providing spiritual care.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-006資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000035216篇名：A Hierarchical Model of Occupational Burnout in Nurses Associated With Job-Induced Stress, Self-Concept, and Work Environment作者：Ru-Wen LIAO;Mei-Ling YEH;Kuan-Chia LIN;Kwua-Yun WANG關鍵字：occupational burnout;job-induced stress;self-concept;practice environment;nurse期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Nurses may experience different levels of occupational burnout in different unit and hospital settings. However, pooling multilevel data in an analysis ignores independent, environmental, and sociocultural contexts of ecological validity. Purpose: This study aimed to explore a hierarchical model of occupational burnout that is associated with job-induced stress, nurse self-concept, and practice environment in nurses working in different units and hospitals. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted, and 2,605 nurses were recruited from seven hospitals. The outcomes were measured using the Maslach Occupational Burnout Inventory-Human Services Survey, Nurses' Self-Concept Instrument, Nurse Stress Checklist, and Nursing Work Index- Revised. Hierarchical Linear Modeling 6.0 software was used to conduct hierarchical analysis on the study data. Results: On the nurse level, job-induced stress was a significant factor affecting emotional exhaustion (β = 0.608, p ＜ .001) and depersonalization (β = 2.439, p ＜ .001), whereas nurse self-concept was a significant factor affecting emotional exhaustion (β = <U+2212>0.250, p ＜ .001), depersonalization (β = <U+2212>1.587, p ＜ .001), and personal accomplishment (β = 4.126, p ＜ .001). Furthermore, emotional exhaustion and depersonalization were significantly related to level of education (β = 0.111, p ＜ .01; β = 0.583, p ＜ .05). No significant unit-level associations were identified between occupational burnout and the factors of job-induced stress, nurse self-concept, and practice environment (p ＞ .05). The intragroup correlation coefficient for emotional exhaustion was 2.86 (p ＜ .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings of this study confirm that individual nurse characteristics are strong predictors of emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and personal accomplishment as these relate to occupational burnout. In addition, nurse self-concept was identified as the most important predictor of all three aspects. In clinical practice, self-concepts about nursing may reduce occupational burnout. Nursing managers formulating new policies should consider nursing background and offer autonomous control over practice.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-008資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000034817篇名：Curial Role of Nursing Research in the Healthcare Delivery System作者：Heng-Hsin TUNG期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：1-1-001資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000037518篇名：Assessment of Dietary Habits in Patients With Chronic Heart Failure作者：Hilal UYSAL;Havva OZ ALKAN;Nuray ENC;Zerrin YI<U+011E>IT關鍵字：heart failure;food preference form;food variety;Healthy Eating Index期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Nutritional deficiency is a critical factor in the development and prognosis of heart failure. An optimal diet should be ensured and maintained to manage the symptoms of heart failure. Purpose: This study assessed the dietary habits of patients with chronic heart failure using diet quality indices with the goal of determining their nutritional status. Methods: Forty-four female patients and 56 male patients (mean age: 66 ± 11.38 years) who had been admitted to the cardiology clinics of a university hospital in Istanbul between March 2012 and August 2014 were included in this study. Results: In terms of body mass index, 34% of the participants were normal weight, 37% were overweight, and 21% were obese. Furthermore, this study found the mean daily total energy intake to be inadequate and the total mean score of the Healthy Eating Index to be 74.6 ± 9.32. The diet quality of most participants fell into the ”needs improvement” category. Conclusions: This study used the Healthy Eating Index, a measure developed to assess diet quality, to assess the food consumption patterns of patients with chronic heart failure. The findings support using this index before providing diet recommendations to patients.起始頁-結束頁：1-10-007資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000032919篇名：The Shared Subjective Frames of Interdisciplinary Practitioners Involved in Function-Focused Care in a Nursing Home: Q-Methodology作者：Mi So KIM;Gyu-Tae KIM;Su Jung LEE;Min Sun PARK;Eun-hye JEONG;Sung Ok CHANG關鍵字：function-focused care;interdisciplinary;nursing homes;Q-methodology;subjective frames期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: An interdisciplinary team-based approach in nursing homes has been suggested in the literature as a strategy for delaying functional decline in residents. Function-focused care is a philosophy-based approach in which interdisciplinary practitioners assess functional capacity and help older adults to optimize and maintain their remaining abilities. Purpose: This study explored and described the shared subjective frames of interdisciplinary practitioners as regards function-focused care for nursing home residents. Methods: Q-methodology was used to analyze the subjectivity of each factor of function-focused care for nursing home residents. Data were collected from August to September 2016. Thirty-four Q-statements were selected and scored by the 30 interdisciplinary practitioners on a 9-point scale with a normal distribution. Data were analyzed using the PQ Method 2.33 program. Results: The results revealed four factors of function-focused care, including (a) using a wait-and-see approach to encourage self-care, (b) maintaining interactive communications to identify and respond to changes, (c) reinforcing residents' inner and outer strengths for homeostasis, and (d) using a tailored approach based on comparisons between the past and the present. Shared subjectivity may provide an important collaborative framework to identify and solve complex problems related to the functional needs of nursing home residents. Conclusions: The results of this study elucidate the subjectivities of interdisciplinary practitioners and better enable their provision of effective care in support of the remaining functional abilities of older adults living in nursing homes. The findings may be used as a reference to establish communication methods and shared documentation for interdisciplinary practitioners in nursing homes and construct interdisciplinary function-focused care practice guidelines.起始頁-結束頁：1-10-011資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000034720篇名：Factors Associated With Blood Pressure Classification in Korean University Students: A Descriptive Survey作者：Eun-Ju CHOI;Ae Kyung CHANG;Jin Yi CHOI關鍵字：blood pressure;university student期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The prevalence of hypertension in young adults has increased. Hypertension is known to be a leading contributor to many diseases. Purpose: The study aimed to identify factors influencing blood pressure (BP) classification in university students and to establish a basis for the prevention and management of hypertension in young adults. Methods: Four hundred three university students in South Korea were analyzed to determine the factors that influence BP classification. Data were analyzed using the chi-square test, analysis of variance, and multinomial logistic regression. Results: The reference group for the logistic regression analysis included students with normal BP. The odds of being male and of having an overweight or obese body mass index were significantly higher in the prehypertension group than in the normal BP group. The odds of regular (<U+2265> 6 months) exercise habits, having subcutaneous and borderline visceral fat types, and social support were significantly lower in the prehypertension group than in the normal BP group. The odds of being male, being overweight or obese, and having more exercise barriers were significantly higher in the hypertension group than in the normal BP group. The odds of having a high or low economic status were higher and lower in the hypertension group, respectively. Finally, the odds of having subcutaneous or borderline visceral fat types and a vigorous physical activity level were significantly lower in the hypertension group than in the normal BP group. Conclusions: Interventions that address the factors related to BP in young adults are necessary to prevent the occurrence and progression of hypertension in young adults.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-003資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000032501篇名：Improving Coping Styles in Family Caregivers of Psychiatric Inpatients Using Planned Behavior Problem-Solving Training作者：Zahra ABEDI;Mousa ALAVI;Zahra GHAZAVI;Denis VISENTIN;Michelle CLEARY關鍵字：mental disorders;family carers;problem solving;planned behavior;coping styles期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The consequences and high costs of psychiatric disorders impact family caregivers greatly. Health services should identify and provide accessible support programs to facilitate effective caregiver coping. Purpose: The aim of this study was to determine the effectiveness of a theory-of-planned-behavior-based problem-solving training program on the coping styles of family caregivers of psychiatric inpatients. Methods: In this two-group, randomized control trial, 72 family caregivers were randomly assigned to either a control group receiving standard care or an intervention group receiving a training program (eight sessions over 4 weeks). Demographic information was recorded at baseline, and the Coping Inventory for Stressful Situations was administered to both groups at baseline, immediately postintervention, and 1-month follow-up. Results: Immediately after the intervention, the intervention group earned significantly higher task-oriented coping style scores (mean difference = 5.03, p = .015) than the control group, but no significant difference was detected between the two groups for either emotion- or avoidance-oriented coping style scores. At 1-month follow-up, the intervention group earned significantly higher scores than the control group for task-oriented (mean difference = 8.56, p ＜ .001) and emotion-oriented (mean difference = 7.14, p = .002) coping styles. No improvement in avoidance-oriented coping style at the postintervention or follow-up time points was detected. Conclusions: Implementation by nurses and other health professionals of problem-solving training programs that are based on the theory of planned behavior is recommended to strengthen the use of task- and emotion-oriented approaches that help family caregivers of psychiatric patients better cope with stress.起始頁-結束頁：1-7-012資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003202篇名：Discrepancy Among Self-Reported Adherence, Prescription Refills, and Actual Anticoagulant Control作者：Pai-En CHIU;Hsuan-Ming TSAO;Chuan-Hsiu TSAI關鍵字：warfarin;adherence;polypharmacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Patients must adhere to their prescribed warfarin regimens and regularly monitor the anticoagulation effect to maintain therapeutic levels. The ability to evaluate regimen adherence accurately is crucial to the success of patient coaching. However, prevention of thromboembolic events is challenging when the association between medication adherence and the actual amount of anticoagulant agent taken cannot be determined. Purpose: This study used self-reported medication taken and prescription refills to (a) verify warfarin medication adherence and (b) assist clinicians to determine the discrepancy between medication adherence and anticoagulant control efficacy. Methods: This study was conducted at a national-university-affiliated hospital in Yilan County, Taiwan. Structured questionnaires and medical record reviews were adopted. A 100-point visual analog scale was used to measure the reported adherence of participants, whereas medication refill adherence was compared against self-reported adherence. Finally, degree of adherence was evaluated based on time in therapeutic range. Results: This study included 192 participants. Half (n = 94, 49%) were women, and the mean age was 69.6 years. Mean scores were 92.2% for the visual analog scale and 87.3% for medication refill adherence. Medication adherence correlated significantly with age, as reflected in the visual analog scale scores (p ＜ .05). The participants who were receiving polypharmacy with five types of medicines or less attained higher visual analog scale scores, whereas participants who were on warfarin for 2-12 months exhibited higher medication refill adherence. Time in therapeutic range correlated negatively with age, although stability improved with therapy duration. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Despite their high self-reported adherence levels, patients of advanced age require careful monitoring of their time in therapeutic range. The participants in this study who were on warfarin for a relatively longer time exhibited higher stability in the therapeutic range, despite their low medication refill adherence. The results of this study suggest that patient age, duration of warfarin therapy, and poly-pharmacy are factors associated with medication adherence. The findings may facilitate future assessments of warfarin adherence in patients as well as the implementation of more effective clinical nursing procedures and management practices.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-005資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003743篇名：The Process of Developing Resilience in Patients With Burn Injuries作者：Jing HAN;Xue-Ping ZHOU;Jun-E LIU;Peng YUE;Li GAO關鍵字：burn;resilience;psychological rehabilitation;grounded theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Patients with burn injuries resulting in visible disabilities may face negative emotional experiences during rehabilitation. Understanding the development of resilience in these patients may help those who are seeking methods to better adapt to their new situation. Purpose: This study aimed to explore the development of resilience in patients with burns during their convalescence. Methods: Ten patients with burn injuries who were convalescing in a general hospital in China were recruited and enrolled as participants. Data were collected using recorded, semistructured in-depth interviews and analyzed following the principles of grounded theory. Results: The development of resilience in patients with burns included five stages of ”black hole,” ”introspection,” ”integration,” ”practice,” and ”growth.” Both internal and external protective factors were identified. The internal protective factors included hope, sincerity, will, belief, and curiosity, and the external protective factor was mutual relationships that reflected the qualities of caring, support, sharing, commitment, and intimacy. Conclusions: Resilience was achieved gradually over several progressive steps through the five stages (black hole, introspection, integration, practice, and growth). The results of this research may provide insights and support to patients who seek to improve their adaptation to new situations.起始頁-結束頁：1-8-013資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003424篇名：Predictors of Palliative Care Knowledge Among Nursing Students in Saudi Arabia: A Cross-Sectional Study作者：Ahmad E. ABOSHAIQAH關鍵字：nursing;nursing education;nursing students;palliative care;palliative care knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Societal aging, a concern in many countries worldwide, is increasing the demand for quality palliative care in Saudi Arabia. Nursing education is responsible for providing nursing students with high levels of knowledge and competency related to palliative care. Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the predictors of palliative care knowledge among nursing students in Saudi Arabia. Methods: A convenience sample of 409 nursing students from one public academic institution and one private academic institution in Saudi Arabia was surveyed from November to December 2017 in this descriptive, cross-sectional study. The 20-item Palliative Care Quiz for Nursing was used to collect the data. Descriptive statistics were used to fully describe the demographic characteristics and palliative care knowledge of the participants. One-way analysis of variance and t test were used to examine the associations between palliative care knowledge and the demographic characteristics. Multiple regression analysis was conducted to identify the significant demographic predictors of this knowledge. Results: The mean score of the participants was 5.23 (SD= 3.24, range = 0-12), indicating poor palliative care knowledge. The participants lacked palliative care knowledge in terms of palliative care principles and philosophy, management of pain and other symptoms, and psychosocial and spiritual care. Being enrolled in a private university, being in the second year of a nursing program, having attended palliative care education sessions outside a university setting, and attending a palliative care course in the nursing program were identified as significant predictors of higher palliative care knowledge. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study may be used as a basis for formulating education policies and interventions to enhance palliative care education and clinical training among nursing students and ensure the quality of palliative care not only in Saudi Arabia but also in other countries.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-002資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003015篇名：Effects of an Education Intervention on Nursing Students' Knowledge and Attitudes Regarding Skin Self-Examination and Skin Cancer Risks作者：Ozum ERK<U+0130>N;Ozcan AYGUN關鍵字：early detection;education;nurse;skin self-examination;student期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The incidence of skin cancers is increasing in Turkey as well as worldwide. Nurses have a potentially influential role to play in educating the public about skin cancer prevention. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to teach nursing students the risks of skin cancer and the steps involved in conducting related skin self-examinations to encourage positive attitudes toward skin cancer protection and early detection. Methods: This research used a quasi-experimental, single-group, pretest-posttest design. The study population was composed of all the nursing students who were currently enrolled in a university in Mu<U+011F>la, a city in southern Turkey (n = 900). The study analysis included the 332 nursing students who had completed both the pretest and posttest assessments. An intervention to raise awareness about skin cancer risks and skin self-examination was carried out using educational materials that included posters/pictures, brochures, a PowerPoint slideshow, and a video. The posttest assessment was done 6 weeks after the pretest. Results: The participants were 18-23 years old, and 67.5% were female. Furthermore, 3.6% had undergone a routine (external) screening for skin cancer, and 14.5% believed that they were at risk for skin cancer. The mean score for knowledge of skin cancer risks for those participants who had completed the program was 5.75 ± 1.20 in the pretest and 6.84 ± 1.17 in the posttest (minimum: 0, maximum: 8). The mean posttest score was higher than the pretest score in this group, F(1, 329) = 6.49, p = .011, and a significant difference was found between the mean pretest and posttest score for knowledge of the ABCDE rule (p ＜ .05). Conclusions: Educating nursing students about skin self-examination increased their level of knowledge about both skin cancer risks and the ABCDE rule. We believe that this and similar educational programs are an effective way to increase the knowledge and awareness of nurses regarding skin cancer and to improve their attitudes toward performing skin self-examination.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-004資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003266篇名：Translation, Adaptation, and Validation of the Malay Version of the Cardiac Rehabilitation Barriers Scale作者：Li Sze CHAI;Sidiah SIOP;Zabidah PUTIT;Lily LIM;Azylina GUNGGU;Suk Fong TIE關鍵字：translation;adaptation;psychometric testing;Cardiac Rehabilitation Barrier Scale;Malay期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: The rate of cardiac rehabilitation attendance at the Sarawak Heart Centre was identified as very low, and the reason has not been investigated. A scale is needed to identify barriers to participation in cardiac rehabilitation among patients with heart disease in Sarawak, Malaysia. Purpose: The purposes of this study were to translate, adapt, and evaluate the Malay-language version of the Cardiac Rehabilitation Barriers Scale (CRBS) and to measure the psychometric properties of the Malay-version CRBS to justify its use in Sarawak. Methods: A forward and back-translation method was used. Content validity was assessed by three experts. Psychometric testing was conducted on a sample of 283 patients who were eligible to participate in cardiac rehabilitation. A construct validity test was performed using factor analysis. Cronbach's alpha was used to examine the internal consistency. The test-retest reliability was calculated using the intraclass correlation coefficient on 22 participants. Independent-samples t test and analysis of variance were conducted to assess the criterion validity. Mean scores for total barriers of the scale and each individual factor were compared among the different patient characteristics. Results: The Malay-version CRBS showed an item level of content validity index of 1.00 for all of the items after improvements were made based on the experts' suggestions. The factor analysis, using principal component analysis with direct oblimin rotation, extracted four factors that differed from the original study. These four factors explained 52.50% of the cumulative percentage of variance. The Cronbach's alphas ranged from .74 to .81 for the obtained factors. Test-retest reliability was established using the intraclass correlation coefficient value of .78. Criterion validity was supported using the significant differences in the mean score for total barriers among educational level, driving distance, travel time to the hospital, and cardiac rehabilitation attendance. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: This study found the Malay-version CRBS to be a valid and reliable instrument. It may be used with inpatients to identify barriers to participation in cardiac rehabilitation to promote rehabilitation attendance and improve patient care.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-006資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003287篇名：Depression in Nonhospitalized Jordanian Patients With Coronary Artery Disease作者：Ibtisam M. AL-ZARU;Fadwa ALHALAIQA;Heyam Fawaz DALKY;Kholoud Ali ARRAMADAN;Abdul-Monim BATIHA關鍵字：Jordan;coronary artery disease;depression;health assessment;demographic predictors of depression期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) are likely to experience depression, which contributes to the burden of disease and is a risk factor for mortality. Patients in outpatient clinics in Jordan are not routinely screened for depression. Significant relationships among patient characteristics must be determined to ascertain the predictors of depression. Purpose: The aims of this research were to assess the level of depression symptoms in nonhospitalized patients with CAD; to examine the relationships between depression and relevant sociodemographic, self-reported health history, and patient health perception variables; and to identify possible predictors of depression in Jordan. Methods: This cross-sectional study recruited a convenience sample (N = 174) of nonhospitalized outpatients who had been diagnosed with CAD. Self-reported demographic, health history, and health perception information (independent variables) were provided by the participants. The depression scores (dependent variable) for the participants were assessed using the Cardiac Depression Scale. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, the chi-square test, Pearson's correlations, and multiple linear regressions. Results: Half of the participants reported mild to moderate depression, with 37% reporting severe depression. Predictors of depression included gender (being female), having a concomitant chronic disease, prior surgery, irregular exercise, impaired sexual activity, and self-perceived poor psychological health. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: To improve patient outcomes, clinical personnel should screen patients with CAD for depression and offer a combined pharmaceutical and therapeutic treatment intervention. An easy-to-administer instrument to detect depression may be included in the standard patient checkup routine used in clinics. Several patient characteristics were found to significantly affect depression and health outcomes.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-008資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003418篇名：Women With Amenorrhea and Men With Menstruation: The Qualitative Experiences of People With Disorders of Sex Development in Nigeria作者：Abdurrahman Muhammad SANI;Ismi Ismail ARIF;Mohd Mursyid ARSHAD;Ismaila Arzika MUNGADI;Kim Geok SOH;Kim Lam SOH關鍵字：disorders of sex development;amenorrhea;menstruation;qualitative study;experiences期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Disorders of sex development (DSD) affect the quality of life of people who live with this condition. In developing countries, diagnoses of DSD are associated with a delay in presentation until the patients developed ambiguous physical traits and features. Purpose: This study explores the menstrual experiences of people with DSD and sex reassignment in Nigeria. Methods: A qualitative approach with a phenomenological study design was employed in this study to explore and describe the experiences of people with DSD at the Usmanu Danfodiyo University Teaching Hospital in Sokoto, Nigeria. The data were collected using face-to-face interviews, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed using NVivo software. Results: The findings show that the participants experienced menstrual problems: men with menstruation and women with amenorrhea. The female participants generally described amenorrhea as a disappointment and linked menstruation with womanhood. Amenorrhea evinced both emotional and psychological effects. However, some of the female participants considered amenorrhea in a positive light and were happy with their lives without menstruation. The menstrual experiences of male participants included menarche, lower abdominal pain, regular monthly bleeding, and ovulation. The male participants described menstruation as a disaster in their lives and a source of anxiety, suicidal ideation, and depression. Menstruation negatively affected their psychosocial well-being. Conclusions: The menstrual experience of individuals with DSD negatively affects their quality of life. The women with DSD in this study showed a generally poor knowledge of menarche, menstruation, and puberty, indicating that their parents had ignored the initial symptoms of DSD. DSD were only recognized at puberty because of the development of ambiguous physical traits and of the onset of menstruation in men and the confirmation of amenorrhea in women.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-009資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000003139篇名：Effects of Massage and Acupressure on Relieving Labor Pain, Reducing Labor Time, and Increasing Delivery Satisfaction作者：Ilknur Munevver GONENC;Fusun TERZIO<U+011E>LU關鍵字：labor pain;massage;acupressure;labor time;mother's satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Background: Several recent studies have documented the effects of massage and acupressure in reducing labor pain and labor time and in satisfaction with the delivery. However, few studies have investigated the comparative effects of these two therapies. Purpose: The aim of this study was to compare the effects of massage and acupressure on labor-related pain management, duration, and satisfaction with delivery. Methods: This randomized controlled trial (n = 120) included three intervention groups (massage only, acupressure only, and massage + acupressure) and one control group, in which patients received no massage or acupressure treatment. A personal information form, Pregnant Watch Form, and Visual Analog Scale (VAS) were used to collect data. Frequency and percentage calculations, chi-square test, Student's t test, Tukey's honestly significant difference test, and one-way variance analysis were used for data analysis. Results: In the latent phase of labor, the mean VAS scores of the massage-only group and massage + acupressure group were lower (4.56 ± 1.36 and 4.63 ± 1.52, respectively) than that of the control group (6.16 ± 1.46; p ＜ .01). In the active and transition phases, the mean VAS scores of the massage-only group, acupressure-only group, and massage + acupressure group were significantly lower than that of the control group (p ＜ .01 and p ＜ .001, respectively). During postpartum, the mean VAS score of the massage + acupressure group was lower (2.30 ± 0.70) than that of the control group (2.96 ± 0.72; p = .003). Cervical dilatation completion time and 1- and 5-minute Apgar scores were similar among all of the groups (p ＞ .05). The three intervention groups reported relatively more positive feelings than the control group, and all three of the interventions were found to be effective in improving satisfaction. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this study indicate that the dual application of massage and acupressure is relatively more effective than either therapy applied alone and that massage is more effective than acupressure.起始頁-結束頁：1-9-010資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000034401篇名：臺灣縣市別長照需求之中長期推計及趨勢分析並列篇名：Regional Projections and Trend Analysis of Long-Term Care Needs for Taiwan's Elderly作者：陳柏琪(Po-chi Chen);許聖民(Sheng-ming Hsu);林幸君(Hsing-chun Lin);陳肇男(Chao-nan Chen);張靜貞(Ching-cheng Chang)關鍵字：縣市別人口推計;縣市別失能人口推計;長期照護;臺灣可計算一般均衡模型;regional population projection;regional disability population projection;long-term care;GEMTEE期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：雖然中央政府已透過總體人口推計進行長期照護規劃，但老人長照的執行主要還是仰賴縣市政府，顯示縣市別老年及失能人口推計之重要性。本文結合衛福部國民長期照護需要調查與臺灣可計算一般均衡模型，來推估縣市人口、失能人口以及在地老化意願人數。結果發現：（1）失能人口將從2015年的70.8萬人，增加至2061年之151.2萬人，成長113.61％。其中6都所占比例，將由59.50％提高至72.87％。（2）失能老人希望在地老化人數，預估由31.7萬人增至90.8萬人，大幅上揚186.23％。（3）鄉村失能人口所占比例較低，但鄉村醫療資源較<U+7232>缺乏，未來處理失能照護議題時，區域化的差異<U+5024>得有關單位重視。英文摘要：The implementation of long-term elderly care relies on local governments, which highlights the importance of projecting the disabled elderly population at the city and county levels. This study combines the Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model with the disability prevalence rates collected from the ”National Long-Term Care Needs Survey” by the Ministry of Health and Welfare to project the elderly population in need of long-term care at the city and county level in Taiwan. We find that: (1)The number of disabled people is expected to increase from 708 to 1,512 thousand, growing sharply by 113.61% between 2015 and 2061. (2)The number of disabled elderly who are eager to ”age in place” is forecast to increase from 317 to 908 thousand, soaring by 186.23%. (3)Reducing the disparities of long-term care provision between rural and urban regions, between genders, and among different income groups is a serious issue to be addressed in the future.起始頁-結束頁：523-558資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心2篇名：印度在美中互動的槓桿角色並列篇名：India's Leverage in US-China Interactions作者：黎寶文(Pao-wen Li)關鍵字：美中關係;印度;三角關係;第三方影響;事件資料;US-China relations;India;triangular relations;third-party effect;event data期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：印度在美中兩大強權之間的第三方影響<U+7232>何？本文利用事件資料庫探討兩個問題：（1）印度是否扮演牽動中美互動的關鍵角色？（2）若然，印度如何牽動中美雙方互動？透過時間序列分析1995年至2017年間的美中印三邊互動行<U+7232>紀錄發現，在控制美中經濟相互依賴與兩國內部政權輪替的情形下，來自印度的第三方影響確實存在於美中互動過程，也印證了印度以區域競爭者的身分，在美中競逐中扮演牽制中國之角色。美印關係是影響中美決策者決定合作與衝突的關鍵，印度的合作與否將影響美中交往的利弊分析與威脅認知。英文摘要：What role does India play as a third party in US-China interactions? This paper aims to answer the question based on event data with two steps. First, is India a significant third party when analyzing US-China relations? Second, if yes, how does India's third-party effect work? By investigating the US-China-India triangular interaction from 1995 to 2017 with time-series analysis, I show that India's third-party effect is significant in US-China relations and works as a regional competitor to check and balance China's rise as the US strategy suggests. The analysis in this paper also indicates that US-India relations are the key for the United States and China to plan their next interactions. Furthermore, India's cooperation is the crucial element to influence the perceptions of threat and the cost-benefit analysis of both the United States and China in their decision-making process.起始頁-結束頁：559-605資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心3篇名：明治日本的「自由帝國主義」與臺灣統治論：從福澤諭吉到竹越與三郎並列篇名：”Liberal Imperialism” in Meiji Japan and the Discourses of Taiwan under Japanese Rule: From Fukuzawa Yukichi to Takekoshi Yosabur<U+014D>作者：藍弘岳(Hung-yueh Lan)關鍵字：自由主義;臺灣;殖民地;福澤諭吉;竹越與三郎;liberalism;Taiwan;colony;Fukuzawa Yukichi;Takekoshi Yosabur<U+014D>期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文從全球史視野，討論福澤諭吉與其所主導的《時事新報》，及在知識系譜上與福澤有所關聯的竹越與三郎如何論述臺灣和殖民統治臺灣的意義等問題。他們如歐洲的自由帝國主義者，在日本國內政治方面雖持自由主義觀點，但在對外政策、殖民地政策方面發表帝國主義式言論。歐洲的進步使歐洲的許多自由主義者肯定帝國的擴張。我們可看到許多明治日本的自由派知識人大抵也有類似看法，儘管他們自身也非歐洲人。但歐洲自由主義者和本文所論的明治日本自由主義者對於其殖民地的看法還是有差異，其間的關聯和差異將是本論文討論的問題。英文摘要：The article begins with thorough examinations of the views of Fukuzawa Yukichi, other authors of Jiji Shinp<U+014D> (Current Events) and Takekoshi Yosabur<U+014D> on what Taiwan meant to Japan in the Meiji Era and proceeds to explore their discourses on how to rule Taiwan in the context of global history. They were like European Liberal Imperialists, tending to discuss issues of domestic politics from the point of view of liberalism; however, on the other side, they also expressed their opinions from the perspective of imperialism in foreign policies. In fact, success of the European empires prompted the European liberals to believe that they did not need to apply their moral and political standards to the non-European, and the liberals of the Meiji period upheld the same belief, although they were also non-Europeans. However, some differences remain in their views on colonial policies, and this article therefore showcases these similarities and differences between the two groups.起始頁-結束頁：607-643資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心4篇名：什麼是「障礙研究」？英美的理論發展、建制化與臺灣本土化歷程並列篇名：Defining Disability Studies: The Development of Disability Studies in UK and US and the Localization Process in Taiwan作者：林駿杰(Jun-jie Lin);張睇(Heng-hao Chang)關鍵字：障礙研究;在地化;建制化;社會模式;後殖民取向;disability studies;localization;institutionalization;social model;post-colonial approach期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：英美障礙研究（Disability Studies）受到障礙者權利運動影響，自70年代後逐漸發展茁壯，以社會、文化及政治的障礙認識論，修正過去由缺損與個人模式<U+7232>主的傳統障礙觀點。然而，英美社會發展出的障礙研究，缺乏臺灣本土障礙者的實際生活經驗，臺灣社會學界在引用時往往產生許多限制。本文則以「障礙研究」<U+7232>研究對象，回顧英美障礙理論發展包括社會模式的影響與限制，探討人權模式與後殖民取向之興起，同時整理障礙研究的建制化，以及在臺灣社會所引發的在地化問題。最後，本文回顧現有臺灣障礙研究的文獻與貢獻，並討論臺灣障礙研究未來的圖像及展望。英文摘要：”Disability studies” is an academic discipline developed in the industrialized countries since the 1970s, and it has developed various social, cultural and political epistemologies. This research reviews the theoretical developments of disability studies in social science, including the social model, minority model, human rights model and post-colonial approach, and discusses the institutionalization of disability studies in the English-speaking world. In addition, it reviews process of introduction of disability studies to Taiwan. Finally, it examines the disability studies literature in Taiwan and discusses the issues and challenges of localization and the future of disability studies in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：645-691資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心5篇名：臺灣民<U+8846>的公民意識與公民參與並列篇名：Citizen Consciousness and Citizen Participation in Taiwan作者：徐明莉(Ming-li Hsu);莊文忠(Wen-jong Juang)關鍵字：公民參與;公民意識;政治參與;社會參與;政策參與;citizen participation;citizen consciousness;political participation;social participation;policy participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：理論上，影響公民參與的因素相當多，就個人層面而言，除了性別、年齡、教育程度等人口變數外，另一個重要因素即是公民意識。本研究運用2018年「政治變遷與臺灣公民意識」全國民意電話調查資料，檢證臺灣民眾的公民意識是否<U+7232>公民參與的重要解釋變數。不同於傳統的政治參與，本研究所定義的公民參與包含「政策參與」和「社會參與」在內，公民意識則定義<U+7232>「反權威意識」。本研究發現，民眾的公民意識對個人的社團活動參與、慈善行<U+7232>、政策參與，以及整體公民參與有正向的顯著影響；此外，人口變數對公民參與行<U+7232>也有部分的解釋力。英文摘要：From a theoretical perspective, there are a number of factors that affect citizen participation. On an individual level, besides demographic variables such as gender, age, and education, one of the main factors is citizen consciousness. This paper looks into how the concept of citizen consciousness plays a role in citizen participation by examining a nationwide telephone interview survey. Different from traditional political participation, the concept of citizen participation includes policy participation and social participation in this study. Citizen consciousness is defined as anti-authoritarianism. The findings showed that citizen consciousness has positive impact on participation in civic associations, philanthropic behavior, policy participation, and overall citizen participation. In addition, demographic variables also have some impact on citizen participation.起始頁-結束頁：333-366資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心6篇名：公民意識對臺灣民<U+8846>政治參與之影響：2012與2018兩個年度的觀察並列篇名：The Impact of Citizenship on Political Participation among Taiwan's Public: Evidence from Two Citizenship Surveys in 2012 and 2018作者：楊貴(Gui Yang);陳韻暄(Yun-hsuan Chen)關鍵字：政治參與;公民意識;公民政治;民主深化;political participation;citizenship;citizen politics;democratic deepening期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文採用2012年與2018年兩波公民意識調查資料，觀察比較臺灣民眾公民意識與政治參與之持續和變遷。本文發現：臺灣在由民主鞏固期進入民主深化期的過程中，民眾的投票參與、衝突參與顯著下降，意見表達有所提升。在兩個年度中，不論是對於常規性（conventional）政治參與或非常規性（unconventional）政治參與，公民意識均<U+7232>影響臺灣民眾政治參與之重要變數，公民意識與兩類政治參與存在正向連結。<U+5024>得注意的是，公民意識在2012與2018年呈現之影響持續且一致，此研究發現或有助拓展臺灣政治參與之現有解釋，以及追蹤觀察臺灣民主政治之發展。英文摘要：Based on two citizenship survey datasets in 2012 and 2018, this paper mainly focuses on the continuity and change of citizenship and political participation among Taiwan's public. This paper found that electoral participation and participatory conflict among Taiwan's public declined to some extent, but opinion expression increased slightly from 2012 to 2018. This paper also found that citizenship has a significant positive impact on both conventional political participation and unconventional political participation. Additionally, the positive linkage between citizenship and political participation was continuous and consistent. Our findings contribute by expanding existing explanations of political participation and understand democratic development in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：367-410資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心7篇名：戰爭與民主：抗戰時期中共的民主論述及戰國策派的挑戰並列篇名：War and Democracy: The Discourse of Democracy of Communist Party of China and Challenges from Zhanguo School in the Sino-Japanese War作者：施純純(Chun Chun Shih)關鍵字：中共;民主;戰國策派;戰爭;革命;Communist Party of China (CPC);democracy;Zhanguo School;war;revolution期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：中共在抗戰期間以「民主」作為論述主軸，強調「民主」與「正義」之戰的必然聯繫，幫助中共在戰時的國共合作中爭取政治空間，同時論證中共統治的正當性與優越性。另一方面，中共亦透過其民主論述為蘇聯政治體制辯護，公開支持蘇聯，並在太平洋戰爭爆發後，強調中共與蘇聯、英、美的共同外交立場。戰國策派則從「大政治」的角度指出國際戰爭有其運作邏輯，否定了民主與戰爭性質的必然關係，並質疑中共在抗戰期間爭取政權的正當性。中共對於戰國策派的批判，因而呈現出抗戰時期複雜的政治局勢，以及中共在眾多限制下建立政權的難題。英文摘要：The discourse of democracy was the main propaganda of Communist Party of China (CPC) in the Sino-Japanese War. Chinese Communists emphasized the necessary connection between ”democracy” and ”just” wars, and justified their struggling for political space and state building. They also defended the political system of Soviet Union as democracy, and asserted common diplomatic ground of CPC, Soviet Union, United States, and Britain in 1942. The discourse of democracy was the strategy which CPC used to compete with Kuomintang under a united front. Zhanguo School noticed the serious national crisis, and insisted that international wars were irrelevant to morality and ideologies. They asserted the idea of ”real politics” and repudiated the necessary connection between democracy and characteristics of wars. Zhanguo School challenged CPC's discourse and political strategies, and tended to support Kuomintang government to increase the force of the regime. Therefore, Chinese Communists criticized Zhanguo School for their whole plan of war. This criticism reflected the complicated political situation in the Sino-Japanese War, and many difficulties of state building of CPC as well.起始頁-結束頁：411-449資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心8篇名：契約自由、民主政治與國家責任：格林對19世紀英國勞動立法過程中的階級代表課題之反思並列篇名：Freedom of Contract, Democratic Politics and State Duty: Green's Critical Reflection on the Class Representation Issue in the 19th Century British Labour Legislation Movement作者：劉佳昊(Jia-hau Liu)關鍵字：格林;契約自由;國家干預;政黨政治;大眾民主;Green;freedom of contract;state interference;party politics;popular democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：始自亞里斯多德而至社會契約論，西方契約學說歷經演變，迄於18世紀孕育國家不得任意干涉個人契約自由之原則。惟當產業革命繼起，勞雇雙方的契約不平等現象日益加劇。值此際，格林即藉批駁社會契約論與個人主義式的自由觀，開展了一套融貫個人自由、社群共善和政府干預等觀念之學說，為其積極鼓吹立法改革之基礎。而為闡述格林學說思想的實踐意義，本文即從19世紀英國勞動立法過程論起，敘明政黨政治的階級代表問題，何以成為格林開展其立論的關鍵因素之一。而就勞動立法議題來說，格林最終所促進的，乃是一套結合契約正義與國家責任思想的大眾民主論述。英文摘要：From Aristotle to social contract theory, contract doctrine has been through transformations, and by the 18th century, it had developed the principle that the state should not interfere with individual contract freedom. As the Industrial Revolution emerged, however, the unequal contract conditions between employees and employers had become worse. In order to found his call for legal reformation of these unequal conditions on a solid base, Green criticised social contract theory and the individualist conception of contractual freedom and constructed an alternative theory consisting of individual freedom, common goods and government intervention. The present article aims to expound the practical significance of Green's theoretical works , and accordingly, it will explicate how the class representation issue in the 19th century British Labour Legislation movement prompted Green to reconstruct the theorem of liberalism and provide a theory for the reformation. What Green thus established is a popular democratic theory with a focus on contractual justice and state duty.起始頁-結束頁：451-487資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心9篇名：統治形象與統治能力：以17世紀英格蘭內戰時期政治文宣戰為例並列篇名：Images of Governing and Governability: A Case Study of the Propaganda during the 17th Century English Civil War作者：賴芸儀(Yun-I Lai)關鍵字：再現;圖像;文宣;英格蘭<U+5185>戰;查理一世;representation;image;propaganda;English civil war;Charles I期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：17世紀英格蘭內戰時期，議會軍從國王查理一世逃亡時棄置的私人物品中，發現他與王后荷麗葉特以及朝臣的往來信件。這些信件經議會編整後出版為The King's Cabinet Opened（1645）一書，呈現國王聽憑王后指示的軟弱個性，重創國王形象。本文透過脈絡主義式的研究途徑，梳理與建構相關史料，試圖探討當時圍繞該書有關政治能力之論述。該書透過打擊王后的形象，來質疑國王的統治能力。日後保王派則是藉由王后來宣傳君主權威，以及仿效議會派利用統治者配偶形象來打擊統治者統治能力的做法，透過指責護國公夫人有欠高雅的行<U+7232>，嘲諷護國公克倫威爾缺乏統治能力。英文摘要：This article proposes a contextual revision to the propaganda in the 17th century English Civil War on the images of governing and governability based on the publication as The King's Cabinet Opened of a packet of the King's letters. Said pamphlet showed that his Catholic French Queen, Henrietta Maria, wholly managed King Charles I and his Council. This offensive propaganda raised a huge debate on the personal characters of political rulers and ability of the King and the Queen to govern. The images of the Queen and later the Protectoress became a part of the controversy about the ability of the King and the Protector to govern.起始頁-結束頁：489-521資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心10篇名：回顧移轉支付問題：凱因斯、凡爾賽和約與德國一戰賠償並列篇名：A Review of the Transfer Problem: Keynes, the Versailles Treaty, and the German Reparations作者：何泰寬(Tai-kuang Ho);葉國俊(Kuo-chun Yeh)關鍵字：移轉支付問題;凱因斯;德國一戰賠償;凡爾賽和約;transfer problem;John Maynard Keynes;German reparations;Treaty of Versailles期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：一戰於1918年結束。最晚自1919年開始至1932年，凱因斯持續批評戰後協約國對於戰敗德國的索賠金額。凱因斯在辯論時使用的最重要分析觀念，就是移轉支付。本文回顧凱因斯提出的移轉支付問題，以及晚近對於凱因斯觀點的修正。由於移轉支付問題是凱因斯歐洲債務重整計畫的一部分，本文也一併討論他所提出的協約國債務處理方案，及其所涉及的利益衝突。英文摘要：World War I ended in 1918. From at least as early as 1919 to 1932, Keynes kept criticizing the Allies' reparations policy towards defeated Germany. In the debate he initiated, the most powerful idea that Keynes resorted to was the concept of the transfer problem. This article review Keynes's transfer problem and the recent amendment to Keynes's point of view. Since the transfer problem was part of Keynes's plan for European debt restructuring, this article also discusses Keynes's proposals for dealing with interally war debts and his conflict of interest during the debate.起始頁-結束頁：159-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心11篇名：誰支持婚姻平權？探索臺灣婚姻平權的支持基礎並列篇名：Who Supports Same-sex Marriage? Exploring the Mass Bases of the Same-sex Marriage Issue in Taiwan作者：林珮婷(Pei-ting Lin)關鍵字：同性婚姻;世代;婦運九○世代;政黨認同;多元家庭價值;same-sex marriage;generation;1990s generation women's movement;party identification;pluralistic family values期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年來婚姻平權議題受到臺灣社會大眾廣泛討論與重視，成<U+7232>重要議題，因此本研究試圖解析婚姻平權的支持基礎。首先，從臺灣婚姻平權議題的發展脈絡出發，檢視1991∼2017年民意發展趨勢。其次，透過模型分析探究民眾婚姻平權態度的差異，是來自於社會結構還是家庭價值觀的不同，又或是政黨政治動員的結果。研究結果顯示民眾對婚姻平權的態度正處於震盪期，對婚姻平權議題的支持不僅是因其所處的社會結構位置與身分，亦是立基於對多元家庭價值觀的支持，並同時受到特定政黨認同影響；此意謂著婚姻平權在臺灣已正式轉變<U+7232>政治議題。英文摘要：In recent years, same-sex marriage has become an important issue in Taiwan. This study aimed to explore the bases of support for same-sex marriage. First, we reviewed the contexts of same-sex marriage discussions in Taiwan and demonstrated the distribution of people's preferences between the years 1991 and 2017. Second, we applied an ordered logit model to examine whether social structures, family values, and party identification affect people's attitude toward same-sex marriage. The research findings indicate that public opinion of same-sex marriage is in a turbulent period, and people support same-sex marriage based not only on demographic factors, but also on pluralistic family values and party identification. This finding confirms that same-sex marriage has formally become a political issue in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：207-238資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心12篇名：「修正共和主義」與「新共和主義」的理論困境及其成因並列篇名：The Theoretical Dilemma of ”Revising Republicanism” and ”Neo-Republicanism” and Its Causes作者：劉岫靈(Hsiu-Ling Liu)關鍵字：修正共和主義;新共和主義;消極自由;無支配自由;觀念圖式;revisionist republicanism;neo-republicanism;negative freedom;freedom as non-domination;scheme of ideas期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Skinner的「修正共和主義」與Pettit的「新共和主義」同<U+7232>當代共和理論的新典範，它們都是以西塞羅的res publica理論作<U+7232>主要參照而建構的共和理論。一方面，Skinner<U+7232>了使共和主義調和於消極自由，採取權利中心詮釋建構了「修正共和主義」。另一方面，Pettit<U+7232>了使共和主義適用於當代多元民主，採取無支配自由中心詮釋建構了「新共和主義」。然而這兩種近代共和理論都出現了理路矛盾與理論困難。本文將採用觀念圖式的分析方式，說明Skinner與Pettit在參照西塞羅圖式的同時，是如何更動了西塞羅圖式中的詞彙使用傾向與聯結關係，最終導致兩組理論的理路矛盾與理論問題。英文摘要：Skinner's ”revisionist republicanism” and Pettit's ”neo-republicanism” are the new emerging paradigms of contemporary republican theory. They both use Cicero's ”theory of res publica” as the main source to construct republican theory. On the one hand, Skinner adopted juristic discourse to construct ”revisionist republicanism” in order to reconcile republicanism with negative freedom. On the other hand, Pettit adopted freedom as non-domination discourse to construct ”neo-republicanism” in order to make republicanism applicable to contemporary pluralist democracy. However, the two kinds of republican theories suffer from the problem of internal logical contradiction and the theoretical confusion. This paper will use the method of scheme analysis to explain how Skinner and Pettit refer to and change the scheme of Cicero at the same time, which finally leads to two paradigm contradictions and theoretical problems.起始頁-結束頁：239-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心13篇名：臺灣稅收預測表現之探討並列篇名：An Empirical Study on the Forecast Performance of Tax Revenue in Taiwan作者：陳國樑(Joe Chen);楊佩烜(Pei-Hsuan Yang);黃勢璋(Shih-Chang Huang)關鍵字：稅收預測;準確性;理性檢驗;tax forecasting;accuracy;rational test期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：政府近年屢屢出現實際稅收大幅高於預算稅收的現象，「稅收預測」準確性的討論已成<U+7232>各界矚目焦點。雖然稅收預測與政府施政作<U+7232>息息相關，但國內檢討臺灣稅收預測的文獻尚不多見。本文藉由臺灣1984－2017年的稅收預決算資料，透過跨國比較、理性檢驗、準確性分析以及迴歸模型等方式，探討我國政府稅收預測的表現。研究結果顯示，政府現行稅收預測未能具備準確趨勢，無法滿足統計預測弱理性的要求，也未能有效運用資訊；本文另採其他方法對各稅目進行稅收預測，結果亦顯示大多優於現行政府之預測。英文摘要：In recent years, the government has repeatedly experienced the phenomenon that actual tax revenue is significantly higher than the budgetary forecast. Discussion on the accuracy of ”tax forecasting” has become the focus of attention from all walks of life. To examine whether tax revenue forecasts correspond to the properties of ”good forecasts” in statistics and econometrics, we conduct cross-country comparison, rational tests, comparison of accuracy, and regression analysis, using data collected from budgetary forecasts and realized tax revenues in the period from 1986 to 2017. The results find that the government's tax forecasting has no accurate trend, and does not satisfy weak rationality, suggesting that the government does not use information effectively. Finally, forecast results from four competing methods are compared to the official forecasts, and the results suggest that the competing estimates are more accurate for most of the taxes.起始頁-結束頁：271-319資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心14篇名：原漢通婚家庭中雙裔子女的族群從屬：子代性別與數量的影響並列篇名：Ethnic Status Inheritance in Aboriginal-Han Marriages and Families: Inference of Gender and Quantity of Offspring作者：劉千嘉(Chien-chia Liu);章英華(Ying-hwa Chang)關鍵字：原漢雙裔;原漢通婚;從母姓;人口普查;biracial;ethnic intermarriage;mother's surname;population census期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：2001年原住民族基本法通過後，原住民母親與漢人父親的子女從母姓可取得原住民身分。本文運用2010年人口普查資料，探討原母漢父子女的族群從屬現象。研究發現如下：（1）近半數原母漢父之子女從屬母親族群身分；（2）兒子較女兒不易從屬於母親的族群身分；（3）獨生子女較不易從屬母親族群身分；（4）手足數量越多，子女從屬原住民身分的機率越高。結言之，雖然父系原則仍影響漢父原母的子女姓氏選擇，但族群身分的福利與權利保障確實有助於從母姓的選擇。英文摘要：Since the Indigenous Peoples Basic Law was announced in 2001, biracial children who have an indigenous mother's surname have been entitled to inherit indigenous status. Based on 2010 household and population censes data, this study focuses on those who have an indigenous mother and Han Chinese father and explores the ethnic inheritance of biracial children. The main findings are as follows: (1) Nearly half of biracial children inherit their indigenous mother's ethnicity. (2) Daughters are more likely to inherit their indigenous mother's ethnicity than sons. (3) An only child is less likely to inherit an indigenous mother's ethnicity. (4) The more siblings one has, the more likely a biracial child is to inherit an indigenous mother's ethnicity. The study concludes that patrilineal rules still significantly affect the choice of surname for those with an indigenous mother and Han Chinese father. Nevertheless, the welfare and rights derived from the indigenous status do facilitate the choice of an indigenous mother's surname.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心15篇名：家庭所得階層對創業決策影響之研究－臺灣社會變遷調查資料的實證分析並列篇名：The Impact of Family Income Classes on Entrepreneurial Decisions in Taiwan作者：林祖嘉(Chu-Chia Lin);李明軒(Ming-hsuan Lee);林姵宜(Pei-yi Lin)關鍵字：家庭所得階層;創業;階級流動;臺灣;income class;entrepreneurs;social mobility;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究使用中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心所發布的2017年「台灣社會變遷基本調查」之資料，針對家庭所得背景對於創業決策的影響，以及家庭所得階層與創業之間其他的交互影響進行實證探討。研究結果發現來自年少時期越高所得階層的樣本成<U+7232>創業者的可能性越大；而家庭所得階層越高的樣本在創業時，越有可能選擇資本或技術密集度較高的專業產業。此外，創業對於所得階層的流動有顯著的正向影響，顯示創業降低了所得階層的延續，有利於所得階層的流動。英文摘要：Previous studies have shown that the majority of entrepreneurs in earlier periods of Taiwan came from low-income families. However, as the economic conditions have improved, an increasing number of people aim at market opportunities and choose to be entrepreneurs to seize the opportunities. People from higher income classes usually have more advantages in this new type of entrepreneurial activities. Therefore, this paper re-examines empirically the relationship between income classes and entrepreneurial decisions. Moreover, we also examine the choice of industries of entrepreneurs from different income classes and whether starting a business provides an opportunity of upward social mobility. The results show that individuals from higher income classes are more likely to become entrepreneurs, and that entrepreneurs from higher income classes are more likely to enter industries with higher entry barriers. The results also show that starting a business has significant impacts on social mobility, providing a channel for upward social mobility.起始頁-結束頁：39-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心16篇名：政治情緒與選舉參與：2012年和2016年臺灣總統選舉的經驗分析並列篇名：Political Emotions and Electoral Participation: An Empirical Analysis of Taiwan's 2012 and 2016 Presidential Elections作者：李冠成(Kuan-chen Kee)關鍵字：政治心理學;政治情緒;選舉參與;臺灣總統選舉;political psychology;political emotions;electoral participation;Taiwan's presidential election期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文從政治心理學的角度探討公民的政治行動是否<U+7232>個人自由意識和深思熟慮的產物。心理學家指出，有意識的行<U+7232>至少是心智和大腦交互作用的結果。據此，本研究主張情緒作<U+7232>一個短期因素，也會影響民眾的政治參與。運用2012和2016年臺灣總統選舉的資料，我們發現選民感受不放心、生氣或有希望等情緒，對其政治參與有程度不等的影響。此外，在不同類型的參與上，情緒的影響也不同，希望促進不需要成本的參與，憤怒則促使民眾參加要付出成本的活動。在當代民主社會中，儘管我們期盼政治行<U+7232>是理性的，但實際上公民的政治判斷與行<U+7232>並不能排除情緒的影響。英文摘要：This study examines whether political actions are a product of mind and deliberation from the perspective of political psychology. Psychologists have demonstrated that human behaviors are the result of an interaction between the conscious mind and unconscious brain. Accordingly, we argue that emotion, as a short-term factor, does affect citizens' political participation. Using data from the 2012 and 2016 Taiwan presidential elections, we investigate the effect of political emotions on electoral participation. The results show that the extent to which individuals attend campaign activities is influenced by political emotions-worry, anger, and hope-in varying degrees. Further analyses suggest that political emotions have diverse effects on different types of electoral participation. Feeling hopeful motivates involvement in low-cost activities, while anger stimulates costly forms of participation. In contemporary democracies, we hope that citizens' political actions are driven by careful consideration, but in practice, their political judgments are not completely immune from feelings.起始頁-結束頁：81-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心17篇名：冷戰時期非政府組織的中介與介入：自由亞洲協會、亞洲基金會的東南亞文化宣傳（1951-1959）並列篇名：Intermediaries and Interventions of NGOs in the Cold War: Southeast Asian Culture Propaganda of CFA and TAF (1951-1959)作者：王梅香(Mei-hsiang Wang)關鍵字：文化冷戰;權力理論;中介者;亞洲出版社;友聯出版社;cultural Cold War;power theories;intermediaries;Asian Press;United Press期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：32卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文從權力中介者角度，探討自由亞洲協會、亞洲基金會在東南亞文化宣傳中權力運作的多重面向。冷戰時期非政府組織聯結美國官方和海外華人，並因其協商位置，使其在外部的政治利益和內部的理念價值間有所衝突和權衡。本文說明非政府組織的階段性變化，從原本的經費贊助者、政策輔助者，逐漸轉變<U+7232>介入者，扮演自由價值捍衛者和宣傳網絡建置者等多重角色。其次，非政府組織逐漸成<U+7232>行動主體，發展出自身的宣傳理念和策略。最後，非政府組織透過跨國中介，將美方的宣傳目標，中介給香港在地的行動者，然後傳播至東南亞，形成跨國層級中介的現象。英文摘要：This article explores the multiple aspects of the power operation of the Committee for a Free Asia (CFA) and the Asian Foundation (TAF) in the Southeast Asian cultural propaganda field during the Cold War from the perspective of power intermediaries. Non-governmental organizations during the Cold War connected the United States officials and overseas Chinese, and because of their negotiating position, made them try to balance the conflicts between political interests and internal values. This study argues that NGOs gradually changed their roles from sponsors of funds and facilitators to interventionists. NGOs are active participants, acting as value defenders of freedom and advocacy network builders. Second, NGOs have gradually become the subject of action, developing their own propaganda concepts and strategies. Finally, NGOs mediate the propaganda goals of the U.S. to the actors in Hong Kong, disseminate their information to Southeast Asia and form a transnational hierarchical intermediary.起始頁-結束頁：123-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心01篇名：一個時代的結束－編輯室報告並列篇名：Editorial: The End of an Era...作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：4-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).00012篇名：「褲兒」生存模式：《誰在找麻煩》和《日常對話》中的酷兒時間與修復轉向並列篇名：Mrs. Pants' Modes of Life: Queer Temporalities and Reparative Turn in Troublers and Small Talk作者：陳佩甄(Pei-Jean CHEN)關鍵字：性政治;不穩定階級;酷兒生存模式;《日常對話》;《誰在找麻煩》;修復式閱讀;Sexual politics;Precariousness;Queer modes of life;Small Talk;Troublers;Reparative reading期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文分析臺韓紀錄片－南韓的《誰在找麻煩》（《<U+BD88><U+C628><U+D55C><U+B2F9><U+C2E0>》）（2015）和臺灣的《日常對話》（2016）－中，主角李蛻和T媽媽月女的生命經驗，據此提出「非典型記憶」的歷史形態，並探問「酷兒生存模式」與「歷史修復」的可能。李蛻和T媽媽前後出生、成長於1945至1970年代的南韓和臺灣，彼時兩地正經歷劇烈的政治、經濟轉型：從日本殖民、冷戰反共，到朴正熙與蔣中正的威權時期；同時是從農業社會轉型至工業化社會的高峰期。兩位紀錄片主角身處在這樣特定的歷史時空中，在性／別（同性戀者、不婚女性、家暴單親）與勞動（女工、司機、祭司）身分上呈現有別於當時主流社會高度集體正常化的「邊緣性」（precariousness），並透過紀錄片的口述回憶，將此生命經驗傳遞到拍攝者與觀眾眼前。本文認為，兩位紀錄片主角的生命經驗凸顯了「酷兒時間」的複雜歷史向度，並反映了兩個重要的歷史問題：其一，主導性歷史參照總是著重於「意識形態」與「象徵」的操作，而李蛻和T媽媽的生命經驗則反映了，著重這兩個分析面向，會忽視歷史參照系統中的「物質基礎」。再者，他們的邊緣生存狀態不只與性／別身分有關，而是跟生命形態緊密扣連，也因此必須連結階級、勞動、信仰等面向，據此揭露各種權力系統的結盟。最後本文提出酷兒歷史的「修復轉向」，以兩部紀錄片呈現的「修復性閱讀」重塑酷兒主體經驗中的日常性與情感結盟，嘗試在社會建構的意識形態和表演性之外，補充較少被觸及的生活體現，以此修復酷兒歷史，進而重構批判方式。英文摘要：Focusing on the main figures of Yi Muk and T Mama in recent queer documentaries: Troublers (2015) and Small Talk (2016) produced by South Korean and Taiwanese independent directors, this paper speaks to recent work in queer theory and historiography on the potential for ”queer modes of life”. Yi Muk and T Mama were born and lived in South Korea and Taiwan during the 1945-1970s, when the two societies were undergoing drastic political and economic transformations: from Japanese colonialism, the Cold War system, to the authoritarian regimes, as well as the peak period of the economic development and industrialization. Against this backdrop, the two protagonists demonstrate a critical lived experience of precariousness in terms of gender/sexuality and labor work. I argue the ”precarious memory” embodied in the documentaries present a useful analytical framework for examining the dominant mode of history writing. To facilitate this argument, I will trace the shifting paradigms of sexual norms from the legacy of colonialism, the cold war ideology, to the precarious present when the knowledge production of sexuality is passed on to subsequent generations. To be more specific, I will discuss the issues of gender norms through the reading of the liminal subjects of pajissi and chh<U+0113>ng-kho-e (both means Mrs. Pants in Korean and Taiwanese language), the precarious lives of these non-normative subjects under cold war system, and how the directors (as subsequent generations of Yi Muk and T Mama) integrate this socio-history into the present and future, to approach a reparative reading of queer history.起始頁-結束頁：7-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).00023篇名：同志潛影、後遺民與冷戰：以早期華語語系明星白雲為例並列篇名：Queer Latent Images, Post-loyalism and the Cold War: The Case of an Early Sinophone Star, Bai Yun作者：許維賢(Wai-Siam HEE)關鍵字：後遺民;中國性;華語語系;冷戰;同志;風流才子;Post-loyalist;Chineseness;Sinophone;Cold War;Queer;Dashing young scholar期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文透過早期報紙、電影畫報、影片和白雲親筆文章及相關回憶錄等史料，把白雲的明星生涯置於從抗戰到冷戰的語境進行深入考察，並對其另類的同志潛影和中國性進行分析。本文從華語語系和後遺民論述透視出生馬來亞的白雲橫跨中國大陸－香港－臺灣－南洋四地的離散經驗，探討白雲作為中國性的後遺民各種錯植和頹廢的離散經驗，追思他那些風流艷史如何顛覆了現代中國國族論述的正統？白雲「娘娘腔」的「美人」明星造型、同志潛影和風流艷史又是如何挑戰現代中國性的陽剛霸權和同質性？本文挪用明星理論對白雲的明星生涯和反宣傳手法進行梳理和分析，並釐清男明星白雲作為一種消費現象在早期華語語系文化圈的形成，他在銀幕上操演傳統中國陰柔的風流才子造型，也有意識在私生活中頻頻不羈與男女明星製造緋聞的反宣傳手法，這一切呼喚和建構一種具有同志潛影的銀幕形象，在成功引起社會大眾凝視和爭議的同時，也觸怒了國共兩黨現代媒體所要維持的國族父權社會文化秩序。他的個案顛覆了離散華人論述視野下的「源」與「流」之間的主從關係，體現了早期華語語系大眾的需求、夢想和集體無意識是如何被現代中國性、現代性、抗戰、國共內戰和冷戰的各種意識形態進行編碼、調節或壓抑。英文摘要：This essay sets the career of early Sinophone star Bai Yun (1916-1982) in its Second Sino-Japanese War to Cold War context, using materials from early newspapers, magazines, film, Bai Yun's own writings, and memoirs to analyze his alternative queer latent images and Chineseness. The essay uses a post-loyalist perspective to examine Malaya-born Bai Yun's diaspora experience, which spanned Mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Southeast Asia. It discusses Bai Yun's various displaced and decadent diaspora experiences as a post-loyalist Chinese, and explores how his amorous exploits upturned the upright orthodoxy of modern Chinese nationalism. Bai Yun's ”girlish” pin-up star image, queer latent images, and amorous history challenged the hegemony of masculinity and homogeneity within Chinese Nationalism. The essay also applies star theory to analyze Bai Yun's career and reverse publicity methods, examining the formation of Bai Yun as a consumption phenomenon in the early Sinophone cultural sphere. On screen, he performed with the stylings of a traditional Chinese feminine dashing young scholar; off screen, he frequently created scandals involving other male and female stars as part of a reverse publicity strategy. This called up and constructed an on-screen persona with a queer latent image. While he successfully attracted controversy and the gaze of the audience, he also enraged the nationalist patriarchal socio-cultural order that the modern media of the KMT and CCP wished to maintain. His case subverts the primary-subordinate relationship of ”roots” and ”routes” as seen in diaspora Chinese discourse, embodying how the needs, dreams, and collective unconscious of early Sinophone audiences were encoded, mediated, or repressed by Chinese Nationalism and the various ideologies of the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Chinese Civil War, and the Cold War.起始頁-結束頁：43-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).00034篇名：抵抗、協商與認同：東莞夜市小販的身分實踐並列篇名：Resistance, Negotiation and Identification: Daily Practice of Night Market Hawkers in Dongguan, China作者：黃微子(Weizi HUANG);王靜雯(Jingwen WANG)關鍵字：夜市小販;身分政治;日常實踐;Night market hawker;Identity politics;Daily practice期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020中文摘要：中國大陸很多城市有著發達的夜市文化，卻缺乏對夜市小販群體的身分研究。本文以東莞作為田野，回溯小販在舊城街邊聚集形成夜市，到最終被迫搬遷、離開街道的四至五年歷史，主要討論小販如何通過日常活動實踐其身分政治。研究者發現，本地青年小販先是基於校友認同，繼而基於地緣政治內部的階級認同，來組織串聯，挪用文化保育的論述來合法化占街經營的行為。階級認同無法跨越地方文化歧視，因而形成本地小販對外地小販的排斥。但當攤販被迫搬遷上樓，經營的經濟門檻大幅提升後，地方認同實際上被擱置，夜市空間為小販中有相對較高資本的階層所共享。英文摘要：Many cities in China have a highly developed night market culture, but there is a lack in the studies of night market hawkers. Taking Dongguan, China as the field site, this paper reviews a short history since local hawkers started gathering in a remarkable street in the old town five years ago, until they were driven into a brand new night market building. Our research focuses on how the hawkers formed their sense of identities as street hawkers through daily practice. It is found that young local hawkers's identities are first based on the alumni network, and then on class within regional restriction. Non-local hawkers were pushed out at the early stage. This kind of local cultural identity, however, were laid aside when the cost of running a stall in the new night market went much higher. The market space was shared by the hawkers who possess larger capital, regardless of their birthplaces.起始頁-結束頁：83-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).00045篇名：《十年》與香港後雨傘情感政治並列篇名：Ten Years and the Politics of Emotion in Post-Umbrella Hong Kong作者：麥樂文(Sam Lok-man MAK)關鍵字：情感／情緒;情感管理;雨傘運動;香港電影;Emotion;Emotion management;Umbrella Movement;Hong Kong cinema期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020中文摘要：《十年》是關於香港未來的電影拍攝計劃。由於碰觸了尖銳的政治議題，電影公映初期受傳統商業發行機制以各種理由排斥、抵制，只在少數院線上映，僅有的播放影院甚至在高票房情形下突然落畫。電影團隊後轉而與民間團體合作，舉行社區放映活動，以非主流的方式流通，卻取得了主流電影評獎體制的肯認－香港電影金像獎最佳電影。當電影被《環球時報》批評「《十年》導演們宣揚絕望」、「在這座城市裡擴散焦慮」，不少「進步」評論人同樣認為影片流於情緒抒發而無助建立香港主體性，對立的政治立場弔詭地同以情緒之名進行批評，正好指向了可能的介入路徑－情感的政治。《十年》作為電影文本固然是情感的中介，當文本在不同場域、社會機制流通時所產生的各種論述，同樣是情感流通的過程、環節之一，當中的抵抗與斡旋不僅指向《十年》本身，同時打開了討論當下香港文化政治的空間。本文將重構《十年》的流通脈絡，借助阿赫美（Sara Ahmed）、威廉斯（Raymond Williams）、布朗（Wendy Brown）等理論資源，探討文本及其流通的情感邏輯，嘗試尋求後雨傘香港文化政治的另類理解。英文摘要：Ten Years is a cinema project that projected imaginaries towards Hong Kong's near future. As the film engaged with sensitive political issues, it was boycotted by most of the commercial distributors in Hong Kong. However, the marginal circulation circuits marked its distinctiveness as a unique event of Hong Kong cinema. Under the intensifying political tensions, the cinemas suddenly suspended the screening of Ten Years even it had reached a surprising box office record. The team then switched to an alternative way to circulate the film by organizing community screenings with NGOs. While the film is marginalized from the mainstream distribution channels, it received ”the best movie” prize from the 35th Hong Kong Film Awards which is a quasi-official institution of recognition of the Hong Kong cinema. However, once Ten Years' nomination was announced, Huanqiu Times, an official media of PRC, accused the directors of ”disseminating despairs” and ”spreading anxiety around the city.” Surprisingly some ”progressive” critics also resonated with such negative view over the ”emotional” aspect of the texts. This paradox points toward a new path for critical intervention: the politics of emotions. On one hand, Ten Years serves as a medium of emotions that circulated around the society; on the other hand, discourses had been generated through the text's circulation across various fields and social institutions. Such a process also played a significant role in the production of emotions. Resistance and negotiation in this process opened up spaces for investigation of the current conjuncture of Hong Kong. As a new approach to articulate the cultural politics of ”post-Umbrella Movement,” inspired from Sara Ahmed, Raymond Williams and Wendy Brown's theoretical thinking on emotions, this paper first reconstructed the context of the circulation and then deploy textual analysis of the emotions of Ten Years.起始頁-結束頁：115-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).00056篇名：人民作為一種修辭？香港「反逃犯條例運動」中的民主與身分認同並列篇名：People as a Rhetorical Term: Democracy and Identity in Hong Kong's Anti-ELAB Movement作者：彭麗君(Pang Laikwan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：152-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).00067篇名：法治之非法並列篇名：The Lawlessness of Law and Order作者：陳錦榮(John Nguyet ERNI);林家瑄(Chia-Hsuan LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：163-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).00078篇名：香港反送中運動：劃界、翻譯與轉型並列篇名：The Hong Kong anti-ELAB Protest Movement: Bordering, Translation, and Transitions作者：蘇哲安(Jon SOLOMON)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：186-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).00089篇名：逆風說的話：對話廖偉棠並列篇名：Words against the Wind: A Dialogue with Liu Wai Tong作者：曾金燕(Jinyan ZENG);廖偉棠(Liu Wai Tong)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：221-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).000910篇名：一「分」為二；一「生」為二並列篇名：Two Derived from One; Two Generated from One作者：王德威(David Der-wei WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：232-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).001011篇名：一與二：毛澤東與方以智的思考並列篇名：One and Two: How Mao Zedong and Fang Yizhi Think作者：楊儒賓(Rurbin YANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：240-245資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).001112篇名：規範性治理和解放性批判：對立或並置？並列篇名：On the Normative Governance Paradigm and Emancipatory Critical Politics: Opposites or Composition作者：洪世謙(Shih Chian HUNG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：246-253資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).001213篇名：冷戰／劃界的思想考掘：朝向解放政治並列篇名：Archiving Cold War/Bordering: Toward a Liberatory Politics作者：王智明(Chih-Ming WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：254-264資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).001314篇名：「麻風為業」的當代中國式汙名與韌性並列篇名：Careering Along with Leprosy: Chinese Leprosy Doctors' Stigma and Their Resilience作者：孫賀(He SUN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：266-275資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).001415篇名：要呼吸？還是面子？：在新冠肺炎的時代重讀麻風並列篇名：To Breathe? Or to Save Face?: Rereading Leprosy in the COVID-19 Era作者：董顯亮(Xian-Liang DONG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：276-282資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).001516篇名：再現實驗場生命並列篇名：Representing Lives in the Laboratory作者：張超雄(Chaoxiong ZHANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：283-290資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).001617篇名：回應：「後帝國」中國的歷史實驗、矛盾與延續並列篇名：Response: The Historical Experiment of Post-Imperial China and Its Contradiction and Continuation作者：劉紹華(Shao-hua LIU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：291-296資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).001718篇名：種族與暴力的啟示：解讀好萊塢製作的黑人電影並列篇名：Race and Violence: Reading Black Movies of Hollywood作者：葉舒瑜(Soo-Ei YAP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：31期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：297-311資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202010_(31).001819篇名：欲望與框座：藝術實踐的「轉身」－編輯室報告並列篇名：Desire against the Frame: On Artistic Transformation作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：4-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).000120篇名：離散的群島、間續的系譜：一部臺灣基進性創作之「剩餘史」的可能並列篇名：Scattered Isles and Fragmented Genealogy: On a ”History of the Rest” for Radical Art Practices in Taiwan作者：吳祥賓(Hsiang-Pin WU)關鍵字：臺灣基進性創作;藝術內在的政治性;剩餘;弱機構;臨界書寫;Radical art practices in Taiwan;Politics of aesthetics;Residuum;Weak institution;Limits of writing期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020中文摘要：綜觀臺灣從二十世紀初至今的美術史，深受北美與西歐前衛藝術影響的創作者們，在面對過去不同殖民政權的壓迫、新自由主義的剝削，乃至於今日全球資本主義崩解的危機之時，皆透過不同的抗爭實踐以及特定時空脈絡的迴返與連結，孕生出各自創作內在的基進性特質與政治性動能。然而，臺灣基進性創作之政治動能，卻也經常跟政治場域裡的異質能量相互產生矛盾與衝突。在此情形下，某種暫時懸置於雙方矛盾中的「剩餘」之抵抗動能，便直指藝術抗爭實踐最為核心的意涵。如果「剩餘」意指的是，在不同生活層面的縫隙及邊界上游離且不斷形變之抵抗能量，又如果「剩餘」指向的也是那些無法被既定的文化生產體制所制約之另類生產模式，那麼，基進性創作在進入展覽與歷史之再現機制的同時，是否意味著「剩餘」之抵抗動能的收編與異化？而若回到所謂「美術史」書寫的命題裡，我們是否又能夠穿透上述「剩餘」的弔詭，並形構出一部離散、間續的「剩餘史」，進而藉此開展再次從體制內脫逃的可能？本文試圖將焦點置於臺灣檔案室、意識部落以及MIGA的研究材料之上，並佐以洪席耶（Jacques Ranciere）的美學與歷史書寫之論點，以及曼恩（Paul Mann）對於藝術之「剩餘」狀態的剖析，期望為上述的提問梳理出一條分析路徑。英文摘要：In the History of Art in Taiwan, Taiwanese artists develop in a unique way the radicality of their art practices which are deeply inspired by North-American and West-European Avant-garde. In fact, this artistic radicality is also built on its resistance to oppression by the different colonial regimes, to exploitation by the neoliberalism, and to the current global crisis in the collapse of capitalism. However, the radical art practices in Taiwan are often confronted by the reactions coming from the political sphere. And in this situation of confrontation or even contradiction between art and politics, the force of resistance generated by radical art practices turns out to be suspended in a state of the ”rest”. If this state of the ”rest” is the very place where artists create their force of resistance at the limits between different spheres of life, and develop a new mode of production to temporarily flee from the absorption by capitalism, will the ”rest” be instantly alienated and dissolved when radical art practices are subjected, on the one hand, to the system of representation in the exhibition, and on the other hand, to the system of interpretation in the History? And if the history writing is an inevitable way to capture the traces of the ”rest” in radical art practices, would it be possible to write an ”history of the rest” and escape at the same time from the taming of the History? This article will develop different approaches to these questions not only with Paul Mann's criticism on the ”rest” and Jacques Ranciere's aesthetic and historiography theory, but also with the artist collectives like Taiwan Archives, Open Circle Tribe, and MIGA. The aim of this research is to bring a new perspective on the history of radical art in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：11-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).000201篇名：展演身體感知及其作為博物館研究的方法之芻議並列篇名：Staging Embodiment and Senses in the Museum: A Proposal作者：張釋(Shih CHANG);陳郁婷(Yu-Ting CHEN)關鍵字：博物館展示;研究方法;身體感知;新加坡;臺灣;Museum exhibition;Research methods;Body and senses;Singapore;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020中文摘要：博物館為何需要重視身體感知及其研究？作為現代性產物，即使隨著新博物館學論述的誕生，博物館在研究、展示與觀眾經驗的製造上仍側重物質的視覺面向。然而，人類生活的經驗與記憶，是由身體分析當下所有感官訊息的結果，也因此能夠理解身體感知與物質文化的關係具有社會意涵。同時，博物館若視身體為記憶的載體，便表示博物館認同外在的物質與個體精神世界的差異性，並認同可透過個體身體動態保存文化遺產，延續集體記憶。亞太地區的博物館近年來逐漸出現新的趨勢，以回應文化多元性與文化平權的要求，而在原有基礎上，增加非視覺的研究、展示與教育活動。因此，本文首先簡要回顧博物館中關於博物館中視線的生成、身體與感知的研究趨勢及其於博物館研究領域的應用。其次，本文以新加坡美術館與國立臺灣史前文化博物館的展覽為案例，討論感知介入博物館展覽的不同方法。透過實例分析，本文指出當代博物館對於感知與身體記憶的重視，有助於其補充以視覺為主的物質文化研究，為博物館研究提供更多元的理論、突破的出口，跳脫出侷限在物質文化的研究，並對以物為主的論述的權力展開批判。同時，透過保存與再現非視覺文化資產，可使個體得以更平等的共感文化內容，切身感受物質與非物質文化的社會意義，構築其「身」為文化記憶的載體，動態保存並傳承歷史記憶。英文摘要：Why do museums need to pay attention to embodiment and sensorial studies? Modern museums and their exhibitions are visually oriented and are often positioned as a space where one is not supposed to indulge one's ”lower” senses. However, human experience and social memory are produced and reproduced through sensory and bodily engagements, which are crucial carriers of material culture and its social meanings, and therefore have the potential to preserve cultural heritage in dynamic ways. Using the concepts of ”situated knowledge” and ”sensory ethnography”, this paper discusses how sensorial and bodily elements are utilized in museum spaces through two case studies: Singapore Art Museum and the National Taiwan Museum of Prehistoric Culture. This paper points out that museum exhibitions which demonstrate sensorial and embodiment elements are able to produce dynamic contents and tell versatile stories. Placing emphasis on perception and body memory, these exhibitions are therefore able to transcend visually-based material culture research and provide meta-theories for museum studies. At the same time, by preserving and representing non-visual cultural heritage, these exhibitions show how sensory embodied knowledge can transmit between person and generations through the visitors' sensorial and material engagement in the exhibitions.起始頁-結束頁：37-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).00032篇名：迷失在認同焦慮中的「臺北」「國立」故宮博物院並列篇名：Lost in the Politics of Identity: ”Taipei,” ”National” Palace Museum作者：王舒俐(Shu-Li WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：69-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).00043篇名：回顧與前瞻：談故宮的定位並列篇名：Review and Prospect of the Positions of the Natoinal Palace Museum作者：許雅惠(Ya-hwei HSU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：83-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).00054篇名：脫掉政治的緊箍咒，轉向專業並列篇名：Breaking Free of Political Shackles and Moving Toward Professionalism作者：施靜菲(Ching-Fei SHIH)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：92-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).00065篇名：故宮的時代解：人本主義、策展框架、科技設計並列篇名：National Palace Museum (Taiwan): Dilemmas and Solutions作者：曾柏文(Albert TZENG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：106-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).00076篇名：規劃亞洲城市大計：回顧故宮南院落腳嘉義太保的規劃足跡並列篇名：The Ambitious Planning of an Asian City: A Review of the Plan Making of the Southern Branch of National Palace Museum in Taibao, Chaiyi作者：黃舒楣(Shu-Mei HUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：114-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).00087篇名：「後自然」概念下的藝術實踐與環境認同：以2018臺北雙年展為核心的討論並列篇名：Artistic Practice and Environmental Identity Under the Concept of ”Post-Nature”: Taipei Biennial 2018 as a Case in Point作者：黃宗潔(Tsung-Chieh HUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：128-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).00098篇名：奧奎．恩威佐：全球策展與典範轉移並列篇名：Okwui Enwezor: Global Curation and Its Paradigm Shift作者：唐慧宇(Hui-Yu TANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：150-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).00109篇名：照護或控制？後帝國實驗下的麻風醫生並列篇名：Care or Control? Leprosy Doctors in China's Post-Imperial Experimentations作者：陳嘉新(Jia-shin CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：161-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).001110篇名：疾病隱喻下的底層之聲並列篇名：The Voice under the Metaphor as Illness作者：陳重仁(Chung-Jen CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：166-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).001211篇名：集體生命史的洞見與不見並列篇名：Collective life history that reveals and conceals作者：傅向紅(Hoeng-Hong POR)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：172-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).001312篇名：透視「後帝國」：生命史、防疫史、社會政治史並列篇名：Unfolding ”Post-Imperial” China: Life History, Epidemic Control History, and Sociopolitical History作者：曾金燕(Jinyan ZENG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：178-182資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).001413篇名：評周麗卿《探索現代中國的政治轉型：〈新青年〉與民初的政治、社會思潮》並列篇名：A Review of Li-Qing Zhou's Exploring the Political Transformation of Modern China: New Youth and the Political and Social Thoughts of the Early Republic of China作者：王琛(Chen WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：184-203資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).001514篇名：重新思考《新青年》與五四新文化運動：對王琛學者書評的回應並列篇名：Rethinking New Youth and the New Culture Movement: A Response to Chen Wang作者：周麗卿(Li-Ching CHOU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：30期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：204-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202004_(30).001601篇名：青少年網路成癮並列篇名：Internet addiction in adolescents作者：洪研竣(Yan-Jun Hong);吳秀英(Shiow-Ing Wu);林煜軒(Yu-Hsuan Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：599-601資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).PF062篇名：台灣COVID-19疫情初期實施居家檢疫／隔離措施探討並列篇名：Home quarantine and isolation in Taiwan in response to COVID-19作者：林怜伶(Ling-Ling Lin);張雅姿(Ya-Tzu Chang);江柏榮(Po-Jung Chiang);王怡雅(Yi-Ya Wang);藍一逢(Yi-Feng Lan);林千玉(Chien-Yu Lin);蕭慶瞬(Ching-Shun Hsiao);劉慧蓉(Hui-Rong Liu);楊靖慧(Chin-Hui Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：602-610資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).1090863篇名：日本推動照顧工作師制度之歷史脈絡：回顧1950至1980年代並列篇名：Assessing Japan's certified care worker training system: 1950s-1980s作者：徐明仿(Ming-Fang Hsu)關鍵字：介護福祉士;照顧工作;專業證照;自立支援;certified care worker;caregiving;qualification;self-reliance support期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：日本於1987年立法通過介護福祉士制度（本文譯照顧工作師制度），開啟學校教育養成機制與國考證照機制，雙軌並進培育第一線照顧人才。本文以傳統概念性文獻回顧探討日本法制化之歷史沿革，搜尋日本官方歷史性政策文獻資料，從日本資料庫檢索系統IPSS、CiNii、NDL篩選納入12篇（1970-1990年）官方政策文獻、9篇（1970-2020年）日文期刊論文，及自華藝線上圖書館、台灣期刊論文索引系統計4篇（2000-2020年）相關研究。本文歸納出日本順利推動法制化之因素有四點，中央政府強力主導、社會工作與照顧工作之雙師制度同時法制化、「訓．用．勞」三端的支持，以及銀髮產業界的支持。英文摘要：Japan passed the Certified Care Worker Act in 1987 and initiated specialized nursing care education and a dual-track approach to national qualification to cultivate care professionals. This study adopted a traditional literature review methodology to investigate the historical evolution of Japan's legal regime for care workers. It searched for official historical Japanese policy documents (1970-1990) in domestic and foreign databases, including IPSS, CiNii, and NDL. This study identified four major elements contributing to Japan's success in enacting regulations governing care workers, namely (1) strong central government leadership, (2) the adoption of a dual system for certifying social workers and care workers, (3) a collaborative training system involving both employers and employees, (4) and support from the care industry.起始頁-結束頁：611-622資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).1091224篇名：Acute watery diarrhea in an urban sector of Islamabad in 2018: an outbreak investigation並列篇名：急性水樣腹瀉疫情調查：以伊斯蘭瑪巴德一都市區域為例作者：Majid Ali Tahir;Amjad Mehmood;Mumtaz Ali Khan;Zakir Hussain;Amna Ali;Aliya Jabeen;Nazia Hassan;Moin Iqbal;Sana Habib Abbasi關鍵字：AWD;outbreak;investigation;supply water;drainage;急性水樣腹瀉（acute watery diarrhea, AWD）;疫情爆發;調查;供水;排水期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：Objectives: In response to the reports of presence of acute watery diarrhea (AWD) in sector I-9/4 of Islamabad, Pakistan, the Federal Disease Surveillance and Response Unit of the National Institute of Health (NIH) Islamabad appointed an outbreak investigation team to confirm the outbreak, identify risk factors and formulate recommendations for control. Methods: A descriptive study was conducted from July 27 to August 20, 2018 to investigate the potential causation of illness and modes of transmission in the outbreak. Active case finding started through a house-to- house case search and the establishment of a case definition. A total of 46 cases of AWD were identified by surveying 508 homes during the study period. Results: The study results revealed that ground bore water (OR 0.1916, CI 0.0633-0.5798, p ＜ 0.0034) and public supply water (OR 6.6182, CI 5.2384-25.3678, p ＜ 0.0027) stored in unsafe utensils for drinking are probable causes of this outbreak. Despite most of these people (n = 30, 65.2%) being aware of the poor quality of the water, they still consuming it. All cases had closed drained toilet facilities at their homes which may have resulted in triggering of the infection. Commonly witnessed signs/symptoms included loss of motion, abdominal cramps, vomiting and fever. People living in this sector belong to an excellentsocio-economic class. Conclusions: The outbreak of AWD in this area revealed that the public water supply may become contaminated at any instance resulting in an outbreak.英文摘要：目標：為回應聯邦疾病監測及應變單位（Federal Disease Surveillance and Response Unit）所報導位於巴基斯坦伊斯蘭瑪巴德I-9/4區的急性水樣腹瀉（acute watery diarrhea, AWD）個案，巴基斯坦國家衛生研究院（National Institute of Health）派出調查團，前往確認該地疫情、找出風險因素、提出疫情控制建議。方法：採用描述性研究方法，在2018年7月27日至8月20日期間探討潛在病因以及該疾病的傳播途徑。本研究透過逐戶調查搭配已建立的AWD個案定義，積極尋找個案，研究期間中一共調查了508戶，確認了46個AWD個案。結果：研究結果顯示，存儲在不安全飲用容器中的地下水（OR 0.1916, CI 0.0633-0.5798, p ＜ 0.0034）及公共水龍頭提供的飲用水（OR 6.6182, CI 5.2384-25.3678, p ＜ 0.0027）是最有可能導致此次疫情爆發的原因。雖然大部分的個案（n = 30, 65.2%）都知道水質不好，但他們仍然選擇持續飲用，且所有個案家中都有封閉式排水的廁所設備（100%），此因素可能引爆疾病傳染。最常見的徵兆和症狀為腹瀉、腹絞痛、嘔吐、發燒等，此地區居民有良好的經濟地位以及教育程度。結論：此地區AWD疫情爆發的狀況顯示出，公共區域的供水隨時都有可能受到污染，進而造成疫情爆發。起始頁-結束頁：623-631資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).1081075篇名：台灣肌萎縮性脊髓側索硬化症的發生率、盛行率及死亡率並列篇名：Incidence, prevalence and mortality of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Taiwan作者：陳瑞鴻(Jui-Hung Chen);李子奇(Charles Tzu-Chi Lee)關鍵字：肌萎縮性脊髓側索硬化症（ALS）;全民健保資料庫;發生率;盛行率;死亡率;amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS);National Health Insurance Research Database;incidence;prevalence;mortality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：肌萎縮性脊髓側索硬化症（Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, ALS）為一重大疾病，監測其基礎流行病學指標以掌握此疾病的流行趨勢至為重要。本研究分年度進行台灣的ALS發生率、盛行率及死亡率等統計。方法：本回顧性世代研究從重大傷病資料庫納入1999年1月1日至2017年12月31日間新診斷ALS案例，並串連台灣全民健保資料庫與全國死因資料檔進行分析。結果：2008-2015年逐年的ALS年齡標準化發生率約在每10萬人0.33-0.44人間；年齡標準化盛行率從2008年的1.54人上升至2015年的2.31人（每10萬人）。1999-2016年期間在初診日後的5年內有很高的死亡率（年粗死亡率14.7%∼19.7%）。另在僅納入確定死亡個案的分析中，經氣切、非侵入型呼吸器使用或胃造口手術的個案其平均存活期則顯著提高（分別為4.92年比2.66年，3.56年比2.45年及3.75年比3.02年）。結論：延續1999-2007年對台灣ALS流行病學之研究，本研究顯示於2008-2015年的逐年發生率趨於穩定，而逐年盛行率有增加的趨勢。初診日後5年內有很高的死亡率，而氣切、非侵入型呼吸器及胃造口可延長病患的存活時間。英文摘要：Objectives: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a serious disease. Therefore, monitoring basic epidemiological indicators for clarifying the epidemic trend is crucial. Yearly epidemiological statistical data were determined to assess the incidence, prevalence, and mortality of ALS in Taiwan. Methods: In this population-based retrospective cohort study, patients who were newly diagnosed with ALS from January 1, 1999, to December 31, 2017, were enrolled from the Registry for Catastrophic Illness Patient Database. Medical claims from the National Health Insurance Research Database and national mortality database were linked for further analysis. Results: The age-standardized incidence rate of ALS in 2008-2015 was approximately 0.33 to 0.44 per 100,000 people. The age-standardized prevalence rate increased from 1.54 in 2008 to 2.31 in 2015 (per 100,000 people). High mortality rate (annual crude mortality rate = 14.7%-19.7%) was observed within 5 years after the date of the first diagnosis in 1999-2016. The analysis of confirmed death cases only indicated that the average survival time improved significantly in patients who underwent tracheostomy, noninvasive ventilator use, or gastrostomy (4.92 years versus 2.66 years, 3.56 years versus 2.45 years and 3.75 years versus 3.02 years, respectively). Conclusions: Following ALS epidemiological data during 1999-2007 in Taiwan, this study revealed that the annual incidence rate of ALS in Taiwan was stable from 2008 to 2015. However, the trend of the annual prevalence rate increased gradually. The mortality rate within 5 years after the initial diagnosis was high, and treatment with tracheostomy, noninvasive ventilator use, and gastrostomy can prolong survival time.起始頁-結束頁：632-642資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).1090936篇名：Surge capacity解析與規劃－八仙事件的醫院實證並列篇名：Exploring and planning surge capacity - hospitals' empirical evidence in Formosa Fun Coast Dust Explosion作者：莊秀文(Sheu-Wen Chuang)關鍵字：大量傷患事件;八仙事件;緊急應變;突發湧入作業能量（surge capacity）;mass casualty incident;Formosa Fun Coast Dust Explosion;emergency response;surge capacity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究目的是針對突發湧入作業能量（surge capacity）的意義與規劃，以八仙粉塵暴燃事件（八仙事件）實證進行釐清與解析，以提升該名詞的在災害應變計畫中的應用。方法：收集四家初期收治八仙傷患醫院的基本能量資料、急診室大量傷患湧入期間的傷病患檢傷、出入急診時間、轉院／轉房等紀錄，以及相關文獻。採用流程追蹤分析方法，建立傷病患流動與急診負荷變化的時間圖列，並計算各醫院過載時間、負荷指數、以及負荷上升與減緩指數，進一步比較醫院間大量傷患湧入對於突發湧入作業能量的需求變化樣態與速率。結果：八仙事件造成四家醫院呈現四種傷病患超載的緊急醫療服務需求模型，其中MM和TH醫院的過載時間與負荷指數較高，顯示該二醫院資源供需的差距最大，以及醫院應變的相對困難度較高。基於醫院規模與急診平日診量之差異，MM與TH醫院衡量突發湧入作業能量的病床基準並不一致。另外，MM的負荷變化速率亦高於TH，對於資源短缺的因應，視緊急醫療處置內容與短缺項目，兩家醫院採取類似或差異化的調適性（韌性）作為，來應對醫療處置能量間的差距。結論：Surge capacity並不能統一單一衡量指標，如空床數，來運算出“最大”的計量，而是依照大量傷患的規模與醫院的特性，設置適當的衡量基準。Surge capacity的規劃宜以突發湧入作業能量概念結合韌性能力，並加強系統要素在資源規劃的角色，同時，參考過載時間、負荷增減速率等多元性的因素，做為未來大量傷患緊急應變計畫的整備策略。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate and compare hospitals' surge capacity during the Formosa Fun Coast Dust Explosion (FFCDE) to promote refined applications of surge capacity in disaster response planning. Methods: We collected the following data from four initial receiving hospitals after the FFCDE: basic hospital capacity; emergency department (ED) patient log data, including triage, arrival time, departure or discharge time, and ED stay duration; and related literature. Process tracking analysis was employed to establish a time chart of patient flow against the ED workload. Each hospital's overload time, load index, load accumulated index, and load relief index were calculated and used to compare the effects of burn patient influx and demand patterns on the overload rates of the four hospitals with respect to surge capacity. Results: After FFCDE, the four hospitals presented four types of dynamic overload patterns, all of which illustrated their emergency medical service demand statuses. The overload time and load index of the MM and TH hospitals were relatively high, indicating that these hospitals had the largest resource supply- demand gap. Moreover, the two hospitals had some difficulty in eliciting response. The differences between hospital size and average number of daily ED patient visits indicated differences in metrics of bed size measurement used by the MM and TH hospitals for measuring surge capacity. Furthermore, the load change rate was higher in hospital MM than in hospital TH. Depending on the content of emergency medical treatment and shortage items, the MM and TH hospitals elicited similar or different responses to cope with medical resource shortages. Conclusions: Surge capacity was not consistently calculated as a ”maximum” measurement of only one metric (e.g., number of empty beds), but it was set using appropriate measurements based on the mass casualty size and characteristics of each hospital. Surge capacity is defined as the capacity to satisfy sudden demand due to patient influx during or after a disaster. Hospitals should integrate the concept of surge capacity with resilience, strengthen the role of their system elements during surge capacity planning, and adopt multiple dimensions, including resource volume, overload time, load accumulated index, and relief index, when conducting surge capacity planning for disaster response.起始頁-結束頁：643-655資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).1090967篇名：週日門診開診狀況與忠誠病人急診利用之相關性探討並列篇名：After-hours access to ambulatory care on sunday and utilization of emergency department for loyal patient作者：蔡金玲(Chin-Ling Tsai);郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo)關鍵字：忠誠病人;固定就醫地點;急診利用;常規時間外就醫;loyal patients;usual source of care;emergency visit;after-hours visit期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：探討週日使用西醫醫療資源的患者特質，並探討病人特性、醫事機構特性及院所週日門診開診狀況對忠誠病人急診利用之影響。方法：本研究採用健保資料庫，研究期間為2016年至2018年，以有固定就醫院所之病患為主要研究對象，使用羅吉斯迴歸分析「固定就醫院所週日開診狀況」、「病人特性」、「醫療利用」、「醫事機構特徵」對忠誠病人選擇門診或急診醫療之影響。結果：研究結果顯示男性、65歲以上的老人、低收入戶、有共病症、有重大傷病、身心科就醫病史、門診就醫次數低、有住院的紀錄、就醫時間越晚、就醫科別為外科、兒科、忠誠院所特約層級別越高、就醫院所位於高度都市化市鎮者、忠誠院所位於低度都市化市鎮者、開診率較低的醫療區更容易至急診就醫，在控制其他變項後，院所週日未開診則其忠誠病人至急診的風險顯著高於有開診的院所（OR=12.72，95%CI：12.56-12.87）。結論：研究顯示院所週日開診與否與其忠誠病人急診利用相關，因此建議衛生主管機關除提供誘因鼓勵假日開診外，強化基層醫療照護系統、宣導民眾應用資訊科技，提升資料查詢便利性及正確性，使西醫基層醫療照護的可及性及可近性提高，促進醫療資源有效利用，以減少假日急診壅塞情形。英文摘要：Objectives: Barriers to timely access to usual sources of medical care lead patients to use the emergency department as a ready alternative. This study aims to determine the characteristics of patients who use medical resources on Sundays. We also examined the relationship between emergency department visits and barriers to receiving usual sources of care in a timely manner for loyal patients. Methods: Data from 2016 to 2018 were obtained from Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database, and the study estimated of medical care utilization in the past year. Patients were classified as having a usual source of care if they made 80% or more of their total ambulatory visits to the same clinic. Descriptive statistics and logistic regression analyses were used to determine relationships between the medical service provided on Sundays and the use of the emergency department by loyal patients. Results: This study included 2,952,002 ambulatory and emergency department visits from 1,449,968 loyal patients. Patients who had a higher risk of emergency visits had the following characteristics: male, over 65 years of age, low-income, co-morbidities, major injuries, poor physical health, or poor mental health. In terms of medical use, the following was also associated with a higher risk of emergency visits by patients: low outpatient visits, having a record of hospitalization in the past year, after-hours visits, medical needs for surgery, or pediatrics. The positive associations between barriers to receiving usual source of care in a timely manner and emergency department usage persisted even in multiple logistic regressions that adjusted for patient characteristics, medical use, and characteristics of medical institutions. The risk of emergency department visits was significantly higher among loyal patients whose usual clinics did not provide medical services that met their needs than among patients whose usual clinics did meet their needs (OR=12.72, 95%CI:12.56-12.87). Conclusions: The results indicate that loyal patients who have barriers to their usual source of medical care are more likely to utilize the emergency department. Improving the availability and accessibility of primary medical care on Sundays may help reduce rates of emergency department use and resolve current situations of unmet medical needs.起始頁-結束頁：656-668資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).1091088篇名：評論：週日門診開診狀況與忠誠病人急診利用之相關性探討並列篇名：Commentary: after-hours access to ambulatory care on sunday and utilization of emergency department for loyal patient作者：謝慧敏(Hui-Min Hsieh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：669-669資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).109108019篇名：作者回覆：週日門診開診狀況與忠誠病人急診利用之相關性探討並列篇名：Author's response: after-hours access to ambulatory care on sunday and utilization of emergency department for loyal patient作者：蔡金玲(Chin-Ling Tsai);郭年真(Raymond N. Kuo)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：670-670資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).1091080210篇名：社區長者身、心、社會衰弱量表之切點初探：以台北兩行政區為例並列篇名：Pilot study on cutoff values of physical, psychological and social frailty indexes in Taiwan community-dwelling older people作者：鐘子婷(Zi-Ting Zhong);陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen);陳秀熙(Hsiu-Hsi Chen);葉彥伯(Yen-Po Yeh);張睿詒(Ray-E Chang);陳殷正(Yin-Cheng Chen);陳鵬宇(Peng-Yu Chen);陳雅美(Ya-Mei Chen)關鍵字：身體衰弱;心理衰弱;社會衰弱;身;心;社會衰弱整合量表（MSTQ: Modified SOF TFI QSFS Integrated Frailty Tool）;切點;physical frailty;psychological frailty;social frailty;MSTQ: Modified SOF TFI QSFS Integrated Frailty Tool;cutoff values期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：為提早篩檢長者延緩不良健康結果，探討身體（SOF+緩慢、SOF+握力）、心理（TFI, Tilburg Frailty Indicator）、社會性衰弱指標（QSFS, Questionnaire to define Social Frailty Status），以及整合性衰弱指標（MSTQ, Modified SOF TFI QSFS Integrated Frailty Tool）合適台灣族群的最佳切點。方法：收案對象為台灣北部城市兩個行政區的65歲以上長者（行政區一，n=471、行政區二，n=703），以AUC探討工具鑑別力，以約登指數找最適切點。結果：身體指標「衰弱」<U+2265>2分，「前衰」=1分；心理指標「衰弱」<U+2265>3分，「前衰」=2分；社會指標「衰弱」<U+2265>2分，「前衰」=1分。整合性衰弱指標「衰弱」<U+2265>4分，「前衰」=3分，鑑別力比單一衰弱面向好。衰弱盛行率方面，行政區（二）身體衰弱（SOF+緩慢）盛行率11.6%；（SOF+握力）14.5%；心理衰弱9.0%；社會衰弱20.0%；身（SOF+緩慢、SOF+握力）、心、社會整合量表衰弱24.6%、25.5%。結論：本研究提供身體、心理、社會性衰弱指標之「衰弱」與「前衰」切點做篩檢標準。身體（SOF+握力）、心理、社會及整合性衰弱指標鑑別力之敏感性比起（SOF+緩慢）略好。不過，仍建議依需求選擇適合量表。英文摘要：Objectives: Screening for frailty among older people to guard them against adverse health outcomes is a crucial task as the population ages. This study sought to find the most optimal cutoff values for physical (SOF-walking speed、SOF-handgrip), psychological (TFI, Tilburg Frailty Indicator), and social frailty indexes (QSFS, Questionnaire to define Social Frailty Status), and Modified SOF TFI QSFS Integrated Frailty Tool (MSTQ) in Taiwanese community-dwelling older people. Methods: The study used cross-sectional survey data in two secondary sets collected from two municipalities in Taipei, with 471 and 703 older adult participants, respectively. Spearman’s rank correlation analysis was used to assess the association of three dimensions of frailty. Receiver operator characteristic curves were generated to determine the discriminant functions for these frailty indexes. Results: Modest associations were found between physical, psychological, and social frailty. The full integrated frailty indexes, which combined the three separate indexes, showed an improved discriminant function (cutoff values: frail <U+2265>4, pre-frail = 3) relative to the single index. The cutoff values suggested for Taiwanese older adults was as follows: physical frailty (frail <U+2265>2, pre-frail = 1), psychological frailty (frail <U+2265>3, pre-frail = 2), and social frailty (frail <U+2265>2, pre-frail = 1). Conclusions: Our findings supported the use of the full integrated frailty index and provided cutoff values to screen older community-dwelling people for frailty. The discriminate ability of the MSTQ was better to include SOF-handgrip comparing to include SOF walking speed as physical frailty. Researchers can select either one of the indexes as needed.起始頁-結束頁：671-685資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).10910911篇名：肺炎住院病人特性及住院天數之影響因子並列篇名：Characteristics and factors influencing length of stay in hospitalized patients with pneumonia作者：沈季香(Chi-Hsiang Shen);楊麗玉(Li-Yu Yang)關鍵字：肺炎;住院天數;住院病人;pneumonia;length of stay;inpatient期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：隨著人口高齡化，肺炎的發生率有逐年攀升趨勢，不僅是國人健康的一大威脅，隨著住院天數的延長，更會增加健康醫療服務的經濟負擔。本研究目的係探討肺炎住院病人特性及住院天數的影響因子。方法：採回溯性相關性研究，從病歷的次級資料進行分析，研究對象為2013年至2017年台灣南部某醫學中心之內科住院病人，以羅吉斯迴歸分析檢定病人特性與住院天數之相關性及影響程度。結果：本研究收集初診斷肺炎住院之病人共488人，平均年齡72.3（±17.9）歲，平均住院天數為17.6天。研究發現鼻胃管留置（p ＜ 0.001）、共存疾病數（p =0.031）與住院天數達顯著性相關。進一步以羅吉斯迴歸分析影響住院天數長短的因素發現，有鼻胃管留置者（β= 1.525, p ＜ 0.001）、執行胸腔物理治療者（β= 0.622, p = 0.002），其住院超過12天的風險越高，其中以鼻胃管留置的相關性最高。結論：影響肺炎住院天數的因素主要為鼻胃管留置，故建議醫療照護人員應適時評估個案鼻胃管留置的必要性，以期能降低住院天數，提供未來醫療機構改善肺炎住院天數之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: With population aging, the incidence of pneumonia is increasing yearly, representing a major threat to people's health in Taiwan as well as contributing to increasing lengths of hospitalization and the economic burden of health care. The purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of the characteristics of patients with pneumonia on their length of hospital stay. Methods: A retrospective correlation study was conducted. Data were collected from 2013 to 2017 in the medical ward of a medical center located in southern Taiwan. Logistic regression analysis was performed. Results: A total of 488 patients with pneumonia were recruited and enrolled as participants. The mean age of the participants was 72.3 (±17.9) years, and the mean length of stay was 17.6 days. The results demonstrated that the use of nasogastric tubes (p ＜ .001) and comorbidities (p = .031) were both significantly correlated with length of stay. Logistic regression analysis indicated that the use of a nasogastric tube (β = 1.525, p ＜.001) and chest physical therapy (β = 0.622, p = .002) increased the risk of the length of stay extending to more than 12 days, with nasogastric tubes exhibiting the highest correlation. Conclusions: The use of nasogastric tubes affects the length of hospital stay of pneumonia inpatients. We therefore suggest that clinical nurses assess the necessity of nasogastric tube indwelling, as selective deployment may reduce the length of hospital stay of patients with pneumonia. This study can serve as a reference for clinicians seeking to reduce the length of stay of patients with pneumonia.起始頁-結束頁：686-695資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).10910112篇名：台北都會區不同性別高齡者休閒時間身體活動和靜態行為與健康生活品質之關係並列篇名：Gender differences in the relationships among leisure-time physical activities, sedentary behaviors, and Health-Related Quality of Life for older adults in Taipei metropolitan area作者：王立亭(Li-Ting Wang);方怡堯(I-Yao Fang);何信弘(Hsin-Hung Ho);張少熙(Shao-Hsi Chang)關鍵字：老年人;休閒活動;久坐行為;生活品質;elderly;leisure activity;sedentary behavior;Health-Related Quality of Life期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷6期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：身體活動不足與過量靜態行為已被證實為兩個獨立的健康危險因子，且存在著性別差異。方法：本研究為橫斷性調查，採用電腦輔助電話訪談對台北市65歲以上高齡者進行調查，有效樣本1,068份（年齡72.3±6.1歲，女性54.6%），所有參與者使用SF-8評估健康生活品質、國際身體活動量表－長版，瞭解休閒時間身體活動水平和強度，及使用靜態行為量表得知久坐概況。結果：休閒時間身體活動（總時間、中高強度、步行時間）和健康生活品質（生理、心理健康及總分）的平均上數觀察到性別差異，但在靜態行為（靜態時間及看電視時間）方面則無性別差異。進一步分析，發現女性休閒時間身體活動和步行時間越多，可顯著正向預測生理健康與整體健康生活品質；但男性皆無顯著關聯。靜態行為方面，男性靜態時間愈多，可顯著負向預測其生理健康；看電視時間越多，生理、心理及整體健康較差；但女性則無相關發現。結論：本研究發現評估健康生活品質時，區分性別、身體活動和靜態行為是重要的。建議未來提供高齡者健康生活品質促進之訊息時，可針對不同性別及行為進行更有效的介入。英文摘要：Objectives: Insufficient physical activity and sedentary behavior in two great a quantity have been proved to present different health risks to different sexes. Methods: This study utilized a cross-sectional survey. Data were collected by conducting computer-assisted telephone interviews (CATI) to investigate the health of individuals aged 65 and over in Taipei City. A total of 1,068 valid samples were obtained (age = 72.3±6.1 years, 54.6% were women). The participants' HRQoL were assessed using the SF-8 questionnaire, the level and intensity of their leisure-time physical activity (LTPA) were assessed using the long form of the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ), and the extent of their sedentary behaviors was assessed using the Measure of Older Adults' Sedentary Time (MOST) questionnaire. Results: Differences between genders were observed for LTPA (overall, MVPA, walking) and HRQoL (physical health, mental health, overall), but not for sedentary behavior (sedentary time and TV viewing). For the female participants, a higher overall LTPA and an increase in the time spent walking were positive predictors of good physical health and overall HRQoL. No significant associations were found between men. For the male participants, increase in sedentary behaviors was a significant negative predictor of physical health. For males who spent an increased amount of time watching TV, this two was a negative predictor of physical health, as well as of mental health and overall HRQoL. There were no relevant findings for women. Conclusions: These findings highlighted the importance of considering gender differences and the level and intensity of PA and SB when evaluating HRQoL. The results provided an important insight into the promotion of HRQoL for older adults. Future research could examine more effective interventions targeting specific genders and behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：696-708資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202012_39(6).10910013篇名：要提升生育先落實適齡結婚並列篇名：To boost birth, marriage first作者：薛承泰(Cherng-Tay Hsueh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：465-468資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).PF0514篇名：原死因選擇準則改變對死因別死亡率趨勢分析的影響並列篇名：Effects of changes in underlying cause of death selection rules on the analysis of cause-specific mortality trends作者：呂宗學(Tsung-Hsueh Lu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：469-477資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).10904015篇名：青少年每日靜態行為的時間分布、測量與類型：範域文獻回顧並列篇名：Prevalence, measures, and types of daily sedentary behavior among adolescents: a scoping review作者：陳上迪(Shang-Ti Chen);陳俐蓉(Li-Jung Chen);王宗進(Tsung-Chinn Wang);古博文(Po-Wen Ku)關鍵字：久坐;螢幕行為;加速規;每日時間;prolonged sitting;screen-based behavior;accelerometers;daily time期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究旨在以範域文獻回顧探討國際間青少年每日靜態時間的分布、測量方法，以及分析常見的青少年靜態行為類型。本研究以Bauman等人（2008）研究靜態行為盛行率搜尋檢索方式與搜尋後結果，並延續其檢索策略搜尋PubMed與華藝線上圖書館在2012－2020年期間的期刊論文，篩選納入43篇。研究發現如下：（一）青少年每日客觀測量靜態時間平均為8.83小時／日（中位數為9.05小時／日），不同研究間的異質性高；（二）靜態行為測量包含自陳式問卷測量及客觀儀器測量，二者各有其優缺點並具功能互補性；（三）青少年靜態行為類型相當多元，可歸納出兩種類型：螢幕使用（包含：看電視／影片、使用電腦／瀏覽網頁、打電動／遊戲、使用手機／傳訊息／聊天）與非螢幕使用（包含：完成學校課業、從事休閒、騎乘交通工具、閱讀）。尤其是看電視／影片、使用電腦／上網、玩電動／遊戲等螢幕式靜態行為，以及完成學校課業等非螢幕式行為等，不僅是最常被納入問卷測量題項中，也是花費靜態時間最高的幾種行為。本研究發現可供未來政府及學術機構研發適合測量台灣青少年靜態行為的工具以及進行青少年族群靜態行為調查、監測與分析之參考。建議未來針對青少年靜態行為的研究應採用具人口代表性的大型樣本，採取多次測量的前瞻性世代研究設計，並兼採自陳式問卷及客觀儀器測量，以進一步了解青少年靜態時間與其各種健康狀態的關係。英文摘要：This scoping review (a) explored the prevalence of sedentary time among adolescents worldwide, (b) discussed issues of assessment regarding sedentary time, and (c) analyzed different modes of adolescent sedentary behavior. We used the search strategies and results of Bauman et al. (2018), who reviewed the prevalence of sedentary time. We extended their results and searched two databases (PubMed and Airiti Library) to identify published studies. Forty-three studies were eligible for the scoping review and were analyzed. The average of sedentary time using objective measures was 8.83 h/day per adolescent (median: 9.05 h/day). High interstudy heterogeneity was observed. The studies assessed sedentary time by using objective and subjective measures, which had advantages and disadvantages and were sometimes complementary to each other. Furthermore, adolescents engaged in diverse types of sedentary behavior. In general, two types of sedentary behavior were observed: screen-based behavior (i.e., watching TV/videos, using the computer/ surfing websites, playing video games, and using cell phones/sending text messages/chatting) and nonscreen-based behavior (i.e., doing homework, engaging in recreational activities, traveling, and reading). Among them, the screen-based behaviors of watching TV/videos, using the computer/ surfing websites, and playing video games and the nonscreen-based behavior of doing homework were the most common sedentary behaviors for adolescents. Our findings provide evidence for developing an indigenizing scale for future researchers to investigate, monitor, and analyze the prevalence of sedentary time among adolescents. To elucidate the associations between adolescent sedentary behavior and various health outcomes, future large-scale prospective studies are warranted that include multiple waves of representative samples and employ a combination of objective and subjective measures of sedentary behavior.起始頁-結束頁：478-492資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).10908016篇名：大學生蔬果攝取行為及其影響因素之探討－以新竹縣某科技大學為例並列篇名：Fruit and vegetable consumption behavior and its influencing factors among college students: a survey at a University of Technology in Hsinchu County作者：趙丹平(Dan-Ping Chao);蘇聖珠(Sheng-Chu Su)關鍵字：大學生;天天5蔬果;健康自覺;蔬果攝取;健康行為;college student;five a day;perceived health;fruit and vegetable intake;health behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：蔬果為健康飲食中重要的一環，而大學為行為發展定型的關鍵時刻，大學生之健康自覺可能影響其健康促進行為。故本研究期望了解大學生的蔬果攝取及自覺健康現況，進而探討可預測蔬果攝取行為之影響因素。方法：本研究以新竹縣某科技大學日間部大學生為研究對象，採分層隨機抽樣和自填問卷蒐集資料，共發出403份問卷，回收有效問卷375份，有效回收率93.1%。結果：本研究發現研究對象每日蔬菜和水果達建議量者分別僅有1.6%和8%，每週蔬果達建議量超過三天者不到半數；而自覺健康狀況在中等程度之上，以人際互動得分最高，情緒狀態最低。其中男性、低收入、自覺健康狀況之生活適應高分者的每週蔬果達建議量天數較少；收入低和自覺健康狀況之人際互動高分者的每日蔬菜份數較少；而低年級、校外租屋、自覺健康狀況之人際互動高分、情緒狀態低分者的每日水果份數較少。結論：建議針對上述蔬果攝取亟需改善的族群優先規劃衛教課程，並運用同儕的力量引起興趣及相互支持。英文摘要：Objectives: Fruit and vegetables are essential for a healthy diet. College age is a crucial period of development and formalization in personal behavior, and the perceived health status (PHS) of college students may influence their health-promoting behavior. Therefore, this study aimed to explore the factors of fruit and vegetable consumption behavior of college students by understanding their fruit and vegetable consumption profile and PHS. Methods: We enrolled 403 students from a university of technology in Hsinchu county by using stratified sampling and a self-administered questionnaire. We received 375 valid questionnaires with an effective rate of 93.1%. Results: The daily vegetable and fruit consumption of participants which met the recommendation were only 1.6% and 8%, respectively. Less than half the participants meet the fruit and vegetables consumption recommendation for more than three days per week. The PHS of the participants was relatively positive. They had the highest PHS score for interpersonal interaction and the lowest score for emotional status. Male participants and those with low income and high score for life adjustment of PHS had fewer weekly recommendation-meeting days of fruit and vegetable consumption. The participants with low income and high score for interpersonal interaction of PHS had inadequate daily servings of vegetables. Underclassman, those in off-campus housing, and those scoring high in interpersonal interaction and low in emotional status of PHS had inadequate daily servings of fruit. Conclusions: We suggest that the health education for the students who are require improvement in their fruit and vegetable consumption behavior should be planned preferentially and be supported by their social group.起始頁-結束頁：493-508資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).10904317篇名：自評健康與社會資本：以國際社會調查計畫資料為本的跨國分析並列篇名：Self-rated health and social capital: cross-national analysis of international social survey data作者：高美英(Meei-Ying Kao);吳齊殷(Chyi-In Wu)關鍵字：健康;社會資本;社會信任;社會參與;health;social capital;social trust;social participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：近年來關於社會資本對健康的影響之探討漸多，許多研究皆指出不同層次的社會資本對健康的效益。然而，大部分的研究結果卻仍然有諸多限制。若無法釐清社會資本的外生性，以及缺乏對社會資本跨脈絡效應的理解等等，這些問題限制了過往研究結果的可推論性。本研究運用大規模的跨國資料，分析個人社會資本在不同非正式與正式的社會資源整合條件下，對健康的影響。方法：使用由全球數十個國家調查機構合作蒐集之跨國調查資料，國際社會調查（International Social Survey），取2007年休閒生活組與2017年網絡組兩筆資料進行分析。結果：個人的社會信任與社會參與皆與健康有正向連結，在「高社會資本國家」或「OECD國家」的社會參與對健康的正面影響更加明顯；而社會信任僅有在「高社會資本國家」對健康有額外的正向效應，在「OECD國家」則無此現象。結論：這個發現有助於我們重新理解不同面向社會資本對健康的作用方式，以及其效應如何受所處社會條件的影響而改變。英文摘要：Objectives: The impact of social capital on health is increasingly discussed. Many studies have highlighted the health benefits of social capital. However, most research results are affected by limitations. Failure to clarify the exogenous nature of social capital and the cross-contextual effects of social capital may limit the inferences of other research. Therefore, in this study, large-scale multinational data are used to analyze the effect of individual social capital on health in various informal and formal social resource conditions. Methods: Data came from International Social Surveys, which are collected by dozens of national survey agencies worldwide. Data from the 2007 leisure life group and the 2017 network group were used for analysis. Results: Individual social trust and social participation are positively linked to health, and social participation has a more positive effect on health in countries with high social capital or in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. In countries with high levels of social capital, social trust exerts an additional positive effect on health, but this does not occur in OECD countries. Conclusions: This finding facilitates the reevaluation of how social capital affects health and how its effects depend on social conditions.起始頁-結束頁：509-521資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).10902018篇名：探討資訊監測系統導入傳染病疫情控制之實證研究：以台灣登革熱為例並列篇名：Implementing a surveillance system to control epidemics of infectious diseases: an empirical study on dengue fever in Taiwan作者：黃維民(Wei-Min Huang);黃露葵(Lu-Kuei Huang);林慧茹(Huei-Ru Lin);羅浚晅(Chun-Hsuan Lo);林嘉瑩(Chia-Ying Lin)關鍵字：資訊監測系統;傳染病疫情;實證研究;登革熱;台灣;surveillance system;epidemic;empirical study;dengue fever;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：對台灣各縣市衛生行政機關之防疫人員做實證調查，對於登革熱監測系統的導入與使用行為，分析其關鍵影響因素及阻力。方法：採用結構式問卷調查法，以解構式計畫行為理論為核心，並加入組織互動、任務特性等外部變數建立完整研究概念架構。在資料分析上，透過統計軟體SPSS 22.0進行敘述性統計，包括信度和效度分析。另外，藉由統計軟體Smart PLS 3.2進行路徑分析及模型預測力估計。結果：母體數目為782人，共回收有效問卷388份，回收率為50.63%。包括知覺有用與知覺易用等11個假設構面對使用行為與意圖有顯著影響（p＜0.01）。結論：本研究模型對影響衛生單位導入及公共衛生防疫人員使用登革熱監測系統使用意圖之因素解釋力為47.1%。本研究結果將有助於釐清與支持公共衛生單位導入監測系統之關鍵影響因素。英文摘要：Objectives: This empirical study analyzes the key factors influencing the implementation and use of the dengue fever surveillance system in Taiwan by conducting a survey for the epidemic prevention staff in Taiwanese public health administration. Methods: We use a structural questionnaire survey and consider the decomposed theory of planned behavior to be the core theoretical foundation. To build a more complete research framework, we add external variables, accounting for organizational interaction and task characteristics, to the core theoretical foundation. Descriptive statistics are obtained and reliability and validity tests are conducted using SPSS v22.0. In addition, we use Smart PLS v3.2 to conduct a path analysis and estimate the power of the predictive model. Results: The study has 782 samples, with 388 valid questionnaires and a response rate of 50.63%. The results indicate that 11 hypotheses, including perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use, significantly affect the behavior and intent of use (p ＜ .01). The 11 hypotheses proposed in our research framework have positive correlations. Conclusions: The empirical model proposed in this study has a good explanatory power of 47.1%. Our findings help identify key factors affecting the implementation and use of the dengue fever surveillance system by public health administration staff members in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：522-535資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).10907619篇名：台灣自殺死亡率趨勢之改變：連結點迴歸分析（1971-2018年）並列篇名：Changing suicide trends in Taiwan: a joinpoint regression analysis from 1971 to 2018作者：張奕涵(Yi-Han Chang);廖士程(Shih-Cheng Liao);林倩宇(Chien-Yu Lin);許嘉月(Chia-Yueh Hsu);張書森(Shu-Sen Chang)關鍵字：自殺;自殺率;趨勢;連結點迴歸;台灣;suicide;suicide rates;trend;joinpoint regression;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：台灣自殺死亡率在近十年間不再明顯下降，本研究藉由分析1971－2018年間性別、年齡別和方法別自殺率趨勢之轉折，了解近十年自殺率趨勢改變之特徵。方法：使用全國死因資料，計算15歲以上年齡標準化年自殺率和性別別、年齡別（15－24、25－44、45－64和65歲以上，即青、壯、中和老年）與方法別（上吊、中毒、燒炭、墜落、溺水和其他方法）自殺率。使用連結點迴歸分析來確認自殺率趨勢的轉折點。結果：整體自殺率在1971－1992年間呈下降趨勢，降幅以1980年代晚期最為明顯，其後自殺率上升至2006年達到高峰後下降，在2011年發生轉折，未再有明顯下降，此轉折主要發生於青、壯、中年男性和青年女性，他們的主要自殺方法包括上吊、燒炭與墜落都呈現類似變化。研究期間台灣主要自殺方法由中毒轉變為上吊、燒炭、中毒與墜落，同時，不同性別年齡層有不同的主要自殺方法。結論：近十年間台灣自殺率不再繼續下降，不同性別年齡層的自殺率趨勢與常見自殺方法亦有所差異。未來需進一步研究導致不同人口族群自殺率趨勢改變的性別年齡別特定因素，以利防治策略之擬定。英文摘要：Objectives: Suicide rates in Taiwan did not continue their previous downward trend during the past ten years. This study aimed to investigate suicide trends and assess differences by sex, age, and method in Taiwan between 1971 and 2018 to better understand the pattern of changes in trends over the last ten years. Methods: Suicide data were extracted from Taiwan's national cause-of-death mortality data files. Annual age-standardized suicide rates for population aged <U+2265> 15 years and suicide rates by sex, age (15-24, 25-44, 45-64, and <U+2265>65 years), and method (hanging, poisoning, charcoal burning, jumping, drowning, and other methods) were calculated. Joinpoint regression was used to identify the years in which suicide trends changed. Results: Age-standardized suicide rates decreased between 1971 and 1992, with the most marked decline observed during the late 1980s. Suicide rates subsequently increased to reach a relative peak in 2006 and then decreased until 2011, after which the downward trend changed to a stable trend. The recent changes in suicide trends were mainly observed in males aged 15-64 and females aged 15-24. We observed similar changes in these groups for trends in suicide rates of common suicide methods including hanging, charcoal burning, and falling. The most common methods of suicide changed from poisoning to hanging, charcoal burning, poisoning, and falling in Taiwan over the study period. Furthermore, the main methods of suicide differed by sex and age groups in recent years. Conclusions: Suicide rates did not continue to fall in Taiwan over the last decade, with differences in trends and common suicide methods across different sex and age groups. Further research is required to identify sex- and age-specific factors contributing to recent changes in suicide trends in various demographic groups to inform suicide prevention strategies.起始頁-結束頁：536-552資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).10908120篇名：代謝健康／不健康之肥胖／過重與心血管疾病風險間的關係：台灣具代表性的世代研究並列篇名：Association between metabolically healthy/ unhealthy obesity/ overweight and the risk of cardiovascular disease: a representative cohort study in Taiwan作者：葉姿麟(Tzu-Lin Yeh);簡國龍(Kuo-Liong Chien)關鍵字：代謝健康肥胖;代謝症候群;心血管疾病;三高主題資料庫;社區前瞻性世代研究;metabolically healthy obesity;metabolic syndrome;cardiovascular disease;Taiwanese Survey on Hypertension, Hyperglycemia, and Hyperlipidemia databases;community-based prospective cohort study期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：探討台灣代謝健康肥胖者（Metabolically healthy obesity, MHO）和心血管疾病（Cardiovascular disease, CVD）間的關係。方法：受試者來自於三高主題資料庫。本研究將身體質量指數（body mass index, BMI）區分為：體重過輕（BMI ＜ 18.5 kg/m^2）、正常體重（BMI18.5至23.9 kg/m^2）和肥胖／過重（BMI <U+2265>24 kg/m^2）。無糖尿病、高血壓、高血脂症且符合以下定義為代謝健康：（1）空腹三酸甘油酯 ＜150 mg/dL；（2）男性高密度脂蛋白膽固醇 <U+2265>40 mg/dL或女性高密度脂蛋白膽固醇 <U+2265>50 mg/dL；（3）空腹血糖 ＜100 mg/dL；（4）收縮壓 ＜130且舒張壓 ＜85mmHg。研究終點是以全民健康保險資料確認之發生CVD事件或死亡。使用Cox迴歸模型估計風險比（hazard ratio, HRs）和95%信賴區間（confidence interval, CI）。結果：5,719名受試者年齡平均值（標準差）為44.0（15.5）歲，50.2%為女性，其中1,479名為參考組（代謝健康正常體重者），493名MHO者平均年齡43.3歲，女性比例47.1%。在追蹤中位數（四分位差）13.7（13.6-13.8）年間，共發生了449個CVD事件或死亡，其中MHO組發生了25個CVD事件或死亡。MHO組經多變項調整後之HR為1.75，意即相較於參考組顯著增加了75%的CVD風險，95%CI為1.02－2.99。結論：無論目前代謝健康與否，鼓勵所有肥胖者應積極維持正常體重，以減少將來之CVD風險。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the relationship between individuals with metabolically healthy obesity (MHO) and the cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk in Taiwan. Methods: Participants from the Taiwanese Survey on Hypertension, Hyperglycemia, and Hyperlipidemia databases were recruited, and classified into three body mass index (BMI) categories: underweight (BMI ＜ 18.5 kg/m^2), normal weight (BMI 18.5 to 23.9 kg/m^2), and overweight/obesity (BMI <U+2265>24 kg/m^2). Participants without diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia and had healthy metabolic profiles (1) fasting triglyceride ＜150 mg/dL; (2) high-density lipoprotein cholesterol <U+2265>40 mg/dL in men or <U+2265>50 mg/dL in women; (3) fasting glucose ＜100 mg/dL; (4) systolic blood pressure ＜130 and diastolic blood pressure ＜85 mmHg were defined as metabolically health. Our endpoints were CVD events or death, ascertained by the National Health Insurance Research Database. Multivariable adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) by Cox regression analysis were performed. Results: A total of 5,719 participants with mean (standard deviation) age 44.0 (15.5) years old, 50.2% women was recruited. Among the total participants, 1,479 individuals were metabolically healthy normal weight (the reference group), 493 participants were the MHO group with the mean age 43.3 years old and women percentage 47.1%. During a median (interquartile range) follow-up time of 13.7 (13.6-13.8) years, 449 ascertained CVD events or deaths developed, 25 CVD events or deaths developed in the MHO group. Compared with the reference group, MHO had a significant higher CVD risk, adjusted HR with 95% CI was 1.75 (1.02-2.99). Conclusions: Aggressive body weight control, even in current metabolically healthy status, is mandatory for CVD control.起始頁-結束頁：553-564資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).10911101篇名：醫院護理主管領導行為、團隊健康氣候及護理人員職場幸福感之多層次研究：護理人員健康行為之中介效果驗證並列篇名：Multilevel research on leadership behaviors of nursing supervisors, healthy team climate, and workplace well-being of nurses: mediating effect of nurse health behavior作者：林雅雯(Yea-Wen Lin);鍾玉珠(Yu-Chu Chung)關鍵字：護理團隊;魅力領導;健康氣候;健康行為;職業幸福感;nursing team;charismatic leadership;healthy climate;health behavior;workplace well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在針對護理團隊主管領導行為、團隊健康氣候、護理人員健康行為及職場幸福感之關聯性進行多層次分析。方法：採用橫斷性研究設計，以便利取樣方式選取願意參與研究之護理團隊及其護理人員，共選取43組護理團隊，共計663人。本研究問卷包括魅力領導、組織健康文化、健康促進生活及職場幸福感量表，以及背景變項。結果：單一層次關係的驗證結果顯示，護理團隊主管領導之形塑文化行為對團隊健康氣候三構面都有顯著正向影響，護理人員健康行為對護理團隊主管領導之形塑部屬行為影響護理人員之職場幸福感三構面都具有部分中介效果。跨層次關係的驗證結果顯示，團隊健康氣候會影響護理人員的職場幸福感三構面，團隊健康氣候對職場幸福感三構面的影響乃透過健康行為的部分中介作用而產生。結論：研究發現護理團隊主管領導行為對於團隊的健康氣候、護理人員的健康行為與職場幸福感構面間存在一定的影響性，更突顯護理團隊主管領導的重要性。英文摘要：Objectives: This study was a multilevel analysis on the relationship between leadership behavior of nursing supervisors (including culture shaping behaviors and subordinate shaping behaviors), healthy team climate, nurses' health behavior, and nurses' workplace well-being. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted using the questionnaires include Charismatic Leadership Scale, Organizational Health Culture Scale, Health Promotion Lifestyle Scale, Workplace Well-being Scale, and background variables. Convenience sampling was used to select nurses from each of 43 nursing teams, and the questionnaire was distributed to 663 nurses. Following the calculation of descriptive statistics, hierarchical regression analysis was conducted to assess the relationships among single-level constructs. Subsequently, hierarchical linear modeling was used to assess the relationships among cross-level constructs. Results: Regarding single-level relationships, culture shaping behaviors of leadership significantly affected all three dimensions of the healthy team climate. In addition, the effects of culture shaping behaviors of leadership on three dimensions of the workplace well-being of nurses were partially mediated by nurses' health behavior. Regarding cross-level relationships, the healthy team climate affected three dimensions of workplace well-being of nurses, and this effect was partially mediated by nurses' health behavior. Conclusions: By using a multilevel model, this study demonstrated that the leadership behavior of the nurse leader affects the team climate, nurses' health behavior, and nurses' workplace well-being. The findings highlight the importance of leadership in the nursing team.起始頁-結束頁：565-577資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).1090592篇名：台灣使用自動化編碼系統與國際疾病分類第十版對死因統計之影響：雙軌編碼研究並列篇名：Impact of automated coding system implementation based on ICD-10 on mortality statistics in Taiwan: a bridge coding study作者：呂宗學(Tsung-Hsueh Lu)關鍵字：死因統計;可比較性研究;雙軌編碼研究;國際疾病分類;死亡率趨勢;cause of death statistics;comparability study;bridge coding study;International Classification of Disease;mortality/trends期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷5期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：評估台灣使用自動化編碼系統與國際疾病分類第十版選擇原死因（新制）對於死因統計之影響。方法：本研究將2007年所有死亡個案同時使用新制與舊制（編碼人員使用國際疾病分類第九版人工選擇原死因）進行編碼，計算死因別可比較性比值（新制死亡數／舊制死亡數）。本研究探討改制後對兩種死因統計列表清單之影響，一是主要（十大）死因排序列表，二是美國國立衛生統計中心使用的113分類項列表。結果：使用新制與舊制前三名死因排序相同，但是死亡數卻有差異。新制比舊制死亡數，惡性腫瘤少2,544人，心臟疾病多2,274人，腦血管疾病少2,144人。舊制支氣管炎肺氣腫氣喘死亡數為1,165人排名第十二，新制慢性下呼吸道疾病死亡數5,314人排名第七。新制／舊制死亡數比值大於2.0的死因是敗血症（2.751），病毒性肝炎（2.385）與本態性高血壓及高血壓性腎臟疾病（2.102）。比值小於0.7的死因是阿茲海默症（0.250）與支氣管炎（0.638）。結論：本雙軌編碼研究指出，造成某些死因別死亡數新制與舊制差異較大的原因有兩個：一是對應統計列表死因分類項涵蓋編碼的詳細度與範圍差異不同造成，二是台灣不少死亡證明書開具者習慣將明確死因診斷填在第二或第三個診斷，造成編碼人員與自動化編碼系統的判斷不同。建議分析台灣2008年前後死因別死亡率趨勢時，首先要確認所要探討的對應統計列表死因分類項涵蓋編碼的詳細度與範圍，新舊制是否有很大差異；二是使用轉換比值進行調整；三是使用多重死因分析進行補充。英文摘要：Objectives: To assess the effects of implementing an automated coding system and the International Classification of Disease (ICD) 10th Revision (ICD-10) on mortality statistics in Taiwan. Methods: We used a new automated coding system based on ICD-10 (automatic ICD- 10) to assign the underlying cause of death (UCOD) for all deaths occurring in 2007. We then compared the number of deaths according to automatic ICD-10 with that coded manually by coders according to ICD-9 (manual ICD-9). The comparability ratio (CR, automatic ICD-10/ manual ICD-9) for a specific cause of death (COD) category was calculated. We assessed the impact on two mortality tabulation lists: the main (10 leading) tabulation list and the 113-category tabulation list used by the US National Center for Health Statistics. Results: The three leading CODs were the same according to both methods: malignant neoplasm, heart diseases, and cerebrovascular diseases. However, compared with manual ICD-9, automatic ICD-10 recorded 2,544 more deaths for malignant neoplasm, 2,274 more deaths for heart diseases, and 2,144 fewer deaths for cerebrovascular diseases. In all, 1,165 deaths were recorded under the bronchitis, emphysema, and asthma category, which ranked 12th according to manual ICD-9. By contrast, 5,314 deaths were recorded under the chronic lower respiratory disease category, which ranked 7th according to automatic ICD-10. Three CODs had CR ＞ 2: septicemia (2.751), viral hepatitis (2.385), and essential hypertension and hypertensive renal disease (2.102). By contrast, two CODs had CR ＜ 0.7: Alzheimer's disease (0.250) and chronic and unspecified bronchitis (0.638). Conclusions: The results of this bridge coding study indicated large differences between the new and old methods in some COD categories. Two possible reasons are identified for this discrepancy. First, the level and range of codes included in the corresponding tabulation COD categories were different. Second, many medical certifiers recorded more specific COD diagnoses as the second and third diagnoses, which resulted in differences in judgment between coders and the automated system when assigning the UCOD. We recommend three measures when examining cause-specific mortality trends before and after 2008 in Taiwan. First, large differences in the level and range of codes included in corresponding COD categories should be evaluated. Second, the CR should be used for adjustment. Third, multiple COD data should be analyzed as a complement.起始頁-結束頁：578-597資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202010_39(5).1090393篇名：我國需要發展全方位的「孕產婦心理健康政策」並列篇名：Developing a comprehensive maternal mental health policy作者：張<U+73CF>(Chueh Chang);謝佳容(Chia-Jung Hsieh)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：353-355資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).PF044篇名：由不同國家2019冠病毒疾病死亡率差異談死亡率可比性問題並列篇名：Explaining national differences in mortality from COVID-19: issues on comparability作者：呂宗學(Tsung-Hsueh Lu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：356-363資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).1090625篇名：COVID-19大流行期間的身體活動建議並列篇名：Recommendations for physical activity during the COVID-19 pandemic作者：古博文(Po-Wen Ku);田甜(Tian Tian);王湘(Hsiang Wong);陳俐蓉(Li-Jung Chen)關鍵字：冠狀病毒;肺炎;健身運動;檢疫;封城;coronavirus;pneumonia;exercise;quarantine;lock down期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：新型冠狀病毒肺炎（以下簡稱COVID-19）的爆發不只對社會與經濟帶來了嚴重衝擊，同時也大幅影響了每人的生活方式。當COVID-19大流行肆虐全球之際，各國政府採取了系列措施如：外出戴口罩、保持社交距離、居家隔離、居家檢疫、集中檢疫，甚至封城等。這些做法不可避免的限制了身體活動以及產生更多靜態行為。如何在COVID-19大流行期間保持規律活動及健康顯然是一個重要的議題。本文彙整與COVID-19及身體活動有關之研究證據，並針對以下主題進行探討：（一）檢視近年美國、英國與世界衛生組織所發布最新身體活動指引，並針對當前全球身體活動不足的盛行率進行描述分析；（二）依據最新的研究證據，探討COVID-19爆發對身體活動不足與靜態行為的具體衝擊；（三）最後根據文獻探討結果，歸納在COVID-19流行期間如何進行身體活動的建議：（1）少勝於無：從事一些中強度身體活動比都沒有好。每日以步速（介於每分鐘100-130步）至少步行4,000-5,000步，能達到7,000-8,000步更佳，並搭配每周至少2天的中強度主要肌群強化運動。（2）減少久坐：每日靜態久坐不宜超過9小時，並應增加久坐中斷次數（如：每50分鐘站起來動一動），以輕度身體活動取代靜態行為，如走路或伸展5-10分鐘。（3）均衡選擇：儘可能從事多種身體活動如：有氧運動、阻力運動、伸展運動及平衡運動。（4）適性參與：視個人興趣與資源選擇適合的運動方式（如：徒手式運動、器械式運動、電子式運動或家務式勞動）。以上這些建議將有助於在COVID-19大流行期間或未來類似疫情爆發時，引導民眾如何透過身體活動強化身心健康。英文摘要：The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak has not only had severe social and economic effect but also has substantially affected the lifestyles of individuals. As the coronavirus pandemic rips through the world, many countries have implemented series of restrictions to control infection, such as the wearing of masks outside, social distancing, home isolation, home quarantine, group quarantine, and lockdowns, and these measures have inevitably limited physical activity and required more sedentary behavior. How a person can remain physically active and healthy during the COVID-19 pandemic is a crucial issue. The following procedure was implemented to review evidence regarding the COVID-19 outbreak and physical activity. First, the latest physical activity guidelines released by the United States, United Kingdom, and World Health Organization were reviewed, and the prevalence of insufficient physical activity was determined. Second, the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak on physical activity and amount of sedentary behavior were discussed using the obtained evidence. Finally, the current review suggests the following for individuals wishing to remain physically active and healthy: (1) Some physical activity is preferable to nothing. Engaging in some moderate-intensity physical activity, such as at least 4,000-5,000 steps per day (7,000-8,000 is better) at a pace of 100-130 steps per minute and resistance training twice a week to improve major muscle-group strength, is essential for everyone. (2) Daily sedentary time should be kept to less than 9 hours a day, and numerous breaks (e.g., every 50 minutes) in which sedentary time is replaced with light activity (e.g., 5- to 10-minute walking or stretch exercise) should be taken. (3) Ideally, people should engage in different types of physical activity, including aerobic exercise, resistance training, stretching, and balance training. (4) Finally, people should select types of exercise (e.g., freehand exercise, equipment-assisted exercise, electronic exercise, or household work) that fit their interests and resources. These suggestions provide guidance for strengthening individuals' mental and physical well-being through physical activity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic or future similar outbreaks.起始頁-結束頁：364-372資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).1090576篇名：高齡者財務濫用與專業人士的旁觀者介入模式：以失智症為中心的回顧並列篇名：Elder financial abuse and the professional bystander intervention model: a review centered on dementia作者：黃于玲(Yu-Ling Huang);廖翊涵(Yi-Han Liao);古鯉榕(LI-Jung Elizabeth Ku)關鍵字：失智;高齡;財務濫用;金融機構;dementia;elder;financial abuse;financial institutions期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：過往的高齡照護研究專注於長者身心狀態的維持，忽略了身心狀態與其財務安全的關聯。近年來不少研究團隊開始關注高齡者失智如何增加財務濫用的風險、財務濫用的型態以及降低此類風險的措施。本文針對此一主題進行重點式文獻回顧與評論，首先整理高齡者財務濫用的定義與類型，特別關注高齡失智者，並介紹「專業人士的旁觀者介入模式」與其降低財務濫用風險的效果。本文在第二部分整理並分析國內近十年與失智者財務濫用相關的新聞，資料來源包含《中國時報》、《聯合報》、《自由時報》、《蘋果日報》四家報紙，分析的內容包含財務濫用類型、濫用者身分、財物損失的內容以及金融專業人員的角色。本文依照濫用者身分將新聞分為三類：家人侵占、外人詐欺、本人濫用，發現在後兩者情境中，銀行行員常扮演旁觀者介入的角色，防止財務濫用事件發生。後續研究方向建議：調查行員對於失智者財務濫用的辨識敏感度並強化其介入能力，與發展在地化的失智友善銀行培訓課程。英文摘要：Research on senior care has focused on both physical and mental health care, but the relationship between elders' financial security and health has been overlooked. Recent studies have investigated how dementia increases the risk of elder financial abuse-focusing specifically on types of and measures against elder financial abuse. In the first part of this paper, we define and contextualize elder financial abuse, with specific respect to elders with dementia. We then introduce the professional bystander intervention model and discuss its potential to reduce the risk of financial abuse of elders with dementia. In the second part, we analyze news articles related to financial abuse of elders with dementia in Taiwan from 2009 to 2018. News articles published in four major newspapers (China Times, United Daily News, Liberty Times, and Apple Daily) are included. We analyze the types of financial abuse, identities of the abusers, types of property lost, and roles of bank staff. We categorize elders with dementia's financial abuse into three ones based on the identity of the abuser: ”family embezzlement,” ”third-party fraud,” and ”self-misuse.” In the cases of third-party fraud and self-misuse, bank staff were more likely to act as bystanders to prevent financial abuse. We propose two future research directions: first, to survey the bank staff's awareness toward the financial abuse of people with dementia, and second, to develop training courses for banks to assist them become more dementia friendly.起始頁-結束頁：373-385資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).1090507篇名：活躍老化之概念分析－以高齡者之賦權為主體並列篇名：A concept analysis of active aging: the subject of empowerment for the elderly作者：黎沛姍(Pei-Shan Li);謝佳容(Chia-Jung Hsieh)關鍵字：高齡者;活躍老化;概念分析;賦權;實證;elderly;active aging;concept analysis;empowerment;evidence期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：活躍老化為世界各國共同探索和追尋之目標與挑戰，有效建構高齡者的活躍老化已經是社會文化之歷程，並為高齡政策制定的重要基礎，所有以高齡者為核心，擴大至改善高齡者、家庭、社區和社會的活動都是活躍老化之元素。然而，活躍老化之概念不僅持續在發展，同時也具有多元特性，以多方面的視角詮釋活躍老化的概念，包含維持高齡者正常的日常生活活動功能及增加健康保障，以達到預期健康壽命的延續，並在此過程中達成獨立自主的態度發展生命歷程。因此，本文目的為運用Walker和Avant（2005）發展的概念分析步驟，針對活躍老化的概念發展與定義進行闡述，同時確認高齡者活躍老化之定義特徵包含健康壽命延續、賦權參與社會活動、工作意識及經濟安定、自立且安全的生活品質與擁有自信獲得尊重共五項，並列舉各項案例說明，最終提出國家層級概念活躍老化指標和個人層級活躍老化評估量表之實證測量工具的應用。期望借由多方面的視角來理解與詮釋活躍老化的概念，將有助於健康照護團隊人員能了解並應用此概念於高齡者的健康服務實務中，進而以高齡者之賦權為主體，達到貫徹「活躍老化」的整體目標之實踐作為。英文摘要：Active aging has been a challenging goal that is being explored and pursued by countries all over the world. Effectively establishing active aging for the elderly is a social and cultural process that requires policy framework and planning. The elderly are at the core of the active aging strategy, although families, communities, and society are also essential components in its utilization. However, the adoption and practice of active aging have continuously developed in different ways and with different characteristics all over the world. Some of the traditional aspects in the active aging policy framework are daily activities for the elderly, health protection, and life expectancy. However, the modern senior population has ability to take active part in social and political processes, so the rights to independent development must also be considered. Therefore, this study used the analysis steps of Walker and Avant (2005) to describe the definitional features of an intermediate period, case report, the results and their causes, and measurement tools for active aging. The definitional features of active aging including healthy life extension, empowerment to participate in social activities, work consciousness and economic stability, self-confidence and safe quality of life, and have self-confidence and respect. Finally, the directions of the evidence-basic measurement tools of the national level active aging index and the individual level active aging assessment scale. A multidimensional perspective was used to explain the concept of active aging. The results could help health care team members to understand and apply the concept in health care practice for the elderly, and empowerment of the elderly could help to achieve the overall goal of ”active aging.”起始頁-結束頁：386-396資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).1090378篇名：嚴重急性呼吸道症候群（SARS）及新冠肺炎（COVID-19）投入資源比較暨推估疫情下可能投入之資源－以某醫學中心與區域醫院為例並列篇名：Comparison of resources investment for SARS and COVID-19 and the probable investment in epidemic resources - the case of a medical center & regional hospital作者：林育瑄(Yu-Xuan Lin);戴天亮(Tien-Liang Tai);羅銀秀(Yin-Hsiu Lo);陳惠貞(Hui-Chen Chen);鍾靜江(Ching-Chiang Chung);邱淑芳(Shu-Fang Chiu)關鍵字：SARS;COVID-19;投入資源;超前部屬;推估疫情;SARS;COVID-19;investment of resources;advance deployment;epidemic prediction期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在比較SARS及COVID-19兩疫情資源投入、醫學中心與區域醫院在SARS期間資源投入差異比較分析，及在疫情不同發展階段，推估醫院可能之資源投入（含支出及成本）。方法：採回溯性資料統計，進行不同疫情及不同層級醫院比較及投入資源推估。結果：某醫學中心SARS期間總資源投入為7,034萬元，以設置負壓隔離病房及發燒篩檢站為主要投入資源（約佔總投資50%），而COVID-19期間以防疫物資、醫護人員特別津貼投入較多。而醫學中心與區域醫院投入防疫資源與醫院規模相關性高。另某醫學中心推估新冠肺炎（COVID-19）如發展到最嚴重時期，紫色2階時不含成本分攤會投入約4,304萬元支出，約SARS期間支出61%，如含成本分攤，約投入5,334萬元，約為SARS期間之76%。SARS時期因無類似經驗，突發疫情讓醫院措手不及、且無負壓隔離病房等設施，須大量投入此項資源以收治確診病患，而COVID-19疫情雖嚴峻，因已設置負壓隔離病房等設施，且政府與某醫學中心均採超前部署，至目前為止疫情尚在掌控當中。結論：疫情具有不可預測性，疫情何時結束無法預測，對醫院防疫資源投入的預估有侷限。疫情在某階段時間長短、疫情嚴重度、政府的防疫政策及醫院防疫措施效果均會影響資源投入的金額。而在防疫期間醫院收入減少，如無政府經費挹注，會造成醫院資金周轉問題，政府應作為醫院防疫後盾，適時予以醫院財務支持，以共度難關。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aims to compare the resources invested during the SARS and COVID-19 epidemics, analyze and compare resources invested by a medical center and a regional hospital during SARS, and estimate the possible investment of resources (including expenses and costs) by the hospitals in different stages of epidemic development. Methods: Compare the different epidemics and hospitals at different levels based on retrospective data, and estimate the investment of resources. Results: A medical center invested NT$ 70.34 million worth of resources during SARS, mainly for setting up negative-pressure isolation rooms and a fever clinic (accounting for about 50% of the total investment), whereas the investment during COVID-19 is mainly on anti-epidemic supplies and special allowances for healthcare workers. There is a high level of correlation between investment in anti-epidemic resources by a medical center/regional hospital and the scale of a hospital. Moreover, a medical center estimates that when COVID-19 develops to the most severe stage, the investment will be around NT$ 43.04 million (excluding cost allocation), that is about 61% of the expenditure during SARS, and around NT$ 53.34 million (including cost allocation), about 76% of the SARS expenditure, at Purple Level 2 status. At the time of SARS, with no similar experience before, hospitals were caught unprepared upon the sudden outbreak, with no negative-pressure isolation facilities. Immense investment had to be made in this resource to accommodate confirmed cases. Although the COVID-19 epidemic is severe, with the negative-pressure isolation facilities already established and the advance deployment already adopted by both the government and the medical center, the epidemic has been kept in control to date. Conclusions: Due to the unpredictability of the epidemic, the time when the epidemic will end is unpredictable, and this will constrain the hospitals' ability to estimate the investment in anti-epidemic resources. The length of a certain stage of epidemic, the severity of the epidemic, the government's anti-epidemic policy, and the result of the hospitals' implementation of anti-epidemic measures all affect the amount of investment in resources. When combating the epidemic, hospitals will have reduced income, and hospitals may face cash flow problem if no government funding is provided. To give back up for the hospitals' anti-epidemic efforts, the government should provide timely financial support for the hospitals to help them overcome the challenge.起始頁-結束頁：397-410資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).1090699篇名：評論：嚴重急性呼吸道症候群（SARS）及新冠肺炎（COVID-19）投入資源比較暨推估疫情下可能投入之資源－以某醫學中心與區域醫院為例並列篇名：Commentary: comparison of resources investment for SARS and COVID-19 and the probable investment in epidemic resources - the case of a medical center& regional hospital作者：邱政元(Jeng-Yuan Chiou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：411-411資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).1090690110篇名：12週漸增式肌力訓練對老年人不同體能表現之成效並列篇名：Effect of a 12-week incremental muscle strength training regimen on different physical performance in elderly people作者：胡巧欣(Chiao-Hsin Hu);吳一德(I-Te Wu)關鍵字：老年人;肌力;運動訓練;社區環境;elderly;muscle strength;exercise training;community environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：12週漸增式肌力訓練對老年人不同體能表現之成效。方法：招募65歲以上無規律運動習慣60位老年人，依上、下肢肌力（muscle strength）與走路速度檢測結果，分成體能良好組18位、體能普通組16位、體能衰弱組（physical weakness）11位和控制組15位等4組。運動訓練組三組老年人均參與每週兩次、每次約90鐘運動訓練共12週；控制組則正常作息。分別於運動介入前、後評估上、下肢肌力（muscle strength）、單腳站（one leg stance）、10公尺走路速度（10-meter walk speed），與簡易身體功能量表（short physical performance battery, SPPB）。結果：共56位受試者完成本研究，除慢性病罹患率，各組基本資料並無統計差異。經12週漸增式肌力訓練介入後，體能良好組及體能普通組在上、下肢肌力、單腳站立、10m走路速度四項表現達顯著成效；體能衰弱組則在上、下肢肌力、10公尺走路速度三項表現達顯著成效。進一步分析發現在上肢肌力之改變量體能良好及體能普通組顯著高於對照組；在下肢肌力與單腳站立之改變量體能良好及體能普通組顯著高於體能衰弱組及對照組；其餘10公尺走路速度及簡易體能活動組間皆未達顯著差異（p＞.05）。結論：12週漸增式肌力訓練對不同體能程度的老年人在各項體能表現皆有促進效果，可提供國內各社區關懷據點，應用於不同體能程度的老年人介入及效益評估之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: The effect of 12 weeks of muscle strength training on the physical performance of elderly people was investigated. Methods: This study recruited 60 people older than 65 years and without a regular exercise habit. On the basis of their upper and lower limb muscle strength and walking speed, they were divided into a control group (15 participants) and three training groups, namely high physical fitness (18 participants), general fitness (16 participants), and physical weakness (11 participants) groups. The training groups trained twice weekly for 90 min for 12 weeks, whereas the control group kept their normal routine. Upper and lower limb muscle strength, one-leg stance, 10-m walking speed, and short physical performance battery (SPPB) score were assessed before and after the exercise intervention. Results: A total of 56 subjects completed this research. Except for the prevalence of chronic diseases, no significant differences were discovered in the basic data of the groups. After 12 weeks of incremental muscle training, the high physical fitness and general fitness groups achieved significant improvements in upper and lower limb muscle strength, one-leg stance, and 10-m walking speed. By contrast, the poor physical fitness group significantly improved their upper and lower limb muscle strength and 10-m walking speed. Upon further analysis, we discovered that the improvements in upper limb muscle strength in the high physical fitness and general fitness groups were significantly greater than those in the control group. Moreover, the improvements in lower limb muscle strength and one-leg stance in the high physical fitness and general fitness groups were significantly greater than those in the poor physical weakness and control groups. No clear differences in 10-m walking speed and SPPB score were found (p ＞ .05). Conclusions: The 12-week incremental muscle training benefitted the elderly participants with different physical fitness levels in every aspect of physical performance. This research can be provided as a reference to every community care center in Taiwan to demonstrate an effective exercise intervention and the benefits for elderly people with varying levels of physical fitness.起始頁-結束頁：412-426資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).10903611篇名：醫學中心高齡門診病患其睡眠品質及各項構面之性別差異研究並列篇名：Sex differences in sleep quality and various dimensions among elderly outpatients at a medical hospital作者：許惠玲(Hui-Lin Hsu);陳伊伶(Yi-Ling Chen);蕭思美(Szu-Mei Hsiao);周雨青(Yu-Ching Chou);楊燦(Tsan Yang)關鍵字：老年人;睡眠品質;性別差異;呼吸障礙;older adults;sleep quality;sex differences;sleep-disordered breathing期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究以醫學中心門診老年人為研究對象，探討及分析影響老年人睡眠品質及各項構面之性別差異及修飾作用。方法：本研究採橫斷式研究設計。於台灣南部某醫學中心之高齡醫學科、神經內科與精神科之門診個案，進行人口學特質、生活型態、代謝症候群臨床檢驗值、匹茲堡睡眠品質問卷、愛普沃斯嗜睡量表、老年憂鬱量表、睡眠呼吸障礙與日常生活活動功能等量表進行資料收集。結果：結果顯示女性有較多睡眠品質不佳的問題。而女性無規律運動、BMI≧27、憂鬱評估異常、有代謝性症候群及睡眠呼吸障礙中／高風險者有較差的睡眠品質；男性中憂鬱評估異常及睡眠呼吸障礙中／高風險者有較差的睡眠品質。以睡眠品質的各構面分析中發現，女性在主觀性睡眠品質、睡眠潛伏期時間、睡眠效率、服用藥物幫助入睡及日間功能上都較男性差。以邏輯斯迴歸分析睡眠品質各項構面之性別修飾作用，結果顯示男性女性老年憂鬱評估異常者在主觀式睡眠品質、服用安眠藥物與日間功能失調構面上較憂鬱評估正常者有較高風險。男女性在睡眠呼吸障礙中／高風險者的睡眠困擾與日間功能障礙構面上較低風險者有較高風險，女性更多了睡眠潛伏期及睡眠總時間兩構面。結論：男性當中有較多睡眠困擾的問題及睡眠潛伏期較長，女性為睡眠潛伏期較長及使用睡眠藥物，男女皆有較多的主觀睡眠品質不佳。憂鬱評估異常為男性及女性的主觀睡眠品質、使用睡眠相關藥物及日間功能障礙之影響因素；睡眠呼吸障礙為男性睡眠困擾及日間功能及女性睡眠潛伏期長、睡眠時間短、睡眠困擾及日間功能的影響因素。英文摘要：Objectives: This study takes the elderly outpatients of a medical hospital as subjects, analyzes the effects of various dimensions on their sleep quality, and examines how such effects differ by sex and modification. Methods: By employing a cross-sectional design, this study collected data by obtaining clinical measurements related to metabolic syndrome in patients attending outpatient geriatrics, neurology, and psychiatry departments at a medical center in Southern Taiwan. Data were collected using a questionnaire containing a demographic scale, a lifestyle scale, the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, the Geriatric Depression Scale, a sleep-disordered breathing scale, and an activities of daily living functional assessment scale. Results: Women had more problems with low sleep quality. Women with irregular exercise, BMI <U+2265> 27 kg/m^2, an abnormal depression evaluation, metabolic syndrome, and moderate-to-high risk of sleep-disordered breathing had low sleep quality, as were men with an abnormal depression assessment and moderate-to-high risk of sleep-disordered breathing. In the analysis of all dimensions of sleep quality, women had significantly poorer scores than did men in subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, habitual sleep efficiency, sleeping medication use, and daytime dysfunction. In a logistic regression analysis on sex modification in various aspects of sleep quality, men and women with abnormal geriatric depression results had higher risks of poor subjective sleep quality, sleeping medication use, and daytime dysfunction than did those with normal depression results. Men and women with moderate-to-high risks of sleep-disordered breathing and daytime dysfunction, respectively, had higher risks of sleep disturbance than did their counterparts with low risks. Conclusions: The most common sleep problems in men were sleep disturbance and longer sleep latency, whereas those in women were longer sleep latency and sleeping medication use. Both men and women frequently experienced low subjective sleep quality. Abnormal depression assessment was the major factor influencing the subjective sleep quality of men and women, as indicated by their use of sleeping medication and daytime dysfunction. Sleep-disordered breathing among men and long sleep latency and short sleep time among women were the major factors affecting sleep distress and daytime functioning.起始頁-結束頁：427-440資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).10901112篇名：刨路作業人員結晶型游離二氧化矽暴露特性調查並列篇名：The investigation on exposure characteristics of crystalline free silica of pavement milling operator作者：楊心豪(Shin-Hao Yang);陳昆皇(Kun-Huang Chen);黃小林(Hsiao-Lin Huang);洪粕宸(Po-Chen Hung);黃筱茜(Hsiao-Chien Huang);徐櫻芳(Ying-Fang Hsu);莊啟佑(Chi-Yu Chuang)關鍵字：刨路;作業環境;總粉塵;可呼吸性粉塵;可呼吸性結晶游離二氧化矽;pavement milling;operating environment;total dust;respirable dust;crystalline free silica期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：刨路作業中作業人員會暴露於高粉塵與結晶型游離二氧化矽的環境中，本研究主要針對刨路作業環境中總粉塵、可呼吸性粉塵以及可呼吸性粉塵結晶型游離二氧化矽進行採樣分析，以瞭解刨路作業作業人員中粉塵與可呼吸性結晶型游離二氧化矽之暴露情形。方法：選取10條平面道路作為銑刨作業之採樣標的，採樣分為區域採樣與個人採樣，個人採樣是由作業人員配戴個人採樣器，並依行政院勞動部公告之採樣分析建議方法進行採樣，總粉塵與可呼吸性粉塵為建議方法CLA4002與CLA4001，可呼吸性結晶游離二氧化矽則以CLA4003進行之；區域採樣則是利用腳架配載採樣器，並以相同建議方法於刨路前一日作業進行背景濃度採樣。結果：在10條刨路作業道路中，刨刀確認員、駕駛員、人孔確認員總粉塵平均濃度為2.77±1.71mg/m^3、3.74±2.54 mg/m^3、0.76±0.59 mg/m^3；可呼吸性粉塵平均濃度為1.20±0.80 mg/m^3、1.60±0.93 mg/m^3、0.33±0.25 mg/m^3；刨刀確認員與駕駛員之可呼吸性結晶型游離二氧化矽平均濃度為0.53±0.29 mg/m^3與0.73±0.44 mg/m^3，人孔確認員由於暴露時間較短，僅一條道路檢出0.10 mg/m^3外，其餘均為未檢出。在檢出之結果中，三種粉塵中個人暴露均顯著高於背景值。以我國之第一種粉塵容許標準來看，刨刀確認員與駕駛員超過容許值之比例為75%及90%；另以美國NIOSH針對可呼吸性結晶游離二氧化矽暴露濃度建議值0.05 mg/m^3為基準，本研究調查之刨刀確認員與駕駛員暴露濃度超過建議值之比例為89%及100%。結論：刨路作業產生高量之可呼吸性結晶游離二氧化矽，使得作業人員確實暴露危害中，因此實應加強作業人員個人防護以及開發粉塵防護裝置等職業衛生措施，方能保障作業人員健康。英文摘要：Objectives: Pavement milling process produces high concentrations of dust and free crystalline silica during. This study aimed to explore the exposure of total dust, respirable dust and respirable free crystalline silica for workers during the pavement milling operation. Methods: Ten roads were selected as the sampling sites. Both milling-site samples and personal samples were collected and analyzed according to methods CLA4002, CLA4001, and CLA 4003 recommended by the Ministry of Labor, the Executive Yuan. Results: During the pavement milling process on the 10 roads, the average total dust concentrations in samples collected by cutter confirmers, drivers, and manhole confirmers were 2.77±1.71 mg/m^3, 3.74±2.54 mg/m^3, and 0.76±0.59 mg/m^3, respectively. The corresponding average exposed respirable dust concentrations were 1.20±0.80 mg/m^3, 1.60±0.93 mg/m^3, and 0.33±0.25 mg/m^3, respectively. The respirable crystalline free silica exposure concentrations of cutter confirmers and drivers were 0.53±0.29 mg/m^3 and 0.73±0.44 mg/ m^3, respectively. Due to the short exposure time, only one sample of respirable free crystalline silica was collected for the manhole confirmer, with a concentration of 0.10 mg/m^3. The results also showed that these three kinds of dust concentrations of personal exposure were significantly higher than the background concentrations. The cutter confirmer and the driver with exposure of respiratory dust exceeding the Taiwan's permissible exposure limit accounted for 75% and 90%, respectively, or exceeding the US NIOSH recommended value of 0.05 mg/m^3 accounted for 89% and 100%, respectively. Conclusions: Workers are exposed to the hazardous respirable free crystalline silica during the process of milling roads. Personal protective equipment and dust protection devices should be strengthened to ensure the health of workers.起始頁-結束頁：441-452資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).10903213篇名：Prevalence and related factors of musculoskeletal disorders among dentists in Taiwan: a cross-sectional study using the National Health Insurance Research Database並列篇名：台灣牙醫師肌肉骨骼疾病的盛行率與相關因素：以全民健保資料庫進行橫斷性研究作者：李淑芬(Shu-Fen Li);洪錦墩(Chin-Tun Hung);吳啟明(Chi-Ming Wu);李美文(Mei-Wen Lee)關鍵字：dentist;musculoskeletal disorders;risk factors;comorbidity;牙醫師;肌肉骨骼疾病;危險因素;共病症期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Objectives: Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) are common occupational diseases that consume medical resources and reduce productivity and work quality. When treating patients, dentists often must maintain a fixed posture. Thus, dentists have a higher chance of MSDs. This study examined the prevalence and frequency distribution of MSDs among dentists and the related factors for MSDs. Methods: A cross-sectional study design was used, and 8,303 dentists with 12 consecutive months of practice in 2011 from the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database were selected as study subjects. The study variables included sex, age, mean number of consultations per month per dentist, level of medical institution, and comorbidity. The logistic regression model was used to analyze related factors for MSDs in dentists. Results: In 2011, the prevalence of MSDs in dentists was 15.8% (Overall, 84.2% of the dentists had no record of visiting a doctor; in addition, 2.1%, 0.6%, 0.2%, and 12.9% of the dentists had visited a doctor once, twice, three times , and four times or more frequently, respectively). Male dentists had a marginally significant lower risk of MSDs than did female dentists (odds ratio [OR]: 0.86; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.74-1.01). Compared with dentists in the age group of 26-35 years, dentists in the age groups of 36-45, 46-55, and 56-65 years had a higher risk of MSDs (OR: 1.28; 95% CI: 1.07-1.54; OR: 1.70; 95% CI: 1.43-2.02; OR: 1.69; 95% CI: 1.38-2.06, respectively). Compared with dentists without comorbidities, dentists with insomnia, depression, or anxiety had a higher risk of MSDs (OR: 1.44; 95% CI: 1.09-1.90; OR: 1.67; 95% CI: 1.10-2.53; OR: 1.70; 95% CI: 1.25-2.31). Conclusions: In total, 15.8% of the dentists had MSDs. For dentists with MSDs with records of visiting a doctor, those who visited once accounted for 13%, and those with over two visits accounted for 87%. MSDs of the back accounted for most MSD cases. Female sex; older age; and comorbidities of insomnia, depression, and anxiety were factors associated with MSDs in dentists.英文摘要：目標：肌肉骨骼疾病是工作場所中常見的職業病，罹病者除耗用醫療資源外，也會影響生產力與工作品質。牙醫師在治療病患時經常需長時間維持固定姿勢，使其有較高機會發生肌肉骨骼疾病。本研究目的主要是調查牙醫師肌肉骨骼疾病的盛行率、次數分布與肌肉骨骼疾病的相關因素。方法：使用橫斷式研究設計，從台灣全民健保研究資料庫中擷取2011年連續執業12個月之牙醫師共8,303位作為研究對象。研究變項包括性別、年齡、每月平均門診次數、執業醫院層級、共病症等。使用邏輯式迴歸模型分析牙醫師肌肉骨骼疾病之相關因素。結果：2011年台灣牙醫師肌肉骨骼疾病盛行率是15.8%（無就醫記錄者佔84.2%，1次佔2.1%、2次佔0.6%、3次佔0.2%、4次以上佔12.9%）。男性牙醫師罹患肌肉骨骼疾病的風險邊際顯著低於女牙醫師（odds ratio [OR]:0.86; 95% confidence interval [CI]:0.74-1.01）；相較於26-35歲之牙醫師，牙醫師36-45歲、46-55歲56-65歲有較高的肌肉骨骼疾病的風險（OR: 1.28; 95% CI: 1.07-1.54;OR: 1.70; 95% CI: 1.43-2.02; OR:1.69; 95% CI:1.38-2.06）；相較於無共病者，共病失眠、憂鬱、焦慮症的牙醫師有較高的肌肉骨骼疾病風險（OR: 1.44; 95% CI: 1.09-1.90, OR: 1.67; 95%CI:1.10-2.53, OR: 1.70; 95% CI: 1.25-2.31）。結論：牙醫師實際上有肌肉骨骼疾病醫療利用的盛行率是15.8%。有肌肉骨骼疾病就診記錄的牙醫師，就醫次數僅為單次者只佔13%，2次以上者佔了87%。背部是最容易發生肌肉骨骼疾病的部位。女性、年齡增加與共病失眠、憂鬱或焦慮皆是牙醫師罹患肌肉骨骼疾病的相關因素。起始頁-結束頁：453-463資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202008_39(4).10901814篇名：如何讓銀髮族吃得巧、吃得健康！作者：潘文涵;吳思芸期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：231-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).PF0315篇名：植入性醫材登錄監視制度與病人權益保障作者：陳再晉;鐘珮純;陳冠文;蕭允強期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：235-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).10902116篇名：逗陣鬥結核桌遊：綠絲帶卡牌創新設計作者：蔡俊欽;林云茜;吳芳妤;陳思柔;曾含妤;林函蓁;陳美芳;何雪珍期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：240-242資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).10901217篇名：燒傷醫療體系與大量燒傷事件應變計畫之國際比較並列篇名：International comparison of burn medical care systems and emergency response plans for burn mass casualty incidents作者：莊秀文(Sheuwen Chuang);戴念梓(Niann-Tzyy Dai);何慧燕(Hui-Yan Ho)關鍵字：大量燒傷事件;燒傷醫療體系;國際比較;緊急應變計畫;burn mass casualty incidents;burn care systems;international comparison;emergency response plan期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究目的是針對國際先進國家之燒傷照護體系與大量燒傷事件應變機制，進行比較，找出我國可借鏡之處。方法：以英文資料較完整的美國、澳洲、英國、瑞士與我國進行比較，分成兩個層次：各國對於燒傷治療的基本醫療體系，以及當大量燒傷傷患事件發生時，各國緊急應變的計畫或機制。結果：相對於美、澳、英、瑞四個國家皆有基本的燒傷醫療照護分級體系，以及地區性或全國性的大量燒傷事件的應變計畫而言，我國尚未在此方面有特別的建置，各國燒傷醫療體系的層級數不一。全國性的大量傷患事件應變層級從澳洲的兩層級、瑞士的三層級、美國的四層級、到英國的六層級，美國人口稠密的大都會，如紐約市，將醫療機構分為四個燒傷能力處置層級，來規劃區域性的大量燒傷事件應變計畫。結論：依據研究的結果與我國都會區人口、醫療體系特性，本文建議參考紐約市燒傷中心之大量燒傷事件應變計畫，研擬建立我國區域性、乃至全國性大量燒傷事件應變計畫，以及醫院燒傷醫療能力分級作法，做為我國燒傷醫療體系的短中期精進目標。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study is to compare and learn from the burn care systems and emergency response plans for burn mass casualty incidents (BMCI) across developed countries. Methods: Based on the availability of English information, the United States, United Kingdom, Switzerland, and Australia were selected for comparison with Taiwan. Two categories are compared across the 5 countries: the basic medical care systems for burn patients, and emergency response plans for BMCIs. Results: In contrast to Taiwan, the United States, Australia, United Kingdom, and Switzerland have established basic burn care systems and regional or national emergency response plans for BMCIs. The number of layers within both burn care systems and nation-wide emergency response plans for BMCIs varies from country to country. Emergency response plans for BMCIs in Australia was designed with two levels, and with three levels in Switzerland, four levels in the United States, and six levels in the United Kingdom. In densely-populated metropolitan areas such as New York City, hospitals are divided into four levels of burn care abilities as part of the regional emergency response plan for BMCIs. Conclusions: Based on the results of the study and the characteristics of Taiwan's metropolitan population and medical care systems, the article recommends referring to the burn-center regional emergency response plans for BMCIs of New York City to develop a regional to national BMCI plans, and ranking method for burn care capabilities of hospitals as a short to medium-term improvement goal for Taiwan's burn care system.起始頁-結束頁：243-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).10900618篇名：全民健保民眾就醫流程經驗與治療效果滿意度之相關：2012-2016年我國全民健保就醫權益調查為例並列篇名：Relationship between patient procedure experience and treatment outcome satisfaction by using 2012-2016 annual National Health Insurance survey data作者：邱尚志(Shang-Jyh Chiou);李佩珍(Pei-Chen Lee);李麗惠(Li-Hui Lee);林寬佳(Kuan-Chia Lin)關鍵字：全民健康保險;就醫流程經驗;滿意度調查;安德森架構;National Health Insurance;patient procedure experience;satisfaction survey;Andersen Behavioral Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：探討以基層醫療或醫院的就醫流程經驗中哪些因素與治療效果滿意度有關。方法：資料來源為「101-105年全民健保民眾就醫權益長期監測系統之研究」，此研究以各年度橫斷面調查方式進行。問卷採用安德森架構，整合五年資料為同一樣本群體，依門診與醫院分成兩群進行後續分析，導入邏輯斯迴歸分析探討影響病人的就醫治療結果滿意度的相關因素。結果：民眾就醫經驗中與醫師之間的互動是相當重要影響治療結果滿意度的因素，有高達六或十倍以上的勝算比會比不滿意者表示滿意其治療效果，醫護人員如果有提供衛教指導也會有將近兩倍的勝算比，然不同求醫行為仍有其他影響因素。結論：影響滿意度核心因素仍然是民眾看診的經驗，醫病信任關係、醫療訊息傳遞與決策共享過程的品質皆是影響民眾總體感受的因子。台灣健保正邁向階段性成熟整合期，透過政策技術創新與倡議增加民眾互動的誘因，進而改善民眾就醫流程經驗與滿意度，逐步邁向醫病關係公平效率觀感及多方參與度的提升。英文摘要：Objectives: Identify factors influencing patients' satisfaction with outcomes of medical treatments of primary or hospital care. Methods: This study used data from the 2012-2016 annual National Health Insurance (NHI) surveys, which explored patient experiences related to receiving of medical services. The questionnaire was created on the basis of Andersen's model. We considered that data from every survey year in the multiyear survey database were independent and representative of the population. Logistic regression analysis was introduced into the research to explore relevant factors influencing patients' satisfaction with treatment outcomes. Results: Doctor-patient interaction with regard to outpatient services was a crucial factor influencing patients' satisfaction with treatment outcomes. Such an interaction was associated with a high likelihood of satisfaction with treatment outcomes (odds ratio = 6-10, p＜0.001). Moreover, implementation of health education by medical staff was another factor concerning the likelihood of satisfaction with treatment outcomes (OR = 1.4-2.0; p＜0.001). Nonetheless, influential factors may vary for different medical-seeking behaviors. Conclusions: Treatment-seeking experience is the key factor influencing patient satisfaction. Other factors influencing people's overall satisfaction include the doctor-patient trust, the quality of medical information delivery, and shared decision-making processes. Taiwan's NHI is entering a stage of maturity and integration, where innovative initiatives on policies and technologies serve as incentives to increase interaction with the public, thereby improving people's procedure experience and satisfaction with medical care, achieving positive perceptions of fairness and efficiency in a doctor-patient relationship as well as increased participation of various parties.起始頁-結束頁：257-268資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).10812619篇名：健保放寬降血脂藥物給付範圍對心血管疾病發生率及費用之影響並列篇名：The impact of expansion of dyslipidemia drug coverage on cardiovascular disease incidence and costs under the National Health Insurance scheme作者：郭蓓蓓(PEI-PEI KUO);鄭守夏(Shou-Hsia Cheng)關鍵字：降血脂藥物;心血管疾病;高血脂;醫療費用;健保給付;hypolipidemic drugs;cardiovascular diseases;hyperlipidemia;health expenses;National Health Insurance benefit package期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：全民健保於2013年8月1日放寬高危險族群使用降血脂藥物的給付規定，本研究旨探討該政策對於心血管疾病發生率與醫療費用之影響。方法：使用全民健康保險全人口資料庫進行分析，針對用藥給付放寬的範圍去界定研究與對照組，選取無心血管疾病史的糖尿病患者118,912人為研究組；無心血管疾病史且無糖尿病史的高血壓患者150,930人為對照組。追蹤觀察期為2013年8月1日前後各3年。統計分析採用差異中的差異法，檢視政策實施前後，兩組病人在降血脂藥物開立、心血管疾病（急性心肌梗塞與缺血性腦中風）發生、及醫療花費的差異。結果：研究發現在政策實施後，研究組的病人比對照組較容易獲得降血脂藥物的開立（OR=1.095, p＜0.0001），其心血管疾病的發生機率也較低（OR=0.914, p=0.0046），且降血脂藥物費用較低（β=-0.016, p=0.0019），而心血管疾病的花費雖然有比較低，但未達統計上的顯著差異（β=-0.087, p=0.1504）。結論：2013年的放寬降血脂給付政策讓高風險族群的糖尿病患者的用藥人數上升、心血管疾病發生趨緩，但尚未見可以節省健保花費，建議未來可以做更長期的觀察評估。英文摘要：Objectives: Aiming to reduce the occurrence of cardiovascular disease (CVD), Taiwan's National Health Insurance (NHI) Administration expanded coverage for hypolipidemic drugs for high-risk patients, including patients with a history of CVD or diabetes in 2013. This study intended to evaluate the impact of this policy. Methods: Patients with diabetes but without a history of CVD (118,912 subjects) were selected as the study group, and patients with hypertension but without a history of CVD or diabetes (150,930 subjects) were the comparison group. Using August 1, 2013, as the cut-off point we defined 3 years each in the pre- and post-policy periods. Generalized estimation equation (GEE) models with a difference-in-differences analysis were used to estimate the effects of the new policy in 2010 and 2016. Outcome variables included the likelihood of receiving hypolipidemic drugs, occurrence of CVD (acute myocardial infarction and ischemic stroke), and expenses for drugs and CVD. Results: After introduction of the policy, subjects in the study group were more likely to receive hypolipidemic drugs (OR=1.095, p＜0.001), and less likely to have CVD (OR=0.914, p=0.0046) than subjects in the comparison group. The subjects in the study group also had lower expenses for hypolipidemic drugs (β=-0.016, p=0.0019), but the lower expenses for CVD did not reach the significance level (β=-0.087, p=0.1504). Conclusions: The expanded coverage for hypolipidemic drugs significantly increased the use of medications for high-risk patients, and reduced the occurrence of CVD in Taiwan. Long-tern evaluation of this medication policy is recommended.起始頁-結束頁：269-277資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).10813220篇名：以系統性文獻回顧及統合分析法探討運動對於老人憂鬱的療效並列篇名：Effects of exercise on depression in older people: a systematic review and meta-analysis作者：方莉(Li Fang);方淑慧(Shu-Hui Fang);方景林(Ching-Lin Fang)關鍵字：老人;憂鬱;運動;elderly;depression;exercise期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：以系統性文獻回顧與統合分析法，整合及探討運動對於老人憂鬱的療效。方法：搜尋的資料庫包含：2004年到2019年間發表於Pubmed、CINAHL、Cochrane Library、華藝線上圖書館、台灣期刊論文索引系統、台灣博碩士論文知識加值系統等電子資料庫。證據等級採用Melnyk和Fineout-Overholt提出介入性研究的證據等級。擷取後之資料採用RevMan 5.3軟體進行統合分析（Meta-Analysis），以檢視運動介入對老人憂鬱之療效。結果：納入結果分析的文章有13篇，共有1,477位受試者（實驗組720 & 對照組757人），95% CI [-0.45, -0.10]，Z=3.14，p=0.002，顯示綜合效果量為-0.27，表示運動介入可改善老人的憂鬱，但成效偏低。在次群體分析部份呈現：運動介入時間為「至少24週」、「每週運動兩次或三次」且對象為「社區老人」，可有效緩解憂鬱程度。結論：老人接受運動治療，可以改善其憂鬱。建議社區老人之運動設計，運動時間可設計為「至少24週」、且「每週運動兩次或三次」，以利緩解其憂鬱；未來希望納入更多實證研究，以針對介入運動種類、運動介入時間、每週介入的次數及受試者特質（種族、年齡、不同憂鬱程度個案）等因素，進行更明確的分析與討論。英文摘要：Objectives: To integrate and explore the effects of exercise on depression in older people by a systematic literature review and meta-analysis. Methods: The electronic databases PubMed, CINAHL, Cochrane Library, Index to Taiwan Periodical Literature System, and National Digital Library of Thesis and Dissertations were searched for articles published between 2004 and 2019 in Taiwan. This study used the level of evidence outlined in the article by Melnyk and Fineout- Overholt (2005) for the interventional study. A meta-analysis was applied using the RevMan 5.3 to examine the effects of the exercise interventions on depression in older people. Results: This study included 13 articles in the analysis. In total, 1477 participants (exercise: 720; control: 757, 95% confidence interval [-0.45, -0.10], Z = 3.14, p = 0.002) showed a combined effect of -0.27, indicating that exercise intervention could improve the degree of depression in older people. According to the subgroup analysis, the intervention time is ”two or three times a week for at least 24 weeks”, and the participant belongs to the ”elderly community,” which can effectively alleviate the degree of depression. Conclusions: Exercise can improve the degree of depression in older people. The recommended exercise protocol of older people in the community is that it should last for ”at least 24 weeks”, and include ”exercise twice or three times a week” to alleviate their depression. More empirical studies are suggested in the future to provide a clearer analysis and discuss the factors of types of activity interventions, duration of exercise interventions, number of weekly interventions, and demographic characteristics (race, age, and degrees of depression).起始頁-結束頁：278-291資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).10903001篇名：運用德菲法建構醫師健康識能專業知能指標之研究並列篇名：Study of constructing indicators of physician's professional competence on health literacy by Delphi method作者：劉峻正(Chun-Cheng Liu);張家臻(Chia-Chen Chang);賴香如(Hsiang-Ru Lai);蔡兆勳(Jaw-Shiun Tsai);明金蓮(Jin-Lain Ming);董貞吟(Chen-Yin Tung)關鍵字：健康識能;德菲法;醫師;醫病關係;醫療資源;health literacy;Delphi method;physicians;doctor-patient relations;medical resources期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在建構醫師健康識能專業知能指標，以促醫療提供者關注、掌握與因應病人健康識能、進行良好醫病溝通，並協助病人有效運用醫療資源。方法：本研究採德菲法，進行三回合調查，以凝聚13名專家之共識。根據文獻與焦點團體訪談結果，界定醫師健康識能專業知能之內涵與面向，並擬定指標初稿。在每回合調查歷程中，針對各項指標的適切性與一致性進行分析，依據專家意見修正與增刪指標。結果：建構「概念與評估」、「接納與尊重」、「溝通與互動」及「醫療資訊與決策」等四面向、13次面向、44項指標，以利醫師扮演健康識能評估者、接納者、規劃者及導引者之角色。結論：本研究建構之健康識能專業知能指標可作為未來規劃醫師健康識能專業知能相關職前與在職教育課程，以及研發相關測量工具之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: This study aims to construct indicators of physicians' professional competence on health literacy in order to motivate healthcare providers to pay attention to master, and respond to patients' health literacy; conduct good doctor-patient communication; and assist patients in effectively using medical resources. Methods: The Delphi method was applied, and three rounds of investigation were conducted to gather the consensus of 13 experts. According to the literature and results of focus group interviews, the connotations and dimensions of physicians' professional competence on health literacy were defined, and the first draft of indicators was drawn up. In the course of each round of investigation, the suitability and consistency of various indicators were analyzed, and indicators were revised, added, or deleted according to the experts' opinions. Results: Four dimensions, namely ”concept and evaluation”, ”acceptance and respect”, ”communication and interaction”, and ”medical information and decision-making”; and 13 sub-dimensions and 44 indicators were constructed to help physicians play the roles of health literacy evaluators, receivers, planners, and guides. Conclusions: The indicators of physicians' professional competence on health literacy constructed in this study can be used as a reference for future planning of pre-service and on-the-job education courses related to physicians' professional competence on health literacy, as well as development of related measurement tools.起始頁-結束頁：292-310資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).1081302篇名：合併飲食、運動與心理介入對體重與飲食行為之成效並列篇名：The effects of combined diet, exercise, and psychological intervention on body weight and eating behaviors作者：柯佳宜(Chia-I Ko);林宜美(I-Mei Lin);李純瑩(Chun-Ying Lee)關鍵字：身體質量指數;體重管理;心理介入;情緒型飲食;饞食型飲食;body mass index;weight management;psychological intervention;emotional eating;grazing期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：傳統減重以飲食和運動介入為主，本研究探討傳統減重合併心理介入對體重與飲食行為之成效。方法：採立意取樣招募體重管理中心體重過重與肥胖（身體質量指數大於等於24以上）的參與者，分為八週傳統減重組（以營養、有氧和肌力課程為主）與八週傳統合併心理組（包括傳統減重合併認知行為治療與正念飲食），分別於介入前、後測量參與者的體態、情緒飲食者量表（Emotional Eater Questionnaire, EEQ）和嘴饞量表（Grazing Questionnaire, GQ）。結果：二因子變異數分析發現「組別×時間」在腰圍和腰臀比有交互作用，事後檢定發現傳統合併心理組之後測腰圍與腰臀比低於前測，而傳統減重組僅後測腰圍低於前測。傳統合併心理組在腰圍和腰臀比的改變量高於傳統減重組。二因子變異數分析發現「組別×時間」在EEQ總分有交互作用，EEQ總分和GQ總分有顯著時間主效果，事後檢定發現傳統合併心理組在後測EEQ總分低於前測，後測時傳統合併心理組之EEQ總分低於傳統減重組，傳統合併心理組之EEQ總分改變量高於傳統減重組。結論：傳統減重合併心理課程在降低參與者腰圍、腰臀比、情緒型飲食與饞食型飲食之效果比傳統減重更佳。英文摘要：Objectives: Traditional weight control programs include diet and exercise. The present study explored the effects on body weight and eating behaviors of traditional weight management (TWM) combined with psychological intervention versus TWM only. Methods: Purposive sampling was used in this study. Participants with body mass index <U+2265> 24 kg/m^2 were recruited from a weight management center and assigned to an eight-week traditional weight management program (TWM; diet, aerobic, and muscle strength exercise) or eight weeks of TWM with psychological intervention (PSY; cognitive behavior therapy and mindfulness eating). The indices of body weight, Emotional-Eater-Questionnaire (EEQ) score, and Grazing Questionnaire (GQ) score were measured at pre-test and post-test. Results: Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed significant Group × Time interaction effects on waist circumference (WC) and waisthip ratio (WHR). Post-hoc comparison found lower WC and WHR at post-test than pre-test in the PSY group, and lower WC at post-test than pre-test in the TWM group. There was a larger change in WC and WHR in the PSY group than the TWM group. Two-way ANOVA showed a significant Group × Time interaction effect on EEQ and Time main effects on EEQ and GQ. Posthoc comparison showed lower EEQ of PSY at post-test than pre-test, and lower EEQ in PSY than TWM at post-test. Otherwise, the change scores of EEQ in the PSY group were better than the TWM group. Conclusions: This study indicated that TWM combined with psychological intervention had better effects on WC, WHR, EEQ, and GQ than TWM alone.起始頁-結束頁：311-325資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).1081373篇名：檢視職業傷害的趨勢、分布與社會不平等：勞保現金給付之分析並列篇名：Trends, distribution, and social inequality of occupational injury: analysis of labor insurance compensation data作者：陳怡靜(Yi-Jing Chen);鄭雅文(Yawen Cheng)關鍵字：職業傷害;勞工保險;健康不平等;occupational injury;labor insurance;health inequality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：社會經濟地位可能影響職業傷害風險，然而台灣對此議題的探討仍不多。本研究旨在檢視職業傷害的近年趨勢、分布與社會不平等現象。方法：分析2016至2018年間勞保職業災害現金給付資料，比較不同性別、年齡、投保薪資、投保單位與產業之職業傷害發生率。結果：2016至2018年間有30,809,863投保人年，共發生1,617件致死性及150,026件非致死性職業傷害；平均致死性及非致死性職業傷害發生率分別為每十萬人年5.25及486.94件。非致死性職業傷害發生率有下降趨勢，但通勤事故佔比為36.3%且比例有上升趨勢。不論是致死性與非致死性職業傷害，男性均顯著高於女性，而60歲以上及20歲以下顯著高於其他年齡層。投保薪資最高的族群，職業傷害發生率最低，但投保薪資與職業傷害發生率之相關未呈現階層化分布。依產業類型分析，可發現營造業的致死性與非致死性職業傷害發生率最高，運輸倉儲、農林漁牧及土石礦業的致死性職業傷害發生亦顯著偏高。結論：勞動主管機關應檢視職業安全保護措施，並針對高風險族群加以改善，有關投保薪資與社會經濟地位之關聯則需進一步探究。英文摘要：Objectives: Workers' socioeconomic positions may influence the risk of occupational injury. However, in Taiwan, research on this issue remains limited. This study examined the recent trends, distribution, and social inequalities of occupational injury. Methods: We obtained data from the workers' compensation insurance during 2016-2018. Incidence rates of occupational injuries were compared by gender, age, level of insured salary, employment type, and industry. Results: From 2016 to 2018, 1617 fatal and 150,026 no nfatal occupational injury benefit claims were granted in 30,809,863 insured person-years. Incidence rates of fatal and nonfatal occupational injuries were 5.25 and 486.94 per 100,000 person-years, respectively. Although the incidence rates of fatal occupational injury were declining, the proportion of commute injury accounted for 36.3% of total occupational injury claims, and this proportion was increasing steadily. For both fatal and nonfatal occupational injuries, men and those aged ＞60 or ＜20 years had a significantly high risk. Those in the highest salary bracket had the lowest incidence of occupational injury, but no apparent pattern was observed between insured salary and occupational injury rate. However, construction workers showed significantly high incidences of both fatal and nonfatal occupational injuries. Workers in transport, logistics, and primary industrial sectors, including agriculture, fishery, forestry and mining were also observed to have high incidence rates of fatal occupational injuries. Conclusions: Labor authorities should examine and improve regulations and measures for occupational safety and health protection, particularly for high-risk groups. In addition, the relationship between insured salary and socioeconomic position deserves further research.起始頁-結束頁：326-336資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).1090164篇名：醫院環境及設備消毒以預防COVID-19感染之探討並列篇名：Environmental disinfection at hospitals as a strategy for COVID-19 spread prevention作者：林增玉(Tseng-Yu Lin);洪靖慈(Ching-Tzu Hung);曾士誠(Shih-Cheng Tseng);林俊祐(Chun-Yu Lin)關鍵字：COVID-19（新冠病毒）;醫院環境清潔;COVID-19 (New Crown Virus);clean hospital environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：醫院公共環境設備或接觸面是最常被忽略預防感染重要點，藉由清潔頻率探討，達到COVID-19疫情期間預防感染及避免感染擴散的目的。方法：本研究採取ATP冷光反應檢測法，來量化醫院公共環境設備或接觸面環境污染的程度，以反應不同實際清潔頻率所達到的效果。結果：實證發現依照常規清潔及加強清潔頻率，如一般預測有不同檢測結果。常規清潔無法符合文獻建議較嚴格小於250RLU的標準。結論：於COVID-19疫情期間之上班時段對一般人頻繁接觸的物體表面清潔消毒頻率應提高至每2小時一次，並定時監測及將結果反應給清潔人員，同時支持嚴格遵守環境和手部衛生的要求，以達到COVID-19感染控制之目標。英文摘要：Objectives: Cleanliness of hospitals' public environmental equipment or contact surfaces are frequently overlooked in the prevention of COVID-19. This paper discusses the cleaning frequency, with the purpose of preventing COVID-19 infection and controlling its dissipation during the pandemic. Methods: Using the ATP cold light reaction detection method, we quantified the degree of pollution in hospitals' public environmental equipment or contact surfaces to reflect the effect of actual cleaning frequency. Results: Empirical findings indicated that according to the conventional cleaning and enhanced cleaning frequency, different test results are expected as generally predicted. Routine cleaning cannot meet the standard recommended in the literature (i.e., ＜250 RLU). Conclusions: During the COVID-19 pandemic, the frequency of cleaning and disinfecting surfaces of objects frequently contacted by general public should be increased to every 2 hours. Moreover, these results should be regularly monitored and reflected to the cleaning staff, so that they can support strict compliance with environmental and hand hygiene to meet infection control goals for COVID-19.起始頁-結束頁：337-341資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).1090385篇名：住院病患家屬對病人自主權利法的認知、態度及預立醫療決定的行為意向並列篇名：Knowledge and attitudes regarding the Patient Autonomy Act and behavioral intention regarding signing advance decision among in-patients' family members作者：吳佳穎(Chia-Ying Wu);陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen);黃心慈(Shin-Tsyr Hung)關鍵字：病人自主權利法;住院患者家屬;疾病末期;預立醫療決定行為意向;Patient Autonomy Act;in-patients' family members;terminal illness;behavioral intention of advance decision期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：探討住院病患家屬對「病人自主權利法」（簡稱病主法）的認知、態度和預立醫療決定的行為意向。方法：以自擬結構式問卷為調查工具，於台北某國立醫學中心內外科病房及加護病房之住院病患家屬為訪問對象，共收案80人。結果：1）不到一半的受訪者（48.8%）知道己實施「病主法」，然而對病主法內容的答對率卻很高（71.88%），顯示多數受訪者肯定病人自決的理念。女性較男性有較高的填對率（35.00% vs. 13.75%, p＜0.001）。多數受訪者對「病主法」與安樂死（協助加工死亡）的差異並不清楚。2）90%以上受訪者願意進行「預立醫療照護諮商」（ACP），但卻只有一半（51.25%）願意簽署「預立醫療決定」（AD）。受訪者自覺生活品質良好會傾向簽定預立醫療決定。3）受訪者面對疾病末期時，治療選擇的考量因素首要為「治療後會不會造成未來家庭經濟負擔」，其次才是「治療後是否依舊行動自主」，第三是「治療後能不能恢復清醒」。4）受訪者對自己或是對父母、配偶在疾病末期情境下（以「重度失智症」為例）所做的治療選擇明顯不同。5）值得注意的是，多數受訪者不認為簽署「病主法」後，醫療人員即不再提供治療照護，也不認為簽署「病主法」就是等死。結論：住院病患家屬雖不完全知道「病主法」，但大多認同「病主法」能尊重「個人治療意願」，顯示多數民眾肯定個人自決的理念。民眾面對自己在疾病末期或是替父母、配偶在疾病末期做決定時，傾向採取不同的決策選擇，政府應強化宣導「預立醫療決定」，以避免疾病末期的決策困境。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the understanding of and attitude toward the ”Patient Right to Autonomy Act” (hereafter, Patient Autonomy Act) among family members of hospitalized patients and their behavioral intention in advance decision (AD). Methods: A structured and specifically tailored questionnaire was used to conduct interviews with 80 family members of patients in the intensive care unit, medical, and surgical wards of a national university hospital in Taipei. Results: (1) Only 49.8% of the interviewees were aware of the Patient Autonomy Act; however, the understanding of its content was very high, with a correct rate of 71.88%. The results indicated that most interviewees were in favor of the concept of patient autonomy. However, most interviewees were also unclear regarding the difference between the Patient Autonomy Act and euthanasia (assisted death). Women had a better grasp of this distinction than did men (correct rate = 35.00% vs. 13.75%). Married individuals demonstrated a better understanding of the Patient Autonomy Act than unmarried individuals did. (2) More than 90% of the interviewees were willing to engage in advance care planning; however, only 51.25% of the interviewees were willing to sign an AD. Interviewees who judged that they had a good quality of health were more inclined to sign an AD. (3) In case of terminal illness, interviewees' medical decisions were primarily concerned with whether the patient recovers consciousness after treatment, whether they were still able to move autonomously, and whether treatment would incur a financial burden. However, interviewees' medical decisions varied depending on whether the decision was to be taken in connection with themselves, their parents, or their spouses. (4) Notably, most of the interviewees did not think that after signing the Patient Autonomy Act, the medical staff would stop providing treatment or care, nor did they think that signing it was equivalent to simply waiting for death. Conclusions: Although family members of hospitalized patients do not fully understand the Patient Autonomy Act, most of them comprehend that the legislation respects ”the treatment wishes of individuals.” Therefore, a large proportion of the population is in favor of the concept of individual autonomy. When confronted with their own terminal illness, Taiwanese people adopt different medical decisions than when faced with that of a parent or a spouse. This indicates that the government should strengthen awareness of AD, thereby avoiding decision-making quandaries in cases of terminal illness.起始頁-結束頁：342-349資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).1090416篇名：評論：實踐中的病人自主權利法作者：楊秀儀期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：350-351資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).109041017篇名：作者回覆：生命末期治療決策代理的性別議題作者：吳佳穎(Chia-Ying Wu);陳端容(Duan-Rung Chen);黃心慈(Shin-Tsyr Hung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：352-352資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202006_39(3).109041028篇名：高齡營養促進的前端預防並列篇名：Front-end preventive strategies for nutrition care for older adults作者：曾櫻枝(Ing-Jy Tseng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：103-104資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).PF029篇名：解讀台灣1995年嬰兒死亡率上升並列篇名：Interpretation of the rise of infant mortality in 1995 in Taiwan作者：呂宗學(Tsung-Hsueh Lu);江東亮(Tung-liang Chiang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：105-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).10813610篇名：高齡社區長者社會衰弱之範域文獻回顧並列篇名：Scoping review of social frailty among community-dwelling older adults作者：方佩欣(PEI-HSIN FANG);張睿詒(RAY-E CHANG)關鍵字：老化;失能;衰弱評估;社區介入;aging;disability;frailty assessment;community intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以範域文獻回顧討論社會衰弱評估工具、分析社會衰弱的決定因子以及其不良結果相關的實證研究，經搜尋PubMed、Web of Science、PsycINFO、華藝中文資料庫，篩選納入37篇（2008至2019年）研究。本文歸納出幾點結果：（一）37篇文獻共有10種評估社會衰弱的工具；（二）年齡較大、低教育程度、獨居等17類變數會有較高的社會衰弱風險，而性別、居住城鄉則有不一致的結果；（三）社會衰弱與失能、死亡率、認知障礙、生理衰弱顯著相關，也與生活品質、生活滿意度有負相關。未來研究可發展適合台灣本土之社會衰弱評估工具，利用縱貫性研究實證社會衰弱與健康不良結果的因果關係，作為政府應用於社區介入、預防失能政策之參考。英文摘要：The study conducted a scoping review on empirical studies on social frailty's determinants and health-related outcomes. We collected studies from PubMed, Web of Science, PsycINFO, and Airiti Library (Chinese), and 37 studies from 2008-2019 met the inclusion criteria for this study. The study revealed the following findings: (1) The 37 studies included 10 assessments. (2) Seventeen variables, such as older age, lower education, and living alone, have a higher risk of social frailty; on the other hand, gender and residing in an urban/rural areas show inconsistent results. (3) Social frailty was positively correlated with disability, mortality, cognitive impairment, and physical frailty and negative correlated with quality of life and life satisfaction. Future studies can develop an indigenizing scale and provide evidence for the causal relationship between social frailty and adverse outcomes through longitudinal research designs. Governments can use these results for community intervention and disability prevention.起始頁-結束頁：112-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).10811311篇名：東亞已開發國家的性別平等、家庭政策對生育之影響：對台灣的啟示並列篇名：Influence of gender equality and family policies on fertility in developed countries in East Asia: lessons for Taiwan作者：許碧純(PI-CHUN HSU)關鍵字：性別平等;家庭政策;生育;已開發國家;東亞;gender equality;family policies;fertility;developed countries;East Asia期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：持續的低生育率是諸多已開發國家共同面對的問題，儘管生育率都是低於人口替代水準，從晚近三十年的發展而言，北歐及西歐國家有止跌回升的趨勢，東亞及南歐國家則仍持續低迷。為何會有這樣的差異？本文從性別平等、家庭政策及外在環境不穩定等因素分析台灣、日本與南韓之低生育，企圖建立一個解釋東亞已開發國家低生育的分析架構，特別著重於分析台灣、日本及南韓低生育趨勢及政府相關政策的因應與挑戰，最後討論台灣低生育的現況，並進行反思。針對台灣持續的低生育問題，作者建議政府應更積極的投入支持性別平等及相關支持家庭的友善政策，以避免陷入低度生育的陷阱。英文摘要：Persistent low fertility rate, especially below replacement level, is a critical problem in many developed countries. These rates have been reversed in Nordic countries and Western Europe, but rates have declined to all-time lows in East Asian and Southern European countries since the early 1990s. This study examined differences between the fertility rates of these groups of countries to analyze the factors underlying this difference. Gender inequality, flawed family policies, and macro-level uncertainties are the critical factors that have resulted in low fertility in Taiwan, Japan, and South Korea. In this study, we developed a framework to explain the trend of low fertility in these three East Asian countries, with a particular focus on government responses to this challenge. This study also analyzed the current problem of low fertility in Taiwan to furnish prescriptions for the government. To mitigate the problem of low fertility in Taiwan, government policies should proactively support gender equality and work-life balance.起始頁-結束頁：129-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).10808512篇名：台北市社區空氣汙染與皮膚老化之關係並列篇名：Association between air pollution and skin aging in Taipei City communities作者：詹馥妤(FU-YU CHAN);詹長權(CHANG-CHUAN CHAN);李睿桓(JUI-HUAN LEE);袁子軒(TZU-HSUEN YUAN);施淑芳(SHU-FANG SHIH);陳政友(CHENG-YU CHEN);胡益進(YIH-JIN HU)關鍵字：皮膚老化;都市空氣汙染;台北市;skin aging;urban air pollution;Taipei期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討台北市社區之空氣汙染與其居民皮膚老化之關係。方法：本研究選擇以台北市大同區及北投區作為收案地點，研究對象選擇居住於台北市滿一年以上、年齡介於20至70歲且皮膚無傳染性疾病之社區民眾。本研究採用之方法包括運用微析皮膚照相機及臉部膚質影像分析測量皮膚老化、以自填問卷蒐集與皮膚老化之相關變項，以及依照研究對象居住地址估算暴露值之資料推估民眾暴露於PM_(10)、PM_(2.5)與NO_2之程度，最後以多變項羅吉斯迴歸探討空氣汙染暴露與皮膚老化之關係。結果：空氣汙染物NO_2與皮膚老化兩者具有正向關係，NO_2的暴露程度愈高，皮膚老化1歲以上之風險亦較高（OR=1.05, 95% CI, 1.004 to 1.10）。結論：研究對象暴露於NO_2的濃度愈高，皮膚老化的風險也越高。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated associations between air pollution and skin aging among residents of Taipei City. Methods: We selected Datong District and Beitou District as research sites. The participants were residents aged 20 to 70 years who had lived in Taipei City for more than 1 year and had no communicable diseases. We used a microscopic skin camera and facial image analysis to measure degrees of skin aging. We investigated factors related to skin aging through self-administered questionnaires. We estimated exposure to PM_(10), PM_(2.5), and NO_2 based on participants' residential address. Finally, we conducted multiple logistic regression analysis to examine association between air pollution exposure and skin aging. Results: A positive and statistically significant association between NO_2 exposure and skin aging was identified. The risk of skin aging increased with the degree of exposure to NO_2 over 1 year (OR = 1.05, 95% CI, 1.004 to 1.10). Conclusions: Higher exposure to NO_2 is associated with a higher risk of skin aging.起始頁-結束頁：143-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).10810813篇名：細懸浮微粒重金屬組成與肝癌發生或死亡之相關性研究並列篇名：Association between the heavy metal constituents in fine particulate matter and the risk of liver cancer incidence or death in Taiwan作者：呂姿儀(TZU-YI LU);蕭雅萍(YA-PING HSIAO);吳治達(CHIH-DA WU);陳建仁(CHIEN-JEN CHEN);楊懷壹(HWAI-I YANG);潘文驥(WEN-CHI PAN)關鍵字：細懸浮微粒;重金屬組成;肝癌;土地利用迴歸;fine particulate matter;metal constituents;liver cancer;land-use regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：利用回溯型世代追蹤設計，評估細懸浮微粒中重金屬組成與肝癌的發生或死亡風險之相關性。方法：納入REVEAL-HBV世代（1991－1992年基線收案）居住在台灣本島之13,515名參與者，透過國家癌症登記與死亡檔進行資料連結，定義追蹤期間（1993－2014）之新發生或死於肝癌病患。參與者之長期暴露濃度乃使用土地利用迴歸模型推估細懸浮微粒中八種重金屬濃度（2002－2006），包含鋇、銅、錳、銻、鋅、鉛、鎳和鎘。本研究使用Cox比例風險模型估計PM_(2.5)中重金屬組成與肝癌之風險比和95%信賴區間。除此之外，還應用雙暴露模型校正細懸浮微粒中重金屬彼此之干擾效應，以評估重金屬組成與肝癌之相關性。結果：本研究追蹤期間共有322名新發生或死於肝癌病例。每增加一個對數尺度單位之PM_(2.5) Cu（銅），其校正過後之風險比（95%信賴區間, p-value）為1.15（1.03－1.29, 0.017）。在雙暴露模型中，發現PM_(2.5) Cu與肝癌風險仍然存在正相關，風險比（95%信賴區間, p-value）為1.13（1.00, 1.27, 0.045）。結論：大氣中PM_(2.5)中重金屬組成之銅可能和罹患或死於肝癌之風險有關。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the association between the heavy metal constituents in PM_(2.5) and liver cancer incidence or death in a large Taiwanese cohort. Methods: A subset of 13,515 participants of the REVEAL-HBV cohort who lived in Taiwan (excluding outlying islands) during 1991-1992 was adopted for this study. Patients with liver cancer were identified through computerized data linkage with the national cancer registry and death certification systems during 1993-2014. Long-term exposure levels to eight metal constituents of PM_(2.5) (i.e., Ba, Cu, Mn, Sb, Zn, Pb, Ni, and Cd) during 2002-2006 were determined using land-use regression models. Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate the hazard ratios (HRs) of PM_(2.5) metal components on liver cancer incidence or death, after adjustment for potential confounders. To investigate mutual confounding effects, we further applied two-pollutant models for evaluation of the association between metal constituents of PM_(2.5) and liver cancer. Results: During a median follow-up of 23.2 years, 322 cases of liver cancer or death were identified. With a one-unit increment on a log scale, the adjusted HR of PM_(2.5) Cu was 1.15 (95% confidence intervals [CIs]: 1.03-1.29). In addition, the association between PM_(2.5) Cu and liver cancer incidence or death was significant. The two-pollutant model revealed a positive association of PM_(2.5) Cu with liver cancer incidence or death (HR = 1.13, 95% CI: 1.00-1.27). Conclusions: The findings suggest that exposure to metals within ambient PM_(2.5), and PM_(2.5) Cu in particular, may increase the risk of liver cancer occurrence or death.起始頁-結束頁：155-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).10807514篇名：攝食米食之砷、鎘、鉛、銅暴露健康風險評估－以桃園、彰化、台中稻米樣本為例並列篇名：Assessment of the health risks of arsenic, cadmium, lead, and copper exposure through rice consumption: using rice samples from Taoyuan, Changhua, and Taichung as examples作者：黃耀輝(YAW-HUEI HWANG);范致豪(CHIHHAO FAN);顏筠庭(YUN-TING YEN);周宜蓁(YI-CHEN CHOU);賴思齊(SZU-CHI LAI)關鍵字：米食;砷;金屬;健康風險評估;致癌風險;rice;arsenic;metal;health risk assessment;carcinogenic risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究利用國內桃園、彰化、台中等地稻米樣本實地資料為例進行健康風險評估，以瞭解攝取米食的潛在重金屬暴露風險等級。方法：本研究在桃園與彰化／台中兩地區分別採集167筆與200筆稻米樣本，以感應耦合電漿質譜儀測定銅、砷、鎘及鉛等金屬含量。再結合蒙地卡羅模擬分析法評估健康風險。結果：研究結果顯示，國人經米食攝取金屬之非致癌風險值最高為砷暴露，0.518（5%，95%百分位：0.166,1.663）。另外，攝取米食之砷暴露致癌風險值中位數為2.33×10^(-4)（7.48×10^(-5)，7.48×10^(-4)）。再以無機砷為例，若米食中濃度管制標準分別設在0.20、0.15、0.10 μg/g，國人經米食攝取之砷暴露致癌風險值中位數降低幅度分別為4.3%、13.3%與31.8%，健康風險值小於1×10^(-4)的人口比例則分別為12.1%、14.3%、22.7%。結論：利用健康風險評估過程可檢視國人體重、米食攝食量、金屬種類與濃度、致癌或非致癌性風險參考係數等因素對健康風險值的影響程度，推估不同管制標準對改善健康風險的幅度，做為米食安全政策評估的重要參考依據。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated data of rice samples from Taoyuan, Changhua, and Taichung to rank the potential health risks of heavy metal exposure through rice consumption. Methods: In this study, 167 rice samples were collected from the Taoyuan area, and another 200 rice samples were collected from the Taichung and Changhua areas. The copper, arsenic, cadmium, and lead levels were assessed in the rice samples and used for health risk assessment through Monte Carlo simulation. Results: The results indicated that arsenic exposure resulted in the highest non-carcinogenic risk of 0.518 (5th percentile to 95th percentile: 0.166-1.663). The median carcinogenic risks were 2.33 × 10^(-4) (7.48 × 10^(-5), 7.48 × 10^(-4)) for arsenic exposure. If the standards for arsenic content in rice are set at 0.20, 0.15, or 0.10 μg/g, the corresponding median carcinogenic risks for arsenic exposure through rice consumption in Taiwan were reduced by 4.3%, 13.3%, and 31.8%, respectively, and the proportions of the population with a health risk less than 1 × 10^(-4) were 12.1%, 14.3%, and 22.7%, respectively. Conclusions: The extent of the effects of body weight, rice intake, metal type, metal concentration, cancer slope factor, and non-cancer reference dose on the health risk assessment could scrutinized through the health risk assessment processes. The reduction of health risk through the implementation of various rice arsenic standards could also be evaluated and used accordingly as reliable reference for making policy decisions pertaining to rice food safety.起始頁-結束頁：170-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).10811415篇名：癌症與非癌生命末期病人使用安寧療護對照護利用及費用的影響並列篇名：Effect of hospice care use on the utilization and expenses of care for end-of-life patients with and without cancer作者：萬宣慶(SHUAN-CHING WAN);周盈邑(YING-YI CHOU);張冠民(GUANN-MING CHANG);董鈺琪(YU-CHI TUNG)關鍵字：安寧療護;生命末期病人;醫療利用;醫療費用;照護品質;hospice care;end of life patients;medical utilization;medical expenses;care quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：我國人口快速高齡化，安寧療護需求持續增加，自2009年將八大非癌末期患者納入安寧療護給付範圍後，安寧療護的照護層面更為全面，過往安寧療護影響之研究未包含非癌末期患者，因此，本研究目的係探討癌症與八大非癌患者使用安寧療護對照護利用及費用的影響。方法：本研究採用百萬承保抽樣歸人檔，研究對象為2012年死亡之罹患癌症與八大非癌末期成年患者共5,062人，使用多元邏輯斯迴歸和線性迴歸分析，探討安寧療護使用對於生命末期積極照護利用及整體醫療費用之影響。結果：生命末期病人使用安寧療護可使死亡前30天接受較少侵入性治療，包含加護病房的使用、插管的使用、呼吸器的使用、心肺復甦術的使用，以及死亡時是在醫院。在醫療費用上，使用安寧療護可以減少死亡前1個月的總醫療費用。結論：生命末期病人使用安寧療護，在死亡前積極照護率呈現下降，顯示有使用安寧療護的末期患者，在照護品質上較佳、醫療利用較少且在死亡前一個月的醫療總費用較低。英文摘要：Objectives: The demand for hospice care is increasing because of the rapidly aging population in Taiwan. Since 2009, health insurance payments have been expanded to cover eight categories of noncancer terminal diseases, thus making hospice care accessible to more people. Previous discussions on hospice care have focused only on patients with end-of-life cancer, to the neglect of other patients. This study fills this gap by exploring the effect of hospice care expenses and utilization on patients with cancer and patients with noncancer terminal diseases. Methods: Data were obtained from the Million People File - a study of 5,062 adult patients with either cancer or diseases in one of the eight categories of noncancer terminal diseases who died in 2012. Multivariate logistic regression and linear regression were used to verify the use of hospice care for end-of-life aggressive care utilization and overall medical expenses. Results: End-of-life patients receiving hospice care used fewer aggressive treatments 30 days prior to death, including use of intensive care units, intubations, mechanical ventilation, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and were less likely to die in a hospital. The use of hospice care reduced the total cost of medical care in the final months before death. Conclusions: In general, for end-of-life patients receiving hospice care, the use of aggressive care before death has been declining. End-of-life patients treated with hospice care had better care quality and less medical utilization. The total medical expenses for hospice care decreased during the final month prior to death.起始頁-結束頁：187-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).10807316篇名：收治長期呼吸器依賴病患之醫院集群網絡關係分析並列篇名：Social network analysis of hospitals admitting ventilator-dependent patients in Taiwan作者：莊秀文(SHEU-WEN CHUANG);郭迺鋒(NAI-FONG KUO);鄭佳欣(CHIA-HSIN CHENG)關鍵字：呼吸器依賴病患;呼吸器整合性照護制度;程度中心性;社會網絡分析;全民健保;ventilator dependent patients;integrated prospective payment system;degree centrality;social network analysis;National Health Insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：呼吸器依賴患者整合性照護制度（簡稱IDS）已執行十八年久，本研究目的是釐清歷年來收治呼吸器依賴病患（簡稱VDP）醫院之集群網絡的結構變化與特性差異。方法：採用社會網絡分析法（SNA），針對以2000－2013年中區業務組之所有申報VDP醫院之健保資料，分析醫院間病患移動的互動脈絡，並以程度中心性指標，結合圖形理論與地理資訊進行集群結構分析，以及運用ANOVA比較集群網絡內各項特性值之差異性。結果：依歷年VDP人數消長分為成長期、穩定期與緩降期。前三大醫院集群是以醫學中心為核心醫院的網絡，其結構無大幅度變動，僅呈現明顯的集中、地域性區隔分佈。網絡特性值較明顯一致性的變化，包括醫療費用、病患醫院網絡間轉院次數、與每人平均轉院次數，均在緩降期間時顯著降低，但如ICU回轉率、每人平均ICU回轉次數，各集群則是上升後到緩降期無明顯下降，集群網絡程度中心性平均值僅A01與A03有顯著性增加。研究意涵指出集群間、集群內醫院呈現既競爭又依賴的關係，為因應VDP人數遞減，降低病患轉院頻率，增加ICU回轉率似乎成為醫院的因應對策。結論：運用SNA可以更加瞭解在IDS下各時期醫院網絡結構的樣態與特性變化，不但適用來解釋醫院網絡關係與經營現象，做為未來IDS政策發展的參考，亦可做為其他衛生政策之實行、醫院群體反應研究的參考範例。英文摘要：Objectives: The integrated delivery system (IDS) for ventilator-dependent patients (VDPs) has been in implementation for more than 18 years. This study clarified structural changes and differences in characteristics among hospital networks admitting VDPs. Methods: Social network analysis (SNA) was used to analyze the health insurance data of VDPs during 2000-2013 from all hospitals a part of the national health insurance administration, Central Division. Patient transfer and interaction between hospitals were analyzed; thereafter, degree centrality index was used to combine graph theory and geographical information for cluster structure analysis. Finally, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to test the differences in various characteristics between hospital networks. Results: According to the number of VDPs, three phases were classified: growing phase, stable phase, and decline phase. The top three hospital clusters comprised the networks in which medical centers operated as core hospitals, showing a clear concentration and geographical boundary over time. Medical expenditures of each cluster network, the average number of patient transfers between hospitals, and the average number of transfers per patient showed a consistent pattern of changes across the networks. However, intensive care unit (ICU) return rate and average number of ICU returns per patient did not decrease significantly during the three phases in each cluster. The average of degree centrality of networks A01 and A03 showed a significant increase. The findings imply that hospitals within and between the cluster networks exhibit competitive and interdependent relationships. In response to the declining number of VDPs, which reduced the frequency of patient transfers, the increased ICU return rate seemed to be a common strategy among hospitals. Conclusions: Employing SNA can broaden the understanding of structures and characteristic changes of hospital networks, which not only helps interpret hospital network relationships and business operating patterns but also can be used as a reference for future IDS policy development. The use of SNA in the IDS study also obtains a reference example for the implementation of other health policies and research into hospital behavior.起始頁-結束頁：202-214資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).10813517篇名：評論：收治長期呼吸器依賴病患之醫院集群網絡關係分析並列篇名：Commentary: social network analysis of hospitals admitting ventilator-dependent patients in Taiwan作者：楊式興(Shih-Hsing Yang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：215-215資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).1081350118篇名：中文版家庭照顧者給藥管理困擾量表之發展與信效度評估並列篇名：Development and validation of the Family Caregiver Medication Administration Hassle Scale-Chinese version (FCMAHS-CH)作者：顧德璉(TE-LIEN KU);吳淑英(SHU-YING WU);蘇億玲(YI-LIN SU);賴嘉敏(CHIA-MING LAI);季瑋珠(WEI-CHU CHIE)關鍵字：家庭照顧者;給藥管理;困擾;信度;效度;family caregiver;medication administration;hassle;reliability;validity期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在發展一份適合評估台灣家庭照顧者給藥管理相關心理負荷之測量工具，並測試其信、效度。方法：本研究採橫斷面研究設計，分為三個階段，首先透過雙向翻譯及專家內容效度進行中文版家庭照顧者給藥管理困擾量表編制；接著邀請本國籍家庭照顧者及醫療專業人員共15名進行前驅研究；最後以138名本國籍家庭照顧者為研究對象進行量表施測，並於兩週後以便利取樣方式從原本138名個案中選取30名進行後測。結果：中文版家庭照顧者給藥管理困擾量表包含：「資訊取得／資訊分享」、「給藥時間安排」、「安全性議題」、「藥品領取/處方箋管理」四構面，共計24題，可解釋總變異量為65.76%。量表具備良好內容效度，心理計量分析顯示量表具備良好內在一致性信度、再測信度、建構效度、區辨效度及已知組比較效度。結論：中文版家庭照顧者給藥管理困擾量表具有良好信、效度，可應用於評估國內家庭照顧者族群給藥管理照顧工作之心理負荷，亦可作為衛生教育介入方案之需求評估工具。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study was to develop a Chinese version of the Family Caregiver Medication Administration Hassle Scale (FCMAHS-CH) and examine its psychometric properties, reliability, and validity for Taiwanese caregivers. Methods: A cross-sectional methodological design was executed in three phases. First, the original English version of the FCMAHS was translated into Chinese through a two-way translation process, and an expert panel was then convened to evaluate the content validity. Second, a pilot study was conducted with 15 Taiwanese family caregivers and health care professionals to test the readability of the FCMAHS-CH. Finally, a sample of 138 Taiwanese adult family caregivers completed the FCMAHS-CH, and 30 of the participants were retested after 2 weeks. Results: The FCMAHS-CH contained 24 items classified into the following four domains: information acquisition and sharing, medication scheduling, safety issues, and prescription filling and management. The overall scale with four domains explained 65.76% of the total variance. The scale had acceptable content validity; psychometric analysis demonstrated high internal consistency and test-retest reliability as well as good construct, discriminant, and known-group-comparison validity. Conclusions: The FCMAHS-CH can be used to assess medication administration-related stressors among Taiwanese family caregivers. The scale has well established reliability and validity, thus providing a new tool for future practice and research into family caregiving in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：216-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202004_39(2).10809819篇名：青少年網路成癮並列篇名：Internet addiction among adolescents作者：蕭宇涵(Yu-Han Hsiao);李宣信(Shiuan-Shinn Lee);李孟智(Meng-Chih Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).PF0120篇名：公共衛生緊急事件與2019新型冠狀病毒（COVID-19）之法政議題並列篇名：A study on legal policy of public health emergency and COVID-19作者：林展甲(Chad Chan-Chia Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：5-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).10900501篇名：兒童死亡回顧並列篇名：Child death review作者：梁富文(FU-WEN LIANG);呂立(FRANK LEIGH LU);呂宗學(TSUNG-HSUEH LU);江東亮(TUNG-LIANG CHIANG);呂鴻基(HUNG-CHI LUE)關鍵字：兒童死亡回顧;死亡證明書;可預防性;兒童死亡率;child death review;death certificate;preventability;child mortality期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：台灣已於2019年4月24日公告修正《兒童及少年福利與權益保障法》，第13條新增「中央衛生主管機關應進行六歲以下兒童死亡原因回溯分析並定期公布分析結果」，讓兒童死亡回顧有法源依據。本文包括三個部分：首先解釋為什麼要進行兒童死亡回顧，接著簡述兒童死亡回顧的發展，最後建議如何進行兒童死亡回顧。兒童死亡回顧的定義：由跨單位跨領域代表組成的小組，分享該單位對於該兒童死亡個案相關記錄，勾勒出導致兒童死亡的較完整脈絡情境，找出可改變的因素，提出具體建議，系統性減少類似死亡事件再發生。本文建議各縣市依照四個步驟來推動兒童死亡回顧：步驟一：由府一層主管擔任兒童死亡回顧小組召集人，邀請核心成員固定參與討論；步驟二：由衛生局擔任資料小組與協作平台，整理死亡兒童基本資料與聯絡開會事宜；步驟三：依照議程進行個案討論；步驟四：撰寫會議記錄與建議報告。中央衛生主管機關應彙集不同縣市建議，擬定適當防治（制）策略，有效降低兒童死亡率。英文摘要：The Protection of Children and Youth Welfare and Rights Act was amended on April 24, 2019. Article 13 indicates that health authorities must conduct a child death review (CDR) for children who die when aged 6 years and younger and periodically release analysis results. The present article includes three sections. First, we explain why CDR should be implemented. Second, we introduced the development of CDR. Third, we suggest appropriate measures to implement a CDR program. CDR is defined as a collaborative process that brings people together from different sectors and multiple disciplines to share and discuss comprehensive information on circumstances leading to the death of a child. Moreover, notable and potentially remediable factors are identified, and recommendations for system improvements are made to prevent future child deaths. Four steps were recommended to implement a CDR program at the city or county government level. Step 1: a deputy mayor or magistrate of the city or county government is appointed as the convener of the CDR team and invites core members to attend regular meetings. Step 2: the health bureau of the city or county is established as the coordinating center for the collection of basic information regarding deceased children and is responsible for arranging the meetings. Step 3: the CDR meeting agenda is followed. Step 4: meeting minutes and recommendations are recorded. Health authorities in the central government collect recommendations from city or county governments and use them to design relevant prevention and control strategies to effectively reduce child mortality.起始頁-結束頁：8-16資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).1070622篇名：成人每日步行數與健康：日行萬步健康才保固？並列篇名：Daily steps and health in adults: should we walk 10,000 steps per day for optimal well-being?作者：陳上迪(SHANG-TI CHEN);陳俐蓉(LI-JUNG CHEN);古博文(PO-WEN KU)關鍵字：走路;規律運動;健康行為;日行萬步;walk;regular exercise;health behavior;10,000 steps a day期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：步行為日常生活中的重要活動，「每日一萬步、健康有保固」亦是國人常聽到的健康推廣口號。然而，日行萬步對於不少人可能是難以達成的目標，且步行對健康的實證效益是否一定需要達到日行萬步？亦有不少運動與公共衛生專家質疑。本篇綜論在於探討成人每日步行數與健康的關係，並針對以下議題進行評析與討論：（1）探討各國成人每日步行數的現況；（2）彙整國際上成人每日步行數的建議；（3）參考已發表的系統性文獻探討與統合分析的研究證據，探究每日步行數與健康關係；（4）分析影響成人每日步行數與其健康關係的重要研究議題。整體而論，目前已發表的系統性文獻探討與統合分析儘管主要來自於橫斷性研究，但已發現：每日步行數不需達到1萬步已可產生健康效益。近年的前瞻性研究更發現，相較於活動不足者（如：2,000－3,000步／日），每日步行數即便增加至4,000－5,000步左右就會產生顯著的健康效益。若能以日行至少7,000－8,000步為目標則效益更大。本文建議成人每日步行可獲取健康效益，即使未達「日行10,000步」。對活動不足者宜鼓勵其在日常生活中逐步增加步行，並以每日至少7,000－8,000步為目標。惟目前良好的研究證據仍相當缺乏，未來需更多具大型代表性樣本且涵蓋不同年齡群的前瞻性世代研究及其統合迴歸分析加以驗證。英文摘要：Walking is an essential activity for everyday life. Walking 10,000 steps per day is a frequently promoted goal for health promotion. However, this widely accepted slogan has been criticized as unrealistic. Additionally, public health professionals have not reached agreement on the effect of this goal on health outcomes in adults. The following procedures were implemented to review the evidence for the relationship between number of daily steps and health outcomes. First, the country profiles of the daily steps of adults were described. Second, guidelines for the number of daily steps issued by government authorities in various countries were reviewed. Third, evidence obtained through systematic reviews and meta-analyses was examined to explore relationships between the number of daily steps and health outcomes. Finally, research topics regarding the association between number of daily steps and health outcomes were discussed. In summary, evidence from systematic reviews and meta-analyses, which were mainly based on cross-sectional studies, revealed health benefits are likely to be gained by fewer than 10,000 steps per day in adults. Recent prospective cohort studies have indicated that as few as approximately 4,000-5,000 steps per day are significantly related to health benefits when compared with inactive individuals (i.e., 2,000-3,000 steps per day); The benefits progressively increased for those who took at least 7,000-8,000 steps per day. Overall, the current study suggested that people could reap health benefits even when taking fewer than 10,000 steps per day. Individuals who are inactive should be encouraged to progressively increase their daily steps in order to reach the goal of at least 7,000-8,000 steps per day. Because robust evidence relating daily steps and health outcomes is lacking, large-scale prospective studies based on representative samples with broader age groups and meta-regression analyses are required.起始頁-結束頁：17-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).1080443篇名：探討健康促進學校國際認證成效：從學生健康行為表現之觀點並列篇名：Effectiveness of health promoting school international accreditation: a study from the perspective of students' health behaviors作者：陳富莉(FU-LI CHEN);邱詩揚(SHY-YANG CHIOU);陸玓玲(DIH-LING LUH);王英偉(YING-WEI WANG)關鍵字：健康促進學校;國際認證;健康行為;國小;國高中;health promoting school;international accreditation;health behavior;elementary school;junior and senior high school期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討健康促進學校國際認證成效，比較參與認證獲獎與未獲獎學校的學生健康相關行為表現差異。方法：研究樣本為第一屆（2012年）參與健康促進學校國際認證之國小、國中、高中（職）學校四、八、十年級的學生，共計192校。研究工具為自填式問卷，包括基本資料、認證獲獎與否、健康相關行為。2014年完成18,711人問卷施測，包含國小6,744人、國高中11,967人。研究資料採用SAS 9.4版套裝軟體進行描述性統計、卡方檢定及羅吉斯迴歸分析。結果：控制學生背景資料後，發現國小獲獎學校學生在吃蔬菜、運動、熬夜三項行為表現顯著優於未獲獎學校學生；國高中獲獎學校學生在刷牙、運動、睡眠及被霸凌經驗等四項行為表現顯著優於未獲獎學校學生；然而，吃早餐、水果攝取、看牙醫、吃甜食、吸菸等行為表現，獲獎與未獲獎學校學生並無顯著差異。結論：參與認證獲獎學校的學生多項健康相關行為比未獲獎學校表現好，建議未來應積極落實並推動健康促進學校計畫的永續發展。英文摘要：Objectives: This study compared the health-related behaviors of Taiwanese students' in health promoting school(HPS) international accreditation award and non-award schools to assess the effectiveness of implementing the health promoting school program. Methods: Samples of 4th, 8th, and 10th grade students in 192 elementary, junior high, and senior high schools were recruited from participation in the first health promoting school international accreditation in 2012. The research instrument was a self-administered questionnaire which included demographic information, awards for HPS international accreditation, and health behaviors. A total of 18,711 respondents, including 6,744 elementary school students and 11,967 junior and senior high school students, completed the questionnaire in 2014. Descriptive statistics, chi-squared test, and logistic regression were conducted using SAS 9.4 software. Results: While controlling the personal' demographic variables, the study showed that elementary schools students from HPS accreditation award schools were significantly better than non-award schools students in vegetable intake, exercise, and staying up late; and junior and senior high school students from accredited award schools exhibited significantly better than non-award schools students in teeth brushing habits, exercise, sleep, school bullying experience. Students from award and non-award schools had no significant difference in eating breakfast, fruit intake, dental checkup, eating sweets, and smoking behavior. Conclusions: Students from HPS accreditation award schools exhibited more favorable health-related behaviors than non-awards schools students. The findings suggest that implementing the health promoting school program is a necessary move and ensuring the sustainable development.起始頁-結束頁：27-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).1080944篇名：建構具專家及老人團體共識之台灣高齡友善城市指標並列篇名：Development of indicators of the ageing-friendly city for Taiwan through a consensus of experts and the elderly作者：李佳霙(CHIA-ING LI);廖麗娜(LI-NA LIAO);李采娟(TSAI-CHUNG LI);林志學(CHIH-HSUEH LIN);劉秋松(CHIU-SHONG LIU);林文元(WEN-YUAN LIN);龍紀萱(CHI-HSUAN LUNG);林雪淳(HSUEH-CHUN LIN);王英偉(YING-WEI WANG);張李淑女(SHU-NU CHANG LEE);王中儀(JONG-YI WANG);李心瑜(HSIN-YU LEE);吳文慈(WEN-TZU WU);林正介(CHENG-CHIEH LIN)關鍵字：高齡友善城市;環境監測;指標;age-friendly cities;environmental monitoring;indicator期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：建立能與國際接軌的台灣高齡友善城市指標。方法：參考世界衛生組織（WHO）發展全球高齡友善城市指標的步驟，第一階段工作以縮減高齡友善候選指標庫為主。第二階段工作以技術面及實務面之可行性為主，依實務意見修改指標，再經專家意見修正後，建立台灣高齡友善城市指標。結果：第一階段工作將候選指標庫由75項縮減至38項。第二階段工作共發放64份問卷予專家及老人團體代表，回覆47份（回應率73.4%），分析後有15項指標其整體準則、技術性準則及實務性準則分數皆排名在前50%，有3項指標在所屬面向之下排名在前50%，其餘有10項指標屬國際指標，故候選指標庫由38項縮減至28項；彙整縣市實務意見，且參考WHO最新文件增加2項指標，進行22位專家意見調查後，建立台灣高齡友善城市指標共28項指標，其中23項為國際指標，5項為全國指標。結論：參照WHO指引及專家與老人團體看法建立台灣高齡友善城市指標，為監測及改善高齡友善環境程度，建議應定期收集台灣高齡友善城市指標數值。英文摘要：Objectives: To develop indicators of the ageing-friendly city for Taiwan. Methods: We adopted the global indicators of the ageing-friendly city from the World Health Organization (WHO) to develop indicators for Taiwan. The first phase of our work involved creating a pool of candidate indicators and then reducing the number of indicators. Second, we evaluated the feasibility of the indicators from technical and practical aspects. We adopted suggestions and comments from practice staff members and experts to develop our final version. Results: In the first phase, the pool of candidate indicators was reduced from 75 to 38. In the second phase, we carried out a survey to assess the feasibility of indicators by involving 64 experts and representatives of elderly groups. The response rate was 73.4%. After quantitative analysis, 15 indicators had overall, technical, and practical criteria scores which ranked in the top 50%. Three indicators ranked in the top 50% of their domains, and another 10 international indicators were kept in this run. After a series of discussions, we finally obtained 28 indicators of the ageing-friendly city for Taiwan, including 23 international and 5 local indicators. Conclusions: A consensus of indicators of the ageing-friendly city for Taiwan was produced and guided by the procedures proposed by the WHO. Regularly reporting those indicators would be useful for the monitoring and improvement of age-friendliness among cities and counties.起始頁-結束頁：41-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).1081005篇名：台灣親密關係暴力被害人醫療利用與費用分析並列篇名：Medical care utilization by intimate partner violence victims and associated costs in Taiwan作者：江宛霖(WAN-LIN CHIANG);劉淑瓊(SHU-CHIUNG LIU);黃志中(JOH-JONG HUANG)關鍵字：親密關係暴力;醫療利用;醫療費用;全民健保資料庫;intimate partner violence;medical care utilization;medical care costs;National Health Insurance research databases期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討台灣親密關係暴力被害人醫療服務利用與費用，並估算台灣親密關係暴力被害人的每人每年醫療費用。方法：本研究使用2015年家暴通報明細檔，以20－64歲14,531位親密關係暴力被害人為研究對象，串聯至全民健保資料庫分析個案的住院、門診與急診醫療利用情形，並比較其與一般就醫民眾（對照組）的醫療利用差異。結果：本研究發現，親密關係暴力被害人在案期間的住院、門診與急診就醫率及就醫次數都比對照組顯著較多。而在醫療費用上，親密關係暴力被害人在案期間的醫療費用亦顯著比對照組高。至於就醫原因，親密關係暴力被害人的住院與門診案件都以精神疾患較對照組來的多，急診案件則是因損傷及中毒而就醫的情形顯著較多。此外，親密關係暴力被害人平均每人每年醫療費用為56,202元，比對照組的23,117元多了33,085元，高約2.4倍。結論：醫療利用成本分析可作為政府發展親密關係暴力預防與醫療服務提供相關政策的有效工具。英文摘要：Objectives: To estimate medical care utilization by intimate partner violence (IPV) victims and the associated costs in Taiwan. Methods: A Ministry of Health and Welfare domestic violence reporting data set containing data of 14,531 IPV victims aged 20-64 years was linked to utilization and cost data from the National Health Insurance (NHI). The NHI data included utilization and costs of medical services, such as impatient, outpatient, and ambulatory care. A comparative analysis of the utilization and costs between IPV victims and non-IPV patients was performed. Results: Compared with non-IPV patients, IPV victims demonstrated higher medical service utilization and associated costs. Moreover, they were considerably more likely to have mental health disorders in inpatient and outpatient settings and have injuries in ambulatory care settings. For IPV victims, the average cost of medical services was NT$56,202 per person per year-approximately 2.4 times higher than that for non-IPV patients. Conclusions: Cost analysis is a tool useful for estimating medical care utilization and associated costs, the results of which can facilitate the formulation of government policies for both IPV prevention and medical service provision.起始頁-結束頁：52-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).1081066篇名：再論藥價差並列篇名：Revisiting the pharmaceutical price gap作者：劉亞明(YA-MING LIU)關鍵字：藥價差;全民健保;pharmaceutical price gap;National Health Insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本文目的在探討台灣藥價差形成的機制，並利用藥價調整公式估算學名藥與原廠藥之相對藥價差比例。方法：資料上透過健保署所公佈的第五、六、七次藥價調查清單，計算個別藥品的平均價差，再估計學名藥與原廠藥的相對藥價差比例，以及利用迴歸方法探究影響相對價差比例的因素。結果：分析結果顯示學名藥藥價差略高於原廠藥藥價差，學名藥競爭降低學名藥相對原廠藥的藥價差比，療效市場競爭則會提高該藥價差比。不過，由於資料所能估計藥價差的品項較少，且多屬於相對較新進的品項，因此對藥價差比例的估計有可能傾向低估。結論：本文認為藥價政策除調整藥品絕對價格以控制醫療支出外，也應考量學名藥與原廠藥間的相對價格比例水準以保障民眾用藥選擇權益。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this paper is to discuss the mechanism underlying the pharmaceutical price gap and to estimate the relative profit margins of generic and brand-name drugs. Methods: Data were obtained from the drug list from the fifth to seventh waves of price adjustment and population claims data compiled by the National Health Insurance Database. Results: The analysis indicated that generic-to-brand price ratios and discount rates jointly determined generic-to-brand profit ratios. The profit margins of generic drugs were slightly higher than those of their brand-name counterparts. Competition between generic drugs reduced the generic-to-brand profit ratio, but therapeutic competition increased this ratio. Conclusions: The results of this study indicate that policy makers may select an appropriate generic-to-brand price ratio in order to improve resource allocation between generic and brand-name drug markets.起始頁-結束頁：64-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).1081127篇名：影響平均餘命增長之生命表特性及其相關死亡率模式分析並列篇名：Effect of life table indices and a related mortality model on increase of life expectancy作者：林正祥(CHENG-HSIANG LIN);張怡陵(YI-LING CHANG)關鍵字：平均餘命;存活曲線矩形化;死亡變異;混合模式;遲緩衰老;life expectancy;rectangularity of the survival curves;variability in the distribution of ages at death;hybrid model of mortality;senescence-slowing期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：探討死亡年齡變異、存活曲線矩形化間之生命表特性及相關的死亡率模式對平均餘命的影響。方法：利用1998－2016年台灣生命表資料，以各類相關指標測量存活曲線矩形化與死亡年齡變異趨勢。並以相關死亡率模式中重要的混合模式，探討平均餘命增長變化受到死亡率下降與遲緩衰老步調下降消長影響情況。結果：存活曲線間逐漸呈現矩形化的情況，且死亡年齡變異也呈下降狀態；以年齡95歲為上限利用面積差異百分比來檢測矩形化，結果顯示矩形化逐漸趨向平均餘命極限。另透過死亡率混合模式的分析結果得知平均餘命增長趨勢，其中32%是受到死亡率下降的影響，而受到延遲老化的影響則為68%。結論：各種指標均顯示存活曲線有逐漸矩形化的情況，死亡年齡的變異則是呈現下降的趨勢，平均餘命的增長受到一定的限制。從死亡率混合模式分析結果顯示這些年來平均餘命受到遲緩衰老的影響遠較死亡率下降來的大，對於平均餘命的展延，遲緩衰老當扮演舉足重的角色。英文摘要：Objectives: To investigate the effect of variation in age at death and rectangularity in the survival curve on the increase of life expectancy and further investigate this phenomenon by using a hybrid mortality model. Methods: By using life table data in Taiwan, we measured the rectangular trend in survival curves and variation of age at death on the basis of related life table indices. We then applied a hybrid mortality model to interpret the effects of declining mortality and senescence-slowing on life expectancy. Results: The survival curve, which is closely related to life expectancy, gradually became rectangular from 1998 to 2016, and the variation of age at death declined. We measured the rectangularity of survival curve by setting the upper limit age of 95 years through using the percentage difference in area and found that rectangularity gradually approached the limit. Analysis using the hybrid mortality model revealed that 32% and 68% of the increase of life expectancy resulted from declining mortality and senescence-slowing, respectively. Conclusions: All indicators pointed to the survival curve gradually becoming rectangular and the variation of age at death trending downward, implying that human life expectancy is approaching a certain limit. The hybrid model of mortality revealed that the increase of life expectancy was affected more by senescence-slowing than by declining mortality.起始頁-結束頁：74-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).1080528篇名：一般護理之家照護標準作業流程項目需求探討並列篇名：Importance-performance analysis for the evaluation of care standard operating procedures in Taiwan nursing homes作者：梁亞文(YIA-WUN LIANG);林育秀(YU-HSIU LIN);蘇<U+4FB0>寧(CHUN-NING SU)關鍵字：一般護理之家;照護;標準作業流程;重要－表現分析法;nursing home;caring;standard operating procedure;importance-performance analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討臺灣一般護理之家對照護標準作業流程的重要性及需要性，作為政府協助擬訂照護標準作業流程項目的優先順序參考。方法：本研究為一橫斷性研究，以結構式問卷調查一般護家管理者對照護標準作業流程項目的重要性及需要性認知。統計分析先以成對樣本t檢定檢視受調查者對照護標準作業流程項目的重要性及需要性認知間是否存在顯著差異，再以「重要-表現分析法」探討重要性高需要性高的項目。結果：53個照護項目中有34個項目之重要性顯著高於需要性；31項照護項目落在第一象限（重要性高需要性高），應列為優先考量訂定照護標準作業流程的項目。結論：一般護家照護標準作業流程可強化護理人員及照顧服務員提供完整、正確的照護，達到照護有效性以及降低變異性。本研究發現一般護家重要性高且需要性高的照護標準作業流程項目，且發現需求項目因規模而有不同，主管機關可依研究結果，考量規模因素，制定公版流程供一般護家參考，提升住民照護品質。英文摘要：Objectives: The aim of this study is to identify and prioritize standard operating procedures (SOPs) for nursing home care based on the perceptions of their importance and desirability reported by nursing home administrators. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study. Structured questionnaires were used to measure the perceptions of importance and desirability toward SOPs for care among nursing homes administrators. A paired t-test was used to test the differences between the administrators' perceptions of the importance and desirability of these SOPs. Importance-performance analysis (IPA) was adopted to explore the ”concentrate here” items for further improvement. Results: For 34 SOPs, the perceived importance was significantly higher than the perceived performance. In quadrant I items (i.e., concentrate here), administrators perceived SOPs as highly important, and perceptions of desirability were above average, indicating that these SOPs required the greatest attention. Conclusions: Nursing home SOPs not only ensure that nurses and nursing assistants provide complete and accurate nursing home care but also improve the care effectiveness and reduce the care variability. This study revealed that the nursing home scale affects the SOP desirability. The results are useful for identifying areas for strategic focus to facilitate the development of SOPs for nursing home care.起始頁-結束頁：90-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202002_39(1).10810101篇名：江浙派維新人士與抗爭運動新模式的創立並列篇名：Jiangsu and Zhejiang Reformers and the Establishment of a New Model of the Resistance Movement作者：李達嘉(Ta-Chia Li)關鍵字：汪康年;維新派;抗爭運動;民族主義;Wang, Kangnian;Reformist;Resistance Movement;Nationalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文論述晚清活躍於上海地區的江浙維新人士在近代中國抗爭運動的開創性角色。這些維新人士以汪康年為首，其他主要的成員有葉瀚、江詒年、經元善等人。和康有為、梁<U+5553>超相較，他們更能與地方紳商結合，也更注重實踐。文中考察1898年發生在上海的四明公所事件、1900年初立儲引起的電爭、1901和1903年的兩次拒俄運動，發現他們在這幾次抗爭行動中都居於主導地位。他們善於運用印刷媒體和電報局，進行輿論宣傳、傳單印製和拍發電報。把集會的地點從傳統的會館轉移到公共空間，以擴大集會的成員。在新聞發的張園發表演說，運用民族主義來鼓動群眾的情緒。同時使用罷市、罷工作為政治抗爭的手段。這些抗爭方式異於傳統，開創了現代中國抗爭運動的新模式。英文摘要：This article discusses the pioneering role of the Jiangsu-Zhejiang reformers who lived in Shanghai during the late Qing Dynasty in the modern Chinese resistance movement. These reformers are headed by Wang Kangnian, and members included Ye, Han, Wang, Yinian, Jing, Yuanshan, and others. They were more able to integrate with local gentry and businessmen than Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao, and paid more attention to practice. It examines the following protests in the late Qing Dynasty: the Ningbo Guild Hall incident in Shanghai in 1898, a joint telegram protest against the prepared emperor's heirs in early 1900, and two campaigns against Russian aggression in 1901 and 1903. It was found that Jiangsu and Zhejiang reformers dominated these actions. They were good at using print media and telegrams for publicity, leaflet printing and joint telegrams. And transferred the venue of the gathering from the traditional hall to a public place to expand the members of the gathering. They started a public speech in the newly developed Zhang Yuan, stimulated mass emotions with nationalism. At the same time, strikes were launched for political protest. These methods of resistance were different from the traditional ones, which created a new model of modern Chinese resistance movement.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：1950－1970年代中華民國視野下的亞洲：以《中國學生周報》為研究中心並列篇名：Asian Perspectives of the Republic of China in the 1950s-1970s: Focusing on China Student Weekly作者：龐浩賢(Ho-Yin Pong)關鍵字：《中國學生周報》;亞洲視野;東南亞華僑教育;越南戰爭;釣魚臺爭議;China Student Weekly;Asia Vision;Overseas Chinese Education;Vietnam War;Diaoyu tai Disputes期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文主要透過1950－1970年代接受美國政府資助並在殖民地香港出版的青年刊物《中國學生周報》，挑選當時期報刊內對於亞洲各項大事件的報導和評論，期望探討及理解當時香港華人青年和報刊如何理解亞洲區域的發展和所發生的重要事件。本文主要疏理並分析了《中國學生周報》上有關於東南亞華僑教育、越南戰爭的評述及對保釣運動的報導或評論，藉此作為切入點，分析該報如何論述當時亞洲各國的發展。本文發現《中國學生周報》並非配合其資助者美國政府的利益立場，作評論或論述這些事件，卻是以中華民國的利益本位，觀看和論述以上三件發生於亞洲區域的重要事件。透過分析《中國學生周報》對於東南亞華僑教育、越南戰爭的評述及對保釣運動的論述意識，可以理解和呈現出當時中華民國政府對於以上三件發生於亞洲區域的重要事件的看法和立場。因此，《中國學生周報》可謂形成了一種「奇特的亞洲視野」。英文摘要：This article mainly draws on the reports and comments on Asian countries published in China Student Weekly from the 1950s to 1970s, focusing on how the Chinese society understood important events in Asia. My paper specifically relies on China Student Weekly articles which reported on the overseas Chinese education in Southeast Asia, the Vietnam War, and the Baodiao Movement, in an attempt to analyze how this newspaper discussed Asian issues at that time. It is evident that China Student Weekly reported the above three events with an emphasis on the interests of Taiwan (Republic of China), forming a peculiar ”Asian vision.” In particular, China Student Weekly did not support the national interests of the sponsoring country, that is, the United States, but rather affirmed the political rights of the Republic of China.起始頁-結束頁：45-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：《左傳》齊國交通路線考論並列篇名：The Discussion of Traffic Routes in Qi State in Zuo-Zhuan作者：黃聖松(Sheng-Sung Huang);徐鼎鼎(Ding-Ding Xu)關鍵字：《左傳》;春秋;齊國;交通;路線;Zuo-Zhuan;Spring and Autumn Period;Qi state;Traffic Route期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以《左傳》為範圍，考論春秋齊國交通路線。以齊都臨淄為核心，輻射為南向、西南向、西向、北向、東向等五個方向之道路。南向交通路線主要幹道為「臨淄－艾陵」，自艾陵又分「艾陵－堂阜」，「艾陵－夾谷（祝其）」，「艾陵－博」三道。西南向路線前半段路程途經都邑為「臨淄－祝柯」，至祝柯後又分「祝柯－靡笄山」、「祝柯－平陰」二道。平陰以下又分「平陰－京茲」、「平陰－靡笄」、「平陰－陽州」三線，第二線又與上述「祝柯－靡笄山」連接。「平陰－陽州」途經穀時，又分支「穀－莘」一線。西向路線途經都邑為「臨淄－轅」，北向路線途經都邑為「臨淄－薄姑」。東向路線又分南北二道，北道途經都邑有「臨淄－密」；此外，邶殿又北向分支一路至鄑。至於南道前段途經都邑為「臨淄－東陽」，至東陽後又分三路，由北至南依序為「東陽－棠」、「東陽－介根」、「東陽－莒」。此外，上述第三路自郱又東南分出一路可達郚，是歧出之一線。英文摘要：This article discusses traffic routes in Qi state in Spring and Autumn Period, and it only refers to Zuo-Zhuan. There were five routes in the Qi's capital Linzi, and there were five directions of them: southward, southwestward, westward, northward and eastward. The main road to the south was ”Linzi to Ailing”. It forked to three roads at Ailing, and they were ”Ailing to Tangfu”, ”Ailing to Jiagu (Zhuqi)” and ”Ailing to Bo”. The first half distance to Zhuke by way of capital Linzi was southwestward. It forked to two road s at Zhuke, and they were ”Zhuke to Mijishan” and ”Zhuke to Pingyin”. In addition, Pingyin was an interchange of three roads, which were ”Pingyin to Jingzi”, ”Pingyin to Mijishan” and ”Pingyin to Yangzhou”. The road ”Pingyin to Mijishan” connected to ”Zhuke to Mijishan”. Gu was on the road by ”Pingyin to Yangzhou”, and the road ”Gu to Shen” was the way down. ”Linzi to Yuan” was westward, and ”Linzi to Baogu” was northward. There were two roads on eastward route. ”Linzi to Mi” was northbound, and ”Linzi to Dongyang” was southbound. There was a branch to north down to Zi at Beidian on the way northbound. The first half distance to Dongyang by way of capital Linzi was southwestward. It forked to three roads at Dongyang, and they were ”Dongyang to Tang”, ”Dongyang to Jiegen” and ”Dongyang to Ju”. There was a branch to southeast down to Wu at Ping on the road ”Dongyang to Ju”.起始頁-結束頁：75-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：幾暇清賞：清代乾隆朝的〈是一是二圖〉並列篇名：Royal Delight in Artifacts-Emperor Qianlong's Shiyishiertu作者：王崇齊(Chong-Ci Wang)關鍵字：乾隆皇帝;是一是二;前臺;後臺;Qianlong Emperor;Shiyishiertu;Front;Backstage期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：清高宗曾以內府所藏宋人〈無款人物圖〉為張本，命人繪製了多幅佈局類似的圖畫，以其上皆有皇帝親題：「是一是二，不即不離。儒可墨可，何慮何思。」故稱〈是一是二圖〉。本文嘗試從歷史情境切入，討論畫作中被繪入「逼真」器物的狀況，在當時如何可能，從而突出畫作的特殊之處。接著，取用社會學家戈夫曼（Goffman Erving）分析人類互動的戲劇理論框架，引入「前臺」（front stage）、「後臺」（back stage）等概念，可知相對於「前臺」的乾隆皇帝，〈是一是二圖〉則表現了清高宗萬幾餘暇的「後臺」形象。同時參照雍正朝曾靜案中對皇帝私生活與私德的攻擊，可知此其乃根植於「非我族類，其心必異」構想，直指「異族」皇帝「後臺」形象的不堪聞問。相對於雍正皇帝在《大義覺迷錄》大量揭露「後臺」皇家私事的應對策略，在〈是一是二圖〉中，乾隆皇帝身居「後臺」以及與漢族文人形象相疊合的裝扮，恰是漢族文人最普遍表現「前臺」形象，這不只打造了清高宗在皇帝身份之外自我形象，同時還回應了漢族對其身份的內在質疑。英文摘要：Emperor Qianlong once had many paintings produced whose layout is similar and based on Human Figue without Caption, a Song painting in his royal court collection. On all of them is handwritten by the Emperor ”It's both sole and dual, neither joint nor separate. Either Confucianism or Mohism works; why fret and ruminate?” Hence it is titled Shiyishiertu (painting of sole and dual) . This article, examining pertinent historical circumstances, seeks to discuss the conditions of bizhen (reality-approximating) objects in the paintings as well as how this is plausible at that historical juncture so that the features of those paintings may stand out. Next, by utilizing concepts of ”front stage” and ”back stage” in the theoretical framework by the sociologist Erving Goffman which analyzes human interaction, we may arrive at the understanding that, in contrast to the ”front stage” Qianlong, Shiyishiertu exhibits the leisure-in-the-midst-of-hectic-duties image of the Emperor in the back stage. By juxtaposing the assaults on the emperor's private life and moral character in the Zeng Jing case during the Yongzheng reign, we realize that this accusation is rooted in the belief ”Those who do not belong to us ethnically must be alien at heart,” which points directly to the alleged fact that the backstage image of the Manchurian emperor must be too indecent to learn of. In contrast to Yongzheng's coping strategy of massively exposing royal privacy in Dayijuemilu (Records of great righteousness resolving confusion) compiled under the Yongzheng's guidance, in the case of Xiyixiertu, the fact that the backstage image of Qianlong dressed as a Han literatus happens to be the most common frontsage image of Han literati not only forges another self-image of Qianlong other than that of the emperor but at the same time serves as a response to the questioning of the Han people over his identity as well.起始頁-結束頁：141-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：聖愚的歸屬：區辨異常的機制及其之於污名的當代反思並列篇名：Defining the Holy Fool: Differentiation and its Significance in the Question of Stigma作者：黃明慧(Huang, Ming-Hui)關鍵字：聖愚;東正教;污名;異常;Holy Fool;Orthodox Church;Stigma;Abnormality期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：當真相被愚昧蒙蔽，污名於焉而生。污名的指涉之所以成立，是因其處於相對於正常的類別及歸屬。當污名的特徵超出常人的理解時，它的殊異或被視為天賜之福，或成為社會竭力排除的禁忌。俄羅斯的聖愚被東正教視為具神性的異常個體，他的存在透露出一種類別建構的機制，刻劃出如聖愚之類的異常人在歷史文化中的步履。本文透過梳理聖愚的身份變化、瞭解帝俄晚期安置異常人的決策、觀察異教徒的田野紀錄等，探查聖愚不等同其他「患者」的原因，並以此反思當下區辨異常的機制。污名總是處於相對的、動態的關係。儘管異常的人、事對於穩定的社會秩序可能構成威脅，卻無法否定其之於革新生態系統的助益。無論聖愚的言行是否符合彼時社會對於「正常」的期待，評判的機制與其背後累積的文化底蘊，展現俄羅斯獨有的特色，一種處於二元兩極狀態下的矛盾，及各類族群交融後的共存共生。英文摘要：Stigma emerges when the truth is blinded by ignorance. The stigma reveals itself with a given meaning only when it is placed in a relative position to an anticipated normal category. The visibility of a certain distinctiveness can be emphasized as a divine gift which is beyond our general understanding or as a taboo which should be avoided for the benefit of social order. The holy fool in Russia bears a stigma which has been defined in various ways and has been explained as the condition when there is a necessity. The aim of this paper is to initiate a conceptual discourse about the question of abnormality in a society requiring the least differentiation through the study of the holy fool amongst the non-Russian natives of diverse habitus within the Russian Empire in the late nineteenth century. The objective is to take the holy fool as a figure to examine the rules for distinction and to question the issue of different others in an atmosphere where every individual (bearing more or less a stigma) should have his/her right of survival. Stigma happens in fluid and relative situations. Abnormality may be a threat to the stability of system, but can be an alternative to new invention.起始頁-結束頁：197-234資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：浪漫愛的展演與消費：臺灣社會蜜月旅行的媒體再現（1990-2010）並列篇名：The Display and Consumption of Romantic Love: the Media Representation of Honeymoon in Taiwan (1990-2010)作者：姜穎(Ying Chiang)關鍵字：休閒與性別;蜜月旅行;休閒社會學;消費主義;Leisure and Gender;Honeymoon;Sociology of Leisure;Consumerism期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：蜜月旅行為西方現代性中異性戀浪漫愛／婚姻的重要文化儀式之一，是消費主義與性別認同展演的場域。本文以批判論述分析建構臺灣社會的蜜月旅行系譜，達成「旅行研究的批判性轉向」企圖，這種分析方法有助理解與休閒／旅行相關的權力網絡與認同模式。爬梳了1990至2010年間臺灣平面媒體的蜜月旅行論述，發現自1990年代起，生活消費版建立了有關蜜月旅行的消費主義論述與實踐範例，成為臺灣（異性戀）婚禮儀式／消費的一部份。蜜月旅行與異性戀婚姻中，女性被連結為重視、策劃的婚禮實踐者，蜜月成為異性戀浪漫愛的物質證據之一，並生產出各種性別規範。2000年代起，中產階級以海外蜜月旅行為主要（理想）形式且逐漸穩定下來。除了名人的蜜月旅行經驗言說外，主流媒體及其所屬之電子平臺，讓一般中產階級開始了蜜月旅行言說／分享。差異化、秀異的蜜月旅行實踐成為媒體再現的焦點。最後，蜜月作為異性戀男女「性適應」的工具性角色在20年間逐漸弱化，但有關蜜月的性別分工，仍延續了1990年代初期的論述，女性是蜜月旅行的幻想者／主要期待者，男性則有「義務」完成其夢想，進而交換／延續未來婚姻生活中傳統的性別分工模式。英文摘要：The honeymoon travel is not only an important ritual for the heterosexual newlyweds but also a symbol of romantic love in modern society. It is a significant field for individuals to display identities and reproduce the dominant consumerism and gender ideologies. A contextual, gendered and historical research of honeymoon is very important for the understanding of concepts of gender and leisure in Taiwan. The aim of the research is to achieve a ”critical turn in tourism studies”. In doing so, multiple genres of texts will be collected. Critical discourse analysis will be adopted in attempt to build the contour of the collective memory and practices of honeymoon in Taiwanese society.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：歸葬娘家：明清時期東莞懷德鄧族與女性祖先的祭祀─以「姑嫂墳」傳說為例並列篇名：A Study on Female Ancestors in Clan System in Ming and Qing Dynasties: Take the Legend of ”Gu Sao Tomb” as an Example作者：龔禮茹(Liru Gong)關鍵字：女性祖先;宗族;風水;科舉;墓祭;Women Ancestors;Clan;Fengshui;Offer Sacrifices in Front of a Grave/Tomb期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：明清以來，民間對女性祖先作為夫家宗族的祭祀對象，經歷了一個逐步接受的過程。在廣州增城有一處姑嫂墳，系為歸葬娘家的出嫁女而立，并流傳一個關於姑嫂情深的傳說。女性歸葬娘家，這一看似特殊的歷史現象，在南方「不落夫家」的民間傳統和儒家禮制都能找到依據，這意味著走進婚姻制度的女性仍與娘家具有密切的聯繫。饒有趣味的是，這種聯繫在女性逝世數年後，卻依然能夠在姻親家族中發揮關鍵作用。這一現象的出現，與明清時期儒家禮制庶民化的過程有關。「姑嫂墳」的傳說實際為懷德鄧族在一個複雜歷史過程中形成的傳統，通過女性祖先故事的建構、祭祖儀式的實踐，凝聚同族的利益共生關係和文化認同。由此我們可以看到，儒家關於女性祖先的祭祀觀念落實到民間社會的時候，士大夫利用儒家禮制、民間知識傳統、國家的力量，乃至社會關係力量的疊加，逐步將對女性祖先的祭祀演變為宗族的一部分。正是在各種力量的推動下，祖母吳氏由鄧族中一位不受重視的角色，演變為與宗族科舉事業密切關聯的、強化宗族支派內部凝聚力的關鍵人物，在宗族祭祀中具有重要地位。英文摘要：Since the Ming and Qing Dynasties, the people have gradually accepted the ancestors of the female ancestors as the object of sacrifice for the clan. Actually, the legend of ”Gu-siao-fen” is a tradition formed in a complicated historical process by the Huaide and Deng nationalities. Through the construction of female ancestor legends and the practice of ancestor worship rites, it condenses the interests of the same clan and cultural identity. From this we can see that Confucianism has been put into practice in local society, integrating folk knowledge tradition, national power and even the superposition of social relations, gradually transforming the sacrifice of female ancestors into a part of the clan. Under the impetus of various forces, the grandmother Wu was transformed from a role that is not valued by the Tang clan into a key person who is closely related to the clan's imperial examination and strengthens the internal cohesion of the clan tribe. It plays an important role in the clan sacrifice.起始頁-結束頁：47-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：心經之謎：從「手少陰脈獨無腧」談起並列篇名：The Enigma of Heart Meridian: On ”Only Heart Meridian does not have Acupuncture Point”作者：鄭宛鈞(Wan-Chun Cheng);楊仕哲(Su-Tso Yang)關鍵字：手少陰脈;手厥陰脈;心包;代心受邪;神門;Hand Shao-Yin Meridian;Hand Jue-Yin Meridian;Pericardium;Hurt by Evil Instead of Eart;Shenmen期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：「手少陰脈獨無腧」出自《靈樞．邪客》篇，該篇提到因為心為五臟六腑之大主，故諸邪之侵犯心者，都是傷在心包絡，而一般治療心病都取手厥陰心包經的穴位，是以「手少陰脈獨無腧」。對於「手少陰脈獨無腧」這個議題，歷代醫家、學者著重在「少陰之脈獨無腧」而以手厥陰之腧代替，並且以心包代心受邪的角度來看待此概念。至於「手少陰脈獨無腧」的「腧」字所指涉的是針灸的腧穴還是五輸穴，由於輸、俞、腧三字通假的情形在醫經中不可謂少見，因此「腧」字在這裡的意義亦未成為研究者討論的重點。本文嘗試交互討論出土文物和傳世醫籍，藉此分析「手少陰脈獨無腧」的概念以及心經的穴道、徑路之謎。研究後發現，「手少陰脈獨無腧」的意思很有可能表示唯獨手少陰脈不具備完整的五輸穴。英文摘要：The verse, ”only heart meridian does not have acupuncture point”, was recorded in the chapter of External Evil Qi of the canon of Lingshu (Miraculous Pivot). It mentioned that the heart is like the king among the visceral organs. When the external evil qi attacks the heart, the pericardium is hurt instead. Thus, the acupuncture points of pericardium meridian is used to treat heart diseases for treatment. As for the explanation of this verse, most renounced doctors and scholar stress on the concept that the pericardium would take the place of heart when evil attacks occur as the guards protecting the king. Concerning the ”acupuncture point” in the verse, whether it meant the general acupuncture points or five transport points is a matter worthy of discussion. The phenomenon of phonetic loan character is quite common in ancient Chinese medical texts. This study analyzed the unearthed cultural relics, ancient medical cannons, and ancient medical texts to solve the hidden meaning of the verse and the enigma of the acupuncture points and path of the heart meridian. In conclusion, we found that the verse, ”only heart meridian does not have acupuncture point”, most likely meant the heart meridian does not contain a complete set of five transport points.起始頁-結束頁：83-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：論嘉靖本《三國志通俗演義》對讀者頓失劉、關、張之「療癒」寫作策略並列篇名：How Romance of the Three Kingdoms Alleviates the Pain of Readers Caused by the Writing Strategy of Sudden Loss of Liu, Guan and Zhang作者：林郁迢(Lin Yu Tiao)關鍵字：嘉靖本;三國演義;劉備;關羽;張飛;Jiajing Edition;Romance of the Three Kingdoms;Liu Bei;Guan Yu;Zhang Fei期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：嘉靖本《三國志通俗演義》展現出令人嘆服的藝術表現力，作者不僅熟諳閱讀心理，更具有療癒讀者因某些故事情節而感到失落的寫作本領。劉、關、張三兄弟對讀者而言，實有缺一不可之重要性，然而作者基於歷史演義小說必須尊重歷史結局的前提之下，卻又不得不依據事實，使之相繼離世，也就難以避免造成讀者的失落感。難能可貴的是，作者猶能巧妙運用各種文學手法，逆勢撫平讀者因劉備、關羽、張飛接連驟逝而產生的巨大失落感，或藉由人物形象的創造及各種虛構事件的活用；或透過敘事的大架構，經由時間的淡化，場景的轉移，故事情節的設計等等，適足以讓讀者在失落之餘仍樂觀其後。藉由本文的討論，希望能夠揭示《演義》此一部分隱而未顯的小說美學。英文摘要：The author of Romance of the Three Kingdoms racked his brain to make the stories following the death of Liu Bei, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, and the endeavor was similar to the one he made to arrange a series of closely-related and twisting stories before and after the death of Zhuge Liang. The author's efforts to relieve the pain of the subsequent death of the three main characters in the book can be found in the fictitious life stories of Guan Xing and Zhang Bao and in the comparison between the two roles and Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, which were taken as the literary compensation for the death of Guan Yu and Zhang Fei. In terms of the narrative architecture of the novel, such chapters as Zhuge Liang's Southward Expedition and Seven Captures of Meng Huo distract readers from the battlefield in central China to seek a temporary ceasefire among the three kingdoms, shift the attention away from the death of Liu Bei, and relieve the pain of readers caused by the sudden death of Liu, Guan and Zhang. It is obvious that the author of Romance of the Three Kingdoms was deeply aware of the minute change in the psychological status of readers and had the writing skills to comfort readers.起始頁-結束頁：125-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：原食力：原住民飲食文化做為食農教育的社會實踐並列篇名：Indigenous Food Power: Indigenous Food and Foodways as Participatory Action Research of Food and Farming Education作者：葉秀燕(Joyce Hsiu-Yen Yeh)關鍵字：食農教育;社會實踐;原住民研究;原住民飲食文化;參與式行動研究;Food and Farming Education;Social Practice;Indigenous Studies;Indigenous Food and Foodways;Participatory Action Research(PAR)期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以2012-2018年推動原住民飲食文化做為食農教育與社會實踐經驗為主軸。筆者運用慣用語「實力」轉化為同音的「食力」。「原食力」倡議「做中學」的身體實作與知識實踐，反映了原住民族飲食文化當中令人不容忽視的面向，亦即知識主體與文化環境生態的內在結構，而藉由對當代國內外食農教育的概念與經驗的爬梳，進一步介紹原住民藉由食物與土地和環境所展現出的價值與能動力，不僅呈現原住民族飲食的在地風土特質，更具體勾勒出從土地到餐桌原住民主體的位置，及原住民飲食做為食農教育的可見性與行動力。確切的說，「力」就是飲食產生的力量，原住民主體的力量與行動的力量，透過原住民飲食文化，本文企圖召喚出主體在土地的身體銘刻經驗，建構「食」踐的行動位置。具體而言，本文聚焦於當代食農教育的認識與經驗，同時也強化原住民飲食文化的生態智慧及其「土生土長」做為食農教育的價值與意義，透過從東華大學校園土地與飲食連結的小米種植、FATS團隊的組織發展、阿美織羅部落與春日國小的「食」踐，人與原本斷裂的土地有了深刻的連結，也凸顯原住民飲食做為食農教育的指標性意義，衍伸出族群的文化主體性，進而反思參與式行動研究與在地社會實踐循環推進的意義與可能。英文摘要：This paper takes an inter-disciplinary approach to examine complex interactions between indigenous knowledge, culinary heritage and the local practice of food and farming education. The discussion of this paper is based on my participatory action research(PAR) on ”Food and Farming Education” from 2012-2018. In this paper I want to present some examples of millet-growing as intergenerational and cultural learning experiences among indigenous elders and young mostly indigenous students to reinforce the community-university(CU) partnership. It stresses the importance of using cultural knowledge, culinary traditions and local region agricultural resources to develop indigenous culture to exercise and implement their rights to promote indigenous food heritage and bring people back to their lands. Encouraging meaningful participation by all parties, together we explore how farming and food turn into edible heritage and become multiple resources for local economic development. Our initiative emphasizes indigenous people's capacity for adaptability, resilience and restoration of traditional agriculture and food use and production in response to modern conditions. My aim is to enhance the visibility of the roles of the traditional indigenous culture, knowledge and foodways in the wider field of cultural heritage, food and farming education and indigenous studies.起始頁-結束頁：167-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：嚴壽逸墓誌銘所反映元代地方醫者仕宦並列篇名：Yan Shouyi's Epitaph: The Career Advancement of a Local Southern Medical Officer作者：范家偉(Ka Wai FAN)關鍵字：元代;嚴壽逸;墓誌銘;官醫;地方醫學教育;Yuan Dynasty;Yan Shouyi;Epitaph;Medical Officer;Local Medical Education期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文從元代一位地方官醫嚴壽逸的一生，探視他從求學到出仕的歷程，藉此反映元代醫學教育的實際運作。過去研究集中在制度層面，分析元代地方醫學教育制度。嚴壽逸在元代不是很有名，相關資料不多，但嚴壽逸與元代知名士人如吳澄、揭傒斯、胡長孺交往，因而在他們著作中留下若干記載。本文以危素所寫〈故天臨路醫學教授嚴君墓銘〉為主要的線索，按墓誌銘敘述嚴壽逸生平，討論五個主題：儒者改習醫學、元代地方醫學教育、醫者北遊京師、管理地方醫學事務，以及與儒者交往。這五個主題與元代官方推動地方醫學教育有密切關係。本文最後比較三位南方地方醫者嚴壽逸、葛應雷、朱震亨，了解金元醫家劉完素、李杲等著作，傳至南方的情況，及其成為南方醫者學習的重要文本。英文摘要：This paper discusses the life of local medical officer Yan Shouyi, his study of medicine, and his career advancement during the Yuan dynasty. While previous studies of Yuan dynasty medical history emphasise the institutional level by analysing the local medical educational system, this paper focuses on the example of one southern medical officer as a reflection of certain key aspects of the Yuan dynasty medical education system. Though Yan was not famous and there is not much recorded about his life, he had personal connections with famous scholars such as Wu Cheng, Jie Xisi, and Hu Changru. Based on their writings, as well as Yan's epitaph written by Wei Su, this paper explores five aspects of the Yuan medical system, including the incidence of scholars changing their career to learn medicine, local medical education, the physicians visiting the Yuan capital, the management of local medical systems, and Yan's interaction with Confucian scholars. These aspects are closely related to the promotion of local medical education by the Yuan court. Finally, this paper compares the lives of three southern physicians, namely Yan, Ge Yinglei and Zhu Zhenheng, to understand how the medical writings of famous medical physicians Liu Wansu, Li Gao, etc., spread to the south from the north during Jin-Yuan transition period, and how their writings became important texts for medical education in the south.起始頁-結束頁：213-252資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社12篇名：國家？家國？全國性人民團體命名與競爭的國族想像並列篇名：”Regarding Country as Home” or ”Regarding Home as Country”?: The Imagination and Contestations of Nation in the Naming Politics of National Civil Organization作者：葉韻翠(Yun-Tsui Yeh)關鍵字：命名;行政區域名;人民團體;國族想像;臺灣認同;Naming;Names of Administrative Region;Civil Organizations;Imagination of Nation;Taiwanese Identity期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以標示群體名稱的「人民團體名」為媒介，旨在揭示政治力對於命名權的掌控已脫離了「公共」範疇，而更進一步地侵入了「私有」領域。文中採用歷史文獻分析法，由法規條文的歷史演變查看引起人民團體命名爭議的根本原因。特別聚焦在全國性人民團體名稱冠以行政區域名作法所產生的國族符號競爭。研究揭示，政府藉由各項法規的制定，要求人民團體之區域範圍依行政區域組織甚至分級，以及人民團體名稱冠以行政區域名稱、全國性團體名稱冠以中華民國字樣等作法，進行「以地統人」與「以人統地」的雙重治理。原本受到政治力干預而命名的行政區域名，從而又對人民團體的認同與情感產生影響。在法律的規範下，全國性職業團體長久以來被限制冠以「中華民國」字樣，呈顯出與「他者」──尤其是中華人民共和國區別化的國族認同。而全國性社會團體原先被要求須以「中國」、「中華」或「中華民國」為名，顯示政府遷臺後仍持續以舊有的政治、國家符號作為「全國性」象徵，強迫教化臺灣人民「以國為家」。1999年以後「臺灣」一詞的「合法」使用，標示出臺灣人民「以家為國」的在地實踐，由下而上發起力量創造出新的、競爭的國族符號，與其他力量共同推促、實踐著臺灣國族認同的轉向。英文摘要：By taking the names of civil organizations which identify groups as the medium, this paper aims to reveal that the political control of naming rights has been out of the ”public” sphere and further into the ”private” sphere. The historical literature analysis is adopted to probe into the root of disputes over the naming of civil organizations by surveying the historical evolution of the related laws and regulations. Especially focused on the struggle of national symbols which arise from the names of national civil organizations which are prefixed the names of administrative region. This study reveals that the government, by enacting the relevant laws and regulations, requires that civil organizations organize and even grade according to the administrative regions, prefix the names of administrative regions to civil organizations, and prefix Republic of China to national organizations to carry out the dual governance with ”Rule the People by the Land” and ”Rule the Land by the People”. The name of the district, which is named after political intervention, is represented to influence the identity and affection of the civil organizations. The naming of national occupational organizations has long been forced to prefix the words ”Republic of China”, showing the different national identity from the other-People's Republic of China. The names of the national social organizations were originally required to prefix ”China”, ”Chinese” or ”Republic of China” showed the government still continued to use the old political and national symbols to force the Taiwanese to ”Regard Country as Home” after the R. O. C. regime exiled to Taiwan. Since 1999, the ”legitimate” use of the word ”Taiwan” has marked the Taiwanese localized practice of the ”Regard Home as Country”. The bottom-up forces have been creating new and competitive national symbols, together with other forces pushing the turn of Taiwanese national identity.起始頁-結束頁：1-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社13篇名：當代臺海關係下的媽祖形象建構：一場解嚴後蘇澳漁民的集體朝聖行動並列篇名：The Image-Building of Matsu in the Morden Cross-Strait Relationship: A Study of the Su'ao Fishers' Pilgrimage after the Lifting of Martial Law in Taiwan作者：林瑞愷(Rui-Kai Lin)關鍵字：冷戰;臺海關係;走私;媽祖信仰;地方社會;Cold War;The Relationship between the Both Sides of the Taiwan Strait;Smuggling;Matsu Religion;Local Society期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究關注蘇澳南天宮媽祖與解嚴前後蘇澳地方社會的發展變化，並試圖探究解嚴後這場漁民的集體行動對突破當時兩岸特殊的政治框架帶來的影響。本研究以地方宮廟的一尊神的形象建構作為研究切入點，試圖從民間的角度，從下至上地重新檢視戰後臺灣地方社會的發展歷程與冷戰體制的互動關係。當地漁民自蘇澳開發始便沒有停止與外界的貿易與交流。本研究發現，在戰後的發展中，他們為了適應時局變化，不停地試圖在貿易經濟、漁業經濟、宗教經濟中周旋以取得最大利益。本文透過田野調查，結合民間與官方論述進行討論，集中探究蘇澳漁民1987年接受中國大陸製神像和1989年發動的直航進香活動及其意涵。作者企圖展示蘇澳地方社會與現代國家的互動過程與利益競逐的過程。而其中，宗教作為一種被國家與地方社會認可的協調方式被提上檯面。作為行動的結果，南天宮因此崛起成為東臺灣首屈一指的媽祖廟，蘇澳的媽祖成為當時兩岸津津樂道的「海峽和平女神」，同時最早由漁民首開的交流經驗也隨著戰後兩岸政治的發展被逐漸被大眾認知並進入法律視野。英文摘要：This thesis focuses on the history of societal development in postwar Su'ao, and tries to understand the development of Su'ao local society in post-war period. By using religion as the starting point of analysis, this research figures out how the collective action of Su'ao's fishermen used religion to package their requirement. This research tries to understand the temple (Nantien Temple) as a gathering point for locals, and observing how the temple functions as a center for both competition and cooperation between local society and the regime. This research attempts to comprehend Taiwan's post-war political history and the patterns of Cold War era political affairs by understanding the life experience of people living on the frontier. Even in the turmoil of the Cold War, fishermen acting in the Taiwan Strait never stopped their communication through the black market. This research considers this experience of communication through nongovernmental channels as the fountainhead of the Post-Cold War Cross-Strait relationship. In addition, leaders of collective anti-government action used religion as a negotiation tool to catch the public's attention. By analysing those two actions in 1987 and 1989, this research gains first-person insights into the mutual interaction between local and government powers as well as local responses to government control. Result of the collision with government authority, Nantien Temple has become an influential temple of Taiwan; the experiences and needs of local fishermen who represent the peoples who has the needs to contact with each sides were also recognized by both sides of the Strait of Taiwan through religion.起始頁-結束頁：53-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社14篇名：臺北市社子島開發案探討：複雜性理論作用者的觀點並列篇名：A Study of Shezidao Development Project in Taipei City: Agents Perspective of Complexity Theory作者：陳夢琨(Meng-Kwen Chen)關鍵字：作用者;社子島開發案;複雜性理論;Agents;Shezidao Development Project;Complexity Theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究從複雜性理論的作用者探討社子島開發案，將社子島開發案之作用者分為政府官員、政治人物、專家學者、企業廠商及在地居民五類，對社子島土地開發案進行分析社子島開發案的爭議原因、社子島開發案的實況、以及臺北市政府對於社子島開發案一事無成之原因，並提出建議。為期全面深入分析社子島開發案，本文使用文獻分析法與深度訪談法，以探討社子島之社會作用者關係。本研究發現：臺北市政府未著重社子島開發案的作用者、未能掌控社子島開發案有作用者之間的互動過程、未具體掌握社子島開發案作用者自有的私利、未形塑社子島開發案當地居民熱忱與共同利益。本研究建議：針對五類作用者個別方式處理社子島開發案加以追蹤、針對主導作用者之間的互動做進一步釐清、如何誘導作用者之間的互動進展，使從分裂與矛盾的自我利益叢結脫身，到公共利益之建構。英文摘要：This study explores the agents in the local governance of the Shezidao development project with the perspective of the complexity theory. In this case, the author divides the agents into government officials, politicians, experts and scholars, enterprise manufacturers, and local residents in five categories. The author analyzes the reasons for the controversy surrounding the development of the Shezidao project, and the reasons why the Taipei City government had failed in the development of the Shezidao project, and makes recommendations. With the literature analysis method and in-depth interview method, the author explores the relationship among these agents in the Shezidao development project. The study finds that Taipei City Government did not focus on these five categories of agents, failed to try to control the interactive process among these five categories of agents, and did not specifically grasp each self-interests of these five categories of agents, and did not shape the local residents' enthusiasm and common interests in the case of the Shezidao Development Project. The author proposes to track their claims of these agentso n the development of the Shezidao development project, to further clarify the interaction among these agents, and to induce their interaction from the contradiction of self-interest to the construction of public interest.起始頁-結束頁：105-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社15篇名：客家與平地原住民族複合行政區族群關係與認同之研究：以苗栗縣南庄鄉為例並列篇名：The Research of Ethnic Relations and Identity on ”Hakka-Indigenous Combined Districts”: A Case Study of Nanzhuang Township in Miaoli County作者：陳定銘(Ting-Ming Chen);徐郁雯(Yu-Wen Hsu);彭蕙妤(Hui-Yu Peng);黃勤真(Chin-Jen Huang)關鍵字：族群認同;族群關系;客原複合行政區;社會網絡;Ethnic identity;Ethnic Relations;Hakka-Indigenous Combined Districts;Social Networks期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以族群邊界、認同、多元文化、族群關係與社會網絡，以及客原複合行政區等觀點，析探苗栗縣南庄鄉客家與平地原住民族的族群認同與族群關係。本研究透過文獻分析、社會網絡分析，以及深度訪談等方法，檢閱族群認同與政策相關理論，以及苗栗縣南庄鄉族群移墾過程、客家與平地原住民族族群關係等做為政策網絡分析基礎；採取深度訪談法，描述苗栗縣南庄鄉客家與平地原住民族的互動、認同和發展，並透過社會網絡的議題網絡，分析客原複合行政區內族群關係的變遷與因應策略。最後，研究發現包括族群關係由競合邁向多元文化、政府資源的分配對南庄族群關係的影響、原住民族客家化議題三項，並針對政策發展、文化保存、青年返鄉、公私部門與在地互動等觀點，提出相關建議。英文摘要：This Research analyzes the ethnic identity and ethnic relations of the Hakka and Indigenous in Nanzhuang of Miaoli County in view of the ethnic boundary, identity and multiculturalism. By the analysis of the literatures and social network analysis and interview, we will review the theories of ethnic identity and policy, analysis the policy network based on the ethnic history and the relationship between Hakka and Indigenous in Nanzhuang. We expound the interaction, identity and development between the Hakka and the Indigenous in Nanzhuang through in-depth interviews. We used the issue network of social network, that we will analysis the changes and the strategy of the ethnic relations in the Hakka-Indigenous Combined Districts.起始頁-結束頁：167-227資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社16篇名：一個安東尼奧尼的「中國」，兩岸如何各自表述？並列篇名：One China Consensus with Different Interpretations: The Case of Antonioni's Cina作者：蔡慶同(Chin-Tong Tsai)關鍵字：紀錄片;符號學;安東尼奧尼;「中國」;Documentary;Semiotics;Michelangelo Antonioni;Cina期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：1972年，義大利導演安東尼奧尼有一個難得的機遇，獲得允許在官方陪同下進入當時封閉與鐵幕的中國拍攝，在北京、河南、蘇州、南京與上海等地待了22天，並製作完成了長達三個半小時的紀錄片「中國」，後來該片不僅遭到中共查禁與抗議，更在平面媒體上受到了持續一年的批判，而經過剪輯刪減與加配旁白的黑白訊號版本，卻又成為臺灣三臺聯播的政宣節目；本文即是以安東尼奧尼及其「中國」事件作為一個個案研究，這裡包括了「中國」的紀錄片、《人民日報》的批判文字以及臺灣三臺聯播的影像版本，尤其是探討它如何呈現著一個視聽的符號之收集、定錨，最後被延伸並建構成另一個意識形態的神話之歷程；而作者藉此想進一步凸顯的正是，紀實性的音像作為視聽的符號及其語言，其詮釋如何立基於它與觀看關係、社會形構及文化意義體系之間的連結。英文摘要：How do we apply the method of semiotics to analyze documentary? Based on collecting and editing real signs such as image, sound, voice-over and subtitle, the director presents his or her documentary as some kind of visual-audio langue. This paper tries to examine the case of Antonioni's Cina(1972) of which three versions differ from each other: the director's cut version, the criticism by People's Daily and the screening one on Taiwan's television. It is argued that the versions lead to a mystification process of ideologies. The author aims to emphasize that the realistic documentary should be interpreted in its connections to the viewing, the social formation and the cultural meaning systems.起始頁-結束頁：229-261資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社17篇名：會澤正志齋攘夷論之思想建構探析並列篇名：An Analysis of Aizawa Seishisai's Construction of J<U+014D>i Thought作者：郭雨穎(Yu-Ying Kuo)關鍵字：會澤正志齋;儒家倫理;西夷教法;天祖;尚武;Aizawa Seishisai;Confucian Ethics;Religious Teachings;Tens<U+014D>;Military期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：幕末時期，伴隨著異國船頻繁東來，當時知識人對西夷入侵持有高度的危機意識，從而致使攘夷論的勃興。如後期水戶學儒者會澤正志齋即指出，西夷欲通過「教法」來達至愚民，故其攘夷論主要著眼在對西夷「教法」提出批判。本文將探討會澤正志齋攘夷論的形成，尤其聚焦在他是如何摶合儒家倫理與神道思想，以此來抵抗西夷「教法」。正志齋意識到西方國家將宗教與國力緊密結合的態勢，故其以宗教來繪測國家性格，通過西夷「教法」的吸收，在提出「息距」、「破邪」同時，亦以之為參照對象，仿擬西教的「至上神」概念，締造「天祖」概念來與「天主」對抗，藉此收攬已然漸次離散的民心。此外，更是訴諸「尚武」以達至攘夷，藉以重振幕府之「武威」。英文摘要：During the Japanese Bakumatsu era, with the frequent arrival of foreign ships, the arrogance of the j<U+014D>i theory caused the intellectuals hold a high degree of generated high crisis consciousness of the invasion of Westerners (”The rude barbarians of the west 西夷”). That an understanding of Westerners ought to start from religion, as pointed out by Aizawa Seishisai 會澤正志齋, a scholar from the Later Mito School 後期水戶學, because Westerners used ”religious teachings 教法” to achieve the goal of misguiding the populace. As a result, Aizawa's exclusionism based its construction on the criticism of Westerners' ”religious teachings”; in addition to proclaiming Japan the superior ”Shinshu 神州” (”Land of Gods”), he used ”the principles of morality 人倫之道” to discriminate against those who were different from the Japanese. This paper examined the formation of j<U+014D>i thought in the Later Mito School toward the end of the Edo Period, especially focusing on how Aizawa combined Confucian ethics and Shintoism to fight against Westerns' ”religious teachings.” Aizawa was aware of the situation in which Western countries' national power was closely bound with religion; therefore, he used religion to depict national characteristics. Through the assimilation of Westerners' ”religious teachings,” he put forward ”Sokkyo 息距” and ”Haja 破邪”, and at the same time used them as reference to imitate the idea of the ”supreme god 至上神” in Western religion, creating the ”Tens<U+014D> 天祖” to fight against the ”God 天主” and to win the hearts of the people, as they had gradually been turning aloof. In addition, Aizawa also resorted to ”Martiary 尚武” to achieve expel rude barbarians of the west, in order to reinvigorate the majesty of Shogunate.起始頁-結束頁：1-58資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社18篇名：「留守政府」時期外務卿副島種臣對外政策的檢討：臺灣「番地無主論」之形成與運用並列篇名：The Investigation on Foreign Policies Proposed by Soejima Taneomi from 1872 to 1873: Formation and Application of the Statement on ”Terra Nullius in Taiwanese Aboriginal Area”作者：李啟彰(Chi-Chang Lee)關鍵字：副島種臣;牡丹社事件;臺灣出兵;明治外交;日清關係;Soejima Taneomi;Mudan Incident;the Taiwan Expedition;Meiji Diplomacy;Japan-Qing Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文乃就1872至1873年間日本外務卿副島種臣利用琉球人在臺灣南部「番地」遭殺害一事，提出「番地無主論」主張的形成，乃至運用等一連串過程所進行的實證考察；同時也對過程中重要相關議題，例如，美國的影響、副島身分、軍艦派遣，及「番地」問題交涉遲延等，進行再檢討。其結果大致可歸納如下：1.副島的臺灣「番地」認知，最初是基於外務省的臺灣資料調查，認為「番地」非清國所有，最後在5號意見書中，從國際法角度明確主張「番地」乃「無主之地」的「番地無主論」。2.美國方面對於副島的影響主要表現在，由直接對臺灣「番地」出兵改為對清外交交涉，及激發其占領「番地」的企圖心。3.從副島對「番地無主論」的堅持，可以看出他對於占領臺灣「番地」所具有的強烈企圖心與對外擴張性格。4.特命全權大使的任命、軍艦的派遣等，皆有其外交慣例及實務上的需要，不能僅以政府與副島間的對抗關係來說明。5.避免琉球問題的爭議與「番地無主論」是副島在北京交涉時的兩大策略。藉由上述檢討結果，除了更清楚、完整地闡明副島的對外擴張性格外，同時也進一步釐清相關的重要政治、外交議題，為牡丹社事件研究提供新的視角與觀點。英文摘要：This article discusses the transition from the formation to the application of the statement on ”Terra nullius in Taiwanese aboriginal area,” proposed by Soejima Taneomi from 1872 to 1873, as a response to the massacre of Ry<U+016B>ky<U+016B>an residents in ”Taiwanese aboriginal area.” Coherently, this article also reinspects several significant factors and subjects during this process, such as the influence of the United States, Soejima's status, the dispatch of warships, and the procrastination on the political negotiation in regard to ”Taiwanese aboriginal area.” There are some generalizations as follows: First, Initially, Soejima considered that ”Taiwanese aboriginal area” didn't belong to the Qing Dynasty according to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan's report on Taiwan. Afterwards, in the Fifth Opinion, he made an explicit statement on ”Terra Nullius in Taiwanese Aboriginal Area” from the standpoint of international law. Second, The United States' major influence on Soejima was converting his action from dispatching troops to seeking diplomatic negotiation with the Qing Dynasty, and after that inspiring his ambition to occupy the ”aboriginal area.” Third, Based on Soejima's persistence in his assertion of ”Terra Nullius in Taiwanese Aboriginal Area,” it was obvious that he had strong intentions on expanding the border of Japan and had taken aim at ”Taiwanese aboriginal area.” Fourth, The appointment of ambassadors and naval dispatches were usual diplomatic practices with actual demand and wouldn't be relating them directly to the confrontation between Soejima and the Government of Japan. Fifth, Avoiding the controversy over the Ryukyu incident and the statement on ”Terra Nullius in Taiwanese Aboriginal Area” were Soejima's main strategies for diplomatic negotiation with the Qing Dynasty.起始頁-結束頁：59-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社19篇名：被形塑的「認同」：澤村榮治與國族主義下的日本職棒（1934-1944）並列篇名：Shaped ”Identity”: Eiji Sawamura and Nippon Professional Baseball under Nationalism (1934-1944)作者：劉建偉(Chien-Wei Liu)關鍵字：澤村榮治;日本職棒;國族主義;軍國主義;讀賣新聞;Sawamura Eiji;Nippon Professional Baseball;Nationalism;Militarism;Yomiuri Shinbun期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文旨在探討1930年代起至1945年太平洋戰爭的結束，在國族主義下，澤村榮治以及日本職棒的形成與發展。透過在1934年的日美棒球交流賽中，澤村榮治其精彩表現與《讀賣新聞》的報導，如何表現出日本國族主義的滲透如何由體育場外轉移到場內。而1936年日本職棒聯盟的成形，更是國族主義的具體表現。戰爭爆發後，適逢政府朝向軍國主義化的發展，在總體戰體制的號召下，職棒聯盟為求生存，選擇走向與國家一致的道路，並在聯盟制度上體現其國族主義至上的思維。不論是聯盟或者球員，選擇依附在國家政策下，是出自對國家的認同，又或是對現實的無奈。澤村榮治個人的球員經歷與日本職棒初期的發展，事實上反映運動在日本的戰時體制下，也具有強烈「國家認同」的形塑與挪用。英文摘要：This article aims to discuss Sawamura Eiji and development of Nippon Professional Baseball under Nationalism of Japan during 1930s to 1945. There are two major essays. The First, Sawamura Eiji performance in the Japan-U.S. Exchange Match led the peak of Nippon Nationalism. The Second, the Nippon Professional Baseball League, eatablished in 1936, encounted developing Japanese Militarism. Eventually they chose the same way standing with their country for survival. Whether the league or its baseball players chose following national policy to show their national identity or just due to that they had no choice, the article presents another appearance of development of Japanese baseball under the war.起始頁-結束頁：117-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社20篇名：世紀之交章太炎的「文學」觀：西力東漸中明治日本言文一致運動及清末的語境並列篇名：Zhang Taiyan's Redefinition of the Notion of ”Literature”: Seen from Late Qing China's Encounter with the West and Zhang's Relations with Meiji Japan作者：林少陽(Shaoyang Lin)關鍵字：「文學」概念及範圍;明治日本;章太炎;劉師培;王國維;The Notion of ”Literature”, the Late Qing China;Meiji Japan;Zhang Taiyan;Liu Shipei;Wang Guowei期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：中日甲午戰爭之後，尤其在戊戌變法前後直至新文化運動初期的大約二十多年，文學的範圍、定義問題被頻頻論及。劉師培、章太炎、王國維、田北湖等的相關討論，都與西學以及明治日本的影響不無關係。從1900年至晚年，章太炎就「文學」的定義、範圍等的討論就從未間斷。章太炎糅佛教與莊子哲學於一體的齊物哲學，與其透過明治日本與德國哲學的相遇以及關聯，近年已經有一定的研究成果，但是，章太炎的「文學」討論與明治日本的關聯，尚不太見。本文置章太炎的「文學」討論於漢字圈與西方學術相遇的語境之中，探討這一類討論與明治日本的關聯，並且探討章太炎與同時代相關討論之不同。本文認為，雖然章太炎的「文學」觀與後來的「五四」新文化運動一代的「文學」觀迥異，然而，因為章太炎以文史相關的廣義的「文學」觀重構了中國學術史，其間也必然解構了韻文中心的中國「文學」史敘述，因而不期然地為「五四」一代翻譯自西方的「文學」觀作了不自覺的準備。英文摘要：Zhang Taiyan (i.e. Zhang Binglin, 1869-1936), one of the most prominent scholars and influential thinkers of the late Qing Chinese Revolution, frequently wrote on the notion of ”literature” (”wenxue” and ”wen”) at the turn of the late nineteenth to the early twentieth century, a period in which Chinese intellectuals actively introduced Western learnings in order to reconstruct traditional Chinese scholarship. His concern with the notion of literature lasted until his late years after the Westernized May-Fourth New Cultural Movement from 1916 to 1921. To a certain extent, previous studies have clarified Zhang's reconstruction of Chinese philosophy on the basis of his own Buddhist- and Zhuangzi-centric philosophy and his relations with Meiji Japan's Western-influenced reconstruction of 「philosophy」 . However, Zhang's redefinition of the notion of literature has not yet received such treatment. This paper aims to shed light on Zhang's unique redefinition of ”literature” through locating it within the context of his relation to discussions of the notion of ”literature” (”bungaku” and ”bun”) in Meiji Japan and the Genbun'icchi Movement. In other words, this paper locates Zhang's arguments about literature within the historical context of the East Asian Sinitic sphere's encounter with Western ”literature”. In addition, this paper also compares Zhang's argument to the writings of his contemporaries like Liu Shipei (1884-1919) and Wang Guowei (1877-1927), who also stayed in Japan. Although Zhang has quite a different understanding of the notion of literature compared to that of other thinkers of the May-Fourth generation, this paper argues that Zhang unexpectedly prepared a scholarly foundation for the translated notion of ”literature” articulated by the May-Fourth generation, an articulation that Zhang himself fiercely criticized.起始頁-結束頁：167-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：放逐／反放逐：重探〈屈原賈生列傳〉合傳意義與「發憤著書」說並列篇名：Exile and Counter-Exile: Researching the Questions and Passions of The Double Biography of Qu Yuan and Jia Yi作者：許愷容(Kai-Jung Hsu)關鍵字：放逐;反放逐;史記;發憤著書;成一家之言;Exile;counter-exile;Shiji;Passions of Writing Books;Statement of Academic Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：58卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文嘗試從「放逐（exile）／反放逐（counter-exile）」視角，重新解構〈屈賈列傳〉，期能在前賢研究成果上，進一步深化合傳意義，重新詮釋「發憤著書」說：從編纂角度看，史公不僅在敘事脈絡上，企圖以「放逐──創作」貫串兩人；在史料的剪裁、取捨間，刻意忽視賈誼的政治才華，著重於與屈原俱為逐臣的經歷。屈原與賈誼，同樣面臨貶謫（放逐），採取著作申發（反放逐）；不僅是為了抵抗現實、尋求異代知音，在某種程度上，也具有寬慰、舒緩的療癒效果，並激盪出不朽的人格典型與文學範式（反放逐）；史公在身、心層面經歷形同「放逐」的重擊，體會楚騷發憤抒情的觀點，進而運用在史傳創作上，發憤著書，而能成一家之言，垂範後世，發揮「反放逐」的積極效用。英文摘要：From perspectives of exile and counter-exile, the author tries to reconstruct The Double Biography of Qu Yuan and Jia Yi. The author, based on the study results of the predecessors, hopes to further study the questions of double biography, and reinterprets the saying of ‘Passions of Writing Books'. Sima Qian, in the view of compilation, tried to connect Qu Yuan, and Jia Yi with exile (write). Among the cutting and choice of historical materials, Sima Qian pretentiously neglected the political talents of Jia Yi; yet, he rather emphasized the common experiences, which Jia Yi and Qu Yuan had been as exile servants. Qu Yuan and Jia Yi, whom all had faced being exiled, expressed their counter-exile by writing. They not only resisted reality, and searched for intimate mates, but to some degrees had the comforting effects, which aroused immortal characteristics and literature norms (i.e. counter-exile). Sima Qian, whom physically and mentally had been hardly struck, experienced the viewpoints of Chu Tzu, and further applied to historical biography. As a result, he built his statement of academic analysis, and used as positive effects of counter-exile.起始頁-結束頁：213-256資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：Trading Behavior and Profits of Retail and Institutional Investors around Earnings Announcements in Taiwan's Stock Market並列篇名：臺灣股市散戶與法人在盈餘宣告前後之交易行為及損益作者：詹場(Chang Chan);張仲豪(Chung-Hao Chang)關鍵字：Taiwan's stock market;earnings announcement;retail investor;institutional investor;臺灣股市;盈餘宣告;散戶;機構投資人期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：We analyze the trading behavior and profits of retail and institutional investors around earnings announcements in Taiwan's stock market. We find that the average annual trading profits of institutional investors around earnings announcements are higher than those of retail investors by NT$22 billion dollars. In addition, institutional investors enjoy higher trading profits during the earnings news announcement periods (ENAP) than during the non-ENAP; they also enjoy higher trading profits during the good ENAP than during the bad ENAP. Finally, for the return predictability of trades, foreign institutional investors are the best, followed by domestic institutional investors, and then retail investors.英文摘要：本研究分析臺灣股市盈餘宣告前後機構投資人（法人）與散戶之交易損益及行為。結果發現法人每年在盈餘宣告期間之獲利高於散戶220億。此外，法人在盈餘宣告期間之獲利高於非盈餘宣告期間，且於好盈餘訊息期間之獲利高於壞盈餘訊息期間。在盈餘宣告前之交易對報酬的預測力方面，外國法人最佳、本國法人次之、散戶再次之。起始頁-結束頁：1-57資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202012_28(4).00012篇名：Does CSR Materiality Affect Financial Performance in Taiwan?並列篇名：臺灣企業社會責任之重大性議題會影響公司財務績效嗎？作者：黃啟瑞(Chi-Jui Huang);柯文乾(Wen-Chyan Ke);林志斌(Chih-Pin Lin)關鍵字：Materiality;corporate governance;corporate social responsibility;CSR disclosure;financial performance;重大性;公司治理;企業社會責任;企業社會責任揭露;財務績效期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study explores the relationship between a firm's performance on corporate social responsibility (CSR) materiality and its financial performance. It develops measures for evaluating firms' performance on CSR materiality. Using the sample of listed firms in Taiwan's electronics and financial industries, this paper shows that firms rated higher in environmental, social, and governance sustainability significantly outperform those rated lower. Furthermore, negative sustainability behaviors have more significant impacts on firms' financial performance than positive sustainability behaviors. Finally, the positive relationship between financial performance and the performance on CSR materiality is more significant in the electronics sector than in the financial sector.英文摘要：本研究探討企業社會責任（CSR）重大性議題表現與財務績效之關係。本文建置指標衡量CSR重大性議題。以臺灣電子及金融業上市公司實證發現，在環境、社會和治理等重大性議題評等越高，其財務績效也越優異。相對於正面永續性行為，負面永續性行為對財務績效的影響更大。最後，CSR重大性議題對財務績效之影響，電子業比金融業更顯著。起始頁-結束頁：59-109資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202012_28(4).00023篇名：Corporate Tax Avoidance and Cost of Equity Capital: The Case of Taiwan並列篇名：公司避稅與權益成本：以臺灣為例作者：許景嵎(Ching-Yu Hsu)關鍵字：Corporate tax avoidance;cost of equity;outside monitoring;growth opportunities;information quality;公司避稅;權益成本;外部監督;成長機會;資訊品質期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Using the data of Taiwan's listed firms, this paper shows that the cost of equity capital is negatively associated with firms' tax avoidance activities. This effect is stronger for firms that have better outside monitoring, greater growth opportunities, and higher information quality. These results suggest that the positive cash flow effect of corporate tax avoidance can reduce the cost of equity capital. In other words, investors require lower rates of return on equity for firms with more tax avoidance activities because they expect that tax avoidance can generate positive cash flows.英文摘要：利用臺灣上市公司資料，本文發現公司權益成本與避稅行為呈現負向關係；當公司擁有較好的外部監督、較佳的成長機會，以及較高的資訊品質時，此負向關係更為明顯。實證結果說明，公司避稅行為能提高現金流量而降低權益成本；也就是說，由於投資人預期公司避稅能增加現金流量，因此願意降低權益的預期報酬率。起始頁-結束頁：111-149資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202012_28(4).00034篇名：Corporate Giving Decision: Agency Problem Hypothesis vs. Shareholder Wealth Maximization Hypothesis並列篇名：企業捐贈決策：代理問題假說vs.股東利潤極大化假說作者：王泰昌(Taychang Wang);吳元利(Yuanli Wu)關鍵字：Corporate giving decision;agency problem;corporate governance;shareholder wealth maximization;企業捐贈決策;代理問題;公司治理;股東利潤極大化期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：We examine the determinants and consequences of corporate giving decisions by agency theory, corporate governance mechanisms, and shareholder wealth maximization. The results show that firms with more serious agency problems are more likely to engage in persistent corporate giving, while firms engaged in maximizing shareholder profits are more likely to engage in one-off corporate giving. Moreover, as corporate giving increases, shareholders reduce their valuation of firm cash holdings, and investors respond negatively to corporate giving. Using subsamples, institutional settings are examined to explore the differences in giving decisions between family businesses and professional managers.英文摘要：本研究根據代理理論、公司治理機制，與股東利潤極大化的觀點，探討企業捐贈之決定因素與效果。研究發現代理問題較嚴重的公司，較傾向從事恆常性捐贈。然而，將捐贈支出視為廣告策略之一，追求股東利潤極大化的公司，較傾向從事一次性捐贈。此外，研究顯示企業捐贈會造成財務績效下降，且市場投資者對於捐贈給予負面評價。起始頁-結束頁：1-74資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202009_28(3).00015篇名：Are Public Firms Less Responsive to Investment Opportunities? Evidence from R&D Investment of Taiwan Firms並列篇名：上市公司投資機會敏感度較低嗎？－臺灣研究發展投資之實證研究作者：謝依珊(Yi-Shan Hsieh);黃朝熙(Chao-Hsi Huang)關鍵字：Managerial short-termism;R&D investment;internal funds;public firms;private firms;經理人短視行為;研究發展投資;內部資金;上市公司;未上市公司期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：We explore whether managerial short-termism affects investment decisions of public firms by comparing how R&D investment of public and private firms responds to growth opportunities with a sample of Taiwan firms in the manufacturing industry over the period 1989-2014. Our results show that public firms generally exhibit low investment sensitivity to growth opportunities regardless of their reliance on external finance. Moreover, among the firms less reliant on external finance, public firms exhibit significantly lower investment sensitivity than private ones. These results all point toward public firms' managerial short-termism.英文摘要：本文以臺灣上市上櫃與未上市上櫃公司R&D投資對投資機會反應敏感度差異，驗證上市公司經理人短視近利行為存在的證據。實證結果顯示，上市公司R&D投資敏感度皆普遍偏低，且在統計上不顯著。特別是，在內部資金充裕的公司中，上市公司R&D投資敏感度顯著低於未上市公司，這些結果提供了上市公司經理人短視近利行為存在的證據。起始頁-結束頁：75-112資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202009_28(3).00026篇名：Peer Effects on Firm Dividend Policies in Taiwan並列篇名：同業效應對臺灣公司股利政策之影響作者：King Fuei Lee關鍵字：Dividend policy;peer effects;Taiwan;股利政策;同業效應;臺灣期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：With the dividend-paying culture increasingly taking hold in Taiwan, this paper investigates the effects of industry peers on the corporate dividend policies in the country. By employing the instrument variable technique, we find strong evidence that the payout policies of Taiwanese firms are positively influenced by the policies of their industry peers. This peer influence tends to be stronger for companies operating in industries with lower product competition and higher information uncertainty, indicating that firms imitate their peers for information-based reasons. Younger, smaller and harder-to-value companies are also more likely to mimic their larger, older and easier-to-value peers.英文摘要：本研究探討同業對臺灣企業股利政策的影響，藉由工具變數法發現同業的股利政策對公司具正向顯著影響力。在低產品競爭且高資訊不確定性的產業中，此同業效應的影響力更為明顯，即模仿行為基於資訊明確性。研究亦發現，市值小、新設立及難以估價的公司更有可能模仿市值大、創立更久及較易估價的同行企業。起始頁-結束頁：113-144資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202009_28(3).00037篇名：CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment: Evidence from the Industry Deregulation並列篇名：從法規鬆綁探討CEO過度自信與公司投資之關聯性作者：陳一如(I-Ju Chen)關鍵字：CEO overconfidence;corporate investment;industry deregulation;CEO過度自信;公司投資;政府法規鬆綁期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study examines the relationship between CEO overconfidence and corporate investment after deregulation. Industry deregulation allows deregulated firms more operation freedom, gives managers more discretion over operation strategies, and creates a more competitive environment. Therefore, managerial function or decision quality become more and more important after deregulation. Our empirical findings suggest that overconfident CEOs of deregulated firms are more willing to conduct investment, in particular advertising expense, in the post-deregulation period. Furthermore, the deregulated firms with overconfidence CEOs perform better than other matched firms after complete deregulation.英文摘要：本研究探討政府法規鬆綁後，公司主要經營者是否會因過度自信而影響到公司投資的效益。一般而言，政府法規鬆綁會讓公司在經營上有更大的彈性與競爭，因此公司的管理效能或決策品質變得越來越重要。研究結果顯示，在法規鬆綁的產業中，過度自信的公司經營者常增加廣告的投資，而投資後的績效確實優於未鬆綁的配對公司。起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202006_28(2).00018篇名：The Effect of Algorithmic Trading on Intraday Price Efficiency: Evidence from the Foreign Exchange Market並列篇名：程式交易對於日內價格效率的影響：以外匯市場為例作者：吳震星(Zhen-Xing Wu);洪禎蔚(Zhen-Wei Hong);高櫻芬(Yin-Feng Gau)關鍵字：Algorithmic trading;price efficiency;pricing error;foreign exchange markets;vector autocorrelation (VAR);程式交易;價格效率;價格偏誤;外匯市場;向量自我迴歸模型（VAR）期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This paper studies the impact of algorithmic trading (AT) on informational efficiency in the foreign exchange market on an intraday basis. Following Hasbrouck (1993), we measure hourly and ten-minute pricing efficiency by using prices and order flows, and show that, in FX markets, AT exhibits a reverse intraday pattern with trading size. The results suggest that greater AT activity is related to lower market efficiency, implying that algorithmic traders strategically enter the market when informational efficiency is lower. However, AT is associated with an increase in market efficiency in subsequent intraday periods in EUR/USD and USD/JPY markets.英文摘要：本文研究外匯市場中，程式交易對於市場日內資訊效率的影響。根據Hasbrouck（1993）的模型，我們利用實際交易價格和訂單流量衡量每小時和每10分鐘的價格效率，並發現程式交易活動與價格效率有顯著的反向關係，反映程式交易者會策略性地在價格效率較差的時候進入市場。然而，在市場中的程式交易活動變熱絡後，下一期的價格效率會提高。起始頁-結束頁：49-90資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202006_28(2).00029篇名：Corporate Social Responsibility and Risk: Evidence from China並列篇名：企業社會責任與公司風險：中國市場的實證作者：詹場(Chang Chan);柯文乾(Wen-Chyan Ke);池祥麟(Hsiang-Lin Chih);盧嘉梧(Chia-Wu Lu)關鍵字：Corporate social responsibility;firm risk;idiosyncratic risk;market risk;China;企業社會責任;公司風險;特有風險;市場風險;中國期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：The empirical findings in this paper show that CSR mitigates the firm-specific risk of Chinese firms, but exacerbates the market risk since CSR is associated with higher market risk. In addition, the returns of CSR-minded firms rise faster than those of less CSR-minded firms when the stock market return is positive, indicating that Chinese investors value firms' CSR performance when the stock market is up. The 'upside' effect is driven by the positive news effect and reliability effect, especially pronounced for firms with a lower level of government ownership and firms whose CSR policies are less driven by agency problems.英文摘要：本文探討中國市場中，企業社會責任與公司風險的關係。實證結果顯示：企業社會責任能減緩公司特有風險，但與系統風險則呈現正向關係。當大盤報酬率為正，企業社會責任表現較佳的公司報酬率上升速度較快，此情形主要是由「正面的新聞效果」及「信賴效果」所造成，對於政府持股較低及代理問題較小的企業尤其明顯。起始頁-結束頁：91-133資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202006_28(2).000310篇名：Analytic Formulae for Valuing Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefits in a Multi-Asset Framework並列篇名：評價保證最低提領給付於多資產架構下之解析解公式作者：楊曉文(Sharon S. Yang);王昭文(Chou-Wen Wang);劉議謙(I-Chien Liu)關鍵字：Guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits;analytic formulae;averaging concept;reciprocal gamma distribution;lognormal distribution;保證最低提領給付;解析解公式;平均值概念;反咖瑪分配;對數常態分配期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study attempts to find the analytic formulae for valuing guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits (GMWB) in a multi-asset framework. With the assumption that each equity process follows a geometric Brownian motion, we obtain the analytic formulae for GMWB by approximating the sum of the correlated lognormal variables using the averaging concept of reciprocal gamma and lognormal distributions. Numerical experiments show that analytic formulae of the averaging concept are accuracy, even for long-duration policies. Thus, the analytic formulae provide the significant advantage and efficiency in valuing GMWB.英文摘要：本文試圖找到於多資產架構下保證最低提領給付（GMWB）之解析解公式。假設每個資產過程皆依據幾何布朗運動，藉運用反咖瑪與對數常態分配之平均值概念近似有相關性的對數常態隨機變數之和，我們得到GMWB之解析解公式。其數值顯示平均值概念之解析解公式表現精確，用於長期保單時亦然。評價GMWB時，此解析解公式具有顯著優勢與效率。起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202003_28(1).000111篇名：Market Impact of Analyst Reports-A Comparison of Recommendations, Target Prices, and Earnings Forecasts並列篇名：分析師報告的市場衝擊－投資建議、目標價、盈餘預測之比較作者：謝文良(Wen-Liang G. Hsieh);李進生(Chin-Shen Lee)關鍵字：Security analysts;stock recommendations;price targets;earnings forecasts;Taiwan;證券分析師;投資建議;目標價;盈餘預測;臺灣市場期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：We examine short-term market reactions to recommendations, target price, and earnings forecasts simultaneously released in analysts' reports. Using regression to disentangle the price impacts, we show that investors in Taiwan primarily respond to analysts' recommendations, with target prices serving a critical role when analysts reiterate recommendations. After controlling the effect of the other two elements, earnings forecasts only indirectly affect returns through recommendations and targets. Analyst reports show stronger impact if issued (1) with explicit message, (2) for stocks difficult to valuation or with more firm-specific information, and (3) in a trading environment that permits unimpeded information transmission.英文摘要：本文分解證券分析師報告中的投資建議、目標價、盈餘預測三項資訊對股價的衝擊。臺灣股市首要回應投資建議，當分析師重申該建議時，股價則反映目標價資訊，而盈餘預測僅間接透過投資建議和目標價影響股價。強化分析師資訊衝擊的因素為：預測的內涵明確、標的股評價不易且富含公司特有資訊、及交易活絡利於市價反映資訊。起始頁-結束頁：27-75資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202003_28(1).000212篇名：Are Higher Co-Moments Priced? A Tale of Two Countries並列篇名：高階風險是否影響股票價格？兩國市場分析作者：董良(Liang Dong);林少群(Keith S. K. Lam);葛鴻雲(Hung Wan Kot)關鍵字：Higher co-moments;coskewness;cokurtosis;China stock market;U.K. stock market;高階風險;協峰度;協偏度;中國股票市場;英國股票市場期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：28卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study investigates the role of higher co-moments in explaining stock returns in the China and U.K. stock markets. In China, investors price only coskewness risk, while U.K. investors price both coskewness and cokurtosis risks. China investors use a two-year window to evaluate coskewness risk, while U.K. investors utilize a five-year estimation window. In addition, the significant coskewness risk premium in China is driven mainly by the sub-period after the split share structure reform. We argue that differences in market infrastructure and stage of development contribute to explaining the different higher co-moments pricing behavior in the two markets.英文摘要：本文研究高階風險在中英兩國市場對股票收益率之影響。中國市場僅協偏度風險具定價效應，而英國市場中協偏度風險與協峰度風險均影響定價。中英投資者分別傾向使用兩年與五年期高階風險評估窗口。中國市場中顯著協偏度風險溢價主要來自股權分置改革後。我們認為，市場結構和發展階段差異有助於解釋兩市場中高階風險定價行為。起始頁-結束頁：77-109資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202003_28(1).000301篇名：Welfare-Improving Vertical Mergers in the Presence of Downstream Product Differentiation並列篇名：下游異質產品競爭下增進福利的垂直結合作者：溫偉任(Wei-Jen Wen);李文傑(Wen-Chieh Lee);黃文嫻(Wen-Hsien Huang)關鍵字：Vertical merger;Downstream product differentiation;Welfare;垂直結合;下游產品差異;福利期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：This paper investigates the welfare effect of a vertical merger in a market with downstream product differentiation. Previous studies find that a merger in this setting tends to be welfare-reducing if the merged firm exits the upstream market and the downstream goods are highly differentiated. The reason is that a reduction in the number of upstream suppliers raises the input price and lowers downstream production. This paper departs from previous studies by considering the case in which the merged firm continues to trade in the upstream market. A vertical merger is always procompetitive with this assumption change because, in this case, the merged firm sells inputs in the upstream market if the downstream goods are sufficiently differentiated.英文摘要：本文探討下游異質競爭下的垂直結合的福利效果。過去的研究發現，如果下游產品的異質程度高，而且垂直結合後的廠商不再參與中間財市場的買賣，則垂直結合傾向於降低福利；原因是上游廠商家數的減少會提高中間財價格，從而減少下游的產出。本文與過去文獻不同之處在於假設垂直結合後的廠商會繼續在上游市場買賣中間<U+8D22>。在此假設下，垂直結合一定會提升福利；因為當下游產品的異質程度高時，垂直結合後的廠商會在上游市場賣出中間財。起始頁-結束頁：445-473資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：租稅稽查與廠商租稅逃漏－來自擴大書審廠商的證據並列篇名：TAX AUDIT AND TAX EVASION: EVIDENCE FROM TAIWANESE FIRMS作者：鄭<U+4F03>君(Yu-Chun Cheng);楊子霆(Tzu-Ting Yang);韓幸紋(Hsing-Wen Han)關鍵字：擴大書審;租稅逃漏;傾向分數配對法;Corporate taxation;Tax evasion and avoidance;Propensity score matching期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文推估擴大書審制度造成的租稅逃漏金額，財政部為簡化稽徵成本及程序，鼓勵全年營業收入淨額及非營業收入合計在3,000萬元以下之營利事業以擴大書審方式申報營所稅，透過此一方式繳稅的廠商，稽徵機關就其申報案件通常予以「書面」審核，稽查的強度較低，因此，廠商有較多機會進行租稅逃漏。本文利用傾向分數配對法將擴大書審與特性相似的非擴大書審廠商配對後，選取收入合計1,000-3,000萬元的企業進行分析。研究結果發現，擴大書審廠商無論有無給付員工薪資，員工人數及給付員工薪資金額都顯著低於非擴大書審廠商。根據我們的估計結果，在2004到2014年之間，擴大書審制度每年因操控收入及成本費用所造成的營所稅及綜所稅逃漏金額約為20至30億元。英文摘要：This paper examines the causal effect of corporate tax audits on firms' behaviors using a unique corporate tax audit policy in Taiwan, which involves lower audit effort for firms with reported revenues just below 30 million NTD. The study focuses on how firms ”control” the cost and expense to minimize their tax burden. To simplify the analysis, we investigate whether there is a significant difference in salary expenditure between the firms which file their tax returns under a unique corporate tax audit policy and those do not. We use the corporate tax return data and income registry data from the Fiscal Information Agency between 2004 and 2014. To reduce the selection bias, the ”propensity score matching” method is adopted. We find this policy significantly decreases reported salary expenditure, and leads to annual tax losses of about 2 billion to 3 billion.起始頁-結束頁：475-509資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：租稅負擔與地下經濟的門檻效果－台灣的實證研究並列篇名：THRESHOLD EFFECTS IN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE TAX BURDEN AND THE SHADOW ECONOMY: EVIDENCE FROM TAIWAN作者：林朕陞(Chen-Sheng Lin);洪福聲(Fu-Sheng Hung);朱美麗(Mei-Lie Chu)關鍵字：地下經濟;租稅負擔率;門檻模型;Shadow economy;Tax burden;Threshold model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：地下經濟與租稅負擔之間存在著緊密的關係。相對於過去文獻大多從線性模型來探討租稅負擔率（或稅率）與地下經濟規模的關係，本文運用非線性的門檻模型（threshold model），以租<U+7A0E>負擔率作為門檻變數，探討租稅負擔率與我國地下經濟規模是否存在非線性關係。實證結果支持台灣的租稅負擔與地下經濟之間存在一個門檻效果，當租稅負擔率低於19.657％時，租稅負擔率的提高將顯著降低地下經濟的規模；但若租稅負擔率高於19.657％，租稅負擔率的上升將顯著提高地下經濟的規模。從樣本內預測能力的評比中，我們也發現門檻模型確實優於線性模型，且門檻模型的結論不因地下經濟的估計方法不同而有所差異。英文摘要：A close relationship between the tax burden and the shadow economy (SE) has been established in the literature. While most existing studies examine this relationship using a linear model, this paper adopts a non-linear threshold model to identify whether there exists any tax-burden threshold effect for this relationship in Taiwan. We find that there is a threshold effect for the rate of tax burden in this relationship, which is equal to 19.657%. If the rate of tax burden is less than 19.657%, then an increase in the rate of tax burden significantly decreases SE. By contrast, if the rate of tax burden is greater than 19.657%, then a further increase in this rate leads to an increase in SE. In addition, we present results showing that the threshold model outperforms the linear model in terms of in-sample fits, and that the relationship between the tax burden and SE, whether above or below the former's threshold level, is quite robust with respect to different estimation methods for SE.起始頁-結束頁：511-555資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：商品不可分割性與最適商品稅兼論利益團體遊說的情況並列篇名：CONSUMPTION INDIVISIBILITY AND OPTIMAL COMMODITY TAXATION: APPLICABILITY TO LOBBYING BY INTEREST GROUPS作者：呂俊慧(Chun-Hui Lu);許韶芳(Shao-Fan Hsu);翁<U+5803>嵐(K. L. Glen Ueng)關鍵字：不可分割性;商品稅;利益團體;政治均衡;Indivisibility;Commodity tax;Interest groups;Political equilibrium期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：傳統探討最適商品稅制的文獻忽略了商品消費的不可分割性以及利益團體這兩個重要的經濟事實。有鑒於此，本文建構存在不可分割財之二元消費的經濟體系，探討商品稅訂定的效率解與引進利益團體遊說下的政治均衡解。依據我們所獲致的研究結果顯示：基於不可分割財具有高能力者傾向會買，而低能力者傾向不會買的特性。（1）對不可分割財課稅具有差異性定額稅的功能（differential lump-sum tax），使得最適的商品稅應該在高能力者願意購買不可分割財的前提下優先對該財課稅，其稅率為正。至於可分割財則在消費扭曲效果（效率面）、低能力者所得重分配的改善（公平面）、受補償門檻受限效果間取得平衡。（2）由於高、低能力者對於商品稅率的制訂之看法不同，前者對於不可分割財的課徵偏好輕課，後者則偏好重課。這個結果使得考慮利益團體遊說後的商品稅率之制訂，均衡時，不可分割財的稅率將降低、可分割財的稅率則提高。至於社會的福利水準也將因利益團體的存在而下降。英文摘要：The traditional literature on the optimal commodity tax system ignores two important economic facts: indivisibility of consumption, and interest groups which may lobby for commodity tax policies. In view of this, this paper explores two solutions: the efficiency solution and political equilibrium solution. According to our research, based on the fact that only the high-type taxpayers will buy indivisible goods, (1) the commodity tax on the indivisible goods acts as differential lump-sum taxes, which leads to the conclusion that the optimal commodity tax on the indivisible goods should be given priority for taxation under the premise that high-ability taxpayers will still be willing to purchase indivisible goods. The tax rate of indivisible goods is positive; (2) high-ability taxpayers hope the tax on indivisible goods could be much lighter, while the low-ability taxpayers hope the tax on indivisible goods could be much heavier. This result reveals that the tax rate on indivisible goods in the political equilibrium will be lower than the one in the optimal commodity taxation. As for the social welfare level, it will decline due to the existence of interest groups.起始頁-結束頁：557-587資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：An Experimental Study on the Effects of Democracy on Tax Compliance並列篇名：民主參與對租稅順從效果的實驗研究作者：徐麗振(Li-Chen Hsu);簡錦漢(Kamhon Kan)關鍵字：Tax compliance;The effects of democracy;Tax auditing;Penalty;Experiment;租稅順從;民主效果;租稅稽核;懲罰;實驗期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：We experimentally investigate behavioral compliance and the effects of democracy on tax compliance in an environment in which subjects are allowed to vote on the tax, audit, or fine rate. We control for the selection effect by adding a randomization stage of computer decisions similar to that proposed by Dal Bo et al. (2010). Our experimental evidence shows that democracy has an effect on compliance when fine rates are to be voted on. We also find that subjects behave more compliantly when a higher audit rate or a higher fine rate is applied than when a lower counterpart is applied. However, subjects having voted for a high rate are not necessarily more compliant than those who voted for a low rate, especially when a high rate is applied.英文摘要：我們以經濟學實驗方法探討實驗參與者在可以對稅率、稽核率、或懲罰率表決的環境中，他們的租稅順從行為與民主效果。我們藉由在實驗中加入由Dal Bo et al.（2010）所提出的電腦隨機決策階段來控制選擇效果。我們的實驗證據顯示當投票的變數是懲罰率時，民主效果存在。我們也發現當實驗參與者面對高稽核率或高懲罰率時，會比面對低稽核率或低懲罰率來得較順從。不過投高稅率、稽核率、或懲罰率的人未必比投低稅率、稽核率、或懲罰率的人來得順從，尤其當最後適用的是較高者。起始頁-結束頁：309-339資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：消費外部性與經濟成長－兩部門模型的意涵並列篇名：CONSUMPTION EXTERNALITIES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH: A TWO-SECTOR MODEL作者：謝智源(Jhy-Yuan Shieh);陳智華(Jhy-Hwa Chen)關鍵字：消費外部性;消費稅;經濟成長;兩部門模型;Consumption externality;Consumption tax;Economic growth;Two-sector model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：單部門成長模型強調消費外部性影響經濟體系的途徑是就業效果，因此在勞動供給外生決定的環境下，消費外部性並不會影響總體經濟表現。不同於既存文獻，本文設計一個納入消費外部性的兩部門成長模型並指出，消費外部性影響總體經濟體系的管道除了就業效果，還包括資源重分配效果。在固定規模報酬生產技術的假設下，不需要藉助就業效果，資源重分配效果會使得資本密集商品的消費外部性與經濟成長具有正向關係，但勞動密集商品的消費外部性與經濟成長率的關係則呈現不確定的狀態。另外，我們也討論了消費稅政策並發現兩部門架構下，資本密集商品的消費稅比較可能會傷害經濟成長表現，但勞動密集商品的消費稅對於經濟成長率的影響並不確定。英文摘要：The effect of keeping up with the Joneses on macroeconomic performance has a long and controversial history. The existing literature usually adopts a one-sector growth model and indicates that the employment effect is the key factor in determining the effect of consumption externalities. This paper tries to incorporate consumption externalities into a two-sector endogenous growth model and finds that the sectoral re-allocation effect is also an important factor. Our results suggest that greater social aspirations in consumption may stimulate (deter) the rate of economic growth, provided that conspicuous goods are relatively capital-intensive (labor-intensive). We also find that the consumption tax in capital-intensive (labor-intensive) goods is more likely to deter (favor) the economic growth rate.起始頁-結束頁：341-371資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：運用隨機共同成本邊界函數聯合估計中國銀行業之成本效率及市場競爭度並列篇名：JOINTLY ESTIMATING THE META-FRONTIER COST FUNCTION AND PRICE EQUATION TO EXAMINE THE CHINESE BANKING INDUSTRY'S COST EFFICIENCY AND MARKET COMPETITION作者：黃台心(Tai-Hsin Huang);陳禹伶(Yu-Ling Chen);邱義晃(Yi-Huang Chiu)關鍵字：成本效率;市場競爭程度;隨機共同成本邊界;Lerner指數;關聯結構法;技術缺口比率;Cost efficiency;Market competition;Stochastic metafrontier cost function;Lerner index;Copula methods;Technology gap ratios期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文探討中國銀行業在2006年至2016年間的成本效率以及市場競爭程度，將整體銀行業分為二個群組，第一類為國有銀行，第二類為城市商業銀行。第一階段採用Huang et al.（2018）提出的方法，運用關聯結構法針對兩群組樣本，個別聯立估計隨機成本邊界函數和價格迴歸方程式，得以分別計算兩群組銀行的成本效率值和市場競爭度指標；第二階段採用Huang et al.（2014）提出之方法，合併兩群組資料後，再度聯立估計隨機共同成本邊界與共同邊際成本函數，進而計算技術缺口比率、共同邊界效率值與潛在Lerner指數。實證分析發現城市商業銀行的成本效率較國有銀行高，在競爭度方面，潛在Lerner指數與傳統Lerner指數都指向城市商業銀行有較強市場力，而與結構法支持國有銀行市場力較強的結論相反。英文摘要：This paper applies the stochastic metafrontier cost function to jointly estimate the market competition and cost efficiency of the Chinese banking industry using data spanning 2006-2016. We divide Chinese banks into two groups, i.e., state-owned banks and city commercial banks. The model that is developed by Huang et al. (2018) is first applied to estimate the cost frontier and price equation in the context of copula methods. Then the metafrontier model of Huang et al. (2014) is employed to jointly estimate the stochastic metafrontier cost function and marginal cost functions in order to compute the technology gap ratios, metafrontier cost efficiency, and the potential Lerner index. The empirical results show that city commercial banks are more efficient than state-owned banks. Since the average value of the Lerner index for city commercial banks exceeds that of state-owned banks, the former are found to have a higher market power than the latter.起始頁-結束頁：373-412資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：生產力與後發廠商的品質轉型並列篇名：FIRM PRODUCTIVITY AND THE QUALITY TRANSFORMATION OF LATECOMER FIRMS作者：謝中興(Chung-Hsing Hsieh)關鍵字：變動彈性;核心能耐;品質轉型;後發廠商;Variable elasticity;Core competence;Quality transformation;Latecomer firms期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文將Antoniades（2015）模型擴展到動態環境，後發廠商可以開拓成本能耐，並以轉型升級到高端品質廠商為目標。本文首先說明開發成本能耐的利益終將告磬，因此在適當的時點轉型升級以取得新的競爭優勢，將是廠商必須面對的課題。因為先行轉型者的先占作用，產業整體呈現漸進式的轉型調整，並可能出現異質性的均衡。接著，本文推導出產業的升級時徑，並進行比較靜態分析，主要的結論是：市場進入障礙下降或生產效率的技術進步將導致更激烈的競爭，並降低轉型升級的廠商比例。相反地，有助於發展品質能耐的外生變化，例如轉型升級的研發成本下降，或轉型之際的市場整合等，均加快產業調整，並致使更高比例的廠商完成轉型。本文為後進廠商的發展策略、發展政策的設計以及市場整合對品質轉型的影響等做出理論上的貢獻。英文摘要：This paper extends the model of product innovation proposed by Antoniades (2015) to a dynamic setting in which latecomer firms can exploit their cost advantage and aim to become high-quality players. The benefits of exploiting extant cost-based competence are found to erode; gaining new competitiveness, such as high-quality competence, at the appropriate time is thus an inevitable challenge. Because of the preemptive effect of forerunners, the industrial adjustment of adopting the leap strategy is gradual, and heterogeneity may arise in equilibrium. We determined the equilibrium diffusion of the adoption of this strategy and examined the effects of exogenous changes on this diffusion. Specifically, we herein show that reductions in the barriers to market entry and improvement in cost efficiency result in tougher competition and reduce the probability that a firm will adopt the leap strategy. By contrast, changes helpful to exploring quality-based competence, such as a decrease in the fixed cost of adoption or market integration during the diffusion period, can expedite a leap and may persuade more high-quality players to join in. This model makes a theoretical contribution that informs latecomer strategies, the design of development policies, and the effects of market integration.起始頁-結束頁：413-444資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：On the Efficiency Aspect of Inheritance Taxation並列篇名：遺產稅的效率面作者：朱敬一(C. Y. Cyrus Chu);呂俊慧(Chun-Hui Lu);楊建成(C. C. Yang)關鍵字：Inheritance tax;Resource misallocation;Efficiency;遺產稅;資源錯誤配置;效率期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Bequest by definition is what a child receives from her deceased parent. This fact implies that returns to bequeathed capital may vary substantially across children if the capital market is not perfect. Previous studies on inheritance tax such as Piketty and Saez (2013), however, are mostly built on the perfect-capital-market premise under which bequeathed capital all receives a common rate of return. Theoretically, this paper identifies inheritance tax as a device for increasing TFP (total factor productivity) by correcting the possibly inefficient misallocation of bequeathed capital. Numerically, calibrating the U.S. economy suggests that it is optimal to significantly increase the progressivity of the inheritance tax from the current level, which contributes to a steady-state 6.29% increase in TFP.英文摘要：遺產<U+7A0E>文獻，以Piketty and Saez（2013）為代表，假設資本市場完全，因此，所有遺產賺取相同的資本報酬。但是如果資本市場不完全，不同人繼承的遺產即可能賺取不同的資本報酬。本文證明，課徵遺產稅可以矯正資本市場不完全所造成的資源錯誤配置，以美國經濟體為例，將目前遺產稅率提升到最適水準，在長期可以增加美國總生產力達6.29％。起始頁-結束頁：151-181資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：Comparing Specific and Ad Valorem Taxes under Price<U+FFFD><U+FFFD><U+FFFD><U+FFFD>Inelastic Demand with Quality Differentiation並列篇名：在品質差異與無彈性需求下的從價稅與從量稅比較作者：王光正(Kuang-Cheng Andy Wang);周冰瑤(Ping-Yao Chou);梁文榮(Wen-Jung Liang)關鍵字：Specific tax;Ad valoremtax;Quality differentiation;Price-inelastic demand;從量稅;從價稅;品質差異;需求缺乏彈性期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：We examine the superiority of a specific tax and an ad valorem tax in a fully covered model with vertical differentiation, in which the demand elasticities of the products are inelastic. By focusing on the influences of vertical differentiation and inelastic demand, we show that a specific tax is superior to an ad valorem tax in the short run, when the marginal cost of the high-quality product is relatively low or is relatively high and the ad valorem tax rate is high. We also show that a specific tax may not only be welfare superior to, but may also Pareto dominate an ad valorem tax in the long run, when the ad valorem tax rate is high. These two results imply that the government should impose a specific tax on products with price-inelastic demand if the tax revenue requirement is high. Besides, we obtain that the main result remains unchanged when one of the firms is a foreign firm, and that the firms' equilibrium quality levels and outputs will change to become identical to welfare-maximizing levels regardless of the tax schemes, when one of the firms is a public firm.英文摘要：我們在一個品質差異且缺乏彈性的完全覆蓋之市場下，討論從量稅與從價稅間的優劣。在這樣的模型設定下，我們得到下列兩個主要結果。第一、在短期時從量稅可能優於從價稅。當高品質廠商邊際成本相對較低，或邊際成本雖然相對較高但從價稅率較高時，課徵從量稅下的福利高於課徵從價稅下的福利。第二、在長期時，只要從價稅率夠高，課徵從量稅下的福利不僅較高，從量<U+7A0E>對從價稅還有柏雷圖（Pareto）優勢。這兩個結果顯示，在需求缺乏彈性下，若政府需要較高的稅收，課微從量稅較從價稅好。除此之外我們也做了一些延伸討論。第一、若市場上的兩本國廠商改為一個本國廠商一個外國廠商，上述第二項長期結果依然成立。第二、若市場上的兩民營廠商改為一公營一民營，則無論是課徵從價稅或從量<U+7A0E>，此混合寡佔下的品質水準與產量分配都可達到社會福利最大下的品質水準與產量分配。起始頁-結束頁：183-216資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：貿易成本與國際商品課稅原則的選擇－垂直產品差異的角色並列篇名：TRADE COSTS AND THE CHOICE OF INTERNATIONAL COMMODITY TAX PRINCIPLE: THE ROLE OF VERTICAL PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION作者：吳朝欽(Tsaur-Chin Wu);梁景洋(Ching-Yang Liang);李曜成(Yao-Cheng Lee)關鍵字：垂直產品差異;商品課稅原則;貿易成本;Vertical product differentiation;Commodity tax principle;Trade cost期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文在Haufler et al.（2005）的模型基礎上，建構一個垂直產品差異化的兩國產業內貿易模型，探討產品品質差異程度與貿易成本如何影響國際商品課稅原則的選擇。本文為非對稱模型，以全球總福利水準高低來選擇商品課稅原則。本文發現，當產品品質差異大時，採取生產地原則的全球總福利大於消費地原則。隨著產品品質差異縮小時，當貿易成本較低時，採取生產地原則的全球總福利大於消費地原則；當貿易成本較高時，採取消費地原則的全球總福利大於生產地原則。此外，當產品品質差異更小時，採取消費地原則的全球總福利大於生產地原則。本文的另一貢獻是，將福利效果拆解成效率效果與貿易差額效果，用以分析這兩項效果如何影響不同課稅原則下高、低品質國家的福利效果。英文摘要：Based on the model of Haufler et al. (2005), this paper constructs a vertical intraindustry trade model with two countries to explore how the degree of quality differentiation and trade cost affect the choice of commodity tax principles. This paper analyzes the choice of commodity tax base by world welfare in an asymmetric model. It is found that the origin tax principle is superior to the destination tax principle in terms of world welfare for the case of large differences in product quality. As the degree of quality differentiation shrinks, world welfare is higher under the origin tax principle when the trade cost is low; world welfare is higher under the destination tax principle when the trade cost is high. In addition, when product quality differences are smaller, world welfare is higher under the destination tax principle. Furthermore, this paper decomposes welfare effects into the efficiency effect and the trade balance effect, and investigates how the above two effects affect the welfare effect of high-quality and low-quality countries under two tax principles.起始頁-結束頁：217-260+ap1資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：不同財源融通方式的退休年金對經濟成長與社會福利的影響並列篇名：ECONOMIC GROWTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT WAYS OF FINANCING A RETIREMENT PENSION作者：金志婷(Chi-Ting Chin)關鍵字：退休年金;保費融通;稅賦融通;經濟成長;社會福利;Retirement pension;Premium financing;Tax financing;Endogenous growth;Social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文分析退休年金對經濟成長與社會福利的影響效果，並比較保費融通與稅賦融通的方式發放退休年金之相對優劣。經由本文的分析，得到以下結論：（1）無論保費融通或稅賦融通的方式發放，退休年金皆會挫低經濟成長，且稅賦融通的方式挫低經濟成長的程度將超過保費融通的方式；（2）退休年金的發放將減低年輕人的福利、提高年長者的福利，保費融通所減低年輕人的福利低於所提升年長者的福利，<U+7A0E>賦融通則可能減低年輕人較大幅度的福利，相對於保費融通的方式，<U+7A0E>賦融通的形式發放對各世代民眾的福利皆有較為不利的影響；（3）本文理論推估模型存在部分研究限制，導致各年齡層的就業人口與當期應納稅額等理論估計值與實際數據有些許差距，但因所有年齡層都是作跨期最適選擇，經折現加總後各年齡層的估計誤差將不大，使得退休年金對經濟成長與各世代福利的影響效果也不會有太大的估計誤差。英文摘要：Based on the growth and welfare effects of a retirement pension, this paper analyzes the pros and cons (by the lifetime risk) between premium financing or tax financing. Several main findings are concluded as follows. First, both premium financing and tax financing reduce the balanced growth rate, and tax financing reduces economic growth rate more than does premium financing. Second, a retirement pension reduces the welfare of the younger and raises that of the older. To finance from premiums, the welfare loss of the younger is lower than the welfare gains of the older; but to finance from taxation, the welfare loss of the younger may be higher than the welfare gains of the older. Relative to premium financing, tax financing has larger bad effect on welfare of all generations. Finally, there are some research limitations in the theoretical estimation model, which leads to some estimation errors between the theoretical estimation and the actual data on the employed population and the tax payable in each age group. Since everyone determines the resource allocation by intertemporal optimization, the errors in estimating the growth and welfare effects of retirement pension will not be too large.起始頁-結束頁：261-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所13篇名：Lexicographic Strong Belief and Perfect Extensive-Form Rationalizability並列篇名：辭典式強信念與完美展開形式可合理化作者：楊智鈞(Chih-Chun Yang)關鍵字：Lexicographic strong belief;Perfect lexicographic extensive-form rationalizability;Perfect extensive-form rationalizability;Lexicographic probability system;辭典式強相信;完美展開形式可合理化;完美辭典式展開形式可合理化;辭典式機率系統期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Within the framework of lexicographic probability systems (LPS's), we propose the notion of lexicographic strong belief. Perfect lexicographic extensive-form rationalizability (PLEFR) is defined by perfect rationality and common lexicographic strong belief of perfect rational strategies. We show Yang's (2018) perfect extensive-form rationalizability (PEFR) is equivalent to PLEFR.英文摘要：在辭典式機率系統的架構下，我們提出辭典式強信念此一概念。完美辭典式展開形式可合理化則定義成完美理性與共同辭典式強信念完美理性策略。我們證明Yang（2018）的完美展開形式可合理化與之等價。起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所14篇名：高雄氣爆後的房價被市場暴棄了？並列篇名：DID HOUSING PRICES DROP DRAMATICALLY AFTER THE KAOHSIUNG GAS EXPLOSIONS?作者：徐士勛(Shih-Hsun Hsu);陳琮仁(Tsung-Jen Chen);林士淵(Shih-Yuan Lin);張金鶚(Chin-Oh Chang)關鍵字：高雄氣爆;實價登錄;地理資訊系統;差異中的差異法;Kaohsiung gas explosions;Real estate transaction;Geographic information system;Difference-in-differences期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：為了分析2014年高雄氣爆事件對氣爆區域房屋總價的影響，我們整理氣爆前後兩年高雄市的房屋實價登錄交易資料並輔以「地理資訊系統」完成房屋的空間定位，之後我們在最適對照組的時空資料範圍下利用「差異中的差異法」進行分析。我們發現，「災害陰影效應」對平均總房價的負向影響在氣爆後9個月內並沒有顯著高於「更新效應」的正向影響；相對地，「更新效應」淨效果隨氣爆時間經過而較可能顯著拉抬房價。分量迴歸分析更顯示高總價房屋在氣爆3個月後就顯著受益於「更新效應」的抬價效果，而低總價的物件則遲至氣爆後9個月才顯著呈現此正向效果。整體而言，氣爆後「更新效應」淨效果對氣爆區房價的總拉抬效應高於公私部門投入的復建與修繕更新總經費。英文摘要：In order to analyze the impact of the gas explosion in Kaohsiung in 2014 on the property prices in the gas explosion area, we accessed the official real estate transaction database to collect data on properties located inside and outside the area which were transacted two years before and after the gas explosion. A Difference-in-Differences approach was then applied based on the transaction records. The results indicated that the impact of the negative ”hazard effect” on the average total price of property was not significantly higher than the positive ”renewal effect” in the nine months after the gas explosion. The net ”renewal effect” was more likely to increase the price as time passed after the gas explosion. Moreover, the quantile analysis suggested that the high-priced properties significantly benefited from the ”renewal effect” three months after the gas explosion, while the positive effect on properties with low total price was significant nine months after the explosion. Overall, the total increase in housing prices due to the net ”renewal effect” in the gas explosion area was higher than the total cost of the reconstruction and renovation contributed by the public and private sectors.起始頁-結束頁：33-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所15篇名：公司治理與庫存現金並列篇名：CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND CASH HOLDINGS作者：張世忠(Shih-Chung Chang)關鍵字：公司治理;庫存現金;流動性衝擊;流動指數;Corporate governance;Cash holdings;Liquidity shock;Index of liquidation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文主要是發展出一個理論模型來探究庫存現金在公司治理中所扮演的角色，而公司治理的目的是在於抑制經理人進行投資決策時想要加碼投資的自利行為。本文研究結果發現，最適公司治理標準應隨著經理人的代理問題嚴重程度及公司在產業發展的不同階段而彈性調整，代理問題愈嚴重或位於產業成熟期的公司，應採取愈嚴格的治理標準，一體適用的治理標準可能對成長期的公司不利。在允許外部融資的情況下，最適的公司治理標準將提高，有助於實現較高的股東權益價值，而隨著公司資產的流動指數愈高，若沒有要求充份的資訊揭露，經理人將會選擇偏高的投資水準，故公司治理標準必須更嚴格。此結論也意指公司治理標準應隨著資產流動性的變動而跟著調整。英文摘要：In this paper, I develop a theoretical model in which we explore cash holding as a corporate governance mechanism. By using this mechanism, shareholders restrain the self-interested behavior of managers, such as increasing capital inputs when making investment decisions. I find that the optimal level of corporate governance intensity should be adjusted according to the severity of the managerial agency problem and the stages of the company's industrial development. A stricter governance mechanism should be adopted when the agency problem is more serious and the industry is more mature. Our findings are summarized as follows. The application of governance mechanisms may be detrimental to firm value when the firm grows at a fast rate. The optimal governance mechanism is more intensive when external financing is allowed. For a firm with high asset liquidity and insufficient information disclosure, a stringent governance mechanism should be applied to reduce over-investment problems. As such, the optimal intensity of corporate governance mechanisms should be flexible and dependent on various factors.起始頁-結束頁：69-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所16篇名：斷點迴歸方法論之法人持股與企業租稅規避並列篇名：INSTITUTIONAL OWNERSHIP AND TAX AVOIDANCE: EVIDENCE FROM REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY作者：郭振雄(Jenn-Shyong Kuo);何怡澄(Yi-Cheng Ho);林咸劭(Hsien-Shao Lin)關鍵字：指數股票型基金;租稅規避;法人持股比率;不連續斷點迴歸模型;ETF;Tax avoidance;Institutional ownership;Regression discontinuity期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究採用Fuzzy不連續斷點迴歸模型（fuzzy regression discontinuity design）與工具變數法（instrumental variable method），以兩階段方式探討法人持股比率對企業租稅規避的影響。本研究採用2007年至2016年的台灣50與中型100指數成分股名單的上市櫃公司（排除TDR、F股）共1,142個觀察值，進行實證分析。實證結果顯示，首先，指數股票型基金重組，使得台灣中型100指數頂部企業的法人持股比率高於台灣50指數底部企業；其次，兩種指數股票型基金在門檻附近的法人持股比率差異，與企業租稅規避程度呈顯著正向關係。亦即在門檻值附近，法人持股比率較高的企業的租稅規避程度亦較激進。敏感性分析，採用全體上市櫃企業樣本、18個月衡量基金重組後企業租稅規避程度、運用Crane et al.（2016）的兩階段分析架構、以及分別檢視三大法人，以及不同季審核成分股重組股票基金，獲得一致結果。英文摘要：We implement a fuzzy regression discontinuity design and instrumental variable method to examine the effect of institutional ownership on tax avoidance. In this study, our initial data are obtained from the Taiwan Economic Journal (TEJ) database. The empirical results indicate that, first, the firms at the top of 0051 exhibit much higher institutional ownership than firms at the bottom of 0050. Second, we found a significant, positive relationship between the differences in the institutional ownership near the thresholds of the two indices (0050 and 0051) and tax avoidance. In other words, we find a significant discontinuity in the level of the tax avoidance characteristics at the cutoff. The firms with more institutional investors exhibit higher levels of tax avoidance. By further conducting a sensitivity analysis, we used a sample of all listed companies to measure tax avoidance over an 18 months' period, and adopt the two-stage empirical structure of Crane et al. (2016). Furthermore, we review the three major institutional investors separately, and examine constituent stock restructuring equity funds in different quarters, all with consistent results.起始頁-結束頁：105-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：【論文摘要】家庭組成對教育成就的影響並列篇名：【論文摘要】The Impact of Family Composition on Educational Achievement作者：陳香如(Stacey Chen);陳妍蒨(Yen-Chien Chen);劉錦添(Jin-Tan Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：家庭中父母對小孩性別偏好所造成的資源配置不均問題近年來深受重視，尤其在重男輕女的傳統社會。例如在印度，學者發現女嬰在出生之後得到的哺乳與照護都少於男嬰，女嬰的死亡率也較其他國家來得高。然而，以這些國家的資料來分析性別偏見對女性帶來的影響，研究的結果卻相當分歧，大部分研究發現女性並未因重男輕女的性別偏見而有不好的表現；在台灣，女性進入大學就讀的比例反而還高於男性。女性表現不比男性差是否就表示性別歧視導致的資源剝奪問題不存在？答案可能不是肯定的。女性可能因為天生的性別特性，例如較具韌性，使得她們出生存活率高、在某些行為上有較好的表現，導致我們所觀察到的男女差異低估了性別歧視的程度。有鑑於此，經濟學家近年來開始估計弟弟（相對於妹妹）對姐姐或哥哥教育成就的影響,以便消除掉男女之間天生的差異。但即便如此，這方法運用到性別歧視嚴重的國家，例如印度，仍很難找到家庭內性別歧視的證據。諾貝爾經濟學獎得主Ester Duflo與Angus Deaton都指出這個實證上的難題。傳統迴歸模型估計弟弟對於姐姐或哥哥的教育成就影響時，通常將觀察到的手足總數（小孩總數）放於控制變數之中，這樣的模型估計有一個假設，亦即弟弟的存在不會影響到兄弟姐妹的多寡。但這個假設在重男輕女的國家並不適用，因為父母會一直生育到有兒子為止（son-preferring stop rule），因此前幾胎小孩的性別組合將會影響到父母的總生育決策之下，擁有弟弟對姐姐教育表現的影響可能會透過兩種管道：一為間接效果，就是透過減少手足總數而對姐姐教育資源帶來的正向效果；另一為直接效果，在小孩總數固定不變的情況之下，弟弟的存在對姐姐會造成資源掠奪負面效果，也就是性別歧視的效果。正是因為這兩個管道的影響方向剛好相反、會相互抵銷，造成實證上弟弟對姐姐影響的總效果普遍太小或不顯著。最重要的是，在此種生育決策之下，傳統模型控制了一個「會受到手足性別影響的變數（實際的手足總數）」，造成所謂「不良控制（bad control）」的問題。如果手足性別會透過影響手足總數而影響小孩的教育成就，那麼控制手足總數在實證上相當於強制性的把所有會生育到有兒子的家庭排除在分析範圍之外，這種模型勢必會低估弟弟的存在對姐姐的直接掠奪效果。本文先從方法論來解釋這個實證難題，並定義直接效果與間接效果，提出嚴謹的實證模型，然後應用到台灣的行政資料來檢視家庭中第一胎小孩的教育成就如何受到第二胎性別的影響，其中教育成就變數是以「是否完成高中教育」以及「是否考進大學」來衡量。我們的實證模型結合方法論，可以估算出弟弟對姐姐造成的直接影響（性別歧視影響）與間接影響。就我們所知，雖然有少數文獻提到手足性別對小孩的表現可能會有直接與間接影響，但目前為止仍未有其他研究同時估算出這兩個效果。除了估算出直接效果與間接效果，本研究實證模型的設計也解決了兩個重要問題：一為第二胎小孩性別的內生性問題，二為家庭內小孩總數的內生性問題。由於1985年之後台灣超音波檢查愈趨普遍，且實施「優生保健法」允許有限制條件的墮胎，因此小孩的性別可能是父母親選擇的結果而非隨機外生。有鑑於此，我們選取的家庭樣本限制在第二胎小孩出生於1985年之前的家庭。另外，小孩總數的內生性在「小孩質量互補」的文獻中已經有深入的探討，但在「手足競爭」的實證文獻上幾乎沒有研究重視此問題。誠如之前所提，手足性別會透過影響手足總數而影響小孩的教育成就，若不解決手足總數內生性的問題，勢必會進一步干擾手足性別的直接效果與間接效果的估算。面對這個挑戰，本文利用「第二胎是否為雙胞胎」來度量小孩總數的外生變化，這些實證策略需要一套具有詳盡家庭變數與小孩教育表現的資料才能支持。本研究串連台灣出生檔與大學聯考檔得到實證所需的家庭中小孩資訊（出生年月、出生順序等、手足性別等）與教育成就，這獨特資料涵蓋龐大的樣本數目，大大提升本研究估計的精確度。本研究將長子與長女作為分析樣本分開估計，實證結果發現，對長子而言，弟弟所造成的直接效果與間接效果都非常接近零；但對長女而言，弟弟對姐姐造成的直接效果則是負的，間接效果為正的，兩者抵銷之後的總效果接近零。利用同樣的資料，我們也證實以傳統模型所估計出的結果會顯著低估直接效果與間接效果。針對過去的「手足競爭」文獻中缺乏家庭內性別歧視證據的疑難，我們的研究結果提供一個新的解釋。長女樣本所估計出的負向直接效果顯示，若家庭中小孩數目固定不變，弟弟對姐姐會有資源掠奪效果，證實了家庭中仍存在性別歧視現象。而弟弟對姐姐的正向間接效果有很重要的意涵，這代表弟弟的存在會使母親減少生育總數，進而增加父母親分配在每位小孩（包含女孩）的資源。正向的間接效果，也意味著若讓父母親可以自由選擇生育數目，有兄弟的女孩可能會因此而享有小規模家庭的效益。相對於中國實施一胎化政策或後來放寬的二胎化政策嚴格控管家庭生育數目，台灣讓父母親有生育選擇的自由，重男輕女觀念促使家庭規模自然地減少，同時家庭內男女資源分配也越來越平均。英文摘要：Gender bias in families has been persisting across generations in many regions. Girls in India, for example, get weaned earlier, receive less childcare and health care, and suffer from higher mortality. However, some studies find no evidence that Indian females receive less care than males under normal circumstances (Duflo 2005). Deaton (1997, 2003) suggests that Indian families have carried out equal parental spending and vaccination for both genders. Using data from Taiwan-a society with a long tradition of preferring sons over daughters - we also find surprising evidence of females having the advantage of completing high school or attaining a university education. One explanation for these mixed results is that women are more enduring than males given the same care (Waldron 1983); consequently, gender differences in child outcomes often understate the degree of gender bias. For purposes of detecting gender bias, one practical strategy for canceling out the endowment deficit of males is to estimate the sibling gender effect on child outcomes while keeping the realized number of siblings (sibsize) constant. The literature on sibling rivalry (or cross-sibling competition) has adopted that strategy. However, the method of ”keeping the realized sibsize constant” does not work for households that would go on to have more children until they get a son-the so-called son-preferring stopping rule of childbearing (Yamaguchi 1989; Jensen 2005; Filmer, Friedman, and Schady 2009). Since the estimation method excludes households following the son-preferring stopping rule, previously estimated effects of sibling gender composition might have understated the degree of gender bias. Son preference and the son-preferring stopping rule suggest that having a brother may affect a boy's or a girl's human capital formation in two ways. One is an indirect effect (IE) by decreasing potential sibsize, and the other is a direct effect (DE) where potential sibsize remains constant. Under son preference, DE captures the rivalry effect of a son (relative to a daughter) on child outcomes, keeping other things (including potential sibsize) constant. Under the son-preferring stopping rule, IE captures the gain/penalty from the reduced sibsize by a brother's presence, keeping other things (including potential sibling gender) constant. If child quality is independent of quantity, then IE is zero. However, if child quality decreases with quantity, then IE is positive. Because DE and IE may go in opposite directions, a brother's overall impact on child outcomes can appear to be too small, particularly in countries with strong pro-son bias.5 Therefore, understanding the relative importance of DE and IE is necessary for detecting gender discrimination. Because the gender composition of the existing children affects the decision to have more children, ”keeping the realized sibsize constant” has created bad-control problems. The problems understate DE and leave IE undefined since no variation in sibsize left for defining IE after holding constant the realized sibsize. The bad-control problem is more than an issue of endogenous sibsize. Even if sibsize were unrelated with unobserved determinants of child outcomes, the conventional method would still bias downward because of sibsize varying with sibling gender. Perhaps IE has been recognized and formulated in the literature, but IE's relative magnitude to DE is still an open question. Rather than keeping the realized sibsize constant, Barcellos, Carvalho, and Lleras-Muney (2014) propose a new method to address the bad-control problem. They shut down the IE channel by restricting their sample to infants under 15 months of age. This strategy works because mothers cannot respond to a child's gender by having more babies in such a short window. They find strong evidence of gender imbalance in receiving childcare, which is not masked by the son-preferring fertility-stopping rule. This study aims not to explain female advantage in education; instead, we seek to detect gender bias in family settings, although the aggregate statistics show patterns of female advantage in education. We provide causal estimates of the next brother's DE and IE on firstborn females/males' education. Our focus is the sibling gender effects on the firstborn (not on children born later); later-born children only exist if realized firstborn gender is such that parents continue fertility. The previous studies about family size effects have addressed the sample selection issue by estimating the impact of the later-born sibsize on the existing children. This selection issue is particularly relevant for Eastern Asian countries and several South-Eastern Asian fastgrowing economies, where fertility has fallen below the replacement level. As more than 50 percent of Taiwanese families in our data have only one or two children, we address this selection issue by focusing on firstborn outcomes. Our empirical work confronts four challenges. The first is to formulate DE and IE by overcoming the bad-control problem. Rather than using the realized sibsize to define DE and IE, we use potential sibsize because, in counterfactual worlds, it is possible to fix or change potential sibsize with a change in sibling gender composition. We decompose the overall impact of sibling gender on human capital accumulation into two separate causal channels: the active reallocation of parental resources along the direction of gender given potential sibsize (DE) and the passive effect of sibling gender through changing potential sibsize upon a change in sibling gender composition (IE). We show both theoretically and empirically that sibling gender's coefficient in a human capital formation model cannot be interpreted causally as the DE of sibling gender, even if consistently estimated. One can interpret the coefficient of sibling gender causally only in the absence of the son-preferring fertility-stopping behavior or the lack of an interaction term between sibling gender and family size in child outcomes. As expected, empirical results indicate a massive difference between the coefficient of sibling gender and the average DE, particularly for firstborn daughters, whose family size is more responsive to the next sibling gender compared with firstborn sons. The second challenge is to address the endogeneity of family size. While extensive empirical literature has taken the endogeneity of family size seriously on various outcomes (e.g., child education), this is less of a recognized issue in studies on the effect of sibling gender composition. Given that the sibling gender effect works in part through its impact on family size, it is crucial to treat endogenous family size properly. Only controlling for the realized sibsize in regressions of child outcomes on sibling gender yields misleading results. Following the previous literature on family size effects on child outcomes, we address the endogeneity issue by exploiting the plausibly exogenous variation in sibsize due to twinning at the second birth, conditional on family background characteristics. Critiques of the twins' instrument have noted that the tradeoff between child quality and quantity is understated (or overstated) if parents who have secondborn twins invest more (or less) in the first child than those who have a secondborn singleton, due to an endowment reinforcing (or compensating) motive. Rosenzweig and Zhang (2009) recommend a remedy for this problem by including the secondborn children's mean birth weight. Because fetal conditions may reflect the parental lifestyle, we prefer not to have a covariate relating to unobserved family factors. Nevertheless, we discuss the results from Rosenzweig and Zhang's approach as robustness checks. The third challenge is to address potential concerns about endogenous child gender due to possible sex-selective abortion or recall errors. We minimize this possibility by restricting the Birth Registry data to firstborn children born before 1985 when abortion was not legal, and sex-testing technology was not widely available. Using the same data like ours, Lin, Liu, and Qian (2014) have noted that the sex ratio at birth for the first two parities remained within the normal range between 1980 and 1992. The sex ratio started diverging from this after 1986 but only for the third- and higher-parity births. Consistent with their findings, our test statistics show that endogeneity of child gender for the first two births is not a concern in our data. The fourth challenge is to overcome data limitations. Typically, data analysts can only partially or indirectly observe the family size and sibling gender composition and cannot observe child outcomes directly after infancy. Using Birth Registry data for all of Taiwan since 1978, we ensure that each family's sibsize and sibling gender composition are complete and accurate by tracing at least 15 years of fertility history for each mother who first gave birth before 1985. By matching Birth Registry records with University Entrance Test records, we can observe each firstborn child's educational outcomes during adolescence, completed family size, and sibling gender composition. Using our modified approach, we find that both DE and IE are near zero for firstborn males. In contrast, firstborn females have a negative direct effect and a positive indirect effect, which almost cancels each other out, resulting in a near-zero total effect. This finding offers new evidence of gender bias in family settings, which cannot be detected by conventional methods. Conventional measures, such as gender gaps, have suggested clear female advantages of completing high school and entering university. Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates indicate much smaller DE and IE than those constructed from our instrumental variables (IV) estimates. This study represents the first attempt to formulate and evaluate the indirect effect of sibling gender on child outcomes via a change in potential family size. The result pointing to a large and positive indirect impact has important policy implications. Suppose parents' ability to control their total fertility is restricted (as in China's two-child policy). In that case, the overall rivalry impact of sibling gender could be much more significant. Although we study a particular economy where son preference is strong, it is precisely in countries where son preference is strongest to expect DE and IE's coexistence, driven by gender discrimination and son-preferring stopping rules. As a by-product of our analysis, we find the effects of family size on child education (and the direction of omitted variable bias) highly depend on sibling gender composition. OLS overstates family size effects if the next sibling is male and understates them if it is female. This contrast is particularly evident among firstborn girls. If the next sibling is also female, parents' utility gain from a larger family is more remarkable. If the next sibling is a brother rather than a sister, the son-preferring stopping rule kicks in, and parents' utility gain from a larger family decreases. The two-stage least squares estimates show that a third child in the family would lower firstborn daughters' high school completion rate or university admission rate by about one-third if the next sibling is female too. A next brother also reduces the effect of family size on firstborn males' education. However, the estimates are imprecise and much smaller in magnitude than the impact on firstborn daughters'. Our findings on family size effects are related to the quality-quantity tradeoff literature that uses sibling sex composition as an instrument for family size (Angrist and Evans 1998; Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2005, 2010; Conley and Glauber 2006; Caceres-Delpiano 2006; Angrist, Lavy, and Schlosser 2010). Most of these studies use data from countries where gender bias within the family is arguably small, and high demand for sons is rare. The direct effect of sibling gender on child outcomes is likely negligible (Huber 2015). The indirect impact via reduced family size is zero (assuming parents do not follow the son-preferring stopping rule). However, for data from countries with gender bias, our results imply that the firstborn's gender (or the gender composition of children in general) cannot be a valid instrument for fertility or family size because it affects child outcomes directly and violates exclusion restrictions. As with any study, this paper has some limitations. First, our empirical strategy is only valid when the secondborn's gender is random. However, the randomness of the secondborn's gender may not hold in other regions where sex-selective abortions are prevalent, as in India and China (Kishor and Gupta 2009; Wei and Zhang 2011). Second, using the twins' instrument, we find the proportion of compliers is 32-60 percent of the firstborn population. Given that 87 percent of our sample has two or three children, the percentage of compliers in some developing countries is likely lower due to larger family size. Nevertheless, the estimated magnitude of intrafamily gender bias is significant for policy. Unlike the previous evidence of gender bias, mostly focusing on infant females, our results show that intrafamily gender bias has a sizable negative impact on firstborn female adolescents' education. However, it is mostly indirectly offset by parents' fertility-stopping rules. China recently started to relax the one-child policy and bring in the two-child policy. We predict that a next brother (relative to a next sister) would harm the firstborn's human capital formation because the policy shutdowns the indirect channel would have offset the direct rivalry effect.起始頁-結束頁：453-461資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系2篇名：Foreign Direct Investment Competitions in a Three-Country Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model並列篇名：競爭外人直接投資之三國動態隨機一般均衡模型分析作者：吳<U+5F66>成(Yen-Chen Wu);陳思寬(Shikuan Chen);張銘仁(Ming-Jen Chang)關鍵字：foreign direct investment;heterogeneous firms;public infrastructure;tax competition;外人直接投資;異質性廠商;公共建設;賦稅競爭期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Using heterogeneous firms and public infrastructure assumptions, this study explores the consequences of FDI competition between two countries in a three-country DSGE model. Two countries compete for FDI by providing public infrastructure, reducing taxes, or offering subsidies to foreign investors. We find that an increase in public infrastructure attracts more FDI if the government finances the public investment expenditures via labor income tax hikes, import tariffs, or government consumption reductions. Increasing public infrastructure also increases domestic production and results in an appreciation in the real exchange rate and a deterioration in terms of trade. However, the increase in public infrastructure results in a higher relative domestic labor cost, impeding foreign FDI and reducing the effect of the policies that attract FDI. Reducing the corporate tax rate is another effective way to draw FDI. However, corporate tax reductions do not work if the public infrastructure decreases along with the reduction of the corporate tax rate. Finally, permanent deregulation in the host country improves social welfare regardless of the policies that the host government uses to attract FDI.英文摘要：在考慮廠商生產力異質性及公共基礎設施有助於廠商生產的假設下，我們利用一個三國隨機動態一般均衡模型去分析兩國競爭外人直接投資的情況。兩國藉由提供公共基礎設施、減少稅收或向外國投資者提供補貼等來爭奪外國直接投資。我們發現，如果政府經由提高勞動所得稅、進口關稅或減少政府消費<U+7232>公共投資支出提供資金，則公共基礎設施的增加將吸引更多的外國直接投資。公共基礎設施的增加也提高了國內生產，並導致實質匯率升值和貿易條件惡化。但是，公共基礎設施的增加導致相對較高的國內勞動力成本，從而阻礙了外國直接投資並降低了吸引外國直接投資的政策效果。降低公司稅率是吸引外國直接投資的另一種有效方法。但是，如果公共基礎設施隨著公司稅率的降低而減少，則公司稅率的降低無法有效吸引外來投資。最後，無論地主國政府採取何種政策吸引外國直接投資，地主國的永久性放鬆管制都會改善社會福利。起始頁-結束頁：463-516資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202012_48(4).00013篇名：Exploring the Sources of Growth and Slowdowns for Growth Successes並列篇名：經濟快速成長與趨緩成因之探究作者：盧姝璇(Shu-Shiuan Lu);簡元佑(Yuan-Yu Chien)關鍵字：sources of growth and slowdown;neoclassical;Japan;South Korea;Taiwan;成長與衰退來源;新古典;日本;韓國;台灣期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan experienced unprecedented high growth after World War II but failed to sustain the high growth after the 1990s. Why did these growth successes fail to sustain their high growth? This study shows that the dynamics of total factor productivity growth has been crucial in driving the overall output dynamics. Moreover, the long-term stagnation was exacerbated by labor market frictions and sometimes prolonged by capital market frictions.英文摘要：日本、韓國和台灣在二次世界大戰後雖都歷經前所未有的高成長，其幅度卻在1990年代後陸續變小。<U+7232>什麼這些經濟快速成長的成功案例無法繼續維持高成長？本研究指出，產出的快速增長與趨緩主要受到總要素生產力變化的影響：總要素生產力快速增長使產出高成長，但其成長速率趨緩時產出的成長也跟著變慢。另外，在成長趨緩時期，多由勞動市場存在均衡下的既有耗損加深趨緩的程度，但是當勞動市場存在均衡下的既有耗損對產出趨緩沒有作用時，資本市場存在均衡下的既有耗損又造成趨緩，使趨緩一直延續，以致成長停滯的問題更嚴重。起始頁-結束頁：517-546資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202012_48(4).00024篇名：多產品下品質改善的技術授權並列篇名：Product Licensing with Multiple Products作者：張瑞雲(Ray-Yun Chang);黃鴻(Hong Hwang);彭正浩(Cheng-Hau Peng)關鍵字：多產品;技術授權;垂直產品差異性;數量競爭;multiple products;vertically product differentiation;technology licensing;cournot competition期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：在實務上，低品質廠商在接受高品質廠商的技術授權後，可能會同時生產高、低品質產品，亦即存在「多產品」的特性。本文建構一個垂直產品差異性模型，探討當存在此一特性時，授權廠商在不同授權契約下的市場均衡、社會福利以及其最適技術授權契約。本文的分析結果指出：在單位權利金授權下，被授權廠商會同時生產高、低品質兩種產品；但在固定權利金授權下，被授權廠商只會生產高品質產品。再者，當授權前兩產品的品質差異性程度較小（大）時，授權廠商偏好固定權利金授權（單位權利金授權）。此外，研究結果顯示，在兩部訂價授權下，不但會發生「多產品」的市場均衡，且其最適固定權利金與單位權利金均大於0。這些結果與「單一產品」（即假設被授權廠商只能生產高品質產品）下之結論迥異。英文摘要：In practice, a low-quality licensee may continue to produce its low-quality product after receiving product licensing from a high-quality licensor. This paper assumes this is the case and constructs a vertically differentiated products model to investigate the optimal licensing contract and the resulting social welfare. We show that the licensee produces both the low-and high-quality products under royalty licensing; whereas only the high-quality product is produced under fixed-fee licensing. In addition, from the licensor's perspective, fixed-fee licensing is superior (inferior) to royalty licensing if the quality difference between the two products is small (large). Finally, the optimal two-part tariff licensing by the licensor should consist of a positive royalty and a positive fixed fee and the licensee necessarily produce both products after licensing. These results are in sharp contrast to those in the licensing literature with the licensee producing only the high-quality product after licensing.起始頁-結束頁：547-572資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202012_48(4).00035篇名：經濟學遊戲教學模式的學習成效分析並列篇名：A Learning Effectiveness Analysis of Game-Based Teaching in Economics作者：鄭保志(P. C. Roger Cheng)關鍵字：遊戲教學;學習成效;差異中差異法;試題反應理論;game-based teaching;learning effect;difference-in-differences approach;item response theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文探討學生在遊戲教學模式下學習經濟學的成效。我們一共招募了22個《經濟學》班級約1,500名學生，分<U+7232>實驗組（遊戲教學）與對照組（單向講授），針對相同的主題範圍進行一次前測與兩次後測，藉由比較兩組間前後測的差異來驗證遊戲教學的效果。實證結果顯示，兩組學生的學習投入時間沒有顯著差異，但遊戲教學會讓學生對《經濟學》產生較<U+7232>正面的態度。在短期學習成效方面，遊戲教學的優勢主要展現在難度較高的進階試題；而在中長期記憶方面，遊戲教學則是全面一致地有統計上顯著優勢，包括教案未涵蓋到的主題，顯示其正面的外溢效果。英文摘要：This article examines the effectiveness of game-based teaching on student achievement in a principles of microeconomics course. A total of twenty-two classes (nearly 1,500 students) participated in the study - fourteen of which (the treatment group consisting of 996 students) made use of two classroom games throughout the first half of the semester while the remaining eight classes (the control group consisting of 488 students) used the lecture-oriented approach. On the same range of topics covering markets, welfare, and public-sector policies, all classes jointly implemented one pretest and two post-tests. We find that students in the treatment group exhibited a more positive attitude toward economics, achieved a significantly greater short-term improvement in their understanding of advanced topics, but differed little in hours of study. Furthermore, the use of classroom games increased the mid-term retention of economic knowledge significantly and comprehensively, including a positive spillover effect on concepts not covered in the games.起始頁-結束頁：573-610資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202012_48(4).00046篇名：學歷和主修領域對薪資的影響－以「台灣青少年計畫」為例並列篇名：The Effect of Diploma and Major on Earnings - Evidence from the Taiwan Youth Project作者：劉家樺(Chia-Hua Liu)關鍵字：頂尖國立大學;主修領域;薪資;收入不均等;Elite national college;Field of major;Earnings;Inequality in earnings期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文使用「台灣青少年計畫」，檢視學歷和主修領域對薪資的影響。薪資的衡量<U+7232>第一份和最近一份工作時薪。在考慮三種大學類型下，學歷分<U+7232>未上大學、大學（私立、一般國立和頂尖國立大學）、研究所（私立大學、一般國立大學和頂尖國立大學研究所），主修分成「人文社會農」和「理工醫」。發現：（1）在未考慮主修領域下，同等學歷中，一般國立與私立大學的薪資無顯著差異，頂尖國立大學的薪資高於私立大學；（2）相同大學類型中，學歷的提升對薪資有正向影響。在考慮主修領域下，前述結果仍多數成立。（3）最高學歷的大學類型才對薪資有影響之效果。（4）在未考慮主修領域下，同等學歷中，不同大學類型在轉職薪資變化上無顯著差異，而研究所轉職薪資變化高於大學。即使考慮主修領域，這些結果仍多數成立。英文摘要：The paper examines the effects of diploma and major on earnings. The analysis is based on a longitudinal panel survey from the Taiwan Youth Project. The measures of earnings are the logarithm of hourly wage for the first job and the most recent job. The college types are categorized into private college, regular national college, and elite national college. The majors are simplified into those related to Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics, or Medicine (STEMM) and others (non-STEMM). The highest degree is catagorized as lower than college, college (private college, regular national college, and elite national college), or master's (master for private college, regular national college, and elite national college). Without considering the major field, the results show that (1) with the same diploma, there is no difference in earnings between private college and regular national college, but those with an elite national college degree have higher earnings than those with private college degrees. (2) A master's earns more than a college degree within the same college type. If the major field is taken into consideration, most of the aforementioned results still hold. (3) Only the college type of highest degree has effects on earnings. (4) Assuming the same academic qualifications, there is no significant effect on earnings when transferring from first to the latest job. However, within the same college type, for those with a master's, the change in earnings when transferring from the first to the most recent job is higher than for college graduates. These results still hold when the major field is considered.起始頁-結束頁：611-669資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202012_48(4).00057篇名：清末的隱田並列篇名：The Hidden Fields in Late Ch'ing Taiwan作者：吳聰敏(Tsong-Min Wu)關鍵字：土地產權;隱田;land rights;hidden fields期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：1898年9月，台灣總督府創設臨時台灣土地調查局，啟動土地調查事業。在此之前，劉銘傳在1886年曾推動<U+6DF8>賦事業，重新丈量台灣的田園面積。總督府的丈量結果比劉銘傳所丈量的面積多出約41%，兩次丈量結果的差異，本文稱之<U+7232>「隱田」。台灣各地區隱田比率不同。本文發現，平均每甲產量低以及執法效率低的地區，隱田比率較高。本文將隱田細分<U+7232>三種型態進行分析，發現產權較明確者所占比率較高，顯示地主關心隱田被查出的後果。1905年，土地調查事業完成之後，台灣的土地產權制度現代化；土地爭訟案件相對減少，土地交易相對增加，反映產權制度革新對經濟發展的正面影響。英文摘要：In September 1898, the Japanese Colonial Government in Taiwan began a cadastral survey. About ten years earlier, Liu Ming-ch'uan had proceeded with a land survey project to measure paddy and dry fields. The land area measured from the Japanese cadastral survey was 40% higher than that of Liu Ming-ch'uan. The discrepancy in the measurement from the two surveys is called ”hidden fields” in this study. The hidden field ratio varied across the whole island. We find that the hidden field ratio is higher in the area where rice productivity is higher and law enforcement is better. The hidden fields can be divided into three types, and we find that the most popular type is the one with more secure land rights. After the cadastral survey was completed in 1905, a modern land right institution was established in Taiwan. Since then, land litigation cases decreased and land transactions increased.起始頁-結束頁：305-342資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202009_48(3).00018篇名：台灣日治初期資本主義財產法制的確立（1898－1905）並列篇名：The Establishment of Capitalist Property Law in Taiwan during the Early Japanese Colonial Period: 1898-1905作者：陳宛妤(Wan-Yu Chen);王泰升(Tay-Sheng Wang)關鍵字：日治初期;現代法;財產法;資本主義;early Japanese colonial period;modern law;property law;capitalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以目前台灣日治時期契約與財產權相關法制發展的研究成果<U+7232>基礎，從法律與經濟互動影響之觀點，分析台灣從日治初期所建立的現代財產法制的規範內涵、其所代表之意義，以及與現代資本主義經濟的關連性。本文指出在日治初期的民事法規範會因屬人或屬地的要素，呈現複雜的適用情況，但在整個法制的建構上，已朝向近代西歐資本主義法邁進，當中重要的法律概念亦逐步在台灣建置生根。另外，產業金融法規範如何影響日治時期的經濟發展？現代財產法又在台灣的殖民地經濟特質中扮演何種角色？都是未來應再進一步探究的課題。英文摘要：This paper begins with a critical review of studies of property law and contract law, which experienced dramatic changes in Taiwan during the Early Japanese Colonial Period. We then re-analyze the meanings of modern property laws and relationship between these laws and the capitalist economy from the legal and economic interaction perspective. We point out that the civil law norms at the beginning of Japanese rule were complicated by the elements of the person or territory, but the essence of the legal system had been reformed so as to increase its similarity to modern Western European capitalist law. Fundamental legal concepts were being gradually created in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：343-380資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202009_48(3).00029篇名：日治時期台灣現代交通建設對商品運輸的影響：以米穀為中心（1899－1918）並列篇名：The Effect of a Modern Transport System for Commodities during the Period of Japanese Rule: Grain Transport (1899-1918)作者：陳家豪(Chia-Hao Chen);蔡龍保(Lung-Pao Tsai)關鍵字：統一市場圈;米價;商品運輸;鐵道;人力肩挑;market integration;rice price;commodities transportation;railway;porter期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：一般都認同鐵道對經濟發展有相當大的幫助，特別是以持發展觀點的現代化論者<U+7232>然。本文延續吳聰敏與盧佳慧（2008）的討論，分析沒有縱貫鐵道經過的市鎮（以下稱<U+7232>「非沿線市鎮」）如何被整合進島內統一市場圈？本文以大溪與南投<U+7232>案例，顯示當現代交通網絡建立之後，人力輕便鐵道與私設鐵道快速取代人力肩挑，沿山市鎮的連結對象從港口市鎮轉<U+7232>縱貫鐵道車站。以上的改變降低了米穀運輸成本，帶動整體運輸量擴張；此外，不同市鎮的米價差異逐漸縮小，「非沿線市鎮」的價格逐漸趨近於縱貫鐵道經過的沿線市鎮，「非沿線市鎮」彼此間亦將逐漸趨於一致，島內統一市場圈於是形成。英文摘要：Past studies on the economic history of Taiwan have argued that the formation of a modern transportation system during the Japanese colonial era promoted market integration of the cities close to the north-south railway line. In this paper, we will explore further these issues focusing on how the non-station areas were integrated into the Taiwan economy. We find that: (1) local railway systems decreased trade costs and interregional price gaps between non-station areas and station areas, and non-station areas and non-station areas. (2) the formation of a modern transportation system including the north-south railway line and local railway systems increased interregional trade.起始頁-結束頁：381-420資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202009_48(3).000310篇名：全球化對勞動份額之影響－台灣製造業分析並列篇名：The Effects of Globalization on Labor Shares - Some Evidence from Taiwan's Manufacturing Industries作者：劉碧珍(Bih Jane Liu);楊子菡(Tzu-Han Yang);黃登興(Deng-Shing Huang)關鍵字：勞動份額;全球化;技術進步;對外投資;labor share;globalization;technological progress;foreign direct investment期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：台灣在1990年代中葉之後全球化有加速進行的趨勢，同時勞動份額也開始下跌。本文目的即在討論全球化是否是造成台灣製造業勞動份額下跌的主要肇因。本文發現，造成台灣製造業勞動份額下跌，主要來自全球化後產業偏向資本密集的生產方式，以及對中國大陸累計投資增加所致。這些與多數文獻之主張「全球化有降低勞動份額」的結論一致。但對中國出口或對中國之外其他地區的累計投資，反而對勞動份額有正面影響，則與多數文獻的結論不一致。本文進一步對勞動份額加以拆解，發現不論結論是否與文獻相同，其詮釋也因台灣經濟現象特殊而與文獻不同。英文摘要：Taiwan has been experiencing fast globalization after the mid-1990s; Taiwan's labor share of income has also reached a peak in 1995 and has begun to fall since then. The purpose of this paper is to examine whether globalization is the main triggering factor for the falling labor shares in Taiwan's manufacturing industries. We show that manufacturing industries' adoption of more capital-intensive technology and increasing cumulative FDI to mainland China as a result of globalization are the two main factors causing the labor shares in Taiwan's manufacturing industries to fall. This is consistent with the findings in most previous literature. However, Taiwan's exports to China and cumulative FDI to countries other than China tend to raise labor shares, which is different from past findings. By breaking down the changes in labor shares, we find that because of the unique economic situation that Taiwan faces, the explanation for our empirical results (regardless of whether or not they are consistent with the literature) may differ from those provided by the literature.起始頁-結束頁：421-451資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202009_48(3).000411篇名：哪類孩子最受教？從政大校務資料看學生表現並列篇名：Student College Performance under the Multiple Entrance Policy - Evidence from Administrative Data of National Chengchi University作者：李浩仲(Hao-Chung Li);李文傑(Wen-Chieh Lee);連賢明(Hsien-Ming Lien);王平(Ping Wang);簡錦漢(Kamhon Kan)關鍵字：多元入學;學業表現;非學業表現;multiple entrance policy;academic performance;nonacademic performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文使用政大自2002至2015年的校務資料探討不同管道入學學生的表現差異。結果顯示：推薦甄選學生有最好的學業成就，其次<U+7232>個人申請學生，再次之<U+7232>考試分發學生。然而在控制學測成績後，個人申請和考試分發學生成績差距變小，尤其在2007年後兩者差距幾乎消失。我們亦觀察到即使在控制學測成績後推薦甄選學生持續有亮眼的學業表現。就非學業活動表現來說，我們發現非考試分發學生參與情形較<U+7232>活躍，但這當中一部份可用學測成績和活動參與的正相關性來解釋。最後，本文建構了一組學業配適度指標，協助我們瞭解那一種入學制度較能夠選出具備合適學業能力比較優勢的學生。結果顯示，自2011年起，非考試分發管道入學學生其學業配適度不如考試分發學者，尤其是來自低PR高中與低所得居住地的學生。英文摘要：This study uses the 2002-2015 administrative data of National Chengchi University to compare the performance of students entering through different tracks. Academically speaking, students admitted through high-school referral (REFER) performed the best, followed by those admitted through individual applications (APPLY). Students entering via joint examination and placement (JEP) on average performed least favorably. However, the academic difference between APPLY and JEP students were mainly due to their academic preparation before entering university. In particular, once we controlled for their score difference in the General Scholastic Ability Test (GSAT), academic performance in the university between APPLY and JEP students disappeared after 2007. On the other hand, REFER students still showed a strong academic advantage even after we controlled for GSAT scores. Also, we found that REFER and APPLY students were more willing to participate in school activities and join student clubs, though a substantial portion of this inclination can be explained by their GSAT scores. Finally, we devise an index to measure the scholastic match of each student to his/her department of study. The results suggest that since 2011, APPLY and JEP students on average have lower scores on this index, especially the ones from low PR high schools and low income areas.起始頁-結束頁：139-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202006_48(2).000112篇名：台灣已婚婦女勞動供給之實證研究－動態非線性追蹤資料模型之應用並列篇名：An Empirical Study on Labor Supply of Married Women in Taiwan Using Dynamic and Nonlinear Panel Data Model作者：曾中信(Chung-Hsin Tseng);張勝凱(Sheng-Kai Chang)關鍵字：追蹤資料模型;probit模型;Tobit模型;狀態相依;panel data;probit model;Tobit model;state dependence期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文參考Hyslop（1999）的計量方法，在非線性追蹤資料模型中加入一階狀態相依（first-order state dependence）、誤差項一階自我迴歸（first-order autoregression）等動態結構，探討已婚婦女勞動參與具有持續性的現象。研究資料採用華人家庭動態資料庫（Panel Study of Family Dynamics，簡稱PSFD）民國93-96年的主樣本資料。研究結果發現，年齡與教育年數的影響皆符合一般理論預期；勞動參與具有顯著正向的一階狀態相依，以及負向的誤差項一階自我迴歸；小孩個數對婦女勞動供給在靜態模型中具有顯著的內生性。然而，在動態模型中，此外生性假設的檢定並不顯著。此外，丈夫薪資所得無論在靜態或動態模型中皆具有顯著的內生關係。英文摘要：This paper follows the empirical methods in Hyslop (1999) to investigate married women's persistence of labor participation in Taiwan. Dynamic structures such as first-order state dependence and a first-order autoregressive error term are incorporated in the estimation. The data used in this paper is the Panel Study of Family Dynamics (PSFD) between 2004 and 2007. It is found that the effects of both age and education are similar to those found in the previous literature. Moreover, it is discovered that there is significantly positive first-order state dependence and a negative first-order autoregressive error term for labor participation of married women in Taiwan. The hypotheses of the exogeneity of fertility and husband's income are both rejected in all static models. However, the exogeneity of fertility could not be rejected in all dynamic models.起始頁-結束頁：187-220資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202006_48(2).000213篇名：大學入學管道與學業表現－以北部某私立大學為例並列篇名：Admission Channels in Matriculation and Academic Performance - A Case Study of One Northern Private University作者：陶宏麟(Hung-Lin Tao);吳幸蓁(Shing-Jen Wu);陳碧<U+7D89>(Bih-Show Chen);楊怡雯(Yi-Wen Yang)關鍵字：大學入學;申請;繁星;指考;matriculation;application;multi-star;exam-entrance期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文分析北部某私立大學100至104學年五個年度入學學生於大學前兩學年的學業成績，發現三種入學管道的學生，不論是以原始分數、系排名、標準化Z值代表學業表現，均以繁星生最佳，申請生次之，指考生最差，這樣的結論也適用只採計必修科目。繁星生在數理相關科系表現不如在非數理相關科系表現，但仍顯著優於指考生。指考生在課業投入、學習滿意、就學穩定上都較繁星生或申請生差。繁星生在課業投入雖然顯著大於指考生，但這無法解釋他們成績<U+7232>什麼優於指考生。高中成績可相當程度解釋繁星生的好成績，但仍無法完全解釋，本文試圖提出原因。英文摘要：In this paper we analyze first two years' academic performance of students admitted to one northern private university from the years 2011 to 2015. The result shows that academic performance of students from the Multi-stars program is best, whether using grades, ranking in department or z-score as measuring standards for academic performance. This result still holds when using only required courses. Next to students from the Multi-stars program are students from the Application channel, while students from the Joint College Entrance Exam (JCEE) channel are worst in academic performance. The academic performance of students from the Multi-stars program in math and science related departments is worse than their performance in non-math and science departments. Nonetheless their performance is still significantly better than students from the JCEE channel. Academic performance of students from the JCEE channel are worse than students from the Multi-stars channel or Application channel in academic hour inputs, learning satisfaction, and academic status stability. The superior performance of students from the Multi-stars channel over students from the JCEE channel can not be explained by more academic hour inputs. Grades from high-school might be a good reason for their superior academic performance in university. But this factor is not the sole reason for the superiority of the Multi-stars channel students. In this paper, we try to give some other explanations.起始頁-結束頁：221-268資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202006_48(2).000314篇名：代工廠商的創新升級與產業動態並列篇名：Innovation Upgrades in Subcontractor Firms and Industrial Dynamics作者：謝中興(Chung-Hsing Hsieh)關鍵字：異質性廠商;創新升級;變動需求彈性;自創品牌;firm heterogeneity;innovation upgrades;variable demand elasticity;OBM期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文將國際垂直分工引入Melitz and Ottaviano（2008）模型，探討代工廠商創新升級之相關議題。因<U+7232>高生產力廠商能承擔自創品牌的採行成本，且循代工升級的獲利空間有限，故最可能自創品牌。據此，本文探討後進廠商的長期發展與產業動態。首先，當採行成本夠高，自創品牌並不抵觸品牌夥伴的利益，故不會遭受抵制；其次，OBM品牌對市場的影響決定於廠商的異質性程度，當生產力差距夠大，市場結構不穩定，低生產力品牌將被OBM品牌取代。反之，市場結構穩定，新舊品牌和平共存。最後，自創品牌的採行成本下降有助於產業轉型升級，有較高比例的廠商跨足到品牌經營。英文摘要：We introduce international fragmentation of production processes in the Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) model. We do so to explore perspectives on innovation upgrades in subcontractor firms. We first demonstrate that high-productivity firms are the firms that are most likely to develop into own-brand manufacturing (OBM) players. Such firms profit little from subcontracting upgrading and can afford the fixed cost of adoption. We then embed our results in a dynamic setting to address questions on the long-term evolution of latecomer firms and industrial dynamics. When adoption costs are high enough, a brand vendor can benefit from the OBM strategy of its partner, and consequently, does not boycott collaborative upgrades as retaliation. Furthermore, the impact of OBM strategies on market structure is demonstrated to depend on the extent of productivity heterogeneity. Market structure is unstable and low-productivity incumbents will be replaced by OBM players if productivity is heterogeneous enough. By contrast, old and new brands can coexist in a stable market. Finally, an exogenous decrease in the fixed cost of adoption can expedite subcontractor adoption of the OBM strategy. This may persuade a higher fraction of OBM players to join.起始頁-結束頁：269-299資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202006_48(2).000415篇名：Pension Reform in Taiwan: A Macroeconomic Analysis並列篇名：台灣的年金改革－以總體經濟學角度分析作者：鄭宇翔(Yu-Hsiang Cheng);林軒馳(Huan-Chih Lin);田中敦子(Atsuko Tanaka)關鍵字：pension reform;labor supply;intensive margin;extensive margin;年金改革;勞動供給;集約邊際;外延邊際期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：This paper quantifies the fiscal costs of different policy reforms in Taiwan that achieve the goal of a self-financed pension system. We build a general equilibrium life-cycle model with endogenous labor supply on both intensive and extensive margins, consumption, savings, and benefit claiming. We conduct counterfactual analysis to evaluate the impacts of various reforms that could balance the pension budget while taking current demographic changes into account. We find that the pension system can be self-financed if the government (i) increases income taxes by 5.4%, (ii) increases consumption taxes by 6.2%, (iii) increases pension taxes by 9.3%, or (iv) decreases the pension benefits by 23.5%. We also compare our results with those from a partial equilibrium model, often used in the existing studies. The comparison highlights the importance of the general equilibrium effects and indicates that partial equilibrium analysis underestimates the negative effects on the labor supply.英文摘要：本文為達到退休金自籌的制度目標，針對台灣不同年金改革方案下的財政成本進行量化分析。我們建立生命週期的一般均衡模型，納入集約邊際及外延邊際的勞動供給、消費、儲蓄及退休時機作為內生變數，並在考量當前人口結構變化下利用反事實分析法評估各種年金改革方案達到平衡預算的影響。本研究發現，若政府（1）提高綜合所得稅5.4%、（2）提高消費稅6.2%、（3）提高自提退休金9.3%，（4）降低退休給付23.5%，將可能達到自籌的年金制度。另外，本研究發現部分均衡分析可能低估了對勞動供給的負面影響，而研究結果的差異突顯一般均衡效果的重要性。起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202003_48(1).000116篇名：入學管道與學習表現並列篇名：Multi-channel Admission and Academic Achievement作者：李維倫(Wei-Lun Lee);古慧雯(Hui-Wen Koo);駱明慶(Ming-Ching Luoh);林明仁(Ming-Jen Lin)關鍵字：多元入學;個人申請;入學考試;高中畢業學校;學業成績;multi-channel admission;college application;entrance exam;high school alma mater;college score期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：我們使用2007－14年間入學之台大學生的學籍資料、入學考試成績和在學成績，探討不同管道學生入學後的學業表現差異，並藉此評估多元入學政策在台大實施的成效。我們發現，以個人申請管道入學學生的學業成績雖然顯著優於透過指考入學的學生，但學測成績的差異即可解釋兩者入學後學業表現的大部分差異；控制學測成績後，申請生和指考生的學業成績並沒有顯著差異。而在轉系與退學的面向，申請、繁星生無論在轉系、成績因素退學和主動退學的比例，皆明顯低於指考生。在繁星計畫／繁星推薦方面，繁星生平均的學業表現優於申請生和指考生。這不只是來自明星高中繁星生的貢獻，非明星高中繁星生的學業表現平均而言也顯著高於指考生。然而如果只看來自2011－15年內無人以申請或指考進入台大的高中的繁星生，其學業成績則顯著低於指考生。此一差異也可以用學測成績的差異來解釋；控制學測成績後，這些繁星生和指考生的學業成績並沒有顯著差異。英文摘要：At the turn of this century, National Taiwan University (NTU) started to admit undergraduate students via different channels. Top ranked students in high school are considered by the Star Program. Students interested in the Application Program are first screened by their GSAT (General Scholastic Ability Test) scores, and those who pass this screening will be further evaluated by the departments. Students not admitted by these two programs take a national joint entrance examination (Exam) and will be matched with departments of various universities based on their scores. This study compares college performance of students who enter NTU via different channels. We find that students admitted by the Application Program perform better than those admitted by the Exam Program. However, this performance difference could be explained by the difference in their GSAT scores. Star students, on average, perform better than other students. Once we focus on high schools that have no graduates entering NTU via the Application or Exam Program, we find their Star students have lower college scores than other students. These Star students, usually from backward places, though lagging behind their classmates in GSAT scores, exhibit good upward mobility in their class ranks.起始頁-結束頁：31-76資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202003_48(1).000217篇名：台灣金融情勢與經濟預測並列篇名：Taiwan's Financial Conditions and Economic Forecasting作者：張天惠(Tien-Huei Chang);朱浩榜(Hao-Pang Chu)關鍵字：金融情勢指數;信用;資產價格;經濟下行風險;financial conditions index;credit;asset price;downside risks期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：全球金融危機證實，過度且持續的信用創造及資產價格泡沫<U+7232>觸發金融危機的重要因素。近來研究發現，評估金融情勢不僅有助預測未來總體經濟走勢，尚有助判定未來經濟下行風險。爰此，本文採用大量金融變數，並納入房地產市場與銀行信用等資訊，再以Doz, Giannone, and Reichlin（2011）兩階段動態因子模型，建構我國之金融情勢指數（financial conditions index, FCI）。實證結果顯示，FCI顯著領先實質面的經濟變數，且可提供有助經濟預測的額外資訊。當未來經濟成長的下行風險越高，FCI的領先性質將更形明顯；FCI對於經濟活動陷入衰退之預測能力表現佳，且納入房地產與信用變數之FCI表現可能更勝一籌。英文摘要：In this paper, we develop Taiwan's financial conditions index (FCI) using a wide range of financial indicators, especially encompassing real estate and credit data in order to study the relationship of financial conditions and economic forecasting. We employ the two-step dynamic factor model of Doz, Giannone, and Reichlin (2011) which makes estimation more accurate and efficient. The results indicate FCI not only performs better as a leading indicator of real economic variables, but also provides additional information for forecasting economic activity. Furthermore, the higher the future economic downside risks, the better the FCI serves as a leading indicator. FCI (specifically incorporating information on real estate and credit variables) appears to signal downside risks to economic growth well.起始頁-結束頁：77-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202003_48(1).000318篇名：資產流動性、失業與貨幣政策並列篇名：Liquidity, Unemployment and Monetary Policy作者：陳妍蒨(Yen-Chien Chen);張德存(Te-Tsun Chang);林佑龍(Yo-Long Lin)關鍵字：失業;資產流動性;菲力普曲線;pledgeability;unemployment;Phillips curve期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：48卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文以全面均衡的模型來探討台灣資產流動性，勞動市場與貨幣政策長期的關聯。模型捕捉社會上的經濟活動有時會處於完全競爭市場，有時交易也會需要搜尋、議價或受限於信用限制。因存在著受限制的承諾，因此消費者需要將資產當成抵押品來進行交易。在貨幣均衡下，流動性上限將由貨幣政策決定。若央行增加貨幣成長率，因為貨幣價值越低，人們對於房屋的需求會更高，房屋實質價格會上升；然而，房屋價量增加的結果只是排擠貨幣的持有，消費者可使用資金的實質價值反而下降，進而減少消費。廠商也會因<U+7232>獲利銳減而減少雇用人員，使得失業率提高。英文摘要：In the current paper we study the interactions between asset liquidity (pledge-ability), unemployment, and monetary policies in a general equilibrium framework. Limited commitment or imperfect monitoring affects interterm-poral allocation of resources. People then use assets as collateral to ensure compliance with commitment. In the monetary equilibrium, the debt limits are determined by monetary policies. Higher monetary growth rates lower real balances but push up real housing prices. Households, however, consume less because of decreasing values of purchasing power of total assets. Also, firms hire fewer workers because of the decline in profits. In the end, we see the positive slope of the Phillips curve.起始頁-結束頁：107-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202003_48(1).000401篇名：社群媒體中訊息設計與社群結構對消費者行為之影響：以資料探勘方法分析LINE@為例並列篇名：An Exploration of Social Media Message Design, Community Structure, and Consumer Behaviors-Taking LINE@ as Example作者：朱彩馨(Tsai-Hsin Chu);李彥賢(Yen-Hsien Lee);陳展宏(Chan-Hung Chen)關鍵字：訊息設計;資料探勘;網站流量;會員封鎖;購買行為;Message design;data mining;webpage clicks;member blocking;purchases期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：22卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：隨著LINE的使用融入消費者生活，許多企業想藉助LINE來傳遞品牌資訊、建立會員關係、與銷售產品。本研究以LINE@社群訊息為研究標的，運用資料探勘方法來分析LINE@上的訊息設計與網站流量、會員封鎖與訂單轉換率的關係。研究結果發現，會員規模為影響流量轉換的主要因素，抽獎則是次要因素；加入LINE@時間為影響會員封鎖行為最相關的因素；而目標會員率、溝通時段、加入LINE@時間為影響下單訂購最相關之因素。研究的結果建議經營者宜先健全社群會員結構與體質，再進行訊息設計的各項操弄，以達到較佳的經營與轉換績效。英文摘要：When LINE becomes popular in our daily life, many organizations exploit it to improve brand information delivery and customer relationship for increasing sales. This study investigates how to manage LINE@ message to facilitate desired consumer behaviors. Anchored on real-world practices of LINE@, this study adopts data mining approach to examine the effects of message design elements on consumer responsive behaviors, such as webpage clicks, member blocking, and purchases. Our research findings suggest that membership size and lucky draw are the main factors that affect webpage clicks. Besides, the interval that a company has joined LINE@ is the main factor for blocking message. Finally, unblocking member ratio, time period of message post, and interval that a company has joined LINE@ would affect customer's purchases. Our findings also suggest that organizations must understand and strengthen the structure of social media community before putting efforts on designing messages.起始頁-結束頁：129-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202012_22(2).00012篇名：Are You Watching Live Stream Shopping? An Investigation of Influential Factors on Audiences' Trust and Loyalty Intention from Elaboration Likelihood Model Perspective並列篇名：你正在觀看購物直播嗎？從推敲可能性模型觀點探討線上直播平台觀眾之信任及忠誠意圖作者：鄭菲菲(Fei-Fei Cheng);李嘉珊(Chia-Shan Li);劉沛希(Pei-Hsi Liu);吳金山(Chin-Shan Wu)關鍵字：Shopping in live streaming;ELM;trusting belief;loyalty intention;直播購物;推敲可能性模型;信任;忠誠意圖期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：22卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：With the proliferation of online live streaming applications, a new type of shopping environment has changed the way for sellers to interact with their potential buyers. How to win the trust and loyalty from the audiences is one of the major challenges for online sellers to provide product information through online live streaming. In this study, factors on the audiences' trusting belief and loyalty intention toward the broadcaster were examined from the perspective of Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM), in which the information in live streaming was delivered through central route (e.g., argument quality) and the peripheral route (e.g., source credibility). In addition, two moderators were included: the product scarcity and product involvement. Scenario based laboratory experiment was conducted and the research results indicated that information delivered through peripheral route showed more significant influence on audiences' trusting belief and loyalty intention toward broadcasters. However, when the product was offered with amount limitation (product scarcity), the influence of argument quality will be strengthened. In addition, people who are high in product involvement will be more influenced by argument quality, while the source credibility showed more positive influence for participants with lower product involvement. Findings from this study can provide important implications for live streaming broadcasters and platforms.英文摘要：直播購物更加注重賣家與買家之間的關係，而行動裝置的普及，讓許多使用者可以隨時隨地觀看線上直播，因此直播購物成為許多賣家銷售的形式。本研究以推敲可能性模式（Elaboration likelihood model, ELM）為理論基礎，探討在線上直播環境下，買家如何透過中央路徑（直播主產品論述品質）及周邊路徑（來源可信度），形成對直播賣家的信任，並了解在產品稀少性及產品涉入高低程度調節下，對於信任的影響，以及透過信任所產生之忠誠意圖。研究結果共獲得377份有效完整數據，使用迴歸分析探究兩路徑下觀眾對直播主的信任影響。研究結果發現，透過論述品質及來源可信度可增強觀眾的信任感，此外產品供給數量及觀眾對於產品涉入程度的不同也會影響觀眾對於直播主的信任。起始頁-結束頁：159-178資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202012_22(2).00023篇名：利用數據辨識及驅動商業生態系的可行性初探－以台北代表性商圈應用為例並列篇名：A Preliminary Study on Data-driven Diagnosis and Deployment of A Business Ecosystem in A Commercial District in Taipei作者：郭建良(David Chien-Liang Kuo);張元溢(Mars Yuan-Yi Chang)關鍵字：數據應用;商圈;商業生態系;個案研究;服務設計;Data-driven applications;commercial district;business ecosystem;case study;service design期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：22卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：為回應有關商業生態系在設計與驅動環節的理論—實務缺口，本研究聚焦探討下述課題︰（1）能否類比既有研究、場域特質和數據，研提轉換為商業生態角色的衡量指標；（2）能否槓桿消費者移動與跨店行銷數據，辨識業者在商業生態系的角色；（3）能否搭配短期資源與服務設計，驅動原先不具關鍵者之商業生態系發展。本研究以台北市代表商圈為標的，透過為期半年的驗證後發現，所提四項指標可協助測試與區辨既有場域店家角色，並透過關聯分析找出潛力候選關鍵業者；惟結果亦顯示，若生態系領導者心態未到位，且未能累積長期應用資源，則短期挹注與服務設計恐僅能形塑聯合行銷成效，難以誘發不同種群商家參與，更遑論促成商業生態系永續。英文摘要：To help close the gap between theory and practices in terms of business ecosystem design, this study investigates the following three research issues: (1) whether it is applicable in developing an operational framework and measures for mapping firms into appropriate roles of a business ecosystem based upon accessible practical data and guidelines from current studies; (2) whether leveraging customer flow data and cross-firm marketing data is beneficial in depicting the possible role of each firm, thus designing an appropriate business ecosystem; and (3) whether the abovementioned design, cooperating with external, short-run sponsored resources, is helpful in activating and fostering the operations and sustainability of a business ecosystem without keystone players inside. A represented commercial district in Taipei is investigated, whereas a six-month-long proof-of-concept (PoC) stage is examined. Results reveal that the proposed method covering four corresponding measures perform well in terms of role classification based on a fitness role portfolio mapping and the ability of identifying potential key players in the ecosystem. However, our findings also reveal that without dramatic changes in the mindset and behaviors of various participants in the business ecosystem, the ecosystem can be hardly fostered and sustained by short-term supports through external driving forces.起始頁-結束頁：179-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202012_22(2).00034篇名：第三方餐飲外送平台價值分析：餐飲供應合作夥伴之觀點並列篇名：Hierarchical Value Analysis of Third-Party Food Delivery Platforms: Perspective of Food and Beverage Providers作者：白<U+51E2>芸(Fan-Yun Pai);葉子明(Tsu-Ming Yeh);蕭鈺錦(Yu-Chin Hsiao)關鍵字：餐飲外送平台;價值分析;方法目的鏈;階層價值圖;Food delivery platform;value analysis;mean-end chain;hierarchical value map期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：22卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：台灣外食市場每年成長，業者面對的競爭卻來越來越白熱化，越來越多餐飲業者採用第三方的餐飲外送平台，銷售外送餐點，選用外送平台有優點也有缺點，究竟是甚麼原因讓餐飲業者投入餐飲外送平台的懷抱？加入平台後又能為企業帶來哪些價值？本研究透過方法目的鏈，訪談40位餐飲業者，分析外送平台合作之屬性以及合作後所得的結果及最終可獲取之價值。研究結果共獲得了9個屬性、8項結果、6項價值，並藉由分析蘊含矩陣，建立階層價值圖，了解屬性、結果、價值之關聯，並找出最重要之路徑，提供第三方的餐飲外送平台服務設計之參考。英文摘要：Although the Taiwanese food and beverage market grows, the food and beverage face keener and keener competition because the increase of providers. More and more food and beverage providers use third-party food delivery platforms (FDPs). There are advantages but also disadvantages to adopt a FDP. It is therefore an important issue to understand the why food and beverage providers are willing to participate FDPs. Mean-end chain was used to analyze the attributes, consequences, and values of third-party FDPs for food and beverage providers. Forty owners of catering restaurants were interviewed. From the collected data, content analysis was conducted and hierarchical value maps were built. Management implications are provided for FDPs to design attractive service accordingly.起始頁-結束頁：213-238資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202012_22(2).00045篇名：從服務設計觀點探討數位遊戲之玩家需求與遊戲設計供給之落差並列篇名：Applying Service Design Approach to Investigate the Gap in Demand and Supply of Digital Games作者：李保宜(Pao-Yi Lee);何淑君(Shu-Chun Ho);許惠媚(Hui-Mei Hsu)關鍵字：數位遊戲;遊戲設計;服務設計;玩家需求;品質機能展開;Digital games;design of digital games;service design;demand of players;quality function deployment期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：22卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究目的在從服務設計的觀點了解遊戲玩家的需求與遊戲設計應改善之技術落差，從玩家需求角度為出發點提出數位遊戲設計應具備的技術要素。本研究分別從遊戲玩家與遊戲供應商的角度收集資料。採用多種研究方法：第一、以個別訪談法收集遊戲玩家對動作遊戲之需求構面；第二、透過問卷調查法收集遊戲玩家的需求構面之滿意度與重要度，接著使用品質特性排序評量法找出玩家對遊戲需求之應優先滿足次序。第三、透過專家訪談建立遊戲供應商之遊戲設計技術供給要素。第四、透過關係矩陣調查了解數位遊戲之供需落差。研究發現動作類遊戲最需優先滿足的顧客屬性為「個人化」，人機介面應著重發展「體感操作」之科技特性以滿足遊戲玩家之需求。英文摘要：The objective of the research is to explore the improvement priority of dgitial games from the service design perspective. This study intends to fulfill the gap of digital game players ”demand and the digital game providers” supply of engineering characteristics. We applied multiple research methods: interviews, survey research, quality function deployment (QFD), and importance and performance analysis (IPA) to find out the priority of improvement that customers desire. We found the top prioritized customer attributes which needed to be improved is the personalization in the Action games. In addition, the top engineering characteristic of game design that needs to be improved is Human-computer interface (body feeling). From the service design perspective, this study identifies customer attributes (service requirement) and engineering characteristics (service quality) of design of digital games.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202006_22(1).00016篇名：影響雲端ERP系統轉換意願之因素：社會影響和創新擴散之觀點並列篇名：Switching Intention of Cloud ERP System: The Roles of Social Influence and Innovation Diffusion作者：張育瑋(Yu-Wei Chang);許秉瑜(Ping-Yu Hsu);楊清淼(Qing-Miao Yang);洪吟芳(Yin-Fang Hong)關鍵字：雲端運算;雲端ERP;創新擴散理論;理性行為理論;知覺風險;Cloud computing;cloud ERP systems;innovation diffusion theory;theory of reasoned action;perceived risk期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：22卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：雲端運算的系統和服務被認為是商業和技術領域的「下一個大事件」。過去雲端運算相關的研究主要多針對組織新技術的採用和接受，卻很少有研究者從企業層級針對系統轉換意願進行實證研究。本研究整合了創新擴散理論和理性行為理論，旨在調查企業從傳統ERP轉換到雲端ERP意願的影響因素。研究對象為已導入ERP系統的企業管理者，共回收有效問卷277份。本研究運用結構方程模型進行假說驗證。結果顯示，雲端ERP系統的相對優勢、相容性、易用性與主觀規範對態度為顯著的正向影響，主觀規範與態度對轉換意願為顯著的正向影響，而知覺風險則是負向影響轉換意願。本研究結果為雲端服務供應商提供了系統功能與組織層面上的實質建議。英文摘要：Cloud computing systems and services are regarded as ”the next big thing” in commercial and technological areas. Although previous studies have focused on the adoption and acceptance of cloud computing technology, few studies have focused on the switching intention to cloud systems. Based on the innovation diffusion theory and the theory of reasoned action, our research model was developed to examine the switching intention from traditional ERP systems to cloud ERP systems. By the data collected from Taiwan, a total of 277 valid questionnaires were collected. We used structural equation modeling to test the eight hypotheses. According to our findings, relative advantage, compatibility, ease of use, and subjective norm has significant effects on attitude. Subjective norm and attitude is positively related to switching intention. Perceived risk is negatively related to switching intention. This research advances the theoretical understanding of how enterprises switch to cloud ERP systems and offers organizational suggestions for cloud suppliers.起始頁-結束頁：29-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202006_22(1).00027篇名：影響病患授權電子病歷交換意願之因素－整合信任與健康信念模式並列篇名：Factors Influencing Patients' Willingness to Authorize Exchange of EMR-Integrating Trust and Health Believe Model作者：許惠媚(Hui-Mei Hsu);連俊瑋(Jiunn-Woei Lian);賈佩芳(Pei-Fang Chia);周惠櫻(Huei-Yin Chou)關鍵字：電子病歷交換;資訊隱私顧慮;健康信念模式;信任;Electronic medical record exchange;information privacy concern;health belief model;trust期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：22卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：「台灣健康雲」成功推動的關鍵因素之一是電子病歷交換必須獲得病患授權。然而，在民眾日益重視隱私權的年代，如何讓病患願意授權電子病歷交換，實為一重要課題。本研究主要探討影響病患授權電子病歷交換的因素為何。研究方法為問卷調查法，對象為某醫院之門診病患，採隨機抽樣300名進行資料收集，回收有效問卷248份。結構模式分析結果顯示，資訊隱私顧慮對電子病歷交換授權的意願並沒有直接影響，而是透過知覺益處和知覺障礙間接影響其意願。此外，社會規範亦是影響授權電子病歷交換意願的決定因素之一。在實務上，本研究結果可提供醫療院所與政府單位在制定相關政策之參考依據；在學術上，更強化健康信念模式在廣泛健康行為的解釋能力。英文摘要：The one of critical successful factors of ”Taiwan's health clouds” is under the authorization of the access to patients' electronic medical records. However, in the age of increasing the right of privacy, how to make patients willing to authorize electronic medical record exchange becomes an important issue. The purpose of this study is to explore the factors that will influence on the patient's willingness to authorize electronic medical record exchange. In this study, the questionnaire survey was employed and randomly distributed to 300 outpatients in a hospital, of which 248 valid questionnaires were returned and analyzed. Results of this study indicate that information privacy concern is not directly associated with the willingness of patient's electronic medical record exchange, but through perceived benefits and perceived barriers to affect it. In addition, social norm is another key factor affecting the willingness of patient's electronic medical record exchange. The results of this study can be a reference for medical institutions and governmental agencies to make relevant policies; for academics, the results of this study enhance the explanation power of HBM on general health behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：61-86資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202006_22(1).00038篇名：產品置入顯著度與幽默情境之效果：以Instagram為例並列篇名：Impact of Product Placement Prominence and Humor Context: An Example of Instagram作者：秦時雋(Shih-Chun Chin);周軒逸(Hsuan-Yi Chou)關鍵字：Instagram;產品置入顯著度;認知型幽默;刺激尋求;自我建構;Instagram;product placement prominence;cognitive humor;sensation seeking;self-construal期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：22卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：常見廠商在各類媒體的內容中置入產品、品牌訊息，試圖潛移默化改變消費者對品牌的記憶與態度。過往研究指出，明顯的置入方式雖能提高消費者對品牌的印象，卻容易產生負面態度。本研究以社群媒體Instagram為產品置入媒介，欲藉由幽默之效，來扭轉置入顯著度的可能負面效果，探討在認知型幽默情境的有／無運用下，產品置入顯著度對品牌記憶和態度的效果是否有別，並考量消費者刺激尋求和自我建構類型的干擾效果。三個實驗的結果發現：在Instagram貼文中明顯（vs.隱含）置入產品，能夠提升觀看者的品牌記憶，而當結合認知型幽默時，還可提升品牌態度，特別是對於高刺激尋求或獨立我自我建構的消費者；不過，認知型幽默情境會弱化明顯產品置入對品牌記憶的提升效果。英文摘要：Many companies and marketers place product and brand messages in various media in an attempt to unobtrusively and imperceptibly change consumers' brand memory and attitudes. Prior studies have indicated that prominently placing products/brands in various media can increase consumers' brand memory; however, it is also more likely to elicit consumers' negative attitudes toward brands. Using the social medium Instagram as the medium of product placement, this study examines whether humor can reverse the likely negative impact of product placement prominence. Specifically, it tests the effects of product placement prominence in Instagram posts on brand memory and attitudes with and without the use of cognitive humor. Additionally, the moderating effects of consumers' sensation seeking and self-construal are explored. The results of three experiments reveal that prominent (vs. subtle) placement in Instagram posts increases consumers' brand memory. Prominent placement yields better brand attitudes when cognitive humor is used in the posts, especially for consumers with high sensation seeking and independent self-construal. However, the use of cognitive humor weakens the positive impact of prominent placement on brand memory.起始頁-結束頁：87-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202006_22(1).000401篇名：廣泰金屬如何重新在日本市場獲利作者：溫丹瑋;紀文勝關鍵字：國際運籌管理;生產成本;製造業期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：廣泰金屬工業成立於1978年，生產焊接材料為主，在海外已建立銷售據點以及生產廠房。日本市場一直是廣泰外銷的主力市場，長年維持穩定的銷售量。然而近年日本市場經營的獲利逐年減少，在2015年6月已經到達難以維持的狀況。廣泰需要找出能夠快速且有效解決困難，重新獲利的方法。起始頁-結束頁：1-1資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).CNI0012篇名：賠上企業形象的服務失誤：聯合航空強拉旅客下飛機事件個案作者：陳純德;曾紫嵐關鍵字：航空業超額訂位;服務失敗;服務補救期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：本教學個案旨在說明聯合航空強拉旅客下飛機事件，以提供學生學習航空業超額訂位實務模式以及服務失誤時的服務補救課題。學生可以從個案教學中分析討論航空業超額訂位實務模式對航空公司及旅客的意涵；更可以從個案討論中學習服務業的服務失誤有可能傷害企業形象的珍貴教訓。起始頁-結束頁：23-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).CNI0233篇名：一之軒烘焙坊的生產與銷售協調作者：吳碧珠關鍵字：一之軒烘焙坊;產銷協調;銷售時點系統;企業資源規劃系統;延遲策略期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：一之軒時尚烘焙自1980年創立迄今，擁有22家連鎖門店，年營收達8億元以上規模。隨著社會經濟發展，近年來台灣烘焙產業成長迅速，已達600億元左右的市場規模，通路主要區分專攻袋裝麵包的超市、超商、喜餅專賣店等通路，以及主打現烤麵包的品牌烘焙業，整體係一中小型企業競爭激烈的產業。「好賣的總常在缺貨，不好賣的剩一堆」，一之軒南京店門店透過POS與ERP系統，解決生產與銷售難平衡的困境，並採用利潤分享制度，激勵門店前店與後廠協同合作。本個案主要在探討行銷導向的麵包烘焙業，如何運用管理制度，提升經營效益，並提出實務管理意涵。起始頁-結束頁：45-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).CNI0454篇名：芯藝SPA－賺錢了嗎？作者：林瓊香;黃秀勤;羅世輝關鍵字：芯藝SPA館;美容美體產業;損益表;損益兩平點期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：王冠惠技師及尤心弦技師於2019年9月合資成立芯藝SPA時尚美學館，專營臉部保養護理及美體放鬆等SPA產品。本個案描述兩人攜手投資創業，專業技能穩住顧客，兼保養品行銷也步入軌道，只是兩人辛苦工作，從事美容美體產業的伙伴，往往說好就好，收入存入共同戶頭，店裡的支出開銷也統一由戶頭支出，老闆兼工友，創業近半年，評估是否培訓助手，試算著每月營運成本及收入，到底有沒有賺錢？本教學個案為作業層級個案，藉芯藝個案提供的資訊，探討提供繁多服務品項的美容美體產業，有沒有賺錢？如何能多賺錢？引導學生根據個案資訊，算出各服務品項的毛利率，及涵蓋一家店的營業收入、商品銷貨收入及成本支出；並在現有的設備產能下，利用收支表，評估增聘人力損益兩平的營收增加額；芯藝如何賺更多錢？要增聘助手？還是邀請具經驗的技師抽成進駐服務？起始頁-結束頁：67-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).CNI0675篇名：天津鮮活－面對房租漲價之決策選擇作者：王逸萍;吳明憲關鍵字：決策;交易成本理論;成本計算;房租漲價;產能期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：鮮活果汁控股公司因總部昆山廠產能不足以支應日漸成長的業務，於2014年在天津及廣東另擴新廠，兩者皆採取先承租廠房確認發展性後，再購地建廠的策略。天津鮮活於新廠建造期間，因遵循政府推動控制霧霾整治政策停工半年，以致工程進度嚴重落後而須再延長租約，此時房東提出將房租由原來的12萬元／月漲到30萬元／月的要求。由於漲幅太大加上價格高出市價甚多，讓吳明憲總經理覺得極不合理而不肯輕易妥協。面對房東強硬的態度，天津鮮活公司內部不得不緊急研擬各種可行的選擇方案，並以決策制定程序作為方案選擇的判斷基準。此時的天津鮮活有哪些方案可選擇？不同的選擇方案中，所需考量的因素有哪些？又應如何做決策？起始頁-結束頁：85-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).CNI0856篇名：台灣舞茶道茶飲的成長策略：與夥伴共舞作者：李雨師;王妗濰;謝俊宏關鍵字：直營;加盟;加盟主;夥伴關係期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：舞茶道茶飲創立於2007年，當時台灣茶飲市場已是百家爭鳴，且各大連鎖品牌紛紛積極佈局海外市場。舞茶道總經理張壯楠相信唯有深耕台灣、站穩腳步，才有機會放眼國際。舞茶道目前已有42家門市，大多集中於台灣北部與中部，張總經理正在思考應如何帶領舞茶道布局台灣市場。本個案旨在探討舞茶道之展店策略的改變與考量因素，以及舞茶道如何在有限的資源下借力使力，與加盟主建立夥伴關係，以持續市場擴張與成長。藉由本個案，學生可瞭解連鎖加盟企業之各類型展店手法、加盟主管理機制與市場佈局之間的配合。起始頁-結束頁：107-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).CNI1077篇名：標竿學習如何寫個案讀書會－快艇專案作者：張四薰;周龍鴻;林豪傑關鍵字：虛擬社群;專案管理;價值共創;治理機制;利害關係人期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：對於碩博士生或是大專院校教師而言，寫個案是理論與實務結合之學習，且兼顧滿足學校要求期刊投稿之需求，但是要完成一篇TSSCI期刊等級的個案寫作必須要有個案故事案源，以及具有專業個案寫作養成訓練能耐之主筆，二者缺一不可。個案寫作之產出有其相當的困難度，如何有效完成具發表品質的個案是一個值得探討的課題。本個案以執行「快艇專案」的價值共創案例為核心議題，探討一個由志工幹部組成，成員免費自由參加的知識分享虛擬社群，實際執行「媒合與輔導活動」的案例，媒合社員資源，讓社員分組，學習個案寫作，跨進個案寫作門檻，解決社員不會寫個案的需求問題。透過本個案情境的討論，逐步引領學生理解虛擬社群與價值共創相關理論，利害關係人參與價值共創平台，了解虛擬社群經營者如何以當責方式執行平台活動，吸引成員參與社群，進而共創社群價值，提供具體實用的建議與實務操作上的省思。起始頁-結束頁：129-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).CNI1298篇名：How Kuangtai Regains Profits in the Japanese Market作者：Dan-Wei (Marian) Wen;Wen-Sheng (Vincent) Chi關鍵字：International Logistics;Production Cost;Production Industry期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Since the establishment of Kuangtai Metal Industrial in 1978, welding materials have been its main product. The sales and production of welding materials have extended beyond Taiwan to overseas markets, making Kuangtai an international company. Among the overseas markets, the Japanese market has been Kuangtai's main export market with stable sales for many years. However, in recent years, the profitability in the Japanese market has decreased significantly and it has made business in the Japanese market shaky in June 2015. Under this circumstance, Kuangtai needs to find solutions that can quickly and effectively resolve difficulties and regain profits in the Japanese market.起始頁-結束頁：173-173資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).ENG1739篇名：Service Failure that Impairs Corporate Image - The Case of the Passenger Being Forcibly Dragged Off United Airlines Flight作者：Chun-Der Chen;Tzu-Lan Tseng關鍵字：Flight Overbooking in the Aviation Industry;Service Failures;Service Recovery期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：This case depicts the incident that one passenger was dragged off United flight in order to offer students a context to learn about common practice of overbooking in the aviation industry, as well as the service recovery issues upon service failures. From this teaching with case, students learn about the implications of flight overbooking in the aviation industry. In addition, students can learn from the case discussion how a service failure became a disaster for the image of United Airlines.起始頁-結束頁：193-193資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).ENG19310篇名：The Coordination of Production and Sales in IJYSHENG Bakery作者：Pi-Chu Wu關鍵字：IJYSHENG bakery;Coordination of Production and sales;POS;ERP;Postponement Strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Founded in 1980, IJYSHENG Bakery now has 22 chain stores and an annual revenue of more than NTD 800 million. Along with the economic and social development, Taiwan's baking industry has grown rapidly in recent years, reaching a market size of around NTD 60 billion. Sales channels can be divided into two categories: stores that specialize in bagged bread, for example supermarkets, convenience stores, and cake specialty stores, and the branded baking industry that focuses on freshly baked bread. It is an industry where small and medium-sized enterprises are highly competitive. Best sellers are always out of stock, while a pile of unpopular breads are left. IJYSHENG Nanjing Store has solved this dilemma through POS and ERP systems, and adopted a profit sharing system to incentivize sales and production coordination. This case study mainly discusses on how to use the management system to improve the operating efficiency of the marketing-oriented bakery industry, and in turn proposes practical management implications.起始頁-結束頁：211-211資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).ENG21111篇名：Does Sin-Yi SPA make money?作者：Chiung-Hsiang Lin;Hsiu-Chin Huang;Shih-Hui Lo關鍵字：Sin-Yi SPA;Beauty and Body Industry;Income Statement;Break-even Point期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Ms. Wang and Yuo jointly founded the Sin-Yi SPA in September, 2019, a store that mainly offered the services of facial care and body relaxation. This case describes the two people working together to invest and start a business, utilizing professional skills to stabilize customers, and selling skin care products to sustain income. They have started business for nearly half a year without monthly salary, and they keep revenue and expenses in a common account and only withdraw the exact amount of money when they are in need. With so much effort, is Sin-Yi SPA making money? This teaching case is an operation-level case. Using the information provided by Sin-Yi SPA, the researcher tries to teach students to calculate the gross profit margin of each service item in the beauty and body industry. Besides, the researcher also manages to calculate the required revenue for break-even point regarding hiring an assistant for Sin-Yi. What should they do to make more money? Should Sin-Yi SPA hire an assistant or an experienced technician to settle in?起始頁-結束頁：231-231資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).ENG23112篇名：Fresh Juice Industry (Tianjin) - Decision Making in the Face of Rising Rents作者：Yih-Ping Wang;Sam Wu關鍵字：Decision Making;Transaction Cost Theory;Cost Forecast;Rent Increase;Production Capacity期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Sunjuice Co., Ltd. expanded its new factories in Tianjin and Guangdong in 2014 due to the insufficient capacity of its headquarters in Kunshan plant. For these two sites, the company decided to start with plant rental and then to buy the land for building its own factory if given a promising future. The construction of the new plant was suspended for half a year due to the haze control reinforced by the government, resulting in a serious delay in the progress of the project and need to extend the lease. At this time, the landlord requested to raise the monthly rent from RMB120 thousand to RMB300 thousand. Mr. Ming-Hsien Wu, the general manager rejected this rent increase since it was unreasonably large and much higher than the average rent in the nearby area. In the face of the landlord's arrogance, Fresh Juice Industry (Tianjin) had to promptly figure out feasible actions and use the decision-making process as the basis for judging the options. What would the options for Tianjin Fresh be at this time? Among those options, what factors should be taken into account? And how should decisions be made?起始頁-結束頁：249-249資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).ENG24913篇名：Dancing with Partners - The Growth Strategy of Maisadou Tea and Cafe作者：Yu-Shih Lee;Chin-Wei Wang;Chun-Hung Hsieh關鍵字：Regular Chains;Franchise;Franchisee;Partnership期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Maisadou Tea and Cafe was established in 2007, when competition in Taiwan's tea drinks market was fierce and many companies were active in expanding oversea business. The general manager of Maisadou Tea and Cafe , Chuang-Nan Chang, believed that the overseas business opportunity would come true only when the company was standing firmly in Taiwan. Maisadou Tea and Cafe now has 42 chain stores mostly in the north and centre of Taiwan. Chuang-Nan Chang is considering how to lead the company to develop the market in Taiwan. This case highlights Maisadou Tea and Cafe's market strategy, and how the company collaborates with the franchisees with limited resources. Through the case, students will realize the fitness among market strategies, management mechanism of franchisees and market expansion.起始頁-結束頁：271-271資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).ENG27114篇名：The Study Group of Benchmarking on Writing a Case - The Speedboat Project作者：Sze-hsun Sylcien Chang;Roger Chou;Hao-Chieh Lin關鍵字：Virtual Community;Project Management;Value Co-creation;Governance Mechanism;Stakeholders期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：For master's and PhD students or teachers of colleges and universities, writing a case is a consolidated learning of theory and practice, and it also meets the needs of the school for journal submission. However, to complete a TSSCI journal-level case writing, it is necessary to have the source of a case story and the lead author with professional case writing training ability, both of which are indispensable. The output of case writing is quite difficult, and how to effectively complete a case with publication quality is a topic worthy of discussion. This case takes the value co-creation of implementing the ”Speedboat Project” as the core topic and discusses a knowledge sharing virtual community composed of volunteers. The members can freely participate in this virtual community, practically execute the cases of ”matching and coaching activities”, and the teachers will match members' resources, divide the members into groups to learn and cross the threshold of case writing, and help solve the problem of members who do not know how to write cases. Through the discussion of this case scenario, students are guided to understand the related theory of virtual community and value co-creation. Stakeholders may participate in the value co-creation platform and understand how virtual community operators responsibly perform platform activities, and members are attracted to join in the community, creating the value of the community together and thus provide specific, constructive suggestions and practical reflections.起始頁-結束頁：289-289資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202010_39(4).ENG28915篇名：感知高績效工作系統與工作績效之後設分析研究並列篇名：A Meta-Analytic Study of Perceived High Performance Work System and Job Performance作者：房美玉(Meiyu Fang);顏秀穎(H.Y. Yen)關鍵字：感知高績效工作系統;後設分析;任務績效;組織公民行為;perceived high performance work system;meta-analysis;task performance;organizational citizenship behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：探討感知高績效工作系統與工作績效間的關聯性。工作績效包含任務績效與組織公民行為。研究設計／方法：以後設分析法研究2000年至2020年間已發表或未發表之中外研究及期刊論文，共得36篇。研究結果：感知高績效工作系統與任務績效間修正後相關係數為.312，涵蓋樣本為11,349人，效應量d為.657；感知高績效工作系統與組織公民行為之修正後相關係數為.343，涵蓋樣本為6,577人，效應量d為.730。調節分析發現感知高績效工作系統與自評及他評之任務績效修正後相關係數分別是.313與.309，兩者效應量相差不到百分之一。研究限制／啟發：相同資料來源可能會產生共同方法變異量。理論／實務／社會意涵：高績效工作系統透過影響個人能力、動機、與機會之機制產生綜效，進而提升組織績效，因此從員工對於高績效工作系統的感知觀點出發是了解此運作機制的重要關鍵。創見／價值：以往較少從員工觀點出發的高績效工作系統研究，本後設分析包含過去20年所累積的研究並以效應量呈現關聯性的強度，結果可作為後續研究的參考依據。英文摘要：Purpose - The present study examines the relationships between perceived HPWS and job performance (include task performance and organizational citizenship behavior). Design/methodology/approach - The present meta-analysis are based on 36 published or unpublished articles from 2000-2020. Findings - The findings indicate that perceived HPWS is positively related to task performance with a corrected coefficient of .312, the effect size (d) of .657 with the total N=11,349. The corrected correlation coefficient between perceived HPWS and OCB is .343, and the effect size (d) is .730 with the total N= 6,577. A moderator analysis of the evaluation source found no significant differences between self-ratings and other-ratings of task performance. The corrected correlations between the perceived HPWS and self-ratings, and the perceived HPWS and other-ratings are .313 and .309, respectively. Research limitations/implications - The common method variance might influence the effect sizes. Practical implications/Social implications - The perception of HPWS from employees will influence their attitudes and working behaviors. Therefore, a meta-analysis study of the relationship between the perceived HPWS and job performance can help to understand the mechanism between HPWS and organization performance. Originality/value - There are few HPWS studies based on the employee's perception. The present meta-analysis study summarized the effect sizes of perceived HPWS and job performance accumulated in the past 20 years.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202007_39(3).CNI00116篇名：不信任對線上購物意圖之影響－兩岸消費者之比較研究並列篇名：The Effects of Distrust on Online Shopping Intention-A Comparative Study between Cross-Strait Consumers作者：王凱弘(Kai-Hung Wang);游耀華(Yao-Hua You);黃鐸銘(Tuo-Ming Huang);范錚強(Cheng-Kiang Farn)關鍵字：產品態度;不信任信念;購買意圖;兩岸對比;Product Attitudes;Distrust Beliefs;Purchase Intention;Comparison between Cross-Strait期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：本研究以二元產品態度，探討不信任對消費者線上購買意圖的影響，並對台灣和大陸兩岸的消費者進行比較性研究。研究設計與方法：本研究採用實驗設計方法，以線上問卷方式分別對兩岸消費者進行調查，有效樣本台灣115份與大陸150，共計265份。實驗先針對標的產品選擇、品牌名稱、產品屬性和效價評論進行4次前測，正式階段則對受測者隨機分配到4組不同組合情境之一，在閱讀不同情境之產品評論後進行問卷作答。本研究採用ANCOVA與PLS-SEM進行假說檢定分析。研究結果：研究發現，對產品的正面態度和負面態度會顯著影響對產品的不信任；對產品的不信任會顯著影響購買意圖。此外，台灣消費者對產品的不信任比大陸消費者高；大陸消費者則在負面態度對不信任的正向影響大於台灣的消費者。研究限制：本研究採實驗設計，因外部變數可控而有較好的內部效度，但相對要推論到母體的外部效度易受到威脅；另外，在回收樣本數較小且不夠廣泛下，研究結果可能產生偏差。實務意涵：本研究建議企業制定策略時要因地制宜，應該建立一完善的顧客互動機制，降低消費者對產品的不信任感，並建立快速的反應機制，在遭遇顧客投訴或負面資訊時能夠及時處理，減少顧客的負面情緒。線上與店面購物最大差異在於對實體商品直接接觸與體驗，業者應理解負評遠大於正評的影響性，並重視客觀評價機制的重要性，才能使電商更往正向發展。價值：從二元態度的角度來理解消費者，可更加接近真實世界，準確地預測和洞察消費者的行為。驗證與比較兩岸消費者在線上購物時，對產品評論的感知與行為方式是存在差異性。英文摘要：Purpose - This research explores the effects of distrust on consumers' online shopping intention with a dualistic attitude, and conduct a comparative study on cross-strait consumers. Design/methodology/approach - This research deploys a controlled experiment to analyze the on-line questionnaires retrieved from consumers on both sides of Taiwan Strait. A total of 265 valid questionnaires were recovered, 115 from Taiwan and 150 from China. We firstly conducted 4 pilot tests, primarily on the selection of the subject products, brand names, attributes of the product, and valence reviews. Later in the large-scale survey, participants were randomly assigned to one of the four experimental scenarios. They read through products reviews under different scenarios and then answered the questionnaire. The hypotheses were tested using ANCOVA and PLS-SEM. Findings - The results show that the positive/negative attitude towards product significantly affects the distrusting beliefs; distrusting beliefs in turn significantly affect the purchase intention. In addition, the distrust of Taiwanese consumers is higher than that of Mainland Chinese; the positive effects of the Mainland Chinese consumers' negative attitude on distrust is higher than that of Taiwanese consumers. Research limitations/implications - This experimental design is expected to have better internal validity because the external variables are controllable. However, it might constitute a threat to external validity, the validity of applying the conclusions outside the context of this study. Besides, the small number of recovered samples and the limited coverage might result in biased research results. Practical implications/Social implications - This research suggests that companies should formulate strategies by adapting to local conditions. By building a complete customer interaction mechanism, firms are able to ease consumers' distrusting beliefs ; by establishing a speedy response mechanism, firms are allowed to promptly cope with customer complaints or related negative information, decreasing the level of customer dissatisfaction. The major factor that distinguishes shopping at stores from online shopping is the direct contact with physical products. Companies should understand that negative reviews have stronger influence than positive ones do, and highly value the importance of objective evaluation systems in order to realize more prosperous e-commerce. Originality/value - By understanding consumers from a dualistic attitude perspective, we might come closer to reality, and be able to more accurately predict and penetrate consumer behaviour. Through verifying and comparing the online shopping behaviour of consumers on two sides of the Taiwan Strait, we see their differences in perceptions and patterns regarding product reviews.起始頁-結束頁：29-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202007_39(3).CNI02917篇名：A Meta-Analytic Study of Perceived High Performance Work System and Job Performance作者：Meiyu Fang;H.Y. Yen關鍵字：perceived high performance work system;meta-analysis;task performance;organizational citizenship behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Purpose - The present study examines the relationships between perceived HPWS and job performance (include task performance and organizational citizenship behavior). Design/methodology/approach - The present meta-analysis are based on 36 published or unpublished articles from 2000-2020. Findings - The findings indicate that perceived HPWS is positively related to task performance with a corrected coefficient of .312, the effect size (d) of .657 with the total N=11,349. The corrected correlation coefficient between perceived HPWS and OCB is .343, and the effect size (d) is .730 with the total N= 6,577. A moderator analysis of the evaluation source found no significant differences between self-ratings and other-ratings of task performance. The corrected correlations between the perceived HPWS and self-ratings, and the perceived HPWS and other-ratings are .313 and .309, respectively. Research limitations/implications - The common method variance might influence the effect sizes. Practical implications/Social implications - The perception of HPWS from employees will influence their attitudes and working behaviors. Therefore, a meta-analysis study of the relationship between the perceived HPWS and job performance can help to understand the mechanism between HPWS and organization performance. Originality/value - There are few HPWS studies based on the employee's perception. The present meta-analysis study summarized the effect sizes of perceived HPWS and job performance accumulated in the past 20 years.起始頁-結束頁：81-103資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202007_39(3).ENG08118篇名：The Effects of Distrust on Online Shopping Intention-A Comparative Study between Cross-Strait Consumers作者：Kai-Hung Wang;Yao-Hua You;Tuo-Ming Huang;Cheng-Kiang Farn關鍵字：Product Attitudes;Distrust Beliefs;Purchase Intention;Comparison between Cross-Strait期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Purpose - This research explores the effects of distrust on consumers' online shopping intention with a dualistic attitude, and conduct a comparative study on cross-strait consumers. Design/methodology/approach- This research deploys a controlled experiment to analyze the on-line questionnaires retrieved from consumers on both sides of Taiwan Strait. A total of 265 valid questionnaires were recovered, 115 from Taiwan and 150 from China. We firstly conducted 4 pilot tests, primarily on the selection of the subject products, brand names, attributes of the product, and valence reviews. Later in the large-scale survey, participants were randomly assigned to one of the four experimental scenarios. They read through products reviews under different scenarios and then answered the questionnaire. The hypotheses were tested using ANCOVA and PLS-SEM. Findings - The results show that the positive/negative attitude towards product significantly affects the distrusting beliefs; distrusting beliefs in turn significantly affect the purchase intention. In addition, the distrust of Taiwanese consumers is higher than that of Mainland Chinese; the positive effects of the Mainland Chinese consumers' negative attitude on distrust is higher than that of Taiwanese consumers. Research limitations/implications - This experimental design is expected to have better internal validity because the external variables are controllable. However, it might constitute a threat to external validity, the validity of applying the conclusions outside the context of this study. Besides, the small number of recovered samples and the limited coverage might result in biased research results. Practical implications/Social implications - This research suggests that companies should formulate strategies by adapting to local conditions. By building a complete customer interaction mechanism, firms are able to ease consumers' distrusting beliefs ; by establishing a speedy response mechanism, firms are allowed to promptly cope with customer complaints or related negative information, decreasing the level of customer dissatisfaction. The major factor that distinguishes shopping at stores from online shopping is the direct contact with physical products. Companies should understand that negative reviews have stronger influence than positive ones do, and highly value the importance of objective evaluation systems in order to realize more prosperous e-commerce. Originality/value- By understanding consumers from a dualistic attitude perspective, we might come closer to reality, and be able to more accurately predict and penetrate consumer behaviour. Through verifying and comparing the online shopping behaviour of consumers on two sides of the Taiwan Strait, we see their differences in perceptions and patterns regarding product reviews.起始頁-結束頁：105-129資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202007_39(3).ENG10519篇名：Policy Uncertainty, Financial Reporting Quality, and Investment Efficiency作者：Chi-Chun Liu;Lin-Hui Yu關鍵字：Policy Uncertainty;Investment Efficiency;Financial Reporting Quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：Purpose - This paper examines the association between policy uncertainty and investment efficiency and whether this association varies with financial reporting quality. Design/methodology/approach - We use the monthly-updated economic policy uncertainty index (EPU) developed by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2015) to proxy for policy uncertainty. We estimate the modified version of Biddle, Hilary, and Verdi's (2009) model to capture the optimal level of investment. Finally, we estimate the modified cross-sectional Jones model (1991) and the Stubben's (2010) model to construct proxies for financial reporting quality. Findings - W document a positive association between the aggregate level of uncertainty and investment efficiency. In addition, we find that this association is stronger for firms with lower financial reporting quality than for firms with higher financial reporting quality, suggesting that firms with lower financial reporting quality are more sensitive to the political environment. Research limitations/implications - While we conduct a battery of robustness tests, our proxies for policy uncertainty, investment efficiency, and financial reporting quality may still have measurement errors. Practical implications/Social implications - Our findings have important implications to the government. As companies with better reporting quality are less sensitive to the changes in the political environment, regulators should promote measures to enhance firms' financial reporting quality. Originality/value - We extend prior studies investigating the association between policy uncertainty and firms' investment by exploring an alternative perspective-investment efficiency and provide direct evidence to suggest that firms with better financial quality are less sensitive to macro-conditions. This message is not directly documented in prior accounting literature and is relevant to the capital market participants.起始頁-結束頁：131-157資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202007_39(3).ENG13120篇名：控制股東掏空行為及其公司治理分析：以樂陞案為例並列篇名：Tunneling Behavior of Controlling Shareholders and Corporate Governance:A Case Study of XPEC Inc.作者：邱麗卿(Li-Ching Chiu)關鍵字：掏空行為;控制股東;公司治理;財報不實;Tunneling Behavior;Controlling Shareholders;Corporate Governance;Financial Statement Fraud期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本個案為真實事件之管理層級的圖書館個案，源於2016年8月31日樂陞爆發震撼台灣資本市場首宗成功公開收購，竟演變成證券詐欺交易，還隱藏具控制權的大股東利用經營機會，進行不法交易獲取不當利益之事實，不僅侵害公司及股東權益，也嚴重危害資本市場發展。樂陞股價的跌幅高達88.57%，成為2016年最大地雷股，股票甚至下櫃，受害股東多達2.2萬名。控制股東掏空公司的嚴重後果及影響廣泛，藉由本個案教學讓學生瞭解控制股東受到自身利益趨使掏空行為，重大損害中小股東利益需要被關注，進而學習從代理問題、公司治理與公開資訊分析，檢視控制股東掏空行為發生的本質、原因與所涉影響範圍。為健全公司治理實務，如何發現或是什麼因素激勵著控制股東的掏空行為，受股東委託的董事會有無發揮監督職能，投資人如何避免成為掏空受害者，乃至於證券監理的失靈等，皆是值得深入探討的問題。本文也藉此個案討論，提出現行公司經營、深化公司治理與證券監理的興革建議，應對控制股東及管理階層加強監督，增加公司內部的透明度，乃目前防範控制股東掏空行為發生及維護股東權益的重要議題。英文摘要：This management-level library case is created on the basis of a real event, that the successful public tender offer to acquire XPEC turned out to be a securities fraud transaction on August 31, 2016. It shocked the capital markets since this kind of frauds was first seen and XPEC also concealed the fact that the controlling shareholders with control rights used operating opportunities to engage in illegal transactions and obtain improper interests, which both violated the rights of the firms and shareholders and seriously jeopardized the development of capital markets. The stock price of XPEC decreased by as much as 88.57%, which made it the largest landmine stock in 2016. The stock was even delisted from the OTC market, and affected as many as 22,000 shareholders. The repercussions of the controlling shareholder's involvement in tunneling the firm are severe with a wide range of influences. Through this case study, students will understand that more attention should be paid to the tunneling behavior of controlling shareholders affected by their own interests. It also focuses on expropriation of small and medium shareholder interests, and students will learn to examine the nature, causes and impacts involved in the tunneling behaviors of controlling shareholders from views of agency problems, corporate governance, and public information analysis. Issues that are associated with corporate governance practices require further discussions, such as the discovery of tunneling behaviors of controlling shareholders and why, whether the board of directors that are entrusted by the shareholders play a good role in supervisory, tips for investors to avoid becoming victims of tunneling, and the failure of securities supervision. Through this case study, this article also provides reform suggestions on enhancing current corporate management, corporate governance and securities supervision. To prevent tunneling behaviors of controlling shareholders and protect shareholders' equity, the company shall reinforce the supervision of controlling shareholders and the management team, and increase internal transparency.起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).CNI00101篇名：存技電子－跳槽風波帶來的警訊並列篇名：Techtalent's Job-Hopping Storm:Alarm or Opportunity?作者：李函俞(Han-Yu Lee);楊俊英(Chun-Ying Yang);葉穎蓉(Ying-Jung Yeh)關鍵字：組織誘因;適配理論;組織文化;組織生命週期;人力資源策略;Organizational Inducements;Fit Theory;Organizational Culture;Organizational Life Cycle;Human Resource Strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：選擇比努力重要，而人生許多重要的抉擇都是充滿矛盾與衝突。往往會讓人左右為難的難以選擇，到底是要向左走還是向右走？林經理在心中琢磨了許久，試著從不同的角度來思考只求當下能做較佳的選擇。轉眼間林經理在這家公司已經服務了13年，想當初進公司時就是張副總做的面試。這位做事充滿幹勁兢兢業業的資深副總，所帶領的事業部每年為公司帶來六到七成的營業額。一直以來在張副總的提攜與授權，讓林經理有個寬廣又能恣意發揮的舞台。彼此的關係就好似千里馬與伯樂，使他的心中始終對張副總抱著知遇之恩。但另一方面這家公司的組織文化與人性化的管理方式，更是讓林經理打從心底喜歡它。因此，面對昔日的老長官跳槽後轉而兵戎相見來挖牆角，彼此在人才與訂單之間拔河，心中的感受真是五味雜陳。林經理試著透過對部門不同年紀夥伴的了解，從需求出發去思考留才的方式來鞏固組織的戰力。公司的歷史悠久經歷了不同的組織生命週期，陸續經歷過幾次的組織變革也獲致不錯的成效使業績得以不斷的創新高。然而伺服器代工的產業正面臨微利化與競爭的白熱化，為了公司的永續成長此刻是否正面臨下一次的組織變革？在這種內外交迫的狀況下，雖充滿機會也面臨許多未知的風險。到底是要向左走還是向右走？除了從不同角度去思考留才激勵的方式，更重要的是思考下一步的轉型。本個案可用於討論企業高階主管跳槽前後所潛在或衍生的人力資源管理議題。回到跳槽事件前，從各種層次的適配去討論把人擺對地方的重要及需要考慮的層面。接下來針對跳槽後衍生而來的挖角行為，從激勵的角度去留下績效良好的優秀人才。若從更根本的角度去思考這整個跳槽事件，則可對組織文化及因應組織生命週期不同階段所要採取的改變加以探討。期待以此個案的學習，能讓管理人員將來面臨類似處境時可供參考及借鏡；更希望管理人員能透過此個案去認識相關人力資源管理方法論後，能未雨綢繆及早思考去防範類似的事件發生。英文摘要：This case discusses the decision by a product manager, Lin, in the high-tech industry, of staying or leaving his current job while having to keep up the morale of his subordinates. Issues to be considered include work relationships, family-friendly culture, and the reputation of the current organization, as well as an invitation to join a competitor company from Lin's former supervisor, who was once a star senior vice president at the company; the job sounds attractive for its challenges and the vision described by the former supervisor. Lin's current company, established 42 years earlier, is reaching maturity from the organizational life cycle perspective and ready for another product paradigm shift. It urgently needs more innovative actions and talents. This paper's learning objectives include understanding how to retain talents through organizational inducements, how organizational culture develops, and how different human resource strategies can be employed at various stages of an organization's life cycle. Motivation theories, such as the job characteristics model and fit theory, are also introduced. Teaching notes are provided at the end.起始頁-結束頁：35-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).CNI0352篇名：長庚養生文化村－餐廳的營運與管理並列篇名：The Restaurant Operation and Management of Chang Gung Health and Culture Village作者：詹錦宏(Chin-Horng Chan);黃美涓(Alice M.K. Wong);王勝本(Sheng-Pen Wang)關鍵字：長庚養生文化村;老人住宅;餐廳;自助餐;按月包餐;Chang Gung Health and Culture Village;Senior Home;Restaurant;Self-Service Meal;Monthly Meal Plan期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：長庚養生村在2012年4月對住民進行供餐滿意度調查，整體滿意度84.7分。養生村根據2012年調查的住民意見，投入了大量的時間與財力，經過長時間的規劃，在2014年上半年，對餐廳進行大規模整修，希望提供住民更佳的用餐環境與服務品質，整修完成後的用餐調查得到89分的正面反映。但是，2018年7月的供餐滿意度調查結果，卻得到了71.2分的甚低評價，對養生村的餐廳管理是一大警訊。戴興業主任不解為什麼餐廳做了這麼多努力，住民滿意度調查卻得到相反結果，召開幹部會議，討論問題與對策。英文摘要：In 2012, Chang Gung Health and Culture Village (CGHCV) administered a food service satisfaction survey to its residents, and overall survey results showed that it scored at 84.7 points. Based on residents' feedback, the village invested a considerable amount of time and money into dining service enhancement. After extensive planning, large-scale renovation of the restaurants in the village was conducted in the first half of 2014. The goal was to provide residents with an improved dining environment and service quality. Following the renovation, the village obtained positive feedback of 89 points for meal provision. However, a similar satisfaction survey administered in July 2018 reported a considerably lower score of 71.2 points, which represented a major warning to restaurant management at CGHCV. Chief Dai did not understand why those actions were having the opposite effects of the expected outcome; therefore, he held manager meetings to discuss the issues and coping measures.起始頁-結束頁：51-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).CNI0513篇名：喬福的海外投資策略並列篇名：Chiao Fu's Overseas Investment Strategy作者：倪福全(Fu-Chuan Ni);洪世章(Shih-Chang Hung)關鍵字：聚氨酯泡綿;海外投資;中國大陸;泰國;Polyurethane Foam;Overseas Investment;Mainland China;Thailand期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：喬福是一家傳統聚氨酯泡綿製造業，自1990年開始朝向海外投資後，一開始即分別前往中國大陸及泰國投資設廠。當時是為了因應台灣土地、工資等生產成本的提高及主要客戶外移的需求，而同時前往兩地設廠。二十多年來，喬福不論在中國大陸或泰國，皆能隨著地主國的經濟成長而發展。但兩地的政治、社會、文化背景的不同，連帶影響經濟與產業發展趨勢產生不同的變化。面臨中國大陸嚴苛的法規條件及本土業者的崛起，加上台灣政府鼓勵新南向政策，雖然大陸市場廣大，經濟發展快速，台商也有同文同種，語言及文化上的優勢，但泰國政治環境的穩定和經濟發展的政策，似乎對喬福也有相當的吸引力。在資源有限的情形下，喬福在繼續擴展海外成長的過程，面臨了近三十年另一次重大的抉擇。本個案提供真實的案例，以了解中小企業海外投資發展的過程，面對產業環境演變所帶來的投資挑戰。英文摘要：Chiao Fu is a traditional polyurethane foam manufacturer from Taiwan. In 1990, in response to the overseas expansion of major buyers and increasing production costs, Chiao Fu invested in both China and Thailand. For nearly 30 years, the company has developed along with the economic growth of these two host countries. However, the different political, social, and cultural backgrounds of China and Thailand have led to various changes in economic and industrial development trends. Chiao Fu may continue to pursue growth in China and enjoy the cultural and linguistic advantages that Taiwanese companies have benefitted from in the vast and fast-growing Chinese market. Alternatively, given the harsh regulatory conditions in China, the rise of local players, and the Taiwanese government's New Southbound Policy, Thailand is seemingly increasingly attractive to Chiao Fu because of its political stability and economic outlook. With limited resources, Chiao Fu has come to another major decision point after 30 years of overseas expansion. Accordingly, this case study enables us to examine how small and medium-sized enterprises develop overseas expansion strategies and face challenges generated by social and political changes.起始頁-結束頁：71-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).CNI0714篇名：緯豐營造－集體鬧離職事件並列篇名：Wei-Fong Construction Company-A Case of Collective Resignation作者：陳志堅(Chih-Chien Chen);游堯忠(Yao-Chung Yu);張惠真(Hui-Chen Chang)關鍵字：資源依賴理論;勞資談判;公平理論;談判協議最佳替代方案;Resource Dependence Theory;Labor Negotiations;Equity Theory;Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：企業員工必須為工作付出心力來獲取報酬，但員工總覺得公司所給的薪水遠低於自己的付出，因此在職場中常見員工跳槽 或者嘗試勞資協調以獲取更好的報酬。對於企業主來說，好不容易培養的員工離職或者員工的怠、罷工都會將讓企業產生額外的成本或損失。因此當企業面臨這樣的問題時，如何有效的解決是一個重要的課題。本個案以緯豐營造實際發生「以離職作為談薪手段」的案例為核心議題。透過本個案情境的討論，將逐步地引領學生理解資源依賴理論與公平理論，並且了解談判過程中應該注意的重點與技巧。英文摘要：Enterprise employees must make efforts for their work to get paid, but employees often feel that the company salaries are much lower than their contribution. Therefore, it is often found in the workplace that employees change jobs or try wage bargaining coordination for better compensation. From business owners' viewpoints, losing well-trained employees, sabotage or strike will cause extra costs or losses. Therefore, when enterprises are faced with such problems, it is quite important to solve them effectively. This case is created on the basis of an actual event of ”give me a raise or I quit” in Wei-Fong Construction Company. Through this case study, students are guided to understand resource dependence theory and equity theory, as well as the key points and skills involved in negotiation.起始頁-結束頁：89-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).CNI0895篇名：文雄眼鏡－通路商合併之決策分析並列篇名：An Analysis of M&A Decision of Distributor-A Case Study of Wenhsiung Optical作者：黃子佳(Tzu-Chia Huang);林宜君(Yi-Chun Lin);戴佑真(You-Zhen Dai);林豪傑(Hao-Chieh Lin)關鍵字：策略;綜效;企業併購;資訊不對稱;企業價值評價;Strategy;Synergy;M&A;Information Asymmetry;Business Valuation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：2002年底隱形眼鏡技術突破的影響下，預期隱形眼鏡市場將會跳躍成長，開啟眼鏡大廠、診所及銷售通路跨國上下游整併風潮。彼時上櫃公司寶島眼鏡（收購公司）跟同業文雄眼鏡（目標公司）提出合併，希望達到併購產生綜效。本文主要探討合併決策分析與併購價格計算，透過本個案亦可學習企業價值估計。本文敘明文雄眼鏡與寶島眼鏡併購時空背景及當時合併過程。教學手冊則以策略管理及企業評價理論，教導學生理解合併決策考量因素、學習企業價值如何公允表達及計算併購價格。透過本個案研究，將會協助學生了解併購與綜效關係、企業價值評估方法應用及併購價格計算，此研究亦具備管理實務意涵，此為本研究主要貢獻。英文摘要：At the end of 2002, due to a breakthrough in contact lenses technology, the sales of contact lenses were expected to increase significantly. Recognizing the changes, many large manufacturers, hospitals and distributors started international upstream and downstream integration, hoping to achieve synergy through M&A. Amid the M&A wave, Wenhsiung Optical received an M&A proposal from Formosa Optical. This article analyzes the M&A decision making and price calculation through a case study. The article describes the background and the process of the M&A of Formosa Optical and Wenhsiung Optical. The teaching note uses strategic management and business evaluation theories to help students understand the considerations in M&A decision-making, the fair presentation of corporate values, and the calculation of M&A prices. This case study will help students understand the relationship between M&A and synergies, as well as corporate value assessment methods and M&A prices calculation. The research also sheds insight on management practices. These are the main contributions of this research.起始頁-結束頁：107-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).CNI1076篇名：Tunneling Behavior of Controlling Shareholders and Corporate Governance: A Case Study of XPEC Inc.作者：Li-Ching Chiu關鍵字：Tunneling Behavior;Controlling Shareholders;Corporate Governance;Financial Statement Fraud期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This management-level library case is created on the basis of a real event, that the successful public tender offer to acquire XPEC turned out to be a securities fraud transaction on August 31, 2016. It shocked the capital markets since this kind of frauds was first seen and XPEC also concealed the fact that the controlling shareholders with control rights used operating opportunities to engage in illegal transactions and obtain improper interests, which both violated the rights of the firms and shareholders and seriously jeopardized the development of capital markets. The stock price of XPEC decreased by as much as 88.57%, which made it the largest landmine stock in 2016. The stock was even delisted from the OTC market, and affected as many as 22,000 shareholders. The repercussions of the controlling shareholder's involvement in tunneling the firm are severe with a wide range of influences. Through this case study, students will understand that more attention should be paid to the tunneling behavior of controlling shareholders affected by their own interests. It also focuses on expropriation of small and medium shareholder interests, and students will learn to examine the nature, causes and impacts involved in the tunneling behaviors of controlling shareholders from views of agency problems, corporate governance, and public information analysis. Issues that are associated with corporate governance practices require further discussions, such as the discovery of tunneling behaviors of controlling shareholders and why, whether the board of directors that are entrusted by the shareholders play a good role in supervisory, tips for investors to avoid becoming victims of tunneling, and the failure of securities supervision. Through this case study, this article also provides reform suggestions on enhancing current corporate management, corporate governance and securities supervision. To prevent tunneling behaviors of controlling shareholders and protect shareholders' equity, the company shall reinforce the supervision of controlling shareholders and the management team, and increase internal transparency.起始頁-結束頁：147-147資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).ENG1477篇名：Techtalent's Job-Hopping Storm: Alarm or Opportunity?作者：Han-Yu Lee;Chun-Ying Yang;Ying-Jung Yeh關鍵字：Organizational Inducements;Fit Theory;Organizational Culture;Organizational Life Cycle;Human Resource Strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：This case discusses the decision by a product manager, Lin, in the high-tech industry, of staying or leaving his current job while having to keep up the morale of his subordinates. Issues to be considered include work relationships, family-friendly culture, and the reputation of the current organization, as well as an invitation to join a competitor company from Lin's former supervisor, who was once a star senior vice president at the company; the job sounds attractive for its challenges and the vision described by the former supervisor. Lin's current company, established 42 years earlier, is reaching maturity from the organizational life cycle perspective and ready for another product paradigm shift. It urgently needs more innovative actions and talents. This paper's learning objectives include understanding how to retain talents through organizational inducements, how organizational culture develops, and how different human resource strategies can be employed at various stages of an organization's life cycle. Motivation theories, such as the job characteristics model and fit theory, are also introduced. Teaching notes are provided at the end.起始頁-結束頁：181-181資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).ENG1818篇名：The Restaurant Operation and Management of Chang Gung Health and Culture Village作者：Chin-Horng Chan;Alice M.K. Wong;Sheng-Pen Wang關鍵字：Chang Gung Health and Culture Village;Senior Home;Restaurant;Self-Service Meal;Monthly Meal Plan期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：In 2012, Chang Gung Health and Culture Village (CGHCV) administered a food service satisfaction survey to its residents, and overall survey results showed that it scored at 84.7 points. Based on residents' feedback, the village invested a considerable amount of time and money into dining service enhancement. After extensive planning, large-scale renovation of the restaurants in the village was conducted in the first half of 2014. The goal was to provide residents with an improved dining environment and service quality. Following the renovation, the village obtained positive feedback of 89 points for meal provision. However, a similar satisfaction survey administered in July 2018 reported a considerably lower score of 71.2 points, which represented a major warning to restaurant management at CGHCV. Chief Dai did not understand why those actions were having the opposite effects of the expected outcome; therefore, he held manager meetings to discuss the issues and coping measures.起始頁-結束頁：197-197資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).ENG1979篇名：Chiao Fu's Overseas Investment Strategy作者：Fu-Chuan Ni;Shih-Chang Hung關鍵字：Polyurethane Foam;Overseas Investment;Mainland China;Thailand期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Chiao Fu is a traditional polyurethane foam manufacturer from Taiwan. In 1990, in response to the overseas expansion of major buyers and increasing production costs, Chiao Fu invested in both China and Thailand. For nearly 30 years, the company has developed along with the economic growth of these two host countries. However, the different political, social, and cultural backgrounds of China and Thailand have led to various changes in economic and industrial development trends. Chiao Fu may continue to pursue growth in China and enjoy the cultural and linguistic advantages that Taiwanese companies have benefitted from in the vast and fast-growing Chinese market. Alternatively, given the harsh regulatory conditions in China, the rise of local players, and the Taiwanese government's New Southbound Policy, Thailand is seemingly increasingly attractive to Chiao Fu because of its political stability and economic outlook. With limited resources, Chiao Fu has come to another major decision point after 30 years of overseas expansion. Accordingly, this case study enables us to examine how small and medium-sized enterprises develop overseas expansion strategies and face challenges generated by social and political changes.起始頁-結束頁：219-219資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).ENG21910篇名：Wei-Fong Construction Company-A Case of Collective Resignation作者：Chih-Chien Chen;Yao-Chung Yu;Hui-Chen Chang關鍵字：Resource Dependence Theory;Labor Negotiations;Equity Theory;Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：Enterprise employees must make efforts for their work to get paid, but employees often feel that the company salaries are much lower than their contribution. Therefore, it is often found in the workplace that employees change jobs or try wage bargaining coordination for better compensation. From business owners' viewpoints, losing well-trained employees, sabotage or strike will cause extra costs or losses. Therefore, when enterprises are faced with such problems, it is quite important to solve them effectively. This case is created on the basis of an actual event of “give me a raise or I quit” in Wei-Fong Construction Company. Through this case study, students are guided to understand resource dependence theory and equity theory, as well as the key points and skills involved in negotiation.起始頁-結束頁：235-235資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).ENG23511篇名：An Analysis of M&A Decision of Distributor-A Case Study of Wenhsiung Optical作者：Tzu-Chia Huan;Yi-Chun Lin;You-Zhen Dai;Hao-Chieh Lin關鍵字：Strategy;Synergy;M&A;Information Asymmetry;Business Valuation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：At the end of 2002, due to a breakthrough in contact lenses technology, the sales of contact lenses were expected to increase significantly. Recognizing the changes, many large manufacturers, hospitals and distributors started international upstream and downstream integration, hoping to achieve synergy through M&A. Amid the M&A wave, Wenhsiung Optical received an M&A proposal from Formosa Optical. This article analyzes the M&A decision making and price calculation through a case study. The article describes the background and the process of the M&A of Formosa Optical and Wenhsiung Optical. The teaching note uses strategic management and business evaluation theories to help students understand the considerations in M&A decision-making, the fair presentation of corporate values, and the calculation of M&A prices. This case study will help students understand the relationship between M&A and synergies, as well as corporate value assessment methods and M&A prices calculation. The research also sheds insight on management practices. These are the main contributions of this research.起始頁-結束頁：253-253資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202004_39(2).ENG25312篇名：動態能力文獻之發展軌跡與展望－主路徑分析並列篇名：The Development Trajectory of Dynamic Capability -Main Path Analysis作者：李建財(Peter C. T. Lee);盧煜煬(Louis Y. Y. Lu);劉顯仲(John S. Liu)關鍵字：動態能力;主路徑分析;關鍵延伸主路徑;微觀基礎;微觀／認知取向;Dynamic Capabilities;Main Path Analysis;Key-Route Main Path;Microfoundation;Micro/Cognition-Orientation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：本研究回顧動態能力文獻之發展軌跡與展望，尤其是新興學派的演化路徑，提出一種關鍵延伸主路徑分析，用以彌補先前研究之不足。研究設計／方法：本研究以關鍵字“dynamic capabilities”和“dynamic capability”從WOS及Scopus資料庫蒐集文獻，建立引用網絡，並以結合主路徑分析及文獻的文字探勘，找出主要文獻發展軌跡及分岐路徑。研究結果：本研究發現動態能力文獻發展軌跡可分成三個階段：起始、分岐、合併。在分岐階段又有兩個分支：主要的宏觀／集體導向及次要的微觀／認知導向。研究限制／啟發：本研究文獻資料受限於WOS及Scopus資料庫，限縮至管理與商業領域，並限制為期刊論文或回顧文獻，共字分析限制為前一百大語詞。理論／實務／社會意涵：本研究展示出過去的文獻多數集中在宏觀／集體的研究，相對上微觀／認知少被觸及的。這是值得注意與投入，尤其是跨層級的整合。創見／價值：本研究成果對動態能力文獻的研究有所啟發，並在文獻回顧的方法論上提供一個嶄新的方法，可擴及其他領域。英文摘要：Purpose - This study reviews articles in the dynamic capability (DC) literature and proposes an alternative method, key-route main path analysis, to reduce the effect of sample selection bias in prior research approaches. Design/methodology/approach -This research uses the keywords ”dynamic capabilities” and ”dynamic capability” to collect literature from the WOS and Scopus databases, building a citation network. By combining the main path analysis and test-mining for literature review, this study reveals the global main path and branch paths. Findings-This study discovers that the development trajectory can be separated into three phases: the initial phase, the diverged phase, and the converged phase. There are two branches in the diverged phase: major main path (Macro/Collected-orientation) and minor secondary main path (Micro/Cognition-orientation). Research limitations/implications -Web of Science (WOS) and Scopus are used for searching the literature, with a limited scope of journal and review articles in management and business fields. The co-word analysis is conducted with top 100 indexing terms. Practical implications/Social implications -This study shows that most previous literature focused much more on macro/collective research than on micro/cognition research. The discovery deserves more attention and further endeavors, especially in cases of cross-level integration. Originality/value -This study contributes to suggest the key-route main path of development trajectories of the DC literature and the same research methodology can be applied to other research fields.起始頁-結束頁：1-18資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202001_39(1).CNI00113篇名：When Do Family CEO Successors Perform Strategic Change Heterogeneously?並列篇名：家族繼任接班人執行策略變革何時會產生差異性？作者：翁鶯娟(Ying-Jiuan Wong);張恆瑜(Heng-Yu Chang);李振宇(Cheng-Yu Lee)關鍵字：Family CEO Successor;Behavioral Agency Theory;Family Socioemotional Wealth;Strategic Change;Alignment of Interests;家族接班人;行為代理理論;家族社會情感財富;策略變革;利益一致性期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Purpose - Based on the socioemotional wealth (SEW) perspective, this study investigates how family CEO successors affect strategic change. Additionally, by further incorporating behavioral agency theory, we discuss whether the relationship between a family successor and the degree of strategic change is altered by performance aspiration gaps and alignment of interests. Design/methodology/approach - This study analyzes a sample set of CEO succession events of Taiwanese firms by adopting the least squares regression analysis to test our hypotheses. Findings - The results show that family CEO successors have less intention to initiate strategic changes. However, when a firm's performance is below the aspiration level, these successors increase their intention to raise the degree of strategic change. The mitigating effect of the performance below the aspiration level is further enhanced when a firm's cash flow rights are aligned with its voting rights. Research limitations/implications - This study complements the extant research by adopting the SEW perspective to illustrate why the intention to initiate strategic change by a family successor differs from non-family ones. Also, we complement the SEW perspective by incorporating behavioral agency theory to better reveal why heterogeneous strategic change behavior of family successors is observed. Furthermore, our research echoes the importance of corporate governance mechanisms to enhance the incentives of family firms properly to operate the firm in the interests of stakeholders. Practical implications/social implications - Our findings indicate that family SEW is the predominant factor in family firms' decision-making process and is affected by contextual situations leading to heterogeneous strategic behaviors, suggesting that we need to consider not only the successor but also the situations when evaluating a family business. Originality/value - Our research highlights the complexity of family succession and provides managerial insights and recommendations.英文摘要：研究目的：本研究以家族社會情感財富觀點探討家族接班人如何影響策略變革，並引入行為代理理論，探討績效預期缺口與利益一致性是否改變家族接班人對策略變革的影響。研究設計／方法：本研究以台灣上市、櫃公司之接班人為樣本，並採用最小平方迴歸法檢測研究假設。研究結果：研究結果發現家族接班人較少進行策略變革；績效缺口低於預期水準時減緩家族接班人不願進行策略變革的行為；當現金流量權與投票權一致性越高時，績效缺口低於預期水準的干擾效果越強。研究限制／啟發：本研究補充現有的研究，以家族社會情感財富觀點說明為何家族接班人的策略變革的意圖不同於非家族接班人。此外，本研究引入行為代理理論以補充家族社會情感財富觀點，清楚闡述為何家庭接班人的策略變革行為具異質性。我們的研究亦回應公司治理機制相關文獻，說明公司治理機制對於家族企業考量利害關係人利益的重要性。理論／實務／社會意涵：本研究發現家族社會情感財富是家族企業決策過程中的主要考量因素，並且受不同情境影響而產生不同的策略行為的結論，說明評估家族企業時不僅須考量接班人，亦須納入不同的情境因素，才能深入了解家族企業的策略行為。創見／價值：本研究除凸顯接班人對策略變革影響的複雜性外，亦提供實務建議與了解家族接班人的策略變革行為。起始頁-結束頁：19+103-121資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202001_39(1).ENG10314篇名：台灣產險業再保險市場存在有資訊不對稱嗎？分位數迴歸與自然試驗法之應用並列篇名：Does Asymmetric Information Exist in the Reinsurance Markets of Taiwan? Applying Quantile Regression and Natural-Experiment Method作者：陳瑞祥(Juei-Hsiang Chen);許永明(Yung-Ming Shiu)關鍵字：再保險;資訊不對稱;道德風險;Reinsurance;Information Asymmetry;Moral Hazard期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：本文主要目的是檢定台灣產險業再保險市場是否存在資訊不對稱。研究設計／方法：我們使用自然試驗法與若干有母數模型估計平均效果結果。研究結果：結果顯示台灣產險業再保險市場存在資訊不對稱。研究限制／啟發：由於資料無法取得，我們無法獲得再保險契約層面資料並且我們無法控制契約層面資訊。實務／社會意涵：對於再保險公司實務從業者，於承保業務上應該要更謹慎，特別要注意高損失率保險公司的分保業務。對於監理機關，可採取若干影響保險公司並且減緩此現象進而增加再保險市場效率的措施。創見／價值：本文的核心價值是辨認台灣產險業再保險市場是否存在資訊不對稱與何時資訊不對稱更加嚴重。英文摘要：Purpose - The primary aim of this study is to examine whether asymmetric information exists in Taiwan non-life industry reinsurance market. Design/methodology/approach - We use a natural experiment and several parametric models to estimate the average effects results. Findings - Results have shown that the reinsurance information asymmetry phenomenon in Taiwan's reinsurance markets does exist. Research limitations/implications - Due to data unavailability, we could not obtain the reinsurance contract level data and we could not control the contract level information. Practical implications/Social implications - For reinsurer practitioners, they should be more cautious about underwriting, especially for the business ceded by high loss ratio insurers. For regulators, they might take some measures to affect insurers to mitigate such phenomenon to enhance the reinsurance market efficiency. Originality/value - The core value of this study is to identify whether asymmetric information exists in Taiwan non-life industry reinsurance market and when the asymmetric information phenomenon will be more severe.起始頁-結束頁：21-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202001_39(1).CNI02115篇名：激勵性薪酬結構對盈餘管理選擇策略的影響並列篇名：The Impact of Incentive Compensation Structure on the Choice Strategy of Earnings Management作者：許永聲(Yunsheng Hsu);陳雪如(Hsueh-Ju Chen);黃勝華(Sheng-Hua Huang)關鍵字：激勵性薪酬;股票基礎薪酬;應計項目盈餘管理;分類移轉;實質盈餘管理;Incentive Compensation;Stock-Based Compensation;Accruals-Based Earnings Management;Classification Shifting;Real Earnings Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：研究目的：探討激勵性薪酬制度所誘發盈餘管理行為，是否只是財務報表上的操弄、還是已經犧牲企業的實質利益。而可能的不利影響，是否可以藉由適當的薪酬結構設計而減緩。研究設計／方法：本研究利用不同盈餘管理方法對企業的影響並不相同的特性，實證分析在激勵性薪酬制度下，為達成激勵薪酬盈餘目標，企業利用應計項目、分類移轉及實質盈餘管理的程度。研究結果：激勵性薪酬制度會同時增加應計項目、分類移轉及實質盈餘管理程度。不過股票基礎薪酬制度會降低企業利用實質盈餘管理，增加分類移轉及應計項目盈餘管理。研究限制／啟發：本研究僅考慮薪資、獎金及特支費、股票股利、現金股利及員工認股權五項薪酬項目。此外盈餘管理方法也僅限於分類移轉、應計項目與實質盈餘管理。理論／實務／社會意涵：激勵薪酬制度下，管理者的盈餘管理會損害企業的實質利益，但股票基礎薪酬契約就可減緩此損害程度。創見／價值：激勵性薪酬可能的不利影響，可以透過股票基礎薪酬契約減緩。英文摘要：Purpose - The purpose of the paper is to explore whether the impact of an incentive compensation system is just the manipulation of financial statements or at the expense of real future benefits. Specifically, it studies whether the compensation structure mitigates the negative influences. Design/methodology/approach - By empirical study, the paper explore the influences of incentive compensation system on the use of accrual-based, classification shifting, and real earnings management. Findings - The results show that incentive compensation simultaneously increases the use of accrual-based, classification shifting, and real earnings management. And a stock-based compensation system decreases the use of real earnings management, but increases the use of classification shifting and accruals-based earnings management. Research limitations/implications - This study only considers 5 compensations including salaries, bonuses and extraordinary charges, stock dividends, cash dividends, and employee stock options. In addition, earnings management methods are limited to classification shifting, accruals-based, or real earnings management. Practical implications/Social implication -The incentive compensation harm the firm's real benefit, that could be mitigates by a stock-based compensation structure. Originality/value -A stock-based compensation structure could mitigate the negative influences of the incentive compensation system.起始頁-結束頁：43-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202001_39(1).CNI04316篇名：The Development Trajectory of Dynamic Capability -Main Path Analysis作者：Peter C. T. Lee;Louis Y. Y. Lu;John S. Liu關鍵字：Dynamic Capabilities;Main Path Analysis;Key-Route Main Path;Microfoundation;Micro/Cognition-Orientation期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Purpose - This study reviews articles in the dynamic capability (DC) literature and proposes an alternative method, key-route main path analysis, to reduce the effect of sample selection bias in prior research approaches. Design/methodology/approach -This research uses the keywords ”dynamic capabilities” and ”dynamic capability” to collect literature from the WOS and Scopus databases, building a citation network. By combining the main path analysis and test-mining for literature review, this study reveals the global main path and branch paths. Findings-This study discovers that the development trajectory can be separated into three phases: the initial phase, the diverged phase, and the converged phase. There are two branches in the diverged phase: major main path (Macro/Collected-orientation) and minor secondary main path (Micro/Cognition-orientation). Research limitations/implications -Web of Science (WOS) and Scopus are used for searching the literature, with a limited scope of journal and review articles in management and business fields. The co-word analysis is conducted with top 100 indexing terms. Practical implications/Social implications -This study shows that most previous literature focused much more on macro/collective research than on micro/cognition research. The discovery deserves more attention and further endeavors, especially in cases of cross-level integration. Originality/value -This study contributes to suggest the key-route main path of development trajectories of the DC literature and the same research methodology can be applied to other research fields.起始頁-結束頁：87-101資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202001_39(1).ENG08717篇名：Does Asymmetric Information Exist in the Reinsurance Markets of Taiwan? Applying Quantile Regression and Natural-Experiment Method作者：Juei-Hsiang Chen;Yung-Ming Shiu關鍵字：Reinsurance;Information Asymmetry;Moral Hazard期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Purpose - The primary aim of this study is to examine whether asymmetric information exists in Taiwan non-life industry reinsurance market. Design/methodology/approach - We use a natural experiment and several parametric models to estimate the average effects results. Findings - Results have shown that the reinsurance information asymmetry phenomenon in Taiwan's reinsurance markets does exist. Research limitations/implications - Due to data unavailability, we could not obtain the reinsurance contract level data and we could not control the contract level information. Practical implications/Social implications - For reinsurer practitioners, they should be more cautious about underwriting, especially for the business ceded by high loss ratio insurers. For regulators, they might take some measures to affect insurers to mitigate such phenomenon to enhance the reinsurance market efficiency. Originality/value - The core value of this study is to identify whether asymmetric information exists in Taiwan non-life industry reinsurance market and when the asymmetric information phenomenon will be more severe.起始頁-結束頁：123-140資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202001_39(1).ENG12318篇名：The Impact of Incentive Compensation Structure on the Choice Strategy of Earnings Management作者：Yun-Sheng Hsu;Hsueh-Ju Chen;Sheng-Hua Huang關鍵字：Incentive Compensation;Stock-Based Compensation;Accruals-Based Earnings Management;Classification Shifting;Real Earnings Management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：39卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Purpose - The purpose of the paper is to explore whether the impact of an incentive compensation system is just the manipulation of financial statements or at the expense of real future benefits. Specifically, it studies whether the compensation structure mitigates the negative influences. Design/methodology/approach - By empirical study, the paper explore the influences of incentive compensation system on the use of accrual-based, classification shifting, and real earnings management. Findings - The results show that incentive compensation simultaneously increases the use of accrual-based, classification shifting, and real earnings management. And a stock-based compensation system decreases the use of real earnings management, but increases the use of classification shifting and accruals-based earnings management. Research limitations/implications - This study only considers 5 compensations including salaries, bonuses and extraordinary charges, stock dividends, cash dividends, and employee stock options. In addition, earnings management methods are limited to classification shifting, accruals-based, or real earnings management. Practical implications/Social implication - The incentive compensation harm the firm's real benefit, that could be mitigates by a stock-based compensation structure. Originality/value - A stock-based compensation structure could mitigate the negative influences of the incentive compensation system.起始頁-結束頁：141-161資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202001_39(1).ENG14101篇名：SPATIAL IMAGINATION: Skinnerian ”Human Interaction Systems” and the Roles of Spatial Imagery and ”Subjection” in Chinese Rituals並列篇名：空間想像：施堅雅「人類互動系統」與漢人儀式中空間意象及主體性之角色作者：桑高仁(P. Steven Sangren);蔣馥蓁;丁仁傑期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：G. William Skinner's complex apprehension of China as a nested hierarchy of regional (”human interaction”) systems revolutionized subsequent understanding of what ”China” is in temporal and spatial terms. The prodigious spatial imagination embodied in Skinner's project develops from an explicitly objectivist-cum-behavioralist perspective. For the most part, Skinner argued that emic perceptions - for example, of local identities, the structure of imperial bureaucracy, pathways for social and economic mobility - reflect these ”natural systems” (i.e., emergent mainly on the basis of rational economic decisions, on the one hand, and the logic of political control and extraction, on the other). Spatial imagination figures importantly, but very differently, in the structure of ritual production of subjectivities (in the sense, broadly speaking, developed in Judith Butler's Psychic Life of Power). Based on analysis of a variety of ritualized contexts (individual worship, domestic architecture, territorial-cult celebrations, pilgrimages, imperial rituals), I propose that Skinner's framework nonetheless possesses potential insights regarding how emic spatial imagination figures in the production of these subjectivities. This juxtaposition of emic and etic vantages, on the one hand, troubles the distinction between ideology and social reality, but on the other hints at an encompassing theoretical synthesis.英文摘要：G. William Skinner提出將中國視為具有套疊性階層之區域（「人類互動」）系統的複雜研究，徹底顛覆了爾後我們對所謂「中國」的時間與空間層面上的理解。Skinner研究所體現出來的巨大的空間性的想像力，得自於明確的「客觀主及行為主義」（「objectivist-cum-behavioralist」）觀點。Skinner認為，在多數情形下，主位（emic）觀點----例如地方性認同、官僚系統結構、社會經濟流動----皆反映了「自然系統」（即主要基於經濟理性決策，但又受到政治控制與榨取的邏輯）。空間想像具有重要性，但在主體性的儀式建構上是非常不一樣的一件事（廣義來說，這是從Judith Butler《權力的精神生活》中所發展而來的）。基於對各種儀式化脈絡的分析（個人信仰、家內建築、地方信仰慶典、繞境、國家祀典），我認為Skinner的架構仍能幫助我們來討論，主位的空間想像如何在建構主體性過程中發揮作用。這裡將主位與客位（etic）並列的好處是，一方面對意識形態與社會現實間的區分提出詰問，同時也暗示了一個涵蓋更廣的理論性的統合。起始頁-結束頁：1-16資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所2篇名：會議作為方法：前言作者：呂欣怡(Hsin-yi Lu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：19-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所3篇名：計畫作為許諾：人文創新與社會實踐計畫中的會議、國家話語、與社區行動並列篇名：Planning as Promise: Meetings, the Language of the State, and Community Action in the Humanities Innovation and Social Practice Project作者：容邵武(Shaw-wu Jung)關鍵字：計畫;承諾;會議;國家治理;人文創新與社會實踐計畫;plan;promise;meeting;governance;humanity innovation and social practice project期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：人類學一般將國家官僚行為的功能歸納為工具性和象徵性，前者強調國家施政的理性計算，後者著重在國家和當地原有文化分類的關係。以國家計畫為例，我試圖指出計畫還必須如同宗教許諾願景般的功用，引發人民情感的層面，讓其加入一個更大的意義秩序，甚至一同構建自己成為國家治理的一員。本文將以我參加的科技部「人文創新與社會實踐」計畫（2013-2016年）為例，描述計畫執行的三種鼓勵參與的會議型態，計畫團隊與補助單位的評鑑工作會議、計畫團隊內部的例行會議、計畫團隊與合作社區的交流會議。我將說明此計畫如何是當今誘發對未來憧憬的政策的一環；其次，在各種層次的執行上，許諾和現實的矛盾是如何顯現在各種行動者的協商和調整。本文希望說明會議（meeting）作為聚集不同性質行動者的場合，呈現出追求美好未來的政策構建了當下人們的身份、欲望，以及不滿。英文摘要：Anthropology generally regards the state and bureaucracy as instrumental and symbolic, the former based on its utilitarian rationality, while the latter on its relationships with local culture. Taking the case of planning, I further point out that attention should be paid to its potency to conjure emotions among the people, and how it promises, much as a religion promises its devotees, to let people become part of a much larger meaningful totality, and more, willful agents of state governance. This article draws on my participation in the Humanities Innovation and Social Practice Project under the Ministry of Science and Technology from 2013 to 2016. It explores how the Project stimulates people's engagement through three kinds of meeting: meetings between the funding agency and the Investigation Team, between members of the Investigation Team, and between the Investigation Team and collaborative groups. The paper first explores how planning develops into the mechanism of a promissory future; and second examines the gaps between the promise and the discontent that arises as a result of negotiations and attunements among various agents. Meetings are one way of materializing planning; they are an important venue through which we understand how the plan constructs and encounters different identities, desires, and anxieties when it promises a good future.起始頁-結束頁：27-78資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所4篇名：會議作為未來時間性的匯集與競逐－台灣離岸風電環評的民族誌分析並列篇名：The Meeting As Convergence and Competition of Future Temporalities: An Ethnographic Analysis of the Environmental Impact Assessment of Taiwan's Offshore Wind Development作者：呂欣怡(Hsin-yi Lu)關鍵字：環境影響評估;離岸風力發電;會議;時間性;未來;Environmental impact assessment;offshore wind energy;meeting;temporality;future期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：環境影響評估，是體制內賦予公民參與科技風險評估的主要管道，因此環評會議經常成為各方表述與論辯開發案之命運的主要戰場。受到晚近人類學時間研究的啟發，本文主張，環評並不只是空間與環境資源分配的折衝，環評會議也是各種歧異之時間性的匯集與競逐。本文以攸關台灣未來能源部署的離岸風電計畫環評為田野場域，把出現於環評會議的意見之時間向度區分為「遠未來」、「近未來」，與「立即的預期時刻」（immediate anticipatory moment）。政府與開發單位透過大型基礎設施的規劃，承諾了一個關於能源結構與海域環境的遠未來，但環評會議主體的專家委員與其審議之環評書件能夠履行的只限於目前的科技能力所及的近未來，而民眾參與環評過程，一方面是受到大型基礎設施計畫所建構的遠未來願景之召喚或激怒；另方面，會議作為各種論述交鋒的意見場域，實作者在其中經驗的是一系列立即的、不可逆的預期時刻，每一個（台上或台下）激昂發聲的時刻，都指向下一個未知瞬間的新開始，而這正是吸引民眾參與會議的重要因素。環評程序從地方說明會、現勘公聽會到中央的專案小組會議過程中，遠未來的討論比重逐漸被近未來的技術預測所取代，而民眾參與的意願也隨之下降。英文摘要：Environmental impact assessment is the main channel for citizens to participate in science and technology risk assessment within the system, so EIA meetings often become the main battlefield for all parties to express their opinions and debate the fate of an development project. Inspired by recent anthropological theorization on time and temporality, this paper argues that the EIA is not just a negotiation of the allocation of space and environmental resources. The EIA meeting is also a convergence of competing temporalities. This article uses the EIA meetings for an offshore wind development project as the field site and the topic of analysis, in which the future of Taiwan energy deployment is at stake. I divide the temporal dimensions of the opinions expressed in the EIA meetings into the ”distant future”, the ”near future”, and the ”immediate expectation moment.” The government and the developer have promised a grand vision of the distant future of the energy structure and marine environment through the planning of large-scale infrastructure. However, the expert committee members of the EIA meeting can only perform in the near future that can be grasped by current scientific and technological capabilities. The public participation in the EIA process is, on the one hand, summoned or provoked by the long-term vision promised by large-scale infrastructures; on the other hand, the meeting is a field of opinion for discursive confrontation, in which the actors experience a series of immediate and irreversible anticipatory moments. Every moment of excited evocation (on or off stage) points to a new beginning of the next unknown moment, and this is the main factor that attracts people to participate in the meetings. During the EIA process, from local briefings and public hearings to ad hoc committee meetings in the conference room of the EPA, the proportion of discussions about the distant future has gradually been replaced by near-future technical predictions, and thus the enthusiasm for public participation has also declined.起始頁-結束頁：79-128資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所5篇名：活力的部落，培力的評鑑？原住民族部落活力計畫現場的民族誌觀察並列篇名：Vital Tribe, Empowered Evaluation? Ethnographic Observation at the Site of the Indigenous Vital Tribe Program作者：林文玲(Wen-ling Lin)關鍵字：部落活力計畫;評鑑會議;物的議會;超越人類的視角;異質組裝;the indigenous vital tribe program;evaluation meeting;parliament of things;more-than-human perspective;heterogeneous assembly期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：台灣原住民族部落在新自由主義與全球資本流動的衝擊、社會快速變遷、及個人主義興盛的社會脈動中，傳統部落文化日益空洞，部落集體支持系統亦逐漸式微。有鑑於此，行政院原住民族委員會於2012年開始推動原住民族部落活力計畫，期望透過原住民族傳統文化中的共做、共食、共享與共榮的互助方式，凝聚部落成員的力量，維持部落生存的穩定。為了確實掌握各活力部落計畫執行狀況，該計畫設置了期中訪視與期末在地評鑑會議，以督導及考核計畫實施的成效。期中訪視與期末評鑑機制在於引導、指認部落活化的基底與架構，以及永續經營的願景。本文以原住民族部落活力計畫的幾次期末評鑑會議為場域，試著從人為中心的會議探討方式稍微偏移，一方面循著客體、環境、地方、身體以及物質的主動性視角及其所顯露的軌跡，與其他實體的關係樣態，所組成的「物的議會」，進行觀察、描述與討論。再一方面本文也將透過物的發言，去覺察並辨識在評鑑會議中起著情動之各式各樣的物及其動態生成，以及它們如何滲透以人為中心視角的評鑑會議，對會議的形式、界線與內涵造成影響。英文摘要：Under the impact of neo-liberalism and global capital flows, as well as the rapid social changes and the flourishing of individualism, the traditional tribal cultures of the indigenous peoples in Taiwan have become increasingly emptied out, and the tribal collective support systems have gradually declined. In view of this, the Council of Indigenous Peoples started the Indigenous Tribe Vitality Program in 2012, hoping to unite the strength of the tribal members through mutual assistance, co-eating, sharing, and co-production to maintain the stability of tribal survival. The Indigenous tribal vitality program is implemented through tribal meetings to form consensus and complete its public affairs participation. In addition, in order to truly understand the implementation of the vitality program of each tribe and the effectiveness of the promotion of the program, the administrative part of the promotion program requires a mid-term visit and a final local evaluation meeting. Experts, scholars, and administrators make up the members of the mid-term visit and the local evaluation meeting at the end of the period. They are also used to screen the tribes that can be continuously funded in the next year and that can serve as models for the guidance and development of the vital tribes in the future. The mid-term visit and final evaluation mechanism is to guide and identify the foundation and structure of tribal activation and the vision of sustainable management. This article takes the final evaluation meetings of the Indigenous Tribes Vitality Program as the field for observation and proposes a different research approach from the existing human-centered perspective of the meeting. It observes, describes, and discusses the ”parliament of things” composed of the agentive perspectives of objects, the environment, places, bodies, and materials, as well as their revealed trajectories, and their relationship with other entities. Through the speaking and self-narration of things, researchers will be able to detect and identify all kinds of things and their dynamic generation in the evaluation meeting, as well as understand how they penetrate the evaluation meetings, affecting the form, boundaries and connotations of the meetings.起始頁-結束頁：129-174資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所6篇名：Silvio, Teri J.: Puppets, Gods, and Brands: Theorizing the Age of Animation from Taiwan作者：傅可恩(P. Kerim Friedman)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：176-181資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所7篇名：胡台麗，劉璧榛主編：《當代巫文化的多元面貌》作者：李宜澤(Yi-tze Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：182-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所8篇名：Susan Gal and Judith T. Irvine: Signs of Difference: Language and Ideology in Social Life作者：劉子愷(Tzu-kai Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：187-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所9篇名：蘇育賢：《工寮》Gubuk（Hut）作者：林孟瑢(Meng-rung Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：198-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所10篇名：游志聖：《ivucung誰迷了路》ivucung: Unraveling the Riddle of Our Roots作者：李愛娜(Eliana Ritts)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：201-205資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所11篇名：三位第一代臺灣原住民籍紀錄片運動者的倫理實踐並列篇名：The Ethical Practices of Three First-Generation Indigenous Documentary Film Activists in Taiwan作者：思嘎亞．曦谷(Skaya Siku)關鍵字：自我再現;反身性;內部拍攝倫理;分享式人類學;self-representation;reflexivity;endogenous filming ethics;shared anthropology期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：在視覺人類學的研究架構下，本論文透過參與觀察與深度訪談分析三位重要的臺灣第一代原住民籍紀錄片導演－馬躍．比吼（阿美族）、比令．亞布（泰雅族）與張淑蘭（達悟族）。他們都曾透過紀錄片製作與自發性的巡迴放映行動，在自己所屬的社群中推動族群集體認同與文化復振行動。本項研究特別聚焦在三位導演於原住民部落拍片時，所面對的幾個矛盾處境，例如，具有爭議性的合作案、探討影片中不被呈現的片段，以及具有原住民身份在部落拍攝時可能存在的困境等等。透過原住民籍紀錄片導演的個人反思，本文嘗試驗證原住民內在視角的發掘，有助開拓紀錄片拍攝倫理議題的思辨，同時期許觸發當代導演與被攝者互動關係之間更開闊的理解。英文摘要：Through the lens of visual anthropology, this paper offers an analysis of three first-generation Indigenous documentary filmmakers in Taiwan: Mayaw Biho (Amis), Pilin Yapu (Atayal), and Chang Shu-Lan (Tao). Using participant observation and in-depth interviews, I explore how these directors revolutionized discourses of collective Indigenous identities and revitalized local cultures through documentary films and independent public screenings. I also consider some of the challenges and complexities these directors faced while filming in their native communities. Through these reflections, this article raises ethical questions around conflict management during collaborative filming, what is left unseen and unsaid, and how directors negotiate their own identities as insiders in relation to their work. I aim to demonstrate how Indigenous endogenous perspectives can contribute to ethical debates around documentary filmmaking and expand contemporary understandings of the relationships between directors and their subjects.起始頁-結束頁：1-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所12篇名：檳城華人「公司」遺產化過程的主體想像並列篇名：Subject Imaginary in the Process of Patrimonialization of Penang Chinese Kongsi作者：李威宜(Wei-I Lee)關鍵字：世界遺產;遺產景觀;主體想像;共同財邊界;公司苦力叢結;World heritage;heritagescape;subject imaginary;boundary of common goods;Kongsi-coolies complex期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：在2008年登錄為世界遺產地的馬來西亞檳城喬治市，華人公司這一性質獨特的社群組織，因為漫長而複雜的歷史淵源，名下持有古蹟區大量的不動產業：宗祠、宮廟、街屋。本文針對喬治市這一遺產化過程展開研究，嘗試探討這一「世界遺產」在特定的歷史脈絡與現實情境下，某些未得彰顯的重要意義。首先，我將通過一趟遺產漫步，了解喬治市公司遺產景觀的大致樣貌，以此回顧各大公司協同政府、NGO團體，因應入遺所展開的各種遺產行動。繼之，我將針對華人公司世遺化過程中，從理念敘事到經營管理，發生的一些事件與變化進行分析，釐清其遺產化動能中各種不同的主體想像，包括祖先、市民。然後追溯歷史，我將討論華人公司作為一種世界遺產，應該如何面對與之密切相關的苦力世界，並提出「公司／苦力」叢結的遺產主張，以理解這些艱難歷史中一般意義上的人的命運，及其留給我們的遺產價值。英文摘要：The traditional Chinese Kongsi have been important historical actors in trade activities and powerful community organizations since the nineteenth century in Southeastern Asia. In George Town, Penang (Malaysia), a world heritage site listed since 2008, Chinese Kongsi own massive collective property in the historical quarters, such as ancestral halls, temples, and shop houses. This article will examine the particular process of Kongsi becoming heritage, and try to initiate a discussion of some meanings of world heritage that are not yet apparent, in a specific historical context and contemporary situation. We will explore the particular Kongsi heritagescape in George Town, first by walking through its core zone, and recalling different heritage actions led by these traditional Chinese Kongsi, along with governmental forces and NGOs, in response to UNESCO's initiative. Then we will analyze some events and changes that have occurred, from narratives to management, during this process, and bring out different subjects involved in this heritage dynamic, such as ancestors or citizens, are imagined. Going back in history, we ask how the Chinese Kongsi, as world heritage, should face the history of coolies that was inseparable from its own. We put forward the idea of a Kongsi-coolies complex heritage, in the hope of understanding the destiny of humans in general through this difficult history, and the legacy that it bequeaths to us.起始頁-結束頁：61-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所13篇名：Living Together: Spirit Guardians And People in Singkawang並列篇名：共同生活：山口洋的守護「精靈」與人群作者：蔡靜芬(Elena Gregoria Chai Chin Fern)關鍵字：Chinese;Dayak;penunggu;spirit medium;Singkawang;華人;達雅族;守護靈;靈媒;山口洋期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：'Before religion, there was tradition' (sebelum ada agama, adat sudah wujud) is an expression commonly heard among traditional medical practitioners in Singkawang, West Kalimantan, Indonesia. This saying hinges on the belief in penunggu (spirit guardians). Locals from different ethnicities-Chinese, Dayak, and Malay-all believe in the presence of penunggu in their surroundings. If these beings are disturbed, they will cause sickness or discomfort. To appease them and cure illness, people rely on the help of tatung (spirit mediums). Mediums, by means of spirit possession, can effect cures and negotiate ways to bring about peaceful relations between penunggu and people. This study finds that the people of Singkawang set aside their ethnic and religious differences to reconcile with the local spirit world in a harmonious manner.英文摘要：Sebelum ada agama, adat sudah wujud（在宗教之前，有傳統），是在西加里曼丹省山口洋市傳統醫療者中常聽到的說法，這句諺語是關於penunggu（守護靈）的信仰。當地不同的族群－華人、達雅族（Dayak）、馬來人－相信守護靈存在於周遭環境中。如果這些精靈受到騷擾，會引發生病或不適。為了安撫守護靈和治療疾病，可求助於tatung（靈媒）。靈媒透過將精靈引入自己體內，治療疾病，與精靈協商，讓守護靈和人之間的關係趨於平和。本文處理西加里曼丹省山口洋市的多元族群社會中人與精靈的關係，採用Bird-David's（1992,1999,2004）的論點，即人與精靈之間可以形塑良好關係。山口洋市的人們相信，如果精靈－尤其是守護靈－受適當安撫，就可能成為提供協助與保護的善靈。守護靈被認為是監管一處的守護者，山口洋市的所有族群都共享這個信仰，幾乎每個人都能說出與守護靈相遇或接觸的故事。守護靈的存在融入了山口洋市的社會世界。本文建立於2016年為期六個月與2017年三個月所蒐集的民族誌田野資料，這些與守護靈和其他精靈互動的故事遍及於在當地人的日常生活與關注之中。山口洋市數以千計的廟宇和靈媒扮演兩個世界之間的連結，守護靈透過靈媒，協助並試圖製造有利於雙邊的往來，這些往來是內生性的。守護靈可能透過協商而受安撫，守護靈可能應邀入廟當成神靈一樣受崇拜，它也可能主動接觸人類提供保護服務。為了人群的利益，與守護靈的關係可以形塑，或借用Bird-David的說法，可以「培養」。起始頁-結束頁：123-141資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所14篇名：Toying with God: The world of Religious Games and Dolls作者：張珣(Hsun Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：144-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所15篇名：Filial Obsessions: Chinese Patriliny and Its Discontents作者：丁仁傑(Jen-Chieh Ting)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：149-155資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所16篇名：《希望之夏：身心障礙革命》Crip Camp: A Disability Revolution作者：劉文(Wen Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：158-160資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所17篇名：《大地蜜語》Honeyland作者：劉如意(Ruyi Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：161-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所01篇名：臺灣景氣狀態之預測並列篇名：FORECASTING BUSINESS CYCLES IN TAIWAN作者：蕭宇翔(Yu-Hsiang Hsiao);林依伶(Yi-Ling Lin)關鍵字：景氣循環;景氣指標;機器學習;Business cycle;Business indicators;Machine learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：國發會認定並發布景氣循環峰谷時點存在一定時間的落後，使施政單位不易即時掌握景氣狀態變化，鑑於近年臺灣經濟成長變動劇烈，本文搜集大量國內、外總體經濟變數，預測2001年以來臺灣景氣狀態變化。除採logistic模型逐一檢視各變數對當期或未來臺灣景氣衰退的預測表現外，亦運用4種能考量大量變數資訊的預測模型：以向前選取法（forward stepwise approach）篩選變數組成多變量logistic模型，運用主成分分析從大量總體變數萃取主要因子，組成logistic因子模型，以及random forest與boosting兩種機器學習演算法，進而比較不同預測模型的樣本外預測表現。根據樣本外預測結果，在向前零期預測（zero-step ahead forecast）方面，採用實質海關出口值單一變數即能有效捕捉當月景氣狀態，而對未來1-6個月的短中期預測時，考量大量變數資訊的機器學習法預測表現普遍較佳，而因子模型對未來1-3個月的預測亦有不錯的表現。英文摘要：Announcements of the dates of peaks and troughs in business cycles are made with such a considerable lag that policy makers can't know the current business cycle regime early. In this paper, we collect a wide range of domestic and foreign business indicators to assess their abilities to forecast Taiwan's recessions since 2001. We adopt logistic models to examine the usefulness of each indicator and consider four different methods to extract relevant information from all indicators: a forward stepwise approach, a logistic factor model, and two machine learning approaches. The analysis focuses on out-of- sample performance from the current month (zero-step-ahead forecast) to six months ahead. Our empirical results show that the ”real exports of goods” has the best predictive power for zero-step-ahead forecast. However, for one-month- to six-month-ahead forecasts, machine learning techniques show better out-of-sample performance than other forecast models.起始頁-結束頁：1-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：從人口老化及薪資停滯角度探討全民健保財務及保費負擔世代分配問題並列篇名：NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE FINANCIAL MECHANISMS AND INTERGENERATIONAL PREMIUM BURDENS IN THE FACE OF POPULATION AGING AND WAGE STAGNATION作者：梁景洋(Ching-Yang Liang);韓幸紋(Hsing-Wen Han)關鍵字：全民健康保險;人口老化;薪資停滯;世代分配;National health insurance;Population aging;Wage stagnation;Intergenerational premium burdens期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：有鑒於我國人口老化快速，且因青年薪資停滯等因素，不僅對於全民健保財務形成負面影響，亦導致世代分配問題。故本文將人口老化及薪資停滯因素納入健保費率推估模型中，以時間序列模型推估未來健保費費基、保險給付支出、平衡費率及個人所得，並計算平衡費率及不同各世代的健保保費負擔金額及負擔比例。在一般保費無費率上限6%下，且在「中人口推估&中協商成長」的情境假設下，健保平衡費率將從現行的4.69%，預估於2041年上升至12.28%，且越晚出生的世代負擔越重。故本文建議為降低人口老化及薪資停滯對青年世代健保保費負擔的不利影響，以平衡世代負擔的分配差異，未來宜從收支連動機制、保費計費基礎、釐清財務責任歸屬等面向加以改革，其研究結果可供全民健保未來財務改革方案之參考。英文摘要：Rapid population aging and wage stagnation among young people have negatively affected the finances of the National Health Insurance (NHI) program as well as exacerbated intergenerational inequality in Taiwan. In this study, population aging and wage stagnation were included in the model to estimate premium bases and benefit payments, which were then used to calculate the balance of payment rates and intergenerational premium burdens of NHI. Given the general premium rate without the rate ceiling of 6% and an estimated scenario with moderate population projection and moderate negotiated budget growth, the current 4.69% premium rate of the NHI would rise to 12.28% in 2041, and the rate would be higher for people born in later years. To mitigate the negative effects of population aging and wage stagnation that disproportionately impose the financial burden of paying NHI premiums on younger generations and eliminate the intergenerational inequality in NHI, reforms are necessary that implement a revenue-payment-linked mechanism, adjust the premium bases, and accurately determine financial responsibilities. This study is expected to provide a reference for efforts to reform the NHI program's financial structure.起始頁-結束頁：57-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：臺灣農業部門溫室氣體排放趨勢推估－動態可計算一般均衡模型之應用並列篇名：GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) BASELINE FORECASTING FOR TAIWAN'S AGRICULTURAL SECTOR USING THE DYNAMIC COMPUTABLE GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM (CGE) APPROACH作者：許聖民(Sheng-Ming Hsu);王仁(Shitephen Wang);李篤華(Duu-Hwa Lee);林幸君(Hsing-Chun Lin);蘇忠楨(Jung-Jeng Su);邱祈榮(Chyi-Rong Chiou);張靜貞(Ching-Cheng Chang);徐世勳(Shih-Hsun Hsu)關鍵字：溫室氣體排放;基線預測;動態可計算一般均衡分析;溫室氣體排放減量;Greenhouse gas emission;Baseline forecasting;Dynamic computable general equilibrium analysis;Mitigation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：環保署於2017年3月28日公告《溫室氣體階段管制目標及管制方式作業準則》中指出，中央各部會應訂定部門別的溫室氣體排放趨勢推估及參數，並進行溫室氣體排放趨勢推估及情境分析，作為積極減碳分工佈局的依據。本研究的主要目的為建立我國農業部門溫室氣體排放基線與未來相關因應政策模擬分析，主要是採用由中央研究院永續科學中心與澳洲農業與資源經濟局（ABARES）共同研發的動態可計算一般均衡模型及資料庫，並於農業部門做調整延伸，考量未來我國經濟成長與農業政策目標，評估我國農業部門未來之溫室氣體排放趨勢，並同時檢視其對於經濟面、能源面、社會面與環境面所帶來的衝擊影響。本文的特色為根據2017年中華民國溫室氣體排放清冊報告，將農業部門的排放範疇區分為農林漁牧之能源及電力消費排放（簡稱燃料燃燒）與非燃料燃燒兩大類。另外，本文考慮兩種情境的設計，分別為基準情境：考量目前已規劃之未來農業政策；政策情境:提高糧食自給率達40%目標，分別評估在不同情境下的農業部門溫室氣體排放趨勢。本文的另一特色為著重於「由下而上」的政策研究方法，透過與農委會各業務單位（包含農林漁牧）與農業相關學者專家之反覆討論不同的情境設計，共同檢視基礎數據並進行參數校準，使得本文所推估之未來農業部門溫室氣體排放趨勢更趨合理並符合實際。英文摘要：”Regulations for Periodic Regulatory Goals and Approaches of the Greenhouse Gas Emissions”, issued by Taiwan's Environmental Protection Administration, indicate that the central competent authority shall consult with the central industry competent authorities to determine the national greenhouse gas (GHG) emission trend projection principles and parameters as well as to project GHG emission trends and to provide scenario analysis. The major purpose of this study is to establish the methodology and provide the baseline forecasting and related policy simulations of greenhouse gas emissions in Taiwan's agricultural sector. We use the dynamic computable general equilibrium (CGE) modularization system - GEMTEE (General Equilibrium Model for Taiwan Economy and Environment), developed jointly by the Centre for Sustainability Science, Academia Sinica and the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES). The GEMTEE modularization system is applied in the agricultural sector for considering the future economic growth and agricultural policy objectives of Taiwan, forecasting the future GHG emission trends of the agricultural sector, and evaluating its impact on the economic, energy, social and environmental aspects via experts' consultation workshops. Based on the 2017 Taiwan Greenhouse Gas Inventory Report, the GHG emission of the agricultural sector is divided into two categories: fuel and electricity consumption in agriculture, forestry, fishery, and animal husbandry (referred to as fuel combustion) and non-fuel combustion with the sources of emissions mainly being methane and nitrous oxide produced by agricultural production activities, livestock gastrointestinal fermentation and excreta treatment. Moreover, we consider the design of two scenarios, which are (1) the baseline scenario: considering the current planned agricultural policy only; (2) policy scenario: increasing the self-sufficiency rate of food to 40%, and assessing its GHG emission trends. Another feature of this paper is the ”bottom-up” approach. Through experts' consultation workshops (including experts on agriculture, forestry, fishery and animal husbandry), we discuss different scenario designs and jointly review the basic data set. Parameter calibration is carried out, which makes the future trend of GHG emission in the agricultural sector reasonable and realistic.起始頁-結束頁：111-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：壹、2020年臺灣經濟情勢總展望之修正作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：159-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：161-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷1期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：189-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：臺灣貨幣政策慣性之分析並列篇名：THE INERTIA OF MONETARY POLICY: EMPIRICAL RESULTS FOR TAIWAN作者：高崇瑋(Chung-Wei Kao);萬哲鈺(Jer-Yuh Wan)關鍵字：泰勒法則;貨幣政策;慣性;利率平滑化;Taylor rules;Monetary policy;Inertia;Interest rate smoothing期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究以臺灣之即時資料與修正資料為對象，討論貨幣政策法則內落後一期利率具顯著解釋能力，是因貨幣當局面對具序列相關之衝擊使然，抑或與貨幣政策慣性之性質有關。透過English et al.（2003）與Castelnuovo（2003）之架構，以前瞻式泰勒法則進行的分析指出，中央銀行利率平滑化措施，為落後一期利率在貨幣政策法則內具顯著解釋能力的原因。而改以不同利率平滑化與衝擊序列相關設定，或將股價變化納入貨幣政策法則內後，原有分析結論依然可以成立，顯示文中有關貨幣政策慣性之推論具有穩健性。以逐步擴大樣本進行的估計指出，貨幣政策慣性程度有隨時間而提高的變化，且未因2007年全球金融風暴而受到影響。此外貨幣政策法則內各參數估計值的顯著性，亦會隨時間改變而出現消長，這隱含臺灣貨幣當局之政策反應函數有隨經濟發展階段不同而改變之特性。英文摘要：Based on real-time data and revised data of Taiwan, we address whether the lagged interest rate in monetary policy rules means inertia of monetary policy or serially correlated policy shocks faced by the Central Bank. Adopting the model of English et al. (2003) and Castelnuovo (2003) and based on the frame- work of forward-looking Taylor rules, the empirical results indicate that implementing monetary policy in a gradual fashion by the Central Bank of Taiwan is the cause of the lagged interest rate entering estimated monetary policy rules. Besides, the conclusion that the lagged interest rate in monetary policy rules represents inertia of monetary policy can also be confirmed by alternative specifications of interest rate smoothing and persistent shocks and by taking the role of financial variables in Taylor rules into account. Considering the impacts of the global financial crisis of 2007 on the issue investigated in this research, the inferences about the inertia of monetary policy of Taiwan can still hold. The significance of the coefficients in Taylor rules varies over time, and this implies that the reaction function of the Taiwan monetary authority is accommodating different phrases of economic development.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：臺灣就業和非就業之多元選擇、工資式的一般化兩階段估計、與樣本選擇偏誤成因並列篇名：THE MULTIPLE CHOICE OF EMPLOYMENT AND NON-EMPLOYMENT, A GENERALIZED TWO-STEP ESTIMATION OF WAGE EQUATIONS, AND THE FACTORS OF SAMPLE SELECTION BIAS IN TAIWAN作者：江豐富(Feng-Fuh Jiang)關鍵字：一般化兩階段估計法;典型vs.非典型就業;部分時間vs.全部時間工作;Generalized two-stage estimation approach;Atypical vs. typical employment;Part-time vs. full-time job期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本研究主要目的有二：一是以「多元logit模型」實證探討國內勞工選擇參與各就業與非就業部門的附著機率；另一是估計各就業部門的工資率式，為獲取一致性估計結果，並根據「一般化兩階段估計法」設定「樣本選擇變數」修正各部門觀察樣本的「選擇誤差」。就業部門共分「非典型部分工時、非典型全部工時、典型部分工時、典型全部工時」四個互斥部門；非就業部門含有非勞動力和失業兩個部門。採用行政院主計總處2011至2016年「人力運用調查」的混合個體資料進行迴歸，其結果擇要如下：（1）高教育程度者、「X、Y、和Z世代」、已婚男性、和單親爸爸選擇典型全部時間工作之機率都高於相同特性的其他族群，但選擇進入其他三個非典型部門的機率則相反。（2）兩個部分工時就業部門因其母體工資率之離散度大於另兩個全部工時就業部門，致其「正選擇誤差」都大於後者。（3）四類就業者中，唯有典型全部時間就業者的生命週期工資率時徑符合人力資本理論。（4）工資率的高低排序為：已婚男性（≒單親爸爸）＞未婚男性＞未婚女性（＞單親媽媽）＞已婚女性。（5）縣市失業率對各就業部門的工資率都有不可小覷的負面影響。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is two-fold: first, apply the multi-nominal logit model to estimate the attachment to various employment and non-employment sectors; second, adopt the generalized two-stage estimation approach to correct for selectivity bias in the wage equation of each employment sector. The employment section is classified as four mutually exclusive sectors of atypical/ part-time, atypical/full-time, typical/part-time, and typical/full-time employment, while the non-employment section includes both sectors of unemployment and non-labor force. By fitting the related estimation models to household data from the Manpower Utilization Survey of Taiwan conducted in each May of 2011-2016, the results can be briefly summarized as follows: (1) Those with higher education level, married males, and single fathers, as well as generations X, Y, and Z, have a higher probability of attaining typical/full-time employment than their counterparts. (2) The two part-time sectors are found to have greater positive selection bias than the other two full-time sectors, mainly because the population wage dispersions of the former sectors are greater than those of the latter ones. (3) Of the four employment sectors, only the life-cycle wage profile of the typical/full-time employment sector is compatible with what is predicted in human capital theory. (4) Holding other things equal, the magnitudes of wage profiles by gender and marital status are found to be in the order of married male (≒ single father) ＞ single male ＞ single female (＞ single mom) ＞ married female. (5) The county-level aggregate unemployment rate imposes a non-negligible negative impact on the wage rate of each employment sector.起始頁-結束頁：45-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：我國房地產價格波動對於創業活動的影響之研究並列篇名：THE IMPACT OF HOUSING PRICES ON ENTREPRENEURIAL ACTIVITIES IN TAIWAN作者：李明軒(Ming-Hsuan Lee);陳釗而(Jau-Er Chen);劉孟奇(Mon-Chi Lio)關鍵字：房價;房價所得比;創業活動;創業決策;臺灣;Housing prices;Housing-income ratio;Entrepreneurial activities;Entrepreneurial decisions;Taiwan期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：過去已累積大量的文獻探討房地產產業的擴張與經濟成長之間的關係，這些文獻普遍認為房地產產業提供了經濟成長重要的動能來源、可以刺激經濟活動。然而，晚近有學者開始批判快速上漲的房價可能成為負擔、改變一國的創業環境。為了進一步了解房價波動對於我國創業活動的影響，本研究分別利用我國2002至2015年的縣市追蹤資料、以及「華人家庭動態調查」之個人追蹤資料來進行實證研究，估計方法包括雙向固定效果模型、隨機效果模型、以及Logit模型。縣市追蹤資料的估計結果發現房價對於新增工商業活動、自營及雇主比例的淨影響皆偏負，代表當房價上升，創業活動與創業人口比例下降。個人追蹤資料的估計結果則發現房價對有房人群創業決策的淨影響偏正、對無房人群創業決策的淨影響則偏負、或不顯著，代表當房價上升時，有房人群選擇創業的機率上升，而無房人群選擇創業的機率或無變動、或下降，顯現經濟較弱勢的無房人群較無機會從房價變動中獲得改善經濟狀態的機會。英文摘要：This study empirically examines the impact of housing prices on entrepreneurial activities in Taiwan. While previous studies focused on the positive impact of housing prices on economic growth, lately some scholars have started to point out the possible negative impact of high housing prices on entrepreneurial activities. We utilize a panel dataset consisting of 22 counties and cities in Taiwan from 2002 to 2015 as well as an individual-level longitudinal dataset, and examine the impact of housing prices on entrepreneurial activities in Taiwan. The empirical strategies include fixed effect models, random effect models, and logit models. The findings of this study provide evaluations of the impact of housing market activities on the economy from a different angle.起始頁-結束頁：95-134資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：壹、2020年臺灣經濟情勢總展望作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：135-136資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田;陳樂昱;張靜貞;吳安琪;楊子霆;劉祝安期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：137-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：165-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：Guest Editors' Introduction to the Special Issue on Social Meaning and Reality並列篇名：「社會脈絡中的意義與實在」專號：客座主編導言作者：陳湘韻(Hsiang-Yun Chen);薩利．哈斯蘭格(Sally Haslanger)期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷4期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：661-668資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202012_50(4).00012篇名：Open Questions in the Metaphysics of Habitable Categories並列篇名：「可居之類」形上學的開放性問題作者：艾克賽爾．巴塞羅(Axel Arturo Barcelo Aspeitia);陳湘韻(Hsiang-Yun Chen)關鍵字：social ontology;social categories;social construction;identity;migration;社會存有論;社會性類別;社會建構;認同;遷移期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：My purpose in this text is to offer a general roadmap for navigating most current debates in the metaphysics of social categories regarding what sort of fact it is for a person to inhabit one social category or another-for example, what makes a person Mexican, or gay, or rich. With this goal in mind, I propose classifying the debating positions into three broad camps: common sense theories, socio-historical accounts, and performative theories. I characterise their main differences, identifying the main challenges and achievements of each. I show that for persons well integrated into their categories, the differences between these three broad camps are minuscule, yet become crucial when we try to account for people not so well integrated. Then, I sketch a pluralist proposal that reconciles the three camps I have identified, while doing justice to the challenges presented by interstitial phenomena such as mestizaje, transition, passing, migration, etc.英文摘要：本文試圖對當前最新的社會性類別形上學爭議，描繪出一個整體的路徑圖。「可居之類」的形上學爭議所處理的是，何種事實決定了一個人屬於某個社會類別？譬如：怎樣的事實使得一個人是墨西哥人、是同志、或是富裕的？本文將這些爭議中不同的立場分為三大理論陣營，即：常識理論、社會歷史解釋理論，以及展演理論。文中描述了三者間的主要差異，更指出其各自面臨的關鍵困難與優勢。作者認為，在說明那些與「可居之類」融合得很好的人時，這三大理論陣營的差異其實微乎其微；反之，在解釋那些和「可居之類」無法完美融合的人時，三者間的差異卻有關鍵的影響。本文因此試著提出一個多元式的進路來調和這三大理論陣營，此分析也能更適切地處理如：mestizaje（拉美涵化）、變遷、跨界、遷移等間歇性現象。起始頁-結束頁：669-707資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202012_50(4).00023篇名：Structurally-Constituted Human Kinds並列篇名：結構構成的人之類作者：榮恩．麥隆(Ron Mallon);陳湘韻(Hsiang-Yun Chen)關鍵字：social construction;semantic externalism;human kinds;race;社會建構;語意外在論;人之類;種族期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Some kinds of human or person seem to be intimately involved in the extra-human or extra-personal world; this involvement can take a variety of forms. Social constructionists have suggested that various human kinds may exhibit surprising dependence upon socially caused or constituted aspects of the world, and some have appealed to externalist, causal historical accounts of the semantics of kind terms for a model of how to reconcile such unappreciated sociality with successful reference of the terms. Focusing on the case of race in the U.S., I suggest that following this appeal to externalist semantics may lead, in some cases, to the embrace of human kinds that are constituted by the causal and material effects of past social practices. I also suggest that such structural dependence has counterintuitive consequences.英文摘要：某些類別的人似乎與人之外的世界有緊密的關聯，這些關聯可呈現為數種不同的形式。社會建構論者認為，某些人之類的形成，以令人驚訝的程度依賴於社會所造成或構成的面相；有些社會建構論者並以關於類別詞的外在論式的因果歷史語意論，來說明如何調和此一未受到足夠重視的社會性，以及我們對這些類詞的成功指涉。聚焦於美國脈絡下的種族，我認為遵循這種語意外在論，在某些情況下，會導致由過往社會習俗的因果效應所構造而成的人之類。我也主張，這種結構性的依賴會引發違反直覺的後果，並支持人之類的語意多元主義。起始頁-結束頁：709-737資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202012_50(4).00034篇名：Invariantist, Contextualist, and Relativist Accounts of Gender Terms並列篇名：性別詞的恆定主義、脈絡主義及相對主義作者：丹．載曼(Dan Zeman);陳湘韻(Hsiang-Yun Chen)關鍵字：trans people;self-identification;invariantism;contextualism;relativism;跨性別;自我認同;恆定主義;脈絡主義;相對主義期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：In this paper, I explore a range of existent and possible ameliorative semantic theories of gender terms: invariantism, according to which gender terms are not context-sensitive, contextualism, according to which the meaning of gender terms is established in the context of use, and relativism, according to which the meaning of gender terms is established in the context of assessment. I show that none of these views is adequate with respect to the plight of trans people to use their term of choice to self-identify and be referred to accordingly. I then consider an invariantist view based on self-identification and explore some of its challenges.英文摘要：本文探討的是數個現存與可能的關於性別詞的改良型語義學理論：根據「恆定主義」，性別語詞的意義無關於脈絡；根據「脈絡主義」，性別詞的意義是在使用脈絡中被確立；根據「相對主義」，性別詞的意義則是在評價脈絡中被確立。本文指出這些理論都面臨一個困境，即，它們皆無法妥適處理跨性別者選擇符合其自我認同的性別詞。作者提出一個基於自我認同的恆定主義的分析，並討論這樣的處理所面臨的一些挑戰。起始頁-結束頁：739-781資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202012_50(4).00045篇名：#NotAllMen and #NotMyPresident: The Limits of Moral Disassociation並列篇名：#NotAllMen以及#NotMyPresident：道德切割的限度作者：鄭若冰(Robin Zheng);陳湘韻(Hsiang-Yun Chen)關鍵字：moral disassociation;collective responsibility;blame;social change;structural injustice;道德切割;共同責任;責備;社會改革;結構不正義期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷4期出版年：2020中文摘要：Moral disassociation occurs when an agent separates herself from an unjust collective practice that is upheld by a social group to which she belongs. I examine two contemporary phenomena that can plausibly be understood in at least some cases as attempts to morally disassociate from injustice: #NotAllMen and #NotMyPresident. I argue that even though moral disassociation matters for the moral assessment of individual agents, it is far less important for the project of social change. More specifically, I show that even in the best cases, questions of moral disassociation function to draw our focus toward ”good” vs. ”bad” individual actors, actions, and attitudes-thereby diverting attention away from wider systemic processes of injustice. At best, moral disassociation is nonessential, and at worst, specious or counterproductive, because what matters most for rectifying structural injustice is recognizing that we all bear remedial responsibility for collectively bringing about radical transformation.英文摘要：道德切割發生於個人自外於其所屬社群所從事的不正義之行為。我檢視兩個當代的現象——#NotAllMen以及#NotMyPresident，至少在某些情況下，此兩者可被合理地理解為道德切割。我主張，道德切割即使能影響我們對行為者個人的道德評價，其對社會改革的影響卻微乎其微。進一步而言，我說明即使在最佳狀況下，道德切割使我們將注意力集中在「好」與「壞」的個人行為者、行為，以及態度，因此忽略了更廣泛的、系統性的不正義過程。道德切割充其量是無關緊要的，而在最糟的狀況下，它是誤導、適得其反的。因為對改正結構性的不正義來說，最重要的是我們認識到，要集體實現根本的轉變，所有人都要承擔修補的責任。起始頁-結束頁：783-822資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202012_50(4).00056篇名：假設性思考與倫理學方法並列篇名：Hypothetical Thinking and the Methodology of Ethics作者：許漢(Hahn Hsu)關鍵字：假設性思考;倫理學方法;道德一般主義;道德規範的必然性;hypothetical thinking;methodology in ethics;moral generalism;the normative necessity of moral norms期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：倫理學中使用假設性思考的觀念是：假想一個情況並思考這個情況的道德意義，這會對於我們思考實際情況的道德意義有指引作用。這是倫理學中的假設性思考方法。許多哲學家接受這樣的思考方法。Jonathan Dancy明白反對假設性思考的方法論功能。本文的論述內容包括：一、說明倫理學中的假設性思考作為方法的一般性結構與特性，闡述假設性思考在倫理學論述上方法論的功能；二、討論並反駁Dancy之否定假設性思考在倫理學有方法論功能的主張；三、討論Dancy提出的倫理學經驗主義的後設倫理學主張，尤其是他的反道德一般主義的論述；Dancy的理論面臨一項重要的困難：無法說明道德規範的必然性。英文摘要：The idea of hypothetical thinking as a method in ethics is in allowing one to imagine a situation and then think about the moral significance of the imagined situation; doing so provides guidance as to how the moral significance of the actual situation can be dealt with. While many philosophers adopt this method, Jonathan Dancy, however, rejects this idea. This paper attempts to explain the methodological structure and features of hypothetical thinking in ethics; argue against Dancy's rejection of hypothetical thinking as a method of ethical discourses and reasoning; and explain some relevant meta- ethical issues and difficulties associated with Dancy's rejection, especially the insurmountable difficulty Dancy faces in explaining the normative necessity of moral norms.起始頁-結束頁：483-521資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202009_50(3).00017篇名：從同婚爭議論公共理性的完備性並列篇名：On the Completeness of Public Reason in the Same-Sex Marriage Debate作者：吳澤玫(Tse-Mei Wu)關鍵字：公共理性;完備性;同性婚姻;羅爾斯;道德妥協;public reason;completeness;same-sex marriage;John Rawls;moral compromise期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：羅爾斯主張公共理性是完備的，即根據共享的政治價值和推論方式做判斷，將可對具爭議的重要制度和法律得出合理答案。本文的目的是要從同性婚姻合法化的爭議，檢視公共理性的完備性意涵。筆者將指出，各種政治正義觀可能得出不同的政治價值合理排序，且公共理性觀無法解決「何謂婚姻？」這個背景問題的歧見，因此完備性不能理解為對爭議議題「達成共識」。在「達成可合理接受的制度方案」的意義下，公共理性的完備性則可成立。為此，必須在公共理性的基礎上補充民主多數決和立法的道德妥協。英文摘要：Rawls claimed that public reason is complete; that is, it allows citizens to formulate a reasonable answer to controversial institutions and laws through judgments that appeal to shared political values and reasoning methods. The aim of this paper is to examine the meaning of the completeness of public reason by discussing the dispute over the legalization of same-sex marriage. I will point out that various political conceptions of justice may lead to different, reasonable, orderings of political values. Moreover, the conception of public reason cannot resolve the background question, ”What is marriage?” Therefore, the meaning of the completeness of public reason cannot be understood as ”achieving consensus” on controversial issues. Public reason is complete in the sense of ”achieving an institutional solution that can be reasonably accepted.” To this end, it is necessary to supplement the democratic majority and legislative moral compromise based on ideals of public reason.起始頁-結束頁：523-569資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202009_50(3).00028篇名：邁向基本收入：論非工作風氣並列篇名：Towards Basic Income: On the Non-Working Ethos作者：林耕漢(Keng-Han Lin)關鍵字：基本收入;工作;工作風氣;非工作風氣;價值中立;basic income;work;the working ethos;non-working ethos;value neutrality期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：這篇文章試圖探討為了基本收入制度的可行性，我們需要什麼樣的社會風氣的問題。基本收入的主要提倡者范巴黎斯（Philppe van Parijs）注意到，假使有一部分的人在接受基本收入後不去工作，那這將會造成社會體系的不穩定。為了解決這個問題，他提出工作風氣的構想。然而，本文將指出，在推動基本收入制度上，我們也需要允許人們不從事有償工作的風氣，即非工作的風氣，其能改變目前的工作倫理。並且，本文主張堅持價值中立的國家在推動非工作風氣上只能採取某些觀點作為理據，同時允許一些觀點在社會中自行傳播。英文摘要：This article attempts to explore the kind of social ethos needed to make feasible the institution of a basic income. Philppe van Parijs, the main advocate of basic income, has noted that if some people opt out of work as a result of receiving a basic income, the social system will be rendered less stable. To resolve the incentive problem, he proposed promoting an ethos of work, meaning that while individuals might be permitted to not engage in paid work, they would nonetheless retain a willingness to engage in paid work thanks to a number of non-institutionalized norms. However, this article argues that van Parijs pays insufficient attention to differences between the stability and accessibility of an institution. The former explores how to sustain an institution after it is established; the latter how to promote an institution prior to its establishment. Moreover, the ethos of work is related to the stability of the basic income institution. If this argument is correct, in promoting the basic income system, it will also be necessary to establish an ethos which allows people to not engage in paid work, that is, the ethos of non-work, which can change the current work ethics to improve people's acceptance of basic income. Moreover, this paper claims that a country insisting on value neutrality can only adopt certain viewpoints as part of its rationale in promoting a non-working ethos, while allowing some viewpoints to propagate in society.起始頁-結束頁：571-611資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202009_50(3).00039篇名：Reporting on ”China” in a ”Novel” Way: Japanese Translations of Eileen Chang's The Naked Earth and The Rice-Sprout Song in the USIS-Tokyo Book Translation Program (1952-1956)並列篇名：「新」中國報導：東京美新處譯書計畫與張愛玲《赤地之戀》、《秧歌》日譯（1952－1956）作者：王梅香(Mei-Hsiang Wang)關鍵字：Cultural Cold War;U.S. Aid Literary Institution;Sociology of Art Work;Politics of Translation;International Interpersonal Network;文化冷戰;美援文藝體制;作品社會學;翻譯政治;跨國人際網絡期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷3期出版年：2020中文摘要：This study adopts the perspectives of ”regional politics” and ”cultural propaganda,” in examining the relationship between the cultural propaganda of the United States Information Service Tokyo and Japanese translations of Taiwan and Hong Kong literature, taking as examples Eileen Chang's The Naked Earth and The Rice- Sprout Song. The study uses the records of the USIS-Tokyo Book Translation Program in the National Archives and Records Administration, analyzes the translation of literature from Hong Kong and Taiwan, and clarifies the importance of Japanese translations of works from Taiwan and Hong Kong for cultural propaganda in Northeast Asia. First, I demonstrate that as part of the Book Translation Program, the Japanese translation of the literature of Taiwan and Hong Kong is a medium for understanding ”Communist China.” Second, I explain the functions of the two works of Eileen Chang in the Book Translation Program and clarify their production process and the logic of U.S. propaganda. The Naked Earth was published by a family publisher, Sekatsu-Sha, and translated for its characteristics: ”anti-communist,” ”journalistic literature,” and ”middle school level book series.” In contrast, The Rice- Sprout Song was a special project in the Book Translation Program and a Jiji Press publication, characterized as anticommunist fiction. The paper uses the USIS-Tokyo Book Translation Program to outline the cultural propaganda development of the U.S. Aid Literary Institution in Japan, which started under Allied military occupation as the Japan Book Translation Program, and progressed to a collaboration with Japan's existing monopolistic publishing industry and international interpersonal network.英文摘要：本研究從「區域政治」與「文化宣傳」角度，以張愛玲《赤地之戀》與《秧歌》為例，探討東京美新處文化宣傳與臺港文學日譯的關係。首先，兩部作品作為理解「共產中國」的媒介。其次，說明兩部作品的定位和功能：《赤地之戀》為「家庭式出版社」出版品，因其「反共」、「報導文學」和作為「中學程度的系列叢書」而被翻譯；《秧歌》作為譯書特殊計畫：「時事通信」的書目。最後，透過兩書說明「美援文藝體制在日本」的運作邏輯，承繼「同盟國軍事佔領日本」翻譯計畫，與日本既有的壟斷性出版事業協力，並透過跨國人際網絡而完成。起始頁-結束頁：613-660資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202009_50(3).000410篇名：專題序－歐美AI的發展與挑戰作者：洪德欽;蔡政宏期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：137-145資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202006_50(2)000111篇名：戴維森論圖靈測試並列篇名：Davidson on the Turing Test作者：趙之振(Chi-Chun Chiu)關鍵字：戴維森;圖靈測試;思想歸屬;徹底翻譯;人工智慧;Davidson;Turing Test;thought attribution;radical interpretation;artificial intelligence期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：圖靈提出以模仿遊戲來測試機器能否思想。戴維森論證這測試是無法決定受測對象之語意學，故而無法決定機器能否思想；但庫辛思基卻反駁戴維森的論證。針對此中爭論，本文首先勾勒並釐清戴維森對模仿遊戲所作之評述，然後展示他對圖靈測試之批評；其次是論證庫辛思基批評戴維森之理據或是不成立，或是奠基於其對戴維森哲學的誤解之上；最後則是展示戴維森有關思想之條件的觀點與AI的關係：對於我們可以如何修訂圖靈測試，以此判定受測對象是否具有思想，戴維森的看法可以給我們怎樣的啟發。英文摘要：Davidson argues that the well-known Turing Test, being a method of determining whether a machine can think, fails to tell us anything about the semantics of the tested object and thus is inadequate to discover whether can think or not. However, against Davidson, Kuczynski claims that his reasoning is entirely fallacious and has little force in attacking the Turing Test. In this paper I will first delineate and clarify Davidson's comments on Turing's imitation game and his reasons for reject it as a proper test of machine thinking. Second, I will object to Kuczynski's criticisms by showing that his arguments are either ill-founded, inconclusive, or based on his misinterpretation of Davidson's thought. Finally, I will show how Davidson proposes to modify the Test in accordance with his own theory of interpretation, and the significance of this modified version for the attribution of thought to AI.起始頁-結束頁：147-178資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202006_50(2)000212篇名：反思機器人的道德擬人主義並列篇名：Reflection on the Moral Anthropomorphism of Robots作者：何宗興(Tsung-Hsing Ho)關鍵字：機器人;人工智能;道德主體;道德擬人主義;反應態度;robots;artificial intelligence (AI);moral agency;moral anthropomorphism;reactive attitudes期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：如果機器人的發展要能如科幻想像一般，在沒有人類監督下自動地工作，就必須確定機器人不會做出道德上錯誤的行為。根據行為主義式的道德主體觀，若就外顯行為來看，機器人在道德上的表現跟人類一般，機器人就可被視為道德主體。從這很自然地引伸出機器人的道德擬人主義：凡適用於人類的道德規則就適用於機器人。我反對道德擬人主義，藉由史特勞森對於人際關係與反應態度的洞見，並以家長主義行為為例，我論述由於機器人缺乏人格性，無法參與人際關係，因此在關於家長主義行為上，機器人應該比人類受到更嚴格的限制。英文摘要：If robots are to function automatically, without human supervision, as depicted in sci-fi imagination, then we must ensure that robots not commit moral wrongs. According to the behaviourist conception of moral agency, if robots, assessed purely on the basis of behaviour, perform as morally as humans, they can be considered moral agents. This naturally leads to moral anthropomorphism: the position that whatever moral standards apply to humans apply equally to robots. I argue against moral anthropomorphism. In light of P. F. Strawson's insights into interpersonal relationships and reactive attitudes, and drawing on paternalist actions as examples, I argue that robots, being not persons, are unable to participate in interpersonal relationships, and therefore their paternalist actions towards humans ought to be less permissible than humans'.起始頁-結束頁：179-205資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202006_50(2).000313篇名：淺論AI風險預測的規範性爭議並列篇名：A Preliminary Study of Normative Issues of AI Prediction作者：洪子偉(Tzu-Wei Hung)關鍵字：規範性;歸納法;隱私;人工智慧;預測技術;normativity;induction;privacy;artificial intelligence;predictive technology期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：AI預測技術深具潛力的其中一個應用，在於分析過去資料以預防極端氣候的災害。但當預測對象從自然環境變成人類本身，爭議隨之產生。本文旨在探討以人類資料作為風險預測之規範性爭議，並主張：（一）AI的不可解釋性，並非因其無法提供機械式步驟，而是人類的認知限制無法對數量龐大的步驟賦予意義。（二）AI的歸納法、黑箱等問題在大腦上也會遇到，兩者的差異是程度上而非種類上的。（三）必然性與事實性條件並無法一致地排除極端案例，卻又不排除既有法律或社會規範。（四）自主性原則之優點在確保權責相符、避免喪失人類能力、降低AI發展的社會阻力。英文摘要：This paper focuses on normative aspects of AI prediction-that is, technologies used to predict the future through analyses of big data concerning the past. While this technology seems promising in forecasting extreme weather or rehabilitating endangered wildlife, it is controversial when applied to human beings, e.g., an Israeli company is using AI prediction to identify possible terrorists, and China's government to locate potential dissidents. This paper explores some of the normative issues and argues: (1) AI-derived conclusions are inexplicable not because machines fail to provide mechanical steps, but because our limited cognitive power cannot assign meaning to the, probably billions of, steps, and thus we fail to understand the conclusions reached by AI; (2) while AI is considered to have an inductive problem, to be a black box, and to have other epistemological issues, these worries apply to the human brain as well. AI and the human brain are different in degree rather than type; (3) the necessity argument and the reality condition cannot be used to exclude radical cases (e.g., China's social credit system) without excluding existing laws or social norms; and (4) the principle of autonomy has advantages, which include balancing power and responsibility, and reduces public distrust.起始頁-結束頁：207-229資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202006_50(2).000414篇名：AI倫理的兩面性初探－人類研發AI的倫理與AI倫理並列篇名：A Preliminary Study of AI Ethical Duality: AI Ethics and Ethical AIs作者：甘偵蓉(Zhen-Rong Gan);許漢(Hahn Hsu)關鍵字：國際AI倫理準則;AI倫理的兩面性;含括的倫理觀;分散式行為主體性;底線式道德義務;artificial intelligence (AI) ethical guidelines;the duality of AI ethics;a more inclusive view of AI ethics;distributive agency;a bottom-line view of moral obligations期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：目前AI國際倫理準則在規範方向上偏向AI研發及使用者，比較缺乏針對AI系統本身，但AI的自主學習能力，使得AI的倫理規範應該涵蓋這兩個面向，本文提出較為含括的哲學倫理觀來說明。這項倫理觀包含了AI的自主道德決策能力，如依據其目前及可預期的技術基礎，如與人類相較雖屬於知性與低限度的，但在決策的責任承擔上仍具備分散式行為主體性。最後針對AI兩面向的倫理規範，我們提出底線式道德義務作為所有規範的起點。並對於落實AI規範的議題，提出個案研發的倫理評估機制設立方向，以為回應。英文摘要：AI (artificial intelligence) is characterized by autonomous learning and reactive capabilities. Arguably, these characteristics mean AIs can be held liable for failing to adhere to ethical, legal and social regulations when undertaking autonomous acts. In this paper, we consider the duality of AI ethics: that AI ethics should work both for humans and Artificial Intelligences. We lay out a more inclusive ethical view which would accommodate the idea of AIs characterized by distributive agency, which posits that AIs possess only a minimal degree of autonomy or intelligent autonomy in virtue of which AIs can be given a certain agency status. The agency status of AI will differ from that of human beings, governments, and corporations, nonetheless, the inclusive view also suggests that AIs ought to be held accountable for their acts: shared responsibility. We also suggest an idea of a bottom-line view of moral obligations as the starting point for the duality of AI ethics. Finally, we suggest an implementation mechanism of AI ethics based on case evaluations.起始頁-結束頁：231-292資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202006_50(2).000515篇名：初探目的解釋在法律人工智慧系統之運用可能並列篇名：No Vehicles in the Park?: On AI's Teleological Interpretation in Law作者：陳弘儒(Hung-Ju Chen)關鍵字：人工智慧與法律;目的解釋;法律推理的電腦模型;規範性;工具理性;artificial intelligence and law;teleological interpretation;computational models of legal reasoning;normativity;instrumental rationality期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：本文說明法律推理的計算機模型在設計上的可能困境。文章指出，在目的被給定的條件下，雖然可能運用CMLRs進行目的推論，但仍舊無法消除規範性的質疑，因為有限範圍之目的推論是對於未來可能結果之預測，因此，可能世界如何與目的之規範事態相符合是一個關鍵問題。此外，本文直視「目的如何具有規範性」的議題，並指出法律推理的不確定性。在實踐層面，則透過「目的」之概念分析為CMLRs提供哲學反省，釐清其運用界線以及邊界問題。英文摘要：Legal purposes not only contribute to the meaning of legal norms but also help lawyers arrive at legal conclusions, and even provide justificatory force. Engineers in Artificial Intelligence and Law also recognize the importance of teleological reasoning in law and aim at building a computational model capable of teleological interpretation, no matter in models of statutory reasoning or case-based reasoning. This paper investigates the problem of teleological interpretation in CMLRs. It points out that CMLRs are capable of operating teleological reasoning within a limited scope but incompetent to deal with normative issues such as why certain values shall be realized through a teleological interpretation. This is because CMLRs in a purposive interpretation function to predict future possible outcomes, but it is another (fundamental) question regarding how this presupposed possible world fits into the normative state of affairs of a legal purpose. This article makes two contributions. First, it directly focuses on the form and structure of purposive interpretation providing analysis and reflections on its applicative problem in CMLRs. Second, it clarifies the relationship between a legal purpose and meaning of a legal norm. This clarification helps CMLRs to understand to what extent a model design of teleological interpretation is acceptable.起始頁-結束頁：293-347資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202006_50(2).000616篇名：歐盟自動駕駛車之發展策略與法律規範並列篇名：EU Development Strategy and Legal Control of Automated Vehicles作者：洪德欽(Der-Chin Horng)關鍵字：自駕車;安全要求;歐盟;移動聯網;智慧交通系統;automated vehicle (AV);safety requirements;EU;connected mobility;Intelligent Transport System (ITS)期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：人工智慧（AI）結合數位科技之發展，自2010年之後已逐漸應用於自駕車產業。自駕車的發展將帶來創新的功能與機會，也會影響各國的交通結構以及人類的生活方式。自駕車對各國經濟、社會、倫理、生活等方面帶來新的問題與挑戰。自駕車法律建構因此扮演一項重要因素，以規範自駕車的發展秩序、創新研發、安全標準、風險責任、公平競爭與貿易機會等法律關係。汽車乃歐盟一項重要產業，歐盟相當重視自駕車之發展。本文研究歐盟自駕車的發展策略及法律規範，以了解歐盟自駕車發展過程遭遇哪些問題，又採取哪些因應政策？歐盟自駕車安全要求以及智慧交通系統又如何規範及建構？歐盟自駕車建制有哪些特徵、意涵、影響，同時又能提供臺灣哪些參考及啟示。英文摘要：Automated vehicles (AVs) have been an emerging industry in line with the development of artificial intelligence (AI), digital technology, and connected mobility since 2010. These technologies arrived suddenly on the market, and their future development is expected to accelerate. AVs promise many opportunities and benefits, but also pose many challenges regarding their social impact and the transport system. Regulation plays a key role in the development of AVs in the EU, ensuring AV safety, delineating legal responsibilities, privacy and consumer protection, risk control, fair competition, market access, public confidence, etc. The EU has paid a great deal of attention to AV because the automobile industry is crucially important to the European economy. This paper examines the development strategy and legal framework for AV in the EU, particularly focusing on the following core issues: the concept of AV, development, strategy, safety requirements, opportunities and challenges of the AV, the formation of Intelligent Transport System, the specific features of the EU's AV regulation and policies, the significance and impact of the same, and any implications for Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：349-431資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202006_50(2).000717篇名：社會交換視角下的信任－性別與異質性的社會資本並列篇名：Trust from the Perspective of Social Exchange: Gender and Heterogeneous Social Capital作者：楊天盾(Tien-Tun Yang);熊瑞梅(Ray-May Hsung);杜業榮(Ye-Rong Du);盧科位(Ke-Wei Lu)關鍵字：社會交換;信任;異質性的社會資本;風險;信任賽局;social exchange;trust;heterogeneous social capital;risk;trust game期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷2期出版年：2020中文摘要：信任涉及人類生活的層面很廣，小至人與人的互動、個人經濟交易行為，大至個人對政府的認同，都需要以信任為基礎。社會學家、政治學家、經濟學家，甚至神經科學家都有涉入信任的研究，然而鮮少有跨領域之間的合作。本研究結合實驗經濟學的實驗法，從社會交換的過程來探討信任行為的建立。研究發現，在信任交換的過程中，當互惠性愈高，雙方交換的風險降低，個體愈願意給予對方信任。而性別上的差異，更多展現在異質性的社會資本上。當社會資本異質性低時，男女的差異不大，但社會資本的異質性高時，男生就顯著的給予更多的信任。英文摘要：Trust involves the wide range of aspects of social life, including personal economic transactions, an individual's recognition of government authority, business and trade conducted between different organizations. Sociologists, political scientists, economists, and even neuroscientists have all researched trust, but their work seldom draws on interdisciplinary cooperation. Therefore, this study combines behavioral economics with social network and social capital theory to interpret the various operational mechanisms responsible for trust behaviors. The results show that the more heterogeneous the social capital possessed by boys, the more trust they are willing to invest in processes of trust exchange. In trust exchanges, there is a significant influence on mutuality as individuals (trustors) are more willing to invest trust when, in a previous round, trustees received greater rewards.起始頁-結束頁：433-481資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202006_50(2)000818篇名：Neighborhood Stressors and Social Integration, Living Arrangements, and Characteristics and Variabilities of Sleep in Old Age並列篇名：鄰里社會壓力與社會連結、居住安排對老年人睡眠狀況與變化之影響作者：陳人豪(Jen-Hao Chen)關鍵字：aging;neighborhood effects;living arrangements;sleep;老化;鄰里效應;人口健康;居住安排;睡眠期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Decades of research has demonstrated that where individuals live can affect their health and well-being. Using theories and research from sociology and sleep medicine, this study will extend the literature on how neighborhoods affect health to examine how neighborhoods and living conditions affect sleep among the elderly, which is an important but overlooked health topic in the social science literature. This study hypothesizes that neighborhood stressors, such as perceived danger, undermine the elderly's sleep, while factors contributing to neighborhood integration, such as social connectedness and a sense of community, promote the elderly's sleep. Second, the study hypothesizes that living arrangements (i.e., living alone or with a spouse, family member, or other person) moderate the relationship between neighborhood and sleep. The analysis uses nationally-representative data from the National Health, Social Life, and Aging Project (N=684), which includes objective assessments of older adults' average sleep characteristics and variabilities. Overall, findings suggest that the social dynamics of neighborhoods can independently predict older adults' sleep characteristics, but the processes are complex and may vary by living arrangements. Specifically, the study finds that neighborhood was not associated with average actigraphic sleep characteristics, but social connectedness was associated with less variability in sleep duration and marginally associated with less variability in wake time after sleep onset. Older adults who lived in intergenerational households had greater variability in sleep fragmentation when they perceived higher degree of danger in their neighborhood, and less variability in sleep fragmentation when they felt social connectedness and a sense of community in their neighborhood. In addition, some gender differences were found.英文摘要：美國研究證實，居住社區會影響不同群體之個人健康與福祉。然而有關於社區鄰里與健康的研究中，卻尚未探究其對老人睡眠的影響。本研究整合睡眠醫學和社會學理論觀點，探究老人客觀睡眠品質如何受其所處的社區鄰里社會環境所影響。本研究欲驗證兩項假說：（一）居住在危險或孤立的鄰里會危害老人的睡眠；反之，居住在社區連結強的鄰里則會提升其睡眠狀況。（二）老年人的居住安排能調節鄰里特徵對睡眠的影響。本研究使用美國老年健康社會生活調查資料進行統計分析，探究居住鄰里社會環境對客觀睡眠狀況之影響，包含平均睡眠狀況與睡眠變化情形。結果顯示，老人居住於孤立的鄰里較易睡眠中斷；反之，居住於社會連結強的鄰里則有較穩定的睡眠時間長度。此外，老人的居住安排方式調節社區對睡眠的效果。與子女同住或居住安排較為複雜的老人，其居住於危險鄰里對於睡眠的負面效果會被強化。本研究證實社區鄰里特徵能預測老年客觀睡眠狀況，但此影響效果在不同性別間有差異。並且，社區鄰里特徵的效果受老人居住安排方式所調節。起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202003_50(1).000119篇名：John Lyly's Galatea: Memes, Cross-Dressing, and Likeness並列篇名：約翰．黎里的《嘎樂媞亞》：模因、異性裝扮、模似作者：謝心怡(Hsin-Yi Hsieh)關鍵字：Galatea;memes;likeness;cross-dressing;Queen Elizabeth I;《嘎樂媞亞》;模因;模似;異性裝扮;女王伊莉莎白一世期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：John Lyly's Galatea (1584) is a court comedy of virtue, which was written specifically to be performed before Elizabeth I. Composed after Campaspe (1583) and Sapho and Phao (1584), Galatea is the third in Lyly's first series of court comedies, and situated within the author's successive approaches to the cult of Elizabeth I, who was worshipped as the Maiden Queen of England and the Virgin Mother of her nation. Furthermore, after the playwright's first prose fiction work, Euphues: The Anatomy of Wit (1578), Galatea is also Lyly's first play to revise the motif of father-daughter disagreement and to rethink conflicting male likenesses. Through double cross-dressing, two females' love of being alike is thus dramatized in response to the dysfunction of patriarchal authority. Accordingly, this article explores the way in which certain figures or ideas are reproduced, even mutated through imitation, as memes in the play relating to the queen's virtue. Given the presence of the queen at the play's performance, this article explores how far Lyly redefines the subordinate relationship of the on-stage subjects to the off-stage Queen Elizabeth I: examining how the sacrificial virgins, vagrant boys, and cross-dressed maidens of Galatea seek various routes to the same shelter under the eye of the constant and multidimensional queen who stands in as an exemplar of divine perfection.英文摘要：約翰．黎里的《嘎樂媞亞》（1584）是一部專為伊莉莎白一世撰寫、演出的美善宮庭喜劇，撰於《坎珮絲珮》（1583）及《莎芙與費歐》（1583）之後，為黎里的第一組宮廷系列的第三部作品，參與了作者頌揚伊莉莎白一世「以閏女之姿作為一國之君」及「以貞女之態作為一國之母」的承繼性「女王崇拜」。此外，《嘎樂媞亞》延續了黎里的首部小說《尤弗伊斯：智慧的剖析》（1578），首次改編了父女之間的爭執與男性之間的「因相似而相怨」，並藉由雙重異性裝扮，讓女性「因相似而相愛」的劇情得以對應父權的失能。因此，本文旨在探索《嘎樂媞亞》中的特定人物或概念，如何透過模仿而經歷「模因」般地複製、甚至突變，卻仍能展現與女王美善之間的關聯。本文析究黎里如何藉由首席觀眾的風采，重新定義了《嘎樂媞亞》中台上臣民與台下伊莉莎白一世的主從關係：檢視恆久不變及多重面向的女王，猶如神聖完美的典範，在她的看顧下，處女獻祭的人選、流浪的男童、異性裝扮的閏女如何透過不同的方式尋覓相同的庇護。起始頁-結束頁：47-78資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202003_50(1).000220篇名：Erotic Transgression in Carlos Saura's Tango並列篇名：《情慾飛舞》踰越情慾作者：談玉儀(Yuh-Yi Tan)關鍵字：Bataille and Borges;self and other;fictional death;Argentine tango;playful metafilm;巴代伊與波赫士;自我與他者;虛構死亡;阿根廷探戈;後設電影的嬉戲期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：50卷1期出版年：2020中文摘要：Carlos Saura's musical film Tango, an audio-visual poem, is patterned upon the discourse of the Argentine tango in its pursuit of cultural otherness. The film elucidates the mid-life crisis of writer/director Mario reframed in an erotic site wherein his masculinity is challenged, distressed, and resurrected. With a playful metanarrative attached to love romance and dance spectacle, Tango crosses between the genres of melodrama and dark fantasy to conjure up the weakness of masculine hegemony threatened by murder and sexuality. A genealogy of the erotic via Georges Bataille's taboo-transgression relation substantiates the perception that Mario's self is being reconstituted in an erotic and sacrificial rite transpiring on the architectural terrain of tango dance and musical scenes. In these mise-en-scenes, the subject separates his ”other” self from a patriarchal figure with the help of revisionist femme fatales Elena and Laura, as well as with his competitors, Ernesto and Angelo, who challenge him to avoid a living death. It is this quintet of five characters who create the tango microcosm of the film. Supported by his integral relationship with the camera and the mirror set in a cavernous rehearsal hall, Saura and his surrogate, Mario, challenge notions of conformity while reflecting the history of tango, ”now and then,” in an interconnected multi- dimensionality worthy of Borges' labyrinthine narratives. As a symbolic metaphor and psychological meditation, tango serves to reflect Mario's configuration of the self/other and the encounter with sex and sexuality, death and resurrection, taboo and transgression. Eventually Mario's self, possessed by his mediators' otherness, desires a shift from the self to otherness and focuses intently on the coupling bodies, redoubling his excitement upon entering the maze of the tango.英文摘要：卡洛斯．薩烏拉的音樂電影《情慾飛舞》，為一部精緻華麗的視覺詩歌，訴說身兼導演及劇作家雙重身分的馬利歐，在拍攝《探戈》影片時所產生的情慾危機，導演愛情生活經歷緊密地與當時阿根廷的探戈文化與歷史相互重疊與呼應。他的男性氣概在與前妻勞拉與女友愛蓮娜的情慾關係中，受到挑戰、折磨後重生；而製作人安傑拉與編舞家艾恩斯托也與他產生亦敵亦友的相生相剋關係，這繁複的五角關係如同阿根廷探戈論述所追求文化他者的建構過程。薩烏拉透過趣味盎然與意象豐富的探戈舞蹈與音樂，輔以後設電影繁複的敘事結構，以戲中戲跨越類型的想像，進而嘲諷男性霸權所受到的威脅，此恰可呼應劇中看似矛盾卻相生的自我／他者、性別／慾望、死亡／重生、禁忌／踰越等議題。筆者嘗試透過法國哲學家喬治．巴代伊有關禁忌與踰越的情色論述，波赫士的迷宮敘述學，與後設電影中五重角色綿密的情慾關係，解構馬利歐如何在一連串「展演」式的探戈舞蹈場面調度中，彰顯主體與被男性社會所邊緣化的「他者」，在面對死亡與性別等禁忌議題時，反轉、形塑而重生。起始頁-結束頁：79-135資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202003_50(1).000301篇名：調查研究－「大數據」的方法與應用作者：陶振超;張仁和期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：45期出版年：2020起始頁-結束頁：5-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心2篇名：大數據與人工智慧方法在行為與社會科學的應用趨勢並列篇名：Applications and Trends of Big-data and AI Methods in Behavioral and Social Sciences作者：黃從仁(Tsung-Ren Huang)關鍵字：大數據;人工智慧;行為科學;社會科學;big data;artificial intelligence;behavioral sciences;social sciences期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：45期出版年：2020中文摘要：2010年代大數據與人工智慧在行為與社會科學的應用趨勢，總結來說是個「見山是山，見山不是山，見山還是山」的歷程。本文回顧過去2010－2019十年之間，主要以小樣本、結構化資料為主的行為與社會科學研究，為何開始擁抱大樣本、非結構化的資料後，又逐漸回歸到細緻的小樣本研究；同時，用來分析資料的統計模型，為何從簡單的解釋性模型逐漸過渡為複雜的預測性模型後，而又轉向解釋性模型？理論上，這些大數據的搜集與分析，將使得研究結論因為樣本多樣性與統計檢定力俱足而能有好的可重現性。實務上，大數據與人工智慧方法對於行為與社會科學的影響卻是將研究從低可重現性提升到高可重現性後，又使其陷入低可重現性的困境。由於這些更迭，文末並討論行為與社會科學研究者在面對這些大數據與人工智慧的變革與衝擊時，該是聞風不動抑或聞風而動？英文摘要：The digital era fosters the blossoming of research methods that can collect and analyze big data of human behavior for descriptive, correlational, and experimental studies in behavioral and social sciences. More and more studies leverage the internet or smartphones to collect big data and adopt artificial intelligence (AI) methods, such as machine learning, to accurately model the big data. As researchers become more enthusiastic about these new approaches, they also gradually learn the limitations of such big-data and AI methods. Compared to paper-based surveys and laboratory experiments, internet- or smartphone-based approaches of data collection often compromise data quality over quantity because such data collection processes, despite being less constrained by space and time, are also less controlled by researchers. Similarly, compared to traditional statistical models, AI’s algorithm-based approaches of data analysis often compromise model simplicity over accuracy because such data models, in order to capture complex regularities in data, are inevitably complex and hence less explainable. As a result of these relative advantages and disadvantages of big-data and AI methods, the trends of applying them in behavioral and social sciences in the 2010s are, to some extent, circular-the rise of big-data and AI methods leads to a re-appreciation of traditional research methods and subsequent development of hybrid approaches. To elaborate on the circularity, the present article reviews the relevant literature published between 2010 and 2019 from the perspecitves of data collection, data analysis, and study reproducibility. Specifically, in terms of data collection, behavioral and social sciences were grounded in small data, grew an interest in big data for their potential of testing universality of research findings, and then turned back to collect relatively quality-assured small data. In terms of data analysis, behavioral and social scientists developed theories predominantly using explanatory statistical models, being attracted to but at the same time felt perplexed by highly accurate predictive models that were based on machine learning, and then finally found ways of making predictive models explainable. In terms of study reproducibility, although collection and analysis of big data held the promise of improving sample size, sample diversity, and thus the reproducibility of results and inferences in behavioral and social sciences, ironically the study methods themselves were becoming irreproducible because the rapidly evolving cyber environments from which research data were gathered might have irreversibly changed, or the technical threshold of repeating the same analysis was insurmountably high to most researchers in the field. How can behavioral and social scientists respond to the aforementioned changes and impacts brought about by big-data and AI methods? Based on foreseeable scientific and technological trajectories, in the end we conclude that the hurdles of learning and applying the big-data and AI methods will be lowered and thus recommend researchers to integrate both new and old methods, which are, in fact, complementary to each other. These integrated approaches, such as aggregating big data from small studies for machine-learning analysis, will help researchers to see not only the forest but also the trees and ultimately help advance behavioral and social sciences.起始頁-結束頁：11-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心3篇名：從智慧型手機的數位足跡解析人類日常行為：以手機使用、睡眠作息和工時型態為例並列篇名：Interpretation of Daily Human Behavior via Smartphone Digital Footprints: Examples from Smartphone Use, Sleeping Patterns, and Working Hours作者：江庭瑋(Ting-Wei Chiang);陳思宇(Si-Yu Chen);林煜軒(Yu-Hsuan Lin)關鍵字：智慧型手機;行動應用程式;生態瞬間評估法;網路心理學;數位表現型;smartphone;mobile applications (apps);ecological momentary assessment;cyberpsychology;digital phenotyping期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：45期出版年：2020中文摘要：近年來普及全球的智慧型手機，使我們可以透過每天人和手機互動留下的「數位足跡」，更準確、即時、持續地量化日常環境中的個人心理與行為。研究手機的數位足跡將直接從人類行為紀錄的巨量資料獲取珍貴的訊息，催生出「網路心理學」、「心理資訊學」、「數位表現型」等新興研究領域，這是突破傳統研究模式的新進展。本文將回顧數個以智慧型手機被動資料為基礎的行為模式研究，介紹如何收集並分析手機資料以了解人類一天常見的三項行為：使用手機、睡眠與工作。從這些實證應用中，本文綜合整理了手機資料較傳統研究方法的幾項重要優勢：提高受試者留存率，避免時間扭曲效應，以及提升資料的時間解析度。文末並討論手機數位足跡未來發展的潛力與優勢：除了解讀人類心理與行為以外，還可以進行即時、密集、個人化的行為介入與治療。英文摘要：With the global prevalence of smartphones in recent years, we can now study human behavior and the mind via our daily interactions with smartphones. These data automatically collected by our digital devices are called ”digital footprints.” They not only provide an objective, real-time, and ecological source of measurement, but also provide insights into human behaviors and mental activities. The digital footprints from smartphones can be seen as a new opportunity for behavioral science and psychological research, for example, in the emerging fields of cyberpsychology, psychoinformatics, and digital phenotyping. This review introduces several studies that have applied time-series smartphone passive data to interpret common human behaviors, focusing on three mobile apps: ”Know Addiction” for smartphone use, ”Rhythm” for sleep time, and ”Staff Hours” for working hours. ”Know Addiction” automatically records the timestamps of screen-on, screen-off, notifications, and app usage. First, we defined an 'episode' of smartphone use as the time period from screen-on to the successive screen-off. App-generated parameters reflecting the frequency and duration of smartphone use facilitate the identification of smartphone addiction. Second, we shifted from smartphone-centered analysis to human-centered analysis by distinguishing ”proactive use” from ”reactive use.” Our prior research has shown that the duration of proactive use, defined as the total time of the epochs without any notification within one minute before the screen-on, may be more representative of addictive behavior than the total duration of smartphone use. Third, by applying methods like empirical mode decomposition to identify trends in smartphone use, we are able to observe long-term behavioral patterns. ”Rhythm” was designed to identify sleep time based on smartphone behaviors. ”Rhythm” also measures changes in sleep patterns and promotes users' awareness of social jetlag between weekdays and weekends. By quantifying long-term circadian rhythm stability, a ”digital chronotype” can be delineated. Our previous study has shown that screen time, mainly mediated by bedtime smartphone use, delayed the circadian rhythm, and reduced total sleep time. ”Staff Hours” is an app to capture working hours and patterns for medical staff in real-time. This app collects objective GPS location data longitudinally in the background with a power-saving design. Using geofencing technology, combined with self-reported work time information and on-call schedule, this app automatically records the working hours one spends in his or her workplace. ”Staff Hours” improves the efficiency of labor inspection, as we can now compare real-time work hours on a large scale. Our prior study revealed that medical staff had longer work hours than non-healthcare professionals, with resident physicians working the longest hours at 60.4 hours per week in hospitals. There are several advantages of using digital footprints from smartphones in behavioral science and psychological research. First, passive data collection solves the problem of recall bias and time distortion, and results in higher user retention and temporal resolution. Moreover, smartphones show potential for immediate interventions and personalized treatments. With the growing emphasis on medical device software nowadays, we envision that mobile apps collecting digital footprints will be widely used in clinical settings and public health.起始頁-結束頁：43-71資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心4篇名：語言探索與字詞計算詞典2015中文版之修訂並列篇名：The Revision of the Chinese Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count Dictionary 2015作者：林瑋芳(Wei-Fang Lin);黃金蘭(Chin-Lan Huang);林以正(Yi-Cheng Lin);李嘉玲(Chia-Ling Lee);James W. Pennebaker關鍵字：語文探索與字詞計算;文本分析;大數據應用;LIWC (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count);text analysis;big data analytics期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：45期出版年：2020中文摘要：以自動化日常語言分析展現心理特性的研究，近年來相當受到關注，語文探索與字詞計算（Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count，簡稱LIWC）就是一項廣受學者青睞的分析工具。LIWC歷經幾次的改版，近期對LIWC2007的詞典做了大幅的增刪，並在2015正式發布最新版本。本研究之目的，即在對LIWC2015詞典建立相對應的中文版詞典，進行信效度檢驗，並介紹相關應用文獻。研究一以中文版LIWC2007詞典為基礎，對照LIWC2015詞典的改版，進行了相對應的類別增刪及語詞的增補。研究二蒐集各類題材的部落格文本為材料，並將各文本以奇偶句分成兩文本分別進行LIWC分析，並檢驗其在各類別使用率的相關性，進行信度分析。研究三以Ptt電子佈告欄上的Hate版與Sad版文章各50篇進行書寫差異比較，以檢驗CLIWC2015的效度。本文並對LIWC與大數據分析相關之文獻進行介紹，同時說明LIWC的優勢與限制。期待透過CLIWC2015的修訂完成，對研究華語文使用者的心理特性探討，提供一項研究利器。英文摘要：Automated analysis of natural language in its daily use has shown to be effective in capturing psychological characteristics in the literature. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC), developed by Pennebaker and his research team, is one of the most commonly used text analysis tools in the social sciences. The essential assumption of LIWC is that the frequencies of word usage in certain categories serve as language markers that index individuals' inner thoughts and psychological processes. LIWC contains two parts, the computer software and the dictionary. The computer software is used to calculate the frequency of words in each category. The dictionary is the LIWC key classifying words into categories. LIWC2015 is the latest dictionary, and is based on a significant revision of its predecessor, the LIWC2007 dictionary. The aim of the current study is to develop a corresponding Chinese version of the LIWC2015 dictionary (CLIWC2015) and demonstrate its reliability and validity. Based on the Chinese LIWC 2007 dictionary, we revised CLIWC2015 by adding and deleting corresponding categories of the LIWC2015 dictionary. We described the details of the process in Study 1. There is a total of 10,795 words belonging to 79 categories in CLIWC2015, including 25 linguistic process categories and 54 psychological process categories. Study 2 collected 100 texts from blog posts on various topics. The average total word count in each post was 1,290 in Study 2. To calculate the reliability, sentences in each text were ordered first, and then odd- and even-numbered sentences were grouped into two subtexts. LIWC indices were calculated for each subtext, and then correlation coefficients between the corresponding subtexts for each language category were used for reliability analyses. Results showed that all word categories demonstrated strong correlation effects except one punctuation category which calculated the frequency of the dashes usage. One possible explanation is that dashes is not a commonly used punctuation mark in the blog posts which could have lowered the reliability. To examine the validity, study 3 collected 100 posts from the Ptt bulletin board system, 50 of which were from the ”hate” board, and the rest were from the ”sad” board. The average total word count in each post was 164 in Study 3. The two sets' linguistic features were compared. Consistent with our hypotheses, ”hate” board posts used significantly more anger, swear and netspeak words, and exclamation marks. In contrast, ”sad” board posts used significantly more first-personal singular pronouns, sad, anxiety and cognitive words, and higher cognitive complexity words. Across studies 2 and 3, our findings supported the reliability and validity of the CLIWC2015 well. Unlike traditional content analysis, which requires a great deal of time and effort, one of the most important strengths of LIWC is the ability to analyze huge text files rapidly. Recently, more and more research has applied LIWC to analyze big data. In the last part of this article, we also discussed the implications of using CLIWC2015 and its applications in Chinese culture and big data analytics.起始頁-結束頁：73-118資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心5篇名：公務人員關注議題之文字探勘：以PTT公職板為例並列篇名：A Computational Text Analysis on the Core Issues for Public Servants: Evidence from the PTT作者：王貿(Mao Wang)關鍵字：公務人員;文字探勘;批踢踢實業坊;內部顧客;結構式主題模型;public servant;text mining;PTT;internal customer;structural topic model期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：45期出版年：2020中文摘要：以往政府並不重視基層公務人員的意見，除了缺乏溝通平臺外，更常見的是許多意見交流只存在於個人層次的人際管道。然而，隨著各種網路論壇與社群的興起，亦產生了以公務人員為主要使用者的討論社群，內容則是與公職生涯有關的各種議題。從內部顧客管理的觀點，理解公務人員的疑問與需求，正是公務人力資源管理的關鍵。基此，本研究以「批踢踢實業坊」（PTT）中的「公職板」為研究標的，蒐集該板內屬於提問性質之發文共20,616篇，利用文字探勘之方法，描繪公務人員關注之議題面向。依結構式主題模型分析之結果發現，發文可以歸納為13個主題：福利、活動、互動、請假、備考、採購、就任、錄取、改革、調任、志願、考績、詢缺。繼而深入探討主題內容並對照實務運作，另以主題網絡呈現主題間之關聯。最後，依研究結果提出相關建議，供政府人事主管機關與未來研究參考。英文摘要：Background: The government used to ignore the voice of public servants from the bottom levels, the reasons being not only a lack of communication channels but also the fact that such information often exists exclusively within personal networks. However, along with the rise of online forums and social media, there are some communities, discussing all kinds of issues related to public jobs, mainly for public servants. One key element of public personnel management is to realize the problems raised by and needs of the internal customer, namely civil service, and thus this study is to investigate what issues are most discussed online by public servants. Methods and Data: Survey is a common way to understand the voice of internal customers, but it is also accompanied by certain problems, such as a narrower survey framework decided by the survey administrator, and respondents' fear of identity disclosure to their supervisors. Using textual data from online forum posts, without the downside of the survey method, and exploiting the techniques of computational text analysis are helpful to depict the issues public servants truly care about. This article focuses on textual data from the PublicServan Board (公職板)of the PTT (like a Taiwanese version of Reddit), collects 20,616 posts which ask a question, and summarizes the content of posts through an unsupervised machine learning method. Results: Based on the result of a structural topic model, this article examines these posts and can be clustered into 13 topics: benefits, activities, interactions, leave, examinations, procurement, reports, recruitment, reform, transfers, job rankings, appraisals, and position seeking, and compares them to the government practices we recognize, and visualizes the relationships between the topics. In this corpus, the amount of posts on each topic varies. The top four topics include: job ranking (11.15%), position seeking (10.32%), recruitment (9.61%), and interactions (9.43%), and the results reveal that qualified people tend to raise questions about how to find an ”appropriate” agency and a ”suitable” position. This finding is in line with the fact that the numbers of posts are higher every March and September because that is when the results of the public service exams are announced. Apart from discerning different topics, there are some discrepancies and contradictions between the findings from these textual data and the annual survey administered by the Directorate-General of Personnel Administration, Executive Yuan (行政院人事行政總處). The high turnover rate is attributed to dissatisfaction with promotion by the authority, but the relationship between turnover and dissatisfaction with promotion rarely shows evidence from the posts we collect. Interactions with line managers and colleagues in the workplace often result in doubts and complaints which we can discover from textual data, yet no numeric data explicitly indicate this situation in the annual survey. Finally, the topic network adds more contextual information to specify topic categories and uncover their relationships. Conclusions: Computational text analysis does not replace traditional ways of comprehending public servants, but can complement and confirm what we know about public servants. This type of analysis provides not merely higher or lower numbers but a meaningful context, and can, more importantly, help enhance interpretations. Some suggestions are made for the reference of the government personnel authority and future research agendas.起始頁-結束頁：119-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心6篇名：從經驗中對話：初探計算社會科學的立論基礎與應用挑戰並列篇名：Dialogue from Experience: Exploring the Theoretical Basis and Application Challenges of Computational Social Science作者：余貞誼(Chen-Yi Yu)關鍵字：計算社會科學;計算轉向;手機;數位生活記錄;computational social science;computational turn;smartphone;lifelogging期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：45期出版年：2020中文摘要：隨著資訊科技的進步，藉由數位科技的輔助作為研究工具、分析方法和認識範疇的取徑，已成為一股社會科學的新興風潮。面對如此的計算社會科學浪潮，我們應將其本身視為值得探問的研究主體，並思索其運用的方式，才可望增進對此計算轉向所帶來的影響力、價值和企圖展望的理解。這篇文章透過對計算社會科學的本體論、認識論和方法論的討論，來爬梳它所立基的知識與方法基礎之所在；同時藉由實際運用計算取徑作為資料收集和輔助分析的研究經驗，來討論當計算取徑遇上社會研究時，其所擅長的數值分析能夠如何與敘事詮釋的方法相互並用，以促成更接近社會事實的理解樣貌。此外，文中也討論數位科技輔助的資料收集形式如何對方法倫理帶來複雜的挑戰。藉由這樣的積極理解，以及與數位科技方法對話的累積，希望能讓我們持續發展出新的、適當的且相互共融的方法，去應對已日漸被科技中介的社會世界。英文摘要：With the advancement of information technology, the use of digital technology as a research tool, analytical method, and exploration approach has become a new wave of social science. This rapidly emerging trend of computational social science should itself be treated as a research subject. It is necessary to explore its methods and premises, and to think about the possibility of application, in order to enhance our understanding of its influence, value and prospects. Therefore, this article attempts to discuss the ontology, epistemology and methodology of computational social sciences. The ontology of computational social sciences can be said to be a ”metadatification” process, which converts various types of information into data, and performs computational processing with its mathematical logic. In the epistemology of computational social sciences, algorithms are used to sort out patterns and structures that were previously undetectable to the naked eye, and to find correlations or rules from the data pile. The methodology emphasizes that mechanical objectivity can be used to filter out artificial biases to produce rigorous knowledge. However, when we apply computational approaches, we must still reflect on its knowledge assumptions in order to find an appropriate method to integrate with social interpretative approaches. First, the form of research data is diverse, and not all are suitable for conversion to byte format. Second, the meaning of patterns and structures is not self-explanatory, but relies on human interpretation to bring context and meaning in order to make it into thick data. Third, it is necessary to be honest in the process of data intermediation, including the determination of the scope of data collection, the process of data translation and cleaning, and the final presentation of data, all of which are full of traces of social construction. Through my research experience of data collection and analysis by using a computational approach, I will discuss how the data analysis of the computational approach can be used in conjunction with the narrative interpretation method to promote the understanding of social facts. I use a mobile app to collect the temporary data of people using social media to understand the temporal structure and mechanism of social media's integration into daily life. This technology-assisted method can help me collect more accurate and detailed information, and I also use in-depth interviews to understand the context and meaning behind the data. The data obtained from the mobile app, like cultural probes, gives an overview of the usage scenarios, finds out the structure of the usage patterns, and then illuminates an entrance for us, allowing us to see the deeper meanings in the context. In other words, data and interviews are complementary, both by using data to stimulate narratives and deepening data by using narratives. In addition, I also discuss how digital technology-assisted forms of data collection pose complex challenges to method ethics, including changes in the nature of the field, and research ethics and privacy protection issues. With such a positive understanding and dialogue with digital technology methods, we hope that we can continue to develop new, appropriate and mutually inclusive ways to cope with the social world that has gradually been involved in technology.起始頁-結束頁：155-196資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心7篇名：監測訪問時間的調查品質管制程序並列篇名：Monitoring Interview Duration for Survey Quality Control作者：謝淑惠(Shu-Hui Hsieh);李名鏞(Ming-Yung Lee)關鍵字：訪問時間;調查品質管制;管制圖;台灣社會變遷基本調查;主成分分析法;interview duration;survey quality control;control chart;Taiwan Social Change Survey;principle components analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：44期出版年：2020中文摘要：社會科學研究常使用問卷進行資料收集，但資料品質與抽樣誤差、調查過程產生的誤差等有關。Biemer和Lyberg（2003）建議使用資料收集過程來監控資料品質。Japec（2005）建議監測訪談的持續時間，以提供有關資料品質的訊息。有好的過程品質，才能得到好品質的資料。以調查周邊資料和時間標記作為資料品質管理，不僅能獲得更高品質的資料且能同時改善操作效率和降低成本。本研究以2015年「台灣社會變遷基本調查計畫」工作與生活組為例，提出一個以訪問時間為基礎的調查品質管制程序，並將管制圖應用於調查資料品質管制。我們提出的程序包含三個部分：<U+2474>訪員的篩選程序，利用主成分分析法依據訪問時間將訪員分類；<U+2475>決定檢查比例的程序，依據訪員分類配置不同的檢查比例；<U+2476>訪員個人監測程序，運用個人中位數管製圖選取檢查樣本。此研究目標不是簡單的監測，而是提供持續品質改善的程序，且能更有效的掌握檢查作業成本，以兼具品質改善與成本控管。英文摘要：To collect data in social sciences, it is common to use questionnaire survey methods. Data quality is essentially a function of the magnitude of error in data. If data have sufficient accuracy, it is said that the data quality is high. On the other hand, if the magnitude of error in data is large, the data are said to have poor quality. These criteria for data quality can be applied when using data to estimate population parameters. There are two forms of error in estimating parameters. The first, known as sampling error, is the error as a result of drawing a probability sample rather than conducting a complete enumeration. The second, known as nonsampling error, refers to all other forms of error that can occur during data collection and processing procedures. Therefore, efforts to improve data quality are directed at nonsampling error. Biemer and Lyberg (2003) provide an extensive discussion of methods for data quality improvement. They suggest focusing on steps to improve the data collection process. Often a good-quality process implies good quality of both the data sampled and the resulting output. Using paradata and time stamps to manage survey data collection can lead to a more efficient operation that produces higher quality data at lower cost. In this study, we explore the effect of interview duration on data quality in the Taiwan Social Change Survey (TSCS). The TSCS, the first nationally representative survey in Taiwan, was established in 1985 and is conducted through face-to-face interviews. In it, interviewers are instructed to perform their tasks according to the key principles of standardized interviewing. If the interviewer complies with standardized procedures, an abnormal interview duration is less likely. Conversely, if the interviewer deviates from the standardized procedures, there is higher probability of an abnormal interview duration. Interview duration is very important for the interviewer with regard to planning fieldwork activities, and is a factor which influences his or her cost and benefit analysis. Short and well-paid interviews are financially and organizationally more attractive. Japec (2005) suggested monitoring interview duration, since it can tell us something about data quality. This paper addresses the problem of quality control in a survey based on interview duration data, and applies control charts to the monitoring process. We conducted this process in three parts: (1) classification of interviewers based on interview duration data using principal components analysis. The aim was to improve the efficiency of monitoring the data collection process. (2) detection of the optimal rate among different interviewers' classifications, and avoidance of continually collecting data by using non-standard interview procedures which affect the quality of survey data. (3) use of a median control chart to monitor the potential causes of variation between individual interviewers to find out why some interviewers' interview times exceed the control limit. To assess the applicability of the proposed method, we used the 2015 Work and Life module of the TSCS to illustrate the proposed process for survey quality control. The research goal of this article was not simply to monitor, but also to improve the quality of the process over time. Based on the proposed process, it is notable that the inspection operation cost can be more effectively controlled.起始頁-結束頁：7-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心8篇名：臺灣社區照顧關懷據點與需求人口之資源供需差異分析：應用地理可近性方法評估社區照顧資源配置妥適性並列篇名：Disparity in Resource Allocation between Community Care Centers and the Demand Population in Taiwan: An Evaluation Conducted by Geographic Accessibility作者：曾明性(Ming-Hseng Tseng);吳慧卿(Hui-Ching Wu)關鍵字：社區照顧關懷據點;社區照顧;地理可近性;資源配置;空間不平等;community care center;community-based care;geographic accessibility;resources allocation;spatial inequality期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：44期出版年：2020中文摘要：提高社區照顧關懷據點可近性，有助落實活躍老化政策。本文以2017年衛生福利部公開資料為資源提供點，65歲以上人口為需求人口，運用皮爾森相關係數、地理可近性、吉尼係數等方法，以縣市區域平均法、分區（同縣市使用）最近距離法及全島（跨縣市共享）最近距離法，進行資源供需差距分析。研究發現，需求人口區位與據點位置與數量，存在資源供需差距。首先，從線性相關分析發現，皮爾森相關係數相當低，顯示資源供需區位分布相關程度低。其次，就據點服務負荷量，50%據點服務負荷量低於平均數，推論為位置偏僻或與其他據點鄰近，導致服務人口較少。第三，就取得據點服務最近距離分析，平均值最大縣市是花蓮縣、嘉義縣、南投縣、新竹縣、臺東縣，若將使用方式以全島（跨縣市共享）最近道路距離法評估，除臺東縣，其餘縣市最近距離都能縮短。最後，就需求人口據點擁有率（地理可近性分數），吉尼係數呈現不公平趨向，「中位數－平均數」皆負值，顯示縣市資源分配不平等。英文摘要：Neighborhood social networks are influential for the elderly's health and well-being, and community-based care can enhance their participation in social activities. The geographic accessibility of community care centers can reduce traffic inconvenience and advance the policy of active aging. This study focuses on the congruence between the demand population and the distribution of the supply of appropriate resources. The investigation applied the methods of Pearson's correlation, geographical accessibility, and the Gini coefficient to explore the service loading ratio of, resource ownership of, and nearest distance to community care centers. In this study, community care centers were held to be the supply points for the resources based on information derived from open data available in 2017. The demand population of the elderly was calculated according to the population aged 65 years or older in 2017. On the basis of these methods and data, our study provides a comparative analysis by using the administrative district average method, the nearest distance method of the same administrative district, and the nearest distance method of cross-county resource sharing. The results obtained from this investigation demonstrate the inconsistency between the density of the demand population location and the geographical distribution of community care centers. First, Pearson's correlation coefficients show a low degree of conformity in the resource allocation's demand and supply. This finding indicates inconsistency between the resource supply and the demand population. Second, according to the amount of service loading, 50% of the centers show below-average values. These figures indicate that the locations are isolated or are adjacent to each other and are thus lacking in demand population. Third, based on the largest average of the nearest distances, the top five counties were found to be rural. Applying the nearest distance method of cross-county sharing of resources to reassess accessibility, all except Taitung County can shorten the nearest distance. These results support our research position of encouraging local governments to share community care centers. Finally, based on the service resource ownership rates of the demand population (geographic accessibility scores), the Gini coefficients are between 0.4~0.7, emphasizing the seriousness of the inequality between the resource supply and the demand population. In sum, the appraisal of spatial resource allocation is a key issue for governmental agenda-setting, whereby geographic accessibility assessments should examine both the demand side (e.g. elderly demand population, and rural/urban locations of administrative districts) and the supply side (e.g. distance factor, and capacity of community care centers). Geographic accessibility and the equality of resource distribution need to be examined synchronously in order to optimize the spatial locations of community-based care resources. Our study suggests that effective policy creation can allow the demand population, regardless of the area of the registered permanent residence, to make use of community care centers, and encourages local governments to cooperate and to share their community care resources. Through our policy suggestion of the cross-county sharing of resources, the inconsistencies between the demand population and the distribution of the supply of resources can easily be improved by enhancing the geographic accessibility of the elderly. This move can help the elderly to avail themselves of community care centers, and promote the execution of the ”aging in place” policy goal.起始頁-結束頁：41-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心9篇名：健保資料與抽樣調查並列篇名：Using National Health Insurance Database for Sampling Surveys作者：余清祥(Jack C. Yue);簡于閔(Yu-Min Chien);梁穎誼(Yin-Yee Leong)關鍵字：常住人口;全民健康保險;大數據;普查;遷移;de jure population;National Health Insurance;big data;census;migration期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：44期出版年：2020中文摘要：人口資料是國家施政的基礎，大多數國家會以普查（Census）為全國性資料的主要蒐集方法，但近年戶口普查遭遇不少挑戰，許多國家考量不進行全國普查，改以其他方法取得資料品質可媲美普查的全國人口估計值。美國、法國的滾動式普查是方法之一，每年輪流抽取3%不同的樣本，除了可取得不錯的資料品質，又能獲得五年連續調查結果，打破十年一次靜態人口的限制。本文也以探討普查替代方法為目標，評估以健保就醫資料取得我國國民經常活動資料的可行性，比較幾種常見的常住地判斷方式，包括感冒就醫、以及本文提出的幾種方法，評估哪種方法較能反映國人就醫地區的特性，並討論未來以健保就醫作為取得常住人口時，必須考慮的配套措施及限制。另外，我們也將常住地判斷方法應用於探討人口遷移，將立委選區訂為分析單位，以避免人數差異太大的問題，分析發現臺灣大致可分為幾個生活圈，其中有幾個地區的遷入及遷出相對活躍。英文摘要：Censuses are usually the only method for collecting information on a national population, and they are conducted every ten years for most countries. Taiwan's government also conducts censuses every ten years to collect information on the de jure population, covering the shortage of the household registration system. However, there are potential problems in the traditional census, such as low response rates, poor data quality, outdated information and rising survey costs. Taiwan, like a lot of countries, has been seeking alternative methods for collecting national data and decided to use sampling surveys (of about 16% of the national population) to replace the whole population census in 2010 and 2020, in order to cope with the problems of low response rates and rising survey costs. Still, the sampling survey cannot provide timely population information in Taiwan. The rolling census is one of the new methods which can offer up-to-date information, and was first adapted by the U.S. and France in 2010. The rolling census in the U.S., American Community Survey, collected data on 3% of the national population annually for five years, and this can deliver a time series of national estimates for those five years. In this study, we aim to explore new data collection methods which can serve as an alternative to the traditional census and provide timely population information. In particular, our goal is to evaluate the possibility of using data from the National Health Insurance (NHI) Research Database for acquiring information on the de jure population in Taiwan. In particular, we use the Longitudinal Health Insurance Database 2005 (LHID2005) in this study. In addition to records on upper respiratory tract infections, we also propose three other methods based on the records of outpatient visits to identify the place of normal residence. We choose outpatient rates and other criteria from the NHI data for method evaluation, and find that the medical cost of outpatient visits less than 555 points (one point is close to one New Taiwan Dollar) is the most appropriate method. To demonstrate the feasibility of using NHI data to acquire the population information, we apply the proposed methods to explore the domestic migration in Taiwan. The official records of Taiwan's domestic migration are available only at the level of province and special municipality, and are not accessible for counties and townships. To make up for the deficiency of official records, we estimate the domestic immigrants and emigrants at the level of electoral circumscription (73 seats) for members of the Legislative Yuan. The population of each electoral circumscription is between 200,000 and 500,000, smaller than that of counties and larger than that of townships. The results show that the domestic migration in Taiwan can be separated into three sub-regions: northern, central, and southern Taiwan. The migration activities are active within each region, but not as active between regions. Also, the six major cities (or special municipalities) in Taiwan, each with population of at least two million, attract most of the domestic immigrants, and the remote areas (such as eastern counties) have the highest emigration rates.起始頁-結束頁：97-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心10篇名：享用與敘述性品評指標評估與分析－臺灣高山茶應用並列篇名：Hedonic and Descriptive Sensory Evaluation and Analysis-An Application to Taiwan Alpine Tea作者：簡立賢(Li-Hsien Chien);紀淑怡(Shu-Yi Chi);戴錦稔(Chin-Nien Tai);黃正宗(Cheng-Chung Huang)關鍵字：高山茶;茶品評指標;滋味與香氣;偏最小平方法;重要表現圖像分析;Alpine tea;tea sensory evaluation;taste and aroma;PLS-SEM;IPMA期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：44期出版年：2020中文摘要：臺灣高山茶因其特殊香氣與滋味廣受國人喜好，但產業界與消費者對於高山茶多是以海拔高度定價，缺乏具產品辨識的品評基礎研究，導致各高山茶區產品區隔不易。本研究以南投縣仁愛鄉轄下清境、合歡山、福壽山、奇萊山與大禹嶺五處茶區為例，透過兩階段專家意見程序，以國內現行烏龍茶茶葉之外觀、水色、滋味、香氣與葉底五項感官品評標準構面，建立臺灣高山茶專業品評要求的17個指標。研究分析採「結構方程式—偏最小平方法」評估各品評指標內涵，再以多組分析法進行分群突顯五個茶區的差異，透過「重要—表現圖像分析」方法，針對構面中最重要的滋味（味覺）與香氣（嗅覺）構面，具體建立高山茶品評特色指標。本研究結果顯示，建立的品評指標確實可具體描述茶區特色屬性，可透過滋味與香氣的感知地圖有效掌握高山茶的產地特色。英文摘要：Taiwan alpine (high mountain) tea products are very popular with consumers due to their unique flavors and aroma, and have become high-priced agricultural products in recent years due to the planting altitude. In practice, there is a lack of attribute research to identify and evaluate product quality, and to use as a reference for pricing the tea efficiently. Application of quantitative analysis of the tea's chemical composition for determining the source of tea products is also quite limited. These limitations make it quite difficult to distinguish the various products in the different producing areas, and often lead to confusion and disputes. The present study identified and applied five primary sensory evaluation constructs of tea, namely appearance, tea color, taste, aroma, and leaf shape, to evaluate whether a hedonic attribute index of alpine tea can adequately describe products from different areas. A total of seventeen indices were chosen from the five constructs of the most popular tea competition evaluation standards. Twenty-two sensory experts conducted the evaluation of fifteen tea samples from the five tea areas of Renai (Cingjing, Hehuanshan, Fushoushan, Qilaishan, and Dayuling) in Nantou to identify the specific attributes of that area's tea. We tested the significance of the practical attribute items corresponding to the five sensory characteristics with a partial least squares path model and examined the differences in sensory evaluation indicators between the five Nantou tea areas with multi-group analysis. The major conclusions are as follows: (1) The main chemical components of tea, such as total catechins, showed significantly different results in tea products of the same tea species at different altitudes. Thus, quantitative analysis of the main chemical components can provide clues to the altitude of the tea plantation location. However, if the tea areas are very close to each other, this method may not effectively discriminate between the differences. (2) Practical hedonic indexes for high mountain tea sensory application were established. The results show that the sensory attributes effectively provide a sound basis to identify alpine tea products for different tea regions. In this study, based on the existing five major constructs of the evaluation framework, and by expert opinions and practical operations, we established seventeen descriptive operational variables for the evaluation of mountain tea in five areas. (3) A workable attribute tool for segmenting tea products was established. A two-dimensional map framed by taste and aroma, two popular sensory constructs, was developed and is provided with the multi-group analysis. The descriptive evidence can assist the local industry chain in promoting its local agricultural products by linking the qualities of tea products to their specific areas of origin. The present research shows that the hedonic attribute index for Taiwanese alpine tea established in this study is able to accurately measure the products of different mountain tea areas. Quantitative analysis provides the altitude information of the tea product at the first stage. The sensory indexes in this study are then able to further identify the source of the product by its attributes, and should effectively reduce market disputes and improve efficiency.起始頁-結束頁：131-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心
