01篇名：以開放大數據資料來源進行不動產交易、人口特徵與優勢資源歧異度之多層次空間探勘：臺灣本島349鄉鎮市區之不均現況分析並列篇名：Using Open Big Data Sources and Multilayer Spatial Data Mining in Real Estate Transaction, Demographic, and Diversity of Beneficial Resources: Visualizing the Current Inequality of the 349 Town-level Districts in Taiwan main island作者：游舜德(Tony Shun-Te Yuo);楊育安(Yu-An Yang)關鍵字：住宅市場;空間不均;空間資料探勘;房價因素;資料視覺化;Data Visualization;Housing Market;Spatial Data Mining;Spatial Inequality;Property Price Determinants期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：開放資料與巨量資料探勘概念的提出已有相當時間，然至今尚未有能涵蓋全臺灣不動產交易與特徵資料的整合性探勘結果，對空間與非空間資訊提供充分且完整的描述與呈現。過去的文獻顯示不動產價量的決定因素，與所屬空間的人口特徵及各種優質資源，具有一定關係；故欲詳細描繪不動產交易價量的空間分布，這應該是多層次的分析，且須運用各種不同演算程序與方法達成；本研究即提出一整合複雜資料多演算法的資料探勘方法，透過開放資料來源，針對臺灣本島349個鄉鎮市區，涵蓋超過五十萬筆資料，萃取出高、中、低指標分布區，並以視覺化的方式呈現。結果顯示，臺灣當前的不動產交易、人口與資源分布確實是不均的。英文摘要：While the concept of open and big data has been around for some time, scholarship on comprehensive mining results on property transaction and related spatial and non-spatial characteristics variables have not been explored or published. Previous research suggests that the determinants of property price were closely related to demographic and the diversity of beneficial resources, such as infrastructures and environmental amenities. As a result, in order to illustrate these determinants in detail, our analysis used multiple algorithms to extract these comprehensive features. From various open data sources, this study collected over half-million data numbers on the 349 town-level districts in Taiwan main island. The clusters of high, mid- and low-transaction, population and resources districts were extracted and displayed in 2D and 3D maps. The results show that spatial inequality still exists in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.202105_24(1).00012篇名：情緒能力、和睦關係、實質吸引力與專業能力對忠誠度之影響－以房屋仲介業為例並列篇名：The Impact of the Emotional Competence, Rapport, Physical Attractiveness, and Professional Competence on the Loyalty: In the Case of Housing Brokerage Industry作者：李春長(Chun-chang Lee);張香美(Hsiang-mei Chang);葉文芝(Wen-chih Yeh);俞錚(Zheng Yu)關鍵字：情緒能力;和睦關係;實質吸引力;專業能力;線性結構方程模式;emotional competence;rapport;physical attractiveness;professional competence;structural equation model期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以消費者角度探討影響房屋仲介人員忠誠度之因素，整合情緒能力、和睦關係、實質吸引力、專業能力與傳統忠誠度模式（滿意度、信任與忠誠度）之關係，以建構本研究之概念架構模式。問卷調查對象為高雄市曾經與房屋仲介人員接觸或接受服務之經驗者。應用線性結構方程模式（structural equation model, SEM）進行參數估計與分析。問卷調查共發放830份問卷，實際回收293份，有效問卷共為281份，有效回收率為95.90%。實證結果顯示，情緒能力會對和睦關係與專業能力產生顯著正向影響。和睦關係會對滿意度產生顯著正向影響。實質吸引力會對專業能力產生顯著正向影響。專業能力會對信任產生顯著正向影響。信任會對滿意度產生顯著正向影響。滿意度會對忠誠度產生顯著正向影響。信任對忠誠度產生顯著正向影響。實證結果隱含於探討影響顧客忠誠度之因素時，不可忽略情緒能力、和睦關係、實質吸引力與專業能力之重要影響效果。英文摘要：This study examined the factors that influence the loyalty of housing brokers from the consumer's perspective. The conceptual framework for this study was developed by considering the relationships between emotional competence, rapport, physical attractiveness, professional competence, and the traditional loyalty model. The questionnaire respondents were individuals from Kaohsiung City who had interacted with or been served by housing brokers. The structural equation model (SEM) was used to perform a parameter estimation and analysis. 830 questionnaires were administered, of which 293 were returned and 281 were valid, representing a effective response rate of 95.90%. The empirical results indicated that: emotional competence has a significant positive impact on rapport and professional competence; rapport has a significant positive impact on satisfaction; physical attractiveness has a significant positive impact on professional competence; professional competence has a significant positive impact on trust; trust has a significant positive impact on satisfaction; satisfaction has a significant positive impact on loyalty; and trust has a significant positive impact on loyalty. These empirical results implied that, with respect to studies on the factors that influence customer loyalty, the important effects of emotional competence, rapport, physical attractiveness, and professional competence should not be ignored.起始頁-結束頁：37-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.202105_24(1).00023篇名：監督式機器學習於土地覆蓋分類效益之研究並列篇名：Research on the Benefits of Supervised Machine Learning in Land Cover Classification作者：范慶龍(Ching-Lung Fan)關鍵字：土地覆蓋;分類;無人飛行載具;監督式機器學習;Classification;Land cover;Unmanned aerial vehicles;Supervised machine learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣土地研究卷期：24卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：無人飛行載具（Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, UAV）之遙測影像相較於衛星影像有快速、機動取得地表資訊之能力，並具有低成本、高空間與時間之解析度，以及影像資料較不受雲霧干擾之特性，已廣泛地運用在小區域之監測與調查作業。本研究運用UAV高效率的遙測取像方式，並結合支持向量機（Support vector machine, SVM）、最大概似法（Maximum likelihood, ML）及隨機森林（Random forest, RF）三種監督式機器學習方法實施地表特徵樣本訓練及測試，再評估五種土地覆蓋（樹木、草地、裸露地、建築物及道路）之分類效益。旨在比較和找到最合適的分類器，以有效率地用於UAV影像之土地覆蓋分類。在鄉村地區研究結果顯示SVM的分類準確率為88%、曲線下面積（Area under the curve, AUC）為0.88、Kappa值為0.83及Gain為96.8%（前50%測試集），其綜合評估的分類效益最佳。另外，選擇地物較複雜的都市地區進行測試，SVM的分類準確率為85.4%，也是三種分類器中最佳的，尤其對於道路能正確地預測（分類）。本研究所使用之機器學習是基於RGB做出預測，無論是在鄉村或都市地區的土地覆蓋分類均有良好的成果，且三種監督式機器學習（分類器）準確率都大於78.6%以上。整體而言，三種分類器能清楚區分各種土地特徵的差異，並分析人為（building、road）與自然（tree、grassland、land）的不同光譜組成與特性，且正確的執行土地覆蓋分類。英文摘要：Compared with that realized through satellites, remote sensing images conducted using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) can yield land surface information more promptly and flexibly. Moreover, this sensing involves a low cost and has a high spatial and temporal resolution. In addition, the obtained image data involve less interference pertaining to clouds and fog. UAVs have been widely used in small area monitoring and investigation operations. In this study, the high-efficiency remote sensing image method based on UAVs is adopted, and three supervised machine learning methods, namely, support vector machine (SVM), maximum likelihood (ML), and random forest (RF), are combined to implement training and testing of the land surface feature samples. Subsequently, the classification benefits of five types of land cover (tree, grassland, land, building, and road) are evaluated to identify the most suitable classifier to be used for efficient land classification for the images obtained using the UAV. For the SVM in rural areas, the classification accuracy, an area under the curve (AUC), Kappa coefficient, and Gain are 88%, 0.88, 0.83, and 96.8% (first 50% of the test set), respectively. This classifier achieves the highest classification benefit. Next, a city area with more complex features is selected for testing. The SVM classification accuracy is 85.4%, which is the maximum among the three classifiers. In particular, the SVM classifier can accurately predict (classify) roads. The machine learning approach performs predictions based on RGB. Satisfactory land classification results are obtained both in rural and urban areas. The accuracy of all three supervised machine learning classifiers is greater than 78.6%. In general, all the classifiers can clearly distinguish the land features, analyze the different spectral compositions and characteristics of artificial (building and road) and natural (tree, grassland, and land), and accurately perform land cover classification.起始頁-結束頁：67-94資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞永續發展研究出版單位：政治大學地政學系、臺北大學不動產與城鄉環境學系DOI：10.6677/JTLR.202105_24(1).000301篇名：新共和主義可以克服國家恐怖主義嗎？並列篇名：Can Neo-republicanism Overcome State Terrorism?作者：劉俊麟(Chun-Lin Liu)關鍵字：恐懼;恐怖主義;國家恐怖主義;新共和主義;非宰制的自由;terrorizing;terrorism;state terrorism;neo-republicanism;non-domination期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：74期出版年：2021中文摘要：恐怖主義對國際社會影響很深，在各種類型的恐怖主義中，國家恐怖主義比起其他非國家恐怖主義是最可怕的類型，根本影響了人民對國家的服從與忠誠。在這篇論文中，本文將主要檢視重視國家地位與功能的新共和主義，去看新共和主義者可否確實面對國家恐怖主義的挑戰。本文認為，以Philip Pettit為首的新共和主義輕忽了國家恐怖主義，以致於他們無法清楚說明與有效解決國家恐怖主義的問題。新共和主義者在這項議題上努力追求免受他人宰制的目標終究無法實現。因此，我們預期未來人類需要繼續忍受恐怖主義的威脅，且無法避免。英文摘要：Terrorism has a deep impact on international society. Among all forms of terrorism, state terrorism is the most terrifying one, essentially influencing the obedience and loyalty of the people. In this paper, we will mainly examine neo-republicanism, which values the status and functions of the state, to see whether the neo-republicans can meet the challenge of state terrorism. My claim is that neo-republicanism, primarily led by Philip Pettit, ignores the relevant issues of state terrorism, so it cannot clearly explain and resolve the problems of state terrorism effectively. This results in failure by neo-republicans when pursuing the goal of non-domination on this issue. Therefore, we can predict that the future of the human race will still unavoidably bear the threat of terrorism.起始頁-結束頁：1-62資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202106_(74).0012篇名：變遷社群中的個人－發展廖文奎哲學以調和社群主義和個人主義的對立並列篇名：Individuals in a Changing Community: Reconciling the Opposition between Communitarianism and Individualism by Developing Liao Wen-Kwei's Philosophy作者：陳瑞麟(Ruey-Lin Chen)關鍵字：台灣哲學;廖文奎;個人;社群;自由主義;社群主義;孔恩;Taiwan philosophy;Liao Wen-Kwei;individual;community;liberalism;communitarianism;Kuhn期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：74期出版年：2021中文摘要：1980年代間政治哲學的社群主義對於自由主義的自我觀提出批評；科學哲學也有個人主義與社群主義的爭辯。台灣哲學家廖文奎在1933年出版《個人與社群》，論證「個人在本質上是社群的產物，偶然卻能成為社群的指引。」這個論點似乎能調和社群主義與個人主義的對立。本文發展廖文奎的個人與社群哲學，再連結孔恩的科學社群概念，企圖重探個人與社群的關係，調和社群主義與個人主義的對立。本文區分community的兩個核心涵義：一個涵義是指「由許多個人所構成的群體或共同體」；另一個涵義是指「把這些個人總括在一起的共同特性」。根據這兩個涵義，我論證：許多個人構成了社群的群體而且社群的共同特性也塑造了個人，但有的個人偶然能引導社群的改變。英文摘要：Liao Wen-Kwei was a Taiwanese philosopher in the period of Japanese rule over Taiwan, and published The Individual and the Community in 1933. The monograph argues that the individual is essentially a product of the community, and yet may by chance become a guide of it. Liao's inquiry into the relationship between individual and community is earlier than the debate between communitarians and liberalists/individualists in the 1980s, providing reconciliation to the debate. However, Liao did not consider the issue of changing communities. In this paper, I first examine the opposition between communitarians and liberalists about individual (self) and community, discuss Liao's proposition and argument, connect the issue with Thomas Kuhn's notion of scientific community, and develop a dynamics of changing community based on Liao's theory. I discern two ontological meanings of the term ”community”: One refers to a social group consisting of individuals who share a communal identity; the other means some communal features that are shared by all individuals in the group and that can connect these individuals as a whole. According to the analysis, I argue that individuals constitute a community, and the communal features of the community in which an individual grows shape her/his self; however, an individual may by chance also change the community.起始頁-結束頁：63-109資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202106_(74).0023篇名：族群界線與族群不平等：一個魯曼系統理論的二階觀察並列篇名：Ethnic Boundaries and Ethnic Inequality: A Second-Order Observation from a Perspective of Niklas Luhmann's Social Systems Theory作者：胡正光(Cheng-Kuang Hu)關鍵字：魯曼;系統理論;自我指涉;二階觀察;族群語意;族群界線;族群不平等;Niklas Luhmann;Systems theory;Self-reference;Second-order observation;Ethnic semantics;Ethnic boundaries;Ethnic inequality期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：74期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文嘗試由魯曼社會系統理論的觀點對「族群」這個語意進行二階觀察。由於民族將「國家的人民」定義為訂立社會契約的同質性公民，使得在民族界線內的群體差異以及它們之間的不平等必須用另外的範疇進行觀察。而族群做為一種群體範疇，是民族「再進入」的結果。民族以民族的形式觀察自身，分化出民族內的民族（即族群）。並且因為觀察者看見了族群分類的弔詭，使得族群以「反身性」（建構論）進行自我指涉。另一個去弔詭化的策略則是轉向「認同」研究，將個體性引入族群溝通，族群身分反成為建構個體性的材料。最後，族群不平等的論述是以族群間的差異銜接溝通。但因不平等成為偶連的，統計學被使用來銜接個體不平等與群體不平等的描述。英文摘要：This article tries to make a second-order observation of ethnic-semantics based on Niklas Luhmann's social systems theory. Because ”nation” defines itself as the homogeneous people of a state who have entered into a social contract, the variety of different peoples in a nation and the inequality among them cannot be described. Therefore, other categories are needed to analyze these two phenomena, and one among them is ethnicity. However, ”ethnicity” is the result of ”nation's” re-entry in itself. In other words, ”nation” observes itself with the distinction of system and environment. Observably, ”nations” emerge in ”nation,” and each of them is the so-called ”ethnicity”. Moreover, since observers have noticed the paradox of the ethnic classifications, the so-called constructionism enables ”ethnicity” to make self-reference based on ethnic reflexivity. Meanwhile, ethnic identity is an alternative to resolving the paradox of the classifications by incorporating individuality into the ethnic semantics. Ethnic identity then turns out to be the material for the construction of individuality. Finally, the argument of ethnic inequality reproduces itself with ethnic differences. However, as social inequalities are now contingent, statistics play the role of connecting the discourse of individual inequality and that of ethnic inequality.起始頁-結束頁：111-181資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202106_(74).0034篇名：以人民主權超克政治之惡：探析邊沁的民主憲政思想並列篇名：Overcoming Political Evil with People's Sovereignty: An Exploration of Bentham's Thought on Democratic Constitutionalism作者：陳建綱(Brian Chien-Kang Chen)關鍵字：蔡英文;邊沁;民主憲政;政治腐化;公共性;公共輿論法庭;道德品賦;Ying-Wen Tsai;Bentham;Democratic Constitution;Political Corruption;Publicity;Public Opinion Tribunal;Moral Aptitude期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：74期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文的目的在探討與分析邊沁的民主憲政理論，並觀察他如何以人民主權克服政治的腐化。邊沁視陪審團制度為正義的學校，因為它可以培養公民參與政治事務的習慣與技能，並可建立公共性以規約掌權者。為了超克政治之惡，邊沁提出「品賦的極大化與支出的極小化」原則，意味著一方面減少掌權者可動用的政府支出，同時培養掌權者與公民的品賦，如此有助於擴大公共輿論法庭的權威，使政府承擔道德責任。據此，在政治場域中，最大多數人的最大幸福意味著達成統治者與人民的利益之合致。市民社會的強健與政府的弱勢是邊沁的民主憲政理論之基本架構，以市民社會的道德力量對抗政府的法制力量則是其核心。英文摘要：The purpose of the article is to explore and analyze Bentham's democratic constitutionalism, and to observe the way in which political corruption is overcome by people's sovereignty. Bentham regards the jury system as ”a school of justice,” for it helps to cultivate citizens' habit and skill of political participation, so that publicity is established and the rulers are regulated. In order to overcome political evil, Bentham proposes the principle of ”aptitude maximized, expence minimized,” which suggests that the expenses of the rulers should be minimized, and they should cultivate their own aptitude as well as that of the citizens. This is beneficial for expanding the authority of the public opinion tribunal, and imposing moral responsibility on the government. On this account, to achieve the greatest happiness of the greatest number in the political sphere means the identification of rulers' interests with those of the people. The basic structure of Bentham's democratic constitutionalism lies in the strength of civil society and the weakness of government, and its core is to counterbalance the legal power of the government with the moral power of the civil society.起始頁-結束頁：183-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202106_(74).0045篇名：民權論與現代性：評《探索政治現代性：從馬基維利到嚴復》作者：周家瑜期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：74期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：261-270資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202106_(74).0056篇名：政治價值與歷史詮釋－讀蕭高彥教授《探索政治現代性：從馬基維利到嚴復》作者：陳正國期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：74期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：271-278資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202106_(74).0067篇名：探索政治（跨）現代性：評《探索政治現代性：從馬基維利到嚴復》作者：萬毓澤期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：74期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：279-299資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202106_(74).0078篇名：評蕭高彥教授《探索政治現代性》作者：曾國祥期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：74期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：301-314資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202106_(74).0089篇名：「嚴復時刻」之再思作者：潘光哲期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治與社會哲學評論卷期：74期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：315-330資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心政治思想研究專題中心DOI：10.6523/SOCIETAS.202106_(74).00901篇名：後現代助產師：Rebozo在丹麥的位移與孕產照護實作的混種並列篇名：Postmodern Midwives: Displacing Rebozo into a Danish Practice through Hybrid Maternity Care作者：施麗雯(Li-Wen SHIH)關鍵字：Rebozo;後現代助產師;轉譯;位移;混種;rebozo;postmodern midwives;translation;displacement;hybridity期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文探討rebozo在丹麥成為新興助產技藝的位移歷程。Rebozo源自於墨西哥，西班牙文原意為裹巾或者披肩之意，近年傳入北歐丹麥，成為助產師常用的陪產技藝。透過在丹麥的田野調查，訪談助產師、產科醫師和懷孕夫妻，本文分析rebozo如何吸引相關行動者的興趣、在丹麥的轉變內涵、以及其如何融入本地的孕產照護並影響了丹麥既有的助產照護。本文發現當rebozo在融入與影響本地原有的照護時，也進行了知識重組。這個重組的過程也是行動者建立與生物醫學和在地的助產實作關聯性過程。這些細微的轉變和影響並非單向的，而是分散、不連續地發生，在不同的行動者的促成下，發展出rebozo在丹麥的特殊轉譯模式。這也是丹麥後現代助產師在實作上跨越生物醫學vs.助產、北方vs.南方、現代vs.傳統，並能夠在彼此間移動的影響結果。本文透過檢視丹麥rebozo的位移歷程，延伸了當代助產師專業認同與傳統助產技藝關係的討論，並分析rebozo的實作如何維繫助產照護所關注的自然產與減少醫療介入的核心價值；也透過分析丹麥助產師如何在傳統技藝與生物醫學間建立關聯性歷程，擴展當代STS研究近年關注的傳統技藝與創新相關議題。英文摘要：This paper discusses the ”displacement” of the rebozo midwifery technology from Mexico to Denmark. Rebozo, which means wrapper or scarf, has traditionally provided pain relief to Mexican women during labour, and it has recently become a common tool for Danish midwives during childbirth. This paper examines the attraction of rebozo for various actors along with its integration into and influence on Danish maternity care. Fieldwork revealed that through its integration into Danish maternity care, rebozo has been translated into a Danish practice. The successful displacement of rebozo from Mexico to Denmark has enabled its integration with other practices and alignment with national clinical guidelines. Notably, this displacement was caused by the decentralised and discontinuous actions of various actors. Based on rebozo, this paper explores identity among modern midwives and their relation to traditional midwifery; modern midwives can promote natural birth and reduce medical intervention by using traditional crafts. By adopting traditional alternative crafts along with modern midwifery and western medicine, Danish midwives are transcending the dichotomies of biomedicine vs. midwifery, North vs. South, and modernity vs. tradition. The paper contributes to discussions of the fluidity and translation of technology and discussions of tradition vs. invention in science, technology, and society.起始頁-結束頁：3-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：臺灣自閉症的「初」現並列篇名：The Initial Appearance of Autism in Taiwan作者：賴品妤(Pin-Yu LAI)關鍵字：自閉症;知識流通;心理衛生;兒童精神醫學;autism;knowledge in transit;mental health;child psychiatry期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以「知識流通」為分析工具，探討自閉症在臺灣「初」現的歷程，分析本土行動者從歐美社會引進自閉症知識過程中的實作與在地修飾，突顯自閉症知識在全球流通的豐富樣態。本文追溯1960年代之前，自閉症診斷尚未出現時的臺灣社會，如何看待「沉默孤僻」的問題學童；而後由不同單位推行心理衛生計畫，即便實踐效果有限，但仍提供發現自閉症的基礎，讓部分的問題行為學童進入醫療化。臺灣本土行動者引進自閉症診斷時，不僅考量到醫學實作與當地文化的適應性，也以文化差異解釋不同地方的兒童異常表現，讓自閉症在臺灣的「初」現與發展，有著不同於歐美社群討論的意涵。藉此可發現，兒童心理衛生工作推動了當代兒童精神醫學診斷、量表與治療實作，是臺灣兒童精神醫學發展的重要磚瓦。本研究最後結合知識流通與醫療化的過程，發現臺灣自閉症的初現，不僅是特定行為問題朝向醫療化的時機，也充分顯示本土行動者篩選與應用知識的能動性。英文摘要：This paper explores the initial appearance of autism in Taiwan. Drawing on perspectives of knowledge in transit, I argue that the practice and local tailoring of native actors reflect the rich global ecology of autism knowledge in transit from Western society to Taiwan. Descriptions of ” problem children” who were ” unsociable and eccentric” were commonplace in Taiwan prior to the emergence of autism as a formal diagnosis in the 1960s. My analysis reveals that, despite its limited influence, the Mental Health Programme in Taiwan provided the basic infrastructure for medicalizing certain behavioral problems of children, and for the eventual formalization of autism as a diagnosis. Autism's emergence in Taiwan and its cultural ramifications differed from those in North America and Europe due to the practices of local medical practitioners and their understanding of the abnormal behavior of children from varied cultures. Therefore, the Mental Health Programme played a central role in shaping the field of child psychiatry by promoting the contemporary diagnosis, scale and practice of autism as a medical and social phenomenon. By looking at autism knowledge in transit, this paper deepens our understanding of medicalization and highlights the agency of the local practitioners as they filtered and applied autism knowledge.起始頁-結束頁：67-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：設計與自由：行為嚮導技術的分類與倫理考量並列篇名：Design and Freedom: A Classification and Ethical Concerns for Behavior-Steering Technology作者：洪靖(Ching HUNG)關鍵字：IBST;MBST;勸服科技;助推;自由難題;IBST;MBST;persuasive technology;nudge;human freedom期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：用於改變使用者行為的科技產品，統稱「行為嚮導技術」（behavior-steering technology），協助使用者朝向更健康、更安全、更環保的生活型態。由於「技術內建改變力」的特性，行為嚮導技術經常引發倫理疑慮，其中以「是否侵害使用者自由與自主」為最。欲回應此問題，須先區分行為嚮導技術的種類與效果。本文試圖說明，行為嚮導技術可就其運作機制分類為「資料型」（informational）與「物料型」（material），兩者分別對應不同程度的自由難題，間接導致前者的相關領域蓬勃發展，而後者至今尚未形成任何社群。然而，本文透過深究並扣連行為嚮導技術的機制、效果、與自由三個面向，一方面論證資料型並未較物料型行為嚮導技術有更好的倫理表現，且後者更能有效緩解當代重大社會問題；另一方面則指出重新理解或詮釋自由難題的必要，並對可能的出路提供初步建議。英文摘要：Behavior-steering technology refers to technologies that are designed to help users have a healthier, safer, and more sustainable lifestyle. As it has the power to alter user behavior, such a technology often causes ethical concerns, especially concerning the loss of human freedom. To respond to this problem, this study first classifies behavior-steering technology into two types by differentiating the mechanism of each, and, second, discusses their pros and cons with several examples. While informational behavior-steering technology (IBST) produces its effects by targeting user consciousness (persuasive technology) or subconsciousness (nudge) and therefore tends to be qualitatively and quantitatively ineffective, material behavior-steering technology (MBST) is aimed at the user's body and is more effective and helpful in tackling social issues that require collective changes, such as environmental crises. This study concludes that to take advantage of MBST without provoking ethical concerns, it is crucial to understand freedom in relation to, rather than independent from, technology.起始頁-結束頁：133-185資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：科學溝通時的語詞解讀分歧並列篇名：Complexities of Rhetoric Interpretation in Science Communication作者：李一平(Yi-Ping LEE);楊倍昌(Bei-Chang YANG)關鍵字：科學溝通;提問語句;語言屬性;次群體共識;science communication;question statements;language attributes;subgroup consensus期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：科技溝通的過程中，詮釋科學內容的差異是引發爭議的導火線。為了呈現個人理解科學議題的差異性，本研究以生物醫學教學場域為田野，由188場專題討論課，收集50則提問語句，並由生醫、社會、人文等28位不同知識背景的人分析其語意屬性，並且比較不同句型，以及資訊量對於判斷的影響。本研究設計了兩種語意分類框架：「問題內容與屬性框架」及「思維結構框架」。前者，以科學實作經驗為基礎，內容分成緣由性、基礎性、延伸性、質疑性與比較性問題等五大類，內含30細項。後者，區分出整體概念架構、數據評價、邏輯判斷及其他等四大類，含10細則。結果指出人的判斷大約有四成的共通性，但是也很容易改變自己的想法，天生的改變機率可能達到六成。而且共識是一種特定次群體的核心判斷，穩定度比較高，它與知識背景訓練以及個人判斷語句的傾向有關。綜合研究結論指出科技溝通的過程可以利用次群體共識可作為基礎，並且應精煉對話語句、以及辨識不同關係人所注重的知識面。英文摘要：The most common stumbling block in science communication is stakeholders' differing interpretations of scientific knowledge, which often leads to controversy. To describe the interpretation spectrum in science communication, we collected 50 questions raised by participants 188 seminars taught at a biomedical center in Taiwan on the theme of ”medical science frontiers.” Next, 28 people from different educational backgrounds, including life sciences, social science and humanities were recruited to classify those questions by their linguistic attributes. Two classification frameworks were used: (1) Question Content and Attribute Framework and (2) Thinking Structure Framework. Developed by the authors, the first one based on laboratory experiences consists of five categories: reasoning, essence, extensibility, justifiability and comparison. The second one emphasizes cognition and has four categories: overall conceptual architecture, data evaluation, logical judgment and ”others.” Consensus of participants' interpretations by group was roughly 40%. Interestingly, people changed their minds frequently over time. The difference between first and second interpretations on the same question set was higher than 60% in some cases. Subgroup consensus within each group was relatively stable and knowledge background- and personal tendency-dependent. Our results indicate that subgroup consensus-based dialogue in a focus group setting, language refinement and awareness of stakeholder interests may be useful in communication concerning controversial scientific issues.起始頁-結束頁：187-232資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：數據始終來自於權力－評Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein (2020). Data Feminism. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.並列篇名：Data Always Comes from Power: Review of Data Feminism作者：余貞誼(Chen-Yi YU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：233-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：強化與社會嵌合的空污治理策略：以美國加州南岸空氣品質管制局的環境正義計畫為例並列篇名：Socially Embedded Air Pollution Governance: A Case Study of the Environmental Justice Program of California's South Coast AQMD作者：杜文苓(Wen-Ling TU)關鍵字：空污治理;環境正義;空污監測;公共／政策溝通;美國加州空氣品質管理局;air pollution governance;environment justice;air monitoring;public/policy communication;South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：33期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以美國加州南岸空氣品質管理局（South Coast Air Quality Management District/SCAQMD）的環境正義計畫（EJ program）為例，從行政機關的角度，探索在空污防制上，如何強化與社會嵌合的治理策略。這個始於1997年的計畫是為確保每個人都有權受到平等的保護，免於空氣污染，並公平獲得參與決策過程，以改善社區內的空氣品質。本文進一步討論，根據這樣的目標，SCAQMD如何鋪設相關之基礎架構，促進其所設定環境正義的實踐？而此架構下的空污治理，需要（或重視）的知識、科技，與傳統的空污治理又有何差異？本文特別聚焦於甫於2017年通過的加州議會法案617，強化針對風險危害最劇之弱勢社區之環境監測計畫；以及同年SCAQMD制訂之1180法案，要求煉油廠需提出全面性周界監測計畫與提供社區監測資源。透過相關文件的蒐集檢閱以及SCAQMD計畫執行的第一線訪查，提供臺灣反思如何設計與推動與社會嵌合的空污防制政策。英文摘要：This article explores the social embeddedness of the air governance strategy of the Environmental Justice (EJ) Program of the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) in California. The EJ program that started in 1997 was designed to ensure that everyone has the right to equal protection from air pollution and fair access to participate in the community air quality improvement decision-making process. This article investigates how the SCAQMD built the relevant infrastructure and has promoted its environmental justice goals. Moreover, I examine the differences between the EJ program and traditional air pollution control management in terms of what knowledge and technology are required to support fair and equal air governance. This article focuses specifically on two initiatives, Assembly Bill 617 (AB 617) and Rule 1180, both adopted in 2017 in southern California. AB 617 aims at developing and implementing new strategies to measure air pollution and reduce exposure in the most vulnerable communities. Rule 1180 mandates petroleum refineries to install and operate fenceline air monitoring systems to measure a comprehensive list of criteria and toxic air pollutants, and to provide information about the impact of air quality on those communities. Through collection and review of first-hand field data as well as the relevant documents from SCAQMD' s official website, this study aims to provide a reference for Taiwan on how to design and promote equitable socially embedded air pollution control policies.起始頁-結束頁：11-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館2篇名：殖民時期女性「疾病」、「身體」與「健康」的符號運作策略與論述建構：以《臺灣日日新報》女性醫藥廣告為例並列篇名：The Semiotic Strategies and Discursive Construction of Women's ”Disease,” ”Body,” and ”Health” in the Colonial Period: Taking Women's Medicines Advertisements of Taiwan Nichinichi Shinpo (Taiwan Daily News) as Examples作者：陳儀芬(I-Fen CHEN);孫秀蕙(Hsiu-Hui SUN);阮理瑛(Li-Ying JUAN)關鍵字：日治時期;圖像符號學;《臺灣日日新報》;女性醫藥廣告;Japanese Occupation Period;Pictorial Semiotics;Taiwan Nichinichi Shinpo (Taiwan Daily News);Women's Medicines Advertisements期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：33期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以日治時期《臺灣日日新報》女性醫藥廣告為例，分析廣告如何建構關於女性「疾病」、「身體」以及「健康」的論述。研究發現，女性藥品廣告符號運作的主要策略是並列傳統漢醫病名與新藥，宣稱療效。意即，古病名、新藥醫。「月經」被視為一種生病的過程，其之為符號則指涉了「子宮病」，「歇斯底里」乃是其延伸義。「調經」更被定義為女性最重要的保健治療方法，在廣告圖文符號安排下，與「按月用藥」之間產生了符號連結。除將女性的身體過度疾病化、鞏固女人為弱之性別刻板印象。廣告主運用了「西方」蘊涵現代與「日本」指涉進步的修辭策略，誇大新式製藥的療效，以說服消費者，深深影響了臺灣民眾關於性別、身體與用藥等概念。英文摘要：The present study analyzes how the discourses of women' s ” disease,”” body,” and” health” were constructed in the women' s medicines advertisements in Taiwan Nichinichi Shinpo (Taiwan Daily News) during Japanese Occupation Period. The study finds that the major semiotic strategy of these advertisements was to align the traditional Chinese medical terms of illness with modern medicines, and claim their healing efficacy, i.e., illnesses with ancient names cured by these modern pharmaceutical products. ” Menstruation” was portrayed as pathological; while as a sign, it signified the ” uterine disease,” and ” hysteria” was its connotation. Regulating the menstrual cycle was defined as the major method of health care and treatment for women. Due to the arrangement of pictorial-linguistic signs, ” regulating menstrual cycle” was therefore linked to” monthly medication.” Besides excessively medicalizing female bodies and stereotyping women as fragile, the advertisers employed the rhetorical strategy of implying that ” the West” was modern and ” Japan” progressive. Thus, they exaggerated the healing efficacy of new drugs in order to persuade consumers to buy new pharmaceutical products, and thence cast a major influence on Taiwanese people' s concepts of gender, body and medication.起始頁-結束頁：57-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館3篇名：異議，別急著爭吵：科學語句的多元詮釋與協商空間並列篇名：No Need to Quarrel over Differing Views: Spaces for Negotiation and Multiple Interpretations of Scientific Statements作者：李一平(Yi-Ping LEE);盧佳慧(Chia-Hui LU);洪宜君(I-Chun HUNG);楊倍昌(Bei-Chang YANG)關鍵字：科學溝通;語言屬性;語意分岐;反身性解釋;焦點團體;Scientific communication;Language attributes;Semantic divergence;Reflexive interpretation;Focus group期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：33期出版年：2021中文摘要：為了瞭解科技溝通時意見分歧的原因，本研究結合類民族誌與焦點團體討論的方法學，逐條檢視個人對於50則討論科學新發現提問句語意的判斷模式，並且進行非結構式的訪談與反身性解釋，勾勒出影響詮釋的主要因素包括專有名詞的理解程度、情境聯想力，以及知識背景所形成的認知習慣。此外，本研究反思科學專業知識與常識的判斷模式，指出促成有效溝通的三個結構性機制與四種個人的技能。三個需要建立的機制是開發科學社群中橋接轉譯知識的能力、團體賦能和證據的認證制度。個人的知能上需要培養的四種技能為1.使用切身譬喻的直白語言；2.將複雜的敘事寫成簡單語句作為語意分析的依據；3.辨識知識背景次群體共識觀點的敏感度，並且以它為討論基礎；4.以對方立場為核心的換位思考的能力來了解衝突的起源。我們認為這些機制與技能所支持的溝通模式有助於創造協商空間，促成公民參與科學對話。英文摘要：This paper tries to identify the reasons behind divergent interpretations of science communication and to propose potential means of reaching consensus. We made transcripts from discussions that took place in university seminars on the frontiers of medical science and asked people working in different academic fields from different educational backgrounds to interpret 50 of the questions that were discussed by the seminars' participants. Combining ethnographic methods, focus group discussions, deep interviews, and reflexive interpretation, we identified major factors influencing our respondents' interpretive preferences, which included comprehension of scientific nouns, contextual associations, and evidence-centered thinking habits. Moreover, analyzing their interpretive reasoning during focus group discussion led us to conceive of three institutional measures and four types of personal skills by which science communication can be made more effective. The three measures are a training program for translating scientific knowledge into the vernacular, group empowerment, and an appraisal mechanism for evidence in debate. The four essential personal skills are: 1. Communicating in straightforward and legible language; 2. Converting complex narrative into simple sentences; 3. Having sensitivity to subgroup consensus; 4. Thinking from the perspective of others. We believe that these strategies and skills will help open up spaces for negotiation and promote public engagement with science.起始頁-結束頁：121-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館4篇名：電子耳與「聽」的展演：社會語言學的取徑並列篇名：Cochlear Implants and Performing Hearingness: A Sociolinguistics Approach作者：萬宗綸(Tsung-Lun Alan WAN)關鍵字：體現;電子耳;人設;社會語言學;embodiment;Cochlear Implants;social persona;sociolinguistics期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：33期出版年：2021中文摘要：在臺灣，治癒耳聾的醫療腳本佔據了談論人工電子耳此一科技物的主流意識形態，除了聽損孩童依個人條件會植入電子耳進行早期療育外，不少成人聽損者也追求人工電子耳植入術，以期待能變得更像聽力健全者。本文從社會語言學的學科傳統出發，透過討論一位成人電子耳植入者的案例，描繪華語的語音系統被其挪用作為展演電子耳有效性的身體風格元素，指出使用電子耳後的「口語改善」應被理解為電子耳植入者體現其勵志障礙者人設的身體實踐，而非單純生理物理上的科技物輔助結果。英文摘要：In Taiwan, a medical script of ” curing” deafness has dominated the discussion of cochlear implants. Many deaf adults pursue cochlear implantation, expecting themselves to become more like hearing people. This article adopts a sociolinguistics approach to explore how Mandarin phonetic variation (the high-falling tone) is appropriated to perform hearingness in the presence of the hearing researcher. This article argues that ” improvement” in cochlear implant users' spoken language performance should be understood as the embodiment of social personae constructed by cochlear implant users, rather than simply a product of technological assistance.起始頁-結束頁：167-193資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館5篇名：彈韌賽伯格的生與死：評Oudshoorn, Nelly (2020). Resilient Cyborgs: Living and Dying with Pacemakers and Defibrillators. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan並列篇名：Living and Dying Resiliently with a Wired Heart: Review of Oudshoorn, Nelly (2020). Resilient Cyborgs: Living and Dying with Pacemakers and Defibrillators. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan作者：王安琪(Anne-Chie WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：195-201資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館6篇名：現代中國血肉有情藥品的眾生相：評Chee, Liz P. Y. (2021). Mao's Bestiary: Medicinal Animals and Modern China. Durham: Duke University Press並列篇名：Living-Beings of Flesh and Blood Sentient Medicines: Review of Chee, Liz P. Y. (2021). Mao's Bestiary: Medicinal Animals and Modern China. Durham: Duke University Press作者：陳柏勳(Po-Hsun CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：203-211資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館7篇名：本草與藥業的近世中國科學史：評Bian, He (2020). Know Your Remedies: Pharmacy and Culture in Early Modern China. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press並列篇名：A History of Chinese Science from Bencao and Pharmacy: Review of Bian, He(2020). Know Your Remedies: Pharmacy and Culture in Early Modern China. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press作者：蔡令儀(Ling-Yi TSAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：213-222資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館8篇名：叩問宇宙不可感知之事物：評紀錄片Black Holes: The Edge of All We Know並列篇名：Reveal the Unperceivable: Documentary Review of Black Holes: The Edge of All We Know作者：區曣中(Yin Chung AU)期刊/會議論文集名稱：科技醫療與社會卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：223-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥衛生綜合	醫藥衛生＞醫藥總論	醫藥衛生＞基礎醫學	醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：國立科學工藝博物館01篇名：中國大陸的經濟風險：財政債務相關議題評述並列篇名：Economic Risks in P.R. China: A Fiscal Perspective作者：葉國俊(Kuo-chun Yeh)關鍵字：中國大陸財政;經濟風險;金融市場;所得分配;China's Fiscal Deficits and Debt;Economic Risk;Financial Markets;Income Inequality期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：作為一項具文獻回顧評論性質的介紹（state of the field），本文仍先建構一個簡單模型，說明中國大陸當前經濟情勢，聚焦於債務、財政收支、經濟發展與金融變數之間的關聯性，並以實際數據評估其風險。之後以此為主軸，分析在新冠疫情下，四個中國大陸當前最重要的經濟風險議題，分別是發展方向由單純經濟成長轉為多重目標，政府干預所造成的金融市場扭曲及其影響，新的「雙循環」戰略下帶路倡議與產業升級的關係及其負擔，以及政府財政行為如何影響所得分配。最後以螞蟻金服首次公開發行與農村扶貧等部分近期事件，驗證既有學術文獻論點並討論如何持續進行觀察分析。英文摘要：As a state of the field, this paper constructs a simple model to explain the relationship among debt, fiscal deficits, economic growth, and financial variables, and then uses Chinese statistics to evaluate economic and financial risks in P.R. China. From the empirical evidence, we can analyze four important issues: transition from growth only to multiple economic goals; financial market distortions caused by government interventions; the burdens of the Belt and Road Initiative for industrial upgrade under Xi's new ”dual circulation” strategy; and the impact of fiscal policies on China's income inequality. The above arguments from the literature cited in this paper are also helpful in explaining some recent events, including the Ant Group's IPO and China's poverty relief strategy.起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202109_64(3).00012篇名：東南亞抵抗政治：回應中國經濟滲透的類型學分析並列篇名：The Politics of Resistance in Southeast Asia: A Typological Analysis of Local Resistance Against China's Economic Penetration作者：張珈健(Chia-chien Chang);楊昊(Alan H. Yang)關鍵字：中國;東南亞;抵抗政治;日常政治的國際政治經濟學;China;Southeast Asia;The Politics of Resistance;Everyday Politics of International Political Economics (EIPE)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文分析中國在東南亞的經濟滲透對東南亞國家與社會的影響，並且探討在地的抵抗與回應，在經驗研究部分，本文特別關注越南、柬埔寨、寮國、泰國以及緬甸五個傳統上被認為「陸地東協國家」的代表性在地抵抗個案，並加上「海洋東協國家」馬來西亞的在地抵抗個案分析作為對照。在理論上本文採取政治人類學Scott的「弱者的武器」、建構主義的「日常政治的國際政治經濟學（EIPE）」、國際政治經濟學的「擴散」研究、對應中國的政經滲透模式，整合出一個類型學分析架構來解析抵抗政治的「成因」與「行動策略」。我們指出環境衝擊、資源獵取、補償不力、劣質施工、貿易與市場壟斷、管理壓迫、貪汙，這七項因素是驅動地方展開抵抗政治的核心理由。而陸地東協國家在傳統上被認為是與中國關係緊密的國家，因此也是被認為「最不可能」抗拒中國經貿誘惑的國家群（most unlikely cases）；而馬來西亞則是近年來最積極尋求中國資本的海洋東協國家之一。但是，本文的研究個案最早自2009年起發生，多半是近10年內存在或持續發生的在地抵抗案例，同時也都是東南亞政府與社會回應中國在當地的投資、建設、經濟布局，以及政治社會影響的具體作為。有鑑於此，本文希望從個案研究與類型學分析，逐步呈現東南亞抵抗政治的整體圖像。英文摘要：This article is aimed at delineating the negative impacts caused by China's economic penetration in Southeast Asia and categorizing how regional countries respond and how local people resist. Empirically, this article pays special attention to representative local resistance cases in Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and Myanmar, which were traditionally considered ”mainland ASEAN countries.” In comparison, this article also studies one representative resistance case in one of the ”maritime ASEAN countries-” the resistance against the East Coast Rail Link project (ECRL) in Malaysia. Traditionally, the mainland ASEAN countries have been considered as countries with close ties with China, and are therefore considered to be the ”most unlikely” group of countries that resist the temptation of China's trade and investment. Furthermore, Malaysia is considered to be one of the countries that most welcome Chinese capital. Additionally, since recent years, most of the local resistance cases that have existed or continued in the past 10 years are also specific actions of the Southeast Asian government and society in response to China's local investment, construction, economic layout, and political and social impact. Theoretically, this article adopts James C. Scott's ”weapon of the weak” in political anthropology, the constructivist IPE - ”everyday politics of international political economics (EIPE)”, the concept of ”diffusion,” and China's political and economic penetration model. This article aims at building up a typological analysis framework to analyze the ”causes” and ”resistance strategies” to resist politics. We point out that the seven factors - environmental impact, resource hunting, poor compensation, inferior construction, trade and market monopoly, management oppression, and corruption are the core reasons driving local governments and their people to resist. In view of this, this article hopes to present a clearer comparison of these cases and build the analytical foundation for studying the overall configuration of the politics of resistance in Southeast Asia.起始頁-結束頁：49-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202109_64(3).00023篇名：中共建政後統戰工作的歷史回顧：彭真的角色和活動並列篇名：An Historical Review of the United Front Works After the Founding of the People's Republic of China: The Roles and Activities of Peng Zhen作者：鍾延麟(Yen-Lin Chung)關鍵字：彭真;統一戰線;中共中央統一戰線工作部;臺港統戰;Peng Zhen;United Front Works;The United Front Work Department of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party;United Front Policy Towards Taiwan and Hong Kong期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：中共自詡統一戰線為其革命成功的「三大法寶」之一。本文聚焦中共第一代「領導集體」成員彭真在各個階段參與中共統戰工作的政治角色與活動，並以之為軸線，扼要檢視中共建政後至「文革」以前，以及「改革開放」初期其統戰工作的發展歷程、理論主張和實踐情形。本文旨在挖掘和重建彭真在中共統戰歷史中的重要角色（中共官方傳記對此未予爬梳，西方學界也無專論），也希冀提供一個歷史視野，觀察中共統戰工作指涉內涵、對象範圍、政治效應的變化軌跡。英文摘要：The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) praised itself on the united front works as one of the ”three magic weapons” for the success of its revolution. The article focuses on the relevant political roles and activities of Peng Zhen, who was one of the main members of the first generation of the central leadership group of the CCP. Peng Zhen deeply participated at the CCP's united front works during various periods. The article uses it as an axis to briefly examine the history, the theoretical arguments and practices of united front works of the CCP throughout history - from the founding of the People's Republic of China, to the pre-Cultural Revolution period, and the initial stage of the ”Reform and Opening-Up period.” The article aims at exploring and rebuilding Peng Zhen's important roles in the history of the CCP's united front works, as the official biography of Peng Zhen does not deal with this issue, and there is also no study that focuses on it in the Western academic circles. The article also provides an historical perspective to observe the trajectory of changes in the connotation, scope of objects, and political consequences of the CCP's united front works.起始頁-結束頁：97-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202109_64(3).00034篇名：中國與格陵蘭的互動：地緣政治與資源政治分析並列篇名：The Interaction Between China and Greenland: An Analysis of Geopolitics and Resource Politics作者：閻亢宗(Hang-tsung Yen);王啟明(Chi-ming Wang)關鍵字：北極;全球暖化;現實主義;資源政治;The Arctic;Global Warming;Realism;Resource Politics期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：現實主義關於國際體系的描述適用於中國與格陵蘭的利益互動，格陵蘭運用本身豐富的天然資源作為達到經濟和財政自主、最終追求政治獨立的資本，在此過程中，它選擇援引中國的力量，中國因對格陵蘭的天然資源、科研、觀光及軍事價值等產生興趣，故兩者一拍即合。但雙方的利益互動影響北極的權力分配，因此引起包括丹麥、美國等的國際疑慮，中國不明的軍事意圖、對稀土供給的壟斷及不佳的環保紀錄，也引起質疑，這也構成中國與格陵蘭未來互動的挑戰和障礙。英文摘要：Realist description of the international system applies to the interaction of interests between China and Greenland. Greenland uses its own abundant natural resources as the capital to achieve economic and financial autonomy and to ultimately pursue political independence. In the process, it chooses to invoke China's power. Due to China's interest in Greenland's natural resources, scientific research, tourism, and military value, the two have a great relationship. However, the interaction of the interests between the two parties affects the distribution of power in the Arctic, which has caused international doubts including Denmark, the United States, etc. China's unclear military intentions, monopoly on rare earth supply and poor records of environmental protection have raised questions as well, which also constitute challenges and obstacles of future interaction between China and Greenland.起始頁-結束頁：129-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202109_64(3).00045篇名：「回歸後中港關係的變遷」專刊編輯導言並列篇名：Introduction to Special Issue作者：王韻(Ray Wang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：iii-vi資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202106_64(2).00006篇名：反送中運動在臺灣：抗爭性集會的分析並列篇名：Anti-Extradition Movement in Taiwan: An Analysis of Contentious Gatherings作者：何明修(Ming-sho Ho)關鍵字：反送中運動;臺灣;香港;抗爭事件;Anti-Extradition Movement;Taiwan;Hong Kong;Contentious Events期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以抗爭性集會（contentious gatherings）為中心，考察發生在臺灣的反送中運動。本文發現，反送中的訴求在臺灣獲得廣泛支持，很少有一件境外的議題可以引發如此密集的動員風潮。這場運動是由不同公民社會行動者所推動，呈現空間廣泛分布的特性。大部分的行動是由臺灣人所發起，由於其身分限制，香港人通常需要臺灣人的協助。學生與公民團體是推動臺灣反送中運動的主力，民進黨與獨派小黨也扮演了一定程度的角色。與香港的情況明顯不同，無組織的匿名行動是不常見的現象。儘管這些參與群體出發點不同，政黨、學生、公民團體、教會、律師的共同參與，等於是2014年太陽花運動聯盟的重新浮現。在最後，本文就提出若干臺灣反送中運動的特徵，包括廣泛而自發的參與、獨派團體的積極投入、香港人將臺灣視為運動主場的延續，而不是所謂的「國際線」。英文摘要：This article studies the anti-extradition movement in Taiwan by looking at contentious gatherings. Hongkongers' opposition to extradition against China's legal authorities found widespread support in Taiwan and gave rise to an intensified wave of mobilization, which was quite unusual since it was not a domestic issue after all. Taiwan's campaign was promoted by different civil-society actors and evenly spread geographically. Most of the initiators were Taiwanese, and due to their status limitation, Hongkongers' actions typically needed Taiwanese's help. While students and advocacy groups played the leading role, the involvement of the Democratic Progressive Party and other pro-independence parties was also considerable. Unlike what happened in Hong Kong, protest actions that were not pre-organized and anonymous were rare. Despite their different motivations, the participation of political parties, students, advocacy groups, churches, and lawyers represented a resurgence of those social forces that undergirded the 2014 Sunflower Movement. Finally, what happened in Taiwan cannot be easily subsumed under the idea of Hongkongers' ”international front” because what happened in Taiwan involved widespread and spontaneous participation and involvement of pro-independence. In addition, Hongkonger activists also see Taiwan as a direct extension of their home front.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202106_64(2).00017篇名：恩庇侍從與香港自由專制之破局並列篇名：Patron-Clientelism and the End of Liberal Autocracy in Hong Kong作者：馬嶽(Ma Ngok)關鍵字：香港選舉;恩庇侍從;自由專制;反送中運動;Hong Kong Elections;Liberal Autocracy;Patron-Client;Anti-Extradition Movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：中共自過渡期開始，一直在香港經營統一戰線以建立管治聯盟，將不同界別、階層、來源的精英和社會領袖納入其網絡之中。自2003年以降，中共投放大量資源到香港，在基層建立各層綿密的恩庇侍從網絡（clientelist network），主要功能之一是在各級選舉中建立龐大的動員機器以支持政權，令在有限民主的立法會選舉中，支持政權的力量可以穩占立法會及選舉委員會的多數。本文將從恩從關係的理論出發，討論中共如何透過利益投放，建立多層的互相配合的利益網絡，配合不同選舉模式（功能界別選舉、立法會直選和區議會選舉），在近年的選舉中逐漸擴大其群眾支持基礎。2019年香港的反送中運動帶來的民意海嘯，令民主派大舉攻陷八成多的區議會議席，對中共這個恩庇策略做成挫折，亦影響中共控制立法會選舉和未來特首選舉的能力，但網絡的基本票源穩固。區議會選舉的大敗，間接促使中共以非常手段以人大為香港立國家安全法，以及在2021年由人大出手根本地改變香港的選舉制度，做成本來「自由專制」和「一國兩制」的賽局被破壞。英文摘要：Since 1997, the Chinese government has been trying to manage a liberal autocracy in Hong Kong. Liberal institutions are allowed to co-exist with an autocratic system that does not allow popular election of the government. The Chinese government carefully engineers a multi-layered patron-client network by cooptation of the business and professional elites by the electoral system, to ensure that they can control the majority in both the Legislative Council and the Election Committee. At the grassroot level, the pro-Beijing camp injected a lot of resources after 2003 to build up a massive patron-client network which becomes a formidable mobilizational machine. This brought the pro-Beijing forces great success in local District Council elections since 2007, and has led to a gradual increase of the pro-government vote since then. The political repercussions of the 2019 anti-extradition movement brought a landslide victory for the Hong Kong democrats in the District Council elections. It marked a severe setback for the patron-client strategy of the pro-Beijing camp, and also indirectly led to the drastic move of enacting the National Security Law for Hong Kong. Furthermore, the imposition of the changes to the Hong Kong electoral system in 2021 altered the ”liberal autocracy” game plan for China. The scrapping of the ”liberal autocracy” game plan brings severe damage to the reputation of Hong Kong as a free city, and at the same time, removes the limited fair elections of Hong Kong.起始頁-結束頁：41-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202106_64(2).00028篇名：九七主權轉移以來北京對香港管治策略的演變並列篇名：The Evolution of Beijing's Governance Strategy Towards Hong Kong Since the Transfer of Sovereignty in 1997作者：沈旭暉(Xu-hui Shen);<U+6822>齊(Pakchai D. Wicaksono)關鍵字：中港關係;一國兩制;反送中運動;國家安全法;China-Hong Kong Relations;One Country Two Systems;Anti-Extradition Law Amendment Bill Movement;National Security Law期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：從1997年主權轉移至今，中國與香港的關係歷經波折，尤其自2019年初開始的反送中運動，香港公民社會抗爭此起彼落，加之隔年初爆發武漢肺炎疫情，市民對中央和特區政府的不滿和反彈與日俱增。北京方面從最初幕後操盤到推出《港區國安法》，引發全球高度關注，特別是香港的「一國兩制」會否走向終結。本文旨在探析自1997年主權轉移以來中國和香港的關係，首先從國際關係的脈絡審視作為「一國兩制」之國際法理基礎的《中英聯合聲明》，繼而從理論和實證層面，分析與梳理北京對港管治策略的演變，以及實施《港區國安法》對香港內部以至其國際地位的沙盤推演和影響，以期預視香港自身和中港關係的未來發展。英文摘要：Since the transfer of sovereignty in 1997, the relationship between China and Hong Kong has been experiencing various ups and downs, especially since the Anti-Extradition Law Amendment Bill Movement that began in early 2019. The struggles of Hong Kong civil society broke out one after another. In addition to the COVID-19 epidemic that happened early 2019, dissatisfaction and backlash against the Central and HKSAR Governments were increasing on a daily basis. From exerting control behind-the-scenes at the beginning to introducing the ”Hong Kong National Security Law,” Beijing has aroused widespread global concern, especially whether Hong Kong's ”One Country, Two Systems” would come to an end. As a result, this article aims to explore the relationship between China and Hong Kong since the transfer of sovereignty in 1997. It first examines the Sino-British Joint Declaration, which serves as the foundation of ”one country, two systems,” from the context of international relations. Then it analyzes and sorts out the evolution of Beijing's governance strategy towards Hong Kong from both the theoretical and empirical levels, as well as describe the scenarios and the impact of the ”Hong Kong National Security Law” on Hong Kong and its international status after its implementation. The article closes with a view to looking ahead in the future development of Hong Kong and its relations with China.起始頁-結束頁：67-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202106_64(2).00039篇名：形塑網路主權與爭辯網路治理：中國大陸就全球網路規範的戰略敘事運用並列篇名：Shaping Cyber Sovereignty and Contesting Internet Governance: China's Strategic Narratives in Cyber Norms作者：姚宏旻(Hon-min Yau)關鍵字：網路治理;網路主權;網路規範;戰略敘事;Internet Governance;Cyber Sovereignty;Cyber Norms;Strategic Narratives期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文的研究標的，聚焦在近年來國際社會對於網路規範形塑過程的外交角力，並置重點於中國大陸在聯合國場域就網路主權意念之戰略敘事運用。回顧過去探討中國大陸角色之國際規範研究，多著重於剖析國際建制的約束效用，亦或探究國際社會如何融入中國大陸於既有國際秩序體制內。然網路空間相較其他國際議題場域，方於晚近才成為各國矚目的競爭領域，當前國際社會對網路空間的治理模式，仍缺乏一強而有力之國際建制或一體適用的普遍共識。也因此本文異於過去著重瞭解國際規範如何對中國大陸產生社會化效用的研究議程，並試圖運用國際關係理論中戰略敘事的分析視角，檢視中國大陸如何形塑國際規範的發展過程。本文主張，中國大陸透過掌握話語權的外交手段，形成不費一槍一彈的擴張其對網路空間的影響力，並建立有利環境以形塑國內外價值。即便當西方國家對其網路主權提案採取異議時，仍能形成有力國際話語，以支持其主張以主權國家為主體之網路治理願景。英文摘要：This paper aims to investigate the diplomatic negotiation in the shaping of emerging cyber norms by the international community. In particular, the emphasis has been placed on understanding China's strategic narratives of cyber sovereignty at the United Nations. The existing research related to the study of international norms and China focuses on either the constraining effects in international norms' utility on China's activities or how to encompass China into the existing international social order. Nevertheless, neither of these approaches would be appropriate for the study of cyberspace, as cyberspace is a latecomer in the discussion of international norms. There are also no recognized rules or consensus to begin with. Hence, this article takes a distinct, yet different approach from the past research agenda, which often emphasizes socializing China into the existing international order. Namely, this paper intends to implement the Strategic Narrative from International Relations to unpack the exercise of language in the current Chinese making of cyber norms. This paper argues that China's successful leverage of discursive practice creates a compelling Chinese story, which helps to enhance its international influence in this critical issue-area without firing a single bullet. China was able to create a global environment in her favor by discursively shaping the domestic and international values on cyberspace and steering direction of cyber norms. This strategic condition allows China to pursue an alternative agenda of cyberspace governance centered around the conventional idea of state sovereignty, even when Western countries continue to express their disapproval.起始頁-結束頁：107-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202106_64(2).000410篇名：何去何從：中臺梵三角關係中的人權與宗教自由並列篇名：Quo Vadis!G Religious Freedom and Human Right in the Triangular Relations of Sino-Taiwan-Vatican作者：梁潔芬(Beatrice Leung)關鍵字：中臺梵關係;美國和香港因素;中梵臨時協議;宗教自由及基本人權;Sino-Taiwan-Vatican Relations;USA and Hong Kong Factors;Sino-Vatican Provisional Agreement 2018;Religious Freedom and Human Right期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：鄧小平在1979年開放政策之初，教廷於1987年主動向中共提議雙方和談，意欲恢復「中梵關係」。這行動對臺灣和教廷建立的「臺梵關係」，有莫大的衝擊。因北京堅持若中梵建立外交關係，必要臺梵斷交。2018年9月中梵簽訂了，有意先解決中梵談判的核心問題－指派主教一事。這「臨時協議」增加臺梵可能斷交的壓力，加上2019年中美爭霸的過程中，中美在貿易、科技、金融等要談的問題將包括「宗教自由」在內的「人權」問題。加上美國以宗教自由問題拉攏梵蒂岡，香港於2019年多個月的抗爭內有天主教會和基督教會的支持，既令北京頭痛，又使中梵關係加增變數。本文旨在討論今日的「中梵關係」和「臺梵關係」加上中美新冷戰期加入新的「人權」和「宗教自由」元素後，有何新發展。英文摘要：When Deng Xiaoping began launching the Open Door Policy, the Vatican in 1987 began wooing the People's Republic of China (P.R.C) in order to reestablish the Sino-Vatican relations. This posed a great challenge to the Republic of China (R.O.C.) in Taiwan, which had already established the Taiwan-Vatican relations. As a result, Beijing from the beginning insisted that the prerequisite of normalized relations between China and the Vatican is to sever the Taiwan-Vatican diplomatic relationship. Thus, in September 2018, the Sino-Vatican Provisional Agreement was signed to resolve the core problem between China and the Vatican, which was the appointment of Chinese bishops. This sudden signing of the agreement led to an increased pressure on Taiwan, as it meant there was the possibility that their relations with the Vatican relations will be severed. On the other hand, 2019 saw the Sino-U.S. rivalry in trade, technology, finance, and military, etc. Of these issues, both China and the U.S. would like to discuss the question of human rights. Furthermore, the addition of unpredictable factors in Sino-Vatican relations, such as the problem of free religion that caused the U.S. in trying to draw closer to the Vatican and the rise in support of Christians, including Catholics in Hong Kong's pro-democratic movements in 2019, gave Beijing extra headache. Hence, this article tries to discuss the future possible developments of the Sino-Vatican-Taiwan relations with so many variables coming into play in the global international political landscape.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202103_64(1).000111篇名：「神聖與世俗：天主教與當代中國」專刊編輯導言作者：王韻期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：iii-ix資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202103_64(1).000012篇名：法國保教權對中國天主教會本土化之影響：問題與解決之道並列篇名：The French Protectorate's Impact on the Inculturation of the Chinese Catholicism: Problems and Solutions作者：陳聰銘(Tsung-ming Chen)關鍵字：法國保教權;剛恆毅;天主教會本地化;中梵關係;French Protectorate;Celso Costantini;Inculturation of Catholic Church;Sino-Vatican Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：法國在華保教權的起源在於清廷之腐敗、國勢衰弱、官員不識國際政治外交和法國帝國主義者野心所致。為了完整呈現法國保教權的本質與發展，本研究首先溯及其源由、演變，式微乃至消滅之歷史演變，再探討該制度如何影響在華天主教人員組織架構、運作發展、語言、禮儀和藝術建築；同時，保教權也引發許多問題，特別是傳教士與本地教士的地位不平等的問題，以及傳教士主導中國教務，天主教的形象也遭到扭曲，而被外教人指摘是洋人的宗教，充滿洋化色彩，也是西方帝國主義的工具。這負面的形象在1910年代以後中國民族主義高漲的年代特別引人側目，也成為傳教之阻礙。這些問題促使教廷正視，遂派遣首任駐華宗座代表剛恆毅尋求解決之道，並進行改革。本研究歸納出中國天主教教會本地化的關鍵因素，在於國籍教士的地位與角色、教廷的支持與中國政府對教會施加的壓力，而中國國勢與國際地位的上升更促使法國在華保教權成為歷史陳蹟。中國擺脫外國列強的束縛後，天主教會才得以逐漸走向自主，展開另一階段本土化歷程。英文摘要：The French Protectorate in China was the consequence caused by the corruption of the Qing's imperial court, the deterioration of national power in China, ignorance to the international politics and, essentially, the ambition of the French imperialists. In order to present a clear picture on the nature and the different stages of the Protectorate in China, this study traces back to the origin, examines its development and the abolition of this system; providing a clear account on how this regime promoted by the French government on Catholicism in China: its members, ecclesiastic structure, activities, languages, liturgy, fine arts, and architectures, etc. The French Protectorate triggered a series of issues, especially on the inequalities between the foreign missionaries and the native clergymen, in which the missionary affairs were under the strict control of the former. This led to the impression of Catholicism in China as a Western religion associated to the Western people. Moreover, it was considered as an instrument of imperialist expansion. This unfavorable image of Catholicism positioned to the public was widely criticized by the emerging Chinese nationalist movement since the 1910s. These problems undermined the effort of the Catholic evangelization that concerned the Holy See to initiate an investigation by sending the first apostolic delegate, Mgr. Celso Costantini, to China to seek for solutions and undertook further reforms where deemed necessary. This study concludes that the key elements in the process of the inculturation of Chinese Catholicism largely rely on the native cleric's status, the support of the Holy See, as well as the pressure from the Nationalist government upon the Church. Only by having liberated itself from the restraints of Western powers, the Chinese Catholic Church earned its ground towards autonomy and basis to begin its inculturation.起始頁-結束頁：21-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202103_64(1).000213篇名：中梵關係是否因循「越南模式」：一種建構主義的觀點並列篇名：Will the Sino-Vatican Relationship Follow the ”Vietnam Model?”: A Viewpoint on Constructivism作者：姚祺(Qi Yao)關鍵字：中梵關係;越南模式;建構主義;天主教;Sion-Vatican Relationship;Vietnam Model;Constructivism;Catholic Church期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：2018年10月羅馬教廷與中國大陸簽署了關於大陸地區天主教會主教任命方式的「臨時協定」，中梵關係（中國大陸與教廷之關係）發展到了全新階段。此次協定簽署前後，中梵關係將因循所謂「越南模式」發展的觀點甚囂塵上。究竟「越南模式」是否會成為未來中梵關係發展的方向呢？這是本文所要回答的問題。廣義來說，「越南模式」涵蓋教廷與越南雙方通過持續互動，形成制度性溝通機制，進而對發展雙邊關係達成一致的整個過程。本文以建構主義理論為視角，通過比較越南與中國大陸兩國與教廷關係的發展，指出兩國在國家身分、利益、國內規範，以及與教廷共有規範的建構存在重大差異，導致中國與教廷關係的發展並無法因循「越南模式」，而這也成為了妨礙中梵之間進一步建立邦交關係的深層因素。英文摘要：The Holy See and China have signed a ”provisional agreement” on the appointment of Roman Catholic bishops in October 2018, which means that the Sino-Vatican relationship has reached a new phase. Meanwhile, the debate about whether or not Sino-Vatican relationship will develop with the ”Vietnam Model” has emerged before and after the agreement. Does the ”Vietnam Model” indicate the future of Sino-Vatican relations? This question is what this research tries to answer. In a broader sense, the ”Vietnam Model” includes the whole process of how the Holy See and Vietnam form a formal negotiation institution and improve bilateral ties through unremitting interaction. Through the perspective of the constructivism theory, this paper compares the development of both Sino- Vatican ties and Vietnam-Vatican ties and reveals that because of the significant variance among identities, interests, domestic norms, and sharing norms with the Holy See, the development of Sino-Vatican ties will not follow the ”Vietnam Model.” Hence, this is the crucial element that obstructs the establishment of full diplomatic relations between the Holy See and China.起始頁-結束頁：57-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202103_64(1).000314篇名：韓戰時期中國共產黨的天主教政策變化並列篇名：The Evolution of Policies to the Catholic Church in the Chinese Communist Party During the Korean War作者：<U+51C3>京威(Thomas Ching-wei Tu)關鍵字：教廷;天主教會;韓戰;中國共產黨;The Holy See;Catholic Church;Korean War;The Chinese Communist Party期刊/會議論文集名稱：中國大陸研究卷期：64卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：韓戰時期是中國共產黨奠定對天主教會政策的關鍵年代。中國共產黨建政初期，雖然暗中支持基督新教部分領袖發起的「三自運動」，但是對整體基督宗教採取寬容態度，盼藉統戰工作納入更多支持者。直到韓戰爆發，中國共產黨才針對教會外籍人士及組織、資金、人事做出總體政策，其後對中國大陸天主教會的各種磨難，亦從韓戰期間對待教會的經驗累積發展而成。韓戰促使中國共產黨與美國外交關係迅速惡化，並因兩國互相經濟制裁，牽連中國大陸境內美國籍天主教會、教會相關資產、教會人員。此外，因為教廷將主張無神論的共產黨視為教廷在第二次世界大戰後最大的威脅，並且教廷主張所有教會神職固守崗位，使得中國共產黨將天主教會相關機構及其外籍人員，視作敵我鬥爭下，必須即刻除去的外患。近年，中國共產黨領導人習近平強調黨員勿忘初心，高度重視1950年代黨的建設與作為，並且對基督宗教祭出多項新政策，致使教會發展進一步受限，與1950年代中國共產黨對待基督宗教作法相近。因此，瞭解韓戰期間中國共產黨對天主教會的政策，對於理解當前中國共產黨看待天主教會的觀點，具有相當程度參考價值。英文摘要：The Korean War is a crucial incident for the Chinese Communist Party's (CCP) policymaking on the Catholic Church. At the beginning of the establishment of the regime, CCP secretly supported the Three-Self Patriotic Movement led by some leaders of the Protestant Church. Despite this, the CCP has tolerated Christianity and hopes to gather more support from the people through the implementation of the United Front. It was not until the Korean War that the CCP formulated overall policies concerning the Western Church, including its organization, capital, and human resources. Furthermore, the Korean War deteriorated the diplomatic relations between the CCP and the United States. Economic sanctions have led to the detention of the American Catholic Orders, churches, and Christians in China. Additionally, the Holy See proclaimed that the Atheist communism was the most radical threat to the Church after World War II. Also, the Holy See also ordered its clergy to hold on to their posts and stay in their dioceses. Both the proclamation and the order had made the Catholic Church become an aggressive foreign power, and the CCP was eager to overthrow it. As a result, during three years of the Korean War, the Chinese Catholic Church was desperately crucified by CCP. However, there is insufficient literature on the Catholic Church in China during the Korean War period. Therefore, it gave birth to this article. Recently, Xi Jinping, the leader of CCP, emphasized the importance of party-building experiences in the 1950s. He also imposed some new restrictions on Christianity, which are comparable to the policies of the 1950s. Therefore, reexamining the early 1950s policies to the Catholic Church is valuable for comprehending recent events.起始頁-結束頁：101-127資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學國際關係研究中心DOI：10.30389/MCS.202103_64(1).000401篇名：父母心理控制與國中生攻擊、受害關係之多重路徑分析並列篇名：The Relations of Parental Psychological Control with Junior High School Students' Aggression and Victimization: A Multiple-Path analysis作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang)關鍵字：父母心理控制;社交焦慮;攻擊;受害;敵意歸因;Aggression;hostile-biased Attribution;parental psychological control;social anxiety;victimization期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：62期出版年：2021中文摘要：過去研究多依單一攻擊理論、受害理論分析父母心理控制與孩子攻擊、受害關係，僅可了解單一理論所重視因素的獨立效果。其次，過去研究多個別探討父母心理控制與孩子攻擊、受害關係，僅可分別了解父母心理控制與孩子攻擊、受害關係，發現許多共同影響變項，可能造成父母心理控制對孩子攻擊、受害效果是否相同的誤會與迷思。故本研究整合許多攻擊理論、受害理論，建構「心理控制與攻擊、受害關係模式」，同時分析父母心理控制與孩子攻擊、受害關係，並深究父母心理控制對孩子攻擊、受害效果的異同。本研究抽取台中地區國中學生為樣本，共1,153人，以結構方程模式進行分析。結果顯示：（1）心理控制與攻擊、受害關係模式適配；（2）父母心理控制正向預測社交焦慮、敵意歸因、攻擊；（3）社交焦慮正向預測敵意歸因、受害；（4）敵意歸因正向預測社交生氣、攻擊；社交生氣正向預測攻擊。綜上述，父母心理控制預測受害路徑上，父母心理控制透過孩子社交焦慮預測其受害；父母心理控制預測攻擊則有三條路徑：其一為父母心理控制直接預測孩子攻擊，其二為父母心理控制透過孩子敵意歸因、社交生氣預測其攻擊，其三為父母心理控制透過孩子社交焦慮、敵意歸因、社交生氣預測其攻擊。英文摘要：Most studies based on single one aggression or victimization theory analyzed the relations of parental psychological control with children' aggression or victimization, which only could understand the specific effect of the unique factor focused on by single one aggression or victimization theory. Furthermore, most studies explored the relations of parental psychological control with children's aggression or victimization, respectively. Some found that parental psychological control could predict children's aggression; others found that parental psychological control could predict children' victimization; some found that parental psychological control could predict children's aggression mediated by social anxiety; others found that parental psychological control could predict children's victimization mediated by social anxiety, which easily made misunderstanding that the effects of parental psychological control on children's aggression and victimization were the same. Therefore, this study integrated several aggression (social learning theory, strain theory, frustration-anger theory, social information processing theory) and victimization theories to construct a model of parental psychological control, aggression, and victimization in order to simultaneously analyze the relations of parental psychological control with aggression and victimization and to explore the difference between the effects of parental psychological control on children's aggression and those on children's victimization. There were 1,153 junior high school students participated in this study, and structural equation modeling was used. The following results were obtained: (1) the model of parental psychological control, aggression, and victimization fitted the observed data well; (2) parental psychological control positively predicted social anxiety, hostile-biased attribution, and aggression; (3) social anxiety positively predicted hostile-biased attribution and victimization; and (4) hostile-biased attribution positively predicted social anger and aggression; social anger positively predicted aggression. Accordingly, the path analysis of parental psychological control on victimization was that parental psychological predicted children's victimization through their social anxiety. There were three predictive paths of parental psychological control on aggression. The first one (based on social learning theory) was that parental psychological control directly predicted children's aggressing; the second one (based on strain theory, frustration-anger theory, and social information processing theory) was that parental psychological control predicted children's aggression by virtue of their hostile-biased attribution and social anger; and the last one which is also based on strain theory, frustration-anger theory, and social information processing theory was that parental psychological control predicted children's aggression by virtue of their social anxiety, hostile-biased attribution, and social anger. Concerning academic contribution, first, this study broke through past research only focusing on single one theory and adopted multiple perspectives to investigate the relations of parental psychological control with children' aggression and victimization by integrating several aggression (social learning theory, strain theory, frustration-anger theory, social information processing theory) and victimization theories. Thus, this study not only showed that the effects of the distinct factors stressed by different theories, but only found that those factors interacted to influence the relations of parental psychological control with children' aggression and victimization. Second, this study expanded past research exploring the relations of parental psychological control with children's aggression or victimization, respectively by simultaneously investigating the relations of parental psychological control with both aggression and victimization to clarify the difference between the effects of parental psychological control on children's aggression and those on children's victimization. Thus, this study showed that distinct operation mechanisms of parental psychological control towards children's aggression and victimization. Parental psychological control could directly predict children's aggression; parental psychological control could predict children's victimization by means of their social anxiety. This study also found that distinct predictive paths from parental psychological control to children's aggression and victimization. The effects of parental psychological control on children's victimization only mediated by their social anxiety; not only social anxiety but also hostile-biased attribution and social anger are important mediators in the effects of parental psychological control on children's aggression. According to the above-mentioned results, this study provided practical suggestion for parents, teachers, and counselors.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210900620012篇名：心理師提供犯罪被害遺族到宅心理輔導服務經驗初探並列篇名：Psychologists' Experiences on Home-based Mental Health Services for the Bereaved Crime Victims作者：洪雅鳳(Ya-Feng Hung)關鍵字：心理健康服務輸送;犯罪被害保護協會;到宅輔導;被害遺族;Association for victims support;bereaved crime victims;home-based counseling;mental health service delivery期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：62期出版年：2021中文摘要：犯罪被害保護協會在執行被害遺族的心理輔導服務經常採取到宅服務輸送模式，然未曾接觸過此服務模式之心理師對此相當陌生。本研究旨在探究心理師對被害遺族到宅輔導的在地經驗，了解其觀點、知覺的挑戰及因應策略。本研究以發現式研究取向針對12位兩年以上提供被害遺族到宅輔導經驗的心理師，透過半結構式深度訪談蒐集資料，採用紮根理論研究的資料分析方式。結果發現心理師對於到宅輔導的觀點可分為四：一是到宅輔導源自提高服務輸送量，持續服務則因專業認同與社會責任；二是有關優勢：豐厚理解、自然建立關係、有利情緒催化與覺察；三是需做的調整：彈性配合案主需求、即時調整架構；四為成效與原因：成效好來自可處遇實際生活議題、成效自然落實生活中，成效有限與案主準備不足、心理師主導權不足，及環境干擾影響會談深度有關。心理師知覺的挑戰有兩主題，一輔導工作慣性的顛覆：包含安全感喪失、會談結構難掌控；二專業角色與界線的模糊：包含專業角色模糊、界線逾越。在因應挑戰上，心理師發展出多元策略來確保人身安全、會談結構，以及平衡關係的情感連結與界線。本研究認為被害遺族的到宅輔導具有社會正義的意涵，其成效可能與被害遺族的喪慟歷程有關，而到宅輔導強化情感連結，心理師在設定界線上會考量維繫連結。最後依研究結果，對犯保協會及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The mental health issues caused by violent death of family members have attracted a lot of attention, and the bereaved ones may experience both symptoms of trauma and grief, and high mental health risks, such as depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, and complicated grief would also be derived from these incidences. In Taiwan, The Association for the Protection of Crime Victims (AVS) is the main unit that provides psychological trauma recovery services for the victims. This AVS often adopts home-based mental health service delivery mode. However, the home-based mental health service model is not common to the psychologists who have always accepted the office treatment training model. This research is to explore the psychologists' views on the home-based mental health services regarding the bereaved families of crime victims, as well as the challenges perceived during the services and coping strategies. In this study, a qualitative research method of discovery orientation was used to collect the experiences in home-based mental health service of 12 psychologists (including 4 clinical psychologists, 8 counseling psychologists, a total of 5 males and 7 females) who have more than two years of experience in providing services in a semi-structured interview. The data analysis method adopts analysis strategies such as open coding, axial coding and selective coding based on grounded theory research. The results indicated that these psychologists' views on home-based mental health services can be divided into four aspects: (1) The origin of home counselling and the meaning of continuous services for psychologists. The origin is to increase the volume of service delivery, and the psychologists are willing to continue to serve because of professional recognition and social responsibility; (2) Advantages of home counseling, including empathy and deep understanding, easy to build relationships naturally. It is beneficial to facilitate emotion and awareness; (3) Adjustments to home-based mental health services, including flexibility to meet client needs and background, immediate adjustment and maintain the treatment structure; (4) The effectiveness and reasons of service, which refer to good counseling effectiveness from being able to manage real life issues and the effectiveness is naturally implemented in life; the limited effectiveness of counseling is related to the lack of preparation of the client, the insufficient dominant power of the psychologist, and the interference in the house environment that affects the depth of the session. Psychologists perceive the challenge of home counseling with two themes. First of all, the subversion of the inertia of counseling work, including loss of safety and familiarity, and difficulty in controlling the structure of the interview. Second, the blurring of professional roles and relationship boundaries which includes blurred professional roles and the crossing of professional boundaries. In response to challenges, psychologists have developed multiple strategies to ensure personal safety, the structure of meetings, and balance the emotional bond and boundaries of relationships. Although the origin of home-based mental health services is to increase the rate of service received by bereaved victims, this study believes that the home-based mental health services has the meaning for social justice. The effectiveness of home-based mental health services may be related to the traumatic bereavement process and preparation of the victims. Such service also strengthens the emotional bond between the psychologists and clients. In addition, it also makes psychologists caught in the pull of emotional bond and boundary. Psychologists would consider maintaining the emotional bond between each other while setting boundaries. This has also prompted researchers to reflect on the norms of therapeutic relations and boundaries under Western counseling education.起始頁-結束頁：35-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210900620023篇名：僑生與本地生的生活壓力與憂鬱情緒之關係：以自我疼惜與主觀幸福感為中介並列篇名：A Study of Overseas Chinese Students and Local Students on Life Stress and Depression: Self-compassion and Subjective Well-being as a Mediator作者：陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);蔡亦倫(Yi-Luen Tsai)關鍵字：生活壓力;主觀幸福感;自我疼惜;遠程中介;憂鬱情緒;Depression;life stress;self-compassion;serial mediating;subjective well-being期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：62期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以自我疼惜與主觀幸福感為中介變項，探討僑生與本地生在生活壓力與憂鬱情緒之關係。採用網路問卷調查，共計有1,347位大學生參與，其中僑生575位、本地生772位。在資料分析方面，採用描述性統計、皮爾森積差相關、單因子變異數分析、Process模式分析。研究結果：（1）本地生與馬來西亞僑生在「自我仁慈」與「正念」的平均得分上，顯著高於港澳籍僑生；在「孤立經驗」與「過度認同」，本地生與港澳籍僑生的平均得分上，顯著高於馬來西亞僑生。（2）本地生、馬來西亞僑生及港澳籍僑生的自我疼惜與主觀幸福感在「家庭壓力」與憂鬱情緒間具有部份遠程中介。（3）本地生、馬來西亞僑生及港澳籍僑生的自我疼惜與主觀幸福感在「未來規劃壓力」與憂鬱情緒間具有部份遠程中介。（4）本地生、馬來西亞僑生的自我疼惜與主觀幸福感在「經濟壓力」與憂鬱情緒間具有部份遠程中介。（5）港澳籍僑生的自我仁慈、自我批評、孤立經驗、過度認同與主觀幸福感在「經濟壓力」與憂鬱情緒間具有部份遠程中介。（6）本地生、馬來西亞僑生及港澳籍僑生的自我疼惜與主觀幸福感在「情緒爭吵壓力」與憂鬱情緒間具有部份遠程中介。（7）本地生、馬來西亞僑生以及港澳籍僑生的自我疼惜與主觀幸福感在「人際壓力」與憂鬱鬱情緒間具有部份遠程中介。最後，本研究依據研究結果，針對高等教育及未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：The purposes of the current study were to explore self-compassion and subjective well-being as a mediator among the relationship life stress and depression of overseas Chinese students and local students. 1,347 college students were recruited from the whole Taiwan's universities and colleges, with 575 were overseas Chinese students and 772 were local students. Data were collected and analyzed by description statistics, Pearson's correlation coefficient, ANOVA, and process model analysis. The results showed that: (1) In terms of ”self-kindness” and ”mindfulness”, local students and Malaysian overseas Chinese students obtain a higher average score than Hong Kong and Macau students; In terms of ”isolation” and ”over-identification”, local students and Hong Kong and Macau students obtain a higher average score than Malaysian overseas Chinese students. (2) Self-compassion and subjective well-being plays a partially serial mediating role in the prediction from family stress to depression for local students, Malaysian overseas Chinese students, and Hong Kongese and Macanese overseas Chinese students. (3) Self-compassion and subjective well-being plays a partially serial mediating role in the prediction from furture planning stress to depression for local students, Malaysian overseas Chinese students, and Hong Kongese and Macanese overseas Chinese students. (4) Self-compassion and subjective well-being plays a partially serial mediating role in the prediction from economic stress to depression for local students, and Malaysian overseas Chinese students. (5) Self-kindness, self-criticism, isolation, over-identification, and subjective well-being plays a partially serial mediating role in the prediction from economic stress to depression for Hong Kongese and Macanese overseas Chinese students. (6) Self-compassion and subjective well-being plays a partially serial mediating role in the prediction from emotional quarrel stress to depression for local students, Malaysian and Hong Kongese Macanese overseas Chinese students. (7) Self-compassion and subjective well-being plays a partially serial mediating role in the prediction from interpersonal stress to depression for local students, Malaysian and Hong Kongese Macanese overseas Chinese students. The research suggestion can provide attention and guidance on the aspects of ”study, future employment and further education planning and economic life adaptation” of Malaysian overseas Chinese students. In addition, higher education can regularly organize study skills and after-school stress relief courses. To enable Malaysian students who are more active in their academic work to have a way to deal with their higher learning pressure. The research suggests that Hong Kong and Macau students can pay attention to and provide guidance on ”learning, future employment and further studies planning, language, and interpersonal communication”. In addition, universities and colleges must implement special remedial teaching for Hong Kong and Macao students who are not able to connect to the language or high school curriculum to resolve differences in language and learning progress. The majority of overseas Chinese in Hong Kong and Macao use Cantonese and Portuguese as the main language, so it is more necessary to strengthen the language courses. Many Hong Kong and Macao students choose to study in Taiwan because it is difficult to enroll in universities in their places of residence. Therefore, their motivation to study is lower than that of Malaysian overseas students. Therefore, colleges and universities need to hold courses and lectures related to the future goals and planning of the department more often, so that Hong Kong and Macao students have a deeper understanding of their own departments, and increase their sense of belonging, identity and motivation to study. Career development and employment counseling groups/psychological counseling centers or international cooperation offices of colleges and universities need to provide overseas Chinese students with friendly and convenient academic counseling and future planning counseling. And they need to hold regular activities, courses, and lectures to let them understand how the status of overseas Chinese students develops in Taiwan, the future development of the field of the department, whether they can be employed in Taiwan, or whether they can effectively bridge the field after returning to the overseas residence of professionalism. If colleges and universities can provide such assistance, overseas Chinese students can study in Taiwan with greater peace of mind.起始頁-結束頁：77-116資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210900620034篇名：企業諮商中面臨企業與員工利益衝突之倫理判斷歷程研究並列篇名：The Process of Ethical Judgment on Managing the Conflict of Internets between the Enterprise and Employees in Workplace Counseling作者：張素惠(Su-Hui Chang);程雅妤(Ya-Yu Cheng);莊謹鳳(Jin-Fong Chuang);王智弘(Chih-Hung Wang)關鍵字：企業諮商;利益衝突;員工協助方案;倫理判斷;倫理衝突;Conflicts of interest;EAPs;ethical conflict;ethical judgment;workplace counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：62期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究在探討諮商師於企業諮商中面臨企業與員工利益衝突之倫理判斷歷程研究。針對五位諮商師進行訪談，以模版式分析進行資料分析。研究發現企業諮商中會涉及不同企業與員工利益衝突議題，經歷衝突判斷與影響階段歷程：（1）衝突階段遭遇：（a）企業生產效能與員工心理健康需求之衝突；（b）企業管理與員工權益之衝突；（c）企業人力管理需求與員工生涯需求之衝突；（d）企業績效管理與員工工作保障之衝突；（e）企業聲譽保護與員工權益維護之衝突。（2）判斷階段會考慮：（a）是否傷害員工權益作為判斷；（b）是否傷害企業利益作為判斷；（c）是否違反勞動法令作為判斷；在判斷階段後會採取：（a）考量企業人力成本以轉介外部資源；（b）善用知情同意程序；（c）尋求專家諮詢與參照同業做法；（3）在影響階段會透過支持系統協助並找到自身調適之道：（a）建立人脈關係，爭取組織或主管認同支持；（b）多重角色負擔，思索角色功能的調整；（c）兼顧雙重案主的聲音與需求；（d）擴增系統觀與組織觀點。企業諮商中面臨企業與員工利益衝突之倫理判斷歷程，需要以企業制度與員工福祉為雙軸概念進行決策判斷。諮商師學習系統觀點，工作視角應由單一案主情境轉移到雙重案主脈絡，同時兼顧雙重案主權益作為判斷與決策行動因應。透過不斷沉澱與思考，形成下一次處理倫理衝突事件經驗判斷。最後，本研究依據結論提出相關建議。英文摘要：This research explores the ethical judgment process encountered regarding the conflict of interests between companies and employees in workplace counseling services. We interviewed with an in-depth method and established qualitative data analysis by utilizing the purpose sampling method. The qualification of participants all have counseling psychologist licenses and more than two years of workplace counseling experience. They also had experiences of encountering ethical judgments issues due to conflicts of interest between the company and employees. In this study, we selected five counseling psychologists for personal in-depth interviews. Template analysis was used for data analysis. We found that different types of conflict of interests between companies and employees could involve workplace counseling, and would experience conflict judgment and influenced various stages: Initially at the first stage which is identified as the conflict stage. These psychologists would encounter: (1) The conflict between the company's productivity and the needs of employees' mental health; (2) The conflict between the company's management and the rights of employees; (3) The conflict between the company's labor needs and the needs of employees' career development; (4) Company performance regarding the conflict between management and employees' job security; (5) The conflict between the protection of corporate interests and the protection of employees' rights. The subsequent stage, which is identified as the judgment stage, will consider three aspects. First of all, judging whether the rights and interests of employees have been jeopardized; second of all, judging whether the interests of the enterprise have been compromised. Finally, it is about the judgment regarding relevant labor laws and regulations. At this stage, there are three ways of managing different matters. First, enterprises consider labor costs and refer to external resources, then make good use of informed consent; and finally, is to seek expert consultation and refer to industry practices. At the last stage, which refers to the impact phase, these psychologists would assist and find adaptation methods through the support system via four steps: (1) to establish a relationship and obtain approval from the organization or supervisor; (2) to adjust role functions regarding multi-role burden; (3) to take into accounts the voices or needs of dual customers; and the last, to expand the organization view or system view. Managing the ethical judgment process of the conflict of interest between the enterprise and its employees, making decisions based on the dual-axis concept of enterprise system and employee welfare is necessary. Psychologists must understand the system perspective and change their perspectives from a single situation to dual situations. In summary, the ethical judgment process that encounters the conflict of interest between the company and its employees in corporate consulting indeed may experience a process of conflict, consideration, action, result, influence, and adjustment. This study at the end proposed recommendation as followed: (1) Suggestions to workplace counselors: Facing the context of the dual clients of organization and employees, workplace counselors need more knowledge in addition to the professional education of ”counselors” or theoretical knowledge of psychology, as well as business management human resources, labor laws, and EAPs. And other related professional knowledge. (2) Suggestions for training institutions for counselors: The training institution for counselors should offer courses on workplace counseling and EAPs to enhance learners' understanding of the workplace environment. In the curriculum planning, adding the theme of workplace organizational culture, value system, management system, and workplace counseling ethics can enhance the ability to respond to and judge the conflicts of workplace counseling ethics. A more comprehensive review of the ethical conflicts in workplace counseling presented by different industries and members of different organizations. (3) Suggestions for future research: Future research may consider including male counselors and different industry categories. In addition to counselors, research objects may include workplace employees and their organization's supervisors.起始頁-結束頁：117-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210900620045篇名：華人基督教權威對於個體順服之影響並列篇名：The Influence of Chinese Christian Authority on Individuals in Taiwan作者：陳姿蓉(Zih-Rong Chen);喬虹(Hung Chiao);孫旻暐(Mein-Woei Suen)關鍵字：文化脈絡;宗教權威;華人基督教;順服;靈性;Chinese Christianity;cultural context;religious authority;spirituality;submissive期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：62期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究旨在瞭解宗教與華人社會脈絡下華人基督徒對順服的理解。研究方法：本研究以立意取樣（purposive sampling）招募三位研究參與者接受訪談，並以現象學做為研究方法，萃取整體現象架構以還原參與者參與宗教的經驗，以瞭解研究參與者對於宗教權威的內在解讀。研究結果：促進個體順服的原因主要為個體對順服的心理意義詮釋、靈性內涵、以及自身的信仰狀態。信仰過程中個案會透過自我覺察歷程來瞭解前述三者，從而選擇主動順服、被動順服與不順服，並產生不同的情緒感受、靈性適應和結果。研究結論：（1）神在信徒的生活中具有頗深的影響力，來自信仰上的規範會從家庭、教會、聖經文本中獲得傳輸，也是將權威內化至自己價值觀的過程；（2）權威與基督徒價值觀的差異使基督徒會產生矛盾與懷疑，且不違反誡命與違反教義時會產生罪惡感和感到後悔；（3）基督徒順服上帝可以幫助信徒減少風險，做出最安全適合自己的選擇和幫助自己成為合神心意的人並獲得屬靈上的成長與賜福。英文摘要：One of the common cultural values shared within Chinese communities is to obey the authority. Christian doctrine emphasizes obedience as a response to the Christian practice of faith. Obedience, as an important practice in various forms of human relations, such as between the older-younger siblings, the parent-child relationship, husband and wife, and the employer-employee relationship. The primary object of this study is to understand Chinese Christians' mentality and psychological connotations of the religious authority as well as the concept of obedience in both Chinese cultural and religious context. The study aims to promote the exploration of spiritual experiences in the context of Taiwanese culture in order to understand the psychological mechanisms that arise from the concept obedience in individuals. Participants were recruited using purposive sampling to select those with the most data available. Potential participants who were interested in this study were referred by church members and/or directly invited by the first author. All of them filled out the ”Francis Christian Attitude Scale” and only the ones whose scores reached the targeted level were contacted for a phone screening or a face-to-face interview. Finally, three participants, between the ages of 21 and 28, two have been Christians for more than 10 years and one has been only three years, were recruited for the study and participated in several interview sessions. The study used phenomenology for research paradigm to extract and to restore participants' experiences in religion, as well as to describe their internal explanations of religious authority. The results indicated that psychological mechanisms which promotes personal obedience are composed of (1) the formation of faith in the external environment (e.g., church, religious leaders, and religious texts); (2) how individuals' understanding of faith (understanding of religious norms, shapes of God's imagery, and the process of church interactions) affects the Christians' emotional reactions of obedience, and (3) the positive and negative coping and outcomes. The external environment experienced by the participants includes the church, religious texts, and religious leaders to help shape the individual's understanding of faith. The Christians are able to construct their own understanding of what Christianity looks like as well their knowledge and practice of the divine-human relationship and religious norms. They are also able to form their own personal image of God, and give back to the spiritual situation through positive or negative church interactions. Individuals understand the previous three dimensions via the process of self-awareness, and to choose active obedience, passive obedience, and disobedience, which followed by different emotional outcomes, spiritual adaptation, and results. In summary, three aspects have been concluded. First, God has strong impacts on Chinese Christians' daily life, and the religious regulations transmit through family, church, and Bible. Individuals internalize religious authority into their value systems during the transmission process. Second, obedient to God may help Christians reduce risks, make the safest and proper choices, become ”the man after God's own heart” , as well as gain spiritual growth and blessings. Third, differences between religious authority and Christian values create contradictions and doubts; thus, Christians may feel guilty and regretted when breaking commandments and teachings. Last, doubt and skepticism in faith may also be removed through the verification of daily practice and newly-gained self-awareness, or be modified through communication with religious leaders in the church. Individuals grow in the process of re-examining themselves and faith. Based on the object relationship theory, the results indicated that the relationships with parents and elders in the family in Chinese society extend to the believers' image of God as a way of honoring God. In addition, Christians practice their faith as the pursuit of moral and ethical transcendence. The passages of obedience appear not only to the members of the church as the honor of the other to fulfill their obligations and responsibilities, but also to respond to God as the honor of the other who is willing to be appointed by God. This study at the end concluded with a discussion of counseling ethics in relationship between clients and their therapists in spiritual counseling.起始頁-結束頁：153-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210900620056篇名：主編的話－現象學心理學的臺灣實踐並列篇名：Editor's Preface: The Praxis of Phenomenological Psychology in Taiwan作者：林耀盛(Yaw-Sheng Lin);劉淑慧(Shu-Hui Liu);李維倫(Wei-Lun Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：61期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：1-19資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210500610017篇名：什麼是進步？一個關於輕症自閉症青少年社會互動的現象學研究並列篇名：What is Called Progress? A Phenomenological Study on Social Interaction of Adolescents with Mild Autism Spectrum Disorder作者：莫少依(Shao-I Mo);張正芬(Cheng-Fen Chang)關鍵字：社會互動;現象學方法;語用學;輕症自閉症;質性研究;Mild autism spectrum disorder;phenomenology;pragmatics;qualitative research;social interaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：61期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究是從「進步」的構念反思出發，以輕症自閉症青少年的社會互動現象為目標，擱置以往聚焦於個體缺陷或追求「進步」的介入觀點，重新概念化並揭示輕症自閉症者的互動行為。本研究邀請三位育有輕症自閉症青少年的母親描述孩子從小到大的社會互動狀況，並以現象學方法分析訪談逐字稿，從而獲得對輕症自閉症青少年社會互動表現的普遍結構描述。研究結果指出，輕症自閉症青少年社會互動之普遍結構包括五項主題，分別為：依循著道理或軌道化的行為表現樣態、在溝通行動中沒有出現可以修飾行為的反饋作用、特定興趣領域的形成有助於溝通現象的出現、溝通時的語用影響取決於他人的知覺立場與反應以及不激起道理對立的順應他人行為。這五項主題不應分別來看，而是共同構成一個關於輕症自閉症者「社會互動現象」之整體，並得以回答所謂的「社會互動上的進步」。除了回答研究問題外，本研究可以貢獻於輕症自閉症者社會互動研究的構念反思，以及有助於實務工作者設計輕症自閉症青少年的教育訓練計劃。最後，本研究結果對大眾提出這樣的倡議：與輕症自閉症者互動是相互了解與相互改善的過程，如果與輕症自閉症者互動之一般人可以投入此一過程，而非僅僅只是將互動問題歸究於輕症自閉症者本身的困難，則將更有利於後者的社會適應。英文摘要：This study aimed at understanding the phenomena of progresses in social interaction among adolescents with mild autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Most researches on adolescents with mild ASD adopted the idea of progress that indicated a view of deficiency and took competence as the focus of intervention. While some of them claimed to have positive results in helping the mild ASD subjects gain progress (i.e., being more capable in social interaction), there are no promising changes appearing in long term observation and most of the adolescents with mild ASD have limited capacity in social interaction throughout their lives. To understand this contradiction concerning the phenomena of progress, this study carefully reviewed the definitions of progress employed in these literatures and found that, the progress conceptualized in most of existing studies can be described as a ”competence-focused” one which is obtained from measuring the subjects' capacity in comparison with their own level of social interaction performance before the research manipulation, or in comparison with the normal children participating in the research. Thus, the obtained progress exists only within a narrow condition and could not be replicated outside the research settings. Putting aside the view of deficiency, this study adopted the paradigm of discovery and intended to grasp the phenomena of social interaction of the adolescents with mild ASD as a whole in order to clarify the possible dimensions of its progress. Three mothers of adolescents with mild ASD were interviewed for their long-term observation of their children's social interaction. Using a phenomenological method, interview transcriptions were analyzed and resulted in a description of the general structure of social interaction of adolescents with mild ASD. The general structure revealed from the analysis is composed with five themes. (1) Embodied rule-sticking behaviors, which indicates the rules the subjects with mild ASD stick with have the character of being ontological and never fall into the level of negotiation. (2) Lacking of feedback loops in communicative interaction, which shows that the subjects with mild ASD are not able to comprehend the communicative cues other than overt language and thus no modification would occur even as they offend others. (3) Conversation on specific interests and habits raising the quality of interaction, which highlights the phenomena that the subjects and their conversation partners will ignore the communicative hindrance and advance their interaction while focus on the topic of interest. (4) Other-depending pragmatic impact in communication, which indicate that the pragmatic impact along with the ASD style of communication can be enlarged or eliminated by the conversation partners as they adopt different attitudes. And (5) complying behavior when no conflict with others, which denotes that as the interaction partners deliberately avoid conflict with the subjects with mild ASD, the latter could comply the others' request. According to these findings, even though the characters of ASD style of communication are still salient and prevailing, ”progresses” in interaction can also be obtained due to the topics of interest, the others' attitude toward the pragmatic impact from the talk of the subjects and deliberate avoidance to conflict by the others. It is clear that the progress can be observed not due to the improvement of competence but the others' responses. This understanding solves the contradiction concerning the phenomena of progress appearing in the existing literatures. In addition to answering the research questions, our findings also provide a conceptual reflection to the studies on adolescents with mild ASD and a guidance for practitioners to design proper plans for training the adolescents. Last but not least, stemming from this research is also an advocacy to the public: The interaction with people with mild ASD is a process for mutual understanding rather than proving their being deficient.起始頁-結束頁：21-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210500610028篇名：經驗取向暖身歷程研究－心理劇身體暖身活動之運用並列篇名：The Process Study of Experiential Approach Warm-up-Using Body Warm-up Activities in Psychodrama作者：游淑瑜(Shu-Yu You);林宜蘋(Yi-Ping Lin)關鍵字：心理劇治療;身體暖身活動;經驗取向暖身;詮釋現象學;Body warm-up activities;experiential approach warm up;hermeneutic phenomenology;psychodrama期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：61期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文的目的在於以詮釋現象學的方法，嘗試揭露心理劇中經驗取向暖身的經驗結構內涵。本研究的經驗取向暖身，係以現象學對身體經驗的論述，經驗治療與真實動作為概念基礎，心理劇導演運用身體暖身活動幫助成員暖身。團體結束後，研究者選取五位具有自發性暖身經驗的成員，研究者並邀請這五位成員撰寫暖身經驗描述文，並獲得經驗描述文本。研究者並以李維倫與賴憶隉]2009）提出之現象學分析方法，針對經驗描述文進行資料分析。本研究結果有二個發現：（1）是經驗取向暖身經驗歷程，呈現出兩個行為向度：（a）是縱向聯繫作用：話語－身體感受，這個向度說明成員透過話語及身體經驗的暖身，能經驗到身體感受，並進一步經驗到自己；（b）是橫向聯繫作用：團體中的人際語言、非語言行動，會引發成員的身體感受，幫助成員經驗自己；（2）是經驗取向暖身歷程的四個結構內涵包括：（a）初進團體成員狀態的經驗主題；（b）團體成員分享、支持與互動，成員投入團體的經驗主題；（c）成員透過看見／聽見他人的分享，成員可以感受自己身體感受、理解他人或浮現生活事件；（d）成員運用身體暖身活動，成員能能體驗自己的身體感受，浮現生活事件，並經驗自己。透過本研究，我們有機會了解經驗取向暖身的經驗歷程，解明經驗取向暖身的內涵，藉以擴大並充實心理劇的理論。英文摘要：This study aimed at revealing the experiential structure of participants in experiential approach warm-up. Experiential approach warm-up is based on phenomenology, experiential therapy, and the concept of authentic movement. The researchers reviewed the warm-up theory of psychodrama, the body experience in phenomenology, experiential approach, and the concept of authentic movement. In the experiential approach warm-up, there were some body warm-up activities, including body movement, meditation, role play, concretization. In the study, the researcher used the paradigm of hermeneutic phenomenology. The five selected participants were assessed by two psychodrama expert as ”spontaneous participants” according to the five dimensions of the spontaneity (Lai, 2017). The five participants were all women between 22 and 50 years old, and their Psychodrama training hours ranged from 70 to 280 hours. After the group, the researcher asked the five participants to write down their experience after participating in body warm-up activities. Phenomenological analysis (Lee & Lai, 2009) was applied to the descriptions of experience obtained from five participants after they attended experiential approach warm-up. The experiential structure of participants in experiential approach warm-up were obtained. Two main findings were obtained. (1) The experiential structure of warm-up in psychodrama consisted of two dimensions of behaviors. One was the vertical dimension, indicating the words-bodily feelings connection: participants were warmed up through bodily activities and participants experienced themselves. The other was the horizontal dimension, indicating the interpersonal verbal and nonverbal communication Repetitive in group. Participants' bodily feelings were aroused and participants experienced themselves. (2) The experiential structure of warm-up included 4 structures: (a) When group members just came into the group, group members felt confused, were distant from the group and were struggling to be the Protagonist. (b) Through the mutual sharing, support and interaction between group members, group members felt supported and relaxed, and they could participate in the group psychologically. (c) When members saw or heard others' sharing, member experienced themselves, understood themselves and others, and thought of some life events. There are two subthemes in the structure. One is ”members saw or heard other's sharing-body feelings-understood themselves and others”, the other is ”members shared their experience or heard others' sharings-body feelings-think of life events-awareness”. (d) members used body warm-up activities (body movement, meditation, role play, concretization) to do warm-up, members can experience themselves, think of life events and experience themselves. There are three subthemes in the structure. The first is ”body movement-the touch of the body-body feelings-experience themselves”. The second is ”body warm-up activities (body movement, meditation, role play)-body feelings-think of life events-awareness”. The third is ”body warm-up activities (body movement, meditation, concretization)-body feelings-awareness”. In the study, the researcher discussed the relationship between body warm-up experience and spontaneity and the mechanism of experiential approach warm-up. The mechanism of experiential warm-up is : (1) the verbal and nonverbal behavior between members evoke the body experience of members and facilitate spontaneity. (2) body warm-up activities help members being here-and-now and prepare for being the protagonist. Through this study, various significant features regarding experiential approach warm-up were clarified. The study helps to understand the experience of participating in body warm-up activities. However, the findings may not apply to other types of warm-up; not can the study explain the experience of the participants who are in low spontaneity.起始頁-結束頁：57-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210500610039篇名：心理創傷敘事療癒的理論與實務探討並列篇名：Theoretical and Practical Implications of Narrative Healing of Psychological Trauma作者：汪文聖(Wen-Sheng Wang)關鍵字：心理創傷;呂格爾;敘事;敘事療癒;鄂蘭;Arendt;narrative;narrative healing;psychological trauma;Ricoeur期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：61期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以敘事來考量心理創傷療癒的問題。敘事是穿越掩飾記憶甚至掩飾痛苦的創傷的一種方式。敘事療癒不宜只停留在技術的層面，更應去探討敘事本身的理論，這包括敘事形成的時間結構（敘事的時間）與在情節組構所根據的意義（敘事的意義）。前者涉及敘事如何穿越創傷，後者涉及敘事何以能療癒痛苦。這些從呂格爾的《時間與敘事》來闡述，涉及奧古斯丁、亞里斯多德、海德格與鄂蘭。敘事時間是主觀與客觀時間的綜合，超越了奧古斯丁與海德格本真的時間所代表的主觀時間，及亞里斯多德與海德格流俗的時間所代表的客觀時間，而以海德格的「時間內狀態」為依據，但鄂蘭致力於人的不朽性也有所關連。敘事的意義可溯及亞里斯多德的「淨化」與佛洛伊德的「悼念」概念。寬恕所本的尊重或愛固然不是敘事的條件，但涉及敘事整合的問題，可加持敘事意義對創傷療癒的說明。理論為臨床實務來檢驗。余德慧基於詮釋現象心理學對敘事指出的兩個路數：（1）敘事乃建構出文化心理學；（2）敘事要以個案的間距化為形成的條件。它們由余德慧與余安邦的研究案例來驗證，也為懷特與艾普斯頓的敘事方法來補充，林耀盛對於「九二一」震災的研究更詳細呼應與檢討本文所處理的敘事理論。本文一個中心議題是：敘事療癒源於受苦也在擺脫受苦，受苦是個案可衝破有限性的臨界點，敘事是衝破此臨界的方式之一。余德慧後來所致力的「人文臨床」就是在開展這受苦的臨界意義。英文摘要：This article considers the problem of healing of psychological trauma from the narrative perspective. Narrative is a way to travel through the trauma of concealing memory, and even pain. We should not stick on the technical side, but rather look into the narrative theory. It includes the temporal structure of narrative formation (narrative time), and the meaning that a narrative composition of a series of events is based on (narrative meaning). The former involves how to form the time of narrative, and the latter involves the reason why narrative can heal pain. These are expounded in Ricoeur's ”Time and Narrative,” and refer to Augustine, Aristotle, Heidegger, and Arendt. The narrative time is a synthesis of subjective and objective time, beyond the subjective time on the one hand, represented by Augustine, and Heidegger's authentic time, and the objective time on the other, represented by Aristotle and Heidegger's vulgar time, and on the basis of Heidegger's concept of ”within-timeness.” Arendt's commitment of human immortality is also related to that. The meaning of narration can be recurred to Aristotelian ”catharsis,” and Freudian ”mourning”. Respect or love for forgiveness is not a condition of narrative, but they involve the issue of narrative integration, and can back up the narrative meaning to explain the healing of trauma. Theory is examined by clinical experience. In the practical part, I first clarify the two ways Der-Heuy Yee emphasizes on narrative based on the hermeneutic phenomenological psychology: narrative presupposes distanciation of a client from his or her involvement in a trauma situation, and narrative can constitute cultural psychology. This can be verified by the practical research conducted by him and An-Bang Yu, and can be supplemented by the narrative methods proposed by Michael White and David Epston who recently have been introduced into Taiwan. Distanciation is a way for narrative to travel through trauma concealing painful memories. This is also clear from the discussion of a research report by Yaw-Sheng Lin who carried out narrative research on the case of the September 21 earthquake and demonstrated how the narrative could begin from the traumatic situation. In addition, according to this research, the importance of narrative exchange and integration can be verified. The meaning of narration can be linked to Aristotle's Poetics, but the research shows the particularity of Chinese culture, which also proves the way that narrative constitutes cultural psychology emphasized by Der- Heuy Yee. To put it concretely, narration is after all a way for people to devote themselves to self-satisfaction, but as far as narration is concerned, because the mother in this case lives in a network of relationships with her eldest son to whom her psychological trauma is imputed. It is necessary for her to establish a narrative relationship with him to exchange memories to achieve narrative effect. In this case, the eldest son himself, and his wife, should also tell the story through interviews, and the exchange of memories between them and the mother should be the researcher's consulting strategy. Yaw-Sheng Lin has tried to enable this mother to gradually get along with his eldest son and daughter-in-law. However, the establishment of this relationship between mother and son and daughter-in-law has not been realized in the actual process of consultation. Nevertheless, this mother can finally get some healing for her soul, and her life is peaceful because of her psychological shift to take care of her grandchildren. The reason is that Chinese people often suffer due to the break in the relationship between relatives and friends, and their suffering is often overcome by a new connection with relatives and friends. This case in which the psychological shift of a client to the care of grandchildren and so a connection with them leads to a peaceful life shows an example. It is manifested that the peaceful result of mother' soul is not affected by a new narrative relationship; however, this result is acquired though a narrative consulting, which can inspire us to think about how narrative strategy should take cultural background into consideration. This is a viewpoint of that narrative can constitute cultural psychology. One central theme of this article is: Narrative therapy originates from suffer and aims to release a person from suffer; suffer is the borderline for a person to transcend his/her limitation; narrative is a kind of way to cross the borderline. Der-Heuy Yee aimed to develop the significance of the borderline of suffering in terms of his later foundation of ”humanistic clinical practice.”起始頁-結束頁：89-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186202105006100410篇名：敘事研究中「存在經驗」與「存有」的地理學方法探問：從情緒地理學與詮釋現象學取「徑」並列篇名：Enquiry of ”Lived Experience” and ”Being” in Narrative Study: Taking Path through Hermeneutic Phenomenology and Emotional Geography作者：翁士恆(Shyh-Heng Wong);彭榮邦(Rong-Bang Peng)關鍵字：存在哲學;敘事探問;情緒地理學;詮釋現象學;emotional geography;existential philosophy;hermeneutic phenomenology;narrative enquiry期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：61期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究從本體論為起點探討「存在經驗」與「存有」的本體論點，接連「主體性」以及「主體間際性」的經驗論述，以詮釋現象學以及情緒地理學的本體論與知識論觀點，形成一個對於「存有」的地理學形式探問。在諮商與心理治療質性研究的敘事轉向的歷史中，「敘事」以被發展為探究主體經驗的研究依據，但對於主體敘說位置的不明，也常常讓敘事研究具有無法被批判或判準的濫觴。因此本研究定調在「探問」：從確認敘說者與研究者的位置作為一個倫理性的存在，試圖重新形成一個探問的起點。從詮釋現象學在歐陸對於存在哲學的影響，以及在台灣人文與臨床療癒的發展，本文提出意義收發的探問方向，從主體間際性與主體性在敘說與聆聽的迂迴途徑，去定義從外返身的探問。另外，從歐洲情緒地理學的發展，結合心理分析的「過渡」觀點，我們可以更定位主體性的經驗位置，同時取徑地理學的知識論與方法論。而在探問的方法論上，本文整理現有的諮商與心理治療方法論中提出兩個探問「存有」的地理學方法，第一，從內在空間與外在空間的移動勾勒內在地景的生成；第二，從詮釋現象學的意義裂解與還原經驗及敘事結構。從三個探問「存有」的方法論點，重新定位接引諮商與心理治療在敘事研究資料分析中，探索意義途徑與經驗結構的兩個方法論基礎。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to enquire ”lived experience” and ”being” from the nature of time and space. The authors argued that meaning construction needs to take terms methodologically by hermeneutic phenomenology and emotional geography. Four discussion points are showed as follows and used to articulate the utility of narrative analysis. Firstly, this study defines the enquiry itself as enquiring ”being” in its subjectivity or intersubjectivity. Through reviewing the ”narrative turn” in the history of qualitative research, narrative is stated as the representation of one's self and therefore studying one's life story is to explore the meaning construction of lived experience, which is through saying and said, and has its subject from and object for. Ontologically, it is argued that meaning in narrative has its own time and space and therefore researchers need to find the route of how meaning could be developing. The second part of this study is to further debate the nature of ”lived experience” and ”being” as topographical and geographical. Meaning develops with its directions between self and other; therefore, a researcher's ambition to ”reflect” outside world or ”reflexively” clarifies inner world of oneself and decides the attitude of studying meaning construction of lived experience. This part defines and reviews the ontological concern of ”being” and its relation of space and time. From current finding of emotional geography in Europe, narrative could therefore be widen its epistemological and methodological perspective for exploring ”being” and ”lived experience”. In the third part of this study, according to our ontological arguments epistemological perspectives have been elaborated for understanding meaning construction of ”being” and ”lived experience”. The dimensions of time and space are particularly relevant here. Through Heidegger's contribution of Dasein analysis and dwelling concepts, we defined narrative has its time linear structure in which presence is in-between the past and future, and has its space structure of being-in-a-space, from geographer Malpas's contribution. We linked Winnicott's concept of ”transitional space” and discussed the ”being” as the ethics between self, other, and transitional space, and further discussed the indigenous studies conducted in Taiwan about the structural concern as well as the topographical nature of perception. The final part of the arguments focuses two methodological concerns: route and structure. The former lead to the discussion of geographical approach towards qualitative data. Here the illustration of mental landscape is offered and is argued as an analytic method. Humanistic geographical approach developed in recent decades focused on reflexive description of self-other relationship and the mental/emotional landscape, so that lived experience and being could be illustrated by where and how the meaning is constructed. Therefore the route and structure of meaning construction can then be represented. The second methodological concern take narratives to the hermeneutics and phenomenology of meaning construction, in which Husserl used ”epoche” as the method of temporally disregarding its causality but the ”things itself”. This method could help a researcher systematically investigate both temporal and topographical nature of lived experience. From Wei-Lun Lee's six-step correction from Giorgi's five steps of analysis, the way in which ”being” can be opened into the description of phenomenon. Also, Lee's methodological investigation to human perception was followed for exploring the structure of lived experience itself. This study particularly focuses on the temporal structure of narratives, and taking the final methodological path through the circle of hermeneutics, which regards narrative as having its circle of interpretation as the process of meaning construction. A method named Critical Narrative Analysis (CNA) is discoursed here. Six steps of data analysis for qualitative data is introduced for concluding the concern for enquiring meaning structure within narratives, especially when data is with historical and temporal characteristics. By above arguments, the understanding of narratives according its ontology, epistemology and methodology is carefully linked with the use of narrative analysis in counseling and psychotherapeutic practice. And methodological concerns of narrative are concluded for answering how and why taking path through hermeneutic phenomenology and emotional geography is important in narrative enquiries.起始頁-結束頁：119-151資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186202105006100501篇名：地方公所推動社區自主防災之角色與限制：知識中介理論觀點並列篇名：The Roles of District and Township Offices for Developing Disaster-Resilient Communities in Taiwan: A Perspective of Knowledge Brokering Theory作者：張鎧如(Kaiju Chang)關鍵字：地方公所;災害防救;社區自主防災;質性研究;知識中介;district and township offices;emergency management;disaster-resilient community;qualitative research;knowledge brokering期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：60期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以地方公所為研究對象，從知識中介的理論觀點，探討地方公所在推動社區自主防災的工作上，扮演著何種角色？又如何與鄰里社區互動？以及在推動的過程中面臨了哪些限制與挑戰。藉由文獻的爬梳，以及訪談資料的分析，展開理論與實務的對話，研究發現地方公所角色任務除了部分回應理論面之「災害防救知識傳播者」、「災害防救知識連結者」、「災害防救能力培育者」，以及「民眾災害防救知識需求回應者」等類型，亦同時扮演「災害防救政策執行知識連結者」；其面臨的挑戰與限制，主要來自於地方公所本身有限的災害防救能量，以及公所人員接觸民眾時遇到的各種在地性差異；而地方公所首長本身對於災害防救業務與自主防災社區計畫的支持程度，具有關鍵的影響。本研究有助於累積知識中介理論應用的實證文獻，並就地方公所在回應地方需求、促進多元行動者協力、以及鼓勵社區參與災害防救公共事務的角色期待上，提出進一步的討論，同時也針對地方公所協助鄰里社區推動自主防災工作提出政策建議。英文摘要：This paper aims to explore the roles and limitations of district and township offices in Taiwan in developing disaster resilient communities from a perspective of knowledge broker theory. Four types of knowledge brokering roles are proposed and discussed in this paper, including ”disseminating”, ”linking”, ”cultivating”, and ”responding to needs from communities.” After collecting and analyzing qualitative data from interviews, the findings show that district and township offices not only take on the above-mentioned four types of knowledge brokering roles moderately, but also work as a bridge to link central or local governments with communities with respect to policy implementation-related knowledge. The limitations which district and township offices confront are associated with their organizational capacities in emergency management and the diverse natures of local communities. Support from township mayors or district executives could be a key to influence how district and township offices conduct their knowledge-brokering activities in developing disaster-resilient communities. In general, this paper serves to accumulate empirical studies in the areas of local governance, emergency management, disaster-resilient community, and knowledge brokering.起始頁-結束頁：1-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202103_(60).00012篇名：實踐公部門線上協力式政策參與之研究：以機關回應態樣與決策行為核心的檢視並列篇名：The Practices of E-Collaborative Policy Involvement in Taiwanese Public Sector: An Inspection of Agency's Response Patterns and Decision-Making Behaviors作者：張鐙文(Teng-Wen Chang);吳佩靜(Pei-Ching Wu)關鍵字：協力式治理;協力式政策參與及制定;政策論證模式;電子連署;公共政策網路參與平臺;collaborative governance;collaborative policy involvement and policy-making;modes of policy argument;e-petition;JOIN.gov期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：60期出版年：2021中文摘要：當協力式政策參與及制定逐漸躍升為公民參與的圭臬之際，但僅有少數研究關注在此一過程中，政府如何透過資通訊科技回應公眾的政策需求，其中，又以分析機關決策依據與邏輯的實證研究相對稀少。對此，本研究認為Dunn所提出的政策論證之架構及模式，恰好提供一個合適的分析框架，能用於檢視政府決策准駁之論述及依據，而有助於填補當前研究的缺口。因之，我們選擇公共政策網路參與平臺上具備全國性電子連署功能的「提點子」項目作為研究個案，並聚焦於已成案且獲得機關完整回覆之政策提案，嘗試藉由內容分析與集群分析等方法，一方面，說明機關採用之政策論證模式；另一方面，辨識及歸納特定的機關回應態樣，並進一步檢視其與不同提案屬性之間的關聯。本研究發現機關普遍採用的政策論證模式是「方法」，最不常用的則是「通則化」，而依據回應之政策論證模式的組合，則可將之劃分為六種特定的機關回應態樣，且各自具備不同的提案屬性，惟機關回應態樣與提案屬性兩者之間並無顯著的關聯。此外，研究亦針對政策、方案、法律及法規等權威性文件的角色與功能，以及機關線上回覆是否符合法定的回應程序與形式等議題進行探討。相關成果均可以作為後續研究精進與未來實務推動之參考。英文摘要：While collaborative policy involvement and policy-making have become the golden rules of public participation, few studies have focused on how the government responds to the public's policy requests through ICTs in the process of collaborative policy involvement and policy-making, not to mention analyzing the underlying reasons and logic were taken by public agencies. Therefore, we treat the theory of policy argument and its modes mentioned by Dunn as a suitable analytical framework and tool for inspecting the underlying reasons and logic of public policy-making. The 152 cases of e-petition on the JOIN.gov platform were selected for this study. We conducted content analysis and cluster analysis to illustrate the models of policy argument used by the government, and identified their specific response patterns; we also explored the relationship between the different response patterns and the attributions of the petitions. According to current data, ”Method” is the most dominant policy argument mode used by the government, and ”Generalization” is the least dominant. Six different response patterns and their own attributions are identified, although there is no significant relationship between them. This study also discusses the role and function of ”authority documents” (i.e., laws, regulations and policies), and analyzes the procedure and form of the government's response. The results from our study provide follow-up academics and practitioners more insight into the reality of e-collaborative policy involvement in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：47-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202103_(60).00023篇名：犯罪防治與循證公共政策的對話：以1982-2020年臺灣金融機構搶案為個案的初探分析並列篇名：A Dialogue between Crime Prevention and Evidence-Based Public Policy: A Case Study of Bank Robberies in Taiwan, 1982-2020作者：吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu);潘競(Ching-Heng Pan);蔡藹玲(Ai-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：理性選擇理論;效用極大化;犯罪經濟學;銀行搶案;犯罪防制;rational choice theory;utility maximization;economics of crime;bank robbery;crime prevention期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：60期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文旨在從金融治安的觀點，檢驗在什麼時間比較可能發生銀行搶劫案件，而金融機構搶案結果和時間的關連性為何？作者藉由「理性選擇理論」（rational choice theory）的觀點，闡述銀行搶匪的行為動機，以及說明時間因素為什麼是搶犯決定採取行動的重要考量。為檢證相關命題，本文蒐集1982年至2020年《聯合知識庫》和《司法院法學資料檢索系統》資料，臺灣共計發生378件金融機構搶劫案件，這些案件的犯案人數有504位，本文以這些搶犯做為分析對象。根據依變數特性，本文以「層狀勝算對數模型」（hierarchical logit model）進行兩個分析層級，檢證搶劫案件的成功與否受到什麼因素的影響，尤其在時間因素方面有無顯著差異。除了量化分析之外，本文亦進行「半結構式深度訪談」（semi-structured intensive interviews）。資料顯示，金融機構類型、星期、時段、犯案人數、犯案工具等變數，對於銀行搶案結果具有顯著效應。整體而言，在時間因素方面，週五、上午11時至中午13時59分，以及15時之後的時段，安全警戒心態可能較為鬆散，致使搶匪心生歹念，這是金融單位安全防備需要強化的時刻。英文摘要：This study investigates the questions of when bank robberies are most likely to occur, and what is the proximate relationship between the outcomes and the timing of financial institution heists from the perspective of crime prevention. Using rational choice theory, we examine the behavioral motives of bank robbers and explain why the time factor is a major consideration in the robber's decision to act. To test the hypotheses, this study collected bank heist data from the United Daily News Database (UDNDATA) and the Law and Regulations Retrieving System of the Judicial Yuan. A total of 378 bank robberies occurred in Taiwan between 1982 and 2020, involving 504 criminals. Given the characteristic of the dependent variable, the study conducts a two-level analysis using hierarchical logit models. We evaluate the factors that affect the success (or failure) of bank robberies, paying close attention to whether significant differences exist with respect to time factors. In addition to quantitative analyses, we conduct semi-structured intensive interviews. Empirical results reveal that variables such as the type of financial institution, the day of the week, the time of day, the number of criminals, and the tools used in the heist all have a statistically significant effect on the outcome of bank robberies. In general, levels of security alert are likely lower on Fridays, in the hours between 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., and in the period after 3 p.m., which leads robbers to strike at those times. Accordingly, these are the time periods during which financial institutions need to beef up their security precautions.起始頁-結束頁：97-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202103_(60).00034篇名：從實務觀察與〈位置決定腦袋？政府部門系統使用者角色差異下的資料協力意向〉觀點交流作者：曾憲立期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：60期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：131-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202103_(60).00045篇名：替官僚自主性的強力辯護－超越政治：官僚裁量與可信賴承諾作者：洪琬茹期刊/會議論文集名稱：公共行政學報卷期：60期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：139-147資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學公共行政學系DOI：10.30409/JPA.202103_(60).000501篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：i-iv資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：不再壟斷政治性的現代國家－論Carl Schmitt如何轉化Weber的政治性和國家概念並列篇名：Modern State without Monopoly of the Political: How Carl Schmitt Transforms Max Weber's Concept of the Political and of State作者：楊尚儒(Shang-ju Yang)關鍵字：Carl Schmitt;Max Weber;國家;政治性;暴力的壟斷;Carl Schmitt;Max Weber;state;the political;monopoly of violence期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文試圖指出Carl Schmitt對於國家和政治性的概念建構受到了Weber的影響。從Weber對於政治組織的定義可以發現，「政治性」是和暴力的行使這一特徵是連結在一起的。而國家，作為政治組織的一種類型，則被定義為是「壟斷正當物理性暴力」的政治組織。Schmitt則使用了Weber的概念，進一步把政治定義為對敵友的區分，亦即決定被施加暴力的目標群體，而國家則是必須壟斷政治性的政治統一體。此外，本文亦指出，Schmitt藉著將國家和政治性兩個概念脫鉤，以試圖釐清在國家不再能壟斷暴力之後，國際法和世界秩序的轉變。英文摘要：This article attempts to contextualise how Max Weber influenced Carl Schmitt's concept of the state and the political. By looking into Weber's definition of the political association, the article firstly addresses an intimate relationship between his concept of the political and the feature of exercising violence. Under this definition, the state, as one kind of the political associations he defined, could be seen as an association that achieves ”the monopoly of legitimate physical violence.” This Weberian definition of the state seems to influence how Schmitt defines the concept of the political. The article then analyses how Schmitt transformed such a Weberian definition into his concept of the political, i.e. to distinguish friends from enemies by which to decide what group is the aim of violence, and his concept of the state, i.e. a political entity that monopolises any decision from the political. The article concludes Schmitt's Weberian legacy by pointing out that Schmitt, how-ever, tried to decouple the concept of the political from the state in order to account political developments. That is, how the international law and the world order trans-form when the states can no longer hold the monopoly of exercising violence.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：從審議系統觀點探討臺灣邵族傳統領域治理與公民行動並列篇名：Exploring the Thao Traditional Territory Governance and Citizen Action from a Deliberative Systems Perspective作者：范玫芳(Mei-fang Fan);張簡妙琳(Miao-lin ZhangJian)關鍵字：審議系統;審議民主;治理;公民行動;壓迫;deliberative systems;deliberative democracy;governance;citizen action;oppression期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：晚近審議民主系統取向強調公共審議係涵蓋了諸多溝通形式與實作的廣大系統，其關注系統的特定組成間的連結性與相依性、功能的分工與互補，以及如何整體性地影響治理體系的審議品質。本文基於審議系統理論和認識上的取徑，以日月潭邵族傳統領域開發案爭議為例，探討傳統領域治理體系的缺失與認識上的壓迫（epistemic oppression），以及公民行動如何發揮系統性的功能和審議的力量。個案顯示邵族傳統生活敘事與證詞，在縣政府和地方環評審查的決策場域中未能被賦予重要價值，且審議系統中決策場域、公共領域，以及系統構成部分間存在著「解耦」（decoupling）問題。邵族部落和公民團體致力於傳遞和連結諸多場域和審議活動的敘事、知識與說理，不僅在對抗壓制性的權力、捍衛傳統領域和文化主體性，同時也促使系統中地方環評機構的缺失，可以被其他構成部分的審議所彌補，並有助於提升系統整體的運作功能。針對傳統領域治理的缺失，有必要打造「社會學習」場域導向差異的互相了解，並尋求「後設共識」（meta-consensus）。英文摘要：The deliberative systems approach perceives public deliberation as a broad system that encompasses diverse communicative practices and emphasises the connectivity and interdependence of its components, division of deliberative labour and functions, and how crucial components interconnect to enhance the deliberative quality of the system. Drawing on deliberative systems theory and the epistemic approach to democracy, this study investigated the controversies surrounding a development project in the traditional Thao territories of the Sun Moon Lake region, with the objective of exploring epistemic oppression and how citizen action performs functions of deliberative systems and deliberative power. The study shows that the Thao tribe's narratives and testimonies of their life have not been valued, multiple forms of epistemic oppression, and the decoupling problems that exist between empowered spaces and other components in deliberative systems. To combat epistemic oppression and coercive power and safeguard traditional territories and cultural subjectivity and continuity, the Thao tribespeople and civic society organisations engaged in transmission and connectivity of narratives, knowledge, and reasons in multiple spheres and sites. It highlights failures in local environmental impact assessment institutions can be compensated for in other parts and components of deliberative systems, and citizen action contributes to improve functions of deliberative systems. This article argues that social learning spaces must be oriented to achieve mutual understanding regarding differences to attain a meta-consensus.起始頁-結束頁：37-77資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：澳洲原住民族文化資產管理典範轉移的歷史過程並列篇名：The Paradigm Shift of Australian Indigenous Cultural Heritage Management: A Historical Analysis作者：陳怡萱(Yayut Yi-shiuan Chen)關鍵字：澳洲;和解共生;原住民族文化資產;地景;認同;cultural heritage;Australia;reconciliation;Indigenous peoples期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文討論在澳洲歷史中原住民族文化資產的典範轉移以及其經驗對台灣的啟發。在澳洲脈絡，「地景」此概念是文化資產／認同／歷史的建構論述的核心命題。筆者將澳洲歷史過程中的地景論述整理為三個階段：「荒野」、「叢林」與「家園」，這三個時期的地景論述都反映出了當時的族群關係，而族群關係又透過相關法制而具象化並落實於當時的原住民族文化資產管理。透過討論澳洲歷史過程中原住民族文化資產管理的典範轉移，本文主張：（1）將原住民族文化資產區分成為有形／無形無法如實反映族人的本體論認識；（2）原住民族文化資產也應重視當代原住民族社會認為重要的資產，而不是陷於對古老的、原真的文物保存的桎梏；（3）政府應肯認原住民族對文化資產的連結並積極主動將原住民族捲動進入參與式管理文化資產的過程。英文摘要：This paper discuss the paradigm shift of Australian Indigenous cultural heritage management and its inspiration to the Taiwanese society. In Australian settings, the notion of ”landscape” is critical in cultural heritage-identity-history matrix. This paper argues that the paradigm shift of ”landscape” narratives in the Australian history can be categorized into three phases: wildness, bush and country. In each periods, the predominant ”landscape” narrative represents ethnic relations at that certain period of time. Furthermore, ethnic relations was institutionalized into regulations of Indigenous cultural heritage management. Through discussions, this paper argues (1) the dichotomy of tangible/intangible cultural heritage does not reflect the Indigenous peoples' ontological understandings of heritage; (2) acknowledgement of the importance of contemporary history in Indigenous cultural heritage management instead of fossilization of Indigenous culture; (3) Indigenous peoples' participation is critical in sustainable Indigenous cultural heritage management.起始頁-結束頁：79-133資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會5篇名：奮力成為照亮黑暗的蠟燭－政治大學的校園民主經驗並列篇名：Striving to be a Candle in the Dark: The Experience of Campus Democracy at National Chengchi University作者：黃厚銘(Hou-ming Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：135-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會6篇名：書評：Opposing Democracy in the Digital Age: The Yellow Shirts in Thailand〔數位時代中的反民主－泰國黃衫軍運動〕by Aim Sinpeng〔艾姆．辛朋〕並列篇名：A review of Opposing Democracy in the Digital Age: The Yellow Shirts in Thailand by Aim Sinpeng作者：陳柏宇(Boyu Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：143-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會7篇名：世界民主大事紀：2021年1－3月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: January-March 2021期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：151-169資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會8篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Editor's Note作者：黃東益(Tong-yi Huang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：i-iv資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會9篇名：公共治理的政治理據－阿岡本、盧梭與傅柯並列篇名：The Political Rationality of Public Government: Agamben, Rousseau and Foucault作者：蕭育和(Yu-he Hsiao)關鍵字：公共治理;阿岡本;雙元護佑機制;盧梭;政治安治;想像的民主;傅柯;大治理;public government;Giorgio Agamben;double structure of the providential machine;Jean-Jacques Rousseau;political economy;imagined democracy;Michel Foucault;governmentality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文從檢視阿岡本《王國與榮光》中主權與治理作為「雙元護佑機制」的經典命題開始。對阿岡本來說，現代民主國家憲制基本上繼受了這個自基督教傳統而來的政治治理結構，從神學上的安濟到政治上的安治實踐，證成了至高之主（權）對世俗的護佑，在阿岡本看來，盧梭與傅柯對於公共治理的論述都繼受了此一雙元護佑機制。本文通過盧梭與傅柯相關論述的檢視，質疑阿岡本此一命題。對盧梭而言，政府的治理就其本身並沒有任何足以安治政治體的政治理據，治理與主權之間必然存在的張力是總意志與私意志衝突的延伸，安治是主權、法律與政府治理的緊密連鎖，而對於此一緊密連鎖在現實上的可能鬆脫，盧梭透過「想像民主」的構思，增補了一個政府治理作為虛擬主權者的理論環節。傅柯關注的是盧梭刻意忽略的「治安」活動，從市民社會中自發性監管窮人的實踐，以及主權國家權力向市民社會的延伸等等皆構成了「大治理」的特定政治場域。如傅柯所闡述，在十八世紀歐洲所流通關於治安的文獻中，安治的主題一直都是論述國家之「燦爛輝煌」的核心，此即公共治理的政治理據。傅柯以「大治理」說明現代國家形成的趨勢，雙元護佑機制中所涉及的主權法理論述，在其中同樣沒有地位。英文摘要：This essay examines the thesis of ”the double structure of the providential machine” in Agamben's The Kingdom and the Glory. For Agamben, the constitution of modern democracy essentially inherits this political government structure from the Trinitarian paradigm in Christian theology, which, through the mystery of the economy to the practices of government, justifies the providence of the transcendental sovereignty of God. According to Agamben, the modern discourses of public government suggested by Rousseau and Foucault still continue this double structure of sovereignty and government. By investigating the relevant arguments in Rousseau and Foucault, this essay challenges this assertion made by Agamben. For Rousseau, the inevitable tensions between the sovereign and the government reflect the clash between general will and private will, so the practices of government bear no political rationality in itself, and have to be firmly restrained by law under control of sovereignty as general will. Rousseau also conceived ”imagined democracy”, the government as the virtual sovereign, to supplement a theoretical moment in this sovereign-law-government chain. The next part of this essay would concentrate on the arguments provided by Foucault. Focusing on the ”police” practices deliberately ignored by Rousseau, Foucault claimed the spontaneous practices of supervising the poor in civil society, combined with the extension of power of the sovereign state into civil society, articulate the specific political field of ”governmentality”. As Foucault argued, in the texts on ”the police” circulated in 18th-century Europe, the concerns of public security were constantly the central part of the discourses of the ”splendor” of the state, that is the political rationality of public government. For Foucault, however, in this process of the governmentalization of the state there also holds no place for juridical discourses of sovereignty implicated the double structure of the providential machine.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會10篇名：歷史的照妖鏡－從原住民抗爭探究紀念碑的轉型正義並列篇名：The Magic Mirror of History: Transitional Justice as Reflected in Protests by Indigenous Taiwanese against Historical Memorials in Taiwan作者：顧玉玲(Yu-ling Ku)關鍵字：原住民族;殉難榮民紀念碑;日警殉職碑;轉型正義;集體記憶;indigenous peoples;memorial to the martyred veterans;memorials to the death of the Japanese police;transitional justice;collective memory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文針對泰雅族人要求拆除雪霸國家公園內的「大鹿林道殉難榮民紀念碑」，以及布農族人要求在玉山國家公園的「日警殉職碑」旁設立原住民紀念碑，以文獻收集、實地踏查、深度訪談等研究方法，探討歷史敘事的權力結構，分析國家治理如何使用紀念碑主導、框定人們的集體記憶，並正視轉型正義風潮下，原住民族視角所揭示的社會矛盾，以異質記憶挑戰歷史真相。研究持續追蹤多年，至2019年卓溪鄉公所設立「卓樂屠殺事件紀念碑」，以及2021年在雪霸國家公園建造「泰雅祖靈紀念廣場」，從被遺忘的原住民族視角，看待轉型正義的歷史重述，梳理集體記憶與歷史敘事的關聯，並重新定性紀念意義。當代追求政治民主，集體記憶也必須從威權支配走向多元鬆綁，學習在不同的社會力之間進行協商。紀念毋須與特定成就嵌合，因為未來認識的提昇都可能挑戰今日所見的侷限，紀念原住民族的祖先與亡靈，要實質分享權力，學習他們與自然共生的山林知識、文化記憶，訴求跨世代、跨地域、跨族群的共生。英文摘要：This article focuses on two protest movements organized by Taiwan's indigenous communities in opposition to extant memorials to explore the power structure of historical narratives, analyze how national governments use memorials to curate social / collective memories, and show how indigenous perspectives help rectify historical narratives under the aegis of transitional justice. As societies democratize, collective memories typically embrace a greater diversity of opinions and perspectives. Negotiations among different social forces must accept the premise that 'redress', rather than finding a new way to cover old wounds, requires revisiting and re-debating these wounds to define their value to contemporary society. Rather than encouraging unthinking acceptance or reflexive glorification of the past, memorialization offers an opportunity for introspection and awareness. Confirming an accomplishment is not the core purpose of memorialization, as subsequent shifts in perspective may see beyond current limitations. Current comparative reflection permits our seeing beyond the cognitive frame of the past to protect original ecologies, reject perspectives rooted in the interests of one ethnic or national group, and seek balance across generations, areas, and communities.起始頁-結束頁：39-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：政府危機處理與施政評價：論領導人印象對防疫表現評估的影響並列篇名：Crisis Management and Government Performance: The Impact of Leader's Impressions on Evaluations of Government Response to Covid-19作者：方淇(Chi Fang);吳重禮(Chung-Li Wu)關鍵字：印象理論;領導人印象;新冠肺炎;施政評價;美中台關係;Image Theory;Image of Leaders;Covid-19;Government Performance;U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：在新冠肺炎疫情下，台灣民眾如何評價美國與中國的防疫成效？國際情勢與疫情資訊龐雜變化之際，民眾又該如何做出判斷？作者以「印象理論」（image theory）作為研究架構，探討美中國家領導人印象和中國軍事威脅是否會對美中防疫成效認知造成影響。本文建構三個變數，分別是「美國領導人印象」、「中國領導人印象」，以及「敵對印象」，從而檢驗台灣民眾的主觀認知是否會影響其對美中兩國防疫成效的評價。本文採用「2020年中國印象：美國因素的影響評估」調查資料，藉由「有序勝算對數模型」（ordered logit models）進行檢證，探討領導人印象與軍事威脅的效應。實證結果符合研究預期，對於該國領導人印象愈佳的民眾，愈容易給與該國正面的防疫成效評價；去除軍事威脅後，對中國產生好感的民眾，傾向給與中國正面的防疫成效評價，卻未必願意肯定美國的防疫政策。此等結果證實印象理論的研究經驗，民眾身處龐雜資訊的情況下，愈仰賴領導人印象作為主要的資訊來源，以此作為施政評價的依據。此一傾向在危機時期尤為顯著，新冠肺炎作為2020年的主要危機，各國的危機處理成效促使民眾重新檢視各國的能力，惟民眾仍偏好以國家領導人印象、而非實際資訊，作為施政評價的依歸。英文摘要：Amid the coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak, how do the Taiwanese public evaluate the performance of the United States' and Chinese governments in handling the pandemic? How should people make judgments when the international situation and information about the coronavirus disease keep changing? Using ”image theory as its research framework, this study explores whether the Taiwanese public's impressions of U.S. and Chinese leaders and China's military threat toward Taiwan affect their perceptions of the U.S. and China governments' responses to Covid-19. We construct three variables: impression of U.S. leaders, impression of Chinese leaders, and enemy image. We utilize the 2020 China Image Survey and an ”ordered logit model” to probe the effects of the leaders' impressions and military threat when evaluating a government's response. The findings reveal that Taiwanese people who have a better impression of a country's leaders are more likely to rate that country's government's performance more positively; after removing the effect of the military threat, people who are fond of China tend to evaluate the Chinese government's response more positively than that of the U.S. government. The results largely confirm the predictions of image theory. When information is complex, people are more prone to relying on their impressions of a country's leaders-rather than on factual information-as the basis for their evaluations of government performance. This tendency is particularly pronounced in times of crisis, such as the Covid-19 pandemic. Moreover, China's military threat toward Taiwan does not affect the Taiwanese people's assessment of government performance in other countries; it is only limited to the country where the threat originated.起始頁-結束頁：1-50資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202106_25(1).00012篇名：目標國的全球化程度對經濟制裁結果的影響，1992∼2005並列篇名：The Influence of Target States' Degree of Globalization on the Outcome of Economic Sanctions, 1992-2005作者：薛健吾(Chien-Wu Alex Hsueh)關鍵字：全球化;KOF全球化指數;經濟制裁;經濟威壓;兩岸關係;Globalization;KOF Globalisation Index;Economic Sanction;Economic Coercion;Cross-Strait Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：在武力使用較受限制的當代國際社會，經濟制裁便成為國家之間處理衝突議題的重要政策工具之一。在互賴程度較高的國家之間，彼此之間或至少其中一方將因為比對方有較低的敏感性與脆弱性而擁有制裁槓桿，而近年來全球化的進展更加深了國家與國家之間的互賴關係，那麼，全球化對於經濟制裁的影響又是如何呢？本文的目的，即在於探究目標國在「政治」、「經濟」和「社會」這三個不同面向上的全球化程度，對於其在被單一國家威脅或是實際執行經濟制裁之後是否會讓步所產生的影響。根據相關文獻的建議，本文的論點預期，當目標國的「對外政治連結」程度愈高時，基於「目標國可能受到實質多邊制裁的程度愈低」、「目標國可能得到的外部支持程度愈高」、「目標國與發起國之間的敵意程度愈高的可能性愈大」以及「政治因素的影響方向較為穩定」等四大理由，因此在發起國對目標國發出制裁威脅或者是實際執行經濟制裁的時候，目標國的對外「政治連結」程度愈高，則其做出讓步的機率將會愈低。且因為這四大理由並未能在目標國的對外「經濟連結」關係和對外「社會連結」關係中穩定出現，因此目標國的對外「經濟連結」程度和對外「社會連結」程度對其做出讓步的機率並沒有顯著的影響。本文以後冷戰時期全球的經濟制裁事件為樣本，從1992<U+223C>2005年這一段期間的經驗證據支持了本文的論點。本文的發現對於目前的兩岸關係也具有重要的啟示。英文摘要：In contemporary international society where the use of force is largely restricted, economic sanctions are an important policy tool when states deal with conflicts between themselves and other states. Among those states with high levels of interdependence, at least one or both sides will have sanctioning leverage due to lower sensitivity and vulnerability. In addition, recent developments in globalization have further enhanced the interdependence between nations. Subsequently, what influence will globalization have on economic sanctions? The goal of this research is to explore the impact of the degree of globalization of the target states on their ”political connections,” ”economic connections,” and ”social connections” when a single state either threatens to implement or implements economic sanctions directed toward them. The previous findings suggest that the stronger the political connections that the target states have, the less likely they will be substantively cut off, the more likely they will be able to receive external support, and the more likely that the senders and targets will be highly antagonistic towards each other. However, the economic and social connections between target states and other countries do not have the same effects as their political connections. Besides, the causal directions of target states' political connections are much more stable than those of the economic and social connections. Therefore, the target states that have stronger political connections will have a lower probability of making concessions when threatened or when the sanctions imposed by the sender state are actually enforced. By contrast, the level of their economic or social connections will not be significantly affected regardless of whether they concede or not. Empirical evidence based on the post-Cold War economic sanctions from 1992 to 2005 supports this argument. The findings of this research also have important policy implications for current Cross-Strait relations.起始頁-結束頁：51-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202106_25(1).00023篇名：人格特質對台灣大學生政治容忍感之影響並列篇名：The Effects of Personality Traits on Taiwanese College Students' Political Tolerance作者：蔡維廷(Wei-Ting Tsai);王靖興(Ching-Hsing Wang)關鍵字：人格特質;政治容忍感;太陽花學運;大學生;異質性效果;Personality Traits;Political Tolerance;Sunflower Student Movement;College Students;Heterogeneous Effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究探討人格特質與政治容忍感之間的關係。鑒於台灣過去文獻未曾探討心理因素與政治容忍感之間的關係，故本研究檢視人格五大特質－外向性、親和性、嚴謹性、情緒穩定性和經驗開放性－對於大學生政治容忍感的影響。運用來自〈我國大學生政治社會化的定群追蹤研究〉第四年的調查資料，本研究透過有序勝算對數模型估計人格特質與政治容忍感之間的關係。實證結果發現，親和性和經驗開放性兩項人格特質對於大學生的政治容忍感具有顯著性的影響。確切而言，親和性人格特質愈高的受訪者，其政治容忍感愈低；反之，經驗開放性人格特質愈高的受訪者，則有較高的政治容忍感。另外，嚴謹性和情緒穩定性兩項人格特質對於政治容忍感亦有部分的影響力。另一方面，雖然外向性人格特質與政治容忍感之間似乎不具有關聯性，但是進一步檢視人格特質對於不同性別大學生政治容忍感的影響，則發現外向性人格特質愈顯著的女性大學生，其政治容忍感愈低；再者，嚴謹性人格特質對於女性和男性大學生的政治容忍感亦具有不同的影響。總結而言，本研究證實人格特質確實是影響大學生政治容忍感的重要解釋變數，並且提供初步證據說明人格特質對於女性和男性的政治容忍感具有異質性的影響。這對於政治容忍感相關研究的發展有著重要的意義，亦即在探究個人的政治容忍感時，除了脈絡、態度和行為因素之外，亦須將人格特質的心理因素納入考量。英文摘要：This study aims to explore the relationships between personality traits and political tolerance. Given that past studies in Taiwan have never investigated the relationships between psychological factors and political tolerance, this study examines how the Big Five personality traits - extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, emotional stability and openness to experience - affect college students' political tolerance. Using survey data from the panel study on the political socialization of university students in Taiwan, this study employs an ordered logit model to estimate the effects of personality traits on political tolerance. The empirical results show that agreeableness and openness to experience have significant effects on college students' political tolerance. Specifically, people with higher levels of agreeableness tend to have lower levels of political tolerance; by contrast, those with higher levels of openness to experience are inclined to have higher levels of political tolerance. Besides, conscientiousness and emotional stability also exert some influence on political tolerance. On the other hand, while extraversion seems to have nothing to do with political tolerance, further analysis reveals that extraversion has heterogeneous effects on political tolerance for female and male college students. That is, female college students with higher levels of extraversion tend to have lower levels of political tolerance. Furthermore, conscientiousness also exerts a gender-differentiated effect on political tolerance. Overall, this study confirms that personality traits are important determinants of political tolerance among college students and provides preliminary evidence for heterogeneous effects of personality traits on the political tolerance of women and men. The findings provide new insights into the study of political tolerance and suggest that personality traits should be taken into consideration to explain individual political tolerance apart from contextual, attitudinal and behavioral factors.起始頁-結束頁：97-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202106_25(1).00034篇名：理念在公共政策中的角色及其內容與變遷：以台灣社會對毒品施用者的處置為例並列篇名：The Content and Role of the Idea in The Making of Policy: The Case of the Policy on Drug Users in Taiwan作者：劉名峰(Ming-Feng Liu)關鍵字：政策理念;毒品施用者;文明化歷程;政治優位;比較政策;Policy Idea;Drug User;Civilizing Process;Political Preponderance;Comparative Public Policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究試圖透過理念來了解公共政策與其所在之社會間的關係，而此一關係在轉型期裡又特別重要，因為這是個結構及理念同時發生重大變遷的歷史時刻。因此，掌握兩者間的同源性可說是政策研究之理論與實務面的核心課題。文章以台灣歷史上對毒品施用者的政策，及其間多次的轉變作為研究的對象，除了藉著毒品施用者特別邊陲的位置，而在減少主流社會之權力與利益的介入之際，突顯理念的地位之外，也透過數度的轉型與政策的變遷，歸納出台灣社會的特殊性。不同於「政策典範」的概念僅涉及政策理念的形式，本文由文明化歷程所發展的架構，還指出了政策理念的實質內容。首先，文中透過「個人—社群」及「吸納—排除」兩軸，對毒品施用者的處置提出四種政策理念，即大監禁、威嚇、減害與和解；其次，參照著國際政經體制而帶出了此間政策理念的一般路徑，並串連出政策理念與政治社會脈絡間的同源性；最後，透過對台灣歷史上對毒品施用者的政策，本文不僅指出其間政策理念的內容與變遷的路徑，也說明了「政治優位」是台灣社會的特質。尤有進者，此一不同於一般路徑的特質，除了得以反思國際政經體制的西方中心之外，台灣的個案還更具代表性地表現出非西方國家的普遍性，並認為在當下轉型的情境裡，政策研究需要更多地將「政治帶進來（bringing the politics back in）」。英文摘要：The paper aims to explore the structural homology between policy ideas and their respective socioeconomic background, which has played an important role, par excellence, in the age of transition. In this regard, it studies the policy regarding drug users in Taiwan from its very beginning until now, within which there are three principal periods: the Qing dynasty and Japanese colonial period, the authoritarian period, and the period after democratization. Based on the Eliasian perspective on configurational sociology and the civilizing process, four idea-types of policy idea are elaborated: great confinement, intimidation, harm reduction, and reconciliation. Besides, based on the changes in the international regime of political economy, this paper presents a trajectory of policy ideas about drug users in general, and compares this with the case of Taiwan with political preponderance, not only because of the geopolitical tension between the Qing dynasty and Japanese empire, and Communist and Nationalist China, but also due to the political struggle between the KMT and DPP. While the first two periods emphasize the role of nation-state building, the last one focuses on human rights. In this regard, this research not only presents a reflexive stand vis-a-vis the Western-centred civilizing process, but also explains the reason why the case of Taiwan is more likely to represent the general elements for non-Western countries. As such, this study concludes that it is necessary to bring politics back into the realm of policy research.起始頁-結束頁：151-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202106_25(1).00045篇名：Machiavelli's Moderate Machiavellism並列篇名：馬基維利的溫和馬基維利主義作者：Kyung-Hee Kim關鍵字：Machiavelli;Realism;Moralism;Moderate Machiavellism;Virtue;馬基維利;現實主義;道德主義;溫和馬基維利主義;德行期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣政治學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Machiavelli has been conventionally understood as the proponent of extreme Machiavellism. He has been easily demonized as the advocate of tyranny pursuing private interests and power regardless of means and methods and of being unconditionally committed to evil, as well as a thinker who has completely disregarded morality and excluded this virtue from the realm of politics. By drawing upon a careful reading of his original writings, however, this article seeks to portray Machiavelli as a proponent of moderate Machiavellism rather than of the extreme variety. Although Machiavelli embraced the oft-mentioned Machiavellian elements of realpolitik, he also identified loopholes within Machiavellism. In particular, he was fully aware that Machiavellism-that is, the exercise of violence to achieve the purpose regardless of the means and method-may not bring the desired outcome and success. To be specific, this article proposes three reasons why Machiavelli himself must be interpreted as the advocate of moderate Machiavellism. First, Machiavelli called for the efficient use of violence as a means of rule. Violence should not be used consistently. The ruler must exercise violence at once and temporarily and must then obtain the public's trust through proper dispensation. The inefficient or uncontrolled exercise of violence without the appropriateness in light of its consequences will inevitably lead to failure. Second, Machiavelli intended to constrain the use of violence and its evilness within the purpose and cause of the common good. He warned of negative consequences for the arbitrary and unrestricted use of violence. Finally, Machiavelli offered to use the violence in a timely manner. During the phase of founding a state when the concentration of power is highly required, immoral methods such as violence and deception can be tolerated. To govern the state afterwards, however, it is more important to have a form of governance that depends on a legal system or justice. In short, the main point of Machiavelli's Machiavellism lies in his critique of the authorization of blind moralism and unconditional violence. Machiavelli himself was not a Machiavellian in the conventional sense.英文摘要：一直以來，馬基維利一直被理解為極端馬基維利主義者，當人們提到不擇手段追求私利與權力的暴君時，馬基維利常被妖魔化為這種暴君的支持者，也被認為是一位完全屏棄道德、並將這個價值排除在政治場域的思想家。然而，在透過對馬基維利著作的細讀，本研究試圖將馬基維利定位為溫和馬基維利主義的支持者。雖然馬基維利擁護現實政治的馬基維利因素，他其實也明辨馬基維利主義的闕漏。特別是，他完全認知到馬基維利主義—亦即不擇手段運用暴力達成目標—並不必然能帶來所欲的結果與成功。具體而言，本論文提出三個理由說明為何馬基維利必須要被詮釋為溫和馬基維利主義的支持者。第一，馬基維利主張要用有效率的暴力來當作統治的手段。君王不應恆常地使用暴力，而是要立即且暫時性地用暴力，並且要適時運用赦免以取得人民的信任。無效率、無節制，而且不顧後果地用暴力將必然導致統治失敗。第二，馬基維利意圖在追求共善的目標下節制暴力的使用，他警告專橫且毫無節制地使用暴力會產生負面後果。最後，馬基維利認為使用暴力時要考量適當的時機。在建造國家初期，由於集中權力有其必要性，所以可容許君王使用暴力和欺騙的不道德手段。但在建國之後，則需要利用法律體系或正義來進行統治。簡言之，馬基維利的馬基維利主義立基於對盲目道德主義和無條件使用暴力的批評，他並非一般意義下的馬基維利主義者。起始頁-結束頁：201-238資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：台灣政治學會DOI：10.6683/TPSR.202106_25(1).000501篇名：探索臺灣公務人員追求職涯成功「為官之道」的認知：Q方法論之研究並列篇名：Ways to Pursue Career Success from the Public Servants' Perspectives: A Q Methodology Study in Taiwan作者：陳揚中(Yang-Chung Chen);陳敦源(Don-Yun Chen);張鎧如(Kaiju Chang);董祥開(Hsiang-Kai Dong)關鍵字：公務職涯管理;職涯成功;為官之道;Q方法論;public career management;career success;the ways of being a public official;Q methodology期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：72期出版年：2021中文摘要：長久以來，我國政府人事管理主要是從上到下的資源管理思維，很少有機會從下到上、以人為本的角度切入思考，本研究試圖透過職涯發展理論與公務人員「為官之道」的認知連結，展現臺灣公務人員對於如何能擁有成功之職涯發展的認知圖像。本研究以「個人與組織之配適度」（person-organization fit）以及「職涯成功」（career success）的理論觀點為主軸，試著討論公務職涯管理、職涯成功與為官之道三者之間的關聯性意義，並以Q方法論為主要研究途徑，透過39位臺灣公務人員由Q排列展現他們對於如何能在公務體系獲取良好的職涯發展之認知，而歸納和詮釋出六種主要類型，包含：團隊整合型、品牌經營型、專業保守型、領導學習型、交際關係型、與管家侍從型。此外，本研究更進一步嘗試連結量化的問卷調查，藉由3,661份問卷調查的資料，確認不同認知類型之公務人員的分布狀況。最後，本研究嘗試從組織管理的角度思考，結合為官之道、職涯成功、以及個人與組織之配適等理論觀點，對公務職涯管理的研究與實務進行省思。而本研究建構之臺灣公務人員職涯發展的自我認知圖像，除了對公務人員管理與發展實務有所啟發外，也可作為未來針對公務人員職涯成功的定義與探索之研究基礎。英文摘要：This study combined ideas of ”the ways of being a public official” and ”career development theory” to explore how public servants pursue a successful career in Taiwan. The person-organization fit theory and career success theory are applied to discuss the relationships among concepts of public career management, career success, and the ways of being a public official. Through interviewing with 39 public servants and conducting a large-sample questionnaire survey, this mixed-method study utilizes Q methodology to identify six patterns of pursuing career success from public servants' viewpoint, including ”boundary spanner,” ”personal branding master,” ”conservative expert,” ”management trainee,” ”coat-tail rider,” and ”steward.” The frequency distribution results of the above six patterns by analyzing a total of 3,661 survey respondents also presented in this study. Based on the research findings, this study contributes to advancing our understanding of career success for public servants in Taiwan from both academic and practical perspectives.起始頁-結束頁：1-66資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系2篇名：全民健康保險委員會決策參與影響因素之探析：社會網絡分析的觀點並列篇名：Factors Associated with the Decision-making Participation of National Health Insurance Committee Members: Analysis Using Social Network Analysis作者：王光旭(Guang-Xu Wang);葉謹寧(Jin-Ning Ye);劉宜君(I-Chun Liu);陳敦源(Don-Yun Chen);林昭吟(Chao-Ying Lin)關鍵字：全民健康保險委員會（健保會）;社會網絡分析;委員會治理;收支連動;決策參與;National Health Insurance Committee (NHIC);social network analysis (SNA);committee governance;decision-making participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：72期出版年：2021中文摘要：臺灣的二代健康保險係透過合議制的健康保險委員會（以下簡稱健保會），負責關於健保費率、給付範圍與年度醫療給付費用總額協定等重大健康保險財務事項的審議。因此，健保會的運作成效與健保財務良窳息息相關。從實務上來說，雖然這種合議制組織在臺灣行政運作上十分常見，但運作成效卻沒有衡量的標準，國內也鮮少有關委員會治理方面的論著可供參考。本研究認為，委員對會議的出席與積極討論，是衡量健保會是否能達到設置目標的基本要件。由於委員會是一個封閉性的群體，彼此間在決策參與中會產生密切的互動，甚至形成非正式組織，影響到決策參與的結果。據此，本研究以委員決策參與為討論標的，探究委員之間的互動關係是否會影響到委員的決策參與行為。據此，本研究以105年度健保會的委員為分析對象，透過社會網絡問卷與105年度的會議實錄蒐集相關資料進行分析。本研究的成果有三：1、如實呈現健保會委員在參與決策過程中的互動關係；2、學者專家與被保險人的影響力較高，位居核心，與會行為較為積極，反之醫事團體代表較為位居邊陲，參與也較不積極；3、委員對於討論事項和專案報告的發言積極度，主要受到委員間資源依賴和法規諮詢關係的影響。本研究並依據以上的研究成果，針對強化委員參與的頻率與品質提出具體的建議。英文摘要：Taiwan's second-generation NHI is operated by the National Health Insurance Committee (hereinafter NHIC) through a directorial system. The Committee is responsible for the review of major health insurance financial matters, such as the health insurance rate, the scope of payment, and the annual medical payment negotiation under the global budget payment system. Therefore, the effectiveness of the NHIC and the management of health insurance finance are greatly related. In practice, although this directorial organization is very common in Taiwan's administrative operations, its operational effectiveness is not measured. There are currently few studies on committee governance in Taiwan. According to this study, the attendance rate and the enthusiasm of members at the meeting are the basic requirements for measuring whether the NHIC can achieve its goals. Since the committee is a closed group, the members will closely interact with each other in decision-making, and even form an informal organization, which will affect the outcome of decision-making participation. This study takes the decision-making participation of members as the main discussion topic, to explore whether the interaction between the members will affect their decision-making participation behavior. The study investigated the participation behavior of members of the 2016 NHIC and analyzed the data obtained through a social network questionnaire and the 2016 conference record. The results are as follows: 1. Truly present the interaction of members of the NHIC in the decision-making process; 2. The influence of scholars and insured persons ranks the highest, and their participation behavior is more positive. In contrast, the representatives of medical institutions are more at the border, and the level of participation is low; 3. The enthusiasm of the members regarding the discussion items and the project report is mainly influenced by the resource dependence and law consultation among the members. On the basis of the aforementioned results, this study also proposes specific recommendations to strengthen the frequency and quality of committee participation.起始頁-結束頁：67-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系3篇名：直接民主與代議民主的融合：瑞士與德國公民投票制度的探討並列篇名：Integrating Direct and Representative Democracy: An Analysis of the Referendum System in Switzerland and Germany作者：許友芳(Yu-Fang Hsu);蘇子喬(Tzu-Chiao Su)關鍵字：直接民主;代議民主;公民投票;創制;direct democracy;representative democracy;referendum;initiative期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：72期出版年：2021中文摘要：一般來說，公民投票作為直接民主的一種形式，其施行通常被認為是為了彌補代議政治的不足之處。然而如此的看法似乎揭示了直接民主一定程度上優於代議民主，而使代議機關在公民投票程序上的角色常被忽略。基於直接民主的實證研究逐漸證實，直接民主概念所衍生出的制度並不一定能夠產生更具民意代表性的結果。因此在本文中，我們挑戰了直接民主必然可以彌補代議民主不足的看法，並認為代議民主彌補直接民主亦等同重要。從這個角度出發，本文檢視瑞士以及德國漢堡公民投票之相關規定。我們關注的問題是兩個個案之公民投票程序所需時間，以及政府與議會在公民投票程序中被納入的時機與作用。最後，本文進一步探討兩個案公民投票制度在提高公民投票案之能見度上、強化代議機關與提案人互動以及保障合憲性的表現。由於代議機關在公民投票發動過程中所應扮演的角色在我國公民投票制度的討論中幾乎未曾受到重視，因此公民投票在制度設計上如何能夠更大程度地與代議民主相互結合，乃是特別值得我國深入探討的議題。本文認為，若臺灣能在公民投票發動的過程中（而非事後）納入議會政黨的審議、憲法法院的審查，並使代議機關於審議公投案後能夠提出對案，將更能強化我國代議民主及直接民主之互補。英文摘要：Generally speaking, as a form of direct democracy, the referendum is implemented to compensate for the shortcomings of representative politics. However, this view implies that direct democracy is in a certain sense superior to representative democracy, and the role of representative organs in referendum procedures is often overlooked. Empirical research about direct democracy has gradually confirmed that systems based on the concept of direct democracy do not necessarily produce results that are more representative of public opinion. Therefore, in this article, we challenge the view that direct democracy is necessarily an appropriate instrument to make up for the shortcomings of representative democracy, and argue that it is equally important for representative democracy to correct the shortcomings of direct democracy. From this perspective, this article examines the relevant regulations for the referendum in Switzerland and Hamburg, Germany. We focus on the time required for the referendum process in the two cases, and the timing and function of how the government and the representative assembly are included in the referendum process. Finally, this article explores the performance of the two referendum systems in improving the visibility of referendums, strengthening the interaction between representative organs and sponsors, and ensuring constitutionality. Since the role of the representative organs in the process of initiating a referendum has received very little attention in the discussion of the referendum system in Taiwan, how the referendum can be better integrated with representative democracy is a particularly worthwhile topic. This article proposes that if Taiwan were to include the parliamentary parties in the deliberations already during the process of launching a referendum (rather than after the fact), allow for early review by the Constitutional Court, and provide for the possibility of the representative organs directly making counter-proposals, this would further strengthen our representative democracy and better complement the mechanisms of direct democracy.起始頁-結束頁：115-157資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系4篇名：我國能源政策實施政策環評之成效分析：以離岸風電區塊開發政策之政策環評為例並列篇名：The Effectiveness Analysis of the SEA on Taiwan's Energy Policy: The SEA on Offshore Windfarm Cluster Development Policy作者：陳潁峰(Ying-Feng Chen)關鍵字：政策環評;環境影響評估;能源轉型;離岸風電;能源政策;strategic environmental assessment;environmental impacts assessment;energy transition;offshore wind power;energy policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：行政暨政策學報卷期：72期出版年：2021中文摘要：為解決以環評（EIA）為基礎的風險治理零碎問題，國際上已普遍從EIA衍生出具有政策協調與法規盤點性質的「政策環評」（又稱「策略環評」，本文稱SEA），在政策初期釐清潛在利害相關人脈絡和現行法規疏漏，以民主工具確立風險全貌與上位價值排序，以提供更好的政策選項。有鑑於我國推動能源轉型經常遭遇風險爭議，2016年我國也進行了離岸風電第三期區塊開發政策的SEA，這是我國首次針對能源轉型特定政策預先啟動SEA。此次SEA經過9個月的意見蒐集，環評會做出若干決議作為政策規劃與EIA審查參考，本文以IAIA所提的6項SEA成效指標分析SEA過程以及對後續EIA的影響，認為此次SEA在6個層面各有不同成果，其中表現最好的是「聚焦力」和「漸進學習」，其主要成果體現於技術規範和保育規範的明確化，以及由官方承擔建構本土長期海洋資料庫的責任；但在「永續導向」、「整合力」、「可問責性」和「參與度」等四個指標上，則因為繼承現有環評體制問題而存在隱匿風險疑慮，因此亟需推動法制改革。本文總結指出，此次SEA運作仍不脫EIA的舊有框架，雖能協助政策聚焦和創造學習空間，但體制仍嚴重缺乏民主元素，成果雖難令人滿意，但與國際SEA之制度演進經驗也若合符節。由於SEA和EIA本就有不同的目標，本文提出若干國際制度改革作法供政府取法，SEA需要更全面的體制性民主工具運用，才能超越EIA的傳統科學理性分析，並在政策前端規劃、中端評估和後端管制具體提昇國家治理和政策推動的能量。英文摘要：To deal with the fragmentation of risk governance based on the environmental impact assessment (EIA), the strategic environmental assessment (SEA) has been widely adopted internationally, which helps laying out the inter-relationships of potential stakeholders and probes the flaws of current regulations in the early stage of policy making. This democratic device enables the evaluation of risks comprehensively and thus prioritization of values during policy-making process. Furthermore, the SEA also applies the concepts of cumulative impacts and prioritization of values to the higher level decision-making process through risk reviews. Due to the recurrent risk disputes accompanied with the promotion of energy transitions in Taiwan, the government adopted the SEA for the third-stage offshore wind farm development policy in 2016. It was the first time that the pre-cautionary SEA was employed on a specific energy policy in Taiwan. After 9-months' examinations of opinions from various parties, the EIA committee concluded several guiding principles for subsequent EIA reviews and future policy formulation. This article applied 6 SEA effectiveness indicators proposed by the International Association for Impact Assessment (IAIA) based on the analysis of the process of the SEA and its impacts on succeeding EIAs. It suggests that this SEA had different attainments at distinct aspects. Among them, ”focused” and ”iterative” were demonstrated most fruitful, for the SEA helped concretize technology specifications and conservation norms, as well as holding government responsible for establishing long-term local marine databases. Nevertheless, in the aspects of ”sustainability-led,” ”integrative,” ”accountable,” and ”participative,” the concealment of risks in the SEA seemed to exist and hence further legal reforms may be needed to achieve more satisfactory results. This study concludes, while the SEA in this case improved policy-planning and created prospects for learning, it was still constrained by the existing EIA institutional structure. Despite the severe lack of elements of democracy resulted in unsatisfactory outcomes, the evolution, however, showed similar patterns as the practices of international SEAs. Since the SEA and the EIA serve different goals, this article proposes several procedures conducted by international SEAs for future reforms. The SEA requires more comprehensive employment of institutionalized devices of democracy to operate beyond EIA, which merely focuses on scientific reviews, and to elevate the government's capacity in governance and policy implementation during phases of preliminary planning, in-process evaluating, and pipe-end regulations.起始頁-結束頁：159-204資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：國立臺北大學公共行政暨政策學系01篇名：我國立法院黨團協商的制度變遷與制度化並列篇名：The Institutional Changes and Institutionalization of the Party Negotiation Mechanism in the Legislative Yuan in Taiwan作者：丁鼎(Ting Ting)關鍵字：黨團協商;國會制度化;立法院長;多數黨;Party Negotiation Mechanism;Institutionalization;President of the Legislative Yuan;Majority Party期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：88期出版年：2021中文摘要：黨團協商已經是我國國會重要的立法程序，被視為增進立法效率和解決朝野僵局的機制。由於研究多半受限資料的不完整，關於黨團協商運作機制相關理論甚少。這種情況在第9屆立法院出現改善，協商會議實況與文字紀錄均在立法院網站公開。不僅如此，此屆立法院政黨席次大幅洗牌，首次民進黨單一過半並由非國民黨委員擔任立法院長。本文將以制度化的角度來檢視第9屆的黨團協商運作：面對立法環境生態的劇烈變動，第9屆黨團協商機制的制度運作是否出現變化？立法院長在協商中扮演的角色為何？現行協商機制是有利於多數黨還是少數黨？最後探討黨團協商基於何種因素影響委員會決議？本文比較了第8屆與第9屆的提案進度與黨團協商的關係，並以第9屆送交黨團協商的審查會版本法案作為分析單位，檢驗協商記錄和法案內容，輔以黨團幹部與委員會召委的深度訪談，以期了解黨團協商的制度變化。研究結果顯示，第9屆黨團協商機制，無論是在制度實際運作、立法院長的角色、對政黨立法產出的影響，都與第8屆有很大的差異。以制度化角度來看，第9屆黨團協商制度化程度明顯提升，法案均照一定程序進行，高達九成的協商法案完成三讀，以往高比例法案受到擱置的情形不再。再者，黨團協商會議已經形成分流，依據法案爭議程度，大協商由立法院長主持，小協商則由召委負責。在立法院長角色上，依照協商分級制度，第9屆立法院長只主持爭議性法案，角色明顯由協調者轉為主持人，立法院長對協商成敗的關鍵影響力不若以往，黨團協商的程序規則已能依照普遍性原則來執行。最重要的是，由於上述的制度性變革，造成協商彈性盡失，導致協商失敗的法案只能往院會表決一途，此種轉變明顯有利於多數黨。最後，我們分析了黨團修改委員會決議的動機，並指出行政機關在黨團協商機制中有實質影響力，卻未有相關制度規範，這很可能是黨團協商後續制度化的隱憂。英文摘要：The party negotiation mechanism has been a pivotal legislative procedure of the Legislative Yuan in Taiwan, and it has come to be regarded as a mechanism for improving legislative efficiency and resolving impasses between the ruling party and the opposition party. Due to the specialty of the party negotiation mechanism in legislative studies, there are few related theories and most research is limited by incomplete data. However, the situation had changed with the 9th Legislative Yuan in which the meeting minutes of the party negotiation mechanism had been opened to the public for the first time. Moreover, the political structure of Legislative Yuan changed drastically - the DPP won a legislative majority for the first time, allowing the party to appoint the legislative president - a position which had always been held by KMT legislators in the past. The questions this article aims to answer are: With the radical changes in the political structure of the legislative environment, did any formal or informal institutional transformations occur? What level of institutionalization has been achieved? What is the motivation for the caucus to modify the committee's resolutions? This article compares the legislative initiatives of the 8th and 9th Legislative Yuan, and analyzes the contents and results of bills and records of committee meetings, which act as the units of analysis in order to examine the influence of the party negotiation mechanism. We also utilize in-depth interviews with caucus leaders and committee conveners to understand the actual operation of the negotiations. In general, our findings show that the 9th Legislative Yuan was much more institutionalized than the 8th, that up to 90% of the bills had been successfully enacted, meaning that there was no longer a phenomenon of high rates of bills being defaulted during negotiations, as they had been in the past. Furthermore, the president of the Legislative Yuan who used to be very influential to the results of negotiations has changed into a role that doesn't intervene in the disputes but only focuses on the procedure. With the lack of the president's mediation, the breakdown of the negotiation can only move to roll call votes. This change is apparently favorable to the ruling party. With regards to the motivation of the caucus, bills of ideological confrontation and party competition likely end in negotiation deadlocks, while bills of cognitive divergence mostly finish with content modification.起始頁-結束頁：1-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202106_(88).00012篇名：日本介護保險制度的準市場化：成果與課題並列篇名：The Quasi-Marketization of Japan's Long-Term Care Insurance System: Achievements and Issues作者：林淑馨(Shu-hsin Lin)關鍵字：介護保險制度;日本;準市場;民營化;市場化;Long-term Insurance System;Japan;Quasi-market;Privatization;Marketization期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：88期出版年：2021中文摘要：在日本，傳統社會福利服務的供給以政府為主，提供高齡者等相關的協商援助、設施服務與居家服務等。然而邁入21世紀，公私部門間的關係出現顯著的變化，政策執行逐漸依賴民間組織，兩者間的權責劃分越來越模糊，連社會福利服務供給也不例外。準市場是一種活用市場原理，同時保留公部門管制的制度設計。該理論強調「購買者與供應者分離」，認為財政與供給應分別歸屬公部門和私部門，同時也主張服務的使用者可以藉由選擇權的行使，從多樣的服務供給者中選擇自己所需的服務。本文從準市場理論的成功要件和評估基準來檢視日本介護保險制度的成果與課題。研究發現，日本介護保險制度準市場化後，雖然介護服務市場結構轉換，但尚未形成實質競爭的市場，介護服務市場雖有多元供給者，卻因禁止價格競爭，以及供給者集中在少數大型業者而影響其成效。另外，購買者即是使用者的制度設計，恐怕更容易引起資訊不對稱，從而影響選擇權的發揮。英文摘要：In Japan, social welfare services are traditionally provided by the government, which support the elderly with counseling, facility support and home care services. However, entering the 21st century, there has been a significant change in the relationship between the public and private sectors, with policy implementation gradually relying on the private sector. The role and responsibility between the public and private sectors has become vague, including the supply of social welfare. The quasi-market is an alternative to the free market mechanism, which at the same time preserves the control and institutions of the public sector. Quasi-market theory stresses ”the separation of supplier and purchaser”, meaning that the finance and the supply should be the responsibilities of the public and private sectors respectively. Service users may choose what they need according to the various services offered. This study aims to review the results of Japan's Long-term Care Insurance System through the success factors and evaluation criteria of quasi-market theory. Th study finds that the structure of long-term care services changed after the quasi-marketization of Japan's Long-term Care Insurance System, however it is not yet a competitive free market. Though there are multiple suppliers in the long-term care industry, forbidding price competition and the fact that only large companies have provided such services has limited the success of the quasi-market mechanism. Additionally, the design of having service users act as purchasers causes asymmetric information and negatively affects the power of choice.起始頁-結束頁：51-88資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202106_(88).00023篇名：國際關係情境模擬與影片討論的學習成效：一個隨機實地實驗並列篇名：The Learning Effectiveness of International Relations Simulations and Film Discussions: A Randomized Field Experiment作者：郭銘傑(Jason M. Kuo)關鍵字：隨機實地實驗;國際關係;情境模擬與影片討論;自我選擇效果;主動學習動機;Randomized Field Experiment;IR;Simulations and Film Discussions;Self-selection Effects;Active Learning Motivations期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：88期出版年：2021中文摘要：不同於海內外既有相關文獻，本文設計並執行第一個在臺灣本土應用隨機實地實驗（randomized field experiment），以評估情境模擬與影片討論的教學方式對學生國際關係的學習成效。結合實驗數據迴歸分析、半結構訪談與部分學生教學評鑑的內容分析結果發現：情境模擬與影片討論這兩種教學創新的嘗試對於以學期成績衡量的學生平均學習成效雖然沒有直接因果作用，但卻對主動學習動機強烈的同學有提升學習成效的間接自我選擇效果（self-selection effects）。研究發現突顯因材施教的重要性。未來提升大專院校國際關係學習成效的相關政策規劃與執行可雙管齊下：在鼓勵創意教學模式的嘗試之外，也著重於鼓勵教師增強學生學習動機，使學習成效的衡量跳脫學業成績的窠臼。英文摘要：Distinct from the relevant existing literature, this study designed and administered the first randomized field experiment for evaluating the learning effectiveness of International Relations (IR) simulations and film discussions in Taiwan. Using both the techniques of regression analyses of experimental data and content analyses of qualitative data from semi-structured interviews and course evaluations from students, this study found no direct causal effects from simulations and film discussions on the course grades of students. Yet, indirect self-selection effects on course grades were detected among individual students with active learning motivations. These findings underscore the importance of teaching undergraduates in accordance with their aptitudes. In the future, more emphasis could be put on encouraging instructors not only to innovate their teaching modes but also to strengthen the students' active learning motivations beyond course grades at the learning level when it comes to educational initiatives to facilitate the learning effectiveness of IR.起始頁-結束頁：89-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202106_(88).00034篇名：重奪「靈性政治」：傅柯與鄂蘭論革命並列篇名：Reclaiming ”Political Spirituality”: Foucault and Arendt on Revolution作者：蕭育和(Yu-he Hsiao)關鍵字：革命;傅柯;鄂蘭;抵抗;靈性政治;革命精神;Revolution;Michael Foucault;Hannah Arendt;Resistance;Political Spirituality;Revolutionary Spirit期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：87期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文嘗試透過當代兩位重要思想家傅柯與鄂蘭對革命的論述，探究他們共同關切的一個理論問題：如何定位革命？傅柯與鄂蘭都意圖從革命中分離出某種或可稱之為「革命體驗」的東西，傅柯稱之為「靈性政治」，而鄂蘭則稱之為「革命精神」。對他們兩人來說，革命體驗所表述的抵抗，界定了革命，其無法化約成往後任何的革命成就，革命體驗與革命所成就者彼此之間，必然存在某種張力關係。革命體驗是一個無法透過往後的革命成就所窮盡的事件，而其中抵抗與集體性的生成互為表裡。傅柯與鄂蘭對革命的闡述，不只相當具有啟發性，而革命所想望的新政治與集體性潛能，乃是自既有關係網絡中所孕生，則是兩人彼此呼應的主張。英文摘要：This essay focuses on issues of revolution in the writings of two contemporary political thinkers, Michel Foucault and Hannah Arendt, whose core concerns are the redefinition of revolution. They both attempted to separate something which may be called the ”experience of revolution” from the revolution itself; Foucault named it ”political spirituality” and Arendt named it ”revolutionary spirit”. For them, there will always be tension between the experience of revolution and the resulting institutions, since resistance is the experience of revolution, and cannot merely be a conceived phenomenon of a transition phase or reduced to any resulting institutions. The most heuristic point lies in their interpretation of revolution: the resistance is always accompanied by the conception of collectivity. This essay also argues that, for Foucault and Arendt, the potentiality of another politics and of collectivity envisaged in a revolution would breed from their existing relations.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202103_(87).00015篇名：檢視容克執委會的規範性權力作為：以環境政策為例並列篇名：The Practice of Normative Power in Jean-Claude Juncker's Term: From the Case of Environmental Policy作者：賴昀辰(Yun-chen Lai)關鍵字：綠色規範性權力;歐盟;環境政策;容克任期;權力角色;Green Normative Power;EU;Environmental Policy;Juncker's Term;Role of Power期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：87期出版年：2021中文摘要：作為一個特殊的國際關係行為者，歐盟的權力角色長期以來在學界備受重視，學者發展出許多不同的概念，來描繪歐盟此不同於傳統國家的國際行為者。然而雖有許多不同的概念描繪歐盟的權力角色，目前卻缺乏一個可普遍適用的分析框架，來觀察國際行為者的權力角色，故本文試圖建立一權力角色分析框架，主張應由「機會」、「工具」及「實踐」三面向，來觀察國際關係行為者的權力角色。在對歐盟不同的描述中，「規範性權力」近期最受關注，因此本文將以權力角色分析框架，來觀察歐盟在國際社會上的規範性權力。在案例選擇上，歐盟在環境議題上引領發展，並以條約將「永續發展」訂為歐盟的重要目標之一，故本文將聚焦在容克執政期間，歐盟在環境議題的作為，觀察歐盟在面臨內外挑戰的時期，其於國際社會上的綠色規範性權力實踐。英文摘要：As a special international actor, the role of the EU's power is a hot issue in academic debates. Scholars develop several concepts to describe the EU as an actor which is different from that of traditional national states. Despite various concepts being proposed, there so far has been no analytical framework developed to observe the role of international actors' power. As a result, this essay tries to develop an analytical framework of the role of power, which observes international actors from the perspectives of opportunities, instruments and practices. Among the various descriptions of the EU, ”normative power” is a highly-debated one. This essay uses the analytical framework of the role of power to observe the role of the EU's normative power in international society. This research chooses to analyze environmental issues, as the EU takes a lead in this area and sets ”sustainable development” as an important goal in its treaties. The development of environmental issues in the EU during Jean-Claude Juncker's Mandate will be observed in this research to discuss the EU's practice of normative power in international society during this difficult time, in which the EU faced both internal and external challenges.起始頁-結束頁：39-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202103_(87).00026篇名：日本科技政策決策思維研究：從經濟至上到以人為本並列篇名：The Thinking Behind the Decision-making of Japan's Science and Technology Policy: From focusing on Economic Growth to becoming People Oriented作者：李世暉(Shih-hui Li)關鍵字：日本科技政策;AI;經濟成長;以人為本;Japan's Science and Technology Policy;AI;Economic Growth;People Oriented期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治科學論叢卷期：87期出版年：2021中文摘要：日本在戰後的科技政策及其發展有兩個特質。首先，政府與企業的研發機構扮演重要的角色；其次，經濟成長被視為科技政策的優先目標。但自2000年之後，日本科技政策的決策者開始思考政策的多元目標，傾向「以人為本」思維取代經濟成長。透過政治系統模型，本文藉由對日本「科學技術基本計畫」（第一期至第五期），以及「以人為本的AI社會原則」的分析，探討2000年後日本科技政策思維轉向「以人為本」的過程與意涵。以結論而言，全球永續發展概念的普及，日本社會課題的嚴峻以及國民經濟的興起，影響了日本科技政策決策機制，這亦是解讀日本科技政策思維轉換過程的關鍵。英文摘要：Japan's science and technology policy and its development had two characteristics after WWII. First, R&D institutions of the government and enterprises had played important roles; secondly, economic growth had been prioritized as the goal of science and technology policy. However, since 2000, Japan's science and technology policy-makers have begun to focus on multiple policy goals, and have tended to consider that a focus on economic growth should be replaced with ”people-oriented” objectives. On the basis of the political systems model, this article discusses the shift in thinking behind Japan's science and technology policy after 2000 by analyzing Japan's ”Basic Science and Technology Plan” (Phase 1 to Phase 5) and ”People-oriented AI Social Principles”. It concludes that the popularity of concepts of global sustainable development, the serious social issues in Japan, and the rising of a people-centered economy continue to exert influence on the decision-making of Japan's science and technology policy. This is also the key to interpreting the conversion process of the thinking behind Japan's science and technology policy at this time.起始頁-結束頁：93-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：臺灣大學政治學系DOI：10.6166/TJPS.202103_(87).000301篇名：主編序言作者：徐斯勤期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：71期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：i-ii資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202106_(71).00002篇名：從比較共產主義看中共百年並列篇名：Centennial of the CCP: A Perspective of Comparative Communism作者：吳玉山(Yu-Shan Wu)關鍵字：中共建黨百年;中國研究;比較共產主義;比較威權主義;Centennial of the CCP;Chinese Studies;Comparative Authoritarianism;Comparative Communism期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：71期出版年：2021中文摘要：今年（2021）中國共產黨迎來百歲黨慶，在這一個世紀當中最重大的發展當然就是中共在1949年的建政，成立了中華人民共和國。我們今日討論中共百年，焦點自然是在於此一共黨國家如何能持續存在與發展，甚至與美國比肩，而成為世界兩強之一，而其體制又是否有變異的可能。本文的重點在於檢視政治學及其相關研究如何從理論的角度來瞭解1949年以後的中國大陸，探討中國研究與比較共產主義之間的關係，指出理論研究經常落於形勢變遷之後，流於解釋已經發生的歷史，而無法關注到當下正在進行的趨勢與未來可能出現的巨變。對於中國的研究，一開始過於強調其集體性（共產政權），在蘇東巨變之後又相反地強調其特異性（中國國別研究），或是其一般性（威權政治），而忽視了其區域性（現有共產政權集中於東亞區域）與貫時性（與歷史共產主義國家的可比性與理論的共通性）。在蘇東共產政權崩解後式微的比較共產主義在此卻正可以產生重大的學術貢獻，其意義主要表現在兩個方面：一個是提供概念框架與關鍵變項；一個是提供跨時與現實的經驗案例。如能喚回比較共產主義，重拾其理論眼光，將對於今日中國政治的理解與未來穩定性的預判具有重大助益。英文摘要：In 2021 the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) celebrates its centennial. The most significant landmark along its development path in the past one hundred years is obviously the founding of the People's Republic of China (PRC) in 1949. In Taiwan, the focus of our discussion naturally falls on how the party-state could continue to exist and develop into a superpower that rivals the United States, and what are the prospects of its transition into other forms of political system. The paper reviews how political science and other related disciplines study and theorize the politics of mainland China, and explores into the relation between China studies and comparative communism. It points out that theories in the field generally fall behind development on the ground, fail to capture ongoing trend and sense the possibilities of monumental changes ahead. They are thus relegated to explaining what has happened afterwards. The study of Chinese politics was originally defined by its organizational origins (communist system) without providing an explanation of regime dynamism, while after the collapse of the Soviet Union and European communism it has become overly concentrated on its uniqueness (Chinese studies), or its general, nondemocratic property (authoritarianism), at the expense of its regional nature (most of the existing communist regimes are in East and Southeast Asia) and its trans-temporal quality (commonality and comparability with historical communist regimes). At this point, to bring back comparative communism that has been on relative decline since the breakdown of the European communist regimes may serve two purposes: provide conceptual framework and identify key variables, and offer historical and existing empirical cases. The utilization of the theoretical resources of comparative communism will go a long way toward understanding Chinese politics and assessing the stability of the party-state.起始頁-結束頁：1-31資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202106_(71).00013篇名：建構合意空間：當代中國大陸學術知識分子與國家的互動策略並列篇名：Constructing the Sphere of Acceptability: An Interactive Strategy Between Academic Intellectuals and the State in Contemporary China作者：張鈞智(Chun-Chih Chang);黃錦堅(Jinjian Huang)關鍵字：合意空間;國家社科基金;國家與社會關係;話語互動;學術知識分子;Academic Intellectual;Discursive Interaction;National Social Science Fund;Sphere of Acceptability;State-Society Relation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：71期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文提出「合意空間」的概念，探討當代中國大陸學術知識分子和國家之間的話語互動。本文以2007∼2019年國家社科基金的文本資料為例，使用文字探勘和詞彙匹配技術，將知識分子和國家共享的話語空間劃分為三種型態：合意空間、不合意空間和侍從空間，進而提出學者迴避國家指示和建構合意空間的三種策略。本文提供了一個觀察國家與知識分子之間話語互動的新概念架構，強調即使鑲嵌在國家的限制當中，知識分子與國家的互動角色也不能簡單化約為服從，同時也扮演了自主的角色。知識分子與國家之間的互賴和協調，可能促進威權體制的調適性治理。英文摘要：This paper proposes the concept of ”sphere of acceptability” underlying the discursive interaction between academic intellectuals and the state in contemporary China. Through text-mining and vocabulary-matching analysis on data of 2007-2019 National Social Science Fund, the discursive sphere shared by academic intellectuals and the state are divided into three types: acceptable, unacceptable, and clientelist spheres. Furthermore, three strategies are illustrated for scholars to avoid the state's direction and construct the sphere of acceptability. This paper presents a new conceptual framework for underlying discursive interactions between the state and intellectuals. Embedded in the state's restrictions, the role of intellectuals interacting with the state cannot be oversimplified as submissive but also as autonomous simultaneously. Interdependence and coordination between intellectuals and the state may facilitate adaptive governance in an authoritarian regime.起始頁-結束頁：33-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202106_(71).00024篇名：組建「巡邏隊」－中共中央與省級紀檢菁英結構與流動分析並列篇名：Forming the CCP's ”Police Patrols”: The CCDI and Provincial CDIs Elite Structure and Mobility in China作者：張執中(Chih-Chung Chang);楊博揚(Bo-Yang Yang)關鍵字：中紀委;代理人;省紀委書記;習近平;菁英政治;Agent;CCDI;Elite;Provincial Secretaries of CDI;Xi Jinping期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：71期出版年：2021中文摘要：中國共產黨紀律檢查委員會（簡稱紀檢）與黨委員會（簡稱黨委）同為中國共產黨全國代表大會選舉產生，兼具政治與專業性，雖然在階層化的晉升競賽中並非屬於領先群，但中央卻有賴紀檢系統作為「巡邏隊」來監督部門與地方等「代理人」。本文主要檢視江澤民到習近平時期，中央與地方紀檢菁英結構與流動，試圖找出菁英結構背後的政策與制度關聯，同時也探討紀檢菁英的背景與經歷對政策執行的影響。從鄧小平恢復中央紀律檢查委員會（簡稱「中紀委」）到習近平推動國家監察體制改革，都顯示紀檢系統與核心領導人的密切關係。本文發現自江澤民時期，雖然開始推動中紀委的接班梯隊與專業化，也開始推動地方幹部的交流。不過，制度的擴散主要歷經胡錦濤到習近平的任期，包括紀檢全面駐點、紀檢與其他重要分口的連結，最終到國家監察委的建立。加上省級紀委書記的提名朝「異地交流」與「中央空降」為主流，將省級紀委書記由地方黨委任命的代理人，改造為中央監督地方黨委的巡邏隊。英文摘要：The Commission for Discipline Inspection (CDI) and the Party Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) are both elected by the Party Congress. Although the CDI elites are not the leading group in the promotion competition, but they have gradually become the key to CCP's internal control over the cadres ever since the era of Deng Xiaoping. In order to discover differences in the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (CCDI) and Provincial CDI elites structure and mobility of Xi and his predecessors Jiang and Hu, this research collected and reviewed data on the personnel reshuffling of the CCDI and provincial secretaries of CDI, and to identify institutions or policies as key independent variables in explaining the elite mobility. This analysis contends that when it came to reforming the professionalism and succession in echelon of CCDI and the process for nominating provincial secretaries of CDI as early as Jiang Zemin's tenure. However, it was not until the period of Hu and Xi, that more than 90% of selection and appointment approaches were either through office exchanges between different locations or direct planting from the party center. The more frequent switching of the discipline-inspection secretaries of provincial commissions indicates that the center has become more reliant on discipline inspection commissions to monitor governments and party committees. Each of the above steps reflected a strong inclination to dictate the selection process for personnel reshufflings at all levels of the CDI in Xi's period.起始頁-結束頁：61-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202106_(71).00035篇名：大<U+8846>化的網路監管與威權體制：中國大陸的網路「舉報」制度並列篇名：Popularized Internet Regulation in Authoritarian Regimes: The Online ”Informing” System in Mainland China作者：周嘉辰(Chelsea C. Chou);黃佳雯(Chia-wen Huang)關鍵字：大眾化監管;威權政體;網路審查;舉報制度;Authoritarian Regimes;Informing System;Internet Censorship;Popularized Regulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：政治學報卷期：71期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文探究中國大陸的網路言論監管制度，我們發現，目前網路言論的監管開始出現「大眾化」的趨勢。透過建立網路舉報制度，中國政府鼓勵人民在網路世界裡進行廣泛的舉報，使人人都成為網路言論的監管者，讓民間人士主動幫助政府監管網路世界的每個角落。為了瞭解一般網民對於這種舉報制度的態度，本文利用深入訪談以說明舉報制度如何在一般網民間獲得響應。我們發現，人人有責的道德責任感是促使網民主動參與舉報的主要原因，而過往的舉報經驗與相關的獎勵措施也有助於網民繼續加入舉報的行列。由於網路舉報相當廣泛，中國網民的自我審查已相當嚴重。然而，除了舉報虛假訊息或政治意見之外，中國網民也開始利用舉報制度來達到自己的目的。這種使用方式常產生舉報制度未預期的效果，包括不同網民群體之間的大規模爭論，對中國政府的網路監管帶來更多的挑戰。英文摘要：This article explores the internet regulation in Mainland China. We find that the current pattern of internet regulation has begun to be ”popularized.” By establishing an online informing system, the Chinese government encourages ordinary people to make extensive reports in the online world, making everyone a regulator of online speech, and allowing individuals to take the initiative to help the government regulate every corner of the internet content. In order to understand whether Chinese netizens support this system, we use in-depth interviews to illustrate how the informing system is welcomed by internet users. We find that the sense of morality that everyone is responsible for internet regulation is the main reason that motivates individuals to become an informant, and the past reporting experience and related incentive measures also help netizens continue to participate in. Due to the wide range of online informing, the self-censorship of Chinese netizens has become very serious. However, in addition to reporting false information and political opinions, Chinese netizens have begun to use the informing system to achieve their own goals. This often produces unexpected effects, including large-scale disputes between different groups of netizens, and hence brings more challenges to the Chinese government to regulate the internet.起始頁-結束頁：99-129資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：中國政治學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6229/CPSR.202106_(71).000401篇名：臺灣南部某國立大學學生對空氣汙染防制政策支持度之研究並列篇名：University Students' Support for Air Pollution Prevention Policy in a Public University in Southern Taiwan作者：謝百淇(Paichi Pat Shein);項文雄(Wen-Hsiung Hsiang);陳繼成(Chi-Chen Chen);郭哲凱(Che-Kai Kuo)關鍵字：空氣汙染;空氣汙染防制政策;風險論點;Air Pollution;Air Pollution Prevention Policy;Risk Argument期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：空氣汙染對民眾生活品質的威脅日益嚴重，對於人體健康的危害甚鉅。大學生是未來世界的準公民，對於政府未來的決策有當然決定權。因此，本研究是藉由大學生空氣汙染防制政策支持度之結構模式分析，探究820名大學生在「細懸浮微粒（Fine Particulate Matter <U+2264> 2.5 μm, PM_(2.5)）科學知識」、「科學參與」、「自然連結」、「幸福感」，以及五大風險論點（「相對風險」、「預防優先」、「無法做決策」、「風險不大」與「利弊權衡」）對於「空氣汙染防制政策支持度」的關連性。本研究結果發現，大學生在「PM_(2.5)科學知識」、「自然連結」均與風險論點中的「預防優先」產生正向關連，與「風險不大」、「相對風險」呈現負向關連，亦即大學生的科學知識越高、與自然的關係越緊密，越有可能對空氣汙染採預防的態度。「幸福感」與「風險不大」的風險論點有正向關連，驗證生活中越感幸福的學生，對於人生中的風險視為必然且危害不大的假設。「空氣汙染防制政策支持度」僅與「預防優先」論點成正向關連，而此論點也與「PM_(2.5)科學知識」、「自然連結」成正向關連。本研究的發現可提供給高等教育的科學及環境教育的教學實務與學術研究之參考。英文摘要：Air pollution has become a critical hazard to people's health and quality of life. University students, as future citizens, have the right and responsibility to determine the government's future policies. This study aimed to understand university students' position on the risks of air pollution risk (relative risk, precautionary risk, uncertainty, small risk, and pros and cons) in relation to Fine Particulate Matter <U+2264> 2.5 μm (PM_(2.5)) scientific knowledge, scientific engagement, connectedness to nature, support for air pollution prevention, and well-being. Survey data were collected from 820 university students from various academic disciplines and were analyzed using path analysis. Findings showed that students' PM_(2.5) scientific knowledge and connectedness to nature were positively correlated to precautionary risk and negatively correlated to small risk and relative risk. When the students have more scientific knowledge and connectedness to nature, the more likely they are to take on a precautionary risk attitude toward air pollution. Students' sense of well-being was also positively correlated to their view that air pollution presents a small risk. Students' support for air pollution prevention was positively correlated to precautionary risk, PM_(2.5) scientific knowledge, and connected to nature. The study presents educational implications for promoting science and environmental education in the higher education.起始頁-結束頁：83-112資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202106_29(2).00012篇名：高中生在社會性科學議題決策中的反思與評估並列篇名：Senior High School Students' Reflection and Evaluation of Decision-Making Process Regarding a Socioscientific Issue作者：張文馨(Wen-Xin Zhang);許瑛玿(Ying-Shao Hsu)關鍵字：反思;決策能力;社會性科學議題;集群分析;Reflection;Decision-Making Ability;Socioscientific Issues;Cluster Analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本個案研究研發融入後設認知問題的社會性科學議題（Socioscientific Issue, SSI）導向決策課程，並探討高中生的反思與評估表現。研究以便利取樣邀請66位來自臺北市某兩校高中的學生參與。研究資料來自學生在前、後測及學習單的填答內容，透過集群分析、共變異數分析、相依t考驗等統計分析，探討學生在課程中反思與評估能力的表現，以及其對決策能力與決策學習成效的影響。本研究以集群分析，依學生學習單中的反思與評估表現差異，將其分成四組：決策可行性／提出配套組、利弊權衡／提出配套組、利弊權衡／無關回應組、推理合理性／提出配套組。結果發現，利弊權衡／提出配套組、利弊權衡／無關回應組在課程中的從多元面向考量議題、利用補償性方法權衡方案表現顯著高於決策可行性／提出配套組，且這兩組經課程後的決策能力亦有顯著提升。推理合理性／提出配套組課程中的考量多元面向表現顯著優於決策可行性／提出配套組。基於研究結果，本研究建議未來發展後設認知引導問題，需具體引導學生深入反思SSI決策的本質，從決策過程的利弊權衡的角度進行評估與反思，以達到提升學生決策能力之目的。英文摘要：This study aimed to investigate senior high school students' reflection and evaluation of decision-making toward a Socioscientific Issue (SSI) and how such decision-making influences students' decision-making performance. Researchers developed an SSI-based decision-making curriculum embedded with metacognition prompts as a platform to explore students' reflection and evaluation on their decision-making toward the SSI. Convenient sampling was used to select 66 students from two senior high schools located in Taipei City to take part in this study. Cluster analysis, a one-way analysis of covariance, and a pair t-test were used to analyze students' responses from a pre- and post-test instrument and student worksheet. Major results indicate that students' reflection and evaluation could be clustered into four clusters: (1) a feasibility/ complementary group, (2) a trade-off/complementary group, (3) a trade-off/irrelevant group, and (4) a reasonableness/complementary group. Students in the trade-off/complementary and trade-off/ irrelevant groups showed significantly higher performance in the curriculum than students in the feasibility/complementary group, especially when considering multiple dimensions of the SSI and when using compensatory rules to make a decision. Students in the two groups showed significant progression in their decision-making ability at the end of the instructional treatment in contrast to the students in the feasibility/complementary group and reasonableness/ complementary group. In contrast to the feasibility/complementary group, the reasonableness/ complementary group demonstrated significantly higher performance when considering multiple dimensions of the SSI. These results suggest that the direct and explicit metacognitive prompts were successful in engaging students in deep reflection to elaborate on these students' decision-making abilities, especially to engage students in evaluating and reflecting on the usage of trade-off analysis.起始頁-結束頁：113-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202106_29(2).00023篇名：透過建模教學提升學生在化學電池概念和建模能力上的表現並列篇名：Eliciting Students' Understanding of Chemical Battery and Modeling Competence via Modeling-Based Instruction作者：曾茂仁(Mao-Ren Zeng);邱美虹(Mei-Hung Chiu)關鍵字：化學電池;建模能力;建模教學;科學學習;Electrochemical Cell;Modeling Competence;Modeling-Based Instruction;Science Learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：建模是科學家觀察現象、透過實驗證據而發展出科學理論以解釋現象的歷程。學生知識建構的歷程也需透過建立、修正與精緻模型，方能使其逐漸與科學模型相似。因此，科學學習的過程中培養學生建模能力是重要且必須的目標。本研究以四階段與八步驟之建模歷程設計國中階段化學電池課程，探討教師使用建模文本進行建模本位教學（Modeling-Based Instruction, MBI），對學生化學電池的科學概念與建模能力的影響。本研究化學電池概念問卷是由成分（電極、電解液、鹽橋與電器）、關係（反應方程式與原理）、系統（離子與電子移動）組成，共計44題，由兩位科學教育博士且具備MBI與化學背景的高中與國中教師、資深高中化學與國中自然科教師各一位建立專家效度，預測試卷的內部一致性信度為α = .76。研究對象為臺北市某國中七、八年級學生共51位，分成MBI組（n = 24）與一般教學組（n = 27），研究者收集學生教學前後的化學電池評量與晤談資料。研究結果顯示，MBI組於科學概念的整體表現、成分、關係與系統此四項學習成效較一般教學組高，且在科學概念的整體表現與系統達顯著差異（p ＜ .001）。針對建模能力的表現，MBI組於模型選擇、建立、效化與應用成效優於一般教學組。綜合以上研究結果可知MBI的確有利於學生在化學電池主題的學習。英文摘要：Modeling is a process by which scientists develop theories to explain scientific phenomena based on the observations of natural and experimental evidence. Therefore, an important and essential goal in science education is to cultivate students' modeling competences. The purpose of this study is to use modeling-based instruction (MBI) to investigate the effectiveness of development of students' electrochemical cell concepts and modeling competences in learning electrochemistry. Participants were divided into two groups: (1) a MBI group (n = 24) and (2) a command instruction (CI) group (n = 27). The difference between these groups was that MBI was presented with explicit descriptions and representations of modeling processes during instruction. Both groups were asked to answer questions on an electrochemical cell assessment questionnaire. The items in the modified questionnaire were validated by three chemistry teachers and one science education professor. The internal consistency Cronbach's α result for the questionnaire items was .76. The findings revealed that: (1) the students in the MBI group significantly outperformed the CI group on the overall content knowledge about electrochemical cell (p ＜ .001), and (2) the students in the MBI group outperformed the CI group on overall modeling competence (p ＜ .001). These findings suggest that the MBI facilitated students learning of the electrochemical cell concepts and better enhanced their modeling competences.起始頁-結束頁：137-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202106_29(2).00034篇名：高中資訊科技教科書資訊科學史內容分析並列篇名：Content Analysis of the History of Computer Science in Senior High School Information Technology Textbooks作者：陳秋燕(Chiu-Yen Chen);邱瓊芳(Chiung-Fang Chiu);吳正己(Cheng-Chih Wu)關鍵字：資訊科技教科書;資訊科學;資訊科學史;Information Technology Textbook;Computer Science;History of Computer Science期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在分析高中資訊科技教科書中資訊科學史的呈現情形。研究首先建立「資訊科學史篇幅分析表」及「資訊科學史內容分析表」，分別針對資訊科學史所占篇幅及內容進行分析，內容分析類目包括：圖片內容、主題領域、年代、事件貢獻者及因果脈絡敘述等五項。接著針對13套通過教育部審定之高中資訊科技教科書進行分析。研究結果顯示，資訊科技教科書中之資訊科學史：（1）篇幅介於0.20%∼5.40%，平均每套占2.20%；（2）呈現形式以文字為主；（3）圖片內容以設備為主；（4）軟體領域出現最多；（5）年代大多是在1946年Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer（ENIAC）發明後；（6）貢獻者以組織機構為多；（7）以簡單事實無因果脈絡的敘述為主。研究亦發現課程綱要及教科書作者是影響教科書資訊科學史呈現的重要因素。本研究建議未來課程綱要應將資訊科學史納入學習內容，並增進教師及教科書作者的資訊科學史素養。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to analyze how the History of Computer Science (HoCS) is presented in senior high school information technology textbooks. The review checklists for analyzing the contents of HoCS in the textbooks were developed and contained the following topics: space allocated, type of pictures, field, era, contributor, and context about the evolution of computer science theories or techniques. A total of 13 senior high school information technology textbooks endorsed by the Taiwan Ministry of Education were analyzed. The findings of this study were as follows: (1) the space allocated to HoCS ranged from 0.20% to 5.40% (an average of 2.20%); (2) the main format of history presentation used in HoCS was text; (3) the pictures used in HoCS mainly featured equipment; (4) the most discussed field in HoCS was software; (5) the era of history incidents presented in HoCS occurred mainly in the years after the invention of the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer (ENIAC) in 1946; (6) the names of contributors mentioned in HoCS were mostly organizations; (7) the narrative of HoCS is mainly simple and without much further explanation about the evolution of computer science theories or techniques. In addition, this study found that the computer science curriculum guidelines and textbook authors were important factors affecting how HoCS was presented in these textbooks. Based on these findings, the researchers of this study posit that HoCS should be included in the learning content of future computer science curriculum guidelines. Furthermore, teachers' and textbook authors' literacy of HoCS should also be enhanced.起始頁-結束頁：167-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202106_29(2).00045篇名：族群、家庭經濟、閱讀環境與認知能力對幼兒科學問題解決能力影響之研究並列篇名：The Study on the Influence of Ethnic Group, Family Economy, Reading Environment, and Cognitive Ability on Scientific Problem-Solving Abilities of the Preschoolers作者：謝亞恆(Ya-Heng Hsieh)關鍵字：科學問題解決能力;家庭經濟;族群;認知能力;閱讀環境;Scientific Problem-Solving Ability;Family Economy;Ethnicity;Cognitive Ability;Reading Environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在探討族群、家庭經濟、閱讀環境、認知能力與幼兒科學問題解決能力之關連性及發展變化。因此，研究對象為332位五歲學前幼兒及其家長，在經過三次長期追蹤調查之後，運用潛在成長模式分析進行五歲公、私立學前幼兒族群、家庭經濟、閱讀環境與認知能力等因素對於科學問題解決能力的直接影響，以及不同族群透過家庭經濟、閱讀環境與認知能力三個中介變項對於科學問題解決能力所造成的間接影響。研究結果發現：一開始科學解決能力越高的幼兒，後續科學解決能力並沒有增加越快的趨勢。其次，非少數族群幼兒，其日後的科學解決能力之成長速率明顯高於少數族群，而且會隨著時間的遞移有顯著擴大趨勢。另外，家庭經濟、閱讀環境與認知能力在幼兒科學問題解決能力之起始表現與成長率有顯著影響。最後，就整體效果分析顯示，少數族群幼兒家庭經濟的弱勢，閱讀環境資源的缺乏，惟認知能力有不錯的表現，使得初期科學解決能力表現不差，但隨著三波的遞移，少數族群科學解決能力的成長速率不如非少數族群，因而加大其與非少數族群科學解決能力的差距。由此來看，族群、家庭經濟、閱讀環境、認知能力對幼兒科學問題解決能力起始狀態與成長速率具有影響。文末提出相關討論與建議。英文摘要：This research aims to explore the relationship and developmental changes on ethnic groups, family economy, reading environment, cognitive ability, and children's scientific problem-solving ability among 332 five-year-old preschoolers and their parents after three long-term follow-up surveys. The Latent Growth Model (LGM) was used to analyze the direct influence of factors such as family economy, reading environment, and cognitive ability of preschoolers on their scientific problem-solving abilities, as well as the indirect influence of these variables in different ethnic groups. Results showed that the follow-up abilities of preschoolers with higher scientific solution abilities did not increase faster than preschoolers with lower scientific solution abilities. Secondly, the growth rate of scientific solution abilities of the majority ethnic preschoolers was significantly higher than that of the minority ethnic preschoolers. Third, family economy, reading environment, and cognitive ability of preschoolers showed a significant impact on the initial performance and growth rate of scientific problem-solving abilities among the preschoolers. Fourth, in spite of the disadvantage of minority students' family economic status and the lack of reading environment resources, preschoolers with good cognitive ability demonstrated better initial performance in scientific solution abilities. However, the growth rate of the abilities of the minority ethic preschoolers was not as good as that of the growth rate of the abilities of the majority ethic preschoolers. These results indicate that ethnic group, family economy, reading environment, and cognitive ability have an impact on the initial state and growth rate of scientific problem-solving abilities among the preschoolers in this study. Relevant discussions and suggestions are put forward at the end of the article.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202103_29(1).00016篇名：STS科學讀寫探究對四年級不同程度學生科學學習動機、小組合作及過程技能影響之研究並列篇名：The Effect of Inquiry With STS Reading and Writing on Fourth-Graders' Motivation, and Cooperative and Process Skills in Learning Science: Different Competent Group Approach作者：靳知勤(Chi-Chin Chin);陳錦滿(Jin-Mann Chen)關鍵字：STS讀寫;小組合作技能;科學過程技能;科學學習動機;探究;STS Reading and Writing;Cooperative Skills;Process Skills;Motivation on Science Learning;Inquiry期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究採混合研究法設計，將Science-Technology-Society（STS）生活化素材與科學讀寫融入以「Engagement/Exploration/Explanation/Elaboration/Evaluation（5E）探究學習環模式」設計之自然科教學，讓一班國小四年級學生（N = 25）經歷蒐集資料、解決問題、運用知識的過程，來探討其全體及不同程度學生之科學學習動機、小組合作技能、科學過程技能是否有所成長。研究歷經「時間」、「美麗的彩虹」、「水中生物」三個單元之學習，共31節課；在教學前、後，施以科學學習動機、小組合作技能、科學過程技能等量表；另以科學讀寫單、活動單、回饋問卷、檢核表、焦點小組觀察與訪談，蒐集質性資料。研究結果顯示學生的科學學習動機、小組合作技能、科學過程技能均獲提升；不同程度學生間，在小組合作技能後測總分有顯著差異；另在科學學習動機及科學過程技能之總分及分量表中，亦發現有不同程度學生在教學後獲致成長。英文摘要：This mixed-method study infused Science-Technology-Society (STS)-reading/writing strategy together with Engagement/Exploration/Explanation/Elaboration/Evaluation (5E)-inquiry learning cycle to develop science instruction materials for teaching a class of fourth graders (N = 25). Students were instructed on a process of information gathering, problem solving, and knowledge forming. Investigators explored if this process could improve their motivation, cooperation, and process skills in learning science. Thirty-one hours of instruction were used during this investigation focused on three topics: Time, A Beautiful Rainbow, and Aquatic Living. At the beginning and end of instruction for each topic, a scientific learning motivation questionnaire, a cooperative-skill inventory, and a process-skill test were administrated to evaluate changes among the students. In addition, reading-writing worksheets, activity worksheets, a feedback questionnaire, a checklist on students' performance, and observation and interviews among members of the focus group were used to collect qualitative data. Results showed that students achieved significant growth on all three tests. High-, mid-, and low-achievers revealed significant differences in cooperative learning on the post-test. Changes were also found among students in learning motivation and process skills.起始頁-結束頁：25-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202103_29(1).00027篇名：Improving Junior High School Students' Marine Food Webs Learning Through a SWI-Prolog-Based Interactive Learning System並列篇名：運用以SWI-Prolog為基礎之互動學習系統增進國中生海洋食物網學習之研究作者：王傑瑋(Jie-Wei Wang);黃琴扉(Chin-Fei Huang);林哲正(Che-Chern Lin)關鍵字：Prolog;Auto Reasoning;Food Webs;Expert Systems;Computer Assisted Learning;Prolog;自動推論;食物網;專家系統;電腦輔助學習期刊/會議論文集名稱：科學教育學刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：This study investigates the effects of integrating a SWI-Prolog-based interactive learning system in a junior high school students' food webs learning program. An expert system programming language called SWI-Prolog was utilized to build an interactive learning system based on a food webs diagram. One hundred seventh-grade students participated in this study. They were divided into an experimental group and a control group. Both groups were asked to complete a pre- and post-test questionnaire that included a ”Food Webs Learning Literacy Test” and questions related to different treatments about learning strategies that were used in this study. The experimental group learned with the SWI-Prolog-based interactive learning system, while the control group learned with photographic cards. The results showed that the SWI-Prolog-based interactive learning system could significantly improve students' food webs knowledge performance and learning behavior.英文摘要：本研究主要目的為探討「運用以SWI-Prolog為基礎之互動學習系統對於國中生海洋食物網學習之效益」。本研究主要採用SWI-Prolog專家系統程式語言，建置海洋食物網互動式學習系統，並藉此探討該互動式學習系統對於國中生海洋食物網學習之成效。本研究之研究對象共有100位七年級學生，並分為實驗組與對照組；實驗組與對照組均需於研究進行前完成「食物網學習素養量表」之前測，接著，實驗組採用以SWI-Prolog為基礎之互動式學習系統進行海洋食物網相關主題之學習，而控制組則是採用傳統的圖卡式學習；最後，兩組均需於學習後完成「食物網學習素養量表」之後測。研究結果指出，相較於圖卡式學習而言，以SWI-Prolog為基礎之互動式學習系統可以提升學生海洋食物網之概念知識與學習態度，且兩者達顯著差異。本研究建議後續研究可深化SWI-Prolog專家系統程式語言之運用，進一步建構學生相關科學學習困難之路徑追蹤。起始頁-結束頁：57-81資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中華民國科學教育學會DOI：10.6173/CJSE.202103_29(1).000301篇名：以問題導向學習應用於特殊教育輔助科技課程之實踐成效並列篇名：Practical Effects of Problem-Based Learning in Special Education Course on Assistive Technology作者：林珮如(Pei-Ju Lin)關鍵字：行動研究;師資培育;問題導向學習;教學實踐研究;輔助科技;action research;assistive technology;problem-based learning;teacher education;teaching practice research期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：46卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究採行動研究，旨在探討問題導向學習（problem-based learning, PBL）運用於某國立大學特殊教育系輔助科技課程之實踐與成效。本研究參與者為選修輔助科技課程的39名四年級學生，共分成8組，每組4-5人。研究者以行動準備期、課程實踐期、反思與成長期三階段發展PBL教學模式，並透過問卷調查、焦點團體訪談、省思日誌、文件等量化與質性多元資料的蒐集，以了解PBL運作的歷程與成效。本研究主要將教學案例融入問題情境中，模擬教學實務，讓學生整合特殊教育與輔助科技專業知能，以小組合作方式解決三個案例的問題。同時在PBL運作歷程中，以學生為核心，學生在小組中分別擔任主席、紀錄、發言人與其他組員等角色，教師則擔任誘發者、引導者與促進者。研究發現，所有學生對於PBL教學法持正面評價，肯定PBL有助於學生專注與參與課堂中、激發學生的學習興趣與動機，以及在PBL歷程中，學生學習主動搜尋相關資訊、參與小組討論並與同儕溝通協調與團隊合作，以多元與系統性思考推理、問題解決方式，整合與應用特殊教育與輔助科技專業知能解決案例問題，進而習得輔助科技專業知能。本研究結果對於大學教師在師資培育應用PBL教學法提供一可行之教學實踐參考案例。最後，根據研究結果對教學實務與未來研究提出建議，並說明其研究限制。英文摘要：Purpose: The gap between educational theory and practice is a long-running problem in the field of teacher education. Problem-based learning has been increasingly used and applied in medical education and health care in recent years. However, problem-based learning is seldom emphasized in teacher education courses, the focus of which is the instruction of theoretical knowledge. Problem-based learning allows students to combine theory and practice to solve simulated or real-life case problems, thereby improving their problem-solving ability. This study explored the process and effects of implementing problem-based learning in an assistive technology course offered by the special education department of a national university in Taiwan. Methods: This study employed an action research approach. In total, 39 senior students enrolled in an assistive technology course in the second semester of the 2019 academic year participated in the study. The participants were divided into eight groups, each consisting of 4 or 5 students. The study was conducted in three phases: preparation, practice, and reflection. Three cases were presented to the participants as problem-based scenarios to simulate teaching practice. The effects of problem-based learning were evaluated using quantitative and qualitative methods, including questionnaires, focus group interviews, and reflection logs. Results/ Findings: The students used knowledge acquired in the assistive technology course to collaboratively solve problems related to the cases. Through this student-centered and problem-based learning approach, students assumed the roles of chairpersons, recorders, speakers, and group members. The teacher assumed the role of facilitator, guide, and promoter. Both qualitative and quantitative data indicated that every student provided positive feedback on problem-based learning. Problem-based learning helped the participants to focus and participate in the classroom. It stimulated their interest and motivation to learn, enabling them to search actively for relevant information; participate in group discussions; communicate; collaborate; employ varied and systematic thinking, reasoning, and problem-solving methods; integrate their theoretical knowledge and experience in special education and assistive technology for problem-solving; and subsequently acquire professional assistive technology knowledge and skills. Conclusions/Implications: The results demonstrated the feasibility of problem-based learning in special education teacher education programs. Applying problem-based learning can have positive influences on students and encouraged teachers to reflect on their teaching methods. In conclusion, problem-based learning should be implemented in subjects related to teacher education programs for preservice teacher education students to develop their thinking, reasoning, problem-solving, communication, and teamwork skills. However, the research on problem-based learning in special education requires additional attention and methodological refinement.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202107_46(2).00012篇名：探討啟聰學校學生持有之科學家意象並列篇名：Images of Scientists Held by High School Students With Hearing Impairment作者：林佳穎(Jia-Ying Lin);邱美虹(Mei-Hung Chiu);林佳弘(Jia-Hong Lin)關鍵字：科學家意象;畫科學家測驗;聽覺障礙學生;Draw-a-Scientist Test;scientist image;students with hearing impairment期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：46卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：學生持有之科學家意象可能會影響他們對科學的態度，以及選讀科學相關科系與職業的意願。已有許多研究討論不同族群、性別與年齡的學生持有之科學家意象，但較少研究討論聽障學生持有之科學家意象。本研究認為可能是因為聽障學生的聽力受損，且溝通能力與閱讀能力受限，故使用問卷或晤談皆不易瞭解他們持有之科學家意象。Chambers於1983年發展出「畫科學家測驗」，受試者僅需在圖畫紙上繪製出人像即可進行評估，故本研究使用畫科學家測驗以瞭解啟聰學校學生持有之科學家意象。本研究參考先前研究發展出「現代科學家檢核表」，並將68位啟聰學校高中生的繪圖資料進行檢核與分析。研究結果顯示啟聰學校高中生持有之科學家特徵最多為整潔乾淨、男科學家、中年以上與有好奇心，女科學家特徵與較多正面印象有正相關，男科學家特徵與較多刻板印象有正相關；啟聰學校高中生持有之科學家類型以刻板印象為最多，並發現學生畫出無關科學家的比例偏高；此外也發現女學生持有較正面的科學家意象，男學生持有較負面的科學家意象，不同年級學生持有之科學家意象無顯著差異。經由深度晤談發現啟聰學校高中生對科學較不感興趣，也認為自己較不適合學習科學。最後本研究建議教師在教導使用手語之啟聰學校高中生時，可以多提供關鍵字線索，以及教導學生自我監控之技巧；並能於教學中多融入女科學家故事、科學有益於社會之議題以及探究與實作活動，讓學生產生科學認同感，進而提升學生參與科學的可能性。英文摘要：Purpose: Students' images of scientists may affect their attitudes toward science and their willingness to choose science-related fields for majors or careers. Although many studies have investigated the images of scientists held by students of different ethnic groups, genders, and ages, few studies have discussed the images of scientists held by students with hearing impairment. Due to hearing loss, students with hearing impairment have poorer communication and reading abilities. Understanding such students' images of science and scientists through questionnaires or oral interviews alone is not easy. The purpose of this research was to understand the images of scientists held be students with hearing impairment. Methods: Chambers developed the Draw-a- Scientist Test (DAST) in 1983, where students draw an image of a scientist on drawing paper for evaluation. We used the DAST to understand the images of scientists held by students with hearing impairment. Results/Findings: We developed the Modern DAST Checklist based on previous research and analyzed the data from drawings by 68 senior high school students from a local hearing-impaired school. The results revealed that the attributes perceived of scientists held by the students with hearing impairment included neatness or cleanliness, male sex, middle-age or older, and curiosity. Female scientist sex was positively correlated with more positive impressions, and male scientist sex was positively correlated with stereotypes of scientists. The students tended to have stereotypical images of scientists, and a high percentage of students drew pictures of unrelated scientists. In addition, we discovered that female students held more positive images of scientists, and male students held more negative images of scientists. We observed no significant differences in the images of scientists held by students in different grades. Through in-depth interviews, we learned that the students were uninterested in science and believed that they were not suitable for learning science. Conclusions/Implications: Our findings reveal the images of scientists held by students with hearing impairment and the gender-related differences in such images. Overall, we suggest that, when teaching students who use sign language for learning, teachers provide keyword clues and teach students self-monitoring. Teachers can also tell more stories about female scientists than they typically share, discuss scientific issues that are beneficial to society, and implement more practical activities in classrooms to increase students' sense of scientific identity and enhance the possibility of students participating in science. This study proposed follow-up research directions and practical applications as well as provided suggestions for future related activities.起始頁-結束頁：31-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202107_46(2).00023篇名：中文版慈悲心靈量表應用於臺灣青少年之心理計量分析並列篇名：Psychometric Properties of Chinese Version of Compassion Mind Scales as Applied to Taiwanese Adolescents作者：張芝萱(Chih-Hsuan Chang)關鍵字：青少年;慈悲心靈;慈悲感知與行動;慈悲憂慮;Adolescents;Compassionate Engagement and Action;Compassionate Mind;Fears of Compassion期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：46卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：慈悲與心理健康的關係，近年逐漸受到學術與臨床研究的關注，其概念可擴展資優生情意發展的視域。惟現階段尚無適用於中小學的中文測量工具，因此，本研究進行了兩項國外慈悲量表之中文化工作—慈悲感知與行動量表（The Compassionate Engagement and Action Scale），慈悲憂慮量表（Fears of Compassion Scale），以651位5到12年級學生樣本（包含中小學資優生與普通生），系統的檢驗量表信效度與因素結構，確認其跨文化適用性。結果顯示：一、中文版慈悲感知與行動量表，經驗證性因素發現：「自我慈悲」、「對他人慈悲」、「他人對己慈悲」三個子量表下各包含二因素：慈悲的感知（理情涉入）及行動（實踐智慧）；二、中文版慈悲憂慮量表之三個子量表下各具二因素：「自我慈悲的憂慮」包含「自我疏離」和「嚴以律己」；「對人慈悲的憂慮」包含「心理負擔」與「負面人性」；「他人對己慈悲的憂慮」包含「擔憂失落」和「關係距離」；三、中文版慈悲心靈量表具良好的內部一致性與再測信度；慈悲感知與行動和情緒型態、安全依附及人事智能呈顯著正相關；慈悲憂慮與逃避和焦慮依附呈中高度正相關，與人事智能呈低度負相關；四、透過雙元因子CFA模式，可發現個體的慈悲心靈除了受「自我慈悲」、「對人慈悲」和「他人對己慈悲」等脈絡因素的影響，同時受「慈悲憂慮」、「慈悲感知與行動」特質因素的影響。綜言之，中文版慈悲心靈量表應可適用為測量青少年慈悲心靈構念之研究工具，並可藉此了解資優生的情意發展。最後，提出本量表未來研究與應用之相關建議。英文摘要：Purpose: The relationship between compassion and mental health has gradually attracted academic and clinical interest. Compassion is a sensitive, empathetic, sympathetic and nurturing attitude toward suffering or distress with a commitment to try to relieve it in self and others. It involves caring motivation, distress tolerance, and requires courageous actions. The concept of compassion can enrich the connotation of affective development for gifted students. Nevertheless, no Chinese version of scales for assessing students' compassion exists. Little is known about the development of adolescents' compassion. Therefore, in this study, two scales were translated and examined: Chinese version of Compassionate Engagement and Action Scales (CCEAS) and Chinese version of Fears of Compassion Scale (CFCS). The Chinese Version of Compassion Mind Scales (CCMS) comprises the two scales above. The CCMS provides an integrated assessment about three orientations of compassion competencies and fears: the compassion for others, the compassion from others, and self-compassion. Methods: This study validated the CCMS in Taiwanese adolescents by using a cross-sectional design. The questionnaire samples included 5th-12th grade nongifted students and gifted students (N = 651). Participants completed a range of scales including compassionate engagement and action, fears of compassion, emotional styles, attachment styles, and personal intelligence. The reliability, validity, factor constructs, cross-cultural applicability, and differences between gifted and nongifted students of CCMS were examined systematically. Results/Findings: 1) The CCEAS has three original dimensions: self-compassion, compassion for others, and compassion from others. Each dimension includes the two factors of compassionate engagement and compassionate action. 2) The CFCS includes three original dimensions: fears of compassion for others, with the two factors of psychological burden and negative humanity; fears of compassion from others, with the two factors of worry about loss and relationship distance; and fears of self-compassion, with the two factors of self-isolation and strict self-discipline. 3) The CCMS has acceptable internal consistency and retest reliability. The dimension of compassionate engagement and action is significantly positively correlated with emotional styles, secure attachment, and personal intelligence. Fears of compassion are significantly and positively correlated with avoidant and anxious attachment. Personal intelligence is slightly correlated with compassionate engagement and action and also with fears of compassion. 4) According to a Bifactor confirmatory factor analysis model, the compassion mind is affected not only by the contextual factors of self-compassion, compassion for others, and compassion from others but also by the special factors of fears of compassion and compassionate engagement and action. Fears of compassion are slightly negatively correlated with compassionate engagement and action. Conclusions/ Implications: The CCMS is a valid research tool for measuring the competencies and fears of compassion in adolescents which can be used in research and clinical practice. The CCMS also distinctly discriminates between gifted and nongifted students, thus supporting its specificity. The CCMS further indicates important complex relationships between emotional styles, attachment styles, and personal intelligence. Understanding how to facilitate compassionate engagement and action and inhibit fears of compassion is critical; herein, suggestions based on the results are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：61-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202107_46(2).00034篇名：高中語文學術性向資優班潛在退班傾向學生之抉擇與生涯思考脈絡並列篇名：Career Thinking of Verbally Talented Students in Senior High School and their Decision to Withdraw from Gifted Class作者：陳勇祥(Yung-Hsiang Chen)關鍵字：生涯;資優;語文性向;verbally talented;gifted;career期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：46卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究探討高中語文學術性向資優班學生萌生退班念頭之因及其去留抉擇，並依其生涯取向，分析生涯思考與生涯決定之脈絡。依據研究目的，提出研究問題為：了解語資班學生產生退班念頭的動機背景與衝突發現及調適轉變，並分析其對生涯的覺察反思與生涯決定之影響脈絡。因此，本研究以紮根理論研究取向，透過深度訪談，蒐集研究參與者之去留抉擇與生涯思考的歷程脈絡與現象經驗之資料，以建構其意義內涵。研究參與者為就讀大學四年級學生，且高中就讀語文學術性向資優班，曾有退班傾向但最終未退班者，共13位。其中女性9位，男性4位，平均年齡為21.6歲。結果發現：學生萌生退班念頭與升學體制、學習方式及未來發展有關，亦有認為語資班與其期待不符。而當其抉擇是否退班的過程，發現其中仍有諸多吸引其繼續就讀之處，是引發其在抉擇衝突中能釐清想法的關鍵。此外，大學科系給予研究參與者諸多不同的學習歷程，亦使其理解學習環境與科系及生涯的關聯，非為絕對限制。因此，本研究建議教師應強化覺察力，以及早發現潛在退班傾向學生並尋求適時介入之時間點，同時透過分析學生優勢潛能與表現差距的歷程，引導其思考自我之學習偏好與執行落差的調適方式，並關注其於此一歷程之想法變化，作為語資班之班級經營、課程規劃、行政運作與教學策略等向度調整之參考。英文摘要：Purpose: This study explored the reasons that verbally talented high school students have thoughts of quitting classes and then analyzed the context of career thinking and career decisions based on their future career orientation. The research aims were (1) to understand the motivational background, conflict discovery, and adjustment changes of verbally talented high school students and (2) to analyze participant perceptions of their careers and the context of their career decisions. Methods: With its grounded theoretical research orientation, the study employed in-depth interviewing to collect data on participant decision-making, career thinking process contexts, and phenomenon experience in order to construct meaning and connotation. The participants were fourth-year university students. They had enrolled in a class in high school for verbally talented students, considered quitting the class, but in the end did not quit. The 13 participants (9 women and 4 men) had an average age of 21.6 years. Results/Findings: Students' initiation of quitting the class was related to their entry route, their own learning methods, and their future development, and some believed that the class did not match their expectations. However, when they were deciding whether to quit the class, they considered the many advantages of continuing, which was the key triggering them to clarify their ideas in the conflict of choices. In addition, the university provided the participants with numerous learning journeys, which enabled them to understand the relationship between the learning environment, the department, and their career. Conclusions/Implications: The findings suggest that teachers should guide gifted students to discover their language advantages and express their own characteristics. In addition, the curriculum should combine the personal strengths and language-related experiences of students to enable them to uncover their own strengths and unique characteristics. This method could be used to respond to student learning preferences and could be adjusted in line with the difficulties encountered by students or situations where they were not interested in certain topics. Teachers should also pay attention to the problems encountered by gifted students in their career choices and guide them from the conflicts of ideas and concepts toward discovering perspectives that promote changes in thinking. Therefore, teachers should strengthen their awareness and identify students with thoughts of withdrawing from gifted classes and seek the time for intervention as early as possible. Teachers can analyze the gap between student potential and performance to guide students to think about methods of finding their own advantages. In addition, teachers should note changes in student thinking during decision-making processes and adjust class management, curriculum planning, administrative operations, and teaching strategies in a timely manner.起始頁-結束頁：93-123資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202107_46(2).00045篇名：心智障礙者參與職業探索活動之歷程探究並列篇名：Career Exploration Activities for Individuals with Mental Disorders作者：吳亭芳(Ting-Fang Wu);黃柏華(Po-Hua Huang)關鍵字：心智障礙者;職業探索;職涯發展;career development;career exploration;individuals with mental disorders期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：46卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：心智障礙者由於自身特質或環境的限制，不利其職涯發展，提供各種機會協助探索職業興趣，及未來可能就業方向，應為職涯輔導之重點。目前心智障礙青年職業探索活動處於起步階段，且少有實證研究探究其歷程與對職涯發展的助益。因此本研究以個案為中心，以半結構式題綱，深度訪談18位曾參與職業探索活動的心智障礙者，深入分析其經驗。研究結果呈現心智障礙者職業探索的歷程主要包含（1）初始階段：參與目的以了解個人的職業興趣和喜好為主，並能增進學習經驗；（2）探索階段：透過探索活動改變認知歷程，形成個人知識和職業知識；兩者交互作用下，心智障礙者評估所探索的職類對個人的適配性；（3）改變階段：參與職業探索活動後，活動經驗增進後續就業的準備，包括應用習得的技能於日常生活和對工作的態度有所改變。參與者對於個人職涯發展和生涯規劃的認知調整與行為改變主要呈現三種結果：（1）察覺適合該職種：從表現的結果作為適配與否的關鍵，判斷個人具備投入該職種的條件；（2）覺察不適合該職種：因了解自身能力的限制和偏好，調整未來職涯發展的方向；（3）發現工作潛能：發覺個人優勢能力和特定職種的適配性，作為未來職涯發展的考量。並以四位參與者參與職涯探索的歷程說明此活動對於個人職涯發展的助益與改變。此外，大多數參與者對此活動都給予高度正向評價，認為能滿足其參與動機和目的，認同其對職涯發展的價值，鼓勵推廣並建議將訊息傳遞給相關單位，以及建置網頁來推廣。整體而言，職業探索活動適合對象為離開學校初入社會或是職涯未定者，而非以直接就業為目的者；為增進多元探索的可能性和可及性，連結不同系統的資源是活動成效的關鍵。文末，提出後續研究和實務應用，以及未來辦理相關活動的建議。英文摘要：Purpose: Mental disorders are disadvantageous to individuals' career development. Career counseling should focus on providing opportunities to individuals with mental disorders to explore career interests and possible future employment directions. Career exploration activities for young adults with mental disorders are at the emerging stage, and few empirical studies have explored the process of these activities and their benefits for young adults seeking career development. This study used a qualitative approach to explore the experiences of young adults with mental disorders participating in career exploration. Methods: The researchers invited 18 young adults with mental disorders to share their personal experiences with career exploration activities through semistructured in-depth interviews. A thematic analysis method was used. Data from the interviews were organized into verbatim manuscripts that were systematically analyzed through coding to summarize the meaningful themes and to answer the research questions. Results/Findings: The results indicated that the process of career exploration for individuals with mental disorders included three stages as follows: (1) the initial stage, in which the goal of career exploration was to understand the individual's career interests and preferences and to enhance their learning experience; (2) the exploration stage, in which individuals with mental disorders changed their cognitive schema through the career exploration activities, both in terms of knowledge about their selves and knowledge about work (the participants used this knowledge to assess the suitability of the job they explored); and (3) the changing stage, in which the experience the participants' gained through the activities, including applying their new skills to daily living and changing their attitudes about work, prepared them for subsequent employment. The activities prompted the participants to adopt one of three attitudes regarding their career planning and development : (1) perceiving that they were suitable for the type of job they explored: deciding on the type of job they explored as a future direction for their career based on their performance in the exploration; (2) perceiving that they were not suitable for the type of job they explored: readjusting the future direction of their careers because they understood the limits of their own abilities and their preferences; (3) discovering their potential in the type of job they explored: discovering their personal strengths and considering the type of job they explored as a future direction for their career development. The four participants' career exploration journey also illustrated the benefits of the activities and their effects on the direction of the participants' careers. In addition, the majority of the participants positively evaluated the career exploration activities, believing that the activities helped them to achieve their initial goals and affirming its usefulness for career development. The participants also encouraged promotion of the activities and suggested that their message be relayed to related institutions and that a promotional website be created. Conclusions/ Implications: The career exploration activities were suitable for those who had left school to enter the labor market or for those who had not yet determined the direction of their careers, rather than for those who sought direct employment. The variety and accessibility of the career exploration activities can be improved by incorporating resources from the government's labor, education, and social systems. This study proposed follow-up research directions and practical applications as well as provided suggestions for future related activities.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202103_46(1).00016篇名：平板電腦結合影片示範教學介入包裹對國中重度自閉症學生生活技能之成效並列篇名：Effects of Tablet-based Video Modeling Package on Teaching Life Skills to Junior High School Students with Severe Autism作者：王瑞婉(Jui-Wan Wang);王慧婷(Hui-Ting Wang);鈕文英(Wern-Ing Niew);張正芬(Cheng-Fen Chang)關鍵字：平板電腦;生活技能;國中重度自閉症;影片示範;iPadR;iPadR;life skills;severe Autism;video modeling期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：46卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以兩位國中重度自閉症學生為研究參與者，研究目的為探討以平板電腦結合影片示範教學介入包裹教導三項生活技能－沖泡飲品、洗碗和擦窗戶之成效。研究設計採單一個案研究法之跨行為多試探設計，自變項為平板電腦結合影片示範教學介入包裹，含影片示範、增強、時間延宕、少至多提示系統（口語提示、手勢提示、示範提示、肢體提示）等介入策略，依變項為生活技能表現之工作步驟正確百分比。本研究共分為三個階段進行：基線期、介入期及維持期，以視覺分析作為本研究資料結果的主要分析方法。研究結果發現平板電腦結合影片示範教學介入包裹能提升兩位國中重度自閉症學生的三個生活技能的學習成效，並具有良好的社會效度。平板電腦結合影片示範教學介入包裹對國中自閉症學生學習生活技能有維持成效。研究建議介入包裹應考量學生先備條件調整其介入策略。雖然本介入包裹成效良好，未來若能再發展更符合時間及經濟效率的影片示範教學方式，對現場老師執行教學將更有助益。英文摘要：Learning life skills is challenging for most people with severe autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Video modeling is an evidence-based effective practice employed to teach people with ASD. The recent widespread use of mobile devices has facilitated the implementation of video modeling. However, the use of iPadR-based video modeling for teaching life skills to people with severe ASD has been scarcely studied. Purpose: This study examined the effectiveness of iPadR-based video modeling package, comprising video modeling, reinforcement, time delay, and least to most prompting system, for teaching three life skills, namely drinks making, dish washing, and window cleaning. Furthermore, this study examined the maintenance of the effect. Methods: A single-case, multiple-baseline-probe-across-behaviors design was employed. Two junior high school students with severe ASD participated in the study. The dependent measure was the percentage of the accurate steps taken by participants to learn the life skills. The study had three phases: baseline, intervention, and maintenance phase. To fulfill the objective of a single-case research design, which is to teach mastery even after a functional relationship has been established, additional visual prompts were added to the intervention, in addition to fade procedures for task materials or video prompts for specific steps when the participants needed them to master the skills independently. The primary methods to interpret the effects of the study comprised visual analysis, including trend variability and level comparison among phases and tiers across skills and participants. Results/Findings: A functional relationship was established between the video modeling intervention package and the life skills learning of junior high school students. The study scored high in all interobserver agreements, social validity, and fidelity. Gains from the intervention were maintained over 1 month. Although immediate effect or effect within three points was found, extended intervention was implemented so that participants could eventually master the skills. Conclusions/Implications: This study extended the evidence supporting the effect of video modeling on the life skills learning of individuals with severe ASD. Future research may proactively focus on identifying the goodness of fit between the adjustments to the video modeling intervention and student characteristics. Although the effectiveness was of the video modeling intervention was impressive, future research should investigate the use by practitioners and the cost, benefits, and sustainability of employing video modeling for all learners. Moreover, self-determination of people with severe disability should be highly encouraged in the future, including self-selecting reinforcers, target learning skills, instruction methods, self-monitoring processes, and the social validity of its effectiveness.起始頁-結束頁：29-57資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202103_46(1).00027篇名：那些年，我們一起追的女孩、男孩－兩位自閉症譜系青少年的追愛歷程之敘事探究並列篇名：Those Years, You Are the Apple of My Eyes-A Narrative Research on the Love Process of Two Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorder作者：田統成(Tung-Cheng Tien);于曉平(Hsiao-Ping Yu)關鍵字：自閉症譜系;同性戀;追愛歷程;異性戀;敘事探究;autism spectrum disorders;heterosexuality;homosexuality;narrative research;the process of love期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：46卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在敘探兩位不同性取向自閉症譜系青少年的追愛歷程，含戀愛動機、追求技巧、愛情觀及其歷程脈絡。本研究採敘事探究，透過半結構訪綱與深度訪談蒐集資料並持續閱析文本，以敘寫兩位研究主體的那些年追愛故事。研究結果揭示：單戀哥共四段追愛女孩。他著重顏值及其散發的吸引力，初見好感才有後續可能。追求偏自然建立關係，當暖男伴她左右、送上所需。愛情類型趨友誼式的日久生情，然偏安全保守，愈長大愈難告白。以簡單不多想方式看自身障礙。愛情觀是不強求也不將就、專情包容、愛是簡單喜歡。外交哥共四段追愛男孩。第一段想有人陪；第二段想照顧未社會化的他；第三段渴望被照顧；第四段因對方成熟而值得攜伴，共通點是像男孩的男人。講究主動追求，狂找搭聊、送禮告白。愛情類型為多樣貌：遊戲、奉獻、瘋狂及穩定。曾視自閉症為詛咒，不懂愛裡的應對分際，後認它是麻木禮物。其性向歷經懷疑覺察、測試探索、壓抑混亂及接受認同。愛情觀重點是喜歡而非性別，愛是不可或缺但非全部。兩位研究對象各有擇友偏好、也曾陷入障礙再調適走出、因愛緩解障礙及舉止皆獨有理性思維，亦有全然不同的追愛類型與告白進程。其展現各自課題：單戀哥是「為愛跨越自我舒適圈」，原木訥自我，後溫暖付出。外交哥是「為愛調整步調與性向認同」，曾愛得用力卻無能為力，後調整過激行為和想法，勇於接納同性戀的自己。建議教育人員應重視自閉症譜系者的愛情體驗與其問題，並融入特殊需求課程，協其成長。英文摘要：Purpose: This study explored and analyzed the pursuit of love by two adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) who had different sexual orientations. Aspects of the process, including motivation for love, pursuit skills, concept of love, and changes in the process, were assessed. Methods: This study adopted the narrative research method by employing in-depth and semistructured interviews. Data were collected and subsequently analyzed, and the love stories of the two research subjects were examined. Results/Findings: The study results revealed that Mr. Unrequited had a total of four love stories concerning a girl. He focused on the girl's looks and attractiveness. He became aware of the possibility of being in love when he felt good upon laying his eyes on the girl for the first time. When he pursued the girl, he tended to build a relationship through natural processes. He would observe the girl and wait to chat with her. In addition, he would act affectionately with her and gifts her presents. He was inclined toward loving the girl like a good friend. He pursued love in a secure and conservative manner, and the more his love developed, the more difficult he found confessing to it. He would adjust to the love process through the simple method of not thinking too much about his ASD. ”No insistence and no settlement” was his concept of love, and he was willing to treat the other person with sympathy and tolerance. He believes that love between two individuals who like each other should be simple. Mr. Social had pursued love four times, and was attracted toward men. In his first romantic relationship, he wanted a companion. In the second one, his partner was innocent and had not been socialized, which evoked Mr. Social's instinct to take care of him. In contrast to his second relationship, he longed to be cared for by the other in this third one. In his fourth relationship, he found the other party to be mature and considered being in a relationship with him worthwhile. The common feature among all his lovers was that they were all men who looked or acted like boys. Mr. Social actively pursued love by constantly looking for and chatting with men who interested him. In addition, he gave gifts and directly confessed his love. His style of pursuing love with different people was diverse-from ignorantly ”having fun” in the beginning and simple dedication, passion, and madness to long-term stability. Owing to his ASD, he did not know how to address love in the beginning and, later, felt numb toward love. His process of sexual self-identification had four stages, namely doubt/awareness, test/exploration, suppression/confusion, and acceptance/identification. His concept of love was focused on liking somebody, and their gender was incidental. Furthermore, although he perceived love as indispensable, he did not think of it as the only thing that mattered in life. An analysis of the similarities and differences between the pursuits of love by the two participants revealed that in terms of similarities, they both showed implicit preference toward the conditions of their lovers. Furthermore, they both suffered from ASD but learned to re-adapt themselves. Love was also found to alleviate the symptoms of ASD. Their behaviors when in love highlighted their unique rational thinking. In terms of differences, they demonstrated completely different styles for pursuing and confessing love. Conclusions/Implications: Each of the participants followed different processes in their respective pursuits of love; for example, Mr. Unrequited ”crossed the comfort zone for love.” He was originally dull but later showed his active and gentle side and learned to give and care for others. Mr. Social ”adjusted the pace and identified his sexual identity.” At the beginning, he loved deeply and was helpless. Later, he slowed down and reviewed his excessive behaviors and negative thinking and bravely accepted his homosexual self. We recommend that educators should be aware of the love experiences of those diagnosed with ASD and the problems they face. Furthermore, the courses in the special needs domain must integrate the process of love in the curriculum to help individuals with ASD identify themselves.起始頁-結束頁：59-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202103_46(1).00038篇名：手語經驗對視覺空間心像運作影響之實驗研究並列篇名：The Influence of Sign Language Experience on Imagery Abilities作者：邱倚璿(Yi-Shiuan Chiu)關鍵字：中文;心像產生;心像維持;手語;失聰／聾人;Chinese characters;hearing impaired/deaf;image generation;image maintenance;signed languages期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育研究學刊卷期：46卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：手語運用視覺空間特性呈現文法規則以達成語言溝通，本研究欲探討使用臺灣手語的使用者，相較於未有手語經驗的非手語者，是否在心像產生與心像維持運作上有所不同。本研究的心像實驗作業是以中文數字作提示，要求受試者於4×5方格中形成對應的阿拉伯數字心像，之後延宕一段時間（刺激間距ISI），於方格中的一個細格會出現一個目標項X，受試者需以按鍵判斷目標項位置是否出現在先前產生的心像路徑中。實驗操弄第一個受試者內獨變項為ISI，一組為心像產生（200、400毫秒），另一組為心像維持（800、2000毫秒）；第二個受試者內獨變項為目標項X出現在心像位置，依照筆劃順序先後分為早筆劃與晚筆劃位置，早晚筆畫差異可視為是心像完整性的指標，當有完整的心像時，早晚筆劃的差異便不復存在。實驗邀請24位失聰手語者、19位聽常手語者，與24位聽常非手語者參與，以澄清聽力、手語經驗與心像運作的關係。研究結果發現在心像產生ISI為400毫秒時，失聰手語者、聽常手語者早晚筆劃未有差異，顯示出手語使用者此時已產生完整的心像；在心像維持ISI為800毫秒時，失聰手語者與聽常手語者相較於聽常非手語者有較高的正確率，但在2000毫秒時則表現相似。基於上述結果以及失聰手語者與聽常手語者在心像運作的表現型態相似，本研究結果顯示出臺灣手語經驗與心像運作有關，手語經驗能促使手語者在心像產生與短期心像維持有其運作優勢，同時，手語和空間認知的相互作用關係可以提供更全面的觀點來了解語言如何塑造思想。英文摘要：Purpose: In sign language, visual-spatial spaces are used to represent grammar rules to achieve language communication. This study examined whether the signers who had learned Taiwanese Sign Language (TSL) had different internal mental imagery processing than those who had no experience in sign languages. Methods: In this study, Chinese numerals were employed as probes in the experiment on internal mental images. The participants were required to form mental images corresponding to Arabic numbers in a 4 × 5 grid. After a period of delay (interstimulus interval [ISI]), a target X appeared in one of the grids. The participants had to determine whether the position of the target item appeared in the previously generated mental image path by pressing buttons. The first within-subject variable was ISI. One group of ISI was formed for image generation (200 and 400 ms) and the other group was formed for image maintenance (800 and 2000 ms). The second within-subject variable was the positioning of the target X in the mental image (early-imaged and late-imaged segments). The division of mental images into early-imaged and late-imaged segments was conducted according to the order of strokes in each mental image. Furthermore, on the basis of the assumption of the sequential process in image generation, the difference between early-imaged and late-imaged segments was considered an indicator of the integrity of the mental image. If the participants completed their mental images, the difference between early-imaged and late-imaged segments disappeared. The experiment recruited 24 deaf signers, 19 hearing signers, and 24 hearing nonsigners to clarify the impact of hearing loss and sign language abilities. Results/Findings: The results highlighted that during the image generation with ISI 200 ms, all participants demonstrated superior performance in the early-imaged segment condition. During the image generation with ISI 400 ms, the nonsigners still showed the effects of early-imaged and late-imaged segments. However, no differences were observed among signers in the early-imaged and late-imaged segments. This findings indicated that the signers had already produced a complete mental image by that time. When the mental image was maintained for 800 ms in the image maintenance task, the signers had a higher accuracy than the hearing nonsigners. However, the signers and nonsigners performed similarly when ISI 2000 ms was employed. The deaf signers and the hearing signers demonstrated similar performance patterns in both image tasks, highlighting the critical role played by experience in TSL. Conclusions/Implications: Our findings revealed that experience in sign language proved advantageous for signers in terms of mental image generation and short-term mental image maintenance. The interaction of sign languages and spatial cognition could offer a more comprehensive view of how language shapes the mind.起始頁-結束頁：85-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.6172/BSE.202103_46(1).000401篇名：替換式數學對增進國小數學學習困難學生在除法計算與文字解題之成效並列篇名：Effects of Substituted-Mathematics Instruction on Calculation and Word Problems of Division for Elementary Students with Mathematics Learning Difficulties作者：楊哲宇(Che-Yu Yang);王瓊珠(Chiung-Chu Wang)關鍵字：替換式數學;數學學習困難;除法;計算;文字解題;calculation;division;mathematics learning difficulties;substituted-mathematics ins期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：53期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在探討替換式數學對增進數學學習困難學生的除法計算與文字題學習之成效。研究方法採跨參與者多探測設計，以三位國小中年級以上有數學學習困難學生為研究對象。研究結果顯示：替換式數學介入後，數學學習困難學生在除法計算及文字題學習表現，具有立即成效與維持成效。進一步觀察計算和文字題的表現，發現三名學生在替換式數學介入之後，除法計算正確率有明顯提升以及時間變短的趨勢，但流暢性受限於估商能力，還是不夠自動化。除法文字題之正確性雖較基線期明顯提升，但時間並沒有明顯減少，當正確性與流暢性發展不一時，應先確保正確性後，時間長短才有意義。三名個案針對原本規劃的教學介入方案反應各不相同，研究者在教學過程中有針對其反應替換不同的教學策略，才讓學生的學習得以有成效，顯示替換適合策略在替換式數學教學中可能是極為重要的一環。根據研究結果建議：包括繼續探討計算速度能否提升，替換策略與個案學習特質的交互關係，學習單的設計和替換策略亦可有更多元的想法。英文摘要：This study was aimed to analyze the effects of substituted-mathematics instruction on calculation and word problems of division for elementary students with mathematics learning difficulties. The research method was a multiple probe design across participants. Three participants were 3rd-, 4th-, and 5th-graders with mathematics learning difficulties. Data were presented through graphic method and visual inspection to analyze the effects of substituted- mathematics instruction. The results of this study indicated that substituted-mathematics instruction had immediate and maintenance effects on calculation and word problems of division for the students with mathematics learning difficulties. The intervention was more effective for division calculation than word problems in terms of accuracy and fluency. Three students with mathematics learning difficulties had different responses to substituted- mathematics instruction. Flexible use of substituted strategies was important for successfully executing this math program.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320210600530012篇名：特殊教育師資生在聽障教育實習運用手語教學的專業成長研究並列篇名：A Study on the Professional Growth of Special Education Pre-service Teachers Using Sign Language Teaching in the Deaf Education Practicum作者：楊雅惠(Ya-Hui Yang)關鍵字：特殊教育師資生;聽障;手語;教學專業成長;個案研究;special education pre-service teachers;hearing impairment;deaf;sign language;professional growth of teaching;case study期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：53期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究主要目的為延續師資生學習手語歷程之探究後，繼續探討其運用手語於聽覺障礙教學實習的專業成長之個案研究。本研究以大學聽障教育實習指導教授與特殊學校合作方式，安排24位師資生在國、高中部國文科進行為期九週的教學實習。研究架構參考教學互動模式與教學指標，規劃實習課程的程序為一次教學參觀，二次教學見習，和六週的實地教學實習。師資生（1）採取小組合作模式討論教學課程與教法以及手語的練習；（2）透過特殊學校指導教師的課前指導教案、上臺上課後的教學技能和手語的指導所提供的專業教學經驗；（3）經由同儕間的互助支持與觀摩見習，以及主教者的教學省思等方式，在聽障教育實習運用手語教學的專業成長之歷程。研究結果顯示：（1）師資生在國文科課程運用手語教學時，從開始覺得緊張有挑戰性和難度，到實習結束，學生自覺對於學科教學手語有進步，更精進手語的期待；（2）在學科專業表現則在書寫教案、組織內容、考量聽障學生個別特性、鼓勵聽障學生參與機會、提升師生間互動、有效教學策略增進學生專注力及教學省思等七項教學指標中有呈現正向成長；（3）師資生經由聽障教育專業課程和與特殊學校合作的入班學科實習課程，與聽障學生的教學互動更緊密，有助於在教學專業的成長表現。英文摘要：This research is a continuation of the previous study done by the researcher that investigated special education pre-service teachers' learning experiences of sign language. The purpose of this case study was to explore the professional growth of those pre-service teachers (PSTs) who used sign language during their deaf education practicum. In this study, an university advisor, and practicum supervisors from a special school cooperated in arranging a nine-week field practicum for 24 PSTs to teach Chinese in either a junior high or high school division of a special school. The research used the framework of the interactive teaching model and teaching indicators. The PSTs (1) adopted the model of group cooperation in discussing instruction curriculum, teaching strategies, and practicing sign languages; (2) embraced lesson plans, teaching activities, and sign languages practices guided by their practicum supervisors; and (3) engaged in peer observation feedbacks and self-reflection on teaching. The result of this study found: (1) the PSTs sensed tension and felt that it was a challenging task at the very beginning; however, at the end, they believed that they had made improvements after teaching the subject with the sign language; (2) in the aspect of their performance on pedagogical content knowledge, seven dimensions of teaching indicators had shown positive growth; and (3) the cooperation between special education teacher preparation program and special schools strengthened the classroom interactions between PSTs and students with hearing impairment, which contributed to PSTs' professional growth of teaching.起始頁-結束頁：31-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/2074558320210600530023篇名：生態取向遊戲治療對學齡前疑似注意力不足過動症兒童之職能治療方案發展與成效探究並列篇名：The Occupational Therapy Project Development and Effectiveness Investigation of the Ecosystemic Play Therapy for Suspected Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Preschool Children作者：詹雅淳(Ya-Chun Chan);許育光(Yu-Kuang Hsu)關鍵字：生態取向遊戲治療（EPT）;注意力不足過動症（ADHD）;生態瞬間評估法（EMA）;ecosystemic play therapy (EPT);attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD);ecological momentary assessment (EMA)期刊/會議論文集名稱：特殊教育學報卷期：53期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究針對學齡前疑似注意力不足過動症兒童設計生態取向遊戲治療方案，並進行方案評鑑與探究治療成效及歷程。研究之方案發展以前導研究進行方案評估初探，再修正為正式方案進行正式研究。12對4到6歲疑似注意力不足過動症兒童與其家長參與本研究：實驗組接受6週的生態取向遊戲治療；控制組待排治療。以「注意力缺陷／過動障礙測驗」及「克氏注意力持續度表現測驗第二版」進行前後測及3週後的追蹤。並以生態瞬間評估法讓家長填寫「兒童活動量表」。結果平均出席率為99%。雖然介入前實驗組兒童注意力症狀較控制組兒童稍為嚴重，但組內比較發現實驗組兒童症狀與行為問題進步程度均達顯著（p＜.05）；控制組兒童只有在「遺漏錯誤」、「違規錯誤」、「持續動作」及「反應時間」進步程度達顯著。組間比較發現實驗組兒童之立即介入成效以專注力及日常生活行為問題進步程度顯著優於控制組兒童；保留效果在過動及衝動症狀和日常生活行為問題進步程度達顯著。生態評估法的結果發現實驗組兒童的行為在前三週改善效果最為顯著，並持續進步至追蹤期。研究結論支持生態取向遊戲治療方案對疑似注意力不足過動症兒童之症狀與行為有正向影響。研究依據結果進行討論，並對實務與未來研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：The goal of this study is to develop and examine the effectiveness of an Ecosystemic Play Therapy (EPT) Program for suspected attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) preschool children. The program was developed from a pilot experiment and then a randomized controlled trial was conducted to examine its effectiveness. 12 parent-child dyads were randomly assigned to the experimental group and the waitlist control group. The experimental group received the EPT Program for 6 weeks. Outcomes were measured with the Attention- Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Test and the Conners' Kiddie Continuous Performance Test II at baseline, after treatment, and at follow-up. For each child participant, a parent would complete the Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) protocol with the Activity Level Rating Scales for Parents. The percentage of attendance was 99%. Although the experimental group showed a little more severe inattention symptoms before the treatment, they showed significant improvement in ADHD symptoms and behavior problems, while the control group showed significant improvement in partial symptoms, ”Omissions”, ”Commissions”, ”Perseverations” and ”Hit Reaction Time”. Comparing the differences between the two groups, the experimental group showed significant improvement in attention and behavior after the treatment, and again significant improvement in hyperactive/impulsive symptoms and behavior when reevaluated at the follow-up appointment. EMA results showed the behavior problems of the experimental group improved significantly in the first 3 weeks and continued to the follow-up. In conclusion, the EPT Program has positive effects on suspected ADHD preschool children. Research based on the results to discuss and make recommendations for practice and further studies.起始頁-結束頁：61-97資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：彰化師範大學特殊教育學系DOI：10.3966/20745583202106005300301篇名：新手團體諮商師領導能力發展探究：歷程追蹤、分項比較與學習類型叢集分析並列篇名：Exploring the Leadership Competencies Development of Novice Group Counselors: Cluster Analysis on Process Tracking, Item Comparison, and Learning Styles作者：許育光(Yu-Kuang Kevin Hsu);刑志彬(Chih-Pin Hsing)關鍵字：非結構諮商團體;諮商師培育;團體諮商師;團體諮商督導;團體領導能力;unstructured counseling group;counselor training;group counselor;group counseling supervision;group leadership competency期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：團體諮商為諮商心理師重要之專業能力，於碩士層級新手階段之實務訓練更為專業發展與教學督導之重要課題；兼顧實際實務執行、學習歷程與能力持續評量之調查，能對於新手團體諮商師之領導能力發展有更清晰的了解。本研究歷經5年蒐集61個進行10次之非結構諮商團體，共計117位碩士受訓層級之新手非結構團體諮商師，受邀請於歷程中第一（開始）、四（轉換）、八（工作）、十（結束）等四次填寫「團體諮商領導能力量表」，據以探討在團體歷程之領導能力變化；其中72位具備完整數據作為本研究分析之對象。研究結果發現：（一）新手團體諮商師在八項能力有顯著成長，且在結束階段量表分項領導能力與總分，皆高於量表常模數值；（二）八項團體領導能力在團體歷程趨勢上，可分為「持續緩進」、「中後期緩進」、「前期略降中後期續進」等三種類型；（三）針對歷程領導能力之學習類型進行叢集分析，發現可分為「高自評組」、「趨中自評組」、「低自評組」三組，在學習成效上，「趨中自評組」於八項能力上均達顯著差異，「高、低自評」兩組在改變與行動的能力均未達顯著，「低自評組」在突破過程障礙、結束與強化改變等兩項上亦未達顯著；（四）針對分項能力學習歷程比較，發現在團體建構方面，三組大致能持續緩進或初期持平而中後續進；在歷程推進深化方面，「趨中、低自評」兩組大致能持續緩進或初期持平而中後續進，但「高自評組」在初期有緩降而中後期才續進的現象；在個體改變介入方面，三組大致呈現初期持平或緩降的現象，而在中後階段「高自評組」在深化個體的能力、「低自評組」在改變與行動的能力還呈現反折的下降狀況。研究依據結果，從培育團體諮商師、教學與督導實務、研究面向等角度進行討論並提出相關建議。英文摘要：As group counseling has been validated as a therapeutic working model, it was considered one of the fundamental abilities of counseling related professionals by the Council for Accreditation of Counselling and Related Educational Programs in 2015 and is also considered a compulsory professional credit to be obtained within the domestic training courses in becoming a counselors in Taiwan. Therefore it is important to focus on the development of counseling profession and teaching supervision during the practical training of master level counselors to guarantee group counseling skills as one of the most important professional abilities for counselors. To better understand the development of leadership competencies of novice group counselors, it is important to consider both the actual practice of group counseling as well as the continuous investigation into the learning process and competencies of novice group counselors. This study utilizes the 'Group Leadership Competencies Scale' constructed by Wu and Hsu (2012, 2015) to focus on the exploration of unstructured counseling group leadership competencies. The connotation of eight group leadership competencies include: the competency to change and take action, the competency to facilitate cohesion in the group, the competency to intensify the group, the competency to guide and propel process, the competency to enhance individual, the competency to build the norm of interaction, the competency to breakthrough process obstacles and the competency to intensify learning and acquisition; the changes in competency during the four stages of group process can be observed to provide reference for understanding the leadership competencies of novice group counselors. The four objectives of this study can be summarized as follow: (1) the overview and analysis of novice group counselors' leadership competencies as a whole: an exploration into the training process and the state of the progress of overall competencies. (2) the analysis of process change of novice group counselors' various leadership competencies: exploration of the state of progress of various abilities during process. (3) The cluster analysis of novice group counselors' leadership competencies learning style: investigation of various learning styles and overall performance existing in novice group counselor community through the change in practical leadership abilities. (4) the analysis of process change of various leadership competencies of novice group counselors with different learning styles: exploration of the progress during process of novice group counselors in different groups of learning styles. To answer the objectives of this study, the researchers collected data of 61 unstructured counseling group which ran for 10 sessions over the past five years with a total of 117 master level novice unstructured group leader counselors; the participating novice group counselors have all undergone 18 hours of unstructured group training course and consented to the setting of this study (to be videotaped during group process, writing up group records after each session and receive practical group supervision every week as the group proceeded). Group counselors were invited to fill out the 'group counseling leadership competencies scale' after the first session (beginning), fourth session (transformation), eighth session (working) and the tenth session (ending) and the data was used to assess the change in group process leadership competencies; 72 counselors out of 117 completed all required data and were chosen to be the object of this study. The study found that: (1) Novice group counselors show significant improvement in eight competencies and expressed higher than the scale's norm in sub-item and total score at the ending stage. (2) There are three types of process trend: 'continuous gradual progress', 'mid to end stage gradual progress' and 'lower at early stages but gradually increases at mid to end stages' of the eight group leadership competencies. Only the competency to intensify the group was observed in the 'continuous gradual progress' trend category and this type of leadership competencies will grow with the group as it proceeds and show significant improvement during the four stages of group process reaching statistically significant difference. The 'mid to end stage gradual progress' trend category showed five different competencies: the competency to facilitate cohesion, the competency to guide and propel process, the competency to enhance individual, the competency to build the norm of interaction and the competency to breakthrough process obstacles; these competencies were higher at the transformation stage than the beginning stage but did not reach statistical difference between the two stages; the significant difference was rather seen after the group entered working stage. The 'lower at early stages but gradually increases at mid to end stages' trend category reflects on the competency to change and take action and the competency to end and strengthen change; although both competencies belong to the third stage of group process (but the difference analysis did not reach statistical significance between the beginning and transformation stage). (3) When cluster analysis was carried out on the learning styles of process leadership competencies, the participants could be divided into three self-evaluation groups (SEG): 'high self-evaluation group', 'central-tendency self-evaluation group' and 'low self-evaluation group'. Regarding learning effectiveness, the central-tendency self-evaluation group reach significant difference in all eight competencies but the high and low self-evaluation groups did not reach significant difference in the competency to change and take action; the low self-evaluation group did not reach significant difference in both the competency to breakthrough process obstacles and the competency to end and strengthen change. (4) The high self-evaluation group expressed subjective high effectiveness in group leadership competencies in the beginning but dropped during the transformation stage and raised significantly during working stage and showed a smaller amplitude of rise during the ending stage The low self-evaluation group showed low subjective effectiveness in group leadership competencies at the beginning and dropped further during transformation stage; great improvement in the competencies were observed during working stage and continued to improve during the ending stage. The central-tendency self-evaluation group showed median subjective effectiveness in group leadership competencies but showed linear rise in subjective group leadership competencies during the transformation, working and ending stages and showed significant rise after the transformation stage. In addition, by comparing the learning process of individual competencies, in regards to the construction of group, all three SEGs showed either continuous slow growth all the way or leveling at the beginning and rise at middle to later stages. In regards to the advance and intensification of process, the central-tendency and low self-evaluation groups showed continuous slow growth all the way or leveling at the beginning and rise at middle to later stages whereas the high self-evaluation group showed decline at the beginning then rise again after the middle to later stages. On the aspect of individual change intervention, all three SEGs showed leveling or slow decline at the beginning but as the group reaches middle to later stages, the high self-evaluation group's competency to enhance individual and the low self-evaluation group's competency to change and take action even showed a reflexed decline.According to the results of this study, the overall leadership competencies and training process of novice group counselors may include aspects such as the outline of leadership competencies development, facilitated teaching and substantial benefits. On the aspects of the process of change and improvement in various leadership competencies, all of the eight competencies showed significant improvement at the ending stage (only the competency to enhance individual did not reach significant difference at the ending and working stages). This finding is a confirmation that the learning of various competencies can be positively predicted in a complete unstructured group process and the leadership of unstructured group can be considered as an effective way of training for group leadership competencies, only that different competencies may express different changing trends at different stages of group process. The examining of leadership competency learning styles and process change of each leadership competency allows for the exploration of the connotation and precautions for groups at the beginning and middle to later stages for novice group counselors of different self-evaluation levels. Finally, the researchers provided relevant suggestions for the learning of novice group counselors, the training of group leaders by counseling agencies, how governmental organizations could help, and the future research possibilities.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).00012篇名：具備心理師證照之國中小專任輔導教師專業認同內涵探究並列篇名：Professional Identity of Teacher-Counselors with a Psychology License in Elementary and Junior High Schools作者：刑志彬(Chih-Pin Hsing);許哲修(Che-Hsiu Hsu);田秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Shelley Tien);許育光(Yu-Kuang Kevin Hsu)關鍵字：心理師證照;生涯轉換;專業成長;專業認同;學校輔導教師;psychology license;career transition;professional development;professional identification;guidance counselor期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：臺灣國中小學校輔導工作在投入許多專業人力後，逐漸落實三級輔導分工；然而現況中有許多輔導教師同時擁有心理師的證照，此類型雙專業認可之輔導人員對於自身位置與專業認同等議題，值得深入探究。本研究目的在理解具雙專業輔導人員對於學校輔導工作的處境、認同、以及困境與因應，邀請8位具雙專業的輔導人員進行深度訪談，並且透過內容分析法，進一步探討生涯轉換的徑路與專業認同狀態。研究結果發現：受訪者對於輔導教師的認同是薪資待遇獲得穩定保障、周圍親友的社會期待，而對心理師則較認同工作模式，有心理師業務單純性高、心理師的專業光環有助於生態系統合作。而在兩者工作角色上面，存在有工作模式與系統角色的差異，其中受訪者自覺兩種角色差異在於業務複雜度、維持界線程度、理解個案角度，而系統他人覺得兩種角色差異在於專業能力、貼近學校生態系統能力，而具雙專業輔導人員決定讓某一種角色發揮的比重情形則是會考量情境及時機；因此，具雙專業輔導人員的專業認同狀態可以分為四種型態交替，包含：「入境隨俗：輔導教師認同為主，壓縮心理師的認同」、「名實相異：外在雖然是輔導教師，但內在以心理師認同為主」、「因時制宜：依時空調整兩種認同的比例與出現方式」、「兼容並蓄：整合輔導教師與心理師兩種角色的認同，產生全新的認同」，在兩種專業角色之間協調、折衝、分工與合而為一，形成多元的專業認同狀態。而其中也存在心理師與輔導教師競爭又須合作的關係，此亦成為具雙專業輔導人員整合並找尋安在位置的重要課題。研究針對結果進行討論，並提出對於專業發展與未來研究之相關建議。英文摘要：Counseling in elementary and junior high schools in Taiwan was limited due to a shortage of professionals in the field, but as school counseling work gradually gained recognition, legislation was enacted to incorporate professionals from different fields into school counseling through the construction of a framework of school counseling work with three levels: development, intervention, and treatment under the Tertiary Prevention System. In the current system, many teacher-counselors possess a counseling license as well as a teaching license. As such, they are both teachers responsible for secondary intervention counseling work and counselors responsible for tertiary treatment counseling work. If these dual professionals experience difficulty in identification, it may halt their professional development (Cinotti, 2015). Therefore, understanding the connotation of professional identification for these teachers is essential (Myers et al., 2002; Weinrach et al., 2011). Previous findings indicated that internal factors, external factors, and professional identification development processes jointly affect one's professional identification on three levels. How these dual-profession teacher-counselors with counseling a license consider the connotation of professional identification through these three levels is an indispensable aspect of their professional development. Embedded in Taiwan's unique division system for counseling work, this study examines the professional development and formation of identification of dual-profession counseling professionals. This study was aimed at understanding the context, identification, and dilemmas of dual-profession counselors in schools. Eight dual-profession counselors participated in in-depth interviews on their education background, how they perceive their position in the school counseling system, and their views and experiences regarding tertiary prevention counseling work in schools before they became a teacher-counselor, after entering a counseling-related postgraduate course, after obtaining the counseling license, and after assuming the role of a teacher-counselor. Their career transition path and professional identification were explored through content analysis of data from interviews. The interviews covered topics such as the path to developing the dual profession, factors contributing to their identification as ”teacher-counselor,” factors contributing to their identification as ”counselor,” the professional identifications of the two career paths, their current professional identification, and how the interviewees cope with dilemmas. Four major paths of career development were identified: 1) after obtaining a master's degree, obtaining the counseling license and then entering schools as a teacher-counselor; 2) obtaining the teaching license after graduating from university and then completing a master's program to obtain the counseling license; 3) becoming a counselor first and working as teacher-counselor and later obtaining a teaching license while working; and 4) after obtaining a master's degree after working as teacher-counselor, becoming a counselor, and then returning to become a teacher-counselor later. Most of the interviewees worked longer as a teacher-counselor than as a counselor. The interviewees pursued the teacher-counselor career because the salary is stable, with high social expectations from relatives and friends. They identified with being a counselor because of the professionalism in professional work and the professional aura is beneficial for the cooperation of ecosystems. Work mode versus systemic role was discussed; some interviewees identified differences in roles as the complexity of professional work, degree of boundary maintenance, and angle of understanding the client; whereas others perceived the difference in the two roles as professional ability and the ability to adhere to the school's ecosystem. For dual-profession counselors, the emphasis on the two roles may vary depending on the context. Therefore, the professional identification of the dual-profession counselors alternated, with four types as follows: ”when in Rome, do as Romans do: identify with teacher-counselor and suppress the counselor identity”; ”inconsistent: taking up the role of teacher-counselor but identify with counselor more”; ”adaptation: adjust the proportion and representation of the two identities depending on the time and place”, and ”inclusive: integrate the two identifications and form a new identification, where one coordinates and negotiates between the two professional roles and forms a multidisciplinary professional identification.” Their identification crisis generally arose when they experienced inner struggle and based on considerations with referred clients and the expectations of others in the system, which also includes the cooperation of the two roles at a professional level and a subtle, unseen competitive relationship between the two roles. The professionals employed the following four modes to respond to their professional identification dilemmas: ”professional connection: participate in professional training courses”; ”retreat in order to advance: redefining the meaning of systemic cooperation”, ”seeking similarities from differences: starting dialogue with people with the same background”; and ”mental segmentation: taking up the role of counselor outside the school.” This has also become an important issue when dual-profession counselors attempt to integrate their roles and navigate their place in the system. The results indicate that when teacher-counselor professionals choose between a career as a counselor and one as a teacher-counselor, they favor the second one due to realistic considerations, although some would prefer a career as a counselor due to its high level of professionalism. The difference in professional identification suggests that the training and supervision of teacher-counselors and counselors should be segmented. The ”professional identification dilemma” and response to it reflects the dilemma of the professional themselves and the expectations of others regarding the dual profession. The results also indicate that elementary and junior high school teacher-counselors are more likely to develop the professional identification dilemma than senior high school guidance counselors. The professional career development path reflects how professionals with various job tenures respond to the professional identification dilemma-hence, the development of different states of professional identification. A dual-profession professional would tend to ”go with the flow” of the school environment or accept the inconsistency between their job title and the content of the work they perform, but as one gradually works through the breaking-in period, one may adopt a professional identification that is best suited to the school environment or find a balance between the two professions while performing the job. Regarding the redefinition and reexamination of the professional identification of these teacher-counselor professionals, both they and their supervisors should pay close attention to the issue of identification, so that they can find their position in the system rather than splitting the options into two or limiting them to one role. Teacher-counselor professionals should be assisted in assimilating similar values within the professions and adjusting for the differences between the two. The contribution of this study is its depiction of the connotation of the professional identity of teacher-counselor professionals. It provides a reference for teacher-counselor professionals choosing career paths and draws attention to the welfare of teacher-counselor professionals. The paper concludes with suggestions for practice, additional research, and professional training.起始頁-結束頁：37-60資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).00023篇名：大專院校學生性侵害受害經驗調查：心理影響、求助行為與體制背叛感並列篇名：Sexual Assault Victimization Among Taiwanese College Students: Psychological Impact, Help-Seeking Behavior, and Institutional Betrayal作者：王麗容(Lih-Rong Wang);黃冠儒(Kuan-Ju Huang)關鍵字：心理創傷;性侵害;校園性侵害;體制背叛感;trauma;sexual assault;campus sexual assault;institutional betrayal期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：校園性侵害近年來獲得許多關注，國內外皆開始重視此議題的嚴重性以及校方的處置狀況。校方的不當作為可能導致受害者的體制背叛感，使性侵害創傷更加惡化。本研究利用網路問卷調查全臺灣大專院校學生（含研究生）的性侵害受害現況，以及性侵害的心理影響、求助行為與體制背叛感。在617名學生中，有34名（6%）在上大學後有性侵害受害經驗，其中加害者多為校內、男性，受害者則沒有性別差異。在心理影響方面，性侵害受害者有較高的憂鬱及焦慮症狀，也有一定程度的創傷症狀。在求助行為方面，有70%的受害者曾經尋求身邊親友協助，但僅23%尋求正式管道協助，而對於校園通報體制的認知在其中扮演重要的角色。在體制背叛感方面，受害者最常感受到難以通報自身經驗、學校沒有足夠的預防措施以及校方否認自己的經驗，但體制背叛感與心理症狀之間的關聯仍有待更多研究。在此脈絡下，大學校園必須負起預防與處遇性侵害事件的體制性責任，以保障學生的心理健康與生涯發展。英文摘要：Sexual assault on campus has received considerable media and academic attention. Sexual assault has substantial long-term impacts on mental health, including depression, anxiety, posttraumatic stress, substance abuse, sleep disturbance, and suicide (Black et al., 2011; Campbell et al., 2009; Smith & Freyd, 2013; Wang et al., 2014). Despite its psychological outcomes, relatively few survivors seek help from formal support networks (e.g., hospitals, sexual violence prevention centers, university counseling centers, and police), although many seek support from friends and family (Krebs et al., 2007, 2016; Sinozich & Langton, 2014; Wang et al., 2012). Furthermore, in response to coverage of the mistreatment of sexual assault survivors, researchers throughout the world have begun to examine how universities respond to sexual assault and its consequences (McCaskill, 2014). Institutional failures to respond to sexual assault cases (e.g., insensitive investigative practices) can result in secondary victimization, which may have serious impacts on a student's mental health and career development (Campbell et al., 2009). In particular, institutional betrayal theory posits that wrongdoings perpetrated by university agencies (e.g., denying the survivor's experiences or punishing them in some way) can cause feelings of institutional betrayal, exacerbating the sexual trauma experienced by survivors (Smith & Freyd, 2013, 2014). Approximately 20 years have passed since the implementation of the Gender Equity Education Act, which stipulates how schools at different levels should respond to sexual violence cases on campus. However, no study in Taiwan has systematically examined the psychological impacts of and university reactions to sexual assault among college students. The present study thus investigated (1) psychological impacts and (2) help-seeking behaviors with regard to sexual assault among college students, and, more crucially, (3) the prevalence and consequences of instances of institutional betrayal. In all, 617 Taiwanese undergraduate and graduate students (45% female students, 81% were heterosexual, mean age = 23.14 years) completed an online survey including measures of sexual assault experiences (Sexual Experiences Survey-Short Form Victimization; Koss et al., 2006), depression (Patient Health Questionnaire, Cronbach's α = .89; Kroenke et al., 2001), anxiety (Generalised Anxiety Disorder Assessment, Cronbach's α = .91; Spitzer et al., 2006), posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD; Posttraumatic Stress Reaction Index-Short Form, Cronbach's α = .95; Wang, 2010), their willingness to report future assault to the campus reporting system (i.e., ”Would you report future sexual victimization to your university or teachers?”), and demographics (e.g., age, gender, and sexual orientation). They also responded to an open-ended question regarding factors that might encourage/discourage the reporting of sexual victimization to their university. The responses were categorized by two independent coders with high interrater reliability (mean Cohen's κ = .84, range = .73- .93). Additional questions were administered if respondents reported being victimized, including their help-seeking behaviors after the assault (i.e., ”Whom did you seek help from after the assault?”) as well as experiences of institutional betrayal by their university (Institutional Betrayal and Support Questionnaire Version 1, Cronbach's α = .94; Rosenthal et al., 2016). In the survey, 34 (6%) respondents reported one or more experiences of sexual assault while attending college, and most of the cases were on campus and conducted by male perpetrators, with both genders equally likely to be victimized (X2(1, N = 617) = 0.94, p = .33). Compared with heterosexuals (5%), non-heterosexual students (9%) were more likely to report sexual assault victimization (X2(1, N = 617) = 4.20, p = .04). Regarding negative psychological outcomes, sexual assault survivors reported more anxiety and depression symptoms (both p ＜ .001) than did non-survivors; survivors also experienced posttraumatic symptoms. Among the 30 survivors who answered questions regarding help-seeking behaviors, 21 (70%) had sought help from classmates (n = 13), friends (n = 7), family members (n = 5), or a partner (n = 1). By contrast, only seven (23%) had sought help from formal support networks, such as their university or teachers (n = 4), university counseling centers (n = 2), or the local domestic violence and sexual assault prevention center (n = 1). Six (20%) survivors had not told anyone about the event. Furthermore, female students and survivors were less willing to report future sexual victimization to their university or teachers (both p ＜ .02). Through analysis of the open-ended responses, we identified five factors that influence colleges student willingness to report a case to their school, namely the characteristics of the case (12%), perpetrator's identity (14%), survivor's feelings (9%), characteristics of the university (50%), and social relationships and face (15%). For institutional betrayal, the most common inadequate reactions from the university included ”making it difficult to report the experience” (60%), ”not taking proactive steps to prevent this type of experience” (53%), and ”denying his/her experience in some way” (50%). Unlike in previous research, we observed little evidence of the psychological consequences of institutional betrayal. Institutional betrayal was unrelated to depression (r = .36, p = .052), anxiety (r = .33, p = .08), PTSD (r = .30, p = .10), and willingness to report future assault (r = .06, p = .76). More studies are required to examine the relationship between institutional betrayal and psychological symptoms. Sexual assault is a serious problem for Taiwanese college students. Male students were equally likely to be victimized, which is at odds with previous findings (e.g., Conley et al., 2017; Hines et al., 2012). Most research in Taiwan has focused on female sexual survivors; more attention should be paid to male survivors. The situation of non-heterosexual students must also be considered, as they face higher risk of sexual assault. The psychological impacts of sexual assaults are significant, but survivors rarely formally report their case to the university. Creating a university reporting system with accessibility, confidentially, trust, and fairness as well as improving student attitudes toward the university are urgent concerns. Much research is required on this topic. Different types of institutional betrayal experiences were reported by the sexual survivors in this study. Even for those who did not seek help from the university, a hostile campus climate can cause a feeling of betrayal. However, the relationships between institutional betrayal and psychological symptoms or help-seeking behaviors are unclear, which may be due to the small sample size of survivors (n = 30). Colleges and universities should nevertheless be aware of these negative experiences and the feelings of sexual survivors. Future research should examine connections among the variables in larger representative samples. The study had limitations. First, the survey used convenience sampling; thus, our findings cannot be understood to indicate the ”prevalence” of sexual assault among Taiwanese college students. Second, we did not examine the effects of the perpetrator–victim relationship on sexual trauma. If the perpetrator was a teacher, the unequal power relations may result in more severe institutional betrayal and frustration. Future research should examine the impacts of sexual assault in different interpersonal contexts. Third, this study did not conduct university-level analyses. The roles of campus climate and culture in a given university and how they influence survivor behaviors and attitudes should be considered. Finally, some respondents directly mentioned the word ”face” in their open-ended responses. The fear of losing face may be a key cultural factor when Taiwanese survivors decide whether to formally report a case. Future research should examine the impacts of sexual assault in different contexts as well as consider the influences of culture.起始頁-結束頁：61-84資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).00034篇名：喪親者與逝者關係之轉化及哀傷調適之研究：以與逝者對話活動為例並列篇名：Transformation of Relationship Between the Bereaved and Deceased and Promotion of Grief Adjustment: Activity Involving Conversations with the Deceased作者：羅耀明(Yao-Ming Lo)關鍵字：哀傷調適;客體關係理論;持續連結;逝者;grief adjustment;object relations theory;continuing bonds;deceased期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究發現華人喪親者雖透過喪儀平台，持續與逝者連結來療癒哀傷，但有些喪親者可能因諸多外在因素而長年壓抑哀傷表達，且與逝者處於不和諧關係。根據東西方文獻指出，表達哀傷及與逝者連結可作為哀傷調適之策略，故本研究將之融入與逝者對話活動。本研究目的在探討喪親者參與與逝者對話活動前後，轉化其與逝者關係及哀傷調適之情形。本研究採質性取徑，以3次深度訪談5位喪親多年之中高齡者，蒐集其參與與逝者對話活動前後之資料，以詮釋學分析資料。本研究結果：（一）受訪者參與本活動前已持續多年哀傷，且與逝者維持不和諧關係；在參與本活動後，哀傷獲得調適，與逝者關係轉化為和諧關係；（二）本活動轉化哀傷及與逝者關係之因素為：在允許哀傷之安全教學環境，本活動提供回憶逝者及與逝者對話之平台，使其有機會經驗與表達哀傷，並喚起與創造好的內在客體的逝者；而正念呼吸有協助其放鬆與覺察。本研究發現：（一）喪親者的哀傷和逝者的不和諧關係密切關聯，對長年哀傷者，與逝者連結的華人喪儀，可能缺乏表達哀傷之安全社會環境；（二）本活動提供此環境，協助其表達哀傷，並與逝者有正向的連結，進而與逝者轉化為和諧關係或完整的客體關係，並獲得哀傷調適，而此關係也持續伴隨喪親者。英文摘要：Most grief theories have been proposed by Western scholars, and Taiwanese studies about coping with grief are primarily based on Western theories. However, death and grief in Taiwanese society are primarily influenced by Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism. In recent years, Taiwanese psychologists have proposed that Confucian societies such as Taiwan value harmony and balanced relationships with the deceased, spirits, and deities. Therefore, the bereaved have an ethical responsibility to perform a series of funeral rituals and to pray for deities to provide guidance to the deceased's soul, such that the deceased can become a ”deity” who protects the bereaved; otherwise, the deceased becomes a spirit, and the bereaved family cannot be at ease. In addition, funerals can catalyze the expression of grief and allow relatives to interact and provide support. After the deceased becomes a deified ancestor, the bereaved family worships the deceased regularly to cope with unresolved emotions and obtain blessings. Psychologists have proposed that, in Confucian societies, the goals of grief healing include ensuring that the bereaved achieves harmony and balance; the harmony of the relationship among the deceased, spirits, and deities is used to assess the grieving process and aid the bereaved in finding inner harmony. Per object relations theory, mourning repairs the damages loss causes to internal objects. Objects can be good or bad, and the study of object relations considers the interaction between the self and internal or external objects. Introjecting good objects is the foundation of positive object relations; individuals can think of these good internal objects and be reminded that good things exist even when the individuals suffer. The self eventually integrates the good and bad parts of the self and the object, achieving a complete object relationship. However, some individuals may be unable to develop a complete object relationship. Therefore, this study extends the interpretation of object relations theory as follows: When a bereaved individual introjects a deceased individual as a bad internal object associated with mostly bad object images, ideas, fantasies, feelings, and memories, the bereaved individual may continue to grieve because of continuing bonds. Nevertheless, if the bereaved individual can reminisce or introject good objects related to the deceased individual and integrate good and bad objects, then a complete object relationship can be developed. Therefore, this study considers grief derived from bereavement to be a response to a disharmonious relationship with the deceased and assumes the necessity of funeral rituals or other means of achieving a harmonious relationship. Although studies have indicated that the funeral rituals practiced in Confucian societies can help bereaved individuals to release their grief and maintain a harmonious relationship with the deceased, some bereaved individuals may experience grief for years because of many external factors (such as the rules of funeral rituals and social norms) and thus maintain a disharmonious relationship with the deceased. Studies have found that bereaved individuals have a tacit understanding of grief expression and follow emotional rules for expressing grief. Because bereaved individuals must account for the feelings of others and a multitude of external factors, they are unlikely to talk about deceased individual or express grief to family members and other people. Therefore, after the funeral period, most bereaved individuals convert their grief into self-repression and individual relief. Both Eastern and Western sources state that the expression of grief and maintenance of bonds with deceased individuals are strategies for coping with grief; therefore, the present study incorporated these concepts into an activity in which a bereaved individual engages in a conversation with the deceased. Studies have indicated that experiential death education is superior to didactic death education. Therefore, the present study adopted experiential death education. We divided the activity into three parts associated with a specific objective: knowing the deceased, reminiscing, and conversing with the deceased. By achieving these objectives, a bereaved individual might share a bereavement experience as well as stories and good memories of the deceased by creating a safe environment to experience and express grief. In our activity, a bereaved individual is blindfolded and instructed to breathe and relax with mindfulness and to imagine walking toward the door at the center of the universe. Upon reaching and opening the door, the deceased individual appears in front of the bereaved individual and takes a form determined by the bereaved individual's imagination (which incorporates introjections of internal objects). The bereaved individual can then express their thoughts to the deceased and receive or feel the thoughts of the deceased. After participating in this activity, the bereaved individual is instructed to write down the thoughts received from the deceased individual. The present study examined the transformation of the relationship between the bereaved and deceased individual and the grief adjustments made by the bereaved while participating in this activity. A qualitative methodology was applied in the present study. A study sample comprising five participants (four women and one man) aged between 45 and 55 years was recruited. Data were collected using in-depth interviews and analyzed using hermeneutic analysis. The results were as follows. (1) Before participating in this activity, the participants had experienced grief for years and had disharmonious relationships with the deceased; however, by participating in the activity, they adjusted their grief, and their relationships with the deceased became harmonious. (2) The transformation of the relationships between bereaved individuals and the deceased can be attributed to the safe learning environment created during the activity, which allowed the bereaved to express their grief, recall their memories of the deceased, and converse with deceased; these processes resulted in opportunities for the bereaved to create and evoke good internal objects associated with the deceased. In addition, mindfulness and breathing helped them to release their thoughts and emotions and maintain a sense of awareness. The findings of the present study are as follows. (1) Unresolved grief is often closely related to a disharmonious relationship with the deceased. For individuals who had been mourning for years, the culture of mourning rituals, through which they maintained a relationship with the deceased, was not a safe social environment for expressing grief. (2) The activity provides an environment for individuals to express their grief, establish a positive connection and converse with the deceased, transform their relationship with the deceased into a harmonious or complete object relationship, and achieve grief adjustment. Taiwanese psychologists have proposed that bereaved individuals can participate in grief healing and find peace through mourning rituals; however, over time, such rituals may gradually become insufficient or be ignored. Conversing with the deceased not only helps bereaved individuals to repair their relationships with the deceased but also establishes an interpersonal network through which bereaved individuals can work through their grief. These findings support the implementation of grief adjustment-related support measures for bereaved individuals and warrant the further investigation and development of grief adjustment activities.起始頁-結束頁：85-107資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).00045篇名：婚姻平權議題之支持方與反對方的心理特性差異：以字詞分析為取向並列篇名：Psychological Differences Between Opponents and Proponents of Same-Sex Marriage: The Linguistic Analysis Approach作者：林瑋芳(Wei-Fang Lin);黃金蘭(Chin-Lan Huang);李怡青(I-Ching Lee)關鍵字：字詞分析;婚姻平權法案;動機歷程;認知歷程;Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC);same-sex marriage;motivation;cognitive process期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：婚姻平權法案是近年臺灣社會受到高度重視的社會議題，透過全民的積極參與發聲，支持方與反對方雖多有機會交流彼此的想法，目前仍無法形成共識。針對支持方與反對方的衝突磨合，本研究嘗試透過字詞分析的角度切入，以字詞使用頻率表徵個體的心理特性與思考歷程，探討支持方與反對方在人我界線、動機歷程及認知特性上之差異。研究一蒐集60篇與婚姻平權有關之媒體投書和報導，支持與反對立場文本各半，以檢驗支持方與反對方在字詞使用頻率之差異；研究二則以研究一之特定字詞使用頻率，透過羅吉斯迴歸檢驗立法院公聽會發言人對婚姻平權法案之立場為支持或反對之預測力。研究結果大致與研究假設相符，意即相較於反對方，支持方較不以伴侶性別為同性或異性，畫分明確的內、外團體，更傾向將所有個體一視同仁；也較容易受到強化社會關係聯結之趨動，而較不重視權力關係的鞏固；在論述表達上，亦呈現較高的認知複雜度。據研究者所知，本研究為國內少數以字詞分析研究取向，探討婚姻平權法案之支持方與反對方，在心理特性與思維特性上之差異的實徵研究論文。期能透過本研究拋磚引玉，從人我關係、動機歷程及思維特性的角度，嘗試理解支持方與反對方的歧異，因瞭解而更能有效對話溝通，早日實踐真正平等的社會正義。英文摘要：Despite being the first Asian country to legalize same-sex marriage, same-sex marriage continues to be controversial in Taiwanese society. Extensive research has attempted to explain attitudes toward same-sex marriage on the basis of religion, gender, and stereotypes. Few studies, however, have focused on the psychological differences between opponents and proponents of same-sex marriage. We adopted the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) method to examine the psychological differences between these two camps. The LIWC method was developed by Pennebaker and his research team and has since become a widely used computer-aided text-analysis method. The essential assumption of the LIWC method is that word usage in certain categories serves as a language marker that reflects an individual's focuses, thoughts, feelings, and psychological state. Given that same-sex marriage is still a controversial topic in Taiwan's society, individuals may feel pressured to truly express their attitudes and thoughts. An advantage of the LIWC method is that it ignores context; only word count is used for indices, which could help reveal individuals' inner psychological processes. The present research used language markers to understand individuals' self-other boundaries, motivations, and cognitive processes. We argue that opponents of same-sex marriage have a clear self-other boundary; they view heterosexual individuals as an ingroup, and non-heterosexual individuals, an outgroup. Accordingly, we hypothesized that relative to proponents, opponents tend to use fewer first-person singular and plural pronouns (indicating less self-involvement and shared identity, respectively) and more third-person plural pronouns (indicating a clear distinction between heterosexuality and non-heterosexuality) when discussing topics involving same-sex marriage. Second, we analyzed the motivations of opponents and proponents. Previous studies of political ideology have revealed that those holding liberal views emphasize affiliation whereas those with conservative views emphasize power. Those with conservative views tend to perceive the government as an authoritarian and disciplinary parent; they want to preserve the current power structure of the society that favors individuals who identify as heterosexual. Because it is primarily those holding liberal social views that promote the legislation of samesex marriage, we hypothesized and found that proponents would tend to use more affiliation-oriented words and that opponents would tend to use more power-oriented words when discussing same-sex marriage. Lastly, we attempted to differentiate the cognitive processing of proponents and opponents. Previous research has indicated that the majority and minority practice disparate methods of persuasion. The majority influence others through normative social influence, which induces people to conform because they want to be accepted and are fearful of violating group norms. By contrast, the minority influence others through informational social influence, which changes people's beliefs and behaviors by convincing them that the minority have accurate information. The information provided is expected to be carefully analyzed, to serve this purpose, well-reasoned and logically consistent arguments are crucial. Therefore, we hypothesized that proponents, as the minority, tend to demonstrate more cognitive complexity in their arguments regarding same-sex marriage. We conducted two studies to test our hypotheses. In Study 1, we analyzed opinions expressed in newspapers and online media. We collected 60 articles with an equal number of opinions written by opponents and proponents to compare the difference between these two camps. All text files were processed using the Chinese word segmentation system developed by the Chinese Knowledge and Information Processing (CKIP) group and subsequently analyzed using the LIWC2015 application and C-LIWC2015 dictionary. The average word count of the text files used in Study 1 was 1124.32 (SD = 666.32), and the LIWC detection rate was 77.32% (SD = 4.40). We performed independent-samples t-tests to examine our hypotheses and discovered that, relative to opponents, proponents tended to use more first-person plural pronouns and affiliation-oriented words but fewer power-oriented words; their written opinions also exhibited higher cognitive complexity. In Study 2, we examined whether word usage characteristics identified for the opponents and proponents in Study 1 could predict an individual's attitude (pro or against) toward same-sex marriage. The data were drawn from the transcripts of two public hearings held by Taiwan's Legislative Yuan in 2016. All transcripts were processed in the same way as in Study 1. The average word count of the transcripts used in Study 2 was 1368.07 (SD = 388.90), and the LIWC detection rate of the transcripts was 81.09% (SD = 4.17). Independent-samples t-tests in Study 2 yielded similar results to that in Study 1. Relative to opponents, proponents tended to use more first-person plural pronouns and affiliation-oriented words but fewer power-oriented words. However, no significant difference in cognitive complexity was observed between proponents and opponents. We suspect that the speakers at the public hearing were experts and therefore capable of giving well-prepared speeches. Furthermore, the results of a logistic regression indicated that individuals who used more affiliation-oriented words were more likely to support samesex marriage. By contrast, individuals who used more power-oriented words were more likely to oppose same-sex marriage. The findings from Studies 1 and 2 highlight the psychological differences between proponents and opponents of samesex marriage. Specifically, the proponents tended to express a shared identity and were more interested in establishing social connections than the opponents; they also demonstrated higher cognitive complexity in their written opinions. The opponents, tended to use power and status words than the proponents. According to our results, we offer suggestions for improving the communication between the two camps, so social equality in the near future may be achieved. First, understanding the psychological difference between the two camps is the first step for better communication. The underlying concern of the opponents is that the legislation of same-sex marriage may be detrimental to the existing social structure and traditional family functions. Thus, for the proponents to have their messages heard by the opponents, it may be better to address the opponents' negative feelings rather than well-formulated reasons. Second, our findings suggest that even though the Gender Equality Education Act was implemented in 2004 in Taiwan, gender and sexual minorities - still face substantial prejudice in our society, which may be detrimental to their mental and physical health. Gender equality education programs dispelling preconceptions regarding homosexuality and improving students' understanding of various sexual identities may be most valuable to tackle such prejudice. Third, our findings demonstrate that a linguistic method such as LIWC can be applied to study controversial social topics. Unlike self-report measurements, which would be prone to social desirability, the frequency of word usage serving as a language marker is hard to manipulate and may reflect individuals' inner processes. Future studies can apply LIWC to examine the psychological differences between proponents and opponents of other controversial social issues such as abortion or the death penalty. In summary, we applied a linguistic method to clarify the psychological differences between proponents and opponents of same-sex marriage in terms of their self-other boundaries, motivations, and cognitive complexity. Future studies can expand the practical applications of our findings to further gender and marriage equality objectives.起始頁-結束頁：109-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).00056篇名：同理心如何發生？從應用劇場之教學切入並列篇名：How Empathy Develops? A Theatre-Based Training Approach作者：李錦虹(Gin-Hong Lee);林明德(Ming-Teh Lin)關鍵字：同理心教學;即興劇;一人一故事劇場;心理系學生;質性研究;empathy teaching;improvisational theatre;playback theatre;psychology students;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：過去十年來，研究者應用戲劇的訓練進行同理心教學。這種跨領域的創新教學法新鮮有趣，也能夠產生印象深刻的學習成果。在建立了跨領域的教學法之後，有待探討的問題是，戲劇訓練活動是透過什麼方式讓學生產生同理心？本研究以輔仁大學臨床心理學系三門課程的學生為研究對象，共64人。三門課程的同理心學習單元時間分別為8小時、12小時，以及18小時。戲劇教師從即興劇以及一人一故事的劇場訓練技巧中，選取適用於該課程之活動，修改後使用在同理心單元。研究蒐集學生資料包括回饋問卷、心得文本，以及課程的臉書留言。所得資料以質性分析步驟進行分析。研究發現同理心的產生可歸納為四個途徑：眼耳觀聽（觀看同儕的演出及其他行動）、身體行動（投入感官肢體的互動演練）、回饋循環（交替接受回饋與給出回饋）、經驗梳理（對課程經驗的敘說與書寫）。這四種路徑指出戲劇教學的特色在於：透過真實人際互動的觀聽及自己的身體行動體驗，引發思想與情感上的深刻反應，以同儕回饋釐清同理體驗，最後透過經驗整理與反思，產生新的學習意義。同理氛圍的營造、引導的焦點對同理心學習的影響，以及如何將課堂的同理經驗轉化到生活應用，皆是未來值得研究的方向。英文摘要：Theoretically the concept of empathy includes four components: the cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and moral empathy. In empathy training it is challenging to develop the emotional and behavioral empathy. Empathy is about human interactions. If there is a lack of real interpersonal interaction experience in the learning process, students will face many barriers and gaps in practice in the future. Empathy is the ability to understand and empathize with people. It is the basic capacity of psychology students, and it is necessary to learn in actual interpersonal interaction. Theatre-based training provide such an opportunity for students to ”encounter with others” in class, that is, a chance to have real contact with their peers. There are some theatre-based training approach related to empathy learning such as ”improvisational theatre” and ”playback theatre”. These two kinds of theatre approach have developed various lively games and exercises that help train empathy in the process of training actors. Many studies explored empathy in medical education through theatre-based technique mostly focused on effectiveness rather than process. Therefore, there is less research data on how students experience the teaching process and how empathy occurs. In the past ten years, the authors have used theatre-based training to teach empathy in universities and hospitals. This cross-disciplinary innovative teaching method is fresh and interesting, and can also produce impressive learning experience. After establishing a cross-domain pedagogy, the question that the authors are curious to explore is how students learn about empathy in theatre-based training? The subjects included sixty-four undergraduate students from three courses in Department of Clinical Psychology in Fu Jen Catholic University. The allotted time of empathy teaching sessions in the three courses were: four 2-hour sessions for ”The Skills and Practice for Helping People”, four 3-hour sessions for ”Expressive Arts Therapy”, and six 3-hour sessions for ”Drama and Interpersonal Exploration”. The faculties of ”The Skills and Practice for Helping People” and ”Expressive Arts Therapy” included the two authors and three theatre teachers. The three theatre teachers who specialized in improvisational theatre and playback theatre led the sessions respectively, and the two authors assisted and observed in these sessions. The sessions of ”Drama and Interpersonal Exploration” were led by another theatre teacher and the second author, and these sessions were observed by the first author. The theatre teachers used the modified training exercises from playback theatre and improvisational theatre in these sessions. The authors collected data from students' feedback questionnaire, reflection writings, and comments in Facebook group of the course. Qualitative research methods were used to analyze these data. The results indicated four themes illustrating the possible pathways that empathy leaning may happen. (1) Through watching and listening: when the stories were enacted or other actions of peers displayed, students learn as observers to watch and listen to the peer's story, their own story, the interaction between them and peers in the training exercises .The watching and listening process facilitated emotions and thoughts related to empathy. (2)Through body action: when students enacted as actors or interacted with each other through physical actions, they perceived with their body and had feelings inside. As if the exterior body theatre initiated the imaginative inner theatre. (3) Through mutual feedback: when students gave and took feedback mutually after watching, listening or body action, they also learned from each other. Taking feedback helped modify the understanding, enhance the sense of achievement and motives of empathy. Giving feedback helped clarify one's own feeling, be appreciative of others' empathetic behavior. (4) Through experience combing: when students narrated or wrote about the course experience, they reflected on the experience and constructed the meaning. Students stayed focus, integrated their feeling and thoughts, and made meaning of the course experience and past experience. The four pathways are related to the four components of empathy: cognition, emotion, action, and morality. ”Watching and listening” triggers students' emotional resonance and cognitive understanding of the targets they are observing. The learning component includes both ”emotional empathy” and ”cognitive empathy”. ”Body action” means that students directly practice ”empathetic action” with their body movements. It is also easier to trigger physical sensations and resonance reactions by using the body to engage in interactive positions. Therefore, there are more of ”emotional empathy” learning when students participate with their body action. ”Mutual feedback ” allows students to learn as empathizers on the one hand and as being empathized on the other. Both positive mutual feelings are helpful to enhance students' affirmation and motivation to practice empathy, which leads to the learning of ”moral empathy”. ”Experience combing” helps students integrate all the previous learning feelings and thoughts, and have a deeper meaning toward empathy in the four components of empathy. We suggest educators aiming to teach empathy to design the curriculum in reference to these four pathways, especially the focus of ”body action” could help students ”get up and move” and learn from their actions instead of only learning from lecture. ”Body action” is not necessarily a dramatic performance, but can be a simple exercise, such as retelling the story and gazing at each other' eyes for few minutes. The key point is that after ”watching and listening” and ”body action”, teachers need to facilitate students to go through ”mutual feedback” and ”experience combing” in a way that students feel comfortable with. The focus of ”mutual feedback” is to encourage students to give feedback in an appreciative way after the exercise. Teachers can use feedback questions such as ”what is the part they have tried to do”, ”what they have done well”, and ”what they feel touched”, so that the feedback improves their confidence and motivation. The focus of ”experience combing” is to encourage students to use group discussions or class writing methods to collect their feelings and thoughts, and to generate deeper meanings related to their own lives. When these meanings are intertwined with students' lives, the course experience can create an impression and accumulate the energy for behavior change. These four pathways point out that the characteristic of applying theatre-based training in empathy education is to trigger profound thoughts and emotional reactions through the observation of real story performance and interpersonal interaction, and through one's own physical action experience, to clarify the empathy experience with peer feedback, and to reflect on the experience to obtain new learning meanings. The insight and new understanding generated in the classroom will motivate students to change the way they interact with others outside the classroom, including their family or friends. This kind of application and change that continues outside the classroom is appealing to educators. If educators have the opportunity to continue the teaching of the last mile, they can successfully complete the fourth stage of Kolb's experiential learning cycle-active experimentation. It is recommended that future courses explore the topic of application and practice. After all, transforming students from classroom learners to practitioners in life is the ultimate goal of education. Further research is needed to focus on how the cultivation of empathetic classroom atmosphere and the focus of instruction influence empathy learning, and how to apply empathy learning experience in daily life.起始頁-結束頁：127-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).00067篇名：宗教信仰對同性戀內隱與外顯態度在同性婚姻的影響：來自臺灣IAT資料庫之分析並列篇名：Moderating Role of Religion Between Implicit and Explicit Attitudes on Opinions Same-Sex Marriage: A Study from Taiwan Implicit Association Test Database作者：唐正儀(Cheng-Yi Tang);張仁和(Jen-Ho Chang)關鍵字：同性婚姻;內隱態度;外顯態度;宗教;傳統家庭價值;same-sex marriage;implicit attitude;explicit attitude;religion;traditional family value期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：至2019年12月為止，全世界已有28個國家或行政區合法化了同性婚姻。在臺灣，同性婚姻議題於從不受重視，直至成為爭議，並於2017年通過同性婚姻合法的釋憲案，且於2019年正式通過同性婚姻修法。有鑑於此，本研究係探討，對同性戀者的內隱、外顯態度及宗教信仰對於同婚合法化之關聯。不僅如此，臺灣主要的不支持同婚團體亦具有宗教色彩，雖然這些團體不以宗教教義為其不支持訴求，而是捍衛「一夫一妻」、「生養子女」等傳統家庭價值，即可見傳統家庭價值與宗教教義之關聯，而家庭功能與婚姻意義成為宗教教義的替身。故本研究探討宗教教義對於個體的內隱、外顯態度預測同性婚姻支持程度有調節效果，且此調節效果又會受到傳統家庭價值所中介。研究一（N=2599）透過臺灣內隱關聯測驗資料庫顯示，宗教對內隱、外顯態度預測支持同婚有調節效果，教義不支持同婚的宗教會強化內隱與外顯態度對支持同性婚姻的影響。研究二（N=192）進一步從性開放的角度切入對同性戀者的內隱偏見，發現宗教對內隱態度預測支持同性婚姻的效果亦顯著，即教義不支持同性婚姻的宗教會強化內隱態度對於同性婚姻的影響，且該歷程又透過傳統家庭價值所中介。據此，期許透過結果能開啟兩造對話，以降低臺灣社會張力。英文摘要：By December 2020, 29 countries (or jurisdictions within them) had legalized same-sex marriage. In Taiwan, the issue of same-sex marriage was not taken seriously in the past, but it became one of the most controversial issues in recent years. In 2017, the chief justice of Taiwan ruled that prohibiting same-sex marriage was unconstitutional, and this ruling required the Legislative Yuan to establish laws allowing same-sex marriage by 2019. However, the result of a referendum in 2018 opposed the recognition of same-sex marriage. This result reveals the tension between proponents and opponents of same-sex marriage. The current study investigated the effect of religion and support for traditional family values on the relationship between implicit and explicit attitudes toward homosexuality and opinion on same-sex marriage. Some of the most influential organizations opposing same-sex marriage in Taiwan have religious backgrounds, especially Catholicism and other Christian denominations. Although such organizations do not present their religion as the main reason for opposing same-sex marriage; they claim to want to protect traditional family values (fulfilling familial obligations by having and raising children) and monogamy (in contrast with promiscuity and sexual openness). More importantly, religious individuals have strong implicit and explicit attitudes and may behave accordingly. The current study examined whether religious beliefs moderate the relationship of implicit and explicit attitudes with opinions on same-sex marriage. Specifically, the relationship between individual attitudes (both implicit and explicit) and opinion on same-sex marriage legislation in Taiwan may be enhanced by religious beliefs that do not support same-sex relationships (such as Christianity and Islam). In addition, this moderation may be mediated by the endorsement of traditional family values. Therefore, this study evaluated a moderated mediation model of the effects of religious beliefs and endorsement of family values on the relationships between implicit and explicit attitudes and opinions on same-sex marriage. For Study 1, 2599 Taiwanese participants (69% female; mean age = 24.09 years, SD = 5.12) were recruited from an implicit association test (IAT) database. After providing their background information, including their gender, age, and religion, the participants were measured their implicit and explicit attitudes (two items, r = .27) toward homosexuality and whether they support same-sex marriage (only one item). The results revealed that religious beliefs moderated the relationships of both implicit (b = 0.16, p = .01) and explicit attitudes (b = 0.07, p ＜ .001) toward homosexuality with opinion on same-sex marriage. Among individuals following religions (e.g., Christianity or Islam) opposing same-sex relationships, implicit attitude toward homosexuality was more strongly associated with opinion on same-sex marriage (b = 0.21, p ＜ .001), whereas, among those without religious beliefs opposing same-sex relationships, implicit attitude toward homosexuality was weaklier associated with opinion on same-sex marriage (b = 0.05, p = .01). Moreover, religious beliefs opposing same-sex relationships increased the strength of the relationship between explicit attitude toward homosexuality and opinions on same-sex marriage (b = 0.14, p ＜ .001), whereas, for people with religious beliefs not opposing same-sex relationships, explicit attitude toward homosexuality had a lower association with opinion on same-sex marriage (b = 0.05, p = .01). In summary, the findings of Study 1 support our hypothesis that religious beliefs opposing same-sex relationships increase the correlation between both implicit and explicit attitudes toward homosexuality and opinions on same-sex marriage. Study 2 further investigated the results of Study 1 by using comprehensive and validated measurements for both the IAT and survey scales. In addition, the IAT was modified: The original questions about abstract concepts (good vs. bad) were replaced with ones on sexual openness (promiscuity vs. monogamy). For Study 2, 192 participants (62% female; mean age = 23.36 years, SD = 3.31) were recruited. After providing their background information, including their gender, age, and religion, the participants were asked about their implicit and explicit attitudes toward homosexuality (five items, Cronbach's α = .84), traditional family values (having and raising children, parenting with family members; 22 items, Cronbach's α = .87), and their opinions on same-sex marriage (11 items, Cronbach's α = .93). The results of Study 2 revealed that religious beliefs moderated the relationship between opinions on same-sex marriage and implicit attitudes toward homosexuality and opinions on same-sex marriage (b = <U+2212>1.24, p = .02) but not explicit attitudes (b = 0.02, p = .56). Simple slope analysis revealed that, for those with religious beliefs opposing same-sex relationships, promiscuity bias increased the correlation between implicit attitudes and opinion on same-sex marriage (b = 2.57, p ＜ .01), whereas for those without religious beliefs opposing same-sex relationships, promiscuity bias was not related to the relationship between their attitudes toward homosexuality and opinion on same-sex marriage (b = 0.29, p = .06). Furthermore, a moderated mediation analysis was conducted in which belief in traditional family values was the mediator of the effect of religion on the relationship between implicit and explicit attitudes and same-sex marriage stance. The results of 5000-iteration bootstrapping indicated moderated mediation (b = -0.24, 95% CI, -0.53, -0.08). Follow-up analysis revealed that for those with religious beliefs opposing same-sex relationships and support for traditional family values, implicit attitudes continued to predict their opinions on same-sex marriage (b = -0.24, 95% CI, <U+2212>0.53, -0.08). However, for those with religious beliefs not opposing same-sex relationships, this indirect path via traditional family values did not represent a mediation effect (b = 0.04, 95% CI, -0.01, 0.12). In summary, the findings of Study 2 support our hypothesis of the moderation effect of religion on the relationship between implicit attitudes toward homosexuality and opinions on same-sex marriage in the presence of promiscuity bias. Specifically, religious beliefs opposing same-sex marriage increased the strength of the relationship between implicit attitude and opinion on same-sex marriage. Furthermore, moderated mediation analysis demonstrated that traditional family values mediated the relationship between implicit attitude and same-sex marriage that was moderated by religious beliefs. These findings provide insights that may build a bridge between proponents and opponents of same-sex marriage and help them to communicate, thereby reducing tension in Taiwanese society.起始頁-結束頁：151-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).00078篇名：國中生學習挫折復原歷程模式之建構：心理資本、社會資本、挫折容忍力、正向情緒、適應性動機涉入之關係並列篇名：Model of Resilience to Learning Frustration: The Relationships Among Psychological Capital, Social Capital, Frustration Tolerance, Positive Emotions, and Adaptive Motivational Engagement作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang)關鍵字：心理資本;正向情緒;社會資本;挫折容忍力;適應性動機涉入;psychological capital;positive emotions;social capital;frustration tolerance;adaptive motivational engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：復原力理論主張不管外境多險惡，個人能從中復原，為其一大優勢。然過去文獻甚少具體化復原歷程，使人不易了解個人如何從逆境復原。故本研究建構「學習挫折復原歷程模式」分析國中生學習挫折復原歷程，同時亦建構「社會資本二階驗證性因素分析模式」來探討國中生學習挫折復原歷程中的社會資本變項。本研究抽取二批國中生為樣本，分別為307人、1560人，共1867人，以結構方程模式進行分析。本研究結果顯示：（1）「社會資本二階驗證性因素分析模式」、「學習挫折復原歷程模式」與觀察資料適配；（2）心理資本正向預測社會資本、挫折容忍力；（3）社會資本正向預測挫折容忍力、正向情緒；（4）挫折容忍力正向預測正向情緒、適應性動機涉入；（5）正向情緒正向預測適應性動機涉入。本研究結果不僅能具體化復原歷程，回應當代心理學重視正向心理學主題，且有助於整合復原力與其他議題的理論、研究。英文摘要：Educational psychology attaches great importance to the influence of the external environment on the individual, but this view appears to ignore that the individual does not passively accept everything in the external environment and has internal power to respond to the external environment. Resilience theory (Garmezy, 1991; Werner, 1982), however, suggests that an individual's adaptability does not fluctuate with the external environment and emphasizes the inherent resilience of the individual. Because of this theory's advantages, this study focused on resilience. Resilient qualities, resilience programs, and the resilience process are three major topics within resilience research (Bolton et al., 2017; Richardson, 2002). Studies have comprehensively analyzed resilient qualities (Chan et al., 2009; Gillespie et al., 2007) and resilience programs (Chen et al., 2014; Knight et al., 2019; Torsney & Symonds, 2019). Many scholars (Flach, 1988, 1997; Richardson, 2002) believe that resilience is a process and requires further investigation. However, insufficient data are available on the resilience process. Previous literature (Flach, 1988, 1997; Richardson, 2002; Wang et al., 2017) have provided few specific details about important protective factors for resilience and how they are related in the resilience process; this makes it challenging to determine which protective factors help initiate the resilience process and what type of resilience individuals achieve. In other words, studies have found it difficult to concretize the resilience process. Furthermore, studies (Shih & Wu, 2017; Chao et al., 2018) have stated that students' learning path is full of frustration; thus, resilience is essential to them. However, few studies have focused on learning frustration in relation to the resilience process. Therefore, this study sought to fill the research gap and become a basis for teaching guidance. Accordingly, this study analyzed the process through which junior high school students develop resilience to learning frustration. According to the resilience process model (Richardson, 2002), Flach's ideas (1988, 1997), constructive failure theory (Clifford, 1988), and Mencius's views (Fu, 2004), resilience may be related to pre-existing protective factors, additional protective factors, wisdom and ability, and adaptation results, and the relationships among them may be that existing protective factors predict adaptation results through additional protective factors and improved wisdom and ability. According to conservation of resources theory (Hobfoll, 1989), Luthans et al. (2004), and other studies (Baluku et al., 2016; Jung & Yoon, 2015), psychological capital and social capital may serve as pre-existing and additional protective factors, respectively, in the process of junior high school students developing resilience to learning frustration. Frustration tolerance can be regarded as improved wisdom and ability in the process of junior high school students developing resilience to learning frustration (Clifford, 1988; Huang & Lin, 2013). According to coping strategy theory (Folkman & Lazarus, 1998), positive emotions and adaptive motivational engagement can serve as adaptation results in the resiliency process of learning frustration for junior high school students. This study analyzed the process of junior high school students developing resilience to learning frustration by exploring the relationships among psychological capital, social capital, frustration tolerance, positive emotions, and adaptive motivational engagement. Although studies have provided interpretations of psychological capital, frustration tolerance, positive emotions, and adaptive motivational engagement, the connotation of social capital remains unclear. On the bases of the social support model (House, 1981), emotional regulation theory (Chiang, 2015; Gross, 2002), the viewpoints of scholars on seeking help (Newman, 1991, 1994), and self-determination theory (Ryan & Deci, 2002), a second-order confirmatory factor analysis of social capital was conducted to analyze social capital among junior high school students, and a social capital scale for junior high school students containing subscales on emotional regulation and problem-solving resources was created. Based on related literature, a model of the process of resilience to learning frustration was constructed to analyze the relationships among psychological capital, social capital, frustration tolerance, positive emotions, and adaptive motivational engagement among junior high school students. According to self-worth theory (Covington, 1992), the viewpoints of scholars on seeking help (Newman, 1991, 1994), and past research (Lin et al., 2013; Luthans & Youssef, 2004; Newman, 1990; Ryan & Pintrich, 1997), psychological capital may positively predict social capital. According to conservation of resources theory (Hobfoll, 1989), the control-value theory of achievement emotions (Pekrun, 2000), expectancy-value theory (Wigfield & Eccles, 2000), and related research (Carmona-Halty et al., 2019; Chang, 2019; Chen, 2017; Cheng et al., 2018; Lai & Wu, 2018; Naveira, 2015; Tsaur et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2017), psychological capital may positively predict frustration tolerance, positive emotions, and adaptive motivational engagement. According to the social support model (House, 1981), emotional regulation theory (Chiang, 2015; Gross, 2002), the viewpoints of scholars on seeking help (Newman, 1991, 1994), self-determination theory (Ryan & Deci, 2002), and previous research (Jang et al., 2009; Joe et al., 2017; Lin, 2016; Liu et al., 2016), social capital may positively predict frustration tolerance, positive emotions, and adaptive motivational engagement. Frustration tolerance may positively predict positive emotions and adaptive motivational engagement (Clifford, 1988). According to the model proposed by Lazarus (1991), the cognitive-motivation model of achievement emotions (Pekrun, 1992), broaden-and-build theory (Fredrickson, 2004), and previous research (Chien & Cherng, 2013; Huang, 2010; Pekrun et al., 2002), positive emotions may predict adaptive motivational engagement. The current study recruited 1867 junior high school students and employed structural equation modeling. The following results were obtained: (a) The second-order confirmatory factor analysis model of social capital and resilience to learning frustration fitted the observed data well. (b) Psychological capital positively predicted social capital and frustration tolerance. (c) Social capital positively predicted frustration tolerance and positive emotions. (d) Frustration tolerance positively predicted positive emotions and adaptive motivational engagement, (e) Positive emotions positively predicted adaptive motivational engagement. In summary, the results of this study indicate that junior high school students' resilience to learning frustration starts with psychological capital (a pre-existing protective factor), which enables students to obtain social capital (an additional protective factor) by motivating them seek help, and these two factors help students to ultimately recover their positive emotions and achieve adaptive motivational engagement (adaptation results) by improving their frustration tolerance (wisdom and ability). These results concretize the process through which junior high school students develop resilience to learning frustration and fill the research gap. Although psychological capital, social capital, frustration tolerance, positive emotions, and adaptive motivational engagement are all critical factors in positive psychology, few studies have investigated them simultaneously, especially as they relate to process of developing resilience. This study, based on resilience and many related theories, explored the relationships among these variables in response to the contemporary prominence of positive psychology and exemplifies the integration of resilience research with other issues. The study results can be used as a reference for teaching and guidance. The findings imply that parents and teachers can encourage students to increase their tolerance of learning frustration to allow them to handle greater challenges in the future. Counselors can also use the study results to develop resilience programs focusing on learning frustration.起始頁-結束頁：173-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).00089篇名：後現代敘事合作取向團體督導歷程中的督導思維與督導策略並列篇名：Supervisory Mindsets and Strategies Applied in Postmodern Narrative and Collaborative Approaches for Group Supervision作者：黎欣怡(Hsin-Yi Li);田秀蘭(Hsiu-Lan Shelley Tien);吳熙琄(Shi-Jiuan Wu);王孟甯(Meng-Ning Wang)關鍵字：紮根理論研究法;團體督導歷程;後現代敘事合作取向;督導思維;督導策略;grounded theory;group supervision process;postmodern narrative-collaborative approach (PNCA);supervisory mindsets;supervisory strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究在探究一個後現代敘事合作取向團體督導歷程中，督導者所展現、運用的督導思維與策略。督導者為本取向資深督導者，受督者為九位諮商心理師。收集此八次團體督導歷程錄音檔，使用質性紮根理論法進行資料分析。研究結果發現，督導者展現了「尊重、欣賞與感謝；不視為理所當然；一般化；公開化；去專家化；持著未知的態度；認可與賦能；珍視在地性知識」等八項後現代督導思維；運用十三項督導策略，分別是「隱而未顯支線故事的探究與建構；敘事解構／外化／命名；見證；本取向諮商理論與技巧之教學／分享／示範；意義性提問；隱喻的使用」等六項本取向獨特性督導策略；以及「傾聽、聽見、回應（使用對方的語言）；不評價、正向好奇地提問以瞭解；瞭解受督者的督導需求與提問；立即性核對；瞭解個案身處之脈絡；賦予新的理解框架；給予指引」等七項共通性督導策略。在督導思維與策略的共同運作下，促進受督者支線故事與專家主體知識之開展與建構，重寫諮商困境故事。本研究發現本取向督導實踐了後現代社會建構理論，研究結果可供有志從事後現代督導工作者參考。文末，針對本研究結果做一討論，並對未來督導實務與研究提出建議。英文摘要：Clinical supervision is an indispensable learning process in counseling education. Research on supervisory mindsets and strategies in clinical supervision is also essential because it can advance knowledge and skills in this field (Tsai, 2012). In the last 40 years, the humanities and social sciences (including psychology and counseling) have been influenced by postmodern social constructionism (PSC; Anderson, 2009, 2012, 2013; Bob, 1999; Carlson & Erickson, 2001; Hair & Fine, 2012; Neal, 1996; Whiting, 2007; Wu, 2010). This influence led to the development of postmodern narrative and collaborative approach (PNCA) therapy. PNCA supervision-related studies have explored the perceived experiences of supervisees (Attridge, 2007; Hair & Fine, 2012) and assessed the effect of PNCA supervision on supervisees (Attridge, 2007; Hair & Fine, 2012; Nadan, 2020; Shachar et al., 2012; Huang, 2015). Their findings have suggested the positive effect of PNCA supervision on the learning and developmental experiences of supervisees. A literature review revealed that few studies have explored what and how postmodern supervisory mindsets and strategies are adopted during the supervision process. Therefore, the purpose of the present study was to explore the supervisory mindsets and supervisory strategies adopted by a supervisor during the PNCA group-supervision process (GSP). Nine certified counseling psychologists with masters' degrees participated in a monthly group supervision that was supervised by a senior clinical PNCA supervisor (the third author) for 8 months. During these 8 months, the nine participants did not receive any other supervision groups. Eight verbatim drafts of the GSP were collected and analyzed by grounded theory. The results indicated that the supervisor exhibited eight types of postmodern supervisory mindsets namely demonstrating appreciation, not taking things for granted, normalization, being public, practicing de-expertization, being not-knowing, practicing validation, and privileging the local knowledge. The present study revealed that the supervisor exhibited the characteristics of PSC. The aforementioned eight types of supervisory mindsets corresponded to the findings of previous studies (Behan, 2003; Carlson & Erickson, 2001; Hair & Fine, 2012; Jenkins, 1996; Kahn & Monk, 2017; Shachar et al.,2012; Sutherland et al., 2013; Ungar, 2006; Weingarten, 2016), which have reported that the characteristics of PNCA supervision include appreciating and applying the experience and knowledge of supervisees, appreciating supervisory dialogue, and maintaining an equalitarian supervisor-supervisee relationship (Carlson & Erickson, 2001; Sutherland et al., 2013; Kahn & Monk, 2017). Behan (2003) emphasized the crucial role of a supervisor in maintaining a curious attitude and being public because such behavior not only can reduce the burden undertaken by the supervisor as an expert but also promote supervisees' autonomy and expertise. Ungar (2006) also highlighted the role of the supervisor in the modeling of deconstruction and not taking things for granted. The present study also revealed that the supervisor adopted 13 types of supervisory strategies, including seven types of supervisory strategies were common adopted in every supervision approach, and six were unique to PNCA supervision. The six types of supervisory strategies unique to PNCA supervision were the exploration of unique outcomes, narrative deconstruction/ externalization/naming, witnessing, teaching/sharing/modeling of PNCA philosophy and strategies, using of meaning-oriented questions and using of metaphors. This study found that the supervisor had adopted four types of witnessing-related behaviors to recognize and empower supervisees, namely the application of a supervisee's opinion at multiple time points, application of other individuals' perspectives in supervisee's narration during supervision, and application of supervisor and other supervisees' feedback. For example, the supervisor asked supervisees to recall and reflect on what they had done during the past year. The supervisor also asked supervisees to consider what's the contributions of themselves as a counselor from the perspective of the client and what the client might say regarding this topic. The supervisory strategy of witnessing enhanced the development of the supervisee's previously absent (but implicit) narrative, unique outcomes, and subjective inner-expertise knowledge. The supervisor who participated in this PNCA GSP also taught, shared, and adhered to the philosophies and strategies of PNCA supervision. These supervisory strategies are widely used in clinical supervision (Hair & Fine, 2012; Hsu, 2011; Shih, 2015; Stoltenberg, 2005) and aid supervisees in achieving appropriate counseling function and learning how to appropriately apply case conceptualization, processing, and personalization skills. In the present study, the supervisor also played the role of a teacher, consultant, and mentor. This observation is consistent with those of previous studies, which have proposed that supervisors need to provide instruction, guidance, direction, and feedback; these comprise specific directions and guidance for specific issues, the use of modeling and discussions to promote the skills of the supervisee, and the promotion of supervisees' reflections through supervision (Shachar et al., 2012; Ungar, 2006; Watkins, 2017). Our study further revealed that PNCA supervision not only achieved the required functions and tasks of clinical supervision but also met the learning requirements of supervisees and promoted the well-being of clients. The present study verified that PNCA supervision is characterized by attentive listening, empathic responses and recognition, and the use of questions to encourage supervisees to reflect on themselves. This finding corresponded to those of other PSC supervision studies, which emphasized that PSC supervision incorporates attentive listening, empathic responses, and walk side by side in the supervision process (Andersen, 1987; Anderson, 2009, 2012, 2013; Carlson & Erickson, 2001; Neal, 1996; Jenkins, 1996; Weingarten, 2016; Whiting, 2007; Wu, 2017). The other seven types of supervisory strategies adopted by the supervisor are common in other supervision models; the strategies adopted were responsive-active listening, the use of positive and nonjudgmental questions, understanding the supervisee's supervision needs, immediately checking, understanding the client's context, reframing, and providing instructions. These seven strategies corresponded to those used in counseling and group counseling, suggesting that they are basic and entrylevel strategies and skills in counseling education. Wu (2017), Anderson (2009, 2012, 2013), and Weingarten (2016) have all highlighted the key role of the supervisor in implementing attentive listening, empathic feedback, and walk side by side and promoting a supervisee's reflection and reconstruction during the supervision process. Guindon (2010/2012) also suggested that immediately checking and reframing are basic skills for providing help in counseling. This finding suggested that the seven strategies can be applied in supervision theories and models, and they can be treated as basic and entry-level helping skills in the context of counseling and supervision. Research on effective and common supervisory strategies applied in supervision theories and models is essential for counseling education because it promotes the application of knowledge and skills that enhance the development and learning experiences of supervisees. PSC-based PNCA supervision emphasizes attentive listening, empathic responses, and positive connotations in relation to supervisees. The goal of PNCA supervision is to generate benefits for both clients and supervisees. With respect to clients' benefits, the goals of PNCA supervision are dissolving the dilemma of the supervisee and promoting the acquisition of knowledge and skills associated with PNCA conceptualization, processing, and personalization. With respect to supervisees' benefits, the goals of PNCA supervision are reanchoring the counseling values, beliefs and theories of the supervisee; promoting the emergence and development of the supervisee's absent (but implicit) narrative, unique outcomes, and subjective inner-expertise knowledge; and enhancing the supervisee's self-efficacy and counseling effectiveness (Wu, 2019). The findings of the present study can be used as a reference to aid the application of PNCA supervision in clinical supervision and counseling education. However, the present study had some limitations and its results must be cautiously interpreted and applied. First, the present study was a qualitative-only study. Second, the supervisees who participated in the study were all licensed psychologists with at least 2 years of practical experience, and all of them participated voluntarily. Third, researchers' mindsets might have influenced the research results during the analysis phase. Future studies can examine the experiences of supervisee with respect to PNCA supervision, the effect of PNCA supervision on supervisees, and whether the patterns or characteristics of PNCA supervision vary depending on the participants involved. For example, whether the patterns or characteristics of PNCA supervision vary when it is applied to master's level part-time practicum students versus master's level full-time internship students? With such knowledge, we can better understand the characteristics of PNCA supervision and enrich postmodern supervision.起始頁-結束頁：199-222資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).000910篇名：國中輔導教師介入關係霸凌事件的輔導困境與策略並列篇名：Counselors' Difficulties and Strategies When Intervening in Relational Bullying Incidents作者：杜淑芬(Su-Fen Tu);鄧文章(Wen-Chang Teng);陳亦鳳(Yi-Feng Chen)關鍵字：霸凌輔導;關係攻擊;關係霸凌;輔導策略;輔導困境;bullying intervention;relational aggression;relational bullying;counseling strategies;counseling difficulties期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：53卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究探究學校輔導教師在關係霸凌事件中的輔導困境與策略。透過團體訪談，共有27位專兼任輔導教師參與，包含22位女性、5位男性，平均年齡34.5歲，教學年資8.31年，而平均輔導年資則為5.59年。資料收集階段共進行5次團體訪談，每次團體約為2.5∼3小時。資料分析採用模板主題分析進行，運用第一次逐字稿建立初步分類系統，再將資料進行分類並視需要增建或修改分類系統。研究結果：輔導教師主要的困境包括（1）關係辨識困境，何謂關係霸凌難以定義，而受害者與加害者互為霸凌循環也讓辨識困難；（2）個別輔導困境包括受害者質疑與擔心被輔導、加害者否認與抗拒輔導等；而（3）系統合作困境則包括合作導師的輔導知能與抗拒合作、以及家長情緒涉入過深導致事件的複雜化等議題。在輔導策略部分，輔導教師多採用個別輔導與系統合作雙管齊下的多元介入輔導策略。首先，輔導教師需要擱置辨識、接納關係流動特性，其次，在受害者和加害者的個別輔導工作中，同理尊重當事人主觀感受，將焦點放在修復人際關係與發展關係能力；而在系統合作中，則直接入班進行旁觀者輔導及導師或家長等重要他人系統合作諮詢，以營造有利於人際修復與關係發展的人際環境。英文摘要：Relational bullying is a prevalent phenomenon that is commonly observed among peers in schools, particularly middle schools. The victims of relational bullying are affected by severe social and psychological adjustment problems; moreover, these interpersonal adjustment problems continue to affect them in subsequent phases of their lives. Studies have revealed an association between reductions in school bullying incidents and the presence of teachers who are sensitive to relational problems and capable of providing competent class management as well as positive behavioral and emotional support and praise to students. Preventive programs that emphasize the development of students' empathy, prosocial behaviors, emotional management, and interpersonal social skills were demonstrated to be effective in reducing relational aggression. Studies have examined the interventions and counseling provided after the occurrence of bullying events and discovered that school counselors mostly worked with victims through individual and group counseling; however, these studies have also suggested the establishment of teacher-parent collaborations to stop bullying. Purpose: This study explored counselors' difficulties and strategies when they intervene in relational bullying incidents in schools. Method: In total, 27 school counselors (comprising 22 females and 5 male counselors) were interviewed in a group setting. The participants had an average age of 34.5 years and an average of 8.31 and 5.59 years of teaching and counseling experience, respectively. They all had experiences of intervening in relational bullying incidents, with 11.1%, 18.9%, 51.8%, and 14.8% of them having intervened in one, two, three, and four incidents, respectively. The participants were divided into five groups, and a group interview lasting 2 to 3 h was conducted for each group. The guidelines for the group interviews comprised four items, namely (i) relational intervention experience (i.e., sharing of experiences in intervening in students' relational bullying incidents), (ii) identification experience (i.e., how incidents were identified or confirmed as relational bullying incidents), (iii) strategies (i.e., sharing of intervening strategies applied to involved students [instigators and victims], bystanders, and other individuals in response to the occurrence of incidents), and (iv) difficulties (i.e., sharing of difficulties encountered when intervening in incidents and the methods used to overcome these difficulties). Data analysis was conducted in the form of template analysis, and the draft of the first group was used to establish the initial category template, after which the categories were amended or revised per the data generated during the analysis. The kappa coefficient for the raters was determined to be .84 after two rounds of adjustments. A group of 10 school counselors were invited to evaluate the draft's credibility, completeness, closeness, and applicability; on a 7-point scale, the raters gave scores ranging from 6.33 to 6.67. Results: The difficulties encountered by counselors who intervened in relational aggression incidents were as follows: (i) Difficulties in identifying relational bullying: The counselors reported that they felt constrained and confused when they had to identify the roles of the individuals involved in relational bullying incidents. An involved student might claim that he or she felt ostracized by his or her classmates even though no one had acted aggressively against them, or they might have been the instigator. In other cases, students might have repeatedly acted aggressively against each other but still claim that they were bullied. (ii) Difficulties in conducting individual counseling: The counselors experienced difficulties in aiding victims, particularly those who lacked social skills and were resistant to change and those who resisted counseling because they felt that they were being blamed. Furthermore, a few counselors were also concerned that their countertransference might hurt the involved students because of the frustrations that they experienced when interacting with stubborn victims. Another challenge was counseling bullies; these instigators had interpersonal advantages and general adopted the avoidant strategy of denial. Some accused instigators also claimed that they felt hurt and became defensive during counseling sessions. (iii) Difficulties in establishing systematic collaboration: First, the counselors reported that they conducted group counseling with the involved classes but encountered difficulties because they had no previous experiences of interacting with these classes. Second, collaboration with homeroom teachers was another challenge because many of these teachers lacked the skills to identify relational bullying in their classes and provide guidance in response to relational bullying incidents; in some cases, the situation was made worse by the use of inappropriate interventional strategies. Moreover, working with parents could be a complex matter; occasionally, these parents were overprotective or too emotional involved in their children's relational problems. Some parents also insisted on verifying the actual roles of the individuals involved in an incident; thus, they neglected the psychological well-being of the involved students. The strategic component of the results indicated that an integrated interventional strategy that incorporated both individual and systematic interventions was optimal for addressing relational aggression events involving relational bullying incidents. The counselors reported that they were able to alleviate the students' trauma when they set aside the concept of identifying the instigator or investigating the incident and accepted the volatile nature of interpersonal relationships among adolescents. When providing counseling to clients who were victims, a counselor empathized and respected a client's subjective perception of the incidents and devoted their efforts toward assisting client's interpersonal skills' development and relational restoration with peers. The counselors revealed that empathic listening and rapport relationships were especially important when working with aggressors; also, if a teacher, possibly with the help of a counselor, could make good use of aggressors' interpersonal power, the whole class would have benefited from this effort. In addition, a counselor could apply mediation to resolve conflicts if agreement could be reached between both parties. When intervening in bullying incidents, counselors reported that the most frequently used strategy was a team-based one that involved homeroom teachers, heads of discipline, and special education teachers. Counselors could establish collaborative relationships with homeroom teachers when they could provide emotional support to these teachers who were coping with problematic relational bullying incidents in their classes. Most counselors conducted group counseling to release tension in a class, implementing antibullying psychoeducation programs, and promoting empathic understanding for victims with special needs (such as autistic or hyperactive students). When working with difficult parents in relational bullying incidents, the counselors revealed that empathizing with parents was the general practice because these parents often received biased information from their children. The counselors worked with parents by maintaining continual home-school communication, providing the parents with consultation services using multiple resources, or implementing these two measures simultaneously. Although enforced counseling was recommended for inclusion in school rules as a legislative means of ensuring involved students' have access to counseling when their parents or guardians are resistant to providing consent, the present study indicated that counselors must overcome multiple types of difficulties and gain the support of parents or guardians to achieve optimal counseling effectiveness. Conclusion/Suggestion: First, both individualized and systematic interventional strategies must be applied for relational bullying incidents. Second, although role identification is essential for preparing mandatory reports, school counselors should focus on the humane roles and functions of a counselor rather than those of an investigator when intervening in bullying incidents. Therefore, we recommend that school counselors concentrate on the relationship traumas of the involved students and aid them in developing their interpersonal skills and restoring their relationships. Furthermore, school counselors must improve their systematic collaboration and consultation abilities to work with teachers and parents when intervening in such incidents. Finally, we recommend the establishment of a community resource center to provide consultation services to school counselors and staff when they encounter relational bullying incidents because they often consider identification and intervention as problems.起始頁-結束頁：223-249資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202109_53(1).001011篇名：解題時機與範例類型對學習成效與認知負荷的影響並列篇名：Effects of Problem Solving and Example-Based Learning on Cognitive Load and Performance作者：黃一泓(Yi-Hung Huang)關鍵字：探索學習;比較範例;認知負荷理論;discovery learning;comparing solution method;cognitive load theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：十二年國民基本教育課程綱要強調在課程中實施探索活動的重要性，如何實施探索活動，達到有效的教學目標，便成為在職老師的重要課題。本研究以數學科的「基本量與比較量」單元為實驗主題，國小六年級學童為實驗對象，以實驗研究法探討兩個因子：探索解題的時機（先解題／先閱讀）與範例學習的類型（比較範例／解題練習），對學習成效與認知負荷的影響。首先，研究者以兩因子來設計畫線段圖、操作線段圖，以及解基準量與比較量問題三個部分的實驗教材。其次，將105名學童隨機分派至四個不同的組別進行實驗操作。而在每個部份的教材學習完成後，以認知負荷量表來量測學童所感知的內在與外在認知負荷。最後，以學習成效測驗來評估學童在畫線段圖、操作線段圖，以及解基準量與比較量問題的表現。統計分析後，得到以下的結果：第一，兩因子間在認知負荷的感知以及測驗成績的表現上皆沒有顯著的交互作用；第二，先解題組學童在學習解基準量與比較量問題時感知的內在負荷顯著高於先閱讀組，先解題組學童在學習操作線段圖與解基準量與比較量問題時所感知的整體認知負荷顯著高於先閱讀組，而比較範例組與解題練習組在三個學習內容所感知的內在、外在，及整體認知負荷皆沒有顯著差異；第三，不同探索解題時機分組在三個學習內容的測驗成績上皆沒有顯著差異，而比較範例組在畫線段圖的測驗成績顯著優於解題練習組。最後，依據研究結果提出教學上的建議。英文摘要：The 12-year Basic Education Curriculum guidelines emphasize the importance of discovery activities in the curriculum. Therefore, methods of implementing discovery-based learning in the classroom and achieving effective teaching goals have become a major topic for current teachers. Alfieri et al. (2011) conducted a meta-analysis of 164 studies and reported that allowing students to only perform pure discovery activities may be detrimental to learning; however, assisted discovery learning, including feedback, worked examples, and self-explanation prompts, can benefit learning. Studies on assisted discovery learning, have provided empirical results regarding the integration of problem solving and example learning. These studies have indicated that learners who cooperate in solving problems before receiving direct teaching or seeing examples perform better than those who first receive direct teaching or examples and then solve problems. However, the findings of these studies only demonstrate that solving problems cooperatively and then studying examples is a more favorable approach than studying the examples individually and then practicing solving the problems. With inconsistent experimental conditions (i.e., cooperative vs. individual), distinguishing the effects of the variables of the timing of problem solving and the type of example learning on teaching effectiveness is impossible. Sweller and Paas (2017) also indicated that most of these studies did not control variables appropriately and that they changed multiple variables simultaneously. Therefore, the experimental designs of these studies were fundamentally flawed and could not isolate the effects of specific variables. Although some studies on the integration of problem solving and example learning have analyzed the learning process from the perspective of cognitive load theory, this is only a theoretical discussion. Studies have not conducted actual measurements of the cognitive load perceived by the learner during the learning process (Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012; Loibl & Rummel, 2014). In addition, for studies in which the experimental participants were elementary school students, only one item was used to evaluate cognitive load, such as ”How much effort did you use in the process of learning just now?”; in general, this cognitive load could not be accurately measured (Huang & Shie, 2016 ; Wong et al., 2012). Furthermore, if the intrinsic and extraneous cognitive loads perceived by the learner during learning cannot be known, cognitive load theory cannot be used to effectively analyze the learner's cognition and information processing during learning (Leppink et al., 2013). Therefore, this study excluded the effect of cooperative learning and allowed learners to learn materials individually to avoid confounding variables. The ”basic quantity and comparative quantity” unit of mathematics was used for the experiments in this study. The researcher conducted an experiment to study the effects of two factors on learning outcomes and perceived cognitive load: Problem-solving timing (problem solving first or reading an example first) and the type of example (comparative example or problem-solving practice). The multidirectional scale developed by Leppink and van den Heuvel (2015) was used to measure intrinsic and extraneous cognitive loads perceived during learning, and an objective reference value was used for the learning outcome to observe germane cognitive load. Therefore, on the basis of cognitive load theory and the relevant literature, the research questions verified in this study were as follows: 1. Does the timing of problem solving and the type of worked-out example affect the intrinsic, extraneous, and overall cognitive load when students learn to draw line segments, operate line segments, and solve reference and comparison quantity problems? 2. Does the timing of problem solving and the type of worked-out example affect the test scores when students learn to draw line segments, operate line segments, and solve the reference and the comparison quantity problems? The researcher first used two factors (timing of problem solving and type of worked-out example) to design an experiment involving three exercises: drawing line segments, operating line segments, and solving a reference and comparison quantity problem. Second, 105 sixth-grade children were randomly assigned to four groups for the experiment: reading examples first then comparing examples (group 1), solving problems first then comparing examples (group 2), reading examples first then practicing problem solving (group 3), and solving problems first then practicing problem solving (group 4). After each exercise was completed, the cognitive load scale was used to measure the students' perceived intrinsic load and extraneous load. Finally, a learning test was used to evaluate the students' learning performance in drawing line segments, operating line segments, and solving the reference and the comparison quantity problems. The answers to the first three questions of the cognitive load scale indicated the perceived intrinsic load, and the answers to the last three questions indicated the perceived extraneous load. Factor analysis with the timing of problem solving and type of worked-out example as independent variables and the test scores and cognitive load indicators as the dependent variables was performed. The two-factor multivariate analysis revealed no significant interaction effect between the timing of problem solving and the type of example on the students' perceived cognitive load or the three test scores. The analysis also indicated that the perceived intrinsic load of the students who solved problems first was significantly higher than that of the students who read examples first when solving the reference and the comparison quantity problems. The overall perceived cognitive load of the students who solved problems first was also significantly higher than that of those who read examples first when operating line segments and solving the reference and comparison quantity problem. No significant difference was observed between the comparative example condition and the practicing problem solving condition in the students' perceived intrinsic, extraneous, or overall cognitive load No significant difference in test scores was observed between the different problem-solving timing conditions in the three tests; however, the test scores of the students who had seen a comparative example were significantly higher than those of the students who practiced problem solving when drawing line segments. Four sets of materials were designed to study the effects of problem-solving timing and worked-out examples on learning effectiveness and perceived cognitive load. The researcher used the multidimensional cognitive load scale to successfully measure the students' perceived intrinsic load and extraneous load. When the experimental conditions were controlled for and the cooperative learning variable was excluded, the experimental results were determined to be consistent with those of previous research regarding worked examples (Kalyuga et al., 2003; Renkl & Atkinson, 2003). The learning performance of group 2 was not higher than that of group 1. Different learning examples may be suitable for learning different types of knowledge. Therefore, on the basis of the findings of this study, the researcher proposes the following strategies for educators. First, because of the nature of problem-solving activities, learners may perceive a higher cognitive load; therefore, learning materials suitable for the level of learners should be carefully designed when implementing a strategy that involves solving problems. Second, the comparison of examples is suitable for learning conceptual knowledge, and practicing of problem solving is suitable for learning procedural knowledge. Finally, when designing teaching materials for comparative examples, educators should add incorrect examples to the materials. The correct and incorrect examples should be compared, and the learner must be asked to explain why the incorrect examples are wrong; doing so can repair the learners' knowledge and enable them develop the correct concept.起始頁-結束頁：731-755資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).000112篇名：升學路徑對大學生自我調節學習特質與學業表現之影響－繁星推薦、個人申請、考試分發多元入學管道之比較並列篇名：Do Students Admitted to Universities Through Different Channels Have Differences in Self-Regulated Learning and Academic Performance? Comparison of Students From the Multi-Star Project, Individual Application Channel, and Exam-Based Channel作者：鄭夙珍(Nellie S. Cheng);王金龍(Jin-Long Wang)關鍵字：多元入學方案;自我調節學習;學業表現;multi-channel entrance system;self-regulatory learning;academic performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：大學多元入學方案的實施，破除單一考試方式，予以考生選擇適合自己升學管道的機會。三種入學管道（繁星推薦、申請入學、考試分發）之升學路徑的差異，影響學生之學習經驗。過去多元管道的比較多探討管道間學業表現之差異，本研究加入自我調節學習特質之影響，有助於理解學業表現差異的原因。由於繁星推薦管道入學標準取決於高中學業表現，而考試分發管道應考時間最長，本研究假設繁星推薦與考試分發兩種管道學生的升學經驗較有助於培養自我調節學習特質，因而也有較佳大學學業表現；另一方面，由於申請入學管道最具有適性揚才的特徵，申請入學生相較於其餘兩管道應有較佳學業動機。本研究以Sitzman與Ely（2011）自我調節學習精簡架構的九變項為探究基礎，首先進行內部因素結構，再據以探討（1）三類學生之自我調節學習對學業表現影響之模式差異，及（2）三類學生在自我調節學習及學業表現之差異。本研究於個案大學學生事務系統蒐集資料，樣本包括繁星推薦513人、個人申請1929人、考試分發2100人，共4542人。研究結果顯示四項自我調節學習建構（目標動能、調節機制、學業動機、投入時間）中，目標動能及投入時間對學業表現有預測力，此一預測模式有跨類別的一致性；而目標動能及投入時間也具有群組差異，呈現出繁星推薦及考試分發優於申請入學管道的結果；就學業表現而言，繁星推薦優於考試分發、而考試分發又優於申請入學。與假設不符的是，學業動機對學業表現無預測力，也未有群組差異。本研究提出研究結果對多元入學方案之實務意涵。英文摘要：For decades, the Taiwanese university admission system consisted of only one channel-the Joint College Entrance Examination-for admitting students into universities. This single-channel system received widespread criticism; for example, it was criticized for imposing enormous stress on students and for preventing students from exploring their interests and alternative career paths. Consequently, the multichannel entrance system was launched in 2002 to replace the single-channel paradigm and provide multiple options for students to be admitted into universities. Among the available admittance channels, most high school students are admitted into universities through three main channels: the multistar project, individual application channel, and exam-based channel. This study focused on these channels. These three channels were developed to meet distinct policy goals, and each challenge has unique procedures and criteria. The multistar project was designed to reduce the urban-rural gap and promote the communization of senior high schools. Therefore, students with good academic performance, regardless of the standing of their high school, have favorable chances of entering the university of their choosing. The individual application channel involves a similar application process to that in the United States and European countries. This channel requires students to prepare a personal portfolio supporting an application to a specific program. In-person interviews are usually mandatory during the process to facilitate proper consideration by the program faculty; compared with the other two channels, this channel is considered more effective at matching students' interests and competences with a department's selection criteria. Finally, the exam-based channel largely duplicates the old system of the Joint College Entrance Examination in which students list their desired programs and the exam score is the only criterion used to determine whether a student is qualified. All students are required to take the General Scholastic Ability Test in late January or early February; however, for students who choose the exam-based channel, an additional and considerably more difficult exam (Advanced Subjects Test, AST) is required in early July. Students who choose the multistar project channel are informed of their results in late March. The interview process for the individual application channel takes place in April, and students are informed of their results in May. For students who use the exam-based channel, the admission results are announced in early August. This study used self-regulated learning characteristics to interpret differences in academic performance. Among the three entrance channels, the multistar project channel emphasizes the high school GPA (grade point average), requiring applicants to maintain a high level of academic performance. The exam-based channel requires students to prepare for an additional and more difficult exam, requiring students to maintain their study skills and efforts longer. During this preparation time, students who choose the two other channels already know their admission results and are relieved of this burden. The researchers hypothesized that students who choose these two channels (multistar and exam-based) would have better self-regulated learning characteristics and academic performance in college. However, because the individual application channel is the most effective at matching students and programs, the researchers also hypothesized that students who choose the individual application channel would have stronger academic motives for their chosen majors in college. The study sample comprised 4542 college students, of whom 513 were admitted through the multistar project channel, 1929 were admitted through the individual application channel, and 2100 were admitted through the exam-based channel. Student data were collected through the student affairs system of a single university in Taiwan. The researchers adopted the nine variables of the framework of self-regulated learning proposed by Sitzman and Ely (2011). The researchers first explored the internal structure of the variables and used them to derive four self-regulatory factors, namely goal momentum, self-regulatory mechanism, academic motivation, and engagement time, which were then used to test the hypotheses. Goal momentum, including self-efficacy, goal setting, and metacognitive strategies, represents the process of planning, executing, and monitoring progress toward goals. Self-regulatory mechanism, including time management, learning environment structure, attention, and attribution, reflects an individual's self-regulating actions during the learning process. Because academic motivation and engagement time could not be categorized into a common factor, they were added to the regression analysis individually. Hierarchical regression analysis was used to derive a predictive model of how these self-regulatory factors predict academic performance (GPA in college). Finally, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied to test the hypotheses: first, that students from the multi-star project and exam-based channels would outperform students from the individual application channel in terms of self-regulatory characteristic variables (except academic motivation) and academic performance, and second, that students from the individual application channel would have more academic motivation than would students from the two other channels. The results demonstrated that among the four self-regulatory learning factors (goal momentum, self-regulatory mechanism, academic motivation, and engagement time), goal momentum and engagement time significantly predicted academic performance; this pattern appeared to be consistent across the three groups of students. Goal momentum and engagement time differed among the three groups. Specifically, as hypothesized, students admitted through the multistar project and exam-based channels outperformed those admitted through the individual application channel. Students admitted through the multistar project channel had higher academic performance than did those admitted through the exam-based channel, and in turn, students admitted through the exam-based channel had higher academic performance than did those admitted through the individual application channel. However, academic motivation (including the evaluation of their values and interest for their majors) did not differ among the three groups. The individual application channel aims to enhance self-exploration among students, and in theory, it best matches students and programs; nevertheless, the results of this study do not support this proposition. In addition, the study revealed that students admitted through the individual application channel had a slightly higher rate of changes in majors (p ＜ .01 in chi-square analysis) than did those admitted through the two other channels. Thus, contrary to the policy goal of matching students and programs, the students admitted through the individual application channel did not have stronger academic motivation, and a higher percentage of these students changed their majors. The individual application channel is the most commonly employed channel to admit students into universities in the United States and European countries; the Ministry of Education in Taiwan intended for this to be the dominant or even only channel for future admissions. The results of this study did not support the superiority of the individual application channel in the Taiwanese higher education context as measured by GPA; instead, the results for this channel were less favorable regarding students' self-regulatory characteristics and academic performance. The establishment of the multichannel entrance system was revolutionary and upheld a noble goal of both allowing students to better tailor their self-development and career paths and giving universities more power to choose suitable students for their departments. However, the revision of public policies to meet the needs of society takes time and multiple adjustments. A new version of the multichannel entrance system will be implemented in 2022; a notable improvement is being negotiated based on negative feedback regarding the current version. For example, students who choose the multistar project and individual application channels have nearly 3 to 4 months of ”nonstudying time” because their application procedure ends earlier. The new version has shortened this non-studying time by revising the timetable. For any policy to improve, it must include a dynamic feedback and revision process. A policy aimed at correcting one problem may create a new set of problems. Although some channels are designed to match students with applied programs, the traditional approach of students choosing programs based not on their interests but on the reputation of the university might still be common. This unexpected behavior during application to programs might have affected the channels through which students enter a program. Additional qualitative studies aimed at identifying the means through which students select an entrance channel are required to further determine effective means of designing policy to better persuade students to choose a major based on their own interests and competence.起始頁-結束頁：757-779資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).000213篇名：我國近30年科技融入數學教學對中小學生學習成效影響之後設分析並列篇名：Integrating Technology in Mathematics Instruction on Grade School Academic Achievement in Taiwan: A Meta-Analysis作者：廖遠光(Yuen-Kuang Cliff Liao);陳勇欣(Yung-Hsin Chen)關鍵字：後設分析;科技融入教學;臺灣學生;數學;學業成就;meta-analysis;integrating technology;Taiwan students;mathematics;academic achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以後設分析法探討近30年我國實施科技融入數學教學對中小學生學業成就之效果，並進而深入分析影響學習成效的因素。我們以「數學」、「科技」、「電腦」、「math」、「technology」、「computer」與「成效」等為關鍵字或篇名，自「臺灣博碩士論文知識加值系統」、「華藝線上圖書館」、「臺灣期刊論文索引系統」、Scopus、EBSCOhost、ProQuest、ScienceDirect及Web of Science等資料庫共收集到282篇研究（20,190位學生），並計算各研究之效果量（effect size, ES）。本研究參考Borenstein等人（2009）、Hedge與Olkin（1985）及Lipsey與Wilson（2001）等所建議的方法。ES定義為實驗組與對照組的平均數之差除以所有樣本之標準差。研究結果顯示，科技融入數學教學對學生之學習成效顯著優於傳統教學，整體平均效果量為0.32（固定效果模式）與0.35（隨機效果模式）。此外，在13個調節變項的分析上發現10個變項對整體成效有顯著影響：（1）國小學生的學習成效顯著優於高中（職）生；（2）國小生在「數與量」及「幾何」上的表現顯著優於國中生而國中生則在「代數」上略優於國小生」;（3）期刊論文的學習成效顯著優於未發表論文；（4）發表於2004－2009年的研究其成效顯著優於2010－2014年的研究；（5）採等組前後測的研究其成效略優於採不等組前後測的研究；（6）小樣本的研究其成效顯著優於大樣本的研究；（7）教學總節數為「6－10節」的研究成效顯著優於「16－20節」的研究；（8）「個人」化的學習成效顯著優於「全班一起授課」及「分小組授課」；（9）「即時反饋系統」的學習成效顯著優於「傳統紙筆」與「混合」；（10）科技融入時機以「課中」的學習成效最佳也優於「課前」、「課後」及「混合」。本研究為國內第一篇以科技融入中小學數學教學為主題的後設分析，研究發現當能提供政策決定者與數學教師重要之參考。英文摘要：Jonassen (2000) suggested that learning with information technology (IT) involves three stages: learning from computers, learning about computers, and learning with computers. The development of learning with IT in Taiwan, beginning with computer-assisted instruction, loosely follows these three stages (Chang, 2002). Integrating IT into instruction is the first stage of learning with computers. Previous meta-analyses (Cheung & Slavin, 2013; Demir & Basol, 2014; Hartley, 1977; Li & Ma, 2011; Slavin et al., 2008, 2009; Slavin & Lake, 2008; Rakes et al., 2010; Sokolowski1 et al., 2015; Young, 2017) regarding the effectiveness of integrating IT into mathematics instruction (ITMI) have reported positive effects compared with non- ITMI classes; effect sizes (ESs) were 0.07-0.9. These meta-analyses also concluded that variables such as publication year, publication type, learning stage, research design, intervention duration, technology type, assessment tool, instructional approach, and mathematics topic might influence the overall ES. A total of 19 meta-analyses investigating the effects of integrating IT into student learning in Taiwan have been performed; however, none of these studies were specifically focused on mathematics. In this study, we performed a meta-analysis to synthesize existing research regarding the effects of integrating IT with mathematics instruction on the academic achievement of elementary and secondary school students in Taiwan. We searched the National Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations in Taiwan, Airiti Library, Index to Taiwan Periodical Literature System, Scopus, EBSCOhost, ProQuest, ScienceDirect, and Web of Science databases for relevant studies by using keywords ”math,” ”technology,” ”computer,” and ”achievement” and gathered 282 studies (with 20,190 participants). We then transformed the quantitative data into ESs. After the calculation of the ES for each study, six studies with unusually large ESs were excluded in further analyses (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001). Thus, the total number of studies was 276. We used the meta-analytic approach suggested by Borenstein et al. (2009), Hedge and Olkin (1985), and Lipsey and Wilson (2001). The ES was defined as the mean difference between the treatment and control groups divided by the pooled standard deviations. The criteria for inclusion of studies were as follows: (1) Studies must compare the effects of ITMI and traditional instruction (TI) on student academic achievement in mathematics; (2) participants must be elementary or secondary school students; (3) the research design must include treatment and control groups, and the treatment group must receive treatment that involved integrating IT into instruction; (4) studies must provide adequate quantitative data for both treatment and control groups so that the ES could be estimated; (5) the number of participants for both ITMI and TI groups must be over 15; studies were excluded if the overall participants were less than 30; (6) the study participants must be Taiwanese students; (7) studies must be published between 1993 and 2019. On the basis of previous meta-analyses, the moderating effects of 13 variables were investigated. These variables were classified into three categories: (1) research characteristics, including learning stage, topic in mathematics, type of publication, and year of publication; (2) research methods, including study design, instructor bias, reliability of assessment tools, number of treatment class sessions, and sample size; and (3) research design, including the instructional approach for the treatment group, learning device for the student, method of integration, and timing of integration. Hedges' g was applied for ES calculation. If studies provided only an F-ratio value or a t value, equivalent formulae were used. In addition, the homogeneity test presented by Borenstein et al. (2009) was used to aggregate and analyze the ESs for all 276 studies. The significance of the mean ES was evaluated by its 95% confidence interval (95% CI). A significantly positive (+) mean ES indicated that the results favored the ITMI group, whereas a significantly negative (-) ES indicated that the results favored the TI group. The results of this meta-analysis revealed that the overall mean ESs were 0.32 (95% CI = 0.30-0.35, z = 24.31, p ＜ .0001) and 0.35 (95% CI = 0.31- 0.39, z = 17.54, p ＜ .0001) for the fixed-effects model and random-effects model, respectively. An effect is said to be small when ES ＜ 0.2, medium when ES <U+2248> 0.5, and large when ES ＞ 0.8 (Cohen, 1992). The results indicated that integrating technology into mathematics instruction had a significant small to medium positive effect compared with TI on the academic achievement of Taiwanese students. Moreover, the homogeneity test was significant (QT = 582.37, p ＜ .0001), indicating that the findings did not share a common ES. A series of moderator analyses were then performed. The analysis results revealed that 10 of the 13 moderating variables selected in this study had statistically significant effects on the overall mean ES. The findings were as follows: (1) The mean ES was higher for elementary school students than high school students. (2) Elementary school students had a higher mean ES for the topics ”Number and Quantity” and ”Geometry” than did junior high students, but junior high students had a greater mean ES for ”Algebra” than did elementary school students. (3) Journal articles had higher mean ES than did unpublished papers. (4) Studies published in 2004-2009 had higher mean ES than did those published in 2010-2014. (5) Studies that applied a pretest-posttest control group design had higher mean ES than did those that applied a quasiexperimental design. (6) Studies with small sample sizes had a higher mean ES than did those with large sample sizes. (7) Studies with less than 15 overall class sessions had a higher mean ES than did those with more than 15 class sessions. (8) Individual learning had a higher mean ES than did whole-class or small group learning. (9) Studies using immediate response system learning devices had a higher mean ES than did those using traditional paper and pencil or mixed devices. (10) Integrating technology in class had a higher ES compared with integrating technology before class or after class. In this meta-analysis, Funnel plot, Rosenthal's (1979) fail-safe Ns and Orwin's (1983) fail-safe Ns were applied to examine publication bias. The Funnel plot indicated that the studies were distributed symmetrically. Rosenthal's and Orwin's fail-safe Ns were 5580 and 8653, respectively-higher than the critical value of 5K+10. The results of all three methods suggest that there was no publication bias. On the basis of these findings, the implications of this meta-analysis are outlined as followings: (1) Education planners in Taiwan should provide adequate funding supporting ITMI and should encourage elementary and secondary school mathematics teachers to implement ITMI in their classes, particularly for students who require remedial instruction; (2) education planners in Taiwan should encourage mathematics educators to develop instructional programs, teaching methods, and learning materials for ITMI classes; (3) fewer than 15 ITMI class sessions have the strongest effects; and (4) future meta-analyses should examine the effects of varied instructional approaches (e.g., collaborative learning, problem-based learning, project-based learning, and self-regulated learning) alongside ITMI. Finally, this study is the first meta-analysis to focus on the effects of technology integration into mathematics instruction on the academic achievement of Taiwanese students. By examining empirical research on this topic, this meta-analysis provides research-based evidence of the positive outcomes of using technology in mathematics classes as well as how those effects are influenced by moderating variables. The findings provide education policymakers and mathematics teachers with valuable insights into methods of improving mathematics achievement.起始頁-結束頁：781-805資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).000314篇名：突破合作學習困境：得獎教師教學策略分析之研究並列篇名：Challenges of Cooperative Learning in Taiwan: Strategies for Improving the Effectiveness of Cooperative Learning作者：林秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Lin);張聖翎(Sheng-Ling Chang);吳相儀(Hsiang-Yi Wu)關鍵字：得獎老師;合作學習;教學策略;successful teachers;cooperative learning;teaching strategies期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：合作學習（cooperative learning）是近二十餘年蔚為風潮的一種創新教學策略，臺灣中小學也陸續採用，然而卻面臨不少實踐困境。本研究旨在探討採用合作學習教學的得獎教師，在面臨教學困境時如何採取最有效的教學策略。共分成兩個研究，研究一目的在搜集一般教師帶領合作學習之困境，以立意抽樣選取30位國中小學教師做為參與者，歸納在課堂中進行合作學習時，最令教師困擾的情境。而研究二目的在搜集得獎教師面對合作困境的教學策略，透過訪問12位採用合作學習而得獎的教師進行內容分析，研究一結果發現，最令一般教師感到困擾的三種困境分別為：（1）合作前期之對話困境；（2）合作中期之共事困境；（3）合作後期之共識困境。根據研究一結果，研究二訪談12位得獎老師面臨困境的策略，結果發現有5個主類目：（1）教師示範營造互信互賴；（2）組內成員互助回饋成長；（3）小組內明確分工分責；（4）加強良性溝通達成共識；（5）教師鼓勵促成共享共榮。最後整理出一套「合作學習的困境與主要策略圖」，提出具體建議供未來研究及實務之參考。英文摘要：Cooperative learning is one of the most innovative teaching methods developed in the past 20 years. Numerous primary and secondary school teachers in Taiwan use this method, but they face many practical challenges. Of the many teaching methods that have been proposed to increase students' learning motivation and efficiency, cooperative learning has been relatively successful in Taiwan. Cooperative learning involves asking students to cooperate in a group to achieve one or more specific learning goals (Chang, 2003). Most classrooms in junior and elementary schools in Taiwan follow traditional teaching methods, which involve one-way, teacher-student instruction. By contrast, cooperative learning encourages students to take control in the learning process. Cooperative learning elevates students' learning interests, willingness, and achievement through group cooperation (Johnson & Johnson, 1994). Thus, numerous studies (Chang, 2005; Wang & Chang, 2003) have demonstrated the positive results of applying cooperative learning in Taiwanese classrooms. Many such studies have focused on demonstrating the strengths and weaknesses of cooperative learning or examining the concept of cooperative learning in a Taiwanese context. Few studies have proposed methods for successfully applying cooperative learning. Applying cooperative learning is challenging for teachers because of its dynamic and unpredictable nature. Typically, teachers who employ cooperative learning methods must group students according to their strengths and characteristics and design appropriate tasks to achieve the overall learning goal of the lesson. Moreover, teachers guide students to allocate and share learning responsibilities and instruct group members to communicate and support each other during the learning process. The entire teaching process requires fully understanding each student's ability and potential, which further requires managing the interactive process and interpersonal conflicts among students. Few Taiwanese teachers have shared experiences of successfully applying cooperative learning by using teaching materials prepared in advance. Cooperative learning is a challenging teaching method that can often be frustrating, which leads teachers to avoid implementing it. This study explored the most common challenges involved in implementing cooperative learning in classroom settings. In addition, this study identified effective and successful strategies that can help teachers succeed in implementing cooperative learning. Accordingly, this study was divided into two parts. First, the potential challenges of cooperative learning were identified through surveys and interviews with 30 teachers who had experiences using cooperative learning in elementary or junior high schools. Second, practical strategies were determined through surveys and interviews with 12 teachers who had successfully applied cooperative learning in the classroom. Cooperative learning challenges were defined as challenging situations that occur during the cooperative learning process. All challenging situations were categorized into three stages of learning, namely early, middle, and late. Through calculation of the frequency that challenging situations arose in each stage, situations representing the typical challenges of cooperative learning were identified. First, during the early stage, the typical challenge was that students were unable to conduct a smooth discussion immediately after groups had been formed. For example, team members did not like or did not want to discuss the learning topics, did not want to state their opinions, or could not clearly understand other members' speech. Second, during the middle stage, the typical challenge was that students were unable to work together when teamwork was required. Specifically, the team could not effectively assign work to each member, or some team members did not agree with how the work was assigned, which caused conflicts among team members. Finally, in the late stage, the typical challenge was that students could not finish their work. For example, team members could not summarize and conclude their work effectively, could not reach a consensus, or did not sufficiently understand the group responsibilities and the importance of sharing credit for the work. In the second part of the study, the strategies that experienced teachers used to overcome these challenges were examined. Five basic strategies were identified: (1) Teachers demonstrate how team members should trust one other; (2) team members help each other and give positive feedback; (3) team members divide responsibilities; (4) team members communicate efficiently and draw conclusions; and (5) teachers encourage team members to share the results and credit for the work. These strategies can help bypass the typical challenges observed in the three cooperative learning stages. In each stage, all strategies or most of them could be identified. However, only two strategies (which accounted for the majority of the effective solutions developed to overcome the challenges observed in each learning phase) were investigated further in each stage. The results indicated that in the early stage, teachers must intervene in group discussions and demonstrate how team members should trust one another to overcome challenges during discussions. This strategy is crucial because most students in Taiwanese classrooms are accustomed to the one-way teaching method, which may make them hesitant to participate in discussions. However, when the teacher is actively involved and facilitating the discussion, students feel safer and are more willing to participate in discussions. The other critical strategy in the early stage was teaching team members how to properly help other team members during the discussion, which included giving positive feedback and clarifying discussion topics together. The results indicated that in the middle stage, solving interpersonal conflicts is essential for overcoming challenges involving teamwork. To successfully implement this strategy, teachers must continue to encourage team members to support each other (as in the aforementioned strategy) and help the group effectively allocate their work responsibilities. Teachers must monitor how tasks are assigned in the group because many unnecessary interpersonal conflicts can arise because of different workloads or because some team members want to avoid taking responsibility. Finally, the results indicated that in the late stage, teachers required two strategies to overcome the challenges involving concluding work. The first strategy involved helping team members efficiently communicate to reach a consensus and draw a conclusion. Within this strategy, teachers must manage their time effectively because students often waste time on aimless discussions or arguments. In addition, the group is expected to reach a consensus, and their conclusion is a critical index for teachers to evaluate whether the cooperative learning approach was successful. Therefore, the key strategy in the late stage is for teachers to actively facilitate efficient communication among groups. The second strategy is for team members to be encouraged to share credit for the work. Learning to share credit for group results and appreciate being recognized as a team can help students understand the aims of the entire cooperative learning experience, which may promote their participation in the next cooperative learning activity. Furthermore, the results of the first and second part of the study were combined to create a ”cooperative learning challenges and key strategies for practice” flowchart, which illustrates the practical challenges of cooperative learning and the strategies Taiwanese teachers can used to mitigate these challenges. This study identified the difficult situations and challenges involved in three stages of the cooperative learning process. The results herein can help teachers address these challenges before substantial difficulties arise. In addition, this study provides effective strategies for addressing these challenges. The results, including the flowchart, can serve as a reference for teachers to determine effective strategies for addressing the challenges involved in different stages of cooperative learning. However, this study had two main limitations. The sample size was insufficient, and only teachers were surveyed and interviewed, which may have influenced the cogency of the study. Future studies should include data from more diverse resources to ensure that evaluations of cooperative learning practices are accurate.起始頁-結束頁：807-827資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).000415篇名：國小低年級學生多元解題自我調節量表之編製發展與實測研究並列篇名：The Development and Testing of Early Primary School Students Multiple Self-Regulation Scale in Word Problem Solving作者：許家驊(Chia-Hua Hsu)關鍵字：多元解題自我調節;多元解題自我調節能力;量表;學習輔導;multiple self-regulation;word problem solving;scale;learning guidance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究因應課綱內容、學習輔導需要、研究實務經驗、國小低年級學生專注力有限特性，精簡歸納多元解題自我調節能力內涵，經專家審閱、試作預試後編製題數精簡、不造成填答負擔、實施便利之評定量表以評估學習者多元解題自我調節能力，並作為學習輔導基礎。考量學校學習內容同質性，採合目標與叢集取樣抽取嘉義縣市二年級學生602人，搭配二步驟解題前導經驗引發評量施測後分兩群進行含信效度交叉驗證在內之各項分析。效度方面，因素分析發現多元解題自我調節一因子含一般性及執行性二向度，共含預思計畫、自我省思、表現控制及執行驗證四分層面結構，且因素萃取、抽取變異比及模式適配度均屬良好；信度方面，α係數及組合信度亦屬良好；決斷值方面，單題、分層面、分量表、全量表極端組t考驗、單題與量表相關亦屬良好。而不同解題表現學生實測結果，發現其一般性及執行性解題自我調節（含預思計畫、自我省思、表現控制及執行驗證）能力均具真正差異，並針對解題表現低分組（後27%）學生多元解題自我調節能力T分數表現進行分類，得到不同分類特性及學習輔導方向，再依不同分類表現剖面，提出學習輔導重點及方案規劃。故國小低年級學生多元解題自我調節量表品質良好並具應用實效。英文摘要：The introduction (purpose and literature review), method, results and conclusions of this research are described as follows. As a response to Taiwan's education reform (12-year basic education curricula established by the Ministry of Education), learning guidance requirements, research practicality experience, and the limited attention of primary school lower grade students, this study developed the primary school lower grade students multiple self-regulation scale (PSLGS-MSRS). This Likert-type rating scale is used as a learning guidance instrument to assess self-regulation learning ability in combination with self-regulation learning componential and content analyses of addition and subtraction word problem solving (WPS) in primary school lower grade students. In addition, the PSLGS-MSRS incorporates the core competencies defined in the 12-year basic education curricula established by the Taiwan Ministry of Education, which include A2 systematic thinking and problem solving in spontaneity dimension A (elementary education stage). On the basis of the results on the PSLGS-MSRS, learning guidance programs were promoted to determine the feasibility of this study. To develop the PSLGS-MSRS, this study analyzed self-regulation and metacognition ability in combination with WPS experience to ascertain students' experiences learning how to address certain problem types and assess their problem-solving performance. The main focus of this research is presented as follows. First, the status and discrimination power of the PSLGS-MSRS was measured. Second, the validity of the PSLGSMSRS was measured. Third, the reliability of the PSLGS-MSRS was measured. Fourth, the WPS ability of various individuals was measured according to their performance on the PSLGS-MSRS. Fifth, functions applicable to the learning guidance of the PSLGS-MSRS in terms of the WPS ability of various individuals were explored. The ability component of self-regulation learning in WPS was divided into two facets, namely general and executive self-regulation, and four batteries, namely forethought, self-reflection, performance control, and executive verification. In the general self-regulation facet, the content was summarized and integrated from three sources. First, the first and third phases of the self-regulation three-phase cycled model from Zimmerman (2013) were analyzed (i.e., forethought and self-reflection, respectively). Second, the self-regulation phases and area frameworks from Pintrich (2004) were analyzed (i.e., forethought and activation, monitoring, control, response, and self-reflection). Third, the stages of the self-instruction process cycling model developed by Caliskan and Sunbul (2011) were analyzed (i.e., setting goals, considering thematic knowledge, and planning how much time to spend on learning). These concepts were summarized into forethought and self-reflection batteries involving the processes of general metacognition and self-regulated operations in mathematical problem solving. In the executive self-regulation facet, the content was a summarization and integration of material from three sources. First, the cognitive and metacognitive framework for mathematical problem solving developed by Garofalo and Lester (1985) was analyzed (i.e., orientation, organization, execution, verification, and evaluation). Second, the three stages of the self-instruction process cycling model developed by Caliskan and Sunbul (2011) were analyzed (i.e., monitoring learning, verifying the results, and discarding useless strategies; selecting a new strategy; and modifying and implementing the new strategy). Third, the cognitive and metacognitive integrated process model for mathematical problem solving developed by Montague (2008); Montague et al. (2011); and Peltier and Vannest (2016) was analyzed (i.e., checking (evaluation), self-instruction, self-questioning, self-monitoring, and reflection). Finally, the second phase of the self-regulation three-phase cycled model from Zimmerman (2013) was integrated (i.e., performance control). These concepts were summarized and integrated into performance control and executive verification batteries involving the processes of executive metacognition and self-regulated operations in mathematical problem solving. For data collection, the PSLGS-MSRS was combined with assessments of previous experience and two-step WPS tasks involving addition and subtraction. Therefore, learning content was also analyzed. The content of the two-step word problems involving addition and subtraction was based on problems from different versions of mathematics textbooks published by different textbook companies for first and second grade students in Taiwan. Next, analyses of the ability component and content were conducted to analyze self-regulation learning and the semantic schema involved in the two-step word problems involving addition and subtraction. After an expert review, the overall results were used to compile and develop the PSLGS-MSRS and the assessments of previous experience for the two-step word problems involving addition and subtraction. To ensure homogeneity of the learning content and students' school experiences, the participants were 602 second graders from Chiayi County and Chiayi City in Taiwan and were selected through purposeful cluster sampling. All participants were tested with the PSLGS-MSRS combined with the assessments of previous experience for the two-step word problems involving addition and subtraction. The data were divided into two clusters for random cross-validation statistical analyses. The statistical analysis methods and measures used were descriptive statistics, a repeated-measures t-test, the Pearson product-moment correlation, exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses, Cronbach's alpha coefficients, composite reliability, multivariate analysis of variance, η2 effect size, the Roy-Bargman stepdown multivariate analysis of variance, and simultaneous confidence interval. All statistical analysis data were processed using IBM SPSS and Analysis of Moment Structures. In addition, the data were evaluated and classified into different clusters. Next, the characteristics and attributes of each cluster were identified, and the corresponding profiles were elucidated to organize the learning guidance program and suggestions for instructional strategies. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses produced numerous factor structures matching the one-factor dimension (WPS multiple self-regulation learning), two facets (general and executive self-regulation learning), and four batteries (forethought, self-reflection, performance control, and executive verification) of the self-regulation learning analyses. The KMO (Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin) value, variance proportions of factor extraction, and the model fitness were positive. The reliability analysis produced a positive α coefficient, and the composite reliability was positive. Regarding the item analysis, the critical ratio and item total correlation were strong, regardless of whether it was for a single item, a subscale, or all items. General and executive self-regulation learning abilities (i.e., forethought, self-reflection, performance control, and executive verification batteries) in WPS multiple self-regulation learning were significantly different among individuals with different WPS performance. Next, the Standardized T score of self-regulation learning ability was classified on the basis of the scores of low-performance students (bottom 27%); different characteristics and learning guidance directions were identified. The student performance profiles of different clusters were used to elucidate the main points and programs of learning guidance. On the basis of these results, the following conclusions were drawn. First, the validity of the PSLGS-MSRS was favorable, which reflected the measured construct structures of self-regulation. Second, the reliability of the PSLGS-MSRS adequately reflected the construct dependability of the self-regulation measurements. Third, the PSLGS-MSRS effectively discriminated the measured performance of individuals with different self-regulation abilities. Fourth, the performance of individuals with different WPS abilities differed significantly according to practical measurements of general and executive self-regulation performance. Fifth, differentiated functions of different learning guidance needs were identified from the PSLGS-MSRS results of individuals with different WPS abilities. Finally, on the basis of these conclusions, the PSLGS-MSRS is verified to be a valid, practical, and effective instrument for assessing self-regulation learning.起始頁-結束頁：829-856資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).000516篇名：青少年知覺的社會支持和英文科學業成就之關係：恆毅力與學習投入之序列中介效果分析並列篇名：Relationship Between Perceived Social Support and English Academic Achievement Among Adolescents: The Sequentially Mediating Effects of Grit and Learning Engagement作者：陳思親(Sz-Chin Chen);陳慧娟(Huey-Jiuan Chen)關鍵字：社會支持;恆毅力;學習投入;英文科學業成就;social support;grit;learning engagement;English academic achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在探討後期中等教育階段青少年社會支持與英文學業成就之關係，並檢視恆毅力和學習投入的中介效果。調查方式採分層便利取樣，參與者為850位臺灣公、私立高中、高職學生，其中男生301人、女生549人。研究工具包含「社會支持量表」、「學習投入量表」、「恆毅力量表」和「英文科成就測驗」。所得資料以描述性統計和變異數分析檢視各向度之現況，並以皮爾森積差相關分析和中介效果分析考驗變項間之關係和序列中介效果。主要研究發現如下：（1）高中生學習投入程度、恆毅力得分，以及知覺的教師支持顯著高於高職生；（2）十年級學生自陳之學習投入程度與知覺的家長支持顯著高於十一年級學生；（3）青少男學習不熱衷程度顯著高於青少女；（4）青少女較青少男顯著感受到更多的同儕支持；（5）青少年社會支持、恆毅力、學習投入和英文科學業成就間彼此呈顯著正相關，而社會支持、恆毅力和英文科學業成就與學習不熱衷呈顯著負相關；（6）家長、教師、同儕和整體社會支持皆對英文科學業成就有正向影響；（7）恆毅力、學習投入序列中介社會支持對英文科學業成就的影響；（8）恆毅力、學習不熱衷依序正向、負向中介社會支持對英文科學業成就的影響。本研究依據上述結果提出建議，以供教育實務單位和未來研究之參考。英文摘要：In light of the crucial role of adolescence as a transitional stage of physical and psychological development and concerns regarding school learning during this time, educators have devoted their efforts to exploring the factors affecting adolescent development. Among all of the contextual factors, social support has been proven to promote students' development and academic achievement (Vollet et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2011). Several researchers have further indicated that social support from different sources offers unique contributions (Song et al., 2015; Wentzel et al., 2016) and may offset each other in some circumstances (Chen & Chien, 2020). Therefore, this research, which is based on Bronfenbrenner's ecological systems theory, both separately and collectively considers parent, teacher, and peer support to provide additional empirical evidence of the relationship between social support and academic achievement. In addition to academic achievement, engagement has been considered the core element of motivation, which represents the quality of students' participation (Skinner et al., 2009). Compared with academic achievement, learning engagement places more emphasis on the learning process, which encompasses students' behavioral, cognitive, emotional, and agentic involvement (Fredricks et al., 2004; Reeve & Teng, 2011). Instead of disengagement, Skinner and his colleagues (2008) highlighted disaffection, which involves the maladaptive motivational states of learning. Numerous studies have suggested that engagement is associated not only with learning achievement but also with physical and mental health (Jang et al., 2016). More importantly, researchers have indicated that learning engagement and disaffection are not innate but rather the product of personal traits and contextual factors (Buhs et al., 2018), which implies that potential for academic success is potentially malleable. Thus, the current study suggests that students' engagement can be increased through social support, which can also reduce disaffection, and that academic achievement is positively related to engagement and negatively related to disaffection. Recently, ”grit” has emerged as a significant predictor of success (Duckworth et al., 2007). Although certain educational policies that have been implemented have included teaching methods for promoting the development of students' grit, whether grit predicts academic achievement remains unclear. Several studies have indicated that grit reduces the risk of disaffection and effectively improves academic achievement (Datu et al., 2016a), whereas other studies have indicated that grit has little explanatory power in terms of academic achievement (Steinmayr et al., 2018). Several researchers have suggested that this difference may be caused by the perception of grit as either domain general or domain specific (Muenks et al., 2017). Duckworth (2016) elaborated that having grit implies not a dedication to all scopes of knowledge and activity but rather a focus on a particular long-term goal that a person has a passion for. Thus, the current study adopted the domain-specific perspective with the aim of clarifying the relationship among social support, grit, engagement, and academic achievement. In the current study, we explored the relationship between social support and English academic achievement among adolescents in upper secondary education and examined the mediating effects of grit and learning engagement. Hence, in terms of adolescents' prior English achievement in the Comprehensive Assessment Program for junior high school students (the entrance exam for senior high school in Taiwan), we explored the sequentially mediating effects of grit and learning engagement-disaffection on perceived social support and English academic achievement, respectively. On the basis of the theoretical framework, the current study was designed to achieve the following aims: (1) clarify the current status of adolescents' perceived social support, grit, learning engagement-disaffection, and English academic achievement and determine whether sex, school type (vocational-high school), or grade (freshman-junior) affects any of the aforementioned variables; (2) explore the relationship among social support, grit, learning engagement-disaffection, and English academic achievement among adolescents; and (3) examine the sequentially mediating effect of grit and learning engagement-disaffection on perceived social support and English academic achievement in terms of prior English academic achievement. Through stratified convenience sampling, 850 students (301 male and 549 female) were recruited from senior high schools and vocational schools in Taiwan. All participants completed the revised Social Support Scale, the Learning Engagement Scale, the Grit Scale, and an original English achievement test. We quantitatively analyzed the data using descriptive statistics, analysis of variance, Pearson correlation analysis, and sequential mediation analysis. The results indicated the following: (1) senior high school students exhibit significantly higher learning engagement, have higher levels of grit, and perceive higher levels of teacher support than do vocational school students. (2) Freshmen (tenth graders) are significantly more engaged in learning and perceive significantly more parental support than do junior students (eleventh graders). (3) Male students are significantly more disaffected in learning than female students are. (4) Female students perceive significantly more peer support than male students do. (5) Social support, grit, engagement, and English academic achievement among teenagers are positively correlated with one another, whereas disaffection is negatively correlated with social support, grit, and English academic achievement. (6) Parental, teacher, peer, and overall social support have positive effects on English academic achievement. (7) Grit and engagement have sequential mediation effects on social support and English academic achievement. (8) Grit and disaffection sequentially mediate the relationship between social support and English academic achievement both positively and negatively. On the basis of these findings, the current study provides suggestions for educational practitioners and offers directions for future research. The findings of this study reveal the importance of parents, teachers, and peers in collaboratively building a positive learning environment to support adolescents' development. Moreover, because of the crucial role of grit in adolescents' learning, fostering grit to increase learning engagement and reduce learning disaffection is key for adolescents. In addition, both engagement and disaffection warrant attention. In this study, most adolescents exhibited a high level of agentic disaffection; these passive learners urgently require more attention. Furthermore, this study confirmed that support from different sources provides unique contributions. Support from parents and teachers affects adolescents' learning engagement and disaffection more significantly than other types of support do. The results indicated that support from older people plays an essential role in adolescents' development. In future studies, the distinctiveness of the participants' microsystem should be considered; accordingly, instruments should be properly modified to enhance construct validity. Although studies have primarily highlighted social support from parents, school teachers, and peers, several participants in our study indicated that they received more support from other family members, cram school teachers, or other peers. Moreover, assessment tools should correspond to participants and their living areas to ensure the value of the research. During adolescence, teenagers try to escape from parents' protection and strive for independence. Whether perceiving more social support might cause opposite outcomes and compromise students' self-identity is worthy of discussion. However, Datu and colleagues (2017) accounted for cultural differences, supplementing ”adaptability to situations” as the third factor of grit. Future studies can modify their assessment tools according to these considerations and perform cross-cultural comparisons. Researchers can collect multiple types of data or long-term data to improve content validity and substantiate empirical evidence. Because this study adopted a self-report inventory, the data were vulnerable to personal response and social desirability bias. Although this study revealed a sequential mediation effect, the total effects were not substantial. Future studies can further explore other mediators to enrich theoretical knowledge on academic achievement and motivation theory. Upper secondary education is the first encounter that teenagers in Taiwan have with the decision-making aspects of different school systems. The study results indicated that vocational school students have lower levels of grit and engagement and lower English academic achievement than senior high school students do. We expect additional studies to examine the upper secondary education system to provide more practical advice.起始頁-結束頁：857-883資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).000617篇名：微課程對注意力與學習保留之影響並列篇名：Effect of Micro-Courses on Learners' Attention and Memory Retention作者：陳姿安(Zih-An Chen);黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang)關鍵字：注意力;片段式課程;學習保留;微課程;傳統線上課程;attention;fragmented course;learning retention;micro-course;traditional online course期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在探討微課程的簡短課程特性對於學習者的影響，並以不同課程切割方式與課程總長度之差異，設計出傳統線上課程、片段式課程與微課程三種不同課程方式，比較三個組別中的注意力與學習保留效果。本研究採實驗設計，以社會心理學課程中的從眾行為做為課程主題，使用量化為主、質性為輔的方式，招募90位大學生作為參與者，隨機分派至傳統線上課程、片段式課程與微課程三個不同課程方式的組別當中進行實驗。研究結果顯示：（1）於客觀之注意力再認表現上，片段組參與者之表現會顯著高於傳統組；而主觀之自陳式注意力表現上，微課組參與者之表現顯著高於傳統組。（2）於學習保留上，三個組別無顯著差異；不過根據不同時段之課程內容分析結果發現，相較於傳統組與片段組，微課組參與者於課程中、後段之學習保留具有更高之上升幅度。英文摘要：With the development of science and technology, the generation and spread of knowledge has accelerated. Peoples' attention spans have decreased as intelligent technological devices have been developed. In addition, modern people continue to receive excessive amounts of information due to the high frequency of Internet use, but a large amount of information cannot be effectively stored in the brain (Small et al., 2009). Scholars have claimed that, given the massive amounts of information and the learning style of digital natives, designing effective learning units that avoid cognitive overload and optimizing students' learning patterns have become important issues in education (Fyfe, 2016; Wang & Fan, 2016). Micro-learning is a new type of learning based on micro-content and micro-media. It was first proposed by Martin Lindner in 2006. Micro-learning is a general term for all short and small learning models, and it is not limited to any form. Micro-courses for micro-learning were proposed by David Penrose, a senior instructional designer in the United States (Wen & Zhang, 2015). He defined a micro-course as a form of curriculum with short films. A previous study noted that the length of the video is related to the participation rate of learners; that is, the shorter the video length, the higher the participation rate (Guo et al., 2014). The short-film characteristics of micro-courses likely increase the focus of learners, thereby increasing their participation rate. Some of the early conventional online courses were derived from the digitization of in-person courses, and the online videos lasted for approximately 40 to 50 minutes, which would make it difficult for learners to maintain their attention (Wen & Zhang, 2015). Therefore, scholars have divided the long-term online course videos into small-scale fragmentary course videos. This increased learning retention effects (e.g., Cheng et al., 2014), showing that attention plays an important role in online video learning. In summary, micro-courses are characterized by short videos, and their content is more streamlined compared with conventional online courses and small-scale fragmentary courses. The use of short films helps students to maintain attention in the learning process, improves learner participation, and enhances learning retention. The development of micro-courses is of great importance in the current learning environment due to the rapid increase in information and the advancement of media technology. However, past studies on micro-courses have focused on learners' affective attitudes toward micro-courses, including learning motivation and learning satisfaction (e.g., Frydenberg & Andone, 2016; Yu, 2016) or have surveyed willingness to use micro-courses among teachers (e.g., Fang & Liu, 2017). Rigorously designed experimental studies examining the learning process for micro-courses are lacking; studies evaluating the learning effectiveness of micro-courses are required. This study explored the attention and learning retention effects of micro-courses featuring simplified content. Based on the course segmentation and total length, three types of courses were designed. In this study, ”conformity”, a topic in social psychology, was the subject of the course. A conventional online course video of approximately 24 minutes was produced (traditional course group); this video was then cut into four fragmented course videos of approximately 6 minutes each according to theme units (fragmented course group), and a micro-course video of approximately 9 minutes was produced after by condensing the original material (micro-course group). Attention and learning retention were compared between these three groups. This study adopted an experimental design. In total, 90 college students were recruited as participants and randomly assigned to one of the three groups (traditional course, fragmented course, and micro-course). Approximately 3 to 6 participants who were assigned to the same group watched the video together. Before the experiment, participants were reminded that mobile phones and other communication devices must be turned off during the class. The experimental procedure was divided into two phases. At the beginning of the first phase of the formal experiment, participants in the traditional course group watched the video of 24 minutes with no break. Participants in the fragmented course group watched the four 6-minute videos with a 1-minute break between each video. Participants in the micro-course group watched the 9-minute video without any breaks. When they had finished watching the film(s), participants in the micro-course group were allowed to rest for 1 minute, after which they completed questionnaires. The results of this study showed that (1) participants in the fragmented course group had higher performance in the attention recognition test than participants in the traditional course group. Moreover, participants in the micro-course group reported higher levels of attention than those in the traditional course group. (2) No significant difference was found in the learning retention effect between these three groups. However, in further analysis, compared with the traditional course group and fragmented course group, the learning retention effect in the micro-course group increased in the later stages of the course. The qualitative data showed that although the three groups of participants all indicated that their attention gradually declined as the course video progressed, they paid attention when introducing real-life cases. However, these three groups of participants reported diverse reasons for attention changes. Participants in the traditional course group reported that the video included too much information, with no room for distraction. In the fragmented course group, although the length of the course was the same as that of the traditional online course, participants were allowed rest periods in between. Some participants reported that during the rest period, they could recall and reorganize what they have learned and could refocus their attention. Some participants in the micro-course group reported that their attention can be maintained during the learning process. In addition, based on the qualitative data from participants, the average time of video that most participants were willing to watch was approximately 10-15 minutes. Few participants could pay attention to videos more than 30 minutes. Moreover, all three groups of participants mentioned that the inclusion of real-life events in the design of the course would be helpful for their comprehension. The presentation of vivid animation and images in the course is not only interesting but also helpful for improving memory. The results of this study imply that through well-designed course content, even a short online learning video can achieve the same learning effect as a longer online learning video. It also allows learners to maintain a higher level of attention in the learning process. In other words, compared with the courses with long online videos, the micro-course could yield greater learning efficiency. Therefore, when designing online learning videos in the future, teachers should use the format of well-designed micro-courses. By shortening the learning time and reducing individuals' attention loads, micro-courses can achieve the same learning effect as courses with long videos.起始頁-結束頁：885-907資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).000718篇名：語音異常兒童語音知覺、音韻覺識與語音產出之相關並列篇名：Relationships Between Speech Perception, Phonological Awareness, and Speech Production in Preschool-Age Children with Speech Sound Disorder作者：簡欣瑜(Hsin-Yu Chien);劉惠美(Huei-Mei Liu)關鍵字：音韻覺識;語音知覺;語音產出;語音異常;範疇知覺;phonological awareness;speech perception;speech production;speech sound disorder;categorical perception期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：臨床上對語音異常兒童的治療常結合語音知覺及音韻覺識訓練，加強其語音產出能力，但目前卻無充足的實證研究支持三者之間的關係。本研究根據言語處理模式相關理論，探討語音異常兒童的語音產出與語音知覺及音韻覺識能力之相關性。參與者為46位5歲語音異常兒童，以自編電腦化和標準化測驗量測其語音知覺（純音區辨、語音區辨、範疇語音指認）、音韻覺識（韻母判斷、首音判斷、聲調判斷、音節刪除）與語音產出（詞語和子音正確百分比）等能力，以相關和迴歸分析探討三者能力間的淨相關，以及語音知覺及音韻覺識對語音產出的預測力。研究結果顯示，語音產出與子音和聲調辨識斜率值有顯著負相關，但與純音區辨敏感度則無；而語音產出僅與音節刪除正確率有顯著正相關，與其他音韻覺識指標則無顯著相關；語音知覺的多項指標與音韻覺識能力也有顯著相關。複迴歸分析結果顯示範疇知覺中的子音和聲調辨識斜率及音韻覺識中的音節刪除對語音產出皆有解釋力，且以語音辨識斜率的解釋力最高。以語音產出作為依變項進行路徑分析，發現範疇語音指認斜率對語音產出有直接的預測力。整體而言，本研究支持語音知覺、音韻覺識及語音產出之間有關聯性的論述，提供語音介入時融入語音知覺及音韻覺識訓練的參考。英文摘要：According to the definition of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, in children, speech sound disorders (SSDs) are defined as speech errors that persistent even after a certain age. Studies have shown that children with SSDs may have problems with phonological perception and phonological awareness in the preschool stage. Some studies have suggested that when treating phonological abnormalities in children, training for speech perception and phonological awareness may also improve treatment effectiveness. However, at present, studies examining the relationships between speech perception, phonological awareness, and speech production of children with SSDs are lacking. To develop an effective intervention plan for children with SSDs, the relationship between speech output and speech processing-related variables should be determined. This study systematically examined the correlations between the speech production of children with SSDs and their levels of speech perception and phonological awareness to provide empirical evidence for improving clinical intervention design. By using speech processing models, this study inferred the possible reciprocal relationships between speech perception, phonological awareness, and speech production. Children develop speech perception abilities (such as basic abilities to discriminate and identify speech sounds) in the early stages of development. This basic speech perception ability affects their abilities of speech production and of phonological awareness (e.g., building phonological representations and manipulations). The development of phonological awareness would improve the fineness of speech perception abilities, which in turn affects the capacity of speech production. Moreover, the perceptual and motor feedback provided based on the speech production ability in preschool children may also promote the development of speech perception and phonological awareness in these children. Although the reciprocal relationships between speech perception, phonological awareness, and speech production in children with typical development or children with SSDs have not been consistently demonstrated in the literature, speech perception, phonological awareness, and speech production are hypothesized to have mutual influence in children with SSDs during preschool ages. This study examined the relationships between speech perception, phonological awareness, and speech production in preschool children with SSDs. Participants were 46 Mandarin-speaking children aged 5 years (39 boys and 7 girls) with SSDs and without any other sensory or developmental disabilities, such as intellectual disability, cerebral palsy, or hearing impairment. Their nonverbal IQ was higher than 80 on the Test of Nonverbal Intelligence-Fourth Edition (TONI-4). Their language comprehension was also more than -1.5 standard deviation on the scandalized language test. Several self-made computerized and standardized tests were used to measure their speech perception, phonological awareness, and speech production abilities. For speech perception, pure tone discrimination, speech discrimination, and categorical perception assessments were conducted. For phonological awareness, assessments of rhyme judgment, initial sound judgment, tone judgment, and syllable deletion were designed. For speech production assessment, we used the Articulatory and Phonological Test for Mandarin-Speaking Children to assess individual children's percentage of correct word production. In addition, the speech samples elicited from the conversation, comic strip cards, and storybooks were collected and analyzed to index the percentage of correct consonants for individual children. Correlation and multiple regression analyses (including path analysis) were used to examine the relationships among these three speech-related abilities as well as the ability of speech perception and phonological awareness to predict speech production in Mandarin-speaking children with SSDs. After controlling for age, language comprehension, and nonverbal IQ, correlations were observed between the speech perception, phonological awareness, and speech production of children with SSDs. Most measures of speech perception and phonological awareness were significantly correlated; however, partial correlations were found between the measures of speech perception and speech production. For example, the identification slope of consonants and tones was significantly correlated with the speech production ability, but pure tone identification was not correlated with speech production. Speech production was only correlated with syllable deletion, but not with other indexes of phonological awareness (i.e., rhyme judgment, initial sound judgment, and tone judgment). Furthermore, the results of multiple regression analysis showed that the identification slope of consonants, tone perception, and syllable deletion had explanatory power for speech production. That is, the speech perception and phonological awareness abilities at the syllable level could predict the variance of speech production. Among the predictive factors, the identification slope of speech was the most powerful predictor of speech production. In path analysis with speech production as the dependent variable, the categorical perception of consonants and tone had direct predictive power for speech production. This study revealed that after controlling for age, language comprehension, and nonverbal IQ, the speech perception sensitivities of consonants and tones (especially the phonetic identification of categorical perception) and phonological awareness (i.e., syllable deletion) of children with SSDs were significantly correlated with their speech production at 5 years of age. Among them, categorical speech identification had direct predictive power for speech production, showing that this ability has important influence on speech production, and this result indicates that children with SSDs may have inferior abilities of speech perception and phonological awareness. This study analyzed the phonological processing ability of children with SSDs, and the results are similar to the previous hypothesis for the normal development of children's phonological processing; that is, speech perception ability affects speech production ability, and phonological awareness ability affects speech perception ability. The improved phonological awareness ability may increase the fineness of speech perception, which in turn affects the speech production ability. The perception or articulation feedback provided during speech production also promotes the further development of speech perception and phonological awareness. Overall, a close interaction exists between the three speech-related abilities as described above. The phonological processing capabilities covered in this research include speech perception and phonological awareness; however, phonological processing should include other aspects (such as phonological working memory). Therefore, future studies should explore other phonological processing abilities of children with SSDs to gain a comprehensive understanding of the phonological causes of SSDs. In addition, currently, two major approaches of intervention exist for children with SSDs, one based on motor skill training and the other based on language processing training. The articulation-based training model focuses on motor skill training for speech production, and this training mainly involves teaching the correct articulatory movements of individual speech sounds at the speech production level. The language processing-based model emphasizes the buildup of correct phonological representation of the complex phonological system for children with SSDs to correct inaccurate speech representations and speech errors. According to the results of this study, training involving both ”listening” and ”speaking” is important and should be conducted as an early speech intervention for children with SSDs. In terms of listening training, establishing phonetic discrimination (i.e., distinguishing the same or different speech sounds), identification (i.e., defining the specific speech sound category), and phonological awareness (i.e., detecting specific phonemes) may facilitate speech production in preschool children with SSDs. The establishment of correct phonological representations for children may facilitate precise speech production. In terms of speaking training, children should be supported to observe the position and movements of the speech organs during articulation training. The feedback of correct speech production movements can also facilitate children's speech perception abilities. Overall, the developments of speech perception, phonological awareness, and speech production are intercorrelated. Speech perception and phonological awareness training should be combined when implementing speech interventions for children with SSDs to improve their speech sound production.起始頁-結束頁：909-933資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).000819篇名：個別研究品質好壞有關係嗎？類比教學對於學生科學概念改變成效後設分析並列篇名：Does Assessing the Quality of Primary Research Matter? A Meta-Analysis of Analogical Instruction-Induced Changes in Students' Science Concepts作者：謝進昌(Jin-Chang Hsieh);邱怡靜(Yi-Ching Chiu)關鍵字：類比教學;概念改變;後設分析;量化研究統合;個別研究品質評估;analogy instruction;conceptual change;meta-analysis;quantitative research synthesis;quality assessment of primary research期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：隨著「以證據為基礎的教育」理念的興起，透過量化研究統合，以提出科學實徵證據，逐漸受到重視，進而使得如何判讀個別研究品質好壞，也成為重要議題。本研究採用系統性文獻回顧與後設分析，針對類比教學主題進行研究統合，目的除探討類比教學對於學生科學概念改變的統合成效外，焦點在於探討一般學者慣用指標（出版類型）與其它研究品質評估指標對於統合結果的影響，以尋求能兼顧效度理論與實務可行之替代性個別研究品質評估指標。本研究結果發現：1. 類比教學整體具有中等教學效果；2. 在未考量個別研究品質時，單一類比教學成效傾向低於非單一類比教學，如類比橋、多重類比教學成效，而針對國小學習階段的參與者使用非單一類比教學，具有最佳教學成效，然而，若同時考量不同個別研究品質時，其顯著調節效果會變成不顯著，顯示研究品質評估具有相當影響力；3. 以「出版類型」作為個別研究品質評估，容易同時涉及出版偏誤議題，而本文建議使用替代性研究品質評估指標，即同時符合前測表現基準可比較性、評量工具信效度、與基本參與者人數等三指標，似乎更能兼顧效度理論、實徵結果與實務可行性。文末，提出幾點結論與建議，供未來研究者參考。英文摘要：As evidence-based education evolves, an increasing body of evidence has highlighted the issue of constructing high-quality indicators in the synthesis of quantitative research. However, what is considered optimal remains unclear and a topic of debate. Numerous researchers assess the single indicator of primary research such as the publication, pretest performance, reliability and validity, and sample size. This approach can result in bias. Therefore, this study proposed alternative quality indicators to replace the single indicator with suitable evidence synthesis. Research on analogy instruction was integrated through a systematic review and meta-analysis, and the effects of analogy instruction were explored through quantitative research synthesis. With respect to literature reviews, document retrieval targets journal articles, master's theses, and doctoral dissertations on the basis of references to relevant retrospective studies. Regarding analogy instruction, systematic literature collection and positioning are performed to avoid missing relevant articles and causing sampling bias. Moreover, the participants included in the present study ranged from preschoolers to elementary, junior high school, vocational high school, and university students. The analogy instruction-related topics discussed included single analogies, analogy bridges, and multiple analogies. However, comments on or introductions of analogy instruction and scientific concept learning performance were excluded from analysis, as were articles on the development at different stages and other irrelevant topics. Because quantitative meta-analysis was conducted, qualitative studies were also disregarded, as were publications that failed to provide the information required for calculating effect sizes. In meta-analyses, Hedges' g is used as a measure of the effect size of standardized mean differences (Hedges, 1982). Owing to pretest-posttest differences in data provided by different institutions, the effect sizes can be roughly classified as those of the mean raw score and the mean-covariate adjusted score (Morris & DeShon, 2002; WWC, 2020b). When the information on adjustments to pretest data, including statistics from analysis of covariance, adjusted means, and standard deviations, was provided, the effect size of the mean-covariate adjusted score was used. According to WWC recommendations (2020b), if this information was not provided but other data (e.g., pretest and posttest means and standard deviations) were and the pretest- posttest assessment tools were consistent, difference-in-differences was used. To account for pretest-posttest correlations, difference-in-differences adjustment was performed. When no pretest data were provided or only posttest-related statistics (e.g., from analysis of variance) were provided, the effect size was calculated from the mean-raw score. Regarding the integration effect of analogy instruction in promoting students' scientific concept learning performance, a medium immediate effect size of 0.59 was obtained. The delayed effect size was reduced to 0.39 (medium). Regarding the moderators of analogy instruction, single analogy regression failed to reach significance, but the p-value was 0.08, that appeared to become more significant or nearly significant. The effect size of analogy instruction for the elementary school students was 0.88, whereas that for students in junior high school and above was 0.52, constituting a significant difference. With regard to seeking more appropriate indicators for assessing the quality of primary research, three indicators are proposed herein: baseline equivalence of the pretest, reliability and validity of assessment tools, and sample size. For baseline equivalence, the effect size was not significantly different regardless of whether the baseline equivalence of the pretest was even. Regarding the selection of effect calculations, even if the attrition rate was excessively high (more than 10%) or the pretest difference was greater than 0.5 standard deviations, they were classified as nonconforming indicators. By this standard, as long as statistics from covariate analysis or pretest and posttest data were provided, the effect size was estimated by using the mean score after covariate adjustment. This appeared to compensate for both types of possible differences, which in turn led to nonsignificant results. Regarding the reliability and validity of assessment tools, the regression coefficient β was -0.57 (pβ ＜ 0.0001). The effect size of 1.06 was large. The result indicates that obtaining a large effect size is simple if the reliability and validity of assessment tools are not addressed. Regarding the sample size, the regression coefficient β for the basic number of participants was -0.81 (pβ = 0.003), demonstrating that a favorable effect size of 1.36 could be easily obtained for small-scale studies on analogy instruction. As Slavin (2008) noted, small-scale studies are likely to obtain extremely positive or extremely negative result. In terms of meeting the three indicators, primary research considering all levels of validity had a medium effect size of 0.49. Similar results were obtained regardless of the quality assessment method used. The effect sizes of the studies that did not meet the quality assessment standards exceeded those of the studies that did, indicating that the effects of analogy instruction in primary research may be overestimated if quality assessment is not considered. Significant effects were observed for both analogy instruction approaches and learning stages. The regression coefficient β values were 0.27 (pβ = 0.03) and -0.41 (pβ = 0.01), respectively. For the elementary school learners, the effect size of 0.77 for single analogies was large. The effect size for approaches other than single analogies was larger (1.04). For single analogies and nonsingle analogies among students in junior high school and above, the effect sizes were 0.36 and 0.63, respectively-roughly in the upper and lower intervals of medium effect sizes. Therefore, different analogy instruction topics had different effect sizes for students at different learning stages, with better results for topics other than single analogies. Regarding publication type, multiples analysis was performed on moderators of the analogy instruction topics and learning stages. A tendency toward positive effects was observed. When publication type is controlled and two moderators are examined at the same time, publication type had little influence on analogy instruction. Regarding the baseline equivalence of the pretest, the comparable regression coefficient β values were 0.07 (pβ = 0.72) and 0.03 (pβ = 0.89) to the analogy instruction topics and learning stages, respectively. Neither were significant. According to the study design and the information provided, the initial selection of an appropriate calculation scale can facilitate the adjustment of the comparability of the baseline equivalence of the pretest. When all three indicators (i.e., baseline equivalence, reliability and validity of assessment tools, and sample size) were met, the mentioned conditions exerted impacts on analogy instruction topics. When the conditions were not fulfilled, the influence of other moderators or the effects of analogy instruction could be misestimated or overestimated, respectively. The conclusions are as follows: First, analogy instruction had an overall positive effect. Second, when the impacts of quality indicators were not controlled, single analogies were less efficient than other analogy instruction topics, such as multiple and bridging analogies. Furthermore, the elementary school students performed better, especially when they received instruction on topics other than single analogies. Finally, publication type is not a favorable indicator in the quality assessment of primary research because of mixed impacts with publication bias. However, alternatives can be well defined both theoretically and empirically through the examination of baseline equivalence, the reliability and validity of assessment tools, and the establishment of basic sample size requirements.起始頁-結束頁：935-962資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).000920篇名：以動態系統取向探討母親後設情緒理念、母子情緒互動彈性與青少年內、外向問題行為之關聯並列篇名：The Relationship Among Mothers' Meta-Emotion Philosophy, Mother-Adolescent Emotion Flexibility, and Adolescents' Internalizing and Externalizing Behaviors作者：劉奕蘭(Yih-Lan Liu);童懿辰(Yi-Chen Tong)關鍵字：動態系統;情緒互動彈性;後設情緒理念;內、外向問題行為;dynamic system;emotional flexibility;metaemotion philosophy;internalizing and externalizing problematic behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以動態系統取向探討母親後設情緒理念、母子情緒互動彈性與青少年內、外向問題行為之關聯。研究對象為118對臺灣北、中部地區自願參與之國中生及其母親。本研究觀察青少年與母親在討論雙方意見不一致話題時，雙方進行問題解決時的情緒互動反應。研究工具採用錄影編碼及「狀態空間網格」方法分析母子在衝突情境互動時的情緒互動歷程，並使用國內外學者所編製的「母親後設情緒理念量表」與「青少年自陳報告」－母親評量版vs. 青少年自陳版進行問卷調查法。 研究結果顯示，母親摒棄型的後設情緒理念對青少年外向問題行為有直接的影響效果，但是母子情緒互動的彈性、母親後設情緒理念與青少年內、外向問題行為之中介模式未得到驗證。再者，母子情緒互動高彈性組較低彈性組之青少年呈現較低程度的外向問題行為。另外，研究樣本之動態系統具有「母親負向參與－子女負向脫離」與「母親正向參與－子女正向參與」兩個吸引因子之互動模式特色。英文摘要：Adolescence is a developmental phase marked by changes in the mother-adolescent relationship. From early to middle adolescence, the number of mother-adolescent conflicts increases and maternal support and power decrease. Changes in the mother-adolescent relationship are accompanied by changes in the range of emotional states involved in these dyadic interactions (De Goede et al., 2009). From a dynamic system perspective, dyadic variability is regarded as an essential factor in relationship changes that allows for the reorganization of interaction patterns (Fogel, 1993). High levels of dyadic flexibility might facilitate relationship change adaptations in mother-child dyads as well as the provision of opportunities that arise during adolescence (Granic et al., 2003). By contrast, low levels of dyadic flexibility might be associated with problems in the mother-child relationship (Granic et al., 2007). Furthermore, dyadic variability in mother-adolescent interaction has been found to be related to both emotion regulation competence and behavioral adjustment in adolescents (Lougheed & Hollenstein, 2016; Van der Giessen et al., 2013). According to Gottman et al. (1996), how mothers interact with their children is strongly affected by their emotional socialization philosophy. In that study, the researchers introduced three types of parental metaemotion philosophy: emotion coaching, emotion dismissing, and emotional dysfunction. Yeh (2002) added a fourth type in a study of emotional uninvolvement among Taiwanese parents. Studies have demonstrated that children who grow up with supportive, emotion-coaching parents tend to have better self-regulation skills and fewer externalizing problems (Shortt et al., 2010; Stocker et al., 2007). By contrast, children with emotion-dismissing parents were more likely to have internalizing and externalizing behaviors as well as emotional regulation difficulties (Gottman et al., 1996). Through a dynamic system approach, this study explored the relationships among the flexibility of mother-adolescent emotional interactions, maternal metaemotion philosophy, and adolescents' internalizing and externalizing problematic behaviors. The first objective was to examine whether mothers' metaemotion philosophy was related to internalizing and externalizing behaviors in their adolescent children by way of emotional flexibility in mother-adolescent interactions. The second objective was to identify the characteristics of attractors in the system of emotional interaction between mothers and adolescents. Participants comprised 118 pairs of junior high school students and their mothers from northern and central Taiwan. Data collection proceeded either at a home visit or at the university's laboratory room. The protocol was approved by the Research Ethics Committee for Human Subject Protection. Observation and questionnaire completion lasted approximately 120 minutes. Observation was performed on the basis of methods used in the study by Hollenstein and Lewis (2006) on dyadic parent-child interaction patterns in conflict-resolution situations. Before observation, the participants were instructed by a research assistant to resolve the conflict as best as they could within 6 minutes. After a discussion on their resolution, the participants completed a series of questionnaires, namely the parental meta-emotion philosophy scale (Yeh, 2002), child behavior checklist (Achenbach, 1991), and the youth self-report (YSR; Achenbach, 1991). Two trained assistants rated the emotional interactions within the pairs on the basis of the specific affect coding system (Gottman & Krokoff, 1989). State space grid analysis was conducted on the flexibility of emotional interactions between mothers and adolescents. The flexibility was defined by the combination of three flexibility indexes: total number of unique cells, total number of cell transitions, and dispersion. Adolescents' internalizing and externalizing behaviors were defined by using a combination of the mothers' reports on the CBCL and the adolescents' reports on the YSR. The results of the mediation analysis indicated that emotional flexibility did not mediate the relationships between maternal metaemotion philosophy and internalizing or externalizing behaviors. However, emotion-dismissing parenting predicted externalizing behaviors. To further examine whether internalizing and externalizing behaviors varied with emotional flexibility, the adolescent participants were divided into high flexibility and low flexibility groups (based on one standard deviation above and below the mean, respectively) and subjected to a t test. The adolescents in the high flexibility group exhibited lower levels of externalizing behaviors. To identify the characteristics of the attractors in the emotional interaction system, a winnowing procedure was conducted. Two significant attractors were established: mother negative engagement-adolescent negative disengagement and mother positive engagement-adolescent positive engagement. The results did not support the mediation hypothesis-that is, maternal metaemotion philosophy did not predict internalizing or externalizing behaviors by way of emotional flexibility. This can be partly explained by the relatively low variances of the flexibility indexes and the internalizing versus externalizing behaviors, which prevented the clarification of intervariable relationships. This might be due to the small size and unrepresentativeness of the sample. The participants, who were volunteers, might share specific characteristics. For example, they had a higher-than-average socioeconomic status; approximately 50% of the mothers had a university or graduate degree. The mothers also tended to participate actively in their children's lives and are concerned about their children's academic performance. Thus, coming from such a high socioeconomic family, the adolescents in this study displayed fewer behavioral problems. This may account for the similar interaction patterns observed in this study. Notably, emotional interactions were only observed in conflict-resolution situations; features of discussion topics (positive or negative), which may affect emotional flexibility, were not considered. In general, maternal metaemotion philosophy basically reflects the emotion socialization process, which is rooted in daily interactions. Given that the present observation was only 6 minutes long, we likely captured only part of the picture of emotional interactions between the pairs. In addition, we focused on emotional flexibility within mother-adolescent interactions. Maternal metaemotion philosophy might affect adolescents' behavioral adjustment through other interaction patterns within this relationship, but these were not addressed in the study. Mother negative engagement-adolescent negative disengagement and mother positive engagement-adolescent positive engagement were identified as salient attractors in the emotional interaction system, with mother negative engagement- adolescent negative disengagement being stronger. The mothers most frequently exhibited dominant attitudes and interest, and the adolescents most frequently exhibited defensive attitudes and interest. Further examination of the videos revealed that the majority of the mothers and adolescents were interested in their conversations. However, when disagreements occurred, the mothers often asked their children to obey them in either a tough or gentle manner. In general, the adolescents responded by either staying silent or passively protesting by saying ”Yes, but......” In Taiwanese society, where filial piety is strongly emphasized, even as adolescents advocate for autonomy and independence, they tend to manage conflicts with their mothers passively or avoidantly instead of aggressively. In conclusion, we investigated mother-adolescent emotional interactions from a dynamic system perspective. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate relevant topics in Taiwan through this approach. Although our findings did not support the hypothesized mediation model, high dyadic flexibility in mother-adolescent interaction demonstrated a preventive effect on externalizing behaviors. Two implications for parenting are presented as follows: First, parents should be aware of their emotional socialization practices toward their children and understand its possible impacts on their children's behavioral adjustment. Second, parents should be more flexible but less rigid in emotional expression when interacting with their children.起始頁-結束頁：963-984資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202106_52(4).001001篇名：重思學習障礙之定義與鑑定：一個特殊教育社會學的觀點並列篇名：Reconsidering the Definition and Identification of Learning Disability: A Perspective of Sociology of Special Education作者：楊巧玲(Chiao-Ling Yang)關鍵字：特殊教育需求;缺陷思維;健全常規;學習障礙;鑑定安置;special education needs;deficit thinking;ableist normativity assumption;learning disability;identification and placement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究延續批判教育學傳統，揭露教育理念與學校實務間的矛盾，聚焦於學習障礙類之定義與鑑定，採取社會學的觀點，檢視學習障礙如何是社會建構的產物。資料來源以訪談為主、文件檔案為輔。結果歸納三點發現：一、製造學習障礙：從無到有再到高出現率；二、灰色地帶：學習障礙與低成就難以切割；三、特殊教育需求：文化刺激不足不易排除。進而提出三點討論：一、教育相關體系生產特殊教育需求；二、特殊教育需求反映健全常規預設；三、健全常規預設強化缺陷思維。最後做成結論、提出反思：一、學習障礙乃一需求／供應鏈體系；二、「需求」與「缺陷」是一體兩面；三、反映健全常規預設以及對人口品質的焦慮。本研究呼籲重新省思學習障礙類別之定義與鑑定，以免背離實現教育機會均等、尊重多元文化差異之政策與願景。英文摘要：Following the tradition of critical education, this study investigates the contradiction between educational ideals and school practices, focusing on the definition and identification of learning disability (LD) and examining how it is socially constructed. Using data from interviews and documents, this study found how LD is manufactured from non-existing, occurring, to being highly-visible, how LD is hard to tell solely from low achievement of students, and how LD is difficult to exempt from lacking of adequate cultural stimuli. Three points were then formulated for discussion. First, special education needs are produced from the entire educational system. Secondly, the assumption of ableist normativity is also required for special education. Finally, ableist normativity reinforces deficit thinking. This study concludes with three statements: 1. LD exhibits a system of demand and supply chain. 2. Needs and deficits are two sides of the same coin. 3. It mirrors the assumption of ableist normativity and an anxiety about population quality. It is important therefore to reconsider the definition and identification of LD for fear of contravening the policy and vision of equal education opportunity and cultural diversity.起始頁-結束頁：1-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210967030012篇名：十九世紀末至二十世紀前半葉美國進步教育流派分法與Dewey的流派歸屬並列篇名：Analyzing the Classification of Various Factions of Progressive Education and J. Dewey's Position in Progressive Education from the End of the 19th Century to the First Half of the 20th Century作者：單文經(Wen-Jing Shan)關鍵字：Dewey的流派歸屬;美國進步教育;美國進步教育流派;理智與品格發展;Dewey's position;progressive education movement in the USA;factions of progressive education movement;intellectual and moral development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以適切的研究文獻為據，解答十九世紀末至二十世紀前半葉美國進步教育流派分法與Dewey流派歸屬的有關問題。先確認Cremin雖未刻意將其分流別派，卻確實為之；次蠡測學者們刻意將進步教育分流別派的緣由與作法；再經層層論述試提行政、教學、自由至上、社會重建、生活適應五分之議；隨後以翱翔在天空中的飛龍詮解Dewey不屬於任一流派之論。文末反思指出，學者們所做進步教育流派分法的討論似未慮及Dewey晚年重視的理智與品格發展，因而須予商榷；又，傳統與進步教育並非截然的二元對立，以兼而有之的觀點截長取短，或較妥當。英文摘要：Based on appropriate research literatures, this article intends to answer the questions about the classification of American progressive education and the belonging of Dewey from the end of the 19th century to the first half of the 20th century. First, despite Cremin did not explicitly claimed the need to divide progressive education into different factions, in actuality he did. Secondly, the reasons and practices of later scholars who intentionally classified progressive education into different factions were examined. Five factions were classified: administratives, pedagogicals, libertarians, social reconstructionists, and life adjustment educators, after a series of justifications were made. Subsequently, ”the flying dragon in the sky” was employed to explain the situation that Dewey does not belong to any faction. Finally, this article argues that the classification of progressive education should be discussed because intelligence and character development, emphasized by later-stage Dewey, is not included. It also suggests that traditional and progressive education are not completely binary. oppositions. It is recommended to employ ”both-and” thinking to extract the strengths and discard the shortcomings of the two.起始頁-結束頁：43-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210967030023篇名：教育革命的挑戰：晚清西式初等教育制度建立與國民教育的醞釀並列篇名：Challenges to Educational Revolution: The Establishment of Western Primary Education in 1904 in Ch'ing China and the Ferment of National Education作者：周愚文(Yu-Wen Chou)關鍵字：癸卯學制;初等教育;教育革命;晚清;國民教育;Gui-Mao school system;primary education;educational revolution;late Ch'ing;national education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:3期出版年：2021中文摘要：清光緒29年朝廷訂頒《奏定學堂章程》，全面改行西式學制，31年再廢科舉，原有教育制度全面廢止，其舉可視為教育革命。然章程公布後，中央如何落實，過去相關研究有限，本文採史學方法，據一手官方文獻及報刊，以當時法、德國民教育概念視角，檢討最基礎初等教育的規劃、實施與調整。因該學制仿日制，日又仿自法、德。施行時遇到主、客觀困難而被迫調整，為求教育普及，先後採設半日學堂、設小學簡易科、縮短修業年限、設簡易識字學塾等變通措施；因政府無力全由公辦，遂容許私塾續存但進行改良，只能宣揚義務教育觀念及預備實施強迫教育而無法正式實施，僅官立免學費而無法全面免費。總之，晚清初等教育制度，已有當時法、德國民教育的部分內涵，但民國初延續，抗戰時才立法實施，其由上而下、穿衣改衣、先求有再求好、先量後質等推動策略，值得今後中央推動教改者警惕。英文摘要：Using historical method with first-hand sources, this article explores the planning, implementation and modification of western primary education based on the concept of French and German national education, including general, public, compulsory and free educations. As a revolution transformation, Gui-Mao Educational System was established in 1904 and overthrew the old Chinese school system. Borrowed from Japan, the system encountered several difficulties during operation, and therefore adjustments were made to better accommodate changes. For popularity, it used the premises of old academies, temples, shrines and public houses. Half-day schools were established, the program and study-years were shortened and brief short-term schools were established to prepare for enacting constitution later. Despite permission of private studios, the system improved the studios. The concept of compulsory education was also introduced and plans were implemented to promote the concept. Only state junior primary schools were free. The new system exhibited several characteristics of national education but it was not formally established until Republican China in 1940. This special reform experience is worthwhile to learn for later educational reformers.起始頁-結束頁：95-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210967030034篇名：這場疫情教我們的事：評介《新冠肺炎與種族主義政治經濟學：為何社會正義觀點如此重要》並列篇名：Book Reveiew: What Covid-19 Teaches Us: A Review of ”Covid-19 and the Political Economy of Racism: Why a Social Justice Perspective Matters”作者：鄭英傑(Ying-Jie Jheng)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:3期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：141-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210967030045篇名：山重水複疑無路，柳暗花明又一村：評《重啟更好的學校：預料之外的COVID-19得以讓教育變得更好》並列篇名：Book Reveiew: Reopening Better Schools: Unexpected Ways COVID-19 Can Improve Education作者：洪郁婷(Yu-Ting Hung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:3期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：151-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210967030056篇名：什麼是歷史教學中的Historical Empathy？並列篇名：What is Historical Empathy in History Teaching?作者：宋佩芬(Pei-Fen Sung)關鍵字：歷史的同情理解;歷史思維;歷史教學;歷史哲學;historical empathy;historical thinking;history teaching;historiography期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:2期出版年：2021中文摘要：英、美歷史教育主流學者對於historical empathy的主張，偏好理性客觀的歷史理解，反對想像或認同等連結個人經驗與情感的理解。本研究爬梳歷史哲學，並訪談七位歷史學者與五位碩士級以上高中歷史教師，探究historical empathy被如何理解及實踐。研究發現，受訪者對於historical empathy的認知呈現光譜般分布，理性導向者似乎受科學的歷史主義影響較深，認為historical empathy是瞭解歷史脈絡與根據證據的推論判斷；情意導向者則有受後現代主義及浪漫主義之影響痕跡，主張同感、想像與啟發的重要；綜合立場者則較有詮釋學的觀點，主張兼具理性與情意面向的historical empathy，並鼓勵證據之外，運用歷史想像、經驗及個人判斷的歷史思維。本研究支持綜合立場者的觀點，認為「歷史的同情理解」是較貼近的翻譯，並認為歷史教學者有必要瞭解不同的歷史哲學觀如何影響「同情理解」的教學，從而能抉擇自己的教學取向。英文摘要：Mainstream British and American history education prefers a rational and objective historical understanding, and rejects imagination or identification that connects with personal experiences. To explore how historical empathy is understood and practiced, this research delineated different historiographical orientations of the history discipline and interviewed seven history scholars and five high school history teachers who hold at least a master's degree. The results showed that the interviewees' perceptions of historical empathy present a spectral distribution. Those who take the rational stance seem to be influenced by scientific historicism, and perceive historical empathy to be understanding historical contexts and making inferences based on evidence. Those who value emotions seem to be influenced by post-modernism and romanticism, which advocate the importance of sympathy, imagination, and inspiration. Furthermore, those who hold the integrated position embrace a hermeneutic view that historical empathy is both cognitive and affective, which encourages the use of historical imagination and personal experiences, in addition to evidence, for historical understanding and judgment. This paper argues for the integrated view and believes that history teachers must understand how different historiographies affect historical empathy teaching in order to make better judgement about their teaching orientations.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210667020017篇名：臺灣提升大學畢業生就業之政策設計分析並列篇名：Improving the Employment of College Graduates in Taiwan: An Analysis of Policy Design作者：謝卓君(Chuo-Chun Hsieh)關鍵字：政策工具;政策設計;高等教育;教育政策;就業力;policy tools or policy instruments;policy design;higher education;education policy;employability期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:2期出版年：2021中文摘要：臺灣近年積極透過政策，縮短高等教育學用落差，努力協助大學生和職場的順利接軌。本研究依據公共政策設計理論，探究政府處理大學畢業生就業議題之政策機制與問題。研究者首先依據文獻，建構用以分析教育政策設計的理論架構。隨後，依據此一理論架構針對相關政策文件進行內容分析，進而釐清2005年以來我國政府為提升大學生就業所採取之政策設計特性。研究發現，我國政府就這項政策議題，展現出混合著強制型與調控型的政策設計特性，其中有多項政策設計要素彼此不相協調的問題，特別是在政策設計一致性與配合性兩方面實有改善空間。文章最後針對政策執行實務與未來研究議題，依據研究結果提出建議。英文摘要：Taiwan has made effort to improve the employment of college graduates by promoting policies for bridging the gap between higher education and the labor market since the 2000s. From the perspective of public policy theories, this study aims to unfold the mechanisms and problems of the design criteria for the government addressing the policy issue. This study firstly devises a theoretical framework for analyzing research questions regarding policy design. Secondly, the study applies the framework to examine the governmental measures introduced since 2005. Based on the context analysis, the study identifies the features of policy design for enhancing the employment of college graduates in Taiwan. The combination of the steering mode and the coercive mode raises concerns about consistency and congruency on the elements of policy design. Finally, this paper provides suggestions for the practices of policy implementation and future research.起始頁-結束頁：41-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210667020028篇名：「他性」與倫理教育：從M. Heidegger基礎存有學到P. Ricoeur自我詮釋學中的倫理思想並列篇名：Otherness and Ethical Education: From M. Heidegger's Foundamental Ontology to P. Ricoeur's Ethical Thought in Hermeneutics of Self作者：何佳瑞(Katia Lenehan)關鍵字：存有學;他性;關心;良心;倫理教育;ontology;otherness;solicitude;conscience;ethical education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以Heidegger基礎存有學為始，後述Ricoeur的倫理學思想，再藉由他性概念逐一探討從Heidegger到Ricoeur的傳承與演變。藉著這一轉變，闡述出一種中立的存有學的關心，逐步推展到一種倫理上帶著情意的、對他人的關心，並召示出道德良心在其存有的本源中已經蘊含了他性的結構，據此，本文得以從存有學的角度指出人是一不得不向他人開放的倫理存有者。最後，以存有學的進路觀之，倫理教育當可引領受教者發現並體認自身中的倫理泉源，以及此泉源中的他性特徵。此種教育方式，將使倫理教育成為一回歸人本有倫理泉源的教育，即一種順性而為、自然而然的倫理教育。道德規範，只有在返回人存有的倫理泉源和力量的觀點下，才成了人「願有」的規範。此種倫理教育所提供的積極性的條件，正在於它與人的存有泉源以及本性的渴望相符而能事半功倍。英文摘要：This paper discusses Ricoeur's ethical thoughts starting with Heidegger's ontology. Based on the concept of ”otherness,” this paper then illustrates the theoretical continuation and evolution from Heidegger to Ricoeur. During this evolution and transformation, a neutral ontological ”solicitude” gradually extends to an ethically affectionate concern for others, showing that moral conscience originally contains a space for ”the others” within itself. This paper thereby argues that a person, as he is, is an ethical being, being necessarily and inevitably ”open” to others. Finally, from this ontological approach, ethical education is suggested to lead the educated to discover within themselves this ethical source as an openness towards others. Ethical education in this way is an education in accordance with human nature, namely, an education which leads towards or returns to man's own ethical source. Rather than only demanding the educated to comply with obligation, ethical education as such provides positive teaching which is consistent with man's ontological source and his natural desires, and results in a more effective way of teaching.起始頁-結束頁：81-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210667020039篇名：東西方教育理論與實務之對話並列篇名：A Dialogue Between East-West Educational Theories and Practices作者：簡成熙(Cheng-Hsi Chien);洪如玉(Ruyu Hung);何佳瑞(Katia Lenehan);李彥儀(Yen-Yi Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：115-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708202106670200410篇名：「師法自然」的教師之道：由老子無與有之「玄」論教學的生成作用並列篇名：Dao of Being a Teacher that Models Itself After Nature: On the Generative Effect of Teaching by Laozi's ”Mystery” of Having and Non-having作者：郭展有(Chan-Yu Kuo)關鍵字：師道;無心無為;道家;道德經;the Dao of teachers;Wu Xin Wu Wei;Daoist school;Dao De Jing期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:1期出版年：2021中文摘要：傳統儒師以傳道、授業、解惑為己任，然教師在從事教學工作時，若過度執求於自身既有的價值分判與情意理想，試圖以自身所掌握到的一切美好作為教學推展之絕對準據，如此的「有心有為」便可能無法給予學生足夠的空間，使學生開展所自具之天真本然，更甚而可能對其加諸錯誤的對待或限制。本文旨在透過老子《道德經》的智慧，敘明道家思想對於上述可能流弊的化解之道，並藉由對感知、行為及關係三個面向的回應，申釋一種「師法自然」的教師之道。筆者試圖論明，透過教師「師法自然」之「無心無為」，方能圓熟自身教學之生成作用，進而成己成人。期藉由本文的討論，能協助教師在成為師者的道路上，思考自身「師」之所以為「師」的善心美意，如何可能與使學生成為獨立學習者之目標並行，使學生於教學關係中自信說出：「我自然」。英文摘要：Despite the fact that Confucianist teachers regard propagating reason, imparting knowledge, and resolving doubts as their duty, teachers may excessively fix upon their own value criteria and ideals and take their own opinion of what is good as the absolute rule in their teaching practice. This ”You Xin You Wei” (having rigid intents and self-opinionated actions) narrows down the possibilities for students to develop their authentic nature or even imposes improper treatments or restrictions. Through the wisdom of Laozi's Dao De Jing, the study interpreted Daoists' unriddling of previous probable problems and stated a ”Dao of being a teacher that models itself after Nature (self-so, that which is so by itself)” in sensible, behavioral, and relational aspects. Specifically, only the teachers who practice a self-cultivation of ”Wu Xin Wu Wei” can complete their generative effect of teaching and accomplish their mission as teachers giving students assistance. This study attempts to help educators reflect on how to make their kindness compatible with the aim of nurturing an independent learner and how to help students confidently say ”I have 'uninstructedly' done it myself.”起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708202103670100101篇名：發展以教師對話為取向之數學課堂教學研究分析架構並列篇名：Developing an Analytical Framework for Investigating Lesson Study: Taking Teacher Talk as an Approach作者：鄭章華(Chang-Hua Chen);林佳慧(Chia-Hui Lin);蔡曉楓(Hsiao-Feng Tsai)關鍵字：課堂教學研究;教師專業發展;教師對話;lesson study;teacher professional development;teacher talk期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：課堂教學研究（Lesson Study）被視為有效提昇教師專業知能的模式，在許多國家或地區廣泛推動。《十二年國民基本教育課程綱要總綱》將此一模式列入教師專業發展項目，期能建立學校本位的同儕共學文化。然而，國內教育界對於課堂教學研究多為理念探討，相關實徵研究尚處萌芽階段；再者，學術界對於課堂教學研究促進教師專業成長的機制仍所知有限。基於此，本研究根據社會文化取徑的對話分析理論與Ball等人的「教學所需的數學知識」（mathematics knowledge for teaching, MKT）理論，發展「數學課堂教學研究對話分析架構」，並以小學數學教師參與「基準量與比較量」單元為案例，探析其專業發展特徵。研究結果顯示：此一架構具備信、效度，適合探究教師參與課堂教學研究之專業發展特徵。教師在課堂準備與省思階段經歷不同的專業成長經驗，社群對話集中在探究式與學科教學知識。本分析架構期能有助於課堂教學研究的實踐與深化，提昇教師公開授課的品質，以及增進對於教師專業發展的認識。英文摘要：Lesson Study (LS) has been viewed as a valuable model for teacher professional development and has been widely conducted in many countries and districts. The general curriculum guidelines of 12-year basic education included LS into the teacher professional item to establish a school-based and collaborative culture among Taiwanese teachers. However, the major LS discussions have revolved around theoretical points in Taiwan, and the empirical study of LS has been scant. In addition, educational scholars' comprehension of how LS contributes to teachers' professional growth is limited. Therefore, this study adapted the sociocultural approach for discourse analysis and the framework of mathematics knowledge for teaching proposed by Ball et al. to construct a scheme for LS talk analysis (SLSTA) to analyze mathematics teachers' peer interactions in conducting LS. We took the LS of a fifth graders' mathematics unit conducted by four teachers as a case to exemplify SLSTA and to identify the teachers' professional development. Data analysis suggested that the reliability of SLSTA was satisfactory. The majority of teachers' talk was exploratory and demonstrated pedagogical content knowledge. Although these teachers spent more time on lesson preparations than lesson reflections, the lesson reflections did not benefit the teachers' professional growth less than the lesson preparations. This framework, SLSTA, expects to examine and escalate the LS quality and contribute to understanding teacher professional development.起始頁-結束頁：1-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202109_17(3).00012篇名：英語授課一定會降低大學課程的教學評量嗎？一個縱貫性個案研究並列篇名：Do University EMI Courses Inevitably Lead to Worse Teaching Evaluations? A Longitudinal Case Study作者：鍾智林(Chih-Lin Chung);羅美蘭(Mei-Lan Lo)關鍵字：英語授課;教學評量;個案研究;English-medium instruction;teaching evaluation;case study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：英語授課被視為我國高等教育國際化的重要手段，但文獻提及大學課程若以英語授課，恐不利於該課程的期末教學評量。亦即，同一課程以中文授課的教學評量優於英語授課，此種認知可能導致教師對英語授課裹足不前。本研究繼而蒐集、分析某位個案教師3門課程、8年來共22班的質性與量化評量資料，以檢驗上述認知。研究發現，同一課程以中文授課、中文輔助之英語授課、全英語授課等模式各有優點，學生沒有絕對偏好；其次，22班教學評量有21班高於系平均值，顯示英語授課教師若善選課程並充分準備，教學評量不一定低於以中文授課的課程；再則，持續的研習增能與教學經驗累積，有助提升英語授課整體教學評量，且降低各構面得分差異，而維持在穩定的高點。質性反饋意見顯示，學生最初認為英語授課較難，但學期末往往會有自我挑戰成功的喜悅，並肯定教師為英語授課的付出。英文摘要：English-medium instruction (EMI) is a fundamental approach to higher education internationalization in Taiwan. However, the literature indicates that EMI may jeopardize teaching evaluation. Some instructors are reluctant to adopt EMI potentially under the recognition that Chinese-medium instruction (CMI) outperforms EMI in teaching evaluation. This study collected and analyzed quantitative and qualitative data of a subject instructor who offered 22 EMI classes in eight years to examine the recognition. The findings suggest that CMI, partial EMI (Chinese is allowed, or PEMI), and entire EMI (no Chinese is allowed, or EEMI) are not superior to one another. Each type of instruction had its advantages that students favored. Second, 21 out of the 22 EMI classes had teaching evaluation outcomes better than the department average. As long as a teacher chooses an appropriate course with complete preparation, the EMI course very likely outperforms the overall CMI courses in the department. Third, the continuous growth of EMI training and teaching experience enables higher evaluation scores and keeps each evaluation facet stable. Finally, the quantitative feedback reveals that the students felt EMI difficult initially, but they embraced the joyfulness of conquering EMI and appreciated the instructor's efforts at the end.起始頁-結束頁：41-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202109_17(3).00023篇名：青年的過度教育：基於PIAAC數據的跨國比較分析並列篇名：Over-Education of Youth Generation in OECD Countries: The Comparative Study Based on PIAAC作者：傅遠智(Yuan-Chih Fu);林宜樺(Yi-Hua Lin);王煒筑(Wei-Zhu Wang)關鍵字：過度教育;高等教育擴張;PIAAC;比較教育;over-education;the expansion of higher education;PIAAC;comparative education期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：教育經濟學家將過度教育視為在勞動力市場中個人所獲得的學歷高於個人實際從事職業所需最低學歷的現象，從宏觀的角度來看，這種現象一定程度的反映出教育系統與就業市場中出現難以銜接的落差。為進一步探討過度教育的成因與情形，本研究使用經濟合作暨發展組織（OECD）於2013年釋出的國際成人技能評量計畫（Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies, PIAAC）數據，依數據完整性選取13個國家為研究範圍，比較各國25至34歲青年族群與其他年長族群出現過度教育可能性的差異，並分析青年族群個人出現過度教育的原因。對照其他年齡族群，首先在學歷與能力的差異方面，結果顯示各國青年普遍有較高的可能性取得大學以上學歷，但在數學能力與語文能力層面卻未必有相同優勢；進一步檢視出現過度教育的情況，發現青年相對普遍更可能出現過度教育現象。最後，本研究進一步比較影響具大學以上學歷青年出現過度教育的因素，經歸納其中邏輯式迴歸模型適配的7個國家分析結果發現，在性別方面，女性青年相較男性青年出現過度教育的可能性並不如理論預期般普遍；工作經驗的增加與個人出現過度教育的關係亦存在分歧並非絕對；另在個人專長領域與能力對個人出現過度教育的影響上，多數國家則有近似的情況，理工農醫領域者產生過度教育的可能性相對低於非理工農醫領域者，而當個人數學與語文能力越佳時，出現過度教育的可能性也較低。英文摘要：Overeducation is defined as the situation where an individual's educational level is higher than the required level he/she needs to have for the current occupation. From a macro perspective, this phenomenon partially reflects the disconnection between education systems and the labor market. To explore the factors causing personal overedcuation, this study used Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) data surveyed by OECD in 2013 to investigate the evidence for graduate underemployment in 13 OECD countries. Using the index of graduate jobs, this study finds that compared to the senior generation, the 25~34-year-old youth generation has a higher proportion of the population with a bachelor’s degree and above but does not guarantee better numeracy or literacy ability. Additionally, results from the logistic regression show that the youth generation has a higher possibility of being classified as overeducated compared to their elderly generation. Lastly, based on the empirical findings derived from seven countries with good model fit in the logistic regression, we found that for the youth generation, the effect of gender as well as working experience on the over-education varies by country. It is very common across countries that the youth whose professionals background is in STEM would less likely be overeducated. The results also confirm that the higher score in numeracy and literacy can reduce the possibility of being classified as overeducated.起始頁-結束頁：71-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202109_17(3).00034篇名：家庭關係對於國中生外向性偏差行為與學業適應問題之影響：以憂鬱情緒與認同非法手段為中介並列篇名：The Effects of Family Relationship on External Deviant Behaviors and Academic Problems Among Junior High School Students: Depression, and Illegitimate Means as Mediators作者：徐乙文(Yi-Wen Hsu);李承傑(Cheng-Chieh Li);董旭英(Yuk-Ying Tung)關鍵字：家庭關係;憂鬱情緒;認同非法手段;外向性偏差行為;學業適應問題;family relationship;depression;illegitimate means;external deviant behaviors;academic problems期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究採取家庭系統論、社會控制理論和差異機會理論的觀點，目的是嘗試建構家庭關係、憂鬱情緒、認同非法手段對國中生外向性偏差行為與學業適應問題的影響機制。本研究採用偏最小平方法之結構方程模型分析高雄市593位國中生。研究結果顯示，家庭關係對外向性偏差行為的直接影響並不顯著，而憂鬱情緒與認同非法手段對外向性偏差行為具有顯著直接影響。其次，家庭關係、憂鬱情緒與認同非法手段對學業適應問題具有顯著直接影響。再者，在中介效果檢定上，家庭關係會透過憂鬱情緒、認同非法手段間接影響外向性偏差行為和學業適應問題。最後，在性別多群組比較方面，影響男生外向性偏差行為與學業適應問題的關鍵是認同非法手段，而影響女生的主因是憂鬱情緒。英文摘要：Based on family system theory, social control theory, and differential opportunity theory, the purpose of this study was to explore the effects of family relationship, depression and illegitimate means on external deviant behaviors and academic problems for junior high school students. This study was to use partial least squares-structural equation modeling to analyze a total of 593 participants recruited from eight junior high schools in Kaohsiung. The results of this study showed that depression and illegitimate means had significant positive direct effects on external deviant behaviors except for family relationship. Second, family relationship, depression, and illegitimate means had significant direct effects on academic problems. Third, family relationships had significant indirect effects on external deviant behaviors and academic problems. Finally, in terms of the multiple group analysis across sex, illegitimate means is the crucial factor for male students influencing delinquency and academic problems while depression is the key factor for female.起始頁-結束頁：107-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202109_17(3).00045篇名：教師領導知識基礎的文獻計量分析並列篇名：A Bibliometric Review of the Knowledge Base of Teacher Leadership作者：陳文彥(Wen-Yan Chen)關鍵字：文獻計量分析;共引用分析;回顧性研究;教師領導;科學圖譜;bibliometric review;co-citation analysis;review of research;teacher leadership;science mapping期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：為了系統性回顧國際上有關教師領導的研究成果，進而探究教師領導之知識基礎，本研究以收錄於Scopus資料庫之期刊論文為範圍，共納入616篇論文進行分析。研究方法採文獻計量法，透過描述統計、引用分析、共引用分析及共現分析等，據以了解教師領導研究的表現情形、研究主題分布情形以及研究背後的智識結構。重要研究發現有三：第一，由研究主題與發表數量的成長趨勢分析，教師領導研究可劃分為四大發展階段，包括「教室層級的教師領導研究期」、「跨越教室的教師領導研究期」、「教師領導研究的數量穩固期」以及「教師領導研究的數量擴增期」。從區域來看，發表數量最多的前3個國家為美國、英國與澳洲，但美國學者之發表數與被引用次數，均占總數一半以上。第二，教師領導研究最具影響力之期刊，前三名均為教育領導研究核心期刊，第四名則是教師教育重要期刊，最具影響力之作者與論文間具有關聯性，而具影響力著作的前十名中，有3篇回顧性研究，1篇概念性研究，6篇實徵研究中則有5篇為質性研究。第三，教師領導之研究主題可區分為6個主要群集，新興研究焦點為中層領導、專業認同、集體效能感、教育政策、教育領導、學校領導等議題，女性領導和信任則是有待開展之面向。而教師領導研究的智識結構可分為「教師教育與組織觀點」、「分散性領導與學生學習」、「分散性領導與學校改進」，以及「平行領導與學校革新」等四大思想流派。英文摘要：To systematically review the research of teacher leadership in the global context and explore the knowledge base of teacher leadership, the study conducted a bibliometric review analyzing 616 journal papers in the Scopus database. The analysis strategies of descriptive statistics, citation analysis, co-citation analysis, and co-occurrence analysis were used to understand the performance, research topics, and the intellectual structure of teacher leadership research. Three important findings were concluded as follows. 1. Based on the quantity and developmental trend of publication, teacher leadership research could be categorized into four phases, which included classroom level teacher leadership study, teacher leadership study beyond classroom level, research quantity consolidation phase, and research quantity increasing phase. The top three influential countries concerning publication quantity and citation rates were America, the UK, and Australia. 2. The top three influential journals of teacher leadership were all core journals of educational leadership. The fourth one was an important journal of teacher education. Of the top ten influential papers, three were reviews of research, one was conceptual paper, and five of the six empirical studies were qualitative studies. 3. The topics of teacher leadership studies could be grouped into six clusters. The emerging themes were middle leadership, professional identity, collective efficacy, educational policy, educational leadership, and school leadership. The intellectual structure of teacher leadership consisted of four schools of thought, including teacher education and organizational perspective, distributed leadership and student learning, distributed leadership and school improvement, and parallel leadership and school reform.起始頁-結束頁：1-35資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202106_17(2).00016篇名：英格蘭國家資歷架構運作機制與實施現狀之探討並列篇名：The Operational Mechanism and Implementation of National Qualification Framework in England作者：陳怡如(Dorothy I-Ru Chen)關鍵字：英格蘭;技術與職業教育;國家資歷架構;能力本位教育;資歷;England;technical and vocational education;National Qualification Framework;competency-based education;qualification期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：英國於2000年所建構之「國家資歷架構」（National Qualification Framework, NQF），不僅影響該國技術與職業教育課程設計與評量模式的發展，也對歐盟與歐盟以外的國家資歷架構與區域資歷架構的發展產生重大影響。時至今日，國家資歷架構的建置已經是各國普遍趨勢，有鑑於臺灣一直不乏學者提出建構類似架構的呼籲，本研究目的在於：一、敘明英格蘭國家資歷架構發展緣由；二、探討英格蘭國家資歷架構的實施現狀；三、分析英格蘭國家資歷架構變革對於技術與職業教育之影響；四、分析現行架構的問題與面臨挑戰；五、根據研究發現，提供臺灣相關發展之參考。本研究透過分析英格蘭與歐盟的官方文件與報告，並針對相關權責組織進行半結構訪談，歸納出主要研究發現：首先，英格蘭國家資歷架構採能力本位模式，因應複雜技術與職業資歷的改革需求而產生，3次改革趨勢為重視業界需求、學習者學習進程，以及資歷透明化與彈性化，而上述改革也對於技術與職業教育實施之權責機構的角色產生重大影響。其次，英格蘭國家資歷架構的建置，有助於政府對於人才培育的面向、層級以及模式有全面掌握，並發展因應策略。最後，此一架構實施是因應技術與職業教育面臨的問題，但目前許多問題仍存在，機制本身運作也有待改善之處，因此後續發展值得關注。希望英格蘭經驗有助於後續臺灣技術與職業教育改革與資歷架構的規劃。英文摘要：The development of National Qualification Framework (NQF) in the United Kingdom (UK) has huge impacts not only on the technical and vocational education in the UK, but also development of national and regional qualification frameworks in most part of the world. As the contruction of NQF has also become a concern in Taiwan, this paper aims to explore: 1. factors contributing to the formation of NQF in England; 2. the current operation of NQF in England; 3. the impacts of NQF reforms on technical education development in England; 4. the related problems and challenges; 5. relfection on the role of the framework in national education in England and its implications for Taiwan. Through document analysis and semi-structural interviews, the research shows: first, the development of NQF in England is competency-based and derived from the needs of technical and vocational educational reform. The trends of its reform show its increasing emphasis on employers' needs, learners' progression, and flexibility and transparency of the framework and related qualifications. Second, the framework enables the government to have overall picture of talent cultivation in England as well as developing necessary strategies for future talent cultivation. Finally, the implementation of the framework was the response to the problems in technical education. Nevertheless, some problems remain and there are needs for further improvement of the framework. Based on the above findings, it is hoped that the English case can provide useful implications for the development of related policy in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：37-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202106_17(2).00027篇名：國中生學習心向、學習自我效能與學習適應之關係：以自我調整學習為中介變項之路徑模式分析並列篇名：The Relationship of Learning Mindset, Learning Self-Efficacy, and Learning Adaptation Among Junior High School Students: Path Model Analysis of Using Self-Regulation as a Mediator作者：丁毓珊(Yu-Shan Ting);葉玉珠(Yu-Chu Yeh)關鍵字：國中;成長心向;學習自我效能;自我調整學習;學習適應;junior high school;growth mindset;learning self-efficacy;self-regulated learning;learning adaptation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：邇來，許多研究發現心向對學習的影響甚鉅，但臺灣目前未有研究探討國中生的「學習心向」如何與自我效能、自我調整學習互動後，影響其學習適應，是以本研究目的在驗證變項間的關係。為達此目的，首先發展適用於本研究的「學習自我效能量表」（Inventory of Learning Self-Efficiency, ILSE）、「自我調整學習量表」（Inventory of Self-Regulated Learning, ISRL）與「學習適應量表」（Inventory of Learning Adaptation, ILA）。本研究以預試231位國中生，進行量表的項目分析與探索性因素分析，並以正式施測331位國中生進行驗證性因素、信度分析，最後進行路徑模式驗證。結果發現：一、ILSE（含信心與恆毅力、目標與策略運用）、ISRL（含後設認知、資源尋求）及ILA（含人際互動與學習方法、專注與學習氛圍）具有良好的信效度。二、國中生普遍具高程度的學習成長心向、自我效能和學習適應表現，但低程度的固定學習心向。三、學習成長心向和學習自我效能會互動後透過自我調整學習的中介而間接影響學習適應，而學習固定心向則未有顯著影響效果。本研究發展之有效評量工具可提供後續研究使用；提出之模式亦可作為提升國中生學習適應之教學參考。英文摘要：Many studies have found that mindset has a great impact on learning. To date, no study has explored how ”learning mindset” would interact with their learning self-efficacy and self-regulation, and then influence learning adaptation among junior high school students. To achieve this goal, we first developed the Inventory of Self-Regulated Learning (ISRL), the Inventory of Learning Adaptation (ILA), and the Inventory of Learning Self-Efficiency (ILSE). The pretest included 231 junior high school students for item analysis and exploratory factor analysis; the formal test used 331 junior high school students for confirmatory factor analysis, reliability analysis, criterion-related validity, and path model analysis. The findings of this study were as follows: (1) All developed inventories had good reliability and validity. ILSE consists of ”confidence and grit” and ”goal and strategies”; ISRL comprises ”metacognition” and ”resource seeking”; and ILA includes ”interpersonal interaction and learning methods” and ”concentration and learning atmosphere”. (2) The junior high school students had a high level of learning growth mindset, self-efficacy, and learning adaptation performance, but a low level of a fixed learning mindset. (3) The path model analysis revealed that junior school students' growth learning mindset and learning self-efficacy interactively influenced their learning adaptation through self-regulation learning, whereas the fixed learning mindset had no such influences. The developed inventories provide further studies valid instruments, and the findings of the path model shed light on cultivating junior high school students' learning adaptation.起始頁-結束頁：83-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202106_17(2).00038篇名：國小教師採合作探究理念進行觀課、議課之個案研究並列篇名：A Case Study of the Implementation of Classroom Observation and Post-Observation Debriefing Based on Collaborative Inquiry Among Elementary School Teachers作者：劉世雄(Shih-Hsiung Liu)關鍵字：合作探究;觀課;議課;教師專業成長;collaborative inquiry;classroom observations;post-observation debriefings;teachers' professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究試圖以教師採合作探究理念，引導教師以學生學習表現為焦點進行觀課和議課，研究目的在探討教師實踐此理念及可能產生的問題。本研究選取一所小學，並邀請4位教師及教務主任組成社群，以研究者所提合作探究的理念，進行3個月共4次循環的觀課、議課活動。本研究主要蒐集教師觀課、議課過程的文字和語音資料，為檢證資料分析的合宜性，再對參與者進行半結構訪談。本研究發現參與教師在觀課紀錄描述中多關注低成就學生的外在行為表現，但在議課時忽略解釋那些學生在教材內容學習理解困難的原因及省思後續的教學策略；本研究也發現教師在合作探究中願意聆聽與對話，已經具有相互分享的教學文化，但在解釋原因與集體省思上仍存有合作探究能力上的問題，導致在集體省思的教學文化上仍面臨困難。採用合作探究理念有助於教師調整對觀課、議課的負向態度，若學校教師持續欲透過觀課、議課提升教學品質與改善學生學習成效，則需要思考教師解釋學生表現的能力，與形塑教師集體省思的教師教學文化。英文摘要：This study proposes a theoretical framework for collaborative inquiry that helps teachers to keep their focus on students' learning performances during classroom observations and the following discussions, and aims to investigate the difficulties teacher face. Four teachers and one administrator from an elementary school were invited to participate in the study. The participants were required to undertake four classroom observations and the following post-observation debriefings, based on a collaborative inquiry framework, over the course of three months. The data, including written notes, dialogue voices in post-observation debriefings, and the semi-structured interview transcripts of each participant, were collected and triangulated. The study demonstrated that the participating teachers paid more attention to the low-achieving students' problematic behavior rather than to the students' cognitive difficulties in learning their material. During the post-observation debriefing, the participating teachers did not discuss adaptive teaching strategies. Moreover, they were willing to listen to one another and have dialogues concerned with developing a more positive teaching culture. However, due to their lack of collective reflection on the most favorable means of instruction, the teachers' collaborative culture still presented a challenge. The primary goal of this study was to help teachers to modify their negative attitudes toward classroom observations and post-observation debriefings. If schoolteachers want to support students' achievements as well as to promote their own professional development by implementing classroom observation and post-observation debriefings, further training in the diagnosis of students' learning difficulties and further culture collective reflection on instructional strategies could be considered.起始頁-結束頁：1-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202103_17(1).00019篇名：我國私立大專校院財務預警指標之建構與應用並列篇名：The Construction and Application of a Financial Warning Indicators for Private Universities and Colleges in Taiwan作者：劉秀曦(Hsiu-Hsi Liu)關鍵字：私立大專校院;財務預警指標;綜合財務指數;private universities and colleges;financial early warning indicators;composite financial index期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：隨著少子女化效應向上延伸，臺灣私立大專校院的經營危機也逐漸浮出檯面。從2014年至2020年，已有6所私立學校陸續走上退場之路，遂讓外界開始關注私立學校經營狀態，進而發現目前國內的確缺少一套能清楚呈現私立大專校院財務情形的預警系統。因此，本研究旨在參考美國實務經驗，並運用教育部「大專校院校務資訊公開平臺」數據來計算我國私立大專校院綜合財務指數，藉此辨識財務卓越學校與危機學校。研究結果指出，本文所提出的四個財務預警指標（包括可用資金比率、生存率、淨資產投資報酬率，與淨營業收益率）以及綜合財務指數在臺灣也具有辨識度與預測力；且經實際運用後發現，國內私立大專校院已有三成比率在個別財務指標上表現不佳，兩成比率在綜合財務指數上表現堪憂，值得各界持續關注。最後根據研究發現，除建議主管機關可運用綜合財務指數落實共同治理和分級監管目標之外，也鼓勵大學經營者將本研究所發展的四個財務預警指標和依不同權重合併後的綜合財務指數納入校務研究分析模式中，藉由自我檢視、長期分析和不斷改進來提升學校辦學成效。英文摘要：As the declining birthrate begins to have an impact on higher educational levels, private universities and colleges in Taiwan have gradually begun to experience an operational crisis. Six private universities or colleges ceased in turn to operate from 2014 to 2020, which drew public attention to the financial situations of private universities and colleges, and made us further aware of the need to develop a financial warning system that would reflect the current financial situation in Taiwan. Therefore, this research study looks at some of the relevant practical experiences undergone in the U.S., and utilizes data from the Information Disclosure Platform for College and University Affairs set up by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan to calculate the Composite Financial Index of local private universities and colleges for identifying each institution's financial status as being either excellent or in a state of crisis. The test results indicated that the early warning financial indicators, including the ratio of available funds, the viability rate, the return on net assets ratio, and the net operating revenues ratio, developed from this research and the Composite Financial Index in universities, were recognizable and predictable. In addition, the research further utilized the indicators to analyze the data and found that 30% of the private universities and colleges were performing not so well in each financial sector, and that 20% of private universities and colleges also performed not so well according to the composite financial index. According to research findings, competent authorities could utilize the Composite Financial Index in universities in order to realize the goals of co-governance and hierarchical supervision. Furthermore, the research encouraged operators in universities and colleges to incorporate the four early warning financial indicators and the Composite Financial Index after consolidating them into an analytical model of institutional research, in order to enhance their performance through self-examination, long-term analysis, and ongoing improvement.起始頁-結束頁：31-68資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202103_17(1).000210篇名：多角度圖像鑑賞教學方式應用於大一藝術賞析課之行動研究並列篇名：An Action Research on Applying Multi-Dimensional Image-Appreciation-Based Teaching Approaches in a Freshman Art Appreciation Class作者：楊馥如(Fu-Ju Yang)關鍵字：圖像鑑賞;多角度教學方式;藝術賞析;image-appreciation;multi-dimensional teaching approach;art appreciation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究與發展期刊卷期：17卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：面對圖像取代文字的環境，藝術教育應有適當圖像鑑賞教學方式來幫助學生瞭解生活中的圖像。但目前藝術鑑賞教學使用的方法，學生只能被動接受專家觀點，很難印象深刻。因此，研究者深入探究Darras及多位學者的教學方法，建構應用於大學課堂師生互動、課外專業訪談的多角度圖像鑑賞教學方式，並瞭解實施結果。本研究採行動研究方法，於某私立大學兩屆大一學生的「藝術賞析」課程中實施，各歷時8週。結果發現綜合多位學者建構的多角度圖像鑑賞教學方式，可培養學生用專業方式來分析作品的能力，從不同對象的角度比較、反思來建構意義及從不同對象身上學習。第一次教學省思後，改採生命教育議題來設計課程；教材加入漫畫；善用Facebook媒體；從提問轉為探究及加入學生提問。教學前學生不懂如何鑑賞作品，教學實施後問卷顯示此課程可幫助他們鑑賞圖像作品，學會比較、反思等。增加的生命教育議題則可幫助他們更認識自己，關懷他人、環境，增進對生命意義的瞭解。質性資料也顯示學生除提升自主鑑賞能力，也增進觀察、分析、思考、提問等能力；學會從不同角度看事物及激發更多想法。英文摘要：With images replacing written text, art education needs to incorporate suitable teaching approaches to reinforce students' image appreciation, and help them to better understand the images they are exposed to in daily life. However, the art appreciation teaching approaches currently in use often fail to make lasting impressions on students, who can only passively accept the specialists' ideas. This researcher examined the teaching approaches of Darras and others in order to develop a multi-dimensional image-appreciation teaching approach for application in university-level teacher-student interactions and extracurricular professional interviews, and came to better understand the implementation outcomes. This study, which conducted an action research methodology, was undertaken as part of the ”art appreciation” course for freshmen at a private university for two consecutive years, while the course lasted for eight weeks each year. The results showed that by using a teaching approach based on synthesizing the multi-dimensional image-appreciation learning methods already established by various scholars, students can gain the ability to analyze art works using specialist techniques, comparing different perspectives, reflecting on the meanings and learning from different subjects. After the first session was completed a different approach was adopted, utilizing life-education-related topics in order to take part in the course design, including incorporating comics into the teaching material, utilizing social media such as Facebook, incorporating the questions raised by the students themselves and developing these questions into investigations. Prior to the application of this teaching approach, students were incapable of appreciating artworks on their own; however, after this teaching approach was applied, questionnaire results showed that the course had enhanced the students' image-appreciation abilities as well their abilities to compare and reflect, etc. The topics on life education furthermore enabled the students to gain a deeper understanding of themselves, to show greater compassion toward others and the environment, and to attain a clearer understanding of the meaning of life. Qualitative data also showed that, aside from their enhanced autonomous capacities for appreciation, the students' abilities to observe, analyze, ponder and question had improved, and that they had learned to observe from different perspectives, thus becoming inspired by new and different ideas.起始頁-結束頁：69-100資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國家教育研究院DOI：10.6925/SCJ.202103_17(1).000301篇名：學校管理模式與學生偏差行為關係之研究：以教師教學投入與教學支援為中介變項並列篇名：Relationship Between School Management and Student Deviant Behavior: Pedagogical Input from Teachers and Teaching Support as Mediating Variables作者：陳玉娟(Yu-Chuan Chen)關鍵字：教師教學投入;教學支援;學生偏差行為;學校管理模式;pedagogical input from teachers;teaching support;student deviant behavior;school management期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究目的係在釐清學校管理模式、教師教學投入、教學支援及學生偏差行為的內涵，進而驗證此四個變項之間的關係、確認本研究所建構之結構方程模式與觀察資料間的適配程度與模式是否成立。為了達成上述研究目的，研究者利用經濟合作暨發展組織（Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD）於2015年進行之實證調查活動，請學校校長或是由校長所指定之學校人士，依目前所服務學校的實際狀況進行填答，共計回收有效問卷14,530份。研究者挑選符合變項定義之題項為衡量變項，利用IBM SPSS Statistic 22.0統計軟體進行描述性統計、探究性因素分析及信度分析，並利用AMOS進行結構方程模式驗證，以瞭解本研究所建構之方程模式是否適配。研究結果發現，本研究的七項假設皆成立，且建構之結構方程模式達到適配標準。綜言之，研究支持：一、學校管理模式對教師教學投入、教學支援及學生偏差行為有直接影響；二、教師教學投入對學生偏差行為具有直接影響效果；三、教學支援對於學生偏差行為亦具有直接影響效果；四、教師教學投入與教學支援亦扮演中介變數角色，學校管理模式可以利用前述兩者作為中介變數，間接影響學生偏差行為表現狀況。立基於上述研究結果發現，本研究提出相關建議供參。英文摘要：This study examined the implications of school management, pedagogical input from teachers, teaching support, and student deviant behavior to construct a structural equation model and validating it using with observational data. The researcher used the empirical data provided in 2015 by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The researcher asked the school principal or a person designated by the principal to complete a questionnaire, and 14,530 valid questionnaires were retrieved. The OECD PISA 2015 School Questionnaire data were used to select topics that conformed to the definitions of the measurement variables. IBM SPSS Statistic 22.0 was used for descriptive statistics, exploratory factor analysis, and reliability testing. SPSS AMOS was used for validation of the structural equation model in terms of goodness of fit. The results validated the seven proposed hypotheses and indicated that the developed structural equations achieved good model fit. Relevant conclusions and recommendations are presented herein on the basis of the research findings.起始頁-結束頁：1-30資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202109_66(3).00012篇名：第二專長教師投入生活科技教育之動機、課程意識建構與教學實踐初探並列篇名：A Preliminary Exploration of Second Specialty Teachers' Motivation, Curricular Consciousness Construction and Teaching Practices in Living Technology Education作者：范斯淳(Szu-Chun Fan);陳君瑜(Chun-Yu Chen)關鍵字：生活科技;非專長授課;動機;第二專長;課程意識;living technology;out-of-field teaching;motivation;second specialty;curricular consciousness期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：非專長授課是教學現場中實際存在的問題，第二專長班即是為此因應而生的教師專業發展途徑。本研究的目的在於探討修習生活科技第二專長課程的教師在投入科技教育時，其自身之動機、課程意識建構及教學實踐的轉化，以期能作為未來推動科技領域師資培訓與教師專業發展之參考。本研究採問卷調查與半結構深度訪談之個案研究法，針對參與第二專長班的教師進行研究，先以問卷調查全體29位學員對實施生活科技課程意願之觀點，再以個人與小組訪談的形式，邀請其中九位學員進行深度訪談。訪談時間為2018年10月，每次訪談時間約60分鐘。研究者運用質性分析軟體進行資料的編碼與分析後，對應量化問卷的分析結果，歸納以下研究發現：一、參與第二專長班之動機，主要源於自身對於實作之興趣與學校教學需求；二、參與第二專長班對其課程意識建構之影響，包含有助於提升對生活科技課程之專業覺知、形塑實施科技教育之信念，並對任教生活科技建立正向的自我覺知；三、教學實踐會促使第二專長班教師快速吸收及轉化專業知識，但在過程中容易因外在環境因素的干擾與自覺專業知識不足，而影響教學信心；四、校內外教師社群與學校行政的支持，是協助第二專長班教師克服教學困難的重要關鍵。英文摘要：Background: Technology education plays an increasingly vital role in ensuring students' technological literacy under the new Curriculum Guidelines of 12-Year Basic Education, which was introduced in 2019. However, because of the low importance assigned to living technology courses, most schools do not have sufficient qualified teachers in this field. This poses a hurdle in the implementation of the technology curriculum of Taiwan's 12-year basic education. Moreover, because of declining birthrates, many teachers have no students to teach and the number of teachers in junior high schools have consequently shrunk. The Ministry of Education established a second-specialty course to provide teachers with a second professional certificate to meet the teaching needs of schools. Living technology is based on hands-on learning, problem-solving, and design thinking. Therefore, in addition to the conceptual knowledge of technology and engineering, living technology teachers should possess diverse practical skills and engineering design thinking and problem-solving abilities. Unlike other traditional disciplines, the living technology course attaches great importance to practical hands-on skills for solving technical problems, which is a major challenge faced by teachers of the second specialty. On the basis of this background, this research explored different means of helping teachers with second specialty to teach living technology more effectively. Purpose: The purpose of this study is to explore the transformation of teachers, who have taken the second specialty course in living technology. These teachers' motivation, beliefs, curricular awareness construction, and teaching practices were examined. Understanding the dynamic relationship among multiple factors that can be used as a reference for the future promotion of teacher training and professional development in the field of technology is imperative. Theoretical Framework: The theoretical framework of the study is based on teachers' beliefs, curricular consciousness, the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) (Ajzen, 1985, 1991), curricular awareness, and teaching practices. This study evaluated (1) teachers' motivation to participate in professional development learning and (2) teachers' curricular consciousness. First, this study investigated teachers' motivation from the perspective of their beliefs and self-efficacy. Teachers' self-efficacy refers to their belief in their abilities to teach effectively and is assessed according to whether the students have acquired real knowledge and abilities (Thoonen et al., 2011). When teachers regard teaching as a mission but feel that they lack professional competence and face pressure from changes in the educational environment, they are motivated to invest in continuing education. However, most teachers engage in continuing education because of several motivating factors. Second, teachers' curriculum consciousness is a dynamic process of awareness. It includes internal reflection, beliefs in their teaching, reflection on curriculum implementation, and interpretation and organization of the environment (Fang & Feng, 2017). Specifically, curricular awareness includes awareness of professional knowledge, awareness of self-beliefs, and awareness of the environment (Chen, 2003; Fang & Feng, 2017; Kung & Lin, 2009). Professional knowledge includes content knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge, knowledge of the teaching environment, and knowledge of students (Shulman, 1986, 1987). Professional knowledge should have a positive connection with teaching practice, which, in turn, modifies curriculum consciousness. Self-belief awareness refers to the self-evaluation of the results of applying certain teaching activities and teaching strategies. This can be explained in conjunction with the ”attitude” aspect of the TPB (Ajzen, 1985, 1991). Environmental factors, such as hardware and software equipment, school culture, parents, and community, may present limitations and challenges to teachers but may also be perceived as opportunities related to the ”subjective norm” and ”perceived behavior control” factors in the TPB (Ajzen, 1985, 1991). Design/Methods: On the basis of a review of the existing literature, this study investigated the factors that affect teachers' motivation for and effectiveness in participating in a second-specialty course and subsequently constructed the outline of a semi-structured interview. A case study was employed along with semi-structured, in-depth interviews with nine teachers from various junior high schools in southern Taiwan. Both individual and group interviews were conducted. The second-specialty course of living technology started in July 2018. To elucidate the changes in the participants' curricular consciousness after the second-specialty course, the interviews were conducted after the first stage of the course (following the completion of eleven credits). The interviews, each lasting approximately 60 minutes, were conducted in October 2018. The transcripts of the interviews were imported into NVivo qualitative analysis software, and the data were analyzed through the following steps: First, preliminary coding and classification was conducted on the basis of the aspects of investment motivation, curriculum awareness, teaching practices. Second, two researchers discussed the preliminary inductive findings, identified common or disparate views, and focused on further establishing concepts. Third, the summarized concepts were compared with related literature, and, if necessary, the interviewees were invited to verify the accuracy of the analysis results or provide auxiliary reference materials. Triangulation was used to ensure the validity of the study. Finally, in-depth discussions were held according to the research purpose, and the research findings were summarized. Results: The encoding and analysis of the data using NVivo produced the following research findings: (1) The motivation of teachers to participate in the second-specialty course of living technology primarily came from their interest in hands-on implementation and their schools' teaching needs. All teachers reported that before teaching living technology courses, they believed that this subject involved handicrafts or industrial arts, which they had previously learned. Most knowledge of technology was derived from self-learning and the experience of using technology in daily life. Most of the participants indicated that fully understanding and transforming the subject into teaching activities was difficult. (2) The effect of teachers' participation in the second-specialty course on the development of their curricular consciousness included the promotion of their professional awareness of living technology courses, the transformation of their beliefs concerning technology education, and the establishment of positive self-awareness regarding teaching living technology. (3) Teaching practice prompted teachers of the second-specialty course to rapidly absorb and transform professional knowledge. However, in the process, their teaching confidence was affected by external environmental factors and a lack of professional knowledge. (4) The support available to teacher communities from inside and outside the school and from the school administration are critical to enabling teachers in the second-specialty course to overcome their teaching difficulties. Conclusion: This study explored the transformation of second-specialty teachers involved in technology education, including their motivation, beliefs, curricular awareness construction, and teaching practices. On the basis of a literature review and interview analysis, the researchers proposed a framework to highlight the dynamic relationship between teachers' curricular consciousness and their teaching practices. The results demonstrated that substantial professional growth occurs between learning in the second-specialty course and teaching living technology in junior high school. Teachers' learning motivation, knowledge construction, and real-life teaching situations influence each other and affect teachers' self-awareness, professional awareness, and environmental awareness, respectively. These dynamic interactions help form teachers' curricular awareness. The interviews revealed that external change factors may motivate teachers to expand their knowledge. However, the most critical factors involve teachers independently generating learning motivation and curricular consciousness and desiring real changes that prompts them to invest in continual learning and teaching practices. Furthermore, teachers must establish their own teaching beliefs and curricular awareness to strengthen their teaching confidence in new fields and face external pressure, which is the core focus of curricular reform.起始頁-結束頁：31-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202109_66(3).00023篇名：應用Petri-Net建構知識構圖強化適性學習診斷與學習推薦之研究並列篇名：Applying Petri-Net to Construct Knowledge Graphs for Adaptive Learning Diagnostics and Learning Recommendations作者：戴建耘(Jiann-Yun Dai);葉國良(Kuo-Liang Yeh);高曼婷(Man-Ting Kao);袁宇熙(Yu-Hsi Yuan);張明文(Min-Wen Chang)關鍵字：知識構圖;派翠西網路;基本電學;學習推薦;學習診斷;knowledge graph;Petri-Net;foundational electricity;learning recommendation;learning diagnostic期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：電機電子領域專業知識概念間存在錯綜複雜的關係，具有相同學習成效的學生可能存在不同的迷思概念與結構，然多數既有學習導引機制缺乏推薦學習者適性學習內容與途徑的規劃，因此，技職專業人才的培育面臨極大的障礙與困境。由於科技的進步，知識構圖被廣為應用於推薦系統，找出符合使用者需求的新訊息。本研究由五位高職電機電子群專業科目知識概念專家、八位試題發展專家及五位電機電子群業界專家與資深教師，運用三回合修正式德菲法剖析電機電子領域核心基礎：「基本電學」12個主題的58個專業概念與95個對應相關性，再利用具有圖形特性的派翠西網路（Petri-Net）技術，建構出其Petri-Net知識構圖，並發現對後續學習影響最巨的概念依序為電路型態與特性、電的單位、向量運算及電壓。此外，本研究以初探性導入建立三種不同學習類型個案學生的Petri-Net知識構圖，並剖析他們個別的學習歷程與狀態，結果顯示Petri-Net知識構圖的應用得以：一、提供視覺化學習鷹架增強初學者的認知結構；二、適性診斷不同類型學習者的迷思概念；三、推估後續概念的學習效果；四、推薦個人化學習內容與路徑助益自主學習與補救教學。據此，本研究提出相關的討論與建議，作為發展測評系統及擬定教學策略參考。英文摘要：Because of the increasing heterogeneity among students in classes and schools, determining a student's basic learning status and ability in each subject and tailoring instruction or adapting remedial teaching to a student's needs and characteristics have become challenging, especially for those students with learning disadvantages. According to Skinner's behavioral learning theory (as cited in Gregory, 1987), differences in a student's learning experiences (such as in understanding concepts) lead to considerable disparities in future learning. Drastic differences in internal cognition and concept structure may exist even among students with the same traditional learning achievements (i.e., scores) (Yu & Yu, 2006). Furthermore, the differences in concept cognition structure between experts and novices may be discoverable by analyzing similarities in students' conceptual understandings, relationships, or psychological metrics (Brand-Gruwel et al., 2005; Hsu et al., 2012). Cognitive diagnostic models, such as the knowledge map, are useful for assessing a student's conceptual knowledge structures and misconceptions to improve differentiated teaching, learning diagnosis, and remedial teaching (Chu et al., 2014; Hwang, Shi et al., 2011; Hwang, Wu et al., 2011; Ku et al., 2014; Lou et al., 2007; Lwo et al., 2013; Ting & Kuo, 2016). However, most such models have been constructed using only vertical hierarchical structures, wherein spotting multilateral correlations or influences between subjects or concepts proves difficult. Unlike an expert, a student cannot intuitively identify the multilateral correlations between the concepts involved a learning pathway, and analyzing novice learning is challenging and requires considerable time and effort. An adaptive mechanism for diagnosing and analyzing students' dynamic learning behaviors and learning pathways could improve autonomous learning and remedial teaching. However, most existing mechanisms cannot offer adaptive or personalized learning content or pathways to the learner (Singhal, 2012; Ting & Kuo, 2016; Wang et al., 2019). With the advantages provided by information technologies such as big data analytics and artificial intelligence, large-scale heterogeneous data analysis, cloud computing, and Knowledge Graphs (KGs) with directionally linked data structures have been widely applied in recommendation systems to facilitate the representation of knowledge structures and to mine for new knowledge that helps to meets users' needs (Deng et al., 2019; Fensel et al., 2020; Guan et al., 2019; Jia et al., 2018; Nickel et al., 2016; Noy et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020). Similar to tree-structured knowledge maps, KGs are based on directional or nondirectional ontological graphs composed of concept nodes and relationship edges and employ the consensus opinions of Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) to generate consolidated KGs or generate KGs automatically from large mined data sets or text. The associated reasoning mechanism is used to make inferences based on the existing concepts and relationships among them. Among all the graph-building options, Petri-Net possess the most robust capabilities for graphical workflow presentation and pathway analysis (Peterson, 1981; Tan & Zhou, 2013). They have long been widely applied in adaptive learning and learning pathway recommendation. According to information published by the Taiwan Bureau of Foreign Trade and Taiwan Electrical and Electronic Manufacturers' Association in 2020, the electrical and electronics industry accounted for 50.59% of Taiwan's total export value in 2019. The foundational electricity course is an important core course for future electrical and Electronic Engineering (EE) study and can be the first obstacle for novices because of the intricate relationships among its knowledge concepts. Also, significant differences may exist in individual understandings of concept structures (Dai, 2015). To address the aforementioned challenges in learning diagnostics and remedial teaching, this study was based on learning theories such as the conditions of learning, constructivism, and scaffolding theory and utilized Petri-Net to achieve the following goals: 1. Use a Petri-Net to construct a KG visualizing a foundational electricity course. 2. Conduct a pilot study to identify personal learning pathways, interrelationships among foundational electricity concepts, and misconceptions regarding novices' learning types. 3. Use students' learning history to predict their learning effectiveness when studying future concepts and maximize their learning outcomes. 4. Recommend an adaptive, calibrated, personalized learning pathway for further remedial teaching and learning. In this study, we employed a three-round modified Delphi technique with 18 SMEs to identify 12 subjects, 58 concepts, and 95 corresponding interrelationships within a core foundational electricity course in EE. We utilized a Petri-Net with graphic features to construct a KG we called a Petri-Net KG. After the third round of the modified Delphi technique, all eight SMEs' Content Validity Indexes (CVI) were 1.00. Cronbach'sαwas .75. The SMEs' opinions regarding the interrelationships of concepts exhibited good internal consistency and reliability, according to 95% confidence intervals. The correlations between concept weights were .83-.96 (p ＜ .01). Intraclass Correlation Coefficients (ICCs) were used to confirm the consistency of SMEs' opinions on the weights of the interrelationships between concepts. ICC (1) was .072, and ICC (2) was .75. All the SMEs' opinions exhibited significant and strong correlations and good consistency. Using 947 students' assessment records, learning portfolios, and learning status data (e.g. conditions of learning performance, scores), the reasoning engine was used to employ the KGs for learning transfer analysis. Preliminary exploration case studies were conducted to create Petri-Net KGs personalized for students with three different learning types (insufficiently hardworking, inadequate learning, and abnormal learning) and to determine their learning progress and status. Sato's student-problem chart was used to classify students' learning types. The major results and findings of this study are as follows: 1. The most important concept was circuit patterns and characteristics, affecting the learning of the subsequent 12 concepts, and the total impact was 6. Units, vector operations, and voltage-in that order-were the next most important concepts. 2. The proposed Petri-Net KG provided students with visualized learning scaffoldings that indicate the experts' consensus cognitive structure. It also clarified any prior concepts requisite for understanding each concept. 3. By utilizing the weights of the interrelationships between concepts and their prior concepts, the reasoning engine could adaptively diagnose misconceptions and further predict students' effectiveness in learning subsequent concepts. 4. Each learning type was associated with a unique cognitive structure. Integrating students' learning portfolio data into the proposed Petri-Net KG enabled the reasoning engine to recommend an adaptive and personalized learning pathway. The aforementioned results have the following implications for future applications and research: 1. The visualized Petri-Net KG for the foundational electricity course could clearly depict learning types, experts' consensus knowledge structure, and students' personal cognitive structures. Additionally, most influential concepts were observable at a glance. Such KGs could be useful for guiding concept recognition and effectively diagnosing misconceptions. 2. The personalized learning pathways and content recommended by the Petri-Net KG and reasoning engine can be used in a self-tutoring platform. The weighted concept intercorrelations and student learning data can be analyzed to determine students' cognitive conditions according to an expert KG. Thus, a model or student learning effectiveness can be established to strengthen the effectiveness of autonomous learning or remedial teaching. The framework of this course-level Petri-Net KG can be extended and applied to other curricula, disciplines, or educational levels to develop appropriate recommendation systems for competency development.起始頁-結束頁：61-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202109_66(3).00034篇名：南向政策下之跨境教師專業發展的需求評估：以五所馬來西亞華文獨立中學為例並列篇名：Needs Assessment of Cross-Border Teachers' Professional Development Under the Southbound Policy: Case Study of Five Malaysian-Chinese Independent Secondary Schools作者：陳慧蓉(Karen Hui-Jung Chen);李玲惠(Lin-Hui Lee)關鍵字：重要性－表現分析法;教師專業知識;教師專業發展;跨境教師培育;需求評估;importance-performance analysis;teacher professional knowledge;teacher professional development;cross-border teacher education;needs assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：新南向政策下，我國致力於和東南亞國家協會等國的雙邊人才交流與培育，其中馬來西亞與我國交流尤其密切。馬來西亞華文獨立中學雖然致力於師資專業化，但仍有改善空間，因此我國師資培育大學逐步與獨立中學合作，培育馬來西亞師資。然而，我國師資培育系統著重於培育臺灣背景的教師，以符合義務教育的需求。要如何走出地方性，有效協助跨境教師所需要的教師專業知能並確保品質，是一大挑戰。本研究以實徵研究方法探討馬來西亞僑生在我國大學畢業後返回獨中任教，或是曾經接受我國培訓的獨中教師，其教師專業知能的需求情形。本研究以問卷、晤談及焦點座談等方法蒐集資料，並結合重要性—表現分析法與差距分析進行資料解析，以增加精確性。結果發現，獨中教師的專業成長需求受到環境與時間因素的影響。由於國家情境脈絡不同，馬來西亞當地與跨境學歷的教師需求有所差異；五所學校中有兩所學校的脈絡較為特殊，需求也不相同；而華文教師與其他科目教師不同，對於教學策略的需求較低。在時間與環境（個人、學校環境及國家脈絡）的影響下，教師因特有的脈絡而有不同的專業成長需求。本研究結果可提供各師資培育大學作為課程調整與規劃之參考，以及國家南向教育政策評估的依據。英文摘要：Under the New Southbound policy, the government of Taiwan is promoting the exchange and cultivation of bilateral talents with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, in which Malaysia is included. Although Malaysian organizations have been devoted to enhancing the professional development of schoolteachers for years, room for improvement remains, especially for those in Chinese independent secondary schools. Teacher universities in Taiwan are cooperating with these secondary schools by accepting Malaysian students for teacher education, in addition to providing workshops or degree programs to in-service teachers for professional development. However, most teacher education programs in Taiwan are designed for preparing teachers to fulfill compulsory education needs. The challenge is to help those who are willing to become cross-border teachers enhance their teaching profession while maintaining program quality to meet requirements and standards. The aim of this study was to assess the professional development needs of teachers in Chinese independent secondary schools in Malaysia; the study particularly focused on the teachers who have become independent secondary schoolteachers after receiving teacher education in Taiwanese universities and those who received diplomas from other countries but received teacher training from the universities in Taiwan. Importance-Performance Analysis (IPA) and discrepancy analysis were used to perform a needs assessment. IPA has been applied to various areas in education and service industries. Previous studies have proved that combining IPA and discrepancy analysis can improve research validity (Hudson et al., 2004). Therefore, this study applied IPA and discrepancy analysis simultaneously to determine the key factors necessary for more effective professional development. In addition, this study referred to the theoretical framework of teacher professional development in Furner and McCulla (2019) and expanded the environmental factors by adding the influence of national context to explore the cross-border teachers' professional development needs. Accordingly, two research questions were investigated in this study: (1) What are the differences between the performance and importance (expectation) levels of independent middle school teachers? (2) Under the influence of environmental factors and different time spans in teaching experiences, what are the differences in teachers' professional development needs? On the basis of previous studies (Day & Gu, 2007; Furner & McCulla, 2019), this study established a two-dimensional framework to analyze the key factors influencing teachers' professional development. The vertical dimension was related to personal, organizational (school), and social (country) environmental factors. This study explored how and the mechanism through which these three-level environmental factors shape teachers' professional development needs. The horizontal dimension was related to a teacher's career stage and focused on how teachers change their professional development needs at each of their career stages. This study utilized surveys, individual interviews, and focus group interviews for data collection. The survey consisted seven pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) attributes and each of them was rated for its importance and performance level by the schoolteachers themselves. A total of 140 responses were returned, and 69 teachers and administrators were interviewed. For data analysis, this study combined IPA and discrepancy analysis to assess needs and determine the improvement priorities. A data-centered diagonal-line model based on previous studies (Abalo et al., 2007; Wyrod-Wrobel & Biesok, 2017) was applied. Performance scores were plotted on the X-axis, and importance scores related to the attributes were plotted on the Y-axis. The data center point (means of importance and performance) was selected as the crosshair to construct a two-dimensional plot. A diagonal line was drawn to meet the data center point to divide the traditional IPA graph into six areas. The area above the diagonal lines was considered to represent an improvement-requiring zone and was further divided into three areas: concentrate here, warning, and improvement areas. The area below the diagonal line was the same as that established in the traditional IPA described by Martilla and James (1977); this area was further divided into three areas: low priority, keep up the good work, and possible overkill areas. After conducting the IPA, this study utilized discrepancy analysis to obtain more information on the differences between importance (expectation) and performance by applying a paired-sample t-test to examine whether a significant discrepancy existed. The study results revealed that national context affected teacher learning. Teachers who graduated from local universities in Malaysia revealed less need for teaching strategies compared with those who studied abroad in Taiwan. However, teachers who received cross-border degrees in Taiwan and China displayed similar learning demands, except that the demand for P3 (subject knowledge) was lower for teachers who graduated from universities in Taiwan than for those who graduated from universities in China. Regarding school context, teachers' professional development needs were different in the case study schools. Teachers at three case study schools (A, B, and E) had similar learning needs, but those at the other two schools (C and D) had different needs. The principal of school D devoted his efforts to engage teachers in school-based professional development. By participating in intra- and inter-disciplinary meetings, teachers cooperated in developing new courses and jointly designed new teaching methods. Therefore, teachers' demand for teaching strategies was lower than other attributes. School C, located in east Malaysia, had a different culture and school context compared with those in west Malaysia. Many students left school in east Malaysia before graduation to prepare for studying abroad or obtaining jobs. Because students' learning motivation and learning needs were different from those in west Malaysia, this special school context influenced teachers' professional development needs in school C. Concerning personal factors, teachers teaching Chinese exhibited lower demands for professional development in teaching strategies than did other subject teachers. Provided with self-study materials, the teachers spent more time trying innovative teaching strategies and teaching students higher-order thinking skills. Therefore, teachers' learning demands for teaching strategies were relatively low. Teachers' learning needs at different career stages were determined to be influenced by environmental factors. According to the literature, early career teachers focus on developing classroom management strategies (Furner & McCulla, 2019); however, this study revealed different results. Novice teachers with less than 3 years of teaching experience had a high demand for professional growth in subject knowledge but low demand for class management. According to the interviews, the low demand was because the teachers had participated in several workshops in classroom management during orientation trainings. Experienced teachers (4-7 years of teaching experience), as reported by Furner and McCulla (2019), still concentrate on learning classroom management skills but gradually shift to enhance their instructional strategies. However, this study determined that teachers at a later career stage had a high demand for teaching strategies but no demand for class management. Teachers with more than 21 years of experience exhibited a high demand for teaching strategies, which is similar to the observations by Day and Gu (2007). This study revealed that the three-level (personal, school, and national) environmental factors and different career stages influenced the needs of professional development. Applying IPA and discrepancy analysis to conduct needs assessment can help execute a comprehensive examination of the needs of cross-border teacher learning. One-size-fits-all professional development cannot fulfill teachers' learning needs. Instead, providing teachers with various professional development programs by considering their academic qualifications, teaching experiences, and school contexts is valuable. The results of the study will be provided to the teacher education programs for universities in Taiwan as well as for the government to assess the implementation of educational policies.起始頁-結束頁：107-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202109_66(3).00045篇名：中小學教師換證制度之研究：體系內涵、遭遇阻力與配套措施並列篇名：License Renewal System for Elementary and Secondary School Teachers: Contents, Resistance, and Supporting Measures作者：吳清山(Ching-Shan Wu);王令宜(Ling-Yi Wang);林雍智(Yung-Chih Lin)關鍵字：教師證照;教師換證體系;教師專業發展;teacher's license;teacher license renewal (TLR);teacher professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：教師專業能力的提升與教育品質的保障息息相關，因此也成為國際重視的重要議題，透過實施教師換證制度，定期更新教師所需之專業知識，不但有助於教師提升專業能力，也能獲得社會各界信任。本研究旨在探討中小學教師換證制度之內涵、可能遭遇阻力及配套措施，研究方法採用問卷調查方法，以學者專家、教育行政人員及學校教育人員為對象進行研究。本研究結論包含：一、換證能夠有效增進教師專業知能、維持專業水準和確保教學品質；二、換證週期以10年為最合適；三、換證採計條件以研習進修時數占多數；四、免除換證條件以獲得政府或民間團體舉辦之全國性特殊優良教師獎占多數；五、延緩證照更新條件，贊成換證期間內因生產、育嬰、侍親等事由辦理留職停薪者占多數；六、主政核發單位，贊成教育部者占多數；七、換證辦理單位贊成地方政府研習機構者占多數；八、推動換證遭遇之阻力，最主要為缺乏法源依據；九、推動換證之配套措施，主要為將換證明定於《教師法》內，取得法源依據。根據上述結論，本研究再提出若干建議，供規劃及推動中小學教師換證體系之參考。英文摘要：Enhancing teachers' professional abilities is closely related to ensuring high education quality and has become a key educational issue globally. Teacher license renewal (TLR) systems not only benefit teachers' professional learning but enable them to gain social trust. This study explored the contents of and resistance to implementing TLR; the study also evaluated the system for supporting TLR for elementary and secondary school teachers in Taiwan. This study was conducted using questionnaires administered to scholars, educational administrators, and school educators. Nine conclusions were drawn: (1) TLR can effectively function to enhance the professional knowledge, maintain the professional standards, and ensure the quality of teachers. (2) The TLR cycle period should be 10 years. (3) Training hours are the main consideration of TLR. (4) Most participants agreed that the Nationwide Special Excellent Teacher Awards should be accepted as an exemption to license renewal. (5) TLR should be postponable for childbirth, childcare, or paternity. (6) The Ministry of Education should be the license-issuing authority. (7) The TLR training hours should mainly include those at local government training institutes. (8) The main difficulty of promoting TLR is the lack of a legal basis. Finally, (9) the main measure proposed for supporting TLR is to amend the ”Teacher Law” to obtain the legal basis. A discussion of the implications these concrete suggestions for promoting TLR is presented.起始頁-結束頁：161-190資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202109_66(3).00056篇名：幼兒視覺空間工作記憶與翻牌遊戲之關聯性研究並列篇名：Relationship Between Visuospatial Working Memory and Concentration Game Performance in Young Children作者：周姍姍(Shan-Shan Chou);王馨敏(Shinmin Wang)關鍵字：幼兒;視覺空間工作記憶;視覺空間短期記憶;翻牌遊戲;young children;visuospatial working memory;visuospatial short-term memory;concentration game期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以80位4∼6歲幼兒為研究對象，探討學前幼兒的視覺空間工作記憶相關能力與翻牌遊戲的相關性。研究結果顯示，翻牌遊戲表現與視覺空間短期記憶（視覺短期記憶、空間短期記憶）及視覺空間工作記憶皆呈現顯著正相關。在迴歸分析中控制月齡及非語文能力後，視覺空間短期記憶（視覺短期記憶、空間短期記憶）可有效預測翻牌遊戲表現，而視覺短期記憶和空間短期記憶也分別對翻牌遊戲表現有獨特的變異解釋量。此外，當控制月齡、非語文能力及視覺空間短期記憶後，視覺空間工作記憶仍能有效預測翻牌遊戲表現，因此視覺空間工作記憶之相關測驗結果均對於幼兒翻牌遊戲表現具有獨特解釋力。本研究以實證證據支持幼兒翻牌遊戲表現需在一定程度上仰賴其視覺空間工作記憶相關能力之論述。英文摘要：Eighty young children (4-6 years old) were recruited to explore the relationship between their performance on a concentration game and visuospatial working memory. The children's performance on the concentration game was significantly correlated with their visuospatial short-term memory (visual short-term memory and spatial short-term memory) and visuospatial working memory. Regression analyses revealed that visuospatial short-term memory explained variations in children's performance on the concentration game after age and nonverbal ability were considered. Moreover, visuospatial working memory was a significant predictor of children's performance on the concentration game, independent of age, nonverbal ability, and visuospatial short-term memory. Collectively, our data suggest that children's performance on the concentration game is significantly associated with their visuospatial working memory related skills.起始頁-結束頁：191-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202109_66(3).00067篇名：體感式遊戲應用於泰文句法學習：泰文學習態度、語言焦慮、遊戲心流、測驗焦慮、句法自信心提升之關係並列篇名：Applying Motion Sensing Gaming to Learning Thai Syntax: Relationship Among Thai Learning Attitudes, Language Anxiety, Gameplay Flow, Test Anxiety and Self-Confidence Enhancement in Thai Syntax作者：譚華德(Nitiwat Watthanapas);洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);葉建宏(Jian-Hong Ye);葉貞妮(Jhen-Ni Ye);郝永崴(Yung-Wei Hao)關鍵字：成就情緒;泰文句法;焦慮;遊戲式學習;體感學習;achievement emotion;Thai syntax;anxiety;game-based learning;embodiment-based learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：身體活動能活化腦前額葉來幫助提升認知表現，然而，以身體活動為基礎的數位學習工具尚未在語言學習領域中有充足研究，加上句法是第二外語學習的關鍵，習得正確的句法系統才能組織完整的文句，故如何有效運用身體活動的數位遊戲來增強外語學習者句法是值得探究的議題。基此，本研究在遊戲式學習的特性下，邀請北部地區兩所大學及一所科技大學，共182名泰文學習者參與研究。研究實施共計15週，使用一款名為“Shaking Fun”的App，此App可進行文字排序。實驗方式為每週讓同學玩20分鐘當作複習。在檢核學習成效上，本研究以成就情緒的控制價值理論（CVTAE），探討與泰文學習活動相關的成就情緒，CVTAE預測正向情緒應能帶來更好的學習價值，而負向情緒則降低學習價值感知，依此，本研究提出一個研究模式。研究結果顯示：一、泰文學習態度與遊戲心流呈現正影響，但與測驗焦慮呈現負影響；二、泰文語言焦慮與遊戲心流呈現負影響，但與測驗焦慮呈現正影響；三、測驗焦慮與遊戲心流呈現負影響；四、遊戲心流與泰文句法自信心提升呈現正影響；五、測驗焦慮與泰文句法自信心提升呈現負影響。英文摘要：Physical activity can activate the prefrontal cotex of the brain and improve cognitive performance. However, digital learning tools based on physical activity have not been sufficiently studied in the field of language learning. In addition, grammatical syntax is a key part of foreign-language learning, and the correct syntax is necessary to learn sentence usage. Therefore, how to effectively use digital games to enhance syntax learning for foreign-language learners is worth exploring. This study invited 182 Thai learners from two universities in northern Taiwan and one science and technology university to participate in the research. This study lasted 15 weeks and employed a digital game called ”Shaking Fun” App, which can be used as learning assessment by involving students to sort text and shake mobile devices to send answers. The students were asked to play for 20 minutes each week. To assess learning effectiveness of shaking mobile devices as taking a test for assessing Thai syntax learning, this research used the control-value theory of achievement emotion (CVTAE) to explore the emotions related to achievements. The CVTAE predicts that activate emotions, such as game flow, bring to better learning value, whereas deactivate emotions, such as test anxiety, reduce learning value. Therefore, a research model based on this theory was proposed; the results of the research revealed the following: (1) Thai language learning attitudes is positively related to gameplay flow; but Thai language learning attitudes is negatively related to test anxiety. (2) Thai language anxiety is negative related to gameplay flow; but language anxiety was positively related to test anxiety. (3) Test anxiety can negatively predict gameplay flow experience. (4) Gameplay flow can positively predict Thai syntax using confidence. (5) Test anxiety can negatively predict Thai syntax using confidence. Expectedly, the results of this study can provide students who learning Thai as secondary language to use ”Shaking Fun” device to improve their achievement emotion.起始頁-結束頁：213-246資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202109_66(3).00078篇名：題型對學生數學表現水準之影響－以相似形為例並列篇名：Effects of Item Type on Student Mathematics Performance: Similar Figures as an Example作者：陳建亨(Chien-Heng Chen);楊凱琳(Kai-Lin Yang)關鍵字：相似形;測驗等化;試題反應理論;題目類型;similar figure;test equating;item-response theory;item type期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究的目的為探討不同題型對試題難度、試題鑑別度及九年級學生數學表現水準的影響，研究者以相似形的能力指標作為測驗內容，設計相同的題目敘述之選擇題、填空題及計算說理題，並編製成含有六題共同題的三種試卷，以進行測驗等化之用。每份試卷分別有361、411及378位的受試者，合計1,150位的受試者。研究設計採用共同題不等組設計，並以同時校準法（concurrent calibration method）進行測驗等化。本研究分別用單向度二參數部分計分模式與多向度潛在迴歸模式（multidimensional latent regression model），進行試題難度、鑑別度及學生在不同題型下所表現之能力參數的估計，並將學生在各題型中的能力估計值排序換算為百分等級。研究結果發現：一、選擇題的平均難度最低，計算說理題的平均難度最高；二、選擇題的平均鑑別度最低，計算說理題的平均鑑別度最高；三、單向度模式分析發現，有69.04%的學生在三種題型能力估計值的PR值（百分等級）相差20以上；四、多向度潛在迴歸模式分析發現，有12.61%的學生在三種題型能力估計值的PR值相差15以上。研究結果顯示，測驗題與學生的數學表現水準有關，而且主要有兩種不同型態的影響。文末針對兩類學生在不同題型較具優勢的原因，做進一步的討論。英文摘要：This study investigated the influence of item type on the difficulty and discriminatory power of items and on ninth graders' mathematics performance. Researchers tested similar figures as competence indicators; three tests were designed with multiple-choice items, completion items, and essay items that corresponded to the same stem, and six common items were equated for each test. The tests were administered to 1,150 students, with 361, 411, and 378 receiving different kind of three tests. The tests were equated using a common-item, nonequivalent group design and the concurrent-calibration method. The difficulty and discriminatory power of items and the ability parameters of the students taking the tests with different item types were estimated with a unidimensional two-parameter partial-credit model and a multidimensional latent regression model. The estimates of the students' ability parameters were converted to percentile ranks (PRs). The following are the results of the study: (1) The average difficulty of the multiple-choice items was the lowest, and that of the essay items was the highest. (2) The average discriminatory power of the multiple-choice items was the lowest, and that of the essay items was the highest. (3) For 69.04% of the students, the values of three item types differed by 20 or more in PR. (4) Finally, the multidimensional latent regression model revealed that, for 12.61% of the students, the values of three item types differed by 15 or more in PR. The results indicate that item type is related to student mathematics performance through two main types of effect. The researchers further investigated why some students' performance on the completion and essay items was superior to that on the multiple-choice items and why some students' performance on the multiple-choice items was superior to that on the essay items.起始頁-結束頁：247-277資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202109_66(3).00089篇名：Designing a Vocational High School Instructional Program for Enhancing Creativity: Effects on Creative Thinking and Group Process Analysis並列篇名：創造思考教學方案對高職生創造思考能力之效果與團體歷程分析作者：陳秀玲(Hsiu-Ling Chen);黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang);蘇筑筠(Chu-Yun Su)關鍵字：creative thinking ability;creative thinking instruction;divergent thinking;process analysis;vocational high school;創造思考能力;創造思考教學;擴散性思考;歷程分析;高級職業學校期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Teaching students the ability to think creatively can improve a country's continuity and prosperity. However how strategies for teaching creative thinking can be efficiently applied remains unclear. This study examined the effect of a 9-week creativity curriculum on the creative thinking ability of students in an engineering program at a vocational high school. A nonequivalent, quasi-experimental design was employed. A total of 85 students were assigned to an experimental group of 41 or a control group of 44. The students in the experimental group scored significantly higher in all aspects of creative thinking ability, namely, fluency, flexibility, originality, and elaboration. The creative thinking curriculum yielded positive results; the emergent themes in the creative process included: (1) curriculum characteristics, (2) group dynamics, and (3) constraining conditions. The results imply that this 9-week creativity curriculum is efficient and can be incorporated into future research on engineering education or creative thinking.英文摘要：教導學生如何創意思考是國家持續發展與繁榮的重要關鍵。然而，目前普遍缺乏如何有效應用創意思考教學策略之討論。本研究主要目的在設計9週的創造力教學方案，並檢驗對於高職資訊科學生之創造思考能力的影響。採用準實驗研究之不等組設計，共85位高職生參與，實驗組為41人、控制組為44人。以新編創造思考測驗、Torrance圖形創造思考測驗之表現，分別作為創造力教學方案之前、後測，進行共變數分析。同時，蒐集教師個別訪談、課室觀察，以及學生焦點團體訪談與個別訪談等質性資料，來分析創造思考教學對高職生創意氛圍之影響。量化研究結果指出，實驗組於創造思考能力之流暢性、變通性、獨創性及精進性，皆顯著高於控制組。根據質性資料結果發現，實驗組在課程特性、團體動力、限制情境等主題上，皆有較佳的創意發想效果，此意味著本研究採用之創意思考教學策略，可有效提升高職生之創造思考能力，建議未來可整合至資訊科教育中。起始頁-結束頁：279-303資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202109_66(3).000910篇名：推來拉去之間？從「推拉理論」分析臺灣人才流失與因應之道：以留美博士為例並列篇名：Between ”Push” and ”Pull”?-An Analysis of Taiwan's ”Brain Drain” and Possible Solutions from the Perspective of Push-Pull Theory: The Examples of Ph.D. Holders in the U.S.作者：鄭英傑(Ying-Jie Jheng);張珍瑋(Chen-Wei Chang)關鍵字：人才流失;全球化;留學生;推拉理論;旋轉盤機制;brain drain;globalization;students overseas;Push-Pull Theory;In-and-Out System期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：在全球化影響下，各國為保競爭力，除重視高等教育人才培養，亦致力於爭搶他國人才，其中以博士人才為甚。在這場人才爭奪戰中，臺灣雖致力於培養博士人才，但也同時面臨「人才流失」的挑戰。據此，本研究主要目的在於先從「推拉理論」觀點，探究臺灣留學博士人才流失之推力、拉力與夾雜於其內之「個人因子」，再從中尋找突破契機。為達研究目的，本研究實際訪談14位留美任職博士。根據研究發現，臺灣端的「推力」因子，包括對臺灣高等教育環境劣勢條件的覺察（例如應聘過程繁文縟節、過度強調人脈、教授角色定位不明等）；美國端的「拉力」因子，則是美國高等教育環境的相對優勢條件（例如應聘過程簡單快速、免除人情羈絆、教授角色定位明確等）；另一組具影響力的「個人因子」，在於主觀認為臺灣各項攬才政策極具不穩定與欠缺完整規劃。最後，植基於研究結果，提出相關政策建議，包括設置「旋轉盤機制」、建立「聲聲喚人情鍊」以及「簡化應聘申請程序」，俾供相關政府單位參酌。英文摘要：In response to the effects of globalization, to keep ahead of the competition countries worldwide strive to cultivate more talented people through higher education systems as well as by recruiting talent from other countries, particularly Ph.D. holders. The Taiwan government, which is no exception in this fight for talent, faces the challenge of ”brain drain.” This study, rooted in ”Push-Pull Theory,” first examined the possible ”push,” ”pull,” and personal factors that exacerbate the brain drain phenomenon in Taiwan (i.e., emigration of Ph.D. holders from Taiwan to other countries) and then provided some possible solutions. To this end, the study interviewed 14 Ph.D. holders who chose to stay in the United States after graduating. According to the current results, the ”push” is related to the weakness of Taiwanese higher education (i.e., red tape during the recruitment process, the prevalence of nepotism, and the unclear roles of professors). By contrast, the ”pull” of the United States are related to the strength of its higher education (i.e., the simplicity of the recruit mentprocess, the lack of nepotism, and the roles of professors being clearly defined). Furthermore, personal factors, particularly those involving policies that draw talented people overseas, include instability and lack of long-term plans. Based on the results, the end of the study offers some policy suggestions, including creating an ”In-and-Out System,” building a ”Bonding System,” and simplifying the application process.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202106_66(2).000101篇名：中文版遠距聯想測驗在創造力研究之應用：回顧與展望並列篇名：The Application of the Chinese Version of Remote Associates Tests in Creativity Research: A Review and Prospect作者：陳姵臻(Pei-Zhen Chen);吳清麟(Ching-Lin Wu);張雨霖(Yu-Lin Chang);黃博聖(Po-Sheng Huang);林緯倫(Wei-Lun Lin);陳學志(Hsueh-Chih Chen)關鍵字：中文;創造力;創造思考教學;頓悟問題;遠距聯想測驗;creativity;creative thinking teaching;insight problem;mandarin;Remote Associates Test期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：34卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：創造力係教育領域持續關注的研究主題之一。遠距聯想測驗（Remote Associates Test, RAT）可有效評估創造思考教學成效。該測驗具計分客觀且施測時間較短的特性，應用於華人創造力研究已近20年。本研究統整自2000年以中文版遠距聯想測驗為工具之43篇期刊論文，針對研究目的分四個部分：不同版本之發展與比較、創造性問題解決歷程之探究、影響遠距聯想測驗表現之相關因素、不同介入成效之評估。結果顯示中文版遠距聯想測驗對應中文字層次（部件、字彙、詞彙）有三種版本，且廣泛應用於探討創造思考歷程。行為與認知神經科學研究結果皆指出個體在遠距聯想測驗的解題歷程必須跳脫框架、轉換問題表徵。同時，研究亦發現操弄內、外在因素皆有效改善遠距聯想表現。據此，建議在教學現場可採用中文版遠距聯想測驗評估學生創造力、營造安全的教學環境、重視學生自主發想、訊息整合與跳脫框架。本研究回顧21世紀至今中文版遠距聯想測驗應用於創造力研究之相關文獻，為中文版遠距聯想測驗的發展與應用提供一個綜觀性的框架，可做為後續研究檢驗創造力理論或現場教師評估學生創造力之參考。英文摘要：Creativity has been one of the focuses of educational research. The Remote Associates Test (RAT) is a valid measurement to evaluate the effect of creativity training. Because of its objective scoring, short completion time required, and relatively simple question preparation, RAT has been adopted in Chinese creativity research for almost 20 years. This study integrates the literature and is divided into four parts: development and comparison of different versions, the exploration of the problem-solving process, factors related to remote association, and effectiveness of different interventions. The results show that the Chinese version of RAT was developed in three levels: radical, character, and word. Behavioral and neuroscience research indicates that the problem-solving process must be dynamic and flexible, and that manipulating internal or external influences can improve associative ability. Suggestions for teaching practices include assessing students' creativity with the RAT, creating a safe environment, training divergent and convergent thinking, and thinking outside the box. The present study provides a comprehensive framework for the development and application of the Chinese versions of the RAT, methods to evaluate students' creativity, and proposes a scope for future research to examine creativity theory.起始頁-結束頁：1-44資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學2篇名：國民小學教師資格考試「數學能力測驗」之數學教材教法評測知識類別與細目及比重分析並列篇名：Mathematical Competency Test of the Elementary Teacher Certification Examination: Knowledge Domains, Specifications, and Distribution Percentage作者：林碧珍(Pi-Jen Lin)關鍵字：師資生;國小教師資格檢定考試;教數學的專業知識;數學能力測驗;數學教材教法;knowledge for mathematical teaching;mathematical competence test;mathematics teaching and contents;Primary Teacher Qualification Examination;prospective or preservice teacher期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：34卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究是利用我國國小教師資格考試「數學能力測驗」之數學教材教法歷屆考題的資料庫進行試題分析，以建立我國師資生國小數學教材教法的知識類別與細目，並分析各類別知識所佔比重。本研究先以文獻分析，形成教師教數學的專業知識分析架構，再分析歷屆國小數學教材教法試題。研究發現：我國國小師資生數學教材教法知識的評量架構包含：數學課程知識4項、分析學生數學認知知識6項和數學教學策略知識8項。從教師資格檢定試題分析得到的知識類別細目隱含著表示我國對於「先實後檢」的師資生教國小數學所須要具備的專業知識內涵。三類知識中，數學課程知識和分析學生數學認知知識所佔比重相當，而以數學教學策略知識比重最少，尤其是「挑選及安排學生解題的發表順序」及「依據學生的反應提出回饋」。本研究分析得到的國小數學教材教法知識類別與細目，可以作為未來「先檢後實」制度下的國小教師資格考試命題的參考，並作為國小數學科教材教法課程制定教學內容的指引，以及提供給師資生準備教檢考試的方向。英文摘要：The study was to explore the knowledge domains and specifications for teaching mathematics measured in the Mathematics Competency Test required in the Elementary Teacher Certification Examination, and the percentage distributed in each knowledge domain and specification. An analytical framework based on literature reviewed was constructed to analyze the items from the annual Mathematical Competency Test. The results showed that 18 specifications were distributed into three knowledge domains in the framework, consisting of four, six, and eight corresponding items to assess prospective teacher's knowledge of curriculum, knowledge of children's cognition, and pedagogical content knowledge, respectively. This framework implicitly signified the professional knowledge required for prospective teachers who have done the internship first and then take the certification examination in elementary school. Of the three domains, there were similar amount of items dedicated to the knowledge of curriculum and students' cognition domains, while the number of items were fewer for mathematical instruction. The items related to ”selecting and sequencing students' various solutions” and ”giving follow-up feedback to students' responses” were neglected in the Teacher Certification Examination. The specifications and domains of knowledge in the assessment framework could be used as a reference for future Teacher Certification Examinations in measuring prospective teachers who take the exam before their internship, according to the new preservice teacher educational policy. This framework can also serve as a guide for mathematics teaching methods courses required in preservice teacher program, and as a direction for prospective teachers preparing the Teacher Certification Examination.起始頁-結束頁：45-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學3篇名：Becoming a Teacher of CLIL in Higher Education: A Pilot Study in Asia並列篇名：學習成為高等教育體系中的CLIL教師：以亞洲教師為個案研究作者：李佳盈(Jia-Ying Lee)關鍵字：content and language integrated learning (CLIL);English as an additional Language;higher education;teacher training;以英語為外語;高等教育;教師訓練;學科內容與語言綜合學習期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：34卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：This study explores the developmental course of training to become a content and language integrated learning (CLIL) practitioner in higher education. Thirteen in-service teachers (five Japanese, four Taiwanese, two Chinese, one Filipino, and one Thai) wholly new to the CLIL approach received an intensive fortnight's training in CLIL. The training, following the CLIL model, started by introducing the theory, rationale and foundations of CLIL and concluded with a mini-CLIL teaching session from each teacher. Two quantitative surveys and a qualitative semi-structured survey yielded data on the trainees' experiences as course members. The results show that the teachers generally approved of CLIL, endorsing its effectiveness more than its efficiency. The teachers' self-confidence in English skills and their past teaching experiences seemingly affected their belief in CLIL's practices. Finally, the teachers revealed some challenges in implementing CLIL in general, in higher education, and in their specific culture-education contexts. The study made important contributions in the field, with its findings serving as valuable references for higher education, teacher-training programs, and interested teachers.英文摘要：本研究旨在探討高等教育教師學習「學科內容與語言綜合學習法」（content and language integrated learning, CLIL）提升教學的效果。十三位大學在職教師（五位日籍、四位台灣籍、兩位中國籍、一位菲律賓、及一位泰國籍）參與為期兩週的CLIL密集師資訓練課程。課程從引領教師認識CLIL教學理論及原理開始，以實作及試教作為收尾。為評估教師參與學習CLIL教學的成效，研究採用兩份量化問卷及一份半結構質性問卷收集相關資料。研究結果顯示，參與教師普遍認同CLIL教學法，並認為其教學效果（effectiveness）優於教學效益（efficiency）。教師對CLIL教學實踐的信念，受到本身的英語程度及過往的教學經驗影響。參與教師對於CLIL於高等教育現場實踐，從所屬教育文化體系，提出存有的挑戰、困難，與困境。本研究為該領域帶來重要貢獻，其結果得提供高等教育發展CLIL教學之參照、師資培訓機構推動CLIL參考，及有志投入CLIL教學的教師了解CLIL教學法的本質等資訊。起始頁-結束頁：91-119資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學4篇名：利用Rasch模式評估高中物理素養試卷過程：教師發展素養試題之啟示並列篇名：Using Rasch Model to Evaluate Physics Competence Tests and its Implications for Teachers' Development of Competency-based Items作者：林淑梤(Shu-Fen Lin);張仁壽(Jen-Shou Chang);吳隆枝(Lung-Chih Wu);黃建彰(Chien-Chang Huang);趙臨軒(Ling-Hsien Chao);許程迪(Chen-Din Sheu);曾博淵(Po-Yuan Tseng);賴彥良(Yan-Liang Lai);李俊穎(Chun-Ying Lee)關鍵字：Rasch模式;物理素養;評量;試題反應理論;assessment;Item Response Theory;physics competence;Rasch model期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育實踐與研究卷期：34卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：十二年國民基本教育將核心素養視為本次課程改革的重點，評量與課程目標一致才能有效推動改革。本文目的為介紹教育部國民及學前教育署普通型高級中等學校物理學科中心試題組教師與科教研究者共同合作發展與效化物理素養試卷後，運用Rasch模式中多向度部分給分模式，檢驗試題的品質、判讀Wright map的意義，呈現發展和施測物理素養試題所遇到的問題與解決策略，作為未來發展素養試題之參考。試題組團隊挑選42題物理素養試題，形成難易度相當的A、B兩卷。利用分層與便利取樣，向全臺19校，1119位高三學生進行施測。Rasch分析結果呈現兩卷幾乎所有試題與多向度部分模式都能適配，且兩卷各向度的平均難度值均在0附近。但Wright map（能力與難度對應圖）呈現少數題目偏易，且缺乏高難度試題，恐較難有效評量高能力的學生。此研究在實務上建議建立全國統一的科學素養評量架構，未來並應多發展建構反應試題、以評量「評估及設計探究能力」和高難度的試題，並且善用Wright map增加教師對素養試題難度的敏感度並增進對學生能力的理解。評量設計探究能力和高難度的試題，並且善用Wright map增加教師對素養試題難度的敏感度與學生能力的了解。英文摘要：Core competencies are the focus of the 12-year basic education curriculum reform. The purposes of the study were to introduce the development and validation of two physics competence tests through the cooperation of the seed teachers in the physics curriculum center, K-12 Education Administration, Ministry of Education, with a science education researcher, and to investigate strategies for developing competency items based on the analysis of multidimensional partial credit model, one of the Rasch models, and the interpretation of Wright maps. Forty-two physics competence items were selected and divided into test A and test B with a similar difficulty level. Stratified and convenience sampling was adopted. Two tests were administered to 1119 Grade 12 students from 19 public senior high schools in Taiwan. The results showed that most of the items in the two tests fit the multidimensional partial credit model, and the average of item difficulty for test A and test B were approximately 0. However, based on the Wright maps, some items were easier, and there was a lack of items with higher difficulty to assess students with higher ability. The study intends to inspire practical educators to build a national assessment framework for scientific literacy and to develop constructed-response items, items assessing the competence of evaluating and designing scientific inquiry, and items with high difficulty. The use of Wright maps may enhance teachers' sensitivity to item difficulty and their understanding of students' ability.起始頁-結束頁：121-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺北教育大學01篇名：香港少數族裔小學生的中文字形知識、轉寫能力和寫作表現的關係並列篇名：The Relationship Between Chinese Orthographic Knowledge, Transcription Skills and Writing Performance on Ethnic Minority Primary Students in Hong Kong作者：鄧芷雲(Tsz-Wan TANG);劉潔玲(Kit-Ling LAU)關鍵字：中文第二語言教學;寫作;轉寫能力;字形知識;teaching Chinese as a second language;writing;transcription;orthographic knowledge期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究採量化測試方法，探討香港少數族裔小學生的中文字形知識、轉寫能力與寫作表現的關係。研究對象為小四（n=34）和小六（n=37）兩級共71位學生。研究結果反映香港少數族裔小學生的中文轉寫能力與寫作表現的關係密切。在兩種轉寫能力中，以拼寫的影響較書寫大，拼寫的影響會由小四維持至小六，覆蓋整個小學階段；而書寫只對小四的寫作篇幅有顯著影響。另一方面，學生的轉寫能力不足，是受到字形知識所影響；在三種字形知識中，以表意部件的影響最為顯著，表意部件會通過轉寫能力影響學生的寫作表現。最後，本研究從寫作範疇的角度，在課程和教學兩方面提出建議，從而探討幫助提升香港少數族裔學生寫作能力的方法。英文摘要：This study incorporated quantitative testing to explore the relationship between Chinese orthographic knowledge, transcription skills and writing performance on ethnic minority primary students in Hong Kong. A total of 71 students (34 Primary 4 and 37 Primary 6 students) participated in this study. This study found that there was a strong relationship between transcription skills and writing performance on ethnic minority children in Hong Kong. Among the two transcription skills, spelling was found to affect writing performance more than handwriting skills, with spelling affecting students from primary 4 through 6, covering the entire period of primary education. Handwriting skills were found to have a significant effect toward the writing productivity in primary 4 students only. On the other hand, the students' poor transcription skills have direct relationship with their lack of Chinese orthographic knowledge. Within the three aspects of orthographic knowledge, knowledge of semantic radical was the most important. Semantic radical knowledge affected students' writing performance through their transcription skills. Lastly, recommendations were given to writing, both as a curriculum and as a teaching pedagogy, to help raise ethnic minority children's writing performance in Hong Kong.起始頁-結束頁：1-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所2篇名：從系統功能語言學視角評估與分析非華語學生實用中文寫作並列篇名：Systemic Functional Linguistics-based Assessment and Analysis on Practical Writing of Non-Chinese Speaking Students作者：邱佳琪(Cha-Kie HIEW)關鍵字：系統功能語言學;非華語學生;實用中文寫作;第二語言寫作;評估;systemic functional linguistics;non-Chinese speaking students;practical Chinese writing;second language writing;assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：系統功能語言學認為語言具有其系統和功能，語文教學應該使學生掌握語言的系統，並在互動中學習如何恰當地使用語言。本文通過實證研究分析59位香港非華語學生的真實語料，結合量化數據和質性分析，探討第二語言學習者的實用中文寫作表現。研究發現，非華語學生整體實用文寫作能力較弱，尤其在語旨、語式、連接、文法等層面表現最弱；在語境內容方面普遍文類知識不足，無法掌握特定文類的寫作目的和結構，文步和層次不完整，亦缺少語境的概念；在表述方式層面詞匯量有限；在文法呈現方面受到英文文法影響，體現了語言的負遷移現象。本研究亦通過基於系統功能語言學發展出的寫作評估標準，為寫作評量提供新的視角，使教師和研究者能更細緻地了解非華語學生的寫作難點和學習需求，掌握學生到底是在語境內容、表述方式或文法呈現當中的十四個層面有甚麼不足之處，才能進一步發展有針對性的教學設計，通過相應策略提升第二語言學習者的寫作能力。英文摘要：Systemic functional linguistics emphasizes on the system and functions of language, and it suggests that language education should help students learn the system of language and how to apply it in communication appropriately. This empirical research analyzed the authentic materials of 59 non-Chinese speaking (NCS) students through quantitative and qualitative analysis. The research findings discovered the weak performance of NCS students in practical writing, especially in the aspects of tenor, mode, conjunction, and grammar. Other problems included the insufficiency in the genre knowledge, inability to understand the writing purpose and structure of certain genre, incomplete steps and phases, lack of the concept of context, limited vocabulary, and the language form affected by English grammar as the result of negative transfer in second language. This research not only studied their practical writing performance but also introduced a new scoring scheme of Chinese writing developed based on systemic functional linguistics. Therefore, teachers and researchers can understand students' writing difficulties and learning needs from the perspectives of context, discourse, grammar and presentation, and develop specific teaching design or relevant strategies to improve the writing ability of second language learners.起始頁-結束頁：27-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所3篇名：Mathematics Anxiety and Learning Strategy as Critical Factors Affecting Geometric Learning of Primary School Students並列篇名：數學焦慮和學習策略是影響國小學生幾何學習的關鍵因素作者：黃思華(Tzu-Hua HUANG)關鍵字：core concepts of geometry;learning achievement;learning strategy;mathematics anxiety;van Hiele geometric thinking levels;幾何核心概念;學習成效;學習策略;數學焦慮;van Hiele幾何思考層次期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：This research examined how the core concepts of geometry, learning strategies and mathematics anxiety predict geometry learning achievements, and whether various variables can explain students' learning achievements at different levels of geometric thinking. A total of 108 children (aged 10-11) completed the tests of van Hiele geometric thinking levels, prior knowledge in geometry, and geometry learning achievement, as well as assessments of mathematics learning strategies, core concepts of geometry, and mathematics anxiety. Of them, 78 children were identified as Level 1 (n = 40) or Level 2 learners (n = 38) according to the van Hiele geometric thinking levels. Eight lessons of this study were conducted, and the content of each lesson was based on a unit of geometry. Results indicated that mathematics anxiety and mathematics learning strategy explained the geometry learning achievement of Level 1 and Level 2 learners respectively. These results highlight the different factors affecting geometry learning achievement of Level 1 and Level 2 learners and the importance of mathematics anxiety and mathematics learning strategy to learners' performance in geometry learning.英文摘要：本研究探討幾何核心概念、學習策略、數學焦慮如何預測幾何學習成就，以及各變項能否解釋不同幾何思考層次學生的學習成就。研究共有108名學生（10－11歲）參與，他們完成van Hiele幾何思考層次、幾何先備知識、幾何學習成就等測驗，以及數學學習策略、幾何核心概念和數學焦慮量表。根據van Hiele幾何思考層次測驗，共有78名學生分別屬幾何思考層次第一級（n = 40）和第二級（n = 38）。本研究共進行八堂課，每堂課的內容為不同的幾何單元。研究結果發現，數學焦慮和數學學習策略分別是影響幾何思考層次第一級和第二級學生幾何學習成就的關鍵因素，結果突顯了影響幾何思考層次第一級和第二級學習者幾何學習成就的不同因素，以及數學焦慮和數學學習策略影響學習者幾何學習成就的重要性。起始頁-結束頁：45-70資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所4篇名：積木式程式設計之學習成效後設分析並列篇名：The Meta-analysis of Block-based Programming on Students' Learning Outcomes作者：邱仁一(Jen-I CHIU);崔夢萍(Mengping TSUEI)關鍵字：程式設計;後設分析;積木式程式設計;學習成效;programming;meta-analysis;block-based programming;leaning outcomes期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：近年來積木式程式語言廣泛運用於各教育階段資訊課程，提供學習者導入程式語言學習的環境。本研究以後設分析法探討積木式程式設計教學對不同教育階段學生學習成效的影響，包含程式設計能力、問題解決、運算思維和學習動機，並探討影響學習成效的變項。本研究透過系統化文獻資料蒐集和篩選，針對2003至2021年37篇已發表的文獻共5,430名樣本進行分析。研究結果顯示積木式程式設計教學的整體效果量為中效果量（0.33），在程式設計能力、問題解決、運算思維和學習動機上皆有正向效果，支持積木式程式設計對學生學習有效。再者，程式設計能力受「教學時間」、「專案類型」和「研究地區」調節變項作用而有差異：問題解決能力受「專案類型」調節；運算思維受「研究地區」調節；學習動機則受「實驗人數」、「積木式程式設計環境」、「專案類型」、「研究地區」調節。本研究結果可作不同教育階段運用積木式程式語言教學的參考。英文摘要：Block-based programming is receiving attention in different educational stages. It provides learners with the access to introductory computer science courses. This meta-analysis study aimed to examine the effects of block-based programming, comparing to traditional instruction, on students' learning outcomes, including programming skills, problem-solving skills, computational thinking, and learning motivation. Database search yielded 37 publications with 5,430 samples. Results indicated that block-based programming had a significantly larger effect size than did traditional instruction for overall learning outcomes (0.33). More specifically, we found positive effect sizes for programming skills, problem-solving skills, computational thinking, and learning motivation. These study findings indicated the benefits of block-based programming education for students' learning outcomes. ”Study duration,” ”project types,” and ”research areas” as moderator variables had statistically significant impacts on the mean effect size in students' programming skill. ”Project types” had statistically significant impacts on the mean effect size in problem-solving skills. ”Research areas” had statistically significant impacts on the mean effect size in computational thinking skills. Moreover, ”sample size,” ”block-based programming languages,” ”research areas,” and ”project types” had also statistically significant impacts on the mean effect size in students' learning motivation. The findings helped teachers implement block-based programming instruction for facilitating students' learning outcomes for students in different education stages.起始頁-結束頁：71-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所5篇名：教科書多元文化內涵之分析研究－以馬來西亞小一華文版健體教科書為例並列篇名：Textbook Analysis of Multicultural Content: Using a Chinese Version of Physical and Health Education Textbook for Malaysian First-Grade Students as Example作者：孫瑜(Yu SUN);林炳洲(Pengchew LIM);王子華(Tzu-Hua WANG)關鍵字：多元文化;健體教科書;教科書分析;multiculture;physical and health education textbook;textbook analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究從性別平衡、族群多元和融合教育三個面向，以內容分析檢視馬來西亞《一年級體育與健康教育》的多元文化內涵，給予教科書編寫省思和建議。研究發現，教科書在整體編寫上有意維持性別圖像在呈現比例上的平衡，與體育運動有關的圖像並無呈現性別的刻板印象，但與健康知識相關的圖像則存在一定程度的性別暗示；教科書基本再現了馬來西亞多元族群的社會現實，並在族群圖像呈現比例上突顯非主流族群在多元社會的地位，但族群內容仍有可討論的空間；而有關身心障礙學生圖像出現的次數不多且內容不夠豐富，但卻是融合教育切實落實的一個良好示範。本研究建議，應立基於以維繫族群間和諧發展的多元文化觀點來呈現多元族群的樣貌，不應過多強化主流族群的思想意識；其次，建基於身心障礙學生應與普通學生一樣受同等對待這樣正確的融合教育理念，才能用來指導現實教學；最後，應從圖像呈現比例和內容上打破性別的刻板印象，從平權的角度編寫有關多元文化的性別圖像。英文摘要：This study examined the multicultural content of a physical and health education textbook for Malaysian first-grade students from the perspectives of gender equality, ethnic diversity, and inclusive education. Qualitative content analysis was adopted to analyze the multicultural content of the book, aiming to provide suggestions for improvement. First, the research found that the textbook deliberately maintained a quantitative balance in the arrangement of gender images. In terms of content presentation, images related to sport events exhibited no gender bias, whereas images related to health knowledge exhibited a certain degree of gender stereotypes. Second, the textbook basically presented the social reality of Malaysia's diverse ethnic groups and highlighted the proportion of images depicting non-mainstream ethnic groups among all ethnic groups. However, discussions on the contents of ethnic groups were insufficient. Third, although few images and little content depicted disabled students, the inclusion of images of such students was a good example of the implementation of inclusive education. Based on these findings, this study had the following suggestions: (a) the presentation of diverse ethnic groups in the textbook's content should be based on the multicultural view of harmonious development among ethnic groups, and overemphasizing the mainstream group's ideology should be avoided; (b) the implementation of inclusive education should be based on the idea that disabled students should be treated the same as non-disabled students; (c) gender content should be written from the perspective of gender equality, thus eliminating gender stereotypes in terms of image proportion and content presentation.起始頁-結束頁：97-114資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所6篇名：建構大學創客教學模式的實驗研究並列篇名：An Experimental Study of Constructing Maker Teaching Model作者：沈翠蓮(Tsuilien SHEN)關鍵字：創客;教學設計;創客教學設計;創意問題解決;maker;instructional design;maker instructional model;creative problem solving期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：創客是大學教育為了發展未來創新知識社會的主力。本研究旨在：建構大學實踐創客教學設計的可行模式，探析創客教學設計模式的學習知覺差異，發展創客產出創意作品的後續研發歷程。研究方法採取準實驗研究的不等組前後測設計，研究對象為開設在大學創意課程的三班共132位大學生，經由6週教學實驗，並以「大學生參與教學設計表現想像創意作品的實驗效益調查問卷」施測，分析教學實驗前後的學習知覺差異。研究提出以下結論：（1）大學創客教學設計模式需要師生共構共變；（2）大學創客教學模式的學習知覺，在創造力、創意問題解決和創客教學設計上獲得顯著驗證；（3）大學創客教學設計課堂作品接力研發為商品，具有教育意義和市場價值。英文摘要：Makers studying at university are the main powerful pioneers for developing innovative knowledge society. This research aimed to construct a feasible model of maker teaching, to explore the differences of learning perception of the maker instructional model, and to develop the subsequent process of product creation. Nonequivalent pretest-posttest designs of the quasi-experimental research was employed. Research participants included 132 college students from three classes of creativity-related courses, who participated a 6-week experiment. They were divided into the experimental group and two control groups. A questionnaire was employed to test their differences of learning perception. Results found that: (a) for the maker instructional model, CEO-I^2M^2E^2-SF, a collaborative constructive relationship should be built between instructor and makers; (b) in terms of the performances of learning perception under the maker instructional model, significant differences were found in the dimensions of creativity, creative problem solving, and maker instructional design; (c) there were educational and marketing values in the subsequent process of product creation by makers.起始頁-結束頁：115-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所7篇名：升讀專上教育的成功與障礙因素：香港主流和非主流學生的異同並列篇名：The Success and Obstacle Factors in Pursuing Post-secondary Education: The Differences Between Hong Kong Mainstream and Non-mainstream Students作者：袁月梅(Celeste Yuet-Mui YUEN);張志強(Alan Chi-Keung CHEUNG);梁長城(Cheung-Shing LEUNG);鄧希(Hayes Hei-Hang TANG);陳仲熙(Luke Chung-Hei CHAN)關鍵字：專上教育;封頂效應;主流學生;內地來港學生;少數族裔學生;post-secondary education;glass ceiling;mainstream student;Chinese immigrant student;ethnic minority student期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：升讀專上教育（專教）一直被視為香港青年上游的途徑，不同社經背景的學生所面對升讀專教的挑戰各有差別。近年，香港教育政策推動多元發展並提供多項支援和計畫，以提升中學生畢業後的發展路向，但不同學生組群在升學上都遇到不同障礙和不同程度的教育不均情況。由於學生的社經和族群背景影響他們對升學與就業的價值觀、期望和目標，他們追求專教面對的障礙和成功因素各有不同，惟香港對此問題的系統化探討不多。為此，本實證研究探討香港主流、內地來港和少數族裔（南亞／東南亞裔）高中生升讀專教所面對的障礙和成功因素，於2018年10月至2019年5月期間在23所香港中學進行問卷調查，合共成功收回5,014名高中生的問卷，發現主流學生雖然在經濟障礙和其他封頂因素的評分均低於少數族裔及新來港學生，但同樣地在多項有利升讀專教的成功因素上的評分亦較後兩者低，而少數族裔則比華裔群體樂觀。本文討論了當中原因，並提供相關的政策建議。英文摘要：Post-secondary education (PSE) is widely regarded as a critical vehicle for upward social mobility for Hong Kong youth. Access to PSE is tightly linked with the socioeconomic status and cultural capital of an individual. Hence, different educational backgrounds lead to different educational and career pathways and life chances. However, students from affluent families tend to have better upward mobility opportunities than those from underprivileged backgrounds. Different factors will affect different student groups' access to PSE. There are relatively few empirical studies conducted on this area. In response, this research investigated the success and obstacle factors affecting access to PSE among the Hong Kong mainstream students, Chinese immigrant students (CIS), and non-Chinese speaking (NCS) ethnic minority (South/Southeast Asian) students. A mixed-method was employed. The survey study was conducted with 5,014 senior secondary students from 23 secondary schools in Hong Kong between October 2018 and May 2019. Contrary to expectations, findings reveal that Hong Kong mainstream students scored significantly lower in the relative functionalism and glass ceiling factors than their non-mainstream CIS and NCS counterparts. Despite encountering fewer financial and language barriers, Hong Kong mainstream senior secondary students were less optimistic about the promise of their PSE credentials. In contrast, NCS students reported a significant level of optimism about PSE's value, and greater concerns about the challenges in overcoming the Chinese language and ethnic cultures than their Chinese peers. Both the reasons behind the essential findings and their implications for policy development were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：137-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所8篇名：Negotiating, (Re)forming, and Creating Identity: An Observation of Students at a Taiwanese Overseas School in China並列篇名：認同的協商、形構、重組與創生：觀察中國大陸一所海外台灣學校的學生作者：陳鏗任(Ken-Zen CHEN);吳建華(Chien-Hua WU)關鍵字：Taiwanese businesspersons' children;transmigrants;identity;overseas schools;台商子女;移民;身分認同;海外學校期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：This article describes how Taiwanese children studying in a Taiwanese overseas school in China negotiated, (re)formed, and created their identities. As 1.5- and 2nd-generation migrants, those Taiwanese students accommodated, connected, reconnected, and made sense of their border-crossing living and learning experiences between Taiwan and China. A total of 21 students, 1 parent, and 7 faculty participated in this study. They expressed multiple identities with regard to rational and instrumental purposes. Their inner self-identities were deeply rooted by the affective belongingness of Taiwan and diaspora experience of living in China. Students remixed various elements from their cross-strait and cross-cultural living experiences into their own identity (re)formation process. Their practical wisdoms about identity not only differed from their elder Taiwanese businesspersons, but also shed light on theoretical discussions of identity.英文摘要：本文描述一所在中國大陸的海外台灣學校學子，在學習和成長經驗中協商、形構、重組、與創生自己的身分認同。這些移民的第二代（或1.5代）移居學子適應理解海峽兩側的跨界生活學習，令自己與變動的環境取得連結、創塑意義。研究者邀請了21位具轉學經驗的學生為主要報導人，並邀請7位教師和1位家長為次要報導人進行深度訪談。雖然學生內心的自我認同深植於對台灣的情感歸屬和僑居中國大陸的經歷，但他們向外展演的身分透露出多元且變動不定的認同，其形塑過程不僅來自情感依歸，亦有理性考慮和策略思維。雖然海外台灣學校子女傳承父輩跨界移動的血液，但發展出認同的實踐智慧已與其父母有所不同。他們的核心認同來自家庭，在殊異的學校生活與跨界經驗中培養社群意識，並發展出能適應移居情境的認同混搭。起始頁-結束頁：161-190資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所9篇名：The Impacts of Principal's Transformational Leadership and Environmental Obstacles on Teachers' Job Satisfaction: The Mediation of Professional Learning Community並列篇名：校長轉型領導與環境阻礙對教師工作滿意度之影響：以教師專業學習社群為中介作者：黃詞凰(Tzu-Huang HUANG);丁學勤(Shueh-Chin TING);陳柏青(Bo-Ching CHEN)關鍵字：principal leadership;educational resource;teachers' job satisfaction;professional learning community;PISA;校長領導;教育資源;教師工作滿意度;教師專業學習社群;PISA期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Previous studies have indicated that conditions of teaching environment and principal's leadership are associated with teachers' job satisfaction (TJS). Moreover, in recent years, in order to promote teaching professional development, teachers' professional learning communities (PLC) have been established one after another. In view of the fact that TJS is influential to teaching quality, the study aimed to construct a model to explore how environmental obstacles (EO), principal's transformational leadership (PTL) and PLC influenced TJS. In the study, the data of PISA 2015 (Programme for International Student Assessment 2015) involving 2,436 senior high school teachers in Taiwan were analyzed by means of structural equation modeling (SEM) and model stability. Results showed that: (a) EO had a negative significant impact on PLC and TJS; (b) PTL had a positive significant impact on PLC and TJS; (c) PLC had a positive significant impact on TJS; (d) the mediating effect of PLC on the influence of EO to TJS was not statistically significant; (e) PLC was proven to positively mediate the influence of PTL to TJS. Based on the results, implications for research and practice were further discussed.英文摘要：過往研究顯示教學環境和校長領導與教師工作滿意度有關聯。再者，近年為促進教師專業發展，教師專業學習社群相繼成立。鑑於提升教師工作滿意度對增進教學品質有很大助益，本研究從環境因素、校長轉型領導和教師專業學習社群來建構三者影響教師工作滿意度的模型。本研究以2015年「國際學生能力評量計畫」（Programme for International Student Assessment, PISA）中2,436名台灣高中教師為樣本，並使用結構方程模式（structural equation modeling, SEM）及模型穩定性（model stability）分析進行驗證。研究獲致以下結論：（1）「環境阻礙」會負向影響「教師專業學習社群」與「教師工作滿意度」；（2）「校長轉型領導」會正向影響「教師專業學習社群」與「教師工作滿意度」；（3）「教師專業學習社群」會正向影響「教師工作滿意度」；（4）關於「環境阻礙」透過「教師專業學習社群」影響「教師工作滿意度」，沒有發現統計上的顯著差異；（5）「校長轉型領導」會透過「教師專業學習社群」中介影響「教師工作滿意度」。最後，本文依研究成果提出研究和實務建議。起始頁-結束頁：191-215資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所10篇名：Exploring the Operational Process of a Teacher Professional Learning Community Through the Lens of Activity Theory: A Chinese Perspective並列篇名：活動理論視角下教師專業學習社群運行過程探究：來自中國的經驗作者：楊鑫(Xin YANG);鄭鑫(Xin ZHENG)關鍵字：teacher PLC;activity theory;interactive process;mainland China;教師專業學習社群;活動理論;互動過程;中國大陸期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Adopting the perspective of activity theory, this research investigated the interactive core elements within a school as a teacher professional learning community (PLC), and analyzed the relationships between these factors and school innovation. The research was based on a qualitative case study over 3.5 years in a newly established private boarding school (School S) in western China. Semi-structured interviews, field documents, and classroom observations were employed to collect data. The research found that teachers played a major role in active interaction with other factors within the PLC. Updating teachers' knowledge and building school knowledge were the objects of the PLC, which motivated the learning activities in School S. There were four intermediary factors between the subjects and objects. Results also showed four interaction pathways within the school as a PLC, namely subject-tools-object, subject-rules-object, subject-community-object, and subject-division of labor-object. These findings indicate that a teacher PLC is a self-organizing learning activity system. The operation of PLCs has realized the transformation from a top-down model and bottom-up model to a middle-up-down interaction model in the school, thus stimulating organizational vitality and promoting organizational knowledge creation.英文摘要：在活動理論視角下，本研究探究了學校作為教師專業學習社群，其內部各要素的互動過程，並分析了教師專業學習社群內部互動路徑與學校變革之間的關係。本研究歷時三年半，以中國西部一所私立中學為質性個案，採用了半結構式訪談、課堂觀察、實地文件等方法收集研究資料。研究結果顯示，教師身為主體要素在專業社群內部互動中發揮主體作用，目標是實現教師知識的更新和學校組織知識的建構。學校作為專業學習社群，其內部主體與客體之間有四條互動路徑，分別是「主體—工具—客體」、「主體—規則—客體」、「主體—社群—客體」和「主體—分工—客體」。研究還發現教師專業學習社群是一個自組織的學習活動系統，其內部各要素之間的良性互動實現了從自上而下模式、自下而上模式到中上下模式的轉變，從而增進組織活力和組織知識創新。起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所11篇名：校長領導對教師專業學習社群的影響探索：一項混合研究並列篇名：Exploring the Influence of Principal Leadership on Professional Learning Communities: A Mixed-method Study in China作者：張佳(Jia ZHANG);滕梅芳(Meifang TENG)關鍵字：分布式領導;轉變型領導;教學型領導;專業學習社群;distributed leadership;transformational leadership;instructional leadership;professional learning communities期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究採用混合研究方法，探討中國內地中小學三種不同的校長領導類型（即分布式領導、轉變型領導和教學型領導）對教師專業學習社群產生的影響。研究向173位中小學校長進行問卷調查，發現三種領導均對教師專業學習社群產生了顯著的正向影響，其中分布式領導對教師專業學習社群的促進作用明顯大於轉變型領導和教學型領導。研究通過進一步的質性訪談，解釋三種校長領導類型影響教師專業學習社群的具體體現。文章就如何通過校長領導改進教師專業學習社群實踐，以及未來研究方向提出了建議。英文摘要：This mixed-method study explored the influences of three leadership styles (i.e., distributed leadership, transformational leadership, and instructional leadership) on professional learning communities (PLCs) in mainland China. A questionnaire survey was administered to 173 principals to examine the effect of the three leadership styles on PLCs. Results showed that all the three leadership styles had significant and positive effects on PLCs, and the effect of distributed leadership was larger than the effects of transformational leadership and instructional leadership. Follow-up qualitative interviews with principals were conducted to explain how such effects took place. Practical implications of the findings for principals and suggestions for future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：29-49資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所12篇名：國民中學校長創新領導、教師專業學習社群與教師教學創新表現關係之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Relationships of Principals' Innovative Leadership, Teachers' Professional Learning Community and Teachers' Innovative Teaching Performance in Junior High Schools作者：黃建翔(Chien-Hsiang HUANG);吳清山(Ching-Shan WU)關鍵字：國民中學校長;創新領導;教師專業學習社群;教學創新表現;junior high school principal;innovative leadership;teachers' professional learning community;innovative teaching performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在了解當前國民中學校長創新領導、教師專業學習社群與教師教學創新表現的現況與關係。研究採用問卷調查，以台灣地區60所國民中學693位教師為樣本，運用描述性統計、積差相關與結構方程模式等進行統計分析。研究結果顯示：（1）校長創新領導、教師專業學習社群與教師教學創新表現的現況良好；（2）校長創新領導、教師專業學習社群與教師教學創新表現三者之間具有相關性，且三者關係模式適配度良好，具有顯著正向效果；（3）校長創新領導可透過整體教師專業學習社群的中介作用，間接正向影響教師教學創新表現，而對其有所助益。本文依據研究結果提出具體建議供教育行政機關、國民中學校長及後續相關研究參考，以提高學校創新經營效能。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the current situations and the relationships among innovative leadership by school principals, professional learning community of teachers, and innovative teaching performance of teachers in junior high schools in Taiwan. A questionnaire survey was adopted by sampling 693 teachers from 60 junior high schools in Taiwan. Statistical analyses were conducted, including descriptive statistics, product-moment correlation and structural equation modeling. The study found that: (a) the current situations of principals' innovative leadership, teachers' professional learning community, and teachers' innovative teaching performance were good; (b) there were correlations among these three factors, and the relationship model fit for these three factors was good, displaying a significant and positive effect; (c) with the mediating effect of the entire professional learning community of teachers, innovative leadership by school principals had an indirect and positive impact on teachers' innovative teaching performance. Based on the findings of this study, recommendations for educational administration authorities, principals of junior high schools, and future follow-up study were provided.起始頁-結束頁：51-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所13篇名：國小教師績效責任領導影響學生學業樂觀之關係－以教師專業學習社群為中介變項並列篇名：A Study on the Impact of Elementary School Teachers' Accountability Leadership on Students' Academic Optimism: Teachers' Professional Learning Community as the Mediating Variable作者：張文權(Wen-Chuan CHANG);范熾文(Chih-Wen FAN)關鍵字：教師績效責任領導;教師專業學習社群;學生學業樂觀;teachers' accountability leadership;teachers' professional learning community;students' academic optimism期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究主要探討台灣國小教師績效責任領導、教師專業學習社群與學生學業樂觀間的關係。透過調查533位國小教師，以分析教師績效責任領導與教師專業學習社群對學生學業樂觀的直接影響，以及教師績效責任領導透過教師專業學習社群對學生學業樂觀的中介影響。經由相關分析和結構方程模式等統計方法，發現教師績效責任領導、教師專業學習社群與學生學業樂觀現況良好，三者有顯著正相關；教師績效責任領導、教師專業學習社群對學生學業樂觀有直接影響；教師績效責任領導亦會藉由教師專業學習社群對學生學業樂觀產生間接影響。本研究建議教師宜運用績效責任領導，促進教師專業學習社群，進而提升學生學業樂觀。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore the relationship among elementary school teachers' accountability leadership, teachers' professional learning community, and students' academic optimism in Taiwan. It investigated 533 elementary school teachers to analyze the direct effects of teachers' accountability leadership and teachers' professional learning community on students' academic optimism, and the mediating effect of teachers' accountability leadership on students' academic optimism through teachers' professional learning community. This study adopted statistical methods such as correlation analysis and structural equation modeling. Results showed that the current situations of teachers' accountability leadership, teachers' professional learning community and students' academic optimism are positive. Significantly positive correlations among them were found. Teachers' accountability leadership and teachers' professional learning community directly influenced students' academic optimism; teachers' accountability leadership indirectly influenced students' academic optimism through teachers' professional learning community. This study suggests that teachers should apply accountability leadership, enhance teachers' professional learning community, and further upgrade students' academic optimism.起始頁-結束頁：73-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所14篇名：The Construction and Development of Teacher Professional Learning Community: Based on Network Co-teaching Between Public School Teachers and Migrant School Teachers並列篇名：教師專業學習社群的建設與發展：基於公辦學校教師和隨遷子女學校教師網絡合作教學的思考作者：李瑩(Ying LI);張佳偉(Jia-Wei ZHANG);柏靜(Jing BAI)關鍵字：teacher professional learning community;collaborative teaching;Online Education Assistance Project;teacher professional development;教師專業學習社群;合作教學;在線教育援助項目;教師專業發展期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：The Online Education Assistance Project (OEAP) is an online collaborative teaching project. This research took the OEAP as a case and used qualitative research methods to analyze the conditions of the OEAP as a professional learning community (PLC), the important factors affecting the development and construction of the OEAP, and the significance of developing and building a PLC. It was found that teachers' individual factors, working environment and students' academic conditions were all important factors affecting the sustainable development and construction of PLC. In addition, the development and construction of PLC based on the OEAP not only promoted student learning, teacher professional development and school construction, but also provided reference for promoting the sharing of high-quality educational resources and regional education balance.英文摘要：OEAP是一個在線教育援助項目。本研究以OEAP為個案，採用質性研究方法，分析了OEAP作為專業學習社群的條件，影響OEAP發展和建設的重要因素，以及發展和建設專業學習社群的重要性。研究發現，來自教師個人的內部因素以及工作環境和學生學業條件等外部因素，都在一定程度上影響專業學習社群的持續發展和建設。此外，依託OEAP組建的專業學習社群不僅可以促進學生學習、教師專業發展和學校改進，還對促進高質量教育資源共享和區域教育平衡具有一定的參考價值。起始頁-結束頁：97-124資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所15篇名：縣域內名師工作室的跨界連接和能量擴散並列篇名：Building Cross-boundary Connections and Expanding Teacher Capabilities Through County Master Teacher Studios作者：喬雪峰(Xuefeng QIAO);黃倩(Qian HUANG);馮攀靜(Panjing FENG)關鍵字：教師能量;名師工作室;專業學習社群;社會網路;邊界跨越;teacher capacity;master teacher studio;professional learning community;social network;boundary crossing期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：協助鄉村教師生成擴散能量成為鄉村教師支持政策實施的關鍵。本研究主要探討名師工作室如何超越地理空間和組織結構，將不同學校的教師聯結為網路學習社群，帶動鄉村教師提升和擴散能量。研究所見，個案名師工作室逐步搭建了以學員為節點、通過專業學習相連接的社會網路。學員被視為可擴展的增長點，將更多節點納入到社會網路中，形成覆蓋縣域的區域性社會網路。名師工作室以賦權增能的方式將學員教師從學習者轉變為能量源，通過影響鏈將能量擴散至整個縣域。英文摘要：Expanding capabilities of rural teachers plays a significant role in implementing rural teacher support policies. This study mainly explored how a county master teacher studio connected teachers across schools into a networked learning community and promoted the expansion of teacher capabilities beyond the geographic space and organizational structures. The study found that the county master teacher studio has gradually constructed an overarching network structure, integrating members through the threads of orchestrated networked learning. Network members, conceived as open access points, incorporated increasing threads and knots into the social network. Meanwhile, the county master teacher studio empowered network members to actively exert capacities, and spread teacher capacities to the overarching network through the chain of influence.起始頁-結束頁：125-142資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所16篇名：探問青年生命意義的來源－以自助攝影（Auto-photography）及照片引談（Photo-elicitation）為進路並列篇名：An Inquiry of Hong Kong Young Adults' Sources of Meaning in Life: The Auto-photography and Photo-elicitation Approaches作者：何瑞珠(Esther Sui-Chu HO);張穎珊(Charis Wing-Shan CHEUNG)關鍵字：生命意義來源;自助攝影;照片引談;sources of meaning in life;auto-photography;photo-elicitation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究藉自助攝影和照片引談的方式，探討香港青年生命意義的來源（sources of meaning in life）。本文屬「香港青少年之追蹤研究」第四階段研究的一部分，訪問了47位年齡介乎23至24歲的年青人。研究團隊邀請受訪者選取三件「帶給你生命意義的事物」並拍照下來在訪談中分享，收回共136段相關敘述。研究團隊按受訪者在訪談中為相片提供的解說，整理出16項「生命意義來源」類別，最多受訪者提及的「生命意義來源」是「家人關係」、「朋輩關係」、「個人成就」和「旅行」。研究團隊又將這16項「生命意義來源」進一步歸納為「個人內在」、「人際」和「超越」三大範疇。這些分類提供具體而整全的框架，給我們理解香港年青人所看重的生命意義源自甚麼經驗和屬於哪些範疇。就方法學而言，本研究引入自助攝影和照片引談，突破並豐富了以往只是以文字、數字收集資料的限制，使我們能更立體地了解年青人如何尋索並建構他們的生命意義，對日後繼續發展出更多元的研究進路甚具啟發意義。英文摘要：As part of the Longitudinal Study of Adolescents in Hong Kong (HKLSA, Phase 4), this study used ”auto-photography” and ”photo-elicitation” to explore local young adults' sources of meaning in life. A total of 47 young adults aged between 23 and 24 were interviewed. Respondents were invited to pre-select three things that brought meaning to their life and share them with photos in the interviews. A total of 136 related narratives were collected. According to the elaborations provided by the respondents for the photos, the research team has identified 16 categories of ”source of meaning in life.” The most popular ”source of meaning in life” were ”family relationship,” ”peer relationship,” ”personal achievement” and ”travel.” These 16 ”sources of meaning in life” could be further categorized into three dimensions: ”intrapersonal,” ”interpersonal,” and ”transcendent.” This categorization has provided concrete and holistic frameworks for understanding how Hong Kong young adults articulated their meanings in life and the major categories of sources of meaning in life with their personal experiences. Methodologically speaking, this research introduced the approaches of auto-photography and photo-elicitation, which has enriched the exploration in this field by breaking through the limitations in collecting data with only words and numbers. Such an attempt has provided a more comprehensive understanding of how young people seek and construct their meanings in life and could inspire researchers to develop more diverse research approaches in related youth studies in the future.起始頁-結束頁：143-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所17篇名：文化取向比較教育研究轉變之探析並列篇名：A Study on Transformation of Cultural Approaches in Comparative Education Research作者：黃柏叡(Bo-Ruey HUANG)關鍵字：比較教育;文化取向;文化主義方法;文化人類學;全球文化;comparative education;cultural approaches;culturalist approach;cultural anthropology;global culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：「文化」曾為比較教育因素分析時期的重要概念，但進入社會科學解釋時期後，文化概念在比較教育領域中的轉變與發展至今未有全面的探討。事實上，自20世紀中期以降，許多文化取向研究途徑被運用於比較教育領域中。本文運用社會地圖學方法，探討文化概念與取向在比較教育領域中的轉變。本文發現，20世紀中期以前，比較教育的文化概念主要是一種整體性的再現，將文化視為影響教育的因素或動力之一；自20世紀下半葉以降，比較教育研究已擺脫傳統視文化為靜態、固定的觀點，轉而採取各種社會科學理論和方法探討文化的理念，主要可分為從70年代的「文化主義方法」、80年代以「文化人類學」為基礎的批判俗民誌，以及90年代至21世紀初的「全球文化」觀點。本研究可釐清文化取向的比較教育研究內涵，以及它在當代比較教育研究領域中的角色和地位，提供有關文化取向比較教育研究的觀點，以作未來比較教育研究的起點。英文摘要：”Culture” was an important concept in the history of comparative education; however, after entering the ”social science period,” the concept of ”culture” in the field of comparative education has not been explored. In fact, since the mid-20th century, various cultural approaches have been applied in the field of comparative education research. This study utilized social cartography to draw the transformation of cultural approaches in comparative education. The study found that the cultural concept in comparative education before the middle of the 20th century was mainly holistic representation, which regarded culture as one of the factors or forces that affected education. Since the development in the second half of the 20th century, cultural approaches in comparative education got rid of the traditional view of culture as static and fixed, and turned to adopt various social science theories and methods for cultural ideas, which could be divided into ”culturalist approach” in the 1970s, ”cultural anthropology” in the 1980s, and the ”global culture” perspective from the 1990s to the beginning of the 21st century. This study not only clarified the connotation of cultural approaches in comparative education and their roles and statuses in the field of comparative education, but also provided perspectives for comparative education research, offering the starting point for future research.起始頁-結束頁：167-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所18篇名：探究認知與情緒歷程對青少年偏差行為的影響：雙重系統理論觀點的檢驗與修正並列篇名：Investigating the Effects of Cognitive and Emotional Process on Juvenile Deviant Behaviors: Examination and Revision of Dual System Theory作者：吳中勤(Chung-Chin WU)關鍵字：雙重系統理論;一般化緊張理論;偏差行為;社會控制理論;社會學習理論;dual system theory;general strain theory;juvenile deviant behavior;social control theory;social learning theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究嘗試整合社會心理學理論與決策理論觀點，從社會認知和情緒的角度，檢視雙重系統理論觀點。由於當前台灣仍缺乏完整探究偏差行為情緒的工具，因此本研究目的在於根據相關理論觀點，編製偏差行為情緒量表，提供信、效度證據，用作進一步檢視和修正雙重系統理論觀點的基礎。本研究以5,079位八年級學生為對象，以結構方程模式分析，檢視量表信、效度，以及理論變項間的共變關係和結構關係。研究發現：（1）偏差行為情緒量表具有良好的信、效度；（2）雙重系統理論觀點應擴充為三重系統理論模式，包含認知促進因素、情緒促進因素和認知抑制因素；（3）認知抑制因素不足以抵銷認知和情緒促進因素對偏差行為的推力，是導致偏差行為的主因；（4）所有因素中，逃避負向生活事件的認知評估和負向情緒，對偏差行為的出現具有最重要的影響。根據本研究發現，分別提出相關建議，供未來研究和教學實務參考。英文摘要：This study incorporated socio-psychological theory and decision-making theory to examine dual system theory from the viewpoints of social cognition and emotion. The main purpose of this study was to establish an emotion scale of juvenile deviant behaviors and provide evidence of reliability and validity as a basis for examining dual system theory. The participants were 5,079 eighth grader. The study adopted structural equation modeling to test the reliability and validity of the scale, and to examine the covariation and structural relationships among variables. Results showed that: (a) the emotion scale of juvenile deviant behaviors had good reliability and validity; (b) dual system theory should be extended as triple system theory, including cognition facilitator, emotional facilitator, and cognition inhibitor; (c) when cognition inhibitor was unable to offset the driving forces of cognition and emotional facilitators, it would cause juvenile deviant behaviors; (d) avoiding negative life events and negative emotion were the most influential factors of juvenile deviant behaviors. According to the results, suggestions for future research and practices were proposed.起始頁-結束頁：187-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所19篇名：香港初中現代文閱讀教學中篇章的銜接分析研究並列篇名：A Study on the Cohesion of Texts in the Teaching of Modern Reading Texts in Hong Kong Junior Forms作者：張燕珠(Yin-Chu CHEUNG)關鍵字：中國語文;閱讀教學;篇章教學;銜接理論;篇章語法;Chinese language;reading teaching;texts teaching;cohesion theory;textual grammar期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育學報卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：香港中學中國語文科由「文選型」範文教學，到「單元式」主題教學，再到結合主題和範文的教學，無論課程如何改革，篇章教學仍然是整個課程的核心，都是連繫學生的閱讀能力。一般篇章教學的模式，是從字詞句到段落到篇章，予人「見樹不見林」的教學觀感。篇章教學應該從層面上分析與語言有關的篇章。層面，即語法銜接層面、詞彙銜接層面和段落銜接層面。層面能夠銜接各項篇章成分，並起連貫作用。本文以系統功能語言學理論體系為研究方法，分析初中記敘文閱讀教學中篇章的照應、省略、替代、連接、重複、同義、上下義、局部和整體關係及搭配，落實篇章銜接與連貫的篇章意義。在篇章分析和教學中，強調語法銜接層面及詞彙銜接層面，把割斷了的語言化篇章教學化為連貫達意的作用。於此，本文提出教學導入的建議，以期語文教師思考引入銜接理論於閱讀教學之中。篇章的銜接分析，在現代記敘性篇章教學中優勢很明顯，惟在適用的學習階段及語體篇章上存在<U+7740>局限。英文摘要：In Hong Kong secondary schools, the Chinese texts were changed from prescribed texts model teaching to unit-based theme teaching, then to the combination of thematic and model text teaching. But no matter how the curriculum has reformed, texts teaching is still the core of the whole curriculum, which is closely linked to students' reading abilities. The general teaching mode of texts progresses bottom-up from words to phrases to sentences to paragraphs to text, which can give a perception of ”not seeing the wood for the trees.” Text teaching should analyze the linguistic features of a text in levels. Levels include the grammatical cohesion level, the lexical cohesion level, and the paragraph cohesion level. Levels can bridge the text elements and take a cohesive role. Based on systemic functional linguistic framework, this article analyzed the teaching of anaphora, ellipsis, substitution, conjunction, repetition, similarity, superordinate and hyponymy, part-whole relation and collocation in junior-form modern reading texts, and implemented the meaning of textual cohesion and coherence. In textual analysis and teaching, emphasizing the level of grammatical cohesion and lexical cohesion can cut off the teaching of language and separate text into the function of coherent expression. Therefore, this article put forward the suggestion of teaching induction, with a view to prompt Chinese language teachers to think about introducing cohesion theory into reading teaching. The cohesion analysis of texts has obvious advantages in modern narrative texts teaching, but there are limitations in its applicability to different learning stages and style texts.起始頁-結束頁：211-227資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：香港中文大學香港教育研究所01篇名：學生及學校因素對合作式問題解決表現之多層級分析並列篇名：Multilevel Analysis of Student and School Factors on CPS Performance in Taiwan作者：莊淑芬(Su-Fen Chuang);盧秀琴(Chow-Chin Lu)關鍵字：PISA 2015;合作式問題解決;性別;社經地位;學校城鄉位置;Collaborative Problem Solving;ESCS;gender;PISA 2015;school location期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：68卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：正如學生能力國際評量計畫（Programme for International Student Assessment, PISA）等許多重要的研究所強調，合作式問題解決（collaborative problem solving, CPS）是21世紀的一項關鍵且必不可少之技能；因此，臺灣中學生在PISA 2015 CPS的表現情形是迫切需要探討的。本研究旨在區分學生層級及學校層級之因素與CPS表現的相關性。學生層級因素為「性別」、「合作態度」和「社經地位」（economic, social and cultural status, ESCS）；學校層級因素則為「校平均ESCS」、「校平均合作態度」和「學校城鄉位置」。本研究採用次級研究法，以臺灣學生共7,708人為研究對象，利用PISA 2015資料庫所建置之合作式問題解決評量表現、學生問卷及學校問卷等研究工具與數據，使用多層次線性模式分析學生層級和學校層級之因素與CPS表現的相關情形，進而探究可能存在的跨層級交互作用。研究結果顯示，預測CPS表現的學生層級因素重要性為性別＞ESCS＞合作態度。此外，男生的平均分數顯著低於女生。合作態度、校平均合作態度和學校城鄉位置與CPS表現的相關性極小。愈高的學生ESCS和校平均ESCS對CPS的表現愈好。學校城鄉位置對於CPS表現並無顯著性跨層級作用。最後討論到對教學和未來研究的建議。英文摘要：As been highlighted by many researches, such as the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) is a critical and necessary skill in 21st century. It was urgent to be understood how the performance of Taiwan students were in PISA 2015 CPS. This research was to distinguish the students' individual characteristics and school characteristics, and take both into account to examine the CPS achievement. It was to ascertain the relationship among the gender difference (GD), the attitude of collaboration (AC), economic, social and cultural status (ESCS), school location (SLOC), school-mean socioeconomic status (SESCS) and school-mean attitude of collaboration (SAC) of CPS performance. The two-level hierarchical linear model was used to analyze 7,708 15-year-old students' data. The results showed that: (1) As the importance of predictors of student level as concerned, GD＞ ESCS＞AC. Furthermore, Taiwanese boys achieved significantly lower average scores than girls. (2) AC, SAC and SLOC variables were minimally related to CPS scores. (3) Higher ESCS at student level and higher SESCS at school level yielded higher CPS performance. (4) SLOC had no moderating effect on CPS. Suggestions for instruction and future research were discussed.起始頁-結束頁：175-207資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會2篇名：雙因素模型下測驗分數信度係數之比較並列篇名：A Comparison of Reliability Coefficients for Test Scores Under Bi-factor Models作者：鄧祈允(Chi-Yun Deng);黃柏僩(Po-Hsien Huang)關鍵字：Revelle的β;分層α;多向度ω;信度;階層ω;雙因素模型;bi-factor model;hieratical omega;multidimensional omega;reliability;Revelle's beta;stratified alpha期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：68卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：在估計測驗分數的信度時，應先考慮測驗的向度（dimensionality），若測驗結構為多向度時，則應使用多向度信度估計法，常見的方法包括分層α、Revelle的β、多向度ω，以及階層ω。然而，過往研究並未仔細檢驗前述多向度估計法的差異，故本研究在真實模型為雙因素模型（bi-factor model）的假設下，系統性地操弄一般因素負荷量、子因素負荷量、子因素數目，以及樣本數，以探討前述四種信度估計法之表現。當以各信度係數之母體參數作為真實數值時，模擬研究結果顯示僅在子因素負荷量較高時，階層ω才會與另外三個信度係數有明顯不一致之真實數值，此意味著在子因素負荷量的真實數值較小時，分層α、β、多向度ω所得到的測驗分數信度估計值仍具有相當高之參考性，其中的β與階層ω展現最為一致之真實數值。當比較各方法的估計表現時，結果顯示相較於多向度ω、分層α，以及β，階層ω橫跨所有情境都展現較大的相對偏誤（relative bias）與變異性（variability），此顯示階層ω雖在估計概念較為合理，但於有限樣本之實徵表現不佳。本研究結果建議，在估計多向度測驗分數的信度時，不應僅參考階層ω，仍需使用其他多向度信度估計指標做為輔助，以對測驗分數的信度有較佳的估計與詮釋。英文摘要：When estimating a test score's reliability, the dimensionality of the test needs to be considered. If the test is not unidimensional, multidimensional reliability coefficients, such as stratified alpha, Revelle's beta, multidimensional omega, and hierarchical omega, should be used. However, these multidimensional coefficients might not be carefully distinguished in practical works. This study aimed to investigate these coefficients' meanings and properties. We used bi-factor models as true models for data generation and manipulated loadings of general and group factors, numbers of group factors, and sample sizes. The results showed that: (1) the true value of hierarchical omega was significantly different from other coefficients only when group factor loadings were high; (2) the true value of Revelle's beta was most similar to the hierarchical omega; (3) hierarchical omega yielded larger relative bias and variability than other coefficients under all conditions. These results implied other multidimensional reliability coefficients were still valuable when group factor loadings were low and hierarchical omega didn't perform well under finite sample settings, although hierarchical omega's meaning was most interpretable. These results suggested hierarchical omega should not be considered as ”golden standard”, other coefficients were still useful to interpret measurement results.起始頁-結束頁：209-231資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會3篇名：「老人靈性健康量表」之編製與驗證並列篇名：The Development and Confirmatory Factor Analysis of the Spiritual Health Scale for the Elderly in Taiwan作者：李孟芬(Meng-Fan Li);石泱(Yang Shih)關鍵字：老人;靈性健康;量表發展;the elderly;spiritual health;scale development期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：68卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：靈性健康是健康的一部分，亦是整合其他健康構面的基石。本研究旨在發展適合我國社會文化背景，針對社區老人的靈性健康量表。此「老人靈性健康量表」包括個人幸福、社群幸福、環境幸福、超然幸福四個分量表。預試以大臺北地區社區老人活動的據點進行現場隨機訪問，共取得391份有效問卷，經由項目分析、探索性因素分析及信度分析後，形成正式量表共12題。正式施測以臺北市65歲以上社區老人為對象進行分層隨機抽樣，共取得有效樣本350份。總量表Cronbach's α係數為.941，各分量表介於.827∼.921，顯示具良好信度。建構效度SEM模式的整體適配指標均達標準，顯示整體模式適配情形理想。本研究以自覺目前「人生滿意度」和「主觀幸福量表」為效標，相關係數分別為.672、.395，皆達顯著正相關。在背景變項部分，不同性別和不同年齡群組老人在靈性健康各構面上無顯著差異，顯示本量表適用於65歲以上社區老人。總結本研究發展之「老人靈性健康量表」有良好的信、效度，可協助專業人員評估老人健康時，更進一步認識社區老人的靈性健康狀況，亦可供後續研究者依此量表架構進行相關研究。英文摘要：Spiritual health is a part of health and also the cornerstone of integrating other health dimensions. In this study, a set of the spiritual health scale for the community elderly were developed, which took the social and cultural background into consideration when designing the scale. ”Spiritual Health Scale for the Elderly” includes four sub-scales: personal well-being, communal well-being, environmental well-being, and transcendental well-being. The study aimed at the community elderly aged 65 and over in Taipei City and New Taipei City. 391 valid samples were collected by using random sampling in the pretest, in order to conduct item analysis, exploratory factor analysis, and reliability analysis. In the end, we obtained 12 questions for the formal scale. In the formal survey, 350 participants, who lived in Taipei City and aged over 65 years old, were selected by using stratified random sampling. The Cronbach's of the total scale was .941 and the sub-scales' were between .827 and .921, which showed good reliability. Based on the results of the SEM model, the overall indicators of construction validity were up to standard, indicating that the overall model was acceptable. The study also applied self-rated current ”Life Satisfaction” and ”Subjective Well-being” as criterions. In the results of criterion-related validity, the Pearson correlations were .672 and .395 respectively, which was statistically significant. In the background variables, it showed that there were no significant differences between genders and among age groups. In conclusion, the ”Spiritual Health Scale for the Elderly” developed in this research has good reliability and validity. This scale can help professionals to understand the spiritual health of the elderly in Taiwan when assessing their health. Furthermore, researchers can expand further related studies based on this scale.起始頁-結束頁：233-261資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會4篇名：以支援向量機處理題型符號與文字特徵應用於微積分試題難度分類並列篇名：Difficulty Level Classification of Calculus Exam Questions Using SVMs with Descriptive Features of Symbols and Texts作者：林泓宏(Horng-Horng Lin);蘇家鈜(Chia-Hong Su);張勝麟(Shing-Lin Chang)關鍵字：支援向量機;文字特徵;微積分;試題難度分類;題型符號;calculus;question description symbol;question difficulty level classification;support vector machine;text features期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：68卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究主要在建立微積分試題的「題型符號與文字特徵」，透過人工歸納，對各類型的微積分試題擷取試題符號特徵，並轉換為向量表示。接著，對試題特徵向量，分別以主成分分析（Principal Component Analysis,PCA）及線性判別分析（Linear Discriminant Analysis, LDA）做降維處裡，找出較符合試題難易分布的特徵空間，最後利用支援向量機對降維後的試題特徵，估計試題的難易度，透過使用支援向量機RBF核函數進行「難、中、易」之試題分類。就文獻探討所知，本研究所提出的「題型符號與文字特徵」計算表示形式，為國內外相關研究中創新的特徵集設計。實驗結果顯示：在5摺交叉驗證測試下，對單一摺測試集之微積分試題難易度分類，最高可獲取95%的正確率，而5摺的平均測試正確率也可達90.19%，基於實驗測試結果遠高於隨機亂猜的33.33%，而對3個類別中，隨機亂猜的95%信賴區間上限約在42.69%，可看出本研究方法的實驗結果大幅高於亂猜達47.5%，顯示本研究所提出的「題型符號與文字特徵」對於微積分試題難易度分類具有顯著的功效。英文摘要：A new design of ”descriptive symbol and text features” of calculus exam questions has been proposed in this paper. The proposed descriptive features of symbols and texts can be extracted from various calculus questions and are represented by vectors. The high dimensionality of extracted features from test questions is then reduced by principal component analysis (PCA) or by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) for finding a lower dimensional feature space that better fits the difficulty-level distribution of test questions. Subsequently, a support vector machine with radial basis kernel is adopted to categorize calculus questions into three degrees of difficulty, i.e., hard, medium and easy. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed descriptive feature representation of symbols and texts of mathematical questions is a novel design for difficulty level estimation of calculus exam questions and is rarely seen in previous literature. In our experiments of difficulty level classification with 5-fold cross validation (CV), the highest classification accuracy of difficulty level of calculus questions in a test fold is 95%, while the average classification accuracy of 5-fold CV is 90.19%. These results are far higher than the mere 33.33% accuracy of random guess. For the three categories, the upper limit of the 95% confidence interval for random guess is about 42.69%. It can be seen that our result is much higher than the upper limit of random guess by about 47.5%. Validate the significant effectiveness of the proposed descriptive features of symbols and texts of calculus exam questions on automatic difficulty level prediction.起始頁-結束頁：75-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會5篇名：雙代理人和單代理人之對話式智慧家教系統於數學學習成效與學習興趣之探究並列篇名：The Effectiveness of Two Agents and One Agent Dialogue Based Intelligent Tutoring System in Learning Mathematics作者：郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo);吳慧i(Huey-Min Wu);游欣容(Hsin-Jung Yu)關鍵字：單代理人;智慧家教系統;對話式;數學;雙代理人;dialogue;intelligent tutoring system;mathematics;one agent;two agents期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：68卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：在對話式智慧家教系統中，教師代理人會以自然語言與學生對話，依據學生所輸入的文字，教師代理人會給予適當的回應，引導學生進行有效學習。對話式智慧家教系統已發展出雙代理人教學方式，除了介面設計不一樣之外，其對話設計機制也有差異。然而，不同的對話模式設計是否會影響學生的數學學習成效和學習興趣，仍然是一個值得探究的議題，故本研究設計雙代理人和單代理人之對話式智慧家教系統，以探討學生透過雙代理人和單代理人對話模式之引導，其數學學習成效與學習興趣之差異。本研究以畢氏定理為內容，開發單代理人與雙代理人之對話式智慧家教系統，研究對象為中部八年級8個班的學生共202位，其中隨機分派3個班接受單代理人對話式智慧家教系統之教學（實驗組一），3個班接受雙代理人對話式智慧家教系統之教學（實驗組二）、2個班接受團班教學（控制組）。研究結果顯示：接受單代理人與雙代理人對話式智慧家教系統之學生，其數學學習成效顯著優於接受團班教學之學生。雙代理人對話式智慧家教系統比單代理人對話式智慧家教系統更能有助於提升低成就學生的畢氏定理學習成效；運用雙代理人對話式智慧家教系統學習的學生，其學習畢氏定理的興趣高於運用單代理人對話式智慧家教系統的學生。英文摘要：Pedagogical agents are embodied animated avatars that help students learn by holding conversations with the students in the dialogue based intelligent tutoring systems. There are different trialogue designs (two agents interacting with a human student) that address different pedagogical goals for different classes of students. The impact of different trialogue designs on learning outcome is still unknown. The core question is whether the learning outcomes show improvement over typical human-computer dialogues (one human student and one tutor agent) and conventional pedagogical interventions. The purpose of this study is to develop two agents and one agent dialogue-based intelligent tutoring systems for learning the Pythagoras Theorem for junior high school students. The effectiveness of two agents and one agent dialogue-based intelligent tutoring systems for learning the Pythagoras Theorem is evaluated in this study. In this study, the ”Pythagoras Theorem” unit of mathematics utilized in Taiwanese junior high schools is adopted to construct tasks in the dialogue based intelligent tutoring system. The 202 students from the eighth grade of Taiwanese junior high school were selected to participate in the field experiment in this study. The results indicated that the students with two agents dialogue-based intelligent tutoring system can get a higher score than that with traditional instruction. Students who received two agents dialogue-based intelligent tutoring system outperformed those who received the traditional group-based remedial program. The low mathematics achievers with two agents dialogue-based intelligent tutoring system get a higher score than that with one agent dialogue-based intelligent tutoring system. Students with two agents dialogue-based intelligent tutoring system get a higher score in learning interesting than that with one agent dialogue-based intelligent tutoring system.起始頁-結束頁：101-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會6篇名：建構反應題的認知診斷模型並列篇名：Cognitive Diagnostic Models for Constructed Response Items作者：郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo);洪裕堂(Yuk-Tarng Hong);楊智為(Chih-Wei Yang);馮文翠(Wen-Tsui Feng)關鍵字：DINA;自動計分;認知診斷;建構反應題;automated scoring;cognitive diagnosis;constructed-response item;DINA期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：68卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：在線上學習中，如何能快速精準的了解學習者是否已經習得課程中的知識或概念，一直是個重要的問題。建構反應題可提供較為詳細的學習者訊息，但在線上測驗中建置建構反應題的自動計分機制需要耗用較多之人力與時間。因此，如何能合併選擇題及建構反應題進行測驗，以降低建置自動計分機制所需的人力與時間，同時能提升自動計分的精準度，也是待探討的議題。在本研究中，將提出一種應用在自動計分機制情境下的統計模型，用於提高數學建構反應題的自動評分診斷概念之準確性，以及比較不同自動計分方式的成效評估，並以模擬研究探討選擇題與建構反應題有效的組合方式，以實徵研究探討新方法的可行性。研究結果顯示，基於建構反應題的認知診斷模型和自動評分機制能提高診斷學習者概念之精準度，而使用適當題數的選擇題合併建構反應題進行測驗時，則可在不損及估計精準度的狀況下降低測驗的長度及施測所需的時間。英文摘要：Multiple choice items are usually used for simple scoring. Constructed response items provide more diagnostic information about learners, however, it is costly and time-consuming to develop constructed response items for automated scoring process. To apply both multiple choices and constructed response items in online assessment would be more efficient. To reach this purpose, an automated scoring method for constructed response items and a statistical model for the assessment with both multiple choice and constructed response items are used in the present study. The study collected both simulated data and empirical data to evaluate the performance of the proposed model. The results show that the proposed cognitive diagnostic model for both multiple choice and constructed response items outperforms those only considering multiple choice items. As well, the efficacy of test development and data analysis was improved.起始頁-結束頁：141-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會7篇名：基於學生決策結果之校系競爭力分析：以個人申請為例並列篇名：Competitive Analysis of Departments Based on Student Decision-Making Outcomes: An Example of Individual Applications作者：陳俊宏(Jyun-Hong Chen);汪曼穎(Man-Ying Wang);施慶麟(Ching-Lin Shih);趙秀怡(Hsiu-Yi Chao)關鍵字：個人申請;集群分析;羅氏自比模型;競爭力分析;competitive analysis;cluster analysis;individual application;Rasch ipsative model期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：68卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：在日趨競爭的高等教育環境下，系所若能明確定位其競爭校系並分析相對競爭力，有助於制定差異化策略，以提升系所競爭力。以數據為基礎的競爭力分析方法，能提供系所因應當前高等教育議題的重要參考。而透過巨量資料分析來協助當前高等教育機構解決所面臨的競爭力問題，更是臺灣高等教育機構以實徵數據分析的科學化及客觀性，做為追求以證據為本的教育決策模式之重要實踐。因此，本研究基於個人申請入學資料（包含申請校系、錄取校系與就讀校系），發展申請者中心之校系競爭力分析，其分析原理與流程如下：首先，轉換申請者同時申請複數校系的紀錄為成對校系相似性（或距離）的測量，再經由集群分析，確認目標系所之競爭集群校系。進一步再透過錄取複數集群內校系的申請者資料，搭配其最後就讀校系的選擇，建立競爭集群校系間的成對強迫選擇反應，並應用羅氏自比模型（為強迫選擇模型之一）估計個別校系的潛在競爭力。研究結果指出，集群分析能有效定位系所競爭集群，而羅氏自比模型分析則能精確進行集群內校系相對競爭力之估計。對於當前的校務研究議題，例如：辦學績效檢驗、校系競爭力分析，以及系所定位與未來發展方向等，本研究成果有助於提供問題解決之線索，並引領後續研究方向。英文摘要：In the increasingly competitive higher education environment, a department has to develop differentiation strategies among its competitor group to improve its own competitiveness. To this end, the information about the competing departments and its relative competitiveness is important. Accordingly, a data-based competitive analysis can help to provide references for the department to respond to the current higher educational issues. Utilizing big data analysis to assist higher education institutions in solving the encountered competition problems can be considered a demonstration that uses scientific and objective practical data analysis as the evidence-based educational decision- making process for higher education institutions in Taiwan. Therefore, this study conducted a series of applicant-centered analyses of departments' competitiveness based on individual application data. The general principle and process are as follows: First, the applicant's record of applying for multiple departments is transformed into the measures of similarity (or distance) between each pair of the applied departments, and the similarity measures are then used to identify the cluster of competitive departments for the target department through the cluster analysis. Next, based on the information of applicants who were accepted by multiple within-cluster departments and attended one of them, the response matrix of paired forced-choice responses between those departments is generated. The Rasch ipsative model (RIM), one of forced-choice models, was then applied to estimate the parameters of ”potential competitiveness” for the departments based on the response matrix. The results indicated that cluster analysis can effectively locate the clusters of competing departments, while the application of the RIM could precisely estimate the relative competitiveness of within-cluster departments. The study can provide important references and guide the direction for further research for current institutional research issues, including the institution performance evaluation, the department competitive analysis, and the self-positioning and future development direction for the institution.起始頁-結束頁：1-23資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會8篇名：以跨平臺資料庫整合探究國內高等教育機構國際化現況：支持校務研究為導向並列篇名：To Explore the Current Status of Internationalization of Domestic Higher Education Institutions through Cross-Platform Database Integration: A Support-Oriented Institutional Research作者：陳繼成(Chi-Chen Chen);蘇盟惠(Meng-Huey Su)關鍵字：校務研究;高等教育國際化;跨平臺資料庫整合;cross-platform database integration;institutional research;internationalization of higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：68卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：高等教育機構國際化往往是評定高等教育機構辦學品質的重要指標之一。過去的相關研究指出，高等教育國際化包含了教師、學生、學術與課程等內涵，依其形式可分為在地國際化與國外國際化。考量主流的世界大學排名國際化指標僅聚焦於國際師生比例與國際合作數量，本研究進一步串聯「大專校院課程教學網」、「大專校院校務資訊公開平臺」、科技部「學術統計資料庫」，以及「Scopus 學術資料庫」，整合出四個國際化指標，以探究不同大學的國際化現況：「大學國際化環境營造（國內）」、「學術環境國際化（國內）」、「國際化學術交流（國外）」，以及「國際學術合作交流」。本研究除探究此測量模式之效度，並建議以此作為大學國際化相關決策支援方向，亦藉此指標調查目前國內高等教育機構之國際化情形。結果顯示，此測量模式具備建構效度與效標關聯效度。在國內大學的表現上，一般大學在所有指標上之表現均優於科技大學、公立大學，亦均優於私立大學。此外，受「邁向頂尖大學計畫」補助之十二所大學在所有國際化指標上顯著高於其他大學。本研究提供了國內高等教育機構評估大學國際化之模式，並進行國際化現況之初步調查，藉以提供高等教育機構之決策者在調查自身所屬機構國際化時，有更佳之測量模式與更充足的資訊做運用與決策。英文摘要：The internationalization of higher education is often one of the key indicators to evaluate the quality of higher education institutions. It includes the connotation of the academic parts, curriculum, teachers, and students, which can be further divided into domestic and abroad internationalization. The present study accessed the databases, ”(Higher Education) Course Information website”, ”Information Platform for College and University Institute Research”, ”Academic Statistics Database of Ministry of Science and Technology”, and ”Scopus” to generate four internationalization indicators: ”university internationalization environment construction (domestic)”, ”internationalization of academic environment (domestic)”, ”international academic exchange (abroad)”, and ”international academic cooperation and exchange”, to explore the current status of internationalization of universities in Taiwan. The structure and validity of this measurement model can be used to support university internationalization related decisions, and the indicators are employed to uncover the internationalization of domestic higher education institutions. The results connote measurement quality in both construct and criterion-related validity. Results show that general universities perform better than all universities of science and technology on all the four indicators, with the public universities performing better than private ones. Besides, the 12 universities in ”Aim for Top University Project” perform significantly better than all the other universities. This also witnesses the effectiveness of the ”Aim for Top University Project”. This study provides a model with four indicators to help explore the status quo of internationalization, and a preliminary probe on the internationalization of domestic higher education institutions. This endeavor seeks to render more robust measurement models along with adequate information required for decision making in higher education institutions with reference to internationalization.起始頁-結束頁：25-51資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會9篇名：利用Google BERT提升中文寫作自動評分之準確率並列篇名：Applying Google BERT to Enhance the Correct Rate of Automatic Scoring in Chinese Writing作者：郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo);李政軒(Cheng-Hsuan Li);黃淇瀅(Chi-Ying Huang)關鍵字：Google BERT模型;LSA;中文寫作;自動評分;automatic scoring model;Chinese writing;Google BERT model;LSA期刊/會議論文集名稱：測驗學刊卷期：68卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：中文寫作測驗在臺灣大型測驗中已行之有年，但是在作文評分時會因為評分教師的教育背景、經驗及認知上之不同而產生差異性，因此發展中文寫作自動評分模型協助教師進行評分工作將顯得極其重要。目前有許多自動計分模型是採用潛在語意分析（Latent Semantic Analysis, LSA），由於其表示於向量空間中的詞彙並未考慮到上下文順序，故在文本分析上將有所限制。有鑑於此，本研究利用Google在2018年所提出的自然語言處理深度學習BERT（Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers）建立中文寫作自動評分模型。Google BERT模型以預訓練及微調為主，預訓練過程中藉由Masked LM（MLM）、Next Sentence Prediction（NSP），以及Transformer編碼的過程，讓模型在文本的處理上更為精確。本研究隨機挑選大學生語文素養檢測之三等級評分（0分、1分及2分）寫作測驗為分析樣本進行研究，共有1,185名學生之寫作文本。利用微調後的Google BERT模型進行中文寫作自動評分，系統與專家評分的整體準確率（Accuracy）達92.07%，優於傳統以潛在語意分析進行中文寫作自動評分（其與專家評分的整體準確率達64.73%）。英文摘要：In Taiwan, the Chinese writing test has been used in a large-scale test for many years. When grading Chinese writing, the score may different since the educational background, experience, and cognition of the grading teachers. Therefore, the development of automatic scoring of Chinese writing to assist teachers in grading is extremely important. At present, many automatic scoring models use Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). Since the vocabulary expressed in the vector space does not consider the context, there will be restrictions on text analysis. In view of this, this research uses the Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers (BERT) proposed by Google in 2018 to establish the model of the automatic scoring model for Chinese writing. Google BERT is mainly based on pretraining and fine-tuning. Google BERT is mainly based on pretraining including the process of Masked LM (MLM), Next Sentence Prediction (NSP), and Transformer encoding. After pretraining, a fine-tuning step was applied by specific essays. These two steps make the model more accurate in text processing. This study randomly selected the three grades (0 points, 1 point, and 2 points) writing test of ”Chinese language literacy test for undergraduate” as the analysis sample for research and a total of 1,185 students' writing texts. Compared to the traditional automatic scoring method of LSA (which overall accuracy rate of expert scoring is 64.73%), using the fine-tuned Google BERT model has better results since the overall accuracy rate (Accuracy) of the system and expert scoring reached 92.07%.起始頁-結束頁：53-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：中國測驗學會01篇名：課程轉化實作促進國小師培生對數學課程理解之研究並列篇名：The Implementation of Curriculum Transformation and the Facilitation of Elementary School Pre-service Teachers' Understanding of Mathematics Course作者：陳彥廷(Yen-Ting Chen)關鍵字：師培生;教科書;教學實務;數學課程轉化;pre-service teachers;textbooks;teaching practice;mathematics curriculum transformation期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究旨在探究22位國小師培生在進行數學課程轉化實作過程中，其對課程理解的轉變，以及促進其課程理解的因素。資料分析則以討論心得、教案、試教語料與評論、總體討論及晤談語料為依據。本研究發現，師培生透過課程轉化，對課程發展過程與課程內涵的理解發展較為豐富；而同儕討論、對實作經驗反思、師培者引導、教師手冊、學生反應及輔導教師回饋是促進師培生發展對數學課程理解的重要因素。最後，本研究提出相關建議以提供未來數學師資培育與後續研究之參考。英文摘要：This research aimed to study 22 elementary school pre-service teachers' attitude change of the transformed course and the contributing factors that facilitates their understanding of the transformed course during the process of curriculum transformation. Data analysis was based on group discussions, lesson plans, teaching drills and interview corpus. This research showed that through the process of curriculum transformation, the pre-service teachers acquired more understanding toward course development and curriculum content; in contrast, peer discussions, reflections on practical experiences, pre-service teacher trainings, the uses of teacher's handbook, and feedbacks from students and teacher-counselors were critical factors to facilitate the development of pre-service teachers' understanding of the mathematics curriculum. Finally, the research proposed relevant suggestions for future mathematics teacher education and research references.起始頁-結束頁：1-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2204.012篇名：國小人員情緒地理的研究：以校長為焦點並列篇名：A Study on Staffs' Emotional Geographies in an Elementary School: Focusing on the Principal作者：林明地(Ming-Dih Lin);梁金都(Chin-Tu Liang)關鍵字：校長;國小;情緒地理;情緒距離;principal;elementary school;emotional geographies;emotional distances期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究主要從情緒地理的觀點，透過參與觀察和訪談的方式，蒐集「旭日國小」成員在六項關鍵事件中互動過程的資料，以分析校長和成員之間的情緒距離形式和關係，並獲致了以下重要的結論。1.校長和成員主要呈現道德、個人、政治、專業等的距離形式和關係，較少出現社會文化和物理距離的形式和關係。2.校長和成員在教學事務上易於發展道德和專業距離的關係，而在行政運作上則是個人和道德與政治距離的關係。3.校長和主任大致有接近的道德距離關係，惟與教師則有比較接近的專業和個人距離關係。4.誰的責任、建立處理原則、堅持自己立場、以對話發展共識等是構成校長和成員道德距離的主要內涵。5.關心成員需求、忽視工作負荷、採取親切的作為、幽默的人格特質等是校長和成員之間個人距離的影響因素。6.彈性調整的作為、審慎的權力運作、尊重教師實務的態度等是拉近校長和成員政治距離的處理原則。7.重視教師的專業自主性、校長的支援和成員的參與、提供對話的空間等方法，有助於縮短校長和成員之間的專業距離。8.校長和成員各種情緒距離的關係，約略有著相互影響的特質。英文摘要：Using the perspective of emotional geographies, this study explored the emotional distances and their relations between the principal and the staffs in ”the Rising Sun Elementary School”. The participatory observations and interviews were adopted in this study. The researchers analyzed the interactive process among 12 members of the school on six critical events and focused on the principal as a center in the school. The main findings were as follows: First, the major categories and their relations among the principal and school members were moral distances, personal distances, political distances, and professional distances, and the least shown relations were sociocultural and physical distances. Second, between the principal and the staffs, the relations of moral and professional distances were developed easily on the teaching affairs. The administrative matters were easy to help creating the personal, moral, and political distances. Third, the close moral distances were shown between the principal and division directors; on the contrary, the principal and the teachers appeared to have relatively close professional and personal distances. Forth, the main connotations of moral distance included the questions of distributive responsibility, building up the operative principles, keeping on the one's own stance, and developing mutual consensus through constant dialogues. Fifth, the influential factors of personal distance were taking care of members' needs, ignoring the workload, adopting the friendly actions, and demonstrating a sense of humor. Sixth, flexible actions, careful power exercises, and respective teaching practice and attitude constituted the operative principles of political distance. Seventh, valuing teachers' professional autonomy, the principal's assistances and members' participation, supplying a dialogue room could shorten the professional distances among the principal and school members. Finally, the relations of the various emotional distances among the principal and school members in this school were shown a slightly interdependent nature.起始頁-結束頁：55-103資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2204.023篇名：兒童文教事業高齡工作者的心理資本學習介入方案之實施成效分析並列篇名：The Effects of Psychological Capital Learning Intervention Program for Elderly Workers in Children's Culture and Education Institutes作者：李新民(Hsing-Ming Lee);黃文三(Wen-San Huang);沈碩彬(Shuo-Pin Shen)關鍵字：工作表現;工作滿意;心理資本學習介入方案;兒童文教事業高齡工作者;組織承諾;job performance;job satisfaction;psychological capital learning intervention program;elderly workers in children's culture and education institutes;organizational commitment期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究以兒童文教事業高齡工作者為研究對象，發展心理資本學習介入方案，透過實驗研究來探討此一方案的成效。研究者採用不等組前測－後測設計，以60名兒童文教事業高齡工作者為實驗對象，其中30名施予心理資本學習介入方案，另30名進行健康管理回春課程。在實驗研究前後，蒐集全體受試者的心理資本、組織承諾、工作滿意與工作表現等測量資料，進行統計分析。其結果顯示：介入方案可以有效提升高齡工作者的心理資本、組織承諾、工作滿意與工作表現。故，依據本研究發現，特針對提升兒童文教事業高齡工作者的心理資本提升及未來研究提出相關建議。英文摘要：This study investigated elderly workers in children's culture and education institutes aiming to develop the psychological capital (PsyCap) learning intervention program, and to explore the effects of this program with research experiment. This research adopted nonequivalent pretest-posttest design, where 60 elderly workers in children's culture and education institutes were randomly selected as subjects for test. Thirty of them took the PsyCap learning intervention program, while the other half took the health management curriculum. All the measurement data resulting from the four scales, PsyCap, organizational commitment, job satisfaction, and job performance, were collected for statistical analysis. The research results indicated that the intervention program significantly enhanced the elderly workers' PsyCap, organizational commitment, job satisfaction, and job performance. Suggested future researches and improvement for elderly workers' intervention program in children's culture and education institutes were also mentioned in this research.起始頁-結束頁：105-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2204.034篇名：The Effects of Background Knowledge and L2 Reading Proficiency on Taiwanese University Students' Summarization Performance並列篇名：背景知識與英文閱讀能力對臺灣大學生學術英語摘要能力的影響作者：林宜瑄(Yi-Hsuan Lin);陳秋蘭(Chiou-Lan Chern)關鍵字：背景知識;英文閱讀;摘要寫作;background knowledge;L2 reading;summary writing期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014中文摘要：本文從認知的角度出發，探討閱讀理解中較低層次的語言知識與較高層次的背景知識對臺灣大學生英語閱讀的影響。尤其在兩種知識的交互作用下，檢視學生閱讀與學科內容相關的英語文章後撰寫摘要之表現。七十一位大學生分別具有高低不同之英語與背景知識，經由托福閱讀測驗與專家設計之知識測驗分組後，以統計工具分析英文閱讀能力與背景知識對摘要擷取能力的影響。統計結果顯示，不論是英語閱讀能力或相關背景知識的高低，均對學生以母語撰寫之摘要表現造成影響。但背景知識程度的高低，對摘要表現的預測力勝過英語能力，背景知識在學術英語閱讀的作用不可或缺；兩種變數於統計結果上並無交互作用，顯示兩種知識彼此間無法互補。此外，本研究結果也發現大學生的閱讀能力不必然受限於所屬之科系，英文系學生在其他領域的知識程度可能超越該領域之大學生；而非英文主修之學生亦可能具有高英語閱讀能力。整體而言，大學生在學術英語文章的摘要撰寫表現上普遍不佳，缺乏建構整體主要概念的能力。依據本文的研究結果，並對大學生閱讀英文與摘要寫作訓練提出相關建議。英文摘要：Undertaken from a cognitive perspective, this study investigates how lower level processing (L2 linguistic knowledge) and higher level processing (background knowledge) influence English reading comprehension of university EFL learners in Taiwan. In particular, the study examines the bilateral effects of these two knowledge bases on the students' performance of a summary writing after reading an article in English which contained subject matter information. A TOEFL reading proficiency test accompanied by a background knowledge test developed by field experts were used to measure the two variables. Seventy-one university students who exhibited different levels of L2 reading proficiency and background knowledge participated in the study. The effects of linguistic proficiency vs background knowledge were scrutinized through statistical measures. The analysis revealed that the level of English proficiency and background knowledge both affected the participants' performances on summary writing into L1; however, the role of background knowledge, being a more powerful predictor of performance, was an integral component of comprehension in academic reading. The concomitant effects of these two variables were not observed, suggesting one knowledge base could not compensate for deficiencies in the other. In addition, the study indicated that university students' understanding of subject matters may extend beyond their own disciplinary area, as English majors might be equipped with more background knowledge than their peers majoring in that specialized discipline; likewise, non-English majors might outperform their English major counterparts in English reading proficiency test. In general, the students performed relatively poor in summary writing since they failed to build a conceptual synthesis based on the reading article. Suggestions toward improvements on English reading and summary writing are proposed for EFL university students.起始頁-結束頁：149-186資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2204.045篇名：《被遺忘的連結》（Forgotten Connections）－書評論並列篇名：Book Review: ”Forgotten Connections-On Culture and Upbringing”Yung-Chuan Fang作者：方永泉(Yung-Chuan Fang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷4期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：187-199資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2204.056篇名：德國大學「卓越計畫」對教學與研究之影響並列篇名：Effects of the Excellence Initiative on German Universities Teaching and Research作者：張源泉(Yuan-Chuan Chang)關鍵字：德國教育;高等教育;卓越計畫;German education;higher education;excellence initiative期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：鑑於德國大學在國際學術排行榜上未有亮眼的成績，因此德國在2006年啟動「卓越計畫」，希冀透過高等教育經費之挹注，以創建「德國哈佛大學」。伴隨著該計畫的推動，一直為各方熱議的焦點，學者曾以「燈塔」與「風車」暗喻雙方陣營對該計畫之評價。本研究透過文件分析法評述該政策對德國大學之影響；首先探究傳統德國大學之理念，而後再進一步評析該計畫之資金分配，及其所產生的效應。近代德國大學以洪堡主義的同質性理念為基礎，而卓越計畫則奠基於「分化典範」，促使高等教育重視競爭而趨向分化。該計畫的資金分配呈現集中化，再加上德國聯邦體制更加速大學間之層級分化。卓越計畫本身雖僅聚焦於尖端研究的提升，不涉及教學與一般性學術研究，但由於該計畫的資金分配高度集中，且因研究成果能獲得更多的資金，而使得教學品質受忽視，此從卓越教學獎勵、教學代理人與教學型教授之設置可見一斑。再者，該計畫促動了頂尖學者的跳槽風潮，尤其競賽失利的大學教授被集體挖角，未來將使得重要研究場域集中於少數大學；再則，僅在短時間對個別大學挹注幾百萬歐元，難以打造出德國哈佛大學，此證諸於慕尼黑大學之國際學術排行榜下滑；其所標榜的菁英大學與其說是燈塔，毋寧更像風車。英文摘要：In response to the lackluster position of German universities in international rankings, in 2006 the German government initiated its Excellence Initiative and began to invest large sums in a few select universities in order to establish ”German Harvard University.” The results have been alternatively evaluated by using the metaphors of a lighthouse and a windmill. This paper uses document analysis to evaluate the influence this Initiative has had on German Universities. After presenting the traditional ideas on higher education in Germany, this paper describes the budget distribution of the Initiative as well as its effects. Universities in modern Germany mainly subscribe to the ideal of Humboltian homogenization; by contrast, the Initiative is based on promoting academic excellence through competition. Moreover, the budget distribution of the Initiative is quite centralized, and the federal government is making rapid progress in its efforts to rank German universities. The focus of the Initiative is on cutting-edge research rather than academics, with additional funding being made available based on the results of such research. As a result, teaching quality has been neglected, as evidenced by the decreasing importance given to teaching prizes, teaching assistantships, and academic professorship. Another result of the Initiative is that it encourages intense competition to recruit top-notch scholars, who are likely to end up concentrated in a small number of elite research institution. Even so, creating a world-class research university is not merely a matter of investing vast sums of money in a small number of universities. This is made clear from the case of Munich University, which has actually dropped in the international rankings and would be better described as a ”windmill” rather than a ”lighthouse.”起始頁-結束頁：1-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2203.017篇名：英美校園霸凌防制政策：教育法之觀點並列篇名：School Anti-bullying Policies in the UK and USA: A Perspective of Education Law作者：林斌(Bin Lin)關鍵字：校園霸凌;教育法;學校安全;school bullying;education law;campus safety期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：近年來先進國家已將中小學校園霸凌之防制，視為重要教育政策議題。但我國校園霸凌之相關研究，主要集中於霸凌行為成因、教職員責任及學校處理霸凌事件之程序，相對忽略校園霸凌防制早已超越學校管理層級。事實上，政府防制校園霸凌不僅需要強化學校教育人員的專業能力，更應重視利害關係人義務及外部機構參與等層面之政策建構。而英、美兩國自廿世紀九○年代初期起，即大力推動學校教育改革，強調校園安全與學習品質之重要，並視校園霸凌防制為中小學校園安全政策之優先內涵，其正向發展經驗值得我國借鏡。因此，本研究擬採用歷史比較法，透過教育法之觀點，針對英、美中小學防制校園霸凌政策之內涵進行分析，以供我國政府部門未來修正相關政策之參考。本研究之結論顯示：英、美校園霸凌防制政策需遵守行政法之原則，能夠回應校園安全之需求，重視對家長之課責，對學生及教師之基本人權亦能予以保障。英文摘要：Anti-bullying in primary and secondary schools has been a vital issue in education policies of developed countries for years. The related researches in Taiwan were mainly focus on the causes of bullying behavior, the obligation of school faculty, and the procedures of dealing with it, comparatively ignoring the fact that school bullying has surpassed the level of school management. To tackle with it, the government should not only strengthen the profession of the school faculty, but also emphasize on the obligation of stakeholders and the involvement of external agencies. From 1990s, the UK and USA have been keen on school education reforms, highlighting the importance of campus safety and learning quality by prioritizing anti-bullying in campus safety policies; their positive experience is worthy for reference. Therefore, this study adopted the historical comparative method to analyse the components of British and American anti-bullying policies in the perspective of education law for the information of modifying related policies in the future. The results suggest the British and American anti-bullying policies follow the principles of administrative law, echo to the call of campus safety, highlight the accountability of parents, and safeguard the human rights of pupils and teachers. Accordingly, implications for related policies adjustments in Taiwan are proposed.起始頁-結束頁：49-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2203.028篇名：新加坡退休者的學習歷程之探索並列篇名：An Exploration into the Learning Processes of Retirees in Singapore作者：李雅慧(Ya-Hui Lee);魏惠娟(Hui-Chuan Wei);胡夢鯨(Meng-Ching Hu)關鍵字：新加坡退休者;學習歷程;成人教育學;Singapore retiree;learning process;andragogy期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：新加坡政府藉由終身學習的倡導，希望促進高齡者參與學習活動，而達到成功老化的生涯發展。本研究的主要目的，是要探討新加坡退休者的學習歷程，包括瞭解他們參與學習的原因、持續深化參與學習的因素，以及參與學習之後所產生的改變，以作為我國高齡教育實施的參考。研究者採用質性研究的方法，針對12位新加坡的退休者，進行一對一半結構式的深度訪談。研究結果顯示：新加坡退休者參與學習活動的主要原因是想試試看、想要追求新知以及解決生活困境；退休者持續深化學習的原因則是因為學到實用的東西、對學習產生興趣以及受到師長及榜樣的影響；退休者參與學習後的結果，變得更有自信、能應用、有貢獻、有能力自我學習；在學習歷程中，學習者的獨立學習能力逐漸提升。本研究對我國高齡教育實施的建議包括：高齡教育機構可運用「鼓勵學習、不限學歷」的行銷策略，吸引退休者參與學習；機構宜針對退休者生涯發展的需求進行教學設計；教師的教學設計需同時考量學習內容及其應用性；教師的教學宜依據學習者的需求進行調整，並且幫助學習者有能力獨立學習；鼓勵參與者組成學習社群，以促進他們進行獨立學習。英文摘要：By promoting lifelong learning the Singaporean Government aims to motivate elderly people to participate in learning activities and experience a fruitful retired life. The purpose of this study was to explore the learning processes of retirees in Singapore. This study explored the reasons that motivate the retirees to participate in learning and continuing education as well as the changes caused by their participation in learning. We hope that the results can provide a reference for implementing education for elderly people in Taiwan. In this study we adopted a qualitative research method and conducted one-to-one semi-structured interviews with 12 Singaporean retirees. According to the results the reasons for the Singaporean retirees' participation in learning activities were a desire to try, to pursue new knowledge and to solve life difficulties. The retirees continued participating in education because they had acquired useful knowledge were interested in learning and were influenced by their teachers or other role models. After the retirees participated in learning they became confident contributive, and capable of applying their knowledge and learning autonomously. During the learning process the ability of the learners to learn independently gradually increased. This study provided the following recommendations for implementing older adult education in Taiwan. Education institutes for older people should employ the marketing strategy of ”encouraging learning without diploma required” to promote learning among retirees. In addition these education institutes can design programs according to the requirements of retired life. Thus, program designs should consider both the learning content and its applicability. Furthermore teachers should adjust the teaching content and methods according to the learners' requirements assist learners with learning independently and encourage learners to organize learning groups that facilitate independent learning.起始頁-結束頁：91-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2203.039篇名：大學生課堂不禮貌行為與品德概念關係之研究並列篇名：Undergraduate Students' Perceptions of Classroom Incivility and Character Concepts作者：徐綺穗(Chi-Sui Hsu);吳佳臻(Chia-Chen Wu)關鍵字：高等教育;課堂不禮貌行為;品德概念;higher education;classroom incivility;character concept期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014中文摘要：本研究探討大學生對課堂不禮貌行為的知覺與認同，及其與品德概念的關係。在大學生課堂不禮貌行為方面，分為激進型與消極型兩種類型；在品德概念方面，則以尊重、負責、及自律等三個核心價值為主要內涵。研究對象為臺灣之大學生，以六所大學，730名大學生進行調查。研究結果如下：1.大學生知覺消極型課堂不禮貌行為多於激進型課堂不禮貌行為，大學生對課堂不禮貌行為傾向不認同，其中對於激進型行為的不認同更勝於消極型。2.南部大學生較北、中部大學生知覺較多課堂不禮貌行為，其認同度也較低；公立學校大學生對課堂不禮貌行為的認同度低於私立學校大學生；大三學生較大一學生知覺較多課堂不禮貌行為；男、女大學生對課堂不禮貌行為的知覺及認同皆沒有顯著差異。3.大學生在尊重、負責及自律三個分層面的單題得分皆高於平均值。南部大學生品德概念得分高於中、北部大學生；公立學校大學生品德概念得分高於私立學校大學生；男、女不同性別之大學生其品德概念得分無顯著差異。4.大學生對課堂不禮貌行為知覺與其品德概念有顯著正相關，而認同程度則與品德概念呈現負相關。大學生品德整體可以正向預測其對課堂不禮貌行為的知覺；大學生的尊重概念則負向的預測課堂不禮貌行為的認同。英文摘要：This study explored the perceptions of undergraduate students regarding the frequency and their approval of classroom incivilities, and examined the relation between classroom incivilities (i.e., passive and active incivilities) and character concepts (i.e., respect, responsibility, and self-discipline). The participants comprised 730 undergraduate students from 6 universities in Taiwan. The findings are as follows: (a) The students perceived more passive classroom incivilities compared with active classroom incivilities; they disapproved of all incivilities, but particularly disapproved of active incivilities. (b) The students in Southern Taiwan perceived more uncivil behaviors in class and disapproved of these behaviors more compared with the students in Central and Northern Taiwan, public school students disapproved incivilities more than private school students. Third year students perceived more uncivil behaviors than first year students. No difference occurred in the perceived frequency and approval of classroom incivilities between male and female students. (c) All students attained above average scores regarding the character concepts of respect, responsibility, and self-discipline. Students in Southern Taiwan attained higher scores than students in the Central and Northern Taiwan, public school students higher than private school students, and male and female students exhibited no differences. (d) Student perceptions of classroom incivilities and their frequencies were significantly and positively correlated with student character concepts, but the degree of student approval of classroom incivilities was significantly and negatively coorrelated with these character concepts; thus, student character concepts can predict perceptions of classroom incivilities and the way students conceive respect can negatively predict their approval of classroom incivilities.起始頁-結束頁：131-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2203.0410篇名：書評《課堂中的歷史戰爭：全球觀點》並列篇名：Book Review: ”History Wars and the Classroom: Global Perspectives”作者：單文經(Wen-Jing Shan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：22卷3期出版年：2014起始頁-結束頁：169-183資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2014.2203.0501篇名：同儕聊作品對於國小低年級學童在故事修改的影響並列篇名：Investigate the Effect of Peer Discussion Activity on Children's Story Revision作者：張菀真(Wan-Chen Chang);廖長彥(Chang-Yen Liao);陳德懷(Tak-Wai Chan)關鍵字：一對一數位學習;同儕聊作品;故事修改;故事創作;塗鴉寫作;one-to-one technology enhanced learning;peer discussion;story revision;story creation;drawing & writing期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：過去許多研究指出，透過同儕回應將有助於提升學生在作文的書寫長度與內容品質，然而，卻鮮少將此機制應用於國小低年級學生。本研究的目的在於探索同儕回應機制在低年級學童創作故事活動的可能性與局限性，故發展「同儕聊作品」模式並運用於塗鴉寫作活動中。研究對象為某國小二年級56位學生，進行一學期的五次故事創作活動。研究結果發現：一、實驗組學生在後測的文章字數顯著高於對照組學生；二、實驗組學生在五個塗鴉寫作主題的定稿平均長度顯著高於初稿長度；三、實驗組學生能逐漸自行給予評語而不仰賴系統鷹架，且多給予糾正類型的評語。此外，本研究討論如何透過同儕互評機制來幫助低年級學生進行作文修改。最後，針對教學與研究提出後續建議與限制。英文摘要：Peer response could effectively increase text' length and quality. However, previous studies majorly focused on older students rather than younger learners. Hence, we designed peer response scaffolding to assisting 2nd-grade students in learning how to give suggestions. The research conducted into an experimental group and a control group to investigate the effect of peer discussion activity on children's story creation. The results showed: (1) Regarding posttest, the number of words in the experimental group was significantly higher than that in the control group; (2) Regarding five writing themes, the average length of the revised texts was significantly higher than the first draft in the experimental group; (3) The experimental group could gradually give their own Comments. Therefore, this study discussed how to help lower graders revise their compositions through peer discussion and provided following suggestion and limitation for teaching and research.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20211013040012篇名：Examining Teachers' Acceptance of Flipped Learning by Using Technology Acceptance Model並列篇名：運用科技接受模式探討教師對於翻轉式學習的態度作者：林哲立(Che-Li Lin)關鍵字：flipped learning;self-efficacy;technology acceptance model;翻轉式學習;自我效能;科技接受模式期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：The present study aims to examine teachers' experience and attitude toward flipped learning by using the technology acceptance model and delineate the causal relationship between ease of use, usefulness, self-efficacy, and behavioral intention of primary and secondary in-service teachers. Two hundred sixty in-service teachers from the compulsory education counseling group in Taiwan participated in the survey, which indicates that some teachers have already adopted flipped teaching strategies in classrooms, though most of them have not received related training. Promoting flipped teaching is supported by most of them, and several relevant supporting measures are suggested (e.g., readiness of technology and cultivating learner self-regulated learning). The results of structural equation modeling indicate that self-efficacy positively predicts ease of use, usefulness, and behavioral intention (both directly and indirectly); ease of use negatively predicts behavioral intention; and usefulness can significantly predict behavioral intention. Several suggestions are provided to help teachers effectively implement flipped learning pedagogy.英文摘要：本研究以科技接受模式為理論基礎，探討我國國中小教師對於翻轉式學習的經驗與態度，運用結構方程模式探討變項間的關係，包括知覺有用性、知覺易用性、自我效能、行為意圖。本研究共調查260位國中小現職教師，教師皆為各領域輔導團之成員，於國中小各領域輔導團研習期間進行調查。結果發現，部分教師已有運用影片或製作影片進行翻轉教學的經驗，許多教師未曾參加相關研習，但大多數的教師認為有必要推動翻轉教室的教學，亦指出相關配套應完善，包括資訊設備的準備、學生自主學習知能的培養等。結構方程模式的分析結果顯示，自我效能正向顯著地預測知覺有用性、知覺易用性與行為意圖，同時知覺有用性可正向顯著地預測行為意圖，但知覺易用性負向的預測行為意圖。本研究依據研究結果提出建議，包括開設增能課程提升教師效能感與教學知能等。起始頁-結束頁：27-61資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20211013040023篇名：程式模組引導教學與目標設定策略對國小學生程式設計學習成效與動機之影響並列篇名：Effects of Types of Instructional Approach and Goal-Setting on Elementary Students' Learning of Computer Programming作者：陳明溥(Ming-Puu Chen);豐佳燕(Chia-Yen Feng);王麗君(Li-Chun Wang)關鍵字：引導式教學;目標設定策略;程式模組化;instructional approaches;goal-setting strategy;modular programming期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究透過實驗教學探討程式模組引導教學（概念模組vs.功能模組）與目標設定策略（等級目標vs.質性目標）對初學者程式設計學習成效與學習動機的影響。本研究採因子設計之準實驗研究法，研究對象為臺北市某國小六年級學生，有效樣本103人。實驗教學活動為期八週，共計320分鐘。學習者的學習成效依認知層次分為「程式理解」與「程式應用」，分別進行分析；學習動機則是探討學習者對實驗教學活動之學習動機在價值成分與期望成分的看法。研究結果發現：一、對學習成效而言，在程式理解成效方面，程式模組引導教學與目標設定策略交互作用達到顯著水準，在「概念模組引導教學」搭配「等級目標設定策略」時，初學者有最佳的程式理解表現，而在其他的程式模組引導教學與目標設定策略組合時，學習者的程式理解成效則無顯著差異；二、在程式應用成效方面，「概念模組引導教學」之學習環境對初學者在程式應用的學習成效最佳；三、在學習動機方面，各實驗組學習者對機器人程式設計學習活動皆抱持著正向的學習動機，而「等級目標設定策略」搭配「概念模組引導教學」學習者有較高的外在目標學習動機表現，接受「功能模組引導教學」學習者在期望成功之學習動機最高。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of types of instructional approach and goal-setting on elementary students' learning of computer programming. A quasi-experimental design was employed and a total of 103 sixth-graders participated in the experimental activity. The independent variables included type of instructional approaches (conceptual module vs. the functional module) and type of goal-setting (grading-goal vs. descriptive-goal). The dependent variables were students' learning performance (knowledge comprehension and knowledge application) and motivation. The results revealed that: (a) For the comprehension performance, the conceptual module instructional approach combined with the grading-goal strategy led to better comprehension performance; (b) Concerning the knowledge application performance, the conceptual module instructional approach group outperformed the other groups; and (c) All participants showed positive motivation toward the programming learning activity, and particularly, the grading-goal strategy with the conceptual module instructional approach revealed higher degree of extrinsic goal than the other groups; and the functional module instructional approach group showed a higher degree of success expectation than the other groups.起始頁-結束頁：63-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20211013040034篇名：HiTeach平臺支援國小自然科5E探究式學習對不同成就學生學習成效之研究並列篇名：Utilizing HiTeach Platform to Support 5E Inquiry Learning in a Science Course: A Study Among Elementary Students of Different Ability Level作者：林秋斌(Chiu-Pin Lin);楊肅健(Su-Jian Yang);張家榮(Chia-Jung Chang)關鍵字：HiTeach;5E探究式教學;自然科教學;HiTeach;5E inquiry teaching;science teaching期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在探討運用HiTeach平臺支援5E（Engagement, Exploration, Explanation, Elaboration, Evaluation）探究式教學法，對國小五年級學生在自然與生活科技課程水溶液的性質單元學習成效的影響，研究採準實驗研究法，研究對象為新竹市某國小五年級兩個班級，共51位學生，分成實驗組與控制組；實驗架構採前測、後測設計，實驗組的教學活動是以HiTeach電子互動式平臺支援5E探究式教學模式，控制組的教學活動則是以行動載具融入5E探究式教學進行。研究結果顯示，兩組的教學法雖然沒有顯著差異，但皆能有效地提升學習成效，對於實驗組學生在「記憶」題型成績的提升有顯著成效。且實驗組低成就學生的學習成效在「記憶」、「分析」與「應用」題型有顯著成效，優於控制組低成就的學生。透過學習態度量表問卷與訪談發現，運用HiTeach平臺支援5E探究式教學有助於同儕之間的互動，且能提高學生的學習興趣。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to explore the effect of using the HiTeach platform to support the 5E inquiry teaching method and to study the learning performance of the students in the subject of ”natural science and technology aqueous solution.” This study is based on the experimental study. A total of 51 fifth-grade students from two classes in Hsinchu City participated in this study. This experimental structure includes the pretest and post-test design. The experimental group of teaching activities used the HiTeach interactive platform to support 5E inquiry teaching mode. The control group did not use the HiTeach platform. The results demonstrated that although there is no significant difference between the two groups of teaching methods, the HiTeach interactive platform can improve the learning effectiveness of the experimental group of students on the questions of memory. The experimental group of low achievement students learned better than the control group of low achievement students on any types of questions, which includes the memory, analysis and application. It had a significant effect. The findings of the questionnaire and the interview indicated that utilizing HiTeach platform to support 5E inquiry instructional strategy could increase the interaction between students and enhance their motivation and interest in learning.起始頁-結束頁：95-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20211013040045篇名：The Online Peer Review: An Exploratory Study on Taiwanese EFL Undergraduate Students as Reviewers and Recipients of Online Feedback並列篇名：以英文為第二外語的臺灣大學生作為回饋者與接受者進行線上同儕回饋之探究作者：陳怡礽(Yi-Jeng Chen)關鍵字：online peer feedback;second language writing;student perceptions;線上同儕回饋;第二語言寫作;學生看法期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：This study investigated the kinds of feedback Taiwanese English as a foreign language (EFL) undergraduate students gave each other, which types of feedback would lead to revision and how these types of feedback were perceived. In pairs they were asked to review their peers' argumentative essays. Thirty-two undergraduate intermediate EFL learners participated in this study. The data consisted of student essay drafts, online peer feedback posts, and qualitative survey responses. The findings revealed six online feedback categories: (1) request for an explanation, (2) explanation of an unclear point, (3) suggestion, (4) reflective talk, (5) critique, and (6) grammar correction. Suggestion and critique dominated the online feedback. Reflective talk and critique were new categories of online feedback that expanded our current understanding. Suggestion, critique and grammar correction were the three types of online feedback that led to revisions. Out of 32 students, only nine incorporated online peer feedback into the revisions. Three prominent perceptions were found to include vagueness of feedback, defensive and receptive attitudes.英文摘要：本研究探討以英文為第二外語的臺灣大學生在英文寫作課中作為回饋者與接受者進行線上同儕回饋時的三個面向：第一個面向探究臺灣大學生進行同儕回饋時會產生哪些不同類別的回饋方式；第二個面向探討在這些不同類別的回饋方式中，有哪些同儕回饋是可以實際引領學生進一步去改寫第二稿；第三個面向著重在學生對線上同儕回饋的看法。學生以兩人一組的形式針對同伴所寫的英文議論文作回饋。有32位英語程度中等的學生參與此研究，資料蒐集包含學生寫作的第一和第二稿、線上的評語，以及在開放式問卷中學生的回應。研究結果顯示，線上同儕回饋包含以下六種類型：要求更多解釋、指出不清楚的論點、建議、文法改正、反思式對話及批判。在這六種類型線上同儕回饋當中，「建議」和「批判」占了很大部分。不同於之前的文獻，「批判」和「反思式對話」這兩種線上同儕回饋擴充了我們對目前的理解。本研究發現，學生接受「建議」、「批判」和「文法改正」這三種回饋後，會進一步去修改。研究也發現，學生對線上同儕回饋的看法有三個主軸：第一個是同伴的回饋模糊且不具體；第二個是有些學生對同儕回饋的抗拒；第三個是少部分學生對線上同儕回饋抱持接受的態度。起始頁-結束頁：123-147資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20211013040056篇名：電競遊戲玩家的團隊合作效能、合作行為對於遊戲獲勝率之關係並列篇名：The Relationship Between Teamwork Efficacy and Cooperation Behavior of eSports Game Players作者：洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);葉建宏(Jian-Hong Ye);葉貞妮(Jhen-Ni Ye)關鍵字：合作行為;多人線上戰鬥競技場;社會相互依賴理論;遊戲獲勝率;團隊合作效能;cooperative behavior;multiplayer online battle arena;social interdependence theory;game win rate;teamwork efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：社會相互依賴理論被用來解釋團隊活動中的合作行為模式，當人們感知到與密切的團隊合作能為目標帶來正向結果時，將產生良好的相互依賴行為，然而，此相互依賴具有級距特質，但在過去的研究中較少被提出討論。故本研究基於高度團隊合作的多人線上戰鬥競技場遊戲情境中，探討團隊合作效能、三種類型的合作行為、遊戲獲勝率之間的關係。本研究的參與者來自中國大陸《王者榮耀》的玩家，有效的研究參與者為228人，有效回收率為82.6%，男生為122人（53.5%），女生為106人（46.5%）。回收數據經由信、效度檢驗後，進行研究模式驗證，研究結果顯示：一、團隊合作效能與獨立行動呈現負相關，與被動合作及主動合作呈現正相關；二、獨立行動與遊戲獲勝率呈現負相關；三、被動合作與遊戲獲勝率呈現無相關；四、主動合作與遊戲獲勝率呈現正相關。從上述結果可知，僅有主動的合作行為方式才能帶來更高的遊戲獲勝率。英文摘要：Social interdependence theory is used to explain the cooperative behavior pattern in team activities. When people perceive that close teamwork can bring positive results to meet their goals, they will produce good interdependence behavior. This interdependence has distance characteristics. However, past studies has rarely discussed this issue. Therefore, this study explores the relationship between team cooperation effectiveness, three types of cooperative behaviors, and game winning rates in the context of a highly team-based MOBA game. Participants in this study were players from Honors of Kings in China. 228 (82.6%) participants participated in this study, 122 were males (53.5%) and 106 were females (46.5%). After reliability and validity test of the data, the research model was verified, and the research results showed that: (1) Teamwork efficacy was negatively correlated with independent actions, and positively correlated with passive and active cooperation; (2) Independent action was negatively correlated with the game winning rate; (3) Passive cooperation has no correlation with the game winning rate; (4) Active cooperation was positively correlated with the game winning rate. It can be seen from the above results that only active cooperative behavior can bring higher game win rate.起始頁-結束頁：149-176資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20211013040067篇名：大學生之校園數位足跡與人格特質關聯性研究並列篇名：The Study of the Relationship Between Student's Personality and Digital Footprint on Campus作者：區國良(Kou- Liang Ou);陳建承(Chien-Cheng Chen);黃郁喬(Yu-Chiao Huang)關鍵字：人格特質;非監督式學習;視覺化分析;數位足跡;personality traits;unsupervised learning;visualization;digital footprint期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：數位足跡是指人們在日常生活中，以數位化的方式儲存使用者所在的位置資訊以及行為歷程，過去經常利用分析遊客的移動路徑後，提供觀光景點或交通動線規劃使用。由於大學生長時間身處在校園中進行學習活動，長期累積的數位足跡若能加以記錄、蒐集及統整分析，將可發掘學生在校園中的行為特徵。本研究以168位大學生自備的智慧型手機作為數位足跡記錄裝置，蒐集一個學年期間在校園中移動之軌跡作為資料集，以開源的R Server及Shiny套件建構視覺化數值分析界面，再利用非監督式學習演算法發掘學生移動及停留的行為群聚現象，進而分析與其人格特質之間的關聯。本研究所提出的創新方法及結果可作為未來學生輔導或校園規劃之參考。英文摘要：Digital footprint refers to collect the people's locational information and behaviors of daily life digitally. The digital footprint analysis can help researchers understand the subject's characteristics and interaction between residents and space. Most of the undergraduates spend a long time on the campus for learning activities. If their digital footprints can be recorded, collected, integrated, and analyzed, it could explore students' behavior characteristics. This study employed 168 college students' smartphones as digital footprint recording devices, which were used to depict the trails of student's movement on campus. A visualization tool for exploring the subject's digital footprint patterns was constructed by R Server and Shiny package, and an unsupervised algorithm was used to figure out their clusters. The relationship between students' digital footprint and their personality traits were discussed in this study. The innovative methods and results support future studies for enhancing digital footprint student counseling or campus design.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20210713030018篇名：於混合學習中基於學習分析儀表板系統應用之自我調節學習方法並列篇名：A Self-Regulated Learning Approach Using a Learning Analytics Dashboard System in Blended Learning作者：陳雅玲(Irene Y. L. Chen)關鍵字：自我效能感;自我調節學習;混合學習;學習分析;學習分析儀表板系統;self-efficacy;self-regulated learning;blended learning;learning analytics;learning analytics dashboard system期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：混合學習將傳統的課堂活動與線上數位資源相結合，使學生能透過明確定義的交互式學習策略獲得更佳的學習成績。這種學習策略不僅保留傳統的學習活動，更加入了線上學習活動來豐富學生之學習。但由於缺乏自我調節的能力，許多學生可能無法在課外時間自行完整地學習課程內容。因此，本研究提出一種應用於大學混合學習課程中的自我調節學習方法，以協助學生使用學習分析儀表板和在課堂上使用電子書系統進行自我觀察學習情況，接著為下一週的學習設定新目標。本研究為評估所提出學習方法的有效性，在採用混合學習模型的大學課程中採用了準實驗設計。實驗組的學生透過使用學習分析儀表板學習本研究所提出之自我調節學習方法，而對照組則經由傳統的混合學習方法進行學習。兩組學生都使用電子書系統學習課堂教材之內容。本研究之實驗結果顯示，使用自我調節學習方法的學生在學習成果，以及自我調節學習和自我效能感的認知方面均優於使用傳統混合學習方法的學生。英文摘要：Blended learning combines traditional classroom activities with online resources. It enables students to achieve better academic performance through clearly defined interactive learning strategies. This type of learning strategy integrates the activities of traditional learning as well as online learning to enrich students' learning experiences. However, students may not be able to study the online course content on their own due to the lack of self-regulated learning (SRL) ability. This research proposes a self-regulated learning method that encourages students using learning analytics dashboard (LAD) to enhance their SRL ability. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed SRL method, this research applies a quasi-experiment design in a university course that uses a blended learning strategy. All students learn in a traditional classroom and use an E-book reading system to access learning material. Only students in the experimental group additionally use the LAD to observe their own learning pattern. This research compares the learning performances of the two groups of student. The results demonstrate that students in the experimental group outperform those in the control group in terms of learning performance, self-regulated learning ability and self-efficacy.起始頁-結束頁：27-42資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20210713030029篇名：運用教育大數據分析國中小學科技領域教師專業標準與發展：以教師在職進修研習資料為例並列篇名：Applying Educational Big Data to Analyze the Professional Standards and Development of Teachers in the Field of Science and Technology of Primary and Secondary Schools: Using Data from Teachers' In-Service Training作者：吳泓怡(Hung-Yi Wu);陳苔青(Tai-Ching Chen);程貳隆(Er-Lung Cheng)關鍵字：在職進修研習;科技領域;教育大數據;教師專業發展;in-service training;field of science and technology;educational big data;teacher professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：隨著雲端計算及大數據科技蓬勃發展，如何挖掘隱藏於非結構性海量教育數據中的豐富價值，將其轉化為有用的資訊，以促進教學決策、改進教學實踐、完善自身專業發展，是大數據時代教師面臨的重大挑戰。因此，有必要從促進教師專業發展的角度，對教師專業進修之相關研習數據進行解讀，釐清教師在職進修與教師專業標準之關係。本研究利用教育部公布之教師專業標準，彙整中小學科技領域相關專家共識，從中篩選關鍵專業評估要素，再運用教師在職進修之教育大數據分析，檢視中小學科技領域教師研習訓練課程與專業標準之關係。期透過此教師研習數據分析，輔以專業教師參與在職進修研習活動之學習成效調查，提供教育主管以視覺化的方式檢視教師在職進修課程與教師專業標準之關連性，以及研習成效分析結果，並掌握可能的問題或徵兆，進而擬訂教師研習改善方案，協助教師精進與強化其專業能力，以有效提升教師在職進修專業發展之學習成果。英文摘要：With the vigorous development of cloud computing and big data technology, how to transform the rich value hidden in the unstructured massive educational data into useful information to promote teaching methods, improve teaching practice, and perfect one's own professional development is a major challenge facing teachers in the era of big data. Therefore, it is necessary to interpret the relevant in-service training data of teachers' professional from the perspective of teacher professional development, and clarify the relationship between teachers' in-service training and teacher professional standards. This study adopted the teacher professional standards promulgated by Taiwan's Ministry of Education to induce the consensus of relevant experts to screen key professional evaluation criteria, then applied educational big data analysis of teachers' in-service training data to examine the relationship between in-service training courses and standards of teachers in the field of science and technology in primary and secondary schools. Through the analysis of teachers' in-service training data along with the survey of the learning effectiveness of teachers' in-service training, education supervisors are provided with a visual way to review the relevance between teachers' in-service training and professional standards, and the result of learning effectiveness, to grasp possible problems or symptoms, and then formulate improvement plans of teachers' in-service training to assist teachers in refining and strengthening their professional abilities, so as to effectively promote the in-service training performance of teachers' professional development.起始頁-結束頁：43-80資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X202107130300310篇名：我國小學學生的大數據學習資料分析研究：以英文字彙自主學習為例並列篇名：The Study of Big Data Learning Analytics in the Elementary School Students in Taiwan: Autonomy Learning of English Vocabularies作者：何宏發(Hong-Fa Ho);陳清煌(Ching-Huang Chen)關鍵字：大數據;自主學習;學習資料分析;big data;autonomy learning;learning analytics期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：互聯網及大數據應用與教育的關聯日益密切，運用數位學習平臺引導學生自主學習，數位平臺學習有利累積海量的數據資料，藉由分析學生學習資料以了解其學習行為，提升教學質量及學生的學習效能，本研究分析小學學生以互聯網方式的自主學習，進行英文單字詞的記憶學習，以大數據的學習資料分析方式，使用數據聚合及數據挖掘來了解一段時間內的趨勢和評估指標。研究發現：一、學習的性別男性比例高於女性；二、有明顯超前學習的趨勢；三、寒暑假期間自主學習的比例高於其他時間；四、星期日及星期一是一週的學習高峰期，一天有四段學習的高峰期，每次學習週期以3分鐘以內為多數；五、影響已學單字總數量的關鍵因素是今天需複習單字總數量。本研究對象為小學學生，學習系統的使用並非免費的資源，需支付使用費用及《個人資料保護法》的限制，增加資料分析的困難度，研究結果的推論受到一定的限制。英文摘要：The relationship of education and the internet and big data application was more closed. To conduct autonomy learning by using e-learning platform had benefits to accumulate the great amount data. To understand and comprehension learning analytics by analyzing the measuring could promote the quantity and quality of teaching behaviors and learning analytics of the elementary students. The study was to understand the learning of memory of English vocabularies by autonomy-learning in internet of the elementary school students. To understand the trend evaluated indicators by data converge and mining which analyzed by descripted methods. Findings, the first, the amount of gender of learning was males more than females. The secondary, the learning trend was to jump a year. The third, the learning analytics proportion was higher in January- February and July-August vocation than other months. The fourth, the Sunday and Monday were the peak in a week. There was rush hours in four period time in a day. In three minutes was majority in every learning period. A key factor affecting the total number of words learned is the total number of words to review today. Limitation: The study objects were elementary school students, the learning-analytics system was covered the costs, and the data were protected by computer-processed Personal Data Protection Law, which increased difficultly in the data analyzing. The reasoned conclusions of the study were limited.起始頁-結束頁：81-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X202107130300401篇名：不同社會系絡因素對臺灣選民投票抉擇的影響：以2016年總統選舉為例並列篇名：The Effect of Social Context on Individual Vote Choices: Evidence from Taiwan's 2016 Presidential Election作者：周應龍(Ying-lung Chou)關鍵字：社會系絡;社群媒體;總統選舉;投票行為;social context;social media;Presidential Election;voting behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：28卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：在近幾年的選舉中，網路成了候選人決戰的新場域。選民透過網路獲取政治資訊、與候選人、朋友在網路上互動，最終決定其投票對象，這也代表在投票行為的研究中，我們必須重視網際網路所帶來的影響。本研究認為選民可以在網路上獲取各種資訊，並且透過網路社群與其他人產生互動，相當適合使用投票行為研究當中的社會學研究途徑（sociological approach）來分析，網際網路可說是一種因科技進步所產生的新社會系絡。但新的社會系絡形成，並不代表既有的社會系絡就會消失不見，只是影響力可能產生變化。本研究以2016年的總統選舉為例，比較傳統社會系絡因素（外在總體環境、人際討論系絡、傳統媒體閱聽系絡）和社群媒體系絡因素對選民投票行為的影響。本研究同時進行電話調查及網路調查。經控制政黨認同之後，在電話訪問方面，發現傳統媒體閱聽系絡的電視新聞、人際討論系絡對於選民的投票行為具有影響力，但社群媒體並未如預期具有影響力。至於網路調查方面的結果，社群媒體則具有顯著影響力，其他傳統的社會系絡因素中，人際討論也同樣具有顯著影響力。本研究結果顯示我們不可忽略社會系絡在投票行為研究中的重要性。英文摘要：In recent years, the internet has become more and more important in elections. Since the internet has become a major source of information for voters whilst also providing a platform for people to discuss politics, it can be concluded that the internet has a major impact on voters' decisions. Therefore, it has become important for more studies to be focused on this phenomenon. Due to the social nature of the internet with the fast-paced societal changes which it brings about, this study uses a sociological approach of voting behavior to understanding this phenomenon. However, this does not suggest that the internet and new social media are eclipsing the more traditional forms of social contexts. Instead, this study suggests that new social media and social contexts are indicative of new and interesting changes taking place. This study concentrates on the 2016 presidential election and specifically looks at different contextual factors. These include social environment, interpersonal discussion, traditional media and social media. This research conducted both a telephone survey and a web survey. After controlling for party identification, we find that interpersonal discussion and TV news have significant effects on voter choice in the telephone survey. Social media only showed their impact in the web survey. Our research suggests that we cannot ignore social context factors.起始頁-結束頁：1-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202105_28(1).00012篇名：地方選舉「去政黨標籤化」的現象與詮釋：以2018年地方公職人員選舉為例並列篇名：The Phenomenon and Interpretation of Removal of the Party Labels: Evidence from the 2018 Local Elections in Taiwan作者：莊文忠(Wen-Jong Juang);張順全(Shun-Chuan Chang);林美榕(Mei-Rong Lin)關鍵字：地方選舉;公民投票;政黨標籤;區位迴歸;資料視覺化;Local elections;referendum;Party label;ecological regression;data visualization期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：28卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：政黨透過選舉動員爭取選民支持，幫助候選人贏得勝選和培養政治人才，厚植政黨永續經營的實力。在2018年地方公職人員選舉中，民進黨因在中央執政推動多項改革政策引發社會爭議，導致縣市長選舉的得票率下滑和席次大減；反觀國民黨則在「討厭民進黨」的政治氛圍和由高雄市引爆的「韓流」效應助攻之下，縣市長的得票率和席次均有所斬獲。從政黨政治的觀點來看，此次地方選舉中，在兩大政黨此消彼長的表象底下，一個值得關注的議題是，臺灣在經歷三次政黨輪替後，政黨在地方政治的勢力是否產生變化？地方選舉中去政黨標籤的議題，在總體資料的分析視角下，其反映的政治意涵又為何？本研究主要以2018年地方選舉結果為例，綜合參採近10年地方選舉總體數據，以及交叉檢證同年與選舉同時舉行的全國性公民投票結果，說明如何輔以公投結果衡量選民的特定政黨認同（或不認同）及選民在議題上的意識形態。本研究利用描述性統計、資料視覺化、（偏）相關統計、區位迴歸、主成分分析等方法，檢視國、民兩大黨及無黨籍的候選人在各種地方選舉的得票差異性與關聯性。本研究發現，地方選舉中，越基層的選舉去政黨標籤化的現象越明顯，尤其是國民黨的標籤；政黨標籤仍會壓縮無黨籍候選人的得票空間，但政黨標籤在選舉中也可能被隱藏化；藉由選民的議題態度可輔助判斷其政治立場，建立「另類」的政治版圖；除縣市長選舉外，選民對特定政黨的議題認同是重要解釋變數，越支持國民黨主張的地方則越不會投給無黨籍候選人。英文摘要：Political parties enlist voter support from electoral mobilization. It not only helps the party's candidate win the election but also cultivates political talents and builds the party's strength for sustainable development. In the election of local public officials in 2018, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) led to social controversy due to the implementation of a few reform policies in the central government, which led to a significant reduction in the seats of mayors and county magistrates and a decline in the share of votes. On the contrary, the Kuomintang (KMT) benefited from the atmosphere of ”Dislike DPP,” and the ”Han Wave (韓流)” originated in Kaohsiung city, which made a huge gain in the mayor and county magistrate elections and got higher vote shares. From the perspective of party politics, beneath the surface of one party's gain and another party's loss in the local-level elections, one topic that deserves attention is whether the political power of the political parties in local politics has changed after Taiwan has experienced three times party alternations? And from the perspective of the analysis of the aggregate data, what is the political meaning of the topic of removing the party label in the local election? This study mainly took the 2018 local public officers' elections in Taiwan as an example. We collects the data of the local elections in the past 10 years and crosschecks the results of the national referendum held at the same time as the 2018 election. The methods which are used in this study to examine difference and correlation of votes gained by the DPP, KMT, and independent candidates in various levels of local elections included descriptive statistics, data visualization, analysis of (partial) correlation, ecological regression, and principal component analysis. The findings including: (1) the phenomenon of de-labeling of political parties in the lower-level elections is more obvious in local elections, especially the KMT label; (2) while the party label will still reduce the votes of independent candidates, but the party label may also be hidden in the election; (3) the voter's attitude towards referendum issues can assist in judging their political affiliation and establishing an ”alternative” political map; (4) in addition to mayoral elections, the more support the KMT's position, the less vote for independent candidates.起始頁-結束頁：53-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202105_28(1).00023篇名：社會距離與兩岸關係認知：臺灣民<U+8846>統獨立場的實證分析並列篇名：Social Distance and Cross-Strait Relations: Taiwanese Attitudes toward the Independence/Unification Issue作者：方淇(Chi Fang);吳重禮(Chung-li Wu)關鍵字：社會距離;社會認同理論;關係認知;兩岸關係;統獨立場;social distance;social identity theory;relational model;cross-Strait relations;independence/unification preference期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：28卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文旨在檢證臺灣民眾如何看待中國，以及他們的心理認知的社會距離，是否會影響其統獨立場。作者採取社會心理學的分析途徑，以「社會距離」（social distance）與「社會認同理論」（social identity theory）作為研究架構，並輔以「關係模式理論」（relational models theory），建構兩個變數，其分別是：臺灣民眾將中國視為「家人關係」或「夥伴關係」，與臺灣民眾認為中國將臺灣視為「家人關係」或「夥伴關係」，從而瞭解這些民眾的統獨立場。本文採用「2019年中國印象」電話調查資料，將民眾劃分為四種類型，以「關係認知」作為「社會距離」的代理變數，藉由「多項勝算對數模型」（multinomial logit model）探討四種類型與統獨立場的相關性。實證資料顯示，關係認知越近的民眾，越傾向統一；然而，關係認知越遠的民眾，卻不必然會傾向獨立。這印證社會認同理論和諸多實證研究的經驗：當個人認知的社會距離較近，選擇接納其他團體時，傾向將其他團體視為「內團體」（ingroup），並產生互惠的期待與較強烈的意見表達；另一方面，當個人選擇疏遠其他團體時，傾向將其他團體歸類為「外團體」（outgroup），卻不必然會貶低其他團體，而在統獨問題上採取較為模糊的立場。英文摘要：This study probes Taiwanese perception of social distance toward China and its impact on their political attitudes toward the issue of independence/unification. Taking advantage of social distance and social identity theories from social psychology, we hypothesize that the Taiwanese people with a smaller perceived social distance toward China would indicate an inclination for China unification; otherwise, they would prefer Taiwan's independence. We modify the relational models theory to construct two variables to approximate social distance: we ask respondents first whether they regard China as a family member or a partner, and second, whether China views Taiwan as a family member or a partner. To examine our arguments, we utilize the ”2019 Survey of the Image of China” to investigate the association between different types of relational cognitions and their impacts on cross-Strait relations. The findings by and large confirm the validity of the relational models theory, revealing that the Taiwanese electorate is prone to support unification when it perceives a closer social distance toward China. The results also demonstrate that those who are willing to accept China as an in-group tend to expect reciprocity from China. In contrast, those perceiving a greater social distance toward China exhibit ambivalent independence/unification preferences; they express less intimate attitudes but also do not exhibit great hostility toward China.起始頁-結束頁：103-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202105_28(1).00034篇名：在野黨的選舉策略與優勢政黨的敗選：伊斯蘭黨與2018年馬來西亞國會選舉的實證研究並列篇名：Opposition Parties' Electoral Strategies and the Defeat of Dominant Parties: An Empirical Study of Parti Islam Se-Malaysia (PAS) and the 2018 Malaysian General Election作者：游雅雯(Ya-Wen Yu)關鍵字：馬來西亞;伊斯蘭黨;民主轉型;競爭式威權體制;國民陣線;Malaysia;Parti Islam Se-Malaysia;Democratic Transition;Competitive Authoritarian Regime;Barisan Nasional期刊/會議論文集名稱：選舉研究卷期：28卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：馬來西亞自1957年獨立以來，國民陣線（國陣）長期執政，並維持競爭式威權體制逾61年，直到2018年5月才首次政黨輪替。目前探討馬來西亞競爭式威權體制為何垮台的既有文獻指出：馬來西亞都市化的趨勢以及馬哈迪因素是造成執政精英分裂為解釋國陣敗選之兩大可能原因。本文結合政黨政治與族群投票的理論視角，主張伊斯蘭黨的政黨目標改變亦是導致國陣敗選的關鍵因素之一。具體而言，伊斯蘭黨的政黨目標從「追求官職」轉向「追求政策」—為了推動伊斯蘭化政策，伊斯蘭黨退出了過去二十年所加入的在野聯盟，因為民主行動黨時常與其因伊斯蘭議題發生衝突。結果伊斯蘭黨自立門戶之後，反倒成功吸引了那些先前對於伊斯蘭黨與民主行動黨結盟有所疑慮的馬來穆斯林選民。因此，本文假設伊斯蘭黨的參選將會對國陣的選舉表現造成影響。為了驗證這個假設，本文利用馬來西亞半島（西馬）165個國會選區在2018年國會選舉的資料進行量化分析。實證結果顯示，當伊斯蘭黨候選人與國陣候選人在同一國會選區競選時，國陣候選人會獲得較少的選票支持。英文摘要：Since Malaysia's independence in 1957, the United Malay National Organization (UMNO)-led Barisan Nasional (BN) coalition government governed Malaysia for 61 years, maintaining a competitive authoritarian system. However, Malaysia experienced its first-ever party turnover in May 2018. To understand the reason why Malaysia's competitive authoritarian system collapsed, the existing literature suggests two key explanations for BN's electoral defeat: increasing urbanization, and Mahathir causing a split among the governing elites. Combining the theoretical perspectives of party politics and ethnic voting, this paper argues that Parti Islam Se-Malaysia's (Malaysian Islamic Party, PAS) change of policy objective also was a factor in explaining BN's electoral defeat. Specifically, the PAS changed its goal from ”office-seeking” to ”policy seeking.” In order to promote Islam, the PAS cut ties with the opposition coalition that it had joined for the past 20 years, because the Democratic Action Party (DAP) conflicted with the PAS with respect to its Islamization policy. The PAS established a new party coalition and focused on promoting Islam, which helped the PAS gain support from the Malay Muslim voters who had not voted for PAS because of its previous alliance with the DAP. Accordingly, this study hypothesizes that the PAS undermined BN's electoral performance. To test this hypothesis, this study conducts a quantitative analysis using data from 165 electoral districts in West Malaysia. The empirical results demonstrate that BN's electoral support was largely undermined in the districts where the PAS contested the election.起始頁-結束頁：149-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：政治大學選舉研究中心DOI：10.6612/tjes.202105_28(1).000401篇名：大學生對生命重大事件成敗歸因之研究並列篇名：A Study on the Attribution of Success or Failure toward Major Life Events among College Students in Taiwan作者：蔡明昌(Ming-Chang Tsai);曾素秋(Su-Ciou Ceng)關鍵字：大學生;生命教育;成敗歸因;量表;學校輔導;Attribution of success or failure;life education;scale;school counseling;undergraduate期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：60期出版年：2021中文摘要：「成敗歸因」係指個體對本身成功或失敗的原因所提出的見解，對於生命教育與學校輔導工作具有重要的意義。自1970年代以來，Weiner所發展的成敗歸因理論及後續的一系列研究，累積了許多豐富的成果，但其內涵中並未包含我國傳統的命運相關概念，因此在解釋個體生命中重大事件的成敗經驗時恐有所不足。基於此，本研究以大學生為研究對象，透過成敗歸因理論及傳統命運觀點的探討，歸納出國人對生命中重大事件成敗歸因的本土化基本架構，藉以發展適用於國內大學生的成敗歸因測量工具，並以分層多階段抽樣法抽取1,222名大學生進行成敗歸因的調查。研究結果顯示，本研究對成敗歸因理論及傳統命運觀點歸納所得，增加「可理解性」的向度，所發展的大學生對生命重大事件成敗歸因量表，包括六項分量表，各分量表中包含順、逆境二個向度，具有良好的信、效度；我國大學生對於生命重大事件的成敗歸因，仍以努力及能力因素的歸因為主；大學生對生命重大事件歸因與事件的順、逆境二者間具有顯著的交互作用存在；大學生在六項歸因因素的得分與五項生命事件二者之間具有顯著的交互作用存在；宗教信仰因素與大學生的成敗歸因之間有顯著的關係；最後，研究者就研究結果對學校生命教育與輔導工作的啟示進行論述。英文摘要：'Attribution of success or failure' refers to the personal understanding of causes of success or failure. For life education and school counseling, attribution of success or failure has important implications. Across the lifespan, an individual often experiences many successes and failures. When individual encountering the similar situations, behavioral tendency will depend on his attributional interpretation of prior success or failure experience. Attribution of success or failure is the phenomenal causality rather than the true cause. But the influence of the phenomenal causality is more important than the real cause. Therefore, if students can be guided to appropriate attribution of their own success or failure, it can help them form a positive outlook on life, which could be helpful in meaning of life education and counseling. Weiner's attribution theory of success or failure and research in this area have provided rich results since 1970's. However, the indigenous concepts of fate have not been incorporated in this theory context. It would be not enough to explain the experience of success or failure toward major life events. There are limited empirical studies that combine the theory of success and failure attribution with the traditional concept of destiny. If we can combine the two, we should have a more complete understanding of the psychological status of students, which will be more conducive to education and counseling. Based on this, the purposes of this study were to (a) develop a research scale for the attribution of success or failure of college students in Taiwan; and (b) understand the current situation of college students' attribution of the success or failure toward major life events. Based on the findings, the researcher discusses the implications of this study on school education and counseling. The present study included college students as participants. Through the discussion of the theory of attribution and the perspective of traditional destiny, the present study summarizes the basic structure of attribution toward major life events so as to develop an instrument of attribution of success or failure for Taiwanese college students. A total of 1222 undergraduates were recruited using stratified multistage sampling to investigate the attribution of success or failure. The results of the study show that the study summarizes the theory of attribution and the perspective of traditional destiny, and increases the orientation of ”understandability” to develop the ”Scale of Attribution of Success and Failure Toward Major Life Events of College Student ”. The scale includes six subscales. Each subscale contains two dimensions of prosperity and adversity which has good reliability and validity. The attribution of the success or failure of undergraduates toward major life events are based primarily on the attribution of effort and ability factors. There is a significant interaction between the attribution of success or failure toward major life events and dimensions of prosperity and adversity, and the interaction between the six attribution factors and five life events is also significant. There is a significant relationship between religious factors and the attribution of success or failure of college students. Finally, the researcher discusses the implications of this study on school education and counseling: (1) In the process of education and counseling, it is the primary task to promote students' understanding of themselves in order to set reasonable goals for all major events in life; (2) To guide students to think about their own way of life when faced with the dilemma of doing their best but still failing; (3) In order to prevent students from forming a fatalistic outlook on life, students should be trained to do their best.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210100600012篇名：適婚男女親密關係暴力行為與關係承諾相關之研究－以關係滿意度為中介變項並列篇名：Relationship Satisfaction as a Mediator of Violent Behaviors and Relationship Commitment of Intimate Partners in Marriageable Ages作者：蘇盈瑜(Ying-Yu Su);朱惠瓊(Hui-Chuang Chu)關鍵字：適婚男女;親密關係暴力;關係承諾;關係滿意度;Intimate partner in marriageable age;intimate partner violence;relationship commitment;relationship satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：60期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究目的在探討適婚男女之親密關係暴力行為現況，以及了解其關係滿意度對親密關係暴力行為與關係承諾的中介效果。本研究親密暴力的方式包括「嚴重暴力」、「輕微暴力」、「性與親密暴力」和「口語暴力」。以504位適婚男女為研究對象，以「親密關係暴力行為量表」、「關係滿意度量表」與「關係承諾量表」為研究工具，採用描述性統計、Pearson積差相關與多元逐步迴歸等統計分析研究假設。研究結果如下：約56.5%的研究參與者曾經歷過親密關係暴力行為；約37.3%的研究參與者同時為暴力行為的施暴者與受暴者。適婚男女的關係滿意度與關係承諾具有顯著正相關（r = .624）。適婚男女的親密關係暴力行為與關係滿意度（r = - .24）、親密關係暴力行為與關係承諾具有顯著負相關（r = -.29）。「口語暴力」和「性親密暴力」兩變項對於關係承諾具有8.5%的解釋變異量，顯示「口語暴力」和「性與親密暴力」與關係承諾之間具有負相關 。最後，關係滿意度在施暴之親密關係暴力行為與關係承諾間具有部分中介效果（β = -.163）；關係滿意度在受暴之親密關係暴力行為與關係承諾間亦具有部分中介效果（β = -.109）。研究結論，建議以長期縱貫性研究與質性研究瞭解個人經驗隨時間之變化與其心路歷程，增加「社會期望」量表以瞭解研究參與者填答之真實性，瞭解暴力行為發動者與個人使用暴力行為之原因。在實務工作上，建議可以發展更具彈性與合適的互動方式與行為，透過早期介入即時處遇，最後是減少愛情關係中的暴力行為，以有效的方法溝通與表達。英文摘要：This study was designed to explore the violent behavior between intimate partners in age for marriage and understood whether the romantic relationship satisfaction functioned as a mediator which was affected by the intimate partner violent behavior and the commitment of a romantic relationship between intimate partners. The definition of intimate violence in the study was meant that unmarried and married men and women in their intimate relationships are subjected to intimate partner violence or violence against intimate partners, and that violent patterns include ”serious violence”, ”minor violence”, ”sexual and intimate violence” and ”verbal violence”. Romantic relationship satisfaction of this study was defined as the satisfaction of an individual with the intimate relationship in which he or she was located. And romantic relationship satisfaction, it should be from the subjective point of view of the individual to understand the cognition, behavior and feeling of the individual in the relationship. Therefore, the relationship commitment in this study is defined as an individual's willingness to love the person and to maintain a long-term relationship with his or her partner in an intimate relationship. This study recruited 504 intimate partners in marriageable age as research subjects. Among them were 385 (76.4%) females w and 119(23.6%) males. The average age of the participants was 32.9 years with a standard deviation of 3.20 years, the average romantic relationship duration was 37.22 months, the median duration of the relationship was 22.00 months. They were asked to fill a set of questionnaires, including Intimate Partner Violent Behaviors Scale, Relationship Satisfaction Scale, and Relationship Commitment Scale. We analyzed the data by using descriptive statistics, Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient, and stepwise multiple regression. The results were as follows: First, about 56.5% of the participants experienced intimate partner violent behaviors. About 37.3% of the participants were both victims and perpetrators in violent behaviors. Second, the data showed that there was a positive correlation between relationship satisfaction and relationship commitment (r = .624). Third, there was a negative correlation between intimate partner violent behaviors and relationship satisfaction (r = -.24) and between intimate partner violent behaviors and relationship commitment (r = -.29). At last, the two variants of ”oral violence” and ”sexual and intimate violence” jointly explained 8.5% of the variance in relationship commitments, supporting the negative relationship between ”oral violence”, ”sexual and intimate violence” and the commitment of relationship. In conclusion, relationship satisfaction had a function as a partial mediator in intimate partner violent behaviors and relationship commitment (β = -.163 vs β = -.109.) It meant that intimate intimacy violence negatively affected relationship satisfaction, which in turn partially affects relationship commitment, reducing the individual's willingness to maintain long-term relationships. There are some recommendations for future research. First, long-term longitudinal and qualitative research should be used to understand the changes in mental process and personal experience. Second, the social expectation variable can be used to value the accuracy of research subjects' answer. Lastly, it is important to find out the cause of violent behaviors and the reason for the individual to engage in violent behavior. In clinical work, practitioners could develop and practice more flexible and appropriate interaction and behavior, offer intervention earlier to reduce violence in romantic relationships, and help individuals in romantic relationship develop effective communication skills.起始頁-結束頁：37-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/1728518620210100600023篇名：校園同志諮商輔導FOSTER專業知能模式之建構研究並列篇名：Research on the Construction of the FOSTER Model of the Professional Counseling Competencies for LGBT in School作者：莊瑞君(Jui-Chun Chuang)關鍵字：FOSTER專業知能模式;同志;社會正義;專業諮商輔導知能;FOSTER model;LGBT;professional counseling competencies;social justice期刊/會議論文集名稱：中華輔導與諮商學報卷期：60期出版年：2021中文摘要：基於對青少年同志族群的心理健康之關注，本研究目的在建構校園同志諮商輔導專業知能之內涵。研究採用半結構式的深度訪談，邀請三種身分的研究參與者，包括同志學生、諮商輔導專業人員與督導，共計40位研究參與者，透過三種不同視角，依據紮根理論形成同志的性傾向友善諮商專業知能之大樹模式，簡稱FOSTER專業知能模式（Friendly and Open for Sexual orientation to the Tree Ecosystem Raise competency model），大樹模式的內涵包括：（1）樹根：象徵根源與核心，專業知能的態度，個別服務為肯認性傾向與覺察自我價值觀、系統處遇為拓展場域的動能與真誠一致的態度、公共倡導為社會責任的覺察與認同人權與發聲的價值。（2）樹幹：象徵支撐與傳達，專業知能的知識，個別服務為多元性傾向觀點與性別論述能力、系統處遇為脈絡處境知識與系統的影響評估、公共倡導為性別相關法律與異性戀霸權論述。（3）樹枝：象徵外展與延伸，專業知能的技能，個別服務為落實主體性的認同與傳遞性傾向平等價值、系統處遇為創造對話空間的能力與資源運用與連結能力。（4）樹葉：象徵綻放與茂盛，專業知能的行動，公共倡導為參與同志活動倡議、促進體制政策改變、公開出櫃成為楷模。（5）養分：象徵滋養來源，專業知能的資源，來源為課程、研習、督導與參與組織、方式為自我覺察與見證他人經驗。因應研究發現，本研究提出建議做為相關研究與培訓之依循方針。英文摘要：Based on the concern for the mental health of LGBT, the purpose of the research is to construct a model of professional counseling competencies for working with LGBT in school. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 20 students, 10 professional counselors and 10 clinical supervisors. These participants co-constructed the tree model of professional counseling competencies from different perspectives based on grounded theory. The tree model is referred to as the Friendly and Open for Sexual orientation to the Tree Ecosystem Raise (FOSTER) competency model. The FOSTER model consisted of five aspects. These five aspects are the root, the trunk, the branches, the leaves and the nutrients. Each of these five aspects includes three levels: individual services, system services, and public advocacy. The first aspect is the root, symbolizing the roots and core of the tree, which reflects counselor's attitude. At individual service level, it is recommended that counselors should affirm and identify the sexual orientation of clients and be aware of their own values. At system service level, it is recommended that counselors should have sincere and consistent attitude, as well as the motivation and energy to expand the field of service. At public advocacy level, it is recommended that counselors should be aware of their own social responsibility and agree with the value of speaking out for human rights and equality. The second aspect is the trunk, which symbolizes the support and communication of the trees and reflects counselor's knowledge of viewpoints of sexual orientation and gender discourse ability. At individual service level, it is recommended that counselors should embrace the concept and perspectives of diverse sexual orientation and engage in gender discourse. At system service level, it is recommended that counselors should know the backgrounds of clients and counselors have the ability to assess the systematic impact on clients. At public advocacy level, it is recommended that counselors should be familiar with gender equality laws and the relevant discourse of heterosexual hegemony. The third aspect is the branches, which symbolize the outreach and extension of the trees and reflects counselor's skills. At individual service level, it is recommended that counselors are required to assist the clients in exploring their own subjective identity and promote the values that all sexual orientations are equal in the counseling process. At system service level, it is recommended that counselors should have the ability to create a dialogue space with the client, and counselors must have the ability to use resources and connect resources for clients. The fourth aspect is the leaves, which symbolize the bloom and dense of the trees and reflect counselor's actions. At public advocacy level, it is recommended that counselors should participate in LGBT-related activities, and counselors should have the agency to promote government system and policy changes and make this change beneficial to the situation of LGBT. Furthermore, if the counselors identify themselves as LGBT, they can come out to clients and become the clients' role model in their future life. The fifth aspect is the source of nutrients provided to trees, which symbolize supervision and training and reflects counselor's resources. The nourishment source of nutrients in the FOSTER model includes courses, training, supervision and participation in LGBT-related organizations. The nourishment methods of nutrients in the FOSTER model include self-awareness of counselors and witnessing the life experience of LGBT students or friends. Finally, implications for research and counselor training are discussed.起始頁-結束頁：73-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣輔導與諮商學會DOI：10.3966/17285186202101006000301篇名：科技促進民主？民眾對推動電子投票與民主發展的關聯性分析並列篇名：Does Technology Promote Democracy? Analysis of the Public's Perception of the Relevance of Democratic Development with Adopting Electronic Voting作者：莊文忠(Wen-jong Juang)關鍵字：電子投票;電子化民主;政治參與;數位落差;民主政治;electronic voting(e-voting);electronic democracy(e-democracy);political participation;digital divide;democracy期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：繼全球民主化的浪潮之後，因應資訊科技的蓬勃發展，公共服務的電子化業已是世界各國政府所致力推行的運動，而電子投票是同時具有民主化與電子化的意涵，期能透過提供便利、可靠的投票方式，降低公民參與政治的成本和提高公民參與的普及度和平等性。雖然不少國家已有具體實施電子投票的經驗，不過，電子投票的操作過程與具體成效，在理論與實務方面也仍有不少爭辯，在我國民主政治發展逐漸鞏固與深化的階段，這是一個十分值得吾人關注與探究的議題。本研究從資訊科技與民主促進的視角切入，探討電子投票的推動與民主政治發展之間的關係，除理論觀點的論證外，也進行實證研究的評估。本文以科技接受模型（technology acceptance model）為基礎探究三個研究問題：（1）社會大眾對電子投票的特性認知與評價為何？（2）社會大眾支持電子投票與否，主要是受到哪些因素所影響？（3）社會大眾認為電子投票的導入對民主政治的發展是否有所幫助？其背後又有哪些重要的解釋因素？本研究透過電話民意調查分析發現：多數民眾仍偏好現行的紙本投票方式；支持推動電子投票的解釋因素由高而低分別是電子投票的便利性、可信任度、公平性和參與度；支持電子投票和推動電子投票可促進臺灣民主發展之間是互為因果關係；而電子投票的參與度、可信任度和便利性則是解釋推動電子投票與我國民主政治發展的顯著因素，此可作為我國後續推動電子投票，與民眾進行政策溝通的參考。英文摘要：Following the global democratization, in response to the vigorous development of information and communication technologies (ICTs), the digitalization of public services has been a campaign promoted by governments around the world. Among them, electronic voting(e-voting) has the meaning of both democratization and digitalization. Reliable voting methods reduce the cost of voter participation in politics and increase the popularity and equality of voter participation. Although many countries have experience in implementing e-voting, the operation process and results of e-voting still have a lot of controversy in theory and practice. Taiwan is in the stage of consolidating and deepening democracy. This is a topic worthy of our attention and inquiry. This research explores the relationship between the promotion of e-voting and the development of democracy from the perspective of ICTs for advancing democracy. In addition to the demonstration of theoretical viewpoints, we also conduct empirical evaluation in this study. This research based on technology acceptance model to explore three main questions: (1) What is the public's perception and assessment of the characteristics of e-voting? (2) What factors affect whether the public supports e-voting or not? (3) Does the public think that the introduction of e-voting will help the development of democratic politics? What are the reasons behind it? This study found through telephone polls that most people still prefer the current paper voting method. Those supported e-voting list their reasons as: convenience, reliability, equality, and participation (ranked from high to low). There is a causal relationship between supporting e-voting and adopting e-voting to promote the development of Taiwan's democracy. Furthermore, participation, reliability and convenience of e-voting are the significant factors that explain the promotion of e-voting and the development of democracy in Taiwan. Those findings are useful for the government to promoting e-voting and communicating with the public.起始頁-結束頁：83-140資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會2篇名：台權會如何反對eID？滾動中的eID政策　潛伏數位極權主義隱憂並列篇名：How does TAHR oppose eID? Is digital totalitarianism on Taiwan's horizon?作者：施逸翔(Yi-hsiang Shih)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：141-149資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會3篇名：書評：State Capture: How Conservative Activists, Big Business, and Wealthy Donors Reshaped the American States and the Nation〔俘虜國家與美國民主—保守派、財團、大金主如何重塑美國政治〕by Alexander Hertel-Fernandez〔亞歷山大．赫特爾－費南德茲〕並列篇名：A review of State Capture: How Conservative Activists, Big Business, and Wealthy Donors Reshaped the American States and the Nation by Alexander Hertel-Fernandez作者：陳冠吾(Kuan-wu Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：151-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會4篇名：世界民主大事紀：2020年10－12月並列篇名：Chronicle of World Democracy Events: October-December 2020期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣民主季刊卷期：18卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：159-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞政治學出版單位：財團法人臺灣民主基金會01篇名：臺灣青少年社會關係認知特點：多情境、多維度探討並列篇名：Taiwanese Adolescents' Cognition of Social Relationships: Multibackground and Multidimensional Exploration作者：王榮(Rong Wang);佟月華(Yue-Hua Tong);孫英紅(Ying-Hong Sun)關鍵字：臺灣青少年;社會關係認知;概念結構;社會關係維度;taiwanese adolescents;cognition of social relationships;conceptual structure;social relationship dimensions期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究有二個主要目的，一是瞭解臺灣青少年對不同情境社會關係的認知結構與維度，以及臺灣青少年對維度認知的方向性；二是瞭解不同年級、不同性別臺灣青少年的社會關係認知特點。研究對象為四、六、八年級（9-15歲）學生。研究首先通過訪談獲取臺灣青少年社會關係清單，運用分類法考察臺灣青少年對家族、學校、同儕三種情境社會關係的認知空間與潛在維度；之後針對較重要的幾種關係，以9點利克特量表方式，進一步具體考察臺灣青少年對關係維度量尺（義務程度、回報程度、服從程度、情感程度）的評定情況。研究結果顯示：（一）臺灣青少年社會關係認知結構在三種情境中皆表現出情感維度；家族情境還有成人兒童、輩份、性別、姻親維度，學校情境還有成人兒童、職責／身份維度，同儕情境還有生活背景、職責／身份維度。社會關係不同維度間有所交織。（二）臺灣青少年對社會關係維度的評定表現出方向性。（三）六、八年級社會關係認知結構比四年級多出情感維度和姻親維度，八年級家族情境中還存在性別維度；在具體維度評定時，六年級則在許多方面表現出不同於四、八年級的特點。（四）無論是宏觀的社會關係概念結構還是具體的維度評定，女生均比男生表現出更明顯的情感取向。英文摘要：Research on Taiwanese adolescents' social relationships has mostly focused on the types, qualities, and states of the relationships as well as their correlation with factors such as adolescents' self-esteem, deviant behavior, and mental health. Relatively few studies have examined social relationships as cognitive objects to investigate their cognitive structure or dimensions. A few studies on cognition have been limited to family background or parent-child relationships and lacked attention to the whole social relationship network. How adolescents perceive their social relationships plays a crucial role in their development. Fourth, sixth, and eighth grade students are in transition periods of adolescence, during which their cognitive competence develops. Moreover, their peer relationships and friendships develop rapidly, and their relationship with their family changes. Additionally, the three grade levels span from primary school to junior high school, and the students' social relationships may differ depending on the environment. According to the interpretation-based view and embodied cognition view, memes, living environment, and growth experience play roles in the development of adolescents and affect their cognition of social relationships. Furthermore, adolescents' social roles change dynamically according to the situation. Social relationships are based on various dimensions, with any one social relationship having more than one dimension. Moreover, social relationships involve at least two parties, and their dimensions may be directional (e.g., self-first or other-first). Therefore, multibackground, multidimensional, and comprehensive research on the social relationships of individuals of various categories (e.g., different ages and sexes) and backgrounds is necessary. The aim of the present study was twofold: (1) to examine the cognitive structures and dimensions of social relationships among different backgrounds and the directionality of dimensions among Taiwanese adolescents and (2) to examine the cognitive characteristics of Taiwanese adolescents of different grade levels and sexes. Two studies were conducted. In the first, 35 students in fourth, sixth, and eighth grades were surveyed. They were asked to write as many relationship terms of address from family, school, and peer backgrounds as possible based on their own experience. This formed the source of the social relationship list of these Taiwanese adolescents. The lists contained 46 different terms of address under the family background, 55 under the school background, and 44 under the peer background. Subsequently, 321 students in grade 4 (9.78 ± 0.66 years, 54 boys and 43 girls), grade 6 (11.43 ± 0.55 years, 51 boys and 40 girls), and grade 8 (13.59 ± 0.61 years, 72 boys and 61 girls) participated in the formal study to categorize the relationship terms of address from each background. After completing the categorization , participants wrote the categorization criteria they used for each background. The number of categories and the criteria of each participant were recorded in SPSS 23.0 to obtain descriptive statistics. Next, the specific categorization criteria of each participant for each background were organized into a dissimilarity matrix. Then, the matrices were superimposed by grade and sex. Nine matrices were obtained for the grade levels, with each grade having three matrices (family, school, and peer backgrounds), and six matrices were obtained for the sexes, with both boys and girls having three matrices each (family, school, and peer backgrounds). These dissimilarity matrices were input into SPSS 23.0, and multidimensional scaling was employed for statistical analysis. Three evaluators labeled the dimensions in the conceptual structures according to the multidimensional scaling analysis results, categorization criteria of the participants, and labeling in previous studies. The kappa coefficients exceeded 0.971. The second study focused on father-child, mother-child, and grandparent-grandchild relationships for family background; teacher-student and classmate relationships for school background; and classmate relationships and friendships for peer background. Dimension scales such as obligation, reciprocation, obedience, and affection were selected based on relevant studies. On a 9-point Likert-type scale, 287 students in grade 4 (9.82 ± 0.68 years, 54 boys and 38 girls), grade 6 (11.42 ± 0.54 years, 49 boys and 35 girls), and grade 8 (13.53 ± 0.60 years, 61 boys and 50 girls) rated the dimension scales of the 6 relationships for both directions (self-first and other-first). Participants' assessments were input into SPSS 23.0. The following analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were conducted with repeated measures on the first two factors for each of the dependent measures (obligation, reciprocation, obedience, and affection) in family and peer relationships: 3 (types of family relationship) × 2 (directions of dimension scale) × 3 (grade levels of participants) × 2 (sexes of participants) and 2 (types of peer relationships) × 2 (directions of dimension scale) × 3 (grade levels of participants) × 2 (sexes of participant). Furthermore, 2 (directions of dimension scale) × 3 (grades of participants) × 2 (sexes of participants) ANOVAs were used with repeated measures on the first factor for each of the dependent measures in teacher-student relationships. The results were as follows: (1) Taiwanese adolescents' conceptual structure of social relationships exhibited both similarities and differences among family, school, and peer backgrounds. Affection was an obvious dimension in all three backgrounds. In addition, adult-child, generation (bei), gender, and in-law dimensions in the family background; adult-child and rank (identity) dimensions in the school background; and life context and rank (identity) dimensions in the peer background were revealed. (2) Taiwanese adolescents' assessments of the dimension scales (obligation, reciprocation, obedience, and affection) had the following characteristics: first, the assessment degrees of mother-child relationships were all the highest among family relationships, and those of friendships were all higher than those of classmate relationships. Second, the assessments of the dimension scales exhibited directionality. The obligation of elders (teachers) to younger generations (students) was higher than that of younger generations (students) to elders (teachers), and the obedience of younger generations (students) to elders (teachers) was higher than that of elders (teachers) to younger generations (students). The affection of teachers for students was higher than that of students for teachers, but no such directionality existed in family relationships. The reciprocation of participants toward peers was higher than that of peers toward participants. (3) Grade-level characteristics were different in the categorization task and the specific dimension scale assessment. For the conceptual structures of social relationships, the sixth and eighth graders exhibited larger affection dimensions in all three backgrounds as well as a larger in-law dimension in the family background compared with the fourth graders. The eighth graders also exhibited gender dimension in the family background. The eighth graders attached greater importance to affection in the categorization task, exhibiting a higher level of cognitive development. However, in the specific dimension assessment, their assessments of affection in family relationships and of obligation in teacher-student relationships were all lower than those of the fourth and sixth graders. In terms of the directionality of dimensions assessment, the sixth graders exhibited some differences with the fourth and eighth graders. The sixth graders' assessments of reciprocation in family relationships and assessment of obedience in teacher- student relationships exhibited more obvious directionality. For the fourth and eighth graders, assessments of reciprocation of friendships were higher than those of classmate relationships, whereas the difference was nonsignificant in the sixth grade. (4) Girls exhibited more obvious affective tropism than did boys in both macro conceptual structure and the specific dimension assessment. In terms of family background conceptual structure, girls exhibited adult-child, in-law, and affection dimensions, whereas boys exhibited adult-child, in-law, and gender dimensions. Girls' assessments of obligation, reciprocation, obedience, and affection in teacher-student relationships were all higher than those of boys. Moreover, girls' assessments of reciprocation and obedience in both family and teacher-student relationships exhibited more obvious directionality than those of boys. Furthermore, girls' assessments of obligation, reciprocation, and obedience in peer relationships exhibited more obvious directionality than those of boys. (5) Taiwanese adolescents did not cognize their social relationships and the dimensions in isolation-social relationship dimensions overlapped and were interwoven. The macro cognitive structure and the specific dimension assessment exhibited both commonalities and differences, as did the cognitive characteristics of social relationships from different backgrounds as well as those of Taiwanese adolescents of different grade levels and sexes. The results suggest that multibackground, multidimensional, and multilevel research on the cognition of social relationships is necessary. Furthermore, the results verify and enrich theoretical perspectives such as dynamic-contextualist metatheory, the convoy model, relational model theory, the embodied cognition view, and the interpretation-based view. This research also has crucial supplementary significance in the research field of Taiwanese adolescents' social relationships.起始頁-結束頁：489-518資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).00012篇名：心理師、輔導教師與同儕領導介入在女高中生飲食異常預防方案之應用並列篇名：Application of Psychologist-led, School Counselor-led, and Peer-led Eating Disorder Prevention Interventions in High School Girls作者：陳宇平(Yu-Ping Chen)關鍵字：女高中生;飲食異常;預防介入;同儕領導;high-school girls;eating disorders;preventive intervention;peer-led期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：探究心理師、輔導教師及同儕三種不同介入者，對女高中生進行飲食異常預防方案之成效及差異情形。本研究採準實驗設計並分兩階段進行，首先邀請三所高中參與本研究，以「飲食態度量表-26題版」（Eating Attitude Test-26, EAT-26）21分為切點，從三校兩學年度共1886位高一女生中，篩選出高危險群160位（8.5%），由其中招募到66人參與內含四單元、每單元1.5小時的「飲食異常介入方案」。研究者將此66位有意願參與方案者，分派入「心理師介入組」、「輔導教師介入組」與「同儕介入組」，總計11組實驗小團體，並招募對應控制組共78人，比較實驗組與控制組在EAT-26及身體意象量表之立即與三個月延續成效，與三組成效差異。相較於控制組，不論在立即與延續效果，「心理師介入組」在EAT-26及身體意象量表得分均達顯著差異；「輔導教師介入組」在身體意象量表分數達顯著差異，而「同儕介入組」則未呈現顯著差異；比較三組在身體意象量表之改變成效，「心理師介入組」顯著高於另外兩組，而在EAT-26之輔導成效三組無顯著差異。心理師介入在降低飲食異常危險因子及身體意象均具顯著成效；輔導教師介入可顯著改善青少女對纖體文化之執著；同儕介入則未呈現顯著成效，文末提出本研究之建議與限制。英文摘要：Most eating disorder intervention programs outside Taiwan are based on quasiexperimental designs. They use school classes or small groups as intervention units and compare short- and long-term effects. Intervention outcomes revealed that, compared with other groups, participants with cognitive dissonance exhibited significantly greater reductions in risk factors for eating disorders and bulimic symptoms (Stice et al., 2006). Although many intervention programs have claimed to be effective, those yielding more significant outcomes have had certain research design features, such as being specially designed for eating disorders, being interactive rather than directive, being multiunit rather than single unit, recruiting mainly female participants older than 15 years, and using interventions conducted by professional counselors (Stice et al., 2007). In Taiwan, the early prevention of eating disorders remains in its infancy, and few studies have focused on prevalence surveys, risk factors, related influencing factors, or sporadic case reports. Current survey results in Taiwan indicate that the prevalence of individuals at a high risk of eating disorders is between 8.6% and 17.5%, and the younger the individual, the higher the prevalence is, highlighting the importance of early prevention. Remarkably few studies have been conducted on interventions to prevent eating disorders in Taiwan; therefore, based on past research findings, the present study explored the effects of on-campus prevention programs for eating disorders. The aim of this study was twofold: (1) to test the effects of three different interveners (i.e., psychologists, school counselors, and peers) using the same intervention program to reduce the risk factors for eating disorders in high-school girls and (2) to compare the effectiveness of the three interventions. Three high schools were recruited to participate in the first stage. We selected groups at high risk of eating disorders among ninth-grade students by using the Eating Attitudes Test 26 (EAT-26). A total of 1886 high-school girls from the three schools were divided into 21 scores using the EAT-26, and 160 high-risk girls (8.5%) were selected. During the second stage, 66 at-risk female students agreed to participate in the experimental group and were assigned to either the psychologist-led group (PCG), school counselor-led group (SCG), or peer-led group (PEG); furthermore, 78 students were recruited for the control group. The experimental group participated in the Prevention Program for Eating Disorders (PPED), a well-tested eating disorder prevention program that involves four 90-minute group sessions. The program mainly allowed participants to criticize the value of ”skinny is beautiful,” establish concepts of correct nutrition and health, acquire skills to respond to pressure related to body image, and enhance their self-confidence. School counselors and peer leaders were required to attend a 6-hour training session to learn how to implement the program. To enable peer leaders to administer the program effectively, a systemic peer-led training program was conducted; thus, with the help of school counselors, experienced group members were able to lead a new group. The effectiveness of the program was evaluated using the EAT-26 and the Body-Image Ideas Questionnaire (BIQ). All participants were asked to complete the EAT-26 and BIQ at the end of the intervention and again at the 3-month follow-up. Compared with the controls, the PCG achieved significantly greater improvement in EAT-26 and BIQ scores for short- and long-term effects; the SCG achieved significantly greater improvement in only BIQ scores for immediate and continuous effects; and the PEG did not exhibit any significant differences in scores. Regarding the effects of the three groups on changes in BIQ scores, the PCG had a significantly greater effect than the other groups did, but no significant difference existed in the effects on changes in EAT-26 scores. Overall, the intervention of the psychologist can significantly reduce the risk factors of eating disorders and improve the positive body image, while the intervention of the school counselor is only effective in promoting a positive body image. The intervention effect of school counselors was not as beneficial as that of psychologists, and a possible reason for this was shared by one school counselor: ”…there are manuals to follow during the intervention process, but in education and training for professional development, there is not much knowledge about eating disorders and a lack of training on how to lead critical thinking, so more practical leadership experience is required to become proficient.” For the PEG intervention, the preventive effect could not be determined. The reason may be related to the younger peer leaders, less training time, fewer leaders in the group, and the special status of participants. Future implementations of the PPED should train older peer leaders, increase their training time, and enhance the training content, as previous research has suggested, by placing greater emphasis on role-playing leadership skills (Stice et al., 2009). This study proposes the following suggestions: initially, off-campus psychologists can provide 4-6 hours of training and supervision to school counselors. After training, school counselors must lead an intervention group to familiarize themselves with the PPED and recruit future PEG leaders. Then, the school can establish and continue to promote the PEG intervention to prevent eating disorders early on campus. Because peer leaders have no experience, this study suggests that groups not exceed six members and receive more than 8 hours of training and supervision. The number of leaders can be increased to three. If this works smoothly, school counselors will not need to invest excessive energy in the long term, and this model will effectively prevent eating disorders in young female students in the long term. In addition, this study differs from past intervention studies on the prevention of eating disorders. The participants not only comprised those who were dissatisfied with their body image but also those at high risk of eating disorders. Although this made the research difficult, it increased the ability to intervene for those in need and made exploring the effect of the program content on preventing eating disorders in young girls possible. This study had the following limitation: the three intervention groups spanned three schools and multiple semesters, and thus, the time of intervention, number of group members, and initial scores of group members may be different due to the above reasons; therefore, the conclusions of this study must be viewed with caution. In summary, the results indicated that with proper planning, schools at all levels can promote various prevention programs for physical and mental health, even on sensitive topics such as eating disorders. Such programs will be highly beneficial for students in terms of facilitating early prevention. Moreover, with appropriate prevention programs and training, school counselors will not only be a critical resource for preventive on-campus interventions but also key promoters of establishing peer-led groups; thus, early preventive interventions can be made sustainable. Such a prevention model based on the advantages of campuses is extremely helpful for harnessing the energy of the school system to promote student health. However, because schools in Taiwan place excessive emphasis on academic performance, the arrangement of long-term activities that fit in with schools' routine work is difficult. Therefore, to continually promote early interventions for young people in schools, a national education policy must be fully planned and implemented.起始頁-結束頁：519-543資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).00023篇名：臺灣中小學輔導人員施為量表發展與效化研究並列篇名：Validation of an Agency Scale for Elementary and Secondary School Counselors作者：李佩珊(Pei-Shan Lee);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong)關鍵字：施為;施為能力;施為行動;學校輔導;驗證性因素分析;agency;agency ability;agency behavior;school counseling;confirmatory factor analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：由於具有獨特性、創新性、價值性及應用性以檢驗中小學輔導人員施為能力與行動之中文版評量工具極為少見，因此本研究目的在發展與效化「施為能力量表」（School Counselor's Agent Ability Scale，簡稱「施為能力量表」或SCA-A）與「施為行動力量表」（School Counselor's Agent Behavior Scale，簡稱「施為行動量表」或SCA-B）兩份量表的信效度。以社會認知取向為本研究工具發展之理論基礎，發展19題「施為能力量表」及40題「施為行動力量表」為研究工具初版以進行預試。此階段以立意抽樣，選取200位中小學輔導人員填答兩份量表，以項目分析及探索性因素分析檢驗本量表之鑑別度及建構效度，形成正式研究工具「施為能力量表」17題，「施為行動力量表」37題。在正式施測階段以立意及分層抽測取樣，選取620位中小學輔導人員進行驗證性因素分析。本研究發現，「施為能力量表」共萃取出自我效能、任務焦點及冒險精神等三個因素，潛在變項的平均變異數萃取量（AVE）為 .46∼.74，信度為 .90；「施為行動力量表」共萃取出倡議行動、施為參與、團隊合作、創意行為、自發投入等五個因素，潛在變項的平均變異數萃取量（AVE）為 .41∼.62，信度為 .94，獲知兩份量表均具有良好的信度與效度，未來可以進一步應用於評估中小學輔導人員之施為能力、行動及相關研究。英文摘要：Innovative assessment systems for elementary and secondary school counselors' agency ability and agency behavior are rare. Therefore, a crucial emerging task is the development of a high-quality research tool for assessing school counselors' agency ability and agency behavior. ”Agency” refers to an individual's capacity for rational choice in the face of external pressures such as social structures, norms, and order. It implies that an individual has a considerable degree of power and the ability to change his or her surroundings (Edwards, 2005; Lipponen & Kumpulainen, 2011). Agency is a central element of the sense of hope, and agents not only recognize that the future will be better than the present but also see themselves as a critical force for achieving it (Billett & Pavlova, 2005). Numerous studies on education and learning have explored the concept of agency as a relevant factor in promoting one's career and lifelong learning; they have indicated that teachers' agency not only promotes student learning but also enhances teachers' professional development. Children and adolescents may experience various mental health problems in schools, communities, and their families, which might be linked to increased work responsibility and challenges for school counselors. School counselors must equally advocate for and access opportunities for students, help all students and their families overcome various forms of oppression and injustice, and act as change agents in the school setting. This study aimed to develop and validate an agency scale for elementary and secondary school counselors. The theoretical basis adopted by this study was social cognitive theory (SCT). Bandura (2001) proposed reciprocal determinism for subjective consciousness, which considers individual factors (P), behavioral factors (B), and environmental factors (E) to be interactive causal relationships. This study was derived from research on professional agency in the field of education; we modeled elementary and secondary school counselors' agency in two major components, namely agency ability (P) and agency behavior (B), which are personal and behavioral factors of SCT. With reference to the literature, this study developed 19 items for a school counselor's agency ability (SCA-A) scale and 40 items for an SCA behavior (SCA-B) scale. This study had two stages: (1) in the pilot stage, purposive sampling selection was employed to recruit 200 participants to complete the two scales for an examination of their reliability and validity. We applied item analysis and exploratory factor analysis to determine the construct validity of the two instruments. After clarification and modification, formal research tools were formed, with 17 items in the SCA-A scale and 37 in the SCA-B scale. In the formal stage, we conducted stratified, purposively sampling selection to recruit a total of 620 school counselors to complete the formal survey. We further used confirmatory factor analysis to examine the research tools' validity. Three factors were extracted from the SCA-A scale: general self-efficacy (eight items), promotion focus (six items), and adventurous spirit (three items). The average variance extracted (AVE) was .46- .74, Cronbach's α was .84-.90, and Cronbach's α for the full scale was .90. Five factors were extracted from the SCA-B scale: advocacy action (12 items), agent engagement (8 items), teamwork (6 items), creative behavior (6 items), and organizational citizenship behavior (5 items). The AVE was .41- .62, Cronbach's α was .78- .92, and Cronbach's α for the full scale was .94. Both scales had good composite reliability, construct validity, and discrimination validity. They provided empirical evidence for promoting the quality of assessments on elementary and secondary school counselors' agency ability and behaviors. The following essential findings provide new insights: First, both the SCA-A and SCA-B scales generally worked well; the response rate was high, most participants could understand the items, the scales exhibited adequate internal consistency, and evidence of convergent and discriminate validity was promising. This study provides a new lens on both Bandura's (2011) self-efficacy theory and Alkire's (2005) consideration of agent ability has benefit to organize a self-multiple model. In the past, the self-efficacy of school counselors in Taiwan has included self-awareness, helping skills, counseling experience, and communication effectiveness, focusing on counselors for a single educational level; by contrast, we found that the General Self-efficacy Scales can be expanded to different educational levels' school counselors. Second, DeJong and DeGoede (2015) found that ”promotion-focused” helpers can significantly reduce people's crises compared with ”protection-focused” helpers. By contrast, we found that three items formed a new ”risk-taking” factor extracted from the original ”promotion-focused” factor. This indicates that counselors being active does not necessarily mean taking risks, which provides a new lens on the concept of ”prudence and seriousness” proposed in indigenous psychological research in Chinese societies. Third, agency behaviors are objective, and quantitative indicators indicate a counselor's actions with participation by individual or collective agency. The agency behaviors of elementary and secondary school counselors encompass active actions for themselves, for the clients they serve, and for other members of the group, and these actions include advocacy actions, agent engagement, creative actions, teamwork, and spontaneous engagement. This structure of agency behavior is similar to that of Blustein et al. (2019). In addition, this study validated the concept of teamwork in our culture, the organizational citizenship behaviors explored by organizational behavior scholars, and the initiatives proposed by academic organizations related to helping others, indicating that elementary and secondary school counselors can demonstrate agency behavior in multiple ways. In sum, the SCA-B scale is more suitable than a single factor is for use in reviewing the work of elementary and secondary school counselors in terms of their agency behavior. We suggest that future studies explore relevant factors for elementary and secondary school counselors as well as research tools for measuring both in-service and preservice educational development training to enhance their professional counseling and guidance self-efficiency. Because school counselors have multiple roles and functions, they face many pressures, struggles, and challenges from multiple sectors every day. Therefore, well-educated and competent school counselors must foster sufficient agency ability and behaviors, such as personal characteristics, values, organizational atmosphere, supervisor support, and peer collaboration. This study suggests that a model of school counselor agency can be established along with the predictive paths and effects of various variables in the near future. Moreover, helpers have different stages of career development, such as beginner, postgraduate, novice professional, and experienced professional. Their agency abilities and behaviors as well as career development differ, and therefore, individual differences must be considered when designing a suitable agency curriculum for them. Finally, some limitations of the present study should be considered. First, the study scales were based on self-reported items, which might increase the possibility of the social desirability effect (Rowley et al., 2007). Therefore, future studies should apply methods other than a self-report questionnaire, such as peer ratings regarding counselors' agency ability and behavior. Second, this study should provide additional evidence for the potential usefulness of applying the Chinese versions of the SCA-A and SCA-B scales to elementary and secondary school counselors in Asian countries for enrich global database.起始頁-結束頁：545-570資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).00034篇名：國中生學業情緒、情境興趣及學習涉入的交互關係並列篇名：Study on Reciprocal Relations among Academic Emotions, Situational Interest, and Learning Engagement作者：黃筠婷(Yun-Ting Huang);程炳林(Biing-Lin Cherng)關鍵字：交互效果;情境興趣;學業情緒;學習涉入;縱貫研究;reciprocal relation;situational interest;academic emotions;learning engagement;longitudinal study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究之目的在分析學業情緒、情境興趣與學習涉入之間的交互關係。為達研究目的，本研究採縱貫研究，抽取600名（男生302人）七、八年級學生為研究樣本，進行4次的測量，所蒐集的四波觀察資料以結構方程模式進行分析。研究發現如下：本研究建構之學業情緒、情境興趣與學習涉入交互效果模式受到觀察資料的支持，在愉悅模式上，學生的愉悅情緒、情境興趣與學習涉入具有正向交互效果關係，即學生第一次施測時的愉悅情緒及情境興趣可以提高其第二次施測時的學習涉入，而學生第二次施測時的學習涉入可以正向預測學生第三次施測時的愉悅情緒及情境興趣，第三次施測時的愉悅情緒及情境興趣可以提高其第四次施測的學習涉入；在無趣模式上，無趣情緒則與學習涉入具有負向交互效果關係，即學生第一次施測時的無趣興趣可以降低其第二次施測時的學習涉入，而學生第二次施測時的學習涉入可以負向預測學生第三次施測時的無趣情緒。本研究根據研究結果提出建議，以提供國中教學現場及未來研究之參考。英文摘要：In educational psychology research, researchers have highlighted problems in students' learning. In fact, many researchers have suggested that students' learning processes are more crucial than their learning outcomes are (Linnenbrink & Pintrich, 2003; Schraw et al., 2001). However, little attention has been paid to students' learning activities and processes; therefore, they formed the focus of the present study. Educational psychology researchers have used learning engagement to describe behaviors in students' learning processes (Putwain et al., 2019). Learning engagement has been defined as the degree to which students participate and engage in learning activities, and it is a critical behavior in active learning. Several studies have demonstrated that learning engagement is closely related to learning motivation, situational interest, and academic emotions (Ainley & Ainley, 2011; Pekrun & Linnenbrink-Garcia, 2012). To investigate academic emotions, researchers in educational psychology have mostly used academic emotion theory (Pekrun, 2006). On the basis of the influence of academic emotion processes, Pekrun (2006) proposed the cognitive-motivational model, which posits that academic emotions influence learners' cognition, motivation, and engagement, thereby influencing their learning achievement. Moreover, in return, learners' learning achievement subsequently influenced their motivation, engagement, and academic emotions, and their motivation and engagement influenced their academic emotions. Therefore, reciprocal relations exist between academic emotions and learning engagement, yet few studies have examined them. Furthermore, a close relationship exists between situational interest and students' learning engagement (Reschly et al., 2008). Situational interest is defined as temporary interest that arises spontaneously due to environmental factors (Hidi & Harackiewicz, 2000; Renninger & Hidi, 2002). Reeve and Tseng (2011) defined student engagement as a four-dimensional concept consisting of behavioral, emotional, cognitive, and agentic aspects. Much research has found that situational interest influences students' learning engagement (Lipstein & Renninger, 2006; Renninger & Shumer, 2002; Silvia, 2006). Some researchers found that situational interest enhanced students' learning engagement, which in turn influenced their situational interest (Ainley & Ainley, 2011). However, relevant studies have only used cross-sectional analyses; limited studies have examined these reciprocal relations. Therefore, the present study proposed a reciprocal relationship between situational interest and learning engagement. According to theoretical and empirical research, the present study constructed an academic emotion, situational interest, and learning engagement reciprocal effect model, which focused on the reciprocal relations between academic emotions (enjoyment and boredom) and learning engagement, situational interest, and learning engagement. The present study employed a longitudinal design to examine the reciprocal relations between these variables. Data collected from a longitudinal study with seventh-and eighth-grade junior high school students (N = 643; 302 boys) from 6 schools (25 classes) in Tainan City, Taiwan, were examined. Data collection was conducted in four waves. Participants were asked to complete the academic emotions scale (enjoyment and boredom), situational interest scale, and learning engagement scale. All scales referred to the students' Chinese classes. Attrition analyses revealed no significant differences in T_1 enjoyment and boredom between partially missing (N = 43) and complete samples; a significant difference existed in T_1 situational interest between partially missing and complete samples, but the effect size was small (η^2 = .01). Therefore, we used 600 complete samples in the subsequent analysis. Moreover, we analyzed the sex and grade-level differences of partially missing samples. The results indicated no significant differences between boys and girls in seventh and eighth grade among the partially missing samples. Finally, the present study used a class unit for sampling (nested data), which may have entailed clustering effects. According to Meuleman and Billie (2009), a group sample size of 40 in the between-level factor structure is sufficient. Only 25 classes were involved the present study; therefore, we standardized all variables by using a class as a unit to prevent class clustering effects (Dowding & Haufe, 2018). The present study applied structural equation modeling to analyze the data by using LISREL 8.80 and SPSS for Windows 23.0. To assess the model fit, we used well-established indices such as root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) ＜ .10, standardized root mean residual (SRMR) ＜ .05, Tucker-Lewis index (TLI), and comparative fit index (CFI) ＞ .95 in addition to chi-square test statistics. Data were analyzed in two steps. After a preliminary statistical analysis, we first examined descriptive statistics, sex and grade differences, and measurement invariance. Second, we examined the model fit by using two strategies: First, the reciprocal relations models were tested competitively against two unidirectional models. If the reciprocal model exhibited a better fit with the data, then the model of the present study was supported. Second, we examined the model fit and effects of all variables. Before analyzing the model, we first analyzed sex and grade differences. No significant differences existed between boys and girls in T_2 learning engagement, T_3 enjoyment, or T_4 learning engagement. However, significant differences existed between boys and girls in T_1 enjoyment, boredom, and situational interest and in T_3 boredom and situational interest, but the effect size was small (η^2 = .01 - .02). Moreover, no significant differences existed between the seventh and eighth grades for all variables. Hence, we did not use sex as a control variable. Second, we tested measurement invariance, which included configural, metric (weak factorial), scalar (strong factorial), and covariance. The results indicated that the boredom scale had strong measurement invariance, Δχ^2 (dfs= 1-5, N = 600) = 0.40-5.30, p ＞ .05, and the enjoyment, situational interest, and learning engagement scales had weak measurement invariance, Δχ^2 (dfs = 4-20, N = 600) = 2.21-23.62, p ＞ .05. According to Putnick and Bornstein (2016), if measurement scales indicate invariance for all variables over time, then they are suitable for longitudinal studies. First, the results of the present study indicated that the academic emotions, situational interest, and learning engagement reciprocal effect model had an excellent fit with the data χ_s^2 (242, N = 600) = 1401.06, 1196.29, p ＜ .05; RMSEAs = .093, .083; SRMRs = .047, .041; TLIs = .93, .97; CFIs = .98, .97. Second, the data analyses revealed reciprocal relations between enjoyment and learning engagement. Students' T_1 enjoyment enhanced their T_2 learning engagement. In turn, students' T_2 learning engagement positively predicted their T_3 enjoyment, and students' T_3 enjoyment enhanced their T_4 learning engagement. Third, reciprocal relations existed between boredom and learning engagement. Students' T_1 boredom reduced their T_2 learning engagement; in turn, students' T_2 learning engagement negatively predicted their T_3 boredom, and students' T_3 boredom reduced their T_4 learning engagement. Fourth, the data analyses revealed reciprocal relations between situational interest and learning engagement. Students' T_1 situational interest enhanced their T_2 learning engagement; in turn, students' T_2 learning engagement positively predicted their T_3 situational interest, and students' T_3 situational interest enhanced their T_4 learning engagement. To conclude, the present study demonstrated reciprocal relations between enjoyment/boredom and learning engagement as well as between situational interest and learning engagement. These findings expand the evidence base for the cognitive-motivational model and further understanding of the relationships among academic emotions, situational interest, and learning engagement.起始頁-結束頁：571-593資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).00045篇名：情緒勞務策略組型及其與相關因素之關係：質、量觀點的個人中心分析並列篇名：Emotional Labor Strategy Profiles and Theirs Relationship with Related Factors: From the Perspectives of the Quality/Quantity作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang)關鍵字：工作倦怠;角色認同;個人中心分析;情緒勞務策略組型;組織認同;job burnout;role identification;person-oriented analysis;emotional labor strategy profiles;organizational identification期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：過去情緒勞務策略研究多採變項中心，甚少採個人中心，然有學者認為採個人中心分析能更貼近真實狀況，並依情緒勞務策略組型的適應性提出實務建議，具較佳生態效度與實務價值，以補變項中心研究不足。其次，學者主張與過去研究顯示個人中心分析可以質、量觀點分類與比較組型，能更有意義、系統的了解不同組型之差異，有助進一步釐清組型差異的關鍵。故本研究採個人中心分析，並以質（基於情緒勞務策略為多向度，有適應性與不適應性情緒勞務策略品質的考量）、量（基於情緒勞務策略理論、資源保存理論）觀點，抽取970名台灣國中教師（男生347人，女生623人）為樣本，採用情緒勞務策略、教師工作認同、教師工作情緒、工作滿意度、工作倦怠量表，並進行集群分析、區別分析、多變量變異數分析，來探討教師情緒勞務策略組型及其與組織認同、角色認同、工作情緒、工作滿意度、工作倦怠之關係。研究結果顯示：（1）情緒勞務策略組型有高量、低量、高質、低質四種組型；（2）組織、角色認同能預測情緒勞務策略組型；（3）整體而言，情緒勞務策略組型在工作情緒、工作滿意度、工作倦怠的差異顯示：高質組最適應性；低質組最不適應性；低量、高量組適應性介於高質、低質組之間，支持「質」的觀點，即以質（重視情緒勞務策略組型品質）較量（重視情緒勞務策略組型的量）之觀點能解釋情緒勞務策略組型在工作情緒、工作滿意度、工作倦怠的適應情形。本研究首度採個人中心分析國內教師情緒勞務策略組型及其與相關變項之關係，學術研究上，不僅突破過去變項中心分析的限制，並依結果提供實務建議：教師需留意情緒勞務策略組型品質，更勝情緒勞務策略組型的量，增加適應性情緒勞務策略的同時，亦應減少不適應性情緒勞務策略，藉此提升工作正向情緒、工作滿意度，並降低負向情緒、工作倦怠。其次，教育單位可透過課程，引導教師重視情緒勞務策略組型的品質，及如何使用高品質情緒勞務策略組型，以適應工作。英文摘要：Most studies on emotional labor strategies have adopted a variable-centered analysis rather than a person-oriented analysis. However, some scholars (Chang et al., 2018; Cossette & Hess, 2015; Hulsheger & Schewe, 2011) have contended that exploring emotional labor strategy profiles and their adaptability in real situations by using a person-oriented analysis, which can compensate for deficiencies of variable-centered analysis, has more ecological validity and practical value. Furthermore, some scholars (Chang, 2018; Vansteenkiste et al., 2009; Wang & Hanges, 2011) have demonstrated that rather than a variable-oriented analysis emphasizing the quality or quantity of variables, a person-oriented analysis stresses the quality and quantity of profiles by classifying and comparing profiles from the perspectives of quality and quantity, which can not only determine differences among profiles more meaningfully and systematically but also clarify the key reasons for differences in profiles more distinctly. Moreover, teachers perform emotional labor (Hochschild, 1983; Yin, 2015), and thus, understanding their emotional labor strategies is crucial. Therefore, this study adopted a person-oriented analysis to analyze teachers' emotional labor strategy profiles from the perspective of quality and quantity and their relationships with antecedent variables (organizational identification and role identification) and outcome variables (job emotions, job satisfaction, and job burnout). In accordance with scholars who have used person-oriented analyses (Marsh et al., 2009; Vansteenkiste et al., 2009; Wang & Hanges, 2011), this study inferred that teachers' emotional labor strategy profiles can be classified into four different quality/ quantity profiles: high maladaptive (surface acting) and high adaptive (deep acting/expression of naturally felt emotions) emotional labor strategies belong to the high-quantity group (high surface acting/high deep acting/high expression of naturally felt emotions); low maladaptive (surface acting) and low adaptive (deep acting/expression of naturally felt emotions) emotional labor strategies belong to the low-quantity group (low surface acting/low deep acting/low expression of naturally felt emotions); low maladaptive (surface acting) and high adaptive (deep acting/expression of naturally felt emotions) emotional labor strategies belong to the good-quality group (low surface acting/high deep acting/high expression of naturally felt emotions); and high maladaptive (surface acting) and low adaptive (deep acting/expression of naturally felt emotions) emotional labor strategies belong to the poor-quality group (high surface acting/low deep acting/low expression of naturally felt emotions). Concerning the relationships of emotional labor strategy profiles with organizational and role identification, on the basis of social identity theory (Ashforth & Mael, 1989) and past studies (Demir, 2015; Newman et al., 2016; Uzun, 2018), this study deduced that the organizational identification emphasized in Western society might predict emotional labor strategy profiles. Grounded in domestic Taiwanese research (Hsu & Huang, 2009; Hwang, 2004; Yen & Hwang, 2011) and relevant studies (Brotheridge & Lee, 2002; Hou et al., 2015; Lin & Shao, 2009), this study inferred that the role identification stressed in Eastern culture also predicts emotional labor strategy profiles. Accordingly, organizational and role identification might predict emotional labor strategy profiles. This study investigated the differences in emotional labor strategy profiles on job emotions, job satisfaction, and job burnout from the perspectives of quality and quantity. From the perspective of quantity, based on emotional labor strategy theory (Hochschild, 1983; Diefendorff et al., 2005) and conservation of resources theory (Hobfoll, 1989), emotional labor strategies are workers' emotional regulation strategies for following emotional expression rules at work; thus, the higher the quantity of emotional labor strategies adopted, the more psychological effort is spent on emotional regulation and the more inner resources are lost, which leads to work maladaptation. Specifically, the higher the quantity of emotional labor strategy profiles adopted, the higher the degree of work maladaptation. Accordingly, the adaptive variables (positive emotions and job satisfaction) of the good-quality group might be greater than those of the high-quantity group; those of the poor-quality group might be smaller than those of the low-quantity group; those of the good-quality group might be equal to those of the poor-quality group; those of the good-quality group might be smaller than those of the low-quantity group; those of the poor-quality group might be greater than those of the high-quantity group; and those of the good-quality group might be smaller than those of the low-quantity group. Differences in emotional labor strategy profiles on maladaptive variables (negative emotions and job burnout) produced results that were the direct opposite of the aforementioned results. From the perspective of quality, grounded in the multiple dimensions of emotional labor strategies (Hochschild, 1983; Diefendorff et al., 2005), surface acting is maladaptive (poor quality), and deep acting and expression of naturally felt emotions are adaptive (good quality); thus, adaptive deep acting and expression of naturally felt emotions increase the adaptation of the profiles, whereas surface acting reduces their adaptation. Accordingly, the adaptive variables (positive emotions and job satisfaction) of the good-quality group might be greater than those of the high-quantity group; those of the poor-quality group might be smaller than those of the low-quantity group; those of the high-quantity group might be equal to those of the low-quantity group; those of the good-quality group might be greater than those of the poor-quality group; those of the good-quality group might be greater than those of the low-quantity group; and those of the poor-quality group might be smaller than those of the high-quantity group. Differences in emotional labor strategy profiles on maladaptive variables (negative emotions and job burnout) produced results that were the direct opposite of the aforementioned results. This study explored whether the quality or quantity perspective better explains the difference in emotional labor strategy profiles on job emotions, job satisfaction, and job burnout. In sum, this study adopted a person-oriented analysis from the perspectives of quality (based on multidimensional emotional labor strategies, namely adaptive and maladaptive) and quantity (based on emotional labor strategy theory and conservation of resources theory) to explore teachers' emotional labor strategy profiles and their relationship with organizational identification, role identification, job emotions, job satisfaction, and job burnout. The participants were 970 Taiwanese junior high school teachers (347 men and 623 women). An emotional labor strategy scale, teacher job identification scale, teacher job emotions scale, job satisfaction scale, and job burnout scale were adopted; cluster analyses, discriminant analyses, and analyses of variance were performed. The following results were obtained: (a) cluster analyses of teachers' emotional labor strategy profiles revealed four profiles: a high-quantity group, a low-quantity group, a good-quality group, and a poor-quality group; (b) organizational identification and role identification predicted emotional labor strategy profiles; and (c) generally, the difference in emotional labor strategy profiles on job emotions, job satisfaction, and job burnout demonstrated that the good-quality group was the most adaptive, the poor-quality group was the most maladaptive, and the adaptation of the high- and low-quantity groups was between that of the good- and poor-quality groups. The results supported the perspective of quality; specifically, the emphasis of quality but not the quantity of emotional labor strategy profiles could better explain the difference in emotional labor strategy profiles on job emotions, job satisfaction, and job burnout. The study first adopted a person-oriented analysis from the perspectives of quality and quantity to explore teachers' emotional labor strategy profiles and their relationship with related factors, which not only addressed the limits of past studies that adopted variable-centered analyses but also provided practical suggestions. For example, teachers should pay attention to the quality rather than quantity of such profiles by upgrading their adaptive emotional labor strategies and reducing maladaptive emotional labor strategies simultaneously to promote positive emotions and job satisfaction as well as reduce negative emotions and job burnout. Furthermore, educational authorities can guide teachers in using good-quality emotional labor strategy profiles to adapt to work by developing teacher training courses.起始頁-結束頁：595-617資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).00056篇名：婚姻關係的信任修復與重建並列篇名：Repairing and Rebuilding Trust in Marriage作者：曾秀雲(Hsiu-Yun Tseng);謝文宜(Wen-Yi Shieh)關鍵字：信任修復;信任重建;婚姻關係;親密信任;trust rebuilding;trust repair;marital relationships;trust in intimate relationships期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：外遇背叛是一種創傷的體驗。本研究想要瞭解華人女性留在婚姻關係中如何進行親密信任修復與重建，不同世代女性經歷性別政策的變化，性別結構的弱勢位置是否呈現世代差異。本研究設計採立意取樣，兼採滾雪球的方式，針對8位（3位60歲世代，5位40歲世代），歷經先生外遇，但仍然選擇繼續維持關係，且經歷親密信任修復與重建的太太進行半結構式深入訪談。首先，利用尺度技術邀請受訪者對伴侶、對自己、對關係進行信任評分，並於訪談時討論外遇前、外遇時及目前信任分數的變化。緊接著，嘗試從重新選擇與評估婚姻的承諾，強調以日常生活實踐付諸具體的行動重新磨合，創造親密信任修復與重建的契機，以及女性主體的世代差異4個部分進行討論。本研究從鉅觀社會規範與微觀個人資源的相對權力關係，提出3點觀察：1.理解先生改變的意願，有助於太太評估親密信任重建的意願。面對先生外遇的重新選擇與評估，太太不單只是個人的偏好與利益風險評估，亦考量關係與家族最大利益；2.親密信任修復與重建的意願與行為，不只是兩個人。重要的是，夫妻雙方必須以實際行動重新磨合，落實於日常生活中自我增能，改善自己與婚姻關係；3.熟齡女性歷經親密信任修復與重建經驗看見自我信任，而年輕世代伴隨著女性意識的覺醒，在情感表達與實踐性親密修復較為積極。英文摘要：Being betrayed by a spouse having an affair is a traumatic experience. Some people choose to divorce, whereas some choose to stay in the marriage. For those who choose to stay, rebuilding trust becomes a critical challenge to overcome. When the trust in intimate relationships breaks down, relationships can be greatly damaged. Therefore, the ability to repair and rebuild trust is essential in couple relationships. This research aimed to explore the strategies that Han Chinese women in Taiwan use to repair and rebuild trust in their marriage after their husbands have affairs. The researchers were also interested in the existence of any cohort differences among the participants, especially after changes in the Volume of Kinship of the civil law that brings more gender equality in Taiwan like married women do not need to change her last name to her husband's. Using purposive sampling and snowballing methods, eight female participants were recruited. Three were in their sixties and five were in their forties. They all experienced their husbands having an affair and chose to stay in their marriages. In addition, they underwent the challenge of rebuilding trust in their marriages. The researchers first used three scaling questions that asked participants to rate their trust in their spouse, trust in themselves, and trust in their relationship at three different timepoints (before the affair, after the affair, and at present). The researchers discussed changes in the scores with participants during the interviews. Semistructured in-depth interviews were conducted to understand how participants faced the crisis of losing trust, reexamined their marriage, and reevaluated their commitment to their spouse and marriage, as well as what actions they took. Friedman's two-way analysis of variance by ranks was used to analyze the scores of the three scaling questions. The results revealed that the affairs seriously threatened the participants' trust in their spouses and relationships. Regarding trust in themselves, no evident change occurred in scores before the affair, after the affair, and at present. During the interviews, the researchers attempted to further clarify four aspects: (1) reevaluating marital commitment; (2) taking specific actions to rebuild the marriage; (3) creating opportunities to repair and rebuild intimate trust; and (4) examining cohort differences in female subjectivity in a patriarchal society. Regarding the reevaluation of marital commitment, the researchers first examined how the participants evaluated the costs and benefits of staying in or leaving the marriage, and their decision to stay was further investigated. One major reason was the wife's understanding of the affair and the husband's regretful attitude and willingness to return to the marriage. Another major reason was the wife's thoughts on marriage after the affair, such as (1) being unwilling to let go of her marriage and/or being unable to accept divorce; (2) returning to the original intention behind marrying her husband; (3) staying married for their children and family members; and (4) wishing for a good ending, which reflects the Chinese value of believing that harmony in a family brings success in all areas of life. Regarding specific actions to rebuild the marriage, the first was the husband's changes after the affair, such as (1) being willing to admit his mistakes and promising not to hide things or keep secrets from the wife; (2) exhibiting a sincere apologetic attitude and compensational behaviors such as additional participation in housework, expressions of love toward the wife, and spending more time with the family; (3) stopping the affair; and (4) actively changing his behaviors to demonstrate commitment to the marriage, such as coming home on time and calling home when there is any change in his schedule. Regarding the wives' changes after the affair, at the personal level they seemed to (1) choose to accept and express their own emotions; (2) exhibit more self-acceptance and self-acknowledgment; and (3) trust themselves again. At the relational level, they would (1) cease or avoid damaging attacks and blame toward their husband; (2) share their feelings more freely and treat their husband with kindness and tolerance; and (3) actively choose to trust their husband again. At the social level, they might (1) seek support from family and friends; (2) seek professional help; and (3) expand their social networks to distract themselves and gain resources. Regarding the creation of opportunities to repair and rebuild intimate trust, the couples (1) changed their original negative communication and interaction patterns; (2) expressed appreciation and thankfulness toward each other; (3) reframed what happened and found new meaning in the affair; and (4) chose to forgive and recommit to each other. Regarding cohort differences in female subjectivity in a patriarchal society, all participants expressed the importance of acknowledging and valuing their female subjectivity. They also emphasized the value of self-acceptance, self-acknowledgment, and self-empowerment. However, differences still existed between the older and younger generations. For the three participants from the older generation, their husbands had affairs that each lasted more than 10 years. Two participants actually signed divorce papers, but because their husbands did not agree they remained in the marriage. Both had careers and earned more than their husbands did, but because of the cultural value of being a faithful wife and mother and belief in not showing family scandal in public, they chose to save their family's face and remain in the marriage. Not much power equality existed in these three marriages. However, because the women's husbands were willing to return to the marriage and repair the relationships, the wives chose to exhibit acceptance, forgiveness, and tolerance toward their husbands, and they were able to rebuild trust in their marriage. The younger generation, because of their superior gender awareness, seemed to be more proactive in expressing their feelings and opinions. Among the five younger participants, three chose to get divorced after discovering the affair. Two of them later remarried the same man, and one was currently living with her ex-husband but had not registered to remarry. In regaining sexual intimacy after the affairs, the older participants seemed more passive and conservative; by contrast, the younger participants exhibited more interest in regaining sexual intimacy. Finally, the researchers proposed three suggestions for helping professionals: (1) when helping clients clarify the reasons for leaving or remaining in a marriage, professionals must help them not only consider personal costs and benefits but also examine the situation from the perspectives of family and culture; (2) regardless of whether a couple chooses to divorce or rebuild their marriage, professionals can help betrayed partners shift their focus from the betrayers to themselves. Rebuilding one's self-trust and understanding one's value and resources can help a betrayed individual to gain courage and power, which are helpful for communicating with a partner to rebuild trust in each other; (3) when helping couples rebuild their marriage after an affair, the present researchers believe that discussing sexual intimacy is beneficial in later stages. Taking cohort differences into consideration, helping couples talk about their needs, expectations, hesitation, and resistance in sexual intimacy can be helpful for rebuilding their marriages.起始頁-結束頁：619-642資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).00067篇名：婚姻適應、伴侶溝通、社會支持與父親產後憂鬱傾向之關係並列篇名：Relationships Amorg Marital Adjustment, Communication Patterns, Social Support, and Paternal Postpartum Depression作者：楊舒涵(Shu-Han Yang);劉彥君(Yen-Chun Liu);陳燕諭(Yen-Yu Chen)關鍵字：溝通模式;婚姻適應;父親產後憂鬱;社會支持;communication patterns;marital adjustment;paternal postpartum depression;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：在男性轉變為父親的過程中，承受的心理壓力與面對社會角色轉換的適應問題並不亞於母親，孩子出生後也可能出現產後憂鬱的風險，但父親在配偶生產前後此段期間的心理健康在臺灣較少成為研究的關注焦點。本研究的目的在探討婚姻適應、伴侶溝通模式、產後社會支持與臺灣父親產後憂鬱傾向的關聯，並檢視憂鬱傾向組及非憂鬱傾向組的父親在上述各方面之差異。258位配偶為初產的父親在產後1至6個月參與本研究，填寫婚姻適應、伴侶溝通模式、產後社會支持及憂鬱情緒等量表。以愛丁堡產後憂鬱症量表（Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale, EPDS）≧10分為切截點，20.16%的臺灣父親在孩子出生後有憂鬱傾向；有憂鬱傾向的父親在婚姻適應上較差，與配偶的溝通模式中「相互建設」的互動方式較少，「要求／退縮」、「互相逃避」等負向溝通模式較多；但是有憂鬱傾向的父親也知覺到較多的產後社會支持。另外，父親在產後知覺到的溝通模式在父親產後婚姻適應與產後憂鬱關聯中具有部分中介效果。臺灣父親產後憂鬱的現象需要更多的關注，婚姻關係不良及負向溝通模式為危險因子，然而社會支持對臺灣父親產後憂鬱的影響，則需更多相關研究來進一步釐清其關係。英文摘要：In the transition to fatherhood, fathers experience the same psychological stress as do mothers and require similar adaptation to their new social role. They are also at risk of postpartum depression; however, in Taiwan, new fathers' stress and emotions have received less focus from researchers. The prevalence rate of paternal postpartum depression has varied from 8.4% to 10.4% among studies (Cameron et al., 2016; Paulson & Bazemore, 2010). Compared with the 5% prevalence rate of depression in the general population of male adults, the risk of depression in the first year after a man becomes a father is approximately double or higher (Cameron et al., 2016; Madsen & Juhl, 2007; Paulson & Bazemore, 2010). Paternal postpartum depression not only negatively affects the father but also the infant's cognition, emotional and behavioral development, and future mental health and parenting behaviors (Epifanio et al., 2015; Melrose, 2010; Wilson & Durbin, 2010). Furthermore, paternal postpartum depression can have a negative impact on marital satisfaction as well as increase the risk of the partner suffering postpartum depression (Don & Mickelson, 2012; Paulson & Bazemore, 2010). From a systemic family perspective, the birth of a child is a major change in the family system. The subsystems of the couple, family of origin, family-in-law, and even friends are also impacted and must adjust to the birth of a child. Moreover, the marital relationship inevitably changes to accommodate the newborn family member. A father's marital adaptation is significantly negative correlation with depression (Foli et al., 2013; Rolle et al., 2017) and anxiety (Rolle et al., 2017; Zerach & Magal, 2017). Furthermore, Norhayati et al. (2015) and Yim et al. (2015) found that marital relationships and postpartum depression are highly correlated. Beach et al. (1990) proposed the marital discord model of depression and suggested that disturbances in a marital relationship are the powerful predictor of future depression symptoms. According to this theory, marital adjustment problems are associated with partners' handling of conflict in hostile and unsupportive manners, which fosters eventual increases in depressive symptoms. Heene, Buysse, &Van Oost (2005) found that negative communication patterns such as demand-withdraw and avoidance patterns were partial mediators in the link between depression and marital distress. Recent studies have also supported the notion that marital communication patterns may play a crucial mediating role between marital adjustment and depression; furthermore, such patterns are often targeted in interventions for depression in couple relationships (Harper & Sandberg, 2009; Heene et al., 2007; Jou, 2009). Although some studies have supported a negative association between paternal postpartum depression and social support (Gao et al., 2009; Wang & Chen, 2006), other studies have reported inconsistent results in that the effect of social support might be influenced by cultural factors. In Hong Kong, Leung et al. (2005) found that the more support a mother receives from her family-in-law, the higher her level of postpartum depression. This could be explained by the fact that most new mothers in Hong Kong live with their in-laws, and the more help they receive from family, the higher the frequency of potential conflict is. In Taiwan, families tend to provide substantial social support to couples during the postpartum period. Husbands may often encounter problems and conflicts between their parents and wives when couples have more contact with close family members (Lai et al., 2010). In this case, the social support perceived by the man may have a negative effect on his mental health. This study aimed to investigate (1) the prevalence of paternal postpartum depression in Taiwan; (2) the association between marital adjustment, communication patterns, postpartum social support, and paternal postpartum depression among Taiwanese fathers; (3) the mediating influence of three partner communication patterns (constructive communication, demand-withdraw communication, and mutual avoidance) on the relationship between marital adjustment and paternal postpartum depression; and (4) the differences between depressive fathers and nondepressive fathers in terms of marriage adjustment, partner communication patterns, and social support after their spouse gives birth to their first baby. This study recruited 258 Taiwanese fathers with their first baby in their current marriages. Their average age was 33.2 years (standard deviation [SD] = 4.17) and the average length of their marriage was 20.7 months. In terms of education level, 41.9% and 32.6% of participants had attended college and graduate school, respectively; moreover, 43.8% of participants share child-raising responsibilities with their wives and nannies; and 43.3% of participants and their wives were the main caregivers for their babies. The study was conducted in medical centers, obstetrics and gynecology clinics, and 37 mothering classes in Taiwan, and an online questionnaire was distributed on relevant parenting community platforms. Demographic and research data were collected using self-reported questionnaires. Each questionnaire contained the Dyadic Adjustment Scale (Spanier, 1976), Communication Patterns Questionnaire (Christensen & Sullaway, 1984), Postpartum Social Support Questionnaire (Hopkins & Campbell, 2008), and the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS; Cox et al., 1987). The participants completed the questionnaire between 1 and 6 months after their babies were born, with an average of 11.7 weeks (SD = 2.8). When EPDS score <U+2265>10 was used as the cutoff, 20.16% of the first-time fathers experienced paternal postpartum depression. Fathers with superior marriage adaptation had more constructive and less demand-withdraw and mutual avoidance communication with their spouses as well as lower levels of postpartum depression. The results supported the hypotheses that communication patterns partially mediate links between marital adjustment and paternal postpartum depression. Compared with nondepressive fathers, depressive fathers (EPDS <U+2265> 10) were significantly less satisfied with their marital relationships and had less constructive and more negative communication patterns with their spouses, such as demand-withdraw and mutual avoidance; however, these fathers perceived receiving more social support during the postpartum period, including that from parents, parents-in-law, and friends, but no significant difference existed between the two groups regarding social support from spouses. Although this result is different from most Western research findings, it is similar to those in the Hong Kong study of Leung et al. (2005), who found a significantly positive association between the level of social support provided by mothers' family-in-law and their postpartum depression. Given the family-oriented culture of Taiwan, a newborn, especially the first child of a couple, usually receives much attention from both sides of the family. Social support related to childcare provided by grandparents as well as excessive advice and involvement in child-raising practices from family members, relatives, and friends could increase fathers' stress levels. Therefore, the availability of social support does not necessarily have a protective or buffering effect on paternal postpartum depression (McVey & Tuohy, 2007). In sum, the prevalence of paternal postpartum depression in Taiwan discovered in this study warrants more clinical and research attention. Although negative marital adjustment and communication patterns were found to be risk factors associated with paternal postpartum depression, the impact of postpartum social support on Taiwanese fathers' postpartum depression must be investigated further.起始頁-結束頁：643-664資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).00078篇名：醫療家族治療於臺灣之發展與應用：我的實踐並列篇名：Development and Application of Medical Family Therapy in Taiwan: Personal Actualization作者：熊秉荃(Ping-Chuan Hsiung)關鍵字：以家庭為中心的健康照護;臺灣醫療家族治療;實踐;family-centered healthcare;medical family therapy in Taiwan;actualization期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：臺灣許多助人專業人員從事不同形式之家庭服務，對崛起於1950年代的美國家族治療有相當的接觸與了解，然而對蓬勃發展於美國1990年代至今的「醫療家族治療」可能相對陌生，本文將介紹「臺灣醫療家族治療的軌跡」、「美國醫療家族治療的進程」及「實踐醫療家族治療」三個面向，提升臺灣助人專業人員認識在健康照護體系提供家族治療的專業脈絡。包括說明「醫療家族治療於美國的爭議與推崇」、「突破阻礙健康照護的藩籬與區隔」、「形成與執行醫療家族治療」、「醫療家族治療的目標」、「動態的醫療家族治療歷程」及「五個層級的系統性合作模式」的內涵。由於臺灣健康保險體系對心理社會及靈性照護的低給付點數及缺乏行政資源及專業架構，因此作者進而娓娓道來在目前的健康照護體系中「實踐醫療家族治療」的歷程，包括：「學習醫療家族治療」、「開拓與奠定專業教育」、「基礎與當代議題」、「家庭與特定疾病共舞：案例分享」、「專業間的競爭與合作」及「一次性邀請與永續合作的醫療家族治療。」作者期望醫療在現今追求高技術水準及高科技化的同時，也能夠提供更完善及整全的服務，並透過本文邀集更多對於以家庭為中心的健康照護系統有認識及有興趣的專業夥伴加入健康照護服務，同時拓展及建構絕佳的衛生和社會福利政策及制度，將健康照護、系統和病人及家屬之間做更好的銜接。英文摘要：In Taiwan, numerous helping professionals provide family services in various formats and settings; although they are relatively familiar with the development of American family therapy in the 1950s, they might not know about the flourishing development of medical family therapy since the 1990s. Medical family therapy is a professional practice that applies the biopsychosocial-spiritual model and systemic family therapy principles in collaborative treatment for individuals and families with medical problems. This article has three sections illustrating the development and application of medical family therapy in Taiwan: ”Trends of medical family therapy in Taiwan,” ”The progress of medical family therapy in the United States,” and ”The actualization of medical family therapy in Taiwan.” The aim of the article is to enhance helping professionals' understanding of their profession's developmental context of providing family therapy in healthcare systems. The author used the keywords ”medical family therapy,” ”medical counseling,” and ”health counseling” to conduct a literature search from 1980 to 2019 in Taiwan and found 53 articles and theses. The majority of articles (88.5%) were published in the last 20 years, indicating that the field of medical family therapy has yet to fully develop in Taiwan. The section titled ”The progress of medical family therapy in America” incorporates specific aspects such as controversy and support in medical family therapy, overcoming of barriers to high-quality healthcare, the formation and implementation of medical family therapy, the goals of such therapy, dynamic processes in such therapy, and the five levels of primary care and behavioral healthcare collaboration. The fundamental assumption of medical family therapy is that all health and relationship problems are biological, psychological, social, and spiritual in nature. Medical family therapy intends to address five ecosystemic splits that hinder health care: (a) splits between the mind and body; (b) splits between the individual and family; (c) splits among the individual, family, and institutional settings; d) splits among the clinical, financial, and operational worlds of health care; and e) the fault line between the often insular world of clinical health care and the larger community. Helping professionals must acquire interdisciplinary knowledge and clinical strategies to overcome the aforementioned splits and achieve the overarching goals of medical family therapy, namely the promotion of agency and communion. In this context, agency refers to empowering patients and families in making decisions regarding their health care, whereas communion refers to helping patients and families feel supported rather than isolated while coping with illness. By assessing individuals and their families' needs and addressing their reliance, medical family therapists plan and implement five levels of systemic collaboration with individuals and their families: (a) minimal provision of medical information and advice, (b) provision of support, (c) undertaking of a systemic assessment, (d) undertaking of planned interventions, and (e) family therapy. This five-level systemic collaboration between biomedical-focused and psychosocial-focused professionals provides a holistic health care framework to develop services that fit the needs of individuals and their families in navigating health challenges. In the article, the author illustrates the essence of cultivating medical family therapy in current health care systems in Taiwan, with minimal reimbursements from the current National Health Insurance program to psychosocial-spiritual care and a lack of institutional structures providing family-centered healthcare. In addition to the institutional shortcomings, the general public is familiar only with advanced, high-technology medical treatments but not integrated, holistic, and family-oriented psychosocial-spiritual care. The author begins by describing her personal experiences in learning medical family therapy in the United States, where she completed an internship at the Family Medicine Center of Highland Hospital and the Department of Psychiatry at Strong Memorial Hospital at the University of Rochester, New York, from 1997 to 1998. Subsequently, the author spent a year at the Chicago Center for Family Health as a Fulbright Senior Scholar during 2018-2019, where her clinical sites included the Advocate Medical Group Family Health Center-Ravenswood and the Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago at Northwestern University. The process of actualizing medical family therapy in Taiwan includes developing curricula and professional training, moving from basic issues to contemporary issues, working with individuals with cancer, genetic disorders, and social withdrawal and their family members (cases examples), interprofessional competition and collaboration, and beginning from one invitation to sustaining collaboration with family therapists in Asian regions. The author designed and taught four courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Three courses were designed to provide students with basic and advanced understandings of the complex relationships among health, illness, and families: ”Family, Health, and Illness,” ”Family and Cancer,” and ”Family Therapy and Health.” They offer students a family systems framework for working with the impact of health problems on patients and families and are especially focused on understanding that all health and relationship problems have biological, psychological, and social natures. Students are encouraged to examine their family-of-origin experiences relating to health and illness. The fourth course is ”Self-Development for Helping Professionals,” which is designed to prepare helping professionals make active and purposeful use of their whole selves in their encounters with clients, with a focus on concepts of self-awareness, access of self, use of self, and self-care. Students are encouraged to develop insight into their personal life experiences, realize the implications of these experiences, and develop skills to intentionally use their own life experiences in facilitating therapeutic change. Students also examine their self-care strategies and attitudes. For more than 20 years, the author has provided clinical training in multiple settings to generate interest in medical family therapy and promote the application of the biopsychosocial-spiritual framework to work with problems related to basic difficulties (i.e., individuals with physical and mental disorders) and contemporary challenges (e.g., individuals with substance use and individuals with gaming disorders). The author facilitated the Chinese translation of The Shared Experience of Illness: Stories of Patients, Families, and their Therapists published in 2003 and the second edition of Medical Family Therapy and Integrated Care published in 2020. These two books are effective tools and foundations for local readers in understanding medical family therapy and its practice. Case examples describe working with individuals with cancer, genetic disorders, and social withdrawal and their family members. The following five strategies were applied to build a locally grounded and globally informed family-centered psychosocial oncology in Taiwan: (a) Forming multidisciplinary teams to enhance professional competence in conducting research and providing services; (b) applying a family-oriented systemic approach and working with healthcare professionals to strengthen biopsychosocial-spiritual holistic care; (c) collaborating with nonprofit organizations to establish evidence-based effectiveness research; (d) raising public awareness of the biomedical and psychosocial dual emphasis regarding comprehensive care; and (e) developing international collaboration in locally grounded and globally informed family-centered healthcare services. Collaboration is an essential aspect of medical family therapy as well as possible tension, and interprofessional competition might be inevitable. ”Power and status in medical settings,” ”role clarity and scope of practice,” and ”teamwork and patient-centered practice” are areas that medical family therapists must address in themselves to prepare students and helping professionals proactively and constructively transform interprofessional competition into collaboration. Recently, more exchanges and collaboration have occurred among therapists in East Asia. The author spent a fruitful week (February 1-8, 2009) in Tokyo with an international expert team, including Dr. Khawla Abu-Baker of Israel, Dr. Young Ju Chun of Korea, Dr. David McGill of the United States, and Dr. Takeshi Tamura of Japan. The intensive exchanges included family-of-origin work and cross-cultural case consultations. The discussants kept in mind that awareness and continuous work on one's self-of-the-therapist issues are crucial for the development of mature family therapists. The team members spent the first 2 days presenting and commenting on each other's family genograms, during which insightful questions were asked and in-depth processing occurred. The examination and reexamination of family themes and interaction patterns led to further understanding of one's family resources and challenges. Five cases were presented over the subsequent 2 days, where issues related to hikikomori were addressed in two families. Hikikomori literally means ”social withdrawal” and has become a major social issue among young people in Japan. An estimated 3%-5% of the population between 18 and 25 years old suffers from hikikomori, and it affects more men than women. Those affected avoid and fear contact with people outside of the family. They do not attend school or hold jobs, and they stay home for months or years doing nothing; sometimes they are violent toward their parents or suicidal. Stimulating conversations surrounding the theme of the conference, ”Culture, Gender, and Generation,” generated interesting viewpoints regarding intracultural as well as intercultural issues. Valuable exchanges continue in the Asian Academy of Family Therapy (AAFT) in the form of annual conferences and case consultations, which enrich training, research, and practice in East Asia. In 2021, The author will be a keynote speaker at the 7th Annual Conference of the AAFT in Seoul, South Korea, where she will address attendees on a topic related to medical family therapy. The author hopes that healthcare systems in Taiwan can achieve the dual aims of pursing advanced biomedical treatments and providing comprehensive family-centered healthcare. The ultimate goal of this article is to invite more helping professionals to provide services in healthcare systems and develop well-rounded social welfare and healthcare policies, thus bridging healthcare systems, patients, and their families.起始頁-結束頁：665-683資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).00089篇名：學前家庭讀寫活動與學習資源對四年級兒童閱讀表現的影響並列篇名：The Influence of Early Home Literacy Activities and Home Resources for Learning on Fourth Grade Students' Reading Performance作者：丘嘉慧(Chiahui Chiu)關鍵字：學前家庭讀寫活動;家庭學習資源;閱讀表現;early home literacy activity;home resources for learning;reading performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：父母對兒童閱讀表現的影響可從學前親子家庭閱讀活動及提供的家庭學習資源看出，然而過去研究未比較兩者中哪一項對兒童的閱讀表現影響較大。本研究的目的在藉由PIRLS 2006、2011、2016三年度的評量，檢驗學前家庭讀寫活動及家庭學習資源對四年級兒童閱讀成就表現的影響，藉以探究兩者對兒童閱讀表現的重要性。臺灣PIRLS 2006共有4589位、PIRLS 2011共有4293位及PIRLS 2016共有4326位的國小四年級學生及學生家長參與。評量工具包括「PIRLS閱讀理解測驗」評量學生的閱讀成績，家長填寫「PIRLS閱讀學習調查」以瞭解家長教育程度、學前家庭讀寫活動及家中學習資源的情況。經由比較三年度的資料可以發現，父母教育程度對兒童閱讀表現的預測力最大。整體來看，學前家中愈常進行家庭讀寫活動，四年級兒童的閱讀理解能力愈好。家中學習資源愈多，四年級兒童的閱讀理解能力愈好。然而學前家庭讀寫活動與家庭學習資源不一定有或多，就對兒童的閱讀能力有益，例如，寫字詞和兒童擁有自己的手機並非對兒童閱讀能力有益。父母與子女間常一起看書比提供資源對子女閱讀表現的影響多一些。結果顯示學前家庭讀寫活動對四年級兒童閱讀表現的影響較大。英文摘要：Parents play a critical role in the literacy development of their children (Baker, 2003; Kush et al., 2005; Lee & Barro, 1998; Sonnenschein et al., 1996; Weinberger, 1996). Providing early home literacy activities or home resources for learning will improve children's development of literacy skills. Parental involvement is frequently mentioned as a parental factor related to children's reading (e.g., Arnold et al., 2008; Baker et al., 1995; Begum, 2007; Considine & Zappala, 2002; Lee & Barro, 1998; Rowe, 1991). Parental involvement refers to the amount of contact parents have with their children, the quality of their interactions, and their participation in their children's school and home activities (Izzo et al., 1999). Home literacy activities include taking one's children to the library, playing games to teach children new things, reading to children, engaging in shared reading, and providing reading materials. Research has revealed that reading enrichment activities at home have significantly positive influences on students' reading achievement (Begum, 2007; Lynch et al., 2006; Purcell-Gates, 1995; Roberts et al., 2005; Rowe, 1991). Greater parental involvement has been associated with stronger preliteracy skills, and literacy experiences during the child's preschool years have been associated with subsequent reading achievement (Arnold, et al., 2008; Neuman & Dickinson, 2001). Moreover, the availability of reading materials in the home is likewise strongly related to achievement in mathematics and science as well as reading (Senechal et al., 1998). Students with numerous books at home exhibit higher achievement in mathematics and science. However, whether early home literacy activities or home resources for learning are more influential on children's reading performance remains understudied. In 2001, Taiwan began conducting national reading programs, which implemented reading activities in schools and even benefited students in rural areas. The government and private organizations have also begun to promote reading activities (e.g., Bookstart which is to give free books to every child under the age of 5) in families because of their own children's reading development. After more than 10 years, the effects of literacy activity promotion and the provision of learning resources for preschool children in Taiwanese families were examined. The goals of this study were to compare the influence of early home literacy activity with home resources for learning on children's reading ability and to identify which factor was more crucial for their reading ability. Data from the Progress in International Reading and Literacy Study (PIRLS) 2006, PIRLS 2011, and PIRLS 2016 in Taiwan were used. The studies had 4589 participants in 2006, 4293 in 2011, and 4326 in 2016, and all participants were fourth-grade students and their parents in Taiwan. Children's reading achievement, early home literacy activity, and home resources for learning were measured using the Reading Achievement Assessment, Student Questionnaire, and Learning to Read Survey from PIRLS 2006, 2011, and 2016. The PIRLS assesses four comprehension processes in reading. The passages in the PIRLS are accompanied by colorful illustrations to help engage students' interest, and several informational articles have noncontinuous text features such as text boxes or diagrams. The PIRLS includes 10 passages ranging in length from approximately 800 to 1000 English words (approximately 500 to 900 Chinese characters). The PIRLS achievement booklets are designed to assess children's ability to comprehend text through comprehension questions. Each child responded to the assessment and received reading achievement scores. The PIRLS Learning to Read Survey was adopted for this study. Students' parents were asked to report on the availability of home resources related to reading achievement. The survey investigated child-parent literacy interactions, home literacy resources, parents' reading habits and attitudes, and home-school connections. The items of early literacy experiences at home included reading books, telling stories, singing songs, playing with alphabet toys, talking about things the child has done, talking about things he or she has read, playing word games, writing letters or words, and reading signs and labels aloud. Students were scored according to their parents' frequency of engaging in these activities with them. All items were rated on a three-point Likert-type scale in which answers ranged from 1 (never or almost never) to 3 (often). The Student Questionnaire was administered to determine students' home resources for learning. Students were asked to report on the availability of home resources. Home resources for learning included the following: parental education level, number of books at home, number of children's books at home, a computer, a study desk for the student's use, an Internet connection, a room of their own, and access to new digital media. All items were answered with yes or no. The International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement's (IEA's) International Database Analyzer (IDB Analyzer) was used to combine and analyze data from all IEA large-scale assessments. This software tool analyzes data from most major large-scale assessments, including those conducted by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, and the PIRLS (IEA, 2016). Each student was provided a single test booklet containing only a portion of the PIRLS assessment. The results were aggregated across all booklets to provide results for the entire assessment, and plausible values were generated as estimates of student performance on the entire assessment. Students' performance averages were computed as the average of the weighted means for each of the five plausible values. The variability among these estimates, or the imputation error, for each variable was combined with the sampling error for that variable, providing an appropriate standard error that incorporates both error components. IDB Analyzer can handle complex sample designs and uses a plausible value methodology to calculate correct standard errors in analyses with large-scale surveys. Descriptive statistics, including percentages and means, statistical significance tests, and linear regression with dummy coding, were used to analyze the data. The results revealed that among educational level, early home literacy activity, and home resources for learning, parents' educational level was the strongest predictor of fourth-grade children's reading achievement. After comparing the results of the PIRLS 2006, 2011 and 2016, we found a strong positive relationship between reading achievement and early home literacy activity. Moreover, students' reading achievement was positively related to their home resources for learning. However, the results further indicated that not all early home literacy activities and home resources for learning were beneficial to students' reading. Furthermore, more activities or resources for learning did not translate to enhanced student reading achievement. For example, parents spending time teaching their children to write letters or words and children having their own cell phone were not beneficial to their reading performance. Parents reading books with their children prior to them entering school was more predictive of children's reading achievement later in primary school compared with any home resource for learning. In sum, the results seemed to indicate that early home literacy activity is more influential than home resources are for learning on children's reading performance. Both the frequency of early literacy activities and amount of home resources for learning increased over the 12-year period. This indicated that families in Taiwan have become increasingly willing to provide resources for their children to learn, and parents of preschool children are willing to spend more time reading together. The results also indicated that reading activities in families promoted by the government and private organizations have had a positive impact on the reading and writing activities and provision of learning resources for preschool children in Taiwanese families.起始頁-結束頁：685-705資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).000910篇名：青少年親子關係類型及親子互動差異比較：因素混合模式分析並列篇名：Heterogeneous Parent-Adolescent Relationship and Effects on Their Interactions with Factor Mixture Analysis作者：程雅妤(Ya-Yu Cheng);王郁琮(Yu-Chung Lawrence Wang)關鍵字：因素混合模式分析;親子關係類型;台灣青少年成長歷程研究;factor mixture model;parent-adolescent relationship;Taiwan Youth Project (TYP)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育心理學報卷期：52卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在探討高三青少年知覺的親密衝突異質性親子關係類型，以及不同類型在親子互動時的訊息坦露程度和關係滿意度差異比較。本研究資料擷取自中央研究院社會學研究所之「台灣青少年成長歷程研究計畫」國一樣本第六波青少年問卷資料。研究樣本為1,745名高三生，研究變項包括其與父、母相處時的親密和衝突互動，親子間訊息坦露程度以及對親子關係的情緒滿意度跟認知滿意度。本研究利用因素混合模式分析（factor mixture model, FMM）進行「親密」、「衝突」二因子之異質性分析，並進一步利用新進發展的BCH方法，針對不同類型的親子間訊息坦露程度與關係滿意度進行差異檢定。研究結果顯示：（一）青少年的親子關係型態，無論是與父親或與母親皆可區分出三種類型，包括：「親近和諧型」、「矛盾混合型」以及「衝突爭執型」。（二）其中以親近和諧型（母親：53%；父親：64%）佔最多數，其次是矛盾混合型（母親：41%；父親：30%），衝突爭執型佔最少人數（母親：5%；父親：6%）。（三）青少年自覺與父親親近和諧的人數比例高過於與母親的人數；而與母親關係感到矛盾的人數比例多過父親；又，與父親和母親衝突爭執的人數比例則無明顯差異。（四）最後，「親近和諧型」有最多訊息交流之行為，且對關係滿意度最高，而「衝突爭執型」不僅鮮少親子間訊息往來，且對關係感到不滿意。英文摘要：Adolescence is a developmental transition set in motion by a cascade of hormonal changes and accompanied by various physiological, psychological, and social changes, including changes in the parent-child relationship. Parent-child relationships are regarded as the most significant relationships in people's lives due to the profound psychological and social bonds involved. Intimacy is the essence of the parent-child relationship. However, when adolescents start to strive for more autonomy from their parents, changes in family conflicts occur. According to the separation-individuation perspective and the autonomy-relatedness perspective, autonomy development is thought to entail changes in conflict and power in parent-adolescent relationships. The aim of this study was to analyze heterogeneity in scales of intimacy and conflict of parent-adolescent relationships and their influences on adolescents' perception of their intimacy and conflict with their parents, and also on the amount of information disclosure and satisfaction with their relationship. Data were extracted from the Taiwan Youth Project (TYP), a panel longitudinal research project managed by Academia Sinica, Taiwan. The TYP investigates young people's life experiences and development. The first wave of data came from adolescents who were seventh graders. Data related to the current study were retrieved from the sixth wave of the project. A total of 1745 (857 girls and 888 boys) 12th-grade adolescents (i.e., those in the final year of senior high school in Taiwan) were recruited. The items in the adolescent survey measured the degree to which adolescents had felt closeness and conflict with their fathers and mothers separately in the past year. Intimacy refers to positive affection, consideration of parents' opinions, concern for parents, and respect for parents. Example items include ”Inquiring about his/her opinions about important things”; ”Paying attention to his/her thoughts”; ”Expressing concern about him/her”; and ”Seeing him/her as a model”. Conflict refers to quarreling with parents or giving parents attitude. The scale included five items related to intimate relationships and three items related to conflict relationships. Responses were given on a four-point Likert scale (from 0 = hardly to 4 = almost always). Regarding information disclosure and satisfaction with parent-adolescent relationships, adolescents answered the following four questions during the sixth-wave assessment: (1) ”Will your father/mother tell you their thoughts regarding decisions that concern you?” (from 0 = hardly to 4 = almost always); (2) ”How much information about your private affairs do you like to share with your father/mother?” (0 = none at all to 3 = a lot); (3) ”Do you feel happy when you are with your father/mother?” (from 0 = very unhappy to 3 = very happy); and (4) ”How do you feel about the relationship between you and your father/ mother?” (from 0 = very unsatisfied to 3 = very satisfied). Adolescents were asked to rate their relationships with both parents separately. The factor mixture model (FMM), implemented in Mplus 8.3, was used to analyze the heterogeneity of intimacy and conflict scores, and the BCH method was used to test the mean score differences in information disclosure and satisfaction among heterogeneous parent-adolescent classes. The FMM used a hybrid of both categorical and continuous latent variables, which allowed the underlying structure to be simultaneously categorical and dimensional. The study assumed several heterogeneous intimacy and conflict subgroups in parent-adolescent relationships. The FMM approach was suitable for this research because it allowed for heterogeneity within groups through the use of continuous latent variables. The results were as follows: First, the parent-adolescent relationships could be divided into three classes, namely harmonious, ambivalent, and conflict. The harmonious class was the majority (mother: 53%; father: 64%); the ambivalent class was the second largest group (mother: 41%; father: 30%); and the conflict class accounted for the smallest group (mother: 5%; father: 6%). Third, the percentage of adolescents who had harmonious father-child relationships was higher than that who had harmonious mother-child relationships; the percentage of people who had an ambivalent mother-child relationship was higher than that of people with an ambivalent father-child relationship; and the proportions in the conflict class were almost identical between fathers and mothers. Finally, adolescents in the harmonious parent-child class were most likely to demonstrate information exchange behavior with their parents, and they exhibited the highest satisfaction with their relationships; by contrast, adolescents in the conflict class demonstrated the fewest communication behaviors and were the least satisfied with their relationships. According to the results, parent-adolescent relationships were classified into three types. One type, namely the detached class (low intimacy and low conflict), did not appear in the current study. This might be because most of the senior-high-school participants still lived with their parents, who are the main providers of financial resources, daily life needs, and emotional attachment; thus, adolescents cannot avoid parent-child interaction. Second, the harmonious class was the largest among the three classes. From a cultural perspective, Chinese culture emphasizes family cohesion and filial piety; therefore, Chinese parent-child relationships are relatively close, which leads to more intimate bonding, closeness, and affection between parents and children. In addition, since Western culture was introduced to Taiwan, parent-child relationships have become more democratic and responsive; an increasing number of parents adopt authoritative parenting, which is characterized by high degrees of support, warmth, and autonomy. Third, in contrast to traditional Chinese families, in which fathers are perceived as serious and emotionally detached from their children, the present study revealed that the adolescents had harmonious father-child relationships. This implies that fathers today are more willing to engage in parental activities; thus, they have more interactive opportunities to establish father-child relationships. Consistent with previous findings, adolescents had more ambivalent mother-child relationships compared with relationships with their fathers. Mothers spend more time with their children; in addition to daily care, the interaction between adolescents and mothers involves more personal and deeper psychological feelings. Simultaneously, mothers usually assume greater responsibility for discipline and supervision of schoolwork and other activities. Teenagers receive pressure from their mother's love as well as discipline; hence, they have more ambivalent feelings toward their mothers. Regarding information disclosure and satisfaction with parent-adolescent relationships, the harmonious parent-child class exhibited the most information exchange behaviors and the highest satisfaction with their relationships. The results of this research are consistent with those of past research that have indicated that close parent-adolescent relationships elicit warmth, supportiveness, and positive communication. Intimate relationships were also found to be major contributors to satisfaction. By contrast, the conflict class exhibited the fewest communication behaviors and were unsatisfied with their relationships with their parents. This finding is in line with those of previous studies. Several studies have indicated that parent-adolescent conflict influences adolescents' perceptions of parent-child relationship satisfaction. Conflict will reduce adolescents' satisfaction with their parents as well as cause negative feelings toward them. In this situation, teenagers are likely to avoid communicating with their parents and refuse to exchange information. Overall, the present study investigated heterogeneity in scales of intimacy and conflict in parent-adolescent relationships as well as their influences. The results specifically revealed three types of parent-child relationships: harmonious, ambivalent, and conflict. However, this research is still in the preliminary stage and must be verified in future studies. This study's limitations and suggestions for future studies are presented as follows: First, only adolescents' data were adopted; hence, parent-child dyadic analysis can be adopted in future research. Second, the participants were all from Northern Taiwan; therefore, future studies could include more participants from Taiwan's Central, Southern, and Eastern regions.起始頁-結束頁：707-729資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞教育學出版單位：臺灣師範大學教育心理與輔導學系DOI：10.6251/BEP.202103_52(3).001001篇名：青少年偏差行為發生與否及發生頻率之模型建構並列篇名：Testing the Model of Juvenile Delinquency's Occurrence and Frequency作者：郭玲玲(Ling-Ling Kueh);洪瑄(Hsuan Hung);董旭英(Yuk-Ying Tung)關鍵字：生活緊張;依附關係;青少年偏差行為;接觸偏差同儕;零膨脹負二項迴歸;life strains;attachment;delinquency;association with deviant peers;zero-inflated negative binomial regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:1期出版年：2021中文摘要：由於青少年偏差行為具有計數之資料型態，且常出現大量零之非常態分布，因此本研究提出零膨脹負二項迴歸模型，試圖突破過去青少年偏差行為研究受到資料異質性以及過度離散的限制，同時考量青少年依附關係、生活緊張及接觸偏差同儕分別對偏差行為發生與否，以及發生頻率兩大面向的影響，最後輔以根方圖作為模型適配度檢視的方法。本研究有效樣本為臺南市國中生947人。研究結果發現：一、生活緊張與偏差同儕是誘發青少年偏差行為的影響因素；二、接觸偏差同儕催化青少年偏差行為發生的頻率，家庭依附關係則降低偏差行為之發生頻率；三、對於出現大量零以及過度離散的計數資料，零膨脹負二項迴歸分析方法所建構之模型相對適配。研究最後並提出有關青少年學校輔導及後續研究之相關建議。英文摘要：The purpose of this study was to explore the impact of attachment, life strains and association with deviant peers on frequency of juvenile delinquency by using the zero-inflated negative binomial (ZINB) regression model with R. The graphical tool ”rootogram” was utilized for the goodness-of-fit visualization of the ZINB model. Research participants were 947 students in Tainan, Taiwan. The results were as follows: (1) life strains and association with deviant peers were significantly associated with the occurrence of delinquency; (2) attachment and association with deviant peers were significant predictors for the magnitude of delinquency; (3) ZINB outperformed negative binomial model for count data analysis with excessive number of responses of zero, and with over-dispersed distribution.起始頁-結束頁：29-63資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210367010022篇名：以實境體驗遊戲融入校外教學深化學生多面向的參與式學習與理解：以〈尋訪馬偕足跡〉為例並列篇名：Using Reality Games in Off-Campus Teaching to Deepen Students' Engaged Learning and Understanding: The Case of ”Inquiring After Mackay's Footprints”作者：陳麗華(Li-Hua Chen);葉韋伶(Wei-Ling Yeh);林月梅(Yueh-Mei Lin);鄭詔月(Chao-Yueh Cheng);范惠美(Hui-Mei Fan)關鍵字：校外教學;素養導向課程與教學設計;參與式學習;實境體驗遊戲;學習理解;off-campus teaching;competence-based curriculum and teaching design;engaged learning;reality game;understandings期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:1期出版年：2021中文摘要：目前學校辦理的校外教學，普遍欠缺十二年國教倡議的素養導向教學精神。而風靡於青少年世代的實境解謎遊戲，具有謎題破解、身體經驗、群體表演等設計要素，與素養導向設計若合符節，展現新世代的學習樣態。為此，本計畫透過與新北市淡水區國小之教師社群協作，將實境體驗遊戲的設計元素融入〈尋訪馬偕足跡〉校外探究學習方案的設計中，並在實施後檢視學生的學習表現。本計畫採用質性研究取徑，過程中兼採觀察、訪談、文件分析等資料蒐集與分析技術，彙集學生、教師及家長的意見和相關文件，加以分析、歸納和詮釋。研究結果顯示：一、在方案設計方面，能涵蓋實境體驗遊戲的三大要素及融入數位解題技術；二、在學習過程中，學生能展現學習事物、學習歷程、題材脈絡、人脈關係、人類環境等多面向的參與和探究學習樣態；三、在學習結果方面，學生對主題的探究學習達到說明、詮釋、應用、觀點、同理心等多面向的理解，惟自我認識面向的理解較不明顯。研究最後提出六項落實素養導向課程與教學的實踐智慧。英文摘要：Integrating three elements of reality games into the development of a project named ”Exploring Mackay's Footprints,” this research investigates how reality games can be used in off-campus teaching to deepen students' engaged learning and understanding. After the implementation the three elements of reality games, namely, puzzle solving, embodied experience and group performance into designing the off-campus teaching project, the students' learning performances were examined. The opinions and feedbacks of students, teachers, and volunteer parents were collected through observations, interviews and document analysis. Qualitative research approach was adopted into data collection, analysis and interpretation. The research results include, firstly, three elements of reality games and one digital puzzle-solving technique comprised in the project, secondly, multi-faceted engagements shown during students' learning targets, learning processes, themes, relationships, and the human environment, and thirdly, multi-faceted understandings of explanation, interpretation, application, perspective, and empathy achieved from students' inquiry. Finally, the article ends with six practical wisdoms for competence-based curriculum and proposal of teaching design.起始頁-結束頁：65-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210367010033篇名：芬蘭一間學校的現象為本學習課程統整設計與學生學習表現並列篇名：A Finnish School's Phenomenal-based Learning Curriculum Integration Design and Students' Learning Performance作者：陳玟樺(Wen-Hua Chen);劉美慧(Meihui Liu)關鍵字：立體學習;芬蘭教育;現象為本學習;課程統整;pop-ups learning;Finland education;phenomenon-based learning;curriculum integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:1期出版年：2021中文摘要：芬蘭新課綱於2016年上路，赫爾辛基地區學校實施的現象為本學習引起諸多關注。現象為本學習以主題或議題為教學核心，其蘊含課程統整特質有助於發展學生二十一世紀所需能力。緣此，本研究進入一公立中小學進行田野研究，試圖探索現象為本學習課程統整設計基本原則和學生學習表現。採個案研究法，以赫爾辛基一間具10年國際文憑（International Baccalaureate, IB）課程實施經驗的公立學校為研究場域，以觀察、訪談及文件分析等方法蒐集資料。結果發現有三：一、個案師生於現象為本學習週之課程統整設計的基本原則主要在透過概念來探究現象、學生參與課程設計、統整在自己身上；二、學生於現象為本學習週之統整學習表現富立體學習效果；三、現象為本學習週之評量目的在引導和鼓勵跨領域學習及發展自我評估能力。本研究最後提出幾點建議，供有興趣發展現象為本學習者參考。英文摘要：The approach of phenomenon-based learning in Helsinki has drawn the international attention since Finland implemented new core curriculum guidelines in 2016. Phenomenon-based learning uses themes or issues as the core of teaching and learning and entails curriculum integration characteristics that may help develop the 21st-century competencies. This study conducted a field study in a public school with ten years experiences of International Baccalaureate programs, exploring the fundamental principles of the curriculum integration of phenomenon-based learning and students' learning performance. The study applied observations, interviews, and document analysis in a seventh-grade classroom from mid-February to early June 2018. Several key findings emerged from this study. First, the fundamental principles of the curriculum integration of the Phenomenon-based learning Week include exploring phenomena through concepts, student involvement in curriculum design, and integration in oneself. Second, students' integrated learning performance during Phenomenon-based learning Week seems to highlight the effect of pop-ups learning. Finally, the purpose of the Phenomenon-based learning Week assessment is to guide and encourage cross-disciplinary learning and develop self-assessment capabilities. This study also provides several suggestions for designers who intend to develop the teaching and learning of phenomenon-based learning.起始頁-結束頁：107-156資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/1028870820210367010044篇名：書評：民主社會中多元文化課程實施的淺碟與再反思－評介《美國原住民族兒童在公立學校的文化抗存》並列篇名：Book Review: Reflections on the Introduction of Multicultural Courses to the School Curriculum in Democratic Societies: A Review of ”Indigenous Children's Survivance in Public Schools”作者：洪承宇(Cheng-Yu Hung)期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育研究集刊卷期：67:1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：157-164資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育學系DOI：10.3966/10288708202103670100501篇名：美、澳、星三國小學師資培育課程與認證制度對我國啟示之探討並列篇名：Accreditation of Primary School Pre-service Teacher Education Curriculums in the United States, Australia, and Singapore and the Implications to Taiwan作者：蘇容梅(Jung-Mei Su);宋曜廷(Yao-Ting Sung);于文正(Wen-Cheng Yu)關鍵字：小學師資培育課程;師資培育;課程認證;primary school pre-service teacher education;teacher education;curriculum accreditation期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：師資培育為專業化的歷程，師資培育課程在其中所扮演的角色與功能，更是重要的環節之一。本研究主要目的為探討我國師資培育課程發展，並以美國、澳洲及新加坡的師資培育機構為例，分析其小學師資培育課程與國家認證制度對我國師資培育課程之啟示。研究結果發現，臺灣小學師資培育課程改革受限於歷史路徑依賴的舊習、包班制概念不清，未能以多學科的能力作為小學師資培育課程的主軸、實踐課程未能階段性且持續性地落實於實際教學場域，以及師資培育評鑑無法確保各校課程實施前是否符合國家規範、實習與教師檢定考試無法發揮課程修習之加乘效果。最後根據三個國家之經驗，提供國內師資培育課程制度革新之啟示，包括：重視師資培育課程品質保證機制，確保課程實施前的品質；強化師資生具備國民小學包班與學習領域之學科知能專業能力；階段性且持續性地增加教育實踐之機會；依據課程性質與重要性，建立適切的學習結構。英文摘要：The cultivation of teachers is a professional process, and the role of the teacher education curriculums is one of the crucial factors. This study aimed to understand the development of Taiwan's primary school teacher education curriculums as well as to analyze the teacher education curriculums and accreditation systems in the United States, Australia, and Singapore. The results indicated that reforms to Taiwan's primary school teacher training curriculums are limited by the old habits of historical path dependence and that the course fails to plan for the basic teaching abilities required for preservice teachers. The practical curriculum has not been implemented in a phased and continuous manner, and the teacher training assessment does not ensure that the school curriculum complies with national regulations before implementation. Finally, the relevant experience in the three included countries provides a reference for improving domestic teacher education - including the need for attention to the teacher education quality assurance mechanism, the strengthening of qualifications for primary school preservice teachers' proficiency, the application of theory at the educational scene in a phased and continuous manner, and the establishment of an appropriate learning structure based on the nature and importance of the course.起始頁-結束頁：35-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202106_66(2).00022篇名：學生學習投入、好奇心、教師集體層級變項與科學探究能力的關係：跨層級調節式中介效果之探討並列篇名：Relationship Among Engagement and Curiosity of Individual Level Variables of Students, Group Level Variables of Teachers, and Scientific Inquiry Abilities: Conference of Cross-Level Moderated Mediation作者：林小慧(Hsiao-Hui Lin);郭哲宇(Che-Yu Kuo);吳心楷(Hsin-Kai Wu)關鍵字：好奇心;科學探究能力;科學探究教學信念;跨層級調節式中介效果;學習投入;curiosity;scientific inquiry abilities;scientific inquiry belief;cross-level moderated mediation;engagement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究目的在探討以個體層級之學習投入、好奇心與教師集體層級變項（包括科學探究教學信念、非科學探究教學信念、教師專業社群支持、創新教學支持、教學經驗）為自變項，探討兩者對學生科學探究能力的影響，並檢驗教師集體層級變項是否透過學生層級變項的中介對學生科學探究能力產生跨層級調節式中介效果的影響與教師集體層級變項之跨層級調節效果。本研究透過對32所國高中、494位教師、1,926位學生的調查，使用階層線性模式（Hierarchical Linear Modeling, HLM）分析變項間的關係。研究結果發現如下：一、學生學習投入與好奇心對科學探究能力有正向直接影響效果；二、教師科學探究教學共同信念、教師專業社群支持與創新教學支持對學生科學探究能力具有跨層級直接效果，其中，創新教學支持的影響效果為正向直接效果，而教師科學探究教學共同信念與教師專業社群支持的影響效果為負向直接效果；三、教師集體教學經驗會經由學習投入影響學生科學探究能力表現，具有跨層級調節式中介效果，亦即教師集體教學經驗不僅對學生科學探究能力有顯著的間接效果，同時也具有正向調節效果；四、教師科學探究教學共同信念對學生好奇心與學生科學探究能力表現之關係具有正向調節效果。除此之外，學生好奇心也具有正向調節教師科學探究教學共同信念與科學探究能力關係的效果，亦即教師科學探究教學的共同信念對於探究能力的負向影響將因學生好奇心的逐漸提升而漸趨減緩，終至好奇心提升到一定程度時，將調節教師集體層級之科學探究信念正向影響學生探究能力，並漸趨增強。英文摘要：This study used the two variables at the individual level of students (i.e., engagement and curiosity) and five teacher group variables at the school level (i.e., inquiry belief, non-inquiry belief, school support for the teacher community, school support for innovative teaching, and teaching experience) as independent variables to discuss how these factors influence the students' scientific inquiry abilities. This study also examined whether school level variables affect the cross-level moderated mediation on the scientific inquiry abilities of students by mediating the student level variables and explored for the cross-level moderation in the school level variables that may occur. In this investigation, spanning 32 junior and senior high schools including 494 teachers and 1,926 students, hierarchical linear modeling was used to analyze the relationship among the variables at different levels. The findings of this study are as follows: (1) The two variables, engagement and curiosity, at the individual level of students have a direct and positive effect on scientific inquiry abilities. (2) Inquiry belief, school support for the teacher community, and school support for innovative teaching have a cross-level direct effect on the scientific inquiry abilities of students. Here, the effect of school support for innovative teaching is positive and direct, whereas the effects of inquiry belief and school support for the teacher community are negative and direct. (3) Teaching experience can influence students' performance of scientific inquiry abilities through engagement, which demonstrates a cross-level moderated mediation. That is, teaching experience not only has an obvious and indirect effect on scientific inquiry abilities but also provides positive moderation. (4) Inquiry belief provides positive moderation on the relationship between curiosity and the performance of scientific inquiry abilities. Similarly, curiosity demonstrates positive moderation on the relationship between inquiry belief and scientific inquiry abilities. In other words, when curiosity gradually increases, inquiry belief gradually decrease a negative effect on scientific inquiry abilities. Finally, curiosity, increasing to a certain extent, moderates inquiry belief, thus having a positive effect on scientific inquiry abilities that are gradually strengthening.起始頁-結束頁：75-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202106_66(2).00033篇名：大學運動績優排球選手自我統合與幸福感之差異及相關研究並列篇名：Investigation of Outstanding College Volleyball Players' Ego Identity and Well-being作者：韓俜亭(Ping-Ting Han);洪瑞兒(Zuway-R Hong);魯盈讌(Ying-Yan Lu);林煥祥(Huann-Shyang Lin);王薪惠(Hsin-Hui Wang);黃愛雅(Ai-Ya Huang)關鍵字：大學運動績優排球選手;自我統合;幸福感;非體育相關學系;體育相關學系;outstanding college volleyball players;ego identity;well-being;non-physical education majors;physical education majors期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究目的在探討大學運動績優排球選手自我統合之類型，不同背景大學運動績優排球選手的自我統合與幸福感的差異和其關聯。本研究以立意取樣選取136位大學運動績優排球選手為研究對象，填寫「大學運動績優排球選手問卷」，最後再選取兩位幸福感最高分及兩位幸福感最低分的大學運動績優排球選手進行個別訪談。本研究以偏最小平方法中的測量模式分析檢驗研究工具之信度與效度，再以獨立樣本t考驗、卡方考驗、偏最小平方法及內容主題分析進行資料分析。本研究量化資料分析結果顯示，32.3％大學運動績優排球選手歸類為迷失型統合；而大學運動績優男排球選手多歸屬於定向型統合，最多數女選手歸屬於迷失型統合；就讀體育相關學系與一般學系之大學運動績優排球選手自我統合類型並未呈現顯著性差異；定向型統合類型大學運動績優排球選手的人際關係、生活滿意、學業成就及個人成長皆呈現顯著正相關。質性個別訪談結果發現大學運動績優排球選手的「自我滿足」與「人際關係與互動」能提升其幸福感和形成定向型統合，而課業壓力和挫折感則會降低幸福感和形成迷失型統合。建議招收運動績優選手的大學在規劃課程、教學與活動時，需考慮大學運動績優選手的身心狀況及學習需求，以提升大學運動績優女排球選手及就讀一般學系排球選手的定向型統合。英文摘要：This study investigated outstanding college volleyball players' ego identity and well-being. This study purposively selected 136 outstanding volleyball players as the sample. All participants were asked to respond to the well-structured ”Outstanding College Volleyball Players' Questionnaire” to assess their ego identity and well-being. In addition, two target students with the highest scores in well-being and another two target students with the lowest scores were selected purposively for individual interviews. Exploratory factor analysis, internal consistency reliability test, t test, Chi-squared test, Partial Least Squares (PLS), and theme content analysis were performed. Initial results revealed that 32.3% of outstanding volleyball players were in the ”identity diffusion” stage. More male players than female players were identified as being in the ”identity achievement” stage. The players in the ”identity achievement” stage had positive interpersonal relationships, high life satisfaction and academic achievement, and successful personal growth. The qualitative results indicated that the male players' high levels of life satisfaction and positive interpersonal relationships improved their well-being and identity achievement. By contrast, the pressure and frustration from academic study might have decreased some players' well-being and increased their identity diffusion. The current results suggest that college educators should consider the physical and mental health of players who are female or non-physical education majors. We recommend that more attention be given to providing players with approaches of improving their identity achievement.起始頁-結束頁：111-144資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202106_66(2).00044篇名：成功期望與興趣價值對數學成就的動態影響：動態結構方程模型分析並列篇名：Dynamic Effect of Success Expectation and Interest Value on Mathematic Achievement: Dynamic Structural Equation Model Analysis作者：曾明基(Ming-Chi Tseng)關鍵字：期望價值理論;動態結構方程模型;數學成就;expectancy-value theory;dynamic structural equation model;mathematic achievement期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以期望價值理論為架構，透過動態結構方程模型分析，瞭解成功期望與興趣價值對數學成就的動態影響。本研究透過經驗採樣方法蒐集國小46位高年級學生，在成功期望與興趣價值兩個變項的密集性追蹤資料，總共100波次，並在課程結束後施測標準化數學成就測驗。經由分析發現，在個體內層次成功期望與興趣價值存在一階自我迴歸，且成功期望與興趣價值也存在一階向量自迴歸，而在個體間層次成功期望正向影響數學成就，興趣價值負向影響數學成就，但是興趣價值對成功期望一階向量自迴歸的隨機變異正向影響數學成就。依據研究結果提出建議，供實務應用及未來研究參考。英文摘要：This research is based on expectancy-value theory. Through an analysis using dynamic structural equation model, we clarified the dynamic effect of success expectation and interest value on mathematic achievement. We employed empirical sampling to collect intensive longitudinal data from 46 elementary school students. A standardized mathematic achievement test was administered after the course. The analysis revealed an autocorrelation and a cross-lagged effect between success expectation and interest value at the within-person level. At the between-person level, success expectation positively affected mathematic achievement, whereas interest value negatively affected mathematic achievement. However, the random slope related to the cross-lag effect of success expectation positively affected mathematic achievement. On the basis of the study results, suggestions were provided for practical application and future research.起始頁-結束頁：145-173資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202106_66(2).00055篇名：臺灣學校領導研究與全球學術的連結：文獻計量分析並列篇名：Connection Between Taiwanese Research on School Leadership and Global Scholarship: A Bibliometric Review作者：潘慧玲(Hui-Ling Wendy Pan);陳文彥(Wen-Yan Chen)關鍵字：文獻計量分析;共引用分析;研究回顧;教育領導;學校領導;bibliometric review;co-citation analysis;review of research;educational leadership;school leadership期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：回顧性研究對公共政策與知識基礎之建立具有重要意義，但臺灣對於學校領導領域研究的回顧並不多見，故本研究以收錄於Scopus資料庫的期刊文章為範圍，以文獻計量方法進行近20年之研究回顧，探討的核心旨趣在於瞭解本土研究與全球學術的連結。經篩選後，計以95篇中、英文文章為分析對象。重要研究發現有三：一、在發表數量與期刊方面，臺灣於2001年方有學校領導的英文論文發表於國際期刊，而世界大學排名之強調及頂尖大學計畫之推動，雖使過往獨重中文發表的狀況產生改變，惟整體發表量仍偏少，且刊登於教育領導與管理核心期刊的比例亦不及兩成。二、以文獻被引用情形分析國際能見度，近20年臺灣學校領導論文被引用數前十名的作者，平均論文篇數為3.5篇、平均被引用數則為45.2次，其中，平均被引用數與非洲地區教育領導研究之落差為3.33倍，與亞洲、非洲及拉丁美洲三個新興地區之落差為11.78倍。三、臺灣學者之研究主題能與國際學界相呼應，但仍有部分議題尚待開展。而共引用分析結果顯示，臺灣學校領導研究的智識結構可分為學習領導、分散形式的領導、領導行為及其影響，以及社會網絡等四個論述派別。上述結果指陳全球化下臺灣教育行政領域的發展，除可致力國際影響力的提升，亦應力求議題之多元。英文摘要：1. Background: Systematic reviews may inform public policies and contribute to the building of a knowledge base. However, reviews of school leadership research are relatively rare in Taiwan. This study conducted a bibliometric review to analyze journal papers by Taiwanese scholars in the Scopus database published in the previous 20 years. The focus was to examine the connection between Taiwanese and global research on school leadership. 2. Research questions: On the basis of the research background, four research questions were proposed: (1) What is the volume and growth trajectory of Taiwanese school leadership research? (2) What is the international visibility of Taiwanese school leadership research as revealed through citation analysis? (3) What are the main topics covered by Taiwanese school leadership research and how do they correspond to the global trend? (4) What is the intellectual structure of Taiwanese school leadership research and how do it connect with the global literature? 3. Theoretical framework: (1) Intellectual development of school leadership research. The theory movement in the 1950s and 1960s highlighted the development of educational administration research. Griffiths (1959) categorized these theories into four groups: social system and role theory, leadership theory, decision theory, and organizational theory. In the 1970s, contingency theory, which emphasizes the influence of context on leadership, was proposed. With the growing interest in school effectiveness and school reform, the organizational perspective was applied to investigate school leadership. Instructional leadership was also emphasized from then on. In the 1990s, other leadership approaches such as transformational leadership, moral leadership, and distributed leadership became popular in school leadership research. With the power paradigm shifting from a heroic view of leaders to a more dispersed view of power, distributed leadership and teacher leadership were also highly recognized. In response to the international context, leadership for learning, which includes elements of instructional leadership, transformational leadership, and shared leadership, has gained global attention in the new millennium. (2) Retrospective view of school leadership research. Systematic reviews did not appear in the field of educational administration until the 1980s. EPPI-Centre (2012) indicated the four key features of systematic reviews. First, a high quality systematic review is explicit and is conducted using transparent methods. Second, it follows a standard set of stages. Third, the review is accountable, replicable, and updateable. Fourth, users should be involved to ensure reports are relevant and useful. The elements of reviews include the central topics of interest, guiding questions, and goals; a conceptual perspective for guiding the review's selection, evaluation, and interpretation of the studies; sources and types of data; data evaluation and analysis; and the major results of the review (Hallinger, 2014). However, according to Hallinger's study in 2014, only eight reviews met these criteria. Of the eight studies, some used critical synthesis, some adopted meta-analysis, and some employed both. In recent years, network analysis, data mining, and bibliometric analysis are increasingly being applied in systematic reviews. In addition to a greater diversity in methods, the regions under review have expanded from the United States and United Kingdom to many other regions. This development can be attributed to Hallinger's effort to initiate international collaboration to build the knowledge base of educational leadership in Asia. Because of the growing interest in the academic development in non-Western countries, he promoted the use of systematic reviews to examine studies in Asia, Africa, Saudi Arabia, and Central and South America, which resulted in more than 30 systematic reviews on educational leadership and management. A wide range of research topics is a prominent feature of educational leadership and management research. Five topics that have gained frequent attention are social justice, female leadership, school leadership preparation and development, trust, and instruction and instructional leadership. The following are the topics of frontier research in this field: principal, school leadership, and student achievement; distributed leadership, instructional leadership, teacher learning, accountability, school improvement, school reform, and leadership development; and race, justice, and urban education. In Taiwan, research reviews on educational leadership are scant. According to Lin's (2000) review, only a few studies have focused on the impact of principals on students. Pan's (2010) review indicated that of all the educational leadership studies in government-funded projects and journals, 70% of the topics were related to principals' leadership styles and behaviors. The distribution of the research topics was not sufficiently diversified to reflect global academic development. 4. Research method: This study used bibliometric analysis on the Scopus database to analyze Taiwanese school leadership research. The review process was based on the steps of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) developed by Moher et al. (2009). After the process of screening, identification, eligibility determination, and inclusion, 95 papers were included for analysis. Descriptive analysis, citation analysis, co-occurrence analysis of keywords, and co-citation analysis were conducted to address the research questions. 5. Research findings: The study had the following three key findings: (1) Concerning the volume of publication in journals, the first English paper on Taiwanese school leadership research did not appear until 2001. Although the promotion of the world university rankings and the launch of the Top University Project have changed the trend of solely using Chinese for academic writing, the number of English studies on school leadership remains limited. Moreover, only 14.7% of papers are published in the core journals of education leadership and management. (2) A citation analysis revealed that the international visibility of Taiwanese school leadership research is low. The average number of papers of the 10 most cited Taiwanese scholars is 3.5, and they have been cited an average of 45.2 times. The number of citations of Taiwanese scholars is 3.33 times less than that of African educational leadership research and 11.78 times less than that of research on three emerging regions. (3) The research topics selected by Taiwanese scholars may highlight international academic development; however, some underdeveloped topics remain such as social justice leadership, organizational theory, institutional theory, and social capital. The current co-citation analysis revealed the four schools of thought of Taiwanese school leadership, namely leadership for learning, distributed forms of leadership, leadership behavior and its impact, and social network. 6. Contributions: Systematic reviews on school leadership are scarce in Taiwan. The present study conducted a bibliometric analysis to examine the development and features of Taiwanese school leadership literature which is innovative in the research method. The connection between Taiwanese studies on school leadership research and global scholarship has seldom been addressed in relevant research. The current analysis presents the development of Taiwanese school leadership and its connection with global trends, providing critical insights and directions for future research on school leadership in Taiwan. 7. Implications: The present findings indicate the future direction of Taiwanese academic development in the field of educational administration. First, publishing more research in English can help increase the international impact of Taiwanese scholars. Greater exposure in English publications can highlight the fruitful outcome of Taiwanese school leadership research internationally. Building the academic connections between Taiwan and other countries will also be beneficial. Second, the current study identified a gap between Taiwanese school leadership research and the global trend. Including more diversified topics may help broaden the scope of research. Some topics recommended for future study include social justice leadership, organizational theory, institutional theory, social capital theory, social justice theory, and critical racialism. Third, conducting periodic replication studies using bibliometric analysis may help track the development of Taiwanese school leadership research. In particular, this method allows for a comparison of the distinguishing features of research among different periods. Fourth, a bibliometric analysis on Taiwanese school leadership research published in Chinese would be of considerable value. Taiwan has several literature databases that collect domestic research. However, the data structure provides insufficient information for an effective bibliometric analysis. To maximize the usefulness of these databases, their data structure design merits special consideration.起始頁-結束頁：175-206資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202106_66(2).00066篇名：以心理資本為中介角色：讀經志工教師教學信念與班級經營效能之關係並列篇名：Psychological Capital as a Mediator: Effect of the Teaching Beliefs of Classical Reading Program Teachers on Classroom Management Effectiveness作者：陳柏霖(Po-Lin Chen);沈妙珊(Mao-Shan Shen);許雅涵(Ya-Han Hsu)關鍵字：心理資本;兒童讀經;班級經營效能;教學信念;psychological capital;classical reading programs;classroom management effectiveness;teaching beliefs期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在瞭解社區兒童讀經志工教師教學信念、心理資本與班級經營效能之關係。研究對象為北、中、南三區的社區兒童讀經志工教師，獲得有效樣本297份。研究者自編「讀經志工教師教學信念量表」、「讀經志工教師心理資本量表」及「讀經志工教師班級經營效能量表」為研究工具，並將調查所得資料進行描述統計與結構方程模型等統計方法分析。研究結果發現：一、教學信念與心理資本為正相關；二、教學信念對班級經營效能有間接正向效果；三、心理資本與班級經營效能有直接正向效果；四、心理資本在教學信念與班級經營效能間扮演完全中介角色。最後，根據資料分析結果進行討論，並對讀經教學與未來研究提出建議。英文摘要：Background: Community Classical Reading Program (CCRP) is a nonmainstream educational approach in Taiwan. The promotion of CCRP has attracted controversy. Some educators have suggested that CCRP results in significant improvements in children's word recognition, reading, and school work (Kao & Chang, 2011a, 2011b), whereas others are opposed to this approach because its paradigm is inconsistent with common educational principles and may weaken children's thinking abilities, which violates the principle of balanced development (Chan, 2016). Although opinions differ regarding classical reading programs, numerous volunteers wish to become CCRP teachers and strive to promote CCRP among the public. This raises the question: What are the benefits of CCRP that lead teachers to support and continually promote the program? According to the researcher's personal experience, CCRP teachers have a positive and optimistic attitude. Even if they encounter objection from the public and scholars, they do not give up easily. They often perceive difficulties as challenges and maintain an optimistic attitude toward the future. The attitudes and traits of such teachers are similar to the psychological capital resources proposed by Luthans & Youssef (2004). Many studies have primarily explored the correlation between psychological capital and job performance (Avey et al., 2011). In Taiwan, studies have demonstrated that psychological capital not only improves individual emotional well-being but also enables teachers to increase their work commitments and achieve higher performance (Chen et al., 2014; Huang & Hwang, 2012; Jeng & Wu, 2012; Lee, 2009). Furthermore, Hsueh (2006) highlighted that the process and method underlying children's classical reading are major factors that influence the effectiveness of classical reading. Encouragement and support of parents and teachers also stimulate children's willingness to read. Yen (2012) indicated that teachers who value what they do tend to believe that CCRP has a favorable effect on children. Furthermore, teachers' teaching beliefs critically influence their teaching behavior and teaching effectiveness (Liang, 2012; Shen & Liu, 2007). Classroom management effectiveness can reflect the teaching effectiveness of teachers and is indicative of student learning; it also affects the trust parents place in teachers (Her, 2009). In brief, the teaching beliefs of CCRP teachers are related to classroom management effectiveness and teaching effectiveness. However, most research on CCRP has focused on the changes in children's concentration, memory, character, and behavior after the program rather than on the teaching beliefs and classroom management effectiveness of CCRP teachers, which warrants further discussion. Relevant research has confirmed that teaching beliefs are positively related to classroom management effectiveness (Chiou & Hu, 2003), and these beliefs have predictive value (Peng & Chang, 2015). Teachers with rich psychological capital pay more attention to their work at school. They not only perform their duties but also exhibit altruistic behaviors. Thus, promoting the job performance of teachers can also benefit the school and student learning (Huang & Hwang, 2012; Lee, 2009; Wang et al., 2014). From this perspective, teachers' teaching beliefs and psychological capital may affect classroom management effectiveness. Studies have rarely examined the relationship between teaching beliefs and classroom management effectiveness. Therefore, this study investigated the relationships among teaching beliefs, psychological capital, and the classroom management effectiveness of teachers in CCRP for children. Guiding questions & assumptions: 1. What are the relationships among the teaching beliefs of CCRP teachers, their psychological capital, and classroom management effectiveness? 2. Does psychological capital serve as a mediator between the teaching beliefs of CCRP teachers and classroom management effectiveness? Significance of study: Research conducted in Taiwan has revealed that 24% of teachers are at high risk of depression (Yu & Yu, 2006), and the more time teachers spend performing teaching duties, the more likely they are to develop depression (Yu et al., 2010). Excessive work pressure is related to deterioration of teaching quality and mental illness in teachers (Kyriacou, 2001). Hence, teachers' mental health problems have a wide range of impacts that merit attention. Psychological capital is regarded as a positive psychological trait that can be a deterrent to stress. People with psychological capital face challenges confidently and have a positive outlook toward the present and future. Given that teachers work in a high-pressure environment, exploring the impact of psychological capital on teachers is crucial. However, psychological capital is rarely discussed in the field of education. Therefore, this study focused on CCRP teachers to examine whether psychological capital serves as a mediator between teaching beliefs and classroom management effectiveness. Theoretical framework: We investigated the effect of psychological capital use on CCRP teachers. We hypothesize that teaching beliefs have a positive relationship with classroom management effectiveness, and psychological capital is a mediator between teaching beliefs and classroom management effectiveness. Method: A total of 297 valid questionnaires were collected through snowball sampling. The assessment tools comprised the CCRP Teachers' Teaching Beliefs Scale, the CCRP Teachers' Psychological Capital Scale, and the CCRP Teachers' Management Effectiveness Scale. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics and structural equation modeling. Findings: The general findings are summarized as follows: (1) Teaching beliefs were positively related to psychological capital. (2) Teaching beliefs exerted a significant indirect effect on classroom management effectiveness. (3) Psychological capital exerted a significant direct effect on classroom management effectiveness. (4) Psychological capital was a full mediator in the prediction of teaching beliefs and classroom management effectiveness. Discussion and implication: Our results revealed that teaching beliefs and classroom management effectiveness have a weak relationship. Hence, other factors also influence the effectiveness of classroom management. However, upon introducing psychological capital as a mediator, the association between teaching beliefs and classroom management effectiveness was stronger than before. Teachers can address problems concerning student behavior and irrational parents by using abundant psychological capital that helps them recover from setbacks, maintain optimism and positivity, and accept the challenge. Therefore, psychological capital serves as a full mediator between teachers' beliefs and classroom management. In terms of implications, teachers should carefully consider their teaching beliefs, hold discussions with their peers, and share their experience with their superiors in order to strengthen these influential people's positive attitude regarding the CCRP training process. Subsequently, they can increase their psychological capital and improve their classroom management. Future study: First, this model can be applied to other teacher groups, for example elementary and junior high school and special education teachers, to test the validity of this model in diverse contexts. If the model is good fit for other sample groups then it can be considered to have favorable external validity. Second, psychological capital is regarded as a positive psychological trait that can help mitigate stress. In contrast to the subjective well-being measure of an individual's current psychological state, psychological capital emphasizes the present and future-oriented psychological functions that highlight the resilience of individuals in response to circumstances (Avolio & Luthans, 2006). Psychological capital is often utilized as a mediator to explore job burnout and work efficiency in the human resources field (Avolio & Luthans, 2006; Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007) but has rarely been discussed in the field of education. Therefore, researchers have called for greater attention to the relationships among psychological capital and job satisfaction, work pressure, and turnover (Avey et al., 2011). Third, we focused on a group of CCRP teachers in this study who were recruited using snowball sampling. Therefore, some sampling bias may exist because of the sampling method. In future studies, participants can be recruited from online communities to increase the diversity of CCRP teachers and compare different groups to test the causal relationship. Finally, this study employed a self-administered questionnaire as the assessment tool. It has low reliability in the student's learning of the teaching beliefs scale. In addition to expanding the number of questions, future research can modify and add reverse questions to measure the participants' true reactions. Furthermore, future research can add the social expectation scale to reduce the effect of social expectations.起始頁-結束頁：207-239資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202106_66(2).00077篇名：樂齡學習者課程參與情形與幸福感、寂寞感及自尊間的關聯並列篇名：Well-being, Loneliness and Self-esteem in Lifelong Learning: The Role of Engagement作者：郭郡羽(Chun-Yu Kuo);王美文(Mei-Wen Wang);張德永(Te-Yung Chang)關鍵字：身分多元性;幸福感;終身學習;課程多元性;學習時間;role diversity;well-being;lifelong learning;course diversity;learning duration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：在高齡社會的趨勢下，高齡者的心理健康相關議題日益重要。透過終身學習能使高齡者不斷參與活動、活化大腦、增加人際連結，對高齡者的心理健康有相當大的助益。在這當中，什麼樣的高齡學習者最快樂呢？本研究目的即以初探性的方式勾勒出高齡學習者的樣貌，藉由發放837份問卷評估樂齡學習中心高齡者的幸福感、寂寞感及自尊，並針對高齡者參與課程的時間、課程的多元性及在學習中擔任身分的多元性將高齡者進行分類，觀察上述參與型態對高齡學習者的影響。結果發現，參與課程時間愈長者，幸福感及自尊都愈高；參與課程愈多元者，寂寞感較低；而身分愈多元者除幸福感、自尊較高外，寂寞感亦較低。本研究試著描繪出高齡學習者的學習特徵與各項重要心理適應變項間的關聯，發現能夠持續參與課程、多元學習及在學習過程中同時擔任多元角色的高齡者心理健康較佳。根據此研究結論，建議樂齡學習中心為高齡長輩開設課程時能關注高齡者持續參與的情形，並鼓勵參與多樣化的課程，並由學員回流成為課程助教或擔任中心志工以增加多元的角色，期使高齡者能更樂在學習中。英文摘要：The present and the future of our society are shaped by an increasing proportion of the elderly population. In the context of the global population aging, mental health concerns are more critical than ever. Lifelong learning provides opportunities for maintaining the mental health of older people. older people can continue to participate in courses to maintain their cognitive functions and increase interpersonal connections. The present study developed a profile of the characteristics of older learners at a older people learning center. We examined the influence of the duration of participation at the learning center, the diversity of the courses selected, and the impact of the diverse roles played by older people on their well-being, loneliness, and self-esteem. The results revealed that a longer participation duration resulted in higher well-being and self-esteem among participants; moreover, participating in a greater diversity of courses resulted in lower loneliness. Furthermore, increased diversity of the roles played was associated with increased well-being and self-esteem and reduced loneliness. This study explored the relationship between the learning characteristics of older learners and various critical psychological variables.起始頁-結束頁：241-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202106_66(2).00088篇名：Perceived Demand Experienced by New Senior High School Teachers in the Philippines: A Mixed Methods Study on the Microlevel Novel Obligations of National Education Reform並列篇名：菲律賓新高中教師的需求感知：從國家教育改革微觀層面看新義務的混合方法研究作者：Allan B. I. Bernardo;Barbara Wong-Fernandez;Carissa M. Enteria;Mateo D. Macalaguing;Henry G. Magat關鍵字：educational reform;high school teachers;mixed methods study;perceived demand;Philippines;教育改革;高中教師;混合方法研究;需求感知;菲律賓期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：In 2016, the Philippine Congress enacted a law that added 2 years to the basic education cycle by implementing a new Senior High School (SHS) program. As part of this national reform effort, schools were required to recruit, orient, and train the first batch of SHS teachers to implement the new curriculum. This mixed methods study explored the microlevel effects of national education reform by analyzing the experiences of new SHS teachers at private schools in Metro Manila regarding new requirements, novel obligations, and increased uncertainties; these are collectively referred to as ”perceived demand.” A convergent parallel design for mixed methods research was employed, and qualitative data from focus group discussions and quantitative data from a questionnaire revealed that several domains were related to perceived demand, including career plans, instructional tasks, and financial concerns. Quantitative data further indicated how heavy, career-related perceived demand was associated with less positive coping strategies and reduced self-esteem. The results demonstrate how the burden of career-related perceived demand relates to teachers' coping mechanisms. The discussion focused on the viability of applying perceived demand caused by social change in analyzing the microlevel effects of reform on teachers, and possible strategies for implementation were discussed.英文摘要：2016年，菲律賓國會頒布法律實施新的高中計畫，將基礎教育週期增加了兩年。作為這項國家改革的一部分，學校必須招募和培養第一批高中教師以實施新課程。本研究採用混合方法，通過分析馬尼拉大都會私立學校的新高中教師在應對新要求、新義務和新增的不確定性時的感受（統稱為「需求感知」），來探索國家教育改革的微觀影響。本研究採用聚合平行設計的混合研究方法，由焦點小組討論的質性數據和問卷調查的量化數據得知，與需求感知有關的領域包括職業規劃、教學任務和經濟考量。量化數據進一步表明，高職業相關的需求感知與較低積極應對策略及低自尊有關。本研究的結果指出了職業相關的需求感知負荷是如何與教師的應對機制相關聯的。本文最後重點討論了在分析改革對教師的微觀影響時運用由社會變化而產生的需求感知的可行性，及可能的執行策略。起始頁-結束頁：265-288資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202106_66(2).00099篇名：表現本位教育實習成績評量制度之建構及其試辦成果分析並列篇名：Outcomes of the Application of Performance-Based Assessment System for Educational Practicums作者：黃嘉莉(Jia-Li Huang);武佳瀅(Chia-Ying Wu)關鍵字：表現本位評量;師資培育;教育實習;臨床表現評量;performance-based assessment;teacher education;educational practicum;clinic performance assessment期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：因應2017年《師資培育法》調整先考試後實習，讓教育實習成績成為取得教師證書的重要依據。本研究基於國際趨勢與相關研究，建構以表現為本的實習成績評量制度，並蒐集利害關係人意見，以瞭解制度試辦的成效。本研究建構評量制度後經過試辦，回收實習學生330份、實習輔導教師255份、實習指導教師41份問卷後，運用SPSS 22軟體進行統計描述分析與質化編碼。本研究發現在表現評量任務的設計上，能讓利害關係人對教育實習歷程有整體性認識、促使實習輔導教師瞭解幫助實習學生方法、促進互動並增進實習輔導教師自我反思，以及減輕革新成績評量負擔的效果；在表現評量任務設計上，能精進實習學生專業教學能力，但任務表單的設計仍有調整的空間；在表現評量方法上，能讓評量實習學生表現更為客觀與具有共識。英文摘要：This study aimed to design a new performance-based assessment system for educational practicums to replace the high-risk assessment included in the Teacher Education Act, amended in 2017. Data were collected from stakeholders' opinions, including 330 student teachers, 255 cooperating teachers, and 41 teacher educators through descriptive statistics. The results demonstrated that the newly developed system allows stakeholders to understand the whole educational practicum process, allows participating teachers to better understand the ways they can help student teachers, facilitates stakeholder interactions, stimulates participating teachers' reflections, and reduces the burden due to previous reforms to the education practicum assessment system. Second, the tasks can promote student teachers' professional competence, but must be adjusted for tasks that are too cumbersome. Third, the use of performance-based assessment methods can make the outcome of assessments more objective and reach a consensus. This research developed an original performance evaluation system that parallels international trends and conforms to the characteristics of educational practicum situated learning. This research also provides additional design ideas and evidence for the transformation of the educational practicum system in Taiwan as a basis for granting teacher certificates.起始頁-結束頁：1-38資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202103_66(1).000110篇名：撥雲見日－身心障礙資賦優異學生教學輔導之行動研究並列篇名：Dispelling the Clouds and Seeing the Sun: Action Research on Teaching and Counseling for Twice-Exceptional Students in an Elementary School作者：鄭聖敏(Sheng-Min Cheng)關鍵字：身心障礙資賦優異學生;教師合作;優勢本位教學輔導;twice-exceptional students;teacher collaboration;strengths-based teaching and counseling期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以一所國小為研究場域，採行動研究法，邀集該國小之導師、身障教育教師及資優教育教師組成研究團隊，透過計畫、行動、觀察、省思、修改、再行動的動態歷程，檢視並調整一名自閉症兼一般智能資賦優異學生原有之教學輔導運作機制及內涵，且探討調整之結果。研究結果顯示，教師合作之身心障礙資賦優異學生教學輔導運作有助於提升學生整體表現，其具體成果在教師合作方面有：一、建立以個管教師擔任教師合作協調者之機制；二、採用靈活有彈性的教師合作方式；三、主動協調各類教師進行師生配對。在身障資優學生所需之支持與成效方面，則有：一、擬定以優勢發展為核心的教學輔導內涵與執行策略，使身障資優學生整體表現提升；二、建構普通班的支持性環境，成為身障資優學生展現優勢的舞臺。本研究根據研究結論，分別從實務現場及未來研究提出若干建議。英文摘要：This study explored the operating mechanism and the content of teaching and counseling provided to twice-exceptional students by a team of teachers consisting of a regular classroom teacher, a disability resource room teacher, and a giftedness resource room teacher. The subject of the case study was a gifted fourth-grade student with autism. The research was conducted through a cyclical process of plan, action, observation, reflection, revision, and reaction. The results demonstrated that providing appropriate services for twice-exceptional students through collaborative efforts of various types of teachers can improves students' overall performance. The results for teacher collaboration were (1) establishing a mechanism for case managers to lead teachers through collaboration; (2) adopting teacher cooperation flexibility; (3) actively coordinating various teachers for teacher-student matching. The results for providing support for twice-exceptional students were (1) developing strengths-based content and implementing strategies for twice-exceptional students; (2) constructing a performance stage for twice-exceptional students to demonstrate their talents in a supportive regular classroom setting. Finally, we proposed some suggestions for governmental education departments, schools, and future studies.起始頁-結束頁：39-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202103_66(1).000201篇名：國家轉型下的高等教育－從福利國家到競爭國家並列篇名：Higher Education under the National Transformation-From Welfare State to Competitive State作者：陳芳吟(Fang-Yin Chen);余曉雯(Hsiao-Wen Yu)關鍵字：福利國家;競爭國家;高等教育;welfare state;competitive state;higher education期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：福利國家的建立是第一次世界大戰後西方先進國家的主流。然而，1970年代時，因為石油危機所引發的經濟問題，以及全球化時代的來臨，使得福利國家逐漸面臨風險與危機。為因應此危機，許多國家因而調整其財政運作方式，也連帶地使得國家的型態與角色面臨轉型。在這樣的轉型過程中，競爭國家體制逐漸取代福利國家體制，成為當代西方主要的國家型態。在福利國家轉型成競爭國家的情勢下，也同時對高等教育的發展帶來不同層面的影響。在福利國家型態中，高等教育是福利清單中的一種項目；然而在競爭國家型態中，高等教育則轉變成用來提高國家競爭力的主要工具之一。本文的目的即在透過相關文獻之分析，一方面探討此種國家轉型的過程；另一方面，則剖析這兩種不同的國家類型對高等教育的影響。大體而言，這些影響主要呈現在兩個層面上：1.就政府而言，其在高等教育領域所扮演的角色，由國家控制走向市場化；而政府的高等教育政策重點，則從干預轉向策略導向。2.就高等教育機構而言，追求學術卓越的用意在於提高國際競爭力；高等教育機構的定位則從創造福利的最大化，轉向重視創業精神與獲利能力。然而，無論是國家或高等教育機構，如何在這樣的轉型中面對社會公平正義的問題，則是一仍需要審慎思考的挑戰。英文摘要：The establishment of the welfare state is the mainstream in advanced Western countries after World War Ι. However, due to the economic problems caused by oil crisis and the challenges brought by globalization, the welfare states have been increasingly at risk and in crisis since 1970s. In response to the crisis, many countries have adjusted their financial operations, which therefore cause the transition of the type and role of the nation. In this transformation process, the competitive state system gradually replaces the welfare state system and becomes an important national type in modern Western countries. The change of state types - from welfare state to competitive state - also brings about different levels of impacts on the development of higher education. Higher education was one of the items in the welfare list in welfare state, but in competitive state, higher education becomes one of the major tools to enhance national competitiveness. By virtue of literature analysis, the aim of this study is on one hand to explore the national transformation process; on the other hand to analyze the impact of these two types of states on higher education. Broadly speaking, these effects are manifested in two levels: 1. the government's role in the field of higher education transforms from state-controlled to market-oriented; while the government's higher education policies emphasize strategy instead of intervention. 2. For higher education institutions, the pursuit of academic excellence lies in enhancing the international competitiveness, and the position of higher education institutions has been changed from the maximization of the welfare to the emphasis on the entrepreneurship and profitability. However, the problem of social fairness and justice in this transitional process is still a challenging task, which both government and institutions of higher education need to face with.起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2102.012篇名：大學自治下對學生基本權保障的探究並列篇名：A Study of the Protection of the Fundamental Rights of College Students from the Perspective of University Autonomy作者：許育典(Yue-Dian Hsu);林姁璇(Hsu-Hsuan Lin)關鍵字：大學自治;學生權利;學術自由;規章自治;層級化校規保留;university autonomy;rights of students;academic freedom;self-regulation;reservation of the university regulatory hierarchy期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：大學具有自治權，是立基於大學自治此一制度；在這樣一個學術自由的制度性保障下，大學得依其內部構成員的共同決意，做出具有拘束力的決定。學校制定規則、辦法皆是以維持校園秩序為出發點所做出的內部決定。縱然在大學校規範圍內，大學生必須遵行，但應肯認大學生在校內，仍有相當範圍的基本權保障空間。在此，為對焦於本文主軸，故將討論範圍，限於大學對於大學生所頒布的校規。首先本文要針對大學自治的內容為建構，對於大學自治的產生、功能與類型為討論。接著針對與大學生緊密相關的校規的性質、作用及對象為討論，其中為衡量校規與大學生基本權孰輕孰重，在此本文型塑一個衡量的層級化概念：層級化校規保留，以便操作校規與大學生之間的利益衡量。最後則著眼於對近年前所發生之實際案例的檢討。整體而言，本文的目的在於，嘗試透過建立一個有關在學大學生基本權之侵害與保障的清晰檢驗結構，並藉此判斷，學生的基本權，是不是如同以前「特別權力關係」中的一方一樣，在以「大學自治」為名的校務實踐下被限制而難以獲得完整的保障；若依照本文的所提出之層級化保留的檢驗結構，可以進一步釐清大學在行使其自治權限時，應該如何面對（各種）大學生的相關權利；另一方面藉此希望大學能夠避免逾越其自治權限，並且符合法治要求，從而保障大學生的基本權，以落實大學生的主體性，並避免特別權力關係的遺毒仍存於大學校園中。英文摘要：Based upon the paradigm of university autonomy, universities enjoy the power of self-governance. The paradigm serves as a systematic protection of academic freedom which empowers universities in accordance with the collective wills of its constituencies to promulgate regulations which have the binding effects upon all affiliates. University rules and Regulations are internal codeterminations promulgated with a view toward maintaining the campus order. Although it is true that university students shall observe the university rules and regulations, it is equally true that university students shall still enjoy the room under the protection of their fundamental rights. Therefore, in order to maintain the focus of this Article, the scope of this Article will be the university rules and regulations promulgated to govern their students. First of all, this Article will construct the content of university autonomy and will discuss its formation, functions, and types. Secondly, this Article will discuss the nature, the functions, and the objectives of the university rules and regulations which are closely related to college students. Of all those discussions, in order to evaluate the significance of the university rules and regulations and the fundamental freedom of college students, this Article will illustrate a concept of a hierarchical regulatory structure, the reservation of the university regulatory hierarchy, to better evaluate the significance between the university rules and regulations and the interests of college students. Finally, this Article will review the recent actually cases. In sum, the purpose of this Article is to attempt to establish a clear reviewing mechanism to determine the protections and infringements of the fundamental rights of college students. Pursuant to the reviewing hierarchical regulatory structure raised by this Article, universities can further clarify how to deal with the fundamental rights of college students while exercising their powers of university autonomy. Furthermore, this Article wishes that the reservation of the university regulatory hierarchy may prevent universities from exceeding their powers under university autonomy, may ascertain that universities observe the law, may protect the fundamental rights of college students, and may help to implement university autonomy and at the same time to prevent the dress of the principle of the special power relationship from being alive in university campuses.起始頁-結束頁：37-67資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2102.023篇名：校長教學視導、教師知識分享與教師專業發展之關係－運用中介效果模式驗證並列篇名：Exploring the Relationship among Principal's Supervision of Instruction, Teachers' Knowledge Sharing and Teachers' Professional Development: A Test of the Mediated-Effects Model作者：陳建志(Chien-Chih Chen);陳亭燏(Ting-Yu Chen)關鍵字：中介效果模式;知識分享;教學視導;教師專業發展;mediated-effects model;knowledge sharing;instructional supervision;teachers' professional development期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究旨在利用中介效果模式，分析國小校長教學視導、教師知識分享與教師專業發展之關聯性。以往相關研究大多運用直接效果模式進行，然而，其無法解決校長如何透過知識分享，影響教師專業發展之重要議題。因此本研究採取中介效果模式，進一步瞭解其關係。本次研究係針對屏東縣國小教師進行問卷調查，所得資料主要應用積差相關、迴歸分析以及結構方程模式進行統計分析。本次研究共得到兩個結論：（1）校長教學視導對教師知識分享具有正向的解釋作用；校長教學視導及教師知識分享對教師專業發展亦具正向的解釋作用。（2）校長教學視導能夠間接透過教師知識分享的中介作用，對教師專業發展造成正向的顯著影響。英文摘要：This study aims to analyze the relationship between principal's supervision of instruction, teachers' knowledge sharing and teachers' professional development by using mediated-effects model. Previous studies normally use directed-effects model. However, the use of directed-effects model does not resolve the most important theoretical issues concerning the means by which principals achieve an impact on teachers' professional development through teachers' knowledge sharing. Therefore, we use mediated-effects model to analyze the relationship in this study. By using product-moment correlation, regression analysis and the structural equation modeling (SEM), this study examined the relationship between principal's supervision of instruction and teachers' professional development mediated by the condition of knowledge sharing. Three related questionnaires were used to measure the major variables while data was collected of teachers in Pingtung County. It was found that principal's supervision of instruction can predict teachers' knowledge sharing and principal's supervision of instruction and teachers' knowledge sharing can also predict teachers' professional development. Also, the result from mediated-effects model indicated that knowledge sharing had the significant mediated effects of supervision of instruction on teachers' professional development.起始頁-結束頁：69-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2102.034篇名：教師發揮教學設計想像力的心理與環境因素探究並列篇名：The Influences of Individual Psychology and School Environment on the Teachers' Imaginative Capability of Instructional Design作者：許育齡(Yu-Ling Hsu);梁朝雲(Chao-Yun Liang);林志成(Chih-Cheng Lin)關鍵字：個人心理;教學設計;想像力;學校環境;individual psychology;instructional design;imaginative capability;school environment期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013中文摘要：本研究探究教師從事教學設計的想像力，及其個人心理與學校環境與該想像力的影響。本研究以380位職前教師的樣本做為因素建構組；復以318位現職教師樣本做為因素驗證組，考驗不同人口變項的差異，並探討影響教學設計想像力的結構模型。研究結果顯示：（1）教學設計想像力，可分為創造性與再造性想像力；（2）教學設計想像力與內外因素影響效果差異，主要顯現於教學年資不同，以及學校規模與擔任職務角色兩者間的交互作用；（3）內在動機對創造性與再造性教學設計想像力，有直接的預測力；（4）個人心理與學校環境之自我效能、生產認知、教學資源、文化特質與物理條件等因素則可透過內在動機的中介作用，間接預測教師教學設計之創造性與再造性想像力；（5）不論對再造性或創造性想像力，負向情緒都有直接的負向效果。本研究所建立的工具，具備穩定的信度與效度，未來可運用於跨領域施測並進行比較分析。此外，預測教學設計想像力的結構模型亦深具再探究的學術價值。英文摘要：This study aimed at analyzing the teacher's imaginative capability of instructional design and how individual psychology and school environment would predict the capability. This study also analyzed the demographic influences and established a structural model to predict the imaginative capability of instructional design. In order to achieve the research goals, we conducted an exploratory factor analysis to determine the most appropriate structure of imaginative capability in a sample of 380 pre-service teachers (serving the calibration sample), and then conducted a confirmatory factor analysis to confirm the established structure in a sample of 318 in-service teachers (serving the validation sample). The results of this study showed that: (1) the imaginative capability of instructional design consisted of creative imagination and reproductive imagination; (2) both the years of service and the interactive effect between school scale and role duty had different influences on the imaginative capability, individual psychology and school environment; (3) intrinsic motivation had direct effects on both creative imagination and reproductive imagination; (4) self-efficacy, generative cognition, teaching resources, human aggregate and physical component had indirect effects on two types of imagination through the mediator of intrinsic motivation; (5) negative emotion had negative effects on two types of imagination. Both reliability and validity analyses gave the instruments good support which can be used for the future inquiries in different domains. In addition, it is valuable to further explore the structural model established in this study.起始頁-結束頁：113-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2102.045篇名：書評：潛在成長曲線模式並列篇名：Book Review: Latent Growth Curve Modeling作者：余民寧(Min-Ning Yu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷2期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：149-159資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2102.056篇名：W. Rein理念學說的修正及其教育意義並列篇名：W. Rein's Doctrine of Ideas and Its Implications作者：朱啟華(Chi-Hua Chu)關鍵字：W. Rein的理念學說;Herbart學派;詮釋學;W. Rein's doctrine of ideas;Herbart School;hermeneutics期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：社會應當要如何影響個體，以便使他的能力得到陶冶，進而又能貢獻所學，促進社會進步，當中所隱含的個人與社會如何互動的問題，一直是教育中的重要課題，因為偏重個體，容易忽略了他的社會責任；過於強調社會又會限制個人能力的發展。因此，如何使個體與社會得到同樣的重視，就有必要加以探討。為釐清這個問題，本文以Wilhelm Rein（1847-1929）的理念學說（Ideenlehre）為例，呈現社會中的不同系統如何影響個體，使他展現不同系統所要求的行為規範。但由於Rein 偏重在社會系統對個人影響的陳述，缺少個人如何回饋社會系統的討論，因此本文要藉由Johann Wolfgang von Goethe（1749-1832）、Georg Kerschensteiner（1854-1932）以及Eduard Spranger（1882-1963）等人對於主體與客體、個人與社會系統間具有辯證發展關係的觀點，補充Rein理念學說不足之處。因此本文研究目的包含了：一、呈現Rein理念學說如何在個人德行能力陶冶，以及與社會道德提升二者間取得平衡；二、討論並補充Rein的理念學說，使其論述內容更有依據；三、由上述修正了的理念學說，衍生在教育上的意義。為達成這三項目的，將以詮釋學作為研究方法。綜合本文討論內容，可以達成如下的結論：一、在修正了Rein的理念學說之後，能夠以此為基礎，說明為何透過教育歷程，可以使個人能力陶冶與社會發展二者間，同時得到提升；二、可以以Rein修正後的學說為依據，說明應當要在教育過程中，同等重視個人與社會這二個面向；三、能由Rein修正後的學說，顯現培養學生批判與反省社會規範能力的重要性。英文摘要：The relationship between individuals and the society, that is how socialized individuals interact with the society and contribute for the improvement of the society, has long been considered one of the most important issues in education. Any unilaterally favored treatment, placing more emphasis on either individuals or the society, may lead to impasse. Therefore it is central to consider how both aspects of the question can come to terms with each other in education.This article aims to explain the relationship between the individual and society on the base of Rein's Doctrine of Ideas. After pointing out that Rein's account is insufficient for responding to this question, particularly as it relates to the individual's ability to feedback to the society, I argue that in order to fully address the issue, we can take into account the thoughts of Goethe, Kerschensteiner and Spranger. They draw attention on the dialectical relationship between subject and object, and between the individual and the external world. Methodologically, the argument of this article proceeds with a hermeneutic approach as follows: first it outlines Rein's theory in terms of how it explains the promoting of individual autonomy can be in accordance with social orders; then it draws attention to what Rein's theory fails to adequately treat; and finally it proposes a modified thinking which enables a better respond to the question.A conclusion to respond to the relation between individuals and the society is discussed, by adapting Rein's theory so as to show that the promotion of critical thinking and the maintenance of social orders are compatible, and both of which belong to the task of education simultaneously.起始頁-結束頁：1-28資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2101.017篇名：塞荷的教育知識論探究並列篇名：A Study on Michel Serres' Educational Epistemology作者：許宏儒(Hung-Ju Hsu)關鍵字：人文科學;米歇爾•塞荷;西北航道;自然科學;教育知識論;human science;Michel Serres;natural science;North West Passage;educational epistemology期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：本文旨在探討法蘭西學術院院士Michel Serres（米歇爾• 塞荷）的教育知識論。當前全球高等教育機構正積極推展通識教育，重新省思以往以學科作為知識分界的教學方式。但若要真正的將知識連「通」起來，成為通識教育，就必須從知識論典範上的根本分析與反思，並從基本知識的細微分子上，重新解構，再加以融合。塞荷認為知識不應該分為自然科學與人文科學。他希冀的是交融自然科學與人文科學的混合的知識形式，一種知識火焰的模式。而這種交融是一種尋「西北航道」之旅的教育知識論。塞荷並針對這種知識論的形式，初步規劃出大學一年級的共同課程。而事實上，通識教育的「通」應由形容詞轉換為「動詞」，其核心在於培養學生自發與自動地跨越分化的知識領域，自我建構具有組織性、聯結性的意義世界。塞荷的教育知識論，即旨在教育出能不斷跨越疆界，通向異質之處的「博學的第三者／知識的吟遊者」。這也是未來「明日之人」（l’homme de demain）的可能圖像。英文摘要：This article investigates French Academician-Michel Serres' educational epistemology. Nowadays, individual discipline as the only means of teaching knowledge has been in question in higher education in the world. Thus, liberal education is taken into consideration as one of the most important reform of curriculum. However, concerning about the liberal education, we cannot but analyze and interrogate the fundamental epistemology of disciplines, deconstruct their elements and reintegrate them. From Serres' point of view, he argues that we can not divide the knowledge into the natural science and the human science. His educational epistemology is a flame-knowledge where the natural science and the human science mix into. He also designs common programs for the first years of College. In fact, the main idea of liberal education is to form students as a self-organization man who is capable of constructing a meaningful, organized and connected world by himself; and to form students as a human who like to spontaneously transgress the boundary of discipline and knowledge. Therefore, his educational epistemology seeks the ”North West Passage” between all knowledge and hopes to come into being a ”troubadour of knowledge” who will never stop transgressing, mixing all knowledge, learning, and being toward others. The ”troubadour of knowledge” represents the future picture of ”a man of tomorrow.”起始頁-結束頁：29-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2101.028篇名：歷史脈絡性思考與國際視野：以國中社會教科書「牡丹社事件」為例並列篇名：Contextualized Thinking and International Worldviews in History Education: An Analysis of the MuDan Incident in Junior High School Social Studies Textbooks作者：宋佩芬(Pei-Fen Sung);吳宗翰(Tsung-Han Wu)關鍵字：歷史教科書;歷史思維;脈絡性思考;多重因果關係;history textbook;historical thinking;contextualized thinking;multiple causations期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：全球化時代的歷史教育開始著重教導學生以超越單一國族視野的角度理解歷史，並培養脈絡性思考與其多重因果關係的歷史思維能力。本研究假設透過教授與國際相關的歷史事件，學生更容易從中培養脈絡性思考的能力。因此，本研究以「牡丹社事件」為例，透過質化詮釋取向的文本分析方法，探究國中社會科歷史部分之教科書如何呈現「牡丹社事件」與其因果關係，以瞭解教科書如何在國際面向之脈絡與多重因果關係上，提供發展學生思維能力的機會。我們檢視南一、康軒與翰林等三個版本的教科書與其教師手冊中對於該事件的敘述。研究發現，「琉球身分」、「近代主權國家」vs.「中華秩序」、「蕃地無主論」、「國際與日本國內反應」及「原住民角度」等背景知識俱是理解此事件的重要脈絡，然而三個版本的教科書並未呈現如此脈絡，因而未能有效幫助學習者進入歷史情境理解歷史。本文主張，如果歷史教科書與教師能在授課時提供更多對當時的世界情勢與思想的背景，則臺灣學生不但能擁有多重因果的思考能力，更能將國際視野自然地紮根在歷史的脈絡性思維裡。英文摘要：In the era of globalization, history education begins to stress moving beyond a single national perspective to understand the past, and preparing students to think contextually and understand multiple causations. This study assumes that it is easier for students to acquire the ability to think contextually through learning internationally related historical events. Using the interpretive text-analysis method, this study uses the MuDan Incident as a case to examine how Juniorhigh school social studies (history) textbooks represent the incident and explains its causation, in order to understand how the textbooks provide opportunities for students to think contextually and understand multiple causations. We examine textbook narratives of Nani, Kang Hsuan, and Han Lin publishers and the teachers' manuals. The results show that ”the status of the Ryukyu kingdom,” ”modern sovereign nation-state system (the Westphalian system) vs. Chinese world order system (Tianxia system),” ”aboriginal Formosa as non-territory,” ”the reactions of the Western countries & the domestic factors in Japan,” and ”the perspectives of Taiwanese indigenous peoples” are important contexts to understand the MuDan Incident, however, current textbooks and teachers' manuals fail to represent the event in a contextualized way, which would not help students get into the historical contexts to understand the past. We argue that if history textbooks and teachers could offer more background knowledge and ideas about the world in the past, Taiwan's students could not only develop abilities to think multi-causally, but also ground their global perspectives naturally in historically contextualized thinking.起始頁-結束頁：83-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2101.039篇名：Three Teachers' Transfer of Literacy Learning並列篇名：三位教師讀寫學習的課程知識之轉變作者：曾靜宜(Ching-Yi Tseng)關鍵字：讀寫學習;知識轉變;閱讀認知;literacy learning;knowledge transfer;reading perceptions期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013中文摘要：讀寫師資訓練一直以來影響與左右教學現場的成效。然，直接影響教師學習轉變因素卻不明。透過讀寫師資訓練，探討教師的學習轉變以及教學現場的應用。藉著兩方面的落差，了解教師在師資訓練學習過程中，所面臨的學習與教學應用的難處以及在教學現場應用的意願。透過一年的讀寫師資補助訓練課程與質性研究的技巧分析，檢視教師們在讀寫師資訓練過程中學習轉變的因素。研究發現，教師的學習行為印證了六個學習轉變因素：一、教師對讀寫教學的態度，二、教師對讀寫教學的適應性，三、教師對讀寫教學的活化性，四、教師對讀寫教學的實用性，五、教師對讀寫教學的融入性，六、教師對讀寫教學的未來可行性。文中鉅細靡宜描述三位教師的個人態度與師資訓練的經驗以及對教材的密切度皆都影響著讀寫師資訓練知識的轉變與現場教學應用的多寡。英文摘要：An overarching goal of literacy professional development involves its impact on teachers' classroom practices. However, a direct consideration of this transfer of literacy learning remains unclear. I address this gap by investigating teachers' transfer of learning from their participation in a professional development event to their classrooms. I capture this intention by asking the question, what supports and drawbacks do teachers encounter when they attempt to transfer professional development proposals into their literacy classroom practices? To answer this question, I conducted a qualitative investigation during teachers' completion of activities linked to a one year, externally funded professional development project. My findings support the influence of six factors: (1) attitude, (2) compatibility, (3) activation, (4) practice, (5) information flow, and (6) self-loop. In this study, three descriptions of teachers are given to illuminate how each person's attitudes and perceptions developed in this professional development experience. The findings indicate how these three teachers' attitudes and perceptions of professional development experiences and commitment to the material influence the transfer of knowledge from the course into the reality of the classrooms.起始頁-結束頁：121-151資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2101.0410篇名：時空多重折射下世界各國接受杜威思想的情況作者：單文經期刊/會議論文集名稱：當代教育研究季刊卷期：21卷1期出版年：2013起始頁-結束頁：153-170資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學教育研究與評鑑中心DOI：10.6151/CERQ.2013.2101.0501篇名：再遊戲化能力初探：以小學生玩家在教育遊戲平臺為例並列篇名：The Exploration of Re-Gamification Competence: The Experience of Elementary Students on Educational Game Platform作者：張鐵懷(Tieh-Huai Chang);陳斐卿(Fei-Ching Chen)關鍵字：小學生;再遊戲化能力;玩家;硬樂趣;電玩經驗;elementary school students;re-gamification;gamers;hard fun;gaming experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：當遊戲不能持續提供沉浸狀態時，玩家的流失並不讓人感到意外，但也有一群玩家與無趣狀態相抗衡，設法自行開創玩法、尋找樂趣，此現象已然益發普遍，但此能力如何生成，尚未受到學術界足夠的重視。本研究從遊戲世界展現之硬樂趣與深度遊玩，提出「再遊戲化」的主張，並以實徵的具體案例佐證。研究聚焦於小學生玩家在持續投入4年以上於全國頗負盛名的遊戲化教育平臺之教室實作，透過觀察、訪談與文件蒐集，探索玩家展現的再遊戲化能力。研究問題定錨於：在教育性遊戲平臺中，有哪些玩家的「再遊戲化」能力展現之實例？研究結果提出三個對比教育遊戲與再遊戲化的轉變：一、「心流理論的打字遊戲」對比「找程式漏洞為樂的再遊戲化」；二、「程序化培養經營書店能力的遊戲」對比「設計以怪書經營書店的再遊戲化」；三、「設計者的遊戲化書店經營遊戲」對比「自製反向密室逃脫的再遊戲化」。這些實例顯示：學生玩家於教育遊戲平臺之作為，與商業遊戲的玩家所顯現的再遊戲化能力相互輝映，顯然，玩家再遊戲化能力已到了以概念定義現象的階段，相當值得更進一步深化與研究。英文摘要：Typically, gamers may leave games when games themselves could no longer afford gamers a state of immersion. Still, there are gamers who fight against dullness, managing to create new basic rules and exploring pleasure in the game. Such phenomena could be observed in the gaming world, but how gamers' come up with the competences of re-gamifying the gamified environment is still obscure and has not received much attention in academia. From the perspective of Hard Fun and the phenomenon of yarikomi in the gaming world, the present study bolstered a concept of re-gamification with empirical evidence. The research context was located at a pioneering gamified educational platform, where elementary school gamers engaged in various educational activities for six years. Through observation, interviews, and the collection of related documents, the present study unveiled the competences of re-gamification exhibited by student gamers. The research question is ”What are the re-gamifying competences on gamified educational platform?” Three themes have been generated from the present study. First, the typing game based on Flow Theory vs. the re-gamification of debugging for fun. Second, the procedural learning game of managing a bookstore vs. the re-gamification of decorating bookstore entrance and finding eccentric stocks. Third, the bookstore game, originally designed for running bookstore business, had been re-gamified into an alternative escape room game. All the above instances were self-initiated by student gamers and suggested empirical evidence of re-gamification. In a nutshell, the present study demonstrated student gamers' agency and practice of re-gamification, which echoed the re-gamifying competences found in commercial games. Apparently, re-gamifying competences of gamers have come to the stage of conceptualizing and theorizing, which definitely deserves further exploration and investigation.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20210413020012篇名：擴增實境對天文學習的影響：以非正式的觀星課程為例並列篇名：Effect of Augmented Reality on Astronomy Learning: An Example of Informal Constellation Courses作者：蔣佳玲(Chia-Ling Chiang);陳震宇(Jen-Yeu Chen);林佑霖(Yu-Lin Lin);賴志宏(Chih-Hung Lai)關鍵字：天文教學;非正式課程;認知負荷;擴增實境;觀星;astronomical teaching;informal course;cognitive load;augmented reality;stargazing期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：觀星是天文教學中重要的一環，但學校的觀星課程受限於時間、地理、天候的因素，要進行戶外實地的天文觀察教學有其困難。另外，在學習輔具方面，目前大部分使用的紙本星座盤或電腦模擬輔助學習的方式，不易真實反應星空的立體感，易造成觀星時操作上的障礙及產生迷思概念。擴增實境技術在教育應用有愈來愈多的趨勢，可結合真實情境與虛擬學習環境，使複雜的空間關係與抽象概念能夠視覺化，為天文教學帶來一線契機。因此，本研究建置一個結合星象儀與行動載具的教學環境，並開發一擴增實境輔助天文觀察之學習系統，以期協助學生的學習，並探討擴增實境在觀星課程中對天文知識、觀星技巧，以及認知負荷的影響。本研究以冬令研習營的方式進行，招募87位國小四、五年級的學童參與，分別分配到擴增實境組、電腦模擬組及星座盤輔助教學組。實驗結果顯示，在天文知識的學習上，擴增實境、電腦模擬與星座盤等三種教學方式，皆可增進天文知識的學習，不過三種方式之間並無顯著差異；在觀星技能上，擴增實境組的觀星技能面向成績顯著優於電腦模擬組及星座盤組，且三組認知負荷無顯著差異，顯示使用擴增實境方式學習，對學生在觀星技能方面有較佳的學習輔助效果。英文摘要：Stargazing is an essential part of astronomy teaching. But in the school's stargazing course, it is limited by time, geography, and weather. Therefore, it is difficult to carry out outdoor astronomy observation teaching. In addition, in terms of learning aids, paper-based planisphere, or computer simulations are most popular to assist in learning. They are difficult to truly reflect the three-dimensional sense of the starry sky, easy to cause operational obstacles when stargazing and generate misconceptions. There are more and more trends in the application of augmented reality technology in education. It can provide a virtual learning environment combined with real situations so that complex spatial relationships and abstract concepts can be visualized. It seems to bring an opportunity for stargazing courses. Therefore, this study proposed a teaching environment that combines the planetarium with mobile devices and built an augmented reality learning system to assist stargazing learning. Moreover, this study also explored the effects of augmented reality on astronomical knowledge, stargazing skills, and cognitive load. This study was conducted in the form of a camp. Students in grades four and five of elementary school were recruited to participate. A total of 87 students were assigned to the augmented reality group, the computer simulation group, and the paper-based planisphere group. The experimental results revealed that any one of augmented reality, computer simulation, and paper-based planisphere could enhance learning about astronomical knowledge. Still, there is no significant difference in the three groups in learning achievement of astronomical knowledge. In terms of stargazing skills, the augmented reality group is higher than the computer simulation group and the paper-based planisphere group. Also, there is no significant difference between the three groups for cognitive load. It means that using augmented reality learning can help students have better learning aids in stargazing skills.起始頁-結束頁：27-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20210413020023篇名：大學生之自我導向學習準備度與智慧型手機成癮之相關研究並列篇名：Interrelationship between Taiwanese College Students' Self-Directed Learning Readiness and Smartphone Addiction作者：陳揚學(Yang-Hsueh Chen)關鍵字：大學生;自我導向學習準備度;智慧型手機成癮;college students;self-directed learning readiness;smartphone addiction期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究主要探討臺灣大學生自我導向學習準備度（進行自我導向學習時所需具備之態度、能力與特質）與智慧型手機成癮之關聯性。研究者針對臺灣地區北、中、南、東公私立大學日間部學生發放自我導向學習準備度量表與智慧型手機成癮量表，以李克特五點量尺計分，共蒐集800份樣本。描述統計結果顯示，臺灣大學生之自我導向學習準備度總量表平均高於中間值3，構面中以「對未來充滿希望」最高，「主動學習」最低；智慧型手機成癮總量表平均略低於中間值，構面最高為「戒斷」與「耐受性」，最低則為「強迫行為」與「功能障礙」。此外，自我導向學習準備度與智慧型手機成癮量表總分呈現顯著負相關，尤其是「自我管理」構面與智慧型手機成癮總分負相關最高；另一方面，「強迫行為」與「功能障礙」與自我導向學習準備度總分有較高之相關。研究者基於各項研究結果提出相關建議，盼能激發更多關於自我導向特質與智慧型手機沉迷／成癮之研究，以持續探究、驗證可行之政策及教學與輔導策略。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to explore the interrelationship between Taiwanese college students' self-directed learning readiness (the attitudes, abilities, and characteristics necessary for self-directed learning) and their smartphone addiction. A total of 800 public and private university students across Taiwan participated in this study, wherein the participants completed a survey comprising the Self-directed Learning Readiness Scale (SDLRS, including hope for the future, self-understanding, active learning, confidence with learning, and self-management dimensions) and the Smartphone Addiction Inventory (SPAI, including compulsive behavior, withdraw, tolerance, and functional impairments dimensions). Descriptive statistics results showed that the SDLRS total scale average score were higher than the midpoint 3, meanwhile the students scored highest on hope for the future and lowest on active learning. As with SPAI, the total scale average score were lower than the midpoint 3, and the participants scored higher on withdraw and tolerance and lower on compulsory behavior and functional impairments. Furthermore, correlation analysis indicated that SDLRS negatively correlated with SPAI, particularly compulsory behavior and functional impairments had highest negative correlations with participants' self-regulation. Suggestions were put forward based on research findings and related literature. We hope this study to stimulate more research on individuals' self-regulation and smartphone addiction, in turn verify effective policies/ strategies for teaching and guidance.起始頁-結束頁：57-85資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20210413020034篇名：數位遊戲式之泰語學習：語言焦慮、自我效能對於情意表現因素及學習價值之相關分析並列篇名：Thai Vocabulary Mobile Learning: Applying Achievement Emotion Theory to Explore the Correlates between Language Learning Anxiety, Self-Efficacy, Gameplay Anxiety and Interest, and Learning Value作者：黃明月(Ming-Yueh Hwang);洪榮昭(Jon-Chao Hong);譚華德(Nitiwat Watthanapas);葉建宏(Jian-Hong Ye);葉貞妮(Jhen-Ni Ye);郝永崴(Yung-Wei Hao)關鍵字：自我效能;泰文學習;遊戲焦慮;遊戲興趣;學習價值;self-efficacy;Thai language learning;gameplay anxiety;gameplay interest;learning value期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：遊戲式學習效用雖在諸多教育研究中獲得證實，但應用於第二外語學習上仍不常見，故本研究在基於成就情緒的控制價值理論及多媒體認知學習理論之下，應用一款數位遊戲APP幫助泰文初學者進行泰文字彙的學習，並探討其學習價值。本研究的有效參與者共162位，教學實驗共計4週，在第4週結束時進行問卷發放，所蒐集的問卷資料，經信度與效度考驗後，再以AMOS 20.0版統計軟體進行模式驗證，研究結果顯示：泰文語言焦慮對遊戲興趣具有負影響，但對遊戲焦慮具有正影響；自我效能對遊戲興趣具有正影響，但對遊戲焦慮具有負影響；遊戲興趣對學習價值有正影響，但遊戲焦慮對學習價值有負影響。英文摘要：The utility of game-based learning has been confirmed in many educational studies. However, it is seldom seen in second foreign language learning. Therefore, based on the control value theory of achievement emotion and theory of multimedia cognitive learning, this study applies a digital game APP to help Taiwanese to learn Thai characters, then to explore the learning value. A total of 162 adults participated in this study. The teaching experiment lasted 4 weeks, after 4 weeks, participants were asked participate in a questionnaire survey. After AMOS 20.0 statistical test, the research results showed that Thai language learning anxiety (TLLA) is negatively related to gameplay interest; TLLA is positively related to gameplay anxiety; Thai language learning self-efficacy is positively related to gameplay interest; but negatively related to gameplay anxiety; Gameplay interest is positively related to learning value; on the other hand, gameplay anxiety is negatively related to the learning value.起始頁-結束頁：87-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20210413020045篇名：高中生運算思維測驗發展並列篇名：Development of a Computational Thinking Test for High School Students作者：胡秋帆(Chiu-Fan Hu);吳正己(Cheng-Chih Wu);林育慈(Yu-Tzu Lin);游志弘(Chih-Hung Yu)關鍵字：測驗;評量工具;運算思維;assessment;instrument;computational thinking期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：運算思維是二十一世紀學生必備的能力，各國紛紛將運算思維納入資訊科技課程的核心理念，相關研究亦成為電腦科學領域的趨勢。然而，如何有效評量運算思維一直是許多研究提及需重視的問題。目前評量的內容多依附在特定程式設計語言或知識下，易流於成就測驗。評估方式多透過分析程式內容或以自評量表與問卷的蒐集方式，前者較為耗時，後者偏向對運算思維的理解與態度，無法準確評量運算思維。因此，發展一套客觀、易實施的評量工具以評估真實的運算思維能力是重要的。本研究旨在發展高中生運算思維測驗，包含問題拆解、演算法、樣式一般化與資料表示等四項內涵。試題由八位中學資訊教師發展，研究者與三位電腦科學專家選題與編修，最後共12題。整體測驗難度接近適中（P = .63），所有試題在高低分群上達顯著差異（p ＜ .05），顯示試題具有鑑別度。在信、效度部分，所有試題與總分之相關係數值皆達顯著水準（p ＜ .01），表示所有題目與總測驗之間具有同質性。試題經專家發展與評估，故具專家效度。此外，本測驗結果與國際運算思維挑戰賽分數呈正相關達顯著水準，顯示具有效標關聯效度。整體而言，本研究發展之運算思維評量工具，具良好的信、效度，可供學生自我了解及教師教學設計時之參考。英文摘要：Computational thinking (CT) is an essential skill for the 21st century. Research regarding the implementation of CT skills in k-12 education explores the issues about how to teach, however, it still lacks the discussion about how to assess. Additionally, existing research about CT assessment either assesses CT skills by grading students' computational artifacts, which is subjective and time consuming, or develops the assessment restricting to specific programming languages, programming tools, or knowledge units. To develop an effective assessment for CT skills, this study establishes language/tool/knowledge-independent standards for CT in terms of the four CT concepts-decomposition, algorithm, pattern generalization and data representation. The initial 23 items were drafted by eight high school computing teachers, and then evaluated and revised by three computer scientists to produce final 12 items. The item analysis was conducted to examine the quality of individual items. The item difficulty index (P value) is .63 (medium difficulty). The t tests reveal a significant difference in each item between the high- and low-score groups ( p ＜ .05). It shows the effectiveness of individual item on assessing students' CT skills. Based on the reliability and validity analysis result, each item is positively correlated with total scale scores ( p ＜ .01), indicating that there is a homogeneity between items and this scale. The verification of content validity was then conducted by computer scientists. The correlation between the proposed scale and the Bebras Challenge was also analyzed and the result shows the coefficient was positively significant (r = .254, p ＜ .001). This proves the criterion-related validity. In conclusion, the CT-assessment instrument developed by this study has both high reliability and high validity. It could be an effective instrument to assess students' CT skills.起始頁-結束頁：1-21資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20210113010016篇名：知識結構的電腦化適性診斷測驗數位平臺應用於國小數學補救教學成效之研究並列篇名：A Study of Knowledge Structure-Based Computerized Adaptive Test System for Elementary School Students on the Effectiveness of Remedial Math作者：楊肅健(Su-Jian Yang);郭伯臣(Bor-Chen Kuo);林秋斌(Chiu-Pin Lin)關鍵字：知識結構;補救教學;電腦化適性測驗;數學;knowledge structure;remedial instruction;computerized adaptive test;mathematics期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究針對國小數學科補救教學，使用知識結構為基礎的電腦化適性診斷測驗數位平臺，以準實驗設計前、後測蒐集相關資料，比較對照組與實驗組實施數學科補救教學學習成效的差異。以教育部科技化評量篩選測驗低於「絕對通過標準」需進行補救教學的二至六年級學生347人為研究對象，實驗組共101人，對照組共246人。研究結果顯示：一、以「知識結構為基礎的電腦化適性診斷測驗數位平臺，輔之以教師從旁指導」的補救教學模式優於以「傳統課堂講授進行補救教學」模式，且學生進步成績達顯著性差異；二、二年級和五年級實驗組成績表現明顯優於對照組達顯著差異，二至五年級實驗組進步分數幅度皆優於對照組；三、實驗組整體補救教學通過率高於對照組，二年級通過率表現高達七成最佳，年級愈低，補救教學通過率愈高；四、數學學習內容無論是數與量（N）、幾何（S）、代數（A）、統計與機率（D）題型，實驗組的補救教學，學生的學習具成效達顯著差異；五、補救教學學生的自我效能、自主學習能力表現、平臺的使用皆持正向肯定的學習態度。英文摘要：The purpose of this research is to use the knowledge structure based on adaptive testing system (KSAT), which provides a learning diagnostic report to support remedial mathematics for elementary school students. To evaluate the effectiveness of the KSAT, three hundred and forty-seven students from 2nd to 6th grade who were under the passing criteria of project for implementation of remedial instruction technology-based-test, participated in this study. There were 101 students for the experimental group, and 246 students for the control group. The performances of these two types of remedial instructions were compared by a pre-test/post-test nonequivalent group design. The results demonstrated that: (1) The KSAT is useful for remedial mathematics in elementary school. The remedial learning with teacher assisted guidance on KSAT outperformed another traditional teaching method, and the differentiation of students' academic achievement were statistically significant. (2) Both the academic achievement and the range of learning improvement in the experimental group from the 2nd and the 5th graders were obviously prior than the control group. (3) The 2nd grade students using the KSAT had the highest passing rate among all groups. As a whole, the passing rate of the experimental group is higher than the control group; the lower the grader is, the higher the passing rate is. (4) The academic achievement of students in remedial mathematic learning has statistically significant improvement no matter on any types of the questions, which includes the number and the quantities (N), geometry (S), algebra (A), statistics and probability (D). (5) All of the learning attitude on students' self-learning efficiency performance, autodidact performance of the remedial students and the usage of the platform were positively supported.起始頁-結束頁：23-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20210113010027篇名：STEAM教學融入程式設計課程對幼兒職前教師問題解決創造力之影響並列篇名：Effect of Incorporating STEAM Instruction Into a Programming Course on Problem-Solving Creativity for Preservice Preschool Teachers作者：吳中勤(Chung-Chin Wu)關鍵字：STEAM教學;幼兒職前教師;問題解決創造力;程式設計;preschool STEAM instruction;preservice preschool teachers;problem-solving creativity;programming期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究主要目的在於透過STEAM教學融入程式設計課程的實施，讓幼兒職前教師提前接觸STEAM教學與程式設計的內涵，以利未來於幼兒園推行相關教學活動，並進一步檢視STEAM教學歷程對幼兒職前教師問題解決創造力的影響。本研究徵求72位來自兩個不同班級的幼兒職前教師參與，並進行問題解決創造力測驗的前、後測。二因子混合變異數分析結果顯示，整體而言，STEAM教學融入程式設計課程有助於提升幼兒職前教師的問題解決創造力，但考量班級差異後，STEAM教學融入程式設計課程對問題解決創造力各成分（含字詞聯想、成語替換、情境式問題解決、創意圖形、不合理圖形覺察能力）有不同的影響，這些影響分別為：一、對不同班級的幼兒職前教師而言，此課程皆有助於提升其「字詞聯想能力」；二、對於提升幼兒職前教師的「成語替換能力」，沒有明顯的助益；三、此課程對幼兒職前教師「情境式問題解決能力」與「創意圖形能力」的影響，會因為班級而不同；四、班級差異是影響幼兒職前教師「不合理圖形覺察能力」的因素，但STEAM教學融入程式設計課程則否。英文摘要：The main purpose of this study was to expose preservice preschool teachers to STEAM instruction by incorporating such instruction into a programming course for them; the goal was to promote STEAM- and programming-related teaching activities for them to incorporate into future classroom practice. Additionally, we assessed the effect of this instructional process on the problem-solving creativity of preservice preschool teachers. Seventy-two preservice preschool teachers from two classes were participated in this study. A pretest and posttest on problem-solving creativity were conducted. Results from a two-way mixed analysis of variance indicated that, in general, this type of instruction improved the problem-solving creativity (demonstrated through abilities related to word association, idiom replacement, contextual problem-solving, creative graphics, and making sense of ambiguous diagrams) of preservice preschool teachers. However, the effects varied when class differences were considered. The effects were the following: (1) Incorporating STEAM instruction into a programming course improved word-association ability in preservice preschool teachers regardless of class. (2) The tested instruction method did not improve idiom replacement ability. (3) The effects of this instruction method on contextual problem-solving ability and creative figure ability differed between classes. (4) Class but not STEAM instruction influenced the ability to make sense of ambiguous diagrams.起始頁-結束頁：49-75資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X20210113010038篇名：3D虛擬環境如何促進跨領域遊戲設計團隊的互動和參與行為並列篇名：How the 3D Virtual Environment to Foster Interaction and Engagement Behaviors of Interdisciplinary Game Development Team作者：楊晰勛(Hsi-Hsun Yang);廖冠榮(Kuan-Jung Liao)關鍵字：3D虛擬環境;大學生團隊;溝通成效;跨領域團隊;遊戲設計;3D virtual environment;college students' team;communication effectiveness;interdisciplinary team;game design期刊/會議論文集名稱：數位學習科技期刊卷期：13卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：跨領域團隊已成為一種常見的組織類型，此模式鼓勵分工和溝通互動以達成團隊的總目標，但跨領域的成員往往會有溝通不良的問題，故將想法具體化有助於組員之間的互動與溝通。本研究利用虛擬環境協助大學生遊戲團隊進行遊戲設計，將討論的內容運用3D虛擬環境的工具呈現，讓組員對於討論內容有更具象化的認知。為了驗證其有效性，實驗對象為大學生20人，利用問卷、影片分析及焦點訪談的方式蒐集資料，以設計3D解謎遊戲為任務目標，主要為探討在虛擬環境下是否對於團隊互動和參與行為造成影響，以及能否促進遊戲設計順利進行。研究結果指出，約有九成的學生對於運用虛擬環境有很高的接受度及滿意度，也認為虛擬環境比起使用紙筆討論可更清楚了解討論的內容。從影片分析結果顯示，團隊在虛擬環境時正向情緒行為有明顯地提升，一起關注著虛擬實境畫面並熱烈地互動。此外，受試者所創建的虛擬環境場景與受試者在任務單上所繪製的平面圖，一經比較後發現，虛擬場景中呈現出明顯的立體感和空間感，可清楚地模擬遊戲動線，且即看即修正。因此，3D虛擬環境的技術可以讓抽象的討論過程變得更加具體化、有效率，消弭溝通障礙的問題，為傳統紙筆討論的方式增添一種新的觀點。英文摘要：Interdisciplinary work teams have become a common type of organization. They encourage favorable division of labour and communication to fulfill team objectives. However, due to the different group members in various fields, there will be some problems with communication. To solve this problem, this research purpose by using technology to unify the idea and concept between group members. In this study, researchers tried to use VR (virtual reality) to guide team members in conceptualizing the 3D project, allowing team members to discuss with a physical 3D space, further enhance their cognition. This paper uses a questionnaire survey, videos, and interviews as a method of study. The participants were 20 undergrad students. The mission of the experiment is to plan a 3D puzzle game. The research purpose is to explore whether the use of VR tools affects the effectiveness of team communication, whether it can assist in game planning discussions, and to investigate the acceptance of students using VR tools. The research results indicate that about 90% of the students have a high degree of acceptance and satisfaction with the use of VR tools. They agree that using VR tools can understand the content of the discussion more clearly than traditional paper and pencil. The video analysis results also show that the team's positive socio-emotional area has improved significantly when using VR tools, and the team also focuses on the VR screen and discusses it. After comparing the virtual space screen with the scene layout, we can see that the VR screen has stereoscopic effects. Use the VR tool can simulate the gameplay and discuss and modify the game scene in real-time. The study hopes that the development of the VR system has provided people a novel method and application to enhance the communication process, increase the productivity and effectiveness of the traditional way.起始頁-結束頁：77-108資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：台灣數位學習與內容學會DOI：10.3966/2071260X202101130100401篇名：發明的自我效能與認知好奇心對持續參與IEYI臺灣選拔賽意圖之研究並列篇名：Relationship Between Self-Efficacy of Invention, Epistemic Curiosity, and Students' Intentions to Consistently Participate in the IEYI作者：宋修德(Hsiu-Te Sung);林意珊(Yi-Shan Lin)關鍵字：持續參與意圖;發明自我效能;認知好奇心;consistent participation intention;self-efficacy of invention;epistemic curiosity期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：在21世紀的現今，創造力最大的成功關鍵即是擁有好的教育，當學生面臨競爭時，可以使他們更有動力去創造與學習。特別是當學生為了要解決創作過程中所產生的問題，需要發揮他們對於知識的求知欲時，認知好奇心為關鍵的因素。本研究希冀藉由發明自我效能與認知好奇心對持續參與IEYI臺灣選拔賽意圖的研究，瞭解發明自我效能影響認知好奇心的作用，反映到持續參與意圖（IEYI臺灣選拔賽），並透過認知好奇心介入學生的發明自我效能與持續參與意圖來確定該途徑的有效性。本研究選擇臺灣參與IEYI臺灣選拔賽之學生為對象，採便利抽樣法進行問卷調查，回收有效問卷745份。所得資料經AMOS 20結構方程模式進行驗證性因素分析，結果顯示發明自我效能對I型認知好奇心（I type Epistemic Curiosity, IEC）與D型認知好奇心（D type Epistemic Curiosity, DEC）有極顯著正相關，IEC與DEC對持續參與均有顯著正相關。研究顯示，透過兩種認知型好奇心可以促進或抑制參與者的持續參與意圖，增加了我們對認知型好奇心的認識，學生的認知好奇心可以在參與競爭的過程中，產生更高的持續參與意圖。英文摘要：In the 21st century, creativity is the key to success and a vital component of quality education. Introducing an element of competition into education can motivate students to be more creative. Moreover, students should be encouraged to solve problems through creative processes and stimulate their pursuit of knowledge. Learning to be curious is a crucial factor in the creative process. This study investigated the relationship between self-efficacy of invention, epistemic curiosity, and students' intentions to consistently participate in the IEYI and understand the role of epistemic curiosity increasing self-efficacy and reflecting the intentions for consistent participation in the IEYI Taiwan trial. Through the intervention of epistemic curiosity, determine the effectiveness of this approach. This study selected Taiwan to participate in the IEYI Taiwan trial. A convenient sampling method was used to conduct a questionnaire survey for students, and 745 valid questionnaire responses were collected. The data obtained were analyzed using AMOS (version 20) structural equations for confirmatory factors. The results showed that the self-efficacy of invention had a significant positive correlation with I-type Epistemic Curiosity (IEC) and D-type Epistemic Curiosity (DEC). IEC and DEC continued to participate in the study. There is a significant positive correlation. This study demonstrated that the participants' intentions to consistently participate can be promoted or inhibited by either IEC or DEC, and our relationship with epistemic curiosity is increased. Students' epistemic curiosity can be enhanced through competition; hence, participants can arouse there consistent participation intention.起始頁-結束頁：83-105資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202103_66(1).00032篇名：從算式或文字閱讀數學科普文章：共變數分析與階層線性模式的比較並列篇名：Reading Popular Mathematics from Equations or Words: Comparison of Analysis of Covariance and Hierarchical Linear Modeling作者：吳昭容(Chao-Jung Wu);鄭鈐華(Chien-Hua Cheng);張凌嘉(Ling-Chia Chang)關鍵字：外在表徵;語言;數學科普;閱讀理解;external representation;linguistics;popular mathematics;reading comprehension期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：理解數學推導是困難的，而文獻上對文本中數學推導段落採用算式或文字表徵何者較具優勢的結論不一。本研究以299位來自四所高中職的高一學生為對象，比較科普文章以算式或文字表達數學推導對理解的影響，以及對高、低能力學生是否有不同的效果。由於高中生能力是巢套於學校，因此以共變數分析與階層線性模式來比較結果。研究材料為三篇幾何的科普文本及其理解測驗，算式與文字兩個版本的內容只在關鍵句（分別僅1、5、5句）用了不同表徵，其餘內容、附圖及測驗都相同。受試者被隨機分派到算式版或文字版，閱讀後的理解測驗包含是非、計算及說明題。此外，受試者也接受閱讀推理篩選測驗與數學先備知識測驗。共變數分析結果顯示能力和版本不具交互作用，且高能力學生顯著優於低能力學生，算式版多數優於文字版。而階層線性模式分析在排除學校平均數學能力的顯著影響後，凸顯了版本的效果，算式版低能力學生的閱讀表現與文字版高能力學生無顯著差異。本研究從算式和文字的語言結構討論算式優勢，也透過文本主題領域、認知負荷、評量重點及測驗題型，和受試者特性與文獻進行比較。英文摘要：Understanding mathematical reasoning is challenging. No conclusive evidence exists on which external representation is more beneficial to comprehension: equation or words. This study involved 299 high school students and examined the effects of external representations and participants' abilities on reading comprehension of popular mathematics. Because students were nested within schools, analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) and hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) were performed, and their results were compared. The materials included three popular mathematics and comprehension tests, all of which were in the domain of geometry. The main difference between the equation version and the verbal version was the method of representation used in key sentences (only one, five, and five sentences differed in each of the three passages, respectively). The other sentences, illustrations, and tests were the same in both versions. Students were randomly assigned into groups for each of the two versions and completed the reading comprehension tests, reading comprehension screening tests, and math prior knowledge tests. The ANCOVA results demonstrated that the equation readers outperformed the verbal readers and that the high-ability readers performed better than the low-ability ones, but the results did not indicate any interaction between version and ability. After the exclusion of the effects of school-average math ability, the HLM results found that low-ability equation readers demonstrated a nonsignificant difference in performance compared with high-ability verbal readers. The benefits of using equations were discussed by comparing the linguistic features of the two external representations. Furthermore, the results were compared with previous research in terms of passage domain, cognitive load, focus of measurement, and participant characteristics.起始頁-結束頁：107-139資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202103_66(1).00043篇名：高中學生角色期望量表之編製並列篇名：Development of Inventory for the Role Expectations of High-School Students作者：郭丁熒(Ding-Ying Guo)關鍵字：角色期望;高中學生;學生角色;role expectation;high-school student;student role期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在編製高中學生角色期望量表，進而建構高中學生角色期望的層面。藉由文獻探討擬定量表初稿，再送請專家審查，並經探索性因素分析與驗證性因素分析後完成量表編製。探索性因素分析、驗證性因素分析均以高中學生、高中教師及社會人士為樣本，樣本數分別為582人與1,509人。研究發現：一、「高中學生角色期望量表」具效度、信度，且模式與資料適配適度為可接受；二、「高中學生角色期望量表」具跨三群組樣本的測量恆等性；三、高中學生角色期望包含社會參與、自我形塑、素養陶冶、探索學習、德行養成及職業準備共六個層面。英文摘要：This study development inventory and dimensions for the role expectations of high-school students. The inventory was constructed according to a literature review, expert reviews, an exploratory factor analysis of 582 participants, and a confirmatory factor analysis of 1,509 participants. The participants consisted of high-school students, high-school teachers, and citizens. The results of this study are summarized by the following: (1) The developed inventory is valid and reliable, and the model-data fit was acceptable according to both exploratory and confirmatory analyses. (2) According to multigroup analysis, measurement invariance of the inventory exists across the three groups of high-school students, high-school teachers, and citizens. (3) The inventory includes six dimensions-namely society participation, self-construction, literacy cultivation, exploring learning, moral development, and occupation training.起始頁-結束頁：141-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202103_66(1).00054篇名：高中科學班畢業生之追蹤研究：大學學習表現與生涯發展之探討並列篇名：Follow-Up Study on College Learning Performance and Career Development of Science Class Graduates作者：張靖卿(Ching-Ching Chang);于曉平(Hsiao-Ping Yu)關鍵字：大學學習表現;生涯發展;科學班畢業生;追蹤研究;college learning performance;career development;science class graduates;follow-up study期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在追蹤調查高中就讀科學班的學生，探討其進入大學後的學習表現與其生涯發展情形，同時調查數理資優班與普通班自然組的畢業學生，以比較不同班型與有無特殊表現學生間的差異。本研究利用普查方式調查2012∼2015年畢業四屆九校科學班學生，總計750人，回收454份，回收率達60.5％。數理資優班與普通班自然組分別回收346份與727份問卷，回收率為31.7％與56.8％。自編問卷內容包括課業學習、活動參與和大學學習情形，以及生涯發展之調查。研究結果發現，科學班學生進入大學後在學業表現和學術活動參與上表現良好，且未來以希望取得博士學位者居多。無論在同儕互動與資源、主動提問與探究，以及自主學習與反思等大學學習與能力提升上，科學班或數理資優班學生均顯著優於普通班自然組畢業生；科學班與數理資優班學生之生涯計畫與準備也較普通班自然組學生更為積極肯定。然而，在非學術性活動參與上，科學班與其他兩組畢業生並沒有差異，亦即科學班學生並未因投入學術活動而忽略服務與休閒活動的參與。三組學生未來想從事的職業均以工程領域與醫學居多。具特殊表現的科學班畢業生有較佳的學業表現，以及較高的生涯期望與抱負。最後，本研究對後續研究方向與科學班學生的生涯輔導提出相關建議，以供參考。英文摘要：This study followed up on the experiences of science class graduates in their college learning and career development and investigated to the extent to which their experiences differed from those who enrolled in math- and science-gifted programs or regular classes focusing on science during high school. A survey research was conducted with all science class graduates from 2012 to 2015 (N = 750) as well as their peers from math- and science-gifted programs and regular classes focusing on science. The response rates for science classes, math- and science-gifted programs, and regular classes focusing on science were 60.5% (N = 454), 31.7% (N = 346), and 56.8% (N = 727), respectively. The questionnaire contained items regarding academic performance, academic and nonacademic activity participation, in-class performance, and career development. The main results were as follows: (1) Compared to their peers, science class graduates exhibited higher academic performance and more academic activity participation, with most of them planning to pursue a doctoral degree. (2) Compared with their regular class peers, both science class graduates and math-and science-gifted program graduates demonstrated higher in-class performance and better career development. (3) No between-group differences were observed in participation in nonacademic activities-indicating that science class graduates could successfully balance their academic and leisure time. (4) All the three groups hoped to pursue a career in engineering or medicine. (5) Science class graduates who received science awards during high school exhibited higher academic performance and career aspirations. The current results have several implications for future research and career counseling for science class students.起始頁-結束頁：173-202資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202103_66(1).00065篇名：國中生完美主義組型暨其與父母期望／苛責、學業情緒、動機涉入之關係並列篇名：Perfectionism Profiles and Their Relationship with Parental Expectations/Criticism, Achievement Emotions, and Motivational Engagement作者：張映芬(Ying-Fen Chang)關鍵字：父母苛責;父母期望;完美主義組型;動機涉入;學業情緒;parental criticism;parental expectations;perfectionism profiles;motivational engagement;achievement emotions期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：許多文獻顯示探討完美主義組型的重要，在教育現場亦可發現學生完美主義組型在學習適應上的差異一直是教師關心的議題，然國內甚少研究採個人中心分析完美主義組型。故本研究以相關完美主義組型理論觀點，探討國內學生完美主義組型及其與父母期望／苛責、學業情緒、動機涉入之關係。本研究抽取兩批國二學生為樣本，共918人，以集群分析、區別分析、多變量變異數分析進行探討。研究結果顯示：一、完美主義特質組型有低追求低在意、中追求高在意、高追求高在意、高追求低在意四組；完美主義來源組型有低自我低社會、高自我低社會、高自我高社會、低自我高社會四組；二、父母期望／苛責能預測完美主義特質組型、完美主義來源組型；三、完美主義特質組型、完美主義來源組型在學業情緒、動機涉入差異的結果皆支持2 × 2組型模式。英文摘要：Several studies have revealed that exploring perfectionism profiles is critical. Understanding differences in learning adaptation among students' perfectionism profiles is essential for classroom teachers. However, few domestic studies have adopted a person-oriented analysis to investigate perfectionism profiles. Therefore, this study explored Taiwanese students' perfectionism profiles in the context of associated theories of perfectionism profiles and their relationship with parental expectations/criticism, achievement emotions, and motivational engagement. A total of 918 junior high school students participated. Analysis consisted of cluster analyses, discriminant analyses, and analyses of variance. The following results were obtained: (1) Cluster analyses of perfectionistic character profiles revealed four profiles: a low strivings/low concerns group, a medium strivings/high concerns group, a high strivings/high concerns group, and a high strivings/low concerns group; cluster analyses of perfectionistic resource profiles revealed four profiles: a low self-oriented/low socially prescribed group, a high self-oriented/low socially prescribed group, a high self-oriented/high socially prescribed group, and a low self-oriented/high socially prescribed group. (2) Parental expectations/criticism predicted perfectionistic character profiles and perfectionistic resource profiles. (3) Differences in achievement emotions and motivational engagement among perfectionistic character profiles and perfectionistic resource profiles were all consistent with the 2 × 2 perfectionism profiles model.起始頁-結束頁：203-230資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202103_66(1).00076篇名：球類活動對智能障礙學生視覺動作整合的影響並列篇名：Effects of Ball Activities on Visual-Motor Integration in Students with Intellectual Disabilities作者：張芳慈(Fang-Tsyr Chang)關鍵字：球類活動;智能障礙;視覺動作整合;ball activities;intellectual disabilities;visual-motor integration期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：有鑑於智能障礙學生視覺動作整合能力的落後現象足以影響其日常生活與學校學習的活動表現，本研究乃探討職能治療球類活動對智能障礙學生視覺動作整合能力的介入成效。研究採單一受試研究法之跨行為多基線設計，以兩位國小特教班智能障礙學生為研究對象，自變項為職能治療接球、投擲球及滾球訓練活動，依變項則為受試者的視覺動作整合能力，同時配合教師回饋問卷進行社會效度分析。研究結果顯示，職能治療接球、投擲球及滾球訓練活動確實能提升智能障礙學生視覺動作整合能力，且具有立即成效與維持成效。此外，職能治療接球、投擲球及滾球訓練活動的社會效度良好，能使學生在日常生活與學校學習之相關功能表現上更為進步。英文摘要：Students with intellectual disabilities often lag behind their peers in terms of visual-motor integration. These limited visual-motor integration abilities reduce their performance in terms of daily living activities and academic learning. The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of ball activities on visual-motor integration in students with intellectual disabilities. A single case study with a multiple-baseline design across various behaviors was adopted. Two students were included in this study. The independent variables were catching, throwing, and rolling ball activities, and the dependent variable was the visual-motor integration ability of the participants. Social validity was also assessed by incorporating teachers' questionnaires into the study. The main findings are as follows: catching, throwing, and rolling ball activities in occupational therapy were helpful for improving participants' visual-motor integration performance and resulted in immediate, maintainable, and satisfactory effects. High social validity was also demonstrated, leading to the conclusion that the intervention can improve students' performance regarding daily living activities and academic learning.起始頁-結束頁：231-274資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202103_66(1).00087篇名：A Study on the Innovation Perceptions of Daily Practices of Early Childhood Teachers in Mainland China並列篇名：中國大陸幼兒教師之日常實踐創新知覺研究作者：陳南希(Nanxi Chen)關鍵字：early childhood teacher;Mainland China;perception of innovation;幼兒教師;中國大陸;知覺創新期刊/會議論文集名稱：教育科學研究期刊卷期：66卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Early childhood (EC) teachers' epistemic knowledge about innovation can influence their innovative practice. Drawing on literature from the field of individual innovation, this study was conducted to clarify EC teachers' understanding of their daily innovation by applying a qualitative approach. The participants included six EC teachers from Mainland China. To understand the teachers' perception of innovation in their daily practice, the following elements were defined: (1) the teachers' personal conception of innovation, (2) examples of innovative practice in their daily work, (3) innovation sharing, and (4) factors influencing innovative practice. Regarding personal conceptions of innovation, this study found that the interviewed EC teachers perceive their daily innovation practice to be multidimensional and to involve their own educational philosophy. The teachers also understand daily innovation to mean the generation and implementation of influential ideas as well as problem-solving. Regarding factors that influence their innovation practice, this study determined that the teachers possessed a systematic sense with awareness of both internal factors (i.e., personalities and traits, intrinsic motivation, personal experience, and professional capacity) and external ones (i.e., whether there is support available at the task level, interpersonal level, organizational leadership level, or local ecological level). This study offers a discussion about perspectives on the process of knowledge production to better understand EC teachers' ideas about innovation in their daily practice.英文摘要：幼兒教師對於創新的認識知識會影響他們的創新實踐。本研究借鑑個體創新的文獻，透過應用質性研究方法，闡明幼兒教師對日常創新的理解。參與者是來自中國大陸的六名幼兒教師。分析資料來自於圍繞幼兒教師對其日常創新與實踐之知覺的半結構訪談，訪談內容包括：一、個人的「創新」概念；二、日常工作中創新實踐的例子；三、創新分享；四、影響創新實踐的因素。本研究採紮根理論取向分析方法對訪談資料進行編碼與歸類。本研究發現，對於創新的認知，受訪的幼兒教師認為其日常創新實踐是多元的，並融入了他們自己對孩子的教育理念。他們還將日常創新理解為有影響力之想法的產生與實施，以及解決問題。此外，幼兒教師在影響其創新實踐的因素方面具有系統的意識，知覺到多種內部因素（即人格和特質、內在動機、個人經驗及專業能力）與外部因素（即是否在任務層面、人際關係層面、組織領導層面及本地生態層面上獲得支持）。本研究從過程知識生產的角度對相關發現進行討論，就幼兒教師對其日常實踐創新之認識做更深入的理解，並期為幼兒教師專業發展相關議題提供啟示。起始頁-結束頁：275-296資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞教育學出版單位：國立臺灣師範大學DOI：10.6209/JORIES.202103_66(1).000901篇名：探討員工組織鑲嵌形態與其對任務績效、工作態度與行為的差異化影響並列篇名：Exploring the Profiles of Organizational Embeddedness and Their Differential Effects on Task Performance, Work Attitudes and Behaviors作者：王豫萱(Yu-Hsuan Wang);紀乃文(Nai-Wen Chi);蘇妙悅(Miao-Yueh Su)關鍵字：組織鑲嵌形態;組織公民行為;任務績效;離職傾向;情感性承諾;Profile of organizational embeddedness;organizational citizenship behavior;task performance;turnover intention;affective commitment期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究擬探討組織鑲嵌（organizational embeddedness）的三種驅力：「契合」、「犧牲」與「連結」，是否會形成不同的鑲嵌形態，並進一步檢視對員工任務績效、正負向工作態度與行為的差異化影響。本研究以兩個時間點的研究設計，共計收集319份主管與部屬配對問卷。依據集群分析結果顯示，共可區分為五種組織鑲嵌形態，分別為：鑲嵌型敬業留任者、敬業型留任者、偷懶或受困型的留任者、過渡型留任者、積極離職者。其中：（1） 鑲嵌型敬業留任者（三種驅力皆高）展現較高的任務績效、組織公民行為與情感性組織承諾；（2）積極離職者（三種驅力皆低），其離職傾向最高、情感性承諾最低；（3）偷懶或受困型的留任者，展現出次高程度的離職傾向，及次低的情感性組織承諾。英文摘要：Organizational embeddedness (OE) refers to internal force that affects employee retention, performance, work attitudes and behaviors. This study explores how the combination of the three dimensions of OE (fit, links, and sacrifice) forms embeddedness profiles, and examines the different embeddedness profiles differentially influence employee positive and negative work attitudes and behaviors. The sample was composed of 319 supervisor-subordinate pairs from various industries. Five embedded profiles were found based on the cluster analysis. The result showed that different profiles have differential effects on organizational citizenship behavior, task performance, turnover intention, and affective commitment. Overall, employees of the ”embedded engaged stayers” show highest levels of task performance, citizenship behaviors, and affective commitment. In addition, employees of the ”enthusiastic leavers” show highest levels of turnover intentions and lowest affective commitment. Finally, employees of the ”slackers or trapped stayers” also express high turnover intentions and low commitment than others.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202106_21(1).00012篇名：由勞動力彈性觀點探討企業對工時法令修改之制度適應並列篇名：Organizational Adaptation to the Regulatory Change of Standard Working Hours in Taiwan: An Employment Flexibility Perspective作者：劉念琪(Nien-Chi Liu);林鈺欽(Yu-Chin Lin)關鍵字：勞動力彈性;強制制度力;制度邏輯;策略人力資源管理;employment flexibility;coercive institutional forces;institutional logics;strategic human resource management期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文整合勞動力彈性、制度邏輯及策略人力資源管理之措施互補與替代觀點，探討當工時法令變動時，企業在各項勞動力彈性措施的調整回應。本研究以2016年台灣《勞動基準法》之工時修法為研究情境，透過188家台灣企業調查資料進行驗證。結果指出強制制度力雖然壓制了工時彈性措施的使用，但企業還是會依循固有制度邏輯回應修法壓力。曾大量運用彈性工時的公司，會較大量運用其他替代型的勞動彈性措施，並減少互補型勞動彈性措施，以追求原有制度邏輯的維持。因此強制型的制度力，並無法真正快速改變公司勞動力彈性運用背後的制度邏輯，公司在短期內反會運用多種不同措施強化原先的邏輯，因此也更加深組織內及場域內多重制度邏輯的爭議及衝突。英文摘要：Integrating institutional theory and strategic human resource management perspectives, this study explores why and how the underlying institutional logics behind firms affecting their reactions to the coercive institutional forces, which is the amendment of Labor Standard Act in 2016. Using a survey sample from 188 Taiwanese firms, our results indicate the more a firm utilized work time flexibility before the legal amendment, they will adopt more other labor flexibility practices in order to protect the existing institutional logics behind their present employment flexibility policy, that is, cost leadership. They will adopt more substitute flexibility practices such as functional flexibility and numerical flexibility. As well, they will restrict the use of complement flexibility practices such as compensation flexibility to lessen the detrimental impact of coercive forces on their existing instructional logics to remain their employment cost under control. However, the adaptation may result in more arguments and conflicts due to the rise of multiple institutional logics during this time.起始頁-結束頁：27-56資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202106_21(1).00023篇名：核心自我評價、職家增益與工作承諾：中介與調節效果模式並列篇名：Core Self-Evaluations, Work-Family Enrichment and Work Commitment: Mediation and Moderation Effect Model作者：繆敏志(Min-Chih Miao);施權峰(Chuan-Feng Shih)關鍵字：核心自我評價;職家增益;工作承諾;中介效果;調節效果;core self-evaluations;work-family enrichment;work commitment;mediation effect;moderation effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究旨在將核心自我評價理論認為核心自我評價對產出變項分別具有直接、中介及調節影響效果的觀點，運用至探討核心自我評價對職家增益與工作承諾的影響效果。本研究採用問卷調查法，以263位本國銀行已婚女性電話行銷人員為樣本，結果有如下發現：（1）工作對家庭增益能部分中介核心自我評價對工作承諾的正向影響，家庭對工作增益能部分中介核心自我評價對工作承諾的正向影響。（2）核心自我評價在工作對家庭增益─工作承諾、家庭對工作增益─工作承諾間具有調節效果，當核心自我評價程度愈高，工作對家庭增益─工作承諾、家庭對工作增益─工作承諾的正向關係將強化。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to apply core self-evaluation (CSE) theory that CSE has direct, mediation and moderation effects on outcome variable, respectively, to explore the effects of CSE on work-family enrichment and work commitment. This study adopts a questionnaire survey method and takes 263 domestic bank married female e-markers as sample. The results are as follow: (1) The work-to-family enrichment (WFE) can partially mediate the positive effect of CSE on work commitment, family-to-work enrichment (FWE) can partially mediate the positive effect of CSE on work commitment. That is, the mediation model is established. (2) The CSE has moderation effects between WFE-work commitment and FWE-work commitment. When the CSE degree is higher, the positive relationships of WFE-work commitment and FWE-work commitment will be strengthened. That is, the moderation effect model is established.起始頁-結束頁：57-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202106_21(1).00034篇名：團隊互動、資源疆界與隨創作為：密室逃脫所展現的團隊創造力並列篇名：Team Interaction, Resource Boundary, and Bricolage Behavior: Team Creativity in Escape Room Game作者：陳蕙芬(Hui-Fen Chen);梁煥煒(Huan-Wei Liang)關鍵字：團隊創造力;團隊隨創;互動類型;資源疆界;急迫任務;team creativity;team bricolage;interaction pattern;resource boundary;urgent task期刊/會議論文集名稱：人力資源管理學報卷期：21卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究探討團隊快速運作且資源有限，如何以隨創發揮團隊創造力。採用質性研究法，以密室逃脫遊戲為場域，蒐集200場遊戲觀察與20場人員訪談，用紮根途徑分析資料，研究發現：（1）資訊活絡與任務協作等團隊互動促進隨創作為。（2）資訊活絡打通資源認知疆界，驅動就地智取、觀異巧取與拼湊漸取等隨創途徑。（3）任務協作擴大資源使用疆界，產出分工各用、銜接聯用與靈活轉用等隨創途徑。（4）資訊忽略、資訊壟斷，及任務失調為主的團隊互動抑制隨創作為。特定的團隊互動打通成員的資源認知與使用疆界，促進隨創作為，激發團隊創造力表現；資源疆界是互動激發團隊隨創的關鍵。意味消融團隊互動「分界」，才能打開「眼界」，超越資源使用的「臨界」，產生創新作為。英文摘要：This study aimed to explore how a team exerts creativity by bricolage under rapid operation and limited resources. We employed the qualitative research method to investigate the team behaviors in an escape room game context. We collected 200 teams' observations and 20 personal interviews and analyzed successful and failure teams' actions with the grounded approach. The main findings are summarized as follows: (1) We identified the interaction patterns which enable the bricolage behaviors in teams; the interaction patterns can be summarized as the core of information activation and task collaboration. (2) We found that information activation could break down the team members' cognitive resource boundaries and then drive the bricolage behaviors like acquiring wisely, observing carefully, and gradually gathering the resources to extend the resource at hand approaches. (3) Task collaboration could expand the resource use boundaries among the team members and then drive the bricolage behaviors like using by job division, using by connecting, and using by transforming as the extension of the make-do approaches. (4) We identified the interaction patterns which constrain the bricolage behaviors in teams; the interaction patterns can be summarized as the core of information ignoring, information monopoly, and task disorder. Therefore, we argued that a team's specific interaction patterns could change the boundaries of cognition and the use of resources. We suggested a new concept of ”resource boundary,” which plays a vital role between interaction patterns and team bricolage behavior. The findings implied that melting the boundaries through the interactions among the members could open the eyes to find out gold in the soil. Therefore, the teams could act by transcending the limits of resources and collaborate to create innovative behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：83-113資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞心理學	社會科學＞社會學	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學	社會科學＞法律學出版單位：中華人力資源發展學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6147/JHRM.202106_21(1).000401篇名：主編的話並列篇名：Words From the Editor作者：楊文山;溫在弘期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：62期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：i-iv資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco Press2篇名：宗教信仰對臺灣年輕成人主觀福祉的影響：貫時性資料的反事實分析並列篇名：The Influence of Religion on Subjective Well-Being Among Taiwanese Young Adults: Counterfactual Analyses With Longitudinal Data作者：范綱華(Gang-Hua Fan)關鍵字：宗教參與;主觀福祉;自我選擇偏誤;反事實推論;religious involvement;subjective well-being;self-selection bias;counterfactual inference期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：62期出版年：2021中文摘要：歐美社會研究顯示，宗教參與和個體身心福祉有顯著正相關；但臺灣的經驗資料卻很少呈現有信仰者與無信仰者的主觀福祉具有顯著差異。有論者指出這是宗教參與和主觀福祉之間的正向關聯受自我選擇作用掩蓋所致，因此宗教參與對主觀福祉仍具有正向影響。但由於研究方法的限制，既有研究並未確認宗教參與和主觀福祉之間的因果順序，無法排除「主觀福祉較高的人更傾向參與宗教活動」這項反向因果解釋。有鑑於此，本研究採用臺灣青少年成長歷程研究計畫2011年與2014年所蒐集的兩次面訪調查資料，檢視2011年有宗教信仰者是否2014年的主觀福祉顯著比無宗教信仰者為高；為排除2011年個體宗教信仰狀況的潛在選擇偏誤，本研究在分析中以處理機率倒數加權法（inverse probability of treatment weighting, IPTW）做反事實因果推論。分析結果顯示，經由IPTW後，宗教信仰對於快樂感與生活滿意度的平均處遇效應（average treatment effects, ATE），處遇組平均處遇效應（average treatment effects for the treated, ATT）、控制組平均處遇效應（average treatment effects for the controls, ATC）皆呈正向顯著，意謂在控制選擇偏誤之後，宗教信仰對於臺灣年輕成人主觀福祉確實具有正向效應。英文摘要：According to research conducted in Western societies, religious involvement is significantly and positively associated with subjective well-being (SWB). However, empirical evidence in Taiwan hardly shows significant differences in SWB between people with and without religious affiliation. Researchers argue this was because the analysis of SWB was biased by self-selection, so religious involvement should still have a positive influence on SWB. Nevertheless, due to limitations of research methods, existing research has not confirmed the causal order of religious involvement and SWB and cannot rule out the possible reverse explanation that ”people with a higher SWB tend to attend religious activities.” Accordingly, this research uses survey data collected in the years 2011 and 2014 by the Taiwan Youth Project to examine whether individuals having religious affiliation in 2011 reported a significantly higher SWB in 2014. In order to deal with the potential selection bias on religious affiliation in 2011, the inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) method is used to apply counterfactual inference of the religious function on SWB. Results suggest that, after applying IPTW, all the average treatment effects (ATE), average treatment effects for the treated (ATT), and average treatment effects for the controls (ATC) of religious affiliation on SWB become positively significant, implying religious affiliation has a positive influence on SWB among Taiwanese young adults when selection bias is controlled.起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202106_(62).00013篇名：結婚的人比較快樂嗎？婚姻對幸福感的異質性處置效應分析並列篇名：Are Married People Happier? Heterogeneous Effects of Marriage on Happiness Among Taiwanese Young Adults作者：胡力中(Li-Chung Hu)關鍵字：婚姻;社會選擇;傾向匹配權數;異質性處置效應;幸福感;marriage;social selection;propensity score weighting;heterogeneous treatment effects;happiness期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：62期出版年：2021中文摘要：隨著臺灣社會結構及家庭規範的變化，晚婚及不婚逐漸取代普遍成婚，進入婚姻不再是每個人必經的人生途徑。在這樣的家庭及人口趨勢下，究竟婚姻是否能帶來幸福？而婚姻對幸福的影響是否又因人而異？本文旨在探討婚姻對於年輕成年人幸福感的影響，並著重在婚姻對幸福感的異質性處置效應分析（heterogeneous treatment effects）。透過使用2011年與2017年自臺北市、新北市及宜蘭縣所蒐集之「臺灣青少年成長歷程研究」（Taiwan Youth Project）長期追蹤資料，並運用傾向匹配權數（propensity score weighting）處理進入婚姻之可觀察選擇效應及估計婚姻對幸福感的異質性效應。研究結果顯示婚姻能顯著提升個人的幸福感且此影響並非來自選擇效應，而是來自因果效應；換言之，婚姻能促進所有男性及高結婚機率女性的幸福感，但對於低結婚機率的女性則無顯著助益或僅具備消極意義的助益。簡單來說，婚姻對於年輕成年人的幸福感仍是重要的社會決定因素，但僅限於男性及進入婚姻機率高的女性。婚姻對進入婚姻機率低的女性之幸福感的促進效應有限。政府在推動鼓勵婚姻的相關政策措施時，需瞭解何者能從婚姻中獲益且應避免一體適用的政策解決之道。英文摘要：With the transformation of social structures and family norms in Taiwan, universal marriage has been gradually replaced by the postponement and abandonment of marriage. Marriage is no longer a necessary and inevitable choice for individuals. Under this trend, it is therefore important to ask whether married people are happier than their unmarried counterparts and who benefits from marriage? This paper aims to investigate whether marriage confers happiness among young adults and who benefits from marriage in Taiwan. Specifically, this project will estimate the heterogeneous treatment effects of marriage on happiness, gauging who benefits from marriage. This paper utilizes the 2011 and 2017 Taiwan Youth Project (TYP), a longitudinal dataset collected in the northern part of Taiwan. Propensity score weighting is applied to address selection on observables and to estimate heterogeneous treatment effects of marriage on happiness. The results show that marriage has a positive effect on happiness, and this positive effect is not explained by selection effects. With regards to heterogeneous treatment effects of marriage, there are no heterogeneous effects of marriage on happiness for men. Marriage confers happiness for men, regardless of their propensity to get married. However, not all women benefit from marriage. Marriage only confers happiness for women who have a high propensity to get married but has limited benefits for those who have low propensity to get married. Simply speaking, the results suggest that marriage remains an important social determinant of happiness for young adult men and women who have high propensity to get married, but less so for women with low propensity to get married. Official policies that encourage marriage should target the right population and avoid a one-size-fits-all solution.起始頁-結束頁：41-89資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202106_(62).00024篇名：父母離婚、死亡、再婚對子女教育成就之影響：兄弟姐妹長期追蹤資料並列篇名：The Impact of Parental Divorce, Death, and Remarriage on Children's Educational Achievements: Evidence From Sibling Data in Taiwan作者：黃芳玫(Fung-Mey Huang);林軒竹(Hsuan-Chu Lin)關鍵字：父母離異;教育成就;隨機效果Tobit模型;兄弟姐妹長期追蹤資料;parental separation;educational achievement;random-effect Tobit model;sibling longitudinal data期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：62期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文使用中央研究院社會學研究所長達11年的「臺灣青少年成長歷程研究」追蹤調查資料，透過父母親出生年、子女出生年，以及父母親婚姻狀態改變或死亡之年分，建構子女在0-18歲父母親離婚、死亡、再婚之長期資料。在考量54%子女仍在學中，本文分別以隨機效果Tobit模型、隨機效果Logit與固定效果Logit模型，探討父母親婚姻狀態發生改變或死亡的時間點及時間長短，對子女最終教育年數及是否上大學之影響。實證結果顯示，父母親的三種婚姻狀態：離婚、過世與再婚，皆顯著負向影響子女教育成就，其中以父母親離婚對子女教育成就之負向影響最大。父母親婚姻狀態改變的時間點在國小前或國小時期，對其子女教育成就之負面影響最大。在婚姻狀態改變的時間長短上，童年時期與青少年時期有不同的邊際效果，以青少年時期父母親離婚的邊際影響最大。英文摘要：In this study, we examined the effects of family disruption, including parental divorce, death, and remarriage, during the period of children's childhood and adolescenthood on their later educational achievement by using sibling data from the 2000-2011 Taiwan Youth Project Phases I and II. By using the birth years of parents and their children, and the year that family disruption occurred, we construct the longitudinal status of family structure for each child from age 0-18. In this study, the educational achievement is assessed by taking into account the family unobserved heterogeneity and right censoring. Our results show that the three statuses of family structure: parental divorce, death, and remarriage, are all significantly and negatively associated with their children's educational achievement. Parent's divorce has the largest and long-lasting negative impacts on their children's educational achievements. The parental divorce occurring during the childhood period has the largest accumulated impacts. The marginal effect, however, are largest during the adolescenthood of their children.起始頁-結束頁：91-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202106_(62).00035篇名：與父母同住的兒「女」們：與父母同住的成年女性的照顧協力分析並列篇名：Daughters Before Sons: An Analysis of the Role of Female Adults Living With Parents in Collaborative Caregiving作者：劉千嘉(Chien-Chia Liu)關鍵字：長期照顧;照顧者女性化;人口普查;代間移轉;long-term care;feminization of caregivers;population census;intergenerational transfer期刊/會議論文集名稱：人口學刊卷期：62期出版年：2021中文摘要：臺灣高齡者的居住安排，歷年調查皆顯示與子女同住的比例均在六成以上，但相關調查多未特意區分同住子女的性別差異。當高齡長者失能需不同程度照顧時，子代的性別是否會造成角色扮演的差異？本文運用臺灣地區2010年人口及住宅普查資料，檢視973,138個高齡親子同住家戶，分析2,636,442名成年子女之性別、婚姻狀態、工作狀態及父母失能狀態與戶內照顧需求等因子，探討女兒在家戶中可能扮演的照顧角色，並進一步訪問南部地區11位與父母同住的成年女性，自婚姻狀況、父母健康狀態、手足關係等面向，呈現與父母同住之成年女兒的多元樣貌。研究發現如下：一、父母須照護時，約二成會與兒子同住，約一成二與女兒同住，六成八則是與兒子女兒共同居住，且女兒較可能成為主要的照顧者；二、臺灣高齡者依舊偏好與已婚兒子同住，但多名子女同住的高齡家庭中，女兒較兒子更可能擔負照顧工作；三、孝道實踐及代間資源交換為成年女兒與父母同住的主因；四、已婚女兒因娘家的資源優勢而能與父母同住；未婚或喪偶的女兒在沒有夫家壓力的狀況下，乃家族裡履行照顧責任的最佳人選。英文摘要：Senior citizens who live with their children have accounted for more than 60% of Taiwan's elderly population over the years, but within the scope of this living arrangement, the differences between living with sons and living with daughters have yet to be elucidated. The respective roles played by sons and daughters in tending to disabled senior citizens in need of varying levels of care remain uncertain. This paper drew on data from the 2010 Population and Housing Census in Taiwan to probe 2,636,442 adult children of 973,138 older parent-child households. The potential role of daughters as caregivers in the household was explored by analyzing factors such as the gender, marital status, and employment status of the children; the status of parental disability; and intra-household needs for care. From the aspects of marital status, parental health status, and sibling relationship, interviews were also conducted with 11 female adults living with their parents in southern Taiwan to represent the diversity of adult daughters living with their parents in the paternal culture. The results revealed that (1) when elderly parents need help, about 20% live with their sons and 12% live with their daughters, but 68% live with both sons and daughters, and the daughter was more likely to become the primary caregiver. (2) Daughters were more likely than sons to assume caregiving duties in older-parent families living with multiple children. (3) The major motivations for adult daughters to live with their parents were the fulfillment of filial obligations and intergenerational exchange of resources; and (4) married daughters' ability to live with their parents might be explained by the resource advantages of their families of origin, whereas unmarried or widowed daughters, free from in-law pressure, were the ideal candidates to assume caregiving duties in the household.起始頁-結束頁：139-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：國立臺灣大學人口與性別研究中心 & 臺灣人口學會 & Ainosco PressDOI：10.6191/JPS.202106_(62).000401篇名：民眾對社會住宅弱勢保障比率態度之影響因素分析並列篇名：An Analysis of the Factors Impacting Public Attitudes Toward the Ratio Reserved for the Disadvantaged in Social Housing作者：陳冠儒(Kuan-ju Chen)關鍵字：社會住宅;社會住宅態度;混居;NIMBY;Social housing;attitude towards social housing;mixed living;NIMBY期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：30卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：社會住宅經常面臨不要在我家後院（not in my back yard, NIMBY）的問題，並遭到當地社區反對。考量上述爭議，本研究利用2015年住宅狀況抽樣調查的14,275筆樣本進行次序邏輯斯迴歸分析。實證結果發現，擁有自用住宅、教育程度較高、年紀較長數對社會住宅弱勢保障比率有顯著負向影響，無自有住宅家戶、家中有身心障礙者則較支持提高社會住宅弱勢保障比率。其次，家戶5年內有搬遷、民眾贊成興建及有意願申請社會住宅時對社會住宅弱勢保障比率亦有顯著正向影響。第三，附近環境美化與管理維護滿意度對於提高社會住宅弱勢保障比率亦有顯著正向影響，但鄰里環境中不同類型設施對弱勢保障比率會有不同的影響效果。最後，都市化程度較高的城市，民眾較支持提高社會住宅弱勢保障比率，但位於都會區周邊城市居民對提高社會住宅弱勢保障比率的支持度較低，顯示民眾對社會住宅弱勢保障比率態度存在明顯地區差異。英文摘要：Social housing is often opposed by local communities due to the NIMBY (not in my back yard) issue. This study utilizes the 14,275 sets of data in the 2015 Report on the Housing Status Survey in order to perform an ordered regression analysis. The empirical results firstly indicate that variables such as home ownership, higher levels of education, and old age have a more significant negative influence on attitudes toward the ratio reserved for the disadvantaged in social housing. However, renters and families with disabilities are more supportive of increasing the ratio reserved for the disadvantaged in social housing. Secondly, when there are families that have moved within the past 5 years and the general public is willing to approve and register for social housing, there is a high level of approval for the ratio reserved for the disadvantaged in social housing. Third, the satisfaction level of the public towards their neighborhood environment has a significant positive effect on the ratio reserved for the disadvantaged in social housing, but the effects of the different facilities vary. Finally, citizens in cities with a higher degree of urbanization are more likely to approve of the ratio reserved for the disadvantaged in social housing. However, citizens located in the peripheral areas of cities are less supportive. The results of the study show that there is a geographical difference in the public's attitude towards mixed-living social housing.起始頁-結束頁：1-26資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會2篇名：臺灣七大都市地區房價所得比之差異與迷思－購屋者擁屋數與主觀因素分析並列篇名：Differences and Myths about House Price-to-Income Ratios in Taiwan's Seven Largest Cities: An Analysis of Buyers' House Ownership and Subjective Factors作者：林佑儒(Yu-Ju Lin)關鍵字：住宅負擔;房價所得比;住宅壓力;住宅自有;分量迴歸模型;housing affordability;house-price-to-income ratio;housing stress;house ownership;quantile regression model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：30卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：臺灣近年來由於房價高漲，住宅負擔問題成為關注焦點。本研究以個體房價所得比視為住宅負擔，以擁屋數（資產部分替代變數）、主觀因素及臺灣七大都市地區為研究主軸，探討房價所得比之三大迷思：一、高房價低所得現象背後反映購屋資金並非單純倚靠所得，擁屋數（資產）也可能為重要來源；二、探討住宅負擔時僅探討客觀因素，卻忽略購屋者主觀因素（支出壓力或房價趨勢看法）影響力；三、高房價或高房價所得比背後代表高住宅負擔，臺北市為房價之首，住宅負擔也為全臺之首。本研究透過最小平方法及分量迴歸模型檢視七大都市地區房價所得比之差異，實證結果顯示，高低分量數值差異最大為區域別（臺北市）及購屋目的（自住或投資），缺少衡量擁屋數會使住宅負擔高估、購屋者對於房價看法或支出壓力等確實影響住宅負擔，而七大都市地區中，低房價地區（高雄市）反比高房價地區（臺北市）住宅負擔重。整體而言，資產（擁屋數）確實為重要購屋資金來源，探討購屋者主觀因素有助於分析住宅負擔，而高房價或高房價所得比背後並不代表高住宅負擔。英文摘要：Against the background of soaring house prices in Taiwan, housing affordability has become a focus of concern. This study determines the housing affordability of an individual according to his or her house price-to-income ratio (PIR). The research framework was established using house ownership (i.e., the number of houses owned) as the proxy variable for assets and subjective factors, with a focus on the seven largest cities in Taiwan. Three myths about PIRs are discussed in this study: (1) A high PIR indicates that an individual's financial ability to buy a house does not solely depend on his or her income, but is instead largely contributed by his or her house ownership (assets). (2) Housing affordability is usually discussed in relation to objective factors; subjective factors from the house buyer's perspective are often excluded from the equation. (3) A high house price or high PIR means low housing affordability, with the result that the city with the highest house prices (Taipei) should exhibit the lowest housing affordability. This study used the method of ordinary least squares and a quantile regression model to explore the differences among the PIRs in the seven largest cities in Taiwan. According to the empirical results, assets (house ownership) serve as the primary source of finance for buying houses. This investigation into house buyers' subjective factors is conducive to analyzing their housing affordability, and a high house price or high PIR does not necessarily indicate low housing affordability.起始頁-結束頁：27-47資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會3篇名：租賃契約條件對商用不動產租金影響之研究並列篇名：The Effect of Contract Terms on the Rent Level of Commercial Properties作者：蔡汶靜(Wen-Ching Tsai);林左裕(Tsoyu Calvin Lin)關鍵字：商用不動產;租金;租賃條款;實質選擇權;二項式評價模式;Commercial Real Estate;Rent;Contract Terms;Real Option;Binomial Option Pricing Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：30卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：影響商用不動產租金之因素眾多，除了總體經濟、區域及個別因素外，尚包括契約因素。我國公部門出租不動產時，其租賃契約中常包含出租方得逕為終止契約之權利，與私部門間之契約常有落差。本研究探討租賃契約中特殊條件對租金之影響，先建構複迴歸模型探討影響租金之因素，發現賦予出租方可逕為終止契約之權利，對商用不動產之租金具顯著影響；再進一步以二項式評價模式分析其隱含實質選擇權價值變化。結果指出公部門資產租賃契約宜考量具特殊條件時租金之公平性，亦提供爾後租約中含特殊條件時之租金定價調整之參考。英文摘要：The rents of commercial properties are affected by various factors, including macroeconomic, regional, individual and other factors such as termination options. The lease contracts of commercial properties in the public sector in Taiwan usually include the terms of termination option for the lessors. This study explores the terms used to terminate the contract for the lessors, which is considered to impose an operating risk on the tenants. This study first employs a multiple regression model to examine the factors affecting the rent level. The results show that the rent is significantly affected by the termination terms for the lessors besides other individual, regional and macro-economic variables. We then apply the ”Binomial Option Pricing Model” to simulate how the value of the lease contract is affected by the termination options. The results of this study indicate that contracts in the public sector should consider the issue of equity for lessors and lessees, and provide important implications for rent pricing when the termination option is included in the contract.起始頁-結束頁：49-69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會4篇名：間接不動產之現貨與期貨市場間的資訊傳遞－以台灣5檔營建上市股為例並列篇名：Information Transmission between Spot and Futures Markets in Indirect Real Estate Markets: A Case Study of 5 Construction Stocks in Taiwan作者：陳宜伶(Yi-Ling Chen);王銘駿(Ming-Chun Wang);詹佳縈(Chia-Ying Chan);蔡己生(Chi-Sheng Tsai)關鍵字：營建類股;投資人注意力;價格發現;波動外溢效果;Construction Stock;Investor Attention;Price Discovery;Volatility Spillover Effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：住宅學報卷期：30卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究探討投資人注意力對於營建類股現貨市場與其個股期貨間價格發現與波動外溢效果之影響。本文選取擁有個股期貨的營建類股，包括中工、冠德、興富發、皇翔與華固共5家公司為研究對象，並以Google趨勢搜尋量指數（search volume index, SVI）作為投資人注意力指標。利用向量自我迴歸模型（vector autoregression, VAR）與Granger因果關係檢定檢測價格發現，並採用雙變量動態條件相關GARCH不對稱模型（bi-variate dynamic conditional correlation GARCH asymmetric model）分析波動外溢效果。實證結果顯示，當投資人注意力高時，會增加營建類股個股現貨市場價格發現功能；此外，投資人注意力高時，也會提高營建類股現貨與期貨市場互相波動外溢至對方市場。英文摘要：This study investigates the impact of investor attention on price discovery and the volatility spillover effect between single-stock futures and the underlying spot market. We examine five construction stocks: BES Engineering Corp., Kindom Construction Corp., Hingwealth Construction Corp., Huang Hsiang Construction Corp. and Huaku Development Co. Ltd. in Taiwan as the underlying stocks, and adopt the Google Trend Search Volume Index (SVI) as the investor attention index. The VAR model and Granger causality test are employed to identify the price discovery of the financial instruments. The bi-variate dynamic conditional correlation GARCH asymmetric model is applied to analyze the volatility spillover effect between the two financial assets. The empirical results demonstrate that the spot market exhibits a better price discovery effect when the degree of retail investor information attention increases. In addition, a high level of retail investor attention also enhances the volatility spillover effects bilaterally in both the spot and futures markets.起始頁-結束頁：71-101資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：中華民國住宅學會01篇名：建構保護性社會工作實務督導指標之初探研究並列篇名：A Preliminary Study on the Construction of Practice Supervision Standards in Protective Social Work作者：游美貴(Mei-Kuei Yu);廖明鈺(Min-Yu Liao)關鍵字：保護性社會工作;保護性社會工作督導;實務指標;德菲法;protective social work;protective social work supervisor;the practice standards;Delphi survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：保護性社會工作在專業發展上，實務督導議題較少被研究。本研究邀集保護性社會工作人員、保護性社會工作督導與學者專家，探討與發展本土的「實務督導指標」及其操作性方式。研究者邀集20位公私部門保護性社會工作人員及督導者參與2次焦點團體。以主題式質化資料分析後，初步擬定「實務督導指標」之草案。後續再邀請10名學者專家舉行兩次德菲法問卷調查，最終確立「實務督導指標」。其後，再邀請10名保護性資深社工與督導，探討指標的具體操作內容。本研究價值在於研擬出屬於本土的「實務督導指標」，包含四大主題「實務知能／技巧」、「專業督導關係」、「責信」與「倫理」構面，以及產出實務督導指標之可操作內容。研究結果可做為保護性社會工作督導制度在實務面及政策面之參考。然而受限於研究量體限制，實務指標恐有未盡之處，未來研究可擴大邀訪公私部門之保護性社會工作人員及督導者參與研究，亦可進行探究此實務督導指標之實踐成效或挑戰。英文摘要：Over the past few decades, a trend of relying on the external supervision provided in protective social work has been observed. Professional supervision is often sourced externally through a private arrangement or contracted out by agencies or individual practitioners of supervision. However, research investigating the quality and efficiency of professional supervision within agencies is rare. This study examined the practice standards for protective social work supervisors. In the first stage, 20 experienced social workers and supervisors of protective social work were invited to participate this study. Two focus groups were created, and all participants in the study followed the practice standards of professional supervision. In the second stage, two stages of Delphi surveys were completed by 10 experts in protective social work. Finally, the 10 senior experienced social workers and supervisors of protective social work presented the practice standards and practical duties of protective social work supervision. As a significant site of practice, critically informed practice standards have the potential to emerge as a site for modeling social change strategies associated with the tradition of critical supervision. Future research is recommended to include participants from protective agencies or even evaluate the effectiveness of practice standards or challenges in their implementation.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202106_25(1).00012篇名：健全老人長期照顧機構治理工具之多層次網絡治理分析並列篇名：A Multi-Level Network Governance Analysis on Governance Tools for Elderly Long-Term Care Institutions作者：蕭文高(Wen-Kao Hsiao)關鍵字：老人照顧機構;多層次治理;網絡治理;治理工具;elderly care institutions;multi-level governance;network governance;governance tools期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：為因應人口快速老化所產生之照顧服務需求，政府於近年陸續推展長期照顧十年計畫；老人機構式照顧是整體長期照顧服務體系之一環，扮演照顧最後一道防線之功能，然而層出不窮之機構事故顯現治理工具失靈，值得深入分析。為此，本文主要目的在於透過文獻與政策文件之探討，以多層次網絡治理為分析概念，剖析老人長期照顧機構治理工具之現況與限制。研究發現相關治理體系在照顧費用補助、機構經營成本補助與地方政府行政人力補助存在缺失，且機構評鑑制度與查核成效有待提升，訊息性治理工具亟需修正等問題。基於前述發現，本文最後建議政府應進行長期照顧機構營運收支分析、整合規劃相關支付制度、建立長照服務專責管理體系，並善用訊息性工具，以回應經營者及服務使用者之需求。英文摘要：In response to the rapid aging of the population and increasing need for care services, the government has launched various parts of the Long-term Care Plans over the past few years. Institutional care for the elderly is part of the overall long-term services system and the last line of defense in elderly care; however, continued accidents in the facilities showed the failure of certain governance tools. For this reason, the main purpose of this article is to analyze the current status and limitations of governance tools for elderly long-term care institutions through a literature and policy document review with the multi-level network governance perspective. Following a systematic review, this study found defects in the arrangement of care payment, supplier subsidies, and administration funding. Furthermore, in regard to the effectiveness of the inspection and auditing systems, information-related instruments need to be improved. Finally, based on the research finding and to meet supplier and citizens' needs, this paper suggests that the government should analyze the revenue and expenditure of long-term care institutions, dedicate its efforts on the integrated planning of the payment system, frame a centered regulating system, and improve information instruments.起始頁-結束頁：49-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202106_25(1).00023篇名：在經驗中學習、從行動中突破：臺灣社會團體工作專業養成的經驗與特色並列篇名：Learning from Experience, Breakthrough in Action: Experience and Uniqueness of the Social Group Work Profession Cultivated in Taiwan作者：林佩瑾(Pei-Chin Lin)關鍵字：社會團體工作;實務智慧;經驗式學習;social group work;practice wisdom;experiential learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：社會政策與社會工作學刊卷期：25卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究目的在於從團體工作的實務經驗中整理出在學習團體工作默會知識時最常遇到的困惑，關注突破學習障礙的影響因素，並梳理出影響臺灣團體工作專業學習與專業實踐的關鍵。本研究以個別訪談與焦點團體方法訪談21位團體工作者，研究發現，幾乎所有受訪者都提到團體工作的抽象性與不確定性，成為學習上最大的挫折，最常遇到的困惑包括難以掌握團體目標、團體活動與團體動力之間的關係，追求「有效能團體」來證明自己，以及預設了角色與人之間的裂隙。團體工作者帶著這些困惑，不斷地透過「做中學、學中做」，在經驗中摸索、模仿與學習，而磨練出膽識以回應團體中的各種變化。如果在這過程中能有師徒制的陪伴與督導，則能從行動中反思，逐漸突破學習困境，而成為一個團體工作者。因此，「在經驗中學習、從行動中突破」是團體工作專業養成的核心，建議學校教育與實務訓練都應該提供適當的經驗學習機會，以發展貼近學習者需求的專業養成模式。英文摘要：In this study, 21 social workers were interviewed using individual interview and focus group methods, trying to sort out the most common confusions encountered in learning group work tacit knowledge, and pay attention to the impact of breaking through the learning barrier trying to sort out from these experiences the key factors that affect the professional learning and professional practice of Taiwan's group work. The study found that almost all of the interviewees mentioned the abstraction and uncertainty of group work, which became the biggest frustration in learning. The most common confusions included the difficulty of grasping the relationship between group goals, group activities and group dynamics, the pursuit of ”effective groups” to prove themselves, and presupposes a gap between roles and humanity. With these confusions, group workers continue to explore, imitate, and learn from experience through ”learn by doing, doing while learning”, and hone their courage to respond to various changes in the group. If you can be accompanied and supervised by the supervisor in this process, you can reflect on your actions and gradually transform into a group worker. Therefore, ”learning from experience, breakthrough in action” is the core of professional development in group work. Both school education and practical training should provide appropriate experience learning opportunities to develop a professional development model that is close to the needs of learners.起始頁-結束頁：93-135資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：台灣社會政策學會DOI：10.6785/SPSW.202106_25(1).000301篇名：臺灣國際觀光旅館考慮要素內生性的兩部門技術效率分析並列篇名：Jointly Estimating Technical Efficiency of Taiwan's International Tourist Hotels with Two Divisions and Endogenous Inputs作者：黃台心(Tai-Hsin Huang);邱義晃(Yi-Huang Chu);黃廉淨(Lian-Jing Huang)關鍵字：國際觀光旅館;關聯結構法;內生性問題;技術效率;寧靜生活假說;International Tourist Hotels;Copula Methods;Simultaneity Problems;Technical Efficiency;Quiet Life Hypothesis期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：57卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：生產函數中自變數的聯立問題，起因於誤差項包含無法觀察到的生產力，影響廠商的雇用決策，導致誤差項與要素需求相關而產生內生性問題，Olley and Pakes（1996）指出要獲得具備一致性的係數估計值，必須同時解決廠商是否繼續營運的選擇問題及聯立問題，因國際觀光旅館退出市場的情形較少，選擇問題較不嚴重，可以忽略。為能正確掌握國際觀光旅館雇用不同類別生產要素，同時進行住宿和餐飲兩種主要生產活動的特質，並將無法觀察到的生產力因素納入考量，本研究利用關聯結構法同時估計79家臺灣國際觀光旅館住宿和餐飲部門的兩條生產邊界函數。發現考慮內生性問題之後，住宿及餐飲兩部門的效率值皆上升；無論是否考慮內生性問題，餐飲部門的管理能力皆優於住宿部門；參與連鎖體系的旅館住宿及餐飲部門技術效率皆較獨立飯店高；金融海嘯發生前與後，樣本旅館的平均效率值沒有明顯差異；寧靜生活假說未獲得支持。英文摘要：The simultaneity problem of independent variables in a production function is caused by the correlation of the error term that contains unobserved productivities with input demands, which then generates an endogenous problem. When estimating a production function, Olley and Pakes (1996) suggest jointly solving two problems - i.e., selection and simultaneity - to obtain consistent parameter estimates. Our research ignores the selection problem, because there are few tourist hotels leaving the market during the sample period, and merely takes the simultaneity problem into account. We thus propose to jointly estimate two production frontiers for Taiwan's tourist hotels, corresponding to accommodation and restaurant divisions, using the copula methods. After considering the simultaneity problem, we find that the average technical efficiency of both divisions increases, the management ability of the restaurant division exceeds that of the accommodation division, chained hotels outperform independent hotels, the average efficiency of the sample hotels before and after 2008 (the subprime crisis) remains the same, and the data do not support the quiet life hypothesis.起始頁-結束頁：173-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系2篇名：移轉訂價、逃漏稅責任分攤、內部控制與租稅協調並列篇名：Transfer Pricing, Tax Evasion Responsibility Sharing, Internal Control, and Tax Harmonization作者：郭虹瑩(Horn-In Kuo);顏志達(Chih-Ta Yen);陳伊琪(Yi-Qi Chen)關鍵字：移轉訂價;逃漏稅責任分攤;內部控制;Transfer Pricing;Tax Evasion Responsibility Sharing;Internal Control期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：57卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文探討多國籍企業在面對子公司經理人隱匿公司所得的行為，以及其需要分攤逃漏稅法律責任的情況下，應該如何制訂移轉訂價與工資契約以達到內部控制的目的。依據我們的研究指出，由內部控制的角度來看，相較於子公司經理人無隱匿公司所得而言，多國籍企業應訂定較高的移轉訂價、降低給予子公司經理人的分紅比例，而當子公司經理人的分紅利益與逃漏稅利益，大於（小於）子公司經理人無隱匿公司所得行為下的分紅利益時，則定額給付的數額較高（較低）。再者，當子公司經理人逃漏稅法律承擔責任比例提高（降低），多國籍企業會提高（降低）分紅比例，移轉訂價的方向則未定。最後，兩國政府租稅政策於Nash均衡時，本國政府制訂的稅率會對外國福利水準造成負的財政外部性，而外國政府制訂的稅率對本國福利水準則不一定會造成負的財政外部性。換言之，當兩國政府從事租稅協調（tax harmonization）時，本國政府的稅率會降低，至於外國政府稅率的調整方向則不一定。英文摘要：This research investigates how multinational enterprises (MNEs) can devise transfer pricing and wage contracts for internal control purposes in the face of the concealment of corporate income by a subsidiary manager and the need to share responsibility for tax evasion. According to our findings, first, from an internal control perspective, MNEs should set higher transfer pricing and lower bonus ratios for the subsidiary manager compared to the subsidiary manager who did not conceal corporate income. Second, if the profit sharing and tax evasion benefits of the subsidiary manager are greater (less) than the profit-sharing benefits of the subsidiary manager who does not conceal corporate income, then MNEs can charge a higher (lower) amount of the lump-sum transfer. Third, if the percentage of liability for tax evasion by the subsidiary manager increases (decreases), then MNEs can increase (decrease) the bonus ratios when the direction of transfer pricing is undetermined. Finally, the consequence of tax harmonization between home and host countries indicates that the tax rate of the home country should be reduced, but the tax rate of the host country remains uncertain.起始頁-結束頁：211-253資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系3篇名：營養知識與飲食品質：台灣青壯年人口之研究並列篇名：Nutrition Knowledge and Dietary Quality: Evidence from Taiwan's Working-Age Population作者：洪乙禎(Yi-Chen Hong)關鍵字：營養知識;飲食品質;社經地位;Nutrition Knowledge;Dietary Quality;Socioeconomic Status期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：57卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：過去探討飲食行為的文獻多以蔬菜和水果類食物為主題，然而良好飲食品質應攝取不同類別食物、並且達到適當數量。本文建構飲食行為的理論模型，採用2004年至2008年台灣營養健康狀況變遷調查作為研究材料，以19歲以上、未滿65歲之樣本為對象，檢視台灣青壯人口在乳品、蔬菜、水果、蛋豆魚肉等四大類食物的攝取行為，討論營養知識與飲食品質的關聯及其他影響因素。考慮營養知識可能存在內生性疑慮，本研究選取工具變數、並採用兩階段的估計方法，以得到營養知識及其他因素的影響效果。分析結果顯示，蔬菜、水果類和蛋豆魚肉類食物，攝取不足的比例都有五成以上；乳品食物，未適當攝取的比例更是超過八成。越充足的營養知識，有助於乳品和水果等兩類食物攝取達到適當數量，但對於蔬菜類和蛋豆魚肉類則沒有顯著效果。另外，教育程度和經濟條件較好，對於飲食品質也有幫助。英文摘要：Most of the previous literature on dietary behavior focuses on vegetables and fruits, yet good dietary quality should include an appropriate amount of diverse foods. This research thus constructs a theoretical model of dietary behavior based on the 2004-2008 Nutrition and Health Survey in Taiwan. The study examines the dietary behavior of Taiwan's working-age population to explore the relationship between nutrition knowledge and dietary quality as well as other influencing factors. Considering the endogeneity of nutrition knowledge, we adopt instrumental variables and two-stage estimation to understand the effect of nutrition knowledge and other factors. The results show that over 50% of the population surveyed have an inadequate intake of vegetables, fruits, eggs, beans, fish, and meat, whereas over 80% are found to have an inadequate intake of dairy products. The subjects with more adequate nutrition knowledge are more likely to consume appropriate amounts of dairy products as well as fruits. However, nutrition knowledge has no significant effect on the consumption of vegetables, eggs, beans, fish, and meat. Lastly, higher education levels and better economic conditions have a positive effect on dietary quality.起始頁-結束頁：255-296資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系4篇名：影響群眾募資成功籌資金額之關鍵因素探討並列篇名：The Analysis of Key Factors Affecting the Successful Funding Amounts of Crowdfunding作者：曾昭玲(Jauling Tseng);郭迺鋒(Nai-Fong Kuo);侯學宏(Hsueh-Hung Hou)關鍵字：群眾募資;金融科技;電子商務;無線寬頻;樣本選擇模型;Crowdfunding;Fintech;E-commerce;Wireless Broadband;Sample Selection Model期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：57卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：由於過往文獻鮮少論述影響群眾募資成功籌資金額的因素，本研究援引flyingV與ditfunding兩大臺灣群眾募資平台之平台條件因素，進而深入補強總體、金融、消費以及科技環境變數之於群眾募資成功籌資機率與籌資金額的影響。實證結果發現群眾募資平台之目標金額越低，支持者人數、評論意見數、更新次數越高，過去成功籌資經驗越多抑或過去失敗經驗越少，均將顯著提升成功籌資機率；而目標金額越高，支持者人數與更新次數越高，過去成功籌資經驗越多或過去失敗經驗越少，均將顯著提高成功籌資金額。其次，群眾募資成功籌資機率分別與臺灣全體銀行每月放款餘額及臺灣金融業隔夜拆款利率間具有顯著負向與正向關聯性，故銀行放款總量越少，群眾募資越易成功籌資，而隔夜拆款利率上升，銀行營運成本上升，亦將提升群眾募資成功籌資機率。國民消費總額及消費者物價總指數二變數與成功籌資金額間分別具有顯著負向與正向關聯性，故當國民消費總額越低或物價水準越高，群眾募資成功募得資金越多。最後，臺灣若具有較多的無線寬頻帳號數，其衍生的數位傳遞能力與滲透力越高，有助於提升群眾募資成功籌資機率與金額。英文摘要：Few studies have properly discussed factors that affect how crowdfunding platforms successfully meet their fundraising targets. This research thus examines the effects of the conditions and factors related to crowdfunding platforms and then analyzes the effects of the macroeconomic, financial, and consumption variables as well as technological environment variables on the successful probability of crowdfunding and the amount of money successfully raised by employing statistical data from Taiwanese crowdfunding platforms flyingV and ditfunding. The empirical results reveal that crowdfunding platforms with lower funding targets, more backers, more comments, more frequent updates, and more successful or fewer failure experiences are significantly more likely to succeed; and that platforms with higher funding targets, more backers, more frequent updates, and more successful or fewer failure experiences are significantly more likely to increase funds raised. A significant and negative association is observed between loans from all banks and the probability of successful crowdfunding; in other words, lower total bank loans prompt more successful crowdfunding. Additionally, a significant and positive correlation is observed between the interbank overnight call loan rate and the probability of successful crowdfunding. This intuitively suggests that higher overnight rates result in higher bank operation and credit costs, which increase the probability of successful crowdfunding. Taiwan's gross national consumption and consumer price index exhibit a significantly negative and positive correlation with the amount of funds successfully raised, respectively. This implies that when gross national consumption is lower or when price levels are higher, the amount successfully raised through crowdfunding increases. Finally, because crowdfunding is a type of e-commerce, more wireless broadband accounts in Taiwan, indicating more frequent digital transmissions and higher penetration rates, raise the probability of successful crowdfunding and the amount of funds successfully raised. However, increases in cell phone numbers alone enhance the transmission of non-digital information and thus do not increase the amount of funds raised.起始頁-結束頁：297-359資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系5篇名：大學生課程停修分析及其與退學及延畢之關係：以北部某私立大學為例並列篇名：Withdrawal, Dismissal, and Late Graduation: A Case Study of One Northern Private University作者：陶宏麟(Hung-Lin Tao);王人豪(Jen-Hao Wang);王千文(Chian-Wen Wang)關鍵字：停修;課程;退學;延畢;校務研究;Withdrawal;Curriculum;Dismissal;Deferral of Graduation;Institutional Research期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：57卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以北部某私立大學校務資料分析什麼課程的停修比例較高，何類學生較可能停修。課程面分析顯示科目不及格比率越高或平均分數越低，停修比例越高。雖然兩者都反映困難科目的停修較高，但學生停修對分數反應更為敏感，顯示兩者捕捉到的反應有所不同。學生成績在及格邊緣才會在意及格與否，但大部分學生都在意分數高低，是以學生對分數較為敏感。0至4學分的課程中，2學分（含）以上的課程停修較高，這與停修的成本及效益有關，停修效益是立即性的，如釋出時間、成績提升與逃避退學；成本為拉長就讀時間形成延畢，屬未來發生。因此停修學分數太低不符合當下效益。必修課程因停修後仍須重修，以及下學期課程因經過上學期的適應與篩選，此兩課程因素也會造成停修比例較低。以學生面來分析顯示成績佳與無二一記錄的學生較不會停修；女性及推薦生與繁星生停修比例低，停修是修正選課錯誤，這可能反映出女性及推薦生與繁星生做事較有規劃；四年級與一年級學生停修比例較低，可能與四年級學生有較豐富的選課經驗，對自我能力評估與時間分配較能掌握，一年級學生則可能較不清楚停修規定或不清楚如何評估自我能力與時間分配，以致未申請停修。對成績落後學生，停修能減低他們被退學的機率，但也提高延畢的可能。英文摘要：This study uses data from a northern private university in Taiwan to investigate what courses have a higher withdrawal ratio and what kind of students are more likely to withdraw. From courses' perspective, those with a higher fail ratio or low average score have a higher withdrawal ratio, yet withdrawals responded to the fail ratio and average score differently. All students are sensitive to score, but only marginal students are concerned about passing the courses or not. Courses of more than two credits are more likely to be withdrawn, reflecting the consideration of costs and benefits. The instant benefits of withdrawals include saving time, enhancing grade point average, and avoiding dismissal, while the future costs are late graduation. Instant benefits are clearly greater than future costs. Students must retake required courses after withdrawal. Students who took an academic year course and pass in the first semester knew how to pass the course in the second semester. Consequently, required courses and second-semester courses are less likely to be withdrawn. From students' perspective, those with good grades and without a record of failing a one-half credit course are less likely to withdraw. Females and recommendation/multi-star students are less likely to withdraw. Withdrawal is a correction of the courses taken in the first place, which probably reflects that females and recommendation/multi-star students are more thoughtful than their countpartners, as they seldom take courses on an impulse. Seniors and freshmen are less likely to withdraw, which might suggest that seniors have abundant experience at taking courses and are more able to evaluate their own capability and to control their time. The low withdrawal of freshmen might result from knowing little about the rule of withdrawal or overestimating themselves. Withdrawals help students whose grades fall behind to avoid dismissal, but enhance their likelihood of late graduation.起始頁-結束頁：1-33資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系6篇名：高等教育配對機制的探討：一個特色大學的招生和學生與科系配對結果的研究並列篇名：Match Mechanism in Higher Education: Learning from a Distinctive University's Recruitment and Retention作者：蔡<U+5F63>涓(Wehn-Jyuan Tsai)關鍵字：高等教育;配對;招生;續讀率;Higher Education;Match;Recruitment;Retention Rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：57卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：2002年「大學多元入學方案」的實施主要為高等教育的入學制度引進不同的篩選方式。有鑑於此，本文使用世新大學2005學年度至2015學年度的校務資料與2005學年度至2014學年度個人申請、繁星推薦和大學考試入學分發招生簡章的校系分則之串連資料，研究大學多元入學管道的配對規則（學生與校系的配對邏輯）與招生標準（大學校系對學生的偏好排序基礎）對學生於大學前4個學期的標準化成績與其系、校續讀機率的影響。由於世新大學為一以新聞傳播著稱的特色大學，故本文主要係利用該特質解決校務研究普遍缺乏學生志願序資料的問題。實證結果顯示在控制世新大學各系組所設定的招生標準下，個人申請與繁星推薦入學的制度將較考試分發更能招收到成績表現較佳、但同時亦有較高的風險會轉至新聞傳播學院相關系組的學生。另外，大學校系若以英文成績做為招生標準，則學生將有較高的可能性以轉系（尤其是轉至新聞傳播學院相關系組）的方式解決其與入學系組配適錯誤的問題。英文摘要：The Multi-Channel College Entrance System in Taiwan that was initiated in 2002 has introduced three types of screening mechanisms. This paper thus focuses on Shih Hsin University and uses 2005-2015 institutional data, which are linked to the regulations of these three screening mechanisms, to distinguish between the influences of matching methods (i.e., assignment algorithm) and selection criteria (i.e., a basis for preferences of colleges over students) on a student's standardized scores and his/her intent to change a major or leave an institution in the first and second years of schoolong. By recognizing the fact that Shih Hsin University is well-known for its college of journalism and communications, we are able to solve the lack of preferences of students in the field of institutional research. The empirical results suggest that the assignment algorithm used for admission via Personal Application and via the Star Plan can significantly attract students with high standardized scores, when compared with an admission via the Joint College Assigned-Subject Examination, at the cost of high intention to change majors. Moreover, our results show that students may not be suitably matched with a major at a specific institution and intend to change majors, as a result of an admission process that is reliant on English tests.起始頁-結束頁：35-91資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系7篇名：明星高中進入頂尖大學的學校特定效果分析並列篇名：Do Elite High Schools Matter for Entering Elite Universities?作者：莊奕琦(Yih-Chyi Chuang);陳晏羚(Yen-Ling Chen)關鍵字：明星高中;臺灣青少年成長歷程研究;樣本選擇性偏誤;學校特定效果;Elite High School;Taiwan Youth Project;Sample Selection Bias;School-specific Effect期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：57卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：臺灣隨著大專院校的擴增，升學率普遍提高，唸大學已不再是重點，能不能唸好的大學才是關鍵。本文分析明星高中是否存在進入頂尖大學的學校特定效果，利用「臺灣青少年成長歷程研究」問卷調查資料，採Heckman兩階段估計法先控制樣本就讀大學的選擇性偏誤，再以羅吉斯迴歸模型估計，涵蓋的控制變數除了家庭背景、地區變數外，再加入個人能力的不同代理變數，並進行不同組合樣本的敏感性分析。實證結果發現，在控制個人能力變數與明星高中為吸引優秀學生的效果後，明星高中對進入頂尖大學仍具顯著學校特定效果優勢，相對勝算比約2.5倍至2.9倍。至於明星高中的學校特定效果來源將因不同的內涵而有不同的政策意涵，故尚待後續研究釐清。英文摘要：Along with the rapid expansion of higher education in Taiwan since the mid-1990s, being admitted by a university is no longer a key issue, whereas entering an elite university remains as a keen space for competition. This paper uses data from Taiwan Youth Project to test the school-specific effect of elite high schools on entering elite universities. We deal with problems of sample selection and the appealing effect for students with good academic performance in elite high schools. After controlling for regions, family socioeconomic status, personal characteristics, and unobserved ability, our estimation results show that there exists a positive and significant school-specific effect with an odd-ratio of 2.5 to 2.9, for students of elite high schools to enter elite universities. However, the connotations of the school-specific effect may lead to varied policy implications and thus require further investigations.起始頁-結束頁：93-122資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系8篇名：公務人員退休金制度改革與其勞動市場之實證分析並列篇名：An Empirical Study on Public Employee Pension Reform and Government Employees' Labor Market作者：陳昱涵(Yu-Han Chen);陳國樑(Joe Chen);黃勢璋(Shih-Chang Huang)關鍵字：退休金制度;薪資水準;工作時數;勞動參與;Public Employee Pension;Wage;Working Hours;Labor Participation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟研究卷期：57卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：近年，我國公務人員退休金制度改革引起軒然大波，但國內卻鮮少對其勞動市場影響進行深入討論。為此，本文運用行政院主計總處（1992-1998，2008-2014）之人力運用調查資料，透過差異中差異（difference-in-differences, DID）及工具變數Probit模型，分析臺灣在1995年與2011年的兩次公務人員退休金制度改革，如何改變公務人員勞動市場之反應。研究結果發現，制度改革後明顯造成公務人員的退休金降低及薪資上升，雖符合學理上薪資與退休金之替代關係，但其顯著效果卻僅限於2011年改革後的次年；對於公務人員工作時數則出現增加趨勢，但效果須視改革幅度而定，尤以改革後第3年最為明顯。在勞動參與方面，退休金制度改革造成非公務人員投入公部門成為公務人員的機率具有負面影響，而公務人員退出公部門的機率則出現上升情形；但若地方選舉發生政黨輪替，個人以約聘僱人員身分進入公部門的機率則是正向影響。英文摘要：Despite the uproar over public employee pension reforms, few studies examine the effect of the reforms on the labor market. This paper thus investigates the impacts of these reforms on government employees' labor market in Taiwan for 1995 and 2011, including wage rates, working hours, and labor participation. We also explore the relationship between the political factors of local elections and labor participation Applying the manpower utilization survey data, results from difference-in-differences (DID) analysis and instrumental variable Probit model suggest that public employee pension cuts did lead to an increase of wages in the year following the 2011 pension reform, which runs in accordance with the substitutability relationship between wage and pension as suggested by theory. In addition, the immediate effect of a pension cut on working hours depends on the magnitude of the reform, and the increase in working hours was most significant three years following the reform. Finally, public employee pension cuts spurred decreases in the probabilities of becoming public employees and increases in the probabilities of withdrawal from the public sector. Specifically, the probabilities of becoming contract employees rose when local elections resulted in a ”switch” in the ruling political party.起始頁-結束頁：123-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺北大學經濟學系01篇名：只想好好地生活：原住民同志之交織處境與因應策略並列篇名：Challenges and Coping Strategies among Indigenous Gay People in Facing Intersectionality作者：Ciwang Teyra;黃炤愷(Chao-Kai Huang);謝宛蓉(Wan-Jung (Wendy) Hsieh)關鍵字：原住民;同志;歧視;交織性;社會支持;indigenous people;LGBTQ individuals;discrimination;Intersectionality;social support期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：43期出版年：2021中文摘要：面對主流和原住民族社會對於族群與性別交織之歧視，原住民同志處境艱辛。本文採面對面深度訪談15名分布於北部、東部和南部的原住民男同志，探討原住民男同志生活中面臨的挑戰及因應之道。研究發現原住民男同志在成長歷程中面臨到不只來自族群、性別身分的歧視，還伴隨其他身分交織的多重污名，如：基督宗教、部落或都市生活經驗、社經地位等，使得原住民男同志的生活處境有別於主流同志社群與原住民族社群。交織的歧視經驗對原住民男同志的生活造成心理負擔，相應的策略是優先投入族群或部落事務、藉著移動和部落保持距離、向上爬升尋求保護傘、與同儕社群連結獲得社會支持。本文建議以交織視角來理解原住民同志在多重身分下優勢與劣勢的全貌。此外，實務和研究上需要更多相應的資源，以協助原住民同志及其家長面對現身與出櫃議題、發掘更多原住民同志的優勢與韌性，並促成族群內部對話，以減少未來壓迫的發生，滿足原住民同志想要好好生活的期待。英文摘要：Background: With the legalization of Same-Sex Marriage in Taiwan, the LGBTQ population and its related issues have gradually gained public attention. Specifically, the indigenous LGBTQ groups experience more severe challenges by encountering the intersectionality of racial and gender discrimination in daily lives. With only a few existing studies regarding the indigenous LGBTQ population in Taiwan, this research aims to fulfill the gap by exploring their life challenges, coping strategies, and resilience factors with an intersectionality perspective. Method/Analysis: This study collaborated with the Taiwan Indigenous LGBTQ Alliance, conducting in-depth qualitative interviews with 15 indigenous gay men who reside in various regions of Taiwan. We employed an inductive thematic analysis approach to analyze transcripts. This approach involved both within and cross-case analysis to identify major themes. The findings were reviewed by the core members of the Taiwan Indigenous LGBTQ Alliance to establish cultural validity. Findings: Many indigenous gay men experienced the intersectionality of racial discrimination, gender identity/ sexual orientation discrimination, and stigmas of religion, class, and SES status during their growths, which is different from the experiences of the general LGBTQ group in Taiwan. To respond to these challenges, indigenous gay men developed several coping strategies. Specifically, they would be actively involved in tribal public affairs and services, kept a proper physical distance from the tribal communities, made connections within the indigenous LGBTQ group, and sought for higher socioeconomic status (SES) to increase a sense of security. Conclusion: This study suggests that more future research about indigenous LGBTQ persons in Taiwan is needed. This study also indicates that more resources are required in order to support indigenous LGBTQ persons and their parents to cope with stress about coming-out, to explore their inner strengths and resilience, and to facilitate dialogues within the tribe. These practices and supports will be critical to reduce further oppression among this population and promote their wellbeing.起始頁-結束頁：1-53資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202106_(43).00012篇名：身心障礙福利機構之職業健康危害與保護機制探討：以教保人員為中心並列篇名：Exploring Occupational Health Hazards and Protection Mechanism in the Disability Welfare Institution: Focus on Educare Givers作者：尤素芬(Su-Fen You)關鍵字：身心障礙機構;職業健康危害;風險溝通;教保員;輔具;the disability welfare institution;occupational health hazard;risk communication;educare giver;assistive device期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：43期出版年：2021中文摘要：身心障礙機構照服人員的工作過程充滿各種職業健康風險，但社會各界鮮少關注，本文藉由質性研究，探討個案機構中職業健康危害情形以及機構的風險溝通與防護機制。研究個案位於南部地區，有成人部與學前部，我們透過參與式觀察及深度訪談進行資料蒐集。研究結果發現，個案機構雖是評鑑優良的機構，且管理上重視風險溝通與員工健康，但教保人員仍飽受職業傷病威脅，顯見職業健康危害保護機制並未有效落實。從人力資源管理的角度來看，機構有部分機制尚待加強，包括：教育訓練需要納入更多職業安全衛生的主題，以及健康促進方案應蒐集職業傷病資料，並發展「員工能遵守健康及安全的要求」措施等。另外，個案機構並沒有使用轉移位輔具，本文呼籲「不徒手搬運政策」需要優先在身心障礙機構落實。面對當前身心障礙機構照服人力不足的問題，本文認為「建立安全健康的工作環境」應該要列為人力維繫的重要項目，這也是回應以「場所性健康促進」作為核心策略的國際趨勢。英文摘要：While the work process of caregivers in disability institutions entails numerous occupational health risks, Taiwan's society rarely pays attention to this issue. Based on the case study and qualitative research, this study explores the occupational health hazards, risk communication and protection mechanisms for educare givers in a disability welfare institution. The research institution in this study is an agency located in southern Taiwan, with the focus on the adult department and preschool department. We collected data through participatory observation and in-depth interviews. In terms of the results of the study, the educare givers are threatened by occupational disasters, despite the case institution's history of excellent performance as reflected in its evaluation results. It is also noteworthy that the institutional management attaches great importance to employee health and risk communication. However, the protection mechanism against occupational health hazards apparently has not been effectively implemented. From the perspective of human resources management, some mechanisms of the organization need to be strengthened, including: education and training need to include more topics related to occupational health and safety, health promotion programs should collect occupational injury and disease information, develop the requisite measures to facilitate employees' compliance with health and safety requirements, etc. In addition, the case institution does not even use any transfer device. This study calls for the ”No-lift policy” to first be implemented in disability institutions. Faced with the shortage of care workers in disability institutions, we argue that ”building a safe and healthy working environment” should be listed as an important item for manpower maintenance. This suggestion is also a response to the international trend of ”workplace health promotion” as its core strategy.起始頁-結束頁：55-106資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202106_(43).00023篇名：兒童及少年安置及教養機構評鑑制度之現況檢視與未來發展取向之省思並列篇名：Government Inspections of Children's Welfare Institutions: An Examination of the Current Practice and Future Outlooks作者：林沛君(Pei-Chun Lin)關鍵字：兒少安置及教養機構;機構評鑑;安置機構;children's home;inspection of children's home;residential care期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大社會工作學刊卷期：43期出版年：2021中文摘要：由於近年來國內兒少安置機構相繼發生性侵與霸凌之重大傷害事件，遂使兒少安置機構評鑑的成效成為各方關注的議題。本文係借鑑〈兒童權利公約〉所揭示之原則及英國「透過孩子眼睛」的評鑑思維，同時透過實地走訪全台兒少安置機構與第一線工作者進行深入訪談，針對中央主管機關舉辦之兒少安置機構聯合評鑑之現行制度進行檢視，建議政府以短期、中期及長期之制度改革進行思考：（一）現階段可藉由強化評鑑人員評鑑前訓練及評鑑標準共識之凝聚以提升評鑑人員專業度及評鑑標準之一致性，採行兒少友善之措施讓被安置兒少於評鑑過程中有更多的參與及意見表達，以使被安置兒少的聲音能獲得實質傾聽，然後再以透明而合宜之方式公開評鑑結果以之取信於社會大眾；（二）就中期而言，則應重新檢視評鑑實施計畫及評鑑指標，嘗試以孩子的視角來看待社工人員的服務內涵及機構特色，將重點放在安置的這段歷程及專注在那些對孩子生活帶來改變的服務，並應建置相關平台以促進評鑑人員、受評機構、被安置兒少及其父母等多方間之溝通；（三）在長期規劃上則應審慎評估未來以獨立專責機關負責評鑑之可行性，讓評鑑能更佳發揮其區分機構優劣、強化並支持實務工作者學習與轉變的功能。英文摘要：This article examines the current practice regarding government inspections of children's welfare institutions in Taiwan and raises issues for consideration by the government. In so doing, this article refers to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the inspection framework adopted by England, in order to demonstrate that the purpose of inspections is not merely for the government to check that institutions are meeting their legal compliance requirements, but also to drive improvements and enhance outcomes for children and young people. In addition, the article draws on observations gathered during in-depth interviews with workers in children's welfare institutions throughout Taiwan, and with academics working in this field. The aim is to raise the following considerations for future policy or law reforms: (1) in the short-term, introducing a mandatory requirement for inspectors to receive training before they conduct inspections, in order to enhance their understanding of child welfare practices. There is also a need re-think and design a more articulated way for children to participate in these inspections; (2) in the medium term, further government guidance is required, in the form of regulations and directives, concerning the core principles that should inform inspections of children's welfare institutions. There is also a need to enhance the dialogue between inspectors and children's institutions, as well as platforms to enable experiences and good practices to be shared among institutions; and (3) in the longer-term, the government should consider establishing an independent institution to be responsible for inspections of children's welfare institutions.起始頁-結束頁：107-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會學出版單位：臺灣大學社會工作學系DOI：10.6171/ntuswr.202106_(43).000301篇名：線上顧客感恩與信任之動態研究並列篇名：A Dynamic Examination of Online Customer Gratitude and Trust作者：黃明新(Min-Hsin Huang);施麗婷(Li-Ting Shih)關鍵字：顧客感恩;潛在成長模型;關係動態理論;customer gratitude;latent growth curve model;relationship dynamics theory期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：過去文獻已提及企業與顧客的關係極可能隨著時間改變，但多數研究者仍採靜態的時間點來驗證其理論模型。本研究以「關係動態理論」為基礎，運用潛在成長模型進行長期資料分析，提出感恩與信任之變動速率，將其應用於線上購物環境，來驗證顧客感恩與信任隨著時間推移，對顧客忠誠度（態度與行為忠誠）所帶來的影響。研究結果顯示，感恩變動速率與信任變動速率正向影響顧客忠誠度，關係利益對關係變動速率也有正向影響。研究結果將強化關係行銷理論應用在電子商務中。英文摘要：Past literature has suggested that the relationship between enterprises and customers is likely to change over time; still, most scholars test their theoretical models by using measures of the relational constructs that represent a static point in time. Based on relationship dynamics theory, this study adopts the concepts of gratitude velocity and trust velocity, and uses longitudinal data gathered from online customers to examine how these constructs influence customers' attitudinal and behavioral loyalty. We find gratitude velocity and trust velocity have significant positive effects on both forms of customer loyalty respectively. We also find that relationship benefits also have positive impacts on velocity. Our findings strengthen the literature regarding relationship marketing in e-commerce.起始頁-結束頁：1-27資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202108_31(2).00012篇名：實施IFRS 9與IFRS 17對我國壽險業監理與經營影響之分析並列篇名：The Impact of IFRS 9 and IFRS 17 on the Regulation and Management of the Taiwan Life Insurance Industry: A Preliminary Anlysis作者：詹芳書(Linus Fang-Shu Chan);彭金隆(Jin-Lung Peng);蔡政憲(Cheng-Hsien Tsai)關鍵字：壽險業;IFRS 9;IFRS 17;保險監理;life insurance;IFRS 9;IFRS 17;insurance regulation期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：我國保險業已於2018年開始採行國際財務報導準則第9號（IFRS 9），而第17號準則（IFRS 17）預計將於2026年實施。本研究採用監理作法檢視、質化訪談及量化模擬分析，探討兩準則對壽險產業的影響與監理策略。研究結果顯示在保險監理上，主管機關主要採階段漸進策略減少接軌衝擊，並採業者自律、外部會計師協力及公司董事會治理等方法達到順利協助制度接軌的目的。在IFRS 9施行後，壽險業損益和業主權益波動幅度加劇，業者對高股利之股票持有意願提高，債券類投資處分利益的認列更有彈性。IFRS 17雖尚未實施，但量化模擬分析IFRS 9與IFRS 17同時施行的影響後結果顯示：壽險公司的收益波動及業主權益波動將顯著增加，推論壽險公司可能面臨負債大量增提且業主權益大幅下降的情形，此將使其負債金額極不穩定且破產機率增加。監理機關於訂定未來長期利率曲線時，應考慮臺灣壽險市場之特性，並宜採取更在地化的監理策略，以降低利率波動之影響。英文摘要：The insurance industry in Taiwan has adopted IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards) 9 in 2018, and IFRS 17 is expected to be implemented in 2026. In this study, we investigate the impact of these two standards on the life insurance industry in Taiwan. We review the supervision regulations, conduct qualitative interviews, and perform quantitative simulation analysis. Our results show that regulators are strategically moving in a phased manner in the context of industrial self-discipline, external accountants' cooperation and corporate governance to reduce the transitional impacts. Since implementation of IFRS 9, volatility of life insurance companies' profit and loss and owners' equity has increased; companies' willingness to hold high dividend stocks has risen; and recognition of bond investment benefits has become more flexible. Although IFRS 17 has not yet been implemented, simultaneous quantitative simulation of impact of IFRS 9 and IFRS 17 shows that both the fluctuation of income of life insurance companies and fluctuation of owners' equity will increase significantly. We speculate that life insurance companies may face a sharp increase in liabilities and a sharp decline in owners' equity, which will make their liabilities become extremely unstable and increase the probability of going into insolvency. The supervisory authority should consider the characteristics of the Taiwan life insurance market when formulating the future long-term interest rate curve, and adopt a more localized supervisory strategy to reduce the impact of interest rate fluctuations.起始頁-結束頁：29-62資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202108_31(2).00023篇名：組織資本及銀行貸款之研究－管理者能力之角色探討並列篇名：Research of Organization Capital and Bank Loan Contracts: The Role of Managerial Ability作者：鍾惠民(Hui-Min Chung);邱敬貿(Jun-Mao Chiu);李怡樺(Yi-Hua Li);洪均旻(Chun-Min Hung)關鍵字：組織資本;銀行放款成本;管理者能力;organization capital;bank loan costs;managerial ability期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究探討企業組織資本的投入如何影響銀行放款的契約，研究資料利用美國1985年至2016年期間上市公司作為研究對象。本研究透過不同的銀行放款契約相關的變數分析組織資本的影響，其中銀行放款變數包括放款利率、放款到期日、擔保品、一般合約數以及財務合約數。研究結果發現組織資本投入越多，能降低銀行放款利率、擔保品以及一般合約數，此結果亦由多項穩健性檢定所支持。本研究更進一步探討管理者特性的影響，結果發現當公司中的管理者能力愈好且投入愈多的組織資本，將使銀行願意提供較低的放款成本。英文摘要：This study investigates the impact of organization capital on the bank loan contracts, using the data of the U.S. listed companies (1985-2016). This study explores the impact of organizational capital through the different variables related to bank loan contracts. Among them, bank loan variables include bank loan spread, loan maturity date, security, number of general contracts, and number of financial contracts. This study shows that a higher organization capital is associated with lower bank loan spread, security, and general covenants. Further robustness checks support these empirical results. We also confirm that higher organization capitals can reduce bank loan spreads when firms have better managerial abilities.起始頁-結束頁：63-100資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202108_31(2).00034篇名：質疑性訊息、消費者自我建構與說服並列篇名：Query-Based Information, Self-Construals and Persuasion作者：顧萱萱(Hsuan-Hsuan Ku)關鍵字：質疑性訊息;自我建構;購買不確定性;產品吸引力;query-based information;self-construal;purchase uncertainty;product attractiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：質疑性說服指透過提問方式使消費者對自我決策產生疑慮，進而關注替代方案的作法，為廣告中重要說服策略。為探測質疑性訊息之說服效果，本研究透過操弄產品迷思、知識偏誤此二調節焦點，以及參照主體，以質疑消費者選擇，瞭解其對不同自我建構者引發的購買不確定性與說服力。研究結果發現當產品功效不當迷思或知識偏誤之訊息採用促進焦點框架以質疑選擇決策時，易引發獨立自我者之知覺購買不確定性，進而提高廣告產品吸引力評價；反之，對相依自我者而言，預防焦點訊息之說服效果較佳。此外，當質疑手法訴求個人而非群眾選擇性，較能誘使獨立自我者懷疑過往決策，增進所知覺之廣告產品吸引力，但相依自我者則較易受群眾選擇性影響，引發購買不確定性，以致提高產品吸引力。英文摘要：Queries about product choices are widely practiced in advertising in which recipients are invited to reflect on purchase decisions while their interests in alternative choices are prompted. Manipulating in terms of the regulatory focus of queries as well as self-or others-frames, this paper identifies purchase uncertainty as a mediator for analyzing product evaluations of consumers with different self-construals in response to queries phrasing in ads for new products. Results show that queries phrased in promotion-focused (vs. prevention-focused) terms yield greater purchase uncertainty and more favorable product evaluation for persons who self-construe as independent rather than interdependent. Furthermore, the independent have more preferential attitudes toward the products when promoted with a self-framed rather than others-framed query, while the reverse occurs for the interdependent. The query effects are mediated by purchase uncertainty.起始頁-結束頁：101-128資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202108_31(2).00045篇名：The Impact of the Act for the Development of Biotech and New Pharmaceuticals Industry on Firm Innovation in Taiwan並列篇名：生技新藥產業發展條例對公司創新影響作者：梁婉麗(Woan-lih Liang);劉泰承(Tai-Cheng Liu)關鍵字：innovation;R&D;tax credits;propensity score matching;difference-in-difference;研發創新;課稅抵減;傾向分數配對法;差異中之差異法;生技新藥業發展條例期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：This study investigates how the innovation activities of the biotech and new pharmaceuticals industry (biopharmaceutical industry) change after the exogenous shock of the enactment of the Act for the Development of Biotech and New Pharmaceuticals Industry (Biopharmaceutical Act). We adopt Propensity Score Matching (PSM) and Difference-in-difference (DID) approaches to deal with sample selection bias and endogeneity problems. We find that approved biopharmaceutical firms engage in more innovation investments after the passage of the Biopharmaceutical Act than unapproved firms. We also confirm the policy effectiveness of the Biopharmaceutical Act, finding that approved biopharmaceutical firms are more encouraged to engage in innovation activities than high-tech firms after the Biopharmaceutical Act. In addition, the stimulation effect on innovation exists only for pharmaceutical and low R&D intensity firms. In the subsample analysis of the inter-industry effects, the stimulation effect is driven primarily by low R&D intensity firms and small firms. These findings consolidate the effectiveness of the Biopharmaceutical Act for biopharmaceutical firms with more serious R&D underinvestment problems. Our investigation also shows the effectiveness of tax credits granted by the Biopharmaceutical Act for the R&D investment of biopharmaceutical firms in Taiwan.英文摘要：本研究探討生技新藥業發展條例（簡稱生技條例）對生技新藥業（簡稱生技業）研發創新的影響。我們採用「傾向分數配對法」與「差異中之差異法」來處理樣本選擇誤差與內生性問題。研究發現，在生技條例施行後，經生技條例核可的公司比未經核可的公司有較多的研發創新。我們也發現在生技條例施行後，經條例核可的公司會比高科技公司有較多的研發創新。再者，經生技條例核可的公司中，新藥公司與研發強度低的公司會致力於較多的研發創新。與高科技公司比較時，生技條例核可的公司中，研發強度較低的公司與小公司會有較多的研發創新。這些發現隱含條例對於研發較嚴重投資不足的公司的激勵效果較強。我們的研究亦驗證政府對於生技業所提供的課稅減免優惠對刺激該產業投資研發創新有正向的鼓勵作用。起始頁-結束頁：129-188資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202108_31(2).00056篇名：廉航服務品質與顧客滿意度：評論參與的調節效果並列篇名：The Moderating Effect of Review Involvement on the Relationship between Low-Cost Carriers Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction作者：倪家珍(Jia-Jen Ni);利怡萱(Yi-Hsuan Li);林孟彥(Tom M. Y. Lin)關鍵字：廉價航空;線上評論;資料探勘;服務品質;Low-cost Carriers (LCCs);online reviews;data mining;service quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：廉價航空是一種新興的營運模式，利用低廉的價格，提供有限的服務，吸引特別在意價格的顧客。為了解顧客在使用此種服務模式時，所感受到的服務品質對其滿意度的影響，本研究運用「資料探勘」技術，蒐集顧客在TripAdvisor網站的英文評論，先了解八個項目的服務品質對顧客滿意度的影響程度，再加入「評論參與」變數，以瞭解評論參與對服務品質與顧客滿意度關係的調節效果。本研究共蒐集17,490則英文評論，經分析後的結果顯示，服務品質的八個項目中，「顧客服務」、「物有所值」，和「報到與登機」等三項，是對顧客滿意度影響較高的項目。此外，「評論參與」對服務品質與顧客滿意度的關係，存有顯著的調節效果。最後再透過字詞分析，找到廉價航空的顧客所重視的其他服務品質構面。在此亦提出管理上的意涵，作為航空業者掌握顧客需求與改善經營策略的參考。英文摘要：Low-cost Carriers (LCCs), as an emerging operating model in commercial aviation, offer low ticket prices at the expense of limited services to attract customers who are particularly concerned about the price. Past studies have used LCCs as examples to understand the impact of service quality on customer satisfaction. In this study, we first apply data mining technology to collect and extract contents of customers' online reviews on LCCs from the TripAdvisor website, then we add the ”review involvement” variable to understand how it interferes with service quality and customer satisfaction. We collect a total of 17,490 English reviews and the results show that ”customer service”, ”value for money”, and ”check-in and boarding” are the three aspects that have high impacts on customer satisfaction. The adding variable ”review involvement” has an obvious moderating effect on service quality and customer satisfaction. Moreover, we conduct a qualitative study and find other service quality variables those customer would concern about Low-cost Carriers. Finally, this study also proposes managerial implications as suggestions for aviation operators to better understand what their potential customers care about and to improve their business strategies.起始頁-結束頁：1-34資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202104_31(1).00017篇名：建商降價動機為何？讓利說VS.銷售說並列篇名：Motivations behind Property Developers' Price Cut: ”Profit-Sharing” vs. ”Sales”作者：李尚華(Shang-Hua Lee);張金鶚(Chin-Oh Chang)關鍵字：不動產市場;不動產開發商;銷售率;議價率;real estate market;property developer;sales rate;discount rate期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：過去國內住宅市場之預售屋及中古屋研究，以價量研究為主，雖有部份國外研究探討中古屋特徵價格與議價能力之關係，但未進一步討論影響新推個案價量背後銷售率與議價率關係。本文主要貢獻係釐清建商在臺北市之新推個案降價動機，及探討其他與新推個案降價相關之因素。根據VECM分析，當銷售率與議價率偏離長期均衡，銷售率之移動速率較議價率快，據此，建商只有在銷售率不佳，財務風險及資金成本增加時才降價（銷售說），而非主動降價提升銷售率（讓利說）；其次，橫斷面資料實證結果，亦確定銷售率與議價率的因果關係，當銷售率提高1%，議價率下降0.022%；最後，我們也發現，影響臺北市新推個案議價率因素，財務規劃重要性高於不動產特徵。本文認為，建商面對市場景氣不佳，新推個案銷售率遲滯時，應主動加大議價空間增加銷售率，以降低財務風險。英文摘要：Past studies on presale and resale housing in the domestic market have focused on price and housing volume. Few studies have investigated presale housing in foreign housing markets, and some studies have focused on the casual relationship between buyers and sellers of existing housing in relation to real estate characteristics and bargaining power. However, these studies have failed to identify the key factor affecting the price-volume relationship: the relationship between the discount rate and the sales rate. This domestic study contributes to the literature by clarifying the motivations behind property developers' price cut of new construction projects in Taipei City as well as by exploring the particular factors that affect a company's price-cutting when promoting new construction projects. First, the empirical results obtained from the vector error correction model (VECM) analysis of the macro perspective reveal the lead-lag relationship between the sales rate and the discount rate. In an unfavorable real estate market, construction companies typically do not reduce the price of their new construction properties to increase the sales rate (i.e., profit-sharing perspective). Instead, they reduce price only when the cost of capital financing increases and financial risk increases (i.e., sales perspective). Second, we confirm the causal relationship between the discount rate and the sales rate, the cross-sectional data analysis reveals that the discount rate decreases by 0.022% for each 1% rise in the sales rate. Third, we also find that compared with property (product) characteristics, financial planning (financial) characteristics more significantly influence the discount rate of new construction projects in Taipei City. Accordingly, this study proposes strategies of enhancing bargaining opportunities for the property developers to boost the sales rate as well as to avoid financial risks when facing house market downswing and low sales rate of new property projects.起始頁-結束頁：35-69資料語文：繁體中文;英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202104_31(1).00028篇名：Executive Stock Options, Corporate Cash Holdings and M&A Decisions並列篇名：高階主管股票選擇權、現金持有與併購決策作者：黃幼琳(Yu-Lin Huang);陳嬿如(Yenn-Ru Chen);陳佰弦(Bai-Sian Chen)關鍵字：executive stock options;corporate cash holdings;mergers and acquisitions;高階主管股票選擇權;現金持有;企業併購期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：This study examines the effect of corporate cash holdings on the risk-taking activities induced by executive stock options (ESOs). Using mergers and acquisitions (M&As) as the proxy of corporate decisions more associated with idiosyncratic risk taking, we find excess cash holdings stimulate the M&A bidding probability induced by the risk incentive of ESOs (vega). The probability of conducting ESOs-induced M&As in cash-rich firms is 7.58% higher than that in non-cash-rich firms. The positive impact of excess cash on the ESOs-induced M&A decisions is more pronounced in firms with low leverage and those in the old economy. Through analyses of the announcement effect and the one-year profitability effect, our results show the market considers the ESOs-induced M&A decisions made by cash-rich firms are more associated with precautionary motives rather than agency incentives. However, while cash-rich firms undertaking ESOs-induced M&As have better profitability than those not conducting ESOs-induced M&As, how the market assigns future valuations to cash-rich firms conducting ESOs-induced M&As still depends on the corporate governance environment of these firms.英文摘要：本研究探討現金持有於高階主管股票選擇權（ESOs）誘發之風險承擔行為之影響，以企業併購作為衡量指標。實證發現公司持有超額現金將有助於提升高階主管因ESOs風險誘因而進行併購決策之機率。當持有超額現金，高階主管因ESOs而進行併購之機率顯著高於未持有超額現金公司之併購機率，差異約達7.58%。同時，超額現金對於因ESOs而進行併購決策之正向影響，在低負債企業與隸屬舊經濟產業之公司中較為明顯。此外，透過宣告效果與績效表現之分析，市場對於超額現金公司因ESOs而併購之決策較傾向認定為預防性動機所致。雖此決策將有助公司未來營運績效，但市場如何衡量其併購後評價仍取決於其公司治理環境。起始頁-結束頁：71-115資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202104_31(1).00039篇名：Valuation and Risk Management of Weather Derivatives: The Application of CME Rainfall Index Binary Contracts並列篇名：天氣衍生性商品之評價與風險管理：CME雨量指數二元式合約之應用作者：林士貴(Shih-Kuei Lin);莊明哲(Ming-Che Chuang);方東杰(Dong-Jie Fang)關鍵字：precipitation derivatives;Markov chain;truncated Fourier series;Esscher transform;market price of risk;雨量衍生性商品;馬可夫鏈;截斷傅立葉級數;Esscher變換;市場風險價格期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：In this paper, we explore and analyze the valuation and risk management of rainfall index binary contracts, a type of precipitation derivative issued by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). We describe the underlying rainfall index with the occurrence model, which is built on a first-order, two-state Markov chain, and with the magnitude model based on mixed exponential distribution. To capture the seasonality characteristics, we describe the parameters of these two models with the truncated Fourier series. Since the weather derivatives market is incomplete due to the essence of its product, we value the rainfall index binary options with the Esscher transform and calibrate the market price of risk (MPR) with real market data. After analyzing the temporal behavior of the MPR, we find that the investors could have more accurate estimations of the rainfall index when approaching the end of the contract period or when entering the accumulation period. We also find that rather than speculators, the market participants are mainly hedgers, which may explain the shrinking of the precipitation derivatives market.英文摘要：本文探索並分析了芝加哥商品交易所（CME）發行之雨量衍生性商品－雨量指數二元式合約的評價與風險管理。作為標的之雨量指數由兩種模型所刻畫：以一階兩狀態馬可夫鏈建立的降雨發生模型，以及以混合指數分配建立的雨量強度模型。上述兩模型之參數均以截斷傅立葉級數擬合，以捕捉降雨的季節性特徵。鑒於天氣衍生性商品市場之不完備性（肇因於商品本質），本文利用Esscher變換對選擇權進行評價，並以CME之真實市場價格校準獲得市場風險價格。在進一步分析市場風險價格的時間行為後，本文發現雨量指數二元式合約之市場參與者會隨著合約到期時間迫近或進入契約的累積期間，而對標的指數有著日益準確的估計；另本研究也發現這個市場的參與者大多為避險者而非投機者，這或許能解釋雨量衍生性商品市場萎縮的原因。起始頁-結束頁：117-153資料語文：英文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202104_31(1).000410篇名：你被「左右」了嗎？產品－價格圖片左右相對位置與解釋水平對產品評價的影響並列篇名：Does Left-Right Matter? Effects of Product-Price Left-Right Placement and Construal Level on Product Evaluation作者：鄭兆宏(Zhao-Hong Cheng);張純端(Chun-Tuan Chang);賴立婕(Li-Chieh Lai)關鍵字：產品－價格左右相對位置;解釋水平;時間窗;產品享樂／實用價值;知覺品質;price-product left-right placement;construal level;time window;product utilitarian/hedonic value;perceived quality期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺大管理論叢卷期：31卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：廣告中的空間視覺因素，總會提供消費者在觀看廣告時一些線索，因為消費者對於空間位置上各有不同的認知，而行銷領域的學者早已對相關的議題如置入廣告在網頁中的擺放位置、產品在廣告中的擺放位置等與消費者的認知進行探討。對行銷者來說，了解消費者的想法，才能讓廣告中的空間配置成為有利於消費者對產品產生正面評價的線索。本研究利用「價格」和「產品」兩圖片的相對位置，探討兩者左右相對位置對消費者可能產生的影響，另外結合影響消費者心理思考模式的解釋水平變數，希望為產品與價格左右空間配置的研究開拓新的篇章。本研究以實驗設計法探討產品－價格左右相對位置（價格置於產品左邊vs. 價格置於產品右邊），搭配消費者不同的解釋水平（高解釋水平vs. 低解釋水平），觀察消費者在產品評價上的反應。透過四個實驗，從思考模式、時間窗和產品享樂／實用價值三個面向來操弄解釋水平的高低，藉由使用不同的廣告呈現方式（看板、單一產品傳單、產品平面廣告及包含多樣產品的商店傳單）以增加研究的外部性，依變數選擇上包括產品知覺價值、購買意願與願付價格。研究結果指出，當消費者使用低解釋水平時，廣告中價格置於產品的右邊會比價格置於產品的左邊使消費者有較高的產品評價；當消費者使用高解釋水平時，廣告中反而價格置於產品左邊會比價格置於產品右邊使消費者有較高的產品評價，消費者對產品的知覺品質可用來解釋此交互作用的產生背後的機制。本研究發現促使行銷人員在設計廣告空間配置時更多考量點，針對目標客群提供產品－價格左右相對不同的擺放位置，以誘發不同解釋水平思考模式，進而獲得較高的產品評價。英文摘要：Previous research has demonstrated visuals of products and prices can impact consumer perceptions. The current research examines how product-price left-right placement (price left, product right vs. price right, product left) in an ad affects consumers' perceived value. We propose that construal level (high vs. low) can moderate the relationship between product-price left-right placement and perceived value. This research further explores three dimensions of construal level (i.e., mindset, time window and product utilitarian/hedonic value). We also conduct four experiments using different ad formats (i.e., billboard, direct mails, and print ads) to enhance the generalizability of this research. Dependent measures include perceived product value, purchase intention, and willingness to pay. The results indicate that when using low construal level to process the information, experiment subjects s exposed to an ad in which price is placing on the right and product on the left show higher product evaluation of the promoted product than those exposed to the same ad but with price on the left and product on the right. On the other hand, when people receive high construal level to process information, they would show higher product evaluation of the promoted product when viewing an ad with ”price on the left, product on the right.” Perceived product quality serves as the underlying mechanism behind the above phenomenon. The findings provide marketers with insights regarding advertising design, that is, appropriate price-product left-right placement should be used for the target audience to enhance their advertising effects.起始頁-結束頁：155-187資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：臺灣大學管理學院DOI：10.6226/NTUMR.202104_31(1).000501篇名：What Has Happened to Non-COVID Patients?作者：Cheryl Chia-Hui CHEN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷6期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：1-1資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004702篇名：Home Coping Strategies for Fatigue Used by Patients With Lung Cancer Receiving Chemotherapy in Rural China: A Qualitative Study作者：Xiaomeng DONG;Jianying PENG;Xingxing LI;Qiyuan ZHAO;Xiuwei ZHANG關鍵字：coping;lung cancer;chemotherapy;cancer-related fatigue;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷6期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Cancer-related fatigue, a distressing symptom, is frequently reported by patients with lung cancer as increasing in severity with the number of rounds of chemotherapy. Yet, patients and healthcare providers are challenged to control this fatigue. Thus, healthcare providers must have interventions to effectively enhance coping engagement in patients with lung cancer. Purpose: The aims of this study were to explore how patients with lung cancer in a rural area of China undergoing chemotherapy cope with the fatigue at home and to summarize their strategies. Methods: A descriptive qualitative research approach was used, and data were collected using semistructured interviews. Sixteen patients with lung cancer with chemotherapy-related fatigue living in rural communities were recruited from a large, tertiary teaching hospital in Huzhou in eastern China. The transcripts of the interviews were analyzed using content analysis. Results: Coping strategies for cancer-related fatigue were delineated into the three themes of (a) psychological adjustment, (b) efforts to change lifestyles and act as a Chinese health practitioner, and (c) relying on social support. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The participants in this study provided information on a variety of approaches to reducing/alleviating cancer-related fatigue that were influenced by Chinese culture. Healthcare providers and patients may work together in clinical settings to identify appropriate, effective coping solutions and then to incorporate these into the regular care regimen to help patients transition between hospital and home.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004533篇名：Effects of an Individualized Educational Program for Korean Patients With Chronic Low Back Pain: A Randomized Controlled Trial作者：Seong-Kyong KIM;Hee-Seung KIM;Sung-Soo CHUNG關鍵字：low back pain;individualized education;daily living disability;back muscle strength;medication adherence期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷6期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Most patients with low back pain prefer to ignore symptoms and avoid medical management because of incorrect perceptions about this condition. However, over 90% of patients with chronic low back pain are hardly unable to perform daily activities, with 50%reporting that their daily activities have been severely impeded. Purpose: In this study, an individualized educational program was developed and implemented in a sample of Korean patients with chronic low back pain, and the effectiveness of this program was evaluated. Methods: This study was conducted as a randomized controlled trial with outpatients (n = 43) in an orthopedic clinic. The Analysis, Design, Development, Implementation, and Evaluation model was applied to develop the educational program. The experimental group was provided with an educational booklet and contacted via biweekly personalized telephone and face-to-face counseling sessions. The control group was provided the educational booklet only. SAS Version 9.4 was used to analyze collected data using the X^2 test, t test, Fisher's exact test, Wilcoxon test, linear regression analysis, and Spearman partial correlation analysis. Results: After 8 weeks, the experimental group demonstrated a significantly greater reduction in maximum, average, and current low back pain experienced within the immediately preceding 24 hours than the control group (p = .001, p = .002, and p = .014, respectively). In addition, daily living disability showed a greater reduction, and average back muscle strength showed a more significant improvement in the experimental group than in the control group (p = .001 and p = .035). The difference in medication adherence between the groups was not statistically significant (p = .089). The experimental group rated an average of 4.3 out of 5.0 points on the program satisfaction scale, indicating an 86% rate of satisfaction. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: In this study, the individualized educational program was shown to be effective in helping alleviate symptoms in patients with chronic low back pain, decrease daily living disability, and improve average back muscle strength. It was further demonstrated that following up with expert medical staffs can motivate patients to incorporate the recommendations of the program into their daily routine, leading to higher patient satisfaction.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004554篇名：Effectiveness of a Nurse-Led Web-Based Health Management in Preventing Women With Gestational Diabetes From Developing Metabolic Syndrome作者：Mei-Chen SU;An-Shine CHAO;Min-Yu CHANG;Yao-Lung CHANG;Chien-Lan CHEN;Jui-Chiung SUN關鍵字：gestational diabetes mellitus;health management;metabolic syndrome;nurse-led;web-based期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷6期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Women with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) are more likely to develop metabolic syndrome (MS). However, the effectiveness of web-based health management in preventing women at high risk of GDM from developing (MS) has rarely been studied. Purpose: The aim of this study was to evaluate the longitudinal effects of nurse-led web-based health management on maternal anthropometric, metabolic measures, and neonatal outcomes. Methods: A randomized controlled trial was conducted from February 2017 to February 2018, in accordance with the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials guidelines. Data were collected from 112 pregnant women at high risk of GDM who had been screened from 984 potential participants in northern Taiwan. Participants were randomly assigned to the intervention group (n = 56) or the control group (n = 56). The intervention group received a 6-month nurse-led, web-based health management program as well as consultations conducted via the LINE mobile app. Anthropometric and metabolic measures were assessed at baseline (Time0, prior to 28 weeks of gestation), Time 1 (36-40 weeks of gestation), and Time 2 (6-12 weeks of postpartum). Maternal and neonatal outcomes were assessed at delivery. Clinical trial was registered. Results: Analysis using the general estimating equation models found that anthropometric and metabolic measures were significantly better in the intervention group than the control group and varied with time. At Time1, the levels of diastolic pressure (β=-4.981, p = .025) and triglyceride (TG;β= -33.69, p = .020) were significantly lower in the intervention group than the control group, and at Time 2, the incidence of MS in the intervention group was lower than that in the control group (X^2 = 6.022, p = .014). The number of newborns with low birth weight in the intervention group was lower than that in the control group (X^2 = 6.729, p = .012). Conclusion/Implications for Practice: This nurse-led, web-based health management was shown to be effective in improving MS outcomes and may play an important role and show feasible clinical value in changing the current pregnancy care model.起始頁-結束頁：1-13資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004565篇名：Development and Evaluation of a Teamwork Improvement Program for Perioperative Patient Safety作者：Shinae AHN;Nam-Ju LEE關鍵字：teamwork;nursing team;program development;patient safety;operating rooms期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷6期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Effective teamwork in healthcare teams improves quality of care, which positively impacts on patient safety. Teamwork is especially crucial for perioperative nurses because they provide care as a team in the operating room. Previous research on teamwork training has principally addressed the general aspects of healthcare settings and focused on interdisciplinary teamwork and has rarely considered operative settings and nursing teamwork. Purpose: The aim of this study was to develop a teamwork improvement program for perioperative patient safety and to evaluate the effectiveness of this program. Methods: A quasi-experimental design was applied. We developed a teamwork improvement program based on teamwork competencies that focused on the perioperative nursing practice. This research was conducted at two operating centers in a tertiary hospital in South Korea, and a total of 60 perioperative nurses participated, including 28 nurses from the cancer operating center (experimental group) and 32 nurses from the main operating center (control group). The program consisted of four sessions and was delivered to the experimental group for a period of 2weeks. Following the intervention, the effectiveness of the intervention was measured using a self-report questionnaire, focus group interviews, and program evaluation survey. Data were analyzed using chi-square test, t test, Fisher's exact test, and content analysis. Results: Nearly all (96.4%) of the participants were satisfied with the overall content of the teamwork improvement program. Statistically significant differences were found between the experimental and control groups with regard to teamwork knowledge, teamwork attitudes, communication self-efficacy, and teamwork skills and behaviors. Three themes were elicited from the qualitative analysis, including ”recognizing the importance and content of teamwork,” ”improving teamwork competencies,” and ”contributing to safe surgery.” No significant difference in the incidence of surgical nursing errors was identified between the experimental and control groups within a 4-week period. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The teamwork improvement program developed in this study was demonstrated as effective in improving perioperative nurses' utilization of teamwork competencies in nursing practice and positively changing teamwork. The findings of this study provide evidence that teamwork training increases nurses' teamwork competencies. The clinical application of teamwork tools using competency-based teamwork training may contribute to patient safety and safe nursing practice.起始頁-結束頁：1-13資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004606篇名：The Relationship Between Psychological Resilience and Stress Perception in Nurses in Turkey During the COVID-19 Pandemic作者：Hatice KARABULAK;Fadime KAYA關鍵字：pandemic;nurse;perceived stress;psychological resilience期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷6期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: In Turkey, nurses are responsible for the treatment and care of patients with coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and for tracing their contacts. Healthcare professionals exposed to COVID-19 face high levels of stress. Purpose: This study was designed to determine the influence of psychological resilience and several sociodemographic and professional characteristics on stress perception in nurses during the COVID-19 pandemic. Methods: A cross-sectional design was used in this study, which was conducted between June 16 and 29, 2020. Two hundred one nurses living in Turkey were enrolled as participants. Data were collected using an information form, the Perceived Stress Scale, and the Brief Psychological Strength Scale. This study aligns with the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology Checklist. Results: According to the results of the multivariate linear regression analysis, the psychological resilience score of the participants accounted for 25.2% of the variance related to stress perception (p ＜ .05). However, several of the demographic and professional characteristics considered in this study were not found to statistically significantly influence stress perception (p ＞ .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings support that psychological resilience is significant in explaining perception of stress in nurses in Turkey. Interventions targeting psychological resilience are needed to reduce nurses' stress perceptions.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004547篇名：Health Literacy Levels of Women and Related Factors in Turkey作者：Sultan AYAZ-ALKAYA;Fatma Ozlem OZTURK關鍵字：women;women's health;health literacy;health promotion期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷6期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Health literacy is a complex issue affecting the health outcomes of women and their families. Purpose: This study was conducted to determine the health literacy levels and related factors of women attending various courses in family centers of a municipality. Methods: This cross-sectional research was conducted on a sample of women enrolled in various courses at eight family centers in a city center. The sample consisted of 837 women who agreed to participate. The participation rate was 76%. Two different health literacy scales were used to collect data for analysis. Results: Of the women, 50.4% were over 40 years old, 35.2% were high school graduates, 89.6% were not working, 53.2% self-reported their monthly income as equal to their monthly expenses, 88.8% had social security, 28.4% had chronic diseases, 29.2% used medication regularly, 35.2% had visual problems, 7.8% had hearing problems, and 77.9% used the internet. According to the results of the Turkish Health Literacy Scale, 45.9% of the participants were in the inadequate category, 30.6% were in the inadequate and limited category, 16.0% were in the adequate category, and 7.4%were in the excellent category. Women aged 40 years and over, those who were elementary school graduates, those who had visual and hearing problems, those who used eyewear, those whose monthly income was less than expenses, and those who were non-internet users respectively had mean health literary scores that were significantly below the mean score for all participants (p ＜ .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The largest number of participants was categorized has having a ”low-insufficient” level of health literacy. Age, educational level, income, having visual and hearing problems, wearing glasses, and internet use were found to affect level of health literacy. For this reason, factors such as age, educational level, income, vision and hearing problems, use of eyeglasses, and internet use should be considered when planning initiatives to increase health literacy in women.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004528篇名：Exploring the Barriers Faced by Nephrology Nurses in Initiating Patients With Chronic Kidney Disease Into Advance Care Planning Using Focus-Group Interviews作者：Jui-O CHEN;Chiu-Chu LIN關鍵字：advance care planning;advance directives;chronic kidney disease;nephrology nurses期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷6期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: The prevalence of end-stage renal disease in Taiwan is the highest in the world. The rate of signing advance directives in Taiwan is lower than in Western countries, and most of the barriers that have been identified relate to initiating advance care planning (ACP). Purpose: This study was designed to explore the barriers to discussing ACP with patients with chronic kidney disease faced by nephrology nurses. Methods: A descriptive qualitative study design was adopted. The Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research was used to report the findings of this study. Data were collected using purposive sampling. A total of 34 nephrology nurses were recruited from hospitals in northern (2 groups, 10 participants), central (1 group, 4 participants), and southern (5 groups, 20 participants) Taiwan. A qualitative content analysis was conducted to analyze the transcripts of the eight focus groups. Results: Five themes were identified, including (a) lacking the confidence to discuss ACP, (b) difficulty in finding an appropriate opportunity to initiate ACP discussion, (c) personally lacking the characteristics to discuss ACP, (d) conflicting perspectives between doctors and nurses over ACP, and (e) culture and belief-based barriers to discussing ACP. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings obtained from the interviews revealed that nurses must enhance their ACP-related knowledge and communication skills and foster personal confidence in initiating ACP discussions. Furthermore, nurses must be empowered to work with other healthcare professionals. To implement the initial process of discussing ACP in clinical settings, clinical guidelines should be developed for healthcare professionals on initiating ACP. These measures may facilitate improved collaboration in healthcare settings and further encourage patients and their families to participate in shared decision-making that may help patients complete advance directives and thereby achieve better care quality at the end of life.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004629篇名：Factors Associated With Adherence to Fluid Restriction in Patients Undergoing Hemodialysis in Indonesia作者：Melyza PERDANA;Miaofen YEN關鍵字：adherence;fluid restriction;hemodialysis;interdialytic weight gain (IDWG);self-efficacy期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷6期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: The factors related to fluid intake adherence among patients undergoing hemodialysis have been explored in many studies. However, most of these were conducted in Western countries and have produced inconsistent results. A study of this issue in Indonesia, a tropical country with strong herbal medicine traditions, may show different results. In addition to demographic characteristics, self-efficacy is a standard measurement used in chronic care management activities such as hemodialysis treatment. Understanding the reasons behind patient nonadherence in Indonesia may help nurses better manage the fluid intake of patients. Purpose: This study was designed to determine the factors that predict patient adherence to fluid intake restrictions. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted on 153 patients undergoing hemodialysis at two hospitals. Intradialytic weight gain over a 1-month period was recorded to assess the participants' adherence to fluid intake restrictions. Intradialytic weight gains of more than 2 kg was considered to be nonadherent. A daily urine output and level of thirst were also recorded. The participants completed an adapted self-efficacy questionnaire, Swedish Fluid Intake Appraisal Inventory, and the data were analyzed together with demographic characteristic and clinical parameters using hierarchical multiple regression. Results: The results revealed that most of the respondents did not adequately adhere to fluid intake restrictions (59.5%). Intradialytic weight gain was shown to strongly correlate with self-efficacy (p ＜ .05, β = -.201), gender (p ＜ .05, β = -.179), educational background (p = .05, β = .159), and urine output (p ＜ .05, β = -.168). Demographic characteristic explained 10.6% and self-efficacy explained 3.9% of the variance in fluid adherence. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Female participants with higher self-efficacy scores reported the lowest average level of intradialytic weight gain, indicating better adherence to fluid intake restrictions. Several demographic factors as well as self-efficacy were identified as potential predictors of fluid intake restriction adherence. Therefore, measuring self-efficacy periodically is a good initial step toward detecting those patients who are at higher risk of noncompliance with fluid intake restrictions.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000045710篇名：Embracing the ”New Normal” in an Aged Society作者：Heng-Hsin TUNG期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷5期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：1-1資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000045811篇名：Quality of Life and Associated Factors in Older Adults With Heart Failure作者：Hsiang-Fen YEH;Jung-Hua SHAO關鍵字：older adults;heart failure;heart-failure-related symptom distress;depression;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Although heart failure (HF) is negatively known to affect older adults physically, psychologically, and socially, only a few studies have explored the predictors of quality of life (QoL) in older adults with HF in Taiwan. Purpose: This study was designed to determine the relationships among depression, demographic characteristics, clinical characteristics, and QoL in older patients with HF. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study. From January 2013 to June 2014, convenience sampling was used to collect data from 175 older adults with HF at two hospitals in Northern Taiwan. Participant data were collected from medical records and researcher-administered structured questionnaires in face-to-face interviews. Results: The QoL of the participants was found to be associated with clinical characteristics, including hospital readmission for ＞ 10 days with an increased level of HF-related symptom distress (HFSD) and more-severe depression. Depression was found to have a mediating effect, with the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class and HFSD both affecting the QoL of the participants through this intermediary. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: HF is a chronic and debilitating disease that often reduces QoL in older adults significantly. Interventions designed to increase QoL by improving the NYHA functional class and alleviating HFSD are valid treatment options only in cases with depressive symptoms. Nurses treating older adults with HF should consider factors such as NYHA functional class and HFSD to reduce HFSD and readmission rates and to enhance the QoL of these patients. In addition, after both hospital admission and discharge, older adult patients should be assessed regularly to monitor for and quickly address the development of comorbid depression.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000044512篇名：Clinical Decision Path for Identifying Recurrent Falls in Late Middle-Aged and Older Patients With Chronic Schizophrenia作者：Mei-Yeh WANG;I-Chao LIU;Chen-Huan CHIU關鍵字：fall;frailty;older;schizophrenia期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Falls are a major hazard for elderly patients with schizophrenia. As patients with schizophrenia may experience a more-accelerated rate of physical aging than the overall elderly population, the risk of falls may emerge during the late middle-age period in this population. Furthermore, the risk of falls is affected by multiple, interrelated risk factors. Purpose: This study was undertaken to capture the complexity of the risk of falls in patients with schizophrenia. A cross-sectional approach was used to apply classification and regression tree (CART) analysis to generate a clinical decision path to identify the risk factors of recurrent falls in late middle-aged and older patients with schizophrenia. Methods: Two hundred ninety-one patients aged 55 years or older were recruited from psychiatric halfway houses for assessment. Frailty, physical functional performance, depressive severity, cognitive function, and level of fatigue were measured, respectively, using the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures Frailty Index, Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB), Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale, Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ), and Chinese version of the Fatigue Severity Scale. The variables revealed by descriptive statistics to be statistically significant were further analyzed using CART analysis. Results: The overall proportion of recurrent fallers in this study was 19.2%. CART analysis revealed eight end groups and identified four predictors: frailty, physical functional performance, cognitive function, and sex. The most prominent condition for recurrent fallers was frailty, present in 57.1% of the frail participants. In the nonfrail group (both prefrail and robust), participants with an SPPB score of less than 10 had a 29.7% chance of being a recurrent faller versus 13.6% for those with an SPPB score of 10 or more. Furthermore, an SPMSQ score of 7 was the next-best split among participants without frailty, with an SPPB score of 10 or more. Finally, among participants without frailty and with an SPPB score of 10 or more and an SPMSQ score of more than 7, the proportion of recurrent fallers was higher in women than men. Conclusions: The results of this study indicate that assessing frailty status may be an effective, first-step approach to identifying schizophrenic patients at an increased risk of recurrent falls. Among patients with prefrailty or robust status, an SPPB score cutoff of 10, an SPMSQ score cutoff of 7, and being female may be used sequentially to identify individuals at a heightened risk of recurrent falls.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000044413篇名：The Effects of a Social Participation App on Seniors作者：Pei-Ti HSU;Chen-Shie HO;Ya-Fang HO;Jeu-Jung CHEN;I-Ju CHEN關鍵字：seniors;app;social participation intention;social participation behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Advancements in medical care have increased the average life span in many countries, resulting in a generally longer postretirement life span. However, retirees may find it difficult to adapt to retirement. Therefore, encouraging retirees to engage with society is important. Purpose: In this study, a senior social participation mobile software application (SSP-App) was developed to stimulate social participation among seniors with the goal of improving their social participation intentions and behaviors. Methods: After developing the SSP-App based on user experiences, a quasi-experimental study was conducted. Participants were recruited from the Keelung Ren'ai Community Center. Next, Random Allocation Software Version 1.0.0 software was used to randomly allocate the participants into experimental and control groups. The 54 participants in the experimental group took part in an SSP-App program, whereas the 53 participants in the control group did not participate in any experimental treatment program. Measurements were conducted at Week 4 (T1) and Week 12 (T2) to evaluate the effects. Data were collected using a demographic datasheet, Geriatric Depression Scale-Short Form, Emotional and Social Support Scale, Social Participation Intention Scale, and Social Participation Behavior Scale. The generalized estimating equations method was used to determine intervention effectiveness. Results: The SSP-App has six main functions, including an activity partner message board, an activity search function that provides information about different activities, a ”Seniors Learning Kiosk” that provides useful information, transportation information, an activity planning and reminder system, and a ”First- Aid Station.” Most participants in the SSP-App precursor test expressed approval. At T1, effects were observed in social participation intention only. However, at T2, effects were observed in both social participation intention and social participation behavior. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The SSP-App developed in this study uses information and communication technology and multiple strategies covering information provision, social support, education, and reminders. Social participation obstacles must be overcome to effectively provide seniors with social participation opportunities and improve their social participation.起始頁-結束頁：1-12資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000045114篇名：The Current Status of the Administrative Dispositions of Nurses: A Nationwide Survey in South Korea作者：Suyoung KIM;Sanghee KIM關鍵字：administrative dispositions;violation;nurse;nursing action;medical law期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: In South Korea, the professional role of nurse has been redefined from ”assistant to” to ”partner of” doctors as part of an overall national health promotion strategy. Purpose: This descriptive survey was designed to describe the current status of administrative dispositions related to nurses in South Korea. Methods: Data were collected between January 2014 and December 2018. The raw data were obtained from 3,553 public health centers nationwide after a request for the disclosure of information related to the administrative disposition of nurses in each city and province. The data included details on administrative dispositions, laws related to administrative dispositions, violations, and standards for administrative dispositions. Results: Most of the nurses affected by administrative dispositions worked for primary and secondary healthcare providers. The most common type of administrative disposition was license suspension (n = 66, 80.5%), and most violations for administrative disposition involved unlicensed medical practice (n = 38, 46.3%). Nurses who had more-specific standards provided as evidence of the disposition faced longer periods of license suspension (p = .035). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Nurses should avoid providing nursing care to patients that is not in compliance with medical laws because the administrative action may vary depending on the violation and the severity of their legal infractions. This study was the first to examine administrative actions specifically affecting nurses in South Korea. The administrative actions of medical personnel were found to depend on the number and degree of violations. Nurses must understand the details of nurse-related administrative dispositions to avoid violating medical laws.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000044315篇名：Effects of Living Alone and Sedentary Behavior on Quality of Life in Patients With Multimorbidities: A Secondary Analysis of Cross-Sectional Survey Data Obtained From the National Community Database作者：Young Eun AHN;Chin Kang KOH關鍵字：living arrangement;multimorbidity;quality of life;sedentary behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Having multimorbidities may increase health problems. Moreover, health-related quality of life correlates negatively with the number of chronic conditions a patient has. Living alone has been identified as a predictor of poorer quality of life, and a sedentary lifestyle is widely known to increase health problems and mortality. Purpose: This study was designed to identify the effects of living alone and of sedentary behavior on health-related quality of life in patients with multimorbidities using nationally representative community data. Methods: A secondary data analysis of the Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey was conducted. In this study, 1,725 adult patients aged 19 years and above with two or more chronic diseases were selected for the analysis. Health-related quality of life was measured using the European Quality of Life-5 Dimensions. Multiple logistic regression was performed to identify the effects of living alone and of sedentary behavior on health-related quality of life. The statistical analyses took into account the components of the complex sampling design such as the strata, clusters, weights, and adjustment procedures, and missing data were treated in a valid manner. Results: After adjusting for gender, age, employment status, and number of chronic diseases, it was found that the odds of having a high health-related quality of life were lower in single households than in multiperson households (odds ratio = 0.62, 95%confidence interval [0.46, 0.84]). In addition, after adjusting for gender, age, employment status, number of chronic diseases, and living arrangement, the odds of having a high health-related quality of life decreased as sedentary time increased (odds ratio = 0.93, 95% confidence interval [0.89, 0.96]). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: To improve quality of life in patients with multimorbidities, nursing interventions that support patients who live alone and have complicated disease-related issues and that reduce sedentary behavior should be developed.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000044816篇名：Identifying and Ranking the Factors Affecting the Choice of Nursing Discipline Among Nursing Students in Iran: A Fuzzy Hierarchical Analysis作者：Zohreh HOSSEINI MARZNAKI;Khatere KHANJANKHANI;Waliu Jawula SALISU;Fatemeh HAJIHOSSEINI;Saeed BARZEGARI關鍵字：fuzzy logic;nursing students;discipline;analytic hierarchical process期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Choosing a career in nursing is frequently a complicated decision that is influenced by multiple factors. Purpose: This study was designed to identify and rank the main factors that influence individuals to choose to pursue a career in nursing. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted at Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Iran. A comprehensive review of the literature was conducted to identify the factors that people consider when making a choice to pursue a career in nursing. The face and content validities of these factors were evaluated. A sample of 250 participants was invited to assess the factors using exploratory factor analysis. Finally, the analytical hierarchy process, in combination with fuzzy logic, was used to rank the criteria and related factors. Results: Twenty factors were identified and extracted from 50 published studies. After confirming the face and content validity of each, these 20 factors were distinguished into four criteria, including (a) external motivation, (b) social dignity, (c) internal motivation, and (d) usefulness of discipline. Each criterion had an eigenvalue greater than 1. External motivation and usefulness of discipline were respectively identified as the most and least important criteria (38.60% vs. 16.11%) in terms of influencing individuals to pursue a nursing career. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this study show that exposure to positive recommendations from family and friends, receiving positive information about studying nursing, positive perceptions regarding the general usefulness of nursing knowledge, and migration opportunities to other countries are the primary factors that influence individuals in Iran to pursue a career in nursing.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000044917篇名：Chinese Immigrant Women's Experiences as Community Health Workers in Korea: A Focus Group Study作者：Jiyun KIM;Hyang KIM;Hae-Ra HAN關鍵字：qualitative research;community health workers;cancer screening;focus groups;minority groups期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: The number of immigrant women in Korea is rapidly increasing. Immigrant women in Korea experience a host of health problems associated with living in a new country. Community health workers (CHWs) may be effective at delivering health promotion programs to vulnerable groups such as recent immigrants. Purpose: Qualitative analysis was performed to identify the main themes characterizing the experiences of CHWs in recommending and guiding preventive screening tests for immigrant women. Methods: This focus-group study was designed to investigate the experiences and perceptions of CHWs. We conducted interviews with 15 Chinese immigrant women who served as CHWs in a cancer screening program. We asked questions about the attitudes and perceptions that CHWs had from their research experiences. Each interview was audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. Results: Three main themes emerged: (a) recognizing the need for preventive healthcare, (b) becoming the CHWs who help people to be healthy, and (c) challenges to overcome to make CHWs more active. The CHWs in this study were willing to help other Chinese immigrant women and to improve their competency to help more effectively. However, they recognized limitations on their ability to address problems when delivering a breast and cervical cancer screening program. Conclusions: When training CHWs for immigrants in Korea, frequent opportunities for consultation should be provided during program delivery to facilitate troubleshooting and help CHWs overcome challenges. A program that utilizes CHWs for various minority groups is needed.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000044618篇名：Effects of a Case Management Program for Women With Pregnancy-Induced Hypertension作者：Cheng-Chen CHOU;Jen-Jiuan LIAW;Chuan-Chuan CHEN;Yiing-Mei LIOU;Chi-Jane WANG關鍵字：case management;pregnancy-induced hypertension;stress;anxiety期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH) is a leading cause of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. Although case management programs have been proposed to improve maternal and fetal outcomes in high-risk pregnancies, limited data are available regarding the effect of case management on women with PIH. Purpose: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of an antepartum case management program on stress, anxiety, and pregnancy outcomes in women with PIH. Methods: A quasi-experimental research design was employed. A convenience sample of women diagnosed with PIH, including preeclampsia, was recruited from outpatient clinics at amedical center in southern Taiwan. Sixty-two women were assigned randomly to either the experimental group (n = 31) or the control group (n = 31). The experimental group received case management for 8 weeks, and the control group received routine clinical care. Descriptive statistics, independent t or Mann-Whitney U tests, chi-square or Fisher's exact tests, paired t test, and generalized estimating equations were used to analyze the data. Results: The average age of the participants was 35.1 years (SD = 4.5). No significant demographic or clinical differences were found between the control and experimental groups. The results of the generalized estimating equations showed significantly larger decreases in stress and anxiety in the experimental group than in the control group. No significant differences were identified between the two groups with respect to infant birth weeks, infant birth weight, average number of medical visits, or frequency of hospitalization. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The nurse-led case management program was shown to have short-term positive effects on the psychosocial outcomes of a population of Taiwanese patients with PIH. These results have important clinical implications for the healthcare administered to pregnant women, particularly in terms of improving the outcomes in those with PIH.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000045019篇名：Social Distancing for Humans, not for Research作者：Ting-Ting LEE期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷4期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：1-1資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000044720篇名：Effectiveness of a Nurse-Delivered Intervention on Illness Perceptions and Quality of Life in Patients With Injury作者：Wen-Chih FANN;Chang-Chiao HUNG;Wendy CHABOYER;Bih-O LEE關鍵字：illness perceptions;nurse-delivered intervention;patients with injury;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Research has shown that nursing interventions are able to affect short-term outcomes in patients with injury. However, evidence based on a comprehensive nurse-led intervention may be beneficial for trauma care. Purpose: This study was designed to assess the effect of a nursing intervention on the illness perceptions and quality of life of patients with injury. Methods: A two-group experimental design and a follow-up period of 12 months were used. Ninety-four patients were randomly assigned to either the experimental group or the control group. A nurse-led cognitive behavioral therapy intervention was used to improve outcomes. Results: The illness perception variables of ”personal control” and ”treatment control” were found to be significantly improved in the experimental group at 3 months after discharge, whereas ”emotional perception” was significantly improved at 6 months after discharge. The intervention was also shown to improve ”social quality of life” at 6 and 12months after injury. Conclusions: This study adds new knowledge related to nursing interventions for patients with injury in terms of the intervention achieving longer-term effects than the interventions examined in previous studies. The results highlight the importance of providing interprofessional collaborative care. However, the intervention protocol should be tested further in future studies.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000043901篇名：Effects of Aerobic Exercise on Cognitive Function in Women With Methamphetamine Dependence in a Detoxification Program in Tianjin, China: A Randomized Controlled Trial作者：Jingjing LIU;Chen CHEN;Maojie LIU;Shumei ZHUANG關鍵字：aerobic exercise;cognitive function;intervention studies;methamphetamine dependence;women期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Cognitive impairment is prevalent among individuals, especially women, with methamphetamine dependence. Although aerobic exercise has been shown to affect cognitive function in humans and animals, few related studies have focused on subjects with methamphetamine dependence. Purpose: The aim of this study was to assess the detoxification-related effects of aerobic exercise on cognitive function in women with methamphetamine dependence. Methods: A randomized controlled trial was used with 98 women with methamphetamine dependence undergoing a detoxification program at a mental hospital. The women were distributed using a computer-generated grouping random method into either the study or control group. The investigator conducting the baseline questionnaire, the neuropsychologist assessing the cognitive function, and the data analyst were blinded to group assignment. In addition to hospital routine care, the study group received an aerobic exercise intervention for 3months. The control group only received hospital routine care. Attention and working memory were measured using the Trail Making Test and Digit Span Test, verbal memory was measured using Logical Memory (LM) and Memory for Persons Data (MPD), and executive function was measured using the Color-Word Stroop Test. Results: Forty-nine participants were randomized into each group, and the valid data of 43 participants in the study group and 46 in the control group were analyzed. The study group showed significantly more improvement over time in terms of Digit Span Test, Trail Making Test, LM-delayed, MPD-5 minutes delayed, MPD-30 minutes delayed, and Color-Word Stroop Test than the control group (p ＜ .05). LM-immediate and MPD-immediate scores showed that the effects of time and the interaction between time and group were significant but that the main effect of group was not. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Women undergoing detoxification for methamphetamine dependence may practice aerobic exercise to improve attention, working memory, executive function, and parts of verbal memory. Aerobic exercise may be incorporated into detoxification treatment programs to facilitate the recovery of cognitive functions in women.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004402篇名：Effects of Environmental Crude Oil Pollution on Newborn Birth Outcomes: A Retrospective Cohort Study作者：Chinemerem ELEKE;Sabinah Obele NGBALA-OKPABI;Daprim OGAJI;Ifeyinwa S. AGU;Esther N. BEMPONG-ELEKE關鍵字：birth;newborn;environment;pollution期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: The World Health Organization encourages countries to improve birth outcomes to reduce rates of neonatal mortality and morbidity. Purpose: This study was designed to examine the effect of environmental crude oil pollution on newborn birth outcomes in Rivers State, Nigeria. Methods: A retrospective cohort design was used to examine the effects of exposure to oil pollution on birth outcomes using facility-based records. K-Dere (an oil-polluted community) served as the exposure group, whereas birth records from Iriebe served as the comparison group. A sample size of 338 systematically selected birth records was examined (169 records for each arm of the study). A data extraction sheet was used for data collection. Data were analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistics at p ＜ .05. Results: The risk of preterm birth was significantly higher in the exposed group (16% vs. 7.7%, relative risk = 2.08, 95% CI [1.11, 3.89], p = .018). At 6 weeks after birth, newborns in the exposed group weighed significantly less (4.64 ± 0.82 vs. 4.85 ± 0.92 kg, p = .032) and reported significantly higher incidence of morbidity compared with the newborns in the comparison group (relative risk = 3.03, 95% CI [2.20, 4.19], p ＜ .001). Conclusions: The oil-polluted area examined in this study was found to have a higher risk of preterm birth, a slower rate of newborn growth, and a higher rate of newborn morbidity than the non-oil-polluted area at 6 weeks after birth. Stakeholders should sustain efforts to remediate the environment in polluted regions and prevent oil pollution. Future research should investigate the mechanisms of the observed toxicological effects and the targeted protection of vulnerable groups in oil-polluted communities.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004353篇名：Comparison of the Incidence of Urinary Tract Infection by Replacement Time of the Urinary Drainage System作者：Yin-Yin CHEN;Chii-Shya CHEN;Ian-Horng CHEN;Chu-Chun LIN關鍵字：urinary catheter;urinary drainage system;catheterization;urinary tract infection;catheter-associated urinary tract infection期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Urinary catheters (UCs) with a closed urinary drainage system have been widely used in patients for many years. However, the frequency of replacing and operating these devices may be associated with catheter-associated urinary tract infection (CAUTI). Purpose: This study was designed to compare the incidence of CAUTI by replacement time (every 14 or <U+2265> 15 days) of the urinary drainage system. Methods: This 1-year prospective, nonrandomized controlled study was conducted in a major teaching hospital. The Transparent Reporting of Evaluations with Nonrandomized Designs Statement checklist was used. All of the patients with UCs were divided into two groups based on each patient's preference with regard to replacement time of the urinary drainage system. Results: Five hundred sixty-two patients were evaluated, and 341 patients with UCs were enrolled as participants in the study. In the per-protocol analysis, 16 patients (22.2%; 9.3 episodes/ 1,000 catheter-days) in the 14-day group and 15 patients (17.9%; relative risk = 1.24, 95% confidence interval [0.66, 2.34]) in the <U+2265> 15-day group (7.7 episodes/1,000 catheter-days; incidence density ratio 1.20, 95%confidence interval [0.60, 2.43]) had CAUTIs. A comparison of cleanliness within urinary bags showed no significant intergroup difference (p ＞ .05). In the intention-to-treat analysis, the incidence of CAUTI between the two groups was also not significantly different (p ＞ .05). Conclusions: No statistically significant difference in the incidence of CAUTI was identified between patients who used the 14-day replacement interval and those who used the <U+2265> 15-day replacement interval for their urinary drainage system.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004374篇名：Exploration of Geriatric Care Competencies in Registered Nurses in Hospitals作者：Fang-Wen HU;Huan-Fang LEE;Yueh-Ping LI關鍵字：competency;geriatric;hospital;nurses;related factors期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Older adults occupy one third of acute care hospital beds, and the regular duties of many nurses include caring for older patients. A working knowledge of geriatric care competencies is necessary for nurses to provide high-quality care to older patients and their families. It is unclear how nurses who work in acute care hospitals self-evaluate their geriatric care competencies and how these self-evaluated abilities differ from the objective abilities of these nurses. Purposes: This study was designed to explore the geriatric care competencies of nurses in hospitals and to identify the factors associated with these competencies. Methods: This was a cross-sectional study. Nurses who were employed and directly caring for patients aged 65 years and older in any of the adult wards of a medical center located in southern Taiwan were recruited as participants. A structured questionnaire was developed based on a review of the relevant literature and validated using expert consensus. This questionnaire included a demographic datasheet, knowledge of geriatric care scale, attitude of geriatric care scale, self-evaluation of geriatric care competency, and geriatric care competency test. Descriptive and inferential statistics were used to analyze the geriatric care competencies of the participants and related factors. Results: One hundred seventy nurses were enrolled as participants. The average self-evaluation score for geriatric care competency was 67.74 (SD = 0.84). However, the average percentage of correct answers given on the geriatric care competency test was much lower (17.6%). The self-evaluation score was found to be significantly associated with job satisfaction and having received continuing education in geriatric care. In addition, age was shown to significantly affect the percentage of correct answers given on the geriatric care competency test. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: A significant gap was found between the self-perceived and actual competencies of nurses in terms of providing geriatric care. Appropriate policies are necessary to improve the geriatric care competencies of nurses working in hospitals and to oversee the implementation of effective educational methods in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004415篇名：Nurses' Knowledge on Sepsis Related to Mechanical Ventilation: An Intervention Study作者：Emmanuel Zamokwakhe HLUNGWANE;Wilma TEN HAM-BALOYI;Portia JORDAN;Benedict Raphael OAMEN關鍵字：critical care unit;sepsis;surviving sepsis campaign guidelines;nurses;mechanical ventilation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Sepsis is a leading cause of mortality and morbidity worldwide. South African adult public critical care units experience incidences of sepsis on an ongoing basis. Nurses caring for mechanically ventilated adult patients in intensive care units (ICUs) need to base their nursing care on ”surviving sepsis campaign” (SSC) guidelines to properly manage sepsis. Adequate knowledge on sepsis guidelines remains crucially indicated for nurses as they endeavor to maintain asepsis in critically ill patients. Purpose: This study was conducted to assess the effect of an educational intervention on nurses' knowledge and practices of sepsis in mechanically ventilated adult patients in public ICUs. Methods: An intervention study, with quasi-intervention two-group, pretest-posttest design, was used to collect data using a self-administered, structured, pretest and posttest questionnaire designed to measure nurses' knowledge and practices on sepsis related to mechanical ventilation. The study was conducted between June and October 2018. An educational intervention was developed and validated. Five purposively selected public ICUs in the Eastern Cape, South Africa, were selected and assigned to three groups: Intervention Group 1 (ICUs 1 and 2), which received the full intervention (containing a 20-minute PowerPoint presentation, printed materials based on sections of the SSC guidelines, and monitoring visits bimonthly for 3 months); Intervention Group 2 (ICUs 3 and 4; receiving the same as Intervention Group 1 but with no monitoring visits); and the control group (ICU 5; receiving no intervention). Results: One hundred seventeen nurses completed the questionnaires at pretest, and 94 completed the questionnaires at posttest, producing a response rate of 79% and 80%, respectively. The results revealed a significant knowledge score increase between pretest and posttest for both Intervention Group 2 (53.28 ± 14.39 and 62.18 ± 13.60, respectively; p = .004) and the control group (56.72 ± 13.72 and 70.05 ± 12.40, respectively; p = .001). Similarly, a recommended practice score increase was shown for Intervention Group 2 (58.8 ± 9.63 and 62.80 ± 9.52, respectively), and a significant increase was shown for the control group (56.72 ± 7.54 and 63.29 ± 5.89, respectively; p = .002). Intervention Group 1 showed a detectable but not significant decline in knowledge (57.72 ± 13.99 and 54.61 ± 12.15, respectively) and recommended practice (61.22 ± 8.66 and 60.33 ± 7.83, respectively) scores. Conclusions: The availability of SSC guidelines was found to have increased knowledge on sepsis related to mechanical ventilation, although including monitoring visits as part of the educational intervention was not found to have a positive effect on increasing knowledge and practices. Further studies are required to explore factors contributing to improving knowledge and practices on sepsis related to mechanical ventilation and the effect that various educational interventions have in this context.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004346篇名：The Association Between Traditional Chinese Medicine Body Constitution Deviation and Essential Hypertension: A Case-Control Study作者：Yung-Cheng LIAO;Li-Li CHEN;Hsiao-Chiao WANG;Jui-Shan LIN;Tin-Kwang LIN;Shu-Chuan Amy LIN關鍵字：essential hypertension;traditional Chinese medicine (TCM);Yin-Xu (Yin deficiency) constitution;Yang-Xu (Yang deficiency) constitution;stasis constitution期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: The prevention and treatment of hypertension is valued globally. The World Health Organization advocates combining traditional medicines in the prevention and treatment of diseases. Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) assumes that diseases originate from the attenuation of one's body constitution. A few studies have found that hypertension is correlated with TCM body constitution. However, body constitution is also affected by living environment. Therefore, investigating the correlation between deviations in body constitution and essential hypertension in different living environments is necessary to provide the basis for using TCM in combination with conventional Western medicine to prevent and treat hypertension. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the association between TCM body constitution deviation and essential hypertension. Methods: A case-control study was designed. Participants were selected from the outpatient clinics and neighboring communities of a regional teaching hospital in southern Taiwan. The study included 210 hypertension and 210 nonhypertension cases. Blood pressures were measured using an electronic sphygmomanometer to confirm the presence or absence of hypertension. The TCM Body Constitution Questionnaire, demographic datasheet, and hypertension-related factors questionnaire were used to collect data. Results: A higher proportion of patients with body constitution deviation were found in the hypertension group than the nonhypertension group. The proportions of patients with Yin-Xu, Yang-Xu, and stasis constitution were 44.8%, 32.4%, and 30.6%, respectively, in the hypertension group and 28.6%, 25.2%, and 19.6%, respectively, in the nonhypertension group. After performing univariate analysis, the results showed significant differences between the two groups in terms of average body mass index; emotional traits of anger, worry, and fear; hyperlipidemia; hyperuricemia; Yin-Xu constitution; and stasis constitution. However, the multivariate analysis revealed having a Yin-Xu constitution to be a risk factor of essential hypertension after adjusting for age, gender, body mass index, emotional traits, drinking habit, hyperlipidemia, and hyperuricemia. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results suggest that Yin-Xu and stasis constitutions are respectively associated with essential hypertension. The findings offer a valuable reference to governments and healthcare professionals to prevent the risk of essential hypertension. Screening and healthcare measures for TCM Yin-Xu or stasis constitution may be included in related prevention plans to minimize public exposure to the risk factors of essential hypertension.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004427篇名：The Effect of the Neuman Systems Model on Anxiety in Patients Undergoing Coronary Artery Bypass Graft: A Randomized Controlled Trial作者：Elham AKHLAGHI;Sima BABAEI;Abbas MARDANI;Fatemeh ESKANDARI關鍵字：Neuman Systems Model;anxiety;coronary artery bypass graft surgery;coronary artery disease期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery is the most commonly used surgical procedure for patients with coronary artery disease. Anxiety is a significant psychological problem associated with CABG surgery that may reduce related treatment outcomes. Purpose: This study was designed to investigate the effect on anxiety of applying the Neuman Systems Model in patients awaiting and undergoing CABG surgery. Methods: A single-blind, parallel-group randomized controlled trial was conducted on patients scheduled to receive coronary artery bypass surgery in an urban area of Iran. Seventy participants were enrolled using a convenience sampling method and randomly assigned to either the intervention group (n = 35) or the control group (n = 35). Participants in the intervention group received intervention in accordance with the Neuman Systems Model format, including meetings held at three levels of prevention. Patients' anxiety was measured using the State Anxiety Inventory before the intervention, immediately after the intervention, and at discharge time. The chi-square test, Fisher's exact test, independent sample t test, one-way repeated measures analysis of variance test, and Fisher's least significant difference were used to analyze the data. Results: No significant difference was found between the mean anxiety scores of the two groups before the intervention (p = .48, t = 0.71). However, the mean anxiety score of the intervention group was significantly lower than that of the control group immediately after the intervention (p = .008, t = 2.73) and at discharge time (p = .007, t = 2.77). Conclusions: The Neuman-based program is an effective and low-cost intervention that may be applied to reduce anxiety in patients awaiting and undergoing CABG surgery. This program may be a good guide in providing healthcare services.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004368篇名：The Varied and Multifaceted Professional Roles of Today's Nurses作者：Pei-Shan TSAI期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：1-1資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004389篇名：Effects of Nursing Education Using Films on Perception of Nursing, Satisfaction With Major, and Professional Nursing Values作者：Hyangjin PARK;Haeryun CHO關鍵字：film;nursing education;nursing students;satisfaction期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Cinenurducation, a film-based approach to nursing education that incorporates student-centered, problem-solving, experiential, and reflective learning strategies, allows students to experience a variety of indirect experiences and improves critical thinking and self-reflection through discussion. Purpose: The aims of this study were, first, to employ a cinenurducation approach to help instill a proper professional nursing identity in second-year nursing students and, second, to examine the effects of this approach on the perception of nursing, satisfaction with major, and professional nursing values of the participants. Methods: An experimental, pretest-and-posttest design was used to test the primary variables, including perception of nursing, satisfaction with major, and professional nursing values. The nursing educational program was developed based on the learning concepts of cinenurducation and the core concepts of nursing. The program, which included six films, addressed the following concepts: Me Before You (problem solving and professionalism), Testament of Youth (nursing management and professionalism), Girl, Interrupted (interpersonal skills and nursing knowledge), Hungry Heart (interpersonal skills and problem solving), Iris (nursing knowledge and problem solving), and Chronic (nursing knowledge and cooperation). The experimental group (n = 14) participated in the 8-week educational program, and the control group (n = 15) did not. Results: Perception of nursing, satisfaction with major, and professional nursing values all improved significantly more in the experimental group than in the control group, with large effects observed. Conclusions: Cinenurducation is an effective approach to promoting professional nursing identity in nursing students. Educators should incorporate films into nursing education. In addition, nursing education should incorporate a variety of educational materials to provide students with opportunities for reflective learning.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000043310篇名：Exploring a Nursing Home-Specific, Interdisciplinary, Function-Focused, Communicative Framework Based on Situation, Background, Assessment, and Recommendation作者：Min Sun PARK;Su Jung LEE;Young Rim CHOI;Sung Ok CHANG關鍵字：older adults;communication;interdisciplinary studies;nursing homes;SBAR期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Improved methods of communication are needed among professionals in related fields to address the increasing complexity of clinical situations and various levels of functioning experienced by older adults who live in nursing homes. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore function-focused clinical communication among nurses and providers based on the Situation, Background, Assessment, Recommendation (SBAR) approach toward interdisciplinary collaboration to maintain function among nursing home residents and to identify the characteristics of SBAR flows in nursing homes. Methods: Detailed interviews with 28 interdisciplinary professionals working in four nursing homes were conducted. Directed qualitative content analysis was used to identify the internal attributes of SBAR-based communication. Case analysis was conducted to identify SBAR flows. Results: Four themes emerged as key factors for function-focused interdisciplinary staff communication in nursing homes. Effective nursing care to maintain function among nursing home residents requires accurate awareness of abnormal circumstances. Knowledge of assessment and resident background are needed to address situations requiring intervention and identify the problems underlying a resident's current state. The optimal therapeutic environment is created by sharing roles and tasks among practitioners through referrals. Twelve generalized situations requiring function-focused communication (i.e., dislocation of body line because of joint contracture, change in walking, difficulty of moving because of pain, difficulty in eating, fever, change in sleep pattern, change in excretion pattern, change in weight, change in condition, change in problematic behavior, decrease in cognitive function, and change in relationships) and the related nurse-centered SBAR pathways were identified. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: These results represent a first prototype for developing practical communication guidelines for nursing-home-specific function-focused care and provide new insights into the interdisciplinary approach.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000042811篇名：The Effects of an Educational Program on the Professional Quality of Life and Health of Nurses: A Cluster Experimental Design作者：Chia-Yun FU;Chia-Chan KAO;Ruey-Hsia WANG關鍵字：nurses;professional quality of life;physical health;mental health;compassion fatigue期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: The complexity of the healthcare environment and intense workloads may negatively impact the health and professional quality of life (ProQOL) of nurses. Prior research has identified a significant association in nurses between ProQOL and health. Developing an intervention to improve the ProQOL and health of nurses may benefit the quality of nursing care. Purpose: The aim of this study was to explore the effects of a compassion fatigue Resiliency, mindfulness Respiration, and Relatives and friends' support (i.e., 3Rs) educational program on ProQOL, physical health, and mental health in nurses. Methods: A cluster experimental design was used in this study to recruit registered nurses at two regional teaching hospitals in southern Taiwan as participants. The experimental group (n = 67) attended the 4-week (2-hours-per-week) 3R educational program. The control group (n = 57) received no intervention. The outcome variables, including compassion satisfaction, burnout, secondary traumatic stress, physical health, and mental health, were measured at baseline, at the end of the intervention (immediate effect), at 4 weeks postintervention (short-term effect), and at 12 weeks postintervention (medium-term effect). The study was conducted from May 2017 to December 2017. Results: Increases in compassion satisfaction and mental health and decreases in secondary traumatic stress were significantly greater in the experimental group than in the control group between baseline and all three posttest time points. Moreover, burnout decreased and physical health improved more significantly in the experimental group than in the control group between the baseline and end of intervention time points (p ＜ .001). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The 3R educational program intervention, integrating compassion fatigue resiliency, mindfulness respiration, and support from relatives and friends, had immediate and positive effects on ProQOL as well as physical and mental health. Moreover, the intervention was shown to have short-term and medium-term positive effects on compassion satisfaction, secondary traumatic stress, and mental health. Nursing managers may apply programs that integrate compassion fatigue resiliency, mindfulness respiration, and relatives and friends' support to improve ProQOL and health in nurses.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000042612篇名：The Impact of Gender on the Effectiveness of an Auricular Acupressure Intervention Administered to Community-Dwelling Poor Sleepers: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial作者：Hsuan-Man HUNG;Hsiao-Ching CHIANG;Hui-Ling WANG關鍵字：auricular acupressure;sleep quality;gender effects期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Women report a higher incidence of sleep problems than men. Few studies addressing the effect of gender on the efficacy of administering auricular acupressure (AA) at shenmen points (heart meridian 7 [HT7]) on sleep quality have been published. Purpose: The primary aim of this study was to investigate the effects of a 4-week AA intervention applied at the HT7 points on sleep quality, perceived physical health, and perceived mental health in community-dwelling individuals with poor self-reported sleep quality. Additional analyses were used to evaluate the gender-specific effects of this intervention. Methods: A cluster randomized controlled trial with repeated-measures design was used. One hundred seventy-nine eligible participants were randomly assigned to either the AA group (n = 88; 47 women, 41 men) or the sleep hygiene instruction (SHI) group (n = 91; 52 women, 39 men). The AA group self-administered acupressure at HT7 on both ears for a 4-week period, whereas the SHI group received an SHI information sheet. Outcome measures included the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and the Short-Form Health Survey-12 Version 2, with data collected at baseline and at 2, 4, and 8 weeks posttest. Results: Linear mixed-model analysis revealed that the participants in the AA group experienced significantly greater reductions in mean PSQI global score and the three indices of sleep latency, subjective sleep quality, and daytime dysfunction than the SHI group at 2 and 4 weeks posttest. The improvements in subjective sleep quality and daytime dysfunction remained at 4 weeks posttest in the AA group, but not in the SHI group. The PSQI global score decreased significantly more in men than women in the AA group between baseline and 4 weeks posttest. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Four weeks of self-administered acupressure at HT7 on both ears is an effective intervention for community-dwelling poor sleepers who are over 45 years old. Moreover, the improvements in subjective sleep quality and daytime dysfunction persist for up to 4 weeks after the end of the intervention. This self-administered acupressure intervention is more effective in men than in women in terms of improving sleep quality. Gender bias is known to influence research results and may lead to inappropriate generalizations. Thus, future studies that are performed to build basic scientific evidence should include considerations of the effects of gender in the study design.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000042713篇名：Machine-Based Hand Massage Ameliorates Preoperative Anxiety in Patients Awaiting Ambulatory Surgery作者：Cheng-Hua NI;Li WEI;Chia-Che WU;Chueh-Ho LIN;Pao-Yu CHOU;Yeu-Hui CHUANG;Ching-Chiu KAO關鍵字：ambulatory surgery;anxiety;hand massage;preoperative;State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Hand massage therapies have been used to relieve anxiety and pain in various clinical situations. The effects of machine-based hand massage on preoperative anxiety in ambulatory surgery settings have not been evaluated. Purpose: This prospective study was designed to investigate the effect of machine-based hand massage on preoperative anxiety and vital signs in ambulatory surgery patients. Methods: One hundred ninety-nine patients aged 18 years and older who were scheduled to receive ambulatory surgery were recruited from the Taipei Municipal Wanfang Hospital in Taipei City, Taiwan. The patients were assigned randomly to the experimental group (n = 101), which received presurgical machine-based hand massage therapy, and the control group (n = 98),which received no intervention. The patients in both groups completed the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory short form at preintervention (baseline) and postintervention. Results: Within-group comparisons of Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory short form scores showed significant decreases between preintervention and postintervention scores in the experimental group (44.3 ± 11.2 to 37.9 ± 8.7) and no significant change in the control group. Within-group comparisons of vital signs revealed a significant increase in mean respiration rate between baseline and postintervention in both groups (both ps ＜ .05). Blood pressure was found to have decreased significantly only in the control group at postintervention (p ＜ .05). No significant preintervention to postintervention change in pulse was observed in either group. Conclusions: The findings of this study indicate that machine-based hand massage reduces anxiety significantly in patients awaiting ambulatory surgery while not significantly affecting their vital signs.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000043214篇名：Components of Empowerment Among Family Caregivers of Community-Dwelling People With Dementia in Japan: A Qualitative Research Study作者：Sayori SAKANASHI;Kimie FUJITA;Rie KONNO關鍵字：dementia;empowerment;family caregiver;Japan;qualitative research期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Family caregivers of people with dementia (PWDs) experience significant physical, psychological, and social burdens. Empowerment, which refers to the process of gaining power in society through behavioral change, is important to coping successfully with care-related burdens. The high burden of care faced by family caregivers in Japan often makes accepting social support difficult for caregivers of PWDs, resulting in feelings of isolation. Clarifying what components constitute empowering experiences for family caregivers of PWDs is necessary to gain a better understanding of their empowerment experiences and to develop relevant support schemes. Purpose: This study was developed to describe the components of empowerment experienced by family caregivers of community-dwelling PWDs in Japan. Methods: This qualitative descriptive study used semi-structured in-depth interviews to explore components of empowerment experienced by family caregivers of adults/older adults with dementia. Purposive sampling was used to recruit 20 family caregivers (age range: 50-87 years) from four self-help groups. A qualitative content analysis method was used to analyze the data. The components derived from the interviews were reviewed by three nursing researchers not directly involved in this study who are specialists in qualitative research and geriatric nursing. Results: Four categories and 12 subcategories were derived to illuminate the components of empowerment among family caregivers of PWDs. Specifically, these categories were as follows: (a) proactive aspects of dementia care that were acquired through the caregiving experience, (b) creating a relationship that respects PWDs, (c) Building relationships based on mutual understanding of one's surroundings, and (d) understanding the social aspects of dementia care. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings of this study provide additional understanding of the components of the empowerment experiences of family caregivers of PWDs in Japan and in other East Asian countries experiencing increasing dementia diagnoses and population aging. In addition, the structural components of empowerment offer a useful perspective for health professionals on assessment and intervention that is framed on the cultural characteristics of East Asia. Ultimately, the results suggest that healthcare professionals should develop intervention programs that are tailored to the needs of caregivers at different levels of empowerment.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000043015篇名：The Impact of Organizational Support on Practice Outcomes in Nurse Practitioners in Taiwan作者：Li-Hui HO;Shu-Chen CHANG;Kevin KAU;Shu-Ying SHIU;Sheng-Shiung HUANG;Ya-Jung WANG;Shiow-Luan TSAY關鍵字：organizational support;job satisfaction;care outcomes;intent to leave;nurse practitioners期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Nurse practitioners (NPs) in Taiwan have practiced mainly in acute care hospitals since 2006. Although organizational support and level of support have been associated with the successful integration of NP roles and effective practice outcomes, organizational support in the context of NPs in inpatient settings is an area that has been rarely explored in the literature. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between organizational support and the practice outcomes of job satisfaction, care effectiveness, and intention to leave in NPs. Methods: A national survey of 512 NPs was conducted that included a demographic characteristics datasheet, the Nurse Practitioner Primary Care Organizational Climate Questionnaire, the Misener Nurse Practitioner Job Satisfaction Scale, and the Nurse Practitioner Care Effectiveness Scale. Multiple regression analysis was applied to explore the specific factors associated with job satisfaction. The statistical significance level was set at .05 with a two-tailed test. All statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS Statistics Version 22.0 software. Results: More than half of the participants were found to be dissatisfied with their hospital managers (54.8%) and with each dimension of organizational support. Overall, 82.1 %of the participants were satisfied with their current practice. A multiple regression analysis showed that the participants who perceived higher levels of organizational support in the workplace (β = .53, p ＜ .001), expressed satisfaction with working with their managers (β=.25, p＜ .001), or perceived better care outcomes (β = .10, p ＜ .001) reported higher job satisfaction. In addition, the participants who expressed intention to leave within 1 year (β = -.09, p ＜ .001) and those with higher patient loads (β=-.09, p＜.001) reported lower job satisfaction. Organizational support was found to explain 50% of the variance in job satisfaction. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results of this study highlight organizational support as the most important factor affecting job satisfaction in NPs. Therefore, administrators work to promote organizational support and improve the work environment to enhance the job satisfaction, increase the clinical practice retention, and improve the care outcomes of NPs.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000042516篇名：The Frequency and Perceived Effectiveness of Pain Self-Management Strategies Used by Individuals With Migraine作者：Hao-Yuan CHANG;Chih-Chao YANG;Mark P. JENSEN;Yeur-Hur LAI關鍵字：migraine;pain management;self-management;perceived effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Migraine is ranked among the most important causes of disability worldwide. Some effective migraine treatments have been identified. However, little is known regarding the treatment strategies used by patients with migraine to manage pain or their efficacy. Purpose: This study was designed to (a) investigate the pain management strategies used by migraineurs and their perceived effectiveness and (b) evaluate the association between the number of strategies used and their overall perceived effectiveness. Methods: A cross-sectional design with consecutive sampling was used in a medical center in Taiwan. Individuals with migraine (N = 174) completed self-administered questionnaires and in-depth interviews to assess the frequency and perceived effectiveness of a variety of pain management strategies. Results: Most participants reported using prescription medications (56%) and over-the-counter medications (51%), which were rated as having good efficacy rates of 78% and 81%, respectively. Traditional Chinese medicine (17%) and folk remedies (13%) were used less frequently and rated as relatively less effective at 65% and 48%, respectively. About half (47%) reported using more than one pain management strategy. Significantly more of those who reported using multiple pain management strategies reported at least ”some effect” than those who reported using one strategy only (73% vs. 27%, p = .001). Conclusions: Prescription medications showed good usage rate and good perceived efficacy. However, about half of the participants used multiple pain management strategies, supporting the need for further research to evaluate the efficacy of combination treatments and to identify those combinations that may have the most additive and/or synergistic effects. Furthermore, the findings indicate that continued use of medications for migraine management is appropriate for many individuals because of the relatively high rates of perceived efficacy for this strategy found in this study.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000042917篇名：The Learning Effectiveness of High-Fidelity Simulation Teaching Among Chinese Nursing Students: A Mixed-Methods Study作者：Zhen LI;Fei-Fei HUANG;Shiah-Lian CHEN;Anni WANG;Yufang GUO關鍵字：high-fidelity simulations;nursing;students;mixed-methods design;learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: High-fidelity simulation (HFS) is an interactive and complex experiential learning pedagogy. Given the limited and inconclusive evidence on the effectiveness of HFS in terms of improving student learning outcomes, a more thorough understanding of students' learning experiences and effects of HFS may inform the improvement of nursing training. Purpose: The aim of this study was to examine the learning effectiveness score of HFS, its influencing factors, and the learning experience of nursing students. Methods: A convergent parallel mixed-methods research design was adopted. Five hundred thirty-three third-year undergraduate nursing students completed the Simulation Learning Effectiveness Inventory. Semistructured interviews were used to elicit the opinions of 22 participants regarding their participation in the HFS experience. Results: The quantitative findings showed a moderately high learning effectiveness of HFS among Chinese undergraduate nursing students (121.81 ± 14.93). The learning effectiveness for equipment resources (15.02 ± 2.38), course arrangement (11.18 ± 1.73), and confidence (18.56 ± 3.67) was relatively low. Extroversion and mixed personality (β= 0.14 and 0.10) and ”dislike” or ”general like” of the course (β= -0.45 and -0.33) were found to influence learning effectiveness (F = 54.79, p ＜ .001, adjusted R^2 = .29). In addition, the qualitative findings indicated that the participants felt positively regarding the ”debriefing,” ”clinical abilities,” and ”problem solving” dimensions of the training. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The focus of the education process and curriculum design of HFS activities should be on improving course arrangement, equipment resources, and students' confidence while paying attention to nursing students' personality traits and course preferences.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000041818篇名：The Mediation and Suppression Effect of Demoralization in Breast Cancer Patients After Primary Therapy: A Structural Equation Model作者：Hsiu-Ling PENG;Hui-Wen HSUEH;Yu-Hsing CHANG;Ren-Hau LI關鍵字：breast cancer;demoralization;psychological well-being;stress;sleep disturbances期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Because of the increasing 5-year survival rate of breast cancer, adjustment to breast cancer survivorship is pertinent to the patient's life after diagnosis. Despite the psychological changes occurring during the transitional period (first 5 years after diagnosis) and after primary therapy having a known, critical effect on survivorship status, the data related to this topic are very limited. Purpose: This study was designed to examine the relationships among demoralization, stress, sleep disturbance, and psychological well-being in women with breast cancer after primary therapy. Methods: Two hundred eight women with breast cancer (mean age = 51.96 ± 8.27) participated in a cross-sectional study in central Taiwan. Recruitment was conducted using convenience snowball sampling at a local teaching hospital. All of the participants had completed primary therapy and were in the 5-year postdiagnosis period. The average duration of cancer was 28 months. The participants completed the Stress of Breast Cancer after Primary Therapy Scale, Demoralization Scale, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Inventory, and Ryff's Psychological Well-Being Scale-Short Form. Data were analyzed using a structural equation model to find plausible path relationships among stress, demoralization, sleep disturbances, and psychological well-being. Results: Demoralization was shown to completely mediate the effect of stress on sleep disturbances. In addition, the predictive effect of sleep disturbances on psychological well-being was overwhelmingly explained by demoralization when competing with sleep disturbances. Furthermore, a positive path was found between stress and psychological well-being because of the suppression effect of demoralization. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Demoralization was found to be a mediator that suppressed the relationships among stress, sleep disturbances, and psychological well-being in the adaptation process of patients with breast cancer after primary therapy. This article adds to the limited research on women with breast cancer after primary therapy who are in their initial 5 years of diagnosis. In addition, this study used structural equation model to find the plausible path relationships among the psychological factors involved in the well-being of women with breast cancer. Supporting patients with cancer and effectively reducing their perceived demoralization will be key to transforming stress into personal growth and a facilitator of long-term recovery.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000042119篇名：The Buffering Effect of Perceived Organizational Support on the Relationships Among Workload, Work-Family Interference, and Affective Commitment: A Study on Nurses作者：Ozge TAYFUR EKMEKCI;Dorela XHAKO;Selin METIN CAMGOZ關鍵字：workload;work-family interference;perceived organizational support;affective commitment期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Minimal research has been conducted to explore the associations among workload, work-to-family conflict, family-to-work conflict, support, and affective commitment. Purpose: This study was designed to explore the moderating role of perceived organizational support on the mediating effects of work-to-family conflict, family-to-work conflict in perceived workload, and affective commitment linkage. Methods: The data were collected using a self-report survey from 164 nurses working at two public hospitals. The hypothesized model was tested using PROCESS macro. Results: Perceived organizational support was found to influence the mediating effect of work-to-family conflict on the linkage between workload and affective commitment, yet not to moderate the mediating effect of family-to-work conflict. The results revealed that workload predicts affective commitment negatively and work-to-family conflict positively. However, perceived organizational support was found to change the effect that workload has on affective commitment. The negative effect of workload on affective commitment was found to be weaker for nurses with adequate organizational support. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Perceived organizational support was found to have both main and buffering effects on the emotional attachment of nurses toward their organizations. The findings support the importance of creating supportive work settings to alleviate the adverse effects on nurses of workload and work-family interference.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000041920篇名：COVID-19 Pandemic: The Challenges to the Professional Identity of Nurses and Nursing Education作者：Shiow-Ching SHUN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000043101篇名：Effect of a Breathing Exercise on Respiratory Function and 6-Minute Walking Distance in Patients Under Hemodialysis: A Randomized Controlled Trial作者：Tajmohammad ARAZI;Mansooreh ALIASGHARPOUR;Sepideh MOHAMMADI;Nooredin MOHAMMADI;Anoushirvan KAZEMNEJAD關鍵字：hemodialysis;respiratory function tests;breathing exercise;incentive spirometry;six-minute walk test期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Pulmonary disorders and poor functional capacity are common complications in patients under hemodialysis. Although breathing exercise is frequently prescribed to improve respiratory function, its efficacy in this patient community is not well established. Purpose: Our study was designed to determine the effectiveness of a breathing exercise on respiratory function and 6-minute walk (6MW) distance in patients under hemodialysis. Methods: A randomized controlled trial approach was used. The sample consisted of 52 patients under hemodialysis from a university teaching hospital in Iran. The experimental group (n = 26) received the breathing exercise program and was encouraged to perform incentive spirometry for 2 months. The control group (n = 26) received only routine hospital care. The respiratory function test and 6MW test were performed at baseline and at 2 months after the intervention (posttest). Results: The two groups were homogeneous in terms of respiratory function parameters, 6MW distance, and demographic characteristics at baseline. Forced expiratory volume in 1 second and forced vital capacity were significantly better in the experimental group compared with the control group at 2 months after intervention. No significant difference was found in 6MW distance between the groups at the 2-month posttest. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The 2-month breathing exercise effectively improved pulmonary function parameters (forced vital capacity, forced expiratory volume in 1 second) in patients under hemodialysis but did not affect 6MW distance. Hemodialysis nurses should strengthen their clinical health education and apply breathing exercise programs to reduce the pulmonary complications experienced by patients under hemodialysis.起始頁-結束頁：1-6資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004232篇名：The Professional Identity of Nursing Students and Their Intention to Leave the Nursing Profession During the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic作者：Shengxiao NIE;Chao SUN;Lei WANG;Xia WANG關鍵字：COVID-19;professional identity;retention;nursing student;cross-sectional study期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has affected China and other countries since December 2019. The effects of this pandemic on nursing students in terms of their professional identity, intention to leave the nursing profession, and perception of clinical nursing work remain unclear. Purpose: The aims of this study were, first, to investigate nursing students' professional identity, intention to leave the nursing profession, and perception of clinical nursing work during the COVID-19 pandemic and, second, to explore factors influencing professional identity to help develop effective strategies to enrich and strengthen this factor in the future. Methods: This cross-sectional, descriptive survey study was conducted on 150 nursing students in China in February 2020. Results: The 14 (9.3%) participants who reported intending to leave the nursing profession earned lower scores for professional identity than their peers who reported intending to remain. The participants who believed that the COVID-19 pandemic had made them ”more passionate about clinical nursing work” earned the highest scores, followed by those who believed the pandemic had ”no effect.” The lowest scores were earned by those who believed clinical nursing work to be ”too dangerous to engage in.” COVID-19 knowledge scores, the perceived effectiveness of preventive and control measures, the number of cases seen on the day the study survey was taken, and time spent daily on COVID-19 events were the variables found to influence professional identity. Conclusions: COVID-19 outbreak is not merely a time of crisis but also an opportunity to reconstruct the professional identity of nursing students.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004243篇名：Relationships Between Job Satisfaction and Job Demand, Job Control, Social Support, and Depression in Iranian Nurses作者：Majid BAGHERI HOSSEIN ABADI;Ebrahim TABAN;Narges KHANJANI;Zahra NAGHAVI KONJIN;Farahnaz KHAJEHNASIRI;Seyed Ehsan SAMAEI關鍵字：Job Content Questionnaire;job demand-control-support model;Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire;nurses期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Nurses often experience a wide variety of stressful situations. Excessive work stress influences the physical and mental health of nurses and decreases their life quality and professional efficacy. In addition, high levels of psychological stress may cause job dissatisfaction and job strain. Purpose: The objective of this study was to explore the relationship between several work-related risk factors and job satisfaction in Iranian nurses. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted on 730 nurses from four public hospitals in, respectively, northern, southern, eastern, and western Iran. Variables in the job demand-control-support (JDCS) model were measured using the Job Content Questionnaire, and job satisfaction was measured using the Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire. Results: The mean score for job satisfaction was 62.94 ± 14.24, which is considered moderate. Nurses with a low level of job satisfaction had significantly higher psychological and physical job demands (p ＜ .05). Significant relationships were found between job satisfaction and several dimensions of the JDCS model, including psychological job demands (β= -0.11, p ＜ .001), physical job demands (β= -0.86, p = .004), skill discretion (β= 0.48, p = .033), decision authority (β= 0.43, p = .028), and supervisor support (β= 1.85, p = .004). The sociodemographic and JDCS model variables used in this study explained 42% of the variation in job satisfaction (R^2 = .42). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Enhancing the job satisfaction of nurses is possible by creating a balance between job demands, job control, and social support.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004104篇名：Does Jaundice in Newborn Infants Affect Exclusivity and Duration of Breastfeeding in Taiwan?作者：Kuei-Hui CHU;Sen-Wen TENG;Chen-Jei TAI;Ching-Mei CHANG;Li-Yin CHIEN關鍵字：neonatal jaundice;breastfeeding;breastfeeding duration;baby-friendly hospital initiative期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Cases of breastfeeding- and breast-milk-related jaundice tend to increase with increased rates of breastfeeding. Diagnoses of jaundice often lead mothers to discontinue breastfeeding because of assumptions that breastfeeding may exacerbate neonatal jaundice and lengthen the duration of phototherapy treatment. Purpose: This study was designed to explore the effect of neonatal jaundice on breastfeeding duration and exclusivity during the first 4 months postpartum. Methods: This study applied a two-group comparative and follow-up design. The two groups comprised 135 and 160 mothers of infants, respectively, with and without neonatal jaundice. All of the participants were recruited from three certified baby-friendly hospitals in northern Taiwan. Follow-up was conducted by telephone at 1 and 4 months postpartum. Results: Mean breastfeeding duration was longer in the group of participants whose infants had neonatal jaundice (group with neonatal jaundice) than in the group whose infants did not have this condition (group without neonatal jaundice; 102.00 vs. 89.85 days, p = .007). The degree of breastfeeding was higher in the group with neonatal jaundice, although the difference was significant only at 1 month postpartum and not during hospitalization or at 4 months postpartum. The results of a Cox regression model showed that the group without neonatal jaundice was more likely to discontinue breastfeeding (adjusted hazard ratio = 1.68, 95% CI [1.08, 2.62]). A generalized estimating equation model suggests that infants with neonatal jaundice had a higher likelihood of being breastfed for at least half of their feedings (adjusted OR = 1.53, 95% CI [1.04, 2.25]). Conclusions: On the basis of the results of this study, neonatal jaundice is not an obstacle to breastfeeding in pro-breastfeeding hospital environments. Participants whose infants developed neonatal jaundice were found in this study to breastfeed more often, which promotes breastfeeding success.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004205篇名：Effect of Scenario-Based Simulation Training on the Obstetrics and Gynecology Nursing Clinical Practicum作者：Ayten <U+015E>ENTURK ERENEL;<U+015E>engul YAMAN SOZB<U+0130>R;Mehtap UZUN AKSOY;Esra ARSLAN GURCUO<U+011E>LU;S<U+0131>d<U+0131>ka PEL<U+0130>T AKSU;Filiz UNAL TOPRAK;Canan UCAKCI ASALIO<U+011E>LU關鍵字：nursing;students;simulation;self-confidence;clinical stress期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Simulation practices in obstetrics and gynecology (OB-GYN) nursing are used in education, practice, assessment, and the investigation of interventional and behavioral skills related to both routine and emergency conditions. Purpose: This study was conducted in an OB-GYN nursing course to determine the effect of simulation practices on clinical practice satisfaction, clinical stress, and self-confidence in nursing students. Methods: A cluster randomized controlled experimental trial was conducted on 122 students (experimental group, n = 58; control group, n = 64). After theoretical training, all of the students applied six scenarios in the OB-GYN nursing simulation laboratory. The students in the experimental group began clinical practice after simulation training, whereas their peers in the control group began clinical practice without prior simulation training. Data in this study were collected using a personal information form, the Pagana Clinical Stress Questionnaire, a self-confidence scale, and a satisfaction subscale from the Clinical Learning Environment Scale on, respectively, the first day and final day of clinical practice. Results: At the end of the clinical practice, average clinical stress in the control group was higher than that in the experimental group (p = .001). No intergroup difference was found in self-confidence levels (p ＞ .05). For the control group, at posttest, the average satisfaction with the clinical learning environment was higher (p = .046) and the average satisfaction with the clinical learning environment was lower (p = .05). In contrast, no mean pretest-posttest differences were found in clinical stress and self-confidence levels in the experimental group (p ＞ .05). In the control group, no mean pretest-posttest difference was found for the clinical learning environment (p ＞ .05), whereas mean clinical stress (p ＜ .001) and self-confidence (p = .012) levels were higher at posttest (p ＜ .05). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The findings of this study indicate that simulation training interventions reduce clinical satisfaction and stress in students but do not influence self-confidence. Nursing educators may provide scenario-based simulation training to students taking OB-GYN courses to enhance their preparedness for clinical practice.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004176篇名：Physical Activity and Cardiac Self-Efficacy Levels During Early Recovery After Acute Myocardial Infarction: A Jordanian Study作者：Abedalmajeed SHAJRAWI;Malcolm GRANAT;Ian JONES;Felicity ASTIN關鍵字：self-efficacy;acute myocardial infarction;physical activity;activPAL;accelerometer期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Regular physical activity is important for patients with established coronary heart disease as it favorably influences their coronary risk profile. General self-efficacy is a powerful predictor of health behavior change that involves increases in physical activity levels. Few studies have simultaneously measured physical activity and self-efficacy during early recovery after a first acute myocardial infarction (AMI). Purpose: The aims of this study were to assess changes in objectively measured physical activity levels at 2 weeks (T2) and 6 weeks (T3) and self-reported cardiac self-efficacy at hospital discharge (T1) and at T2 and T3 in patients recovering from AMI. Methods: A repeated-measures design was used to recruit a purposive sample of patients from a single center in Jordan who were diagnosed with first AMI and who did not have access to cardiac rehabilitation. A body-worn activity monitor (activPAL) was used to objectively measure free-living physical activity levels for 7 consecutive days at two time points (T2 and T3). An Arabic version of the cardiac self-efficacy scale was administered at T1, T2, and T3. Paired t tests and analysis of variance were used to examine differences in physical activity levels and cardiac self-efficacy scores, respectively. Results: A sample of 100 participants was recruited, of which 62%weremale. The mean age of the sample was 54.5 ± 9.9 years. No statistically significant difference in physical activity levels was measured at 2 weeks (T2) and 6 weeks (T3). Cardiac self-efficacy scores improved significantly between T1, T2, and T3 across subscales and global cardiac self-efficacy. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Participants recovering from AMI in Jordan did not increase their physical activity levels during the early recovery phase, although cardiac self-efficacy scores improved. This may be because the increase in cardiac self-efficacy was not matched by the practical skills and knowledge required to translate this positive psychological construct into behavioral change. This study provides a first step toward understanding the complex relationship between cardiac self-efficacy and physical activity in this population. The authors hope that these findings support the design of culturally appropriate interventions to increase physical activity levels in this population.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004087篇名：Utility of Equivalence and Cognition Models in Enhancing Validity of Translated Questionnaires: A Methodological Example Using the Heart Quality-of-Life Questionnaire作者：Wan Ling LEE;Khatijah LIM ABDULLAH;Karuthan CHINNA;Imran Z. ABIDIN關鍵字：coronary nursing;translations;health-related quality of life;patient-reported outcome measures;cognitive interviewing期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: The cross-cultural adaptation of questionnaires has tenuous theoretical underpinnings that limit the rigor of data collection and the meaningful analysis of cognitive interview data. An adaptation of existing models of equivalence and cognition provides structure to the comprehensive investigation of various equivalence types in enhancing the validity of translated questionnaires. Purpose: In this study, a framework comprising equivalence and cognition models was used to assess and finalize the Heart Quality-of-Life (HeartQoL)-Bahasa Malaysia (BM) questionnaire, which was derived from both forward-backward (FB) and dual-panel (DP) translation methods. Methods: Investigation and finalization of two initial versions of the questionnaire were conducted based on findings from an expert assessment (n = 3 sociolinguists blinded to translation methods) and cognitive interviews with purposively sampled patients (FB: n = 11; DP: n = 11). The equivalence model of Herdman et al. and the question-and-answer model of Collins were adapted to form a ”cognition-and-equivalence” model to guide data collection and analysis through modified cognitive interviews. The final HeartQoL-BM was completed by 373 patients with ischemic heart disease from two medical centers, and the data were analyzed using confirmatory factor analysis to assess the evidence of equivalence. Results: Findings from the expert assessment and cognitive interview showed the existence of semantic and item equivalence on almost all of the FB and DP items, identified some subtle potential equivalence gaps, and guided the process of item finalization. Confirmatory factor analysis, including tests of factorial invariance on the final two-factor model of HeartQoL-BM, confirmed conceptual, item, measurement, and operational equivalence, which supports functional equivalence. Conclusions: The potential use of the cognition-and-equivalence model for modified cognitive interviewing and the application of the six equivalence types of Herdman et al. were supported by the HeartQoL-BM showing functional equivalence with its source. HeartQoL-BM is a potentially valid measure of health-related quality of life for patients with ischemic heart disease independent of conditions such as angina, myocardial infarction, and heart failure.起始頁-結束頁：1-10資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004148篇名：Preventing Alveolar Osteitis After Molar Extraction Using Chlorhexidine Rinse and Gel: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials作者：Chia-Hui WANG;Shu-Hui YANG;Hsiu-Ju JEN;Jui-Chen TSAI;Hsi-Kuei LIN;El-Wui LOH關鍵字：chlorhexidine;rinse;gel;alveolar osteitis期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Alveolar osteitis (AO) may occur after molar extraction. Chlorhexidine (CHX) rinse and CHX gel are widely used to prevent AO. Although previous meta-analyses support the effectiveness of both CHX rinse and CHX gel in preventing AO, important issues regarding these two formulations have not been addressed adequately in the literature. Purpose: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials was conducted to determine the effectiveness of CHX rinse and CHX gel in preventing AO. Methods: PubMed, EMBASE, SCOPUS, and Cochrane databases were searched for randomized controlled trials published before June 2018. The risk ratio (RR) was used to estimate the pooled effect of AO incidence using a random-effect model. Results: The RRs of AO in patients treated with 0.12%CHX rinse (RR = 0.54, 95% CI [0.41, 0.72]) and 0.2%CHX rinse (RR = 0.84, 95% CI [0.52, 1.35]) were significantly lower than in those treated with the control. Moreover, a significantly lower RR was identified in patients treated with 0.2% CHX gel (RR = 0.47, 95% CI [0.34, 0.64]) than in those treated with the control. When CHX products of different concentrations were grouped together, patients treated with CHX rinse showed an RR of AO of 0.61 (95% CI [0.48, 0.78]) and those treated with CHX gel showed an RR of AO of 0.44 (95% CI [0.43, 0.65]). On the other hand, a meta-analysis of three trials that compared CHX rinse and CHX gel directly showed a significantly lower RR of AO in patients treated with CHX rinse than in those treated with CHX gel (RR = 0.56, 95%CI [0.34, 0.96]). Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The results support the effectiveness of both CHX rinse and gel in reducing the risk of AO after molar extraction. Each formulation provides unique benefits in terms of ease of application and cost. On the basis of the results of this study, the authors recommend that CHX gel be used immediately after molar extraction because of the convenience and cost-effectiveness of this treatment and that CHX rinse be used by the patient after discharge at home in combination with appropriate health education and case management.起始頁-結束頁：1-11資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.00000000000004019篇名：Chronic Disease Management, Self-Efficacy and Quality of Life作者：Sally Wai-Chi CHAN期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000042210篇名：Predicting the Development of Surgery-Related Pressure Injury Using a Machine Learning Algorithm Model作者：Ji-Yu CAI;Man-Li ZHA;Yi-Ping SONG;Hong-Lin CHEN關鍵字：surgery-related pressure injury;machine learning;risk assessment;cardiovascular surgery期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Surgery-related pressure injury (SRPI) is a serious problem in patients who undergo cardiovascular surgery. Identifying patients at a high risk of SRPI is important for clinicians to recognize and prevent it expeditiously. Machine learning (ML) has been widely used in the field of healthcare and is well suited to predictive analysis. Purpose: The aim of this study was to develop an ML-based predictive model for SRPI in patients undergoing cardiovascular surgery. Methods: This secondary analysis of data was based on a single-center, prospective cohort analysis of 149 patients who underwent cardiovascular surgery. Data were collected from a 1,000-bed university-affiliated hospital. We developed the ML model using the XGBoost algorithm for SRPI prediction in patients undergoing cardiovascular surgery based on major potential risk factors. Model performance was tested using a receiver operating characteristic curve and the C-index. Results: Of the sample of 149 patients, SRPI developed in 37, an incidence rate of 24.8%. The five most important predictors included duration of surgery, patient weight, duration of the cardiopulmonary bypass procedure, patient age, and disease category. The ML model had an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.806, which indicates that the ML model has a moderate prediction value for SRPI. Conclusions: Applying ML to clinical data may be a reliable approach to the assessment of the risk of SRPI in patients undergoing cardiovascular surgical procedures. Future studies may deploy the ML model in the clinic and focus on applying targeted interventions for SRPI and related diseases.起始頁-結束頁：1-6資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000041111篇名：Person-Centered Care Environment Associated With Care Staff Outcomes in Long-Term Care Facilities作者：JiSun CHOI;Da Eun KIM;Ju Young YOON關鍵字：intent to leave;job satisfaction;nursing home;nurse staffing;person-centered care期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Although a general implementation of person-centered care in Korean long-term care delivery systems would be challenging, person-centered care has the potential to improve resident and staff outcomes through changes in current care services. However, little empirical evidence currently supports a positive relationship between person-centered care environments and staff outcomes. Purpose: This study was designed to examine the relationship between person-centered care environments and staff outcomes, including job satisfaction and turnover intention, among care staff in Korean long-term care facilities. Methods: This descriptive, correlational study used data from 235 care staff (94 nursing staff and 141 personal care workers) in 13 long-term care facilities in Korea. Data were collected using structured survey questionnaires, including items related to the person-centered care environment, job satisfaction, and turnover intention. Multilevel linear and logistic regression analyses were performed using Mplus Version 7.0. Results: After controlling for individual (age, education, monthly income, position, shift work, and job tenure) and organizational (type of facility, location, ownership, bed size, and staffing levels) characteristics, a significant relationship was found between the person-centered care environment and job satisfaction and turnover intention among staff in Korean long-term care facilities. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The study findings indicate that working in a person-centered care environment is key to higher job satisfaction, which is a significant predictor of turnover intention among staff in long-term care facilities. To recruit and retain qualified staff to provide high-quality person-centered care in long-term care facilities, a supportive work environment is crucial. Fostering a person-centered care environment will ultimately improve quality of care for residents.起始頁-結束頁：1-7資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000041212篇名：Knowledge and Attitudes Regarding Organ Transplantation Among Cyprus Residents作者：Evanthia ASIMAKOPOULOU;Vaso STYLIANOU;Ioannis DIMITRAKOPOULOS;Alexandros ARGYRIADIS;Panagiota BELLOU-MYLONA關鍵字：attitudes;Cyprus;knowledge levels;organ donation;transplantation期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Organ transplantation was one of the greatest achievements of medical science during the 20th century. Knowledge, education, and culture all play prominent roles in transplantation because of the complexity of the process from donation to transplantation. Purpose: The aim of this research was to determine and analyze the knowledge and attitudes about organ donation and transplantation among the general population in Limassol, Cyprus. Methods: A quantitative research approach was followed, and a questionnaire consisting of closed-ended questions was completed by adults from the general population in Limassol. Results: One thousand two hundred adults out of the 1,346 adults who were contacted responded to the survey (response rate: 89%) and were included as participants. Of the participants, 93.4%(p ＜ .05) considered organ donation to be lifesaving, 57% expressed interest (and 39.8% expressed disinterest) in becoming organ donors, 80.6% (p ＜ .05) expressed awareness of there being a waiting list for people in need of organ transplantation, 50.4% agreed that brain death must be confirmed before organ removal for transplantation, and 47% recalled having been informed about organ donation through the media, with 31.5% stating that they had never been informed about organ donation. Conclusions: The participants demonstrated limited awareness regarding the organ donation system in Cyprus. Furthermore, a significant percentage stated that they lacked a source for obtaining related information. The Cypriot society should be informed and encouraged to participate in organ donation to increase the rate of organ transplantation.起始頁-結束頁：1-8資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000040913篇名：The Impact of Nurse-Led Cardiac Rehabilitation on Quality of Life and Biophysiological Parameters in Patients With Heart Failure: A Randomized Clinical Trial作者：Porkodi ARJUNAN;Ramakrishnan Venkatakrishnan TRICHUR關鍵字：biophysiological parameters;heart failure;nurse-led cardiac rehabilitation;quality of life;patients with chronic disease期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of mortality in the Indian subcontinent, accounting for 38% of deaths annually. One cardiovascular disease in particular, heart failure, is a growing public health problem both in India and worldwide. Purpose: Heart failure is a chronic, progressive disease with increasing rates of incidence and prevalence. This study was conducted to determine the influence of a nurse-led cardiac rehabilitation program on quality of life and biophysiological parameters in patients with chronic heart failure. In this study, it was hypothesized that participants in the cardiac rehabilitation program would report significantly more-positive changes in quality of life and biophysiological parameters than their peers who did not participate in this program. Methods: In this randomized controlled trial, the participants were patients with chronic heart failure who had been admitted to a tertiary care hospital in India. The participants assigned to the intervention group received both nurse-led cardiac rehabilitation and routine care. In addition, intervention group participants received a booklet on cardiac rehabilitation, Healthy Way to Healthy Heart, at discharge and fortnightly telephone reminders about good cardiac rehabilitation practices. A standard questionnaire was used to collect targeted information on participants' general and disease-specific quality of life at 1 and 3 months postintervention. Biophysiological parameters such as body mass index, blood pressure, and serum cholesterol values were also measured. Results: Two thirds of the participants in each group (65% in the intervention group and 66% in the control group) were between 51 and 70 years old. The mean score for the mental component summary of generic quality of life steadily decreased in the control group and steadily increased in the intervention group at the first and second posttests. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: Nurses working in cardiology units play a pivotal role in educating and managing the health status of patients with heart failure. Providing cardiac rehabilitation to patients with heart failure benefits the quality of life of these patients. Nurses working in cardiology units should encourage patients with heart failure to practice cardiac rehabilitation for a longer period to further improve their quality of life.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000040714篇名：Factors Affecting Quality of Life Among the Elderly in Long-Term Care Hospitals作者：Hee-Kyung CHANG;Cho-Rong GIL;Hye-Jin KIM;Han-Ju BEA關鍵字：depression;long-term care hospital;nurse-patient interaction;older people care;quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：The Journal of Nursing Research卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Background: There are challenges in sustaining person-centered care in aged care settings. Key related issues of concern such as quality of life among the older people in long-term care hospitals and interactions with nursing staff have been described previously. Purpose: This study was designed to explore the factors affecting quality of life among older people living in long-term care hospitals in South Korea. Methods: Older adult patients (N = 202) in three long-term care hospitals completed measures of cognitive functions, depression, care dependency, and interactions between nurse and patient and a quality-of-life assessment tool. Univariate analyses were used to examine the relationships among these variables, and a multiple linear regression analysis was used to explore the extent to which these variables predicted quality of life in these patients. Results: The significant factors associated with quality of life were found to be cognitive functions (r = .373, p ＜ .001), care dependency (r = .350, p ＜ .001), and depression (r =-.504, p ＜ .001). The regression model with depression and care dependency as predictor variables accounted for 25.7%of the variance in quality of life. Conclusions/Implications for Practice: The correlation found in this study between quality of life and depression and care dependency provides additional evidentiary support for developing and applying nursing interventions that reduce depression and care dependency in older adult populations.起始頁-結束頁：1-9資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：台灣護理學會DOI：10.1097/jnr.000000000000041301篇名：新聞情緒指標與臺灣加權股價指數之關係並列篇名：Relationship between News Sentiment Indicator and the Taiwan Weighted Stock Index作者：陳冠臻(Kuan-chen Chen);林忠億(Chung-i Lin);陳宏銘(Hong-ming Chen)關鍵字：新聞情緒;投資人情緒;股價指數;文字探勘;交易策略;news sentiment;investor sentiment;stock market index;text mining;trading strategy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以媒體文字量化資訊作為新聞情緒（news sentiment）之變數，探討新聞情緒與臺灣加權股價指數報酬率的關係。結果發現正向、負向情緒變數與股價指數報酬率具有統計上的顯著性結果。我們進一步建立投資策略並考量交易成本於做多的績效，發現加入負向情緒變數後之投資策略，其最佳收益率為13.308%、夏普指標為0.759、期末現值為197.528（萬），皆比未納入情緒指標來得高，顯示納入負向新聞情緒於績效指標均表現較好。本研究結果顯示以新聞正、負向內容形成的新聞情緒指標的確能預測股票市場報酬率，且負面情緒預測能力較正面情緒來得好，與Tetlock（2007）及Garcia（2013）的研究結果一致。英文摘要：This study explores the relationship between positive and negative news sentiment and the returns on the Taiwan weighted stock index by taking media quantitative information as a news sentiment variable. The findings show that these two sentiment variables and the returns on the stock index are statistically significant. Through further establishment of investment strategies and valuing a long position on an option with transactions costs, this study shows that, for the investment strategy with the negative sentiment, the optimal return is 13.308%, the Sharpe ratio is 0.759, and the ending present value is 1,975,280 thousand. They are higher than those strategies with no sentiment variable. This denotes that the performance indicator is better if the negative sentiment variable is included. The results of this study indicate that the negative sentiment is a better prediction than is positive sentiment, which is consistent with the results of Tetlock (2007) and Garcia (2013).起始頁-結束頁：383-423資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心2篇名：策略性環境企業社會責任與民營化中立性定理並列篇名：Strategic Environmental Corporate Social Responsibility and the Privatization Neutrality Theorem作者：侯雨君(Yu-chun Hou);翁<U+5803>嵐(K. L. Glen Ueng);郭虹瑩(Horn-in Kuo)關鍵字：混合寡占;民營化;民營化中立性定理;環境企業社會責任;mixed oligopoly;privatization;privatization neutrality theorem;strategy environmental corporate social responsibility期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：既存探討民營化中立性定理（privatization neutrality theorem）的文獻忽略了近年來相當受到企業重視的環境企業社會責任（environmental corporate social responsibility, ECSR）。有鑒於此，本文建構一個公、民營企業皆進行ECSR活動的混合寡占模型重新探討民營化中立性定理。依據我們的研究結果顯示：（1）民營化中立性定理是否成立取決於生產活動是否具有外部性。當生產不具外部性時，民營化中立性定理成立，反之，則不成立。（2）當污染的邊際損害很大且ECSR效果並不顯著時，政府的最適政策將為課稅而非補貼。（3）當生產具外部性時，即使考慮ECSR活動，民營化對社會福祉而言仍是不利的。英文摘要：The existing literature on the privatization neutrality theorem ignores strategic environmental corporate social responsibility (ECSR), which has received considerable attention recently. To fill this gap, this paper constructs a mixed duopolistic model to re-examine the privatization neutrality theorem, in which both public and private enterprises can strategically carry out ECSR activities to increase consumers' willingness to pay for their products. The results of our research indicate that: (i) Whether or not the privatization neutrality theorem holds is contingent upon the externality of the production activities. When the production activities have no externality, the privatization neutrality theorem will still hold, otherwise, it will not. (ii) When the production activities have externality, privatization still has a negative impact on overall social welfare. (iii) When the marginal damage of pollution is huge and the ECSR effect is not significant, the optimal policy will be taxation rather than subsidy.起始頁-結束頁：425-449資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心3篇名：魯凱族的道德經濟：社會組織、傳統農耕與災害應對並列篇名：The Moral Economy of Rukai Society: Social Organization, Traditional Agriculture, and Natural Hazards Prevention作者：巴清雄(Qing-xiong Ba);台邦．撒沙勒(Sasala Taiban);王宏仁(Hong-zen Wang)關鍵字：道德經濟;魯凱族;最小化風險;再分配;互惠;moral economy;Rukai;risk minimization;redistribution;reciprocity期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究探討霧臺魯凱族的農業實作與社會組織文化如何相互鑲嵌，進而構成道德經濟的一環。研究資料主要來自第一作者從2015年迄今，對19位族人的正式訪問、部落的日常生活觀察，以及2015-2017年間的親自農事耕作與記錄。研究發現，霧臺魯凱社會道德經濟最重要的組織原則是「最小化風險」。在農耕實作上，透過混作栽培、輪耕、現地保存等方法來降低地力消耗、蟲害、天災的問題。在社會文化上，透過頭目貴族進行的資源重分配、族人之間的分享互惠，同時降低了部落最底層人的生存風險，以及自然災害發生的機率。英文摘要：This paper explores how agricultural practices in Rukai society are embedded in its social cultural institutions, which constitute a part of Rukai's moral economy. The data were mainly collected by the first author and include formal interviews with 19 Rukai elders, field observations, and participation in farming from 2015 to 2017. The research findings indicate that the most important principle of Rukai's moral economy is ”risk minimization.” Agricultural practices of mixed plantation, shifting cultivation, and not harvesting specific crops are used to minimize the risk of soil exhaustion, insect pests, and damage from other natural disaster. Socio-culturally, the principle of risk minimization is invoked in the redistribution of resources from talyalai (chiefs or nobles) to common people and reciprocity among the people, both of which minimize the subsistence risk of the poorest people and reduce the impact of natural hazards.起始頁-結束頁：451-490資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心4篇名：政治自由主義之悖論與馬丁路德神學之當代意義並列篇名：The Paradox of Political Liberalism and the Relevance of Martin Luther作者：魏楚陽(Chu-yang Wei)關鍵字：馬丁路德;宗教改革;啟蒙運動;主體性;現代國家;自由主義;Martin Luther;Reformation;Enlightenment;subjectivity;modern state;liberalism期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文研究宗教改革家馬丁路德（Martin Luther）思想之中的信仰與政治自由之間的內在關連性。路德在其宗教改革著作之中，強調信仰的內在自由，對於政治自由的看法，卻是充滿了疑慮。但是在啟蒙運動之後，路德神學逐漸發展出一套獨特的政治自由論述。不同於啟蒙運動者所強調的以個體主體性為基礎的權利主張，路德神學以人的有限性為基礎，反對政治權力的絕對化，並且主張對於社會中的多元性與差異性的尊重；然而此種自由論述，不僅在世俗化社會之中並未得到太多的理解，即使在教會之中，亦未受到足夠的重視。英文摘要：In this research paper, I discuss the inner relationship between belief and political freedom in Martin Luther's thought. In Luther's Reformation writings, he underlines the inner freedom of belief, yet he criticizes the concept of political freedom. After the enlightenment, Lutheran theology developed its unique argument of political freedom. Based on the imperfection of humans, political power should be restricted. Accordingly, plurality and differences in society ought to be respected. But it seems this argument of political freedom is not well understood in secular states and Christian churches.起始頁-結束頁：491-527資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心5篇名：政治爭議與公共理性自由主義的方案並列篇名：Political Disagreements and a Proposal of Public Reason Liberalism作者：許漢(Hahn Hsu)關鍵字：公共理性;價值多元的事實;公共善;自由民主的政治文化與公共認同的傳統信念;公民品德;public reason;fact of value pluralism;public good;political culture and publicly accepted traditional heritages of a liberal democracy;civic virtues期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文提出一個公共理性自由主義的觀念，是基於羅爾斯的政治自由主義所提出的一些修改，包括公共理性的內容、其理論地位以及方法論面的一些想法：一、公共理性所規範的政治議題是廣的；二、公共理性是一般政治道德原則，不只是政治價值或理想，是實質的，不只是程序規範；三、公共理性的內容包括公共善以及政治終極目的；四、公共理性的觀念與適用假設了社會有一定的自由民主的政治文化：五、公共理性自由主義在方法論上放棄羅爾斯抽離的原初處境，公共理性的方法是脈絡化、植根在一個自由民主社會中的政治文化及公共認同的傳統文化中的信念。英文摘要：This paper proposes an idea of public reason liberalism, based on some revisions of Rawls's political liberalism, which will include the following: 1) the scope of public reason is broader than Rawls's; 2) the idea of public reason is to function as a general principle of liberal political morality, not just as a political value or a political ideal, not just providing procedural regulations but also being substantive; 3) the content of public reason includes public goods and the political final end; and 4) the idea of public reason applies only for a society with a liberal democratic culture; 5) regarding the methodology of theorizing, public reason liberalism rejects Rawls's idea of original position, and instead adopts as its method the principle of public reason, which is contextualized and embedded in the political culture and publicly accepted traditional heritages of a liberal democracy.起始頁-結束頁：529-565資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心6篇名：「每場有正當理由的戰爭都是義戰」：格勞秀斯《論捕獲法》的論述策略及其政治思想運用並列篇名：”Every War Derived Entirely from Just Causes, Is a Just War”: Hugo Grotius's Discursive Strategy and Political Thought in De Jure Praedae作者：賴芸儀(Yun-I Lai)關鍵字：格勞秀斯;《論捕獲法》;《論海洋自由》;荷蘭獨立運動;Hugo Grotius;De Jure Praedae;Mare Liberum;Dutch independent movement期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文試圖探討荷蘭法學者格勞秀斯如何將他身處的國際現實反映在他的思想發展上，呈現以世俗化角度，將運用武力維護貿易與航海自由正當化，乃至於世俗化國家之政治論述。格勞秀斯以同意為一切人世間法秩序運作之基礎，構成荷蘭反抗西班牙統治之正當性與合法性。藉由比較《論捕獲法》與早先著作，顯示為聯合東印度公司處理劫掠法律問題的經驗，相當程度地影響了格勞秀斯日後看待國家以及國家主權之概念，而逐漸脫離傳統共和思想從理性或德行的面向，開展出以同意論為核心的共和思想與國家論述。英文摘要：This article reconstructs the intellectual context of the Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius' (1583-1645) De Jure Praedae, in particular, the relation between Grotius' political thought and the political reality with the Dutch Republic faced at the time, including its international politics as well as the developing political discourse of a secular state. It emphasizes the changing conceptions of the lawful use of force to maintain free trade and navigation right from the perspective of political secularization. For Grotius, consent is the foundation of all human laws and it provides the legitimacy for and legality of the right to resist the Spanish rule. By comparing his early works and De Jure Praedae, this article shows how Grotius's republicanism and his thoughts on the political state gradually moves from the traditional republican conceptions, such as reason and virtue, toward consent theory.起始頁-結束頁：179-219資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心7篇名：適得其反？援助的訊息與內戰並列篇名：A Signal of Aid: Adverse Effects on the Onset of Civil War作者：平思寧(Szu-ning Ping)關鍵字：援助;內戰;承諾問題;權力分享;信號;foreign aid;civil war;commitment problems;power-sharing;signal期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：援助的主要目的在於受贈國的發展，而許多國家發生內戰歸咎於經濟情況不佳，那麼，援助是否可以降低內戰的風險？現今的文獻認為援助是具有戰略性的，也就是必須要考慮援助國以及受贈國的互動，因此援助可視為偏向政府的干預，本文認為這樣的干預會惡化政治不穩定國家中的承諾問題（commitment problems）、增加權力分享（power sharing）的成本，同時也降低戰爭成本（war costs），阻礙衝突團體間和平協議的達成而增加內戰爆發的風險。本文使用縱橫資料（time-series and cross section data），以多層次「二元勝算對數模型」（binary logit model）進行分析，結果發現當援助越多，內戰爆發的機率反而會上升。英文摘要：Civil war often occurs in poor countries that also attract foreign aid from developed countries, which raises the question of whether foreign aid is capable of reducing the likelihood of civil war. Despite such aid being known as charity-based foreign policy, previous studies have pointed out that aid is delivered strategically. Since aid targets the incumbent government, it could be seen as a pro-government-biased intervention. I argue that it is the biased interfering signal that causes commitment problems and changing costs of power-sharing and civil war between warring groups to discourage peace agreements. This paper analyzes time-series and cross-sectional data from 1947 to 2017 with multilevel binary logit models, and finds a positive relationship between foreign aid and the onset of civil war, which also confirms the theory.起始頁-結束頁：221-251資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心8篇名：Effects of a Unit-Based Pricing Program on Municipal Solid Waste: Evidence from New Taipei City並列篇名：單位定價方案對都市垃圾量之影響－以新北市為例作者：吳舜文(Shun-Wen Wu);林立闓(Lee-Kai Lin)關鍵字：environmental policy;garbage bag;program evaluation;unit-pricing system;waste management;環保政策;垃圾袋;方案評估;單位定價系統;垃圾處理期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：This study estimates the effects of the unit-based waste pricing program in New Taipei City. The study used fixed-effects models with district-level panel data regarding waste and recycling from July 2007 to December 2011, and demonstrated that the program was related to a significant 40% reduction in monthly per capita waste and a 15% increase in recycling. City-level data from 2000 to 2017 prove that the waste reduction did not rebound in the long term. Because the results were robust under different model specifications and indicated no adverse effects, the paper provides evidence to support arguments that this type of program can effectively reduce waste in high-population-density municipalities.英文摘要：本文旨在探討新北市採取垃圾隨袋徵收－單位定價方案之效果。本文利用2007年7月至2011年12月新北市各區的縱橫資料（panel data），以固定效果模型進行垃圾量和回收量的分析。研究發現新北市採行單位定價方案後，每月人均垃圾量大幅減少40%，而回收量增加15%。另以2000年到2017年的市級數據看來，在隨袋徵收政策之後，垃圾量長期而言並無明顯的反彈趨勢。鑒於本文之各項檢測皆顯示一致的結果，作者認為垃圾隨袋徵收－單位定價方案確實能有效降低垃圾量，本文研究結果將得以提供高人口密度都市採行垃圾減量方案之參考。起始頁-結束頁：253-285資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心9篇名：打敗日本電子大廠後之隱憂：臺灣FPD產業的戰略性耦合與技術依賴並列篇名：Hidden Worries of Taiwanese FPD Industry after the Defeat of Sharp: Strategic Coupling and Technological Dependence作者：田<U+7560>真弓(Mayumi Tabata)關鍵字：技術依賴;戰略性耦合;調解模式;FPD產業;臺日比較;technology dependence;strategic coupling;regulation mode;FPD industry;comparative study of Taiwan and Japan期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究從「戰略性耦合（strategic coupling）」的角度試圖探討臺灣FPD（Flat Panel Displays，平面顯示器）產業在這幾年無法提升附加價<U+5024>的情況之下，科技人才流失到國外，不容易推動產業轉型的主要原因。在本研究，筆者針對臺日廠商進行深度訪談，從GVC（Global Value Chain）策略及資本主義調整模式等分析角度，探討臺日科技產業戰略性耦合的差異。研究結果發現，臺灣廠商透過戰略性耦合，快速地打敗夏普等日本品牌電子大廠下游部門的競爭力。但缺乏長期性人才培訓機制以及人才流動等因素，對於臺灣廠商內部的技術學習累積帶來負面的影響，導致無法主導核心技術的開發，不容易擺脫依賴於日本技術的困境。英文摘要：This study attempts to analyze the main reason for failure of industrial upgrading and technological dependence on Japanese counterparts in Taiwan's FPD (Flat panel display) industry from the perspective of strategic coupling. Result of my research shows that Taiwanese FPD manufacturers, through their competitiveness in the GVC (global value chain) strategy and regulation mode of capitalism, strengthened the effect of strategic coupling: cost performance marketing strategies, cross-national social networks, high mobility of engineers, and adjusting and tuning of technologies were introduced from Japanese counter-parts and defeated Japanese consumer electronics giants. However, on the other hand, Taiwanese strategic coupling also brought negative influence over the technology accumulation and innovation due to the lack of both long-term human resources development and inter-firm and cross-national talent mobility. These problems resulted in the Taiwanese firms' inability to develop core technologies, and they still depend on the key technologies of Japanese counterparts.起始頁-結束頁：287-331資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心10篇名：日本地方創生中的地域共生社會：市民經濟與公民經濟的論辯並列篇名：Regional Care-centered Society within Local Revitalization in Japan: The Dialogue between Civil Economy and Civic Economy作者：黃志隆(Chih-lung Huang)關鍵字：日本;地方創生;地域共生社會;市民經濟;公民經濟;Japan;Local Revitalization;Regional Care-centered Society;Civil Economy;Civic Economy期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文試圖透過對福利國家體制重構的批判，以及市民經濟和公民經濟理念型的建構，分析日本地方創生與地域共生社會政策與制度發展的脈絡。藉由市民經濟和公民經濟的理念型對照，政策與研究文獻整理，以及官方實證資料分析，我們得以理解日本在私有財產制下，以市場機制<U+7232>核心的就業與志願參與形式，有限民主參與機制的建立，以及市民經濟的特性。而本文亦藉由公民經濟理念，檢視其未來發展的挑戰，包括了以社區認同為中心之多樣性財產擁有形式、以社區認同<U+7232>基礎的交換機制、就業和志願參與並重的工作價值肯認，以及社區共同事務參與的權力。英文摘要：This article will analyze the context of the local revitalization and regional care-centered society policies nexus through the criticism of welfare state regime reconstructive theory and the ideal type construction of the civil economy and civic economy. Through the analysis of ideal type, related policies and literature review, as well as collecting official data, we can understand the features of the civil economy in Japan, including private ownership, market distribution mechanisms, its employment centered with a volunteering periphery, and limited participation in democracy. At the same time, I use the idea of civic economy to understand the challenge of Japan's related policy development in the future, including the diversity of ownership, exchange mechanisms based on community recognition, the equal value between employment and voluntary work, and democratic governance based on the community's civic participation.起始頁-結束頁：333-373資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心11篇名：早期臺灣祕史：論晚明海寇林道乾在臺灣的活動並列篇名：Pirate Lin Daoqian of Late Ming in Taiwan: A New Exploration作者：徐曉望(Xiaowang Xu)關鍵字：晚明海寇;林道乾;東番;臺灣;魍港;pirates of the late Ming dynasty;Lin Daoqian;Dongfan;Taiwan;the Wang Harbour期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：晚明海寇林道乾曾多次往來於臺灣。嘉靖四十五年（1566）迫使海寇林道乾逃往東番魍港的不是俞大猷，實為戚繼光和他的部下。萬曆元年（1573）林道乾離開潮州河渡門老巢之後，並沒有馬上駛向柬埔寨，而是先到臺灣海峽活動。從嘉靖四十五年到萬曆六年的十三年裡，林道乾和其手下考察了臺灣多個港口，尋找定居之處，後因夥伴死亡太多以及明軍的攻擊而放棄。晚明的北港是指「台江內海」諸港，包括魍港、新港、赤嵌港與熱蘭遮城附近的大員港。本文根據新發現的明代史料指出：魍港是在臺南新港溪的下游，北港是在萬曆二十年之後才被列為海澄的貿易對象。英文摘要：Lin Daoqian, one of the leading pirates of the late Ming, travelled frequently between Taiwan and mainland China. It is argued by this article that it was not Yu Dayou, but Qi Jiguang and his forces who in 1566 forced the sea-bandits led by Lin Daoqian to flee to the Wang Harbour, Dongfan, in Taiwan. Lin Daoqian and his sea-bandits did not sail to Cambodia in 1573. Instead, they were active in the Taiwan Strait. The author contends that the 'Beigang' in the historical documents referred to a number of harbours on the Taiwan coast, including Wang Harbour, Xingang, Saccam, and Tayouan Harbour. Based on some recently discovered Ming records, the author points out that Wang Harbour was in the lower reaches of the Xingang River in southern Taiwan, and the Beigang did not become the maritime trade counterpart of Haicheng in southern Fujian until 1591.起始頁-結束頁：5-34資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心12篇名：荷蘭東印度公司人員在臺灣周邊海域的水文調查活動（1636－1668）並列篇名：VOC Mariners' Nautical Investigation around Taiwan between 1636 and 1668作者：鄭維中(Weichung Cheng)關鍵字：荷蘭東印度公司;水文調查;海圖測繪;臺灣海道;跨海航路;The Dutch East India Company (VOC);nautical investigation;hydrographical charting;water routes to Taiwan;courses crossing Taiwan strait期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：1624年起荷蘭東印度公司於大員（今臺南安平）設立商館後，於1636年初步完成在臺灣海峽兩岸的局部水文調查。1637年後，因應新航路開闢，針對新竹沿岸、小琉球海域從事細部調查。1642年公司擊敗佔領雞籠之西班牙人，開始掃蕩臺灣中北部新竹、苗栗沿海。同時，公司恢復由臺灣派遣船隻封鎖馬尼拉之行動，數度經由小琉球航向呂宋島。在1664－1668年間佔領雞籠時，由雞籠直航閩北、浙江海域，亦由東部南下航行至巴士海峽。公司人員在此段時間內對於臺灣島周邊的水域調查，確定了船隻由臺灣開航前往他處的端點，直到清代仍有多處持續運行。英文摘要：The Dutch East India Company (VOC) established a commercial post in Tayouan (An-ping in Tainan city, Taiwan) and thereafter launched a series of nautical investigations. This investigation was accomplished in 1636. After 1637, a new set of investigations on the coast of Xinzhu and the waters off Xiao Liu-qiu were initiated for setting a new course across the Taiwan Strait. The Spaniards were defeated in Jilong in 1642, which led to an examination of the coast of Xinzhu and Miaoli. When the VOC resumed its blockade on Manila, vessels were assigned to Luzon passing by Xiao Liuqiu. During the reoccupation of Jilong in 1664-1668, the VOC vessels sailed around northern Fujian and Zhe-jian province and sailed south along the east coast of Taiwan. The VOC mariners had surveyed all waters around Taiwan and pinned down the terminal points for sailing from Taiwan to other shores. Most of those points were still functioning under the later Qing court.起始頁-結束頁：35-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心13篇名：18世紀經由琉球途徑的清日文化交流並列篇名：The Qing-Japan Cultural Exchange by Ryukyu's Intermediary Route during the 18th Century作者：沈玉慧(Yu-hui Shen)關鍵字：近世琉球;中介交流;土通事;冊封使節;交流網絡;early modern Ryukyu;intermediary exchange;Han Chinese interpreters;Qing investiture envoys;exchange network期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：1609年遭薩摩藩出兵的琉球，為了追求本國的自主性，及避免觸發清日間可能的體制衝突，自明清交替以來逐漸採取嚴格的隱蔽政策。中介於中日之間的琉球，為了因應薩摩藩與江戶幕府的需求，不僅居中傳遞情報、商品、文物、技術等，甚至中介雙方的文化交流活動。不同於情報、物品的傳遞，文化交流更仰賴人際網絡，因而亦見清朝官員也參與其中，成為中琉日往來途徑的重要元素。本文藉由17世紀以來此一途徑的發展，考察琉球透過土通事、冊封使節等官員所進行的清日文化交流事例，進而分析清朝官員於其中扮演的角色，探討中琉日交流網絡的形成、內涵及其意義。英文摘要：With the experience of being invaded by the Satsuma Domain in 1609, Ryukyu started to take a strict concealment policy during the Ming-Qing transition. Standing between Qing China and Japan, Ryukyu helped to transmit intelligence, commodities, antiquities, and technologies, among others, to meet the demands of Satsuma and the Shogunate at Edo, and even coordinated cultural exchange activities between Qing China and Japan. Different from the transmission of intelligence and objects, cultural exchange heavily depends on social networks. Indeed, involvement of some Han Chinese interpreters and officials working for the Qing government has been found in these activities. This paper investigates the development and transformation of Ryukyu's intermediary role, examines the cultural exchange activities between Qing China and Japan that involved Chinese participation and Ryukyu's coordination, analyzes the roles of interpreters and officials, and finally discusses the formation and significance of the exchange network between China, Ryukyu, Satsuma and Japan.起始頁-結束頁：81-111資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心14篇名：The Curious Double-Life of Putuoshan as Monastic Centre and Commercial Emporium, 1684-1728並列篇名：普陀山之奇異雙重角色：寺院中心與商業樞紐，1684－1728作者：雷恩．侯洛伊德(Ryan Holroyd)關鍵字：maritime trade;Qing dynasty;Putuoshan;Buddhist history;海洋貿易;清朝;普陀山;佛教歷史期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：This article investigates how the island of Putuoshan simultaneously acted as a Buddhist monastic centre and a maritime shipping hub from the Qing dynasty's legalisation of overseas trade in 1684 until the 1720s. It argues that because overseas trade during the Kangxi era was inconsistently regulated, a mutually beneficial relationship developed between Putuoshan's Buddhist monasteries, the merchants who sailed between China and Japan, and the regional naval commanders on Zhoushan. Instead of forcing merchant vessels to enter ports with customs offices, the naval commanders allowed merchants to use Putuoshan's harbour, which lay beyond the empire's trade administration system. The monasteries enjoyed the patronage of the merchants, and so rewarded the naval commanders by publicly honouring them. However, a reorganisation of the empire's customs system in the mid-1720s shifted the power over trade to Zhejiang's governor general, who brought an end to Putuoshan's special status outside the administration around 1728.英文摘要：本文探討自1684年海禁解除後至1720年代，身為佛教寺院中心之普陀山如何保持其為中國海洋貿易中心之樞紐地位。本文認為其中關鍵在於解禁初期，舟山群島一帶海關設管尚未成熟，所以普陀山佛教寺院、中國船商與定海總兵之間得以建立非官方之三邊互利關係。歷任定海總兵允許商船停靠普陀山，船商參訪寺廟、敬奉觀音，寺院則為定海總兵們建造生祠以感念其特許。然而在1720年代，清廷改組海關，將貿易管轄權移交給浙江省總督，導致互利關係終止，此舉也宣告了普陀山貿易樞紐時代之終結。起始頁-結束頁：113-140資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心15篇名：從遞解僑匯到延伸網絡－1899至1912年香港金山莊華英昌賬簿分析並列篇名：From Delivering Remittance to Extending Networks: An Analysis of the Account Books of Wah Ying Cheong Co., Ltd. in Hong Kong, 1899-1912作者：李培德(LEE Pui Tak)關鍵字：香港金山莊;華英昌有限公司;廣東華僑匯款;華商賬簿;台山商人網絡;Hong Kong Gold Mountain Firm;Wah Ying Cheong Co., Ltd.;overseas Cantonese remittance;Chinese account books;Taishan merchant networks期刊/會議論文集名稱：人文及社會科學集刊卷期：33卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：華商賬簿的史料價值近年漸被重視，不少研究利用賬簿去重建不同的經濟數據。本文的目的主要是通過香港金山莊華英昌的賬簿，包括《各伴工金部》、《各客附寄部》、《內埠各號來往部》，來分析華英昌如何建立橫跨廣東、香港、北美的商業網絡，在競爭激烈的僑匯市場分一杯羹，此其一；通過跨地域的資金流轉，如何成功建立一個包括支付、撥付、轉移支付的財務系統，為客戶提供存款、借款、購物、貨幣兌換、匯款、投資等多元信託服務，此其二；華英昌如何以免收手續費和提供類似旅行社的服務，招徠更多的客戶，鞏固不斷發展的匯款業務，此其三。英文摘要：Recently the research on Chinese account books has gained attention because of the availability of new sources. Focusing on the account books of an importer and exporter firm, Wah Ying Cheong Co., Ltd. in Hong Kong, this paper traces the growth of the company's transnational business network across the Pacific. The study is based on three premises: First, it examines how the company expanded its business network spanning from Guangdong through Hong Kong to North America, in order to cope with the competition in the overseas Cantonese remittance market. Second, it examines how Wah Ying Cheong formed a financial system to provide additional banking services to its customers including deposits and loans, payment for shopping, currency exchange and purchase of stocks. Third, it examines how and why Wah Ying Cheong set up a side business of a travel agency and used it to attract more customers and finally diversified itself in a wide range of services to overseas Cantonese other than remittances.起始頁-結束頁：141-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院人文社會科學研究中心01篇名：「民國」之惑－編輯室報告並列篇名：Queries about the Republic (of China)作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：4-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).00012篇名：丸山真男的「三民主義」觀並列篇名：Masao Maruyama on the Three Principles of the People作者：孫歌(Ge SUN);蔡鈺淩(Yu-Ling TSAI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：8-25資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).00023篇名：時間開始了－1949年的兩場歷史巨變並列篇名：Time Has Begun: On Two Historical Transitions in 1949作者：楊儒賓(Rurbin YANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：26-79資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).00034篇名：從保皇到革命：民國在南洋的足跡與文本並列篇名：From Conservatism to Revolution: Traces and Texts of the Republic of China in the South China Sea作者：陳丁輝(Teng Phee TAN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：80-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).00045篇名：錯位的共鳴：〈美麗島〉跨越海峽的流轉、情感與政治並列篇名：Misplaced Resonance: Musical Traveling, Emotion and Politics of ”The Beautiful Islands”作者：艾可(Ke AI)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：96-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).00056篇名：如何經世、怎樣濟民－與楊儒賓談「一九四九」的視野、問題與方法並列篇名：How to Manage the Society and Help the People-A Conversation with Yang Rurbin on the Perspectives, Problems and Methods of ”1949”作者：黃文倩(Wen-Chian HUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：120-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).00067篇名：以「民國」為方法之前－細讀「回到一九四九：中華民國渡海七十週年紀錄文物展」並列篇名：Before the ”Republic of China” as Method - A Close Reading of ”Back to 1949: Records and Artifacts Exhibition at the 70th Anniversary of the Relocation of the Republic of China to Taiwan”作者：黃文倩(Wen-Chian HUANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：166-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).00078篇名：抵抗的創意：《滾滾遼河》與滿洲國青年的抗日活動（1932-1945）並列篇名：Chinese Youth's Anti-Japanese Activities in Manchukuo, 1932-1945作者：鐘月岑(Yuehtsen Juliette CHUNG)關鍵字：滿洲國;紀剛;滾滾遼河;抵抗;抗日活動;Manchukuo;Ji Gang;Rolling Liao River;Resistance;Anti-Japanese activities期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021中文摘要：東北青年如何抗日？滿洲國的日本警察特務如何監控這些青年人的抗日活動？其中滿族青年在這些抗日活動當中，如何看待自身視國民政府為滿洲王朝的敵人，而自己又為日本宰制的處境呢？本論文是以清華大學圖書館特藏的紀剛先生所捐獻有關《滾滾遼河》的手稿文獻為基礎的研究項目，探討抗戰時期滿洲國在日本控制下東北青年的地下抗日工作情形。由於抗戰後國共持續內戰、大陸淪陷、冷戰期間的兩岸對峙，使得這段東亞歷史中「不能說的祕密」更加詭譎難解，成為國共兩方的抗戰專業史家以及目前仍舊存活並散居兩岸與北美的歷史當事人爭辯的焦點。本文擬透過紀剛先生所捐獻其親身參與東北地下工作收集的文獻資料，進一步耙梳與解讀這一段血淚交織、眾聲喧譁的歷史，尤其是滿洲警察解讀剖析的抗日文藝作品與地下抗日所生產的文本。有別於史學理論上詹姆斯．史考特（James Scott）的經典著作《支配與反抗的藝術：隱藏的文本》，以美國南方白人與黑人以種族和階級為主的二元對立和被動的反抗論述結構，本文立基於中國東北日本人／滿人／漢人錯綜複雜的民族和種族的互動關係，探討1930與1940年代滿洲國文化秩序中的文藝書寫活動與政治。英文摘要：How did young people in Northeast China resist the Japanese invasion? How did the Japanese secret service monitor their cultural activities in Manchukuo? How did the Manchus view these activities within a situation in which they saw the Republican government as their enemy, when they were ruled by the Japanese? The different modes of spatial knowledge these historical actors have employed in narrating the borders of culture and geography have expanded our horizon of this time/space of conflict. This paper explores Chinese young people's anti-Japanese activities in Manchukuo, based on the materials donated by renowned Chinese writer Ji Gang (紀剛). Ji Gang participated in these activities under the cover of a medical student, and described them in his well-received non-fiction book Rolling Liao River (Gungun liaohe 滾滾遼河). The paper focuses in particular on the Japanese secret police's reports, donated by Ji Gang to the Tsing Hua University Library, that analyze the anti-Japanese content of Chinese literary works. These reports can be described as the hidden transcripts, in terms of James C. Scott's definition. However, Scott's work on domination and resistance is framed within a dichotomy of dominator/dominated. This paper will explore the multi-sided contention in Manchukuo involving interactions among the Japanese, Manchus, Han, Nationalists, and Communists through their literary writings.起始頁-結束頁：189-236資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).00089篇名：遊戲化的本土論述：以《民國無雙》MOD為例並列篇名：The Gamification of the Narrative of Locality: Example of the MOD of ”Republican Warriors”作者：黎國威(Kwok Wai LAI)關鍵字：遊戲化;雨傘運動;本土論述;數碼本土性;香港性;Gamification;Umbrella Movement;Local Discourse;Digitalized Locality;Hong Kongness期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021中文摘要：「遊戲化」是近年數碼媒體和公關行銷業界廣受注目的概念，意指將遊戲元素注入不同活動，從而達致玩遊戲以外的目的。很多論者已然提出，「遊戲化」已滲透至生活各個層面，而本文的討論，則在於連歷史書寫也遊戲化了。以歷史為題材的遊戲不在少數，但大多數是在市場販售，以營利為目的之創作，本文討論的案例，卻是在網路上免費發布的數位遊戲《民國無雙》。它不設收費，任人免費和自由下載，亦不會在遊戲內打廣告，只設連結供人捐款支持。該遊戲的另一特別之處，在於它開放遊戲模組（Modification, MOD），供玩家能自行修改和設計新的遊戲內容。各種針對不同歷史時代的客製化改編，不在少數，本文以兩款由同一香港人改編的遊戲為案例，討論遊戲模組如何作為盛載「本土」的重要載體。總括而言，本文以《民國無雙》的MOD結構，及由此改編的《雨傘無雙》和《水貨圍城》為分析個案，討論香港人怎樣利用數碼技術將本土論述以「（類）歷史敘事」形式予以遊戲化（Gamification），即以數碼文本為「本土」或香港性的載體，於網路社會繼續建構與修正源自線下社會的「第三波本土意識」。英文摘要：'Gamification' has become an important concept in the fields of digital media and digital marketing. It used to refer to implant some game elements to nongame activities, to achieve some objectives beyond playing or gaming. Some critics pointed out that the concept of 'gamification' has already penetrated into many different aspects of our lives. This paper would like to show how 'gamification' is also used in the writing of history. In other words, for some cases discussed in this paper, we could see the 'gamification' of historical narrative. It is no doubt that there are plenty of electronic or video games in the game market that take history as their main theme. However, the game(s) discussed in this paper, 'Republican Warriors' (and its derivative works), were not made for profit-making, but for sharing. It only asked for donation from the gamers. It opened its own 'Modification' (MOD), which allows the gamers to modify or even create their own games. This paper picked two modified games as example and discuss how modified games could become an important 'carrier' of locality. In other words, this paper would like to discuss the following question: how the Hong Kong people using digital technology to gamify the local discourse through the format of '(quasi-)historical narrative', in other words, making digital texts as a carrier of 'digitalized locality' or digitalized Hong Kongness, continuing the construction and modification of the 'third wave of local consciousness' from offline society to online community?起始頁-結束頁：237-284資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).000910篇名：合宜的笑聲：美國家庭情境喜劇《我愛露西》在臺灣並列篇名：Have A Good Laugh: American Television Sitcom ”I Love Lucy” in 1960s Taiwan作者：柯裕棻(Yu-Fen KO)關鍵字：電視;喜劇;我愛露西;冷戰;現代性;Television;Comedy;I Love Lucy;Cold War;Modernity期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021中文摘要：《我愛露西》（I Love Lucy）是臺灣電視公司播放的第一齣美國電視情境喜劇，在臺廣受歡迎與議論。二戰後美國盛行的電視情境喜劇展現了新的家庭敘事結構，重建主婦形象與消費社會的家庭景觀。然而對1965年仍在備戰狀態的臺灣而言，電視作為新的共時性視覺娛樂型態，觸動了社會群體的新感官經驗，電視情境喜劇尤為歡樂的情感經驗如何容納於當時的冷戰局勢之下，便引起文化菁英關於文化正當性的討論。本文檢視冷戰時期的文化菁英如何討論通俗文化中的美國，並分析美國做為自由與進步的象徵如何與生活情感構連。本文指出，在面對國家的政治與歷史挫敗時，國族主義的宏大敘事以「國難當前」、「富強建設」這兩種衛戍與發展的論述同時展開，特定的社會差異（如性別和省籍）被重劃，以便動員來支援國族主義。文中分析以下幾點：一、美國電視劇在臺灣盛行的社會條件；二、文化菁英發表於報刊上的「輿論」如何討論性別與國族主義，以及「自由」的美國與我國的現代化。英文摘要：This paper analyzes how Taiwan society comprehended American television situation comedy I Love Lucy in the 1960s. At the early stage of television development, approximately 40% of television programs in Taiwan were imported from the U.S. Among them, situation comedies were popular and widely discussed for their fascinating new formats and the modern lifestyle they represented through the images of housewives. However, certain debates arose as television intrigued the public with novelty, especially the situation comedies were considered too hilarious for a war-torn state. In the discussions of American comedy, I Love Lucy routed the cultural elites to come to terms with their defeated memories in 1949's Mainland China, and to re-evaluate the new American style of humor. They discussed if it was proper to laugh in a tragic time, as well as how to contain such affects and sensations of TV experiences in the Cold War era. This paper analyzes how the elites articulated the concept of ”free” and ”modern” America at different levels-materially and ideologically, by way of Lucy the humorous and unruly American house wife.起始頁-結束頁：285-323資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).001011篇名：性別研究遭遇華語語系之後：評姜學豪《閹人之後：近代中國的科學、醫療與性的轉變》並列篇名：After Gender Studies Meets Sinophone Studies: A Review on Howard Chiang's After Eunuchs: Science, Medicine, and the Transformation of Sex in Modern China作者：孟嘉傑(Jia-Jie MENG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：324-333資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).001112篇名：評介葛塔秋《帝國後的世界創造》：後殖民自決重探並列篇名：Revisiting the Postcolonial Self-Determination: A Review of Worldmaking after Empire by Adom Getachew作者：詹亞訓(Ya-Hsun CHAN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：33期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：334-349資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202110_(33).001213篇名：迂迴於記憶與情感－編輯室報告並列篇名：Tarrying with Memories and Feelings作者：王智明期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：4-6資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).000114篇名：論戰、現實與馬華革命文學：金枝芒的「此時此地」實踐並列篇名：Polemic, Reality and Chinese Malayan Revolutionary Literature: Jin Zhimang and His Practice of ”Here and Now”作者：蘇穎欣(Show Ying Xin)關鍵字：馬華革命文學;金枝芒;現實主義;馬華文藝獨特性論戰;冷戰;馬共;Mahua revolutionary literature;Jin Zhimang;Realism;Uniqueness of Chinese Malayan literature;Cold War;Malayan Communist Party期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：1947－1948年的「馬華文藝獨特性」論戰經常被視為本土意識確立的濫觴，在不同歷史時空一再被召喚。它揭示並定調了往後馬華文學的兩道大命題：（一）本土意識與中國性之間的關係，即馬華文學歸屬與認同的問題；（二）現實主義（相對於現代主義）之於馬華文學書寫的意義，即文藝美學與政治倫理的問題。由於馬華文學論者一般將上述命題以相當二元對立的詮釋框架理解，本文認為重新梳理論戰中「馬華派」主將周容（金枝芒）的文學實踐，有助於我們克服冷戰形塑的對立框架，並試圖理解「馬華革命文學」形成的脈絡和其意義。金枝芒是馬共黨員，在緊急狀態時期加入武裝鬥爭成了軍中作家；其文學除了是革命證言，更是「文學作為革命」的實踐寫作。然而，他一方面忠於作為革命的文學寫作，一方面卻又試圖超越革命敘事本身的封閉性，呈現反差的張力。通過分析金枝芒的中篇小說《督央央和他的部落》（1954）和長篇小說《飢餓》（1960），本文指出馬華革命文學的內在反叛與執拗說明了其功能不僅是反映客觀現實和此時此地的一種文學模式，也呈現對當下現實的認知和干預，甚至是文學對未來的預示和介入。英文摘要：The 1947-1948 literary polemic on the ”uniqueness of Mahua (Chinese Malayan) literature” is often seen as a watershed to the establishment of local consciousness among Mahua writers, and the contents are repeatedly called upon by critics in different historical times. The debates have since set the tone for two major propositions in Mahua literature: firstly, the relationship between localism and Chineseness, namely the problems of identity and belongings of Mahua writers and their works; secondly, the significance of literary realism (as opposed to modernism), which concerns the role of aesthetics and politics in literature. Critics often regard the above issues in rather binary frameworks, and this article argues that revisiting the literary practice of Jin Zhimang, the key proponent of the ”Mahua” camp during the debate, would help overcome the binary caused by the Cold War. The article seeks to understand the contextual formation and meaning of Mahua revolutionary literature. As a partisan writer from the Malayan Communist Party, Jin Zhimang's works are not only a testimony to revolution but also a practice of ”literature as revolution”. Nevertheless, while he was loyal to the writing techniques required by revolutionary literature, he also made efforts to transcend the boundaries and functions of revolutionary narratives. This article addresses the inherent rebellious and pertinacious nature of Jin's revolutionary literature through the analysis of his novella Tok Yang Yang and His tribe (1954) and novel Hunger (1960). It argues that the function of Mahua revolutionary literature is not merely about reflecting objectively the ”here and now”, but goes further to recognize that as prefiguring the ”future”.起始頁-結束頁：9-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).000215篇名：冷戰在馬來與馬華文學場域的介入與衝擊（1950－1969）並列篇名：Intervention and the Impact of the Cold War in Malay and Chinese Malaysian Literature (1950-1969)作者：莊華興(Chong Fah Hing)關鍵字：冷戰;馬華文學;馬來文學;筆戰;文化思想鬥爭;Cold War;Chinese Malaysian literature;Malay literature;Polemic;Cultural thought struggle期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：戰後1950、1960年代見證了英帝國勢力的衰退，喚醒了馬新兩地各民族獨立建國的願望，中共勢力的崛起進一步使南洋華人分裂成擁共與擁蔣兩派。馬來族群在此時追求的是民族主義建國。在各種勢力的衝擊下，英殖民政府為了保護自身的經濟利益，不得不把權力下放給各民族右翼分子，左翼分子視之為新殖民主義，再次展開鬥爭。當美國於1949年意識到東南亞對其物資補給與戰略佈局的重要性時，遂把冷戰焦點轉移到東南亞區域，形成了左右意識形態的對立與競爭，連帶地對馬來與馬華文學生態構成衝擊。1950年代初，在印度尼西亞獨立運動影響下，馬來文壇出現左傾的文學組織－「50年代作家行列」（Angkatan Sasterawan 50）。冷戰的介入進一步引起了該組織內部的分裂，終而掀開「文藝為社會」抑或「文藝為文藝」之論爭。在馬華文學場域，《蕉風》雜誌在創刊初始便打著「純馬來亞化」的口號，就「馬來亞化」課題與新馬左翼文化界展開話語競爭。《銀星》副刊繼之與左傾現實派作者爆發論爭。本文欲釐清兩個文學場域的筆戰所觸及的文化與意識形態問題，並嘗試了解文化冷戰如何主導論戰方向，以及它如何形塑馬來與馬華文學的發展軌跡。英文摘要：The end of the Pacific War witnessed the decline of the British Empire in Singapore and Malaya. It had evoked the aspiration of the local peoples to establish a newly independent nation. Furthermore, the rise of the Chinese Communist Party had led to the Chinese community in Nanyang split into pro Communist and pro Nationalist factions. At this juncture, the Malay ethnic was putting their effort in pursuing a new nation through nationalism ideas and thoughts. With the contestation of various forces, the British colonial was forced to hand-over the power to the right-wing elements of various ethnic groups in order to protect its economic interests in the colony. From the leftist point of view, this was perceived as a move of neo-colonization, therefore they turned to arm struggle again. In 1949, United States began to realize the importance of Southeast Asia to its material supply and strategic planning in the region. The shifting of the Cold War to Southeast Asia eventually led to the confrontation and contestation between the left and right ideology. This situation had brought a profound impact to the Malay and the Chinese literary circle in the country. The impacts of the Indonesian independence movement in the early 1950s had triggered the establishment of a left-leaning literary organization in Malay literary circle, namely ”The 1950s Writers Group” (Angkatan Sasterawan 50). The intervention of the Cold War also had caused a cleavage within the writers of ASAS 50, and eventually led to the polemic over the slogan of ”Art for society” or ”Art for art sake”. In the Chinese Malaysian literary arena, the newly published magazine in 1955, called Chao Foon proposed the slogan of ”Pure Malayanization”, and had created the contestation with the left-wing cultural community over the discourse. Later, a literary supplement called Yingsing also set off the polemic between socialism-realist and modernist writers. This article aims to clarify the cultural and ideological issues mentioned in the polemics in both literary streams, and try to understand how the intervention of the Cold War dominated the direction of the polemic, and how it shaped the trajectory of the development of the Malay as well as Chinese Malaysian literature.起始頁-結束頁：47-72資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).000316篇名：迂迴的關係：神州詩社與臺灣鄉土文學論戰並列篇名：The Circuitous Relationship: Shenzhou Poetry Society and the Home Soil Literary Debate in Taiwan作者：魏月萍(Ngoi Guat Peng)關鍵字：神州詩社;鄉土文學;中國意識;文學實踐;馬華文學;Shenzhou Poetry Society;”Home Soil” literature;Chinese consciousness;Literary practice;Malaysian Chinese literature期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：1976年1月1日，在臺灣留學的馬來西亞華裔學生，創辦了後來者追憶中如同「神話」一般的「神州詩社」。神州詩社承載著濃厚的文化鄉愁，以建構「文化中國」以及「復興中華文化」為己任，想要在臺灣土壤實現一個理想的「古典中國」。但當時政治局勢詭譎，神州詩社捲入政治風波，被扣上「為匪宣傳」罪名，主要成員如溫瑞安、方娥真等人陷入牢獄之災，成為一則牽涉「臺－馬」的政治事件。有關「神州詩社」陷入臺灣白色恐怖政治風波的始終，以及詩社如何誤判「江湖」現實，以致讓文學場域轉化為政治場域，已有一些學者為文梳理基本的輪廓。本文關注的是，神州詩社自1976年創立至1980年因溫瑞安、方娥真等人被捕而解散，這段時間正好是臺灣鄉土文學論戰的高峰期。因此本文嘗試梳理神州詩社對於鄉土文學論戰的反應與回應，其雖未直接介入討論，卻與鄉土文學論戰存在著迂迴的關係。此外，以文學論戰的問題意識為脈絡，勾勒出臺灣鄉土文學論戰對於馬華文學的參照意義。英文摘要：Malaysian Chinese students studied in Taiwan founded the ”Shenzhou Poetry Society”on 1st January, 1976. The Shenzhou Poetry Society which has been regarded as a ”myth” has a strong cultural awareness. It aimed to re-construct the ”Cultural China” and reviving the ”Chinese Culture”. And thus they intended to build up a ”classical China” in Taiwan. Unfortunately, some of the members of Shenzhou Poetry Society were expelled from Taiwan because of the political environment that was unkind to their vision and led to the imprisonment of several members. This is a crucial turning point for the poetry society, as it led to the end of its activities. Shenzhou Poetry Society had published many literary works in Taiwan. The members have established close relationship with Taiwan's literary society. Therefore, this paper attempts to sort out the reactions and responses of Shenzhou Poetry Society of the ”Home Soil Literary Debate” in Taiwan. Although the society did not directly participate in the discussion, its relationship with the debate was rather circuitous. This circuitous relationship may shed light on the development of Malaysian Chinese literature.起始頁-結束頁：73-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).000417篇名：論戰、運動、愛荷華：王拓「鄉土觀」的歷史考察並列篇名：Wang Tuo's ”Xiangtu” Genealogy: Literary Debates, Activism, and Iowa作者：劉羿宏(Yi-hung LIU)關鍵字：王拓;1977鄉土文學論戰;黨外運動;愛荷華國際寫作計畫;Wang Tuo;Nativist Literature Debate in 1977;Tangwai movement;International Writing Program期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以王拓為分析對象，強調王拓在鄉土文學論戰之中與之後的脈絡與移動軌跡，期能為現行的王拓研究以及廣義的臺灣研究提供新的材料。本文立基於王拓的傳記研究，但著重分析王拓1977年的文學評論、1979年的政治活動、1986年的美國行。藉由這三個節點，本文勾勒出王拓在1970年代後半至1980年代後半的際遇與網絡，試圖闡明王拓如何貢獻於鄉土文學論戰反帝、反資、民族主義的核心內容，同時也提供資源予隨著黨外運動形成的臺灣民族意識。本文指出，王拓在這個時期的成就，暗示了他在1990年代與昔日戰友的分裂，並解釋了他日後立場的矛盾，但這樣的矛盾，容或能讓我們重新思考「統」、「獨」等政治標籤的侷限。英文摘要：Building on the scholarship on Wang Tuo's life and works, this essay examines Wang's involvement in literary debates and political activism in the late 1970s, as well as his trip to the United States in 1986. By attending to the three nodal points in Wang's career, this essay intends to illuminate the significance of Wang's apparent inconsistency in his literary-political achievement. It hopes to not only complement current studies on Wang Tuo in relation to Taiwanese history, but also rethink the political labels that delimit our imagination about political futures.起始頁-結束頁：103-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).000518篇名：超越「技術調節」的推測臆想：以Morse Things的事物中心設計為例並列篇名：Speculation Beyond Technological Mediation Theory: A Case Study on Morse Things as a Thing-Centered Design作者：李婉貞(Wan-Chen LEE);梁容輝(Rung-Huei LIANG)關鍵字：事物中心;撤出;物導向存有論;技術調節;互物性;Thing-centered;Withdrawal;Object-oriented ontology;Technological mediation;Interobjectivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：《Morse Things》作為以「事物中心」（thing-centered）取向的互動設計，發揮從物觀點出發的洞察，不僅實踐「物質推測」（material speculation）的創作精神，亦探究事物與人之間的差距。瓦卡里（Ron Wakkary）等學者認為，互動設計可透過「撤出」（withdraw）於人類的理解和感知來實踐後現象學，卻忽略其繼承現象學以人類價值為基準的認識觀，著重對生活世界進行探索。不同於此內在矛盾，「物導向存有論」（Object-Oriented Ontology），接納梅亞蘇（Quentin Meillassoux）對「相關主義」（correlationism）之批評，提醒我們「撤出」源自於物自身的內在特質。「技術調節」（technological mediation）概念雖有助於「人－技術－世界」關係之探察，卻無法對事物之間不可見的「互物性」（interobjectivity）進行解釋，並呈現更具開創性的推測思維。本研究以《Morse Things》為例，分三方面進行論述：一、探討「事物中心」之設計精神，是否服膺第三派典知識取徑，適合以後現象學進行互動作品分析？二、作品所應用的「撤出」概念，其援引之相關理論脈絡為何？是否呼應其作品本質精神？三、作品如何超越「技術調節」而與「撤出」概念對話，探索不同互動體驗之可能？透過對物本體「撤出」的理解，重新思考「事物中心」與後現象學的關係，以及「物導向」視野如何更加豐富「人本設計」觀點，朝向對事物經驗之探索，進而逐步開展「事物中心」設計之理論研究。英文摘要：Morse Things, as an interaction design, applied a thing-centered approach to exploring insights from a thing-centered perspective. The work not just practiced the creative notion of material speculation, but also inquired into the gap between things and human. Ron Wakkary et al. argue that interaction designers can ”do postphenomenology” by the withdrawn experience from our human understanding and perception, but they ignore that the theory inherits the epistemological approach based on human value from phenomenology, and focuses on exploring the lifeworld. Different from this inherent contradiction, the theory of Object-Oriented Ontology has accepted Quentin Meillassoux's critique of correlationism, it reminds us that ”withdrawal” originates from the inherent characteristics of the thing-in-itself. Although the concept of technological mediation can be helpful in investigating and analyzing the human-technology-world relations, it cannot indicate the invisible interobjectivity between things, which presents more creative speculative thinking. This paper, discussing Morse Things as a case, covers three main aspects. First, we investigate the thing-centered design approach by asking whether it matches the epistemic stance of the third paradigm, and can be analyzed through postphenomenology. Second, what is the relevant theoretical context in which the ”withdrawal” concept can be applied to the work? Does it echo the essence of the work? Finally, how does the work go beyond the technical mediation theory, make dialogue with the concepts of ”withdrawal”, and speculate on the possibility of different interaction experience? Through understanding about ”withdrawal”, we rethink the relationship between thing-centered design and postphenomenology, and how the object-oriented vision enriches the human-centered design concepts, towards exploring the experience of things, and gradually developing the theoretical research of thing-centered design.起始頁-結束頁：131-168資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).000619篇名：從觀光客到港妻：臺港跨境婚姻中的親密性與生活方式想像並列篇名：From Tourist to Marriage Migrant: Intimacy and Lifestyle Imagination in Taiwan-Hong Kong Cross-border Marriages作者：黃宗儀(Tsung-Yi Michelle HUANG);胡俊佳(Chun-Kai WOO)關鍵字：臺港婚姻移民;生活方式型移民;觀光凝視;慢活;浪漫假期;Hong Kong-Taiwan marriage migration;Lifestyle migration;Tourist gaze;Slow life;Holiday romance期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以定居臺灣的香港女性婚姻移民（通稱「港妻」）為訪談分析對象，探討觀光凝視與浪漫假期如何促使這些香港女性對臺灣懷抱好感，以婚姻移民的方式移居此地後的日常生活又如何改變了她們對臺灣的感受，從中釐清臺港婚姻移民（marriage migration）與生活方式型移民（lifestyle migration）之關連。有鑑於觀光是港妻認識臺灣的主要管道，本研究從受訪者的臺灣凝視出發，分析觀光經驗如何與其尋求個人抱負及理想生活息息相關，如此的凝視又建構了怎樣的地方感受與浪漫愛。受訪港妻普遍指出旅遊時熱愛臺灣的「慢活」，「小確幸」與「人情味」，而對臺灣的好印象也使得她們對臺灣男性有一定的信任與好感。港妻移居後的日常生活經驗則顯示，臺港家庭和居住環境的差異，改變了港妻對婚後臺灣生活及親密關係的浪漫想像。此外，因移民後的日常生活漸漸脫離觀光凝視，「慢活」等觀光時指認的地方特質及好感日漸減退，對「人情味」的感受亦開始變調。這顯示脫離觀光凝視的移居生活影響她們原本對「臺灣」的想像與理解。面對這樣的變化，部分港妻以「在地人」的身分經營社群網站等形式再現觀光凝視中的「臺灣」，部分則強調適應職場與融入夫家的重要性。本研究認為來臺定居的港妻生活可說是不斷地在觀光凝視的解魅（disenchantment）和復魅（re-enchantment）之間進行協商的程。英文摘要：This essay starts off from the romantic gaze of Hong Kong wives in Taiwan to analyze the connection between Taiwan tourism and their pursuit of personal aspiration and ideal life, as well as the sense of place and romantic love constructed through such gaze. In many instances Hong Kong wives point out that they come to love Taiwan's ”slow living,” ”small pleasures,” and ”friendliness” when they are traveling in Taiwan, and their fond impression thus also lends them certain amount of trust and positivity towards Taiwanese men. The latter part of this essay then discusses the differences in their feeling towards Taiwan after these women married to Taiwan, turning from ”traveling” to ”living.” The imagined life shaped by tourism and holiday romance prompts these Hong Kong women to anticipate its realization when they immigrate to Taiwan through transborder marriage. However, after they take residence in Taiwan, the actuality of life nevertheless meets such anticipation with disenchantment. In various interviews, the interviewees invariably note the discrepancy between traveling and living in Taiwan. At the same time, the glamour of ”slow living” gradually wears off and the taste of ”friendliness” starts to go sour. Facing such a downward spiral, some interviewees emphasize the importance of taking up the challenges of fitting in the workplace and getting along with the in-laws; some start to run blogs, Facebook fan pages, or other forms of cultural and creative jobs, in an attempt to maintain their tourist gaze. By analyzing Hong Kong wives' experience of marrying to Taiwan, this paper argues that their settlement is marked by the continued negotiation between disenchantment and re-enchantment of their tourist gaze.起始頁-結束頁：169-210資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).000720篇名：從實作觀點看另類食物網絡如何形構永續生活並列篇名：Configuring Sustainable Lifestyle in Alternative Food Networks from the Perspective of Practice Theory作者：萬尹亮(I-Liang WAHN)關鍵字：另類食物網絡;永續消費;實作;消費社群;食農教育;Practices;Consumer community;Sustainable consumption;Alternative Food Networks期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：近年臺灣出現許多另類食物網絡，讓消費者直接和農友購買有機食物，以此取得健康安全的食材、促進在地農業、保護生態。目前另類食物網絡的研究大多關注小農、農業和另類市場，而較少探究消費與日常生活。本研究以合樸農夫市集所成立的「樹合苑」作為個案。以「日常實作」概念，分析另類食物網絡中的消費者社群如何建構永續的日常實作、如何組合多元的實作進而發展成特定的生活模式？本研究分析樹合苑網站、媒體報導並訪談參與者，透過參與活動觀察後發現，樹合苑消費者建構了一個支持性網絡和社會展演的空間。支持性網絡把抽象的農業和環境知識，轉譯成日常實作的知識，並建立新的實作規則和做法。樹合苑同時也是一個實作展演的社會性空間，得以讓消費者進行對話和互相學習，實驗新的實作方法，並將不同實作組合起來；透過生活方式的論述賦予目的和價值。從實作的觀點出發，本文企圖凸顯另類食物網絡如何重組購買食材、烹飪、飲食實作的元素，並連結其他日常實作的機制，由此擴大我們對另類食物網絡文化影響力的理解。英文摘要：Farmers markets, consumer cooperatives, and community supported agriculture are examples of alternative food networks (AFNs) that promote organic and local foods to consumers. This paper uses practice theory to understand how AFNs shape food consumption. The case of Eco-Tree Hub created by the first farmer's market in Taiwan is used to illustrate how a consumer community can reconfigure elements of buying, cooking and eating practices and connect food practices to other daily practices such as the use of reusable shopping bags and utensils. The paper makes the argument that AFN's agrifood education allows consumers to play an active role in framing food qualities. Moreover, the consumer community in AFN provided a social space of performance, using food qualities as the sharing element to connect a variety of practices into practice bundles. The consumer community also serve as a supporting network that enable consumers to influence and coordinate with their family members to re-organize daily life.起始頁-結束頁：211-254資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).000801篇名：「和食」的遺產化及其不滿：建構與傳統之外並列篇名：The Heritagization of ”Washoku” and Its Discontents: Beyond Constructionism and Traditionalism作者：張正衡(Cheng-Heng CHANG)關鍵字：和食;無形文化遺產;純正性;遺產論述;遺產的不可知論;Washoku;Intangible Cultural Heritage;Authenticity;Heritage discourse;Heritage agnosticism期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021中文摘要：本論文以學術文獻與檔案為分析的基礎，討論日本在2013年成功將「和食」登錄為聯合國教科文組織（UNESCO）無形文化遺產代表作清單的案例。對於日本「和食」遺產化的過程，一般多半採用「被發明的傳統」、「國族認同建構」或「國家政治經濟戰略」等觀點，批判地解構日本政府在申請登錄時所採用的論述策略和制度操作。然而，在另一方面，這樣的分析僅將「和食」視為某種言語論述，而忽略其所依憑的物質結構以及全球遺產體制的脈絡。換言之，這種批判雖然試圖揭露「和食」的政治性與不純正性（inauthenticity），卻因為對日本的遺產論述及其文化基礎有所簡化，反而削弱了批判的力道。本文的寫作目的不只是為了對批判論點進行批判，而是試圖釐清爭議中對立的論點，藉由採取所謂「遺產的不可知論」的觀點，試著從人類學的觀點對於日本飲食文化研究作出些許貢獻。英文摘要：At the end of 2013, the Japanese government successfully made ”Washoku, the Japanese traditional dietary cultures” inscribed on the UNESCO's representative list of the intangible cultural heritage of humanity. This event aroused extensive criticisms from both inside and outside of Japan. In this paper, I reflexively review the critical comments on the heritagization of Washoku on the one hand, and explore the pending questions left unsolved in the related debates on the other. Taking the perspective of what Christoph Brumann termed ”heritage agnosticism,” this paper aims at contributing to an anthropological understanding of the foods and dietary culture in Japan.起始頁-結束頁：255-298資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).00092篇名：韓國青年萎縮的未來與歧異的議題並列篇名：Shrinking Futures and Divergent Issues of Korean Youths作者：周鈗<U+6D8F>(Yunejong JOO);陳耀宗(Yauchong TAN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：300-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).00103篇名：戰後臺灣「青年」論述的發展與流變並列篇名：Development and Transformation of ”Youth” Discourses in Post-war Taiwan作者：張宗坤(Zackary Zong-Kun CHANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：308-341資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).00114篇名：2008年後的青年貧窮再現：揭露什麼？又遮掩什麼？並列篇名：Representation of Youth Poverty since 2008: What is Revealed and What is Veiled?作者：陳崇真(Chung-Chen CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：342-361資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).00125篇名：看不見未來：臺灣「厭世代」的世代情感初探並列篇名：There is No Future: The Understanding of Emotion in ”The Generation of Weariness” in Taiwan作者：鄭<U+4E98>良(Keng-Liang CHENG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：362-383資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).00136篇名：重探群<U+8846>路線與社會主義經驗：為兩岸關係思考並列篇名：Revisiting the Mass Line and Socialist Experience: Thinking for the Cross-Strait Relations作者：王智明(Chih-Ming WANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：384-393資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).00147篇名：尋找「群<U+8846>」？並列篇名：Looking for the Masses?作者：林淑芬(Shu-Fen LIN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：394-402資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).00158篇名：我們時代的法西斯主義並列篇名：A Fascism for Our Time作者：哈若圖寧(Harry HAROOTUNIAN);陳春燕(Chun-yen CHEN)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：403-425資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).00169篇名：歹物：一種在地之「物」與「死亡地理」的敘事觀並列篇名：Phainn-Mih-A: the Narrative of ”Thing” and ”Necro-geography” on Earth作者：梁廷毓(Ting-Yu LIANG)期刊/會議論文集名稱：文化研究卷期：32期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：426-443資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中華民國文化研究學會DOI：10.6752/JCS.202104_(32).001701篇名：孕產婦的心理健康並列篇名：Perinatal Mental Health作者：林煜軒(Yu-Hsuan Lin);莊海華(Hai-Hua Chuang);羅良明(Liang-Ming Lo);邱弘毅(Hung-Yi Chiou)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：459-461資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).PF052篇名：COVID-19疫情停課後中小學之復課策略並列篇名：Reopening strategies for primary and secondary schools after lockdown due to COVID-19作者：盧玉玫(Yu-Mei Lu);馮嘉玉(Jia-Yuh Ferng);陳凱倫(Kai-Ren Chen);鄭其嘉(Chi-Chia J. Cheng);陳麗珠(Li-Chu Chen);陳富莉(Fu-Li Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：462-473資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).1101103篇名：文化能力於公共衛生中之重要性：以新冠肺炎接觸者追蹤為例並列篇名：The significance of cultural competence in public health: COVID-19 contact tracing as an example作者：李柏翰(Po-Han Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：474-478資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).1100664篇名：台灣成年民眾之室外空氣污染健康識能調查並列篇名：A survey of ambient air pollution health literacy among adult residents of Taiwan作者：黃乙芹(Yi-Chin Huang);侯文萱(Wen-Hsuan Hou);呂芊曄(Chien-Yeh Lu);李岳蓁(Yueh-Chen Li);李佩珍(Pei-Chen Lee);陳怡臻(I-Chen Chen);林明彥(Ming-Yeng Lin);王毓正(Yu-Chen Wang);李中一(Chung-Yi Li)關鍵字：室外空氣污染;健康識能;決策樹;問卷調查;電話訪問;air pollution;health literacy;decision trees;surveys and questionnaires;telephone interview期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：本研究目的為要探討影響室外空氣污染健康識能的因素並界定出我國低室外空氣污染健康識能之族群特性。方法：此為一橫斷性研究，以全國20-70歲的成年民眾為研究對象，收案時間自2020年9月11日至10月22日止。使用電腦輔助電話訪問系統蒐集電訪資料，網路收案則採取立意取樣方式為之。本研究使用32題之中文版「室外空氣污染健康識能問卷」進行電話訪問與網路調查。以決策樹模型演算區辨出低室外空氣污染健康識能之族群特性。結果：共有1,588份問卷納入分析，包含：電話訪問（1,297份）以及網路調查（291份）。透過全國性樣本之調查與決策樹模型分類結果，界定出我國民眾低室外空氣污染健康識能之族群特性為：未婚、教育程度為高中、以及居住於南部地區之民眾。結論：教育程度、居住地與婚姻狀態為影響民眾室外空氣污染健康識能程度高低的影響因素。未來可以針對低室外空氣污染健康識能的族群，作為後續衛教介入之目標族群，藉此期望可提升整體民眾對室外空氣污染健康識能的程度，降低室外空氣污染對健康的衝擊。英文摘要：Objectives: The purpose of this study was to explore characteristics related to ambient air pollution health literacy (AAPHL) and to identify groups with lower AAPHL. Methods: A national, cross-sectional study of Taiwanese adults aged 20-70 years was conducted. Data were collected from September 11 to October 22, 2020. We conducted the survey through computer-assisted telephone interviews. In addition, purposive sampling was used in online surveys. A 32-item Chinese version of the AAPHL assessment tool was used in telephone interviews and online surveys. Decision tree modeling was used to ascertain the characteristics of those with low AAPHL. Results: A total of 1,297 telephone interviews and 291 online surveys were completed, and 1,588 questionnaires were analyzed. The data indicated that having high school education, being unmarried, and living in southern Taiwan were associated with low AAPHL. Conclusions: The education level, area of residence, and marital status were the key risk factors affecting AAPHL. People with the identified characteristics should be regarded as the target population for health education interventions to enhance AAPHL levels in the general population and to reduce the impact of ambient air pollution on public health.起始頁-結束頁：479-493資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).1100705篇名：台灣與南韓校園空氣污染防制政策之比較研究並列篇名：Comparison of campus air pollution control policy between Taiwan and South Korea作者：姚澤銘(Ze-Ming Yao);張弘潔(Hung-Chieh Chang)關鍵字：空氣污染;跨國比較研究;兒童健康;政策;air pollution;cross-national comparison;child health;policy期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：空氣污染是全球兒童最大健康威脅之一。本研究比較台灣與南韓之校園空污防制政策規範，了解差異性與可改善方向。方法：本文從四方面比較我國與南韓校園空污防制政策，包括空品標準、空污監測、校園空污惡化之緊急應對、空污校園防護等。結果：（1）戶外空氣污染物之標準，我國訂定PM_(2.5)、PM_(10)、O_3、NO_2、SO_2、CO和鉛，南韓多增加苯之監測，南韓部分之空品標準也較嚴格。室內空品監測部分，南韓有針對幼兒園和學校場所強制監控，並新增監測之污染物；（2）在室內空品法規方面，南韓專為幼兒族群訂定更高標準之保護措施；而台灣室內空品監測在校園場所仍缺乏全面監測；（3）南韓在空污緊急應對措施之啟動標準對於兒童的保護皆較台灣之標準敏感；南韓近年修法編列預算新增校園保護措施（教室統一安裝空污監測及淨化設備等）。結論：南韓近年對校園空污防制相關之法規頻繁修法，針對兒童族群提供強化之特殊保護，包括空氣品質標準加嚴、新增監控之污染物、空氣污染納入學校衛生法，和編列預算以改善監測與改善校園空氣品質所需之硬體設施，均可作為我國修法之參考。英文摘要：Objectives: Air pollution represents a considerable threat to child health worldwide. This study compared Taiwan and South Korea’s air pollution control policies, with a focus on campus regulations. Methods: Taiwan and South Korea's air pollution control policies were compared with respect to air quality standards, air quality monitoring, emergency response measures to air pollution deterioration, and air quality measures at schools. Results: With regard to outdoor air pollutants, Taiwan has established standards for PM_(2.5), PM_(10), O_3, NO_2, SO_2, CO, and Pb, in addition to which South Korea has established a standard for benzene. South Korea's standards are stricter for some pollutants. In terms of indoor air pollutants, South Korea has mandated compulsory monitoring of specific pollutants and monitored more air pollutants on campus. In terms of indoor air quality, South Korea has established higher standards specifically for kindergartens. By contrast, Taiwan's Indoor Air Quality Act does not include campuses for air pollution monitoring. South Korea's emergency response measures to air pollution deterioration prioritize child protection more than do Taiwan's. South Korea has amended the law and added a budget for protection equipment on campuses, such as air pollution monitoring and purification equipment; this policy should be considered in Taiwan. Conclusions: South Korea has frequently amended the campus air pollution measures to enhance the protection of child health in recent years. The measures include setting higher air quality standards, including air pollution control in the School Health Act, and budgeting for facilities to monitor and improve the air quality of campuses. South Korea's campus air pollution control policies can serve as reference for policy amendment in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：494-505資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).1100856篇名：評論：台灣與南韓校園空氣污染防制政策之比較研究並列篇名：Commentary: comparison of campus air pollution control policy between Taiwan and South Korea作者：黃彬芳(Bing-Fang Hwang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：506-506資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).110085017篇名：作者回覆：台灣與南韓校園空氣污染防制政策之比較研究並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary: comparison of campus air pollution control policy between Taiwan and South Korea作者：姚澤銘(Ze-Ming Yao);張弘潔(Hung-Chieh Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：507-507資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).110085028篇名：台灣醫院醫療不良事件根本原因分析現況與相關因素探討並列篇名：Status of root cause analysis in medical adverse events and related factors among hospitals in Taiwan作者：洪聖惠(Sheng-Hui Hung);鍾國彪(Kuo-Piao Chung);王拔群(Pa-Chun Wang)關鍵字：根本原因分析;醫療不良事件;人為因素;病人安全;root cause analysis;medical adverse event;human factor;patient safety期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：本研究欲瞭解台灣醫院內部進行醫療不良事件根因調查分析之現況，進一步探討調查員個人經驗與醫院特性等對調查時人為因素掌握之相關性。方法：採橫斷性調查，以自擬問卷匿名普查全國負責醫療不良事件通報窗口及根因分析調查員，以雙變量分析探討醫院對於醫療不良事件之根因調查分析現況及影響因素間之相關性。結果：共調查122家醫院、590名調查員，平均回收率91.6%。醫院97.5%設有專責單位，89.3%採自主通報。91%設有根因分析小組。調查員18.6%未接受過訓練，35.8%自覺訓練不足，49.1%僅一半甚至更少的信心以現行調查工具能有效掌握根因，94.2%表示調查有障礙，前三位為「事後回溯困難，記憶偏差」、「受訪人員排斥」及「調查員經驗不足」。調查員之個人經驗，不論專業背景、調查年資、件數、是否接受調查訓練及時數、自覺訓練是否足夠等皆會顯著影響調查時對人為因素掌握度。結論：台灣醫院內部通報制度普遍已建立，調查員個人經驗為影響調查結果的重要因素，應更加重視與培訓。英文摘要：Objectives: This study explored the status of root cause analysis (RCA) of adverse events in Taiwan's hospitals. This study also examined the associations between investigator's personal experience, hospital characteristics with human factors consideration when conducting RCA. Methods: This study adopted a large-scale cross-sectional survey featuring a self-developed questionnaire to investigate the status of the RCA of adverse events and RCA investigators in Taiwanese hospitals. Participants were recruited from institutions responsible for medical adverse event and root cause investigation. Bivariate analysis was applied to analyze the RCA for adverse events and its associated factors. Results: A total of 122 units for hospital patient safety and 590 RCA investigators were surveyed. The questionnaire response rate was 91.6%. Of the hospitals from which participants were recruited, 97.5% had dedicated units to handle reports, 89.3% adopted voluntary reporting system, and 91% established RCA teams. Of the investigators surveyed, 18.6% had not been trained in RCA and 35.8% of the trained investigators still felt insufficiently equipped to engage in RCA. Furthermore, 49.1% of the investigators reported having less confidence to obtain root causes by current investigation tools, and 94.2% of the investigators noted obstacles in adverse event analysis and investigation. The experience of the RCA investigators, including years of participation in the analysis, the number of analysis participated in, whether they received RCA training, total hours of RCA training, and the adequacy of conscious training affected investigators' consideration of human factors when investigating adverse events. Conclusions: The internal reporting system in Taiwan's hospitals is well established, and the personal experience of investigators is a key factor affecting the results of RCA investigations. RCA investigators should, therefore, receive attention and high-quality training.起始頁-結束頁：508-524資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).1100529篇名：人口結構變動對醫學中心急診部分負擔政策有效性之影響並列篇名：Effect of demographic structural change on copayment policy effectiveness for emergency department visits作者：陳文意(Wen-Yi Chen);林晏如(Yen-Ju Lin);楊其璇(Chi-Hsuan Yang)關鍵字：人口結構;非緊急急診;部分負擔;時間變動向量自我迴歸模型;向量誤差修正模型;demographic structural change;non-urgent emergency department visit;copayment;time-varying parameter vector autoregressive model;vector error correction models期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討台灣地區人口結構變動對醫學中心急診部分負擔政策有效性的影響效果。方法：我們使用時間變動向量自我迴歸以及向量誤差修正模型建構人口結構變動對醫學中心急診部分負擔政策有效性的關聯。結果：部分負擔對急診與非緊急急診醫療利用12個月期間的衝擊反應數值均為負值，增加部分負擔能降低醫學中心急診醫療利用。長期而言，人口老化將降低醫學中心急診部分負擔對所有急診醫療利用負向影響，但是對醫學中心急診部分負擔對非緊急急診醫療利用的關聯性沒有顯著的影響。結論：若以減少整體醫學中心急診利用為政策目標時，高齡化社會所要調高的部分負擔將必須遠高於目前設定的水準。考量急診利用降載的政策工具眾多，未來政府在制定急診利用政策時，除考量人口老化對部份負擔政策的鈍化效果外，仍須搭配其他分級醫療的政策工具，藉以達成緩解醫學中心急診利用的政策目標。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated the effect of demographic structural change on emergency department (ED) visits in medical centers in Taiwan. Methods: Time-varying parameter vector autoregressive and vector error correction models were adopted to establish the association between demographic structural change and ED visits in medical centers. Results: Our empirical results revealed negative cumulative responses over 12 months of copayments for ED visits and nonurgent ED visits. The negative relationship between copayments and ED visits was reduced in the aging population, but no significant relationship was found between copayments and nonurgent ED visits in this population. Conclusions: Higher copayment adjustment for ED visits should be made for achieving the policy goal of a lower number of total ED visits for the aging society. Various policy instruments other than the copayment policy have been established to reduce the number of ED visits. Considering the ineffectiveness of the copayment policy for ED visit reduction in the aging society, the government should adopt other policy instruments of the hierarchy of medical care together with the copayment policy to achieve the policy goal of total ED visit reduction.起始頁-結束頁：525-544資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).11005110篇名：運用德菲法發展台灣婦產科低效益照護清單並列篇名：Use of the Delphi method to develop a list of low-value care practices in obstetrics and gynecology in Taiwan作者：張煜詩(Yu-Shih Chang);周盈邑(Ying-Yi Chou);黃文助(Wen-Chu Huang);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：婦產科;低效益照護／過度使用;清單;德菲法;obstetrics and gynecology;low-value care/overuse;lists;Delphi method期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：低效益照護／過度使用漸受關注，如何衡量低效益照護是重要的問題，過去研究發展低效益照護清單多以文獻或臨床醫師凝聚共識，針對台灣婦產科低效益照護清單研究闕如，本研究目的，將以德菲法發展臺灣婦產科低效益照護清單。方法：參考國際明智選擇建議和專家意見，發展婦產科低效益照護問卷。納入醫師為邀請台灣婦產科學會從北中南東醫療院所推薦醫師名單，最終再以德菲法產生低效益照護代表性清單，同意尺度為1分（非常不同意）至9分（非常同意），專家共識定義為中位數≧7且評≧7之比例至少75%，再依評≧7之比例排序以決定前5名清單。結果：本研究共有12名專家參與，兩回合問卷從38項項目中，最終推薦清單共有6項，因排序同名次，7分以上人數比例為91.7%，包括3項檢查（臍動脈都普勒超音波、D-Dimer、紅血球沉降率）、2項處置（催生或剖腹產、子宮切除術）及1項藥品（抗生素）。結論：本研究以德菲法選出6項適合我國國情的清單，政府單位可參考本研究成果發展婦產科臨床指引，能將清單納入且訂出規範；建立資訊整合平台提供低效益照護資訊，不僅有助於醫療人員做出正確決策，也能夠提升民眾對低效益照護之概念。英文摘要：Objectives: The problem of low-value care/overuse has become a focal point among the medical community. Determining how to identify and measure low-value care is a central concern. Previous studies have formulated lists of low-value care practices based on earlier literature or the consensus of clinicians, but no study has yet to focus on low-value care in obstetrics and gynecology in Taiwan. We used the Delphi method to compile a list of low-value care practices in obstetrics and gynecology in Taiwan. Methods: By referring to recommendations from international Choosing Wisely lists and expert opinion, we developed a questionnaire about low-value care practices in obstetrics and gynecology. The Taiwan Association of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommended a list of suitable doctors for inclusion from the medical institutions in the northern, central, southern and eastern regions of Taiwan, and the Delphi method was then used to produce a representative list of low-value care practices. The agreement scale ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 9 (strongly agree). Expert consensus was defined as a median <U+2265> 7 with at least 75% scoring <U+2265> 7. All recommendations were ranked by percentage of score <U+2265> 7 to determine a list of the top five low-care practices. Results: A total of 12 experts completed in two rounds of questionnaires from which six lists of options were selected from a total of 38 recommendations because the rankings were identical. The lists with 91% scoring <U+2265> 7 included three examinations (umbilical artery Doppler, D-Dimer, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate), two procedures (elective, non-medically indicated inductions of labor or Cesarean deliveries, hysterectomy), and one drug (antibiotics). Conclusions: In this study, the Delphi method yielded six lists suitable for conditions in Taiwan. Health officials can refer to these research results when developing clinical practice guidelines for obstetrics and gynecology that can incorporate indicators and set standards. Establishing an information integration platform to provide low-value care information will strengthen the decision-making of medical practitioners and enhance public understanding of low-value care.起始頁-結束頁：545-555資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).11001711篇名：台灣人工生殖法立法前後五年生殖結果的比較並列篇名：Reproductive outcomes of in vitro fertilisation in the five years before and after the legislation of the Assisted Reproduction Act in Taiwan作者：虞希正(Hsi-Cheng Yu);雷文玫(Wen-May Rei);邱淑媞(Shu-Ti Chiou);鄧宗業(Chung-Yeh Deng)關鍵字：台灣人工生殖法;試管嬰兒;活產;流產;Assisted Reproduction Act;in vitro fertilization;live-birth;miscarriage期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：利用台灣人工生殖資料庫探進行實證分析，探討2007年台灣人工生殖法頒布前後，對首次執行試管嬰兒治療成果之影響。方法：擷取人工生殖資料庫中法頒布前與後五年紀錄，利用變異數分析與卡方分析，及廣義線性模型之多變項羅吉斯回歸，比較臨床懷孕、活產、流產、子宮外孕等療程結果。結果：研究共納入2002-2012間83,264次試管嬰兒療程。單變項觀察到立法後五年期間，在著床為胚囊、臨床懷孕及活產率，皆較立法前五年顯著提升；發生子宮外孕、減胎、卵巢過度刺激臨床症候群發生率，則在立法後顯著下降。多變項分析上，在著床為胚囊、臨床懷孕，以及成功誕下活產嬰兒上，立法後較立法前勝算顯著增加31-35%；減胎立法後勝算顯著則降低20%。發現相較於單胚胎植入，選擇植入兩個胚胎活產勝算可顯著增加11%。但若植入3顆或4顆胚胎，則可能同時增加活產與死產勝算。結論：本研究為台灣首篇比較施行胚胎植入限制的前後五年的試管嬰兒生殖結果的差異。研究發現法令限制植入胚胎後，試管嬰兒的活產機率增加及減胎機率減少，相關原因有待後續研究。綜整本研究發現與國內其它實證結果，建議台灣可再下修胚胎植入指引。政府更應持續發展人工生殖技術並擴大補助，特別是單胚胎之植入。英文摘要：Objectives: To compare the outcomes of in vitro fertilisation (IVF) treatment before and after the 2007 IVF regulations in Taiwan by accessing data from the national assisted reproduction database. Methods: Clinical pregnancies (those with the foetal heartbeat detected), live births, miscarriage, fetal reduction, and ectopic pregnancy in the five years before and after the assisted reproduction act were assessed from the national assisted reproduction database. Analysis of variance, Chi-square test, and multivariate logistic regression of the generalized linear model were used to compare the outcomes before and after the implementation of the legislation. Results: A total of 83,264 IVF cycles performed between 2002 and 2012 were included in our analysis. After implementing the legislation, fewer embryos were transferred in IVF cycles, but higher percentages of gestational sacs, clinical pregnancies, and live births were achieved. The rates of miscarriages, ectopic pregnancy, and fetal reduction were significantly less in the post-legislation period than in the pre-legislation period. The multivariate analysis found that the odds of embryos reaching the gestational sacs, clinical pregnancies, and live births per cycle significantly increased by 31-35%; the odds of fetal reduction were decreased by 20%. Compared to single embryo transfer, double embryo transfer increases the odds of live births by 11%. Conclusions: This was the first study to focus on the reproductive outcomes of IVF in the five years before and after the legislation of the assisted reproduction act in Taiwan. The Assisted Reproduction Act limited the number of embryo transfers to four would increase the likelihood of live births and reduce the probability of fetal reduction, and there was still a need for further research to prove. We suggest that the legislation be revised to reduce the maximum number of embryo transfers in an IVF cycle from four to less based on our findings and previous studies. The government can encourage the development of IVF technology and deregulate medical allowances for every IVF cycle to promote fertility in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：556-569資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).11007612篇名：初探低血糖處理行為－立即進食與藥物調整之影響因子並列篇名：Factors associated with immediate food consumption and drug adjustment in hypoglycemia: a preliminary study on hypoglycemia management behaviors作者：黃美娟(Mei-Chuan Huang);洪志秀(Chich-Hsiu Hung);黃雅雯(Ya-Wen Huang)關鍵字：低血糖事件;胰島素治療;第2型糖尿病;立即進食;調整藥物;hypoglycemia events;insulin therapy;type 2 diabetes;immediate food consumption;drug adjustment期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：低血糖是糖尿病的急性併發症之一，需要病人立即處理。本研究目的在探討接受胰島素治療之第2型糖尿病患者，影響低血糖立即進食和調整藥物行為之重要因子。方法：採用橫斷式調查研究法，以立意取樣收集218位在台灣南部一家醫學中心、一家地區醫院和3家基層醫療門診，接受胰島素治療，而且經歷過低血糖事件之第2型糖尿病患者為研究對象。採用低血糖知識量表、低血糖恐懼量表和社會支持量表收集資料。資料收集自2016年5月至2018年7月。結果：218位研究對象平均年齡為62.3歲；女性佔51.8%、教育程度以高中或以上者佔83.5%。本研究以AMOS檢視性別、規律運動、低血糖知識、半年內發生低血糖事件的次數、教育程度和社會支持與立即進食和藥物調整等項關係和最佳配適模式。結果發現女性（p＜0.01）、低血糖知識（p＜0.01）和多次發生低血糖事件（p＜0.05）與立即進食有顯著相關；而多次發生低血糖事件（p=0.01）和社會支持（p＜0.05）與調整藥物有顯著相關，立即進食的總變異量是10.70%和調整藥物的總變異量是4.80%。結論：性別、低血糖知識和多次發生低血糖事件是立即進食的影響因子，而多次發生低血糖事件和社會支持是調整藥物的影響因子。本研究結果可以提供健康照護人員瞭解接受胰島素治療之第2型糖尿病患者，影響低血糖立即進食和調整藥物之重要因子，以作為強化低血糖照護和低血糖管理之實證指引。英文摘要：Objectives: Hypoglycemia is an acute complication of type 2 diabetes (T2D) that requires immediate self-management by the patient. This study explored the key factors determining immediate food consumption and drug administration adjustment when patients with T2D experience an episode of hypoglycemia following insulin treatment. Methods: This cross-sectional survey enrolled 218 patients with T2D receiving treatment in a medical center, a regional hospital, and three primary medical clinics in southern Taiwan. Data were collected from May 2016 to June 2018. Three questionnaires were used: the Knowledge of Hypoglycemia Scale, Fear of Hypoglycemia Scale, and Social Support Scale. Results: This study included 218 patients (mean age: 62.3 years). More than half were women (51.8%), and most had a junior high school education level or below (83.5%). AMOS was conducted to examine the relationships among sex, education, exercise, knowledge of hypoglycemia, multiple hypoglycemia events, social support, immediate food consumption, and drug adjustment and the best fit model. Female sex (p ＜ .01), knowledge of hypoglycemia (p ＜ .01), and multiple hypoglycemia events (p ＜ .05) were significantly correlated with immediate food consumption. In addition, multiple hypoglycemia events (p = .01) and social support (p ＜ .05) were significantly correlated with drug adjustment. The total variance of immediate food consumption and drug adjustment was 10.7% and 4.8%, respectively. Conclusions: Sex, knowledge of hypoglycemia, and multiple hypoglycemia events are crucial factors affecting immediate food consumption, and multiple hypoglycemia events and social support are crucial factors affecting drug adjustment. These findings may help health care professionals understand the factors that can affect the behaviors of patients with T2D in terms of immediate food consumption and drug adjustment after an episode of hypoglycemia. The results may serve as guidelines to improve hypoglycemia care and education.起始頁-結束頁：570-579資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).11002713篇名：運用桌上型遊戲提升國小學生對家庭醫師之認知、態度及自我效能的成效研究並列篇名：Assessing the effectiveness of a tabletop game to alter elementary school students' knowledge, attitudes, and self-efficacy beliefs toward family physician services作者：吳文琪(Wen-Chi Wu);簡彰蔚(Jang-Wei Jian);張家臻(Chia-Chen Chang);張必正(Bih-Jeng Chang);董貞吟(Chen-Yin Tung)關鍵字：家庭醫師;醫療使用;桌上型遊戲;遊戲學習;單組前後測實驗設計;family physician;medical use;tabletop game;game-based learning;one group pretest-posttest experimental design期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷5期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在評價新發展之桌上型遊戲教學模組對提升國小學童的家庭醫師認知、態度及善用家庭醫師資源自我效能之成效，並瞭解此成效在不同的年級、地區和先備知識下是否有差異。方法：本研究運用單組前後測實驗設計的方式，評價國小學童的學習成效，共有479位學生參與。介入方案為跨界專家共同發展之「健康總動員」桌上型遊戲教學模組。經培訓國小教師後，由其進行教學介入。本研究運用重複測量共變數分析模式進行成效評價。結果：教學介入後，國小學童對家庭醫師之認知、態度及善用家庭醫師資源的自我效能，皆有顯著提升。進一步分析年級、地區、和先備知識對介入成效的影響，發現年級及先備知識越低者，成效越高，且成效不受地區差異的影響。結論：本教學模組可提升四至六年級學童對家庭醫師之認知、態度，及善用家庭醫師資源的自我效能。建議教師、家長及實務工作者，可考慮採用正式遊戲的教育策略，提升學生對家庭醫師的瞭解與認識。英文摘要：Objectives: This one-group pretest-posttest study evaluated the effect of a tabletop game-based intervention on elementary school student's knowledge and understanding of family medicine, attitudes toward family care, and self-efficacy in decision making to utilize family physician services, and to examine whether the effects differed by grade levels, area of residence, and prior knowledge. Methods: A questionnaire (pretest) was administered to an experimental group comprising of fourth to sixth grade students (n = 479) recruited throughout Taiwan to assess preexisting knowledge of family practice, attitudes towards family physicians, and the confidence in their ability to utilize family physician services. The same questionnaire (posttest) was administered to the students after playing a tabletop game (intervention) named Healthy Tales, which was developed by a group of health experts and creative educators with the intent to promote family physician-seeking behaviors through educating, reinforcing, and providing fun. Results: Usage of Healthy Tales was associated with statistically significant increases in the knowledge, attitudes, and self-efficacy beliefs toward family physician services. Results from the post hoc test indicated a greater effect of the game on outcome variables as students' grade level decreased as well as in students with less knowledge of family medicine. Conclusions: The tabletop game is shown to be effective in increasing knowledge, attitudes, and self-efficacy beliefs among elementary school students in the study. Educators and parents may consider using Healthy Tales to promote understanding of family medicine, persuade students the value of family care, and finally, to encourage students to utilize family physician services.起始頁-結束頁：580-594資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202110_40(5).11003814篇名：COVID-19疫情中的精神健康議題並列篇名：Mental health issues in the COVID-19 pandemic作者：顏正芳(Cheng-Fang Yen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：347-350資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).PF0415篇名：台灣HIV感染者的口腔照護現況與展望並列篇名：The current status and the prospect of oral care for people living with HIV in Taiwan作者：陳韋翰(Wei-Han Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：351-354資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).11004016篇名：日本長照領域推動自立支援照顧模式經驗之初探並列篇名：A preliminary study on promoting the self-reliance support model in long-term elder care in Japan作者：徐明仿(Ming-Fang Hsu)關鍵字：介護福祉士;自立支援;維護尊嚴;照顧工作;自主性參與;certified care worker;self-reliance support;upholding dignity;care work;willingly participate期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：面臨身心功能逐漸衰退的老年長照需求者，照顧工作者應如何推動「自立支援」照顧模式，如何協助老年長照需求者提升其生活自理能力，是本文欲闡明之關心所在。有鑑於我國長照界推動的自立支援照顧模式是取經自日本長照界，本文收集日本1988年至2000年之老年長照政策官方文獻以及日本近三年出版之介護福祉士教科書及照顧工作者培訓教科書，篩選納入章節含有「尊嚴」、「自立」、「自立支援」、「照顧的基礎」計8冊，以概念性文獻回顧日本政府與日本社福學者是如何詮釋老年長照領域之「自立支援」理念以及透過推動「自立支援」照顧模式，如何將照顧工作內涵朝「廣義」概念發展。本文歸納出日本長照領域推動「自立支援」照顧模式之特色與意義各有五點；於長照實務場域中的推動步驟含有七項流程；日本培育照顧工作者具備之專業能力包含六個面向，可供我國未來探討「廣義」照顧工作內涵以及規劃照顧工作者提升其專業能力內涵之參考。英文摘要：This aim of this study was to address how care workers can promote the self-reliance support model and assist elderly people to enhance their self-reliance capabilities when facing the physical and mental deterioration associated with old age. We searched for the terms ”dignity,” ”self-reliance,” ”self-reliance support,” and ”foundations of care work” in eight certified care worker training textbooks for the past 3 years. A conceptual literature review approach was adopted for examining how Japanese social affairs researchers interpret the concept of self-reliance in long-term elder care. Subsequently, we expanded the caregiving content to a more general concept through promotion of the self-reliance caregiving model. Finally, the study identified five characteristics of the self-reliance caregiving model in use in the long-term care sector in Japan. We discuss seven steps for promoting appropriate practices in the long-term care field and argue that the core professional competence of Japanese care workers is to put ”upholding dignity” and ”self-reliance” into practice. Additionally, six aspects of professional capability training were identified in this study. The insights gleaned can be a reference on general caregiving for Taiwanese care workers that may be used to enhance their professional capabilities.起始頁-結束頁：355-370資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).11003317篇名：新北偏區衛生所長照All-In-One計畫之成效評估並列篇名：Effectiveness of All-In-One program of long-term care in rural health centers of New Taipei City作者：吳肖琪(Shiao-Chi Wu);蔡惟丞(Wei-Cheng Tsai);吳義勇(Yee-Yung Ng);陳潤秋(Ran-Chou Chen);高淑真(Shu-Cheng Kao);陳玉澤(Yu-Che Chen);吳玉鳳(Yu-Feng Wu);汪辰陽(Chen-Yang Wang)關鍵字：衛生所;偏遠地區;長照計畫2.0;長照服務利用;長照All-In-One;health center;rural area;Long-Term Care 2.0;long-term care utilization;Long-Term Care All-In-One期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：衛生所是政府守護社區及偏鄉民眾健康的基層機關。新北市為扭轉偏區長照服務資源不足的困境，2018年推展「長照All-In-One計畫」，讓13個偏區衛生所皆成為照管分站，讓偏區民眾可在衛生所獲得長照的服務。本研究目的為評估新北市偏區衛生所執行此計畫之成效。方法：採回溯性世代研究，由新北市衛生局從衛生福利部「照顧服務管理平台」擷取新北市2018年1月至2019年6月長照2.0服務資料，依照管專員每半年對個案至少評估一次，將資料區分為三個半年時段（P1、P2、P3）進行分析，將每個研究時段的使用資料歸人定義長照2.0使用者半年使用費用、人均月費用。以廣義估計模型（Generalized estimating equations, GEE）分析偏區與都會區在三個研究時段使用長照2.0服務的變化趨勢。結果：在2018上半年（P1）計畫剛開始時，新北市偏區長照2.0使用率低於都會區（7.46% vs 7.72%）；至2019上半年（P3），偏區已明顯高於都會區（14.6% vs 13.0%）。控制其他變項後，偏區半年長照使用費用於2018上半年（P1）雖然較都會區低（b=-7,116.76, p＜0.05），但城鄉差距在P2及P3逐漸縮小，至P3偏區增加量已顯著較都會區多（b=3,113.96及b=6859.47，p＞0.05及p＜0.05）；新北市人均月費用P3顯著較P1低（b=-1,076.73, p＜0.05），偏鄉降低的情形較都會多，但未達統計上顯著差異（b=-754.83, p＞0.05），可能與偏區使用人數快速增加有關。結論：All-In-One計畫藉由照管專員人力挹注與輔導，使偏區衛生所從傳統提供醫療、公共衛生預防保健服務，擴增為具長照管理中心分站，兼有物理治療與輔具資源中心之功能；此模式值得各縣市參考。英文摘要：Objectives: A health center is a fundamental governmental institution that protects people's health, particularly in rural districts. For overcoming the shortage of long-term care (LTC) resources in rural districts, the Health Affairs Bureau of New Taipei City has implemented the All-In-One program in 13 rural health centers since 2018. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the All-In-One program. Methods: This retrospective cohort study was conducted through extraction of the data of LTC service users in New Taipei City from January 1, 2018, to June 30, 2019, from the Care Service Management Information Platform database of the Ministry of Health and Welfare. The extracted data were divided into 3 periods: P1 (from January 1, 2018, to June 30, 2018), P2 (from July 1, 2018, to December 31, 2018), and P3 (from January 1, 2019, to June 30, 2019). The trends in the LTC service 2.0 use rate and 6- and 1-month expenditure per user in each period in rural and urban districts were analyzed using generalized estimating equations. Results: Because the All-In-One program began in 2018, the usage rate of LTC service 2.0 in P1 was lower in rural districts than in urban districts (7.46% vs. 7.72%). In P3, the usage rate of LTC service 2.0 in rural districts was significantly higher than that in urban districts (14.6% vs. 13.0%, p ＜ .05). After controlling other variables, the LTC 6-month expenditure per user in rural districts was less than that per user in urban districts during P1 (b = -7,116.76, p ＜ .05). However, the 6-month expenditure per user increased significantly faster in rural districts than in urban districts in P2 and P3 (b = 3,113.96 and 6,859.47, respectively; p ＞ .05 and p ＜ .05). The decline in expenditure per month per user between P1 and P3 was significant (b = -1,076.73, p ＜ .05). However, the decline in expenditure in rural districts tended to be quicker than that in urban districts (b = -754.83, p ＞ .05). This may have been related to the increased usage rate. Conclusions: All- In-One programs in rural districts have empowered rural health centers to provide not only medical and public health services but also physiotherapy and assistive devices as a substation of LTC management centers. The All-In-One program is worth considering by other counties and cities for improvement of LTC in rural districts.起始頁-結束頁：371-381資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).11002218篇名：A pilot study examining the relationship between environmental contaminants and colorectal cancer at a single medical institute in Taiwan並列篇名：環境汙染物與大腸直腸癌關聯性之台灣單一醫學中心前驅性研究作者：儲天輝(Tian-Huei Chu);周育緯(Yu-Wei Chou);林聖倫(Sheng-Lun Lin);林淑芬(Su-Fan Lin);陳鴻華(Hong-Hwa Chen);胡萬祥(Wan-Hsiang Hu);陳彥仰(Yen-Yang Chen);張簡國平(Guo-Ping Chang-Chien);張峻桓(Jyun-Huan Chang);蔡孟錡(Meng-Chi Tsai);黃昭誠(Chao-Cheng Huang)關鍵字：colorectal cance;environmental contaminants;microanalysis;enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay;大腸癌;環境汙染物;微量分析;酵素免疫分析法期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Objectives: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major health problem with high incidence and mortality rates worldwide. The increased incidence of CRC in Taiwan may be associated with environmental contaminants such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), nitrate, and nitrite. Accordingly, in this study, the relationship between these contaminants and CRC was investigated. Methods: Paired plasma and tumor tissues of CRC patients were obtained from the Tissue Bank at Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital. The samples were extracted and analyzed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for detecting the concentrations of nitrate/nitrite and 16 types of PAHs, respectively, at the Super Micro Mass Research & Technology Center, Cheng Shiu University. Results: Nitrite and the 16 types of PAHs were undetectable in the plasma; thus, only nitrate was selected for further investigation. The data indicated that the plasma levels of nitrate were not significantly different between the CRC and control groups. Notably, the average levels of nitrate in tumor tissues were significantly higher than the average plasma levels, but the nitrate levels in paired plasma and tumor tissues did not show a significant correlation. Moreover, no significant difference in the nitrate levels of plasma and tumor tissues was found in patients with different tumor stages. Conclusions: In this pilot study, no significant correlation was found between the nitrate levels in plasma and tumors of CRC patients, which could be caused by the smaller study cohort. However, the result is a potentially valuable reference for further research.英文摘要：目標：大腸直腸癌（CRC）在惡性腫瘤中具高發生率與死亡率，台灣CRC病患急劇增加可能與環境汙染物（多環芳香烴碳氫類化合物、硝酸鹽和亞硝酸鹽類）有關。因此，本篇研究探討此類汙染物與台灣CRC的相關性。方法：配對的CRC患者血漿與腫瘤組織檢體取自高雄長庚紀念醫院組織銀行，由正修科技大學超微量研究科技中心萃取後，以酵素免疫分析法測定其中之硝酸鹽及亞硝酸鹽濃度，另以氣相層析儀串聯質譜儀進行16種多環芳香烴偵測。結果：因血漿中所含之亞硝酸鹽及多環芳香烴均未檢出，後續實驗針對硝酸鹽進一步分析。實驗結果顯示CRC病患血漿的硝酸鹽濃度與對照組無顯著差別，但腫瘤組織中的硝酸鹽含量顯著高於配對的血漿。但是，硝酸鹽濃度在配對的CRC血漿與腫瘤組織中不具顯著關聯，且不同期別CRC的血漿與腫瘤組織硝酸鹽含量也無顯著差異。結論：此較小樣本數之前驅性研究顯示血液與腫瘤中硝酸鹽含量與CRC的相關性並不顯著，但是可提供後續進一步研究的重要潛在參考依據。起始頁-結束頁：382-393資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).11003719篇名：以質性研究探討台灣推動復能服務之困境與因應策略－從服務提供者觀點分析並列篇名：A qualitative study on the difficulties and strategies for promoting reablement services in Taiwan from the perspectives of providers作者：蔡宜蓉(Athena Yi-Jung Tsai);毛慧芬(Hui-Fen Mao);林佳萱(Chia-Hsuan Lin);李玉春(Yue-Chune Lee);張玲慧(Ling-Hui Chang)關鍵字：復能;長期照護;質性研究;紮根理論;專業人員;reablement;long-term care;qualitative research;grounded theory;professional期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：台灣長期照顧十年計畫2.0自2018年，建立長期照顧新模式，推動復能服務，強調功能性訓練，與長照1.0以身體功能改善為目標的居家復健有所差異。本研究探討專業人員於照護模式的改革中，實務遇到的困難與因應策略。方法：採紮根理論，以南部某縣市所舉辦之復能輔導會議及世界咖啡館討論中，針對復能執行現況與經驗之討論紀錄進行質性分析。參與者包含參與討論之復能團隊人員（如：照顧管理專員、個案管理師、職能治療師、物理治療師及護理師等）。結果：共690人參與活動。實務面臨之困難，共歸納出兩個主題：（1）「對復能無共識」：對復能原則的理解有限或誤解，及建立共識的教育訓練不完善；和（2）「無法有效地團隊合作」：參與人員多與溝通管道不足。因應策略主題有（1）「以個案及其目標為中心」，可行辦法包括個別化目標、關係建立、了解潛能；和（2）「建立新的團隊架構與互動機制」：共同訪視、教育訓練與建立新的溝通管道。結論：推動復能時，從價值觀改變、教育宣導，到服務團隊之配套和整合不足，致使照護模式的改革困難。本研究提出可供參考的策略，未來可納入政策制訂者及服務使用端的觀點更深入探討。英文摘要：Objectives: Compared with Long-term Care 1.0 in Taiwan that emphasizes improving physical function with home-based rehabilitation, Long-term Care 2.0 adopts a home-based Reablement approach that emphasizes functional training. This study explores the practical obstacles when the providers implemented reablement and proposes corresponding strategies. Methods: Grounded Theory was adopted to qualitatively analyze the records of World Cafe meetings and advisory meetings collected from the Reablement Improvement Project in a southern city. Participants were the members of reablement teams who participated in the meetings (such as care managers, case managers, occupational therapists, physical therapists, and nurses). Results: 690 people participated. The practical difficulties of implementation included: (1) a limited understanding or misinterpretation of reablement and inadequate staff training to form a consensus on what reablement constitutes, and (2) difficulty in building an inter-disciplinary reablement network. The strategies to overcome these obstacles include (1) a client-centered and goal-centered approach, such as rapport building, individual goal-setting, and potential assessment and (2) exploration of a workable teamwork and communication mechanism, such as joint visits, joint staff training, and new communication platforms. Conclusions: Differing care values about aging and family and inadequate instructions and dissemination of the policy information contributed to the difficulties of implementing reablement. We proposed corresponding strategies for future research and policy making. Perspectives from policy makers and service users can be further explored.起始頁-結束頁：394-405資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).11003920篇名：影響醫師使用分級醫療電子轉診系統因素與成效評估之初探並列篇名：Factors determining physicians' perspectives on bidirectional electronic referral systems' use and performance作者：陳定紘(Ting-Hung Chen);蕭如玲(Ju-Ling Hsiao);陳奕翰(Yi-Han Chen)關鍵字：分級醫療電子轉診系統;醫師;資訊系統持續使用的後接受模式;使用成效;bidirectional electronic referral system;physician;a post-acceptance model of information system continuance;individual performance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：確立影響醫師持續使用分級醫療電子轉診系統之關鍵因素與成效，以強化系統功能與服務需求，提昇病患持續照護品質，落實分級醫療制度的推動。方法：本研究以資訊系統持續使用的後接受模式為基礎，結合認知易用性、信任與使用成效，來探討影響醫師持續使用轉診系統之因素與使用成效，針對有使用轉診系統經驗之醫師進行問卷調查。回收有效問卷為121份（55.5%），採SmartPLS3.2.6進行資料分析。結果：影響醫師對電子轉診系統之期望確認、認知易用性、認知有用性、滿意度、信任對持續使用（R^2=0.584）皆有顯著影響，持續使用亦顯著影響使用成效（R^2=0.421）。其中使用成效以「能更有效率完成雙向轉診」、「提昇病患照護品質」及「有效掌握轉診病人的動態」為排序前三項。結論：結果可提供推動分級醫療轉診歷程中，持續關注影響醫師持續使用電子轉診系統之因素與使用成效，以作為系統改善的依據，促進醫療資訊流暢，達成分級醫療之利基。英文摘要：Objectives: This study investigated physicians' perspectives on factors influencing the continuing use and performance of bidirectional electronic referral systems. Methods: The post-acceptance model of information system continuance was extended, with perceived ease of use, trust, and individual performance used to identify critical factors affecting bidirectional electronic referral systems' continuance and performance. A survey questionnaire was administered to collect data from physicians experienced in using such systems. Of the 218 questionnaires distributed, 121 valid questionnaires were returned, corresponding to a valid response rate of 55.5%. The data were analyzed using SmartPLS 3.2.6 software. Results: Continuance (R^2 = .584) was mainly affected by confirmation, perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, trust, and user satisfaction, whereas individual performance (R^2 = .421) was affected by continuance. Moreover, the primary three performances of bidirectional electronic referral systems comprised the efficient completion of bidirectional referrals, enhancement of patients' quality of continuing care, and effective monitoring of patients' locations and activities. Conclusions: The findings serve as a reference for formulating a bidirectional referrals policy, charting bidirectional electronic referral systems' performance, and improving these systems. In addition, they provide insights into factors influencing physicians' continued use of these systems and facilitate the promotion of seamless medical information flows and the development of bidirectional referral niches.起始頁-結束頁：406-418資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).10915001篇名：評價復原力介入對第1型糖尿病青少年的自我照顧行為及血糖控制之成效並列篇名：Evaluation of the effectiveness of a resilience intervention for self-care behavior and glycemic control of youth with type 1 diabetes作者：唐善美(Shan-Mei Tang);陳百薰(Bai-Hsiun Chen);王瑞霞(Ruey-Hsia Wang);王慈柔(Tzu-Jou Wang)關鍵字：復原力;第1型糖尿病青少年;自我照顧行為;生活品質;糖化血色素;resilience;youth with type 1 diabetes;self-care behaviors;quality of life;glycolated hemoglobin期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：研究顯示第1型糖尿病青少年的血糖控制較差，復原力強調協助青少年利用優勢克服逆境。本研究目的是探討復原力介入後對第1型糖尿病青少年的自我照顧行為、生活品質、復原力及糖化血色素之成效。方法：本研究為類實驗性研究設計，在南台灣三大醫學中心採方便取樣共125位10－18歲第1型糖尿病青少年隨機分派為兩組，對照組（n = 80）如過去的一般照護，未提供任何介入，而實驗組（n = 45）會接受共三個月復原力介入策略，包括認識自己及激發覺醒、解決問題、接受、轉移注意力及情緒支持，並透過兩次面訪及三次的電訪進行追蹤。介入前、介入後三個月皆測量自我照顧行為、復原力、生活品質及糖化血色素，介入後六個月再收集一次糖化血色素值。採用頻率、百分比、平均數、標準差、卡方檢定、t檢定及廣義估計方程式進行資料分析。結果：研究發現實驗組的自我照顧行為（p = .030）及復原力（p ＜ .001）於介入後三個月，提升改變 顯著高於對照組；實驗組於介入後三個月及六個月的糖化血色素降低的改變量顯著高於對照組（p ＜ .001），而兩組的生活品質改變未達顯著差異。結論：本研究可提供實務、研究及教育界能以復原力介入為基礎，來改善第1型糖尿病青少年自我照顧行為及糖化血色素的控制。英文摘要：Objectives: Youth with type 1 diabetes have poor glycemic control. Resilience interventions emphasize helping youth use their advantages to overcome adversity. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effectiveness of a resilience intervention in improving the self-care behavior, resilience, quality of life, and glycosylated hemoglobin of youth with type 1 diabetes. Methods: A quasi-experimental design was used. Convenience sampling was adopted to recruit 125 participants aged 10-18 years and having type 1 diabetes from three major medical centers in southern Taiwan. The participants were randomly assigned to two groups. Those in the control group (n = 80) received general care as in the past without the intervention. Those in the experimental group (n = 45) received a 3-month intervention on resilience strategies, including self-awareness, problem-solving, acceptance, distraction, and mental support. Two face-to-face interviews and three telephone interviews were then conducted for tracking. Self-care behavior, resilience, quality of life, and glycosylated hemoglobin were measured before the intervention and 3 months postintervention, and glycosylated hemoglobin values were collected again 6 months postintervention. Frequency of use, percentage, average, standard deviation, chi-square test, t test, and generalized estimating equation were used in data analysis. Results: The improvement in self-care behavior (p = .03) and resilience (p ＜ .001) of the experimental group at 3 months postintervention was significantly greater than that of the control group; the reduction in glycosylated hemoglobin in the experimental group at 3 and 6 months postintervention was also significantly higher (p ＜ .001). Change in quality of life did not differ significantly between the groups. Conclusions: The study offers a reference to practical, research, and education circles for using a resilience intervention as the basis to improve the self-care behavior, resilience, and hemoglobin glycosylation control of youth with type 1 diabetes.起始頁-結束頁：419-428資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).1091432篇名：長期照顧機構中中風住民潛在不適當的藥物使用：使用Beers標準觀察的個案並列篇名：Potentially inappropriate medication use among stroke residents of a long-term care facility: an observational case study using the Beers Criteria作者：刑志彬(Chih-Pin Hsing);連嘉豪(Jia-Haur Lian);李仁愛(Jen-Ai Lee);樊雪春(Hsueh-Chun Fan);陳世銘(Shih-Ming Chen);賴誠斌(Cheng-Pin Lai);蔡宜樺(Yi-Hua Tsai)關鍵字：Beers標準;不當用藥情況;中風;長期照顧;處方優化;Beers Criteria;potentially inappropriate medication;stroke;long-term care;deprescribing期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：研究欲探索長期照顧機構罹患中風住民（<U+2265> 65歲）在潛在不適當用藥之人口變項情形、藥品類項，以及處方優化的合作經驗。方法：本研究是個案研究法，對象為台北市某區域醫院附設長期照顧機構22位住民，使用前瞻性的橫斷式研究蒐集資料，包含有（一）長期照顧機構住民基本資料（性別、年齡、用藥種類）和（二）不適當用藥盛行率、介入用藥結果。結果：本研究參與對象的慢性疾病數以4種最多，處方用藥數則以6－10種居多，在潛在不適當用藥方面，以Quetiapine居多。在處方優化有15位住民用藥需與醫師討論處方優化事宜，所佔比例為68.2%。結論：本研究透過2019年的Beers標準，發現長期照顧機構罹患中風住民用藥狀況有其特殊性，醫師依據個別住民的特定情況，考量藥物使用之目的性、有效性、迫切性、劑量合理性等，建議採用醫師與藥師的合作模式，並搭配Beers標準為參考，以降低潛在不適當用藥與處方優化。英文摘要：Objectives: The demographic variables and drug use of stroke residents (aged <U+2265> 65 years) in long-term care facilities were explored for potentially inappropriate medication use, and a cooperation model for prescription optimization was examined. Methods: A total of 22 residents of a regional hospital in Taipei City were included. Data on the following were collected through a prospective cross-sectional method: (1) basic information (sex, age, types of medication), (2) prevalence of potentially inappropriate medication use, and (3) results of the medication intervention. Results: The maximum number of chronic diseases of any participant was four. The participants used 6 to 10 prescribed medications. Quetiapine was the foremost potentially inappropriate medication. The medications of 15 residents (68.2% of the participants) required discussion with attending physicians for deprescribing. Conclusions: Using the Beers criteria, the study determined that the prescriptions and medications of stroke residents in a long-term care facility exhibited unique characteristics. Attending physicians consider factors including the purpose, effectiveness, urgency, and rationality of dosage according to the specific conditions of individual residents when making prescriptions. The adoption of a cooperation model between physicians and pharmacists is recommended, as is the use of the Beers criteria as a reference to reduce potentially inappropriate medications and to promote prescription optimization.起始頁-結束頁：429-440資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).1100493篇名：「兒童版飲食態度量表-26題」應用於本土國小高年級兒童之切點探究並列篇名：Exploration of the optimal cutoff point of the ChEAT-26 in grade 5 and 6 elementary school students in Taiwan作者：陳宇平(Yu-Ping Chen)關鍵字：飲食障礙;兒童版飲食態度量表-26題;國小;切點;eating disorders;ChEAT-26;elementary school;cut-off point期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：探究「兒童版飲食態度量表-26題」（ChEAT-26）在台灣國小高年級兒童使用的最佳切點，期有效應用以降低本土飲食障礙之年輕與嚴重化。方法：採兩階段設計進行：1.邀請願意配合研究之南台灣四所國小，先以「ChEAT-26」對各校五、六年級學生共1859位進行集體施測；2.再依量表總分並考慮正異常組人數相當之原則，按比例以分層隨機抽樣方式，在四校共抽取到380人，進一步取得家長同意書人數為276人（72.6%），安排進入第二階段診斷性晤談。結果：針對276位兒童進行第二階段診斷性晤談後，發現有5位學生診斷為陽性。以ROC曲線分析發現，當切點為16.5時，「ROC」曲線下面積（AUC）為0.704、敏感度80%、特異度44.3%乃較佳之切點；且因「ChEAT-26」為整數計分，亦即在實務上，將17分設為切點更方便應用。結論：「ChEAT-26」在台灣國小高年級學生使用時，飲食障礙高危險群之篩選切點以17分為宜，文末針對結果進行討論與建議。英文摘要：Objectives: The optimal cutoff point of the 26-item Children's Eating Attitude Test (ChEAT-26) used in grade 5 and 6 elementary school students was explored in Taiwan with the aim of effectively screening and managing eating disorders. Methods: A two-stage design was adopted: (1) four elementary schools willing to participate in the research were enrolled, and the ChEAT-26 was applied in 1,859 students in grades 5 and 6; and (2) 380 people were selected through stratified random sampling, and 276 people (72.6%) were enrolled in the second stage of diagnostic interviews after parental consent was obtained. Results: The second-stage diagnostic interview with 276 children revealed a positive result for 5 children. The most suitable cutoff point was 16.5, where the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, sensitivity, and specificity were 0.704, 80%, and 44.3%, respectively. Furthermore, because ChEAT-26 scores are integer scores, it is more convenient to use 17 as the cutoff point when applying. Conclusions: When the ChEAT-26 is used for senior students in Taiwan's elementary schools, the cutoff point for screening high-risk groups for eating disorders is 17. The article concludes with a discussion and recommendation regarding the optimum ChEAT-26 score.起始頁-結束頁：441-452資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).1100364篇名：臺北榮民總醫院婦產部對COVID-19疫情的感染管制措施與成效並列篇名：COVID-19 control measures and their effectiveness in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital作者：廖淑貞(Shu-Chen Liao);簡莉盈(Li-Yin Chien)關鍵字：COVID-19;婦產部;感染管制;成效;COVID-19;Obstetrics and Gynecology Department;infection control;effectiveness期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：新型冠狀病毒全球大流行，需有由中央到醫院、院級到各科部的多層級全面防疫措施，以兼顧防疫與照顧品質。本案旨在探討臺北榮民總醫院婦產部採行的感染管制措施與成效。方法：針對高風險個案、新生兒運送、親職教室、訪客眾多四個防疫問題點，研擬及早鑑別風險、減少嬰兒暴觸感染機會、採行替代方案、採行訪客管理四個策略，制定執行措施，於待產室、產房、手術室及普通病房落實執行。結果：2020年全年共照顧16位高危險個案，無確診案例、無院內感染發生，2020年1月到6月純母乳哺餵率44.8%，較往年同期增加1.3∼1.5%，親子同室率7.7%，相較去年同期無改變，依期別產前親職教室準媽媽出席率4.4%、4.7%，相較去年無明顯變化；準爸爸出席率1.8%、1.6%，相較去年下降0.7∼1.1%；這些比較均無統計上顯著差異。結論：疫情期間調整照護模式，純母乳哺餵率及親子同室率未受影響。顯現防疫限制下，仍可維持醫療品質。英文摘要：Objectives: The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic requires multilevel comprehensive epidemic prevention measures from the central government to hospitals and from hospitals to departments in order to control it. The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness of infection control measures implemented by the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital. Methods: Strategies were developed to deal with high-risk cases, newborn transportation, parental classes, and visits and companions. These strategies included early risk identification, infant exposure reduction, alternative health education tactics, and visitor management. Results: In 2020, 16 high-risk patients received care at our department. No confirmed COVID-19 cases and nosocomial infections were noted. Exclusive breastfeeding rate during the period of January to June 2020 was 44.8%, an increase of 1.3% and 1.5% over the same period in 2019 and 2018, respectively. The rooming-in rate was 7.7%, similar to that (7.5%) of the same period in 2019. Session-specific attendance rates in prenatal parenting classes were 4.4% for second semester and 4.7% for third semester expectant mothers; there was no significant change compared with the 2019 rates (4.5% and 4.6%). The attendance rate of expectant fathers was 1.8% for the second semester and 1.6% for the third semester, a decrease of 0.7% and 1.1%, respectively, compared with the 2019 rates. However, these differences were not statistically significant. Conclusions: The infection control measures implemented for early risk identification, infant exposure reduction, alternative prenatal parenting education, and visitor management were effective as no COVID-19 case occurred and the quality of patient care and treatment was maintained.起始頁-結束頁：453-458資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202108_40(4).1100465篇名：新冠肺炎大流行對C肝消除計畫的衝擊：隱藏性感染人口的診斷與治療並列篇名：Impact of coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic on hepatitis C virus elimination: diagnosis and treatment in the hidden population with HCV infection作者：陳為堅(Wei J. Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：241-244資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).PF036篇名：全球流行傳染病疫情期間使用個人資料科技防疫措施之法律反省與建議並列篇名：A critical evaluation of public health policies that utilize personal data for pandemic control in Taiwan作者：吳倚晴(Yi Ching Wu);陳建煒(K. Arnold Chan)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：245-255資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).1100187篇名：老人社會資本對健康生活品質的影響：以台中市老人為例並列篇名：Effects of social capital on health-related quality of life among older adults in Taichung City作者：梁亞文(Yia-Wun Liang);唐婷菱(Ting-Ling Tang);王佑芸(You-Yun Wang);蘇<U+4FB0>寧(Chun-Ning Su)關鍵字：老人;社會資本;健康生活品質;seniors;social capital;health-related quality of life期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探討老人社會資本及健康生活品質的現況，進一步探討老人社會資本對健康生活品質的影響。方法：本研究為一探索性的橫斷式研究，以結構式問卷調查台中市12個C據點的212位居住在家中的老人。社會資本包含社區參與、信任與安全感、鄰居的連結三個構面、共計15題，健康生活品質則以EQ-5D5個面向（行動能力、自我照顧、一般活動、疼痛／不適與焦慮／沮喪）共5道題項進行測量，各題項計分介於1分至3分之間，3分代表沒有問題、1分代表無法自理／有極度問題。統計分析方法包含描述性統計及推論性統計，多變項分析則以等級機率迴歸探討老人社會資本對健康生活品質的影響。結果：鄉區老人增加一等級EQ-5D的勝算比為2.052（95％ C.I.=1.070; 3.939）；高社會資本老人增加一等級EQ-5D的勝算比為低社會資本老人的3.662倍（95％ C.I.=1.917; 7.001）；老人年齡每增加1歲增加一等級EQ-5D的勝算比下降6.9％（OR=0.931, 95％ CI=0.889; 0.977）；有慢性病的老人增加一等級EQ-5D的勝算比下降62.8％（OR=0.372, 95％ CI=0.165; 0.840）；衰弱前期的老人（OR=0.261, 95％ CI=0.129; 0.530）與衰弱期的老人（OR=0.121, 95％ CI=0.050; 0.289）增加一等級EQ-5D的勝算比分別下降73.9％及87.9％。結論：老人的社會資本對老人健康生活品質具有顯著影響，建議政府提出各項面對超高齡社會政策時，應納入如何提高老人社會資本的相關措施。英文摘要：Objectives: This study explored the effects of social capital on health-related quality of life among older adults in Taiwan. Methods: This exploratory cross-sectional study used a self-administered structured questionnaire to collect data from 212 older adults from 12 community care centers in Taichung City. Social capital was measured using a 15-item scale, which included items on community participation, trust/safety, and neighborhood linkage. The EQ-5D descriptive system is a preference-based health-related quality of life measure with one question for each of its five dimensions: mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort, and anxiety/depression. The responses are coded from 1 to 3, with 3 indicating ”no problems,” 2 indicating ”some problems,” and 1 indicating ”many problems.” Ordered probit regression was used to explore the effect of social capital on health-related quality of life. Results: The results of ordered probit regression revealed that living in rural areas (odds ratio [OR] = 2.0052, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.070-3.939) and having high social capital (OR = 3.662, 95% CI = 1.917-7.001) supported high self-rated health-related quality of life. Low assessment of health-related quality of life increased with age (OR = 0.931, 95% CI = 0.889-0.977), growing number of chronic diseases (OR = 0.372, 95% CI = 0.165-0.840), and Study of Osteoporotic Fractures frailty index (OR = 0.261, 95% CI = 0.129-0.530 vs. OR = 0.121, 95% CI = 0.050-0.289). Conclusions: Social capital played a relatively strong role in determining the health-related quality of life of older adults in Taichung City. Policymakers should implement social capital-related policies when facing a super-aged society.起始頁-結束頁：256-267資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).1100358篇名：不同背景特徵的手術室護理人員對手術煙霧自覺症狀、知識、態度、自我防護行為及阻力因素之比較並列篇名：Comparing different background characteristics in self-perceived symptoms, knowledge, attitude, self-protection behavior, and resistance factors for surgical smoke among operating room nurses作者：游景蘭(Ching-Lan Yu);林麗虹(Li-Hung Lin);謝素英(Suh-Ing Hsieh);紀夙芬(Shu-Fen Chi);王琦(CHI WANG)關鍵字：手術煙霧;知識;態度;自我防護行為;阻力因素;surgical smoke;knowledge;attitude;self-protection behaviors;barrier期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：描述手術室護理人員所經驗過的手術煙霧症狀頻率與嚴重度；及其手術煙霧的知識、態度、自我防護行為及阻力因素，並比較不同背景特徵的手術煙霧症狀頻率與嚴重度、知識、態度、自我防護行為及阻力因素差異。方法：採描述性與比較性研究，方便取樣兩院區手術室護理人員，使用自擬結構式問卷，資料分析採描述性及單因子變異數分析。結果：症狀頻率與嚴重度前三高為想睡覺、流鼻水或其他鼻子不適、頭痛與咳嗽；不同年齡、護理及手術室工作總年資與每日平均工作時數的症狀頻率與嚴重度有顯著差異。知識答對率53.3％；態度平均數3.58分，而不同年齡、職稱、臨床工作職級、臨床工作科別、護理及手術室工作總年資的手術煙霧態度有顯著差異。自我防護行為平均數為1.47分，僅不同臨床工作科別有顯著差異，阻力因素平均數1.03分僅不同職稱有顯著差異。結論：期望此結果可提高手術室護理人員與醫療機構對手術煙霧職業傷害及相關防護方法的重視，並向人員宣導暴露之可能危害與加強自我防護行為。英文摘要：Objectives: To describe the frequency and severity of symptoms of exposure to surgical smoke experienced by operating room nurses and to assess and compare the knowledge of, attitude toward, protective measures for, and resistance factors for surgical smoke among operating room nurses with different background characteristics. Methods: This descriptive and comparative study used a convenience sample of nurses at two operating rooms at a medical institute and asked the nurses to fill a structured self-report questionnaire. The data were analyzed using descriptive statistics and one-way analysis of variance. Results: The three most frequent and severe symptoms were sleepiness, runny nose or other nasal discomfort, and headache and cough. Significant differences in symptom frequency and severity were noted with respect to age, years of nursing/operating room experience, and daily working hours. The knowledge test on surgical smoke was answered correctly by 53.3% of the nurses. The mean score of attitude toward handling surgical smoke was 3.58 and was significantly different with respect to age, work title, clinical nursing ladder, clinical unit, and years of nursing/operating room experience. The mean score for self-protective behavior was 1.47 and significantly differed between different clinical units. The mean score for resistance factor was 1.03 and significantly differed between different work titles. Conclusions: These findings may increase the awareness of the hazards of exposure to surgical smoke and highlight the importance of implementing relevant protection measures, educating medical personnel on the potential risk of and injury after exposure, and improving self-protective behaviors.起始頁-結束頁：268-282資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).1100259篇名：照顧新型冠狀病毒性感染病人護理師之心路歷程並列篇名：Psychological process of caring for patients with coronavirus infections by nurses作者：梅<U+8954>(Man Mei);丘周萍(Chou-Ping Chiou)關鍵字：新型冠狀病毒性肺炎;質性研究;護理經驗;coronavirus infections;qualitative research;experience of nursing期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：新冠肺炎的爆發，於全球各地帶來了衝擊，世界各地進行大規模的防疫措施，造成醫護人員大規模的離職，產生人力的不足、職業生涯的變化、造成了莫大的壓力及因應等問題。確診率上升及醫療資源耗盡，促使研究人員對護理師照護此類病人的經驗進行訪談及分析，期望此經驗能協助日後之醫療人員的壓力及不確定感得到因應及調適。方法：本研究為質性研究深度訪談十位照護新冠肺炎病人的護理師，採內容分析法，透過與研究對象的互動及行為、語言及非語言之意義，以探討護理師照護此類病人之經驗。結果：根據受訪者之心路歷程，歸納出四個主題「過去累積的經驗，只為了蓄勢待發，對抗疾病的下一刻」、「同儕的鼓勵和支持，困苦中仍然堅守崗位，永不放棄」、「面對醫療資源缺乏，環境的艱難，仍堅持到底」、「川流不息的確診人數，陪伴病人的橫亙旅程」。結論：藉由護理師之經驗及心路歷程，提供給臨床護理師照護此類病人之經驗做為參考，同時提供相關主管單位瞭解現況以輔導協助。英文摘要：Objectives: The outbreak of the novel coronavirus pneumonia has caused economic turmoil and social unrest worldwide. Large-scale epidemic prevention measures have been implemented globally, and in-house isolation and quarantine strategies have resulted in the large-scale resignation of medical staff, thereby leading to a shortage of human resources. The change of career has caused great pressure and coping problems with the pandemic. With the increase in the diagnosis rate and the exhaustion of medical resources, researchers are encouraged to analyze the burden and experience of nursing staff caring for infected patients. We hope that this report will help in responding and adapting to the pressure and uncertainty faced by medical staff in the future. Methods: In this research, qualitative in-depth interviews were conducted. We collected the experiences of 10 nurses caring for patients infected with the coronavirus; analyzed the interview responses; and evaluated the nurses' behavior, language, and nonverbal cues through interaction with them. Results: Based on a literature review and the interviewees' experiences and feelings, four themes were identified as follows: ”the past accumulated experience helps to gain momentum and fight the next course of the disease,” ”colleague encouragement and support help medical staff to be persistent in their work,” ”lack of medical resources and the difficulties faced by staff in the medical environment, stick to the end,” and ”the changing number of confirmed cases encountered through a patient's care journey.” Conclusions: The study findings can help nursing staff caring for patients infected with the novel coronavirus by providing a basis for understanding psychological pressure among nurses and adjusting the response protocol.起始頁-結束頁：283-292資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).11000110篇名：評論：照顧新型冠狀病毒性感染病人護理師之心路歷程並列篇名：Commentary: psychological process of caring for patients with coronavirus infections by nurses作者：白香菊(Hsiang-Chu Pai)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：293-293資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).1100010111篇名：台灣版慢性病照護評估問卷之發展與驗證並列篇名：Development and validation of the Taiwanese Version of the Assessment of Chronic Illness Care Questionnaire作者：黃紀諺(Chi-Yen Huang);周盈邑(Ying-Yi Chou);楊銘欽(Ming-Chin Yang);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：慢性病照護評估;效度;信度;慢性病照護模式;assessment of chronic illness care;validity;reliability;chronic care model期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：慢性病照護評估（Assessment of Chronic Illness Care, ACIC）問卷為國際上常用於評估醫療機構慢性病照護之品質或整合程度，但尚未使用於台灣，故本研究目的為翻譯慢性病照護評估問卷，並驗證台灣版ACIC問卷，作為測量台灣慢性病照護品質之評估工具。方法：依世界衛生組織建議之問卷發展流程進行問卷翻譯，我們於2019年7月至2020年2月之間完成ACIC問卷翻譯，郵寄ACIC問卷給56家診所之所有377位醫療人員，並以內容效度指標值（content validity index, CVI）、驗證性因素分析（confirmatory factor analysis, CFA）及Cronbach's α進行信效度檢定。結果：有效問卷共251份，回收率66.6％。經檢測專家效度全數題目之CVI均達0.8以上，刪除原量表其中13題後，配適度指標為0.89，卡方自由度比為1.78，標準化均方根殘差值為0.04，及近似均方根誤差為0.06，驗證性因素分析結果為一可接受之模型。內在一致性檢定之Cronbach's α值為0.897－0.946，顯示題目間有內在一致性。結論：21題台灣版ACIC問卷具有效度和信度，可以作為評估台灣慢性病照護品質的工具。英文摘要：Objectives: The Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (ACIC) questionnaire is widely used to assess the quality or integration of services in medical institutions. However, it has not yet been used in Taiwan. Thus, this study translated the ACIC questionnaire and validated the Taiwanese version of this questionnaire to measure the quality of chronic care in Taiwan. Methods: The translation process was based on the World Health Organization's ”Process of Translation and Adaptation of Instruments.” We translated the ACIC questionnaire between July 2019 and February 2020 and distributed it by mail to 377 medical personnel employed at 56 clinics. The content validity index (CVI), confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), and Cronbach's α values were used to assess its reliability and validity. Results: The number of valid questionnaires returned was 251, and the response rate was 66.6%; the CVI was 0.8 or higher for all questions. After 13 items were eliminated, CFA revealed a favorable index of fit (0.89), with a chi-square to degree of freedom ratio, standardized root mean square residual, and root mean square error of approximation of= 1.78, 0.04, and 0.06, respectively. The Cronbach's α values (0.897-0.946) indicated acceptable internal consistency. Conclusions: The 21-item Taiwanese version of the ACIC questionnaire has satisfactory validity and reliability and can be used to evaluate the quality of chronic care in Taiwan.起始頁-結束頁：294-305資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).10909812篇名：衛生所第二型糖尿病患加入糖尿病共同照護計畫後代謝指標的變化分析並列篇名：Changes to metabolic indices of patients who have type 2 diabetes and are included in the Diabetes Shared Care Program administered in a public health center in Taiwan作者：楊雅惠(Ya-Hui Yang);王俊毅(Jiun-Yi Wang)關鍵字：糖尿病共同照護計畫;衛生所;第二型糖尿病;糖化血色素;Diabetes Shared Care Program;public health center;type 2 diabetes mellitus;glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：糖尿病醫療給付改善方案自2001年實施至今，文獻中探討衛生所執行糖尿病共同照護計畫的研究相當少。本研究以中部某衛生所的糖尿病共照計畫個案資料，分析患者加入糖尿病共照計畫後，代謝指標的長期變化。方法：以回溯性世代研究法進行資料收集及分析，擷取台灣某衛生所「糖尿病共同照護服務管理系統」2002年5月至2008年12月加入共照計畫的個案為研究對象，每位個案自初診後追蹤至多8年，平均追蹤6.2年。使用廣義估計方程式，分析患者加入糖尿病共照計畫後各項代謝指標的變化。結果：共133位納入分析。在前二年分析中，糖化血色素以第4季下降幅度最大（β=-0.41, p=0.003）；在長期8年的分析中，糖化血色素<U+2265>9％的比率，自初收案的28.6％，至第1年底及其後各年度均維持在20％以下。舒張壓在短期有顯著下降；長期而言，血壓控制良好的比率有逐年上升的趨勢。結論：衛生所推動糖尿病共照計畫，使就診病患能獲得良好的照護。加入共照計畫的患者，血糖及血壓的控制整體而言可獲得逐步改善。建議未來能持續招募糖尿病患加入共照計畫，以提升整體照護率及代謝指標之改善。英文摘要：Objectives: Taiwan established the Diabetes Shared Care Program (DSCP) in 2001, but few studies have discussed the DSCP's implementation by public health centers (PHCs) in the community. Thus, this study aimed to analyze the changes to the metabolic indices of patients who had type 2 diabetes and joined the DSCP through a PHC in Central Taiwan. Methods: Participants were enrolled retrospectively from a DSCP database of outpatients who had diabetes mellitus and visited a PHC in Central Taiwan at any period between May 2002 and December 2008. After enrollment, the participants were tracked for up to 8 years, with the average follow-up period being 6.2 years. Due to the use of repeated measurements, generalized estimating equations were applied to evaluate the changes to the examined indices over time. Results: The data of 133 patients were analyzed. In the first 2 years of follow-up, HbA1c significantly decreased in the fourth quarter (β = -0.41, p = 0.003). For the 8-year long-term follow-up, the percentage of patients with HbA1c <U+2265> 9% decreased from 28.6% to 20% or lower in the years following DSCP intervention. The patients' diastolic blood pressure significantly decreased in the short term. The percentage of patients with well-controlled blood pressure increased gradually in the long term. Conclusions: The DSCP implemented by PHCs provides a good quality of care, and it can help patients to continually improve their HbA1c and blood pressure. The DSCP should be promoted among patients with diabetes to improve their metabolic indices.起始頁-結束頁：306-318資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).11001013篇名：國人飲用含糖飲料盛行率與其相關疾病之全民健保醫療費用估計並列篇名：Prevalence of sugar-sweetened beverage consumption and estimated National Health Insurance-related medical expenditures among Taiwanese people作者：張雅惠(Ya-Hui Chang);呂瑾立(Chin-Li Lu);徐宇慧(Yuu-Hueih Hsu);李岳蓁(Yueh-Chen Li);黃乙芹(Yi-Chin Huang);巫岑希(Cherl Cy Moo);古鯉榕(Li-Jung Elizabeth Ku);李中一(Chung-Yi Li)關鍵字：含糖飲料;全民健保資料庫;族群可歸因風險百分比;醫療費用;國民營養健康狀況變遷調查;sugar-sweetened beverages;National Health Insurance;population attributable risk percentage;medical care costs;Taiwan Nutrition and Health Survey期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在分析台灣民眾含糖飲料飲用盛行率，並計算族群可歸因風險百分比以估計民眾喝含糖飲料造成相關疾病醫療負擔情形。方法：本研究利用2013－2016年「國民營養健康狀況變遷調查」區分年齡別與性別，呈現含糖飲料飲用盛行率，並採用國外文獻中含糖飲料相關疾病之相對風險數值，計算族群可歸因風險百分比，爾後相乘2015－2017年全民健保資料庫中門診與住院健保相關疾病就醫費用，獲得我國民眾飲用含糖飲料所造成之醫療負擔。結果：10,443位民眾調查顯示，3－12歲有近4成的幼學童於最近一個月有喝市售含糖蔬果汁，而13－35歲的民眾9成7於最近一個月都有喝含糖飲料，36歲以上之民眾則約7成，且普遍男性喝含糖飲的比例比女性高。含糖飲料飲用造成相關疾病風險的部分，健保主診斷疾病醫療費用年均約為87億元（95％信賴區間為49－124億元），而主次診斷醫療費用年均約233億元（95％信賴區間為138－324億元）。結論：含糖飲料飲用盛行率有明顯的年齡差異，其中年輕世代含糖飲料飲用盛行率明顯較高。不過，因為本研究進行分析時所使用的部分參數援用國外數據，同時也未將含糖飲品與疾病之劑量反應關係納入計算，這對本研究結果的推論增加一些限制。但如何減少含糖飲料飲用過量，以降低民眾健康危害與相關醫療成本支出，仍是未來重要且迫切的健康政策課題。英文摘要：Objectives: To analyze the prevalence of sugar-sweetened beverage (SSB) consumption in Taiwan and estimate the population attributable risk percentage (PAR%) to evaluate the medical care burden of SSB consumption. Methods: The prevalence of SSB consumption was calculated by age and sex according to data from the Taiwan Nutrition and Health Survey collected between 2013 and 2016. The disease-specific relative risks of SSB consumption were determined by reviewing the literature. The medical care costs of diseases attributable to SSB intake were estimated by multiplying PAR% by average annual medical expenditures from 2015 to 2017 according to data in the National Health Insurance Research Database. Results: Among the 10,443 enrollees in this study, 40% of children aged 3-12 years reported consuming sugar-sweetened juice in the preceding month; for adults aged 13-35 and <U+2265>36 years, who had consumed SSB, the relevant percentages were 97% and 70%, respectively. Men reported higher SSB consumption than women did. The average annual health insurance medical expenditure attributable this SSB overconsumption was NT$8.7-23.3 billion (95% confidence interval: NT$4.9-32.4 billion). Conclusions: We identified a distinct and elevated pattern in the prevalence of SSB consumption among young people. Although we extracted the disease risk from the literature and did not consider the dose-response relationship between SSB consumption and disease, the results clearly indicate that SSB overconsumption is related to disease incidence; the corresponding increase in medical care burden is a critical health policy concern.起始頁-結束頁：319-331資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).11002314篇名：新型冠狀肺炎（COVID-19）「數位接觸者追蹤」之法律與倫理議題初探並列篇名：Legal and ethical issues of COVID-19 ”Digital Contact Tracing” measures in Taiwan作者：黃于玲(Yu-Ling Huang);羅承宗(Cheng-Chung Lo)關鍵字：新冠肺炎;數位接觸者追蹤;公衛監控;法律與倫理議題;COVID-19;digital contact tracing;public health surveillance;legal and ethical issues期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：新冠肺炎大流行為全世界帶來前所未有的挑戰。在有效治療藥物與疫苗研發成功之前，非藥物的介入方式（non-pharmaceutical interventions, NPIs）格外重要；其中，數位接觸者追蹤成為2020年全球重要防疫科技之一，台灣疫情指揮中心也使用多種接觸者追蹤措施，本文探究此新興公衛科技的執行、相關法律與倫理議題。方法：透過檢視衛福部官網、新聞報導、研究論文、法規、國際組織指引，本文類型化地呈現數位接觸者追蹤措施使用狀況以及其引發的法律與倫理議題、各方討論與回應。結果：台灣社會在此次疫情中確診、死亡人數皆遠低於其他國家，顯示合併使用多種防疫措施之成效，但也付出法律與倫理代價：電子圍籬、健保系統勾稽、電子足跡資料、簡訊措施皆欠缺法律明確性，也引發公私機構以超前部署之名，進行具倫理與科學有效性疑義的介入，並欠缺監督機制與公眾討論。結論：隱私、自由與防疫監控並非相互衝突的兩難選擇，讓新興數位技術成為防疫與公衛科技一環，除了資訊與生醫專業，也需要納入流行病學、公共衛生、法律、生醫科技倫理、社會科學等不同領域的專業，與相關公民團體，參與數位防疫科技的設計、使用、評估與監督。英文摘要：Objectives: COVID-19 has posed unprecedented challenges to governments and civil society worldwide. Before effective treatments and vaccines become available, nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs), including digital contact tracing technologies, are critical for delaying or controlling the spread of COVID-19. This paper investigates the practices, discussions, and legal and ethical issues of the contact tracing measures imposed in Taiwan during the COVID-19 pandemic. Methods: By analyzing official documents from the Ministry of Health and Welfare website, media reports, legal regulations, international organizations' ethical guidelines, and research on contact tracing measures, this paper categorically presents the applications, effectiveness, and legal and ethical concerns of these measures in Taiwan. Results: Although the rates of confirmed cases and deaths from COVID-19 are low in Taiwan, the Electronic Fence of Surveillance, a digital contact tracing measure implemented by the National Health Command Center, was found to lack legal certainty. Some proactive deployments by public and private organizations that have used location-based services, the National Health Insurance system, and the center's data on of the digital footprints of confirmed cases do not meet ethical and scientific validity standards. Oversight mechanisms have not been established, and public reflection has not been addressed. Conclusions: This paper argues that the choice of upholding individual privacy rights versus performing digital contact tracing is not binary. To make digital technologies part of measures against COVID-19, and future public health crises, it is crucial to include diverse experts not only of information technology and biomedicine, but also of epidemiology, public health, law, ethics, and social sciences, as well as civil organizations in the design, application, oversight, and evaluation of new public health technologies.起始頁-結束頁：332-345資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202106_40(3).10908515篇名：依據流行病學的精準C肝防治先導計劃引領全國性篩檢並列篇名：Epidemiology-based precise hepatitis C pilot control programs leads the official national screening作者：盧勝男(Sheng-Nan Lu);吳慧敏(Grace Hui-Min Wu);蒲若芳(Raoh-Fang Pwu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：123-126資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).PF0216篇名：公共衛生師教、考、用之初探－以政府部門用人為例並列篇名：A preliminary study on Public Health Specialists in education, examination and employment -- in the case of public service department作者：謝依霖(I-Lin Hsieh);古元玲(Yuan-Ling Ku);洪紹淵(Shao-Yuan Hung);莊人祥(Jen-Hsiang Chuang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：127-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).10914017篇名：台灣青少年藥物濫用研究之文獻回顧並列篇名：Review of studies on adolescent drug abuse in Taiwan作者：林淑君(Shu-Chun Lin);郭文正(Wen-Cheng Kuo);管昱翔(Yu-Siang Kuan)關鍵字：回顧性研究;青少年;藥物濫用;review study;adolescent;drug abuse期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究回顧1996年至2017年間國內青少年藥物濫用論文，以瞭解其內涵與題材類型之變化。本文以台灣博碩士論文知識加值系統、HyRead Journal台灣全文資料庫、台灣期刊論文索引與華藝線上圖書館，搜尋青少年藥物濫用論文，共取得59篇。研究發現：這些論文可以分為四大類：論述性、調查性、發展歷程與關連性、以及介入性研究。四類篇數各佔二至三成。依照時序可分三階段，1996-2003年第一階段9篇；2004-2010第二階段20篇；2011-2017第三階段30篇。這三階段的數量變化有明顯的上升趨勢，反映青少年藥物濫用議題日益受到學界重視。這三階段的論文題材亦隨年代而有變化。在第一階段以論述性文章為最多，偏重藥物濫用或預防計畫之概念介紹；第二階段以介入性論文較多，研究對象與研究方法呈現出多元的樣貌；到了第三階段論文篇數的成長幅度頗大，發展歷程與關聯性以及介入性論文為最多，前者多指出同儕或社會網絡對青少年藥物濫用扮演重要的因素；後者多聚焦在反毒教育課程或預防方案之效果。青少年藥物濫用議題之研究日益受到重視，研究議題多樣性也日益增加，此變化趨勢可能與社會情境、藥物濫用政策的變化相關。英文摘要：We reviewed Taiwanese research on adolescent drug abuse for the period from 1996 to 2017 to elucidate the changes in findings and major topics. We consulted the Taiwan Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations, HyRead Journal Taiwan full-text database, Humanities & Social Science Databases Catalog, and Airiti Library. A total of 59 articles on drug abuse among teenagers were identified from 1996 to 2017. The included papers were divided into 4 categories according to their approach: narrative, investigative, interventional, and a focus on developing processes/ relevance. The 4 categories each accounted for 20%-30% of all papers. We divided the papers into 3 stages: the first (1996-2003), second (2004-2010), and third (2011-2017) stages included 9, 19, and 31 papers, respectively. The quantitative changes during these 3 stages exhibited a clear upward trend. This trend suggests that the problem of drug abuse among teenagers has been receiving increased attention. The subject matter also varied during the study period. In the first stage, most studies employed a narrative approach and focused on introducing the concept of drug abuse or prevention programs; in the second stage, intervention studies were more prevalent, and the research objects and research methods varied considerably; and in the third stage, studies focused more on developing processes/relevance and interventions. Research on adolescent drug abuse has received increasing attention, and the diversity of research topics has also increased. This change may be related to changes in social conditions and drug abuse policies.起始頁-結束頁：133-150資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).10912818篇名：低價值醫療：國際經驗與對台灣的啟示並列篇名：Low-value care: international development experiences and the inspiration for Taiwan作者：郭語蓁(Yu-Chen Kuo);譚家惠(Elise Chia-Hui Tan)關鍵字：低價值醫療;過度使用;醫療品質;國際經驗;low-value care;overuse;health care quality;international experience期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：據經濟合作暨發展組織（OECD）統計，世界各國醫療費用皆有穩定上升的趨勢，為解決財務短絀，健康照護資源之重分配儼然成為政府必須面對的課題，而減少低價值醫療的使用，不僅能夠降低非必要的醫療保健支出，更可同時確保健康照護品質之水準。本文自PubMed及Web of Science等資料庫中進行文獻搜索，最後納入28篇具有量化分析之文獻進行綜合回顧。近年來歐美各國持續提出臨床上不建議執行醫療清單，透過彙整國際上低價值醫療之發展沿革、利用情形以及政策介入效益等資訊，能有助於我國政府在研擬改善低價值醫療項目清單之參佐，除低價值醫療項目定義應符合國情外，具有穩定資料來源以利後續監測也是值得重視的一環，藉由促進醫病溝通、有效率地使用醫療資源，降低低價值醫療利用，以達成「以病人為中心」健康照護理念。英文摘要：Health care spending has been growing steadily. With regard to addressing financial challenges in health care systems, resource reallocation has become a critical issue worldwide. Reducing the use of low-value care can minimize health care expenditure and ensure care quality. The recommendations based on evidence-based medicine, such as the Choosing Wisely lists from the United States and the ”Do Not Do” prompts from the United Kingdom, have been established. This systematic review has extracted 28 articles with quantitative analysis from PubMed and/ or Web of Science. Understanding the development, utilization of low-value care services and the effectiveness of alternatives from other countries, would help develop country-specific lists and definitions. Furthermore, continual monitoring and stable data source of utilization are also essential. It is expected that promoting patient-doctor communication, efficient health care resource reallocation, and reducing the use of low-value care can make the main goals of patient-centered care achieved.起始頁-結束頁：151-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).10914219篇名：高風險孕產婦健康管理試辦計畫對照護利用及結果之初步影響並列篇名：Preliminary impact of a care management pilot program for high-risk pregnant women on care utilization and outcomes作者：李果鴻(Guo-Hong Li);董鈺琪(Yu-Chi Tung)關鍵字：照護協調性;產前照護;孕婦健康;新生兒健康;care coordination;prenatal care;maternal health;neonatal health期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：為提高產前照護利用及生產結果，國際間視產前照護協調服務為重要策略。我國自2017年起，實施高風險（社會經濟及懷孕相關風險）孕婦照護協調試辦計畫，因此本研究目的為探討我國針對高風險懷孕婦女實施照護協調試辦計畫對照護利用及結果之初步影響。方法：本研究使用國民健康署提供之資料，選取於2017年5月至2018年5月間生產之所有孕婦，並以高風險定義相關條件，透過傾向分數配對出未參加計畫者，使用多元二分類羅吉斯迴歸模型，以檢測計畫介入是否有助於改善產婦產前檢查利用至少4或8次、剖腹產、低出生體重、早產及產婦併發症。結果：配對後共納入收案及未收案產婦各621人，參加計畫之產婦相較未參加者，產檢未達4次、低出生體重之勝算較低，勝算比分別為0.11（95%信賴區間：0.03-0.44）、0.42（95%信賴區間：0.23-0.77）。結論：高風險孕產婦健康管理試辦計畫之初步成效，可增加高風險產婦產前照護利用至少4次，及降低低出生體重。英文摘要：Objectives: To improve prenatal care utilization and birth outcomes, prenatal care coordination for pregnant women is internationally regarded as a critical strategy. Since 2017, a care coordination pilot program for high-risk (socioeconomic- and pregnancy-related risks) pregnant women has been implemented in Taiwan. The objective of this study was to examine the preliminary impact of this program on prenatal care utilization and birth outcomes among high-risk pregnant women. Methods: Data provided by the Health Promotion Administration on all women who gave birth at any time between May 2017 and May 2018 were employed. Propensity score matching and multivariate binary logistic regression were performed to examine whether the program intervention reduced the odds of having fewer than 4 or 8 prenatal care visits, a caesarean section, a baby with low birth weight, a preterm baby, or obstetric complications. Results: Each group included 621 pregnant women after matching. Pregnant women who participated in the program had lower odds of having fewer than 4 prenatal visits or a baby with low birth weight compared with those who did not participate (odds ratio: 0.11, 95% confidence interval: 0.03- 0.44; odds ratio: 0.42, 95% confidence interval: 0.23-0.77). Conclusions: The preliminary impact of the care coordination pilot program is, first, an increase in the proportion of high-risk pregnant women who undergo at least 4 prenatal care visits and, second, a decrease in the proportion of babies with low birth weight in this group.起始頁-結束頁：166-175資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).10912620篇名：民眾對全民健保重複用藥關懷函的電話回應：以質性分析探討重複用藥之相關因素並列篇名：Telephonic responses to the National Health Insurance medication duplication reminder letter: a qualitative analysis of factors related to medication duplication作者：蔡雅芳(Ya-Fang Tsai);官晨怡(Chen-I Kuan);鄭守夏(Shou-Hsia Cheng);王佳雯(Chia-Wen Wang)關鍵字：重複用藥;關懷提醒;質性研究;全民健保;medication duplication;reminder letter;qualitative analysis;National Health Insurance期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：病人安全是全球公共衛生重要的議題之一，中央健康保險署嘗試對重複用藥高風險族群寄發關懷函提醒。本研究以質性方法分析民眾在收到關懷函後來電回應的內容，以瞭解病人認知與解釋重複用藥之相關因素。方法：本研究團隊與健保署合作，根據健保署所提供2019年1月至3月間確認的重複用藥核扣名單，針對20歲以上且有使用降血糖或降血脂兩類藥品使用者為研究個案，寄發重複用藥提醒關懷函，於2019年7月1日至7月7日，共郵寄出11,000份關懷函，至8月13日止，陸續接獲265通民眾的回應電話，本研究係以民眾回應之內容進行主題分析。結果：根據民眾的電話回應，歸納與整理出以下的六大主題，分別為：民眾對於重複用藥的認知、民眾端認為與解釋重複用藥之個人因素、醫師因素、醫病關係，非醫療情境因素與其他回應等等。結論：重複用藥是一個複雜的問題，其發生存在不同面向的原因，需要病人與醫事人員的共同努力，方可保障病人用藥的安全。英文摘要：Objectives: Patient safety is a major issue in global public health. The National Health Insurance Administration (NHIA) in Taiwan introduced a pilot mail-reminder project for patients with duplicated medication. The responses of those who received the reminder letter were qualitatively analyzed to elucidate how they understand and explain the medication duplication. Methods: The research team collaborated with the NHIA and obtained a list of patients with duplicated medication; patients who were aged over 20 years and who received medication for hyperlipidemia and hyperglycemia were selected for this study. A total of 11,000 reminder letters were mailed to the selected patients during July 1-7, 2019. Until August 13, 2019, a total of 265 phone calls were received from the patients. The patients' responses were analyzed using thematic analysis. Results: Six themes were identified: patient knowledge on medication duplication, patient-perceived individual factors related to medication duplication, patient-perceived doctor factors related to medication duplication, the relationship between health professionals and patients, nonmedical context influencing medication duplication, and other responses. Conclusions: Medication duplication is a complicated matter and exists for various reasons. Thus, a concerted effort is required by patients and health professionals to address this problem and enhance patient medication safety.起始頁-結束頁：176-186資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).10914101篇名：以焦點團體訪談探究台灣北區某集中檢疫所醫護人員自願參與防疫任務之分析並列篇名：Using focus group interviews to investigate the willingness of medical personnel to voluntarily participate in COVID-19 group tasks in a one government quarantine facility in north Taiwan作者：蔡衣帆(Yi-Fan Tsai);黃俐晴(Li-Ching Huang);陳頌云(Sung-Yun Chen);何璇(Hsuan Ho);王嘉寧(Jia-Ning Wang);楊雅婷(Ya-Ting Yang);簡郁珊(Yu-Shan Chien);黃遵誠(Tsun-Cheng Huang)關鍵字：新型冠狀病毒;集中檢疫所;檢疫者;焦體團體訪談;醫護人員;COVID-19;government quarantine facility (GQF);quarantine subject;focus group interview;medical personnel期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：台灣流行疫情指揮中心為提供新型冠狀病毒檢疫者生活的隔離空間，預防社區群聚擴散而設立集中檢疫所。醫護人員是需接觸檢疫者的第一線人員，易曝露在高危險傳染的工作環境。本研究旨在探討醫護人員為何會自願參與檢疫所防疫任務之原因分析，做為未來招募人員之參考。方法：本研究對象以北部某集中檢疫所衛生組醫護人員為招募族群，採焦點團體訪談，專家檢測訪談大綱內容一致性為91%，訪談結束後以內容分析法進行資料分析與彙整，歸納出受訪者意願概念。結果：共12位參與者，4位男性、8位女性，平均年齡48.1±6.4歲、檢疫所平均服務天數82.1±77.1天。分析訪談結果顯示影響醫護人員自願參與防疫任務共有四個面向和6個原因，分別為第一面向滿足安全需要，其原因為防疫裝備充足、標準作業程序完整、完善職前及在職教育訓練；第二面向滿足愛與歸屬的需要，其原因為工作氛圍良好；第三面向滿足自尊的需要，其原因為台灣SARS防疫經驗；第四面向滿足自我實現的需要，其原因為人本關懷心態。結論：在疫情爆發之際，各國就曾陸續傳出醫護人員不足或不願意參與防疫工作。由本研究結果分析可知指揮中心提供資源環境若能滿足Abraham Maslow需求層次，就能吸引醫護人員自願參與集中檢疫所進行任務。建議制定政策時可依需求評估去滿足各層次需求，方可吸引醫療尖兵投入防疫，持續守護社區人民健康。英文摘要：Objectives: The Taiwan Centers for Disease Control have established government quarantine facilities (GQF) to prevent the community spread of COVID-19. Medical personnel are frontline workers who must have contact with individuals in quarantine and are thus at higher risk of infection. As a reference for future recruitment, this study investigated why some medical personnel volunteer to care for individuals in GQF. Methods: The researchers used purposive sampling to recruit participants from a GQF in northern Taiwan. Focus group interviews were administered. The consistency of the interview outline content was 91%. After the interviews, content analysis was performed to examine and summarize the data. The data were coded before comparison, categorization and summarization, producing various core categories. Results: A total of 12 participants voluntarily attended our interviews, compromising 4 men and 8 women, with an average age of 48.1 ± 6.4 years and an average length of service in GQF of 82.1 ± 77.1 days. Our study results revealed four aspects and six reasons that affect the voluntary participation of medical personnel in epidemic prevention tasks. The first aspect was meeting safety needs, and the reasons included sufficient personal protective equipment, complete standard operating procedures, and orientation training and in-service education and training. The second aspect was meeting the needs of love and belonging, and the reason included a good working atmosphere. The third aspect was meeting the need for self-esteem, and the reason included Taiwan's previous SARS epidemic prevention experience. Finally, the fourth aspect was meeting the need for self-realization, and the reason was based on the humanistic concern. Conclusions: At the time of the coronavirus outbreak, various countries reported insufficient medical personnel or personnel unwilling to participate in epidemic prevention work. Our results revealed that if the environment met the Maslow's hierarchy of needs, it can attract medical personnel to volunteer in GQF tasks. In formulating policies, the needs must be met at all levels, so that medical staff would be willing to participate in epidemic prevention work.起始頁-結束頁：187-198資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).1091452篇名：接受政府培訓之運動保健指導員會到社區推廣身體活動嗎？2017年運動保健種子培訓課程之一年追蹤結果並列篇名：Physical activity promotion in communities by exercise health instructors after an official training course: a 1-year follow-up study on the ”2017 Sports Health Teacher Training Program” in Taiwan作者：許秀帆(Hsiu-Fan Hsu);曾國維(Kuo-Wei Tseng);吳品嫻(Pin-Hsien Wu);王英偉(Ying-Wei Wang);林真夙(Chen-Su Lin);成庭甄(Ting-Chen Chen);陸玓玲(Dih-Ling Luh)關鍵字：社區;身體活動;政府培訓計畫;追蹤;community;physical activity;government training program;follow-up study期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：探討運動保健種子師資培訓課程計畫之學員於培訓後至社區推動身體活動之經驗與其自我效能、教學工具使用經驗和推動態度之關聯性。方法：針對國健署「2017年運動保健種子師資培訓課程計畫」培訓完成之1,598位運動保健指導員，於2018年10月透過電子郵件邀請學員進行線上問卷調查，回應之有效樣本865份（回應率=54.13%）。依變項為受訪者自述2017年受訓後至社區推動身體活動之經驗，自變項包括：個人基本資料、工具使用數、推動態度、推動之自我效能等。透過SAS 9.4版以羅吉斯迴歸進行多變項分析。結果：（一）66.36%的受訪者自述於培訓後一年內至社區推動身體活動。（二）經多變項分析發現與相關變項工作年資超過104個月、社區工作、身體活動推動工具之使用種類數越多者及應用工具推動身體活動之自我效能越高者與「身體活動社區推廣經驗」有正向關聯性。結論：2017年運動保健種子培訓課程之一年追蹤調查發現有超過六成之結訓學員會到社區推廣身體活動，建議未來對此類培訓計畫應於事前規劃更嚴謹之評價研究設計或成本效益分析。英文摘要：Objectives: To identify the relationships among physical activity promotion experience in communities (PAPEiC), self-efficacy, tool use experience, and promotion attitude of exercise advocates after official training. Methods: The 1,598 sports health instructors who had completed the National Health Administration's ”2017 Sports Health Teacher Training Program” were invited through email to take an online survey in October 2018 as follow-up. The respondent rate was 54.13% (n = 865). The outcome variable was self-reported PAPEiC after participation in the course. The independent variables were general demographic variables, tool use experience, promotion attitude, and self-efficacy. Multivariate logistic regression was performed using SAS version 9.4. Results: (1) Overall, 66.36% of the respondents reported that they had promoted physical activity in the community within the 1 year of program completion. (2) Multivariate analysis revealed that PAPEiC was significant correlated with (i) work experience of more than 104 months, (ii) the respondent being a community worker, (iii) use of more types of physical activity promotion tools, and (iv) higher self-efficacy with regard to tool use for physical activity promotion. Conclusions: More than 60% of the trainees promoted physical activity in their communities within 1 year of program completion. Our results suggest that future training programs should involve a more rigorous research design or cost-benefit analysis.起始頁-結束頁：199-212資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).1091353篇名：台灣南部日間照顧機構老人樣本族群肌少症之盛行率與其相關因素之探討並列篇名：Prevalence and correlates of sarcopenia among a sample of older adults attending daycare centers in southern Taiwan作者：陳玟潔(Wen-Chieh Chen);邱愛芳(Aih-Fung Chiu);林建志(Chien-Chih Lin);邱群芳(Chun-Fung Chiu)關鍵字：日間照護;日常生活活動;老人;肌少症;洗澡障礙;daycare;activity of daily living;older adult;sarcopenia;bathing disability期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：瞭解日間照顧機構老人肌少症的盛行率與相關因素。方法：採橫斷式與立意取樣設計，對台灣南部6家日間照顧機構65歲老人進行訪談。收集資料包括基本資料、身體質量指數、簡易心智狀態問卷調查表、巴氏量表，以及肌少症指標（肌肉質量、手握力與6公尺走路速度）。結果：研究樣本共165位（男68位、女97位），平均年齡78.9±8.2歲；1/3個案（34.5%）最近一年內有跌倒情形；約1/4個案（23.6%）的BMI值小於21 kg/m^2；超過6成（60.6%）個案有中重度認知缺損；一半以上（53.9%）個案屬於中重度依賴。以2019亞洲肌少症工作小組診斷切點計算，約5成（51.5%）個案有肌少症，男女比率相當。以多變量邏輯斯迴歸（Enter method）分析後，發現與肌少症相關的獨立危險因子有高齡、低身體質量指數、洗澡障礙與平地走動障礙四個變項，其OR值（95% Confidence interval）分別為1.06（1.00-1.12）、0.63（0.53-0.75）、3.76（1.01-13.99）、6.56（1.31-32.92）四個項目（p＜0.05），其餘變項如上述兩項以外的巴氏量表中各變項、性別、教育程度、共病指標、一年內有跌倒史，以及認知狀態未達統計顯著。結論：本研究日照機構樣本肌少症盛行率超過五成。對於日照老人合併有低身體質量指數、洗澡能力及平地走動能力障礙者，需特別留意肌少症發生的可能與風險，以便及早偵測並採取相關策略來延緩或降低肌少症導致的相關危害。英文摘要：Objectives: Examine the prevalence of sarcopenia and its correlates. Methods: In this cross-sectional study, 68 men and 97 women aged <U+2265> 65 years were recruited from 6 daycare centers in Southern Taiwan. In addition to recording participant demographic characteristics, the following were measured: body mass index, Short Portable Mental State Questionnaire, Barthel Index, handgrip strength, 6-m walking speed, and muscle mass index (through bioelectrical impedance analysis). The diagnosis of sarcopenia was made according to the 2019 criteria of the Asian Working Group for Sarcopenia (AWGS). Results: Among the 165 participants (mean age: 78.9 ± 8.2 years), 34.5% had fallen in the preceding year, and nearly one-fourth (24.2%) had a BMI value of ＜21 kg/m2; moreover, 60.6% of participants had moderate to severe cognitive impairment, and 53.9% were moderately to severely dependent in activities of daily living. The prevalence of sarcopenia was 51.5%, which is 6.0% higher than the prevalence obtained when using the criteria recommended by the European Working Group on Sarcopenia in Older People. Multivariate logistic regression revealed that sarcopenia was independently associated with (1) advanced age, (2) a low BMI, and inability to (3) bathe and (4) walk on a flat surface. The odds ratios (95% confidence interval) for these 4 independent variables were 1.06 (1.00-1.12), 0.63 (0.53-0.75), 3.76 (1.01-13.99), and 6.56 (1.31-32.92), respectively. Conclusions: Sarcopenia was highly prevalent in this study's sample. Instead of merely focusing on older adults with advanced age or a low BMI, health providers should focus more on older adults who are unable to bathe and walk on a flat surface; such people are at particular risk of suffering from sarcopenia, which further leads to serious health problems. Moreover, further intervention to prevent or delay the onset of sarcopenia may improve geriatric care in daycare centers.起始頁-結束頁：213-222資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).1091274篇名：評論：肌少症於長照服務：仍待更多的研究並列篇名：Commentary: addressing sarcopenia in the long-term care setting in Taiwan: more work is needed作者：吳易謙(I-Chien Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：223-223資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).109127015篇名：作者回覆：肌少症於長照服務仍待更多研究並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary: addressing sarcopenia in the long-term care setting in taiwan: more work is needed作者：陳玟潔(Wen-Chieh Chen);邱愛芳(Aih-Fung Chiu);林建志(Chien-Chih Lin);邱群芳(Chun-Fung Chiu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：224-224資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).109127026篇名：台灣大腸癌死亡率之空間分析並列篇名：Spatial analysis of colorectal cancer mortality in Taiwan作者：李宗儒(Tsung-Ju Li);陳昭榮(Jun-Rong Chen);李妙純(Miaw-Chwen Lee)關鍵字：大腸癌死亡率;空間分析;鄰近效應;地理加權<U+5EFB>歸;colorectal cancer mortality;spatial analysis;neighborhood effects;geographically weighted regression期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在探究台灣大腸癌死亡率之空間分佈，檢驗空間鄰近效應及社會、醫療資源因子之相關性。方法：使用2015年衛生福利部死因統計檔，對台灣349個鄉鎮市區（離島除外）大腸癌死亡率進行空間分析。以空間延遲模型探究大腸癌死亡率之空間鄰近效應。以地理加權<U+5EFB>歸分析鄉鎮市區大腸癌死亡率相關因子的異質性。結果：大腸癌死亡率有空間聚集（Global Moran's I = .2182），熱區集中新北市、苗栗、嘉義縣及屏東。空間延遲模型不但呈現大腸癌死亡率之正向空間鄰近效應（<U+5EFB>歸係數= .16）；亦具較佳的模型配適度（判定係數=.3217）。空間延遲模型證實整體上，低教育程度比例、老年人口比例、大腸癌發生率愈高及家庭醫師人口比愈低則大腸癌死亡率亦愈高；但，地理加權<U+5EFB>歸估計顯示這些相關之鄉鎮市區估計具異質性，12.9%至79.1%鄉鎮顯著異於平均值。結論：地理資訊系統逐漸普及，未來地區資源分配，應考慮空間相關，評估在地風險及其異質性，以提升資源運用有效性及縮減地區健康不平等。英文摘要：Objectives: To explore the spatial patterns of colorectal cancer mortality in Taiwan, examine its neighborhood effect, and identify potentially associated factors. Methods: This study used spatial econometrics to analyze the geographical distribution of colorectal cancer mortality in Taiwan across 349 townships based on the 2015 cause of death statistics from Ministry of Health and Welfare. A spatial lag model was used to examine the neighborhood effects, and geographically weighted regression was applied to investigate the spatial heterogeneity in the relationship of social and medical resources with colorectal cancer mortality. Results: Colorectal cancer mortality exhibited significant spatial clusters (Global Moran's I = 0.2182), with hotspots in New Taipei city, Miaoli, Chiayi, and Pingtung. The spatial lag model yielded evidence of positive neighborhood effects (β= .16) with acceptable goodness of fit (coefficient of determination = .3217). Moreover, its results indicated that colorectal cancer mortality is associated with areas with higher proportion of limited education, higher proportion of older adults, higher incidence of colorectal cancer, and lower ratio of family physicians to the population. However, the geographically weighted regression revealed a heterogeneous association of these factors with mortality across 349 townships, with 12.9% to 79.1% of towns differing significantly from the mean estimates. Conclusions: With the increasing popularity of the geographical information system, policy makers focused on resource allocation should consider spatial correlation when identifying local risk factors and their heterogeneous effects on health or diseases. Doing so would improve resource effectiveness and reduce regional health inequalities.起始頁-結束頁：225-240資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202104_40(2).1091057篇名：台灣2025年C肝消除的策略與進度並列篇名：Eliminating hepatitis C in Taiwan by 2025: strategies and progress作者：吳慧敏(Grace Hui-Min Wu);楊雯雯(Wen-Wen Yang);劉嘉玲(Chia-Ling Liu);鄭國本(Kuo-Pen Cheng);陳時中(Shih-Chung Chen);陳建仁(Chien-Jen Chen);蒲若芳(Raoh-Fang Pwu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：1-4資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).PF018篇名：負壓隔離病房是醫院的標準配置嗎？並列篇名：Are negative pressure isolation wards essential standard settings in hospitals?作者：蕭世槐(Shih-Huai Hsiao);廖茂宏(Mao-Hung Liao)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：5-7資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).1090759篇名：急診壅塞的原因與改善策略並列篇名：Emergency department overcrowding: an overview of critical issues and improvement strategies作者：蔡哲宏(Jeffrey Che-Hung Tsai);蔡耀德(Yao-Te Tsai);翁紹仁(Shao-Jen Weng);劉士嘉(Shih-Chia Liu)關鍵字：急診;壅塞;醫療品質;病人安全;emergency department;crowding;medical quality;patient safety期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以文獻回顧方式，就急診壅塞概況（包含台灣現況）、原因與機轉、對醫療品質之衝擊及相關的改善策略等各面向進行討論。作者搜尋1999至2019年急診壅塞的相關文獻，再挑選較具代表性的文章加以整理。文獻整理的結果發現輸入—處理效能—輸出的概念模型可用來分析急診壅塞的原因、所造成的影響及可能的解決辦法。作者另提出急診病人與其他類型的病人會共同競爭醫院的一般病床資源的生態，且以水庫的「水位」來說明急診壅塞如何形成的機轉。造成急診壅塞的成因非常複雜，主要發生在輸出端、醫院系統的問題、以及背後醫療體系與給付制度的生態等多重因素所造成。急診的壅塞的相關指標可由等候時間的延長及空間的擁擠情形分別來定義，其中急診留滯病人數能間接反應急診佔床率的概念。改善急診室壅塞的策略可以由急診流程、醫院管理、社區面等方面來討論。已經造成急診壅塞的醫院，必須注意維持照護品質與病人安全。急診壅塞未來將面臨新的挑戰，包含醫療環境的變化與急診生態與作業模式的改變，所以必須以新的思維面對急診壅塞的情形。醫院管理在處理急診壅塞時可能面臨財務上的阻力，因此政策的介入以提高誘因將更形重要。本文所整理急診壅塞各種相關問題的重要文獻，應對國內有志於進行急診壅塞相關研究的學者有所助益，進一步或可引導未來有效的政策之建議。英文摘要：This study reviews emergency department (ED) crowding by focusing on the current situations in Taiwan, causes and mechanisms, the impact of ED crowding on health care quality, and improvement strategies. We searched studies addressing ED crowding between 1999 and 2019 and summarized the most representative articles. We found that the input-throughput-output model can help analyze the causes and effects of ED crowding and reveal potential solutions. ED patients must compete for medical resources, such as acute care beds, with non-ED patients, and reservoir level has been used to explain the mechanism of ED crowding. ED crowding stems from multiple complex factors, mainly including output factors, hospital operation systems, and the health care system overall. The indicators of ED crowding are prolonged waiting time and a crowded space. The number of patients in the ED is indirectly correlated with the ED occupancy rate, and is useful to reflect the situation of crowding. Strategies to solve ED crowding include changes in ED operations and hospital management and the use of a community network. ED crowding has been a critical issue for hospitals, and changes in the health care environment and operations have exacerbated this problem; every staff member has to expend considerable effort in dealing with it. Financial pressure might prevent decision-makers from implementing potential solutions; therefore, incentives and government support may be required. We hope that this study provides a useful overview for researchers and policymakers and guides them to make effective policies for addressing ED crowding.起始頁-結束頁：8-29資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).10912410篇名：輕度身體活動的健康價值被低估了嗎？並列篇名：Are health benefits of light-intensity physical activity underestimated?作者：古博文(Po-Wen Ku);陳俐蓉(Li-Jung Chen);孫繼光(Chi-Kuang Sun);薛名淳(Ming-Chun Hsueh)關鍵字：文獻回顧;規律運動;成年人;老年人;中高強度;review;regular exercise;adult;elderly;moderate-to-vigorous期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：國際身體活動指引建議成年人每週應進行至少150分鐘的中強度有氧運動，或至少75分鐘高強度有氧運動，或以相等活動量進行中高強度組合活動。但這易讓人感到輕度身體活動（如：散步、遛狗、逛街購物、輕度家務勞動等）似乎沒有健康益處。近年逐漸有研究指出：輕度身體活動可為成年人（含老年人）帶來健康效益。本篇綜論檢視了以儀器測量輕度身體活動和其健康有關研究的重要議題，並討論輕度活動對18歲以上成年人的健康益處是否被低估。首先，描述國際間有關客觀測量輕度身體活動的現況。其次，分析以儀器測量身體活動相關研究的系統性文獻回顧及統合分析等證據，探討輕度身體活動與死亡率、罹病率及其他健康狀態之關係。最後，討論輕度身體活動的健康效益是否被低估的議題。整體而言，系統性文獻回顧及統合分析均支持輕度身體活動可提供成年人健康益處，且此效益獨立於中高強度身體活動的影響。部分研究建議成年人每天至少從事6小時的輕度身體活動以獲得健康效益，但須更多研究加以驗證。英文摘要：International physical activity guidelines suggest that adults should engage in at least 150 min of moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity per week, at least 75 min of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity throughout the week, or an equivalent combination of moderate- and vigorous-intensity activity. This seems to imply that little or no health benefits can be reaped from light-intensity physical activity (LPA; e.g., walking slowly, shopping, walking a dog, lifting lightweight objects, and doing household chores). However, an increasing body of evidence indicates that LPA may provide health benefits for adults and older adults. This review examined several crucial aspects of LPA and health and assessed whether the health benefits of LPA for adults aged 18 or older are underestimated. The following procedures were implemented to review the evidence of device-based measurements of LPA and health. First, the country profiles of adults performing LPA were described. Second, evidence obtained through systematic reviews and meta-analyses was examined to explore how LPA relates to mortality, morbidity, and other health outcomes. Finally, research topics regarding whether the health benefits of LPA for adults are underestimated were evaluated. In summary, evidence from systematic reviews and meta-analyses based on device-based assessment of LPA supports the health benefits of LPA for adults, which are independent of the effects of moderate-to-vigorous-intensity physical activity. Although some studies have suggested that adults can achieve health benefits by engaging in LPA for at least 6 hours per day, further research is needed to confirm this finding.起始頁-結束頁：30-40資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).10913011篇名：探討日本照顧工作專業化演進歷程對我國之借鏡並列篇名：The Japanese care work vocational process as a reference for Taiwan作者：徐明仿(Ming-Fang Hsu)關鍵字：介護福祉士;照顧工作;專門職業;專業能力;自立支援;certified care worker;care work;vocational;professional;self-reliance support期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：1987年5月日本立法通過介護福祉士制度（Certified Care Worker），1988年實施日本學校專業教育養成機制與國考證照機制，培育從事第一線照顧工作之專業人才，於法源依據下，日本將照顧工作定位是一份專門職業工作。本文以概念性文獻回顧探討日本從事第一線之照顧工作朝向專門職業化演進之歷程，搜尋國內外資料庫檢索系統CiNii、NDL、華藝線上圖書館、台灣期刊論文索引系統，篩選納入12篇（1990-2020年）日文研究。本文歸納出有六項因素交錯影響阻礙日本探討照顧工作專業性，此六項因素亦正是臺灣現今面臨的阻因。再者，本文歸納出日本照顧工作朝向專門職業演進的條件有五項，可供我國未來規劃提升照顧工作專業性之參考。英文摘要：Japan passed the Certified Care Worker Act in May 1987 and initiated a dual-track approach to specialized nursing care education and national qualification in 1988 to cultivate and certify care professionals; in the act, a ”caregiver” is defined as a certified care worker. This study adopted a conceptual review methodology to explore the historical evolution of the care work professionalization process in Japan. Domestic and foreign databases, including CiNii, NDL, Ariti Library, and TPLS, were searched to identify official historical Japanese policy documents from 1990 to 2020, and 12 studies were obtained. This study concludes that 6 major factors that hindered Japan's progress in professionalization are also the challenges faced in Taiwan. Moreover, this study summarizes 5 principles of the Japanese care work professionalization process that Taiwan can refer to for planning the future development of care work professionalization.起始頁-結束頁：41-54資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).10912912篇名：The impacts of an occupational health and safety course on college students並列篇名：一項大學安全衛生課程對大學生的影響評估作者：董育蕙(Yu-Huei Tong);陳富莉(Fu-Li Chen);陳志傑(Chih-Chieh Chen);林瑜雯(Yu-Wen Lin)關鍵字：occupational hazards;occupational health and safety education (OHS);OHS attitude;OHS self-efficacy;OHS behavioral-intentions;職業危害;職業安全衛生教育;職業安全衛生態度;職業安全衛生自我效能;職業安全衛生行為意向期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Objectives: The impacts of an occupational health and safety (OHS) course on undergraduates' knowledge, attitudes, self-efficacy and behaviorial intentions were evaluated. Methods: Participants included 198 college students (107 receiving intervention and 91 controls) from two universities. This study was a quasi-experimental, nonequivalent control group design with pre-post- and five week follow-up tests. We assessed the differences in mean scores using T-tests. Significant associations between the intervention and outcomes were identified by generalized estimating equation (GEE) regression models. Results: Statistically higher mean scores in knowledge (from 0.49 to 0.65, p＜0.001), attitudes (from 2.83 to 3.00, p＜0.001), and behavioral intentions (from 3.01 to 3.06, p=0.02) were observed in the intervention group, and significant improvements were maintained until follow-up. The regression models indicated that the intervention positively changed OHS knowledge and safety practices among college students. Conclusions: Consistently offering OHS courses in colleges is recommended, as shown by the positive impact demonstrated in this study.英文摘要：目標：本研究係評估一項在大學開設之安全衛生通識課程，對大學生的安全衛生知識、態度、自我效能與行為意向的影響研究。方法：本項研究共有2所大學總計198位大學生參與（實驗組107位：對照組91位），並採準實驗設計之前測－後測－5週後後測設計進行課程介入成效評估。以T檢定分析前測、後測、後後測間之差異，並使用廣義估計方程式迴歸模式評估該項介入課程的成效分析。結果：顯示課程在介入組學生的安全衛生知識、態度及行為意向都有顯著正向影響，且該項正向影響可持續到介入課程結束5週後。此外，廣義估計方程式迴歸模式分析結果顯示在控制學生個人因素後，該項安全衛生介入課程對大學生「安全衛生知識」及「安全衛生態度─安全行為」有顯著正向影響。結論：由於該項安全衛生課程介入顯示了對大學生安全衛生知識、態度與行為意向的正向效應，建議持續於學校提供安全衛生課程予學生學習，對於提升學生安全衛生意識會有相當助益。起始頁-結束頁：55-70資料語文：英文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).10904813篇名：ABCDE bundle介入對加護病房病人譫妄之成效－系統性回顧暨統合分析並列篇名：Effects of ABCDE bundle on incidence of delirium among critically ill patients in intensive care unit: a systematic review and meta-analysis作者：劉芝妤(Chih-Yu Liu);王琤(Jeng Wang);郭素娥(Su-Er Guo);劉靜如(Ching-Ju Liu);周芳如(Fang-Lu Chou);黃秋雯(Chiu-Wen Huang)關鍵字：ABCDE組合照護模式;譫妄;系統性文獻回顧;統合分析;ABCDE bundle;delirium;systematic review;meta-analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：譫妄為加護病房病人常見的合併症，發生率高達八成。國外自2014開始實施ABCDE組合照護（ABCDE bundle）預防譫妄，但歐、亞及國內較少相關研究，也缺乏系統性文獻整合與回顧其成效，本文旨在探討ABCDE bundle介入對加護病房病人譫妄之成效。方法：此研究於PubMed Clinical Queries、CINAHL、The Cochrane Library、Trip、Web of Science、ProQuest和華藝線上圖書館等7種電子文獻資料庫設定關鍵字，搜尋2020年12月以前出版之中、英文文獻，依據納入及排除條件後共納入4篇文獻。依JBI類實驗法評讀工具評價文章品質，發現效果明確超過不良效果，具備充足品質的證據支持，給予“強”建議，並使用Review Manager軟體（RevMan）5.3版本進行統合分析。結果：統合分析顯示ABCDE bundle介入可有效地降低譫妄發生率（RR: 0.63; CI: 0.45∼0.90），並可提高13%的28天存活率（RR:1.13; CI: 1.04∼1.23）。結論：ABCDE bundle對加護病房的譫妄預防及存活率具實證基礎。此結果可提供醫療人員給予加護病房病人多元整合照護之參酌；但受限於研究多為類實驗設計且較少歐亞研究，建議未來投入更多及更嚴謹的在地臨床隨機控制研究。英文摘要：Objectives: Delirium is a common complication in patients in the intensive care unit, with a high incidence of up to 80%. The ABCDE (Awakening, Breathing, Coordination, Delirium monitoring/management, and Early exercise/mobility) bundle care model has been implemented to prevent delirium in the United States since 2014, but only few relevant studies have been conducted in Europe, Asian countries and Taiwan. Moreover, a systematic literature review and meta-analysis of its efficacy is lacking. Methods: This meta-analysis used defined keywords to search for quantitative studies published in Chinese or English before December 2020 in seven electronic literature databases. Four articles were included after applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) quasi-experiment appraisal tools were used to evaluate the quality of these articles. Data were analyzed using the RevMan version 5.3 software. Results: The JBI appraisal was level of evidence 2c, indicating strong evidence. The meta-analysis revealed that the ABCDE bundle could effectively lower the incidence of delirium (relative risk [RR], 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.63, 0.45-0.90) and incidental benefit increase the 28-day survival rate by 13% (1.13, 1.04-1.23). Conclusions: The use of the ABCDE bundle to prevent delirium and improve survival in patients in the critical care unit is supported by evidence. The results may serve as a reference for health-care professionals who provide interdisciplinary care. However, this study is limited by its quasi-experimental design and the lack of studies in Eurasia and Taiwan. Further studies with a stringent design (RCT) are recommended to investigate this topic in depth.起始頁-結束頁：71-82資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).10910414篇名：台灣公民面對新冠肺炎疫情初期之焦慮症狀與防疫作為之趨勢並列篇名：Trends of anxiety and performance of preventive measures among Taiwanese citizens during COVID-19 pandemic作者：趙恩(En Chao);陳國緯(Kuo-Wei Chen);李思賢(Tony Szu-Hsien Lee)關鍵字：新冠肺炎;焦慮症狀;大流行病;防疫行為;趨勢分析;COVID-19;anxiety symptoms;pandemic;preventive measures;trend analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：面對新冠肺炎疫情，民眾若覺知有病毒感染的嚴重性與易感性，可能引發過度焦慮，導致出現過度反應或不理性行為。本研究是分析台灣在新冠肺炎疫情發展初期，成年公民面對疫情威脅時的焦慮症狀與採取防疫作為之趨勢。方法：本研究採用匿名網路調查台灣成年公民面對疫情之焦慮症狀及採取之防疫作為。焦慮症狀是採用STAI-6量表，詢問民眾因為疫情經驗到的緊張、沮喪、擔心、平靜、放輕鬆及滿足，共計6種情緒；防疫行為包含三個構面：洗手與戴口罩之個人防護、咳嗽禮儀、保持社交距離與自願檢疫，共計12題。資料分成三個期間，分別為中國武漢實施封城（1月23日至2月7日）、台灣實施強化邊境防疫、口罩購買實名制與首例無症狀高病毒感染者（2月8日至2月16日宣布第一位死亡案例）以及台灣發生第1例新冠肺炎死亡案例10天後（2月27日至3月9日）。統計方法使用Cochran-Armitage Trend Test及Jonckheere's Trend Test檢視疫情發展不同時段之民眾焦慮程度，以及採取防疫作為之趨勢變化，並進一步檢視性別、年齡、教育程度與收入在焦慮程度與防疫行為關聯性之差異。不同時期之焦慮程度均與防疫行為關聯程度是採用共變數分析。結果：分析結果顯示，研究參與者出現高度焦慮程度之比率在三個時段分別為45%、50%及55%，上升趨勢達統計顯著。能經常或總是落實防疫作為者之比率在三個時段分別為46%、58%及66%，上升趨勢達統計顯著，但與性別、年齡、教育程度與收入之相關未達顯著，表示不同時期之焦慮程度與防疫行為關聯性斜率均一致。共變數分析顯示不同時期之焦慮程度均與防疫行為有顯著關聯。結論：本研究結果顯示隨著COVID-19疫情發展，民眾焦慮症狀及防疫作為，不分性別、年齡與教育程度，都呈現上升趨勢。英文摘要：Objectives: Citizens who perceive SARS-CoV-2 as a threat may experience heightened anxiety of the severe illness caused by COVID-19. This study investigated the trends in anxiety and performance of preventive measures among Taiwanese citizens during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. Methods: This study employed an anonymous online survey to investigate anxiety and preventive behavior practice in adults during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. The 6-item state version of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI-6) was used to measure symptoms of anxiety. The preventive measures consisted of 12 items divided into three categories: personal protection, cough etiquette, and social distance and voluntary quarantine. The three time periods studied were the lockdown in Wuhan, China (from January 23 to February 7), the week when enhanced border protections and in-person mask purchase systems were introduced and the first citizen tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 without symptoms (from February 8 to February 16), and the 10 days following the first death from COVID-19 in Taiwan (from February 27 to March 9). The Cochran-Armitage trend test and the Jonckheere trend test were used to analyze changes in the degree of anxiety and the adoption of preventive measures in the early stages of the epidemic. An analysis of covariance was performed to examine the relationship between changes in anxiety and engagement in preventive behaviors after control for sex, age, education, and income. Results: The percentages of the participants with moderate to high levels of anxiety during the three time periods were 45%, 50%, and 55%, respectively. The percentages of those who practiced preventive measures often or always during the three time periods were 46%, 58%, and 66%, respectively. Significant increases were found both in levels of anxiety and in performance of preventive measures over the three time periods, but no differences across sex, age, education, or income groups were found. Changes in anxiety and performance of preventive behaviors were significantly associated during the three periods. Conclusions: The results revealed that as the pandemic spread, citizens' anxiety, and performance of preventive measures increased significantly for each sex, age, education level, and income group.起始頁-結束頁：83-96資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).10911515篇名：評論：新冠疫情、心理健康與防疫行為並列篇名：Commentary: COVID-19 pandemic, mental health, and preventive behaviors作者：張書森(Shu-Sen Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：97-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).1091150116篇名：作者回覆：愛情還是麵包：代表性vs.時效性與研究倫理並列篇名：Authors' response to commentary: love or bread: representativeness vs. timeliness and research ethics作者：趙恩(En Chao);陳國緯(Kuo-Wei Chen);李思賢(Tony Szu-Hsien Lee)期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：99-99資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).1091150217篇名：社區成年民眾身體活動量、年齡與自評生理心理健康之關聯性並列篇名：Relationships between physical activity, age, and self-rated physical and psychological health in community-dwelling adults作者：翁成傑(Cheng-Chie Weng);陳煒(Wei Chen);王政偉(Cheng-Wei Wang);楊惠斐(Hui-Fei Yang);王建宇(Jian-Yu Wang);黃琬婷(Wan-Ting Huang);范聖育(Sheng-Yu Fan)關鍵字：年齡;身體活動量;自評生理健康;自評心理健康;age;physical activity;self-rated physical health;self-rated psychological health期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：研究欲探索：（1）社區成年民眾身體活動量與自評生理與心理健康的關聯性；以及（2）在不同層級的身體活動量中，年齡與自評健康為線性或U型曲線之關係。方法：研究參與者為社區成年民眾，於教育部體育署舉辦之國民體適能檢測站進行資料收集，包括人口學資料、身體活動量、以及自評生理與心理健康。使用階層迴歸進行統計分析。結果：研究共招募2,212位研究參與者，依照身體活動量區分為高中低三組。控制人口學變項後，高度與中度身體活動量的研究參與者在自評健康（高度Beta = 0.12，中度Beta = 0.20，p值皆小於0.001）、自評生理健康（高度Beta = 0.09，中度Beta = 0.17，p值皆小於0.001）、自評心理健康（高度Beta =0.12，中度Beta = 0.19，p值皆小於0.001）皆顯著高於低度身體活動量者。在三組身體活動量，年齡皆與自評健康為線性正相關，年齡越大分數越高。結論：身體活動與年齡越高，社區成年民眾的自評生理與心理健康越佳。英文摘要：Objectives: The aims of this study were to investigate whether (1) physical activity is significantly associated with self-rated physical and psychological health in community-dwelling adults and (2) associations between age and self-rated physical and psychological health are linear or U-shaped for various physical activity levels. Methods: The participants were community-dwelling adults, and data were collected from physical fitness exam stations operated by the Sports Administration, Ministry of Education. Demographic characteristics, physical activity, and self-rated physical and psychological health statuses were collected. Hierarchical regression was used for statistical analysis. Results: In total, 2,212 adults were recruited and divided into high, moderate, and low physical activity groups. After controlling demographic characteristics, adults in high and moderate physical activity groups had significantly higher self-rated health (high: β = .12; moderate: β = .20, both p ＜ .001), self-rated physical health (high: β = .09; moderate: β = .17, both p ＜ .001), and self-rated psychological health (high: β = .12; moderate: β = .19, both p ＜ .001) than those in the low physical activity group. In addition, linear and positive relationships were observed between age and self-rated physical and psychological health in the three physical activity groups. Conclusions: Adults with high physical activity and old age tended to have good self-rated physical and psychological health.起始頁-結束頁：100-110資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).10909218篇名：客觀測量青少年在校期間身體活動量之研究並列篇名：Objectively measured school-based physical activity among adolescents作者：王文宜(Wen-Yi Wang);李美賢(Mei-Hsien Lee);薛名淳(Ming-Chun Hsueh);周建智(Chien-Chih Chou)關鍵字：SH150政策;中等至費力身體活動;客觀測量;SH150 program;moderate-to-vigorous physical activity;objective measurement期刊/會議論文集名稱：台灣公共衛生雜誌卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：目標：本研究旨在透過客觀測驗工具了解SH150政策推動下國中生在校期間身體活動量之狀況。方法：本研究對象為北部地區418位國中生，透過在校期間配戴五日加速規，蒐集有體育課日、無體育課日、體育課期間以及扣除體育課後在校期間之輕度身體活動（light physical activity, LPA）及中等至費力身體活動（moderate-to-vigorous physical activity, MVPA）時間；並記錄其性別、年級與體位程度等相關因子。結果：不同性別因子下LPA並未有所顯著差異，但MVPA各時間段男生都顯著高於女生；不同年級因子下，LPA與MVPA皆呈現年級越高身體活動量越低，與國際趨勢相同；而體位程度則與以往研究不同，體位適中組達標率為5.74，低於整體學生平均達標率，僅次於體位過重組的學生，可見學生即便體位適中，其身體活動量也是亟需關注的族群。結論：本研究透過客觀測量身體活動量檢視SH150達成率偏低，整體學生僅7.65%達150分鐘以上MVPA，建議可考量國際認可之消耗強度進行規劃，並研議學校執行面之推動策略。英文摘要：Objectives: This aim of the study was to objectively measure students' levels of school-day physical activity at junior high schools in Taipei that had implemented the Sport and Health 150 (SH150) program. Methods: The participants in this study were 418 students from junior high schools in northern Taiwan. Participants were asked to wear accelerometers for 5 days to measure their time spent performing light physical activity (LPA) and moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA). The average amount of time was subdivided into days with and without physical education (PE) class, the duration of the PE class, and the amount of time spent on physical activity on weekdays outside of PE class. In addition, data on participants' gender, grade, and body mass index (BMI) were recorded. Results: No significant differences in the level of LPA were found across genders. However, in terms of MVPA, boys scored significantly higher than girls for all periods. Our results were consistent with those of other international studies suggesting that the higher the grade, the lower the level of LPA and MVPA. However, our findings on BMI differed from those of previous studies. Only 5.74% of students with normal BMI met the SH150 requirements, which was a lower percentage than the overall average and higher only than the overweight group. This result suggests that future studies should focus on students with normal BMIs but low levels of physical activity. Conclusions: International standards on energy consumption intensity should be considered when creating school-day physical activity programs. Strategies for implementing a physical activity programs should also be reviewed.起始頁-結束頁：111-121資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：醫藥衛生＞預防保健與衛生學	醫藥衛生＞社會醫學出版單位：臺灣公共衛生學會DOI：10.6288/TJPH.202102_40(1).10909701篇名：蠟山政道的區域秩序論述之變遷並列篇名：Changes in the ”Regional Order” Discourses of Masamichi Royama作者：曾寶滿(Bau-Man Tzeng)關鍵字：區域主義;東亞協同體;反西方主義;共同態;Regionalism;East Asia Cooperative Community;Anti-Westernism;Gemeinschaft期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文旨在考察政治學者蠟山政道（1895－1980）於1930年代的區域秩序論之變遷，並探究近代日本的區域主義與社會思想互為影響的歷程。本文第一部份回顧近代日本的區域主義在政治外交史與思想史之研究。第二、三部分檢討九一八事變期「亞洲門羅主義」論潮在日本盛行的背景與脈絡，並考察蠟山政道對該論潮的批判理則與其社會思想。第四部分分析蠟山政道從行政學、社會學等學科所吸納的思想資源，探究1920年代至1930年代後半葉之間蠟山政道的「東亞協同體」論的形成過程。本文強調，從對「亞洲門羅主義」的批判到「東亞協同體」論的提出，蠟山政道長期關注如何提出有別於西方知識脈絡的東亞論，但中日戰爭下他的區域秩序論，仍未脫援引西方學知的侷限，面對中國局勢，亦落入輕忽與中國輿論對話之窠臼。英文摘要：The influence of social thought on regionalism in prewar Japan has been generally dismissed so far. But a few scholars began to pay much attention to the importance of social liberalism and corporatism concerning the political relations in Showa Japan. Taking sides with that trend, this article is focused on Royama Masamich's changes in discourse of international relations in interwar Japan. During the Sino-Japanese War, Royama's discourses on regional order was based on the speculation on functionalism and Ferdinand Tonnies' community (Gemeinschaft) theory. Royama, believing that East Asians can possess a common culture by creating policy-oriented institutions, wished to innovate and reconstruct international order in East Asia. In Royama's ”East Asia Cooperative Community” theory, this community should overcome the negative effects of imperialist governance and nationalist sentiment. Finally, in 1938, this theory was embodied in the Empire's official discourse to explain the reasons for the Sino-Japanese War. However, as the war got worse, this theory decreased the part of introspection for imperialism and lose the patience for multiculturalism and nationalism.起始頁-結束頁：1-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社2篇名：日本民俗學對文化財保護政策制定的影響：以民俗資料分類為例並列篇名：Impact of Cultural Traditionology on Policy-making of Cultural Property: A Case Study of Taxonomy for Folk Data作者：王婷儀(Ting-I Wang)關鍵字：柳田國男;民俗學;文化財保護法;文化資產;傳統文化;Kunio Yangita;Cultural Traditionology;Act on Protection of Cultural Properties;Cultural Heritage;Traditional Culture期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：西元1930年代柳田國男致力於民俗學體制化工作，對於調查方法及資料論的建構也同步展開，具體作法以《鄉土生活研究法》一書的撰寫最具代表性。本論以解析民俗資料分類為目標，梳理民俗資料相關的分類模式，具體的構成從論述《鄉土生活研究法》出版的背景環境及學問取向出發，討論柳田對於鄉土一詞的概念與其形成的時代背景，接著檢視民俗研究的田野調查，從中討論柳田國男與折口信夫、和歌森太郎、千葉德爾所建構民俗資料的分類基準。最後從《鄉土生活研究法》一書所建構的民俗資料收集方法，對應日本歷年《文化財保護法》中民俗文化財進行比較分析，此結也是本論重點，從柳田國男提出的現地調查技巧及資料論的適用性，論述學術的民俗學如何應用於日本文化財保護法的制定，實踐日本民俗學「經世濟民」的思想。臺灣學界對於民俗研究的分類項目的討論仍少見，日本民俗學系統性的資料收集方法對於文化財保護法的政策制定直接起了影響作用，值得臺灣借鏡參考。盼望本文可引起臺灣學界對民俗研究學術發展的重視與投入，促進學界及在野研究者們合力推動臺灣民俗資料分類，共同建立對民間與學界有益的知識系統。英文摘要：In the 1930s, Kunio Yanagita started working on the foundation of Japanese Cultural Traditionology, trying to establish an independent discipline domestically. He also put efforts on methodologies that are concerned with research and data collection. The publishing of Research Methodology of Folk Life (Kyoudo Seikatsu no Kenkyuho) was evidence. In this study synthesized multiple frameworks of taxonomy for folk data. In the beginning, by explaining the social, historical, and academic context where Research Methodology of Folk Life was published. Based on these contexts, this study clarifies Yanagita's definition of ”folk context (kyodo) ” and how he formulated this concept. Second, by focusing on the taxonomy of fieldwork, comparing different frameworks and standards that were created by Kunio Yanagoita, Shinobu Orikuchi, Taro Wakamori, Tokuji Chiba, and modification within these frameworks. Finally, based on the fieldwork methodology in Research Methodology of Folk Life, this study discusses a case about the changing status of ”folk property” in the Act on Protection of Cultural Properties in Japan. Through examining the feasibility of Yanagita's theory and how it is applied to the policy-making process of the Act on Protection of Cultural Properties in Japan.起始頁-結束頁：45-87資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社3篇名：韋伯新教倫理的核心概念及其西方中心主義疑雲並列篇名：Is there an Eurocentrism in Max Weber's Protestant Ethics? What is the Key Concept of Protestant Ethics?作者：林錚(Cheng Lin)關鍵字：入世禁慾;西方中心主義;拒絕神化被造物;資本主義精神;新教倫理;Worldly asceticism;Eurocentrism;Refusal of the idolatry;Spirit of capitalism;Protestant ethics期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：韋伯至今仍未擺脫西方中心主義的批評。這主要涉及到他最著名的研究，《基督新教倫理與資本主義精神》︰對大多數讀者來說，他暗示西方的優越性。我們感興趣的問題不在於韋伯是不是西方中心主義者，因為我們有理由相信他不是。而是他對基督新教的研究如何會被視為一種西方中心主義的詮釋呢？這與思想的繼受有關。從韋伯本人提及路德與喀爾文在教義上的差異、同輩學者對韋伯的誤解到《新教倫理》的法語系繼受，這些案例說明想法差距有效扭曲了韋伯與讀者之間的溝通。一點也不像吾人通常所認為的那樣，入世禁慾不是開啟新教倫理的鑰匙，而是拒絕神化被造物原則。這項長期不為人察覺的原則，使一心著眼於救贖的清教徒曉得要如何適當地生活，進而與資本主義精神發生關連。韋伯確實可以把清教倫理形容為獨特的，特別是此種倫理能因褻瀆神明的理由而拒斥其它新教教派。換句話說，對「入世禁慾」概念的過度強調阻礙人們意識到韋伯本人屬意另一個概念，他將無可避免地被視為一位西方中心主義者。英文摘要：Weber has not shaken off yet the criticism of Eurocentrism. This is chiefly concerned with his most famous research, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. For most readers he hints at the superiority of the West. The question we are interested in is not whether Weber holds Eurocentric beliefs, because we have reason to believe that he is not. Rather, how could his study of Protestantism is regarded as a Eurocentric interpretation? This relates to the reception of thought. From the difference between Luther's and Calvin's teachings mentioned by Weber himself, peers who misunderstand Weber and the French interpretation of Protestant Ethics, these cases show that the gap in ideas effectively distorts the communication between Weber and his readers. Not at all as we usually think, the worldly asceticism is not the key to opening the Protestant ethics, but the principle of refusal of the idolatry. This principle which is not noticed for a long time, allows the Puritan who focus on his own salvation to know how to live properly and thus be related to the spirit of capitalism. Weber can indeed describe Puritan ethics as unique; especially this ethics can reject other Protestant denominations because of blasphemy. In other words, the overemphasis on the concept of ”worldly asceticism” inevitably prevents us from realizing that Weber personally prefers another concept, he will inevitably be regarded as a Eurocentrist.起始頁-結束頁：89-137資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社4篇名：論象徵利益－從布赫迪厄的視角出發並列篇名：On Symbolic Interest: From the Perspective of Bourdieu作者：賴曉黎(Shau-Lee Lai)關鍵字：象徵利益;利益空缺;特殊者的利益;普遍者的利益;Symbolic Interest;Disinterestedness;Interest of the Particular;Interest of the Universal期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：從利益的複數性出發，布赫迪厄主張：有多少場域就有多少利益。利益是指向外在對象並受客觀條件制約的驅力（drives），一種驅使人們朝向特定有意義的、有價值行動的動力。象徵利益就是與物質利益作出區辨的否認的利益。在差異邏輯的作用下，通過否認物質利益，象徵利益對原來未區辨者作出區辨，並運用利缺性策略實作出某種特定的新利益，從而建立相對自主的新場域。在與現代經濟利益的區辨中，作為社會分化動力的象徵利益讓新的文化場域不斷興起。其中，追逐特殊者利益的文化場域與追求普遍者利益的科層場域，處於既合作又競爭的狀態。然而兩者的差異亦是明顯的：前者著重於「特殊者」（the particular）利益的追求，主張「為其自身之故」以及除了自身之外沒有別的目的等等；後者則強調「普遍者」（the universal）的利益，通過將自己的特殊利益建立為普遍者，把特殊利益的觀點變成普遍觀點，他們的目的是通過掩蓋私利、遮蔽真相的方式達到壟斷普遍者。英文摘要：Starting from the plurality of interests, Bourdieu argues that there are as many interests as there are fields. An interest is a drive that points to external objects and is subject to objective conditions, a drive that drives people toward certain meaningful and valuable actions. Symbolic interest is denied interest. By the effect of logic of difference and the denegation of interest, symbolic interest distinguishes the undistinguished. Using the strategy of disinterestedness operates new specific interests, and rises a field of relative autonomy. Cultural fields and bureaucratic fields are two different types: the former for interest of the particular and the latter for interest of the universal. In elaborating a theory of public service and of public order, the agents had an interest in giving a universal form to their generic interests. They want monopoly of the universal.起始頁-結束頁：139-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社5篇名：「一例一休」兩次修法下的加班費問題－以立法論為中心並列篇名：A Research of Premium Wages Rate in ”Five-day Working Week System” Amendments: Through the Theories of Legislation作者：王漢威(Han-Wei Wang);林良榮(Liang-Jung Lin)關鍵字：補休;一例一休;加班費;立法論;工作時間;compensatory rest;Five-day working week;premium wages;theory of legislation;working hours期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：為落實週休二日制度，2016年12月臺灣立法院通過「一例一休修法」，增訂休息日之規定。「一例一休修法」施行一年餘，以賦予企業經營和勞工工作安排的彈性為目標，2018年1月「一例一休」再次完成修法。然而「一例一休」的這兩次修法留下許多爭議，例如休息日的加班費倍率與其他休假日間欠缺整合性；新增勞基法第32條之1的加班費換補休規定時，係依勞工延長工作之時數計算補休時數，而非以加班費倍率為標準計算補休時數等，遂引發爭論。由於我國勞基法的諸多工時規定係參考自日本勞基法，且日本已累積大量的工時領域學術研究，因此在工時議題上，分析借鏡日本的研究成果不失為一個有效的研究途徑。礙於篇幅有限，本文集中於檢討勞基法第24條與第39條所定之加班費計算公式（以加班費倍率之設定為主）的議題，透過勞動科學與立法政策目的等之分析，並借助日本的經驗，提出加班費倍率等相關議題的改善對策。英文摘要：In order to implement the policy of ”Five-day working week system”, the Legislative Yuan passed the amendment of the Labor Standards Act on December 2016. However, the Labor Standards Act was reformed once again under on January 2018, because of the needs of flexibility. These two amendments are called ”Five-day working week system” amendments. There are a lot of defects in ”Five-day working week system” amendments, since some loopholes which may have a great effect upon health of labor are left. For example, ”Five-day working week system” amendments fail to strike a balance of the rate of premium wages between the work on ”flexible rest day” and on the other holidays. Due to several working hours regulations of Taiwanese Labor Standards Act origin from Japanese Labor Standards Act, analyzing accumulated Japanese researches is an important approach to study the legislative intent of the working hours regulations of Taiwanese Labor Standards Act. Owing to limited space, this article mainly focuses on the issues which relate to the rate of premium wages for overtime work. Through the theories of legislation, this article proposes the appropriate state rate of premium wages.起始頁-結束頁：193-263資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社6篇名：稻作之道：臺灣稻作農村近30年的轉型歷程並列篇名：Way of Rice Production: an Transformation of Taiwan's Rice Production Villages during Last 30 Years作者：王乃雯(Nai-Wen Wang)關鍵字：稻作農村轉型;「不完全」商品;市場化;臺灣農業;Transformation of Rice Production Village;Incomplete Commodity;Marketization;Taiwan Agriculture期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：稻米在臺灣的生產，一直深受國家力量製肘，而從日本殖民後期到臺灣光復後，此一由上而下的制約力量更顯清楚。然而，隨著1980年代以來，臺灣積極加入國際間的自由貿易組織，以及大宗穀物進口後國人飲食習慣變遷，促使1974年以來公糧保價收購所構築的稻作農村基本框架受到撼動，從而誕生了一連串針對稻米生產的改革。其中，由於長期公糧政策下所形構的農村資源部署，造就了地方碾米廠／糧商壯大自身的物質條件，致使許多改革成效不彰。中央政府曾試圖透過產銷班組織，來培養農民自身直面市場的能力，但受限於產銷班組織的法律位階不明確，及其在農村資源分配過程中無法建立新的、被肯認的公／私界線，以致內部糾紛迭起。此後，產地認證制度雖提供了個別小農面對市場的初步條件，但卻也加速了稻作農村進入個體分化的趨勢之中。耙梳近30年臺灣稻作農村的轉變，也不難發現中央官僚的角色也從以往的積極干預，逐漸隱身成為後端的整合協調角色，表面上看起來是一個中性的過程，然而，就其實質，會發現在面對國際自由貿易組織的介入中，國家的角色已逐漸轉換為將個體打造為適應市場經濟的輔助者。英文摘要：Production of rice in Taiwan was restricted by the government for a long time. However, after 1980's, Taiwan's government actively participated in free trade organizations, and this action made possible the selling of foreign agricultural foods under lower tariffs in Taiwan. Cheaper foreign agricultural foods and the transition of Taiwan's dietary customs impacted the production of rice. Lots of challenges occurring after the 1980's pushed the government to adjust its policy of purchasing rice at a guaranteed price, and this was the most influential governmental action in stabilizing rice planting villages since 1974. The policy also impacted the allocation of resources in rural society and helped local rice mills and dealers to build up their force, which also made doomed the reforms from the central government to failure. The government tried to overcome the problem by organizing farmers to deal with the market in unity, but organization combing production and selling caused lots of troubles due to its obscured legal status. The local government, by setting up a new rule of certificating the origin of rice, gave farmers a basic platform to sell their products, but this also accelerated the process of farmers' individualization. To take a view of the development of rice farmers during last 30 years, it is not hard to find that the role of central government changed from vigorous intervention to passive integration, which looks like a neutral process but in fact, under the requirements of free trade organization, the government has become a helper in allowing farmers to adjust to the marketplace.起始頁-結束頁：265-307資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社7篇名：《莊子》的解構哲學與他者倫理並列篇名：Philosophy of Deconstruction and Ethics of Others of Zhuangzi作者：陳康寧(Kang-Lin Tan)關鍵字：莊子;列維納斯;批判;解構;他者倫理;Zhuangzi;Emmanuel Levinas;Criticism;Deconstruction;Ethics of Others期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：《莊子》的倫理關懷，奠基於「天地與我並生，而萬物與我為一」的冥契體驗，藉由氣化感通而泯除自我中心的執定、打破物我的隔閡，將自我轉化為能夠敞開心胸與他者對話的主體狀態。而列維納斯（Emmanuel Levinas）的他者倫理則可以進一步激盪、深化《莊子》在思考他者的議題所觸及的倫理向度。本文藉由「跨文化批判」的研究視角，讓兩者產生對話從而達到互相激盪、滋長的可能性。列維納斯對他者的倫理關懷，表現在他對西方本體論與帝國權力結盟共構的批判。有意思的是，《莊子》向來被認為具有「解構哲學」的意涵，特別是解除「禮」對人性桎梏的一面，而解構的背後其實隱含一種對權力的敏銳批判和倫理關懷。本文將從《莊子》的「解構」與「批判」面向談起，再進而到他者倫理。英文摘要：Ethical concern of Zhuangzi is based on mystical experience of ”coexistence of heaven, earth and me and universe and me as one”. By connection of Qi, it avoids self-centered persistence and breaks through the boundary between objects and humans. It transforms self into open-minded subject which can have dialogues with others. Emmanuel Levinas' ethics of others further complements ethical dimensions on issues of others in Zhuangzi. By research perspective of ”cross-cultural criticism”, it results in dialogue between two parties and the possibility of mutual enhancement. Emmanuel Levinas' ethical concern on others is shown in his criticism on western ontology and imperial power alliance. Noticeably, Zhuangzi has been referred to the implication of ”philosophy of deconstruction”, particularly the liberalization of confinement of ”rites” on humanity. Deconstruction implies sharp criticism and ethical concern on power. This study will first discuss ”deconstruction” and ”criticism” of Zhuangzi and subsequently elaborate ethics of others.起始頁-結束頁：1-55資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社8篇名：論王龍溪「一念之微」之工夫義並列篇名：Perspective on the Meaning of Self-Cultivation about Wang Longxi's ”Subtle Thought”作者：張莞苓(Wan-Ling Chang)關鍵字：王龍溪;一念之微;意與念;先天正心;後天誠意;Wang Longxi;Subtle Thought;Thought and Will;Xian Tian Zheng Xin;Hou Tian Cheng Yi期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：王龍溪重視「一念之微」，但當「念」與良知本體與工夫統合在一起時，便產生了幾個問題：第一，「念」與「意」的關係為何？第二，「一念之微」的工夫是否只適用於「上根人」的「先天正心之學」？第三，「一念之微」究竟是「體」還是「用」？是「本體」還是「工夫」？第四，「一念之微」之工夫究竟是什麼樣的工夫？因此本文首先針對龍溪在「意」與「念」的關係上進行梳理，看見二者常混同不分、一體連用的情形，以及他在「意」與「念」、本體與工夫之間的微妙取捨。其次，進一步分析「先天正心之學」、「後天誠意之學」的意義，指出其語脈與陽明《大學》「格致誠正」不同，卻也蘊含此脈絡。二學具有現實狀況的陳述，亦有教法點化的操作，兩個層次不應混淆。無論是資質高低，關鍵都在悟，也都需要修，其工夫不離開「一念之微」，統於「誠意」工夫。最後，討論「念」的體用定位與本體工夫，指出「先天正心之學」包含「當下悟入」、「照察消除」兩種意涵，但都不離「一念之微」。此「一念之微」雖具良知意義，但仍屬發用流行層面，正因其即寂即感、有無之間的定位，才使其工夫意義得以呈顯，而不只是停留在本體上虛無飄渺的作用。英文摘要：Wang Longxi attached importance to ”subtle thought”. But several problems arose when ”thought” was integrated with reality and cultivation of conscience. First, what is the relationship between ”thought” and ”will”? Second, is the practice of ”subtle thought” only applicable to the ”xian tian zheng xin zhi xue” of ”natural endowments”? Third, is ”subtle thought” belong to substance or function, reality or cultivation ? Forth, exactly what kind of practice is ”subtle thought” ? The topic will be approached from three aspects. First, to confer the relationship between Wang Longxi's ”thought” and ”will”, and presenting the blend of them. Second, to discuss the meanings of ”xian tian zheng xin zhi xue” and ”hou tian cheng yi zhi xue”, and pointing out the similarities and differences between Wang Longxi's statements and Wang Yangming's ”ge zhi cheng zheng” of ”Great Learning”. Third, discussing the orientation of ”substance-Function” and ontological discipline about ”thought”. ”Xian tian zheng xin zhi xue” includes the two meanings of ”comprehend instantly” and ”eliminat after inspection”, but they are both inseparable from ”subtle thought”. Although ”subtle thought” is related to conscience, it still belongs to the part of function. The meaning of self-cultivation about Wang Longxi's ”subtle thought” will not be nothingness.起始頁-結束頁：57-98資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社9篇名：東亞語境與內證體驗中的近代性構築與批判：蔣維喬與岡田式靜坐法並列篇名：Building Modernity Based on Internal Evidence and a View Encompassing East Asia, along with the Criticism Thereof: Jiang Wei-qiao and the Okada-style Seiza Meditation作者：廖赤陽(Chi-Yang Liao)關鍵字：蔣維喬;因是子靜坐法;岡田式靜坐法;氣功養生;中日關係;Jiang Weiqiao;Yinshizi Jingzuo;Okada Style Seiza Medication;Qigong;China- Japan Relations期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以蔣維喬和岡田虎二郎為個案，從易為學術界所忽略的內證性身心技法與修行的角度，探討20世紀前期，在西方科學強勢語境下，中日知識分子的思考與行動。倡導新學的蔣維喬為了改造國民性而公開傳授<U+9759>坐，卻受到中國主流知識界以科學為名的批判和圍剿，蔣試圖從日本突圍，從岡田等人處尋求其科學與哲學依據，為靜坐賦予近代性，其著作《因是子靜坐法》實為岡田式靜坐法的蔣維喬式中文解說版。不過岡田本人卻是對明治以來全盤西化持強烈質疑與批判之人物，為此他遠渡美國尋求答案。在美國他邂逅了貴格教派的身心技法與思想，回到日本後創立了一世風靡的岡田式靜坐法。就這樣，西方的身心技法影響了日本，而日本之身心技法又傳到了中國卻被作為傳統而痛遭批判。這一個案既反映了近代日本在中西文明接觸中的某種關鍵性角色，也反映了全球視野下的身心技法及其思想的跨域移動及其相互影響。在此過程中，傳統與近代、東方與西方等各種因素激烈沖撞而又相互越境、錯位與糾纏。也正因此，我們更應該避免西方近代對中國傳統這樣的標簽式思維，去深入體會作為修行人共通的內證體驗，這才是他們的思想發生的源泉之所在。英文摘要：Jiang Wei-qiao advocated the practice of jing zuo (quiet sitting meditation) for modifying the national character in early 20th century. However, this method was strongly criticized as unscientific by the people in the country's mainstream intellectual sphere. In response to this criticism, Jiang Wei-qiao sought from Japan evidence of the scientificity and modernity of seiza meditation and, introduced the Okada-style Meditation to China. Okada Torajiro himself originally had strong misgivings about the emergence of westernization in the Meiji period and about the attendant inflow of modern science, adopting a strongly critical stance. To clarify his doubts, however, he went to the United States, where he was exposed to the Society of Friends' (Quaker) mind-body intervention and its philosophy. Influenced by this, Okada returned to Japan and invented the Okada-style Meditation. In this manner, the Western mind-body intervention method was transmitted via Japan to China, where, however, the practice was criticized by Chinese intellectuals as being a longstanding tradition of their own country. This case shows that, during this process of transmission, elements such as tradition and modernity and East and West, while forcefully colliding, mutually crossed boundaries and became intertwined. Therefore, in addition to making efforts to depart from stereotypical dichotomies such as ”traditional China vs. modern West,” we need to closely study the similarities among the internal experiences of the meditators themselves, as these are the very sources from which their philosophies emerged.起始頁-結束頁：99-154資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社10篇名：牟宗三與勞思光論朱子學中是否有「本質」概念：以韓國儒學的論爭為例並列篇名：Concept of Essence in Zhu Xi's Philosophy: the Different Interpretation of Mou Zong-shan's and Lao Sze-kwang's with Reference to Korean Confucians' Debates作者：呂政倚(Cheng-i Lu)關鍵字：牟宗三;勞思光;本然之性;氣質之性;本質;Mou Zong-shan;Lao Sze-kwang;Original Nature;Physical Nature;Essence期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文目的在探討朱子學中是否有相當於亞里斯多德的「本質」概念，這個問題涉及朱子是否運用這個概念來說明其「人性、物性同異」之辨。牟宗三與勞思光在這個問題上的看法迥異，牟宗三認為朱子學中並沒有「本質」概念，勞思光則認為朱子學中有「本質」概念。牟宗三的看法頗具爭議性，引起若干學者的批判。為釐清此爭議，筆者首先以他們對朱子「枯槁有性」說的解讀做為切入點，分析他們二人的看法，指出牟宗三對朱子學的詮釋最具效力。隨後以韓國「湖洛論爭」中的「人性、物性同異」論辯做為參照的對象，通過「人性、物性同」論者對「人性、物性異」論者的批判，指出在朱子的「理氣論」中並沒有安置「本質」概念的空間。最後，筆者指出牟宗三認為唯有將「本質」概念歸諸知識的領域，才能使其在朱子學中獲得獨立意義的看法具有合理性。英文摘要：”Essence” is a critical concept in Aristotle's philosophy. It is important to ask whether it was employed Zhu Xi's philosophy--in his elaboration of the issue ”the difference between the human nature and the thing's nature.” As for this question, contemporary scholar Lao Sze-kwang and Mou Zong-shan reached opposite conclusions. Lao Sze-kwang confirmed that Zhu Xi had the concept of essence in his theory; whereas Mou Zong-shan denied that Zhu had it, and Mou's remark caused some criticism. By clarifying their arguments about the Zhu Xi's ”death matters have nature”, the author argues that Mou's interpretation is more persuasive than Lao's. Furthermore, the author employs the Korean Confucians' debates on ”the difference of the human nature and the thing's nature” as reference, and shows that there is no room for the concept of essence in Zhu Xi's theory of Li-Qi. The paper concludes that only in the field of epistemology, Zhu Xi's concept of essence has its independent meaning and reasonableness.起始頁-結束頁：155-197資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社11篇名：論鍾惺「以情解詩」的《詩經》評點及其詮釋問題並列篇名：An Analysis of Zhong Xing's Comments on Poetry in the View of Emotion-Comments on the Book of Songs and its Issues of Interpretation作者：簡澤峰(Tse-Feng Chien)關鍵字：《詩經》;鍾惺;評點;晚明;性情;Book of Songs;Zhong Xing;Comment;Late Ming Dynasty;Temperament期刊/會議論文集名稱：思與言：人文與社會科學期刊卷期：59卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以鍾惺批點《詩經》為例，分析晚明「評點」這一特殊閱讀方式，在閱讀與理解文本時可能造成的影響、效果。這些影響、效果包括幾個層面：一、對詩意或詩旨的理解側重在何處，也即詮釋批點的重點為何。就現存的批點內容來看，鍾惺似乎並不關心三百篇的整體詩意，即鍾惺似乎對《詩》旨有某種程度的理解，並非全然不顧《詩》意。但他更重視的其實是前人所未曾關心的閱讀意趣等層面。二、從閱讀與理解的策略來看，評點這一讀詩「方法」所著重的是哪一方面，即實際操作時，它所要強調、突出的是甚麼。鍾惺說詩主張取性情之「真」，強調詩歌是真實情感的流露，所以論詩與評詩重「情」。然而這種詮釋評點，賦予讀者更大的詮釋空間，而不同讀者對同一文本的理解與體悟不同，所掌握的「情」也不同。三、和傳統經學家說《詩》最大的不同在於，鍾惺如此向讀者展現自己的某種「品味」，和眾人不同的「意趣」的詮釋法。這種解經方式，在《詩經》詮釋史上的意義為何？能起何種影響？是本文最後要論述的。透過上述三個層面的解析，相信能釐清鍾惺評點《詩經》在晚明的意義。英文摘要：The purpose of this study is to take Zhong Xing's comment on the Book of Songs as an example to analyze this special reading method of ”commentate” in the late Ming Dynasty. Reading and understanding a text can be decomposed into several levels of affects and effects: (1) What is the purpose of understanding the meaning or the subject of the Song, which is also defining the purpose of commentate. As for as the present comment we have preserved, Zhong Xing seems not explaining the meaning of three hundred pieces as a whole. Zhong Xing was more likely having different understanding of the Song that he put more emphasis on the entertainment of reading. (2) From the strategy of reading and understanding, what does ”the method” try to stress in the commentate of the songs. In Zhong Xing's idea, he stresses the reality and the verity of emotion in the song that he put the mark on the affection in the song. (3) According to traditional scholars, the biggest difference in Zhong Xing's comment is that he is showing his own personality of reading by investigating the entertainment of the Song. The arguments of this study are as follows. (1) What is the purpose of using this method in explaining the Book of Songs? (2) What kind of affect it might occur?起始頁-結束頁：199-262資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：思與言人文社會學社01篇名：Financial Derivatives Usage and Bank Risks: The Roles of Female Executives並列篇名：衍生性金融商品運用與銀行風險－女性高階主管的角色作者：陳曉蓉(Hsiao-Jung Chen)關鍵字：Gender;female;derivatives;hedging;credit risk;性別;女性;衍生性金融商品;避險;信用風險期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：This study provides empirical evidence on the roles of female executives in the relationship between financial derivatives usage and bank risks. The results show that female executives decrease the usage of financial derivatives and cause the low ratio of the net fair value of financial derivatives to total assets. Their ”risk allocation” strategies reduce activity risks but raise the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio. However, when a female executive decides to use financial derivatives, the bank's NPL ratio will be reduced effectively. Hence, the authorities and bank stockholders should encourage banks to appoint women as executives from monitoring and hedging perspectives.英文摘要：本文就女性高階主管在衍生性金融商品運用與銀行風險之間的關係所扮演的角色提供實證證據。結果發現，女性高階主管較少使用衍生性金融商品，其衍生性金融商品淨公允價值佔總資產比率較低。女性高階主管的「風險配置」策略會減少活動風險與增加逾放比率。若女性高階主管決定使用衍生性金融商品，反而可有效降低銀行逾放比率。起始頁-結束頁：1-59資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202109_29(3).00012篇名：Changes in Risk and the Demand for Coinsurance for Economically Important Individuals並列篇名：風險轉換與經濟重要性個人之共同保險需求作者：陳姿穎(Tzu-Ying Chen)關鍵字：stochastic dominance;almost stochastic dominance;demand for coinsurance;隨機優越;幾乎隨機優越;共同保險需求期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：This paper provides the necessary and sufficient conditions such that economically important individuals, as suggested by Tsetlin et al. (2015), demand a higher coinsurance rate when they face a change in the underlying loss distribution. We further study this issue by classifying the changes in risk into: (1) an increase in the severity of loss, and (2) an increase in the probability of loss. Finally, we provide a numerical example to demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed approach.英文摘要：本文以Tsetlin et al.（2015）定義之經濟重要性（economically important）個人，探討其在面臨損失分配改變時，保險需求提升的充分必要條件。接著進一步將風險變動的來源，劃分為以下兩個部分討論：第一部分是損失強度（severity of loss）增加，第二部分是損失機率（probability of loss）增加。最後，本文以數值範例說明主要定理之應用。起始頁-結束頁：61-90資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202109_29(3).00023篇名：Mandatory Adoption of XBRL and Corporate Earnings Management: The Effect of Corporate Governance並列篇名：強制採用XBRL與企業盈餘管理－公司治理之影響作者：賴秀卿(Syouching Lai);李宏志(Hungchih Li)關鍵字：XBRL;earnings management;corporate governance;XBRL;盈餘管理;公司治理期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：29卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Using Taiwan listed and OTC companies as the sample, this paper studies how the requirement to adopt eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) affects corporate earnings management. Our findings show that mandatory XBRL adoption reduces earnings management. Regarding the effect of corporate governance, the negative association between mandatory XBRL adoption and earnings management becomes weaker if the major stockholders' shareholding is higher, and becomes stronger if the institutional investor shareholding is higher. The results support the Taiwan government's policy of requiring companies to use XBRL to report financial information.英文摘要：本研究以台灣上市櫃公司為樣本，探討強制採用可擴展商業報告語言（XBRL）如何影響企業盈餘管理。我們的研究結果發現，強制採用XBRL減少盈餘管理。有關公司治理效果，大股東持股比例越高，強制採用XBRL與盈餘管理的負相關關係越弱，機構投資者持股比例越高，負相關關係越強。結果支持台灣政府強制公司採用XBRL申報財務資訊之政策。起始頁-結束頁：91-122資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202109_29(3).00034篇名：CEO Compensation, Director Compensation, and Earnings Management: Does Compensation Structure Matter?並列篇名：CEO薪酬、董事薪酬與盈餘管理－薪酬結構重要嗎？作者：湯惠雯(Hui-Wen Tang);陳振遠(Roger C. Y. Chen)關鍵字：Compensation structure;CEO compensation;director compensation;earnings management;incentive compensation;薪酬結構;CEO薪酬;董事薪酬;盈餘管理;誘因薪酬期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：This study investigates the relationship between excess director compensation and CEO compensation and explores the effects of various abnormal CEO compensations on earnings management. The results show that CEOs who receive abnormal cash and bonus compensation resulting from excess director total compensation tend to increase firm profits through earnings management, thereby reducing future performance. By contrast, CEOs who receive abnormal incentive compensation, total compensation, and exercise-value of stock options are less likely to manipulate earnings. These findings suggest that a proper director and CEO compensation structure can reduce managerial earnings management and can motivate CEO-director collaboration.英文摘要：本文研究超額董事薪酬與CEO薪酬的關係，探討各種異常CEO薪酬對盈餘管理的影響。研究發現，因超額董事薪酬而獲得異常現金及獎金薪酬的CEO傾向以盈餘管理增加公司利潤，卻降低未來績效。相較下，獲得異常誘因薪酬、總薪酬及股票選擇權行使價值的CEO較不會操縱盈餘。適當的董事與CEO薪酬結構可減少盈餘管理，並激勵CEO與董事合作。起始頁-結束頁：1-36資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202106_29(2).00015篇名：Relationship of Managerial Ability, Corporate Social Responsibility, and Operating Performance並列篇名：經理人能力對於公司從事企業社會責任活動與經營績效的影響作者：林煜恩(Yu-En Lin);池祥萱(Hsiang-Hsuan Chih);黃德芬(Der-Fen Huang);林彤璐(Tung-Lu Lin)關鍵字：Managerial ability;corporate social responsibility;operating performance;經理人能力;公司企業社會責任（CSR）;經營績效期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：This paper examines the extent to which managerial ability affects CSR activities and operating performance. We find that managers with higher ability are less inclined to engage in CSR activities but have superior CSR performance. We also find that managers with higher ability who invest in CSR increase firm operating performance. Moreover, managers with higher ability engaging in positive (negative) CSR activities will increase (decrease) the operating performance due to sales revenue increase (decrease) and operating costs and expenses decrease (increase). We conduct the two-stage regressions to control for potential endogeneity concerns, and the findings of our analysis are robust.英文摘要：本文探討經理人能力對於公司企業社會責任（Corporate Social Responsibility, CSR）與經營績效的影響。結果顯示，能力強的經理人較不從事CSR活動，而一旦從事，能力越強的經理人CSR績效越佳。同時，因<U+7232>收入增加（減少）且成本與費用減少（增加），能力<U+5F3A>的經理人從事正（負）向CSR活動會提升（降低）經營績效。以兩階段迴歸處理<U+5185>生性問題，實證結果具穩健性。起始頁-結束頁：37-64資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202106_29(2).00026篇名：How Did Liquidity Creation Affect U.S. Banks during the Subprime Crisis? Exploring Different Aspects of Bank Liquidity Creation並列篇名：流動性創造如何影響美國銀行在次貸危機中的表現？由不同面向探討銀行流動性創造作者：陳韋達(Wei-Da Chen);黃淑君(Shu-Chun Huang)關鍵字：Liquidity risk;credit risk;liquidity creation;financial crisis;流動性風險;信用風險;流動性創造;金融危機期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：29卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Using the sample of U.S. banks, this paper investigates how bank liquidity creation affects their performance during the subprime crisis of 2007-2009. It finds that when credit and liquidity risk are controlled, the pre-crisis liquidity creation has a positive impact on bank performance. When we decompose liquidity creation into components, the assets component of liquidity creation damages bank performance in the crisis, while the liabilities component is beneficial to bank performance. The main results of this paper survive various robustness checks. The findings of this paper provide implications for bank regulation and the management of bank risk.英文摘要：本文探討流動性創造如何影響美國銀行在2007-2009年次貸危機中的表現。實證結果顯示，控制銀行流動性風險與信用風險後，流動性創造對銀行的表現有正向影響。其中，資產面流動性創造不利銀行表現，而負債面流動性創造則有利於銀行表現。本文實證結果穩健，讓我們對銀行監理以及銀行風險管理有更深入瞭解。起始頁-結束頁：65-98資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202106_29(2).00037篇名：How Do Investors React to Investment-Opportunity Shock? Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic and Taiwan Bio-Tech Firms並列篇名：投資人如何回應投資機會衝擊？來自COVID-19疫情與台灣生技公司的證據作者：陳約融(Yue-Rong Chen);李美萱(Mei-Xuan Li);王衍智(Yanzhi Wang)關鍵字：COVID-19;novel Coronavirus diseases;stock returns;bio-tech firms;COVID-19;新型冠狀病毒（新冠肺炎）;股票報酬;生技公司期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：While the stock market crashed in the first quarter after the outbreak of COVID-19, this paper finds that bio-tech firms and their investors could take advantage of the COVID-19 investment opportunity and earn positive abnormal returns. Bio-tech firms earn abnormal returns of 1.63% per day-which can be translated into average capital gains of about 86.7 million NT dollars per day-around the event day on which the WHO declared COVID-19 a global emergency. Positive returns continue after the event day. Moreover, small firms and firms that enjoy greater patent originality and receiving government R&D subsidies earn higher abnormal returns.英文摘要：2020年COVID-19衝擊全球經濟；本研究發現，生技公司及其投資人會因疫情所帶來的投資機會而獲益且賺取正的超額報酬。在世界衛生組織公布COVID-19為全球緊急事件後，台灣的生技公司在宣告日附近每天約賺1.63%的超額報酬，相當於新台幣8,670萬。此外我們也發現市值較小、專利原創性較高或有獲得政府研究發展補助的生技公司所賺取的超額報酬亦較高。起始頁-結束頁：1-24資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202103_29(1).00018篇名：Credit Contagion and Risk Sharing among State Governments並列篇名：州政府間的信用傳染及風險分攤作者：陳獻儀(Hsien-Yi Chen);蔡豐澤(Feng-Tse Tsai)關鍵字：State credit events;risk sharing;capital market;credit market;federal government;州信用事件;風險分攤;資本市場;信用市場;聯邦政府期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：We investigate how the negative credit events of a state can affect the credit risk of other states as well as the channels of state credit-risk spillover in the U.S. We find that one state's credit rating downgrades and credit default swap jumps have a contagion effect on the credit risk of other states. In contrast, a negative credit outlook can introduce credit competition to non-event states. Additionally, risk sharing via capital markets and federal government are two crucial channels on the spillover effects. Industry similarity, political connections, and geographical proximity could affect the size of the interstate spillovers.英文摘要：本文研究美國州負面信用事件如何影響他州的信用風險及其信用風險傳遞渠道。我們發現州的信用評等調降及信用違約交換跳升對他州的信用風險有傳染效果，而負向信用展望對非事件州產生信用競爭效果。透過資本市場和聯邦政府的風險分攤是傳遞效果之主要渠道。產業相似度、政治關聯性及地理位置遠近會影響州之間傳遞效果的大小。起始頁-結束頁：25-60資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202103_29(1).00029篇名：Peer Influence of Corporate Social Responsibility Awards並列篇名：企業社會責任獎項之同儕效果作者：許景嵎(Ching-Yu Hsu);蔡宜均(Yi-Chun Tsai)關鍵字：Corporate social responsibility;peer effects;企業社會責任;同儕效果期刊/會議論文集名稱：財務金融學刊卷期：29卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：This paper investigates how firms react to their peers who are promoted to corporate social responsibility (CSR) awards winners. By using the full set of non-winning peer firms as our control sample, our results show that a firm is more likely to disclose its CSR report or win CSR awards after its peer firms win CSR awards due to the incentivizing effect of awards on peers. Further, we obtain similar results using propensity score matching (PSM) and a difference-in-differences (DiD) approach to mitigate endogeneity. The reactions to CSR are more pronounced when peer firms win their first CSR award.英文摘要：本文探討公司如何回應企業社會責任的得獎同儕。實證結果發現當同儕公司贏得企業社會責任獎項後，同產業公司將更願意揭露企業社會責任報告或爭取贏得企業社會責任獎項，符合激勵效果假說。研究結果在利用傾向分數配對法與差異中之差異法減緩內生性問題後仍然成立。此激勵效果於同儕公司首次贏得企業社會責任獎項時更為明顯。起始頁-結束頁：61-93資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞財金及會計學出版單位：臺灣財務金融學會DOI：10.6545/JFS.202103_29(1).000301篇名：Insurance-Linked Lotto並列篇名：保險連結型樂透作者：陳姿穎(Tzu-Ying Chen);黃瑞卿(Rachel J. Huang);曾郁仁(Larry Y. Tzeng)關鍵字：Rank dependent preferences;Lotto;Individual welfare;Demand for insurance;Regulation;等級依賴期望效用;樂透彩;福利;保險需求;政府管制期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Recent empirical and experimental research has well documented that an individual's willingness to purchase insurance is much lower than the level predicted by the traditional expected utility model. To increase the demand for insurance, this paper proposes a new tool of government intervention: an insurance-linked lotto. The proposed lotto is independent of the occurrence of the insurable risk, but the probability of winning the prize or the prize itself is positively correlated with the insurance coverage. We show that when an individual's preferences are characterized by rank dependent expected utility, the insurance-linked lotto could enhance the equilibrium demand for insurance and improve individual welfare as well. The above findings could be sustained in both cases where the government's objective is to maximize the rank dependent expected utility of the individual and the government evaluates wellbeing by adopting the expected utility framework.英文摘要：近年來文獻指出個人購買保險的意願遠低於期望效用模型的預期，因此如何提高保險需求是一個重要的待解決問題。針對此一問題，本文提出一個創新的政府工具：保險連結型樂透。此樂透跟被保險風險是否發生無關，但保險的購買越多，則樂透的中獎機率或者獎金越高。本文發現，在等級依賴期望效用模型下，此種創新的保險連結型樂透可以提高保險需求，同時也能增進福祉。起始頁-結束頁：321-362資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：董監事責任保險與董事會忙碌性並列篇名：DIRECTORS' AND OFFICERS' LIABILITY INSURANCE AND BOARD BUSYNESS作者：江政融(Cheng-Jung Chiang);張元(Yuan Chang)關鍵字：董監事責任保險;董事會忙碌性;Directors' and officers' liability insurance;Board busyness期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究根據2008至2018年間台灣上市上櫃非金融產業共1,532家公司的資料，檢驗董監事責任險（directors' and officers' liability insurance）的保障如何影響公司董事會的忙碌性（busyness）。既有研究指出公司為其董監事及重要職員投保責任保險雖然有助於優秀董監事與管理階層的聘任與留任、促進任職者承擔適當風險並強化公司與人員面對訴訟時的財務保障，但董監事責任險亦有可能使受保障者產生道德危險與投機行為，例如引發董監事輕忽其職責從而在本公司之外的機構兼任更多職務而形成較高的董事會忙碌程度。實證結果顯示，在考慮控制董事人力資源素質以及公司相關特性與治理條件下，董監事責任險保障程度與董事會忙碌性呈現顯著正向關係，董監事責任險涵蓋程度愈高，董事兼任職務數愈多即董事會忙碌程度愈高，支持董監事責任險引發董事輕忽職責進而兼任較多職務的道德危險觀點。英文摘要：This study examines how providing directors with directors' and officers' liability insurance (DOLI) affects the busyness of a firm's board of directors, using data from 1,532 non-financial firms listed in the Taiwan Stock Exchange (TWSE) and the Taipei Exchange (TPEx) from 2008 to 2018. Providing DOLI may help recruitment and retention of directors and management and strengthen financial protection of firms and individuals when facing litigation. Providing DOLI, however, might lead to moral hazard problems and opportunistic behaviors, such as causing directors to neglect their duties and hold more positions in other institutions, resulting in a higher degree of board busyness. Empirically, after controlling for the quality of the directors and governance of the firms, a significant positive relationship exists between DOLI and board busyness, confirming the moral hazard problem.起始頁-結束頁：363-409資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：以財稅資料分析台灣不動產稅制公平性並列篇名：PROPERTY TAXATION IN TAIWAN: AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF EQUALITY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE TAX DATA作者：傅健豪(Chien-Hao Fu);曾中信(Chung-Hsin Tseng)關鍵字：估價比率;財產稅;垂直公平;財稅資料庫;Assessment ratio;Property tax;Vertical equality;Administrative tax data期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文使用財政部財稅資料庫2004至2017年之個人資料檔、所得明細檔、財產登錄檔等資料，分析我國不動產交易價值、課稅價值與持有人所得、財富之關係，並探討現有不動產持有<U+7A0E>制之公平性。研究結果顯示現行稅制長期低估不動產課稅現值，且偏離市場價值之現象在高價值物件更為明顯。因此，我國的不動產估價比率（assessment-sales ratio）雖在持有人所得上具微幅累進性，但在資產價值上卻呈現明顯的累退性，即資產價值較高者在持有不動產時，反而享有更多因課稅現值偏低而產生的租稅優惠。我們也發現估價比率對資產價值的累退性僅限於不動產，對不動產持有人之金融資產或間接持有之資產反而具有累進性，這意味著現有稅制較有利將資產配置集中於不動產。我們認為若能縮小課稅現值與市場價值之差距，將能強化稅制公平性並降低經濟效率損失。英文摘要：We use income tax and wealth data from Taiwan's Ministry of Finance, from 2004 to 2017, to investigate the incidence of property taxation. Specifically, we focus on the relationships among a property's market value, its assessed value, and the owner's income and wealth. Our results show that Taiwan's property tax system consistently undervalues real estate. The gap between assessed value and market value is especially prominent among high-value properties. As a result, while the assessment-sales ratio is weakly progressive regarding income, it is severely regressive regarding wealth. In addition, since this regressiveness is not evident for financial and other non-property assets, the property tax system provides incentives for people to concentrate their assets on real estate. Closing the gap between property's assessed and market values would enhance the equity of the tax system and reduce resource allocation distortions.起始頁-結束頁：411-444資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：新興凱因斯學派總合供需模型下最適物價目標區之研究－以商品市場需求面干擾為例並列篇名：OPTIMAL PRICE TARGET ZONES UNDER THE NEW KEYNESIAN MODEL: DISTURBANCES IN COMMODITY DEMAND作者：廖培賢(Peir-Shyan Liaw);吳建興(Chine-Hsing Wu)關鍵字：最適物價目標區;新興凱因斯學派開放經濟體系Lucas總供給函數;布朗運動;Optimal price target zone;Open economy Lucas's aggregate supply function of New Keynesian School;Brownian motion期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文利用Frenkel and Rodriguez（1982）、Sutherland（1995）與Lai and Chang（2001）的理論架構為藍本，同時考量工資完全指數化特質的新興凱因斯學派開放經濟體系Lucas總供給函數，使用Lai and Chang（2001）、Lai et al.（2008，2011）等的目標區理論「蜜月效果幾何圖解法」與陳秀華（2004）、廖培賢（2018）等的「最適目標區幾何圖解法」，據以進行在一個資本呈現不完全移動的浮動匯率小型開放經濟體系裡，一旦商品市場需求面遭逢隨機性衝擊時，貨幣當局採行物價目標區體制對相關的總體經濟變數是否具有穩定效果功效之實是面議題與貨幣當局一旦企圖追求社會福利損失極小化的前提下，又該如何挑選最適物價目標區間寬窄之規範面議題的討論。本文的主要結論為當經濟體系裡遭逢商品市場需求面隨機性衝擊時，貨幣當局物價目標區體制的實施對本國物價及本國名目利率都具有穩定效果，對匯率水準是否具有穩定效果端視資本移動程度相對大小而定，另對本國產出則視定義的不同，可有也可無穩定效果。再者，不管貨幣當局相對關心本國物價抑或本國產出水準的波動，一旦貨幣當局企圖追求整體社會福利損失的極小化時，則必須選擇最適物價目標區間為零的本國物價固定體制。英文摘要：This paper presents an open economy macroeconomic model based generally on those developed by Frenkel and Rodriguez (1982), Sutherland (1995) and Lai and Chang (2001). Specifically, this paper uses the geometric approaches developed by Lai and Chang (2001), Chen (2004), Lai et al. (2008, 2011) and Liaw (2018) to determine the optimal price band when the monetary authority minimizes social welfare loss. Under this approach, if the economy faces demand shocks in the commodity and foreign exchange (foreign interests rate) markets, this paper concludes that the monetary authority must adopt a fixed domestic price level strategy (the optimal price band is zero). This is independent of whether the monetary authority cares about fluctuations in the domestic price and output levels.起始頁-結束頁：445-485資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：父母的性別偏好對國中子女升學和高中職主修領域選擇的影響－以「台灣青少年計畫」樣本為例並列篇名：THE EFFECT OF PARENTS' GENDER PREFERENCE ON CHILDREN'S HIGH SCHOOL OUTCOMES AND CHOICE OF FIELD OF STUDY IN SENIOR AND VOCATIONAL HIGH SCHOOLS: EVIDENCE FROM TAIWAN YOUTH PROJECT作者：劉家樺(Chia-Hua Liu);駱明慶(Ming-Ching Luoh)關鍵字：性別偏好;重男輕女;重女輕男;國中升學;主修領域;Gender bias;Preference for son;Preference for daughter;High school outcomes;Field of study期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文使用「台灣青少年計畫」，檢視父母的性別偏好對國中子女升學與高中職主修領域選擇的影響。父母的性別偏好是透過生育停止法則分別定義女孩面對父母偏好兒子和男孩面對父母偏好女兒。結果顯示，在國中升學率趨於100％下，父母的性別偏好對國中子女升學及升學類型均沒有顯著的影響，但父母的性別偏好則會顯著影響子女在高中職主修領域的選擇。在高中端，來自於父母偏好兒子家庭的女孩與父母偏好女兒家庭的男孩均較可能選社會組。在高職端，來自於父母偏好兒子家庭的女孩較可能選女性主流職群，來自於父母偏好女兒家庭的男孩較不會選女性主流職群。這些結果表示，當父母重男輕女的觀念轉為男女平等時，高中職主修領域的性別區隔程度應能有所改善。英文摘要：Using the data of the Taiwan Youth Project, the paper examines the effect of parents' gender preference on children's high school outcomes and choice of field of study in senior and vocational high schools. Based on the fertility stopping rule, the paper defines girls whose parents' preference is for a son and boys whose parents' preference is for a daughter. The results indicate that the parents' gender preference has no effect on high school outcomes of children, because the opportunity to enter high school is close to 100%. However, this gender preference significantly affects children's choice of field of study. For senior high school students, both the effect of girls' parental preference for a son and the effect of boys' parental preference for a daughter on the choice of ”social science program” are positive. For vocational high school students, girls whose parents prefer a son are more likely to choose women-stereotyped fields of study, while boys whose parents prefer a daughter are less likely to choose women-stereotyped fields of study. These results suggest that when parents' gender preference for a son is reduced and their gender preference for children turns to gender equality, the degree of gender segregation in fields of study for senior and vocational high schools can be alleviated.起始頁-結束頁：163-200資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：大學雙二一退學制度與學生規避退學行為並列篇名：COLLEGE DUAL HALF DISMISSAL POLICY AND STUDENTS' AVOIDANCE BEHAVIOR作者：陶宏麟(Hung-Lin Tao);吳東陽(Dong-Yang Wu)關鍵字：退學;雙二一;學分;停修;課程;Dismissal;Dual half dismissal policy;Credits;Withdrawal;Courses期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文分析退學制度下的四個議題：什麼樣的學生比較可能被退學；退學制度是否能提昇學生的學業表現；學生以什麼策略規避二一；發生二一後學生的修課行為是否改變？首先，男性、轉學生、曾休學、有學貸、學測分數低的學生較可能被退學。其次，發生二一的學生未來不及格率會下降。接著，在規避二一策略的有效性上，以不平均分配各科投入時間與規避二一有最顯著之正相關。在雙二一的退學制度下，有二一記錄的學生其未來所修的課可能既「不好過」，又「不營養」，他們的停修學分比自己以前停修的少，他們比以前更不會不平均分配各科投入時間，他們很可能會得到老師的通融，但因而及格的學分比例相當有限。因此，他們不及格比例的下降也包含了自己的努力。英文摘要：This study investigates four issues of college dismissal policy. Who is more likely to be dismissed? Would a college dismissal policy enhance students' academic performance? What strategies are efficient for students to avoid dismissal? Could students that have failed half of the credits of a semester once change their course-taken behavior in the future? First of all, male students or those transferred from another school, students of resumption, and students with a student loan or with low General Scholastic Ability Test scores are more likely to be dismissed. Second, having failed half of the credits in a semester decreases a student's future failure rate. Third, distortion of study time among courses is positively correlated with avoiding failure of half the credits of courses in the future semester. Finally, after failure of half the credits of courses in a semester, students may take difficult to pass and not-easy-A courses; the amount of their course withdrawal declines, as well as the imbalance of time they spend on studying for each course. They may receive mercy from their course instructors; however, the possibility of them actually passing the course is low. In conclusion, their effort also contributes to bringing down their own failure rate.起始頁-結束頁：201-244資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：貿易報復下的資源錯置分析－以中國太陽能產業為例並列篇名：RESOURCE MISALLOCATION UNDER TRADE RETALIATIONS: CASE OF CHINESE SOLAR ENERGY INDUSTRY作者：李文傑(Wen-Chieh Lee);李浩仲(Hao-Chung Li);王信實(Shinn-Shyr Wang)關鍵字：「雙反」（反傾銷、反補貼）;資源錯置;總要素生產力;Antidumping duty;Countervailing duties;Resource misallocation;Total factor productivity期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：以太陽能替代傳統化石能源發電一直為中國政府的產業政策重點，然而政府的強力介入也引發2011年「反傾銷」和「反補貼」的「雙反」調查。本文建立中國太陽能光電企業資料庫，並藉由計算中國太陽能廠商資源配置扭曲，將個別廠商資源投入扭曲程度加總成太陽能產業內的總資源錯置程度。計算結果顯示，中國太陽能產業在政府的保護補貼下存在相當程度的資源配置扭曲。實證結果也顯示，在「雙反」事件後，資源配置扭曲當中的「產出扭曲」分布改善，然而主要影響產業生產力的「資本投入扭曲」並無顯著變化，這樣的改變同時存在於國營與民營企業。總的來說，雖然「雙反」後產出扭曲改善，並減低資源錯置程度且提升產業生產力，但降低資本投入扭曲仍應是後續改善資源錯置問題的政策重點。英文摘要：Solar energy has been the Chinese government's prime candidate to replace fossil fuels for electricity generation. To bolster the solar energy industry, the Chinese government set up a menu of incentive policies that led Chinese firms to expand production aggressively. Within several years, China swiftly dominated the global solar energy production market. However, Chinese firms' predatory pricing provoked retaliation from the U.S. and the EU with ”anti-dumping” and ”countervailing” investigations beginning in 2011. This paper constructed a firm-level panel dataset and measured the extent of resource misallocation prevalent in the Chinese solar industry between 2009 and 2014. Our results suggested that although substantial resource misallocation existed in 2009 and 2010, the Chinese solar industry's misallocation had improved afterward. This occurred mainly because of the improvement in output distortion patterns among Chinese firms. However, through our decomposition exercise, we found that capital distortions played a more critical role in explaining the Chinese solar industry's production loss. This suggested that to advance its solar energy industry further, focusing on curtailing capital distortions should be the Chinese government's priority.起始頁-結束頁：245-283資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：台灣不同世代之終身薪資軌跡並列篇名：THE LIFETIME EARNINGS ACROSS COHORTS IN TAIWAN作者：許碧峰(Pi-Fem Hsu)關鍵字：終身薪資;世代效果;混合模型;初始條件;Lifetime earnings;Cohort effect;Mixed model;Initial conditions期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文使用「華人家庭動態」資料庫之1999－2018年追縱資料，並利用混合模型（mixed model）之隨機效果，將個人薪資偏離母體薪資軌跡的幅度分為兩部分，一為因勞動者的初始條件因素，使薪資永久偏離。二為個人薪資成長的差異，使薪資偏離隨年齡而變化。實證發現初始條件薪酬隨世代而下降，1981－1990世代的男性，若擁有高中、專技、大學等學歷，相對於1960前世代相同學歷的初始條件薪酬，分別減少了34％、32％、50％。在這20年的樣本期間，並無證據顯示出生世代影響薪資成長；而是個人的初始條件超額薪酬（或折價），將使終身薪資軌跡產生差異。不管是年長或年輕世代，個人有較佳（較差）之未觀察到能力，不僅使初始條件薪酬相對偏高（偏低），同時有較高（低）的終身薪資成長。英文摘要：The study adopts the Panel Study of Family Dynamics database which comprises 20-year longitudinal surveys to examine cohort differences by estimating the heterogeneous lifetime earnings among individuals. The random effects of the mixed model are used to distinguish which portion of lifetime earnings was due to the remuneration of initial conditions and which part was due to age-earning profile. H H Empirical results show that the remuneration for initial conditions declined over cohorts. If men born in the 1981-1990 cohort possess high school, college, or university education, respectively, then their remuneration for initial conditions compared with men born before the 1960 cohort will be reduced by 34%, 32%, and 50%, respectively. In the past 20-year surveyed period, no evidence shows that an individual's cohort would cause earnings to grow heterogeneously. Regardless of any cohort, an individual's extra (or discounted) remuneration for initial conditions would affect the growth of lifetime earnings. Those with superior (or inferior) unobserved abilities would have higher (or lower) remuneration for initial conditions, which also increases (or reduces) the growth of lifetime earnings.起始頁-結束頁：285-319資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：Does Taiwan Need a Macro-Prudential Policy? How to Do It? How to Coordinate with Monetary Policy?並列篇名：台灣需要總體審慎政策嗎？如何做？與貨幣政策如何搭配？作者：王柏元(Po-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium;DSGE-VAR;Monetary policy;Macro-prudential policy;Welfare analysis;動態隨機一般均衡;動態隨機一般均衡暨向量自我迴歸;貨幣政策;總體審慎政策;福利分析期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：This paper develops a small open economy dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model with collateral constraints. We estimate the model with data in Taiwan using the Bayesian technique, and assess the fit of the model by the DSGE-vector autoregression (DSGE-VAR) methodology. We demonstrate the welfare implications of the monetary policy and the macro-prudential policy. Our results suggest that an interest rate rule optimally responding to the growth of housing prices or domestic loans could enhance social welfare and make all agents better off. Introducing an optimal loan-to-value (LTV) ratio rule in response to domestic credit or housing price dynamics is also Pareto improving. Furthermore, the optimal deployment of both the monetary and macro-prudential policy could yield more social welfare. The coordination of policies effectively stabilizes the financial system and limits the volatility of inflation. However, because of the heterogeneity of agents, different mixes of policies require customized design for individual welfare optimization.英文摘要：本文建構了一個包含擔保品借貸限制的小型開放經濟體動態隨機一般均衡（dynamic stochastic general equilibrium, DSGE）模型，透過貝式估計法（Bayesian estimation），將其應用在台灣的經濟環境，並運用動態隨機一般均衡暨向量自我迴歸（DSGE-VAR）架構來評估模型的配適度。我們依此模型來分析貨幣政策與總體審慎政策的福利意涵。研究結果顯示，考慮房價或國內貸款的利率政策，可以增進社會整體與個別成員的福利，而針對房價或國內貸款採取反景氣循環的貸款成數（loan-to-value）限制，亦可以達到柏拉圖改善的效果。除此之外，利率政策適切搭配貨款成數限制政策，則可以獲致較大的社會福利，並有效地維持金融穩定、降低通膨變化。然而，由於個別族群的異質性，需設計不同的政策組合，方能極大化不同族群的福利。起始頁-結束頁：1-40資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：策略性中間財訂價與外人直接投資並列篇名：STRATEGIC INTERMEDIATE GOODS PRICING AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT作者：王佳琪(Chia-Chi Wang);邱俊榮(Jiunn-Rong Chiou)關鍵字：垂直相關市場;外人直接投資;策略性訂價;Vertically related market;Foreign direct investment;Strategic pricing期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：跨國企業直接投資（FDI）時，常須利用地主國的中間財，因此地主國中間財廠商之訂價行為往往會影響跨國企業的直接投資決策。本文建立一垂直相關市場模型，假設本國存在一家上游廠商及多家下游廠商，外國有一家正在考慮到當地投資的下游廠商。本文發現，即使外國廠商的生產成本較低，外國廠商FDI後，中間財價格有可能會降低而非提高。其次，一般認為，跨國企業進入本國市場會提高市場競爭程度，故本國下游廠商利潤會降低。然而，我們發現，即使跨國企業較本國企業更具生產效率，跨國企業進入本國市場仍可能使本國下游廠商受惠而非受害。最後，即使本國下游廠商家數增加也不必然會使得本國下游廠商利潤降低，甚至可能使其利潤增加。英文摘要：This paper developed a vertically related market model containing an upstream supplier and numerous downstream firms in a host country. A multinational firm attempts to enter the host country's market. This study finds that even if the multinational firm has a lower production cost, once it enters the market via FDI, the optimal input price may decrease rather than increase. In addition, we find that FDI may benefit local downstream firms as opposed to harming them, even if the multinational firm is more efficient than local downstream firms. Lastly, an increase in the number of local downstream firms may not decrease the downstream firms' profits, may even increase.起始頁-結束頁：41-73資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：中國信用評等品質是否改善？並列篇名：HAS CREDIT RATING QUALITY IMPROVED IN CHINA?作者：黃玉麗(Yu-Li Huang)關鍵字：評等標準;評等品質;違約機率;收益率差;領先或落後指標;Rating standard;Rating quality;Default probability;Yield spread;Lead or lag indicator期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以2007至2018年間獲得中國本土信評公司發布評等的債券為對象，以了解中國評等的品質是否改善。實證結果發現，在其他條件不變下，相對於2007年，債項在2008至2014逐年獲得較差的評等，但2015至2018年，評等卻呈現逐年緩步寬鬆的趨勢。其次，發現隱性或顯性保證程度愈高，獲得愈佳的評等，較佳審計品質的企業也獲得較佳的評等。第三，評等具有資訊內涵，評等愈差，未來發生違約的機率愈高，且投資人要求較高的風險溢酬。但2014年之後，評等的訊息效果大幅下降，顯示評等品質惡化。第四，與國際信評公司合作的本土信評公司，評等的訊息效果與品質並未優於未與國際信評公司合作的本土信評公司。第五，中國本土信評公司發布的評等同時支持評等為領先與落後指標。英文摘要：Using corporate bonds, medium-term notes and enterprise bonds assigned ratings by Chinese local rating agencies during 2007 to 2018 as a sample, this paper investigates whether credit rating quality has improved in China. The results show that, first, the rating standard has tightened from 2008 to 2014, but loosened from 2015 to 2018. Second, the specific regime and environment in China affect credit rating determinants. Bonds with implicit or explicit guarantees are assigned better ratings. Firms with high audit quality are also assigned better ratings. Third, ratings can predict default probabilities and explain bond yield spreads. However, the information effect of ratings significantly decreases after 2014, suggesting the rating quality has worsened. Fourth, the rating quality does not improve for rating agencies cooperating with global rating agencies. Fifth, ratings are both lead and lag indicators in China.起始頁-結束頁：75-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：從總體經濟的角度探討企業社會責任的效果並列篇名：THE MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY作者：王韋能(Wei-Neng Wang)關鍵字：企業社會責任;企業價值;社會福利;Corporate social responsibility;Corporate value;Social welfare期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文建構一個動態一般均衡總體模型，探討當廠商回饋社會的企業社會責任行為體現在改善環境品質時，廠商的企業社會責任支出對總體經濟體系的影響。理論分析的結果顯示，企業的社會責任支出對家計單位的消費、廠商的企業價值與社會福利的影響均不確定。而透過數值模擬分析發現，企業社會責任支出增加對企業價值與社會福利均呈現先上升後下降的倒U字型效果，當企業社會責任支出比例不太高時，具有提高企業價值與社會福利的雙重紅利效果。此外，社會福利極大的企業社會責任支出比例高於企業價值極大的支出比例。從政策面來看，政府提高免稅比例雖可誘使企業社會責任支出增加而改善社會福利，但此政策也令社會福利極大下所需的企業社會責任支出比例大幅提高，使得社會福利極大更難以達成。英文摘要：This paper develops a dynamic general equilibrium model to analyze the macroeconomic and welfare effects of corporate social responsibility (CSR). Analytically, this paper shows that the effects of CSR on consumption, corporate value, and social welfare are ambiguous. The calibration results show that the steady-state corporate value and social welfare exhibit inverted U-shaped relationships with CSR. Moreover, an increase in CSR can result in a double dividend in terms of enhancing both corporate value and social welfare, provided that the status quo CSR expenditure is moderate. Also, the corporate-value-maximizing CSR expenditure is lower than the welfare-maximizing CSR expenditure. From a policy implication's point of view, this paper demonstrates that although an increase in the tax-deductible ratio of CSR expenditure can improve social welfare, it will also distance the state from a welfare-maximizing scenario.起始頁-結束頁：121-162資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：即時認定台灣的景氣轉折並列篇名：Identifying Taiwan's Business Cycle Turning Points in Real Time作者：朱浩榜(Hao-Pang Chu)關鍵字：景氣循環;景氣轉折;機器學習;business cycle;turning points;machine learning期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：在景氣認定上，往往需要蒐集足夠的資料、觀察夠長的時間，才得以確認景氣是否發生轉折。因此，發布認定結果的時點往往較實際轉折落後一段頗長的時間，各界難以即時得知當前的景氣狀態。本文參照Giusto and Piger（2017），應用機器學習上的學習式向量量化（Learning Vector Quantization, LVQ）方法，並設定若干假設及判定規則，即時認定台灣2000年以後的景氣循環。LVQ方法毋須對景氣循環的資料生成過程（data generating process）做任何假設，適合台灣在不同經濟發展階段下，景氣循環亦具有不同特性之情形。實證結果發現，藉由LVQ方法，可大幅縮短景氣轉折發生後所需的認定時間，且得到的轉折時點與國發會相近，故應有助在正式發布認定結果前，得到關於當前景氣狀態的參考資訊。英文摘要：The official chronologies of business cycle turning points often suffer from a substantial time lag, which makes it difficult for economic agents to identify the starting point of a new business cycle phase. Following Giusto and Piger (2017), this paper identifies Taiwan's business cycle turning points after 2000s in real time using a machine learning algorithm known as Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ). Since LVQ does not rely on the specification of the business cycle's data generating process, it is suitable for addressing distinctive features in Taiwan's business cycles at different stages of economic development. Utilizing an LVQ algorithm, business cycle turning points can be identified quickly with a lag of between seven and ten months, considerably better than the official's 12 and 51 months. Furthermore, the empirical results suggest that the turning points identified by LVQ and the official method are quite consistent, and their differences are within a three-month range. In contrast, the turning points estimated by Markov-switching models are significantly different from the official turning points.起始頁-結束頁：335-370資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202109_49(3).00012篇名：以高頻物價數據進行通膨預測並列篇名：Inflation Nowcasting Using High Frequency Price Data作者：蕭宇翔(Yu-Hsiang Hsiao);繆維正(Evan Weicheng Miao)關鍵字：即時預報;通膨預測;分解預測;組合預測;nowcasting;inflation forecasting;disaggregate forecasts;combining forecasts期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：食物與能源價格是影響台灣通膨率波動的重要因素，若能即時掌握兩者價格變化應能有助預測當月通膨率。本文從農產品批發市場交易行情站、畜產行情資訊網、漁產品全球資訊網、中油公司油品行銷事業部等相關網站，擷取蔬菜、水果、毛豬、家禽、漁產品與汽油之每日批發或零售價格，並運用此高頻資料對台灣消費者物價指數（consumer price index，CPI）年增率進行即時預報（nowcasting）。實證發現，運用主計總處公布上月CPI統計時可取得的即時價格資訊，即時預報模型的樣本外誤差均方根（root mean square error，RMSE）約較AR模型低34-44％，且隨著月中資料的更新，即時預報模型的預測誤差亦進一步降低。英文摘要：Food and energy prices are the most important determinants of inflation fluctuations in Taiwan, and their high frequency data are anticipated to be effective predictors for real time CPI. We collect the online, daily, retail and wholesale prices of vegetables, fruit, pork, poultry, fish, and gasoline from official websites. Empirical results demonstrate that with the high frequency price data available on the DGBAS release day for the last month's CPI, the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the nowcasting models are lower than the AR model by 34-44%. Moreover, with the updating of the data through the month, the nowcasting errors decline further. Incorporating food and energy high frequency price data would enable policymakers to predict the real time CPI change amid unusual weather conditions (e.g., typhoons, heaven rain) or amid an unusual international crude oil price fluctuation.起始頁-結束頁：371-414資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202109_49(3).00023篇名：銀行放款組合與貨幣傳遞機制：台灣的實證研究並列篇名：Bank Loan Portfolios and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism: Evidence from Taiwan作者：黃朝熙(Chao-Hsi Huang);謝依珊(Yi-Shan Hsieh);楊茜文(Chien-Wen Yang);王敬淳(Ching-Tsun Wang)關鍵字：貨幣傳遞機制;商銀放款組合;金融中介成本;monetary transmission;bank loan portfolio;cost of intermediation期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文利用台灣的商銀放款細項資料研究銀行放款在貨幣傳遞機制中所扮演的角色與重要性。我們採用Blanchard and Quah（1989）的結構性衝擊認定方式，利用經濟理論對VAR模型移動平均表示（moving average representation）係數所賦予的長期限制，認定貨幣政策衝擊以及各項實質面衝擊。根據衝擊反應函數分析，我們發現實施緊縮貨幣政策後，商銀對個人與企業的放款在短期內皆呈現顯著之下滑，但商銀放款組合中有增加擔保相對較完備的企業投資放款及消費者房屋相關貸款比例的現象。此一放款組合的變化，反映了在資金借貸市場訊息不對稱下，銀行經理基於緊縮貨幣政策造成金融中介成本的提高，將資金導向安全性較高資產的現象。英文摘要：This article empirically examines the impact of monetary policy on bank loan portfolios using Taiwan macro and bank loans data for the period of January 1997 to June 2017. We estimate a vector autoregressive model (VAR Model), which includes four VAR iables, i.e., industrial production index, real exchange rate, the real loan component of commercial banks, and M2. We employ a Blanchard and Quah (1989) structural VAR approach by imposing long-run restrictions on the coefficients of the moving average representation of the VAR to identify monetary policy shocks, money (asset) demand shocks, real aggregate demand shocks, and aggregate supply shocks. We find that in the short run both business and personal loans decline significantly in response to a monetary tightening. However, we also find bank loan portfolios tend to adjust after a monetary tightening, with a decrease in the proportion of less secured loans such as consumer loans and business loans for current operations while there is an increase in the proportion of more secured loans such as personal housing loans and business investment loans. The above response pattern of bank loan portfolios show that bank managers, when facing rising costs of intermediation after a monetary tightening, reallocate bank asset portfolios toward safer loans.起始頁-結束頁：415-448資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202109_49(3).00034篇名：Optimal Capital Income Taxes in the Infinite Horizon Model with Progressive Income Taxes並列篇名：累進稅制下無窮生命模型的最適資本所得稅作者：陳明郎(Been-Lon Chen);賴志芳(Chih-Fang Lai)關鍵字：infinite horizon model;optimal capital income taxation;progressive taxes;無窮生命模型;最適資本所得稅;累進稅制期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：In infinitely lived, representative-agent models with linear income taxes, the influential studies by Chamley (1986) and Judd (1985) have shown that the optimal capital tax is zero in the long run. Our paper uses a similar model with progressive taxes and the results are as follow. First, the long-run optimal capital income tax is positive with progressive income taxes. Second, the welfare gain from moving current tax rates toward positive optimal income taxes with progressive tax rates is larger than moving toward a zero capital income tax with linear income taxes. Our findings lend support to positive capital income taxes under a system of progressive income taxes adopted in developed countries since the late 19^(th) century.英文摘要：在線性所得稅制的無窮生命代表性個人模型，Chamley（1986）和Judd（1985）已經證明長期的最適資本稅為零。本篇研究一個除了累進稅制外其餘設定都相同的模型，結果如下。首先，累進稅制下的長期最適資本所得稅為正。其次，累進稅制下由當前稅率改制為正最適所得稅率的福利利得大於線性稅制下改制為零資本所得稅率的福利利得。我們的發現支持自19世紀後期之後，採行累進稅制的先進國家課徵資本稅。起始頁-結束頁：449-473資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202109_49(3).00045篇名：Democracy and Economic Growth: A Reassessment並列篇名：再探民主與經濟成長作者：林馨怡(Hsin-Yi Lin);蕭宇翔(Yu-Hsiang Hsiao)關鍵字：democracy;economic growth;quantile regression;民主;經濟成長;分量迴歸期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：This paper revisits the relationship between democracy and economic growth using a quantile regression method based on dynamic panel data. It explores the heterogeneous effects of democratization on economic growth when the effects depend on growth rates. Our evidence suggests that democracy can foster or hinder growth, depending on a country's growth rate. The effects of democracy on growth are positive and strong in countries with low growth rates, and weak in countries with high growth rates. The results imply that the lower the growth rate is, the more democracy is beneficial. We conclude that democracy fosters economic growth when countries are experiencing low or moderate growth. When countries have already experienced high growth, democracy is not conducive to economic growth.英文摘要：本文運用追蹤資料分量迴歸模型檢視民主與經濟成長的關係，由於民主化對經濟成長的影響隨經濟成長的高低而不同，因此分量迴歸可捕捉此異質性的效果。我們的研究證實，民主化對一國經濟成長的影響可正可負，取決於該國經濟成長率的高低。當一國處於低經濟成長時期，民主化對該國經濟成長有顯著正向效果，但當一國處於高經濟成長階段，民主化的效果明顯減弱，亦即經濟成長率愈低，實施民主化將有促進經濟成長的好處。本文的實證結果意味，當一國正經歷低迷的經濟成長環境下，民主化有助於刺激該國經濟，並達成經濟成長；但當一國的經濟成長已在較高的水準時，民主制度無助於經濟成長。起始頁-結束頁：169-206資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202106_49(2).00016篇名：Getting Out the Vote: Information and Voting Behavior並列篇名：資訊對投票行為的影響作者：陳依依(Yi-Yi Chen)關鍵字：information revelation;polls;campaigns;strategic voting;collective choice;資訊揭露;民調;造勢;策略性投票;集體選擇期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：This paper experimentally examines the effects of information on voter turnout in the Palfrey-Rosenthal pivotal voter (PR) model. In particular, I compare two different degrees of information revelation: one is that voters know each party's support base (complete information scenario), and the other is that voters know one party's support base but are limited to knowing the probability of the support base of the other party (partial information scenario). There are two main findings. First, in the partial information scenario with a revelation of a weak support base, subjects tend to have a higher belief in being pivotal than theory predicts, which causes their turnout rate to be not lower than those in the corresponding complete information scenario. Second, in the complete information scenario, turnout of the subjects of the frontrunner party is significantly higher than the subjects' best response to their pivotal belief, which can be explained by a PR model incorporating the generalized disappointment aversion effect.英文摘要：本文以實驗方法，探究資訊對Palfrey-Rosenthal關鍵投票者模型（簡稱PR模型）中的投票行為的影響。作者比較完全資訊情境和部分資訊情境：前者為受試者知道每一政黨的基本盤大小，後者為受試者知道某一政黨基本盤大小，而另一政黨基本盤大小，受試者僅知其機率。兩發現如下：第一，部分資訊情境下，當知悉某政黨為小基本盤時，受試者相信自己是關鍵投票者的機率會高於理論值，使其投票率增加，不低於其在完全資訊情境的投票率。第二，完全資訊情境下，當受試者支持的政黨為大基本盤時，受試者投票率會增加，顯著高於其相信自己為關鍵投票者的機率下的最適反應；PR模型結合厭惡失望效果可解釋此行為。起始頁-結束頁：207-262資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202106_49(2).00027篇名：為何女生不讀理工、男生不讀人文？－大學入學考生資料之實證並列篇名：Gender Differences in College Major Choice作者：池伯尉(Bowei Chih);尤素娟(Suchuan Yu);劉錦添(Jin-Tan Liu)關鍵字：高等教育;學科領域選擇;性別差異;選擇偏好;higher education;college majors;gender differences;preferences期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究利用台灣1996年至2010年大學升學考試的考生原始資料，分析男女生對學科領域的選擇偏好及其決定因素。我們發現台灣近15年來，學科領域的性別區隔程度隨時間演進並沒有明顯的改變，男女生對學科領域的選擇方式，大多依循學科領域的性別屬性。利用Multinomial Logit模型的實證顯示，學科成績雖然是影響兩性學科領域選擇的重要因素，但家庭背景以及不可觀察到的選擇偏好影響因素（例如：文化或社會規範）仍扮演重要的角色。我們進一步將男女生選擇各學科領域機率的差異進行拆解，發現文化或社會規範因素可能長期持續的影響著男女生對學科領域的選擇行為。英文摘要：Gender differences in college major choice are well known and have been studied by researchers across many disciplines. This paper addresses the question of how college majors are chosen, focusing on the underlying gender gap. Using the College and University Joint Entrance Examination files, covering the years from1996 to 2010, which is a data set unique to Taiwan, female and male students' major choices are analyzed by a multinomial logit regression. Our results demonstrat that abilities in mathematics, Chinese and English are the most important determinants in the choice for both genders. We also utilized the decomposition strategy to examine the scores of the College and University Joint Entrance Examination in order to explain the difference in the majors chosen by female and male students. However, our results indicate that the difference in test scores between genders accounted for only part of the observed gap. Instead, the difference in unobservable preferences is the main cause of today's gender gaps in choice of academic majors.起始頁-結束頁：263-306資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202106_49(2).00038篇名：台灣經濟政策不確定性指標之建構與分析並列篇名：An Economic Policy Uncertainty Index for Taiwan作者：黃裕烈(Yu-Lieh Huang);葉錦徽(Jin-Huei Yeh);陳重吉(Chung-Chi Chen)關鍵字：EPU指標;經濟政策不確定性;文字探勘;EPU index;economic policy uncertainty;text mining期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：近來的大蕭條使經濟風險與不確定性大幅遽增，因而引發了不少學者不約而同地著墨於政策不確定性的相關議題。不確定性的衝擊，就像大蕭條一樣，不僅影響家戶單位的消費、儲蓄、投資等行為以及就業，衝擊了財金市場的運作而影響長遠。本文依據Baker，Nicholas，and Davis（2016）的方法建構台灣不確定經濟政策指標（以下簡稱台灣EPU指標），並利用黃裕烈與管中閔（2018）的方法進行新聞分類，以節省後續的人工審查步驟。對照過去歷史事件，我們發現台灣EPU指標與許多重大經濟事件相契合，而該指標也對於台灣重要的總體經濟變數有顯著的預測能力以及解釋力。若分析其它國家與台灣的EPU指標也會發現，美國與日本的EPU指標對台灣指標有較大的外溢效果，而台灣與大陸的EPU指標跟其它國家的聯結度較弱，這些結果均符合我們的經濟直觀。我們期待這個新編的台灣EPU指數能夠幫助台灣經濟不確定性建立研究基底，並促進後續在總體經濟、財務經濟、政治學、與社會政策等領域專屬於國內的理論或實證相關研究，並與全球經濟政策研究接軌。英文摘要：The Great Recession appears to have dramatically increased the levels of economic risk and uncertainty and motivated a series of recent efforts to disentangle policy-uncertainty-related issues. Uncertainty shocks like the recent Great Recession may influence long-run consumption, saving, investment behavior and unemployment. In this paper we follow the recent media-based-search approach in Baker, Nicholas, and Davis (2016) to construct a new measure of Taiwanese economic policy uncertainty (EPU) index to characterize the economic policy uncertainty for Taiwan. The index is shown to be informative in explaining/forecasting future major domestic macroeconomic and financial variables. When turning to linkages with EPU indices from other major trading countries around the world via the models by Diebold and Yilmaz (2009, 2014), we found that about one-half domestic economic uncertainty is solely from the Taiwanese EPU index itself; and that spillover from the US and Japan is also important. We hope the newly constructed Taiwanese EPU index can be used as a foundation for theoretical and empirical domestic research in macroeconomics, finance, politics and social policy and be used in conjunction with global policy research.起始頁-結束頁：307-334資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202106_49(2).00049篇名：The Monetary Transmission Mechanism within a Two-Sector Model並列篇名：兩部門模型的貨幣傳導機制作者：陳一德(I-Te Chen);蔡宜展(Yi-Chan Tsai)關鍵字：working capital;habit formation;durable good;bayesian estimation business cycle;營運資金;消費慣性;耐久財;貝氏估計期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：This paper uses a Bayesian approach to estimate a two-sector sticky price model with working capital and habit formation. The estimated degrees of working capital and habit formation are all well above zero, suggesting the existence of both channels. Furthermore, we identify a new monetary policy transmission mechanism that operates through the inflation dynamics of the relative prices due to the heterogeneous degrees of working capital across sectors. Furthermore the estimated model with working capital and habit formation simultaneously accounts for the co-movement between durables and non-durables and the more sensitive response in the durable goods sector to monetary policy shocks as documented in previous studies. Using log marginal likelihood, the model with working capital and habit formation outperforms its counterpart without either of these mechanisms.英文摘要：本文擴充傳統兩部門隨機動態模型，考慮廠商的借貸行<U+7232>及消費者的消費慣性，我們使用貝氏方法去估計其相關參數。估計結果顯示營運資金及消費慣性都是影響貨幣傳導機制的重要因素。此外，在兩部門中因不同部門對營運資金需求的差異，在給定相同的貨幣衝擊下，對兩部門的價格有不同的影響，進而造成其相對價格的變動。這是本文發現新的貨幣傳導機制，相較於傳統的模型，有考慮廠商營運資金及消費慣性的兩部門模型更能貼近現實社會。起始頁-結束頁：1-32資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202103_49(1).000110篇名：Inter-vivos Transfers in Taiwan: Evidence and Theory並列篇名：台灣家戶贈與行為之理論與實證作者：Daniel Barczyk;林姿妤(Tzu-Yu Lin)關鍵字：inter-vivos transfers;social norm;altruism;財富贈與;社會規範;利他行為期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：We study inter-vivos transfers between elderly parents and their children in Taiwan. We find that transfers from children to parents are almost 10 times more common in Taiwan than in the U.S. Our data suggests that this stark discrepancy is due to filial piety. The mere fact that children are employed is the most substantial predictor of transfers from children to parents. Similar to the U.S., however, wealthier parents are less likely to receive transfers and more likely to give. Based on these two key features we propose a first step towards a theory of the family in Taiwan. Children are obliged to transfer a fraction of their labor income to parents. Parents have altruistic preferences which can override this social norm. As a result, transfers from children to parents are common but do not occur in wealthier families.英文摘要：本文探討台灣家庭父母與子女間的財富贈與行<U+7232>。我們發現，台灣父母接受子女金錢餽贈的比例相當高，是美國資料的十倍以上。資料顯示，這樣的巨大差異來自於社會規範下的孝親行<U+7232>。因此，有固定收入的子女傾向於提供孝親費。然而與美國類似的是，經濟條件較佳的父母不僅拿取較少的孝親費，甚至會提供子女金錢方面的幫助。根據實證上的觀察，我們建構一個可用來解釋台灣家庭特徵的理論模型。起始頁-結束頁：33-75資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202103_49(1).000211篇名：台灣財富分配2004-2014：以個人財產登錄資料推估並列篇名：The Wealth Distribution in Taiwan 2004-2014: Evidence from the Individual Wealth Register Data作者：連賢明(Hsien-Ming Lien);曾中信(Chung-Hsin Tseng);楊子霆(Tzu-Ting Yang);韓幸紋(Hsing-Wen Han);羅光達(Kuang-Ta Lo)關鍵字：財富分配;財富不均;國富統計;財稅資料庫;wealth distribution;wealth inequality;national wealth;administrative tax database期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文使用財政部2004至2014年的財產登錄資料並結合資本化法，建構涵蓋房屋、土地、股票、存款、債券、金融票券與房屋貸款的個人財富資料。為確保結果貼近現實，我們以房地產實價登錄資料來計算房屋與土地價值，並在衡量股票時納入個人以投資公司持有的股權（即間接持股）。根據我們所建構的財富資料，台灣財富的吉尼係數（Gini coefficient）約<U+7232>0.79，前10％與前1％富豪的財富占比約<U+7232>62％與23％。台灣的財富不均數據低於美國，約略與瑞典、韓國相近。此外，財富分配在年齡分組中呈現明顯差異：全國財富在2004至2014年間呈現往50歲以上高齡人口集中的趨勢。英文摘要：This paper estimates individual wealth distribution including houses, land, stocks, deposits, bonds, short-term transaction instruments, and mortgage by using the individual wealth register data of the Ministry of Finance from 2004 to 2014 and combining their with the method of capitalization. To ensure that the results are close to reality, we use the price data in the Actual Transaction Price of Real Estate to evaluate the values of houses and land. We also consider both direct and indirect holdings of stocks when we measure wealth. According to our calculation, the Gini coefficient of wealth in Taiwan is about 0.79, and the top 10% and top 1% wealth shares are 62% and 23% respectively. The wealth inequality in Taiwan is lower than in the U.S., approximating the results in Korea and Sweden. Moreover, the wealth in Taiwan between 2004 and 2014 showed a trend of concentration towards the elderly population over 50 years old.起始頁-結束頁：77-130資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202103_49(1).000312篇名：建構台灣的外匯市場干預資料並列篇名：Estimating Taiwan's Forex Intervention Data作者：李秀雲(Hsiu-Yun Lee)關鍵字：外匯存底;匯率;外匯市場;央行干預;foreign reserves;exchange rate;foreign exchange market;intervention期刊/會議論文集名稱：經濟論文叢刊卷期：49卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文分解我國外匯存底的變動成干預、外匯孳息與資產價值重估三部份，得到1982-2015年間其增加中近六成來自孳息、四成多來自淨買匯干預，資產價值漲跌在長期可被忽略，但短期則是外匯存底增減幅度波動的重要因素。扣除外匯存底孳息收入的自然增加，我國大幅累積外匯存底的時間並不是那麼多，只用外匯存底變動代替干預很容易高估央行的阻升金額與期間。央行連續買匯阻升的單根狀況只在1988年之前於統計上顯著，之後干預和匯率並無長期共整合關係。央行外匯買賣互現且缺乏單向持續性，2011年後市場也朝向更浮動的匯率調整。英文摘要：We divide the change in Taiwan's foreign reserves into three parts: yield of the foreign reserves, intervention by the central bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan), and the value re-estimation of the foreign assets (including those from the changes of exchange rates between the US dollar and other foreign currencies). It is found that, during the period 1982-2015, 56% of the accumulation of Taiwan's foreign reserves is from its yield while 44% of it is from official intervention. Employing the change in foreign reserves as a proxy for intervention tends to overstate the degree of intervention of Taiwan's central bank. Except for the period 1982-1987 in which official intervention to prevent an appreciation of the NT dollar is apparent with a unit root process, there is no evidence the central bank intervenes to twist the trend of its exchange rate. The intervention data shows lack of persistency and is not co-integrated with the exchange rate of the NT dollar to the US dollar Since 2011, the scale of official intervention is being reduced and Taiwan's foreign exchange market is getting cleaner floating.起始頁-結束頁：131-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：臺灣大學經濟學系DOI：10.6277/TER.202103_49(1).000401篇名：以多伺服器實踐高可用可回復資訊隱藏之研究並列篇名：Study of Implement High Availability Reversible Information Hiding with Multi-Server作者：劉興漢(Hsing-Han Liu);李權<U+73C9>(Chuan-Min Li);陳岳霖(Yue-Lin Chen)關鍵字：高可用;可回復;資訊隱藏;High availability;reversible;information hiding期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：23卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：資訊隱藏技術可應用於傳送國家及國防機密訊息，但若只有一台伺服器提供資訊隱藏技術服務，當執行資訊隱藏服務之主機因不明原因中斷服務，則會造成終端使用者無法利用執行資訊隱藏服務之主機將文件進行處理，造成服務中斷。目前資訊系統應用的發展趨勢乃能提供高可用服務為目標，避免因單一資訊系統主機中斷服務而導致無法進行後續作業，故本研究提出「以多伺服器實踐高可用可回復資訊隱藏之研究」，有效提供政府單位可靠的資訊隱藏服務。英文摘要：The data-hiding technology can be used to transmit confidential information about state affairs and national defense; however, if there is only one server providing the data-hiding technology service, and the server breaks down for unknown reasons, service will be interrupted, and terminal users will not be able to process files using that server. The development of the current information-system application is aimed at providing high-availability services. In order to avoid situations where a single information-system server stops functioning, which would cause half of the subsequent operations to fail, this paper proposed a ”Mesos architecture-based, high-availability, reversible data-hiding technology” to provide government with effective and reliable data hiding services.起始頁-結束頁：97-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202112_23(2).00012篇名：以方法目的鏈探討中高齡者使用LINE之因素並列篇名：Exploring Factors Influencing Middle-Elder and Seniors Adoption of LINE through a Means-End Chain Approach作者：陳宜棻(Yi-Fen Chen);賴靖憲(Jing-Sian Lai)關鍵字：LINE;行動即時通訊軟體;中高齡;方法目的鏈;價值階層圖;LINE;application software of instant messenger;middle-elder and seniors;means-end chains;hierarchical value map期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：23卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：隨著行動網路進入4G新紀元，即時通訊系統已由個人電腦擴展到智慧型手機。在臺灣，競爭激烈的行動即時通訊市場中，如何開發新使用者與留住現有用戶是系統開發商重要的課題。本研究調查了中高齡者使用LINE的動機、原因與目的，以提供後續軟體更新時，能更具吸引力、更符合使用者。本研究以方法目的鏈，探索中高齡者使用LINE因素中屬性、結果和價值間的關係，以開放式問卷對50位受訪者進行一對一深度訪談，採用階梯法作為訪談工具，將結果繪製成價值階層圖。研究發現：中高齡者使用LINE之屬性以即時通訊能力、貼圖、多元功能為多數人考量之因素，而群組討論、快速解決方案、共同話題為其主要結果利益；最重視的核心價值為工作價值、歸屬認同感、生活樂趣。英文摘要：With the introduction of 4G to mobile networks, Instant Messaging (IM) has extended from personal computers to smartphones. In the highly competitive market of mobile IM in Taiwan, attracting new users and retaining current users is a crucial topic for developers of mobile IM systems. This study investigated the motivation, reasons, and objectives of middle-aged and elderly people to use LINE, in order to devise LINE software updates that are attractive and suitable for users. A means-end chain approach was adopted to examine the relationships among attributes, consequences, and values in the factors of LINE uses among middle-aged and elderly people. We used open-ended questionnaires to conduct one-on-one in-depth interviews with 50 middle-aged and elderly people. Subsequently, we used the laddering method for interviews and created a hierarchical value map based on the results. According to the research results, the attributes of IM capacity, stickers, and multiple functions were the factors prompting middle-aged and elderly people to use LINE. Group discussions, quick solutions, and common topics were the major resultant benefits and the core values that middle-aged and elderly LINE users emphasized most was the sense of belonging and identity, work values and enjoyment of life. After analyzing and investigating middle-aged and elderly users based on gender, this study determined that the male users emphasized work values, whereas the female users valued the enjoyment of life.起始頁-結束頁：119-152資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202112_23(2).00023篇名：你想直播嗎？探討以直播分享自身專業技能之採用意願並列篇名：Do You Want to Live-Broadcast? Explore the Willingness to Share Professional Skills by Live-Streaming作者：楊亨利(Heng-Li Yang);張瑞岩(Jui-Yen Chang)關鍵字：直播;直播主;專業技能分享;採用意願;Live-stream;streamer;professional skill sharing;adoption intention期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：23卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：直播新影音媒體勢力快速崛起，造就數位媒體生態隨之改變。然而，針對直播主相關的學術研究仍不多見。對此，本研究以社會認知理論與社會臨場感理論作為基礎，並以分享自身專業技能為直播內容標的，透過人氣與成就感動機、自我效能（包含社交自我效能與直播技術自我效能兩層面）、知覺互動豐富度、社會影響、隱私風險七個因素，衡量影響一般素人對於使用直播平台分享自身專業技能的意願。研究結果顯示：人氣動機、社交自我效能、知覺互動豐富度、社會影響對使用意願有正向顯著影響，另一方面，我們也發現影響男性與女性對專業技能直播意願的因素並不相同。英文摘要：In recent years, live streaming techniques have been rapidly improved. It has created the era of digital media on web. However, there is few studies about the streamers. Based on social cognitive theory and social presence theory, this study tried to explore the reasons of motivating people to live broadcast their professional skills. The variables, popularity motivation, achievement motivation, sociable self-efficacy, live-streaming ability self-efficacy, perceived interactive richness, social influence and privacy risk, were concerned. The findings indicated that popularity motivation, sociable self-efficacy, perceived interactive richness, and social influence have significant impacts. Moreover, we found the influencing factors between male and female are different.起始頁-結束頁：153-177資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202112_23(2).00034篇名：資訊安全政策的組織正義知覺對員工職場行為意圖之影響：組織信任的中介效果並列篇名：The Impact of Organizational Justice Perceptions about Information Security Policy on Employees' Intentions of Workplace Behaviors: Mediating Effects of Organizational Trust作者：徐淑如(Shu-Lu Hsu);戴基<U+5CEF>(Jeffrey C. F. Tai);康晉維(Joshua Kang)關鍵字：資訊安全政策;組織正義知覺;組織信任;職場行為;Information security policy;organizational justice perceptions;organizational trust;workplace behaviors期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：23卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：目前有關資訊安全政策的組織面研究，多半著眼在員工的政策遵行或電腦濫用防治效果，鮮少針對資訊安全政策對員工的職場行為之影響進行探討。基於社會交換理論，本研究探索員工資訊安全政策的組織正義知覺對其組織信任和各項職場行為意圖之影響。本研究以問卷調查獲得362份有效樣本，並採SmartPLS進行研究假說檢定。分析結果顯示，員工對資訊安全政策的分配與程序正義知覺會正向地影響其組織信任，進而影響其留職、規範職務、資訊安全與組織公民等行為的意圖。本研究彰顯出資訊安全政策的發展與施行之組織正義知覺，不僅和員工是否遵循資安政策有關，其影響還擴及員工對組織的信任及各項攸關組織有效運作的職場行為。英文摘要：The organizational research of Information Security Policy (ISP) primarily focused on studying its effects on policy conformance and computer abuse prevention, leaving the effects of ISP on employees' workplace behaviors under-investigated. Drawing on the social exchange theory, this study explores the impact of employees' justice perceptions about ISP on their organizational trust and intentions of workplace behaviors. We collected 362 effective samples through online survey and analyzed data with SmartPLS. Data analysis showed that distributive and procedural justice both positively influence employees' organizational trust, which in turn affect their intentions to remain in current jobs and to engage in ISP conformance, prescribed job and organizational citizenship behaviors. This study contributes to the literature by illuminating that justice perceptions about ISP can have profound impact on various workplace behaviors beyond ISP conformance.起始頁-結束頁：179-226資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202112_23(2).00045篇名：應用開放資料分析都市功能性區域與人潮分佈並列篇名：Applied Open Data in Functional Urban Area Analysis and Crowd Distribution作者：潘威翰(Wei-Han Pan);林熙禎(Shi-Jen Lin);陳<U+68C5>易(Ping-I Chen)關鍵字：開放資料;地理資訊系統;都市分析;都市功能性區域;商圈分析;Open data;GIS;urban analysis;functional urban area;commercial area analysis期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：23卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：2009年政府開放資料逐漸興起，台灣也在2012年積極發展開放資料，對於政府開放資料的應用漸漸成為趨勢。另外，以往都市功能性區域分析在蒐集資料都花費不少成本，因此本研究利用開放資源解決資料蒐集成本問題，並針對台北捷運流量資料探討，使得該資料可以應用在都市功能性區域分析上。本文利用階層式分群將捷運站分群，找出大台北地區（涵蓋台北市與新北市）這些捷運站周邊的功能性區域。此外，將分辨出的功能性區域結合商圈開放資料找出商圈與功能性區域的關係，進而了解商圈人潮動向。本研究運用了政府開放資料進行都市與商圈分析並節省資料蒐集成本，針對大眾交通運輸流量在分群前處理時進行探討，最後根據不同功能性區域商圈人潮的特性給予結論。英文摘要：Government open data gradually become popular since 2009, so as the government of Taiwan. In 2012, the government of Taiwan promoted to open their data. Therefore, the application of using open data become a trend in Taiwan. Moreover, many researchers used much cost to collect data while analyzing functional urban area. So in this paper, we'd like to use government open data to resolve the cost of collecting data and analyze the flow-type data to be applied in functional urban area. Then, we apply agglomerative hierarchical clustering to finish functional urban area identification in Taipei area (including Taipei City and New Taipei City). Besides, we find the relationship between functional urban area and commercial area which collecting from another open data to understand the tendency of people flow. In this paper, we practically utilize government open data to analyze functional urban area and reduce the cost of collecting data; we also discuss the preprocessing while applying flow-type data to cluster the functional urban area. Finally, we get the conclusion according to the different kinds of functional urban area.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202106_23(1).00016篇名：資訊從眾程度影響衝動購買行為的前置心理歷程研究並列篇名：A Study on Procedure of Antecedent Psychology for Information Conformity Impact on Impulse Purchase作者：管郁君(Eugenia Y. Huang);林淑瓊(Shu-Chiung Lin);何宜蓁(Yi-Chen Ho)關鍵字：衝動購買;網路口碑;資訊從眾;購買制約因素;商品慾望;Impulse purchase;electronic word-of-mouth;information conformity;purchasing constraint;product desire期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：23卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：先前有關衝動購買的行為研究，主要是以外在刺激因素對衝動購買意圖影響進行探討，而消費者從接觸網路口碑產生資訊從眾到衝動購買行為發生之前置心理歷程變化，與調節變數對衝動購買行為影響則較少被探究。本研究的目的為探討消費者閱讀網路口碑後的資訊從眾程度對衝動購買影響的內在心理歷程，以及商品需要認知和購買制約因素的調節效果。研究中共蒐集528份曾經閱讀網路口碑的消費者資料。結果說明，同樣的網路口碑對不同的消費者之影響不同，乃是取決於消費者之資訊從眾程度，並且資訊從眾程度影響消費者的商品慾望，再間接經由衝動購買意圖之升高，增加消費者進行衝動購買的可能性，而購買制約因素對於衝動購買行為實有抑制作用。英文摘要：Previous studies on marketing have investigated the issues of consumers' impulse purchasing behavior. However, current knowledge on the procedure of consumer's antecedent psychology from reading e-WoM and producing information conformity to result in impulse purchasing behavior and the influence of moderating variables on impulse purchasing behavior remain unclear. In this context, this study proposes a conceptual model in which information conformity is regarded as a key factor determining e-WoM's effectiveness in forming the emotional states that eventually lead to impulse purchases. Meanwhile, this study also exams the moderating effects of perceived product need and purchasing constraints. A total of 528 valid responses from participants who have browsed product reviews in past are collected to test the research model. The results show that the degree of consumer's information conformity is mainly critical influencer and information conformity positively influences the desire for the product, which in turn raises the impulse purchase intention, resulting in a possible impulse purchase. Moreover, this study finds that purchasing constraints have moderating effects. This means that whether impulse purchase intention leads to an actual impulse purchase depends on the strength of the purchasing constraints. The contribution of this study is to systematically describe consumer's sequential procedure of mental development from information conformity after reading e-WoM to impulse purchasing behavior. Meanwhile, this study posits that the purchasing constraints are critical moderating factors to decline impulse purchasing behavior.起始頁-結束頁：21-45資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202106_23(1).00027篇名：從資訊覓食理論探索消費者對於電子商務網站推薦系統的點擊行為並列篇名：Exploring Users' Clicking Behavior of Recommender Systems in E-commerce from an Information Foraging Theory Perspective作者：鄭光廷(Kuang-Ting Cheng);林怡伶(Yi-Ling Lin)關鍵字：推薦系統;資訊覓食理論;消費者點擊行為;Recommender system;information foraging theory;consumers' clicking behavior期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：23卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：電子商務網站中的推薦系統，可以幫助消費者過濾出潛在所需的訊息。推薦系統的點擊紀錄除了可以回饋推薦系統的推薦結果，同時也可作為後端演算法優劣的比較依據。然而過去對於推薦系統的點擊研究較為稀少，因此本研究試圖用資訊覓食理論來探索消費者於推薦系統的點擊行為。首先採用實地實驗法，從推薦系統的「提示資訊」與推薦演算法產生的「商品資訊」來探索消費者點擊的差異性；再利用質化訪談的方式，深入理解消費者點擊背後的影響因素。研究結果發現，消費者會受到提示資訊與商品資訊影響其對推薦系統的點擊。其中提示資訊又比商品資訊在瀏覽過程中率先吸引大多數消費者的目光。此一消費者點擊行為可用資訊覓食理論來加以解釋與闡述。英文摘要：Recommender systems in e-commerce assist consumers to filter out overloaded messages. The clicking log can not only be the feedback for improving the recommendations but also serve as a comparison basis for the recommendation algorithms. However, past studies on recommender systems rarely focus on the clicking behavior from the interface perspective. Therefore, this study attempts to apply the Information Foraging Theory to explore consumers' clicking behavior in the recommender systems. This study firstly conducted a field experiment to explore whether consumers' clicking behavior would be affected by the ”title” of the recommendations or the ”product information” generated by the recommender algorithm. We also conducted a qualitative interview to deeply understand the influencing factors behind consumers' clicking behavior. The result shows that consumers' clicking behavior is affected by both prompt and product information on the recommender system but the prompt information can catch users' attention earlier in the browsing process. This consumers' clicking behavior of the recommender system can be explained by the information foraging theory.起始頁-結束頁：47-70資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202106_23(1).00038篇名：運用資料探勘技術預測分析持續互動性高之粉絲團：以臉書醫療健康粉絲團為例並列篇名：Predicting Activeness of Medical and Healthcare Fan Page on Facebook Using Data Mining Techniques作者：李珮如(Pei-Ju Lee);胡雅涵(Ya-Han Hu);李彥賢(Yen-Hsien Lee);吳俊霆(Chun-Ting Wu)關鍵字：Facebook;粉絲團;診所;資料探勘;Facebook;fan page;clinic;data mining期刊/會議論文集名稱：電子商務學報卷期：23卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Facebook開放粉絲團功能後，公司機構的粉絲團數有漸增趨勢；研究指出在粉絲團上鼓勵用戶間互動或與粉絲團經營者互動，將有助提升用戶滿意度，進而增進品牌忠誠度。社群媒體亦常用於增加醫療機構或醫師曝光度、及患者與醫療人員或其他患者即時的線上溝通。過去研究未以維持醫療健康粉絲團人數與忠誠度為主軸，且社群網站特性如用戶互動情況等，在醫療健康粉絲團經營上也未被重視。本研究以用戶互動及貼文類型等變數，使用資料探勘方法找出擁有相對高活躍率粉絲團之共同因子，預測粉絲團是否能維持活躍度，以提供醫療機構維持用戶之參考。實驗結果顯示提高貼文頻率、以照片或影片貼文為主、注重貼文反應及訪客貼文內容，將有較高之醫療健康粉絲團活躍率。英文摘要：The launch of fan page on Facebook has encouraged businessies and organizations to create and operate their respective fan pages. Previous research indicated that users' satisfactions and loyalties can be enhanced by encouraging interations among users (fans) or with curators of the fan page. Social media such as Facebook is often used to increase the exposure of medical institutions or physicians, and to provide a platform for users to communicate directly and immediately with medical staffs or other patients. However, the prior research did not focus on the retention of user and the enhancement of loyalty on medical or healthcare fan pages; in addition, the characteristics of social network sites such as user interactions and connections were not taken into consideration in the operation of medical and healthcare fan pages. Therefore, this study uses data mining techniques to identify important factors of highly active fan pages, and to predict fan pages that could remain active. Our observations provide suggestions for medical and healthcare institutions in retaining users. The experiment results indicate that medical and healthcare fan pages could remain active by increasing the post frequency, incorporating photos or videos in the post, responding to the posts and comments actively.起始頁-結束頁：71-95資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞哲學	基礎與應用科學＞資訊科學	基礎與應用科學＞統計	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中華企業資源規劃學會DOI：10.6188/JEB.202106_23(1).000401篇名：【論文摘要】Abc牙醫導入滿意度偵測系統的難題並列篇名：【論文摘要】The Challenges of Abc Dental Group's Patient Satisfaction System作者：陳建宏(Chien-Hung Chen);王致遠(Chih-Yuan Wang)關鍵字：醫療服務;客戶滿意度調查;服務品質改善;服務金三角;Medical service;Customer satisfaction survey;Service quality improvement;The service triangle期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：Abc牙醫聯盟是一個擁有12間大型牙醫診所，近百位牙醫師的連鎖體系。為了解決網路社群負評問題，導入「Dr. Right」滿意度調查系統。導入後對網路評價有所提升，但也引發牙醫師們的反彈，認為醫師不應該讓病人來進行評價。個案討論滿意度的概念以及為何滿意度調查可作為服務品質改善的依據，藉由服務金三角的概念，說明滿意度調查如何揭露互動行銷過程中的問題，以及醫療組織可如何運用內部行銷的措施強化醫病互動品質；同時考量醫療服務與一般服務業的不同，醫療組織可如何用誘導而非強迫的方式協助醫師強化溝通能力，及如何用流程調整增加醫病溝通之可能。英文摘要：Abc Dental Group is a dental service chain with 12 large clinics in Taiwan, employing almost 100 dentists. The group adopted a patient satisfaction survey system, known as ”Dr. Right”, to counter negative reviews made on the Internet. The system has had positive effects on the chain's rating online, but it was also met with disapproval from its dentists, who claim that they should not be rated by patients. This case study discusses the concept of customer satisfaction as well as the basis for improving service quality by means of satisfaction surveys. Using the concept of the service triangle, we aim to understand four main aspects: how satisfaction surveys reveal problems during the process of interactive marketing, how medical organizations may improve doctor-patient interactive qualities by means of internal marketing, how considering the distinctions between medical services and other regular services, medical organizations can use induction as opposed to compulsory measures to help improve their doctors' communication skills, and finally, how process optimisation may facilitate doctor-patient communication.起始頁-結束頁：1-2資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202110_40(4).CNI0012篇名：【論文摘要】馬光中醫醫療網－醫療服務項目的獲利管理並列篇名：【論文摘要】The Ma Kuang TCM Medical Network-Profitability Management of Medical Service Items作者：戴怡蕙(Yi-Hui Tai);林志銘(Chih-Ming Lin);利尚仁(Shang-Jen Li)關鍵字：作業基礎成本制度;服務成本;可控與不可控;獲利管理;Activity-based costing;Service cost;Controllable and uncontrollable;Profit management期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：2002年之後，因為中醫市場飽和，導致馬光中醫收入成長有限，但淨利率卻下降。2006年盛夏，馬光中醫執行長思考是否應該重新檢視服務項目的服務成本計算方式及進行獲利管理。本個案讓學生學習計算作業基礎成本制度下的服務成本數字，並以可控與不可控觀念來進行服務項目的獲利管理。英文摘要：In the period after 2002, due to the saturation of the traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) market, Ma Kuang TCM Center's revenue growth was capped, yet its net profit margin showed a downward trend. Then, in the summer of 2006, Ma Kuang TCM Center's CEO pondered whether to reassess the service cost calculation of service items and whether to implement profitability management. By analyzing such events, this case allows students to learn how to calculate the service cost figures by means of activity-based costing, and to use controllable and uncontrollable concepts to conduct the profitability management of service items.起始頁-結束頁：23-24資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202110_40(4).CNI0233篇名：【論文摘要】台北市立萬芳醫院－居家醫療推動面臨的困境？並列篇名：【論文摘要】Taipei Municipal Wan Fang Hospital-The Predicaments Faced in the Promotion of Home Health Care作者：邱麗家(Li-Jia Chiu);陳晉誼(Chin-I Chen)關鍵字：居家醫療;價值照護;價值取向;利害關係人;信任關係;Home health care;Value-based care;Value orientation;Stakeholders;Trust relationship期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷4期出版年：2021中文摘要：本個案為管理層級真實公司田野個案，面對「居家醫療推動面臨的困境」為探討主軸，建構以人為本的價值醫療。台北市立萬芳醫院正式啟動居家醫療，2016年6月萬芳醫院開始籌備居家醫療，同年8月30日開始正式收案，而2018年萬芳居家護理所也全面轉型居家醫療。本個案將描述高副院長及陳主任帶領團隊，在推動居家醫療的角色，歷經所面對的真實情境，透過面臨推動歷程之困難及挑戰，如何因應並解決其問題，從中建構以價值為導向的居家醫療照護模式，以創造居家醫療相關人所展現的專業價值。英文摘要：This is a field case study pertaining to the management level of a real company that uses ”predicaments faced in the promotion of home health care” as the main topic of its discussion to construct a humancentric, value-based health care model. Taipei Municipal Wan Fang Hospital has officially launched its home health care services, having started to plan home health care in June 2016 and officially accepting patents on August 30 of the same year, while in 2018, Taipei Municipal Wan Fang Hospital's home care clinic also underwent a comprehensive transformation to its home healthcare service. This case depicts the team-leading endeavors of Associate Director Gao and Supervisor Chen in the promotion of home health care and how problems were handled and resolved in the face of real predicaments and challenges, which are subsequently used to construct a value-oriented home health care model and create the professional values demonstrated by personnel providing home health care.起始頁-結束頁：51-52資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202110_40(4).CNI0514篇名：A Study on the Factors Affecting Downloading of Location Based Services Mobile Applications並列篇名：探討下載適地性服務手機應用程式影響因素之研究作者：林東清(Tung-Ching Lin);徐士傑(Jack Shih-Chieh Hsu);陳耕硯(Ken-Yen Chen);吳盛(Sheng Wu)關鍵字：privacy calculus;location based services;app;technology acceptance model;word of mouth;隱私計算;適地性服務;手機應用程式;科技接受模式;口碑推薦期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Purpose - The purpose of this paper is to find out if users may be attracted by the benefits of location based services (LBS) app's functions, otherwise, users may have stopped by the perceived risks of the LBS app. Thus, we use privacy calculus theory to explain user behaviors in this context. Furthermore, we were to determine the impact of paid or free and app category on privacy calculus. Design/methodology/approach - A total of 425 people responded to our online questionnaire. After dropping invalid or incomplete responses, only 418 surveys were considered valid. We adopted Smart PLS 2.0 to calculate the β coefficients and significance levels of all the proposed hypotheses. Findings - First, whether paid or free makes a difference to the user's privacy calculus depends on the app category. In the paid condition, users focus on the privacy disclosure benefits. This means that users will critically consider the app's functionality. Users also attach importance to the privacy disclosure risks of hedonic apps. In the free condition, users attach more importance to the privacy disclosure benefits of utilitarian apps. Second, the app category also impacts the user's privacy calculus. Users focus on the benefits of a utilitarian app and they pay more attention to the risks of a hedonic app. Research limitations/implications - Our research focused on users of the Android platform, but the behaviors of IOS platform users might be different. Practical implications/Social implications - Vendors of hedonic apps must either guarantee the security of their app or explain how the requested permissions are used by the app. Otherwise, the privacy disclosure risks decrease users' intention to download the app. Originality/value - Since there is almost no research discussing the effects of paid or free and app category on privacy risks, our research is the first to provide insight regarding these two constructs in this context.英文摘要：研究目的：本研究目的想要探討使用者一方面基於使用適地性服務App的好處，另一方面又害怕對於個人位置資訊不當使用的風險。因此我們使用隱私計算理論來探究其使用者行為模式，並進一步深入了解付費與免費對於使用者的隱私計算有何影響。研究設計／方法：總共收集425份線上問卷，刪除無效問卷後共有418份有效問卷，並使用Smart PLS 2.0統計軟體檢測其研究假說成立與否。研究結果：與娛樂型App相比，使用者會比較注重工具型App所能帶來的好處。和工具型App相比，使用者會比較擔心娛樂型App的潛在風險；然而付費App會讓使用者十分重視App所能帶來的好處，況且比起工具型App會更為重視娛樂型app的風險。假若是免費的App，使用者會比較重視工具型App的好處。研究限制／啟發：本研究主要是針對Android平台的用戶，所以IOS平台用戶的行為可能會有所不同。理論／實務／社會意涵：娛樂型的手機應用程式提供商必須保證其安全性或者要說明手機應用程式如何存取要求使用的權限，不然使用者會因隱私洩露的風險降低下載的意願。創見／價值：由於過去的研究很少討論付費型與免費型的手機應用程式對使用者隱私風險的影響，因此本研究提供這兩種不同情境做深入的探討。起始頁-結束頁：1+49-68資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202107_40(3).ENG0495篇名：區域血液中心之存貨政策分析並列篇名：Analysis on the Inventory Policies of Regional Blood Centers作者：王泰裕(Tai-Yue Wang);黃誼昀(Yi-Yun Huang);何國維(Kuo-Wei Ho)關鍵字：血液存貨管理;區域血液中心;類神經網路;Blood Inventory Management;Regional Blood Center;Neural Network期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究針對區域血液中心的血液存貨進行血品壽命與成本分析，同時引入人工智慧方法進行血液需求預測與分析，並比較不同血液存貨管理方法的優劣。研究方法：基於血液的需求及供給皆是不確定性的，會隨著時間或事件的發生而波動，形成一時間序列，本研究以血小板為主要研究對象，利用人工智慧中長短期記憶網路預測未來血小板的供應量，接著以模擬最佳化的方法求解該期最佳存貨策略參數，最後再利用類神經網路模型，預測該期之最佳存貨策略參數，提供血庫管理人員控制血液捐贈量。研究結果：研究發現，在區域血液中心的存貨管理上，血液缺貨及血液過期方面，本研究所提出的法都優於現有的管理方法；並發現當缺貨數量較多時，供應的血小板平均剩餘壽命較高，當過期數量較多時，平均剩餘壽命較低。研究限制：本研究使用區域血液中心的資料作為實例驗證，在不同區域血液中心或擴大為全國性血液調度時，可能會產生效益上的差異。實務意涵：本研究提出之方法提供血庫管理人員能夠明確控制血小板的存貨，依據管理需求採取不同的存貨策略，並將過期處理、缺貨及存貨持有成本降到最低，甚至能夠將此方法應用至其他血品之存貨管理。價值：從區域血液中心的角度來理解血液存貨管理的意涵，尤其是對於短天期的易腐性存貨管理，正確的預測更能顯示出存貨管理的價值。英文摘要：Purpose - This study aims to, with regard to the blood inventories of regional blood centers, conduct blood shelf life and cost analyses and import artificial intelligence methods to conduct blood demand forecasts and analysis, as well as compare the pros and cons of different blood inventory management methods. Design/methodology/approach - Due to the uncertain nature of the demand and provision of blood, which, in a sense, can fluctuate depending on the time or occurrence of certain events, a time series has been formed. This study used platelets as the primary research subject and adopted the long short-term memory (LSTM) network of artificial intelligence to forecast the future supply of platelets. Subsequently, simulation optimization methods were used to determine the optimal inventory policy parameters for the given period, after which the neutral network model was once again used to forecast the optimal inventory policy parameters for the given period. This was done to provide to blood inventory management personnel with a means to enable them to control the amount of donated blood. Findings - The research discovered that, with regard to the inventory management of regional blood centers, the management methods proposed by this study in the aspects of blood inventory shortage and blood expiration are superior to the methods currently adopted. In addition, during periods of relatively severe blood inventory shortage, the average remaining shelf life of platelets provided was relatively high, while the average remaining shelf life was low when the expired quantity was relatively large. Research limitations - This research used the data of a single regional blood center as an empirical example, which, if applied to different regional blood centers or even extended to national-level blood dispatch, could produce differences in effectiveness. Practical implications - The methods proposed by this research provide blood inventory management personnel with clear methods for controlling the inventory of blood platelets, helping them to adopt different inventory policies according to management needs as well as to minimize expiration processing, shortage, and inventory holding costs. Moreover, this method could even be used for the inventory management of other blood products. Value - In understanding the implications of blood inventory management from the perspective of regional blood centers, especially with regard to short-term perishable inventory management, the more accurate the forecast, the greater the inventory management values proved to be.起始頁-結束頁：3-24+69資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202107_40(3).CNI0036篇名：Understanding Why Players Engage in Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game (MMORPG) Guilds: From the Perspective of Core Community Commonalities並列篇名：玩家在大型多人線上角色扮演遊戲（MMORPG）公會中參與行為的影響因素－核心社群共通性觀點作者：傅振瑞(Jen-Ruei Fu);呂怡緯(I-Wei Lu)關鍵字：MMORPG Guilds;Core Community Commonalities;Engagement Behavior;Social Influence;Social Identity;大型多人線上角色扮演遊戲（MMORPG）公會;核心社群共通性;參與行為;社會影響;社會認同期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Purpose - This study investigates the effects of social influence on members' engagement behaviors in MMORPG guilds, a goal-oriented community, where members interact with each other in a fictional and dissociative virtual world. In this environment, engagement behaviors are crucial to members' continuous participation. While most studies focus on players' pathological engaging behaviors in MMORPGs, little information is available on whether social identity and social influence are still important to players' engagement behaviors when they are helping and supporting the group and other members in guilds, and whether players are inclined to be more socially motivated or more self-interested when they interact behind fictional masks or personas. Design/methodology/approach - This study proposes a theoretical model of social identity and social influence to verify the effects of the core community commonalities and individuals' intrinsic and extrinsic motivations on players' engagement behaviors in MMORPG guilds. An online survey on MMORPG forums was administered to 309 guild players. Findings - The findings reveal that players' social identity to the guild has a profound impact on three core community commonalities, and these core commonalities, in turn, affect engagement behaviors significantly. Additionally, social influence - especially shared moral responsibility - has a significant positive impact on players' engagement behaviors than extrinsic motivations. Research limitations/implications - Self-selected sampling methods and the participants, who were Chinese college students, might restrict generalizations regarding the results. Practical implications/Social implications - This study demonstrates that social influence in fictional environments can inhibit personal behavior characterized by a good sense of responsibility and social regulations, and that guild leaders can apply their social identity and the core community commonalities to enhance members' engagement behaviors in a virtual team. Originality/value - This paper shows that individuals are still motivated by self-interest, which they tend to use in a social manner, when they interact in a dissociative and fictional environment.英文摘要：研究目的：大型多人線上角色扮演遊戲（MMORPG）玩家以虛構角色在虛擬環境中互動，本研究探討在缺乏真實個人社會線索的MMORPG遊戲社群中，社會影響對遊戲社群成員參與行為的影響效果。研究設計／方法：建立社會認同、核心社群共通性及個人內部、外部動機對參與行為的關係模型分析影響效果。研究結果：社會認同對核心社群共通性有顯著影響，核心社群共通性，尤其是共享責任感，對參與行為有重要正向影響。研究限制／啟發：自我選擇取樣方法及參與者多為台灣大學生可能限制研究結果的類推。理論／實務／社會意涵：虛擬團隊領導者可透過社會認同和核心社群共通性強化團隊成員的參與行為。創見／價值：在虛擬環境中，個人仍受社會影響的規範，甚至超過自利動機的影響力。起始頁-結束頁：25+71-93資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202107_40(3).ENG0717篇名：Asset Tangibility, the Creditor Influence, and Risk Management Role in M&A Decisions並列篇名：實體資產、債權人影響力與企業併購之風險管理角色作者：黃幼琳(Yu-Lin Huang)關鍵字：Asset Tangibility;Mergers and Acquisitions;Risk Management;Creditor Influence;實體資產;企業併購;風險管理;債權人影響力期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：Purpose - This paper examines whether asset tangibility affects the risk management role of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) and whether the effect of asset tangibility changes with creditor influence. Design/methodology/approach - Based on a study by Garfinkel and Hankins (2011), this research modifies their model by taking the impact of asset tangibility into account. The empirical results are estimated using a logistical model. Findings - Asset tangibility increases the likelihood of firms conducting M&As as their risk management tool when they face increased income uncertainty. Such financing-investment effects regarding asset tangibility are more pronounced with firms with less specific real assets, firms less influenced by bank creditors and those with higher leverage and well-governed firms. Research limitations - This study complements existing research by illustrating the importance of financial feasibility in risk management decisions. In addition, this study highlights the association between asset structure and corporate risk management decisions. Practical implications - This study not only shows how a firm's financial feasibility affects its risk management decisions but also explores the rationale behind managers' responses to increased uncertainty. Value - This paper extends the scope of prior studies investigating risk management decisions via M&As by providing an alternative perspective - the financing-investment relationship. It documents the financial feasibility matters concerning the risk management role of M&As.英文摘要：研究目的：本研究探討實體資產是否影響併購之風險管理角色，及此影響效果是否因債權人影響力而有所改變。研究設計／方法：本文修改了Garfinkel and Hankins（2011）的模型，考量實體資產之影響效果，利用邏輯斯模型進行實證估計。研究結果：當企業面臨遞增之收入不確定性時，實體資產將提升公司利用併購作為風險管理工具之可能性。此投融資影響效果較顯現於資產較不具特殊性公司、較不受銀行債權人影響之公司、高舉債企業及公司治理完善之企業。研究限制／啟發：本文補充了現有文獻，顯示財務可行性對風險管理之重要性，且突顯了資產結構與風險管理之關聯。理論／實務／社會意涵：本研究顯示財務可行性如何影響風險管理決策及經理人回應遞增不確定性之考量依據。創見／價值：本文以另一觀點－投融資關係探討透過併購進行之風險管理決策，證實財務可行性對於併購在風險管理決策具有重要影響。起始頁-結束頁：27+95-117資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202107_40(3).ENG0958篇名：【論文摘要】藝隆農產公司該要買下台灣Dole嗎？並列篇名：【論文摘要】Should Yi-Lung Agricultural Co., Ltd Acquire Dole Taiwan?作者：陳振燧(Cheng-Hsui Chen);黃銘章(Ming-Chang Huang);粘緯豐(Wei-Feng Nien)關鍵字：併購;垂直整合;香蕉產業;Dole;藝隆公司期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Dole公司是全球最大的蔬果跨國生產銷售集團，2005年成立台灣分公司，2006年在台北北投及屏東萬巒設立香蕉分切包裝處理廠，與7-11合作成功引進香蕉單條銷售的商業模式。2014年由屏東縣南州鄉的蕉農余致榮成立的藝隆公司，透過與台灣Dole的合作，成為7-11與好市多的主要供應商。2020年初，長期處於虧損狀態的台灣Dole宣布退出台灣市場。台灣Dole希望藝隆公司買下在台的資產，如果藝隆公司不併購台灣Dole，可能就面對失去7-11與好市多訂單的危機。但併購缺乏規模經濟與範疇經濟，營運整合也是另外一個問題。藝隆該買下台灣Dole嗎？起始頁-結束頁：1-1資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202104_40(2).CNI0019篇名：【論文摘要】加百列商行，該不該再開第四家統一超商加盟店？並列篇名：【論文摘要】Should Gabriel Start Up a Fourth Store under the Franchisee of President Chain Store Corporation?作者：蕭世雄(Shih-Hsiung Hsiao);楊文華(Wen-Hua Yang);李宗政(Chung-Cheng Lee);周冠仁(Kuan-Jen Chou)關鍵字：連鎖便利超商;展店決策;特許加盟;商圈立地評估;範疇經濟期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文旨在引導學生搭配個案的情境，研讀事先指定的相關資料，從而先行了解加盟連鎖便利超商在擴展複數店時所可能產生的各種問題，進行課堂討論。在課堂進行過程中，授課教師可先談論加盟連鎖便利超商發展的基礎概論，並讓學生思考了解加盟總部與加盟店主，基於不同的加盟體制，在制度、認知及情感觀點上可能帶來的影響與限制。此外，透過引用「商圈調查與立地評估」的工具與方法進行各種分析，搭配衛星地圖等立地相關資訊的判讀，綜合考量過去的成功經驗與評估盲點，確認並分析關鍵資訊，得出具體的建議結論，模擬加盟店主是否該繼續投入設立第四家統一超商加盟店的展店決策過程。起始頁-結束頁：17-17資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202104_40(2).CNI01710篇名：【論文摘要】常玉特展：時藝多媒體的智慧財產價值轉化並列篇名：【論文摘要】SanYu Special Exhibition: The Value Conversion of Intellectual Property by Multimedia Shiyi Corporation作者：楊神珠(Angela Yang)關鍵字：產業價值鏈;IP授權產業;常玉特展;博物館策展;價值生態圈期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本個案在探討創意產業中歷史博物館（以下簡稱史博館，為智財擁有者），透過文創商店營運商時藝多媒體公司（以下簡稱時藝），跨域整合授權產業鏈上、中、下游之間的利害關係人（Stakeholders），以「常玉特展」的個案和史博館，共同轉化常玉的無形創作智財價值，又稱智慧財（簡稱智財，Intellectual Property，以下稱IP），與消費者價值交易後，創造有形的財務收益。博物館是創意產業的領頭羊，是文化藝術的孵育地。以往館院收入來源多以門票和企業贊助為主，由於政府預算縮減，企業贊助減少，博物館順應轉型為「企業化」方式營運，因此數位化的IP授權業務因應而生，企業盛行借用文化美學的IP元素，為企業產品及服務進行價值加值，數位「藝術授權」越來越重要，成為博物館收入的新途徑。現代管理將面臨更多的跨領域的挑戰，傳統管理投入等於產出（1+1=2）的概念，已經不敷使用。所以本個案分析時藝，其非僅是擔任授權商品的代理商，更跨界結合產業鏈上的利害關係人，形成產業生態圈合作夥伴的關係，貢獻自身的資源和優勢，共同成功轉化常玉無形象徵性的IP價值為有效的實質收益。起始頁-結束頁：39-39資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202104_40(2).CNI03911篇名：【論文摘要】挖掘數據下的市場商機：捷人科技的數位行銷策略並列篇名：【論文摘要】Mining Big Data for Business Opportunities: The Digital Marketing Strategy of JTEACH作者：賴志宗(Chih-Chung Lai);王豫萱(Yu-Hsuan Wang)關鍵字：資料分析;大數據分析;目標使用者;STP模式;策略分析;數位行銷期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本個案所有真實數據來源為捷人科技官方網站jteach.com與後台安裝之Google Analytics分析數據（以下簡稱GA分析），數據來自於捷人科技官方網站（以下簡稱官網）與使用者互動結果。藉由數據分析與策略分析探討。本個案適用大學與研究所水準的學生以及公司行銷運營新進員工訓練之用，培養大數據當中的洞察力並開發商業智慧當中的分析力，主要目標為發展學生對商業智慧與資料分析的理解，並學習基於分析的商業決策思考。本個案可應用於相關行業的電子商務網站分析，數據資料分析教學使用，以洞察商業活動和預測、規劃和需求策略。個案人物1 - Angela，負責監控公司網站活動並從分析報告中收集資料的中階經理。管理員工並執行公司市場策略，並向她的管理層彙報業績結果和策略實施的有效性。個案用戶2 - Tim，資訊組市場分析師，負責管理公司網站和資料操作，以匯總流量和使用資料。個案使用者3 - Joanne，負責業務組，將成效彙報給Angela，負責數位廣告與平面廣告資料分析。本個案強調了這三個人物之間的工作上互動，並指導學生如何識別和評估公司網站的使用者。此外，本個案也向學生介紹了STP模型（區隔、目標與定位）概念，以增進學生透過模型的資料分析和策略思維技能，了解並深化數位行銷當中的分析洞察力。起始頁-結束頁：59-59資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202104_40(2).CNI05912篇名：綠色產品資訊一定增加購買意願嗎？以輕忽道德與綠色知曉的調節式中介效果為例並列篇名：Does Green Product Information Always Increase Purchase Intention? A Moderated Mediation Model of Amorality and Green Awareness作者：蘇威傑(Weichieh Su);成力庚(Li-Keng Cheng)關鍵字：綠色行銷;道德;馬基維利主義;綠色知曉;green marketing;ethics;Machiavellianism;green awareness期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：商品文案中的綠色資訊大多並非單獨呈現，而是鑲嵌在一般功能性的文案之中。在混合一般資訊與綠色資訊下，消費者的購買行為是否會受到產品的綠色資訊影響。研究設計：本研究進行三個獨立的實驗來驗證假說。研究結果：本研究發現綠色環保訴求對消費者購買意願的影響，是經由消費者對產品資訊的綠色知曉所中介，而消費者的綠色知曉受到其道德感所調節影響。我們另外也發現消費者的輕忽道德傾向調節綠色知曉在綠色環保訴求與購買意願間的中介效果。研究限制：實驗產品皆為功能型產品，但體驗型產品可能會因為有綠色環保特性有其他感受。實務意涵：雖然廠商需注意廣告呈現的方式，以強化消費者能察覺到廣告中加入的綠色環保資訊。但廠商也要注意有些輕忽道德的消費者不會完全正確詮釋商品的綠色資訊。價值：本研究發現綠色產品資訊不一定增加購買意願，會受到消費者的認知與其道德感所影響。英文摘要：Purpose - In most copywriting, green information for the product is not presented alone, but mixed with general functional description. This study aims to examine whether consumers' purchasing behavior will be affected by the green information when green information is mixed with general information. Design/methodology/approach - Three independent experiments are conducted to test our hypotheses. Findings - This study concludes that consumers' green awareness mediates the impact of green product information on purchase intention; whereas consumers' amorality moderates their awareness of green information. Furthermore, consumers' amorality moderates the mediation effect between green products and purchase intention. Research limitations - All the products used in these experiments are functional products. Participants may have different feelings towards experience-based products because of their green features. Practical implications - Vendors shall notice how advertisements are presented to reinforce green information for consumers to perceive though, they shall also be aware that some amoral consumers may not correctly understand the green product information. Value - This study discovers that green product information does not necessarily increase purchase intention, but is affected by consumers' awareness and morality.起始頁-結束頁：1-20資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202101_40(1).CNI00113篇名：從聊天機器人探究對話式服務體驗：認知負荷觀點並列篇名：Conversational Service Experiences in Chatbots: A Perspective on Cognitive Load作者：周恩頤(En-Yi Chou);許文錦(Wen-Chin Hsu)關鍵字：聊天機器人;對話式商務模式;刺激－機制－反應模式;認知負荷;互動品質;chatbot;conversational commerce;stimulus-organism-response theory;cognitive load;interactive qualities期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：本研究以刺激－機制－反應模式與資訊系統成功模式為基礎，從認知負荷觀點探究消費者與聊天機器人之互動品質（即系統品質、資訊品質、服務品質）如何影響其認知、態度與持續使用意圖。研究設計與方法：本研究採便利抽樣方式蒐集193筆曾經使用過聊天機器人的顧客，並以最小平方法進行結構方程模式分析。研究結果：研究結果顯示（1）消費者知覺系統、資訊與服務品質分別會負向與正向地影響認知負荷與使用態度；（2）消費者之持續使用意圖則是會受到認知負荷與使用態度所影響。研究限制與啟發：在數位環境中，每位消費者擁有的服務接觸體驗、平台使用經驗或使用習慣皆不同，則不同程度的先備知識與經驗對於消費者在面對不同資訊內容時，會展現出不同的處理能力，故未來研究可針對消費者認知基模對於認知負荷的影響進行探究。實務意涵：本研究建議企業應導入對話式商務模式，透過聊天機器人提供消費者良好的互動品質（即資訊系統、資訊內容與服務傳遞），不僅能降低消費者的認知負荷，更能創造優質的服務體驗。價值：過往研究主要著墨於聊天機器人介面之設計、擬人化及穩定性等功能性因素，而本研究進一步從資訊過載與互動品質觀點建構一實證模型，探究消費者之創新對話式服務體驗。英文摘要：Purpose - This study examines the issues of cognitive load within the context of stimulus-organism-response theory and the information systems success model in developing a conceptual model by which to characterize interactions with chatbots in terms of system quality, information quality, and service quality. Design/methodology/approach - Structural equation modeling is employed to analyze survey data collected from 193 chatbot users recruited via convenience sampling. Findings - Our results reveal the following: (1) Customers perceiving a positive interaction with chatbots are less encumbered by cognitive load and are more likely to express a positive attitude toward the chatbot system; and (2) Reduced cognitive load and a positive attitude toward the chatbot both have significantly positive effects on the intention of consumers to continue using the system. Research limitations/implications - Within the context of digital environment, each consumer has different service contact experience, platform experience or habits. The capability to deal with various information may vary along with different levels of prior knowledge and experience of a consumer. Therefore, scholars can further study the impact of consumer's cognitive schema on their cognitive load in the future. Practical implications/Social implications - Our research suggests that companies might benefit from developing a chatbot-based conversational service to provide consumers with good interactive quality, which can not only reduce consumers' cognitive load, but also create excellent service experience. Originality/value - Most of the existing literature on chatbots has focused on its interface design, anthropomorphism, and stability, with relatively little research examining the cognitive mechanisms involved in the use of this technology. To contribute to this knowledge gap, this study develops a empirical model by which to characterize interactions with chatbots in terms of information overload and interactive quality (i.e., system quality, information quality, and service quality). The research findings provide valuable insights for scholars as well as marketers seeking to leverage the benefits of chatbots to enhance the customer experience.起始頁-結束頁：21-46資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202101_40(1).CNI02114篇名：雇主品牌管理與員工品牌權益：跨層次之中介與調節影響效果並列篇名：Employer Branding and Employee-based Brand Equity: The Mediating and Moderating Effects in Multilevel Models作者：江旭新(Hsu-Hsin Chiang);游司宇(Shih-Yu Yu)關鍵字：雇主品牌管理;工作意義感;員工品牌權益;自我概念;Employer Branding;Work Meaningfulness;Employee Brand Equity;Self-Concept期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究目的：過去有關於雇主品牌管理的研究多探討對於公司外部求職者的效果，缺乏針對以內部員工為主的研究，因此本研究之目的在於探討雇主品牌管理員工的工作意義感、員工品牌權益，以及與員工自我概念之跨層次影響關係。研究設計與方法：本研究以問卷調查法，從金融產業之29家公司獲得373位員工，以階層線性模式進行跨層次分析。研究結果：雇主品牌管理對工作意義感與員工品牌權益具有跨層次直接影響效果，工作意義感在雇主品牌管理與員工品牌權益之間具跨層次部分中介效果，員工的實際自我及理想自我與品牌一致性在工作意義感及員工品牌權益間具調節作用。研究限制與啟發：本研究之樣本來自金融相關產業，包括銀行業、保險業、證券業組成，樣本的外部效度會受到限制。此外，本研究之員工自我概念僅包含實際自我與理想自我，但自我概念還包含更多不同內涵。理論／實務／社會意涵：雇主品牌管理可做為策略人力資源管理的一部分，並在雇主品牌管理中投入塑造工作意義感的相關資源以及加入品牌人力資源管理的策略。創見／價值：為雇主品牌管理對公司內部影響提供新的觀點，補足雇主品牌管理之跨層次影響研究缺口。英文摘要：Purpose - Prior research mainly focused on the effect of employer branding on external job seekers, revealing a critical research gap. This study aims to investigate the impacts of employer branding on work meaningfulness, employee-based brand equity, and employee self-concept. Design/methodology/approach - 373 employees of 29 organizations were collected from financial industries. Hierarchical linear regression was utilized to analyze multilevel relationships. Findings - Results demonstrate that employer branding positively affects work meaningfulness and employee-based brand equity in multilevel relationships. Work meaningfulness partially mediates the multilevel relationship between corporate branding and employee-based brand equity. Employees' actual self-brand congruity and ideal self-brand congruity moderate the relationship between work meaningfulness and employee-based brand equity. Research limitations/implications - This study collected data form financial industries which comprises commercial banks, insurance and securities companies, indicating that external validity of the research is limited. Moreover, employee self-concept in the research only includes actual self and ideal self, whereas self-concept still contains more different contents. Practical implications/Social implications - Employer branding can be regarded as a part of strategic human resource management, which helps the organization to shape work meaningfulness and build the strategy of brand human resource management in the employer branding practices. Originality/value - This study reflects new perspectives on the internal impact of employer branding and fills the gap of employer branding in multilevel research.起始頁-結束頁：47-74資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202101_40(1).CNI04715篇名：Does Green Product Information Always Increase Purchase Intention? A Moderated Mediation Model of Amorality and Green Awareness作者：Weichieh Su;Li-Keng Cheng關鍵字：green marketing;ethics;Machiavellianism;green awareness期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Purpose - In most copywriting, green information for the product is not presented alone, but mixed with general functional description. This study aims to examine whether consumers' purchasing behavior will be affected by the green information when green information is mixed with general information. Design/methodology/approach - Three independent experiments are conducted to test our hypotheses. Findings - This study concludes that consumers' green awareness mediates the impact of green product information on purchase intention; whereas consumers' amorality moderates their awareness of green information. Furthermore, consumers' amorality moderates the mediation effect between green products and purchase intention. Research limitations - All the products used in these experiments are functional products. Participants may have different feelings towards experience-based products because of their green features. Practical implications - Vendors shall notice how advertisements are presented to reinforce green information for consumers to perceive though, they shall also be aware that some amoral consumers may not correctly understand the green product information. Value - This study discovers that green product information does not necessarily increase purchase intention, but is affected by consumers' awareness and morality.起始頁-結束頁：93-109資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202101_40(1).ENG09316篇名：Conversational Service Experiences in Chatbots: A Perspective on Cognitive Load作者：En-Yi Chou;Wen-Chin Hsu關鍵字：chatbot;conversational commerce;stimulus-organism-response theory;cognitive load;interactive qualities期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Purpose - This study examines the issues of cognitive load within the context of stimulus-organism-response theory and the information systems success model in developing a conceptual model by which to characterize interactions with chatbots in terms of system quality, information quality, and service quality. Design/methodology/approach - Structural equation modeling is employed to analyze survey data collected from 193 chatbot users recruited via convenience sampling. Findings - Our results reveal the following: (1) Customers perceiving a positive interaction with chatbots are less encumbered by cognitive load and are more likely to express a positive attitude toward the chatbot system; and (2) Reduced cognitive load and a positive attitude toward the chatbot both have significantly positive effects on the intention of consumers to continue using the system. Research limitations/implications - Within the context of digital environment, each consumer has different service contact experience, platform experience or habits. The capability to deal with various information may vary along with different levels of prior knowledge and experience of a consumer. Therefore, scholars can further study the impact of consumer's cognitive schema on their cognitive load in the future. Practical implications/Social implications - Our research suggests that companies might benefit from developing a chatbot-based conversational service to provide consumers with good interactive quality, which can not only reduce consumers' cognitive load, but also create excellent service experience. Originality/value - Most of the existing literature on chatbots has focused on its interface design, anthropomorphism, and stability, with relatively little research examining the cognitive mechanisms involved in the use of this technology. To contribute to this knowledge gap, this study develops a empirical model by which to characterize interactions with chatbots in terms of information overload and interactive quality (i.e., system quality, information quality, and service quality). The research findings provide valuable insights for scholars as well as marketers seeking to leverage the benefits of chatbots to enhance the customer experience.起始頁-結束頁：111-130資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202101_40(1).ENG11117篇名：Employer Branding and Employee-based Brand Equity: The Mediating and Moderating Effects in Multilevel Models作者：Hsu-Hsin Chiang;Shih-Yu Yu關鍵字：Employer Branding;Work Meaningfulness;Employee-based Brand Equity;Self-Concept期刊/會議論文集名稱：管理評論卷期：40卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Purpose - Prior research mainly focused on the effect of employer branding on external job seekers, revealing a critical research gap. This study aims to investigate the impacts of employer branding on work meaningfulness, employee-based brand equity, and employee self-concept. Design/methodology/approach - 373 employees of 29 organizations were collected from financial industries. Hierarchical linear regression was utilized to analyze multilevel relationships. Findings - Results demonstrate that employer branding positively affects work meaningfulness and employee-based brand equity in multilevel relationships. Work meaningfulness partially mediates the multilevel relationship between corporate branding and employee-based brand equity. Employees' actual self-brand congruity and ideal self-brand congruity moderate the relationship between work meaningfulness and employee-based brand equity. Research limitations/implications - This study collected data form financial industries which comprises commercial banks, insurance and securities companies, indicating that external validity of the research is limited. Moreover, employee self-concept in the research only includes actual self and ideal self, whereas self-concept still contains more different contents. Practical implications/Social implications - Employer branding can be regarded as a part of strategic human resource management, which helps the organization to shape work meaningfulness and build the strategy of brand human resource management in the employer branding practices. Originality/value - This study reflects new perspectives on the internal impact of employer branding and fills the gap of employer branding in multilevel research.起始頁-結束頁：131-154資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學	社會科學＞管理學出版單位：財團法人光華管理策進基金會DOI：10.6656/MR.202101_40(1).ENG13101篇名：繞開、修復與「移動學習」：深圳青年農民工「當老闆」與「見世面」的學習民族誌研究並列篇名：Bypassing, Repairing, and ”Mobile Learning”: A Learning Ethnography of Shenzhen Young Migrant Workers' ”Being a Boss” and ”Seeing the World”作者：方怡潔(I-chieh Fang)關鍵字：看穿;去技術化;非正式學習;移動;勞動;penetration;de-skilling;informal learning;mobility;labour期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Paul Willis提出「傢伙們」表述清晰的「反學校文化」來闡明底層學子在看穿學校機制之後的反應，本文要以農民工的案例來描繪捕捉另一種看穿學校機制之後的反應，即繞開、修復與「移動學習」。透過分析深圳電子廠內一群「不想讀書但很想學習」的青年農民工遠赴深圳工廠打工所展現的學習策略，本文提出「移動學習」──一種不挑戰原有體制，但又能夠為行動者帶來想像、產生願景的學習方式──說明農民工如何以此來修復學校體制失靈的承諾。放棄受教育進城打工的農民工並非「壞學生」，這個標籤既無助於了解他們的處境，也無法透過用資源使他們成為「好學生」而解決中輟的問題。農民工並非落後、無法學習、缺乏動力或不想學習，而是早看穿他們在教育結構化中的不利位置，「提早進城打工」成為替學習尋找替代方案的結果。這反而展現他們在對抗不利結構時的修復能力與能動性。在「移動學習」中，生活、勞動與學習的界線模糊，也無教與學的二分，農民工透過現場觀察、旁聽、模仿、默會、實作、競爭與合作以及經驗分享等方式來習得知識與技術。一方面藉著到城市「合法邊緣參與」該社會場域的知識與技能，拼貼組裝學習資源為己所用；另方面則透過移動所產生的城鄉結構裂隙，去挪移文化品味、社會經驗與象徵符碼成為回鄉後轉換主體性的資本，試圖以此向上流動與提升社會地位。然而，移動學習仍有侷限性，學習所需的資源、機會與每一步的銜接，皆非制度性過程，很大程度上要取決於等待、機遇巧合、主管的賞識和學習者自己的額外勞動（例如表現出忠誠、苦幹或勤奮等）。英文摘要：In Paul Willis's ”Learning to Labour”, the lads articulate 'anti-school culture' as their reaction after penetrating/seeing through the schooling mechanism. This paper will demonstrate some other reactions to seeing through the school system, through the case of migrant workers in Shenzhen China. These reactions are: bypass, repair, and ”mobile learning”. By analyzing the learning strategies displayed by a group of young migrant workers in an electronics factory, who left school out of choice but were keen to learn, this paper argues that ”mobile learning” allows social actors to imagine and realize new possibilities without challenging the existing structure. Migrant workers use this method to bypass and repair the school system which is falling apart. This paper points out that migrant workers who drop out from school are not ”bad students.” This label is not helpful for understanding their situation or for solving their problems. Their problems cannot be solved by exhausting various resources to help them become ”good students.” These young migrant workers are not backward, unteachable, unmotivated, or unwilling to learn. Rather, they saw through the middleclass nature of schooling and its urban bias, and realized it cannot possibly help them improve their livelihoods. They become wage labourers in factories in Shenzhen as the result of finding alternatives. Migrant workers who engage in ”mobile learning” move to different places and social contexts. On the one hand, through ”legitimate peripheral participation,” they gain knowledge and skills in that social context, and they collate and assemble such learning resources for their own use. On the other hand, they mobilize cultural taste, social experiences, and symbols between urban and rural settings, and thus create social, cultural, and symbolic capital which enables them to transform their subjectivities in response to the failure of the schooling system. However, ”mobile learning” has its limitations. All the resources, opportunities, and every transition of this learning process is not institutionalized. ”Mobile learning” relies largely on waiting, coincidences, the appreciation of supervisors and workers' own extra labor (such as showing loyalty, hard work, diligence, etc.). In short, the path of migrant workers' ”mobile learning” is thin and easily ruptured.起始頁-結束頁：1-61資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所2篇名：研究倫理的形式：文件、會議、與研究倫理審查並列篇名：Forms of Ethics Review: Document, Meeting, and IRB Review Process作者：許<U+701E>文(Ching-wen Hsu)關鍵字：會議;文件;研究倫理審查委員會;倫理審查制度;倫理審查程序;meeting;document;research ethics review committee;ethics review system;ethics review process期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：研究倫理審查委員會由行政事務與審查事務構成，兩者共同運作，執行研究倫理的抽象概念、審查的規範、以及審查的制度。倫理審查會議是「保護被研究者」與「學術知識進展」的協商場合，也是生產表單、程序、與規範的場合。審查會議藉由提出各種預期可能性，來掌握研究計畫的風險，經由反覆討論而達成對倫理原則和應用的共識，並通過重新導向與安排文件的流程，來確保組織作業的一致性。這些會議的產物（文件）進一步框架了審查如何進行，以及研究倫理審查的範疇。無論做為審查程序的一部份、產生決定的途徑，或是建立倫理審查組織與運作的機制，研究倫理審查都與會議密不可分。本文透過會議以及和會議相關的文件，來看大學人類研究倫理審查委員會的執行過程，了解倫理審查如何將倫理原則轉化為可以執行的程序與規範，而會議與文件的形式又如何框架倫理審查。英文摘要：Through looking at university research ethics review committee meetings and examining the documents that frame as well as are produced by the meetings, this article aims to understand how the research ethics review committee translates ethics principles into procedures and rules that can be executed. Most of the literature on research ethics review tends to focus on structural issues of the ethics review system, contending principles of research ethics in different academic fields, and critiques of institutional overreach. Relatively less attention has been paid to the review process and the way ethics regulations are interpreted and applied. This article draws on personal experience as a committee member to describe the actual process through which research ethics review committees arrive at decisions on research applications. Research ethics review committees encompass routine administrative work and research project reviews. The ethics officers, who affirm proper application of administrative laws, and the review committee members, who are trained in specialist areas, work together to implement the abstract concepts of research ethics and execute regulations and laws. While there are differences across committees, research ethics review committees share common configurations and methods of reaching decisions to ensure consistency within individual committees as well as across local committees. During the review process, committee members become temporary bureaucrats for the purposes of decision-making. They actively and constantly interpret research ethics review procedures, rules, categories, and terms while filling in forms and assessing research protocols. Moreover, decisions regarding research applications are made collectively so that they are, or appear to be, beyond individual judgements. Bringing the committee together to discuss research application documents, routine Institutional Review Board (IRB) meetings are where the principles of protecting human research subjects and advancing academic knowledge are actively negotiated. Committee members assess the risk involved in a research project by reading the researcher's application documents, deliberating on various scenarios to evaluate potential research-related harms, resolving disagreements, and reaching decisions as a group based on ethics principles as well as applicable rules. Therefore, IRB meetings are not only the mechanism that makes decisions on research proposals but also play a pivotal role in maintaining ethics guidelines and administrative laws, implementing and producing internal rules, establishing standard operational procedures (SOPs), and generating documents for the review system. The products of these meetings, that is, the meeting minutes, SOPs, and various documents, further frame how ethics reviews are conducted and the scope of the research ethics review. As the topics and methods of academic research are constantly evolving, the ethics review faces the possibility of research projects exceeding current rules, procedures, and categories. In order to accommodate more and more diverse research projects, meet review requirements, maintain consistency, and accomplish the goal of bureaucratic efficiency, review committees must consistently review and revise existing forms, procedures, and categories. Moreover, discussions and decisions made in meetings become precedents that are relied on to achieve consistent decisions. Through documents and meetings, ethics review committees align past precedents, current research, and future prospectuses, and articulate the diverse fields of international research ethics principles, state regulations, bureaucratic administration, and academic research.起始頁-結束頁：63-102資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所3篇名：社會與其結構：再思社會人類學並列篇名：Society and Its Structure: Rethinking Social Anthropology作者：高信傑(Hsin-chieh Kao)關鍵字：社會;社會結構;社會邊界;社會有機體;社會延續;Society;Social Structure;Social Boundary;Social Organism;Social Continuity期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文將探討社會結構研究與社會延續問題是如何從社會人類學之基石演變成一種缺乏研究價值與可行性的過時題材的思想過程。這個過程始於社會人類學家的社會本體論預設，它決定了社會「是」或「像」什麼，社會延續是一種什麼樣的狀態，要造成這種狀態又需要什麼樣的社會結構。然而在這個過程之中，某些關鍵的概念發生了我所謂的「重音移位」現象，亦即在一個概念所能分析出來的諸屬性當中，概念原本的中心意旨從某種屬性轉移到另一種屬性，比如實在性的重音從原本的恆常關係轉移到邊界分明，有機性的重音從原本的相互依存轉移到部份－整體關係。這些難以察覺的重音移位逐漸改變了社會實在論、有機體類比等觀念的內涵，誤導了社會人類學家對於社會生活與其延續的理解，最終將社會結構研究帶到了整體主義與機械論的死胡同裡頭。英文摘要：This article aims to investigate the reasoning process which has made the study of social structure and the question of social continuity become an old-school research topic with little value and feasibility among social anthropologists. This process began with social anthropologists' various ontological presuppositions, that is, how 'Society' is imagined; whether social life is, in essence, the continuous activities of living individuals or partial demonstrations of an out-of-sight, gigantic entity; how social anthropologists should describe and define such an object, etc.. Their ontological presuppositions have provided a set of answers for fundamental questions like 'what is society?' 'what does society look like?' 'what kind of continuity would be necessary for such society?' and 'what kind of structure would be necessary for such continuity?' In this reasoning process, however, central connotations of some key concepts used by social anthropologists have shifted from one property to another, which I call 'accent shift.' For example, the accent of the concept 'realness' has shifted from 'permanent relations' to 'boundedness'; the accent of the concept 'organicity' has shifted from 'mutual dependence' to 'part-whole relations,' etc.. These accent shifts are hard to discern, but have implicitly changed the contents of ideas, including social realism, organic analogy, etc. Correspondingly, social anthropologists' understanding of social life and its continuity has also been twisted. Consequently, the study of social structure has led to the theoretical dead alley of holism and mechanism. Rather than a literature review of anthropological theories of society, this article is an attempt to depict the routes of reasoning when theorists were conceiving their theories. In my opinion, many problems in social anthropology are nothing but a problem of bifurcation among various routes of reasoning. Social anthropologists might observe the same things from different angles, associate the same things with different kinds of relations, and focus on different points within the same concepts, discourses, and ideas. What really matters here is neither the qualities and quantities of empirical data nor the technical problem of 'truth and its representation,' i.e. some people did their fieldwork or wrote their ethnographies badly while others did not. It is rather a problem of social anthropologists' own modes of thinking, their analytical tools and theoretical models which are applied to organize and rework their empirical data. But it should be recognized that those modes of thinking, analytical tools and theoretical models are not products of induction but gifts from devolution and inspiration. Even solid empirical data will not be able to correct mistakes existing in those modes, tools, and models if theorists have a belief in them and attribute the inconsistencies to the people who collected and used the data. In the end, the problem of modes of thinking has to be solved by means of logic, which makes this job look more like a kind of meta-anthropology, as this job can only be done by social anthropologists themselves.起始頁-結束頁：103-160資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所4篇名：Govindrajan, Radhika: Animal Intimacies: Interspecies Relatedness in India's Central Himalayas作者：林浩立(Hao-li Lin)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：162-167資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所5篇名：Wardlow, Holly: Fencing in AIDS: Gender, Vulnerability, and Care in Papua New Guinea作者：吳明仁(Ming-jen Wu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：168-172資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所6篇名：Yuhang Li: Becoming Guanyin: Artistic Devotion of Buddhist Women in Late Imperial China作者：張珣(Hsun Chang)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：173-180資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所7篇名：Francisca Yuenki Lai: Maid to Queer: Asian Labor Migration and Female Same-Sex Desires作者：劉文(Wen Liu)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：181-184資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所8篇名：Juan Salazar:《竹橋》The Bamboo Bridge作者：陳玉苹(Yuping Chen)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：186-188資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所9篇名：Monika Treut:《跨性別世代》Genderation作者：羅盤針(Pan-chen Lo)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：189-192資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所10篇名：Mordechai Vardi:《新婚厭爾》Marry Me However作者：亞威．諾給赫(Yawi Yukex)期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣人類學刊卷期：19卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：193-195資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人類學及族群研究出版單位：中央研究院民族學研究所01篇名：臺灣民眾通膨預期調查資料之分析並列篇名：AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF CONSUMER INFLATION EXPECTATIONS IN TAIWAN作者：繆維正(Evan Weicheng Miao)關鍵字：通膨預期;通膨預測;消費者調查;Inflation expectation;Inflation forecasting;Consumer surveys期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：52卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：臺灣通膨預期之相關實證研究多根據國外專家調查之通膨預期資料，據作者所知，過去的文獻尚未有以民眾調查資料分析臺灣通膨預期的研究。我國公開民眾通膨預期調查的機構包括中央大學台灣經濟發展研究中心與國泰金控，皆為每月公布一次；央行經濟研究處資金流量科每季針對投信進行之產業景氣意向調查，亦包括通膨預期。國泰金控與中央大學的調查結果係民眾對未來物價走勢的看法，請受訪民眾回答其心目中未來物價水準可能上升、下降或持平。本文參照文獻上的作法，量化國泰金控與中央大學的調查資料，計算民眾心目中通膨預期的數值，並進行實證分析。過去量化通膨預期的文獻多採用全樣本的資料計算各月份的通膨預期，然而，政策制訂者必須以每月現有的資料計算通膨預期，本文有別於傳統文獻作法，每月更新通膨預期係採用樣本期初至該月份的所有的資料，以遞迴法計算各月之通膨預期值。本文實證結果之主要兩點結論如下：第一，若以國泰金控與中央大學調查資料量化所得之通膨預期，預測未來六個月的通膨，其預測績效優於傳統之ARMA模型，其中國泰金控超越的程度達到統計上之顯著水準，且量化後之通膨預期，其預測組合可進一步提升預測績效；第二，主計總處每季發布下一、二季通膨之預測時，若以國泰金控之通膨預期資料轉換成下一季之通膨預測，其預測精準度略優於主計總處；若以國泰金控、中央大學之通膨預期資料轉換成下二季之通膨預測，其預測精準度優於主計總處。英文摘要：We present an analysis of inflation expectations in Taiwan derived from the analysis of data from surveys of households. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to analyze Taiwan's consumer inflation expectations. The surveys are conducted by the Research Center for Taiwan Economic Development of National Central University (NCU) and by Cathay Financial Holdings (Cathay). We modify the seminal methods of Carlson and Parkin (1975) and Batchelor and Orr (1988) and quantify their qualitative survey data. We depart from the assumption of a constant just noticeable difference (j.n.d.), under which the determination of δ requires full sample information. Instead we calculate the time-varying value of δ based on all data available up to the time of interest. As a consequence, our quantitative inflation expectations constructed in this paper are ex ante, as opposed to the ex post inflation expectations in previous works. Two conclusions emerge. The first is that the quantified household inflation expectations derived from the NCU and from the Cathay survey data in both cases outperform two benchmark models-the Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA) model and the random-walk mode-in forecasting the six-month-ahead inflation. In particular, the forecasting accuracy of the quantified data derived from the Cathay survey performs statistically significantly better than the benchmark models. Our second conclusion is that our inflation forecasts for one or two quarters ahead outperform the DGBAS counterparts published in their press releases for GDP preliminary estimates.起始頁-結束頁：1-37資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所2篇名：研發與成長：廠齡是否扮演重要角色？－以臺灣製造業為例並列篇名：R&D AND FIRM GROWTH: DOES AGE PLAY A ROLE? EVIDENCE FROM TAIWANESE MANUFACTURING FIRMS作者：劉碧珍(Bih Jane Liu);吳俊信(Jun-Xin Wu)關鍵字：追蹤資料分量迴歸;廠齡;研發;企業成長;Panel quantile regression;Firm age;R&D;Firm growth期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：52卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：一般文獻對於研發與企業成長的討論，多採取OLS迴歸分析法。本文採取追蹤資料分量迴歸法，除了研究研發與企業成長（即營收成長率、生產力成長率）之間的關係之外，也進一步研究廠齡對於研發與企業成長二者之間關係的影響。我們使用2005年至2017年臺灣製造業上市上櫃公司的資料，並以總要素生產力（total factor productivity，TFP）作為生產力的衡量指標，研究結果發現研發對於企業營收成長的效果為正，但對TFP成長的效果則為負；二者都隨著分量之上升而增加；年輕企業的研發成效比老年企業佳，並且二者之間的研發成效差異，也隨著分量的上升而漸漸擴大。這些結果顯示，研發與企業成長的關係將隨著不同分量而不同，且廠齡對於研發成效確實扮演一個重要的角色。即使以不同方式衡量廠齡、或僅納入有研發的樣本廠商，上述結果仍大致成立。英文摘要：This study draws on the data of listed Taiwanese companies for the period of 2005 to 2017 to study the relationship between firm R&D and firm growth in sales and productivity. Whether this relationship differs between younger firms and older firms will also be studied. By applying panel quantile regression and using total factor productivity (TFP) as the measure of productivity, our empirical results show that R&D has positive effects on sales growth but negative effects on TFP growth, and both effects increase with quantiles. Moreover, the R&D effects are larger for younger firms than for older firms at all quantiles, and the difference increases between younger and older firms when the quantile rises. The results suggest that the R&D effects on firm growth will vary across different quantiles, and firm age does play a crucial role in the R&D effects. The above results are still valid for different measures of firm age and for the subsample of firms with positive R&D.起始頁-結束頁：39-81資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所3篇名：退稅便利性與外籍旅客消費－臺北101內部資料分析並列篇名：TAX REFUND CONVENIENCE AND INTERNATIONAL TOURISTS' EXPENDITURE: EVIDENCE FROM TAIPEI 101作者：蔡鳳凰(Feng-Huang Tsai);伍大開(Da-Kai Wu);陳國樑(Joe Chen);周德宇(Te-Yu Chou);黃勢璋(Shih-Chang Huang)關鍵字：加值型營業稅;退稅政策;外籍旅客;差異中的差異;Value-added tax;Tax refund policy;International tourist;Difference-in-differences期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：52卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：有別於以往以問卷調查為研究方法,本文利用臺北101購物中心於2013年7月至2017年6月期間外籍旅客申請退稅的企業內部資料,以差異中的差異模型（difference-in-differences）分析2016年5月退稅便利性提升對外籍旅客來臺消費的影響。實證結果指出,提升退稅便利性雖使退稅件數增加約37%,但外籍旅客消費金額並無顯著變化。就臺北101購物中心資料的代表性而言,為達成刺激外籍旅客消費的效果,除退稅便利性外,必須要有更切實的作法。英文摘要：Most studies on the effect of tax refund policy are done through questionnaire surveys; this study utilizes daily tax refund data in the period from 2013/07 to 2017/06 of the Taipei 101 Shopping Mall to examine the effect of an increase in tax refund convenience in 2016 on international tourists' expenditures in Taipei 101. Results from the difference-indifferences method suggest that although tax refund policy reform led to about a 37% increase in the number of cases applying for tax refunds, there was no statistically significant impact on the overall international tourists' expenditures. Our results show that, based on Taipei 101's data, other alternatives are required to boost international tourists' expenditures.起始頁-結束頁：83-117資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所4篇名：壹、2021年臺灣經濟情勢總展望之修正作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：52卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：119-120資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所5篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田;殷壽鏞;張靜貞;林常青;楊子霆;紀鈞哲期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：52卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：121-148資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所6篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：52卷1期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：149-171資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所7篇名：臺灣高等教育擴張政策實施對大學及以上學歷與過度教育工作者薪資之影響並列篇名：HIGHER EDUCATION EXPANSION POLICY IN TAIWAN: EFFECTS ON THE WAGES OF UNIVERSITY OR HIGHER AND THE OVEREDUCATED作者：徐美(Mei Hsu)關鍵字：高等教育擴張政策;職業和教育不相稱;過度教育;薪資溢酬;High education expansion policy;Mismatch of occupation and education;Overeducation;Wage premium期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：科技進步與國際貿易發達，對於高等技術人才的迫切需求，誘發勞工過度投資教育，嚴重負面影響高等教育學歷工作者的薪資。近年以高等教育擴張政策實施對於高學歷工作者薪資變動之影響雖有著墨，但並不多。臺灣高等教育擴張政策影響到人力資本累積的深度和廣度，雖大幅提升勞工教育程度，教育與職業不相稱的現象也隨之惡化。政策實施造成大學錄取率逐年攀升與大學院校數快速增加，形成勞動市場中高學歷工作者供給面的衝擊，大學及以上學歷工作者薪資下降。本研究的主要目的是，檢定高等教育擴張政策實施是否會顯著惡化大學及以上高等教育工作者之薪資溢酬，改變職業和教育不相稱的分配並影響過度教育工作者的相對報酬。模型估計初步以Heckman兩階段估計法融入Difference-in-Differences（DID）迴歸估計，進一步以ORU模型和Verdugo and Verdugo（V-V）模型合併DID法進行政策評估，以便於分析比較之用。研究結果呈現，在其他情況不變下，高教擴張政策實施，大學品質下降，大量增加高等教育工作者的供給並壓縮薪資，顯著惡化過度教育者的薪資溢酬，惡化程度在控制行業變數後更為嚴重。大學及以上學歷工作者薪資並沒有因為高等教育擴張政策實施而提升，反而是生產力的相對下降，造成與高中、專科教育程度工作者的薪資差距縮小。英文摘要：In this study, we document consequences of the Higher Education Expansive Policy (HEEP) implemented in 1994 in Taiwan and evaluate the wage impact of HEEP on university or higher and the overeducated workers as compared to their corresponding education counterparts. Employing Taiwan's Manpower Utilization Survey data from 1999 to 2008, we test two hypotheses. The first one is to investigate whether the wage premium of workers with a degree of university or higher relative to that of non-university graduates decreased after the implementation of HEEP. The second hypotheses that we examine is whether there was a significant deterioration in wage differential between overeducated workers and their adequately educated counterparts after the HEEP was implemented. Using Heckman's two-stage estimation model as the baseline model, combining the difference-in-differences strategy with the ORU model and Verdugo-Verdugo model setup, we find evidence that Taiwan's Higher Education Expansion Policy has sharply and significantly deteriorated the wages of graduates of university or higher and overeducated workers in Taiwan's labor market.起始頁-結束頁：1-48資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所8篇名：中國農民工和城市勞工之薪資差異再探－追蹤資料分析並列篇名：RE-EXAMINATION OF THE WAGE DIFFERENTIALS BETWEEN MIGRANT WORKERS AND URBAN WORKERS IN CHINA: PANEL DATA ANALYSIS作者：莊奕琦(Yih-Chyi Chuang);顧訓豪(Hsun-Hao Ku)關鍵字：樣本選擇性誤差;能力異質性;薪資差異;教育報酬率;Sample selection bias;Ability heterogeneity;Wage differentials;Return to education期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文採用2008年和2009年中國農村城鎮移民調查（RUMiC）追蹤資料，在考慮樣本的選擇性偏誤、個人能力的異質性與教育變數的內生性下，重新檢視中國農民工和城市居民的薪資差異。研究結果發現，在就業選擇方面，農民工的移動成本與家庭成員工作人數對於是否選擇為受薪勞工有顯著的影響力；在薪資估計方面，城市居民的教育報酬率約為10%，是農民工4.9%的兩倍，此與過往文獻出現相悖結果，而工作經驗的報酬率農民工則大於城市居民。說明在沒有控制樣本選擇性偏誤和能力異質性問題下，城市居民的教育報酬率將被嚴重的低估。進一步利用Oaxaca-Ransom-Cotton薪資差異分解法，發現農民工和城市居民的薪資差異約80%可歸咎於兩者間的稟賦差異，只有約20%是來自不可解釋或被視為歧視的薪資差異。英文摘要：This paper uses panel data from the survey of 2008 and 2009 Rural- Urban Migrants in China (RUMiC) to re-examine the wage differences between Chinese migrant workers and urban residents under the control of endogenous selective bias and ability heterogeneity. We find that in terms of employment choices, the moving cost of migrant workers and the number of family income earners have significant influences on whether people choose to be paid workers. In terms of wage estimates, the urban residents' rate of return to education is about 10%, approximately twice the migrant workers' 4.9%, which is contrary to the existing literature, indicating that the return rate of education of urban residents is seriously underestimated when ability heterogeneity is not controlled. However, the return rate of work experience of migrant workers is greater than that of urban residents. Using Oaxaca- Ransom-Cotton's wage differential decomposition method, we further find that about 80% of the wage differential between migrant workers and urban residents can be attributed to the difference in endowment between the two groups. Only about 20% is unexplained or considered to be discrimination.起始頁-結束頁：49-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所9篇名：On the Determinants of Trading Hubs in East and Southeast Asia並列篇名：東亞貿易雙軸心的形成作者：黃登興(Deng-Shing Huang);黃幼宜(Yo-Yi Huang);蔡青龍(Ching-Lung Tsay)關鍵字：Double trading hub;Export destination hub;Import source hub;Home-market effect;Technological advantage;Assembly hub;Global supply chain;貿易雙軸心;出口目的地軸心;進口來源軸心;本國市場效果;技術優勢;組裝中心;全球供應鏈期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：Based on the existing hubness measure in the trade literature, we develop two modified trading hub indexes in two directions, export destination, and import source. Then we demonstrate the stylized fact of China and Japan's double trading hub, especially in an export destination sense, in East Asia since the early 1990s. After showing the dynamics of the twin hub, more specifically the rising China hub and shrinking Japan hub, theoretical explanations, such as the home-market effect (HME), FDI and technological advantage, transport hub and assembly hub under a global supply chain (GSC) are asserted. Finally, panel data from 1993 to 2014 of thirteen economies, including eleven economies in East Asia, the USA, and EU as a whole, are established to conduct empirical tests. In general, except the transport hub, the empirical evidence supports most of the theoretical arguments, including the role of HME, assembly hub and technological advantage for making a trading hub, in terms of export destination and/or import sources. However, there still remains a country-specific effect in the fostering of the trading hub, especially China, USA, and EU.英文摘要：根據現有貿易軸心估計文獻為基礎，我們修正並發展兩個不同方向的貿易軸心，即出口目的地軸心和進口來源軸心，本文顯示東亞在1990年以來，中日貿易雙軸心之動態發展。具體而言，東亞貿易地位隨著中國崛起，以及日本日益萎縮，讓中國成為東亞地區新的貿易核心。此現象，本文進而從理論以解釋東亞貿易雙軸心如何形成，如本國市場效果（HME）、外國直接投資（FDI）、技術優勢、運輸樞紐，以及在全球供應鏈（GSC）下的組裝中心等。最後，本文以東亞11國以及歐美共13個經濟體，從1993-2014年的追蹤資料進行驗證，實證結果證實除了運輸樞紐之外，本國市場效果、組裝中心和技術優勢等，在出口目的地和／或進口來源軸心方面，對於建立貿易軸心具作用力。但是，特定國家仍然存在形成貿易中心的具體影響，特別是中國、美國和歐盟。起始頁-結束頁：91-130資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所10篇名：壹、2021年臺灣經濟情勢總展望作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：131-132資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所11篇名：貳、臺灣經濟最近情勢作者：周雨田期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：133-165資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所12篇名：參、臺灣經濟趨向圖表與統計期刊/會議論文集名稱：臺灣經濟預測與政策卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：167-189資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞經濟學出版單位：中央研究院經濟研究所01篇名：專號導言：歐盟經濟與產業政策之新藍圖作者：李貴英期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷3期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：429-431資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202109_51(3).00012篇名：歐洲央行單一匯率政策的發展與挑戰並列篇名：ECB Exchange Rate Policy: Development and Challenges作者：洪德欽(Der-Chin Horng)關鍵字：歐元;匯率政策;歐洲央行;新匯率機制;歐元區;Euro;exchange rate policy;ECB;ERM II;Eurozone期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：歐盟於1999年正式進入歐洲經濟暨貨幣聯盟（EMU）第三階段，由歐洲中央銀行（ECB）發行歐元，並執行單一貨幣政策以及匯率政策。2008年的國際金融危機、2012年的歐債危機凸顯歐元區單一匯率政策，以及EMU的一些結構性問題，包括單一匯率是否可以有效適用於19個歐元區會員國。本文研析下列重要議題：歐盟匯率政策的進程、建制、主管機關、決策、操作、重要特徵、意涵與改革等項目。本文亦分析英國脫歐及新冠肺炎（COVID-19）疫情對歐元區匯率政策之影響，以及論證歐元區單一匯率政策如何適用於19個經濟條件不一致的歐元區會員國，對不同會員國產生那些影響，歐盟及ECB如何解決單一匯率政策衍生之相關問題。英文摘要：In 1999 the European Union (EU) entered into the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), and the euro was introduced as the single currency of the EU and Eurozone Member States. This signified a deeper degree of European economic integration and had significant implications for the EU's economy and the international monetary system. The financial crisis of 2008 and the sovereign debt crises of 2012 highlighted structural problems in the Eurozone's single exchange rate policy and the design of the EMU. This paper examines the agenda and institutions of ECB exchange rate policy, as well as the authorities, decisions, operation, key characteristics, challenges and implications. This paper also discusses major challenges faced by the euro, in particular, Brexit and COVID-19, and how a single exchange rate for euro-denominated economies fits with differing requirements of the 19 Member States of the Eurozone. Also, how can the EU resolve the potential risks and problems posed by a single exchange rate policy? This paper offers some critical proposals for reforming EU law in order to enhance the effectiveness of the ECB Exchange Rate Policy and adapt to the challenges of future crises.起始頁-結束頁：433-494資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202109_51(3).00023篇名：歐盟因應中國大陸競爭威脅的新產業政策倡議：爭議源起與可能作為並列篇名：On the Origin of EU-Level Industrial Policy: Nationalism or Destructive Innovation?作者：葉國俊(Kuo-Chun Yeh);林雅淇(Ya-Chi Lin)關鍵字：歐盟產業政策;中國大陸產業政策;破壞性創新;競爭政策;外人投資監控機制;EU industrial policy;China's industrial policy;destructive innovation;competition policy;FDI screening mechanism期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：2019年似成為歐盟產業政策分水嶺：德、法先後發布「德國產業戰略2030」與「歐盟產業政策宣言」，歐洲議會通過外人投資審查機制。部分領導人深受「破壞性創新」影響，積極防範中國大陸於全球分工體系後來居上的獨占力。基於公共利益與國家安全，調整全球分工並整併重要部件產製倡議，雖與傳統競爭思維牴觸，但新冠疫情凸顯公衛產業匱乏似更強化其論述。在執委會堅定支持，以及WTO改革、歐美政策協調、歐中投資協議各界反應等皆不如預期下，或將成為不以單純成本效益決定的次佳政策。預期歐盟會就新產業政策凝聚共識，並在國家本位之間求取平衡。英文摘要：February 2019 was a watershed for EU industrial policy thanks to the ”Franco-German Manifesto for a European Industrial Policy” and the EU Framework for FDI Screening. This paper reviews the relevant theories, history of EU-level industrial policy and recent comments on the above activities. We argue that ”destructive innovation” rather than conventional industrial theory has had great impact on the decisions of EU Member States. That is, a strategy combining new technologies and components improves the price-performance ratio and allows firms in developing economies to catch up and compete with the products of advanced economies. In addition to commenting on nationalism, the EU DG Competition also critiques the Franco-German proposal as violating the policy tradition. However, the new EU-level industrial policy would surpass simple cost-benefit considerations if the WTO reform, EU-US relations, and EU-China bilateral negotiations are unsuccessful in the next few years.起始頁-結束頁：495-556資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202109_51(3).00034篇名：從歐盟公共契約法探討具一般經濟利益公共服務之委外並列篇名：Outsourcing the Public Services of General Economic Interest under EU Public Contract Law作者：張南薰(Nan-Hsun Chang)關鍵字：勞務特許;特許契約;歐盟特許採購指令;歐盟公共採購指令;公私協力關係;service concession;concession contract;EU Directive on Concession;EU Public Procurement Directive;public-private partnership期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：將具有一般經濟利益之公共服務委託私人經營時，可以勞務採購或勞務特許為之。二者在公共服務委外經營上雖扮演重要角色，但與勞務採購不同，勞務特許直至2014年歐盟才通過特許採購指令加以規範。然而，此一指令雖給予勞務特許較明確之定義及較有彈性的選商程序等，但仍存若干問題。勞務特許及勞務採購之區別亦存在疑義，包括如何確認應移轉之風險類型、應移轉風險之程度為何及涉及以公法限制或降低風險時能否符合營運風險之移轉等問題。上述問題在歐盟法院之個案中亦有討論，本文即藉由對相關案例之研究釐清二者之實質內涵與適用關係。英文摘要：One of the primary means of outsourcing public services of general economic interest in the EU, service concessions have been excluded from EU directives on public procurement since the first public procurement law was adopted in the 1970s. However, the legal framework on service concessions established under CJEU case-law changed following implementation of the 2014 Directive on Concession, which aimed to bring legal certainty and transparency to procedures associated with choosing concessioners and the performance of concession contracts. This new Directive provides for looser procedures than the 2014 Public Procurement Directive when contracting authorities decide to entrust the delivery of public services to the private sector through concession contracts, but several important issues are left to be clarified, particularly the distinction between public services contracts and service concessions. This article attempts to provide a wholistic picture of the legal frameworks for outsourcing public services in the EU, including via public service contracts and service concessions under the public procurement law and the case-law of CJEU. Following establishment of the frameworks, this article tries to clarify the ambiguous conceptions of public services contracts and service concession through discussion of the various types of risk, and how much risk should be transferred in the determination of contract types. Also, if operational risks are limited, or extremely low due to the supervision of public service under the domestic public law, how is the nature of the contract determined?起始頁-結束頁：557-596資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202109_51(3).00045篇名：歐盟與美國外資安全審查機制之比較研究並列篇名：A Comparative Study of the EU and the US Approaches in Screening Foreign Direct Investment on Security Grounds作者：李貴英(Catherine Li)關鍵字：外人直接投資審查;國家安全;公共秩序;外人投資風險審查現代化法案;歐盟2019/452號規則;FDI screening;national security;public order;Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA);Regulation (EU) 2019/452期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷3期出版年：2021中文摘要：近年來越來越多國家採用外資安全審查機制，以保護其國家利益與安全。2016年中國美的集團收購德國工業機器人製造商庫卡公司之事件，引發有關安全與尖端技術移轉之熱烈爭論。2017年美國總統川普以國家安全為由否准一家中國大陸支持之投資人對萊迪思半導體公司之收購案。該等案件被視為歐盟與美國進行制度改革之動機。本文擬就歐盟2019/452號規則與美國外人投資風險審查現代化法案進行分析，檢視歐盟與美國如何處理外人投資涉及安全及／或公共秩序之問題，並比較美國與歐盟因應之道。歐盟與美國共同面臨之挑戰，乃是如何堅守市場開放原則，同時採取有效措施因應外資所帶來之潛在安全威脅，並避免暴露機制之弱點。英文摘要：There are an increasing number of countries taking recourse to the FDI screening mechanism to protect their national interests and security. The 2016 acquisition of German industrial robot maker Kuka AG by China's Midea Group Co. led to heated debate over security and the transfer of cutting-edge technologies. In 2017, U.S. President Donald Trump blocked a Chinese-backed investor from buying Lattice Semiconductor Corporation on national security grounds. These deals are believed to be behind regulatory changes in both the EU and the US. This paper examines trends in the EU and the US to frame FDI as a potential security threat. Taking Regulation (EU) 2019/452 for screening FDI and US Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) as the regulatory background, this paper aims to juxtapose American and European approaches to investment security to clarify how the EU and US seek to tackle the security and/or public order implications of foreign investment. The challenge for both is to stay true to their principles of openness while adopting efficient measures addressing security concerns in order to prevent those principles from turning into a strategic vulnerability.起始頁-結束頁：597-651資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202109_51(3).00056篇名：「歐盟公共政策與治理」專題：客座主編導言並列篇名：Guest Editor's Introduction to the Special Issue on EU Public Policies and Governance作者：邵允鍾(Yung-Djong Shaw)期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021起始頁-結束頁：211-217資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202106_51(2).00017篇名：歐洲治理危機：「利益」與「認同」的落差並列篇名：The EU Governance Crisis: Gap between Interest and Identity in the EU作者：卓忠宏(Chung-Hung Cho)關鍵字：歐盟治理;新功能主義;新新功能主義;新制度主義;實用建構主義;EU governance;neo-functionalism;neo neo-functionalism;new institution;pragmatic constructivism期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文以2009年至2019年這十年來歐洲統合發展的危機，試圖提供一個理論解釋的基礎。首先剖析統合理論新功能主義，及其引用新制度主義與建構主義的概念對新功能理論的修正與詮釋。其次以歐洲債務危機、移民難民處理、族群分離運動三個事件做為案例檢驗，梳理出歐盟治理危機的三項落差：承諾與執行的落差、政治菁英與公眾意見的落差、歐洲認同與國家認同的落差；第三，就修正後新功能主義與案例結合，分析造成歐盟治理危機的原因。最後，就新功能主義修正對利益分配、認同分歧等現象總結意見。英文摘要：This paper attempts to provide a theoretical basis for the EU crisis on the development of integration in the past decade (2009 to 2019). First, it analyzes neo-functionalist integration theory, and the revision and amendment thereof, with reference to the concepts of new institutionalism and constructivism. Second, three main gaps are apparent in multiple EU crises-between commitment and implementation, between elite and public opinion, and between a European and national identities. Third, arguments are offered on the factors which caused the EU crisis on the basis of the theory of amended neo-functionalism. The final part concludes the EU crisis had its origins in the divergence between interest distribution and identification.起始頁-結束頁：219-266資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202106_51(2).00028篇名：歐盟決策系統中遊說活動結構、程序及影響力之研析並列篇名：Lobbying Activities in the EU Decision-Making Process: Structure, Process and Influence作者：朱景鵬(Chin-Peng Chu)關鍵字：歐盟決策;遊說理論;多層級治理;透明化註冊;EU decision-making;lobbying theory;multi-level governance;code of conduct;transparency register期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：歐盟係一個具有民主傳統的組織，不僅具有獨立的法律人格，其獨特（sui generis）的法律秩序使得其民主性格不僅來自於會員國的傳統，民主決策的政治體系也有別於一般的國際組織。遊說即是一項在歐盟立法過程中，是否具備民主、透明與課責精神的指標。本文旨在以文獻及內容分析法探析歐盟三個主要決策體系執委會、歐洲議會，及部長理事會的多層級治理結構下，遊說活動的影響因素。研究議題包括：一、歐盟遊說法制健全化之進程、問題及遊說理論；二、歐盟多層級治理結構決策體系，及遊說行為在決策體系中的活動程序、形式與規範；三、進行遊說活動行為相關實務經驗統計之分析。研究發現歐盟的遊說活動超國家制度與國家利益兼容的雙重設計之影響甚大，部長理事會的決策模式與政府間合作型態，仍是遊說活動全面透明化的一道有形障礙。英文摘要：The European Union is an organization with a democratic tradition, not only with an independent legal personality, but also with a sui generis legal order that makes its democratic character which derived from the traditions of the Member States on the one hand and with a political system of democratic decision-making that is different from the usual international organization on the other hand. Lobbying is an indicator of democracy, transparency and accountability in the EU legislative process. The aim of this paper is to use a literature and content analysis approach to explore the influencing factors of lobbying under the multi-level governance structure of the Commission, the European Parliament, and the Council of Ministers, the three main decision-making bodies in the EU. The research topics include: 1) The process, problems and theories of lobbying in the EU; 2) The decision-making system of the EU multi-level governance structure, and the procedures, forms and norms of lobbying activities in the decision-making system; 3) The analysis of practical experience related to lobbying activities. This study found that lobbying in the EU is heavily influenced by the dual design of a supranational system compatible with national interests, and that the decision-making model of the Council of Ministers and the intergovernmental cooperation model remain a tangible barrier to full transparency in lobbying.起始頁-結束頁：267-310資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202106_51(2).00039篇名：強權競爭下的中型國家安全策略：以波蘭與土耳其為例並列篇名：Middle Powers' Security Strategies and Their Responses to Great Powers: The Cases of Poland and Turkey作者：楊三億(San-Yi Yang)關鍵字：中型國家;安全策略;波蘭;土耳其;middle powers;security strategies;Poland;Turkey期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：過去研究非強權國家的安全策略多以中小型國家為標的，本研究進一步將焦點集中在中型國家安全策略選擇，分析這一類國家如何在國際強權政策引導下進行回應。本文觀察波蘭與土耳其兩國策略選擇發現：首先，中型國家因具有較強的綜合國力優勢，造就此類國家積極參與國際事務、展現高度自主性。其次，從地緣政治角度來看，離威脅中心越近，中型國家採取扈從一強去抗衡另外一強的策略就越明顯；相反的，離威脅中心越遠，中型國家採取在兩強間擺盪策略就越明顯。最後，強權有求於中型國家，因此對中型國家多採正向回報或高容忍度的反饋方式。英文摘要：This study explores the security strategies of middle powers and aims at their responses to external environments. This paper argues that: (a) Unlike small powers in international politics, middle powers have more comprehensive national strengths and a more autonomous status. Autonomy for states is a major reason related to middle powers' strategies. (b) Geopolitical proximity and sense of threat will co-define middle powers' security strategies: the closer to the center of threat, the stronger of the sense of threat. (c) Global powers will act to help middle powers' foreign policy in return if middle powers do something to help global powers. One good turn deserves another reflecting this virtuous circle, in some cases. By contrast, a sense of high tolerance of global power for middle powers turnabout were the cases in other regions. We take Poland and Turkey as two examples of middle powers and try to explain their security strategies in accordance with geopolitics.起始頁-結束頁：311-355資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202106_51(2).000410篇名：學生認知能力、非認知能力及家庭社經背景的跨校分布：跨國、跨時期比較國中與高中階段的差別並列篇名：Distribution of Student Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Abilities and Family Socioeconomic Status across Schools: Differences between Junior and Senior High Schools over Time and across Countries作者：黃敏雄(Min-Hsiung Huang)關鍵字：認知能力;非認知能力;家庭社經背景;校間差異;考試制度;cognitive ability;non-cognitive abilities;family SES;between-school variation;high-stakes test期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷2期出版年：2021中文摘要：筆者選擇九年級之後會進入高中階段的32個教育體制，分析國中即將畢業學生被篩選分發到不同高中學校的之前與之後，學生認知能力（學科表現）、非認知能力（社會情緒技能）及家庭社經地位的跨校分布。臺灣在學生家庭社經地位的校間差異上，高中與國中階段之間沒有顯著差別。也就是說，依升學考試成績入學的制度，相對於依戶籍所在學區入學的制度，並沒有提高家境不同臺灣學生同讀一校的機會。俄羅斯與克羅埃西亞的國中畢業生在升上高中之後，認知能力、家庭社經地位及非認知能力的校內同質程度都一致顯著提升，是相當獨特的現象。英文摘要：In many countries, screening and sorting of students into different types of schools starts after the completion of nine-year compulsory education. Here, a total of 32 education systems are selected to examine the distribution of student cognitive and noncognitive abilities as well as family SES across schools, before and after the transition from lower to upper secondary schooling. In Taiwan, Russia, South Korea and four Chinese provinces/municipalities, between-school differences in academic performance increase most markedly as students progress from lower to upper secondary schools. Russia and Croatia are very unique in that between-school differences in all three respects of student characteristics increase significantly as students transit from lower to upper secondary schools. In Taiwan, between-school differences in academic performance at the upper secondary level have decreased significantly since 2014. As to between-school differences in family SES, those at the lower secondary level are similar to those at the upper secondary level. This implies that the use of high-stakes examination for admission to different types and ranks of senior high schools, relative to mandatory school assignment based on household location and registration, does not increase the odds that Taiwanese students of different family SES to attend the same school. Taiwanese students with high social-emotional skills are widely distributed across schools, either at the lower or the upper secondary levels.起始頁-結束頁：357-427資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202106_51(2).000511篇名：Hans von Aachen's Allegorical Representations of the Arts, and His Newly Identified Painting Allegory of the Arts並列篇名：漢斯．馮．亞琛藝術寓意題材的再現與新發現的繪畫作品《藝術的寓言》作者：蔡敏玲(Ming-Ling Tsai)關鍵字：Allegory;Venus-Pictura;visus;art-theoretical conception;artes liberales;寓意;維納斯－繪畫;視覺;藝術理論概念;自由藝術期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：Hans von Aachen is among the artists regarded as representative of the court of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II. During the period from the late 1580s to the beginning of 1600, von Aachen created a number of works referring to the visual arts themselves, especially to the art of painting and its relationship to artes liberales. This paper shows that Hans von Aachen occupied himself intensely with art-theoretical discourses and invented within a decennium a series of paintings and engravings with the same themes. The pictorial concepts of these works, as well as the language of art, reveal the influence of Italian artists and humanists, which are shown distinctly in the newly discovered painting Allegory of the arts.英文摘要：漢斯．馮．亞琛身居神聖羅馬帝國皇帝魯道夫二世宮廷代表藝術家，從1580年代後期到1600年初期，馮．亞琛創作了許多關於視覺藝術題材的作品，尤以涉及繪畫藝術及其與自由藝術間的關聯。本篇論文將揭示漢斯．馮．亞琛對當時代藝術理論的深入瞭解，並在10年內創作出一系列相關議題的繪畫與版畫作品，以此來論述他對繪畫藝術的概念與想法。這些作品所呈現的繪畫藝術意涵及其藝術語言，說明義大利藝術家們和人文主義學者群對馮．亞琛創作及藝術概念的影響，這一理念在近期新發現的繪畫作品《藝術的寓言》中再度得到體現。起始頁-結束頁：1-60資料語文：英文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202103_51(1).000112篇名：反思邊界：俄羅斯的觀點與實踐並列篇名：Rethinking Borders: A Russian Perspective and Practice作者：黃明慧(Ming-Hui Huang)關鍵字：邊界;全球化;洛特曼;巴里巴爾;boundary;globalization;Y. M. Lotman;E. Balibar期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：俄羅斯的疆域遼闊，許多遷徙的規模更甚跨國境的移動。洛特曼透過分析語言及文化形構的歷程，討論個人在空間裡對內、外分際的察覺和實踐。俄羅斯人對於疆界與分界的想像和定義，隨著政權體制與社會結構的變換而有不同的判讀。本文藉觀察帝俄晚期的國家政策與人文活動，探究因戰爭、流放、拓邊等國境之內的「出界」形式，檢視「境／界」的意義在洛特曼描述的狀態裡，呼應巴里巴爾對於邊界成因的關注，兩者之於反思越界這個命題的意義，對於當前少數以國家安全之名施行邊境管制的政策，在面對世界經濟、文化逐漸走向無國界發展的當下，嘗試提煉出值得借鑒的思維。英文摘要：In the vast land of Russia, the scale of internal migration is quite demanding. Through his analysis of the boundary in semiosphere, Y. M. Lotman discovered the awareness and practice of differentiation a man senses within and / or outside the space comprised of languages and forces. In Russia, the idea of borders, or boundaries, is subject to change with political regimes and social construction. According to E. Balibar, the end of the Soviet and Eastern bloc indicated a timing for the (re)arrangement of the borders and territories. This paper aims to discover borders formulated by, or resulting from, expedition, resettlement and exile in late imperial Russia. If my intension of building up a conversation between Balibar and Lotman is possible, their views on the question of border / boundary may hint that the purpose of such lines is (un)necessary as we move into a world of a boundless culture and economy.起始頁-結束頁：61-90資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202103_51(1).000213篇名：東方亞洲作為精神家園與心靈棲息地：自浪漫主義時期至二十世紀德國文學中的亞洲元素並列篇名：Asia as Spiritual Home and Habitat of the Soul: Asian Elements in German Literature from Romanticism to the Twentieth Century作者：林倩君(Chien-Chun Lin)關鍵字：跨文化研究;歌德;審美現代性;道家思想;禪學;cross-cultural studies;Goethe;aesthetic modernity;taoism;zen期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：十九世紀初，歌德與亞洲文化對話之《西東詩集》，清晰地宣示了東西文化間平等依存之關係。如同啟蒙後的西方文明對亞洲國家的社會變遷產生重大影響一樣，絢麗多彩的亞洲文化亦對西方文學與藝術領域的審美從傳統邁向現代留下了明顯的印記。本論文從德國文學史的角度出發，探討了自浪漫主義時期至二十世紀德國文學作品對亞洲思想與文化的接收與借鑒，闡釋了亞洲元素所承載的內涵帶給西方社會與文明的啟示和影響。英文摘要：During the early nineteenth century in Europe, a ”Eurocentric” atmosphere dominated. Goethe's lyrical poem, the West-Eastern Divan, was regarded as entering into dialogue with Asian culture, declared representatively and clearly the equality and interdependency of Eastern and Western cultures in the history of German literature. After the Enlightenment, Western civilization had a major impact on social change in Asian countries. The richness, diversity, and multicolor of Asian cultures also left clear traces on Western art and literature, encouraging its aesthetic transformation from the traditional to the modern. Through the analysis and interpretation of representative works, this paper explores, from the perspective of German literary history, the reception and reference of Asian ideas and cultures in German literary works from the Romantic period through to the 20th century, and more generally how Asian culture has inspired Western society and civilization.起始頁-結束頁：91-158資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202103_51(1).000314篇名：歐洲聯盟對抗工作場所霸凌問題之努力：回顧與前瞻並列篇名：Combating Workplace Bullying in the European Union: Retrospect and Prospect作者：焦興鎧(Cing-Kae Chiao)關鍵字：歐洲聯盟之職業安全衛生法制;工作場所不法侵害;職場霸凌;工作場所騷擾;職場暴力;occupational safety and health rules in the European Union (EU);workplace mistreatment;workplace bullying;harassment in the workplace;workplace violence期刊/會議論文集名稱：歐美研究卷期：51卷1期出版年：2021中文摘要：本文目的是要對歐洲聯盟過去五十多年來，透過職業安全衛生法制之建構，對工作場所霸凌這類新興勞動問題加以因應之努力，做一全面回顧與檢視，並探究它制定對會員國具法律拘束力相關指令之可能性。除前言及結語外，全文共分三大部分。首先說明各類職場不法侵害，包括：就業歧視、性騷擾、暴力、侵及隱私及霸凌等問題興起之背景。其次以四個階段為期，分析它過去建構傳統職業安全衛生法制之各項努力，藉以導出嗣後開始正視人為因素在職場所產生各種負面影響之緣由。最後則探究對制定統一性指令之正反意見，並以國際勞工組織在2019年所通過之190號公約及美國之經驗，分析歐洲聯盟現有制度之優劣得失、引起爭議之處及可供我國啟示之經驗。英文摘要：The purpose of this paper is to offer an overall assessment of efforts made by the European Union in combating workplace bullying. It also examines whether it is possible to promulgate a binding directive for its Member States to solve this problem. The main contents of the paper are divided into four sections. Section One provides a general background about the development of psychosocial workplace hazards, such as discrimination, harassment, violence and bullying in the European Union. Sections Two traces various efforts made by the European Union in combating workplace bullying through the legal regime governing occupational safety and health matters. Section Three reviews the opinions supporting or opposing for the EU to enact related directives for its Member States. It also discusses the merits and shortcomings of the current EU system and examines what Taiwan can learn as it confronts this issue in the workplace.起始頁-結束頁：159-209資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：人文學＞人文學綜合	社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院歐美研究所DOI：10.7015/JEAS.202103_51(1).000401篇名：同居題項設計：家庭動態調查追蹤資料的研究並列篇名：Design of Cohabitation Questions: Findings from the Panel Study of Family Dynamics作者：于若蓉(Ruoh-Rong Yu);廖培珊(Pei-Shan Liao)關鍵字：同居;題項設計;訪員效應;第三人在場效應;家庭動態調查;cohabitation;questionnaire design;interviewer effect;third-party presence effect;Panel Study of Family Dynamics期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：47期出版年：2021中文摘要：同居是一項重要的研究議題，但有關同居題項設計對受訪者回應行為的影響效果，研究卻極為稀少。這項研究採用家庭動態調查2014、2016年的面訪追蹤調查資料，探討同居題項變動前後受訪者應答的差異。另外，輔以調查蒐集到的周邊資料，本文也分析訪員特質、第三人在場與否對受訪者回應的影響效果。研究結果發現，在同居題項改以兩階段方式詢問後，受訪者回答同居的機率高出7倍左右。另外，訪員特質並不影響受訪者對同居題項的應答結果，顯示訪員效應的問題並不嚴重。第三人在場效應的結果則顯示，在場者的身份關係著同居的應答結果：如果受訪者的直系親屬在場，受訪者回答同居的機率顯著較沒有他人在場之下為低；非直系親屬在場的影響效果則相反。除學理上的貢獻外，本文的分析結果可回饋到調查實務，用以改善同居題項的設計方式。英文摘要：In a society which lacks a registration system for cohabitation, whether an individual is cohabiting with someone relies on self-reported information. The quality of the self-reported information matters for estimates of proportions of cohabitation. Such information is also important for research in the fields of demography and family studies on the topics of, for example, reproductive behavior and gender equality. Cohabitation is often asked as one of the options for marital status, while some see it a type of living arrangement. In some societies, however, cohabitation is considered to be a sensitive issue because it is not a legal marital status, and thus respondents might under-report cohabitation when asked relevant questions. In Taiwan, self-reported survey data are the main source of information for habitation. This response option is often combined with being married due to its sensitivity, or viewed as a distinct option in the marital status question. It is important to understand whether the design of cohabitation question affects respondents' self-reported behavior. Using panel data from the Taiwan Panel Study of Family Dynamics (PSFD), this study examines the effects of changes in the cohabitation question on the respondents' answers. The PSFD is a longitudinal survey project initiated in 1999. Up till the survey conducted in 2014, the question on marital status contained seven answer options: unmarried, cohabiting, married, separated, divorced, widowed, and other. Starting with the 2016 PSFD survey, the seven-option marital status question has been revised into a two-question version. The question on marital status is asked first with six mutually exclusive options: unmarried, married, separated, divorced, widowed, and others. Respondents who select the options legally compatible with cohabitation (including ”unmarried,” ”divorced,” and ”widowed”) are then asked whether they are cohabiting with someone. The difference in the probability of reporting cohabitation between the 2014 and 2016 in-person surveys is analyzed based on the sample who are legally compatible with the cohabitation status. For this analytical purpose, the sample of the 2014 survey is confined to the respondents who chose ”unmarried,” ”divorced,” ”widowed,” or ”cohabiting” from the question on marital status. As to the sample of the 2016 survey, it is limited to the respondents who selected ”unmarried,” ”divorced,” or ”widowed” when answering the first item. Using the merged data, the random-effects logit model is applied to analyze the respondents' likelihood of reporting cohabitation. In addition to analyzing the effects of changes in question design, we also explore whether interviewer characteristics and third-person presence matter for the respondents' likelihood of answering cohabitation. Interviewer characteristics include the interviewers' gender, age, and interviewing experience. The dummies on third-person presence contain three categories: presence of direct family member(s), presence of non-direct family member(s), and no third-person presence. The findings indicate that the probability of reporting cohabitation is about seven times higher in the 2016 survey with the revised question on marital status than that in the 2014 survey with the original design. With respect to interviewer effects, none of the interviewer variables is significant. The results on third-person presence effects reveal that the presence of direct family member(s) is associated with a lower probability of reporting cohabitation than that of no third-person presence. The presence of non-direct family member(s) shows an opposite effect. These findings suggest that who the third person is matters for the respondents' self-reporting of cohabitation. This study not only contributes to our understanding of the effects of question design for cohabitation on the respondents' answers, but also provides implications for improving the design of the cohabitation question.起始頁-結束頁：7-43資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心2篇名：影響臺灣人減災整備行為因子之探討並列篇名：Determinants of Disaster Mitigation Behaviors in Taiwan作者：楊惠萱(Hui Hsuan Yang);李香潔(Hsiang-chieh Lee)關鍵字：災害風險;脆弱性;減災整備;災害潛勢;disaster risk;vulnerability;mitigation;disaster-prone areas期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：47期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究立基風險社會文獻，災害社會脆弱性含心理狀況（如風險知覺）、人口或社經條件、家庭結構、社會網絡、網路與社群互動；災害潛勢（如災害經驗）代表危害和暴露量之交集。利用社會變遷基本調查第七期第五次數據，進行多元階層迴歸分析：（1）人口或社經條件對減災整備行為的影響，大於先被加入的災害潛勢、心理狀況。（2）災害經驗、風險知覺可獨立存在，後者對減災整備的影響較大。代表增進風險知覺，比被動地受災，更可鼓勵減災整備行為。（3）心理狀況顯著影響減災整備。（4）教育對減災整備的影響最大，支持災害社會學觀點認為教育提供減災整備知識的吸收能力、資訊管道。（5）家庭結構方面，獨居、有特定需求者、未成年學童對減災整備行為的影響皆不顯著。一方面代表文獻指出有同居者，尤其是未成年學童可鼓勵家庭減災整備行為的狀況，在臺灣不顯著。一方面有特定需求者的家庭，並沒有特別多的減災整備行為。（6）社會網絡、網路與社群互動對颱洪減災整備行為有影響力。英文摘要：This research investigated determinants of typhoon and earthquake mitigation behaviors in Taiwan based on risk analysis of hazards, exposure, and vulnerability, supplemented by the protective action decision model (PADM). Besides psychological condition (i.e., risk perception, life satisfaction, and anxiety), demographics, and socioeconomic characteristics factors (i.e., gender, age, ratio of home ownership, and average monthly income per household) mentioned in the PADM, this research added factors of family structure, social network, and internet and social media usage in the analysis. All of these factors were for the concept of social vulnerability-one dimension of risk analysis. Furthermore, this research used the factor of disaster-prone areas (i.e., disaster experiences, flood-prone areas, and number of protected people possibly affected by debris flow) to represent another dimension of risk analysis: the intersection of hazard and exposure. The 2020 Taiwan Social Change Survey data and multiple hierarchical regression analysis were used for analysis. The results showed that (1) the demographic and socio-economic factor had the greatest impact on mitigation behaviors among all the factors when added hierarchically in the model. This finding added to the literature on the importance of the demographic and socio-economic factor: as the third factor added in the model, it had an impact larger than those of the first and second factors added in the model, namely disaster-prone areas and psycho- logical condition. (2) Risk perception had a larger impact than disaster experience on mitigation behaviors-whether the impact of disaster experience on mitigation behaviors was significant depended on the type of disaster. This result suggested that to encourage mitigation behaviors, actively raising people's risk perception might be a better strategy than passively focusing on disaster experiences. (3) The factor of psychological condition could be an antecedent variable of mitigation behaviors. Experts or practitioners in the field of disaster management could plan how to integrate mental health services into the promotion of disaster mitigation behaviors. (4) Among all variables, education had the greatest impact on mitigation behaviors, which was an exciting result. This result might support the viewpoint of sociology of disasters which believes that education provides capability to absorb knowledge and obtain information of disaster mitigation behaviors. (5) The impact of the factor of family structure on mitigation behaviors was not significant. Unlike the results of previous studies, cohabiting people, especially school-age children, did not encourage family mitigation behaviors in Taiwan. Therefore, the practitioners must continue to work hard to meet their own expectation that school-age children bring home the knowledge they have acquired from school, thereby influencing their families to take disaster mitigation behaviors. The fact that families with access and functional needs did not have more mitigation behaviors than their counterparts suggested a disaster vulnerability in today's aged society. (6) Social networks, the internet, and social media influenced the flood model but were not significant in the earthquake model. As there is still room for improvement, practitioners could learn to effectively use existing social mechanisms to promote and implement disaster mitigation behaviors in Taiwan, such as school-based and neighborhood-based disaster education and management, as well as social media.起始頁-結束頁：45-93資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心3篇名：Modeling Multiple Inflations in Survey Data並列篇名：處理具有多個膨脹值之問卷調查資料摘要作者：林定香(Ting Hsiang Lin);蔡旻曉(Min-Hsiao Tsai)關鍵字：truncated Poisson regression;multinomial logistic regression;zero-inflated Poisson;截斷卜瓦松迴歸;多項式邏輯斯迴歸;零膨脹卜瓦松期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：47期出版年：2021中文摘要：The Poisson (ZIP) regression model is used to analyze data with a Poisson distribution with excessive zeros. Although various models have been developed to fit zero-inflated data, many of them strongly depend on unique features of each data set. To be more specific, this means a sizable group of respondents endorsing the same answers, making the data have modes. For example, some data have cyclical patterns with multiple inflated values, such as survey questions which assess risk or health behaviors within a fixed length of time. Two examples are the question ”During the past 30 days, on how many days did symptoms of asthma make it difficult for you to stay asleep?” and the question ”During the past two weeks, on how many days did you text or e-mail while driving a car or other vehicle?” In this study, we proposed a new multiple-inflated truncated Poisson (MITP) regression model for more than two inflated values. The model is a combination of multinomial logistic regression and truncated Poisson regression; the multinomial logistic regression models the occurrence of excessive values, and the truncated Poisson regression models data following a truncated Poisson distribution. The performance of the proposed model was evaluated through a simulation study. In the simulation study, we compared the performance of truncated Poisson (TP), zero-inflated truncated Poisson (ZITP), zero- and K-inflated Poisson (ZKIP) and multiple-inflated truncated Poisson (MITP) regression models under different simulation configurations. The factors considered include the model used to generate the data and the sample size. A likelihood ratio test was used to select the best model. We generated 1000 replications for each configuration. The accuracy rates of model selection via the likelihood ratio test and MAE (mean absolute error) were used to compare the performance of the models. In terms of MAE, when the hypothetical true model is TP, the means of the MAE of the four models do not have any substantial difference. When the hypothetical true model is ZITP, TP has the worst performance. When the hypothetical true model is ZKITP, TP and ZITP perform poorly, whereas the performance of ZKITP and MITP is much better. When the hypothetical true model is MITP, MITP has the best performance. From the results, MITP is the best model when there are multiple inflated points. ZKITP and MITP fit well when there are zero and K inflated points, while ZITP, ZKITP and MITP fit the data well when there are only inflated zero counts. When the data are truncated Poisson distributed, all four models fit the data well. With an increasing K-inflation rate, ZKITP and MITP have better and stable performance. With fixed sample sizes and parameters, when the true underlying model is truncated Poisson, MITP has the smallest MAE, followed by ZKITP, ZITP and TP. We analyzed a survey question, ”On how many of the PAST 30 DAYS did you smoke cigarettes?” from the US's National Adult Tobacco Survey (NATS) in the empirical study. In addition to typical days of the Poisson distribution (1, 2, 3, and 4 days), the data also have inflated values that are multiples of 5 and 7. The results indicate that the MITP model has smaller MAE, and MSE as well as better model fit, and outperformed competing models.英文摘要：零膨脹卜瓦松（ZIP）迴歸模型主要用於分析有過多零值的資料。雖然已有許多模型用來處理膨脹資料，但多數模型仍須高度仰賴於資料的獨特性。一般而言，當受訪者回答了相同的答案，使得資料出現了一些峰值，就產生了膨脹值資料。本文中，我們提出了一個新的多點膨脹截斷卜瓦松迴歸模型（MITP），可以對多個膨脹值進行建模，該模型是多項式邏輯斯模型和截斷卜瓦松迴歸的混合模型，其中多項式邏輯斯模型預測膨脹值的發生與否。截斷卜瓦松迴歸對呈現截斷卜瓦松分配的計數資料進行建模。在實證研究中，我們以國家成人煙草調查（NATS）中的一個問題“您過去30天內有多少天吸煙”為例，資料除了典型的卜瓦松分配天數外（1、2、3、4天等），在5天及7天的倍數天數也有明顯的膨脹值。結果顯示我們的模型比其他競爭模型具有更佳的配適度。起始頁-結束頁：95-111資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心4篇名：移動的階級不平等：臺灣民眾的交通弱勢與交通事故風險初探並列篇名：Class Inequality of Moving: A Preliminary Study of Transportation-Related Lifestyle and the Risk of Traffic Accidents in Taiwan作者：林宗弘(Thung-hong Lin);許耿銘(Keng-ming Hsu);李俊穎(Chun-yin Lee)關鍵字：階級不平等;交通弱勢;公共交通可及性;交通可負擔性;車禍;class inequality;transport disadvantage;public transport accessibility;transport affordability;traffic accident期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：47期出版年：2021中文摘要：交通系統是各國重要的基礎建設，涉及不同社會階層民眾移動能力之不平等。然而，針對民眾社會階級可負擔性、公共交通工具可及性對交通方式選擇的影響，本土少有實證研究，連結階級不平等與車禍風險的分析更少。因此，本研究運用臺灣社會變遷調查2019第七期第五次（科技與風險組）的問卷數據，分析臺灣各階級民眾之交通方式與其車禍風險差異。運用卜瓦松（Poisson）與多類別邏輯迴歸（Multinomial Logistic Regression）模型統計分析發現，階級不平等會影響臺灣民眾選擇機車、汽車作為主要交通方式的機率，其中雇主最常使用汽車，非技術工人、自雇者與失業者最常使用機車，非勞動力較依賴步行與公共交通系統。其次，機車比汽車或公共交通系統容易導致車禍發生率提高，而受訪者居住地區捷運站密度，會顯著降低其使用機車機率，並減緩遭遇車禍的風險。研究結果建議以公共交通服務特別是捷運替代個人交通工具特別是機車，以減少城鄉差距與階級的交通弱勢，也有助減少機車使用比例，並且降低車禍風險。英文摘要：Transportation systems are critical infrastructure for all countries and provide mobility accessible to all. However, some people's mobility and risks of transportation are more equal than others. In order to explain the inequality in transportation, studies have investigated transport affordability and public transport accessibility for people of different social classes. Yet, there has been little discussion about empirically investigating the relationship between social class and the risk of transportation accidents. In Taiwan, the high mortality rate of traffic accidents, especially involving motorcycles as the major mode of transport, has been publicly criticized for years. Therefore, we investigate the relationship between social classes, modes of transport, and the risks of traffic accidents in Taiwan. Three hypotheses are derived from the international literature and empirically tested with data from the 2019 Taiwan Social Change Survey. First, the social class of Taiwanese shaped their risk of car accidents. The lower classes such as workers and farmers were exposed to and suffered from higher risk of car accidents due to their longer driving time and distance resulting from their occupational and commuting needs. Second, people from lower classes in Taiwan tended to choose motorcycles as the major daily mode of transport because of their affordability; and using a motorcycle increased their risk of suffering from traffic accidents. Third, the lower accessibility of public transport services increased the probability of people using a motorcycle, and using a motorcycle increased the risk. For the sake of concentrating on this issue, we participated in the design of the 2019 Taiwan Social Change Survey (TSCS Round 7, Year 5): Technology and Risk Society. The questionnaire asked the major mode of transport and the frequency of car accidents the respondents had experienced during the last two decades. We merge two levels of data to break through the methodological limitations of the survey. The first level is the sampled data of socioeconomic status and traffic behavior in the TSCS. The second level measuring the accessibility of public transport services is the overall traffic development information, such as the densities of mass transport stations including railways, subways and buses of the township. From Poisson regression results, it can be seen that class inequality significantly affected an individual's choice of whether to adopt mass transit, a motorcycle, or a car as their primary mode of transport in their daily lives. Motorcycles were the main form of transportation (53%) in Taiwan. What is more, the results indicated that employers tended to drive cars; unskilled workers, self-employed individuals (including farmers), and unemployed individuals tended to ride motorcycles; and individuals who are not in the workforce tended to walk or use mass transit. In addition, the motorcyclists were significantly more prone to accidents than respondents driving cars or taking mass transit. In fact, respondents living in an area of higher density with mass rapid transit (MRT) stations tended to use the MRT and had a lower likelihood of using motorcycles; and these respondents had a lower risk of car accidents. Most important of all, the research findings may serve as a guide for transport policymakers; that is, the risk of car accidents in Taiwan could be reduced by building MRT stations and by reducing class inequalities vis-a-vis moving, the urban-rural transport gap, and motorcycle ridership.起始頁-結束頁：113-166資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心5篇名：Comparative Analysis and Application of Imputed Estimators for Population Mean under Stratified Unequal Probability Sampling並列篇名：在分層不等機率抽樣下母體均數插補估計量之比較分析及應用作者：許玉雪(Esher Hsu)關鍵字：nonresponse;ratio imputation;imputed estimator;bias-adjusted estimator;unequal probability sampling;無回應;比率插補;插補估計量;偏誤調整估計量;不等機率抽樣期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：46期出版年：2021中文摘要：With continuously increasing demand for accurate data, the sampling design of surveys has become more and more complex. Unequal probability sampling methods are therefore increasingly used in sample surveys. Item nonresponse is inevitable in survey practice. How to obtain unbiased estimation with data imputation for a complex survey is thus an important issue for research. Previous studies have presented some imputed estimators for equal probability sampling with uniform response. It would be worthwhile to explore the performance of imputed estimators applied to complex surveys, such as unequal probability sampling or different missing data mechanisms. This study aims to present imputed estimators of the population mean for survey data imputed with an auxiliary variable under a stratified unequal probability sampling design, and to compare their performance in terms of different missing data mechanisms and different levels of the correlation coefficient between the auxiliary variable and the variable of interest. By taking nonresponse and imputation into account, this study derives three imputed estimators (weighted, unweighted, and bias-adjusted imputed estimators) and their corresponding variance estimators with stratified unequal probability sampling, where missing data are imputed by ratio imputation. Six cases under different conditions (missing data mechanisms, population distribution, and sample allocation) are selected for a simulation study to compare the performance of the proposed imputed estimators in terms of relative bias and coefficient of variation. The relative bias of the variance estimators is also studied to compare the performance of the corresponding variance estimators. A practical application is performed to show how to apply the imputed estimators derived in this study to real survey data. As expected, simulation results show that the performance of the estimators varies depending on the missing data mechanisms, population distributions, and methods of sample allocation. Simulation results indicate that the estimation precision of the imputed estimator increases as the correlation between the auxiliary variable and the variable of interest increases for all three imputed estimators. The imputed estimators perform with greater stability in cases of missing completely at random (MCAR) than in cases of missing at random (MAR). Comparing the performance among the three imputed estimators, this study shows that in cases of high correlation between the auxiliary variable and the variable of interest, the proposed bias-adjusted estimator works well with stratified unequal probability sampling in reducing the estimation bias and the underestimation of mean square error (MSE) due to unweighted imputation. Moreover, the variance estimator of the bias-adjusted estimator has the smallest relative bias for estimating MSE compared with the two others. The unadjusted imputed estimator with unweighted imputation may cause estimation bias, while its corresponding variance estimators may also underestimate the MSE of the estimator. However, simulation results do not reveal that the bias-adjusted estimator performs better than the imputed estimator with weighted imputation except at a high level of correlation between the auxiliary variable and the variable of interest. In practice, an auxiliary variable which has high correlation with the variable of interest, is commonly used to impute missing values to increase estimation precision. If the survey weights are unavailable and unweighted ratio imputation is used to impute missing values, the proposed bias-adjusted estimator with the corresponding variance estimator is suggested for obtaining a better estimation.英文摘要：調查實務上遺漏值在所難免，如何在複雜抽樣設計下結合遺漏值插補而能得到不偏估計量成為重要的研究課題。本文旨在探討分層不等機率抽樣下結合輔助變數插補遺漏值的插補估計量在不同遺漏機制（MCAR、MAR）及輔助變數與興趣變數之不同相關水準下的表現。本文在分層不等機率抽樣下結合比率插補法導出三種母體均數插補估計量（加權、未加權及偏誤調整）及其變異數估計量。利用插補估計量之相對偏誤及變異係數與其變異數估計量之相對偏誤，比較分析插補估計量的表現，並以一實例說明這些插補估計量如何應用於實際調查資料。模擬結果顯示，三個估計量的估計精確度都將隨著輔助變數和興趣變數相關性的增加而增加，插補估計量在MCAR遺漏機制表現較為穩定。本文所提偏誤調整插補估計量在輔助變數與興趣變數具有高度相關時，確可減少來自未加權的估計偏誤並降低均方誤的低估。實務上，若無權重資料可用而採未加權比率插補，本文所提的偏差調整插補估計量可用以得到較佳的估計。起始頁-結束頁：7-54資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心6篇名：所得變數於政治學民意調查研究中之測量與應用並列篇名：Measurement and Application of Income Variables in Political Science Survey Research作者：蔡奇霖(Chi-lin Tsai);蔡宗漢(Tsung-han Tsai)關鍵字：收入;所得;民意調查;樣本代表性;測量偏誤;income;earnings;opinion poll;sample representativeness;measurement bias期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：46期出版年：2021中文摘要：所得是人們社會階級與經濟地位的重要表徵，其學理價值不言而喻，因此民意調查經常將所得列為基本變數。然而在實際經驗研究中，所得變數的使用率卻遠低於性別、年齡、學歷等其他基本變數。本文認為資料品質的問題是研究者對所得變數卻步的主因。透過理論探討與實例分析，本文發現民眾的所得高低常與單位無反應相關，導致民調普遍有低估所得水準的傾向；同時，高比例且非隨機的項目無反應也是所得變數的一大問題。對此，本文從調查方法論出發，借鑑歐美實務經驗，提出建議如問項更明確化、追問更標準化、答題更匿名化等供臺灣民調界參考，以改善所得的測量。至於應用方面，當前民調的所得變數雖有上述問題但並非毫無用處。本文的分析顯示受訪者回答的所得高低大致符合其對自身社會階級的主觀認知，因此能與學歷及職業等客觀社會階級變數相輔相成。最後，有鑑於所得變數的項目無反應比例甚高，本文亦對實務上常見的應對方法作一討論，供研究者參考以減少誤用。英文摘要：As a key indicator of socioeconomic status, income plays an important role in social sciences and has been a routine socio-demographic item on many opinion polls. However, in Taiwanese political science studies, the use of the income item is far less common than the use of other socio-demographics such as gender, age and education. Data quality is arguably a major problem that puts researchers off from using income data from surveys. In this paper, we examine this problem for the purpose of laying the foundations for future research to improve survey measurement and application of income variables. First, we discuss the issues of income measurement at every stage of the survey process from a methodological perspective and with the support of empirical evidence from various fields of literature. In seeking solutions to those issues, we trace the evolution of income measurement of the American National Election Studies from the 1940s onwards, along with several long-standing, large-scale academic survey projects in Europe. This review identifies a number of designs aimed at a more comprehensible wording of the income question, a more standardised procedure to elicit income information, and a more sensible way to keep income responses confidential. We recommend Taiwanese pollsters apply these potentially useful designs in future surveys for better income measurement. Second, we investigate the existing income data of Taiwanese surveys. Our analysis of the 2001-2017 data from Taiwan's Election and Democratization Studies (TEDS) found noticeable discrepancies between official statistics and survey estimates of the average population income. Further analysis suggests that those discrepancies are partly due to the positive correlation between income and unit nonresponse-in line with our previous methodological discussion. In addition, there has been a non-trivial amount of item nonresponse in the income data of TEDS, which adds another layer of complexity to the use of those data in research. We suspect that these problems are not unique to TEDS, but rather common among political opinion polls in Taiwan, because most of them have measured income in a similar way. Despite those problems, we found that the income variables of TEDS are useful as a strong indicator of respondents' subjective socioeconomic status, hence making a good complement to objective indicators such as education and occupation. This finding, together with those aforementioned, provides a general guide to using the existing income data of political surveys in Taiwan: avoid treating them as a measure of absolute wealth, but use them as an indicator of socioeconomic status. In this regard, these income data, though imperfect, should still serve the needs of many social science studies. Last, with respect to using income data of surveys in research, item nonresponse is an inevitable problem. A common practice to handle this problem is the ”complete-case method”-that is, excluding non-respondents from analysis and focusing solely on respondents without any missing data. In view of its widespread use, we highlight the pros and cons of this method, and make explicit reference to the condition under which it works and the condition it does not work in, in order to provide researchers a quick guide to making good use of the complete-case method to deal with item nonresponse in income data.起始頁-結束頁：55-119資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心7篇名：Linking Understanding of Citizenship to Political Activism: A Comparative Study across 29 Democracies並列篇名：連結公民身份認識與政治行動主義：29個民主國家的比較作者：黃信豪(Hsin-hao Huang)關鍵字：political activism;citizenship norms;rights consciousness;multi-group analysis;政治行動主義;公民規範認知;權利意識;多群分析期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：46期出版年：2021中文摘要：Active citizenship is one of the defining features of contemporary democracies. Many empirical studies on democratic citizens emphasize their attitudinal and behavioral characteristics, such as critical citizens, monitorial citizens, and self-actualizing citizens. However, few of them deal with how citizens understand ”citizenship” itself. By addressing citizens' understanding of citizenship, this study investigates how the understanding, including civic responsibilities and rights, can inspire political activism, and examines these relationships cross-nationally. The author employs citizenship norms and rights consciousness as individual-level notions of citizenship. These two indicate how people see civic responsibilities and rights, respectively. In terms of citizenship norms, since norms are able to shape role expectations that individuals believe they should satisfy, their content is expected to determine their related behavior. In this sense, duty-related norms can weaken political activism, but engagement-related ones will strengthen political activism. In addition, rights consciousness should encourage political activism, and its different domains may affect the willingness to act separately. It is because that perception represents an awareness of the need to defend one's rights, which would stimulate their willingness to act in politics. As for cross-national differences, it is expected that relationships between citizens' understanding of citizenship and political activism are generally stronger in stable democracies than in new democracies. At the national level, signs of progress in citizenship rights apparently differ between the two groups of countries. At the individual level, having more democratic experience and opportunities leads to citizens being more likely to apply their understanding in actual political activities. The data analyzed are from the 2014 International Social Survey Programme (ISSP). The scope of this study includes 29 democratic countries, and the final pooled sample size is 42,355. The empirical analyses are divided into two parts. This study first conducts several nested multiple regression models to demonstrate the links between political activism and understanding of citizenship. Regarding citizenship norms, civil norms are found to weaken political activism, while both political and social norms have a positive effect on individuals' willingness to act in politics. As for rights consciousness, either the political or civil and social domain is able to increase political activism. The second step involves conducting a comparison between respondents in the stable and new democracies. Using multi-group analysis, this study examines how the relationships differ between stable and new democracies. The empirical results show that except for social norms, all the citizenship norms and rights consciousness have, as expected, a stronger effect on political activism in the stable-democracies samples than in their new-democracies counterparts, whether it is negative or positive. The evidence reflects the fact that with more democratic experience and opportunities, citizens in stable democracies are more likely than those in new democracies to apply their understanding of citizenship in actual political activities. This study demonstrates the importance of understanding of citizenship for affecting political activism and illustrates how these effects differ between stable and new democracies. The results contribute to our understanding of political behavior, democratic deepening, and democratic civic education.英文摘要：積極、有行動力的公民是當代民主國家的重要特徵。本研究探討大眾對公民身份的認識，包括公民責任與權利，如何影響其政治行動主義；此外，我們也探索公民身份認識與政治行動主義的跨國差異。透過2014年國際社會調查計畫（ISSP）涵蓋29個民主國家的資料分析，本研究首先證實公民身份認識與政治行動主義的連結：在公民規範認知方面，公民規範減弱政治行動主義，政治與社會規範則分別能強化受訪者參與政治行動的意願；在權利意識方面，社會與公民權利、政治權利意識分別能強化政治行動主義。其次，本研究採多群分析來檢驗穩定、新興民主國家兩群體受訪者公民身份認識與政治行動主義連結的差異。實證結果顯示，大多數公民身分認識與政治參與的關係在穩定民主國家中有顯著較強的連結，反映穩定民主國家的民眾更能將公民身份認識運用在實際的政治行動中。本文證實公民身份認識對政治行動的重要性，研究結果對政治行為、民主鞏固與民主公民教育皆有重要的意涵。起始頁-結束頁：121-160資料語文：英文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心8篇名：高中班級<U+5185>友誼網絡與課業諮詢網絡的生成並列篇名：The Generation of Friendship Networks and Academic Consulting Networks within High School Classes作者：吳秋園(Chiu-Yuan Wu);葉高華(Ko-Hua Yap)關鍵字：網絡動態;友誼相似性;班級脈絡;關係生成;分離時序指數隨機圖模型;network dynamics;friendship similarity;social context of classes;relational formation;STERGMs期刊/會議論文集名稱：調查研究-方法與應用卷期：46期出版年：2021中文摘要：本研究以某高中升學班與普通班各一班為對象，追蹤調查班級內的友誼網絡與課業諮詢網絡，並透過分離時序指數隨機圖模型（STERGMs）分析網絡的生成機制。研究結果顯示：（1）高中生選擇成績相似者交往的傾向隨著班級的升學氣氛差異而有所不同。在高度追求升學績效的班級內，以成績擇友的情形更明顯。（2）高中生挑選課業諮詢對象時頗為精打細算。他們除了向朋友詢問課業問題，也很清楚某科的問題要去請教該科成績高的同學。（3）課業諮詢是高中生友誼的來源之一。曾經提供諮詢服務的同學，爾後更容易成為課餘時間的朋友。英文摘要：This study attempts to carry out three pioneering achievements: comparing differences in friendship networks between an elite class and a normal class in a high school, conducting surveys of academic consulting networks among high school students, and taking a lead in analyzing how high school students' friendships and consulting relationships are generated by using ”separable temporal exponential random graph models” (STERGMs). Previous studies have revealed that high school students tended to form friendships with classmates who had academic performance similar to theirs, and some studies have emphasized that teenagers' friendships developed from class contexts they were in. However, the present study first reveals that class contexts will influence high school students' tendency to form friendships based on academic similarity. Many high schools in Taiwan put students with higher academic performance together in one class, and they strive all out to attend top universities or medical colleges. The academic differences between these selected elite students are usually smaller than the differences between students in normal classes. However, in this study, students of the selected elite class still can form friendships with classmates who have academic performance more similar to their own. By contrast, it is not apparent in a normal class that students form friendships depending on academic similarity. The results here show that a class context with intense focus on academic performance may indeed increase the tendency for students to choose friends based on similar grades. Secondly, most studies of teenager social networks have focused on friendships. The current study attempts to conduct surveys of high school students' academic consulting for each subject. Results demonstrate that high school students are shrewd when choosing suitable peer consultants. In addition to choosing friends as consultants directly, high school students also clearly know how to choose peer consultants for each subject based on their classmates' academic performance in each subject. Besides, it is not common to find reciprocity in such academic consulting. In many situations, the consultant does not intend to obtain helpful information from the receiver. It can be seen from this that the academic consulting network is more like a hierarchical structure. Students with lower academic performance often receive advice from students with higher academic performance unilaterally. This kind of network structure creates chances for knowledge to flow from students with higher academic performance to those with lower academic performance. On the other hand, this study reveals that academic consulting is one of the ways for high school students to develop friendships. The receivers may develop friendships with the consultants who were not friends at first. This finding implies a more significant meaning. Assuming that students with higher academic performance only establish relationships with students who are similar to them, the academic gap would be unfillable or even aggravated. If consulting relationships could be further expanded into friendships, the academic gap would be mitigated, since the consulting relationships often bridge students with higher and lower academic performance. The experience of the present study also provides beneficial inspiration for future research designs.起始頁-結束頁：161-191資料語文：繁體中文主題分類：社會科學＞社會科學綜合出版單位：中央研究院調查研究專題中心
